Trial of Faith, OR THE WOMAN OF CANAAN* On Math. 15. 21, 22, 23, 24.

Together with the Souls Sure Anchor-hold, On Heb. 6. 19.

With the Wisdom of timely remembering our Creator, On Eccles. 12. 1.

^n Several SERMONS, By Timothy Armitage, Late Minister of the Gospel in
Norwitch.

^ONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Cripps, at the first Shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next Lumbard-street. 1661.

To the Christian Reader.
ALthough we have not fully perused these Sermons, yet being well acquainted
with the worth of the Author, we do (not without the desire of many) present
these Notes to thy view. He was a man of a choice, humble, meek, and moderate
spirit, of good natural endowments, heightened with no small measure of Divine
grace; of a sound judgment, yet could bear with those that erred not in the
main; of a large affection, yet without affectation; of good Learning; Artis
est ^^lare artem.
but his Art was in Preaching to conceal his Art. His Teaching was after the
manner of Gods drawing a soul to Himself, viz. Fortiter and suaviter, strongly
and sweetly. His style was even, plain, and full, and (as Anianus spoke of
Chrysostom) his speech was never elevated to the pomp of speaking,
Chrysostomus illud quasi peculiare custodit ac proprium, quod cum semper
sollicitus sit, semper vigilans, and noxii stuporis inimicus, nusquam tamen
ejus oration in pompam elevatur dicentis; sed tota aptatur ad utilitatem
audientis: est enim stilus ipse Ecclesiae auribus accomodandus. Sixth. Senens.
Biblio. lib. 4. de Jo. Chrysostom.
but always accommodated to the profit of hearing. In brief, He was a
faithful, experimental, powerful, and succesful Labourer in the Gospel; for the
Spirit of God breathed much on his heart and Ministry: His life also held pace
with his Doctrine; for as his Doctrine was lively, so his life was doctrinal:
He was beloved both of God and man. Our only grief is, we had such a Preacher
whom now we have not: But in the midst of our sorrows for the loss of him we
have refreshment, by enjoying the issues of his labor; and this book being his
Benjamin, which he did not live to finish, we humbly present unto you, in its
native innocence, as it was midwived from his mouth by the finger of a ready
Penman: Neither could we be so injurious to our departed Brother, or unjust
unto you, as to diminish or add any thing thereunto; lest, instead of his
endeavors, we should give forth our own conceptions. His intention was not to
print them in paper, but to imprint them in the hearts of his Auditory. This
Writing is like Milk in a Bottle, which though it wants the natural warmth of
the Breast, yet being well digested, will afford wholesome nourishment and
spiritual strength. Those that did hear these Sermons delivered by a lively
voice, cannot but rejoice in hearing them echoed over by the rebound of the
Press; in which if there be any faults, you are desired, by the sense of the
neighboring words, to correct them. Thus committing the success of these
following pages (wherein the Author being dead yet speaks) to the blessing of
the Almighty, We rest

Your Servants in the Lord Christ, W. B. T. A. J. R.


Several Sermons preached by Mr. Timothy Armitage upon Matthew. 15. 21, 22, 23,
24, Verses, etc.
Verse 21. Then Jesus went thence, and departed into the Coasts of Tire and
Sidon: 22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried
unto him, saying, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is
greivously vexed with a Devil. 23. But he answered her not a word: And his
Disciples came and besought him, saying, send her away, for she cries after
us. 24. But he answered, and said, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, etc. SERMON I.
YOu have a Relation of Christ's departure from the parts of Judea near to
Jerusalem; Verse. 21.
and his coming to the coasts of Tire and Sidon, the uttermost part of the Land
of Canaan.

And here is a Relation of two great Wonders wrought by Christ there: Two great
Wonders wrought by Christ.
One was a spiritual wonder, a wonderful faith that Jesus Christ wrought in the
heart of a poor woman, 1. Wonder.
the woman of Canaan; it was a wonderful faith, therefore it is brought in with
admiration in the 22. verse, and BEHOLD, a woman of Canaan came out of the same
coasts, and cried unto him, saying, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of
David, etc. Yea it was such a wonder, as made the Son of God to wonder at it in
conclusion, and to say, O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as
thou will.

The second Wonder, 2. Wonder.
which was the effect of this wonderful faith, it was a miraculous cure that
the Lord Jesus Christ wrought upon the daughter of this woman of Canaan, who
was possessed with a Devil, which Devil Christ cast out by speaking one word.

Now concerning the faith of this woman of Canaan; The wonder of this woman's
faith appears first.
the wonder that was in it appears,

First, In that it was a woman, the weaker vessel, and most subject to fears,
yet her heart was raised to believe.

Secondly, Not only a woman, but a Woman of Canaan, a Canaanitish woman, one
that was of the seed and posterity of that cursed Nation the Canaanites, that
were a cursed Nation, and cast out, that room might be made for the Children of
Israel; cast out of the Land, that room might be made for the Children of the
Kingdom, and yet Christ meets with mighty faith in the heart of a woman that
was a Canaanite, one that had not enjoyed the means of Grace, one that had not
enjoyed the privileges of the Jews.

But we shall open the Scripture, and give you a brief Anallysis of it, and lay
a foundation for future discourse, for I shall but dwell upon the borders at
this time.

And in the faith of this woman of Canaan.

First take notice of the Declaration of her faith, The declaration of the
woman^ faith.
ver. 22.

Her faith was declared, first, by the confession she made of Christ, she made
a full and excellent confession of Jesus Christ; O Lord, thou son of David,
there is the confession of her faith: she does acknowledge the Lordship of
Christ, she does acknowledge him to be Lord of all, infinite in power, able to
do what he pleases, yea to command the Devil out of her daughter, for she came
to him for that end; there is a confession of the Divinity of Christ, and of
his infinite power.

Secondly, She does acknowledge him as the Messiah, not only as the Lord of
all, but as the Messiah, Christ the Savior, him that was to come to redeem his
people, and to be a light to enlighten the Gentiles, and therefore she calls
him the son of David; Oh Lord, thou son of David, have mercy on me, etc. where
she does acknowledge him to be the Messiah that was promised to come out of the
loins of David.

Thirdly, There is a declaration of her faith by her prayer she poures out
before the Lord; her prayer was an effect of her faith, she calls upon him with
a great deal of earnestness; and her petition was, that Christ would cast out
the unclean spirit that had taken possession of her daughter, therefore she
spread it before the Lord, My daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.

And the Argument she uses to move Christ (besides her own necessity and the
misery of her child) it was his own free grace and mercy: The Argugument this
woman uses to move Christ.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed
with a Devil.

Have mercy upon me; the affliction of her child was upon her; she does not
say, have mercy upon my child, but upon me; and she pleads mercy and
free grace, have mercy upon me, not her own worthiness; no, but have mercy upon
me.

Secondly, We have the trial of her faith; her faith is tried three several
times, and three several ways the Lord Christ does try her faith, that so it
may appear more shining.

First, How Christ tried the woman's faith.
Christ does try her faith by keeping silent, giving her no answer; she cries
aloud, Lord have mercy on me, but Christ does not so much as open his lips to
give her any encouragement, but he is silent; and that was a mighty trial,
that when she should cry so loud, that Christ should say nothing to her, it was
a mighty trial to this woman's faith.

Secondly, Christ tryes her faith by giving of her a seeming denial, in the 24.
verse, He answered and said, I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house
of Israel; as if he should say, it is beside my arrant to have any thing to do
with this woman of Canaan, I am sent to the Jews in the first place; it was a
seeming denial of Christ.

And it was the greater trial, because Christ did not only seem to deny her
request, but to deny the request of the Disciples, for in the 23. ver. The
Disciples of Christ came and besought him: Oh this was a trial of her faith;
she might have said, I have cried, and there is no hope, and the Disciples they
have besought him for me; but Christ does not answer, but deny her request, and
deny the Disciples request, what hope was left then?

Thirdly, The faith of this woman is tried in the 26. verse, where Christ does
object to her, her own unworthiness and unfitness that he should have any thing
to do with her; he answered and said, it is not meet that I should cast the
childrens bread to dogs: And oh! what a trial of faith was this? Christ does
not only deny her, but seems to upbraid her with her unworthiness; she was of
the Nation of the Canaanites, and they were of the Jews accounted as Dogs; they
were cast out, and were without the Covenant, and without God in the world; it
is not meet, said Christ, I cannot do it, to take the childrens bread, and give
it to dogs; this was a mighty trial.

Now in the third place let us consider the behavior of this woman under these
trials, The behavior of this woman of Canaan under her trials.
how did her faith bear up under these trials? That is declared unto us,

First of all; when Christ gives her no answer, yet still she continues crying
after him; there is the behavior of this woman's faith under that trial. Though
Christ give her no answer, she gives not over her request; though Christ was
silent and would not open his mouth to give her one word, yet she continues
crying, the Disciples say as much, Lord send her away, say they, for she cries.

Secondly, And for her deportment under her second trial; she came and
worshipped, and said, Lord help; and so she continues still in duty, and is
found waiting upon the Lord in an humble posture, she falls down and worships,
she worships Christ and continues in prayer, Lord help.

Thirdly, The behavior of this woman under the third trial she meets withal
is in the 27. verse. and she said, Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
which fall from their Masters table. When Christ tells her, that he must not
take the childrens bread and cast it to dogs, see how her faith now works, and
though this seem the greatest discouragement, yet her faith does make an
excellent improvement of it, and from this discouragement her faith takes ^ice
and waxes stronger and stronger; Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
that fall from their Masters table; she grants all that Christ said, she grants
the proposition and application of it, she grants that she was no better then a
dog, and yet her faith makes an improvement of that which seems to be the
greatest discouragement, she fetches an argument from thence, if I be a dog
let me have the crumbs, if a dog, thy dog, and I will not away from thy feet,
but let me have crumbs that fall from the childrens table. So you have the
carriage of this woman under her several trials.

Fourthly, The victory of this woman's faith.
You have the victory of her faith in the 28. verse; O woman, great is thy
faith, be it unto thee as thou will; and her daughter was made whole.

The heart of Christ seems to be taken mightily with the faith of this woman;
and therefore Christ stands and wonders, that there should be such a faith in a
Canaanitish woman: O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will: I do not only grant the mercy thou ask, but even what thou will; thou
have overcome me with thy faith, Be it unto thee as thou will; and her daughter
was made whole that hour: So that you see the history of this woman of Canaan
o^ened to you: I shall not enter into it now, but (as I said before) dwell upon
the borders of it.

And at this time I shall consider what is written in the 21. 21. Verse spoken
to: three things to be considered.
verse; Jesus went thence and departed into the coast of Tire and Sidon.

1. We shall consider from whence Christ went when he came into these parts.

2. And what was the occasion of Christ's going away.

3. And then consider what this place was that Christ came to, where Christ
wrought this wonder, this miracle.

1. He went from thence, from the parts of Judea; which were near to Jerusalem;
for in the beginning of the Chapter you read, that Christ was there in some
place, where many of the Scribes from Jerusalem came to him, as in the first
verse.

2. What was the occasion of Christ's departure from these parts of Judea that
were near to Jerusalem? Why did Christ leave these parts, and leave that
people? The occasion is intimated; because they opposed Christ, they cavelled
against him; against the person of Christ, against the truths of Christ,
against the disciples of Christ, and against the way of Christ; the Scribes and
Pharisees were filled with enmity against Christ, and the way of Christ, and
therefore Christ departs from them, and goes into the coast of Tire and Sidon.

But more particularly, that which was the cause of Christ's removing from this
people; it was because they set up their own traditions; they set up their own
inventions, and made them equal with the Command of God, nay, they made their
own inventions and traditions above the Commandment of God, which was a mighty
provocation to Jesus Christ; if you read the beginning of the Chapter, you
shall see how they set up their own rules above Gods Rules, which is a
provocation to Christ, and he will not bear with such; you may read the second
and third verses, and so to the end of the seventh verse.

In vain (says Christ) do you worship me, teaching for doctrine the
commandments of men.

So that the occasion of Christ's removing from these parts of Judea which were
near to Jerusalem, was the exalting their own traditions, and making them
equal with Gods Commandments.

It affords something to us for our instruction, which is this, That when a
people, Proposition or Doctrine.
or any soul, shall exalt their own traditions, their own inventions, and make
them equal, or set them above the Commandments and Rules that Christ has
given his people to walk by, Christ will not afford his presence to such a
people, Christ will certainly depart from such a soul, or people.

For the truth is; there is little hope that there should be any good done by
such a people, when they decline the Rule, and set up something of their own,
there is little hope that the word of Christ should do good among such a
people. Therefore Christ will withdraw from them, as he did from these Scribes
and Pharisees; and so will Christ withdraw his special presence from a people
that shall set up their own inventions. For it is a mighty provocation to
Christ.

First of all, when a people shall exalt their own inventions above the Rule
that Christ has given his people to walk by; the minds of such a people are
blinded and darkened, and their hearts are hardened against the Truths of God;
therefore there is little hope of such a people: I say; men's own inventions
thus exalted and lift up above Gods Rule, it blinds the mind, and hardens the
heart against Christ and the things of Christ; it is a making to a man's self a
graven Image: Whatsoever a man shall bring in of his own, as a rule to walk by,
and to worship by, he makes that an image to himself; now they that make graven
Images are like to them, says the Psalmist, They have eyes and see not; God
gives them up to blindness; declining Gods Rule, and Christ's Institution, it
will blind them and harden them against the Truths of Christ.

Secondly, When as men shall exalt their own inventions, the heart is so filled
with them, that there is no room for Christ, and for the most part there is in
such a soul a kind of loathing the Truths of Christ. Wherever you find men's
inventions exalted, there you shall find a kind of loathing, in such a soul, of
the pure and sincere truths of the Gospel, the bread of life is no longer sweet
with them, and the water of life has no relish with them; and when it comes
to this, Christ will not stay, but withdraws his spiritual presence from them,
as he did his bodily presence from the Scribes and Pharisees.

Thirdly, Christ will withdraw from such a people, because for the most part
they are desperate enemies and persecutors of Christ, and of his People, and of
his Truths: So it was with the Scribes and Pharisees, Christ had not such
enemies in all the world as they were, because they were most zealous for their
own inventioons, they declined the Rule, and set up their own rule, and
therefore they prove desperate enemies to Christ. Paul makes an acknowledgement
of it when Christ came to open his eyes, and does tell you, that that was the
cause of his driving on that trade of persecuting the Saints with so much
earnestness, because he was so zealous for the traditions of men; in Phil. 3.
6. You may see there what he says was the cause of his persecuting the Saints:
Concerning zeal, persecuting the Church, touching the righteousness which is in
the law blameless: And so in Gal. 1. 13, 14. For ye have heard of my
conversation in time past, in the Jews Religion, how that beyond measure I
persecuted the Church of God and wasted it. Ver. 14. And profited in the Jews
religion above many my equals in mine own nation, being more zealous of the
traditions of my fathers: The zeal which he had for the traditions of men was
that which carried him on to persecute the Christians with so much violence;
and many times it is so, that they which do most exalt their own traditions,
they become very zealous in persecuting the Saints and Truths of Christ, for it
is natural for a man to become zealous for that which is his own; that which is
of the flesh, that which is a kin to the flesh, the flesh will be zealous for:
Now all traditions they are born of the flesh, they are the offspring of man's
own brain, and therefore upon that account men are many times very zealous for
them to the persecuting of the Saints of God. Now upon this account the Lord
Christ will not afford his presence with such as lay aside his Rule, for they
many times prove the greatest persecuters of Christ and his people.

Fourthly, Christ will not continue and afford his presence with such a people,
as set up their own inventions and traditions in the place of God's Rule,
because they do arrogate that to themselves which is Christ's due; he is the
great Prophet, and given to instruct his people, to make known the way of life
and salvation, and it belongs to Christ to give a rule for his people to walk
by: And therefore when men shall set up their rule in the place of Christ's
Rule; what do they but take the place of Christ, the office of Christ, and turn
Christ out of his office, and set themselves in Christ's chair. Now this is a
great provocation to Christ, and that which Christ will not endure, but depart
from such a people.

Fifthly, They that do exalt their own inventions and traditions in the place
of Christ's Rule, for the most part they place their righteousness in those very
traditions of their own; which is a great provocation unto Christ; for you may
observe this in the Pharisees, they that were so zealous for their own
inventions, and would not submit to the Rule of Christ, they would not submit
to the Righteousness of Christ, but they placed their righteousness in their
traditions, in their inventions; a kind of volluntary humility they had, and
willingly submitted to their traditions, and by so doing did overturn the
righteousness of Christ, placing their righteousness in their own observations;
it was that which made them not to submit to the righteousness of God. Let a
man do never so much, let him walk never so strictly, let him set up the
straitest rule to himself to walk by, though a man do never so much, though he
afflict his body never so much, if this tend to draw off the soul from the
righteousness of Christ, that a man should look upon this as his commendation
before God, and place this in the room of Christ's righteousness, as all do that
set up their own traditions, they do greatly provoke the Lord Christ, and loose
all they do; though men could walk as exactly as the very Angels, yet if that
exactness should draw them to place any trust, any confidence in their
observations and humility, they loose all their labor; for Christ tells his
Disciples in Matthew. 5. 20. That except your righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no wise enter into the
kingdom of heaven: Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees: they went a great way in self righteousness, they walked
very strictly and very precisely; ah but you must have another kind of
righteousness, a righteousness that must be beyond theirs; they placed their
righteousness in their doings, in their observations and inventions; but except
your righteousness exceed theirs, you shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.

The Devil he will allow men to go a great way in such paths of
self-righteousness, to do a great deal, to suffer a great deal, to carry it
very humbly, and very strictly, and seem to be the most mortified men living;
if the Devil can but draw them off from Christ's righteousness thereby, and
place their righteousness in this, he care not how far they go; for the Devil
knows that this will never mortify the deeds of the flesh, whatsoever is of
man's setting up will never mortify the deeds of the flesh; but as I said
before, men may live very strictly, fast and pray, and yet be far from
mortifying the deeds of the flesh; it may be so far from mortifying the deeds
of the flesh, that it may strengthen the flesh and corruption, get strength
while men seem to walk in such a way of seeming mortification; yea the strength
of the body may be spent in seeming mortification, and the corruption
unmortified.

But to reflect a little by way of Application. Application


Oh that this might be a warning piece to us to take heed that we do not exalt
any thing of man in the room of Christ; take heed we do not exalt our rule
above Christ's Rule, that we do not form rules to our selves to walk by, and to
worship by, and decline the Rule, and Institutions, and Ordinances of Christ.

There are two sorts of people that are and will be found guilty of this, Two
sorts of people that exalt their rule above Christ's Rule.
who shall not enjoy the presence of the Lord, for Christ will depart from such
a people.

First, Such as set up outward forms of their own in opposition to Christ's
Form; there have been such a generation of men in this Land, and still there
are, who has such Idols in their hearts who set up their form above Christ's
Form; Christ has left a Rule, and Christ has given his Form, and his
Institutions, which must be observed till his coming; but now when men shall
bring in their own inventions and traditions, their own superstitious
ceremonies into the worship of Christ, which Christ has not commanded, this is
a great provocation to the Lord, and such a people cannot enjoy the spiritual
presence of Christ; for ^ait^ Christ, Go teach, and observe what I have
commanded you, and lo I am with you to the end of the world. So long as a
people cleave to Christ's Institutions, so long they are under the Promise of
Christ, but they that shall go from this are not under the Promise of Christ.

2. And then again there are those that will be found setting up something of
their own in the stead of Christ's Rule, Second sort of people that exalt their
rule above Christ's Rule.
while they pretend that they have another rule then the Word to walk by; the
other is more gross and carnal, but this more spiritually wicked. I say, when
men shall pretend to have another rule to walk by, that they have the Spirit of
the Lord to be their rule to teach them, and they shall not look to the rule of
the Scripture, not look to any rule without them; truly both these sorts of men
will be found to set up their own rule above Christ's Rule: And oh how dangerous
is it? and as I said before, so again, and oh that it might be remembered! It is
a pulling Christ out of his Throne; for men to decline his Rule, the rule of
his Word, which he has given them to walk by, and decline his Ordinances, and
pretend to walk by a rule that is within them, truly they exalt something of
their own above Christ; and let it be remembered what the Lord threatens to such
as will not hear the great Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. and 19. The Lord thy God will
raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto
me, unto him ye shall hearken. V. 19. And it shall come to pass, that
whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him. He that will not take the rule from Christ's mouth, he
that will not walk by that rule that Christ has left in his Word to walk by,
but shall take another rule though the pretense be never so high and spiritual,
the Lord has said that such a soul shall be cu^ off; the Lord will not afford
his presence, Christ will not continue his presence with such a people as shall
exalt any invention above Christ's Rule, the rule of the Word.

But it may be that they will say, Object.
They do not exalt any thing of their own, we are mistaken of that no, it i^
only the Spirit of Christ that they exalt: it is the Spirit of Christ that is
their rule to walk by, and they are not bound to attend to any rule whatsoever
that is without them; but to walk by the rule of the Spirit of God that is
within them.

To whom, Answ.
I say, it is a great mistake, that the Spirit of the Lord in us should be a
rule for us to walk by; the Spirit is not the rule, the Spirit is given to open
the rule, the Spirit is given to shine upon the rule, to declare the rule, but
the Spirit of the Lord is not the rule. It is true indeed, we cannot know the
rule, at least in the spiritual nature of it, till the Spirit of the Lord does
open it* as a man cannot see what time of day it is by the Sun-dyall till the
Sun shine upon it; ah but the Dyall is the rule: And so it is a great mistake*
while men think that the Spirit is the rule, when as the Word of the Lord is
the rule, to the Law and to the testimony, if any man walk not according to
this rule. And so Christ tells his Disciples, that the Spirit is not given to
manifest and discover any new thing, but what Christ has laid dow^ in his
Word: look into John 16. 13. Howbeit when the Spirit of truth is come, he will
guide you into all truth; for he shall not speak of himself* but whatsoever he
shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will show you things to come. Mark how
clear it is, that the Spirit is not given to discover any thing that is beside
the rule that Christ has left; he shall guide you into truth; ah but how? he
shall lead you to the rule and guide you into truth, for he shall not speak of
himself, but what Christ has spoken, and what is written in the Word of the
Lord; and the Spirit is given to speak it with power, and life, and efficacy;
He shall take of mine and show it to you, no new thing, but what is mine; my
Truth, my Gospel; he shall take of mine and show it to you.

Object. But you will say, If the Spirit of the Lord be in me, surely the
Spirit need no rule to walk by; but the Spirit of the Lord is in all the
Saints, what need have they of any other rule?

Answ. I answer: The Spirit needs no rule, ah but the Lord saw that we needed a
rule to walk by, we were apt to be deceived, to call darkness light, and light
darkness; the Lord saw we had need of a rule, and that rule is the Word of the
Lord, which is given us as our rule, and no other rule but only the Word of the
Lord: And therefore be not deceived upon any pretense whatsoever; take heed you
be not drawn off from the Institutions of Christ, from the Word of Christ, the
rule that Christ has left all his people to walk by, for if you be, you will
exalt something of your own, something that you will place your Righteousness
in; and oh how provoking is that to Christ? for a people that do so, they
cannot and shall not enjoy the spiritual presence of Christ; such as forsake
Christ's Rule, and set up their own rule that Christ never made a rule, they
shall not enjoy the presence of Christ, no more then Christ afforded his
presence with the Scribes and Pharisees.

And therefore do but wait upon the Lord, cleave to the Lord, and hold fast
his Rule, and you shall see that the Lord will make it evident to all the
world, that he has left them, though they are never so seemingly high and
spiritual, yet it will appear, that such as forsake him, Christ will forsake
them, they are left of Christ in their judgments already, and wait upon the
Lord, and you shall see that the Lord will leave them to corrupt themselves by
a corrupt conversation; for what way of Christ will not men only forsake, but
blaspheme? and what sins so great will not such a man, as leaves the rule, be
drawn to the commission of? For if the Word be not the rule, but a strong
impulse of Spirit, what impulses may not a man have? he may have the strongest
impulse to the greatest evil whatsoever; if the Lord has not yet left, yet he
will leave such a people to the commission of great evil: As I remember the
history of some of the low Countries, they had such a pretense, that the Word
was not to be their rule, but they were led by the impulse of the Spirit of
God; and I remember in that history it is recorded, that many grievous
wickednesses they did commit* they came to marry many wives, and one of the
chief of them cuts off one of his wives heads. And another upon a time, he
calls his kindred together, and he in the presence of them all takes away the
life of one of his brethren, and said, now the will of the Lord is done: And
what wickedness is it that men may not fall into by a strong impulse?

But so much for that.

I will give you but one hint more in that 21. v. Third thing laid down, which
is the place Christ came unto.
jesus went into the coasts of Tire and Sidon: You ^ee from whence Christ came,
which was from the ^arts of Judea: and the occasion of Christ's de^atture,
because they rejected his Word. But whe^^er came Christ? He departed into the
coast of Tire and Sidon. A word or two of that, and so ^onclude; The coasts of
Tire and Sidon.

First, They were the uttermost parts of the ^and of Canaan.

Secondly, It was a very dark place, a place full (...) darkness and
ignorance; a people that were ^ixed with the heathen, and had learned their
sin^^l customs; and yet the Lord Christ when he goes ^^om Jerusalem, he goes
into the parts of Tire and ^^don.

Briefly observe this: Observation.
The faithfulness of Christ (...) his Fathers work, and the love of Christ to
the (...) of men: Tire a hundred miles from Jerusa^^m, and yet Christ undertook
this journey. Oh (...) faithfulness of Christ in his Fathers work! he ^^ares no
labor, no travel from place to place, ^^om City to City, to the uttermost
parts of the ^^nd, and all was to do his Fathers work: Oh the ^^ithfulness of
Christ!

And take notice of the love of Christ to the ^^uls of men; The love of Christ
to the souls of men.
it was in compassion to a poor wo^^n of Canaan that Christ took this journey,
she (...) known to the Lord before, and in compassion ^^do her soul good, and
to release her daughter (...) was possessed with a Devil, Christ takes this
^^urney. See the love of Christ to the souls of ^^or creatures. Christ knew the
worth of a soul, the preciousness of a soul: what would it advanvantage a man
to gain the whole world and loose his soul? Why in compassion to this woman's
soul Christ takes this great journey.

And by way of Application: Application
Oh that we might learn of Christ to be faithful in that work which the Lord
has committed to us; and to express more love to our own souls and the souls
of others. What a great way did Christ go to do good to one soul? if there be
but one woman (...) Canaan, if but one woman of Samaria, for Christ to preach
to, he takes that occasion. Whatever work the Lord puts into our hand, in the
service (...) our generation, and for compassion to souls, look (...) Christ,
he thought no labor too much to do go^^ to the soul of one woman.

Secondly, Observation, that God has some in every place.
This was a very dark place, the darkness of ignorance and sin did abound in
the^^ parts, in the coasts of Tire and Sidon, and yet (...) Christ goes from
Jerusalem, he departs into the^^ coasts. You see the Lord has some in every
place; no place so dark and sinful, but there (...) be some that may belong to
the Lord, and whe^^ there are any that do belong to the Lord in (...) part of
the world, though never so dark, yet (...) Lord will send from heaven and visit
them; if (...) one poor Canaanitish woman that belongs to the Lord, Christ will
take care of that woman; (...) comes into these dark places, that so he mig^^
make known the light of the Gospel, that this (...) woman might believe, where
there are any (...) belong to the Lord, the Lord will find (...) way to find
them out, he will visit the^ with the discoveries of his Grace and Love by the
declaration of the Gospel of Christ.

And oh that we might observe the wonderful dispensations of the grace of the
Gospel, that he should carry it into the dark corners, that Christ should leave
Jerusalem and carry the Word of Grace into the dark places; that the Lord
should make choice of most unlikely places, places most destitute of the
Gospel; oh the wonderful dispensation of the Lord! nay, that the Lord should
there make some poor creatures eminent in grace; this is another wonder, that
the Lord should bring in some out of the dark corners, and make them most
eminent in Grace, make them patterns of ^aith, as this woman of Canaan was;
here was faith in this woman that made the soul of Christ to wonder: Now what a
wonderful dispensation is ^his and discovery of the free Grace of God? That all
is of God, nothing in man, nothing in the ^eanes without his blessing, that he
should make ^ome to believe in the dark places, yea not only to ^elieve, but
with such an admirable faith as this woman; that he should make them that were
at ^he greatest distance to be most nigh, and the greatest sinners the
excellentest Saints: Oh the ^^eeness of Gods Grace in his dispensations!

This should teach us to put on bowels of merry toward sinners, toward them
that are in the ^ark places of the world. All Christians that are (...) the
world, that has received the light of Christ, should be filled with compassion
toward them that sit in darkness; if we dwell near Jerusalem, (...) should
pity them that dwell in the coasts of Tire and Sidon; and if we can do
nothing, pray that ^he Lord would send forth laborers into his harvest, to
send some into the coasts of Tire and Sidon. Oh pray that the Lord would send
forth laborers into his harvest, that there may be some called out there that
may be strong in faith, an excellent in holiness; nay, they that may be brough^
in out of such places, they may go far beyond them that dwell nigh Jerusalem,
outstrip them (...) faith and holiness; seeing the Lord may have su^^ a people
in dark places, as he had here a preciou^ soul, the woman of Canaan, let us
pity them tha^ are in darkness, and pray that the Lord would sen^ forth his
light to them.

Matthew. 15. 22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and
cried unto him, saying, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David, my
daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.
SERMON II.
BEhold, a woman came out of the same coasts. The Evangelist Mark does take
notice, that when Christ came into these coasts of Tire and Sidon he entered
into a private house, and would have hid himself there, Mark 7. 24, 25. And
from thence he arose and went into the borders of Tire and Sidon, and entered
into an house, and would have no man know it; but he could not be hid: For this
woman of Canaan comes and finds him out, and falls down and worships him.

So then we may observe this briefly:

That where there is a seed of faith in any soul, Observation.
where the work of faith is begun, it will find out Christ wherever he is.

This woman had a seed of faith, she hears of Christ, and though Christ goes
about to hide himself, he could not be hid. Wherever faith is begun in any
soul, it will find out Christ, never rest till it find out Christ, it will come
to him wherever he is: Christ cannot always be hid to the eye of faith; Where
the body is, there will the Eagles be gathered together, says Christ: The
Eagles will find out the dead body, though it be never so remote, though it lay
in a secret cave of the earth, and so where there is faith, the soul will find
out Christ, Christ cannot always lie hid from the soul.

For the eye of faith it has some resemblance like the eye of God: There is
nothing can be hid from the eye of God, Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9. Neither shall I go
from thy presence; if I go to heaven thou art there, and if I make my bed in
hell thou art there, if I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea, thou art there. And so the eye of faith has
resemblance to the eye of God, though indeed the eye of faith cannot always
see God, yet where there is faith the soul will be pursuing after God and
Christ: My soul follows hard after God, says David, Psalm. 63. 8. David had
faith, and his soul pressed after God, made hard after God: Faith will follow
Christ wherever he is, if in heaven, faith will follow him there, if he go
down to hell, even in dark dispensations, faith will follow him there, if he
fly to the uttermost parts of the earth, and seem to be at a great distance,
faith will follow him there: Christ cannot be hid always from the eye of
Faith, it will follow him when he hides himself, as the Spouse in the
Canticles, when Christ hid himself from her, yet she follows him, and seeks him
at home and abroad, and leaves no place unsought, and she never gives over till
she finds him, seeks till she finds, and at last she found him whom her soul
loves.

Nay, I may say, faith will see something of Christ wherever he is, not only
follow after him, but see some glimpse of him wherever he is, though he go
down into hell, the soul will see something of Christ in such a dark
dispensation; in the hardest saying of Christ faith will find something of
Christ, as the Lord calls this woman a dog, and yet she finds out something of
Christ.

And therefore to apply this, Application
briefly.

First, Brethren: O that we might take this woman for our pattern, to follow
after Christ, and find him out, when he hides himself: You that walk in
darkness and see no light, oh that you would look upon this woman, and make her
your pattern: Christ hid himself from her; ah, but she finds him out, and
Christ could not be hid: One would have thought it had been a bold part of this
woman, when Christ retired himself into a private house, that she should find
him out and press in upon him; ah, but the Lord did not reprove her for her
boldness, it pleased Christ well enough. And oh that we might seek after
Christ, and press in upon Christ, even then when Jesus Christ seems to hide
himself that he might not be found!

And for your encouragement, Encouragement to seek Christ.
does Christ seem to be hid from you as from this woman of C^naan? never leave
till you find him, go where he is, wait upon him in an Ordinance, look to him
in a promise, and press in upon him; and let me say for your encouragement,
Jesus Christ does not hide himself from you that you might never find him; no,
the end of Christ's hiding himself is, that you might seek him, that you may
seek him earnestly, diligently, as the Wise men did: Christ did not hide
himself from this woman, with an intent she should not find him; no, if Christ
had intended that, Christ would never have come into those coasts, and
therefore his intent was not that she might not have found him, he might have
gone into the wilderness, and gone where she might never have heard of him; no,
that she might seek him, and exercise faith, and press in upon him. And oh
that this might give encouragement to you poor souls, who are looking after
Christ, who has hid himself from you: O consider, that if Jesus Christ had
intended so to hide himself as you should never find him, Christ would never
have come upon your coasts, Christ would have gone some where else, he would
never have come so nigh to you as he has done, he would never have come so
nigh to your souls, and never have drawn nigh to you in such a word of grace
and promise; no, he hides himself that you might seek him, and not with an
intent you might not find him.

Secondly, consider what an engagement this does lay upon all our souls, this
example of the woman of Canaan in finding out Christ, and pressing in upon
Christ, when she had no invitation: Oh what an engagement is this for our souls
to believe in Christ? What an engagement to come to Christ, to come in faith?
seeing Jesus Christ does not hide himself in a private house as he did then,
no, Christ he draws nigh to us, and stands, as it were, upon the house top.
Wisdom stands in the open street, and there she cries and makes proclamation,
O ye fools, how long will you love folly? ye simple ones, how long will you
love simplicity? So then if she came to Christ when Christ hid himself, what an
engagement have we to come to Christ when Christ stands upon the house top? If
she pressed in to Christ when she had no invitation, O what an engagement lies
upon us in the day of grace to come to Christ? We have many a word of
encouragement; He says, Look to me and be you saved: And he says, Behold me,
to a nation that was not called by his name. O the gracious invitations that we
hear from Christ from day to day! Christ sets the door of Grace wide open; let
him come, and whoever will let him come; and he does engage, that whosoever
comes shall not be shut out, shall not find the door of Grace shut against him;
whoever comes to Christ by faith shall find that all their sins and iniquities
shall not shut the door against them: And therefore, to conclude this, if this
woman came when she had no invitation to come, O what an engagement is it for
us to come to Christ, now Christ stands so as he may be seen afar off? O that
God would persuade the heart of some poor sinner to come to Christ by faith!
But to pass by this.

We shall now consider who this woman was, Who this woman was that come to
Christ.
A woman of Canaan came.

First, Described first, by a woman; a woman is the weaker vessel, more weak
ordinarily then men; stronger passions, greater fears, subject to doubts; and
yet here is a woman* Behold, a woman came.

Secondly, She is described to be a Canaanite, a woman of Canaan, she was of
the stock of the Canaanites, a cursed Nation, cast out of the Land for their
abominations, and their Land given to Israel for a possession; and yet this
woman, though a Canaanite, comes to Christ.

Thirdly, She being a Canaanite, it follows, that before the Lord revealed
himself to her, she was a very sinful woman; so the rest of the Canaanites
were, not only vile in respect of kindred, but vile in respect of actual
transgression; and yet behold, this woman of Canaan here coming to Christ.

So then the Doctrine is this: That the Lord many times is pleased to make
choice of the most weak, Doctrine.
and the most unworthy, and the most sinful, and causes them to come to Jesus
Christ. She was a woman, there is her weakness; a Canaanite, there is her
unworthiness; sinful in respect of actual transgression, even as the rest of
the Canaanites.

We shall clear this Point to you from the Word of God, and give you Instances
that the Lord makes choice many times of the weakest and unworthiest, and win
upon their hearts, and cause them to believe in Christ,

First of all for Gods choosing those that are weak, and bringing home such to
Christ, it will appear that God many times chooses the weakest.

Weak in respect of Estate. Parts. Age. Sex.


To clear these, Weak in estate many times chosen.
first, Such as are weak in estate, poor, such as are mean in estate, for the
most part the Lord makes choice of such: Go and tell John (says Christ, Matthew.
11.) that which you have heard and seen, unto the poor is the Gospel preached,
and the poor receive the Gospel: And in James 2. Hearken my beloved brethren,
has not God chosen the poor of this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom? Some rich, some of great estates are chosen; but for the most part
the vein of Gods election runs thorough the loins of those that are poor.

Secondly, Weak in parts many times chosen.
Weak in parts: If you consider such as are weak in parts and gifts, that have
no great natural parts and gifts, God many times, nay, for the most part makes
choice of such, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. For you see your calling brethren, how that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called;
but God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, and
God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty.

Thirdly, Weak in age many times chosen.
If we consider those that are weak in respect of age; young men, the Lord many
times makes choice of young men, bringing them in, and revealing more of
himself to them then he does to old men; youth is weak, young men are weak,
though not in natural strength, yet in morral strength; for youth is
accompanied with strong passions and lusts that weaken the mind and
understanding; young men for the most part are most rash and inconsiderate.
Arguments of weakness: Young Rehoboam, his young Counsel, what rash judgment
did they give to their King, that cost him his life? And young men are most apt
to be lifted up with pride, and therefore says the Apostle, A Bishop must not
be a novice: and yet many times, notwithstanding young men are accompanied with
so many weaknesses, yet the Lord is pleased to make choice of them: There are
many Instances of it, that the Lord has made choice of young men, and brought
in young men* He made choice of Samuel when he was very young, he ministered
before the Lord; God spoke to him, and gave out visions to him concerning
Elie's house; when he was a child: And so if you look upon all the Kings of
Judah, you shall find none more zealous for God then Josiah was; Josiah was
brought home to God when he was a young man, 2 Chronicles. 34. In the eight year of
his reign he made a great reformation; and then he was but sixteen years old,
and yet he expressed more zeal for God then all the Kings.

And so among Job's friends God speaks best of Elihu the young man; and of all
the Evangelis^s none like to Timothy, he was trained up, and had known the
Scriptures from a child; Nay you shall find, that the very children did follow
Christ when Christ came into the Temple, Matthew. 21. 15. and cried Hosanna to
the Son of David: the Scribes ^^d Pharisees they were offended when they heard
^^e children cry Hosanna to the son of David; he ^^d perfect his praise out of
the mouths of babes ^^d sucklings, the children cried Hosanna to the ^on of
God; so that weak in respect of age the ^o^d many times makes choice of.

Fourthly, Weak in respect of sex many times chosen.
Weak in respect of sex, and that is a ^oman, she is called the weaker vessel,
and yet he many times reveals himself to women, and unto women sooner then men.
This woman of Canaan ^^sthe first that comes to Christ in all these coasts; we
read of no man that came to Christ: and so ^he woman of Samaria, John 4. she
was the first of all that City that was converted to Christ; Christ first
speaks to her, and draws her heart to ^elieve on him, and then she runs to the
City and calls all her friends. And so in Luke 8. 2. you ^ead of diverse women
that followed Christ, there were diverse weak women followed after Christ, and
did minister to him. And so in the Acts of the Apostles, when the Apostles came
to some Ci^ies, the women came first, and were more forward ^hen men to hear
the Gospel, Acts 16. 13, 14. And on the Sabbath day we went out of the city by
a rivers side, where prayer was wont to be made, and we sat down and spoke unto
the women which resorted thither? And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of
purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped God, heard us; whose heart
the Lord opened, etc. The women were the first that came to hear; and here is
mention made of Lydia, whose heart the Lord opened, and she received the Word
of God, and received Christ. And thus you see this particular also cleared,
that the Lord ma^^ times makes choice of the weakest, and mak^ them to come to
Christ.

But secondly, to speak to the second part (...) the doctrine, that the Lord
does not only ma^^ choice of the weakest, but of the most unworthie^^ and I
shall speak only of unworthiness, in respe^^ of parentage or kindred; this
woman she ca^^ of the stock of the Canaanites, which were a wic^^ed and cursed
generation; you read diverse time^ in Scripture what they were, and what great
sin^ners, how they were a people that were given ove^ to all whoredom, and
witchcraft, and cruelty, (...) such as did offer their sons and daughters to
D^^vils, those were the abominations of the Cana^^nites; yet, behold, here is
one of the stock (...) the Canaanites that lay under a curse, cursed (...)
Cain, they were strangers to God and the Cove^nant, and counted dogs by the
Israelites, yet the woman is plucked out, and the Lord works faith (...) her
heart.

But to give you some Instances in Scripture. The Lord pulls out Abraham from
an idolatrous pe^^ple, idolatrous kindred, and makes him to be excel^lent in
faith, and the Father of the faithful. An^ so you read of Rahab, that was of
the Nation th^^ God destroyed, and by faith she was saved and (...) household.
And so you read of Ruth, that was (...) the stock of Moab, yet the Lord makes
choice (...) her, and brings her to be a Proselyte in Israel, an^ though she
was one that came of Moab, yet she was made a Mother in Israel. So you see the
second Particular.

Thirdly, to speak to the third branch of the Doctrine; That the Lord makes
choice of th^se that were most sinful. This woman was not only a Canaanite, but
was as sinful as the Canaanites, before the Lord brought her in to himself: The
Lord makes choice of those that are most sinful. Manasseh, of all the Kings
none like Manasseh, none like him for vileness and wickedness, he did worse
then the Canaanites that were cast out of the Land before the children of
Israel, yet the Lord makes choice of him, and Manasseh's heart at last was
turned to the Lord. And so among all the persecuters of Christ and his Church,
except those that sinned against the holy Ghost, none a greater persecuter then
Paul, he did it with a great deal of violence* and he says, he made the poor
Christians to blaspheme the name of Christ; so violent was I, and so mad was I,
that I persecuted them to strange cities, and haled them to prison; and when
they were judged to death I gave my consent, and my voice was among those that
gave sentence of judgment for their death: And yet the Lord had mercy upon
Paul, and he was brought at last to believe in Christ, and of a persecuter he
was made a Preacher of the Gospel, and of the faith that once he destroyed. And
so diverse Instances I might give you of those that were most sinful, which the
Lord brought home to Christ.

Yea such as lived in Christ's time, of all the people the Publicans and Harlots
were the worst. None like to Zacheus a great oppressor, one that had done much
wrong, and one that did bea^ himself up upon his riches; he was a rich Robber,
^ah but the Lord makes choice of Zacheus, Christ calls him, and he comes down,
and then he turns his hand against his sin that was so dear to him, and makes
restitution of the wrong he had done. And so among all the Harlots none worse
then Mary Magdalen, who had seven Devils cast out of her, and yet the Lord
makes choice of Mary Magdalen, she was brought in to Christ, and made most
excellent among women. Thus you see the Lord many times does make choice both
of the weakest and of the unworthiest in respect of kindred and stock, and of
the most sinfullest.

To shut up all briefly with a little Application. Application


First of all, here is an invitation that this Doctrine does give to diverse
sorts to come to Christ* this Doctrine invites the weakest, and the
unworthiest, and the sinfullest, to come to Christ.

Let me speak to the weakest: O you that are weak in estates, weak in parts,
that you would persuade your hearts to come to Christ, know th^^ this weakness
shall be no block in your way, Christ will as soon receive you as the strong.
And le^ me speak to those that are weak in respect of age* O that you would
persuade your hearts to lo^^ after Christ, to seek after Christ betimes, to see
after faith in the name of the Son of God. Lo^^ upon the example of young men,
spoken of (...) your imitation, Samuel the Prophet, and Josiah the King,
Timothy the Evangelist. Oh that children young men, would look to those
patterns and examples for their imitation, think upon the children that sung
Hosanna; O that children and you^^ men would read that place, the very children
su^ Hosanna to the son of David. Oh what swe^^ music was it? What heavenly
music to he^^ young men and children to be praising the name of Christ?
Children in tender years they sung Hosanna: and oh that this might be a pattern
for children! Children fear the Lord, look after him in tender years, that
while other children are blaspheming and cursing, you may be singing of praise
to the Lord: O what heavenly music is it? The Lord Christ will take it well at
your hand, if you that are young will begin in tender years to look after
Christ, and lift up the name of Christ. Christ took the part of those children;
the Pharisees were offended that the Children should cry Hosanna, but Christ he
took it well, and he pleaded for them; this is that which is written, says
Christ, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings will thou ordain praise: Christ
will take it well at your hands if you that are children will be singing
Hosanna to the Son of David; Christ will take it well at your hands, if you
will be praising and praying to the Lord, though accompanied with a great deal
of weakness, as it is like they sung Hosanna with a great deal of weakness, yet
Christ takes it well at their hand, and says, this is that which is written,
Out of the mouth of babes and suoklings thou will ordain praise.

And let me speak to women, the weaker sex; the Lord, as you have heard, does
make choice of the weakest, and you have had the example of women set before
you that the Lord has done good to.

O remember the women that ministered to Christ; remember the women that
followed the Apostles to the rivers side; remember Lydia, whose heart the Lord
opened, and the woman of Samaria, and this woman of Canaan; and oh that this
might be an encouragement to women! be not discouraged because of your
weakness, and do not say, I know not how to come to Christ: Why the Lord makes
choice of the weakest, and they are brought home sooner then the strong: And O
that it might be an encouragement for you to come to Christ! And let me say to
all women that hear me this day, The woman was first in the transgression; O
that that might provoke women to look after Christ; the woman was the first
that sinned, and the woman was the first that was deceived; and therefore oh
that women would be the first in coming to Christ!

And let me tell you, that if there be any women that hear me this day, and
hear the Word of the Lord, and shall despise it, and will not come to Christ,
but stay at home and dwell in themselves, in their lusts, take heed that the
Lord do not leave you for the refusal of the tender of Christ to be worse then
the vilest of men. Wicked women the Lord has left them many times to be worse
then the worst of men. You know what Jezabel was, a mother of witchcraft and
whoredom; Ahab was bad enough, but she was (...) times worse, drew him on to
shed all the blood of the innocent: And you know that Herodias heard John as
well as Herod, but she received not the Word, and Herodias was worse then
Herod; wh^^ would have thought that there had been so much cruelty in her heart
toward John a good man And therefore women take heed how you de^spise the word
of Grace, least the Lord lea^^ you to greater abominations, and you become^
worse then the vilest of men.

And let me speak also unto those that are unworthy in respect of parentage. If
there be any here that with a sad heart look upon their kindred and fathers
house, as being such as know not God, but are contrary to God; O let not that
be any block in your way, you may be accepted of Christ, though you come of the
vilest kindred, your kindred cannot be worse then the kindred of the woman of
Canaan was, they were cast out of the Land, a cursed Generation; and therefore
all the sins of your parents shall not be any block in your way, the child
shall not bear the sin of the parents, if the child be coming to Christ, and
taking hold of his Covenant, all the sins of your parents shall not be any
block in your way, but you shall be welcome to Christ.

And so for those that are sensible of personal transgression; O let not that
be any block in your way to hinder you from coming to Christ! though you have
sinned greatly with a high hand, yet do not go on to estrange your selves from
the Lord, by keeping at a distance from Christ, and by adding unbelief to all
your sin, which will set home all your sin, and bind them all upon your back: O
that those that have committed great offenses might see what a door the Gospel
to Christ opens to them to come in to Christ!

And let me say for your encouragement, that the Grace of the Lord shall appear
the more toward you: the more sinful you are, the more rich, and glorious, and
excellent shall the Grace of the Lord appear to you; and know that Grace is
never more glorious, then when it triumphs over great iniquities, when Grace
does triumph over great transgressions: O then the Grace of God is glorious;
grace toward you shall be exceeding glorious.

And it shall be for the Lords honor to receive you, to pass by and to
forgive seventy times seven. It is the honor of a man, a man's glory; why it is
the glory of the great God to forgive many and great transgressions, and there
shall be the more joy in heaven for your return; the greater sinners you have
been, the more glad shall the heart of Christ be: When the Prodigal son came
home, what joy was there at his return?

And let me say to you, that all your transgressions shall not be mentioned,
though he or she has been never so vile, yet if the Lord does give any sinner
a heart to come to Christ, the Word of the Lord shall be made good; That all
their sins shall not be mentioned, Ezekiel. 18. 21, 22. If the wicked forsake his
way all his transgressions shall not be mentioned: Oh that this might encourage
unworthy ones to look to Christ!

And truly if unworthy ones shall not be persuaded by this to come to Christ,
know that this example of the woman of Canaan will rise up in judgment against
you; she was as unworthy and sinful as you; and oh what a cutting thing will it
be when sinners shall see Manasseh, and Paul, and Mary Magdalen, and the woman
of Samaria, and this woman of Canaan, to sit down with Christ, and they
themselves shut out? O that God would help you to embrace the Gospel! and know,
that all unworthiness and sinfulness shall be no block in your way, if the Lord
now persuade your heart to make a close with Christ.

And to draw to a conclusion, let us labor to help forward Gods design: Does
God make choice of such? O then we should help forward Gods work, especially
where any stand related to us; weakness shall not hinder, they may come to
Christ; and therefore be in the use of the means, pray for them, and speak to
them, and improve every talent that God has given you, even for the weakest
and unworthiest.

And again, take heed that we do not murmur against any of the dispensations of
the Lord; take heed we do not envy this dispensation, and that our hearts do
not rise up against it; that we do not murmur when we see such and such profess
the name of Christ, and they are very forward, and such as were young children,
and such poor weak women; Now what a high profession do they make? The
Pharisees they were offended when as the rude people (as they called them that
knew not the Law) they followed after Christ. Oh this made the Gospel and
Christ a stumbling block to them! And so when as the children did confess
Christ, and sung Hosanna to the son of David, the Pharisees were offended, it
troubled them at the heart that the children should cry out so, it was a
trouble to them. Take heed that we be not offended when the Lord makes choice
of young ones, and they are too forward as some think; why this is no more then
what the Lord has promised, to pour out his Spirit upon young men, take heed
we be not offended at it; we should rather rejoice in it, when you see young
ones, weak ones, and sinful ones come in to Christ, and are high in
profession, oh you should rejoice in it.

And let your souls wonder at this dispensation, do not envy it, but do you
wonder at it. The Evangelist Matthew he places a note of wonder, behold, a
woman of Canaan, it was a wonder, and we should stand and wonder at Gods secret
dispensation: O here is the mystery of the Gospel, that weak ones and sinful
ones are brought in to Christ.

And rejoice in it as Christ did, and bless the Lord for it, though they have
more then we have, yet do not envy it, but know that this pleases the Lord,
and the Lord will so have it; I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
for so it seems good in thy sight. Christ's soul was taken with it. O here is
a wonder indeed, for which God is to be blessed and praised: And so if God be
your Father, when you see this, do not envy it, but rejoice in it as Christ
did; though I have little, I thank thee that thou art pleased to give out so
much of thy self to such and such, that weak ones and unworthy ones are brought
in to Christ.

And last of all: You that are weak in respect of parts and gifts; and poor,
and unworthy, and weak, in respect of sex, or of vile parentage, and yet the
Lord has plucked you out; and vile and great sinners, and yet the Lord has
brought you home to himself; O bless the Lord for this his dispensation toward
you. If the Evangelist look upon the woman and say, Behold, the woman of
Canaan, O look upon your selves with admiration, Behold the Grace of God which
is revealed to you though poor wretches. O know that you are engaged to the
Lord for this mercy, that God should choose you, the weakest, the unworthiest,
and the sinfullest.

And do you labor to walk worthy of this mercy. Oh if the Lord has chosen you
that were the sinfullest, O labor to bring much honor unto God, as you have
brought much dishonor, and to hold forth the contrary graces to those great
transgressions.

And if the Lord has brought you in that are vveak ones, women; is there ever
a vveak woman that the Lord has made choice of? O admire with fear this
dispensation of God, and bless him for his Grace to you, and labor to adorn
the Doctrine of God and your Savior with a gracious conversation, and study
the Graces the Apostle Peter commends to you, that you should be much in the
exercise of faith, and adorn themselves with a meek and quiet spirit. O this
meek and quiet spirit, this sober and this modest conversation and obedience to
Husbands, these Graces Christ by the Apostle does commend to you, and you are
engaged to do all this and more for Christ, because he has had respect to the
weakest.

Matthew. 15. 22. And cried unto him, saying, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son
of David.
SERMON III.
YOu have seen the woman, and now you shall hear her speak: She cried unto him,
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David.

Observe, here is a declaration of her faith, A declaration of this woman's
faith.
and that we shall first take notice of; her faith is declared by a notable
confession that she makes of Christ.

Her confession: O Lord, thou son of David; it is short, but a great deal is in
it.

First of all, she does acknowledge him to be Lord, Lord of all, to be infinite
in power, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, one that was able to do whatsoever he
pleases, one that was able to cast out the Devil by speaking one word; for she
comes in the behalf of her Daughter and closes with Christ as Lord; where she
does acknowledge his divinity, that he was Lord over all, God blessed for ever,
and had power in his hand, and abillity to do whatsoever he pleased. That is
the first part of her confession, she confessed that Christ was Lord.

Secondly, She confesses that he was the son of David, O Lord, thou son of
David, and therein she does acknowledge his Humanity; as she acknowledged that
he was Lord, so she acknowledged that he was true man.

2. She does acknowledge that he was the promised Messiah, that is comprehended
in that title, Thou son of David: She does acknowledge that he was that Messiah
that was promised should arise out of the House of David, that should come of
the seed of David, the promised Messiah that was promised to be the deliverer
of his people; so she does acknowledge, for she calls him the son of David, he
that was promised should come of the house of David, whom God had promised to
raise up to be a horn of salvation. So you see her confession; she confesses
his Divinity, comes to him as God; confesses his Humanity, comes to him as Man,
and she comes to him as the Messiah, one that was appointed of God to be a
Savior, and one of the house of David. Here is as full and as large a
confession as any of the Disciples make of Christ.

Quest. But it may be queried, Why this woman calls Christ the son of David.
Why she calls him the son of David? she might have expressed him to have been
true man, and called him the son of Adam, why not the son of Adam? or the son
of Abraham? why does she call him the son of David?

Answ. I answer in general: Christ was expected by that name among the Jews,
for so he was promised and prophesied of, that he should be the son of David.

But again, he is called the son of David, because the promise was in a special
manner unto David, in a gracious way, God did confirm the promise of the
Messia^ unto David: Notwithstanding David's imperfection, and the sin that was
in David, yet the promise of the Messiah was to David and his house, though his
house was not so with God, yet God confirmed the Covenant with David, that
Covenant which was made with Abraham, God confirmed it in a remarkable way unto
David; notwithstanding his unworthiness, yet the Messiah should spring out of
his loins; and therefore in respect of that gracious Promise he was called the
son of David.

Secondly, This woman gives him the title of the son of David, because it is
the most honorable title; where there is true faith it will put all the honor
it can upon Christ. David was an honorable King in Israel: David was the first
godly King that ever God set over his own people; so he was honorable, being
the first godly King that reigned over the people; and therefore became David
was most honorable among the Kings, the first godly King, therefore this woman
put honor upon Christ, calls him the son of David.

Thirdly, David was a very remarkable type of Christ, and as he was known by
David, so Christ was known by this name, and called by this name; Christ he was
very like in many things to David; as Christ came of the seed of David, so in
many things Jesus Christ was like to David, and David's Kingdom it was a type
of Christ's Kingdom; and therefore it is said of Christ, Luke 1. That God
should give him the throne of David his father. But in these particulars I
shall instance to you that David was a type of Christ, and Christ like to David.

First, How David was a type of Christ, and how Christ like to David.
In those manifold victories and conquests that David obtained over his enemies
and the enemies of God; why David was a very victorious Prince, he subdued the
enemies of Israel; in David's time, many of the Lords battles were fought by
David, and David returned a Conqueror, he smote the great Goliath that defied
the Armies of the God of Israel, David went forth and smote him, and he fell,
and in those remarkable victories David obtained over the enemies of the
Church, he was a type of Christ, and therefore Christ is called, the son of
David.

Secondly, And then again, David was a type of Christ, in that he brought back
again the Ark of God that was taken captive by the Philistines; David restored
the Ark and brought it back again; so Christ restored the Ordinances, and will
restore them to their perfect purity, even all the vessels of the Lords House
that has been taken captive by the Philistines, Christ will restore them, they
shall all be brought again into their own place, and restored to their first
purity, Christ will fulfill it, there is a promise of it, and he will fulfill
it; in this David was a type of Christ.

Thirdly, David was a type of Christ in that he waited long for the Kingdom,
after the Promise was given to him, yea, after the Lord by Samuel had anointed
David to be King over Israel, after he was anointed he was driven out, and he
waited long for the fulfilling of the Promise, a type of Christ in that; and so
it is with David's Son, the Lord Jesus, though anointed, though the Spirit was
poured out upon him without measure, though anointed to be King, yet we see not
all his enemies put under his feet; there is a promise that it shall be so, but
we see it not, yet he waits for it; and therefore he compares himself to a man
that went into a far country to receive a kingdom for him self; and so Christ
is in Heaven, he sits and waits for it, till the time come that his Father
shall give him the kingdom, and he is to rule over all, his enemies to be made
his footstool.

Nay fourthly, David was a type of Christ in respect of his enemies. David's
enemies were many, and great, mighty, and potent, and so are the enemies of
Jesus Christ: Saul and all his forces rose up against David; and David he had
many enemies in his own house afterward, and they that did eat bread with him
at his table; and his enemies were a type of Christ's enemies; Saul and all his
forces against David, the Devil, and all his Angels, and wicked men against
Christ. Christ's enemies they were such as were his near companions, one that
dipped his hand in the dish with him he betrayed him: And thus you see David was
a type of Christ, his Kingdom a type of Christ's Kingdom.

Fifthly, to add no more but this; David's Kingdom you know was very small at
first, but it grew great; when David came first to the Kingdom there were but
few that took his part; ah, but after there had been war for a while betwixt
the house of David and the house of Saul, God ordered it so, that first one of
the house of Saul fell off, and then another, and the house of Saul waxed
weaker and weaker, and David's house stronger and stronger: So the Kingdom of
Christ, his Kingdom was a little Kingdom, the servants that owned him and his
cause, they are but a very inconsiderable party at first, a little stone cut
out of the mountain without hands, a type and shadow of Christ's Kingdom, but
that stone it waxed bigger and bigger, and became a mountain that filled the
whole earth.

You see why Christ, both here by this woman, and also in diverse other places,
is so frequently called the son of David.

I come now to the observation, from the confession which this woman held
forth, which is this: That true faith it comes unto Christ, Doctrine.
both as he is Lord, and as he is the son of David; it lays this foundation,
and where this confession is not made, there is no true saving faith; true
faith it closes with Christ as he is Lord, and as he is the son of David.

First, I shall show you how true faith comes to Christ, and looks upon Christ,
and closes with Christ as he is Lord; O Lord have mercy on me. This woman here
she make^ the same confession that Peter does, Matthew. 16. 16. and Peter said,
Thou art Christ, the Son of the living God: Here is the same confession that
the Woman makes the Text, she confesses that he was the Son of (...) living
God, that he was Christ, that he was anoi^^ted as he was man to be the Lord and
Saviou^ True faith confesses Christ as he is Lord, and he is the son of David.

I shall show you how true faith closes wi^ Christ(...) as Lord. How true
faith closes with Christ as Lord.


It holds forth thus much to us, to confe^^ Christ to be Lord, or to come to
Christ Lord.

First of all; that faith does confess and ackno^^ledge Christ to be eternal
God: This woman (...) confessing him to be Lord, and so every such confession,
does acknowledge Christ to be etern^^ God, to have the same being with his
Father, th^^ he is Lord, and was Lord from eternity; before there was any world
made, yet Jesus Christ (...) then Lord, he was the eternal God; see what the
Scripture does hold forth of him, Prove. 8. 2^^ I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning^ it is spoken of Christ, it is said of him, that he (...)
from everlasting, in the beginning, before there (...) a world, before any sea,
before any earth, before any mountains, Christ was from everlasting; and thus
true faith does acknowledge that he is eternal God.

Secondly, When true faith does confess Christ to be Lord, it does not only
acknowledge him to (...) eternal, but omnipotent, to be Almighty, infinite
(...) power; if he be Lord of all, then he is infinite (...) power, he can do
whatsoever he pleases; that he can do whatsoever the Father does, Christ
witnes^^ of himself, The same works the Father does, do I (...) which does
declare him to be the same God, the same being with his Father, for he had the
same power * True faith does acknowledge, that all the mighty works of Creation
and Providence, and that the world was made by him, and upheld by him, and
governed by him; according to that place, Heb. 1. 10. And thou Lord in the
beginning have laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works
of thy hands. So that faith that does confess Christ to be Lord, does
acknowledge him to be infinite in power, and that he by his fingers made the
heavens, and by his hands laid the foundation of the earth.

Thirdly, That faith that does acknowledge Christ to be Lord, does confess that
he is infinite in knowledge, and that he is omnipresent, every where; as God he
is in all places, though as man he sits in heaven, yet as God he is every
where, according to that Scripture, the Son of God has eyes like a flame of
fire, he sees all things, a flame of fire discovers all things in the room, so
the Son of God he knows all the corners of the heart, and sees all things, and
needs not that any should testify of man; and that Christ according to his
divine nature fills heaven and earth, and with his gracious presence is with
his people always, Lo I am with you to the end of the world.

Fourthly, That faith that confesses Christ to be Lord, does confess that he
is the object of faith, and of divine worship, and that he is worthy to be
believed on, and worthy to be worshipped, and worthy to be praised, worthy that
all the redeemed of the Lord should sing unto him; that he is worthy of all
divine honor, the same honor that is due to the Father, the Scripture does
witness as much, and therefore the very Angels are called upon to worship him,
Heb. 1. 6. When he brings in the first begotten into the world, he says, and
let all the Angels of God worship him. Now if Christ had not been eternal God,
it had been idolatry to have given divine worship to him; but you see what that
faith does that acknowledges Christ to be Lord, it does acknowledge him to be
eternal God, and acknowledge him to be infinite in power, and in knowledge, and
that he is present in all places, and the object of divine honor.

Secondly, The necessity of believing in Christ as Lord.
Now let me show you in the second place, that it is necessary that every man
and woman that does expect help and salvation by Christ, should come to him as
the Lord: Faith should pitch upon him as omnipotent and omniscient: I say, it
is necessary that they should thus come to him that believe, for else the
foundation of our faith is overthrown: There is no man that does deny this, can
lay a right foundation of faith: no man that does not believe this, that he is
Lord, eternal God, can lay a right foundation, he does not lay that foundation
which God has laid; the foundation which God has laid is his Son, the eternal
God, he with whom he entered into Covenant, and made a Covenant with from
eternity and therefore if there be any other foundation, the foundation will
not hold.

And indeed Christ cannot be a foundation to bear up faith, if he be not
eternal God, and Lord equal with his Father, he were not fit to be trusted: And
cursed is he that trusts in man and make flesh his arm: And if Christ had not
been eternal God, he could not be a fit foundation, and it is necessary that
every soul that comes to Christ should believe in him as Lord, in respect of
that divine worship that is to be given to Christ, else he cannot worship
Christ aright, nor give Christ that honor that is due to him, and so all his
worship is lost.

Thirdly, It is needful in respect of the benefits of Christ's satisfaction,
that men that come to Christ must believe that he is eternal God, and one with
the Father, or else he cannot expect the benefit of Christ's satisfaction; for
if Christ were not infinite God, he could not have given satisfaction to
infinite Justice; if Christ were not God, our sins are not purged away, the
righteousness of Christ is not infinite, then no covering for our
transgressions, no price then of an infinite value for the saving souls; no
virtue in his blood for the taking away of sin; therefore they that do
blasphemously deny Christ to be eternal God, they must deny the satisfaction of
Christ, and then all men are in their sins, and so like to be lost for ever.

Fourthly, True faith must come to Christ as Lord, or else we cannot have any
assurance that he ^an perfect the work of our salvation: The work of our
salvation it is put into Christ's hand, but if (...) be not eternal God, there
is little hope that he should perfect the work of his peoples salvation, (...)
not possible he should overcome all the enemies of his peoples salvation.
Therefore you see that it is necessary, that when any soul comes to Christ, it
should come to him as Lord; so this woman did look upon him, and close with
him, as Lord over all, as he is eternal God, having the same power and
knowledge with his Father, to whom (...) due the same divine honor, and who is
the object of faith.

And therefore I beseech you, Brethren, look to it, that your faith be rightly
grounded; if it (...) not, it will never hold, if it be not grounded upon this
foundation, upon Christ as he is Lord, the same eternal God with the Father, if
this be not the foundation of faith, it will not hold; you can never make a
right confession of Christ, and you will never make such a confession as he
will own, if (...) do not come to close with him as he is Lord ow^ all,
infinite (...) equal with his Father: The D^^ has exceedingly endeavored to
overturn (...) foundation of faith, and through the righte^^^ judgment of God
has prevailed exceedin^^ abroad in the world; he made use of the (...) of old,
and the Socinians of late, who overturn (...) foundation of faith, though they
acknowle^^^ Christ to be higher then man, and greater (...) Angels, yet they
will not acknowledge him (...) equal with his Father, and to have been from
(...); many cavils there are which are made (...) this truth of the Gospel.

Object. What the Socmians object against this truth.
They object, that Jesus Christ says (...) self, That his Father is greater
then he, and th^^^fore by Christ's own confession, say they, he is not (...)
with the Father.

Answ. But for answer: You must know (...) Christ speaks that as he was
Mediator, as he (...) God man; so indeed he put himself under his ^her as
Mediator, as the Savior of his people (...) in respect of his eternal Godhead,
he was (...) with his Father, and his Father was not greater then he, For he
thought it no robbery to be equal with the Father.

Object. And so they object, That Christ was sent, he was his Fathers
Messenger, his righteous Servant, and my Father sent me, and I came not to do
my own will, but the will of my Father.

Answ. Why; Christ having put himself under in respect of the work of Mediator,
so he was under; but as eternal Son, so he was always equal with the Father.

Object. And whereas they cavil; it is said at last, Christ shall give up the
Kingdom to the Father: there is a time coming that God he shall be the greater,
and be all in all: Hence they cavil, that Christ is inferior to his Father,
and shall be put under at last, and God shall be all in all.

Answ. But that Scripture speaks only in respect of Christ's dispensitory
Kingdom, not in respect of his natural Kingdom, which he had from eternity,
^^ing equal with his Father, but in respect of this present dispensation in
which Christ rules his Church, and by such a way and means, Christ shall give
up the Kingdom to his Father, but then he shall reign with the Father, though
not as Media^or, that Kingdom cease; yet he shall reign with his Father.

Quest. But you will say, is this enough for a ^an to believe that Christ is
Lord, and God, equal with the Father? will this faith make a man blessed? ^f
he believe this shall he be saved? Does not the De^il make a confession that
Christ is the Son of the li^ing God?

Answ. Ah, but where the Lord by his Spirit does make an inward discovery of
this to the soul* the Spirit of Christ shining upon the soul, and drawing the
heart to close with Christ, I answer, that this faith is the faith of Gods
Elect. It is true, there may be a notional knowledge of this, in this day of
the Gospel, men they do generally confes^ that Christ is the Son of God: Ah,
where it is only notional, and when the heart is not drawn by this knowledge to
rest upon him who is mighty to save, this bare historical knowledge will prove
ineffectual; but when the Lord does draw the heart to rest upon Christ revealed
in the Gospel, this is true faith.

Secondly, The second part of the Doctrine, that true faith comes to Christ as
he is the son of David.
The second thing propounded (...) That true faith does come to Christ as he is
the son of David; O Lord, thou son of David,

It holds forth two things.

First, She closes with the humanity (...) Christ.

Secondly, She closes with Christ in his offices, and looks to him as he is
appointed by God to be the Mediator.

Here are these two things in this confessi^^ [that he is the son of David] and
true faith (...) must eye both these: If faith be rightly grounded, it must
come to Christ as he is the son of David.

First of all, It confesses that Christ is man (...) well as God, it closes
with the humanity as (...) as the divinity of Christ, he is God and man in
(...) person; believes that he is true man, that he (...) and that he is true
man; without this there (...) be no true faith; it comes to him as to one (...)
took our nature, and died in our nature, and rose again in our nature, and
ascended in our nature, and sits in heaven with our nature; True faith must
come thus to Christ, or else it will not be found to be true faith: True faith
closes with the humanity of Christ, believes that God took the nature of man
into union with the second Person, and so God and man made one Person; it does
not look upon Christ as taking up a body for a time, such a notion many men
have in the world, to conceive that Christ did assume a body, even as he did of
old, when as he did appear to the Patriarchs; Abraham and Lot; the Angel of the
Covenant, as well as other Angels, did assume a body, and so dissolved it
again: Now, say they, as Christ did assume a body for a time, and appear in
that, and then afterward dissolve it, now Christ is no more in the body, but he
is now in the Spirit. This is a gross mistake, A gross mistake concerning the
body of Christ.
a dangerous error, that overthrows the foundation: If Christ did assume a
body, then he was not man; but the Scripture says, He took our nature, he took
not the nature of Angels, but he took the nature of man; to take up a body is
not to take up the nature of man, but he took our nature, a soul and body
together, humane soul and body that is the nature of man; he took a body into
union with the second Person, for so it was not only a body that Christ took
up, but a soul too, My soul is heavy to death, and the soul of Christ was made
an offering for sin. So that remember this, how true faith must look upon
Christ; first as Lord, and secondly as Man, as one that took our nature, soul
and body, into union with himself.

Secondly, The necessity that every man and woman believe in Christ as man.
I shall show you, that there is a necessity, that every man and woman that
expect salvation by Christ, should believe that he took our nature upon him,
and then that he died in our nature, and rose in our nature, and sits now in
heaven in our nature, it is necessary to be believed to salvation; for

First of all; if this be not believed, you cannot have any assurance that any
man or woman shall have the benefit of Christ's satisfaction: Suppose that some
confess, that he is eternal God, and did give satisfaction as he was eternal
God, ye that body that he took up for a time, if he took not the nature of
man, could not satisfy for the sin of man, for justice must be satisfied in
the same nature.

Now if Christ did not really take our nature, and suffer in our nature, there
is no satisfaction* and we can have no benefit thereby, for satisfaction must
be done in the same nature it offended.

Secondly, It is necessary that you should believe that Jesus Christ rose again
in the same nature; for your justification depends upon it, for if the same
person that suffered were not restored, the same that was cast into prison,
were not delivered in a legal way, then there was no Justification* Now our
Justification does depend upon this; when Christ was delivered out of prison,
then did God absolve him, and when Christ rose again, then did Christ virtually
justify all his elect; if the same body did not rise again, there is no
justification, no man has any assurance, that he shall be justified: Therefore
see how necessary it is, that you hold fast this truth, that as the Lord Jesus
took our nature, so he retains our nature.

Yea it is necessary, that you believe Christ retains our nature now in
heaven; for if you do not, why then he has not perfected his office as High
Priest, he has done but part of his work, and so his people be but imperfectly
saved: The high Priest he first killed the sacrifice, and the same person that
offered sacrifice went into the holy place, to make intercession, and to
present the blood of sprinkling: Now if Christ did offer sacrifice, and did not
ascend in the same nature in which he offered the sacrifice, he did not
perfectly fulfill his work as high Priest.

And know this, that if Christ be not in heaven in our nature, there is no
coming for us, there is no way for our coming to God, no way for our converse
with God, for it is not possible that creatures in this state should have
immediate communion with God, without a middle person, a Mediator: Now if
Christ be not in heaven in our nature, and so we might go to God in and by him,
there is no way of coming to God, and no way of having communion with God.

Thirdly and lastly, to speak a word to the next particular.

There are two things in that confession, that Christ is the son of David.

First, To close with his humility, and that is an encouragement to come to
Christ: So

Secondly, She looks to his office, and closes with his office; when she says,
he is the son of David, she acknowledges, that

First of all, that he is the Messiah designed and appointed by God the Father,
for this work of saving his people: O Lord, thou son of David, th^^ art he that
art designed, and appointed, and set a part by God, as David was, to be a
Priest, and to be a Prophet; and thus faith must look upon Christ, him that the
Father has sealed and appointed to be a Mediator, or else he can never close
with Christ.

And then she does not only look upon him a^ one that is appointed by God the
Father, and designed of God.

Secondly, But as one that was fitted for this work, he was appointed by the
Father to save his people, and as he was appointed, so he was fitted every way
for this work; Something to be read in that name, thou son of David.
for surely there was something which she heard, and we may read in the son of
David, which was an encouragement to her to come to Christ, and to believe in
Christ: As

First of all; this is held forth when he is called the son of David, that he
is mighty and strong* a mighty Prince, a mighty Savior, able to save (...) the
uttermost, that he is even like to David, ^s David, whom the Lord gave a great
deal of strength and courage, he pursued after the Lion and after the Bear, and
pulled the Sheep out of the Lions mouth; she eyed the strength of David; if
David do so great things, Jesus Christ the son of David he can do greater
things, he can slay the Lion, and kill the Bear, and smite the G^liah the
Devil, and his instruments.

And then in that name of Christ [thou son of David] there was this that might
encourage her, the mercy and compassion of Jesus Christ, she expressed it her
self, David was a merciful man, full of compassion toward his enemies, full of
patience, full of long-suffering; he spared Shimei when he cursed him; and how
did he carry himself toward Saul, when God put him into his hand, and when his
servants would have had him taken away his life? God forbid, (says he) so
Christ is full of compassion, surely she saw a great deal of the compassion of
Christ. David a merciful man, and so is Jesus Christ.

And then she might see, and so may we, the meekness of Christ, not only mercy,
but abundance of meekness in Christ: David was a great Prince, and yet David's
heart was not lift up with his condition, though his condition was lift up, yet
his heart was not lift up, no, he carried it very lowly and meekly with his
people, he dealt with them as gently as a tender shepherd, 1 Chronicles. 28. 2.
Then David the King stood up upon his feet, and said, hear me my brethren, and
my people. Now surely this woman could not but see the meekness that was in
Christ, David was well known to be a merciful and meek Prince, and if so much
meekness in David, O then what meekness in the son of David? Surely he deals
gently with his people, this was her encouragement.

First, Now therefore to shut up all, Brethren, let us take notice, how little
true faith there is in the world; if true faith comes thus to Christ, as Lord,
and as the son of David, looks to the divinity and humanity of Christ, and
closes with both, looks to the offices of Christ, and as one that is appointed
of God, and fitted for this work; if this be required to true faith, O how
little true faith is in the world? How many are there that do confess Christ
to be true Man? Ah, but they deny him to be true God, deny him to be the same
Essence with the Father, and Substance with the Father, the same Power with the
Father.

Nay truly, such a confession of Christ, it is below the confession of the
Devil, whatever such men may pretend to have the name of Christians, it is
below the confession of Devils, and will leave men as low as the Devils; the
Devils confess Christ to be the Son of God, and therefore where that is denied,
such men go not so far as the Devils.

Secondly, Others that say, he is true God, but either deny that he took our
nature, or that he does retain our nature: Now how contrary is that to the
Scripture? And how destructive is it to the faith of Gods people, and all the
comforts of Gods people? There is no hope of justification, if Christ be not
risen, and no hope of coming to Heaven, if Christ be not there in our nature;
and no possibility for poor creatures to go to God; if the Mediator be not now
in Heaven, there is no coming there: The Apostle speaking of Christ, 1 Timothy 2.
5. For there is one God, and one Mediator, between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus: There is one Mediator, he does not say, there was one Mediator that laid
down his life, but there is one Mediator, the man Christ Jesus: He does not
say, that was the man, but the man Christ Jesus is now the Mediator; and
therefore such as do either deny that Christ did take our nature, or that he
does retain our nature, and rose in our nature, and asCended in our nature,
does mightily help forward the design of the Devil; he always had a design to
overthrow this foundation of faith, and such men are the Devils chief
Instruments, he knows, that if Christ did not rise in that body again, if he
can take away that, he knows that all preaching is in vain, and faith is in
vain, and therefore the Pharisees, when put on by the Devil, they gave the
Soldiers money to say, that his Disciples stole him away: Surely the Devil he
knew that doctrine was of great concernment, and therefore they were put upon
to say, his Disciples stole him away; and such men as deny Christ's
Resurrection, they take the Devils hire, and their faith will be but the faith
of the Sadduces, and will leave them short of life.

Thirdly, And in the third and last place: How may are there that many confess
both these? that may confess. Christ is God, that he is Lord, and that he is
Man, true man, and yet not look unto Christ, as he is fit every way for that
work, as fitted with strength, and meekness, and mercy, for that great work of
perfecting his peoples salvation?

As you desire to have faith that is of the right stamp; would you have it
rightly grounded, and have it laid upon such a foundation as God has laid, and
on such a foundation as will hold? O then look to this woman's confession; look
up to the Lord to make such a discovery of Christ to your souls, that Christ
may be discovered to you as Lord, and that you may close with him as man; God
in our nature, satisfied in our nature, and making intercession in our nature;
and look upon him as one appointed by God the Father; for therein lay a great
deal of a Christians comfort, when the soul comes to eye this Mediator as one
appointed by God, and one ^itted every way for it, full of mercy, and full of
power; if the Lord shall make such a discovery of Christ to your souls, so as
to cause you to lean your souls upon him for life and salvation, this will be
found to be faith rightly built, this is the faith of Gods Elect.

Matthew. 15. 22. And cried unto him, saying, have mercy on me, etc.
SERMON IV.
FIrst, First fruit of this woman's faith.
This woman's faith is declared by the fruits of it, and the first fruit of her
faith, it was the applying of her self unto Christ in a way of prayer: She
comes to Christ, and she prays unto him, and he prayer is set forth by the
fervency of it, for she did not only entreat, but she cries unto him, her
prayer was no cold prayer, but she put up fervent supplications, and strong
cries.

Secondly, Her prayer is set forth by the Argument she uses in her pleading
with Christ for that mercy, the cure of her Daughter, and the Argument she
uses is taken only from his free Grace, and that she pleads, Have mercy on me,
O Lord, thou son of David: She does not present any worthiness of her own, but
she takes hold of mercy.

So that the truth that I shall commend to yo^ is this: That wherever there is
true faith, Doctrine.
it will ma^^ the soul to cry unto Christ, and to plead merc^ and free grace in
the greatest affliction. He affliction was wonderful great, My daughter is
grievously vexed with a devil: She come to Christ, and cries, and takes hold of
hi^ mercy.

I had thought that I might handle the whole Point, but I shall not be able to
go thorough it (...) once, and therefore shall divide it into three
Propositions.

The first is this, That faith will make (...) soul to come to Christ in a way
of prayer, and appl^ it self to Christ alone in the greatest affliction.

Secondly, The greater the afflictions of (...) faithful are, the stronger are
their cries (...) Christ.

Thirdly, When a gracious heart cries unto Christ* it pleads nothing but mercy;
renounces all his ow^ worthiness, and takes hold only of mercy and (...) grace.

I shall speak to the first at this time: That faith will make a soul come to
Christ, and cry to Christ* pour out his complaints before Christ, when it is
(...) the greatest distress, and under the forest affliction and burden. This
woman she applies her self (...) unto Christ, cries only unto him; she does
(...) go to the Idol-gods of her own Nation, she se^^ not unto them, nor trusts
in them, though the people were an idolatrous people, and had many gods that*
they sought after; but she leaves them all, whatever others do, and she goes to
Christ, seeks not to the gods of the Nation, but applies her self to Christ.

Secondly, When she comes where Christ is, she cries only to him, she does not
cry to man, she does not pour out her complaints to man, no, not to the best
of men, she does not cry to the Disciples, she does not cry to Peter, James, or
John, but she poures out her cries to the Lord; O Lord, thou son of David.
Faith makes her in her distress to look to the Lord alone; applies her self
only to Christ in a way of prayer: This is the counsel that Eliphaz gives to
Job, chap. 5. v. 8. says he, If I were in thy condition I would go to God, I
would apply my self to God, I would seek to God, and commit my cause to him; I
would not seek to creatures, I would not make my complaint to the creature,
because they cannot pity me, nor help me, no, it is lost labor, I would go to
God, and seek to God, and I would not keep my burden my self, I would not bear
my burden upon my own shoulder, and stand groaning under my burden; (...), I
would go to God, and commit my cause to him; it is good counsel that he gave
Job, and O that we might be enabled to follow it!

And for the confirmation of the Point, The Point confirmed by Instances from
Scripture.
you shall find many Instances in Scripture, of the ^aints applying themselves
to God alone in the ^^me of their distress; I might hold forth very many, but
I shall only give you one or two: Look upon David as he expresses himself,
Psalm. 14. 1. (...) so on: I cried to the Lord with my voice, to (...) Lord did
I make my supplication, and poured out my complaints before him, and showed him
my trouble: And when was it? It was in a time of great distress: Ver. 3. When
my spirit was overwhelmed within me: I went to God, and made my complaints
known to him, I went not to the creature, but to God. And Jonah, he was in a
sad distressed condition, and yet faith brought him to apply himself to the
Lord, when as he was in that sad estate, Jonah 2. 1, 2. Then Jonah prayed to
the Lord his God out of the fishes belly, and said, I cried by reason of mine
affliction unto the Lord, out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest
my voice. He was so low in his own apprehension as was possible for him to be;
in the belly of hell: And what did he do? I cried to the Lord; he applied
himself to the Lord, and spread his sad condition before the Lord, and he did
not loose his labor, Thou Lord heardest me.

Now for the grounds of the Point, The grounds of the Point.
That faith will teach a soul to go to Christ, and make his complaint to Christ
in all his affliction, for faith discovers to a soul, that all afflictions are
from God, the Lords hand is in all the crosses and troubles, and whatsoever is
matter of complaint, the hand of God is in it, Is there any evil in the city
and I have not done it? says the Lord by the Prophet Amos: Is there any evil
of affliction that I have not brought upon a people? As to the evil of sin,
that is not from God, for that is no being; that is a privation, but as for
affliction, all the affliction that does berall the children of men, it is from
the hand of God; and upon this ground Eliphaz persuades Job to apply himself
to God, Job 5. 6, 8. Affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does
trouble spring out of the ground; I would speak unto God, and unto God would I
commit my cause. Trouble does not spring from the ground, it is not from second
causes, whatsoever trouble the people of God meet withal, ^any of the sons of
men, it springs not from the dust: Whence then? It is from the hand of God,
there is a secret wheel, a great wheel of providence, that sets all on work,
second causes cannot move if that great wheel does not move; so then when this
comes to be reallized to the soul, as faith does discover it, because God has
spoken it, that trouble is from God, whether inward or outward; therefore it
will carry the soul unto God, and make the soul apply it self to God and Christ
alone.

Secondly, Faith does discover, that as all afflictions are from God, and makes
the soul see the hand of God in every stroke, so it does discover, that the end
of all afflictions is to carry the soul to God; that is the end of all
afflictions, to bring God and the soul nigher together; God does not love to
have any of his people at a distance from him, and therefore he sends forth
affliction to bring them nigher to himself: And therefore in Hosea 5. 15. I
will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek
my face; in their affliction they will seek me early: He brings affliction for
this very end, that they may draw nigh to him: And in chap. 6. 1. you may see
the fruit of their affliction, Come and let us return to the Lord; for he has
torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will bind us up. This is the
fruit of their affliction, they were brought nigher to God. God will have his
people enjoy more communion with him, dwell with him, and make them more
conformable to him, more like to himself; and therefore many times he lays
great and sore afflictions upon them: For when the Saints shall be in such a
sta^e, and such a condition, as nothing shall come betwixt God and them, when
they shall so dwell in God, as never to go out from God, when there shall come
no sin, no corruption betwixt God and them, then there shall be no more
affliction, then the Lord God shall wipe away tears from the faces of his
people, no more sorrow and sighing, now the end is attained, when they are
gotten so nigh to God, as nothing can come betwixt God and them: Now when faith
discovers this, that it is the end of affliction to bring the soul nigher to
God, it puts the soul upon it, in its affliction, to return and apply it self
to God alone.

Thirdly, Faith will make a soul come to Christ, and Christ alone, in distress;
for faith does discover, that the help of the creature is in vain in time of
distress; it is faith that does reallize to the soul the vanity of the
creature, and that the creature cannot help in the day of distress: And
therefore the Psalmist cries out, Psalm 60. 11. Help Lord, for vain is the help
of man. Man cannot help, and therefore he applies himself to God alone; Help
Lord, for vain is the help of man. Till the soul sees that vain is the help of
the creature, it will not in good earnest cry, Help Lord; faith shows the soul,
that in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
mountains; in vain is salvation hoped for from creatures, from great men, the
highest of all: There is many a poor soul can tell you by sad experience, and
say it by sad experience, in vain have I sought help from men, and cried to
men, and spread my complaints before men, and therefore it is good for me to
draw nigh to God; for if you look upon all the sons of men, you shall see how
fruitless a thing it is, for a poor soul in distress to apply it self to man,
and to go and pour out his complaints to man; he may speak to such men as are
not at all sensible of what he speaks; he may tell a sad relation of his
sufferings and burdens, and yet not at all affect the heart of him that he
speaks to: There are some such men in the world, nay very many, that regard not
the affliction of Joseph, that are altogether insensible of the burden that lay
upon other poor creatures, that has no compassion, and cannot be affected. It
is said of Gallio, that he cared for none of those things; when as they made
complaints of things of Religion, he cared for none of those things; and so
when some come and make complaints of their burdens, they care for none of
those things: And thus it was with Lazarus, that lay at the rich man's gate, it
is very like he made many complaints, showed him his sorrow and sores, but his
heart was not at all affected, the very dogs had more pity upon him, they came
and licked his sores: And so it is many times, when we make our complaints to
men, they regard not.

Or secondly, Sometimes when we make complaints to men, though there be some
pity, and some compassion in them, and they will express it in good words,
yet very little help and assistance will many men afford; they will seem to
pity and have compassion, but there are some men that will do very little to
the relief of a poor creature under distress, that comes and makes complaints
of his burdens: The Apostle James speaks of some such, chap. 2. 15, 16. If a
brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say
unto him, depart in peace, be you warmed, and filled; notwithstanding you give
him not those things that are needful for the body, what does it profit? Alas,
it is in vain to make complaints to such, what does it avail? It may be some
will pity with good words, be you warmed, and filled, but they give them not
those things which are needful for the body; thus many a poor creature looses
his labor.

Thirdly, When a poor creature makes complaints to man, and cries to man, it
may be he shall make complaints to those that do pity him, and would relieve
him with all their heart, but it is beyond their power to relieve; and so if a
poor man that wants the things of this life, it may be he goes and makes his
complaints to another, he pitties him, and would help him, but he that has a
will has not power many times, and it is not in his hand to do it, and he
cannot uphold another estate but he must break his own; many times it is so.
And so when they come and make complaint of the weakness and infirmities of
their bodies, it may be they are affected, and they would help; ah, but it is
beyond their power: And so when a poor soul comes and complains of distress of
mind, and show the wounds of his spirit, and lay them open, it may be godly
friends may pity you, and desire to help you, but their hand is to^ short to
carry the plaster to your heart and conscience, and to cause it to stick
there, and therefore after all it will go away unsatisfied; in all these causes
they that would help you if they could, they may say as the King of Israel, 2
King. 6. 26, 27. the woman there comes and makes a sad complaint in the time of
famine, at verse 26. And as the King of Israel was passing by upon the wall,
there cried a woman unto him, saying help, my Lord, O King. And what says the
King to her? verse 27. And he said, if the Lord do not help thee, whence shall
I help thee? Alas, my bowels are toward thee, but if the Lord does not help
thee, in vain is the help of man.

Fourthly, When you make your complaints to men, sometimes it falls out so,
that instead of ease from under your burdens, your burdens are increased;
sometimes men may add to the burdens of the afflicted through unskilfulness,
not knowing how to speak to them, and how to carry it toward them; yea
sometimes men may aggravate the burdens of the afflicted, when they make their
complaints, wilfully, through pride, and disdain, and covetousness: And thus it
was when David sent to Nabal, he was in a great strait for provision, and he
sent to Nabal in his strait for relief, and he sent him a churlish answer; Who
is David, and the son of Jesse? I know him not; shall I send my corn and my
oxen that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to him, I know him not.
And you know what Judas did meet withal, when he went to the Pharisees, and
said, I have sinned in betraying the innocent blood: What is that to us? a
bargain is a bargain, if you have sinned look you to that: Whereas if he had
gone to Christ with that complaint, he might have had comfort, but he went to
them, and they spoke that which aggravated his sorrow, and he goes and makes
away himself. So that, I say, in time of affliction faith causes a soul to go
to Christ, for it does discover what man is.

Fourthly, There is this ground of the Point, Faith will make a soul go to
Christ alone, for it discovers to the soul, that in Christ there is all
sufficiency to help it, there is all in Christ that may pity him, and for the
helping of him; it is not in the creature, but it is to be found in Christ, for
Christ is furnished with compassion, there are bowels of compassion toward his
poor creatures in distress; it is an impossible thing that Christ should be
insensible as men are; you may spread your complaints before some men, and they
never be moved no more then the stones in the street, but the Lord Jesus he is
not without compassion, great bowels of compassion toward his people, he
cannot be insensible of any burden that lay upon a poor creature that comes to
him, In all their afflictions he is afflicted, he bears our sickness, he
carries our sorrows; Christ he feels the weight of all affliction, and sorrow,
and burdens that do at any time lie upon his people.

Secondly, As Christ has compassion, so he has a will; he is always willing
to do good to poor creatures that come to him: Men (as you have heard) they are
not always willing, they may give you a parcel of good words, but give you not
those things that are needful: Now Christ he never puts off his people with
good words, though one good word from Christ be more worth then all that men
can do for you; but Christ he will not give you good words alone, but as he
opens his mouth in grace, so he opens his hand in mercy; he opens his mouth and
his hand at the same time, and he is very willing to relieve, and therefore it
is, that he calls poor creatures to him; you may see his willingness by the
invitation that he gives to all poor creatures that are under any distress;
Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest:
Whatever the burden be, whether the burden of sin or sorrow. Christ makes
proclamation, you have his invitation; Come to me and I will give you rest; and
call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver. How does this testify
the willingness of Christ to relieve his poor creatures?

Thirdly, He has not only compassion, but he also has power in his hand,
Christ can do it, he is able to do what he pleases; Thou have done whatsoever
thou please in heaven, and earth, and in all deep places: The deepest
affliction and sorrow that any of his people may sink into, the Lord Jesus is
able to stretch forth his hand and help them, he has all store of provision in
his house, there is an infinite treasure of mercy, all mercies are laid up in
Christ, it shall not break his estate to uphold your estates, for all the
creatures in heaven and earth are the Lords, the heavens and the earth are the
Lords, and the fullness that are in them, therefore there is power in Christ's
hand to relieve his people.

Fourthly, Christ cannot aggravate sorrow and affliction; he will not aggravate
the sorrow and affliction of any of his people that come to him; Christ will
never say to a poor soul, as the Pharisees to Judas, see thou to that: When a
soul comes and says, Lord I have sinned, Christ never gave such an answer, see
thou to that; he never did, neither can he, aggravate the sorrows and burdens
of poor creatures that come to him. Now when faith discovers this to the soul,
and shows that afflictions are from the Lord, and shows, that all afflictions
are for that end, to carry the soul higher unto God, and shows, that all the
help of the creature is vain, and shows, that there is an infinite supply of
grace and mercy, all sufficiency of grace in God and Christ to relieve at all
times, and in all straits; these discoveries that faith makes, will carry the
soul to Christ, and make the soul apply it self to Christ, and cry to him, and
spread his complaints before him in time of great distress.

A word or two by way of Application.

First of all: Application.
If it be so that faith carry the soul to God and Christ alone in time of
distres, what shall we think then, when men by their affliction, and in their
affliction, are carried further off from God? And yet so it is with many, their
afflictions set them at a greater distance from Christ, many a man is hardened
by his affliction, and so set at a greater distance from God by that trouble
and distress he has upon him, afflictions drive many a man from God, make him
run away from God, run any where then unto God; there is many will run to the
creature, and their eye is not to the Lord the holy One of Israel, they run to
the creature to comfort them, run to the world, and run into the way of their
lust, but apply not themselves to the Lord in the day of their distress: You
know that Ahaziah ran to the Devil when he was in distress, so far was he from
running nigh to God in distress, that he run to the Devil himself, he sends to
the gods of the Nations, to know whether he should recover or not; This is a
discovery, that there is no seed of faith in such a soul, for where there is
faith but in the seed of it, the least seed of faith, it will make a soul at
least to be looking to Christ, and crying after Christ in the day of distress,
it will at least cry unto Christ, though there may be many workings of
corruption and temptations, and many distempers of spirit may be bubling up in
time of affliction, yet faith will carry the soul to look toward Christ, and
cry after him, as Jonah did when he was in the belly of hell, I said I am cast
out of thy sight, yet will I look toward thy holy temple: He applies himself to
Christ: And so a gracious heart will be looking to Christ, and the more faith,
the more it will look, and the louder it will-cry.

But secondly, Let it be a word of exhortation, O that it might provoke us all
to deal more with God and Christ in the time of our affliction and distress!, O
that we might cry more to him, and pour out our complaints more to him! as this
poor woman did; she comes and cries, O Lord, thou son of David: Poor souls are
apt to look to the creature in the day of distress, and think such and such
creatures can comfort; Surely my bed shall comfort me, and my couch give me
ease, says Job; but he found no such matter; and so we are apt to say of this
and that creature, I will go and make my complaint to him, he will give me some
refreshment; poor souls are very apt under their burdens to go up and down and
scatter their complaints: Ah, but they take not the right course of going to
Christ, and crying to him, and pouring out the complaints of their souls before
him; and therefore it is, that when they go to men they meet with little
satisfaction, and little relief and comfort, and their spirits are filled with
discontent and dissatisfaction, when as they meet with such men sometimes as
have no compassion at all in them, and sometimes meet with good words and no
more, and sometimes meet with such as pity them, but have no power, and
sometimes meet with some that will aggravate the affliction; and just it is
with God it should be so, when we will not look to the Rock: O that such
disappointments might reach us to look to the Lord, we have thought that this
creature might ease, but we have met with disappointments; O that these
disappointments might teach us to go to Christ! as this woman: And thus the
poor man did for his son, that he would cast out the unclean spirit; I went,
said he, to thy Disciples, and they tried to cast out the unclean spirit, but
could not; and then he comes to Christ, I have been with thy Disciples, and
they could not cast out the unclean spirit, but thou can do it, and Christ
did do it: And O that these disappointments might teach us to go more to
Christ, and make our complaints more to him in time of distress.

Quest. But you will say, What? may we not go to our friends, is it not lawful
to go to men when we are under pressures and burdens, either of the outward or
inward man? and to such and such as may relieve us, may we not apply our selves
to them?

Answ. I answer yes; We may apply our selves to men, but take heed we do it in
Gods way. I say, under burdens and distresses, either outward or inward, we may
apply our selves to men, but take heed we do it in Gods way.

Quest. But you will say, How shall we know we do it in Gods way.

Answ. I answer, first of all, when you do it as an Ordinance of God, when we
make use of the advice and help of others, and go to others as to an Ordinance
of God, then we are not out of Gods way, when we do it in obedience to the Will
and Commandment of God and Christ; when one that is wounded in spirit shall
apply himself to those that are godly, that has the mind of Christ, in
obedience to the command of Christ, Confess your sins one to another, and pray
one for another: Now if out of obedience to Christ I go and confess my sins to
one that is godly, and desire him to pray for me, when we apply our selves to
men, as an Ordinance of God, then we are in Gods way.

Secondly, When we shall keep the eye of our souls upon God alone for help;
when we apply our selves to men for any help, and yet shall keep our eye upon
God, and look upon God as the great moving cause, look upon God as the fountain
of all relief and comfort, and shall look upon the creature only as Gods
Instrument, this is but a pipe, and an empty one too, if God do not fill it,
when as the eye is thus upon God, and eye God as principal in all that comfort
and relief that we expect, and look upon the creature as the means, then we may
apply our selves to the creature, and not out of Gods way.

And a man may know whether he keeps his eye upon God, How to know whether we
keep our eye upon God.
when as he does apply himself to the creature (thus) Are your expectations
from the creature or from God? If a man's eye be upon God, then he will not
expect much from the creature, and applies himself to the creatures, because
they are means, and because it is an Ordinance, but dare not expect much.

Secondly, If a man do meet with disappointments, and he do apply himself to
the creature in Gods way, disappointments will not add any great trouble or
vexation to that man or woman, though he meet with little refreshment; nay,
though instead of help and refreshment, he should meet with an addition of his
sorrow and trouble, yet if in Gods way he will not be troubled, because his eye
is upon God, and I see it is not the will of the Lord I should yet have
comfort, and why should I fret my self, seeing the Instrument is but an empty
pipe, and no creature can refresh me if the Lord do not refresh me? And thus
you have seen when we are in Gods way, and when out of Gods way, in applying
our selves to the creature, and looking to the creature for help, and for
relief.

And O that this might teach us to go more to God, and apply our selves more to
Christ.

Object. But it may be some poor soul will say, Well, I have not only gone to
the creature, but I have applied my self to God, and yet truly I meet with
little refreshment, I have cried to Christ in the time of my affliction, and
yet my burden does continue.

Answ. First, To this I answer: It may be when thou have come to Christ, thou
have complained of thy burden, and of thy affliction, but thou have not
complained of thy sin, thou have not complained of that which is the greatest
matter of complaint; and if thou have at any time looked more to thy burden and
affliction, and have not complained of that which is the greatest matter of
complaint, no wonder then though thou have met with no ease.

Secondly, Let me say, it may be thou have brought thy complaints and spread
them before the Lord, yet thou have not left thy burden with the Lord; many a
soul comes with a great burden, ah, but it carries it away, and does not leave
it with the Lord; and if the burden be not left with the Lord, no wonder that
we have no ease: Christ is willing we should leave our burdens with him, and in
so doing we shall find refreshment.

Thirdly, And let me say further, that it may be the Lord has heard thy cry,
and thy complaint, but thou art not aware of it, thou have not taken notice of
it, through unthankfulness thou have not observed that which the Lord has
done; the Lord at least, he has thus far heard thee, that he has supported
thy spirit under thy burden, and thou have been kept up, so that thy soul has
not failed, and thy spirit has not fainted under thy burden; and truly this is
a great mercy and worthy to be taken notice of: And this is the difference
between your going to God and the creature. Oh that we might be invited by this
to apply our selves more to Christ in time of distress, and spread our
complaints before Christ, for in going to the creature many times the spirit is
wounded* ah, but in going to God the spirit shall be supported, though Christ
do not give out a present answer, yet the heart shall be supported under all
its burdens, but now in going to man, many times the heart and the spirit it is
wounded, by those disappointments that we meet withal, while we expect that
from the creature which it cannot do.

Two things only I shall propound to urge this duty upon you, to make us more
in going to Christ, and less to the creature.

It is a great sin and folly, when as we leave Christ and go to the creature
in the day of our distress.

First, It is a great sin; for what do we then, but set up the creature in the
room of Christ? You know how sensible Jacob was of this evil, he looked upon it
as a great evil, when as Rachel came to him, she wanted children, she comes to
her Husband, Give me children or I die: O what says he? Am I in Gods stead?
Can I give thee children? When as she came and made her complaint to Jacob, and
murmured because she had not the mercy of children, she goes to Jacob, and sets
up Jacob in Gods stead; and so when we are under our burdens, and make our
complaints to the creature and not to God, why the creature may say as Jacob,
am I in Gods stead?

Secondly, There is a world of folly in it, in going from God in time of
distress to the creature. It is a piece of gre^^ folly for a man to go from the
fountain to the broken cistern, to leave the fountain and think a broken
cistern should supply him: It is a great deal of folly for a man to go to a
deaf man, one that cannot hear, pour out his complaints, and expect that he
should speak a word of refreshment; so much folly there is when we go to the
creature, and do not apply our selves to God. If a man should go to a beggar,
one that has no food or raiment, and a man should spend a deal of time in
asking food and raiment; and if he do not give it go away railing, what a deal
of folly were it? And so a great deal of Folly there is, when we do go to the
creature, and do not go to God; we go to them that are poor and naked, and
forsake God, that has all store of provision and mercy laid up in himself: O
that the consideration of our sin and folly, in going to the creatures, might
cause us at all times in our distress to go to God, as this poor woman did,
and cry to him that is the Lord.

Matthew. 15. 22. And behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and
cried unto him, saying, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David, my
daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.
SERMON V.
HEre is a declaration of this woman's faith, the trial of it, and the conquest
of it: The last day we came to consider the declaration of this woman's faith in
the fruits of it, it carries her soul to Christ in a way of supplication and
prayer; and the Argument she uses in prayer, is only the free Grace of Christ,
Have mercy on me, thou son of David.

The Doctrine was this: That wherever there is (...) seed of faith in any
foul, it will carry it out to Christ, and make the soul cry unto him and take
hold of his mercy.

We divided it into three Propositions.

First, That faith will carry the soul to Christ in time of affliction, and
make it seek to Christ, and Christ alone.

Secondly, Afflictions when they are great and strong, will raise strong cries.

Thirdly, A gracious heart pleads only mercy and free grace, only takes hold of
mercy, and looks not at all to his own worthiness.

I spoke to the first of these the last day.

I shall now speak to the second Proposition; this woman was in great
afflictions and distress, her daughter was possessed with a devil, and that
was a sore burden to her spirit: Now this great affliction makes her cry loud,
for the Text does not say, she came and entreated, and besought him, but the
Text says, she came and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord.

So then observe this: Strong afflictions will raise strong cries, Doctrine.
even in Gods own people.

In the opening of the Point, I shall show you two things:

First, That there is a cry of the flesh, and a cry of the Spirit.

Secondly, That great and sore afflictions of (...) continuance may raise both
these cries, it will make both the flesh to cry, and the Spirit to cry.

First, The cry of the flesh what it is.
There is a cry of the flesh, and that is twofold.

It is either a natural cry (...) sense which Nature has of the burden and
affliction which is upon it: Or,

Secondly, It is a sinful cry, which is accompanied with disorder: I say, the
cry of the flesh it is either merely natural, or sinful; the flesh is weak, it
is an emblem of weakness, and is weak indeed, and a little affliction will make
the flesh to cry, the Lord remembered that man is but as dust before the wind.
The first cry of the flesh.
Now the flesh may cry out, and may complain, and yet may not sin in that
complaint, it is true indeed, when a man or woman shall cry out of a little
affliction, when the hand of God does but touch him, and then cry out with
great cries and strong cries, when as the affliction is but little, that
discovers want of wisdom, and want of strength; but now when the affliction is
very great, sore and urgent, and the flesh does cry out through the frailty,
there may be an expression of complaint, and yet not sinful. Job in his great
afflictions made many complaints, poured out many strong cries, and yet in many
of his complaints he sinned not, Job 6. 1, 2, 3. O that my grief were
thoroughly weighed! it would appear heavier then the sand of the sea. Yea you
shall find that our Lord Jesus Christ himself, having taken our flesh, and the
frailties of our flesh, (for he took our humane frailties, but no sinful
frailtie^ and in the days of his flesh he cried, his great affliction made him
cry out, he put up his cries with tears and supplications in the days of his
flesh; as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 5. 7. And in Psalm 22. (which Psalm is a
Prophecy of Christ) he cries out bitter (...) My God, my God; why have thou
forsaken me? ^hy art thou so far from helping me, and from the words of my
roaring? Strong cries, and yet no sin in Jesus Christ; so that the flesh may
cry and yet not sin; for grace when it comes into the soul, does not destroy
nature, it does not make man insensible, and the spirit insensible, but it
allows the flesh to be sensible, and to cry out of his burdens, so it be
without sin.

Secondly, The second cry of the flesh.
There is another cry of the flesh that is raised by sore afflictions, and that
is a sinful cry; now this sinful cry you shall know it thus:

First of all, How to know whether the cry of the flesh be sinful.
It springs from pride, it will make a man cry out through pride of heart, he
cannot bear his burden, nor submit to the hand of God through pride of heart:
When a creature stands upon it, to justify himself and accuse God, calls God
to an account, Why am I thus? And what am I worse then others? And why should
God take me out from all others to make me an example to all others? What have
I done? And what is my sin more then others? When a creature will not submit to
God in his afflictions, but charge God foolishly; and when as he quarrels with
his affliction, if any affliction but this I could have born it, but as for
this affliction, my spirit cannot bear it. O here is a cry that is raised by
affliction, but it is a sinful cry.

Secondly, There is a cry in affliction that does spring from impatiency, and
that is a sinful cry, when a man or woman shall cry out with a great cry, and
make a great lamentation, and yet their burden but an ordinary bur^^^ only they
make it great through impatiency, no^ that the affliction is so in it self, if
the Lord had given a heart to carry patiently under it; but there is many a
poor creature struggles with his affliction, as a young beast unaccustomed to
the yoke, the yoke is easy, but by struggling and striving it pinches and
makes it cry out; and so a man by striving under the yoke of the Lord, though
it be Jobs counsel, that it is good to bear the yoke, yet it throught
impatience cries out; this is a sinful cry.

Thirdly, That is a sinful cry that springs from unbelief, and is accompanied
with unbelief; when as a man or woman in time of affliction shall give way to
hard thoughts of God; whatever cry is accompanied with unbelief, is a sinful
cry: Yet this is the case of many, they cannot persuade themselves that there
is any love in the heart of God toward them, and any love in such an
affliction; I cannot believe it, that there should be love in such an
affliction, that God should lay such a heavy burden upon me, and have any love
to me; when it cries out thus with unbelieving cries, this is a sinful cry:
And so when a man cannot be persuaded, that the Lord should make a good end
with him in affliction: O sure I shall perish one day, and fall by the hand of
this affliction, I shall be broken all to pieces, and never be able to stand
under my burden; when as the soul is thus filled with unbelieving dispairing
thoughts, concerning God and concerning the end of his affliction, and so cry
out in unbelief, Grounds why there are sinful cries in Gods own people.
this is a sinful cry.

First, And again, great and sore afflictions may occasion such cries, even
sinful cries, as the cry of unbelief and impatiencies, and that upon this
ground; there are remainders of corruption in the best heart, there is sinful
flesh as well as spirit.

Secondly, Great afflictions do expose Gods own people to great temptations;
many times they go together, great afflictions and great temptations, for the
Devil seeks his opportunity to do mischief, as the Lord waits to be gracious,
so Satan waits to do mischief: Many times in great afflictions, when the
waters are high, then the Devil will assault; God makes use of affliction to
make his people seek him early; but now the Devil he waits to make the soul cry
out with a sinful cry, and many times the Lord suffers him to prevail: But this
cry of the woman of Canaan was not the cry of pride, impatience, and unbelief,
but her cry was the cry of the Spirit.

And therefore let us examine what that cry of the spirit is, What the cry of
the Spirit is.
which the Lord does raise in the hearts of his people in he day of great
afflictions.

First, It carries the heart to God thorough Christ, and makes its complaint
unto him, it does not cry out against God, but as it cries unto God, so it runs
unto the Lord thorough Christ, and pours out his complaints before him: So
David, Psalm. 142. 1, 2. I cried unto the Lord with my voice, unto the Lord did
I make my supplication, I poured out my complaint before him: The flesh cries
out of his burden, yea, sinful flesh it complains many times, not only of his
burden, but of God himself: Ah, but the spirit that cries unted God, Job 35. 9.
By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed to cry. They
cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty, v. 10. But none says, where is
God n^^^maker? he reproves the sons of men. They are ap^^to cry, but it is the
cry of the flesh, they cry out of the arm of the mighty, but they do not go to
God, None say, where is God that gives songs in the night season? The spirit
in the saddest condition goes to God through Christ.

Secondly, The cry of the spirit it does make a man to cry out as well of sin
as of affliction, it will make a man to cry out more of sin then of affliction;
the flesh is not sensible of the burden of sin; Ah, but where the spirit of the
Lord is, it will make a man cry out most of all of the burden of sin; if God
should take away affliction, and not take a^ way corruption, this would be
little refreshment to him; O miserable man that I am! as you have the Apostle
cry, which was the cry of the spirit, Romans 7. the latter end, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord: He was more sensible of the body of sin, then of
any affliction that lay upon him.

Thirdly, The cry of the Spirit it will make the soul cry more after God
himself, then after any mercy or deliverance, that it may enjoy God, that it
may have the presence of God, and communion with God, that it may be made like
to God; a gracious heart it cries thus after God, yea, in the day of affliction
when the burden is heavy, a gracious heart desires more to enjoy God, then to
be free from his affliction: See how the Psalmist does express himself in Psalm.
63. 1. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee; my soul thirsts for
thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is: David was now in a state of
banishment, it is like he met with sore afflictions, ah, but the cry of his
soul was after God, my soul thirsts for thee, and longs for thee.

Fourthly, The cry of the spirit it is a cry of faith, it cries in faith, and
cries in hope; the flesh cries in despair many times, but the spirit cries, and
believes when it cries, it takes hold of God, and follows after him, follows
God crying, though God go away. See what is said, Psalm. 89. 26. the promise is
made to David's son, Christ; He shall cry unto me, thou art my father, my God,
and the rock of my salvation: He shall cry unto me, (...) but he shall cry in
faith, when he cries he shall say, Thou art my Father, and my rock: And so the
Church, Isaiah 26. she cries out with a great cry, and it is in faith,
doubtless thou art our Father: And so Psalm. 119. when as David cried, he
trusted, he took hold of God, and hoped in his mercy, 145, 146, 147. ver.
though he was in a great affliction, and there was great cause to cry, yet his
cry was the cry of faith, and he hoped in the Word of the Lord, for the
accomplishment of the Word of the Lord.

Fifthly, As the cry of the spirit is the cry of faith, so it is a fervent cry;
that cry that the Lord does raise up by his spirit in the day of affliction, it
is a fervent cry, it is no cold nor lazy cry, but a strong cry: Jesus Christ in
the days of his flesh put up strong cries; and the Apostle James he speaks of
the fervent prayer of Gods people. I am. 5. The fervent effectual prayer of the
righteous prevails much: When the Spirit of prayer does set all the faculties
of the soul a work to look after God, and take hold of God* ^hen it takes hold
of God, and will not let him go, and cry out as the Church, Awake thou arm of
the Lord, as in the days of old; when it will take no rest it self, and give
God no rest, till the Lord comes in a way of grace, that is the prayer that is
spoken of Isai. 62. 6, 7, 8. that prayer that is accompanied with holy fervency
is the cry of the spirit.

Sixthly and lastly, The cry of the spirit is such a cry as will not easily be
silent, though it meet with no answer from the Lord; though it meet with a
denial, as this woman of Canaan she meets with many discouragements, he gave
her no answer at first, still she goes on to cry, her cry was a cry that was
raised by the spirit of the Lord: the flesh may put a man upon it to cry to the
Lord for a season, but if the Lord does not come in, the flesh grows weary; now
the cry of the spirit is a constant cry, that will not give over, but will wait
upon the Lord till such time as he shall send from heaven to save. Thus you see
what the cry of the flesh is, and what the cry of the spirit.

Secondly, Now the Saints in all Ages in the days of their affliction, have
been stirred up to cry with their spirits unto the Lord, and the greater their
afflictions have been, the more they have cried unto the Lord: So it was with
Moses, he was in a great strait when as he was before the red Sea, and then
Moses cried in spirit, God made use of that strait to stir up the cry of the
Spirit in Moses: And so when Jacob was in a great strait, he cried more
earnestly then ever he had done, when as his brother came to meet him with an
Army of men, he saw nothing but death and destruction, he applied himself to
the Lord, and cried mightily: It is said in Hosea. 12. 4. speaking of Jacob, He
wept and he made supplication: And so you know David in Psalm. 14^. cried, and
it was when his spirit was over whelmed and no man to pity him; then he cried
unto the Lord. And you know our Lord Jesus (to give you no more instances) in
the days of his affliction he cried louder then ever: That place Heb. 7. 7. In
the days of his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with strong
cries and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death, and was heard
in that he feared: And the Evangelist Luke does take notice, that as Christ's
affliction and sorrow did increase, so he cried the louder to his Father, Luke
22. 44. And being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly; he prayed the more
when his affliction increased, when he was in the midst of his agony then he
cried more earnestly.

To make some short application of the Point. Application


First of all; Let it be a word of examination, there is none of us but at one
time or other are pouring out our cries and complaints, and especially in our
affliction we are full of cries: Now let us examine whether it be the cry of
the flesh or the cry of the spirit; whether it be accompanied with pride of
heart, and with impatiency and unbelief, with murmuring and repining; O that is
the cry of the flesh, and the sinful cry of the flesh, which is far from the
cry of the spirit.

But to give you two or three things that you may make use of by way of trial.
Trials to know whether our cry be the cry of the flesh, or the cry of the
spirit.


First of all, would you know whether your cry be the cry of the flesh, or the
cry of the spirit* why then examine whether or no your cry and your complaint
be not above your burden: many a man's cry is greater then his bruden that God
lays upon him, it may be he makes his burden heavy by his struggling. Jobs
burden was not so, it was heavy: Now when a man shall cry out and say, no
affliction like to mine, and no burden like to mine, O this is a sinful cry.

Secondly, When our cry is so great as to take us off from our duty either to
God or man, that cry is not a gracious, but a sinful cry; the cry of the spirit
makes a soul wait upon God in a way of duty; but now if a man in time of
affliction is taken off from his duty, surely that cry is a sinful cry.

Thirdly, When a man in the day of affliction cries so loud that he cannot hear
what the Lord speaks to him, God comes and speaks graciously, offers comfort,
but the cry of the soul is so loud, that it cannot hear what God speaks; that a
man shall be taken up with complaints as to refuse all the comfort that God
sends him, this is a sinful cry; this was the cry of that afflicted man, Psalm.
77. 2. In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord, my sore ran and ceased not,
my soul refused to be comforted. Nay, when as a man or woman in the time of
affliction, shall not only refuse his comfort, but justify his complaint, as
Jonah did, he justified his anger, when God asked him, Do thou well to be
angry? Yea, said he, I do well to be angry: This was a sinful passion: And so
when a man shall justify any other passion, his sorrow and complaining, and
say, I do well to complain, and in the bitterness of my spirit I complain, this
is a sinful cry.

And therefore secondly, Let me desire in the name of the Lord, that we would
take heed how we give way to these sinful cries and complainings, these cryings
out, which spring from pride, impatiencie and unbelief. O, I pray, take heed of
giving way to these sinful complaints.

For first, I pray, consider a little, that the hand of the Lord is in every
affliction that is upon you: O that that were seen, that the hand of the Lord
is in it: Thou Lord did is, (said David) I was dumb, and opened not my mouth,
for thou Lord did it. O that would silence the sinful cries of the flesh, if
the heart were sensible that the Lord did it; and if the Lord did it, then
infinite wisdom has done it; and if infinite wisdom order this or that
affliction, why should we cry out of our afflictions.

Secondly, Consider whatever your affliction be, though you say none like mine,
it might have been seven times heavier, infinite power could have heated the
furnace seven times hotter, and made his flery trials seven times more sharp: O
then there is no cause why we should complain, especially in the

Third place, If we consider what we have deserved at the Lords hand; and O
that when we pore so much upon our affliction, we would look with one eye upon
that which may help to silence our sinful complaints! We have deserved that and
a thousand times more at the hand of God. Why should the living man complain,
man for the punishment of his sin? O there is sin enough; though it be true, it
is not always for that God, afflicts, yet he may see enough, for which he may
afflict seven times more. Now let our eye be upon this; this was that which
silenced Jeremiah, Jer. 8. 14. Why do we sit still? Assemble your selves, and
let us enter into the defenced Cities, and let us be silent there, for the Lord
our God has put us to silence, and has given us waters of gall to drink,
because we have sinned against the Lord. Take heed how we open our mouth in the
day of our affliction.

Thirdly and lastly, Let it stir up all our souls to go to God through Christ,
and to cry more in the spirit; and the greater our afflictions are, so much the
more let our cry be to Christ: The time of affliction is no time to give over
praying and crying; but being in an agony he cried more earnestly; and so we in
time of affliction, we should cry more earnestly. O that we might learn thus to
cry, with this gracious, holy, believing, and servent cry: The Lord Jesus has
given great encouragement to his servants to go and cry thus. O what
encouragement does Christ give in Luke 11. 8, ^. by a parable there, of a man
being in bed? he has no mind to rise, but through importunity be is overcome:
And so by that Christ stirs up his Disciples to go and cry importunately to God
their Father. And so in Luke 18. there is another parable of the unjust Judge;
who neither feared God nor man, yet because of the Widows importunity, he
would judge her cause; And shall not the Judge of all do right? I tell you
(says Christ) he will avenge the elect that cry to him day and night. And
therefore Christ gives encouragement to you to go and cry earnestly, and to
wait upon the Lord, and not to give over crying, for the Lord has the bowels
of a father, as the father pitties the child, so the Lord pitties those that
fear him. Now the tender hearted parent is filled with compassion to the child,
if the child be under a heavy burden, the bowels of a father is filled with
compassion, and will not let him lie under that burden; and so the Lord, when
the spirit is even gone, and the soul ready to saint, and the Lord see that
their strength is gone, then the Lord will come in, and exercise the bowels of
a tender hearted father.

And know, that many times the Lord does hide himself, and withdraw, and seems
to be far off from the requests of his people, that so he may stir them up to
cry the more earnestly after him; he sees that they begin to flag in their
prayers, and do not cry so loud as they have done, the Lord he will withdraw,
that so he may stir up a spirit of prayer, bring them into such an affliction,
that so they may cry the more earnestly; the storm was raised, when Christ was
upon the sea with his Disciples, to make them cry the more earnestly: The Lord
seems to sleep many times at the prayers of his people, that so by the prayers
of his people he may be awakened.

Quest. But you will say, What need we cry thus earnestly to the Lord? for he
is found of them that seek him not; we cannot find God by our seeki^^ him, he
must seek us, he is found of them that (...) him not.

Answ. I answer, It is true, God is found (...) them that seek him not; that is
when God comes first into a poor soul, he breaks in upon it, he prevents it
with grace and mercy, and he seeks us, and brings home grace and mercy to the
soul before the soul sought the Lord.

But now when the Lord has found a soul, and brought home a soul to the
knowledge of himself through Christ, O then he expects that that soul should
continually wait upon him, and be seeking of him, in that way which is of the
Lords own appointment: It is true, he is found many times of those that seek
him not, but the Lord is not found of those that seek him lazily; he hears not
cold prayers, no, it is the cry of the spirit the Lord hears.

Quest. Ah, but some will say, I cannot cry and pray, I cannot continue in
prayer, my spirit is overwhelmed, and I am so shut up, that I know not how to
utter a word in the presence of the Lord.

Answ. I answer, Though thy spirit be overwhelmed thou may pray and cry
aloud to the Lord, David did so, and why may not thou* Psalm. 142. 3. I cried
(says he) and it was when my spirit is overwhelmed; and although thou can
not utter a word to the Lord, yet thou may pray and cry with the cries of the
spirit* the Spirit of the Lord stirs up sighings and groanings in the hearts of
his people which cannot be uttered: So when thou can not speak a word to the
Lord, yet thou may cry. Job could no^ speak, yet his soul cried to the Lord,
and his eye cried to the Lord, Job 16. 20. My friends scorn me, but mine eyes
pour out tears unto God. When he knew not how to speak a word, his eye looked
to the Lord, if he cannot pour out his prayer, his eye shall speak, and his
soul shall speak; this may be an effectual prayer.

Object. Ah, but I am filled with the sense of my unworthiness, I dare not go
before the Lord, I dare not beg any mercy, nor stand in his presence, I am
filled with the sense of my own unworthiness.

Answ. I tell thee; though thou be filled with the sense of thy
unworthiness, yet thou may, and ought to cry to the Lord, and pour out thy
soul in supplication: The Publican that went up to the Temple, he durst not
draw nigh, he looked upon himself as an unworthy sinner, and yet poured out his
prayer to the Lord: the sense of thy unworthiness should not hinder thee in
the pouring out of thy prayer to the Lord; the more unvorthy, the more need of
going to the Lord; and the more sensible of thy unworthiness, the sooner the
Lord declares his acceptance. Oh that the Lord would make us all mindful of
this our duty! we are apt to cry with the cry of the flesh, but O that in the
day of our distress we did cry with the cry of the spirit: Let the cry that
springs from pride, impatiencie, and unbelief be silent, laid low, and let it
not open its mouth; but cry with the cry of faith, with the cry of the
spirit, this will be a good evidence, that affliction has wrought the right
way, and that the Lord has done us good by our affliction: Till the flesh be
silent, and the spirit raised up to cry in faith, we shall never have any
evidence, that we have received benefit by our affliction; but when the soul
shall be in affliction, and the spirit up and cry, it will be a good evidence,
that the soul has received good by the affliction.

And to say no more, the Lord will soon draw nigh to that soul that shall thus
be found waiting for him; when the flesh shall be silent, and the spirit cry,
the Lord will soon hear that cry. You know the Lord is a tender hearted
Father, and he will not suffer any of his children to be tempted above what
they are able to bear; he will not suffer them to sink under their burden, but
will come in with delivering mercy; for the Lord does sometimes hear the cry
of the flesh, so he has heard the cry of the flesh, though not the sinful
cry; yet the cry of nature, the Lord has heard that cry: He heard the cry
of Ishamel, when as he was ready to perish for thirst: The Lad cried, and he
heard the cry of the Lad, and the Lord opened the eyes of Hagar, and she saw a
well of water: He heard the cry of the flesh, so gracious is the Lord, yea, he
hears she cry of the young Ravens, of the young Lions, and the Lord he opens
his hand and satisfies them. O that this might be an encouragement to go to
God in all times of distress, let it be never so great, the Lord is a God of
compassion, and if he does hear the cry of the unreasonable Creatures, and the
cry of the flesh, O surely the Lord will much more hear the cry of the
spirit; when his people come and apply themselves to him through Christ, such
as hope in his mercy, and are found wanting for his salvation. Surely the Lord
he will find out the best time, in which he will come in with deliverance to
his Servants.

Matthew. 15. 22. Thou son of David, have mercy on me.
SERMON VI.
WE observed the last day, that great and strong afflictions will rail strong
cries, make Gods people cry loud. It was a sore affliction that was upon this
woman, Ms daughter is grievously vexed with a devil; and wh^^ she comes to
Christ, she does not only pray, (...) cry to him.

But to pass on, and consider something th^^ still remains, and that is to
look upon the Argument that this woman uses in her cry to Christ her Argument
is mercy, she cries mercy, (...) free grace; she does not look to any
worthiness (...) her self, neither does her unworthiness discourage but looks
beyond both, and she closes (...) mercy and free grace, Thou son of David
(...) mercy on me: She comes to the son of David, (...) knew David was a
merciful Prince and King, (...) shows mercy to his very enemies; David spared
the life of Saul, when he had him at a great advantage, and spared the life of
Shimei, though he had provoked David by his curses. Now thus she reasons with
her self, the son of David, the Messiah, of whom David was but a type, he has
more mercy and compassion then David, surely his bowels are infinite, and
therefore though she be a vile sinner, an unworthy wretch, yet she comes and
takes hold of his mercy, and there is nothing else that she pleads with
Christ, nothing else she rests upon, only upon mercy, no other Argument she
uses, only presents her great misery; her daughter is grievously vexed with a
devil: She takes hold of mercy.

So then the Observation is this. That where there is true faith, Doctrine.
it will teach a soul to deny it self, to look beyond it self, its own
worthiness and righteousness, and to take hold of mercy, and of the free grace
of God through Jesus Christ.

I shall open the point to you.

And first I shall give you Instances, that the Saints in all Ages in their
coming to God, has looked at nothing in themselves, but has only pleaded
mercy and free grace in all their straits.

You know that Instance of Jacob, when he was in a great strait he applied
himself to the Lord, he pleaded only mercy, he does not look to any worthiness
in himself, he does not present that before the Lord as any motive, Genesis 32.
10. he pleads no worthiness, but looks to his own unworthiness, O Lord, I am
less then the least of all thy mercies; he does not tell God, that he had
lived without blame, that he had walked justly, and had not defrauded, but he
had been a faithful Steward, that he had walked religiously, and eyed God in
his ways, that he had set up a pillar, and vowed a vow, he pleads none of
this, but O Lord, I am less then the least of all thy mercies.

And so Moses, though he had done as much as most men that ever lived, Deuteronomy. 3.
25. I pray thee let me go and see the good Land. Here is not a tittle of any of
the services that he had done for God that he does mention; he does not say,
Lord, I have taken a great deal of pains with this people, I have followed thy
Commandments, and suffered a great deal of hardship with them for thy sake;
no, he only pleads mercy, Thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness
and thy mighty hand, I pray thee let me go over and see the good Land.

And so David often in the Psalms, you shall find he is pleading with God, and
he makes mercy his refuge, he pleads only mercy and free grace, Psalm. 4. 1.
he pleads that God would bear him in his mercy: And you shall find, that when
the Servants of God has pleaded for others, they have urged nothing but mercy
and free grace in all their supplications. So the Prophet Jeremiah, when he was
pleading for the Church, Jer. 14. 7. O Lord, though our iniquities testify
against us, do thou it for thy names sake, for our backsliding are many, we
have sinned against thee: No mention of any righteousness, no, be mentions
their iniquities, Our backslidings are many, but do thou it for thy names
sake. And so the Prophet, Daniel, when he was pleading for the Lords people, he
looks beyond all righteousness of their own, and pleads mercy, Dan. 9. 17. Now
therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his supplication, and
cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords
sake: He had before in verse 8. confessed all their iniquities, and now, O
Lord, (says he) do it for the Lords sake.

And if you look into the new Testament, from the beginning to the end of the
History of Christ, you shall never find any that were accepted of Christ that
pleaded any thing, but mercy and free grace, Matthew. 9. 27. And when Jesus
departed thence, two blind men followed him, crying, and saying, Thou son of
David have mercy on us. And so in Matthew. 17. 14, 15. another comes to Christ,
and he uses only that Argument, mercy, Lord have mercy on my son, for he is
lunatic. And in Matthew. 20. 30. there is mention of two blind men sitting by
the way side, and they cried out, Have mercy on us. And in verse 13. the
multitude rebuked them, but they cried the more, saying, Have mercy on us, O
Lord, thou son of David. And so the same Argument the Lepers used, verse 17.
Jesus, Master have mercy on us. Indeed we read of some of the Elders of the
Jews, that came to Christ in the behalf of the Centurion, and they plead his
worthiness, Luke 7. 4. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him
instantly, saying, that he was worthy for whom he should do this: But now the
good man himself he had no such thought of himself, but he utterly denies it,
look into verse 6, 7. Then Jesus went with them, and when he was now not far
from the house, the Centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord
trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy thou should enter under my roof;
verse 7. Wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee, but say
in a word, and my servant shall be healed. Neither thought I my self worthy to
come unto thee, such a mean and low account had this man of himself.

First, But I shall clear the Doctrine to you, and make it out, that a gracious
heart, where there is faith, looks beyond all his own worthiness and
righteousness, and comes to Christ.

Secondly, Show you, that the same gracious soul closes only with mercy and
free grace.

First, I say, a gracious soul in its coming to Christ, looks beyond all that
is in himself, and that both in its first coming and afterward in any
disstresse, closes with the Lord, and looks beyond his own worthiness, and
pleads only mercy.

In the souls first coming to Christ, a gracious heart does not not cannot look
to any worthiness in it self, for where the Spirit of the Lord is, it does
discover to man what his vileness and misery is; now where there is a saving
discovery to a soul of his own vileness, it is not possible that that soul
should plead any thing of his own before God. For

First of all, The Spirit teaches a man that he is empty, destitute of all
that which is good, the soul is naked of all that which is good, and is as a
poor beggar, that has neither bread to eat, nor clothes to put on, but in a
sad condition, utterly bereaved of the Image of God: In my flesh dwells no good
thing, says the Apostle, though through grace he had received much from God,
yet in me, in my flesh dwells no good things. Now where there is a discovery
made to a soul, that he is full of wants, poor and naked, surely such a soul
can plead nothing but free grace.

Secondly, The Spirit of the Lord discovers to a soul, that it is not only full
of wants, but full of sin, full of all manner of unrighteousness, not only lost
the Image of God, but is filled with the image of the Devil, and discovers that
all the imaginations of man's heart are evil, and only evil, and that from his
youth upward: Now when the Spirit of the Lord comes to make this discovery to
a man, that he is thus filled with sin, and lets a man see what a filthy thing
sin is, how displeasing to God, how contrary to his Holiness, that soul that
has this discovery can plead nothing of his own when he comes to God, but
mercy and free grace.

Thirdly, The Spirit of the Lord does discover to man, that he is a poor weak
creature, that he is one that can do nothing to help himself out of this
miserable state, that he can do nothing to procure a better condition for
himself, that he can make no satisfaction to God for the least of his
transgressions; full of sin, ah, but he cannot make satisfaction for the least
transgression, he cannot lay down a price to redeem his own soul, he cannot
change his own heart, and he cannot work up his own spirit to believe in
Christ, he cannot subdue any lust in his own heart; a poor weak creature that
can do nothing, cannot think a good thought, nor move toward God: Now when the
Spirit of the Lord discovers this to a man, O then he sees there is nothing to
plead but mercy.

Fourthly, The Spirit of the Lord does discover to a soul, that his natural
estate is a state of enmity; the Lord rips open a man's heart at his
conversion, and shows him what enmities is in his bosom, how full he is of
contrary workings in his heart and spirit to the Lord, he sees that secret
enmity that he never saw before: Now when this comes to be discovered to a man
or woman, that they are in a stare of enmity to God, and the workings of that
enmity cannot cease, if the Lord does not put forth the mighty power of the
death of Christ; I say, that soul that has all these discoveries made to it,
first sees that it has no worthiness, pleads nothing of his own, especially
such a creature, so full of wants, so full of sin, and so full of weakness, and
so full of enmity, such a creature can plead nothing of his own when he comes
to the great God.

Nay, as it sees that it has no deserts to plead, so it sees that there are
contrary deserts, I say, these discoveries will make a soul sensible of
contrary deserts, that it deserves nothing but hell and wrath, and confusion,
rejection from the Lords presence for ever and ever: The Prophet Daniel was
sensible of these contrary deserts of the people, Dan. 9. 8. To us belongs
nothing but shame and confusion: So that you see when the Lord by his Spirit
comes to discover to man, what a vile creature he is, such a soul sees that it
has nothing to plead as matter of merit, but mercy.

And as in its first coming, so whenever a gracious heart goes to God, after it
is brought home, reconciled, made one with God through Christ, after it has
walked with God, yet even then no gracious heart that can plead any worthiness,
any righteousness of his own; when he goes before God, he cannot plead any of
his graces, nor any of his own services, non any of his own sufferings; and if
so, then there is nothing to plead.

I say, a gracious heart cannot plead his own graces, it cannot plead his
faith, not holiness, it cannot present that to the Lord, that the Lord for such
and such graces should bestow mercy; for the very faith of the Saints is
imperfect; now that which is imperfect cannot merit any thing, abundance of
unbelief mixed with the strongest faith, Lord help my unbelief: It is true
indeed, that David, in some of his Psalms, desires God to look upon his faith,
Psalm. 25. 20. Deliver me, for I put my trust in thee: But he does not look upon
his faith as merriting any thing at Gods hand, but only desires that God would
look upon his Covenant, the Lord had promised grace to his people in trusting
upon him; so that he does not desire the Lord to look upon it as any act of
his, for faith is little worth as an act of ours, but he puts the Lord in mind
of his Covenant, of the Promise that he made with his people.

And the Saints, as they cannot plead faith, so they cannot plead holiness, for
as their faith, so their holiness is imperfect; they have many failings,
manyfold corruptions are found in the most gracious heart, therefore they
cannot plead holiness before the Lord.

It is true, Hezekiah in Isai. 38. 3. and so Nehemiah spread before the Lord
what they had done, and how they had walked; but that can be no Argument that
we should make use of that as an Argument, no Argument that that was the best
Argument; but I say, they only did desire the Lord to look upon his own work in
them, they were far from pleading any merit, any desert. And therefore you
shall find the best of the Saints, when in the best temper, have been found
disowning their own righteousness, and their own worthiness. Paul he had as
much to plead, and to trust too, as any man living, and yet he looks upon all
as dross and dung in comparison of Christ; in respect of pleading
righteousness all is dross and dung, though it is good in its place, yet to
lay it as a foundation, it is dross and dung. And see what is said Job 9. 20.
If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me, if I say I am perfect,
it shall also prove me perverse. O that they would mind this that boast of
perfection! Job was as perfect as any, yet if I justify my self, mine own
mouth shall condemn me, if I say I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse.
The very saying I am perfect, would condemn me, it would declare that I am
lying against the truth, and I should declare my imperfection, while I am
pleading perfection: Thus a gracious soul dare not plead faith nor holiness.

Secondly, It dare not plead any services; when it has done its utmost for
God, it dare not plead what it has done, no work, no services, no tears, no
fastings, it dare not plead these before the Lord. Indeed you shall find many
unsound hearts, that have pleaded these things, and trusted to them, many
unsound hearts and hypocrites, that have looked much to their righteousness, to
their prayers and fastings, and their good works and services that they have
done for God, they have pleaded these before God, Isai. 58. Wherefore have we
fasted, and thou have not seen, and afflicted our soul, and thou regardest not.
And so you know the story of the Pharisee and the Publican that went up to the
Temple to pray, the Pharisee he stood upon it to justify himself, Luke 18. 11,
12. he stood much upon his own justification, what he was not, and what he was,
I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
Publican: I fast twice a week, I give tithes of all I possess: But the Publican
he smote upon his breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner; and the
Publican he went away justified rather then the Pharisee. Though hypocrites
look at their services, yet a gracious heart dare not look at any thing it has
done: Matthew. 25. When Christ takes notice what the Saints has done, and says,
Come ye blessed of my Father; I was hungry, and you gave me meat, thirsty, and
you gave me drink, naked, and you clothed me. Why Lord, say they, when saw we
thee a hungry, thirsty, and naked, when did we these things to thee?

What did the Saints do good works ignorantly? did good and did not know? No,
that which is done out of ignorance is sinful, no, they knew what they did, and
that they did but according to the mind of Christ; ah, but when done, they take
no notice of it, their right hand shall not know what their left hand does, for
they dare not plead their services and their duties upon this account.

For they know whatever is good is not theirs, but Christ's, whatever in them
that is good, and whatever good they have done, is by the Lords Spirit, and
therefore they know there is nothing for them to plead by way of merit; no, the
more they are enabled and assisted to do for Christ, the more they are engaged
unto Christ, Christ is not engaged to them, but they engaged to Christ.

And besides, whatever they have done in the service of the Lord as theirs, it
is accompanied with many weaknesses and frailties, that if it were not for
Christ and his righteousness, and Christ's presenting them, God the Father could
not accept the best service that ever was done by the best men.

And besides, the Saints know that when they have done all they can, they are
unprofitable servants, if they could do a thousand times more for God, yet they
have nothing to plead: Christ teaches us so, Luke 17. 10. So likewise ye, when
you shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants; we have done that which was our duty to do. Mark, if it
were possible for any of Gods people to do all that the Lord requires, yet
there is nothing to plead, you have done but that which was your duty, that
which was your debt; Now the payment of a debt is no engagement, he to whom the
debt is paid is not engaged, you have done but your duty. And so the best of
all the Saints, if they could do all that is required, they do but pay their
debt; there is a debt of thankfulness, not debt of justice, we have done that
which is duty, which we owe to mercy and free grace.

Again, the Saints cannot plead their sufferings. Though a man suffer never so
much, and suffer never so well, and suffer upon a good ground, and suffer for
the name of Christ, yet there is nothing that he can plead by way of merit, for
there is no man suffers without sin: there was merit in Christ's. sufferings,
because he suffered and had no sin of his own, he was the Lamb of God without
spot; but now the best of Saints upon earth, who do suffer for the name of
Christ, cannot suffer without sin, though it is not punished for sin, yet still
there is sin in the person, and so can be no desert.

And then beside, it is that which the Saints owe to Chris as they owe all
duties, so they owe all suffering for the name of Christ, and if they should
suffer a thousand times more then ever any man suffered, it is but what they
owe; and therefore suffering cannot be pleaded no more then services. And so
you have the first part of the point.

But of the second part, to speak more briefly to that, as a soul is taken off
of it self, so it pleads only mercy, flees to free grace, comes to naked
mercy.

First, For a gracious heart it sees and knows, that there is a fullness in
mercy to satisfy all its wants, all its desires, there is enough in mercy to
make abundant supply to it as it; sees there is that in it self, which may make
it run from it self, so there is that in mercy and free grace, which may make
it run to it as to a City of refuge. There is a fullness in mercy which may
answer the souls desires and wants; for as you heard before, when the Lord
does discover to a man, that he is a poor creature, destitute and naked, why
the same spirit does discover, that there is enough in mercy to supply all
wants; mercy has made great provision for the poor, naked, destitute
creature; and as it discovers to a soul, that it is a sinful creature, so the
same spirit does discover, that there is enough in mercy to take away all sin,
and pardon all transgressions; and mercy and free grace has set open a
fountain, an infinite fountain, a bottomless fountain of merit in the blood of
Christ, for the washing away of sin; and as the soul sees, that it is a poor
weak creature, so the same spirit does discover to it, that mercy is strong,
and mercy is able to reach him in every condition, and able to lift him up in
the lowest condition, and as it sees that it is an enemy to God, so the same
spirit does discover, that mercy can reconcile it, show what is done for the
reconciliation of poor creatures; mercy has given Jesus Christ for to slay
the enmity and to reconcile poor lost creatures. Thus, I say, a gracious soul
it will flee to mercy, it sees that there is a fullness in mercy to answer all
its wants.

Secondly, And as it sees a fullness, so there is a freeness in the Lords
mercy, and therefore runs to mercy, as this woman did, and pleads mercy, and
to cast her self into the arms of mercy, because free; see that the Lord is a
tender hearted God, and that mercy flew freely from him, mercy makes free
invitations, the soul seeing and hearing that, it is persuaded to apply it self
to mercy.

Thirdly, Such a soul will flee to mercy, because it knows, that all that God
does for his people in the business of salvation, it is for the exaltation of
mercy and free grace, the great work of the redemption of souls, it is only
for the exaltation of mercy and free grace; it was free grace that found out
the way of redeeming souls, and free grace that gave sinners to Christ, and
free grace that gave Christ for sinners, and free grace gives Christ unto
sinners, and all that God does in sanctifying and saving his people, is upon
the account of mercy and free grace, and therefore the Lord he invites souls
to himself, and he makes choice of such as may most of all declare the riches
of his mercy, when he sends to invite men to come in to him, he sends to the
high vvayes and hedges, goes and compels them to come in, Go and call the blind
and the lame: When Christ makes a feast, he sends to the poor; he knovvs, that
the poor hungry souls, when they shall taste of the riches of his grace, they
will be thankful, and they will advance mercy and free grace, and therefore
he sends to the high-vvayes and hedges to compel them to come in. Thus you
have seen both the parts of the Doctrine opened.

A word or two for improvement, and I shut up all.

First, Let us take heed, brethren and friends, that we be not found looking
to any worthiness of our own, when we come to Christ; take heed that we
be not found looking to any righteousness of our own; take heed we bring no
price in our hand when we come for mercy, that will spoil all: O there is
many a poor soul by this is kept from coming to Christ, from closing with
Christ, from resting upon Christ, and so from salvation, because it is a hard
matter to bring them off from looking to something of their own; men will
hardly be persuaded that they do so; but yet it is a very ordinary thing, and
thousands more do it, then will be persuaded they do it, who do look upon
something of their own, and so are kept from Christ: Whence is it else, that
men stand so much upon their own justification? men stand to plead for
themselves, and justify themselves and quarrel with God in time of affliction,
and entertain hard thoughts of God, it is because, men have too good thoughts
of themselves? Whence comes it else, that men are up and down in their spirits,
and comforted according to their actings? But from hence, because men are prove
to look to something of their own, as a foundation of their acceptance with
God: Whence is it else, that men are kept from closing with Christ, because of
the sight of their unworthiness? But from hence, because men would have a
price in their own hand, to buy grace of him, and mercy of him.

But it may be many a poor soul will say, that he does not look to his
worthiness, God forbid that I should do it, says the soul: Ah, but thy
unworthiness does keep thee from Christ; and if so, then thou supposest that
some worthiness in thee should make thee close with Christ.

Now I beseech you Brethren, that we do not look to any thing in our selves,
think not to bring any price with you when you come to Christ, but know, that
we are poor, and naked, and miserable, sinful, and weak, and full of enmity
against God and Christ, that there is nothing that we can plead; what is there
that we would carry? If you had more grace, you could not plead that; if you
had done more service, you could not plead that; and if you had suffered for
Christ, you could not plead that: O then why do our souls flag and hang back,
and do not make have to Jesus Christ?

And let me tell you, that souls that have nothing have best acceptance: I said
before, that if you carry a price you loose all your labor, Christ deals with
the poor, and with none else, and trades with them that have no money; and I
say, that souls that come to Christ most empty, most naked, most destitute,
most desolate, in the apprehension of their own vileness, sinfulness, enmity;
that soul that comes thus to Christ, shall have best acceptance: If a man comes
and pleads any thing else, pleads, Lord, I have done so and so, I have been so
and so, this moves not the Lord, to tell God of your righteousness, and what
you have done, it moves not God at all; but to tell God what a poor creature
you are, full of sin, and full of weakness, full of enmity, and full of wants,
this will move the Lord: Is it not so with your selves? I pray consider how it
is with our selves, and what it is that moves us; when a poor man comes, what
is it that moves us? O when he shall spread his wants, and express the sense
of his wants and misery; a poor man comes to you and says, O Sir pity me,
help me, I want every thing, I have not a rag to put on my back, no bread to
put into my belly, I am blind, I am lame, I have no legs to walk with; no hands
to work with, O this will make impression upon the hearts of men, though hard;
And shall not this move tbe Father of mercies? O it will prevail much: If a
soul shall go and say, Lord, I am miserable, naked no eye to see, no legs to
walk, no hands to work, O this speaks loud; when the soul shall cry, Lord help,
Lord hear me; I tell you, this will plead very loud in the ears of God, for
Christ (as I said before) he will deal with none but the poor, he will heal
them that have nothing; you have many Physicians that go up and down and give
it out, that they will heal the poor for nothing. So Christ gives it our in the
Gospel, that he will heal the poor, and none but the poor; let a poor desolate,
naked, empty soul go to Christ, and say, Lord, thou have invited poor sinners
to come that have no money, and I am such an one,) Lord, heal me: Christ will
heal such a soul; Christ will not heal the rich, if they be rich and full they
have no need of him; The rich he will send away empty, but the poor shall not
go away empty. O then, that this might persuade us, that when we go to God we
might go poor, in the sense of our own unworthiness, for it is the best thing
to move the Lord to mercy.

Lastly, Let us make mercy our refuge, for it is not enough for a man to run
from himself, if he does not run to mercy, if he does not run to free grace, if
he goes any where else there is no healing. Now therefore it calls upon us all,
every one in the Congregation this day, to make mercy and free grace our
refuge: O that we might go to God upon that account, at this woman of Canaan
did, Have mercy on me. O Lord, thou son of David: She comes to mercy, and
pleads mercy, and rests upon mercy and free grace.

Oh that we might make more use of mercy and free grace for all things! Let us
come hither for pardon of sin: Do you want pardon of sin? Plead with mercy and
free grace, flee to the Promises of mercy, I will be merciful to their sin,
and remember their sin no more. And so would you have peace? Go more to free
grace, plead more with mercy, there peace is to be had, it is mercy that
creates the fruit of the lips peace peace. And so do you want healing? healing
of your corruptions, of your distempers of spirit? What is it that you want? O
go to free grace, it is to be had in mercy, there is healing for you, I will
heal their backslidings, and love them freely. Oh that the Lord would help us
all to flee to this refuge. Do you desire any thing? Go upon the account of
mercy, do not stand upon any worthiness, any justification of your selves,
and if you be kept from Christ by your unworthiness, then you have an eye to
your worthiness: O that we might not look upon any worthiness! If a man come
to you and plead, that you would take pity upon him, it would move your hearts
more, then if a man should come and require of you that you should do so and
so for him, because you have done so and so for others? No, but if he falls
down at your feet, it prevails more with you; and so, when God sees that a man
stands upon it, upon his own justification, O this does not prevail; but when a
soul comes to the footstool of free grace, and pleads nothing but mercy, I am
worthy to be cast out, but thou have given an invitation to sinners, and here I
will wait at the footstool of free grace; this will move the bowels of Jesus
Christ.

Quest. Ah, but may not a man cry for mercy, and yet go without it?

Answ. True indeed, it is possible a man may cry for mercy, and call for mercy
in a dead, cold, formal way, many a poor creature will say, Lord have mercy on
me, and he trusts to his Lord have mercy on me, and so thinks that should save
him; but that is not to trust in mercy; they trust in their saying so, but they
trust not in mercy: It is possible that a poor wretch in time of extremity may
cry out, Lord have mercy, and yet not apply himself to mercy; for the soul that
applies himself to mercy, he applies himself in Gods way: Now Gods way in
showing mercy, it is in Jesus Christ; if a man cries never so loud for mercy,
yet if he does not apply himself in Gods way, look thorough the Mediator, he
may cry and go without it; but he that does apply himself rightly to mercy, he
seeks it in Chist, for mercy will do no good out of Christ; therefore a
gracious heart applies himself only to Christ; and he that applies himself to
mercy, he waits the Lords time for mercy: So that a man may say, Lord have
mercy, and cry out for mercy, and yet be far from obtaining mercy.

But now this let me say, that if any poor soul that is sensible of his own
misery, that sees it is full of wants, and full of sin and unrighteousness, and
full of weakness, unable to help himself, and full of enmity, so that it can do
nothing but sin against God, I say, a soul that shall see this, and shall apply
it self to mercy in mercies way, look to God through Christ the Messiah, come
as this woman, to the Messiah, O thou son of David have mercy on me; no soul
that shall thus apply himself to the mercy of God thorough Christ, being
sensible of his own lost condition, and shall there wait, but certainly the
Lord will make a good end with that soul, and that soul, as the Apostle speaks,
Shall find grace and mercy to help in time of need.

Matthew. 15. 22. My daughter is grie vously vexed with a Devil.
SERMON VII.
YOu have seen this woman's faith in her coming to Christ, and closing with
Christt as Lord, and as the son of David.

We shall now see the love of this woman; here is her love as well as her
faith; there was a great deal of love and compassion in her toward her
daughter, the stroke that was upon her daughters body, fell upon her spirit,
and lay heavy there; and therefore she does not say, Lord have mercy upon my
daughter, but, Lord have mercy upon me: It is my affliction, and my burden,
Lord have mercy upon me, for my daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil. Her
daughters affliction was heavy upon her spirit.

Quest. But you will say, Whether was this affection natural or spiritual
grace? Whether did she speak this from natural affection to her child, or was
this a fruit of her faith?

Answ. I answer, Here was both natural affection and spiritual grace; for
seeing this woman had a seed of faith in her, as has been proved, natural
affection could not work alone; where there is the grace of faith in the heart,
it will not leave nature to work alone, but grace will step in and rectify
natural affection, order natural affection, set bounds to natural affection,
set natural affection upon a right ground, and make them look to right ends,
where there is grace natural affection cannot work alone: Indeed in that heart
where grace does not dwell, there nature works alone, as the natural
affections, grief, and sorrow, and anguish, in a natural man, where the spirit
is not, nature works alone, he cannot propound any spiritual consideration to
himself to quiet his grief and sorrow; he may fetch in some carnal
considerations, or he may stay till nature settle of it self, time may wear out
his grief, but no work of grace to compose the spirit, time must work it out:
But now in a gracious soul, nature cannot work alone, but grace will step in to
order and rectify, to set bounds to the affections, and will help to compose
the spirit; and so we may conclude of this woman, here was first natural
affection in her; nature did teach her to love her child, but natural affection
did not work alone, here was also the spiritual grace of faith, faith taught
her to love her child aright; nature taugh her to love her child, but grace
taught her to love her child aright.

So that there was the working both of nature and grace.

Quest. But you will say, Was it not an evil to give way to natural affection?

Answ. I answer, No, natural affection is not the corruption of nature: Indeed
there is a great deal of corruption in natural affection, but natural affection
is not the corruption of nature; no, natural affection is part of the Image of
God, the remnant of the Image of God which was left in man since the fall of
Adam, for it is a sin to be without natural affection: The Apostle, speaking of
the sins of the last days, he reckons up this as one, without natural
affection, Romans 1. 31. Natural affection is part of the Image of God; and it is
that, without which the world could not be continued: The Lord in abundance of
mercy and wisdom has planted natural affection in the hearts of Parents to
their Children, for if it were not so, Gods name would soon be dishonored, and
there would be all manner of cruelty, and the race of mankind would soon be
destroyed; so that it is a mercy to have natural affection, but to have
spiritual grace to work with natural affection, to have faith to set natural
affection right, and to cause it to work aright, that is the greatest mercy:
Now this woman had both, she loved her child, and loved her child aright.

And this woman may be a pattern to all parents, to all those that have
children, and may teach every one of us, not only to love our children, but to
love them aright.

So then to close with the Doctrine, which is this: That wheresoever there is
faith in any man or woman, it will rectify natural affection in them; faith
will teach parents to love their children aright.

In the opening of this Point I shall show you two things.

First, That there is a great deal of love in natural affection in the hearts
of parents toward their children.

Secondly, Where there is faith, it will rectify those natural affections, and
teach to love Relations aright.

First, It will not be unnecessary to show you, that there is a great deal of
love in natural affection in the hearts of parents to their children; it will
not be altogether unuseful to see how much love there is in the hearts of
parents to their children, that children may see the love of their parents to
them.

What a great deal of natural affection is there in the hearts of parents
toward their children? O Lord, thou son of David, have mercy on me, for my
daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil.

And you shall see, that the Lords hand has engraven natural affection upon
the hearts of parents, and it is engraven in such great letters upon the hearts
of parents, that it is almost impossible to wear it out, Isai. 49. 15. Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? It is a very hard thing to do it, it is almost impossible that a
woman should forget her sucking child: It is true indeed, some have done it,
some have forgotten it, some have laid cruel hands upon their sucking child;
such are monsters rather then women, but it is not possible that a woman that
has the compassions of a woman should forget her sucking child.

And our Savior tells us, that it is in the worst of men, Matthew. 7. 11. If ye
then being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children: There is this
good thing in the hearts of the worst men living, love in their hearts to their
children. And therefore it is, that the Lord does make use of the compassions
that is in the hearts of parents, to set forth his own love and compassion
toward his people; that place before, Isai. 49. 15, 16. Can a woman forget her
sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea,
they may forget, yet will I not forget thee: Behold, I have graven thee upon
the palms of my hands. And so Psalm. 103. 13. Like as a father pittieth his
children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear him: He makes use of the bowels,
the pity and compassion of Parents, to hold forth what bowels are in his heart
toward his children.

Now that you may see what this natural affection is, and that you may see the
greatness of the love of parents to their children, consider how it works.

First of all, Love makes them willing to undergo a great deal of pain and
sorrow, labor, care and travel; what is it almost that Parents are not willing
to undergo for their children? O how much sorrow do poor women meet withal in
bearing and bringing forth children? And yet their desire to children does
carry them through all; A woman, though she have a sore travel, says Christ,
when delivered forgets her sorrow, for joy that a man is brought forth into the
world. And so when they are brought forth; what great pains are parents willing
to take for their children? How long do they hang upon their mothers breasts
before they can shift for themselves? And yet that affection that the Lord has
planted in parents, makes them willing to do all this.

Secondly, that natural affection that the Lord has planted in parents to
their children, makes them to sympathize with their children, in every burden
and affliction, every affliction that lies upon their children to be their own
affliction; so this woman in the Text, O thou son of David have mercy upon me:
The affliction was upon her daughter, but it was her burden; O Lord have mercy
upon me. The parent does sympathize with the child, and does account the
affliction of the child to be their own affliction; for how are Parents
affected when their children are ill, and when the hand of God is upon their
children? If the child's head does but ache, it makes their heart ache, so
sensible are parents of their childrens troubles: The Noble man that came to
Christ, see how he was affected when his child was sick, John 4. 49. Sir, come
down ere my child die: At verse 47. he besought Christ, that he would come down
and heal his son, for he was at the point of death. Christ delayed the
business, verse 48. then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders
ye will not believe: But see how abruptly he answered Christ, verse 49. Sir,
come down ere my child die. He was not able to attend any thing else, all his
mind was upon his child, O Sir, come down ere my child die. He could hear
nothing till his child was healed, and thus natural affection works tovvard
their children.

Yea thirdly, This natural affection will ma^^ the parents to pass by many
injuries that are done by children to parents, and yet parents ready to pardon
them; upon the least submission the heart of a parent relents; it is a very
hard matter for a parent to cast off his child, though there be many
provocations.

See some Instances in Scripture; that of Abraham is remarkable, Genesis 21. 9,
10, 12. His son Ismail he was a wicked child, one that sco^fed at the son of
the Promise, and Sarah she makes her complaint, and desires that the
bond-vvoman and her child might be cast out, verse 10. And the thing was very
grievous in Abraham's ^ight because of his son, verse 11.

Though he was a wicked child, a rebelli^^s child, a scoffer at good, yet
when it came to casting of him out, it seems very grievous to Abraham, because
of his son.

And you know the Prodigal son, that had spent his portion in riotous courses,
how willing was his father to forgive him, to pardon all his miscarriages, and
to close with him again upon his first return and submission?

And you know that Instance of David, which holds forth a great deal of
affection that was in that good man toward a wicked child, 2. Sa^. 18. 5. Deal
gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. He was a wicked and
rebellious son, one that rose up against his father, one that would have turned
his father out of his kingdom, one that sought his fathers life, one that had
committed great wickedness in the sight of the Sun: But oh! how does David's
heart yearn toward him? And when the Captains went forth to battle, David gave
this charge, that they should deal gently with him for my sake. Thus you see
how the hearts of parents works toward their children.

Fourthly, That natural affection that God has planted in the hearts of
parents toward their children, does teach them to accept willingly any service
that is done by their children; though it be never so weakly done, yet if the
Father sees that the child has done its good will, in obedience, and in love,
O! how acceptable is the least piece of service done by such a child? And
therefore the Lord takes an argument from this to strengthen his peoples
faith, I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him, Mal. 3.
17.

Fifthly, Natural affection will teach the parents to supply all the wants of
the children. O! what care does parents take to supply their childrens wants,
that they may want nothing that is good for them? They shall have that which is
suitable to them: Ye that are evil know how to give good gifts to your children:
What care do parents take of their children, while young, to supply their
wants? And what care do they take to make provision for their children, when
they are dead and gone? Nay, do not many a poor parent undo himself to make
provision for his children, that he may make them great in this world, and
leave them something when he be dead and gone.

Sixthly and lastly, to name no more; The love that is in parents makes them
exceeding unwilling to part with their children; it is the greatest affliction
in the world, they had rather loose all their estates then loose their
children: Nay, though parents many times be so poor as they cannot keep their
children, yet how loath are they to part with their children? The poor Widow
we read^^, 2 King. 4. 1. all her estate was gone; nothing left her but her two
sons, the creditor came to take unto him her two sons from her, but how loath
was she to part with her two sons? Nay, how hard is it for parents to part with
their children when God takes away their children by death? You know that
Instance of Job, Job 1. he did bear very well all the afflictions and losses
that he met withal, till he came to loose his children, the messengers came
and told him, that all his estate was taken away; and you read of nothing that
Job said, but when they come and told him, his children were slain, then Job
rent his mantle, and fell down upon the ground and worshipped: To loose his
estate was nothing, but to hear that all his children were slain, he rent his
mantle, and fell down upon the ground; a token of his great sorrow: And you
know how David was affected, when they brought him word that Absalom was
killed, he went up to the chamber over the gate, and he wept as he went,
saying, O my son Absalom, would God I had died for thee: A most pathetical
complaint that this poor man makes when his child was taken away, though he was
a wicked child, and one that sought his fathers life. Thus you see the first
part of the Doctrine, that God has planted natural affection in the hearts of
parents to their children.

But secondly, The second part of the Doctrine.
I shall show you, that where there is faith, natural affection cannot work
alone, but faith will rectify natural affection; faith will teach Parents to
love their children aright: Natural affection will teach them to love their
children, ah, but spiritual love that springs from faith will teach them to
love their children aright.

Quest. But you will say to me, when may Parents be said to love their children
aright? or how shall we know that the love of Parents to their children, is not
only the working of Natural affection?

Answ. First, where there is faith, it will teach Parents to love the souls of
their children: Nature will teach to provide for the body, but the Spirit of
the Lord that teaches Parents to look after the souls of their children; now
when the soul is loved and respected more then the body, then do Parents love
their children aright.

In Genesis 17. 18. you may see what a request Abraham does make for his son
Ishmael: Oh! that Ishmael might live before thee. God has been making many
gracious promises to Abraham concerning another Seed, but Abraham did not
forget his son Ishmael, neither could he beg that he might have a great estate,
but that he might live in the sight of the Lord: When Parents take care of the
souls of their children, then Parents love their children aright.

Secondly, Parents love their children aright, when as they do love them in
obedience to the Lord; when they love them, and when they take pains, and act
for them, and perform all offices of love to them in obedience to the Lord;
when Parents do bring up their children, and perform every duty to them, in
obedience to the Lord: these are the children that the Lord has graciously
given his servant; and so he love them, and perform duties to them, that he may
obey the Lord, and be found working the work of his station and relation, in
bringing up these children to the Lord; this is that love that is not only
natural, but spiritual.

Thirdly, Again, Parents love their children aright, when as they have an eye
to the Covenant of God concerning their children; when they have an eye to the
promises of God that he has made to the children of Believers: He has said,
that they that come of thee, shall build the old waste places. When as Parents
thus eye the Covenant of God in looking upon their children as the Lords, and
these are they that the Lord has said he will own; and so love their children
more because they are the Lords then theirs, because the Lord has promised
that he will own them, and make use of them. And so I conceive Mose^'s Mother
had respect to this in her love to her child, Hebr. 11. 23. By faith Moses when
he was born, was hid three Months of his Parents, because they saw he was a
proper child, and they not afraid of the Kings commandment. Her love sprung
from faith, when she hid her child Moses three months; it was not from Natural
affection, but from faith. By faith Moses when he was born, was hid three
months, because they saw he was a proper child, and they not afraid of the
Kings commandment. The Kings commandment was, that all the Male-children should
be drowned, and to disobey his commandment, it did endanger their own lives;
ah, but by faith, she ventured: she looked upon her child as one that God would
make use of, she was persuaded that God would make use of this child Moses, to
do something for the future; she knew that there was a promise that God would
deliver his people, and she knew not but that this might be the Man, and so was
not afraid, but by faith hid him.

Fourthly, Parents love their children aright, when as they are much praying
for their children, presenting their children to the Lord, and praying for
them, crying to the Lord in their behalf for the blessing of the Lord upon
them, when they are very instant with God that he would take away the guilt of
original sin that is upon their children, and the guilt of actual
transgressions that are found upon their children. Job every day took a
sacrifice, and sacrificed for his Sons and Daughters, he prayed for them, he
was careful that sin might not lie upon them: Oh, that was spiritual love that
was found in Job, it was of a right stamp, he was careful that the guilt of sin
might not lie upon them, and therefore he every day offered a sacrifice to the
Lord. And the woman of Canaan she cries in the behalf of her child, she comes
to Christ, and cries to him for her child. And so when Parents go to Christ for
their children; when under bodily Infirmities go to Christ for them, and when
under spiritual Infirmities, go to Christ for them, pleading with Christ for
them, then do Parents love their children aright.

Fifthly; when Parents are careful to educate their children for God, when they
are careful that God may be honored by their children, that their children may
be instructed so as to honor God, when they desire and endeavor to prevent
all dishonor that may be done to God by their children, to reprove them, and
to rebuke them, and not to be so indulgent as old Eli was, which proved to be
the ruin of the whole family. I say, when Parents are careful that God may not
be dishonored, but labor that their children may be instrumental for God, and
they do seek the Lord for this thing, and do deal with them upon this account,
and are careful to instruct them, and to lay before them the mind of God, and
careful so to dispose of them, as God may be served by them; when this is the
care of Parents, this is a discovery that their love is not only natural
affection, but spiritual grace, and their natural affection is set right by
their faith, which the Lord is pleased to bestow upon them.

For the Application. Application.


First, Take notice what a mercy it is, that God has planted such Natural
affections in the hearts of Parents; it is a great mercy, it is that which is
little taken notice of, but it is that which we and all in the world have cause
to bless God for, that parents, yea those that are evil can do so much good for
their children, give out of the good things which they have to their children;
there is much of the wisdom and goodness of God in it, that Parents should do
so much for their children, when they do not deserve it, it is long before it
can deserve any thing; nay when grown up, there are many times contrary
deserts, and that yet the hearts of arents should be kept up toward their
children, as I said before, there is a great deal of the wisdom and goodness of
God in it; for there is a great deal of evil thereby prevented, a great deal of
sin and cruelty that is prevented by the Lords giving of natural affection. Oh
admire the wisdom and goodness of God in this!

Secondly, Let Parents know that this is not enough to have natural affection
and love to their children, but oh that Parents would labor to love their
children aright. It is not enough to love them much, to have great natural
affections, but let Parents labor to love their children aright; labor so to
love them as to love their souls, to take care of their souls, which is a
thousand times more worth then the body; labor to love them in obedience to
God; labor to eye the Covenant of God in loving your children; be more in
seeking the face of God, in the behalf of your children: Oh that Parents would
look upon it as their duty, to pray more for their children. Oh, look upon
Abraham, and let him be your pattern; how did he cry to the Lord in the behalf
of Ishmael? it lies upon all Parents to go to God for their children, yea for
every one in particular. Oh that such an one might live in thy sight! Look upon
the woman of Canaan, how did she cry to Christ for her daughter? oh, Lord have
mercy upon me: Now let Parents go to Christ for their children; oh go and cry
for the souls of thy children, as this woman did for the body of her daughter;
oh Lord, I see such a corruption in such a child, and such a lust in such a
child, oh that the Son of David would have mercy on them. We should go to
Christ for the souls of our children, that Christ would cast out those
corruptions that we see sprouting in our children.

Thirdly, Oh that this might provoke us all to look after faith: what need have
Parents to labor for faith in Jesus Christ? if it be but upon this account,
that you may love your children aright: oh look to Christ for faith, cry unto
Christ to give you faith, that so you may love your children aright: There may
be a great deal of natural affection in parents, they may dote upon their
children, and undo their children, and yet not love them aright; for it is
impossible that a man or woman that has not faith to love children aright,
they cannot love their children aright, till they have faith.

And to provoke all parents to look after faith upon this account of their
children, let me say this to you; that faith will teach you to love your
children impartially. There is a great deal of partiality in natural affection,
and it runs out much to one child, and neglects another; ah, but with spiritual
love it is not so. When Parents love their children aright, it will teach to
love their children more equally; not to love one more then another, unless
they see more of God in one then another.

Again, let me tell you, that faith will make your work to your children easy;
there is a great deal of labor, travel, and pains (as you have heard) to bring
forth children, and a hard work to bring up children when brought forth, but
faith will make your work more easy, when as God is eyed in it, and so you are
bringing up children for God, when as you are loving and caring for children in
obedience to God. Oh this will make your work more easy.

And further let me tell you, that faith will make your work more acceptable to
God. That work you are doing for children, when it is done in faith, is
accepted; if you love your children in faith, the Lord will take it well at
your hand, and the Lord will reward all the labor, service, travel and pains
that Fathers and Mothers do undergo for their children. That instance you find
in Scripture of Moses his Mother, when Pharoahs daughter found Moses by
providence, she commits him to his own Mother to be his Nurse, and she pays his
own Mother for him: And so the Lord he will deal with you that are parents that
act in faith, and perform your duties in faith, the Lord will reward you for
your love to your own children, for taking care of your own children, all your
labor is taken notice of by the Lord, and you shall be rewarded: Oh! what an
encourageis here to all Parents to look after faith in Christ, that so your
service may be accepted of the Lord?

One thing more, and so I conclude: and that is a word to children; is it so,
that there is so much love in the hearts of Parents to their children? is there
so much that Parents do from love to children? oh, that children would labor
to know what is their duty that they owe to Parents! it cannot be told, it
cannot be expressed, how much it is that children owe unto parents. Children, it
is impossible that ever you should requite the love of your parents; oh the
pains, the travel, and sorrow of bringing forth, and bringing up! oh, that
children might know that there is a great engagement lies upon them to love
their parents, to respect their parents, to take heed that they do not grieve
their parents, to pass by all in firmities of parents, to show all respect to
them, and when grown up, to take care of them!

And this is a duty that Christ lays upon you, though a Moral duty, see what is
said in 1 Timothy where children may see what Christ injoyns them, 1 Timothy 5. 4.
But if any widow have children or Nephews, let them learn first to show piety
at home, and to requite their parents, for that is good and acceptable before
God. God lays this duty upon children: you should labor to requite your
parents, to remember their love, their care, their sorrow, their pains and
travel; and you are bound by the Law of Christ to requite your parents, this is
good, this is piety, and this is acceptable to God. And so that place, Levit.
19. 3. Ye shall fear every man his Mother, and his Father, and keep my
Sabbaths: I am the Lord your God. Here is a duty that God lays upon children,
to fear every man his Mother and Father. Children are most apt to despise their
Mothers, therefore the Lord begins there, and lays that duty, first that
children should fear every man his Mother.

And take notice of it, that this is a duty that the Lord sets before the
keeping of his Sabbath; as if the Lord should say, in vain shall they pretend
to be Religious, if they do not fear and reverence every man his Mother and his
Father: I will not accept of your service. It was a brand that was set upon
Esau to all generations, that he did that which was a grief to his Father and
Mother. Now children see your duty, and remember your duty, which the Lord
Jesus lays upon you.

And oh that children would labor for faith, that they may perform their
duties* Parents cannot love their children aright, till they have faith; and
truly children cannot reverence their parents, nor perform the duties they owe
unto parents, unless they have faith. Oh, then that Parents and children would
look up to Christ for faith! and then shall both be able through faith in
Christ to perform that mutual duty that God requires from parents and children.

And to shut up all; let this that has been spoken, strengthen the faith of
all Gods people in Gods love to them: Oh, that by this we might ascend to the
love of God! O, that they that think they have not been concerned in what has
been spoken hitherto, would know they are concerned in this. The Lord would
have you to ascend by the consideration of the bowels that are in parents to
their children, to a consideration of those infinite bowels that are in him
toward you that are his children; As the Father pitieth his children, so the
Lord pitieth them that fear him; what ever workings of love are in the hearts
of parents toward their children, oh! know that there is larger workings of
love in the heart of God toward his children; there are infinite bowels in the
everlasting Father: and if there be so much pity in the hearts of parents, that
they are willing and ready to give out good things to their children, and
willing to pass by and to pardon the miscarriages of their children; oh! how
much more willing is our God to pass by and to pardon the failings of you that
are his children? oh! that this might encourage prodigal children to return to
the Lord* If the father receive his child, that has been a prodigal, why the
Lord is ready to receive you though a prodigal, if the Lord give you an heart
to return, though you have spent all, and abused all your mercies, yet the Lord
is ready to pardon and to receive you.

And let it strengthen your faith and hope in Christ, you that cleave to Christ
for righteousness, you that are the children of that everlasting Father; oh
know that Christ will plead for you, Christ will cry to his Father for you: Was
the woman of Candan so affected with the misery of her daughter, that she
cries, Lord, have mercy on me, my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil?
(...) (I say) this found in this woman toward her daughter? and shall not this
be found in Christ toward his children? oh! then let this comfort you, when
you scarce dare go to God, and cry your selves, such and such a corruption does
annoy you, such and such an unclean spirit is in you: Oh! the Lord Jesus pities
you under every spiritual burden; when as you are troubled with unclean
spirits, he has bowels of compassion toward you; and know that he will go to
his Father, and cry to his Father; and if he cry, he cannot deny the son of his
love, but an answer shall be given to all those requests that Christ puts up
for you, or for any of his people.

Matthew. 15. 23. But he answered her not a word.
SERMON VIII.
I Come now to speak of the trial of this woman's faith; and here is the first
trial of her faith, he answered her not a word. A very great trial, a sore
trial, that this poor woman should in her great strait, and under such a burden
and pressure of spirit, come to Jesus Christ, and cry so earnestly unto him,
and believe so steadfastly upon him, and yet Jesus Christ give her not one word
of answer to her prayer, this was a sore trial; for this carriage of Christ, it
seems to be contrary to what she had heard of Christ, and to what she believed
was in Jesus Christ; for Christ seemed now either to be without compassion to
her, he seems to take no notice, not to be affected; she complained and cried
out of her great burden, and Christ speaks not a word; the Lord Jesus Christ
seems either not to be affected with her misery, or not to regard her misery,
not to take notice of such a poor creature as she was; now both these were
contrary to what she had heard of Christ, and to that she had believed was in
Jesus Christ, without doubt she had heard out of the Prophet Isaiah, that the
Lord Jesus Christ when he came, should bind up the brokenhearted, and preach
deliverance to the captives; now when she applies her self to Christ, Christ
seems not to be that compassionate Savior; certainly she had heard that Sions
King was meek and lowly, and that he would not break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax; but Christ seems to disdain her, and take no notice
of her, nor look after such avile worm as she was; nay, she had believed, that
Christ was low and meek, as appears by that expression of hers in ver. 22.
Thou Son of David have mercy on me; now David was a merciful Prince, and was
very pitiful and compassionate and very meek, and lowly, and humble, therefore
she believed that the Lord Jesus Christ was much more compassionate; and she
did believe that he would not disdain her though she was a poor Gentile; but
Christ seems to be quite contrary, and answered her not a word; this was a sore
trial

The Doctrine then is this. That it is a very sore and great trial unto the
Lords people, Doctrine.
when the Lord is silent to their prayers, and gives no answer to their cries.

In the opening of the point I shall show you; that God has dealt thus with
his own people; and that it has been a very sore trial unto

And then shall show you wherefore the Lord is pleased thus to try his people;
which will make way for the Appplication.

First, God has dealt thus with his people. I shall point you to some places
of Scripture: David often makes this complaint, Psalm 28. 1. Unto thee will I
cry O Lord, my rock, be not silent to me, lest if thou be silent to me, I
become like them that go down into the pit. How earnestly does David beseech
the Lord that he would not be silent to his prayer? Lord, Do not turn away thy
ear from my prayer, and do not shut thy mouth, be not silent. If thou do not
speak something to me in answer to my prayer, I am not able to hold out, but
shall be like them that go down to the pit. And Psalm 69. 3. he makes a sore
complaint, I am weary of my crying, my throat is dried: mine eyes fail, while I
wait for my God. The trial was so great to his spirit, that it had an influence
upon his Body; when David cried to the Lord, he answered not a word; his throat
was dried and parcht up, and his eyes began to fail. And so the Prophet
Jeremiah, Lam. 3. 44. he expresses it in the name of the Church. Thou have
covered thy self with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through. God
seems to hide himself, and cover himself with a cloud, and did so hide himself
as prayer could not find him; he gave him not a word. And the Prophet Habakkuk
he complains of it, chap. 1. ver. 2. O Lord how long shall I cry, and thou will
not hear? even cry unto thee of violence, and thou will not save? Nay, that it
was a sore trial, you shall see it in those expressions of the Prophet David,
spoken of in the person of Christ, Psalm. 22. 2. O my God I cry in the daytime,
but thou hear not; and in the night-season, and am not silent. It was a sore
affliction to Christ himself. O my God, I cry in the daytime, and in the
night-season; that is, I cry continually, night and day, never silent: But thou
art continually silent to me, this was a sore affliction and burden to Christ
himself.

Now that this is a sore affliction and trial, for God to be silent to the
prayers of his people, it appears,

First, if you consider that relation the Lord stands in to his people, and
they to him; he stands in relation of a Father, they his children; he stands in
relation of an Husband, they his Spouse; he stands in relation of a friend,
they his friend; Abraham, he was the friend of God, and so is every believer;
God a friend to him, and he a friend to God; now it is a sore trial, when one
friend shall cry to another, or a wife to an Husband, or a child to a father,
and these relations not give one word of Answer, if a poor child in great
extremity should cry to his father* father help me, and the father not to give
one word, this is a sore trial; if a man cry to a stranger, and meet not with
one word, it is no great disappointment, but when a child cries to a father, or
a wife to an Husband, or a friend to a friend, and they not to speak a word, it
is a great trial.

Secondly, it will appear to be a great trial, because there is nothing in all
the world, that a gracious soul longs more after then this, that the Lord would
be giving a return of prayer, that there may be a converse betwixt God and the
soul, to speak to God, and to hear God speaking back again to it; nothing that
a gracious foul more longs after; oh it longs to hear a word from God, it knows
that the return of prayer, is the way to make a soul rich toward God, and to
make it rich in experience, in faith, in thankfulness, in obedience. Oh how
does a Merchant-venturer long for the return of his commodity from a far
Country? truly there is no merchant in the world, can long more for the return
of his commodity from a far Country, then a gracious soul longs for the return
of prayer; oh says the soul, when will thou come unto me? Now if it be that
which a gracious soul does more long after then any thing in the world, it is a
great trial, when God does not give a return of prayer.

Thirdly, A gracious heart when it puts up a prayer to God, it looks for a
return, for an answer; Psalm 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord will speak:
And so the Prophet Habakkuk after he had prayed, I will get me upon the
watchtower, and I will watch to see what he will say unto me. I will wait to
see what God will speak by his spirit, or by his providence; one way or other
God will speak. Now to have this expectation disappointed, to wait upon the
Lord for an answer, and the Lord not to speak one word, this is a sore trial.

Fourthly, it must needs be a great trial, when God gives never a word of
answer; for a believing soul knows assuredly, that if God do not answer, none
else can hear prayers, and give a return to prayer; it is Gods name, oh thou
that hear prayers, unto thee shall all flesh come. God only can hear prayer,
and God only can give an answer; it is God only that can reach out mercy to the
soul, and speak a word of comfort and counsel; God only can speak a word of
strength, a word of peace, the creature cannot: No, it is God only, I create
the fruit of the lips pea^y, peace. Now when a soul looks up to the Lord, and
meets with nothing from him, and knows that there is no answer to be expected
from the creature, this must needs be a great and a sore trial.

Fifthly, it will appear to be a great trial, if we consider that the flesh and
Devil are exceeding ready to make a great advantage of this providence of God
and dispensation toward his people; for they will improve this to the
dishonor of God and discomfort of the soul, and therefore a great trial.

In two or three Particulars, I shall show you how ready the Flesh and Devil is
to improve this to Gods dishonor, and the souls discomfort.

First, the Flesh and Devil will raise up many doubts, and jealousies, and
mis-giving thought^^ both concerning God, and concerning a man* own condition,
and concerning the duties and services which are offered up to the Lord. They
will make the soul to doubt of the goodness of God, to doubt of the free grace
of God, to doubt of the faithfulness of God, of the truth of God; Surely says
unbelief, the Lord is not so gracious as thou have taken him to be; thou have
rested upon the Arm of his mercy, and thou have believed his grace to be
sufficient for thee in every condition; thou have looked toward him as toward
an infinite compassionate God; but where are the compassions of the Lord now?
not to speak one word to relieve and comfort thee: Thus will the Devil and the
unbelieving heart object, when the Lord does not give out a present answer; yea
unbelief will be accusing the faithfulness of God: Oh! where is his Word and
his Promise? He has said, that they that call upon the Name of the Lord shall
be saved. He has said, Call upon me in the time of trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me: ^h! where is the faithfulness of God? God is
unmindful of his promise. Asaph was under this temptation, Psalm 77. 7, 8. Will
the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? Is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? And thus he goes on
making many Queries concerning the goodness and faithfulness of God.

Secondly, as the Devil and the Flesh does raise many doubts and jealousies
concerning the faithfulness of God, so there are many doubts cast into the soul
concerning the eternal estate and condition of the soul, and that upon this
ground; when as the soul has sought the Lord, and the Lord not answer,
presently the soul begins to doubt; oh, surely I am no child of God, no sponse,
no friend; God could not deal so with children, not to give one word of
comfort, not one word of answer: Oh, surely I am an Hypocrite, for the prayer
of the upright is his delight, and if there were any truth of heart in me, the
Lord would give out an answer; and thus the Devil and the Flesh-raise many
jealousies and fears about the souls eternal state. Or

Thirdly, if the Devil and the Flesh prevail not so far as to cause the soul to
question the goodness of God, and the Truth of God, or to question its own
Sonship, yet they will prevail so far as to make the soul question his services
and his duties which it has performed to God: Oh! surely I have not spoken to
the Lord as I ought, surely I have not been fervent in Spirit, serving the
Lord, my prayer has been but words of my own, not the teachings of his Spirit,
if it had been his own Spirit, the Lord would have heard his own Spirit; but my
prayer has been accompanied with so many infirmities as it has not reached up
to heaven. And thus you see how many a poor soul is led into temptation upon
this ground, the Lords being silent to the prayers of his people.

But you will say, wherefore does the Lord thus try his people?

I answer, sometimes indeed the fault is in our selves that we have no answer
to our prayers; for it is possible that a man or woman that has faith in Jesus
Christ, may be remiss in their walkings* they may neglect some known duty, or
they may connive and wink at some evil way, and if so, no wonder though the
Lord be silent at their prayers. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord
will not hear my prayer: If David regard iniquity, if there be any way of sin
that his heart closes with, the Lord will be silent to his prayers; if any
iniquity be regarded, no wonder though the Lord do not hear.

Yea, sometimes Gods own people are found remiss in their duty, and though they
pray, they pray remisly and coldly; their prayer is accompanied with so much
deadness and distraction, there is so little life and so little spirit, the
Spirit speaks so low that the Lord cannot hear, and he will not hear; and when
it is so that we pray coldly and lazily, we make but a light matter of it, and
are not found crying to the Lord with our hearts, no wonder though the Lord be
silent to our prayers.

Yea, sometimes Gods own people may miss of an answer, because they do not look
after an answer, and then the fault is their own; when as we shall put up our
petition, and shall not be looking after our prayer, shall not be found looking
up, as David speaks, Psalm. 5. 3. In the morning will I direct my prayer unto
thee, and will look up. I will wait for an answer, and hear what God the Lord
will speak, Psalm 85. 8. But when we do not regard our prayer, then no wonder
there is no answer: I say therefore the Lord is sometimes silent to the prayers
of his own people, and the fault is in themselves.

But the Lord is not always silent upon these grounds: A gracious heart may
walk close with God, and may regard no iniquity, and desire not to connive at
any sin, and it may wait upon the Lord for an answer; and yet the Lord may be
silent, and give no present answer to the prayers of his people.

Why so? why, will the Lord deal so with any of his people?

I answer, Gracious ends why the Lord defers an answer to the prayers of his
people.
for gracious ends; as

First, that they may exercise the spirit of prayer which is given out, the
Lord he loves to hear the cry of his people, he loves to hear the voice of the
children when they speak in prayer; there is nothing on eath that, God delights
more in: (...) let me see thy face, and let me hear thy voice (says Christ to
his Spouse) for thy voice is sweet. No^ because the voice of faith in prayer
(...) sweet to the Lord, the Lord he seems (...) to hear or not to take
notice for the present, th^^ so they may pray the more: As a man that delights
in music, if the Musicians play, he (...) take no notice, but lets them play
on, because he delights in it; and so the Lord he takes delight in the
prayers of his servants, The prayer^ the upright is his delight, and he will
give no present answer, that so they may go on praying (...) crying.

Secondly, the Lord may seem to be silent (...) the prayers of his people, that
so he may exer^^ the faith and patience of his servants. It is great trial of
the faith and patience of the Sai^^ when as the Lord seems to take no notice,
(...) give no answer to their prayers; it was for (...) end, that our Lord
Jesus Christ gave not a (...) of answer to this woman of Canaan, it was that
might try her faith, and her patience, and that might exercise it, and that by
the exerci^^ faith, faith might be increased, and her faith (...) arise to a
great faith by this exercise, for at (...) Christ commends her for her faith;
Oh (...) great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as (...) wait.

Again, the Lord is silent many times at the prayers of his people, to try
whether they will continue in prayer, though the Lord does give them no present
answer; oh here is the trial of perseverance; God has heard my prayer (says
David) therefore will I call upon him as long as I live. Ah but that is no
great matter for a man to say, God has heard my prayer and therefore I will
call upon him still: But for a soul to say, I have been crying and calling, and
I will still wait upon him, as long as I live, I will wait upon God; Oh here is
perseverance in prayer, in which Christ does delight.

Fourthly, the Lord is silent many times upon this ground; he gives no present
answer, that so he may prepare an answer for them, and that he may prepare them
for an answer; God gives no present answer, that so he may prepare mercy, and
ripen mercy, and make mercy fit for his people, and that he may ripen them, and
fit them and their hearts for the mercy; so that it is in abundance of grace,
and mercy, and love that the Lord is pleased many times not to give out a
present answer to his people, for all the time the Lord is silent, he is
preparing of mercy and goodness for them, he is making of the mercy fit for his
people, the mercy shall be ripe, and the mercy shall be sweet and wholesome, and
do them good at the heart: When the Lord has thus prepared mercy for them, and
fitted them for the mercy, they shall have the mercy; see what is said in Isa.
80. 18. And therefore will the Lord wait that he way be gracious unto you, and
therefore will he be exalted; for the Lord is a God of judgment, blessed are
all they that wait for him. He waits that he may be gracious, he waits for the
best season, the fittest opportunity, he will stay till the soul has need of
help, in the fittest time the Lord will come in mercy, when he may be most
exalted for mercy, when his people may see most of the hand of God, when they
most prize their mercies, and glorify God for mercy; God waits for such a
time. And therefore you see it is for gracious ends that God many times seems
to be silent for a season, and gives not one word in answer to prayer, as
Christ here to this woman of Canaan.

For the Application of the Point. Application.


First, it speaks sadly of them that never regard whether the Lord give an
answer or no, to their prayer, that pray and pray, and look not after an
answer: How far are such men and women from the disposition of Gods children? a
gracious heart cannot but be affected, when it speaks to the Father, and the
Father gives no answer: And therefore surely when men and women make many
prayers, and look not up for an answer, that regard not whether the Lord
answer, or not, either they are none of his children, or else under a sore
temptation; for let me say unto you, that though it is not for your prayers
that God does regard prayer, yet if you do not look up for an answer, if you do
not regard your prayers, neither will God regard your prayers. And let me say
further, that this is a great dishonor to God: Oh what a (...) is it? it is a
loss to God, and it is a loss also to the soul: for a man to lose all his
prayers, it is a loss indeed. When as a soul does not regard whether God answer
or no, God loses, he loses that glory which would redound to him in the answer
of prayer: Call upon me (says God) in the day of trouble, and I will deliver
thee, and thou shall glorify me. Now if the soul call upon God, and does not
observe whether God hears or no, it cannot glorify God for the return of
prayer, but God loses that honor, that thankfulness, and that love and
obedience, and that dependence, which an answer of prayer might engage the soul
to.

And as God loses, so the soul loses; oh they that look not after the return
of prayer, they lose that which would make their souls rich. For a Merchant to
lose all his return, it will make him a poor Tradesman in conclusion; that soul
that does not look after the return of prayer, loses a great deal of faith,
and dependence, and experience; for God by giving out an answer to the prayers
of his people, he does encourage them, and engage them to trust in him at all
times so long as they live; they that lose the return of prayer, lose the
strengthening of faith, and the engaging of their heart to God.

But secondly, let me speak to such poor souls as are in the same condition
with this woman of Canaan, that have prayed, and have not met with one word of
answer: Poor souls! is this the condition of any of you? I know that it has
been, and may still be the condition of the Lords dearest servants, they may
pray, and the Lord may seem to give no answer: Remember it was so with David,
Jeremiah, and Habakkuk, and with Christ himself.

And let me say this unto thee, that if thou regardest any iniquity in thy
heart, any known sin that thou regardest or connivest at, or if there be
slightness in the performance of thy duty, or contentest thy self with a
slothful performance of thy duty, or thou do not regard thy prayer when thou
have put it up to the Lord; for this we have cause to be humbled, and no wonder
the Lord do not answer our prayers.

But now, if thy own spirit and the Spirit of the Lord can testify that thou
desire to regard no iniquity in thy heart, but to walk up to thy duty, and
desire to be conformable to Christ, and desire to cry in faith, and to wait
upon the Lord for an answer, be of good comfort, though thou do not meet with
one word of answer from the Lord, though thou have cried nights and days,
weeks, months and years, and have not met with with one word of answer, yet be
comforted, this may be the condition of Gods own people.

And let me say further by way of encouragement, that the Lord he extends much
good to thee in this deferring and delaying to give out an answer; it is for
gracious and merciful ends to thy soul that the Lord do not give thee the
present mercy thou prayest for; he will exercise the spirit of prayer, he will
exercise thy faith and patience, and he will fit thee for mercy, and mercy for
thee, and thou shall have it so at last as thou shall bless God for it.

Yea let me say further, though an answer be not given out, thy prayer is
heard, and thy person (...) accepted: Thy prayer is heard with the Lord; oh
that that might be a stay to poor souls that are in this condition as the woman
of Canaan was, that cry, and have cried long: I say thy prayer is heard. Oh
says the soul that I knew my prayer were heard, if I did but know that the
Lord has heard my prayer, I would be content to wait all my days for an
answer, I have been crying for the light of his countenance, and for the
assurance of his love, I have been crying night and day, and if the Lord has
heard my prayer, I should be content to wait for an answer.

But how shall I know that the Lord has heard my prayer? How to know when God
has heard our prayer.


I answer thus; First of all, by that secret support, by those secret hints
which the Lord is pleased at one time or other to bring to thy spirit, some
hint of life, some hint of comfort. Surely if thou have observed while thou
have waited upon the Lord, there has been some secrets hints of comfort that
after thou have been before the Lord, thou have been at ease; and thy trouble
is not so great as it was. Hannah when she poured out her soul before the Lord,
she was in great distress, but before she went away, the Lord heard her prayer;
and this was the sign there was some ease in her spirit, her burden was taken
off, a great deal refreshed in her spirit and so though the Lord has given
thee but the least hint of comfort, the Lord has heard thy prayer, and in due
time he will give a full answer*

Secondly, thou may know that the Lord has heard thy prayer by that strength
he has given thee to go through: Thou art under sore afflictions and
temptations, such as are ready to break thy very spirit, to make thy soul fade
and faint, and yet thou art supported; thou have cried to the Lord, and thou
say thou have no answer; why, does nor the Lord support thee? if the Lord
does support thee, and bear thee up under thy burden, he does in some measure
answer thee, or else how comes it to pass thou have not sunk under thy burden?
when Paul besought the Lord under his temptation, he prayed thrice, that is,
often, that God would take off the Messenger of Satan; the temptation was not
taken off, ah but Paul was heard in his prayer, in that the Lord did bear him
up under his temptation, My grace is sufficient for thee; though I do not think
good to remove the temptation, I have heard thy prayer, my grace is sufficient
for thee. So then remember poor soul that if the Lord has supported thee, the
Lord has heard thy prayer.

Thirdly, does the Lord carry on thy soul to continue in thy prayer? that
although thou have prayed, and met with no answer, yet thou art resolved still
to go on, and say, though the Lord has not spoken one word to me, I will not
give over speaking to him, but my soul shall still cry after God. That was the
resolution David took up, Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord,
that I will seek after; I have desired it, and though I have not attained it, I
will seek after it as long as I live; Is it so that the Lord does carry up thy
spirit still to wait upon him, and still thou art crying and breathing after
the Lord in prayer? that very thing is a certain sign that the Lord has heard
thy prayer.

Fourthly, does the Lord enable thee and make thee willing to wait upon him?
thou have not a present answer, yet thou will wait as David when he had been at
prayer, he waited for the mercy, Psalm 27. 14. Wait on the Lord, be of good
courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart: Wait I say, on the Lord. Oh my
heart, wait I say, wait on the Lord: Have thou through grace so spoken to thine
own heart? I have no answer, but I desire to wait, and I check mine own heart
that I can wait no more quietly, I speak to mine own heart to wait, I say wait
on the Lord; if it be so, the Lord has heard thy prayer.

Fifthly, observe how thy spirit, and how thy carriage is toward God in that
time of Gods delay: Is thy heart kept up toward God, and thy conversation in a
way of obedience? that thou art desirous still to walk with God, and thou durst
not go out from God, though God give thee no answer, but thy heart is made more
humble, and thou art more meek, and more obedient, and more watchful and
observant of thy heart, and watchful over thy ways; is it so? the Lord has
heard thy prayer, though he gives thee no answer.

And therefore I say, The duty of such souls to whose prayers God is silent and
gives no answer. First to mind their duty.
take no care for an answer: I speak to such poor souls as have prayed, and
cried, and have not met with one word of answer from the Lord, take no care for
an answer, only mind that which is thy duty, and let the Lord alone; he is
preparing an answer, he is waiting to be gracious, he waits for a fit season,
for such a season as his grace and mercy may be most exalted; be not thou so
solicitous about an answer, but mind what is thy work and thy duty.

And do thou hold on thy duty in praying to pray, in crying to cry, yea do thou
cry louder then even, and the more Christ seems to stop his ears, and shut his
mouth, and give no answer, the louder do thou cry, as this poor woman did, ver.
25. Lord help me.

Secondly, Secondly, to justify God.
this is thy duty while the Lord thus deals with thee, to justify God, and
condemn thy self, clear the Lord, and lay the blame upon thy self; say the Lord
is righteous, and the Lord is holy, and though he make wait me longer and
longer, yea many years for this mercy, yet the Lord is righteous, and there is
no iniquity in him; the Lord cried, and I did not hear, and the Lord is
righteous, though he makes me wait long; the Lord is gracious, that he speaks
at all to such a poor creature, that there is any promise that he will give out
an answer. Oh justify God, and say the Lord is holy; thus did the Psalmist,
Psalm 22. 3. But thou art holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel;
though thou dealest thus with me, thou art holy, thou art just, and thou art
righteous, and thou art good and faithful, though silent for the present to my
prayer; And so let us say, if the Lord be silent to any of our prayers, yet
Lord thou art holy, thou art righteous.

Thirdly, Thirdly, to maintain good thoughts of God.
this is thy duty labor to maintain good thoughts of God: it is not enough to
justify, not to charge God, but to maintain good thoughts of God at that time
that God is silent to our prayers, and do thou believe that God is contriving
good at that time, now is the Lord waiting to be gracious and preparing an
answer. Oh this is a blessed frame of heart, and how pleasing would it be to
God, to believe that he is good, and that he is gracious, and this very thing
it is for good, for the good of my soul, that he may exercise faith and
patience, and try my perseverance, and that he may fit me for mercy, and mercy
for me? Oh that we could entertain good thoughts of a gracious God when he
defers an answer.

Fourthly, Fourthly, be looking to God through the Mediator.
be looking to God through the Mediator, close more with him through the Son,
look to the great God through the son of David, look to him through that
merciful and compassionate High Priest; look more to God through Christ, and
there rest.

Fifthly and lastly, Fifthly, wait patiently.
wait patiently for him; oh take up a resolution to wait upon the Lord; charge
thy own heart to do it as David did, and though he speaks not to day nor to
morrow, though he speaks not this month, this year, not in this opportunity,
yet say I will wait for the Lord, I will wait in every season, and get upon the
watchtower, and wait patiently, and see which way Christ will come to thy
soul; know it is thy duty to wait, take hold of his promise, he is a God of
judgment, and waits to be gracious, he waits for an opportunity, and
therefore it is good thou should wait; it is good that a man should hope and
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord.

Matthew. 15. 23. And his Disciples came, and besought him, saying, send her
away, for she cries after us.
SERMON IX.
CHrist (as you have heard) is silent to the prayer of the woman, he answered
her not a word, whereupon the Disciples they step in and perform an office and
duty of love for this poor woman they step in, and they plead with Christ for
her Lord send her away, for she cries after us. It is a great question with
some, whether the Disciples did pray for this woman here or no; some think that
they did not make any request for her, there is no mention of any, they only
say, Lord send her away, for she cries after us; Lord, stop her mouth, send
her away, give her an answer, dispatch her, for she cries after us; and this
was done say they, that so the trial of this woman's faith might be the greater.

But I rather conceive, that the Disciples in these words did pray for her,
they did perform an office and duty of love, in interceding with Christ for
her. For,

First of all, it seems they were very earnest in it, they came and besought
him, saying, send her away; Surely, if it had been only to stop her mouth, to
dispatch her, the Disciples would not have been so earnest with Christ to
beseech him; good nature would have taught them more compassion, and therefore
grace teaches them much more.

And then, they seem to be affected with the cry of the woman, she cries after
us, send her away, it breaks our hearts the cries that she makes; Thou Son of
David have mercy on me.

And thirdly, it is clear and evident in the following verse, from the answer
that Christ gives upon their seeking of him. I am not sent but to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. Therefore it is evident, that the Disciples did
not plead with Christ to send her away, to stop her mouth, but they did plead
with Christ though not mentioned, that he would grant her request.

The truth then which the words hold forth to us, is this. That it is the duty
of Christ's Disciples to present the conditions of others unto the Lord in
prayer as well as their own. Doctrine.


We find that Moses the servant of the Lord was much in this work, much in
praying for others, and interceding for Israel; upon every occasion he steps
in, and pleads with God for the people.

And so David in many of the Psalms, he presents the conditions of others unto
the Lord. And our Lord Jesus Christ himself who is our great pattern, was much
in the performance of this duty, John 17. you shall and there that the most
part of the time that Christ spent in prayer, it was spent in praying for
others, there is but one petition that he put for himself, in ver. 1. and
repeated again in ver. 5. and all the rest of his time it was spent in praying
for others, for the Disciples, for those that were converted, and for those
that did belong to God that were not converted: Many requests the Lord Jesus
makes in the behalf of others, and but one for himself. And so the Apostle
Paul, who was a follower of Christ, he was much in this work of praying for
others, Romans 1. 9. he did appeal to God, that he did not neglect this duty. For
God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit, in the Gospel of his son, that
without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers. And so 2 Timothy 1.
3. I thank God whom I serve from my forefathers with pure conscience, that
without ceasing I have remembrance of thee in my prayers. Paul did remember
others before the Lord.

But in the opening of the point, I shall show you, First, who they are that we
are bound to pray for, whose conditions Gods people are bound to remember
before the Lord.

Secondly, what are the special time we are called unto this duty to remember
others before the Lord.

If you ask, Who Gods people are bound to pray for.
who they are that we are bound to pray for.

First, we are bound to pray for them that have done us wrong; a hard lesson,
but a lesson that Christ's Disciples must learn; we must pray for those that
have done us wrong, that have done evil, and spoken evil of us. See what our
Savior Christ says, Mat. 5. 44. But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and persecute you: See here, out of Christ's own mouth
this is our duty, if we be Christ's Disciples we must pray for them that
persecute us, and despitefully use us, we should go to the Lord, and beseech
the Lord to forgive them; thus did Christ, Father, forgive them, they know not
what they do. We should pray that the Lord would open their eyes, that the Lord
would turn their hearts to himself first, and then to us: Brethren, such a
prayer is very welcome to the Lord, as welcome as most prayers that his people
can make, when you shall from the heart pray to the Lord for those that injured
you, and done you wrong, such a prayer seldom goes unrequited. Sometimes the
Lord gives in the soul of an enemy at the request of his people; and oh what a
choice mercy will that be, if thou may gain the soul of an enemy, if a soul
may be delivered from going down to the pit, why the Lord many times gives in
the soul of an enemy; but if the Lord should not give in the soul of an enemy,
that prayer shall not go unrewarded; it may be sometimes the Lord will give in
the soul of a friend, thou go to God, and thou prayest for such an enemy,
Lord forgive such an enemy, Lord open his eyes, and turn his heart, and forgive
his transgression; if the Lord does not grant that request, it may be the Lord
will give in the soul of a child or some of thy relations, because thou have
found in thy heart to pray for an enemy, or else the Lord will reward that
prayer by giving out more of himself; thou beggest for an enemy, if the Lord do
not that, the Lord will give thee more grace, more of his Spirit, the Lord it
may be, will cause his face to slain more upon thee, while thou at his
commandment, and for his sake can find in thy heart to pray for them that are
thy enemies, and have done thee wrong; thou have prayed for an enemy, and I
will be a friend to thee, says the Lord, I will show thee more friendship,
more of my face; this is the first thing: Oh that the Lord would teach us to
practice it, it is our duty to pray for those that have done us wrong.

Secondly, if it be our duty to pray for those that have done us wrong, then it
is our duty to pray for such as the Lord has made instruments to do us good.
Creatures they are but instruments, and all the glory is due to God alone; ah,
but God is to be sought to for the instrument, has the Lord done us good by
such an instrument, in respect of our souls in a word of counsel and direction,
we are to pray for them. When God made use of Abigail in giving a word of
counsel to David, how did he bless the Lord and pray to God for her, 1 Samuel 25.
32, 33. And David sad to Abigail, blessed be the Lord God of which sent thee
this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed be thou etc. And so
has the Lord made any instrumental any way to do us good in the outward man,
to give any refreshment, we are bound to remember them before the Lord; thus
did Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 16. The Lord give mercy unto the house of Onesiphorus, for
he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chains. Onesiphorus was a means
of refreshing Paul in his bonds, and Paul looked upon it as his duty to
remember him before the Lord, he begs a blessing for him and his household; The
Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus; it is our duty to remember those
before the Lord, that have been used as instruments to do us good.

Thirdly, it is our duty to remember before the Lord even those that are
strangers to us, those that we have not known, if we know their conditions. If
the Lord has brought the condition of strangers to us, if the condition of
strangers be a sad condition, we are bound to remember them, and to present
their condition before the Lord; and thus did the Disciples here in the Text,
this woman she was a stranger to them, they never saw her face before, she was
of a strange Nation, one of the Cananites, and yet when the sad condition of
this woman was brought before them, and they heard her cry, their hearts were
moved with compassion, and they besought Christ for her. Lord send her away,
Lord grant her request^* And the Lord laid a great charge upon his people
Israel, that they should remember strangers, and not oppress strangers, but
show kindness to them; and this is one part of the duty we owe to them, to
remember them, and if in any sad condition, we are bound to present them and
their condition before the Lord.

Fourthly, If it be a duty to remember Strangers, then much more to remember
our own Relations, and to present them before the Lord. All our Relations what
ever they be, as we stand related to others in Political Societies, there is an
engagement to remember them before the Lord, a mutual tie betwixt the
Magistrate and the people, and they are bound to pray one for another, godly
Magistrate^ and godly people are bound to remember one another. You know King
Solomon he was one that feared the Lord, and he was very much in praying for
the people, 1 Kings 8. 22. he spent much time in prayer: And so back again it
is the peoples duty to remember their Governors; The Apostle lays it upon
Christians as their duty, 1 Timothy 2. 1. I exhort therefore that first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men, ver. 2. for Kings, and for all, that are in Authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty: In this relation, there
is a mutual tie to remember one another before the Lord.

And if we come to Family-societies, there we shall see relations are bound to
remember one another before the Lord; the relation of Husband and Wife, Parents
and Children, Masters and Servants, the Scripture holds it forth as a duty
incumbent upon all Christians to remember their relations mutually before the
Lord. Husbands are bound to remember their wives, to present their condition
before the Lord: Isaac prayed for Rebeckah, Genesis 25. 21. and at his request the
Lord was entreated; and so back again, the wife is bound to remember the
husband. And so in the relation of parents, parents are bound often to present
their children before the Lord; the example of Job is given for our imitation,
Job 1. 5. And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about, that
Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered
burnt-offerings, according to the number of them all: for Job said, it may be
that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their hearts; thus did Job
continually. See Job presented them all one by one before the Lord, and begged
mercy for them, and that the Lord would take away the guilt of sin which they
might contract while they were feasting in one another house. And so good old
Jacob performed this duty for his children, even then when he lay a dying, he
called for all his children, Genesis 49. he called them one by one, and prayed for
a special blessing to be upon their heads. Parents are bound to remember their
children, and children many times miscarry because parents are no more in doing
their duty, no more crying to the Lord in the behalf of their children; and so
back again children are bound to remember their parents. And so in the relation
of Masters and servants, Masters are bound to pray for their servants; you know
that instance of the Centurion, he came to Jesus in the behalf of his servant,
and was very earnest with Christ, that Christ would be pleased to heal his
servant; this is a duty that is little performed by many Masters, they think if
they can have their servants to work for them, it is all that they have to look
after, but let such Masters know that God will require an account of servants
souls; have you instructed them, and have you presented them often in your
prayers before the Lord? the Centurion came for the body of his servant, and it
is our duty to come often to the Lord for the souls of our servants; and so
back again it is the duty of servants to pray for their Masters. And thus you
see the fourth particular, That it is our duty to remember all our relations
before the Lord. There is one relation more, and that is our Spiritual
relation, which I shall touch before I end that particular; such as stand in
relation one to another in Church-society, they are bound often to remember one
another conditions before the Lord, James 5. 14, 15, 16. Confess your faults
one to another, and pray one for another; yea in Church-societies, it is
especially the duty of Pastors and Elders to remember their flock, and it is
the duty of the people to remember their Elders, and to pray often to the Lord
in their behalf. Faithful Ministers are bound often to pray for their people;
remember what is said of Paul, Romans 1. 9. For God is my witness, whom I serve
with my spirit in the Gospel of his son, that without ceasing I make mention of
you always in my prayers. When ever he came to God, he was mindful of the
Church, I am always mindful of you without ceasing: and indeed the profiting
of a people, and the stedfastness of a people in the faith, and in the truth,
and in the ways of God, it is the glory, and the crown, and the joy and
rejoicing of a faithful Teacher; and therefore surely it is their duty often to
remember their people before the Lord, and so it is the peoples duty to
remember their Pastor and Teacher. The Apostle lays it upon them as their duty,
Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the
Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance and supplication for all
Saints, and for me, that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my
mouth boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel. It is your duty (says
he) to pray for all Saints, and for me in particular, that I may open my mouth
boldly, to make known the mystery of the Gospel; for many times Satan's great
design is to overthrow them that the Lord has set to go before his people.
Satan's great design is to hinder the work of God in their hand, to make such to
fall, and therefore the Lords people had need to pray the more earnestly; for
even the best of the Teachers and Preachers of the Gospel they are but empty
pipes in themselves, and can afford no more then the Lord is pleased to drop in
from above; and therefore there is need that the Lord should be dropping in
continually, or else they cannot bring forth bread in due season, and make
provision for the people, if the Lord do not fill them from heaven; yea the
best of Teachers have need of teaching, though they know never so much they
have need of more knowledge, they have need of more strength, and therefore it
is the duty of the people to remember them before the Lord, that the Lords Vrim
and Thummim may be with them. Thus in all relations it is our duty mutually to
remember one another before the Lord.

Fifthly, it is our duty to remember those that for the present are strangers
to Christ: You will say, what, are we to pray for such as have not the
knowledge of God? yea it is our duty to remember them; if the Lord has been
pleased to make us to differ, and called us out from the number of those
Gentiles who know not God, oh we are bound to pity them, and to pray for them,
whose condition is such as never was rained upon, as the heath in the desert,
their condition is sad, and we should remember them before the Lord, that God
would send forth his light and truth to them, that they that deny Christ, in
word, in profession, and conversation, that they may be brought home to the
knowledge of the Son of God, Psalm. 67. 1, 2. God be merciful unto us, and bless
us, and cause his face to shine upon us. That thy way may be known upon earth,
thy saving health among all Nations.

There are many Nations, and great Nations that to this day know not God and
Christ, that sit in darkness, and perish for want of vision; and truly they who
through free grace do know any thing of God, they are bound to pity them that
sit in darkness, and to pray that the Nations may know the saving truth, and
the way of the Lord.

Sixthly, if it be a duty to pray for those that are strangers to Christ, then
it is a duty to pray for those that are Christ's friends; for all that know the
Lord, and love the Lord in sincerity, Ephesians. 6. 18. Praying always with all
prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto with all
perseverance and supplication for all Saints: It is our duty to remember all
Saints, to remember them that are scattered, to remember them that are
gathered: all Saints, we should remember them in our prayer before the Lord,
and especially Jerusalem, Sions Assemblies they should be remembered, Psalm. 122.
6, 7. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace
be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces. You see Jerusalem, Sions
Assemblies in a special manner should be remembered by us in our addresses to
the Lord. And so Psalm 14. you may see how the Psalmist does express himself in
the behalf of Sion: Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! oh
that the Lord would hasten the time that he will save his people, and Sion be
remembered and built up; Oh that the time were come. And in Psalm. 51. he does
express, that when he had been praying for himself, yet he did not forget Sion,
Psalm. 51. 18. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of
Jerusalem. So that you see that has been spoken to, who they are that we are
bound to pray for.

Secondly, What are the special times in which we are bound to remember others
before the Lord.
what are the special times in which we are bound to remember others, and to
present their conditions before the Lord.

I answer first of all, when they have sinned a sin against the Lord: When we
see any that have sinned greatly against the Lord, that have provoked the Lord,
especially such as have the name of God and Christ upon them, oh then it is
time for us to step in and plead hard with God for them. So did Moses when
Israel had sinned a great sin in making the Molten calf, then he steps in, and
cries hard to the Lord; nay this is commended as a duty, 1 John 5. 16. If any
man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he
shall give him life for, them that sin not unto death. If it be not a sinning
wilfully, a wilful persecution of the Truth that he has professed, why then
if a man see his brother sin, he shall ask and give his brother life. It is a
gracious promise, and a great encouragement to go to the Lord one for another.

Secondly, in time of great affliction, when the Lord lays his hand heavy upon
others either on the outward or inward man, it is our duty then to remember
them, and to present their conditions before the Lord; in time of great
calamity, public calamity upon a nation, it is a duty of Gods people to
present the condition of their people before the Lord. Nehemiah did present the
condition of the people before the Lord, when the hand of the Lord was sore
upon them: And so when God does lay any great affliction upon others, then it
is our duty to remember them, and present their condition before the Lord.
David did so for his enemies when they were sick (says he) I put on sack
cloth, and I fasted.

Thirdly, in time of persecution, that is a special time to present the
conditions of others before the Lord; when we see any that are persecuted for
righteousness sake: When the Church was persecuted in the Acts, and the
Disciples cast into prison, then the Church prayed, then Gods people did look
upon it as their duty to pray, and to pray more earnestly then ever they had
done. And so when the Apostle was in bonds, he sent to them that they would
earnestly seek God for him, that he might hold close to the truth, that he
might not deny the truth nor Christ.

Fourthly, when as the Lord threatens to go away from a people, when a God
threatens to withdraw his presence from a people, or from a soul, oh then it is
the duty of others to remember them before the Lord. When God threatens to
depart from Israel, oh then Moses he steps in, and he is pleading with the
Lord. And so when God threatened, and was about to cast off the Jews after they
had rejected Christ, oh how does the Apostle Paul step in, and cry earnestly to
God, Romans 10. 1. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is
that they might he saved. When God threatens to go away from a soul or people,
oh then it is time for the people of God to step in, and to plead hard with God.

Fifthly and lastly, another time in which we are bound to remember others, is
when we see God coming toward any in a way of mercy. When the Lord was coming
toward the Jews in a way mercy, he stirred up Daniel to pray for them, and to
cry earnestly to the Lord for them, when he came to understand that the time of
deliverance was not far off, but mercy a coming, salvation a coming, then he
cried, and cried more earnestly then ever he had done, he set himself to seek
the Lord by fasting and prayer: When we see God a coming toward any people in
a way of mercy; when God comes toward a friend and relation in a way of mercy,
when we see God is beginning to work, and to move upon their spirits, oh it is
a duty for those relations that know the Lord, to step in and to cry earnestly
to God, yea then to go forth and meet the Lord, and to entreat the Lord that
that work may not go back, but that he would help it on. Application.
I shall not have time for the Application, only this one use I shall leave
with you.

That if it be the duty of Gods people to pray for others, a duty to remember
one another, then it will follow from hence, that it is our duty to acquaint
others with our conditions. If it be a duty for others to pray for us, then it
is our duty for us to to acquaint them with our conditions, or else how can
they seek God in our behalf; if it be their duty to pray, it is our duty to beg
their prayers, and there are some times in which it does lie more especially
upon us to beg prayers of others, that they would step in and plead with God. I
shall in a few words show you what those times are that we are bound more
especially to call others into our help to seek the Lord for us.

First, What those times are that we are bound more especially to call upon
others to seek the Lord for us.
when the Lord does lay the guilt of sin heavy upon the spirit, when the guilt
of sin lies so heavy upon a man's conscience that it cannot be removed, he has
tried all private means, and still his spirit is so oppressed as he knows not
how to stand under it, then it is a duty to call in the help of others; Confess
your sins one to another, and pray one for another, James 5. and he makes a
gracious promise that in such a case he will hear.

Secondly, we are especially bound to ask the prayers of those whom we have
offended. Sometimes the Lord will not be appeased till we have begged the
prayers of those whom we have wronged; this was the case of Abimeleck, when he
had wronged Abraham in taking away his wife Sarah. The Lord smote Abimeleck,
and God does advise Abimeleck to go to Abraham to pray for him, Genesis 20. 6, 7.
And Abraham did pray for Abimeleck, and God did hear the prayer of Abraham for
Abimeleck, Genesis 20. 17. And so the children of Israel they come to Moses when
as they had sinned against the Lord, and murmured against Moses, yet they
desired that Moses would pray for them, and Moses did pray for them, Numbers
21. 7. and the Lord was entreated for them.

And so it was the case of Jobs friends, God directs them to go to Job, and he
shall pray for you, and says God, I will hear him, Job 42. 8. you have sinned
against me, and have had hard thoughts of Job, and have been sad comforters to
Job, but go to Job, and Job shall pray for you, and I will hear Job. Oh! when
we have wronged others, in such a case it is our duty to acknowledge our
offenses, and to entreat that they would seek the Lord for us.

Thirdly, when as the Lord lays any heavy stroke upon us, our affliction is so
heavy as we know not how to bear it our selves; truly it is wisdom then, and a
duty to call in help, in great afflictions we are to request the prayers of
others: The Apostle gives this direction, that such as were members of Churches
that when they were afflicted, they should send for the Elders of the Church,
and that they should pray for them, James 5. 14, 15. And the Lord he promises
that he would give out healing; in great afflictions we are to call in the help
of others, members of the Churches they ought to send for the Elders of the
Church that in time of affliction they may pray for them.

Fourthly, when we are nigh some great danger, liable to danger either in the
outward or inward man, or to walk in some dangerous ways, or when we are by
providence put upon such ways as we may meet with shares and temptations,
where there is any danger, then it lies upon us to call in the help of others.
So Esther 4. 16, 17. she was in great danger, there was a Law that whosoever
went into the King, and was not called, must be put to death, and the cause was
so, that she must go in to speak with the King though it should cost her her
life, and therefore she sends to Mordecai to gather the Jews that are present
in Shushan, and fast ye for me, pray for me, for it may cost me my life,
therefore I desire you to fast and pray for me.

Fifthly, when the Lord calls his people to some great service, some work that
may be for his honor and glory: So Esther when she was about some great work,
fast for me, fast and pray, and I will speak to the King.

Sixthly, when the Lord does seem to shut us up that we cannot pray our selves,
our condition may be so: Sometimes through weakness we are not able, and
sometimes when the Lord withdraws his Spirit, we are not able to pray our
selves, that our prayers are but like Hezekiahs, like the chattering of a Crane
or Swallow, then in such cases it is a duty to send to others, and call upon
others; when we cannot pray our selves.

Seventhly and lastly, when the Lord seems to be angry with any people, when
the displeasure of the Lord waxes hot and heavy, and we do not know how to bear
it, it is hard then to go to God as to a Father, our selves, and therefore then
we had need call in others to our help. When the wrath of the Lord was kindled
against the children of Israel, then Moses stepped it, then he cried to God for
them, for they could not look to the Lord as to their Father, the wrath of the
Lord was hot; and at that time it is our wisdom and a duty for poor souls to
call in others that they may cry to the Lord in their behalf.

Matthew. 15. 24. But he answered and said, I am not sent. but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.
SERMON X.
YOU have heard of this woman's faith, and the first trial of it: Christ tries
her faith by being silent, and giving no answer unto her request; it was a sore
temptation that the son of David, the merciful King should not open his mouth,
nor speak one word for the refreshment of a poor distressed creature: When she
poured out her complaint, he answered her not a word; that is a great
temptation. You have heard also how the Disciples stepped in, and besought Christ
in her behalf, they came and besought him that he would send her away with an
answer, with an answer of peace, certainly that was their request.

But behold here is a second temptation, here is a second trial of this woman's
faith: Christ first tries her by being silent, and now he tries her by speaking
a hard word as it seems, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.

I am not sent, Christ intimates that he had nothing to do with this woman, it
was besides his Commission, I cannot do it says Christ, I must walk by rule, I
must observe my Fathers Commission, I must do that work, and that work only
which I was sent for, but now I was not sent, but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, my work is to do good to a certain number of persons, to show
mercy to a certain number of persons, that are given me of my Father. He calls
them here sheep, Christ's sheep, I am sent for their sakes, and to do good to
them, though termed sheep: Now the Scripture holds them forth to be such as
were given him of his Father from Eternity, all that are given to Christ, are
Christ's sheep, though they may not for the present have Christ's mark upon them,
though Christ does not own them before the world, yet he owns them before his
Father; all that belong to the election of grace they are Christ's sheep, and
Christ says, he was sent to such, I am not sent, but to the lost sheep, they
are in a lost condition, even that number of persons that are given to Christ,
they are lost in Adam, and they have lost themselves by going on in the ways
of actual transgression, they are in a miserable lost condition, Christ's sheep;
but Christ was sent to do good to them, Christ was sent to save them; The Son
of man came to seek and to save them which were lost.

The lost sheep of the house of Israel.

The house of Israel may here be taken literally, for the people of the Jews
which are called the house of Israel. Christ tells the Disciples and this
woman, that his Commission was to do good only to them, I am not sent to
others, I am only sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, my work is
with the Jews, I have nothing to do with the Gentiles; No, my work is to gather
in the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Quest. But you will say, how does this agree with other Scriptures, with those
prophesies that concern the Messiah, our Lord Jesus Christ, that when he came
he should preach to the Gentiles, and that God would give him to be a Covenant
to the Gentiles, Isaiah 42. 1, 2, 6. And in diverse places there are prophesies
that concern the Gentiles, that when Christ came God would give him to be a
light to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews? why then does Christ say, he was
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel?

Answ. Christ spoke first of all, of his personal Ministry; as he preached
himself in person, and wrought miracles himself, so he was sent unto the Jews,
his word was to them, he was their Apostle, their Minister; so the Apostle to
the Romans speaks, Romans 15. 8. Now I say that Jesus Christ was a Minister of
the Circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promise made unto the
Fathers. Christ was to preach in his own person to the Jews, he was their
Minister; and so in that respect, he was not sent, but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

Secondly, it may be said that Christ was not sent to the Gentiles, but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, in respect of that order that God the Father
had appointed for the dispensation of his light, and of his grace and Spirit
among the sons of men. God had appointed that first of all Christ should come
to the Jews, and mercy first should be tendered to them, and grace be first
brought to that people; so Christ's first work was to the Jews, I am not sent
but to them, that is, I am first sent to them, and chiefly sent to them; my
first work is here in Judea: The Apostle Paul says, Christ did not send him to
baptize, but to preach, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel; that is, I was first sent about this work, for he was sent
to baptize, for he did baptize, but my first work was to preach. And so here,
says Christ, I was not sent to the Gentiles, but to the Jews, that is firstly
and chiefly.

Thirdly, or in respect of time: It is true, Christ was not sent, that is, he
was not then sent; his present work was not to preach to the Gentiles, and show
mercy to the Gentiles, no, but afterward: There was a time, when Christ did not
go himself to the Gentiles, and did not show mercy to the Gentiles; nay he
forbad his Apostles and his Disciples: Go not into the way of the Gentiles, but
go ye rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. So that there was a time
when it pleased the Lord not to send the Gospel, but to restrain it from the
Gentiles.

But there was a time also when Christ did send forth his glorious Gospel to
the Gentiles; so that you see in what respect Christ speaks here, He was not
sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,

I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Here is a seeming denial that Christ gives to this woman; he seems to tell her
plainly, that he cannot do it for her, it was besides his present work and
commission, he was not sent to do it; there is the denial. Nay the trial was
the greater, in that Christ answers thus not only to the woman's request, but to
the Disciples request; this heightens the temptation and trial, and makes it
the greater: So long as this woman saw that the Disciples were pleading for her
she might have hope, though there was no ground of hope as to her request,
Christ being silent thereunto, yet it might revive her spirit to see his
Disciples step in, and they to improve their interest in Christ: But when
Christ shall not only give a denial to the woman, but to the Disciples, this
was a sore trial: if the Lord had not mightily strengthened her faith, she
could never have held up her head, she would have concluded, oh alas, my estate
and condition it is sad, it is in vain for me to expect any salvation, any
mercy, he is silent at my request, and he gives a denial, when his Disciples
pray for me; and if God will not hear his own people, why then surely my
condition is sad, thus lay the temptation, and yet the Lord supported this
woman's spirit.

So that we may observe this; That God sometimes does seem not only to be
silent at the prayers of his people when they cry themselves, Doctr. 1.
but he gives a denial when others step in and pray for them.

Nay observe, That after a soul has waited upon God in the use of the means,
Doctr. 2.
when it has prayed and has believed, and when it has called in the help of
others prayers, yet the Lord may seem to give a denial, and the condition may
seem to be worse, and the temptation seem to rise higher even after a soul has
waited upon God in the use of means, and yet the Lord may have a gracious
design toward the soul.

For mark it, this woman's condition was worse now then ever it was; the
Disciples had prayed for her, and yet even after this Christ seems to give a
flat denial, and tells them that he cannot do it for her, it was besides his
commission, he was not sent to do it. So that after the use of means, after her
own prayer, and the Disciples prayer, this woman meets with a flat denial, and
yet the Lord Jesus had a design of mercy to this poor woman.

Yea, it is Gods ordinary way to his people after they have used the means to
remove such a burden, such a temptation, such a corruption, they have gone to
the Lord, they have waited, they have believed, and called in the help of
others, and yet temptations grow high, and yet notwithstanding that, the Lord
my have a design of mercy. The children of Israel when they were in the land of
Egypt under bondage and slavery, they cried to the Lord, and the Lo^^ (...)
Moses to deliver them, and no doubt but (...) cried to the Lord as well as
they, as they pr^^^^ so Moses prayed, he prayed for them, and yet after Moses
was come, the people were not delivered, but their burdens and oppressions grew
heavier and heavier, never so oppressed, as when Moses came to deliver them,
when they cried themselves, and Moses cried, and waited upon God in the use of
means, yet their bondage grew greater and greater; so it was with them, and yet
God had a design of mercy toward them.

And so in Mark 1. 23, 24, 25, 26. At ver. 23. you read of one that had an
unclean Spirit: And there was in their Synagogue a man with an unclean Spirit,
and be cried out,

Ver. 24. Saying, let us alone, what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of
Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one
of God.

Ver. 25. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, hold thy peace and come out of him.

Ver. 26. And when the unclean Spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud
voice, he came out of him.

Mark, when he applied himself to Christ for deliverance, while Christ was
speaking the word, commanding the unclean spirit to go out, yet immediately the
affliction begin to wax greater and greater, and the devil he rages the more;
and yet notwithstanding mercy is not far off, Christ had a design of mercy: And
so does God deal many times with his own people upon the use of means; it is
possible their afflictions may increase, their temptations may increase, and
corruptions wax stronger and stronger, and yet God have a gracious design
toward them, and deliverance may not be far off.

It is true, Satan's design.
that Satan he has a design, and has a hand in it; ah but God also has a
design, and Gods design is a gracious design.

Quest. But you will say what is Satan's design, and what does Satan intend?

Answ. Why, Satan's design is first of all, to take off the soul from the use of
the means, to make the soul undervalue the means, and to cast off the means.
Thus he tempts poor creatures that have prayed, and have met with no answer,
but they are worse; others have prayed for them, and yet they grow worse and
worse, why then he persuades to undervalue the means; for while a soul is thus
waiting upon God in Gods way, mercy is not far off; therefore the Devils great
design is to drive the soul out of Gods way. What is prayer? and why will ye
pray any longer? you are never the better for your own prayers, nor the better
for others prayers; and thus the Devil discourageth the soul from waiting upon
God in the use of the means.

Secondly, Gods design.
Satan's design is, to drive the soul upon the rock of despair, to make a soul
to cast away his confidence: Why will you hope any longer, and pray any longer?
you see all is in vain, God hears not your prayers, God hears not others
for you; others have prayed and cried in your behalf, and there is no answer,
and your misery is greater then before, and therefore why should you wait any
longer? Satan's great design is to make a soul cast away all his hope and
confidence, and to dash and break it in pieces upon tha^ rock.

But now, God has a design of mercy in it, though it be so that the affliction
grow greater and greater after the use of means, yet God has a design of
mercy. For by that.

First of all, God will teach the soul not to rest upon the means, but upon
himself. Satan's design is to draw the creature from the use of means, and Gods
design is to draw the creature more to the use of means. And truly we are ready
to drive our selves upon this work, either to cast off prayer, or else to rest
upon the means; and therefore it is that a poor soul is so cast down when as it
has been waiting upon God in the use of means, has been praying, looking to
the promise, and has been calling in the help of others. I say, we are apt in
this case to show forth the frowardness of our spirits, which does evidence
that we look too much to the means: We think prayer should save us, and upon
the use of means if the Lord does not come in, we are murmuring; Now the Lord
will teach us this, to use the means, but not to rest upon the means, but to
rest upon himself, upon his arm for salvation, and upon his free grace, and not
upon any means.

Secondly, God has this design, when the condition of the creature seems to
grow worse and worse after the use of the means, why the Lord does not
presently help it, is because that he will appear at such a time when his work
of deliverance will be most glorious. He will come in the most seasonable time,
when as deliverance shall be most welcome, and that is, at such a time when all
means fail, when the creature has tried all means whatsoever: As the woman
that had the issue of blood, she went from Physician to Physician, and yet the
worse. Oh the cure from the hand of Christ was welcome. And so when the poor
man brought his son to the Disciples, he tried all means, and the Disciples
could not cast the Devil out: Oh when all means failed, that was the time for
Christ to step in. The Lord will then appear at such a season, when poor
creatures are brought to the lowest state, when a poor soul says, Lord we have
used such and such means, but still worse and worse; oh Lord we know not what
to do, but our eyes are toward thee. Oh this is a time that the Lord will draw
nigh to his people.

And therefore to reflect a little upon this; does God make this to be the
condition of any of you? have we been under some great affliction and burden,
and some great temptation, and have been using all means, and still we find it
grow worse and worse according to our own apprehension, worse after prayer then
before, more temptations after prayer then before, more temptations after
looking to the promise then before? if this be thy condition, be not
discouraged, for this has been the condition of many of Gods people. This was
the condition of the woman of Canaan here before thee, she was worse after
prayer then before, she was worse after the Disciples had prayed for her, then
she meets with a flat denial, and Christ says to her, that he was not sent,
but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. This was the condition of the
woman of Canaan, and yet the Lord Jesus he loves this woman, and he had an
intent to show mercy to this woman, and to grant her request. And therefore if
this be your condition, oh take heed of the Devils design; the Devils design
(as you heard before) is to make you undervalue the means, and to drive you to
despair; take heed of the Devils design. And though this should be your
condition, do not think the worse of the Ordinance of God, do not think the
worse of prayer, the worse of your duties, and do not think the worse of the
prayers of others, do not think the worse of searching the Scripture, and of
applying your selves to the promises, do not think the worse of these things,
it is the Devils design to make you undervalue the means. And take heed that
you do not now cast away all hope, Satan will tell you that there is no hope
concerning you; the servants of God have prayed for you, and now no hope: Oh
know that that temptation will drive you upon the rock of despair; but oh that
you would look to God, and know that he has a design of mercy toward you, nay
in this very thing that it is worse and worse with you, he has a design of
mercy in it, he will draw you off from resting upon the creature, and resting
upon means, and the Lord will now teach you to rest upon himself, and God will
come in when it shall be most welcome. Oh therefore in such a condition we
should set faith a work, though to sense we seem to be worse and worse, and
deliverance further off then ever, worse after prayer then before prayer, oh
yet we should set faith a work, for faith will see that deliverance is near,
and conclude it, because it is Gods way in which he walks toward his people.
When the people of Israel were most grievously oppressed by the Egyptians, then
the Lord handed out deliverance; O soul, though the clouds do seem to gather,
and it be darker with thee then ever, yet say, I will wait upon the Lord in his
way, and I will be found praying still, and calling in the help of others
still. Oh that we might set faith a work, and we should see that Gods salvation
were near. But I shall pass from this.

I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Christ tells this woman that he cannot do it for her, because it did not lie
in his Commission, to which he must be faithful, he could not go beyond his
Commission: What may we learn from hence?

We may take notice of this Historical Proposition. That our Lord Jesus Christ
in all he did, Historical Proposition.
he acted by commission, and kept his eye upon his commission which he was
faithful unto.

The Scripture holds forth, that he was sent of his Father, the Father sent
him, and gave him a commandment what he should do, and what he should speak.
And Jesus Christ he was very faithful in observing his commission, he kept his
eye upon the work that his Father had given him to do, and in that work he was
faithful. In every thing that Jesus Christ acted, he looked to his Fathers
rule, the commission that his Father had given him, See John 5. 30. I can of my
own self do nothing: as I hear I judge, and my Judgment in just, because I
seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which has sent me. And as
in the matter of judging, so in all other dispensations Christ was pleased to
look to the will of his Father that sent him. I came not to do my own will in
that thing, but the will of my Father. And so in John 6. 38, 39. For I came
down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me,
and this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.
As in his works of judging, so in his works of mercy, Christ kept his eye upon
his Fathers will, he looked to his commission, this is the Fathers will that I
should lose none of them, but that I should give life to them all, and raise
them up at the last day.

Yea, in his very words, in all Christ spoke, he kept his eye upon the rule,
and spoke according to his Fathers will and commandment. I speak not of my
self, but what I have heard of my Father, John 8. 26. I spoke to the world
those things which I have heard of him, John 12. 50. Even as the Father said
unto me, so I speak. In all that Christ spoke, he kept his eye upon his
Commission.

And as in all that Christ spoke, he kept his eye upon his commission, so in
all Christ did: As the Father gave me commandment, even so I do, John 14. 31.
still his eye was upon the commandment of his Father, upon his commission; And
in obedience to that commission, he lays down his life, John 10. 15. And I lay
down my life for the sheep, Ver. 18. No man takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again: this commandment have I received of my Father.

Yea in Christ's motions this way and that way, his going to one place, and not
to another, his preaching in one place and not in another, still he kept his
eye upon the commission of his Father. See Luke 4. 43. I must preach the
Kingdom of God to other Cities also; for therefore am I sent. They would have
kept Christ with them, no, says he, I must preach the Kingdom of God in other
Cities; in all that Christ did, he kept his eye upon his Fathers commission, he
looked to his Fathers will, and that was his rule to walk by.

And the ground of it is this, because Christ was found in the form of a
servant; though he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he took upon
him the form of a servant; though the Son of God, yet he was content to be a
servant, that he might bring about the great work of Redemption: Therefore God
calls him the righteous servant, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, Isaiah 53. 11. And as Christ was a righteous servant, a faithful
servant, so he kept his eye upon his commission. Now if Christ had not done so,
if he had not acted all things according to the will of his Father, he had not
been a righteous servant, but he was his Fathers righteous servant, and
therefore he evermore looked upon his commission, what was his Fathers will,
and so he applied himself to it.

And as in all other things, so in this particular in the Text, of preaching
the Gospel, and showing mercy first to the Jews and not to the Gentiles, I am
not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, I am sent to show mercy
to the house of Israel, still he eyed that work that was committed to him,
because the promise was made to them, the promise of the Messiah it was first
made to Abraham and his seed, to that Nation that came out of the loins of
Abraham: And Christ came to confirm the promise that was made to Abraham and
his Seed, therefore in this thing he observed his Fathers order and his Fathers
time; though his Father had a design of mercy to the Gentiles, yet he will show
mercy first to the Jews, and then to the Gentiles: So that the Jews first of
all must have the offer, and then the Gentiles shall have their time; Christ
eyed his Fathers will and time, and therefore he applies himself to that work.

But by way of Application.

First, Use 1.
what cause have we who are of the stock of the Gentiles, who live in this time
and in this Generation, to bless the Lord that we do live in that time when the
partition wall is taken down? there was a time when the Jews only were the
people of God, and when Gods design was to show mercy to them; and there was a
time when mercy seemed to be restrained from the Gentiles; there was a time
when Christ must not preach to the Gentiles, so it was his commission then not
to show mercy to the Gentiles at that time: Go not into any of the ways of the
Gentiles, and into any of the Cities of Samaria enter not. There was a time
when the Gentiles were shut out from mercy, when the word of life and salvation
was restrained from them, when the Lord gave this commission, go not into the
way of the Gentiles, oh how are we beholden to free grace that has broken down
this wall of partition? that now since the resurrection of the Lord Jesus
Christ there is no difference, but now mercy is freely offered to the Gentiles
as well as to the Jews, for the wall of partition is now broken down; and of
how should we admire the grace of God in it? we that were outcasts of the
Gentiles, sinners of the Gentiles, that the Lord should ever send to persuade
us to dwell in the Tents of Shem; we we might have dwelt in the barren
wilderness every day, and never have been called, and that God should invite us
to dwell in the Tents of Shem, oh the free grace of God to poor sinners, that
we live in such a time that there is not a restraint upon the word of the Lord,
nor upon his servants in bringing his word to us Gentiles! oh we are engaged to
the Lord that it is our lot to stand here!

And this may teach us to admire the unspeakable and wonderful love of God that
is let out to the Gentiles. Use. 2.
I say, we should with holy fear admire it, the Jews were the Lords first born,
Christ was sent first to them, chiefly to them, they must have the first tender
and the first offer of mercy, the kingdom of God came first to them, and yet
behold now that word of Christ is verified, the first shall be last, and the
last first; they were the first, and the Gentiles were the last: We were shut
out, and a restraint laid upon the Apostles, go not into their Cities; ah, but
now the first is last, and now God says, go not into the Cities of the Jews,
go not to the house of Israel, but to the Cities of the Gentiles. Oh the
wonderful love of God, that the last should be first, and the first last.

And oh how should this teach us to fear before the Lord, Use 3.
and to take heed that we do not provok^ the Lord to deal with us as he dealt
with the Jews? I say, take heed of provoking the Lord, take heed that we do not
reject Christ, take heed we do not reject the tender of mercy, that we do not
neglect the great salvation held forth to us, that we do not trample under our
feet the blood of the Covenant, take heed that we do not refuse to hear and to
receive the things of our peace: Oh this was that which provoked the Lord to
cast off the Jews, when they cast off Christ and would none of him, when they
cast out the Lord of the Vineyard, when they would not accept of the glad
tidings held forth to them, then the Lord takes away the Word of Life from
them, and sent it to us, that the first is last, and the last first.

And let us take heed that we do not rest upon our privileges. Use 4.
We have the Word and the Ordinances, God deals not so with every people; ah
but let us take heed that we do not rest upon our privileges as they did,
because they were the seed of Abraham, they had the Law, and they had the
Covenant, the Oracles of God, and therefore they rested upon them, and did not
walk worthy of them, and therefore (...) Lord took it from them. Now take heed
that we do not rest upon our privileges, we have the Gospel and fellowship
with Saints, take heed we do not rest in them, but (...) let us labor to walk
up to them, receive Christ in the Gospel, and walk up to our enjoyments or else
we may provoke the Lord to take away the kingdom of God from us, lest the Lord
should (...) and that is dangerous, every man that is lost, he is lost in a
dark way, the way of sin, it is a way of darkness: The Wiseman says of the
sinner, he knows, not whither he goes: his way is the way of darkness, he is
lost in a way of darkness, and (...) he knows not whither he goes.

And as it is a dark way, so it is a filthy way, it is a miry way, that a poor
sinner is lost in; a way where there is nothing but dirt, that when a poor
creature falls, he defiles himself, is woefully defiled with sin which is the
greatest defilement.

And it is a slippery way, and that makes it more dangerous; the way that we
are lost in, it is a slippery way, and so slippery, that it is not possible for
a poor creature to keep his feet, he faleth every day, yea he falls and falls,
and bruiseth himself by his falls.

And as the way it self is dangerous, so there are many dangers in the way,
there is a Lion in the way, and there are fiery Serpents in the way. The way of
Israel in the wilderness, was a dangerous way; truly this is the way that all,
Adams sons and daughters are lost in, where the Serpent lies, the Lion also,
the old Serpent that watches to fright, and destroy, and devour: And oh the
pits that are in the way, and the snares that are in the way, and the enemies
that are in the way!

And further, the way is sad in respect of the end of it. The way that we are
lost in, it is a way that does lead to destruction, the end of the way is
death, and it is not possible for a man to miss the pit, and to miss
destruction and death, if the Lord does not help him out of the way. Every
sinner that is lost, he will go further and further in this way, till he comes
to the end which is death, unless the Lord help him out of the way, unless the
Lord order it so, that he cannot find his way, he ceases not till he comes to
the end of his way, which is death.

And it is the more sad and dangerous, because that a poor creature has none
to help him, none to stand by him, so long as a man is out of Christ, till
Christ comes and finds a soul, none comes to take care of him, and help him out
of this dark way, none to protect him, none to guide him, none to go before
him, none to discover the pit and snare to him, none to uphold him and keep him
from falling, none to stand by him in this sad and dangerous way.

You see the Point opened, Application.
a little by way of Application, and so conclude.

First of all, Use 1.
it lets us see that there are many that may be Christ's sheep, though for the
present they be lost, yet many that we look upon as lost, may be Christ's sheep.
For although it is true, we cannot own them, till they have the mark of Christ's
sheep upon them; Saints cannot own them, for God himself does not own them
visibly before the world, till they hear the voice of Christ, ah, but yet they
may belong to Christ, and may be his sheep, though for the present they may be
lost; I have other sheep says Christ, I have other sheep that I will bring in;
they are my sheep now though poor wandering sheep, though lost in a wilderness,
yet they are my sheep, and they shall hear my voice, and I will bring them into
my fold.

Therefore this should teach us not to mourn as men without hope (as the
Apostle speaks in another case) not mourn as men without hope for the dead;
so when we look upon Friends and Relations, and cannot but judge them for the
present in a lost condition; we may mourn, and we ought to mourn, but not mourn
as men without hope; for they may belong to Christ, and Christ may bring them
in, though they be not yet brought in; therefore we should not give them up for
desperate, though they may be gone very far from God; though they have gone a
great way from God, yet give them not up for desperate: Christ has other sheep
then these that he will bring in; and know, that the Lord is able to bring them
in, though they be gone far from God, and far from his way, yet God is able to
bring them in; the great Shepherd is able to find them, and to lay them on his
shoulder, and able to bring them into his Fold: and therefore we should not be
hopeless, but still be found waiting upon God in the use of the means; if we
say there is no hope, then we give over the use of the means: Hope still, and
wait upon God in the use of the means, cry to God in their behalf, wait upon
the great Shepherd, that he would go forth to seek and to save.

And we should labor to carry so toward all friends, and neighbors, and
relations that are for the present opposite to God and his ways, that we may
gain them; they may be such as Christ may bring in; Christ's sheep were lost,
so were we, and so were they; and therefore take heed that we do not set them
off from Christ, do nothing to make them out of love with Christ; but oh look
upon them as those that Christ may bring in, and therefore let us do what we
can for them.

Secondly, Use 2.
It lets us see the sad condition for the present of those that do not believe
in Christ O! that all sinners would consider their sad condition: Truly it is a
lost estate that every sinner is in, and that is a sad estate, for a man to be
lost; lost to God, and lost to himself, and lost to others; yea so lost, that
he is altogether useless and unserviceable, neither profitable unto God nor
man; yea so lost, as he is in a hopeless condition, to have no hope: Truly
there is not any sinner that goes on in a way of sin, that has any true ground
of hope; and that is a sad condition which is a helpless condition; helpless in
respect of the creature, helpless in respect of himself, helpless in respect of
all men; and oh! it is a dangerous way, O that sinners would think of it; for a
man to be lost in a dark slippery dirty way, for a man to be lost in a
wilderness, to have none to guide him, no friend to comfort him, none to help
him out, in a vast howling wilderness, compassed about with dismal darkness, it
is a sad condition, especially when there are wild beasts in the wilderness,
and every step that he sets he treads on a Serpent, and a Lion in the way. O
that God would persuade sinners of this their lost condition! to be lost, and
thus lost, is a sad estate! yet this is their misery, and men are not sensible
of it.

And it is more sad, because it is the soul that is lost: and O! what would it
advantage a man or woman to gain the whole world, and to lose their own souls?
What ever slight thoughts men or women have of their precious souls that
lodges in their bosoms, it is of more worth then ten thousand worlds; now for
a soul to be in the wilderness, a soul to be in the dark, a soul to be in the
midst of Serpents and Lions, O it is a sad estate and condition: the Lord open
the eyes of men and women to see into this their sad condition.

Thirdly, Use 3.
Are poor creatures by nature in a lost estate and condition? O that they that
are lost would hear the voice of Christ the great Shepherd: Every man is lost
before brought home to Christ; and O that poor lost souls might hear the voice
of Christ this day; here is glad tidings, O that men would receive it: The Son
of man came to seek and to save tha^ which was lost. Here is glad tidings to
you that are in a lost condition; O that God would bore the ear of the soul to
hear this voice of Christ; it is the Shepherd that cries after you, O my sheep
return to me, I am come out of heaven to seek you, and to save you, and I am
now gone forth in the ministration of the Gospel for this purpose: O that poor
lost sheep would hear the voice of the Shepherd, and would receive the glad
tidings that he brings! either men are sensible of their lost estate, or they
are not: there are some that are lost, yea many, and they know it not; but it
is more sad for a man that is lost, and will not be persuaded that he is lost,
but he has a good opinion of his way; such a man goes the faster, and rides
the faster, and he will the sooner be at his journeys end.

Now to those that are lost and know it not, let me say unto you? that the Lord
Jesus does at once hold forth both your danger, and the remedy against that
danger; Christ does by one word hold forth to you, that you are lost; and he
does hold forth to you the way by which you may be saved from that lost estate;
you heard that he was sent to the lost sheep of the House of Israel, and to the
lost sheep of the Gentiles too, though Christ's present work was not among
them; but now Christ sends to the lost sheep of the house of the Gentiles as to
the house of Israel; and by his word he would convince you that you are lost,
and does discover to you the way to come out of that lost condition by
believing; O that you would hear the voice of the great Shepherd that comes
forth this day, and gives you an invitation to return.

But there are some that are sensible of their lost estate; O they see it, and
they know that they are lost, and therefore they look upon themselves as the
most miserable creatures; well, here is glad tidings for you this day, The Son
of man is come to seek and to save what is lost: You see your condition to be a
sad condition, and you say it is lost* and what ever it is it can be but lost;
why the Lord Jesus he was sent on purpose to save that which was lost, it was
the work that Jesus Christ was sent about, the great thing that was put into
Christ's Commission, the great work that his Father put into his hand, to save
what was lost: Now therefore look to the promises of God, yea that gracious
promise in Ezekiel. 34. v. 16. I will see that which was lost, and bring again
that which wa^ driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick. Thi^ promise it concerns the poor lost sheep,
how he will seek them, and save them, and bind them up; O behold there the
readiness that is in Christ to find them; and indeed, Christ has the greatest
care of such poor lost sheep. If a man has a hundred sheep, and one of them be
gone astray, does he not leave the ninety and nine, and goes into the
mountains, and seeks that which is gone astray? He goes forth to seek the
one sheep that is lost; you being that one lost sheep, and you looking upon
your own condition to be lost, and you are sensible that none is so lost as
you, he will leave the ninety and nine to seek you: And therefore hear the glad
tidings of your Shepherd, he comes forth to seek you, be you willing to come
to Christ, and O! what joy will there be in heaven at your return?

Fourthly and lastly, Use 4.
It lets us see, and O that we might see! the infinite riches of the grace of
God in Christ to poor sinners; O! here is grace indeed: What rich mercy was
that, that sent out Jesus Christ to seek lost sheep? O! that we might consider
a little of the greatness of this grace of God, the exceeding riches of it,
that the Lord should send forth his Son Jesus Christ to seek lost sheep. O!
consider what worthless creatures we were, how unuseful and unprofitable both
to God and man; nay, the Lord saw how little useful we should be afterward, how
little we are able to return to the Lord for this his great mercy; yet the Lord
sent forth his Son to seek you.

And consider, that this was at such a time when we could never have returned
to the Lord, when we could never have found God; though we had sought him, we
could not have found him; if we had had any disposition to have sought after
the Shepherd, we could not have found him; no, by all our searching we could
never have found him. And then when it was so with us that we could not find
the way to go home again, that he should send Jesus Christ to show us the way
that he makes, by the Shepherd to lead the wandering sheep home; O free grace!
If the Lord had sent forth the least Angel of heaven to have sought poor lost
sinners, it had been mercy; but that God should not commit this work to his
servants, but give a Commission to his Son, and make it his great work to seek
poor lost sheep, O great love! nay, when we could not find God, and when
Angels could not have found us if they had sought us; herein is the exceeding
riches of grace. Nay, it was at such a time as the Lord might have sent his
Justice to have found us out, God might have sent the Avenger of blood after
us; the Lord might have set all our sins upon us to have found us out, they
might have followed us as so many Avengers of blood; O that at such a time God
should send Christ to find us out, after all our sinful wanderings from God!
that he should make his Son to come and seek, O infinite love!

And therefore let me speak to those that have received this grace: Has the
Lord found out your souls? Has Jesus Christ found you out in your wanderings,
and through mercy brought you home to God? Has he brought home any poor soul
to believe in Christ, and to give up it self fully and for ever to Christ? O!
be thankful for this mercy, and labor to walk worthy of it, and study to know
what is your duty now; you that are Christ's sheep, and were lost, O! what is
your duty? Christ has found you, surely some duty you owe to Christ.

Why, The Duty of souls whom Christ has found.
this is our duty; It is our duty now to seek Christ, to seek much faith in
Christ; if Christ has sought us, and took so much pains in seeking us, that
were not worth the seeking after, O! how should we lay forth our selves to seek
Christ? Seek him every day, Duty 1.
seek much of Christ, seek his face evermore, seek more of Christ every day:
Christ sought us when we were not worthy, and shall not we seek him who is
infinitely worthy, who is the desire of all Nations?

Again, It is our duty to seek others. Christ has found us, it is our duty to
seek others, to pity the sheep that are lost, that for the present are in a
lost estate and condition; take some pains to seek them according to your
Talent and opportunity: O take pains to seek others: As Soon as ever Christ
found Andrew, Andrew he finds Simon Peter; O! Come (says he) and see Christ:
I say, if Christ has found us, let us labor to find others, labor to bring
them to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd: The Lord gave a
Commandment, Deuteronomy. 22. 1. That if any man saw his neighbors Ox or Sheep go
astray, he should pity them, he should not hide himself from them, but he
should pity the poor lost sheep, and the lost Ox: Does God take care for Oxen?
Does Godtake care for Sheep? That a poor lost Sheep be brought home to his
Owner? And that a poor lost Ox be brought home to his Owner? And does not God
take more care for poor lost souls?

And is it not a more acceptable work to bring home lost souls? O pity poorlost
souls, tell them of Christ, show them the way to Christ, and know that if you
shall be an instrument in the Lord's hand to bring home a lost soul to Jesus
Christ the Owner, O it will be service very acceptable to God your Father.

Thirdly, Duty 3.
If Christ has found us, then we should lose no opportunity of honoring him;
Let us know that we are the Lord's, we are not our own any longer, but engaged
to be the Lord's, sought out by Christ, and saved by Christ, and brought from a
wandering condition, and lost in a wilderness, and yet found by Christ in this
wilderness condition; O let us know that we are engaged for ever to be the
Lord's: therefore let not Christ's sheep lose any opportunity of doing service
to Christ, take heed that we do not lose any opportunity of being profitable to
Christ, bringing honor to Christ in our generation, for that is expected by
Christ the Shepherd: So Paul did engage for Onesimus in the Epistle of
Philemon; Onesimus he was a poor runaway sheep, Paul he finds Onesimus, and
he brings him home to Christ, he was instrumental in his conversion, and he
sends him to his Master, and he tells him, that now he will be profitable;
before he was unprofitable, but now he will be profitable to thee and to me,
and to Christ before unprofitable: A sheep is of no use when lost, but when its
found, then it is profitable; and so if the Lord has found our souls, O that
we might do all we can to bring honor to Christ, and lift up his name in this
our generation, for Christ has sound us for that end.

Fourthly, Duty 4.
If Christ has found us, we should be content to lose all we have for him; Let
all go for Christ, it matters not what we lose for Christ, if Christ has found
us: If God calls for our estates, let that go; if Christ has found us, we have
that which is better then a great estate: it had been more sad if God had taken
away our estates from us before he had found us, but if the Lord has found us,
though we lose the world, there is good cause we should be content; what God
calls for, let it go, we should be willing to lose our estates, our credit, our
name, for Christ has found us; if we cannot walk with Christ, and do the
service Christ calls us to, but we must lose estate, and credit, and name, why
let all go, Christ found us, and we should be willing to lose our lives for
Christ; and know, that it shall not be lost, but what a man loses for Christ,
it shall be restored him again.

And fifthly and lastly, Duty 5.
Let us take heed that we do not go out from Christ any more; O! what an
engagement lies upon us to keep close to Christ? O! What pains did Christ take
to seek us, when wandering? And what pains did Christ take to bring us home? O!
Take heed of wandering in the ways of sin, for it is a dangerous way, and
therefore take heed that we be not found wandering; let us labor to cleave to
God, and keep close to Christ; let the sheep hear the voice of Christ, and
follow him where ever he goes; keep close to Christ in every Ordinance, in
every Truth; take heed that we go not out from Christ, for that will be sadder
then all that has gone before; that lost sheep whom Christ has found, should
go into the wilderness again, dark ways again, and defile your elves again, O!
this will go to the heart of Christ; and therefore Brethren, what need have we
to watch? O! let us watch over our own hearts, if Christ has found us, and
brought us home to God, O let us watch over our hearts and ways, that we go
not out from Christ; O let us watch, and let us cry to the Lord, that he would
watch over us, that we may not go out from him: O! let us beg of him that he
would put his holy fear into our hearts, that is his promise; O beg of the Lord
that he would make good his Covenant, that we may have that holy fear in our
hearts, that may keep us for ever from wandering and going out from Christ.

Matthew. 15. 24. I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
SERMON XII.
HEre is a second Trial of this woman's Faith, as I told you when I opened the
words. Christ had tried her faith by his silence, and now by his speaking a sad
word, I am not sent but to the lost Sheep, etc. Wherein he holds forth, that
there a certain number that he is sent unto, a certain company that are given
to him to be his sheep, and that he can show mercy only to such; they only are
in his Commission, and he cannot go beyond his Commission; they whose names are
written in the book of life, their names are written in Christ's Commission; I
am not sent but to the lost sheep. Here is a great trial of this woman's faith,
and she is put upon it to make out her Election; here is a trial concerning her
Election, whether she did belong to God or no.

So then the Doctrine is this:

That the Lord is pleased sometimes to exercise his people with many
temptations about their Election. Doctrine.


That was the great trial that this woman was now put upon. In the opening of
the point it will be needful to show you,

First, That there is an Election of God.

Secondly, That this Election may be known, it may be known who are elected.

Thirdly, I shall show you that this Doctrine it self, it is full of sweetness,
and unspeakable comfort to God's people.

Fourthly, I shall show you, that God's own people may meet with many
Temptations both about the doctrine of Election, and concerning their own
election in particular.

First then, That there is an election of God, which is a glorious truth of the
Gospel, and it is needful that it should be known: Let us enquire what election
is.

It is an Act of God' s good pleasure from eternity, Election described.
whereby he made choice of certain persons, that he might make them holy and
happy through Christ Jesus unto the glory of his own grace. Take this as a
description of Election; where you have

First, The efficient cause, that is God, it is an act of God; and you have the
nature of this Act. 1. It was an act of his good pleasure. 2. It was from
eternity. 1. It was an Act of his good pleasure; there was no moving cause at
all in the creature why God did love it and choose it; no impulsive cause was
found out of God's own bowels, nothing in the creature, nothing out of himself,
it was an Act of good pleasure.

2. And this was from eternity; what ever was done in time, it was purposed
from eternity; they are chosen before the foundation of the world, blessed of
my Father before the foundation of the world; it was from eternity that God did
thus choose and set his love upon poor creatures. You see the nature of it.

Thirdly, In the description you have the Subjects of it, who they were that
God did choose from eternity: Why, they were certain persons, a certain number
of persons that God set his love upon freely; and amongst those sometimes in
Scripture, Christ is said to be the first that was chosen; he was the head of
them, he was the foundation of the building, therefore he is called chosen of
God: Disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, 1 Pet. 2. 4.
the Apostle says of Christ, he was a chosen precious foundation stone.

And as Christ was chosen to be Head, so there was a certain number that were
chosen to be his members; a certain number known unto God, that should fill up
the body of Christ; for God's Decree is not an uncertain nnumber, or
conditional proposition (as some conceive) that whosoever believes shall be
saved; some make no other decree of God but this, that whosoever believes
should be saved, but he did not purpose any particular person, but whosoever
believe shall be saved: Truly that decree is no decree, if there were no other
decree but so, that whosoever believe should be saved, and not decreed certain
persons, then it were possible that no man nor woman at all should be saved, if
God did not determine such and such persons, but only such as believe should
be saved, then I say, there is a possibility that none at all should be saved;
it is true, that is the way of the declaration of God's grace, that whosoever
believes is saved.

But fourthly, We have further to consider, what is the end of Election;
wherefore did God choose certain persons?

There is a twofold end, First, In respect of the creature. Secondly in
respect of God.

In respect of the creature; this was God's end, that such creatures should be
made holy and happy, that they should attain to eternal life, which eternal
life begins here in holiness; and that is eternal life, to know the Father and
the Son; that is the end for which God does predestinate, that they might be
holy through the sanctification of the Spirit, and that they might be blessed
and happy for ever.

But in respect of God, the great end of Election, it is the praise of his own
grace, that so they that shall be saved, they may for ever admire and advance
that rich and free grace of God toward them, that chose them so freely, when
as they were so vile; this is the end of Election.

Fifthly, We may consider the means by which God does fulfill and execute his
Decree of Election: The means of executing his Decree, it is Christ Jesus as
Mediator; he chose such and such, to bring them to such and such an end by such
means, by Christ Jesus, and by Faith in him; Christ as Mediator he is the cause
of the means of God's executing and fulfilling his Decree, though not the cause
of Election, but the cause of the means of God's executing and fulfilling his
Decree, for God would save them no other way but by Jesus Christ; in Ephesians. 1.
4. you have these all together. According as he has chosen us in him, before
the foundation of the world; that we should be holy and without blame before
him in love: Here you see it is an Act of God from eternity, before the
foundation of the world; and at v. 5. you may see it is an Act of his Free
Grace; According to the good pleasure of his Will, v. 5. He was not moved
thereunto by any thing in the creature; no, it was according to the good
pleasure of his Will: And you see also the several ends for which God has
chosen, v. 4. in respect of the creature, the end is, that we should be holy;
and at v. 5. that we should be happy, and attain the inheritance of children;
and the great end of all is in v. 6. That this may be the praise and glory of
his grace: And then there is the means by which God does execute this Decree,
v. 4. He has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world: So that you
see something of this great and wonderful mystery of Election in this place.

But there are two things further which I shall insist upon for the clearing of
the Truth to you; in the opening of which, I shall meet with those things that
are most of all objected against this Truth.

This Act of God from eternity, it was 1. Absolute. 2. Immutable and
Unchangeable.


There are these two general heads, which will clear up much of the mind and
will of God in this Truth; 1. God's Decree is absolute and free: 2. It is
unchangeable.

First, It is absolute and free, it does not depend upon any thing in the
creature; God did not choose, because he foresaw men would be such and such; he
did not choose any, because he foresaw they would believe, (as some imagine) he
did not choose any because he foresaw they would be holy; his decree, and
choice, and love, it was not grounded upon any thing in the creature, for the
Lord he has no such respect in his choice; you may see what is said of Esau
and Jacob in Romans 9. 11. The Apostle is there treating of this mystery, and he
does there, let us know, that it is free and absolute, and does not depend upon
the work or worthiness of the creature; For the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to
election might stand; not of works, but of him that calls: v. 12. It was said
unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. v. 13. As it is written, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Before they had either done good or evil,
God made choice of Jacob; God did not choose him because he foresaw he would be
better then his brother Esau; no, Esau and Jacob were all alike unto God; nay,
if there were any pre-eminence, Esau had it; he was the first born: and was not
Esau Jacobs brother? says God, yet I loved Jacob, Mal. 1. 2, 3. and I hated
Esau: I have bestowed special love upon Jacob, less upon Esau: Not that God
hates the creature without some consideration; but hating here is to show a
less love: Christ says, a man shall hate his Father and Mother for Christ's
sake; that is, love them less then Christ; and Jacob had two wives, one was
hated, the other loved; Rachel beloved, and Leah hated, that is, less loved;
and so God here, he bestows special love upon Jacob, and not upon Esau.

And it is evident from Scripture, that God could not choose for foreseen faith
and holiness; for the Scripture holds forth, that both faith and holiness they
are the fruits of Election, and therefore not the cause of Election; men
therefore believe and are made holy, because God has chosen them from
eternity, Acts 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed; see
here, faith is made the fruit of Election, and of God's love from eternity; the
words cannot be read thus, That as many as believed were ordained to eternal
life; but as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed; and so holiness
or sanctification cannot be the cause of Election, no, it is the fruit of
Election: see Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him
in love: He has chosen us, that we should be holy, not chosen us because we
were holy, but that we might be holy; holiness then proceeds from God's special
love.

And I shall make it further evident to you from some Arguments from Scripture,
Arguments proving Election to be an act of Gods good pleasure:
that it is not possible God's choice should be grounded upon any thing in the
creature, but merely an Act of his own good pleasure; for

First of all, that which makes the Will of God to depend upon the creature,
that cannot be a true doctrine: but now if God does choose upon foreseen faith
and works, because he foresaw the creature to be such, then the Will of God
does depend upon the creature, which destroys the divine nature of God, and
the freedom of God's Will; it is not possible that God's Will should be
determined but by its self; now if God chose upon foreseen faith, and works,
then God's Will is determined by some thing in the creature.

Secondly, It does derogate much from the freeness of God's grace, as also from
the greatness of the mystery, and of the wonder of the Gospel: I say, If God
did choose men because he foresaw that they would be holy, it derogates much
from the freeness of his grace: If it be of works, then it is not of grace; If
God's choice were grounded upon such a foresight of faith and holiness, then it
is not an election of grace.

And it derogates much from the great mystery of the Gospel; God will save
creatures in a wonderful mysterious way, in such a mysterious way as men and
Angels shall stand and wonder at to eternity; now if God did choose upon such a
foresight, or for faith, or for holiness in the creature, why there is no such
great mystery or wonder; but for God to choose freely, when there was nothing
to draw him to such an act, yet then to choose such poor creatures to
everlasting salvation, O! this is the wonder of the Gospel.

Yea thirdly, God's choice cannot be upon any foresight of faith or works, for
the Scripture holds forth that God's choice is before our choice; he chose us
first, and he loved us first; see what Christ says John 15. 16. You have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you that you should go and bring
forth fruit. You have not chosen me, that is, you have not chosen me first; and
so in 1 John 4. 19. We love him, because he first loved us: Now if God did
choose upon any foresight of faith or works, then God did not love us first; for
if God did consider men as believers when he chose them, why then if the soul
believed before God chose, it chose God first, which is contrary to the
Scripture.

Fourthly, The Scripture holds forth that there is some that are Christ's
sheep, that are known to the Lord, though not known to themselves; and
therefore it is God's free love to them to make them sheep; but when they
believe they shall know that they are sheep; but they are sheep before they
believe, but when they believe, they shall be known to be sheep, John 10. 16.
And other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and
they shall hear my voice, and there shall be one fold, and one Shepherd. My
Fathers love has made them sheep; and because they are sheep, they shall hear
my voice, and shall believe in me.

Fifthly, there is one argument more to confirm the truth; If so be that God did
choose upon foreseen faith or works, or because he saw that there was an ability
in the creature to perform or not; I say, if Gods decree were a conditional
decree, then God saw that the creature were able or not able to perform the
condition; If the creature were not able to believe, or to be holy, then it
were a vain Decree; but if God saw that the creature were able to perform the
condition, this ability to believe, and to be holy, it must be either from the
creature, or from God; if it were from the creature, then it destroys the
Doctrine of Grace, and brings in the Doctrine of Works, and that sets up the
Idol of Free Will, which the Scripture beats down, and it lays the stress of
the creatures salvation and happiness upon it self; If God did choose because he
foresaw that the creature would be such, and had a power in it self to believe,
and to obey, this lays the stress of the creatures salvation upon it self.

But if it be said, That God did intend to give the condition, the creature is
not able to believe of it self, and be holy of it self; ah, but God did
determine and decree to make such and such believe, and to be holy, and so he
chose them upon that.

Now to that I say, this comes to nothing, to say God did decree to make such
and such believers, and to make them holy, and upon that foreseeing they would
be such, chose them to life and salvation: Why this is as much as to say,

God did first of all choose them, and then he gave them faith and holiness that
he might choose them; for what is God's Decreeing to give faith and holiness,
but his choosing and setting apart the creature for his self? for that is a part
of the end for which God chose, that it might be holy as well as happy: and
besides, I showed you before, that faith is made to come after election,
therefore cannot go before election.

But it may be objected against this, Does not David say in Psalm. 4. 3. But
know that the Lord has set apart him that is godly for himself? and may we not
object from thence against the absoluteness of God's Decree?

Answer, Some indeed urge from hence, that God considered men as godly when he
set them apart; but there is no such thing in the words; for the Psalmist does
not speak of Gods choosing, but he speaks of the manifestation of God's decree
and purpose to save; now it is manifested by holiness whom God has chosen, and
it comes to be known to others; God does not choose them because they are holy,
but such as are holy, they are evidenced to be such as God has chosen; and
therefore he speaks to others in v. 2. O ye sons of men! How long will ye
turn my glory into shame? How long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing?
and then it follows v. 3. But know that the Lord has set apart him that is
godly for himself: Though a godly man be in affliction, and you may think that
God does not love him, because he is afflicted; but know, that if he be godly,
though in affliction, God has set him apart for himself; so that this place
does not speak of God's decree, but of the manifestation of God's decree.

Another objection is raised out of Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has chosen us
in him. In him,

Some argue from hence, That we are chosen in Christ, and there is no man in
Christ but a believer; no man is in Christ but he that has faith; and
therefore God chooses no man till he be a believer, for we are chosen in him.

To this I answer, first of all in him; it may be understood, he has chosen us
together with him, as head and members are chosen together; as foundation and
other stones may be chosen together; when a man is to build a house, he may at
once choose the foundation stones, and also diverse other stones that he lays
upon the building; he does not lay stones upon the foundation, and then make
choice of them; no, that they are laid upon the foundation, does argue he has
made choice of them.

Secondly, In him, that is, Jesus Christ is the way and means of executing his
Fathers Decree: Jesus Christ he is the way by which God does execute his
purpose and his decree of bringing such and such souls unto blessedness; God
the Father will bring them by Christ, he will bring them this way to life and
salvation, and no other way but by Christ Jesus; he is the cause of the
execution of God's Decree, but not the cause why God will choose such and such;
for Christ says himself, that there is a love that the Father himself has
toward his people; the Father himself loves his people from everlasting, he
loves them the better for Christ's Intercession, but (says Christ) the Father
himself loves you: so that there was love in the heart of the Father to his
people from eternity. And that first love of God it is held forth as the cause
of giving Christ; Christ was not the cause of that first love, but God loved
from eternity, and therefore he gave Christ; God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son; and love gave that Son Jesus Christ to be the
Savior.

Thirdly, I answer, we are said to be chosen in him, not as being believers,
not that God did consider men as believing in Christ actually, but they may
after a sort be said to be in Christ, even from eternity, not actually, but
virtually. Some do explain it thus, as the corn that is sown, and begins to
bud, why as soon as it begins to bud, there is the blade, and the ear, and the
corn virtually, but not actually; and so we were in him from eternity
virtually, as chosen together with him, and given unto him; but not actually in
Jesus Christ, till such time as men do believe in Jesus Christ.

There is a third Objection, which I shall but touch.

But you will say, Why, then God makes choice of sinners, and how can that be?
If God did not choose men upon foreseen faith and holiness, and not consider
them in Christ, then he considered them as sinners; but now how can God choose
men as sinners? When the Scripture says, He is a God of purer eyes then to
behold the least iniquity: If a man be not in Christ, he is a sinner; and can
God love a vile creature from eternity?

I answer, There is a love of good will, and a love of delight; there was a
love of good will that God had to his people from everlasting, yea, although
that God saw they were in themselves vile, sinful creatures; but God does not
love them with the love of delight, till they are washed and cleansed in the
blood of Christ.

But you will say, Quest.
It is not possible that God should do so: A good man he may not take a vile
person to be his bosom friend or companion, and he may not take one that is
wicked, into the relation of a wife or husband; and how shall God do it, who is
a God of purer eyes?

I answer, Answ.
Though we may not make such a choice, God may make such a choice; why? Because
God is able to make them gracious and holy: If we were able to make them holy,
then we might choose the worst in the world: But now there is power in God to do
it; if he choose the unrighteous, he can make them righteous; and if he choose
unbelievers, he can give them faith; and if he choose unholy ones, he can make
them holy: Nay, he chooses for that very end, that he might make them holy and
blameless. So that you have seen that God's Decree it is absolute, that it is
not grounded upon any consideration or worth in the creature, but absolute, in
respect of the means.

And secondly, As it is free and absolute, so it is unchangeable; God cannot,
he will not cast off any that he has chosen; no, see what the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless the foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal,
the Lord knows them that are his. This Decree of God is unchangeable; for it
is as a sure foundation: The foundation is the beginning of the building, and
so this Decree, it is the beginning of all that good, and those spiritual
blessings that God does bestow upon his children; and the foundation is sure
and unmovable, if it be laid by a skilful and powerful hand; foundations are
laid sure: why, this foundation is laid by God's own hand, it is laid by his
wise and mighty hand, and who shall remove the foundation that God has laid?
All the men and Angels in the world cannot overturn the purpose and decree of
God for the saving of one poor soul; all the devils in hell cannot overturn
this foundation; and there is nothing in the creature can hinder it, no
sinfulness, no unworthiness, before conversion, and after conversion, for it is
sure.

And it must needs be sure, because God in his Essence is unchangeable, and
therefore his purpose unchangeable; for the Will of God is God himself, and
therefore the purpose of God can be no more unchangeable then God himself, So
that you see there is an Election, and this Election is of grace: That Is the
first particular.

The second particular, which I shall but touch, is, That this Election may be
known by the sons of men, though it be transacted in heaven; though their names
be written in heaven, yet it is possible for men to know this secret of God's
Decree; this great mystery it is possible that it may be known to others, and
it is possible that it may be known to our selves.

Our Election may be known to others, see Phil. 4. 3. Our Election known to
others.
And I entreat thee also, true yoke fellow, help those women which labored
with me in the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers,
whose names are in the Book of Life: The Apostle here speaking of such and such
persons, he concludes, that their names are in the book of life, and in 1 Thessalonians. 1. 3, 4. Remembering without ceasing your work of faith, and labor of
love, and patience, of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God, and
our Father; Knowing, brethren beloved, your Election of God.

But you will say, How can this be known?

Why, it may be known by the fruits of Election; when the Gospel comes with
power, when the Gospel does overpower the heart, when men and women are
overcome to believe in the name of Christ, when they make a resignation of
themselves to Christ, and when the Image of Christ is stamped upon them, and
they in some measure made conformable to Christ, who is the head of the Church;
then others may conclude in the judgment of charity, such and such are elected
of God: so far as we may know the truth of others faith, so far we may in the
judgment of charity know the election of others. Our Election may be known to
our selves.


But secondly, This may not only be known to others, but to a man's own self;
that he is chosen of God before the foundation of the world; for we are put
upon it to make it sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure; strive to put it out of doubt, be not content to be
at uncertainties in this business; it may not only be known, but make it sure:
he does not exhort them to make it sure in its self, by doing this or that, for
it is sure in it self; but make it sure as to your selves, wait upon the Lord
that your hearts may be confirmed in it, that you are called and elected of
God; for it is possible for a man to know that he is elected.

Yea, Christ puts his Disciples upon it, to rejoice in the consideration of
this, that they were elected, Luke 10. 20. But rather rejoice, because your
names are written in heaven. Rejoice in this, that God has chosen you, and
loved you, that he has loved you with an everlasting love, and that he has
given you to his Son, and will bring you to life and happiness, to the praise
of his grace; in this rejoice.

And therefore it is that the Spirit of the Lord is given out to believers,
that they might know their election; it is one end of Christ's sending the
Comforter, the Spirit of the Lord, who searches the deep things of God, and so
reveals them unto believers; Now this is among the deep things of God, God's
eternal love, this is one of the depths that made the Apostle cry out when he
considered God's way from eternity to poor creatures, The Spirit searches the
deep things of God, and reveals them to his people; the Spirit of the Lord
stood by when he did write the names of his children in the book of life, the
Son was present, and the Spirit was present even from eternity before the world
was made, when God writ the names of his people in the book of life; and
therefore the Spirit it is one of God's Witnesses, and is given to testify
this to his people, he is sent by Christ to testify what he saw from eternity,
that the names of such and such were written in the book of life; God has
given us of his Spirit, that we might know the things that are given us freely
of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. Now this is one of the things that are freely given us of
God, this absolute choice, this love of God that was from everlasting; if ever
any thing were free, this is free; now the Spirit of the Lord is sent to cause
us to know the things that are freely given us of God; Now when the Spirit of
the Lord does make known to a soul that it is elected, sometimes it makes use of
the testimony of the blood of Christ, and of the testimony of Water; and
sometimes he declares this to the soul by his own immediate witness; the Spirit
of the Lord does sometimes make it known mediately, and sometimes immediately:
Mediately, There are three that bear record in earth, the Spirit, the Water,
and the blood, and these three agree in one, 1 John 5. 8. Now the Spirit that
^^^keth the blood of Christ, an^ sprinkles it up^ the soul, and causes faith
to be wrought in the soul, to lay hold upon the blood of Christ; and then there
is the witness of the Blood. And so all the Spirit of the Lord does change the
heart, and renew the heart; there is the witness of the Water; now when the
Spirit of the Lord does shine upon these, the soul can through these draw
comfortable conclusions concerning its own election.

And sometimes there is a more immediate witness; The Spirit it self bearing
witness that we are the children of God, Romans 8. 16. Add his own. Testimony,
beside all others, that a soul is loved of God; so that you see the second
general head, which is this, that this great mystery of election may be known,
it may be known unto others, and to our selves.

And therefore, O that we might wait upon God for the discovery of it! Men are
found negligent in this great business, because they think it is too high for
them; who can ascend into heaven? say they, they think it is presumption for
them to ascend into heaven; and who can know (say they) that they are loved
from everlasting? But O! know souls, that there is an absolute Election of
grace, and this Election may be known; it may be known to others, and it may be
known to our selves; O therefore that we might give the Lord no rest, and our
souls no rest, till this great mystery be made out to us; though it be a
secret, a wonderful secret, Yet there is a God in heaven that reveals
secrets, says Daniel to King Nebu^^^dnezzar, Dan. 2. 28. Thongh it was a
secret, (...) past my reach (says he) yet there is a God in ^aeven that
reveals secrets; and so I say, though (...) be a secret, yet there is a God
in heaven that ^ealeth secrets; and therefore wait upon the ^rd, that we may
know that we are elected.

Matthew. 15. 24. I am not sent, but unto the lost she of the house of Israel.
SERMON XIII.
BUt to come to the third part of (...) Doctrine, which is this,

That the Doctrine of Election is a comfortable Doctrine. Third part of the
Doctrine.


It holds forth solid ground of comfort, and gre^ refreshment to the people of
God: Although ^^ny spurn at it, and carnal reason ready to rise (...) against
it, yet it is a doctrine of sweet and sol^ comfort to God's people. How the
Doctrine of Election is a comforting Doctrine.
And I shall show yo^ how it is such a comfortable doctrine.

First, This is a ground of comfort to poor soul^ that God's love does not
depend upon any thing (...) the creature; a ground of unspeakable comfort that
God he fetches all his arguments of lov^ out of his own bowels, not from any
desert in the creature; Alas, if God's love had gone by desert in us, there had
been but little hope; And I do not know what solid ground of comfort they can
lay, that contend so for a conditional Decree, grounded upon the creatures
acting; for if the Lord had not loved and chosen till he had seen some
worthiness in the creature, till he had seen some better improvement in us then
in others, if the Lord had suspended to love and to choose till then, O! what
little hope might any creature have had, that know the contrary workings of his
own heart? What little hope of being saved? But now, when all is of Free grace,
and the Lord overlooks all unworthiness, and chooses freely, and loves freely;
O this is a ground of hope and great consolation.

Secondly, Second ground of comfort.
There is another ground of comfort and refreshment from this Doctrine; It does
assure us that the Lord is very ready to be entreated, that the Lord is not
hardly brought off to show mercy to poor sinners, that there is not an
unwillingness in God to this work; as unbelief, and the Tempter would suggest;
why? It was that which was the purpose of God from everlasting, I say, God from
all eternity has purposed it: It was the counsel of God, the great work of
God, that which God spent his thoughts upon from all eternity; they were (as I
may say) the first thoughts of the heart of God, to love, and pity, and to
save, and to bring about that great work of saving sinners by the blood of
Christ; this was the great contrivance of God; and it is a great ground of
comfort and refreshment: A poor soul may doubt whether God be willing to save,
and willing to be reconciled to him that has sinned so and so: O! This
Doctrine does comfort exceedingly; for certainly, if it were the great work of
God from eternity, the Lord is not unwilling now to do it. Christ tells his
Disciples, That the Father himself loves you: That is a ground of comfort;
there was a love in the Father toward you, before I made a request for you;
though the Father now love you more, and better, yet the Father himself loved
you, before I made any request for you.

Thirdly, Third ground of comfort.
This is another ground of great refreshment from this Doctrine, That the love
of God toward his people, it is an ancient Love, a love that did not begin
yesterday, a love that is not of a few years standing, but an ancient love, it
is as ancient as eternity; it is as ancient as the Ancient of days; as ancient
as God himself; no beginning but from eternity: O! That commends love
exceedingly, when as love is an ancient love, when as one has born love to
such a Family through many generations, and has provided love for such a
family for many generations to come; that exceedingly commends the love of a
friend, when a friend shall take care that there shall be an Estate entailed to
such a family for many generations to come, that he should provide a portion
for them before they had a being, O! that is ancient love, and that does
commend the love of a friend; and truly it commends the love of the Creator,
and it is full of sweetness and Refreshment that God has loved his people from
eternity; love has run down that long Tract of eternity, and he has provided
a portion from eternity, an inheritance from eternity; oh! that the Lord should
make such provision for poor creatures, before they had any being, not only
thousands of years but even from eternity before they had any being, when there
was no world, no creature, no being, but only in the mind of God; that God then
should choose them, and provide an inheritance for them; truly this commends the
love of God, and makes it very sweet.

Fourthly, The fourth ground of comfort.
There is this ground of refreshment that the Doctrine holds forth; that this
love of God to his people it is a distinguishing love; oh! that commends love
exceedingly, when it is distinguishing, when it puts a difference where there
was no difference; that love that makes a difference and so vast a difference
when no difference, that love is very precious. See what is said in Hos. 1. 6,
7. For I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; but I will utterly
take them away. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save
them by the Lord their God, etc. See here at the very time that God said he
would not have mercy upon Israel, he would have mercy upon Judah, and would
save them; oh, how sweet was the discovery of that love? And truly, this is the
love of God that this Doctrine holds forth, a distinguishing love, that when
there was no difference in the creature, and one not better then another, and
yet that God should take those, and choose those, that were as bad as those that
were left; oh! this distinguishing love, it is very sweet and has a great
deal of refreshment.

Fifthly, The fifth ground of comfort.
This Doctrine holds forth a ground of joy, there is a great deal of true
grounded joy, lasting joy, that may arise and does arise unto the people of
God, from the knowledge of this, that God has chosen them and loved them from
eternity with an everlasting love, it does administer the best ground of
comfort that can be found in all the World. See that place Luke 10. 20. But
rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven. The knowledge of this
special love, that God has written the names of poor creatures in Heaven, it
is a ground of unspeakable joy; rejoice not that the unclean spirits are
subject to you, why? they might rejoice more in that then in any outward mercy
whatsoever, that the unclean spirits were subject to them, for it is more then
if all the men of the world were subject to them: ah, but yet, in this rejoice
not, rejoice not so much in this, for here is a more lasting ground for your
joy, that your names are written in Heaven; it will afford such joy, and will
kindle such a flame of joy, as all the waters of affliction cannot quench. When
a soul comes to know this, and can make out this, that his name is written in
heaven, a soul may then rejoice in every condition, rejoice in Tribulation,
rejoice in Persecution, rejoice in Poverty and distress, yea, though they may
loose all the comforts of life, yet when God reveals to them, that their names
are written in Heaven, they may rejoice, for they have a portion that can never
be lost, an inheritance that can never be taken away from them, though they
meet with never so much scorn and reproach from the World, though men should
cast out their names as vile, yet if their names are written in Heaven they may
rejoice, for their names are precious before God when vise before men, and it
is written there where it can never be blotted out; so that it does administer
matter of sound and sollid joy, such joy as will hold out and cannot be quenched
with many waters.

Sixthly, The sixth ground of comfort.
Another ground of comfort that does arise from the knowledge of our election
is this, that we have and shall enjoy that great privilege and benefit of the
ministry and service of the holy Angels. When God comes to make out his love to
the soul, why, it may conclude that the Lord has given his Angels charge over
them, that the Angels shall defend, and the Angels shall protect, and the
Angels shall deliver from many dangers. See what the Apostle says in Heb. 1.
14. speaking of the Angels: Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation. They that are chosen by God
to an inheritance reserved in Heaven, they have the ministry of all the holy
Angels while on earth; though we see it not with this bodily eye, though we see
not the Angels how they ascend and descend, how they go to Heaven and come
from Heaven, yet it is matter of faith, the word of the Lord has said they are
all ministering spirits, for the good of the Saints; many a kindness the Angels
does us, and we are kept from many a danger by the Angels; He shall give his
Angels charge, and they shall bear thee up that thou dash not thy foot against
a stone: That is another ground of sweet comfort.

Seventhly, The seventh ground of comfort.
It does administer this ground of comfort, that all that Gods people do meet
withal ^here in the world shall work for their good. God will make an
advantage of whatsoever his people does meet withal. See what the Apostle
says in Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good, to
them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose. All
things shall work together for good to those who are called according to his
purpose; according to that ancient love in the bosom of God; all afflictions,
all crosses, all opposition, all persecution, the worst that Gods people can
meet withal in the world, nay their very sins and failings and infirmities
shall work together for good; the infinite wise God will make advantage of all,
that all that they meet withal shall tend to the furtherance of his work, to
the bringing about his purpose. All shall work together for good, yea for the
best good, though they see it not for the present, but wait to the end, and by
that time God has done with his people, put all together and you shall see
that all things shall work together for good; nay, we know it by experience, we
have found that God has brought good out of the greatest evil, and out of the
greatest affliction. And this is to those who are called according to his
purpose.

Eighthly, Eigth ground of comfort.
There is another ground of comfort which arises from the Doctrine of
election, which is this, that The Lord will shorten all the days of
tribulation which they meet withal here in the world; the days of affliction,
and days of tribulation shall be shortened for the Elects sake * and it is a
great refreshment and comfort, that God will shorten all the days of darkness,
days of tribulation, they shall be shortened for the Elects sake; all their
winter days shall be shor days, dark days short days, there is an eternity
of light a coming, a day that shall have no end, the Sun shall never set; but
as for the days of darkness, of sorrow, affliction and tribulation, the Lord
in mercy will shorten them: See what is said Matthew. 24. 21, 22. For then shall
be great Tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this
time, no, nor ever shall be: and except those days should be shortened, there
should no flesh be saved; but for the Elects sake those days shall be
shortened. But for the Elects sake all the days of public calamity shall be
shortened, dark days, sad days, such a sad day as the Jews saw when Jerusalem
was taken by Titus; it is spoken first of that dark and sad day to the Jews,
when so many millions of them perished, such tribulation as never was, and if
the Lord should not shorten those days, no flesh should be saved, that is, not
one of them would have been left alive upon the earth, those days were so dark
and so sore, but for the Elects sake those days of tribulation were shortened.
And so all the days of calamity that Gods people meet withal, those days of
distress, yea days of public calamity, and the days of their particular
afflictions, yea every dark day the Lord will shorten; the Lord in mercy will
shorten the days of their affliction; and that is a great comfort to them,
that though their days of affliction be very grievous, the Lord in mercy will
make their affliction days to be but short.

In the ninth place, Ninth ground of comfort.
there is this comfort that does flow from the knowledge of our election, that
the Lord will certainly avenge the cause of his people. The Lord does take
notice, and he will avenge all the wrongs that any of his elect people does
meet withal in the World. See Luke 18. 6, 7. And the Lord said, hear what the
unjust Judge says, and shall not God avenge his own elect which cry day and
night unto him, though he bear long with them, I tell you that he will avenge
them speedily. I tell you, says Christ, that he will avenge their cause and
all their wrongs and injuries that they meet withal in the World.

In the tenth and last place, Tenth ground of comfort.
there is this ground of comfort, that the Lords people, those whom he loves
from eternity, they shall never fall away from him, never be plucked out of his
hand, it is an impossible thing that they should perish. This is a mighty
ground of strong consolation which they rob poor souls of that do plead for
conditional election; the condition to be performed by the creature, it is
always at uncertainties to the end of a man's life, whether he shall continue
and persevere or no. But now the Doctrine of free and absolute and immutable
election does afford this ground of comfort, and the knowledge of our being in
Gods election does assure us of this, that not any of Christ's Sheep shall
perish, they shall never be drawn off from Christ, never be drawn off from
following Christ their Shepherd, from laying him as the foundation of their
life and happiness. Oh! what need have we to get such a ground of comfort in
these backsliding times? when so many that make a profession do swerve from
their profession, and make shipwreck of their profession of faith; But
notwithstanding (says the Apostle) the foundation of God stands sure, having
this seal the Lord knows those that are his. Though never so many that make a
profession fall away, yet the foundation of the Lord stand sure; and therefore
in Math. 24. 24. See what Christ says, for there shall arise false Christ's,
and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if
it were possible) they shall deceive the very elect. Christ speaks of the
latter days, a prophecy of our times, that there should arise some that
should do great wonders, and be false Christ's, that shall endeavor to take
men off from looking to the true Christ that was crucified at Jerusalem, and is
risen again, false Christ's that shall put you upon it to look to a Christ
within you, and they shall come in such a way, if it were possible that they
should deceive the very Elect, but is it not possible that the people of the
Lords Election should fall finally; they may fall for a time, we know not what
sinful practices Gods people may fall into if the Lord leaves them, and what
error in judgment if the Lord leaves them; but it is not possible that they
should be drawn away for ever; for the Lord will bring them back again to the
right Christ, it is not possible that they should fall away totally and
finally, for the mighty power of God is engaged for their security, You are
kept by the mighty power of God through faith unto salvation. If it were in our
own hand it were not possible that we should be kept, we meet with so much from
within, from an unbeleeving heart, and so much from without, but you are kept
by the mighty power of God through faith to salvation. My Father holds you,
says Christ, and I hold you, and no man can pluck them out of my Fathers hand.
And so you see the third particular that this doctrine of election does
administer many grounds of strong consolation, and great refreshment to the
people of God.

I come now to the fourth particular propounded, and that is this.

That notwithstanding this Doctrine does administer so much ground of comfort,
yet, The Lords people may meet with many temptations about the Doctrine of
Election. Fourth part of the Doctrine.


They may meet with many temptations, both about the election of others, and
their own election.

First, Gods people may meet with many temptations concerning others election.
They may meet with many temptations about the election of others.

And first of all, this may be a temptation, a soul may be prying by the eye of
carnal reason into this great Mystery of Gods eternal purpose and counsel, it
is possible that the people of God may suffer much this way, and by this may be
brought into great temptations and snares, by giving way to carnal reason and
setting carnal reason on work to look into this great mystery, and to desire
and covet that their reason may be satisfied; this proves a great snare and a
great temptation to men when they shall go about to satisfy their carnal
reason, and shall be unsatisfied in that they cannot apprehend to be according
to reason; if their reason be not satisfied they cannot rest in the purpose and
decree of God; oh! this leads many a poor soul into great snares and great
temptations.

And as a remedy against this temptation know this, 1. Remedy.
let us know, that God is no bound to give an account to our reason, of any of
his actings. He gives no account of his matters, says Job. God is not bound
to give an account to the creature, he is absolute and free, and is not bound
to give an account to our carnal reason.

Besides, Let us know this, that our reason is a corrupted and a crooked rule;
2 Remedy.
and shall we go about to measure the counsel of Gods purpose and his acting
from eternity by our crooked rule, and not subscribe to them unless we make
them out by our crooked rule? Oh! let us know, that when this temptation
presents it self, our reason is a crooked rule, and Gods rule strait; and our
rule being crooked we must not go about to measure Gods actings and purpose by
our reason.

Thirdly, As a Remedy against this, know that though our reason were never so
strait, 3 Remedy.
yet there are many things in God that are too deep for us to find out. Though
our reason be not crooked, though it be spirituallized, there are many of the
wonderful mysteries of God that we cannot comprehend; though they are not
against spiritual reason, yet they are above our reason, that it is not
possible, and so long as in this state we cannot comprehend them; it cannot be
made out to our reason those wonderful mysteries of God; therefore we must not
go about to search them out by our reason, and be disconted because our reason
is not satisfied; but we must rest satisfied in the will of God, and admire
that which we cannot comprehend; know that God is not unrighteous, if he choose
one and leave another, he is not unrighteous though we cannot make it out to
our carnal reason; but oh let us stand and wonder and admire as the Apostle
did, he could not satisfy his reason, but he stands and admires and cries out,
oh the depth of the wisdom and counsel of God! how are his ways past finding
out? Romans 11. 33.


Secondly, 2. Temptation.
carnal reason may put us upon some other temptations; a soul may be tempted
exceedingly about that way of God, his choosing some and not taking all; a
gracious heart may meet with this temptation, and be much disquieted with this;
oh! why will not God save all the World? he saves some men, but oh! why will
not God save all? we think it had been better if God had saved all, there is
mercy enough in God to save all, and there is enough in the death of Christ to
save all, his blood has price enough and virtue enough to satisfy for a
thousand worlds; why then would not God save all?

To silence this temptation, 1. Remedy.
that it is infinite grace that God saves any; when we consider what the lost
condition was that man brought himself into, what strangers and enemies how
desperately bent and set against God: Oh! the indignity that has been done to
God by the sons of men! oh! what free grace is it that God will save any? we
should rather stand and wonder that God will save so many thousands yea
millions, when as he might have left all in condemnation. Oh! let us not wonder
that God has not saved all, but wonder that God has saved so many; and that
any of us are in the number of those that are saved.

And further, 2. Remedy.
to silence this temptation; why? say that the fault is not in God, the fault
is in the creature; thy destruction is of thy self; Gods purpose is not the
cause of any man's destruction; no, man brought destruction upon himself, and
man bringing destruction upon himself, God may choose whether he will save him
or no.

And we may say further for the clearing of God, 3. Remedy.
that God does lay blocks in men's way to keep them from running to hell; he
lays many commandments and many promises to keep men from sinning; God put
many moral bars in men's way, though the Lord is not pleased to work
powerfully and overcomingly, yet there are many bars that God does lay in men's
way to keep them from sinning, so that men's own consciences shall witness that
their destruction is of themselves.

Yea I may say further for the clearing of God; 4. Remedy.
that God does afford means of life, and means of salvation; there is
sufficient means afforded to a great part of the World, if not to all; I say
there is sufficient means afforded for bringing men to life and salvation, to
those that sit under the Gospel. Though it is true, the Lord does not always
nor to all men make them effectual infallibly, yet I say there is a
sufficiency in the means, if there were no let in the creature, but that the
Lord does not make those means afforded to us effectual, infallibly to bring
men to life and salvation; therein we must rest in the good pleasure of the
Lord.

Again, 3. Temptation.
this is another temptation; why does God choose this man and not that man? why
Peter and not Judas? Judas sin it was no greater then Peter's sin. Judas
betrayed Christ, Peter denied Christ and is forsworn; now that God should
choose one man and not another; why this man and not that man?

To silence this temptation, we must know that the Lord is free, and mercy it
belongs to him, and he may show it where he pleases. As for this God will give
no account to the creature, why one man and not another, why the Lord will show
mercy to one man not to another. Luke 17. 34, 35, 36.
You know what Christ says, There shall be two men in one bed, the one shall
be taken and the other left; two women shall be grinding together, the one
shall be taken and the other left; two men shall be in the field, the one shall
be taken and the other left. Two in the same condition, the one taken and the
other left. And for this we must rest in the good pleasure of God, and nothing
else will quiet our spirits, if we do not rest in the good pleasure of God,
for God does no wrong to the creature, if he does love one and not another.

And it is a strange thing, that we in our carnal reason will abridge God of
that, which we will take to our selves, and that is to love where he please; if
you love one more then another, you are not bound to give any account of it;
and men take a liberty to bestow gifts upon one and not upon another. And let
not us bind the Lord from that which we will take to our selves, to love one
and not another. And truly if we do not rest in the good pleasure of God in
this, we shall but disquiet our spirits, and meet with no satisfaction.

Again, Gods people may be tempted concerning their Relations, 4 Temptation.
their children. Oh many Parents have many thoughts, whether God loves their
children or no, and whether their children be chosen of God from eternity; and
especially at some times. As when God comes to take away children by death,
then the temptation sets upon but especially when children go on in the ways
of sin, Parents they pray and wait, and they see no fruit, but still they go
on in the ways of sin. It may be the Parents dye and leave their children
going on in sin, and see not the fruit of Gods electing love, nor the fruit of
Covenant mercy, then this proves a sore temptation to them.

Now to silence this temptation, How to silence the fourth temptation.
know that there is no believing Parent, but he may have hope of his children,
even of all his children while they are young, before grown up to renounce the
Covenant: If God take away any of your children young, no Parent but may have
hope concerning his children in the Covenant made to believing Parents, I say
they may have hope, the Covenant of God will relieve in such a case.

Ah, but when children do grow up, and Parents see that they walk in ways
that are evil, and are contrary to God, and are far from God, yet believing
parents may believe that notwithstanding that, they may belong to God; I say
notwithstanding for the present they are far from God, and walk contrary to
the Lord, yet they may be known to the Lord, and in his due time he may bring
them in. And Parents should not give over the use of the means, and though
Parents should wait all their days, and pray and plead the Covenant, and
desire to see the fruit of Gods Covenant, and should not see it, believers they
may dye in hope, the Lord he may bring in Prodigal children; the Lord he may
do them good afterward, when you are dead and gone, he may bring some of your
good counsels and exhortations to their remembrance; he may afterward when you
lie in the dust, bring to remembrance some of your words, and may make them
work powerfully upon their hearts. Believing Parents may still dye in hope,
though they see not the fruit of the Covenant, though their children may be at
a great distance from God, the Lord may bring them in, and you meet with them
with comfort at the last day.

There is one Temptation more concerning others which I shall but touch, and
that is this: Is not the Gospel Preached to all? and are not all commanded to
believe? and is it not declared that whosoever does believe shall be saved?
whatsoever man or woman in the World does believe shall be saved; yea, does not
the Scripture say, that God would have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth? -- The soul may thus reason with it self, how can this
stand with Gods purpose and decree and election? If there be an absolute
immutable unchangeable election, how can it be declared that whosoever believe
in Christ shall be saved; whereas if men be not elected, they cannot be saved,
and if elected, they shall be saved, though they do not believe. Thus the
temptation may work.

I Answer, notwithstanding Gods secret purpose, the Gospel may and must so be
preached; and yet there is no deceivablenesse in God, nothing but truth and
sincerity in God: for you must know that we are to walk by the revealed Will
of God. And all men shall be judged by the revealed Will of God. Now what is
the revealed Will of God, why, that we believe in the name of his Son Jesus
Christ, declaring that whosoever believes shall be saved. And God will
certainly make good that word; whosoever does believe shall be saved. Never any
in the World that came into Christ and believed on his name, but was saved.
Notwithstanding the secret decree and purpose of God, and there is no man but
may claim life and salvation, upon those terms on which the Scripture does
hold forth life and salvation, and that is believing in Jesus Christ.

Objection. But, God would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth; why then sure there is no election.

I Answer, That Scripture does but hold forth, what the thing is which is well
pleasing to God, that men return to the Lord, and that they believe in the name
of Christ, which is the way to salvation, this is a thing that is pleasing to
the Lord; not that God wills it with an effectual operative will, for then it
must needs be: But it only holds forth what is pleasing to God, not that God
will bring all men to repentance, not that God will work faith in all men,
therein God will be left free to his good pleasure; he wills it not with an
absolute will, for then it must needs be.

Question. But you will say, what are the Wills of God contrary one to another?
has God a will and a will? has God a revealed will, that he will have all men
to be saved, and is his secret will contrary to his revealed will?

I Answer, no, Gods wills are not contrary to one another. To say God does
delight, and it is a thing pleasing to him, that men do believe and return to
the Lord, and take hold of Christ; and to say that God is not pleased to work
this in the heart, is no contradiction.

The Gospel declares that this is well pleasing to God, that men do return to
him, and believe in Christ; and the Gospel does declare, that whosoever does
believe shall be saved. Now if God should condemn any man that does believe in
Christ, then God should walk contrary to his will.

But to say, God does approve of these things, they are excellent, and so he
wills them, that is he delights in them; and yet to say, God is not pleased to
work this in every man's heart, there is no contradiction. And thus we should
labor to silence those temptations which our carnal reason may make
concerning this great mystery of Gods election; you see what temptations Gods
people may meet withal concerning the election of others.

Matthew. 15. 24. I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
SERMON XIIII.
THere are more sore temptations that Gods people may meet withal concerning
their own Election.

First, Gods people meet with many Temptations concerning their own election.
A poor soul may be thus tempted, that it is an impossible thing for it to
attain to the knowledge of Gods love; this is a secret, this is that which was
transacted in Heaven, and therefore sure it is not possible for me to attain to
the knowledge of this, that the Lord has loved me, and has written my name in
the book of life. Men may have some good hopes of it, but surely, says the
temptation, it is presumption for any man to think or say, he may come to
assurance, that the Lord has written his name in the Book of life; for there
are these two things against it.

First, Secret things belongs to God.

Secondly, No eye has seen what is done in Heaven, and if eye has not seen
it, how shall I attain to the knowledge of it?

In Answer to this temptation, know and consider that many of the Saints of God
has attained to the knowledge of Gods eternal love, and has risen to this
assurance, that the Lord has loved and will love with an everlasting love. The
Apostle Paul did attain to it, and he gloryes in it; yea then, when he
speaks in the person of all the Elect of God. Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect; it is God that justifies: Verse. 34. Who is
he that condemns; it is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who
is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Verse.
35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? He stands up to challenge
all the world, and the powers of darkness, who dare lay any thing to the
charge of Gods Elect? And in the 38. verse see what he further says, For I am
persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principallities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come: Verse. 39. Nor height, nor
depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the Love of
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. So then you see, it is a thing not
impossible to attain to the knowledge of Gods eternal electing love.

Nay, it is laid upon all the Saints as a duty to seek after the knowledge of
it, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren, give diligence to make your
calling and election sure, for if you do these things, ye shall never fall. So
then election may be made sure, and it is a duty which lies upon all believers
to strive after, that they may make their calling and election sure. Now if it
be so, that this is a thing that may be attained unto, and that the Saints has
attained unto, and a duty which all the children of God are put upon, then
certainly this is a temptation; and know it is a temptation, that it is an
impossible thing for any to attain to the knowledge of Gods electing love.

But Secondly, 2. Temptation.
The second temptation concerning our election may be this, a poor soul may be
thus tempted; it is true, there may be the knowledge of Gods love, and many of
the Saints have attained to this knowledge, but as for me I have no certainty;
I have striven, and I have waited upon God, and sought for assurance, but I
have not attained it; and therefore I am ready to conclude, surely the Lord
has not loved me, others sought and they have attained, and have assurance; I
have sought and I cannot meet with assurance of the love of God, and therefore
certainly the Lord has not loved me.

I Answer to this temptation, know, that thou can not conclude that God has
not called thee effectually because thou have not assurance, and if thou can
not conclude that God has not called thee effectually, because thou have not
assurance, much less can thou conclude, that God has not chosen thee from
eternity, because thou have not assurance.

But Secondly, In answer to this temptation, has not the Lord given thee a
heart to close with Christ, as held forth in the Gospel to poor lost sinners?
has not God made thee willing to accept of Christ? has not the Lord in some
measure enabled thee to cleave to Christ? and do now resolve to cast thy self
upon Christ, to venture all upon Christ, even thy eternity? why then know, here
is that which gives the essence the being of faith? this accepting of Christ
held forth in the Gospel with thy resting upon him, it is the being of faith,
and this faith is no other, but the faith of Gods elect, the fruit of Gods
electing love, it springs from that eternal love which chose his people unto
salvation through faith; and therefore though there be not the comfort of
faith, (assurance is the comfort of faith, the flower that grows upon the fruit
of faith) yet if there be that which gives the being of faith, thou may not
conclude, that the Lord has not loved thee, because thou have not assurance.

Thirdly, In answer to this temptation, thou say thou have no assurance of
Gods electing love, and therefore thou concludest that God does not love thee.
As thou have no assurance that God has chosen thee, so thou have no knowledge
of the contrary, and may not conclude the contrary, that God has not chosen
thee; for if thou should so conclude, thou may lie against the truth; and
therefore cease to draw any conclusions of that which is not known to thee;
and give up thy self to do the revealed will of God; and what is that? but
that thou take hold of the offer of salvation and receive Christ, that you
believe in the name of his Son, for this is his commandment, 1. Joh. 3. 18.

But Thirdly, 3. Temptation.
this temptation may arise in the soul, namely, a desire that God would give it
a sign, an extraordinary sign, it resolves it cannot believe, and will not
believe unless God give it^ sign. This is a temptation that some of Gods
people has met withal.

To answer this temptation, know that it is not Gods ordinary way to give
satisfaction to the soul concerning his love, by giving an extraordinary sign;
it is true the Lord may sometimes, in some cases condescend to his people, and
may give an extraordinary sign; yea the Lord may and has prevented his people
sometimes with an extraordinary sign to prevent their unbeleefe when they have
not asked a sign: You have heard of that woman that sometime lived in
Cambridge, that was many years in a tempted condition, and being sorely
afflicted one day, she took up a glass in her hand and cast it against the
ground with this expression, I am as surely damned as this glass is broken,
and it pleased God so to order it that the glass was not broke, which was to
the conviction of her unbelief. I say the Lord may give a sign, yea when it
is not asked, but it is not Gods ordinary way; but now for a soul to stand it
out with God, that it cannot believe unless God do give it some extraordinary
sign; oh this is a tempting of God, and the Lord may leave such a soul for
ever in its unbelief, when it shall take up such a resolution that it will not
believe though it has the promise unless it has a sign; the Lord I say may
leave such a soul in its unbelief.

And further in answer, It is true, this was Gods way formerly to satisfy his
people by a sign, by some extraordinary sign and vision; but now since the
coming of Christ, God has chosen to speak to us by his son, see Heb. 1. 2. God
who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past unto the fathers
by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. God
formerly did reveal himself in an extraordinary way, he did appear sometimes
and spoke mouth to mouth to Abraham and Moses, that was Gods way then; but now
God has chose to speak to us by his Son, God speaks by Christ, and Christ
speaks by the Scripture, hear him, faith the Father. Now Christ has laid
down a rule for our faith and for our obedience; and know this, that Jesus
Christ by his Spirit can so make use of the word, that it shall give as clear
and evident satisfaction to a soul concerning the love of God, as if God should
give a sign, as if God should speak immediately from Heaven. When the Spirit
of the Lord will make use of the word of grace, it shall satisfy the soul as
fully of his love, as if the Lord did appear from Heaven, and speak to the soul
mouth to mouth.

Further, One thing more I shall speak to this Temptation; you that desire a
sign, and would have an extraordinary sign that God loves you; why, know that
God has given you a sign; we have signs as well as our forefathers had, what
is the water in Baptism, but a sign to us? and the bread and wine in the
Sacrament, but a sign to us? that Ordinance of the Supper which we are
partakers of this day; the Lord has condescended to us to give us a sign, the
bread is a sign, and the wine is a sign, and the sitting at the Lord Table a
sign, it is a sign unto faith, to every believing soul; these are signs that
God has loved it from everlasting, and set it apart for communion with
himself, that he has loved us and given his Son for us, that Christ has loved
us and given his blood for us, that he is reconciled and has set us at his
Table, and we shall sit with him in his Kingdom; here is a sign though not
unto sense, yet here is a sign unto faith. We think that Abraham and the
Prophets they were happy, in that God did appear to them from Heaven, and spoke
to them immediately. When God appeared to Abraham, and he called to him out of
Heaven, Now I know that thou love me, and I have sworn by my self, in
blessing I will bless thee: You think that Abraham and the Prophets were happy,
that he should tell them, that he knew they loved him, and that he would love
them, and would bless them. But know it of a certain that he has dealt more
graciously with us under the Gospel, then with them, in this very particular in
which we desire a sign; in giving us these gracious signs; for it was but
seldom that God gave them a sign, very seldom, and it was but to some of
them, Abraham and the Prophets and Patriarks; but now it is Gods ordinary way
to give us a sign, that which was very rare to them, God has made to us a
standing ordinance, so that we have a sign continually before us; as often as
we brake the bread and drink the wine, the Lord gives a sign to faith, and
speaks to faith his everlasting love. And therefore take heed that we do not
tempt God to seek another sign. What says Christ, Math. 12. 39. The Scribes
and Pharisees desired to see a sign from Christ, verse. 38. An evil and
adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there shall be no sign given
to it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas. They would not accept of the sign
that Christ gave them, no, they would have other signs; They are an adulterous
Generation, says Christ, and they shall have no other sign, but the sign of
the Prophet Jonas. So when we are seeking for other signs, and oh that God
would work extraordinary signs! why, says God, they shall have no other
signs then the sign of the bread and wine and water, these shall be sealing
signs. And know, whereas we think some extraordinary sign should convince us
and overcome our hearts, such is the unbeleefe of our hearts, that if we do
not believe when God gives us his word, and these signs, neither would we
believe if God should speak in some extraordinary way from Heaven. They have
Moses and the Prophets, says Christ, if they will not hear them, neither will
they hear if one rose from the dead. Dives he was desirous that one should go
from the dead to his Brethren; oh no, they have Moses and the Prophets, if they
will not believe them, neither will they believe though one rose from the dead.

Fourthly, 4. Temptation.
Another temptation may be this; (...) desire to be out of the World, that so a
man may know what that state is which God has ordained him unto; there may be
such a temptation as this, a hasting to dye, and to go out of the world, that
so men might know what their state in another world is, what it is that God
has decreed and purposed concerning them.

I answer, There is abudance of folly in this; for let me say to such a soul
under such a temptation, 1. Either thou have assurance of Gods eternal love,
or else thou have it not; 2. Thou know not but that thou may have it; or
3. Thou despairest of ever having it.

Now to the first, If the Lord has given thee any evidence of his love, and
any hopes of blessedness in the World to come, thou do very ill thus to make
have to be possessed of that which the Lord has given thee, thou should
rather wait the Lords time. Remember, what the Scripture says, He that
believes makes not have. If thou have faith, if thou have any hope of a
blessed state in the world to come, take heed that thou do not make have,
thou should rather covet and desire to do that which is thy work before thou
go hence, thou should desire an opportunity of lifting up the name of the
Lord before the Sons of men; now there is no such opportunity of making the
name of the Lord glorious in the grave; and therefore thou should rather
desire to know thy work and to do thy work before thou go hence.

Secondly, If it be so that thou have no evidence of Gods love, not any
knowledge of it for the present, yet thou art not without all hope; why then,
what a folly is it to desire to be out of this world, that thou may know thy
state. Surely thou go out of thy way, that is not Gods way to come to the
knowledge of what God has purposed concerning thee, thy way is to give all
diligence while here, not to desire to go into another world to know what it
is; but it is thy duty to give all diligence before thou go, to make thy
calling and election sure, to wait upon God with all thy might.

Thirdly, If it be so that thou have no hope, but thou disparest concerning the
love of God; Oh I shall never attain to the knowledge of Gods love; why then it
is despairing madness, it is beastly and unreasonable madness in thee to
hasten thy end, to desire to remove out of this world before the Lords time,
that so thou may know thy worst, I say, that is madness and folly, for so
long as thou art in the Land of the living, thou art in a state of possibility;
no poor sinners how vile soever, but while in the Land of the Living, they are
in a state of possibility, for as I said before, so again, that even reason
and a man's conscience will tell him, that it is not possible that he should
know that the Lord has rejected him; and therefore for any man to say it is
impossible that he should be saved, and have no hope, that man lies against
conscience and against truth, to conclude that which the Lord has not
revealed; and therefore while in the state of life, you are in a state of
possibility, and oh! what madness is it for a man to put himself into such a
state where there is no hope, no possibility?

Fifthly, 5. Temptation.
There is another temptation concerning our own election, which is this; If God
has decreed all things, his purpose must stand, why then his purpose cannot be
resisted, God has purposed whatever falls out in the world, he has decreed
it; and therefore we cannot withstand it, if we do sin against God we cannot
help it, God has purposed it, he has purposed all things: and therefore why
does God find fault, why does God punish the sons of men, we cannot help our
sinning against God. That cavil is raised in Romans 9. 19. Why does he yet find
fault? for who has resisted his will?

I answer, Gods decre does not necessitate any man, does not compel the will;
no, when he decrees to save his people and bestow faith upon them, he does not
compel the will, but sweetly inclines the heart. And so God does not compel
the will of men to sin, Gods decree is not the product of man's sinning; it is
true, God suffers it so to be, but man's will it is voluntary in the commission
of sin, and it is that which he chooses, that which he delights in and loves;
and this is the condemnation, Gods decree is not the cause of man's sinning, no,
man's own perverse will is the cause of all sinning. And therefore let no man
say, he is tempted of God, for no charge no blame can be laid upon God. It is
true, Gods secret absolute will cannot be resisted; but Gods revealed will
(which is man's rule) may be resisted, and is resisted, and that shall be their
condemnation. Gods secret will is not known, but it is evident men may resist
Gods revealed will. Ye stiff necked and uncircumcised in heart, and ears, ye
do always resist the Holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye, Acts 7. 51.
So that the Spirit may be resisted, and Gods will may be resisted, that will
which is our rule may be resisted, and is resisted, and that freely and
voluntarily by men's own will, and they are not ordained to it by any of Gods
decrees: And therefore cease to lay the blame on God, for man shall one day see
that his sin is his own, and his condemnation his own.

Sixthly, 6. Temptatiod.
There is another temptation that may arise from Gods decree, and it is a
temptation to this hour. A man may thus reason, if God has decreed that I
shall be saved, then I shall be saved, I shall be saved without my striving,
what need I make such a stir; if God has decreed that I shall be saved, then I
shall be saved though I go on in sin, Gods decree and purpose cannot be
hindered; and therefore if I be chosen to life and salvation, I shall be saved
without my own striving, without taking pains, and I shall be saved whatever I
do.

This is a desperate temptation, and I shall speak something to it. Thou
say if God has decreed thy salvation then thou shall be saved and must be
saved without thy pains, though thou take no pains to look after Christ, and
believe and repent as others do.

To this I answer: First, though God has purposed thy salvation, and though
thou be in the number of his chosen, yet without thy striving and wai^ing
upon God in his own way, thou can not attain to the knowledge and comfort of
it; and is this nothing for a man to go all his days (though he be chosen)
without the knowledge of Gods love, and go under fears, and be in bondage all
his days? is this nothing, though chosen, so long as thou fittest still thou
can not know it, and so not have the comfort of it? But,

Secondly, God has joined the means and the end together, know that; so that
one cannot be without the other. Thou say if thou be elected then thou
shall be saved, thou concludest concerning the end; and I say, if thou be
elected then thou shall certainly be brought to believe in Christ and become a
new creature. The means it is purposed by God as well as the end, God has
decreed to bring his people to life and salvation this way, by believing; in
the way of faith, and in the way of repentance, and in the way of holiness,
you shall be saved; and truly it is as impossible for them to go without
faith, to be in an unrenewed condition all their days, as it is impossible for
those to be saved that are not elected; yea I may say notwithstanding Gods
decree, notwithstanding Gods election, yet if thou do not believe in Christ,
and be not a new creature thou can not be saved, if thou do not get faith
and holiness thou can not be saved. The Apostle he reasons so in Acts 27.
God tells the Apostle there, that the lives of them all should be saved, and at
verse. 30. 31. When the Ship-men were about to flee out of the Ship. Paul said
to the Centurion and to the soldiers, except these abide in the Ship ye cannot
be saved. Because as God purposed the end, as that they should be saved, so he
purposed that they should be saved that way, by staying in the Ship. And so
notwithstanding Gods decree, if thou gettest not faith in Christ, and be not
a new creature, thou can not be saved.

And to that which thou say, it is not of him that wills nor runs, but
God that shows mercy; and therefore why should I strive for life and
salvation?

I deny that, that God will save thee without thy striving: It is true, it is
not for thy faith and repentance that God will save, but without these God will
not save; this is the way by which God saves. You would think he were an
unreasonable man that should argue thus, God has decreed how long I shall
live, whether twenty, thirty, forty, or sixty years, the period is appointed
by God, and therefore it matters not that I eat. Now if God has appointed a
man should live so long, he has also appointed that you should use the means.
Hezekiah he knew how long he should live, I will add unto thy days fifteen
years, 2 Kings 20. 6. It had been strange reasoning for Hezekiah to say, I
will neither eat nor drink for Gods purpose must stand; as God has purposed
the end, so he purposed the means; so that the means and the end are joined
together.

But thou reasonest further; that if God does decree that I shall be saved, why
then I shall be saved though I go on in a way of sin.

First of all, here is a gross mistake of Gods decree; God does not decree to
save any man whatever he does, though he all his days go on to destroy
himself; God never made such a decree, no, Gods decree is to save men from sin
as well as from wrath. If God decrees to save any man from wrath, he decrees to
save that man from sin: As it is impossible that that man should go to hell
that God decrees to save, so it is impossible that that man should wallow in
sin.

And oh what great ingratitude? to say, though I go on in sin I shall be
saved, if God has decreed it. Oh great ingratitude! As if a child should say,
my father has entailed a great estate upon me, and I cannot go without it
though I do all that I can against him; oh! is this the part of a child? sure
of a bastard and not a child! oh horrible ingratitude!

Nay, let me say there is madness in it; there is this madness, as if a man
should say, God has purposed how long I shall live, and it matters not though
I stab my self, and though I run into the Sea, I shall live so long as God
has purposed; oh! such desperate madness is in many men when they reason
about Gods decree.

The seventh and last temptation, is a temptation of despair, 7. Temptation.
which some of Gods people may be exercised withal; and thus they may reason,
if the Lord has not purposed my salvation, if he has not decreed my
salvation, them I cannot be saved whatever I do, though I take never so much
pains, and strive never so much; though I seek faith and repentance, yea
though I do believe, and though I do repent, yet if God has not decreed my
salvation I cannot be saved.

To this I answer; that Gods decree and purpose shall never infringe the truth
of any promises that he has made; now he has made a promise, that whosoever
believe in Christ shall be saved: Now Gods decree shall not infringe the truth
of this promise; and there is no man upon earth that shall believe in the name
of Jesus Christ, but he may claim life and salvation upon Gods promise, and it
shall be made out to him.

And let me say further, that thou do not take the right course to begin at
Gods decree: Oh! this is a discouragement, this will keep thee off from the use
of the means; if I be not elected I cannot be saved, thou take the wrong
course to begin at they election, who taught thee this way? God never taught
thee so; it is from Satan who endeavors to pussell thee in thy way. Though
there be such an election, and the Saints have much comfort when they do know
their election, yet you must not begin with election, but know that you must
walk by Gods revealed will, and look to Gods revealed will; if thou art called
to faith and to believe, thou art not amongst the lost ones, and art called to
life and salvation; and therefore look to the revealed will of God, so long as
a man is in the state of unbeleefe it is not possible that he should know what
God has decreed concerning him. Therefore do not begin at election; this is
for a man to covet to set his foot upon the highest step of the Ladder before
he sets it upon lowest. When a man is in his youth he does not know whether God
has purposed old age for him, and because he does not know it, he is not
discouraged from the use of the means; and so I say, in a state of unbeleefe
thou can not know that God has loved thee, but this should not discourage
thee to wait upon God in the use of the means, giving up thy self to his
revealed will, which commands thee, and all the Sons of men, to believe in
Christ. And as I said, so I say again, that there is no man that ever believed
in Jesus Christ but he was saved; and therefore it is madness and folly for a
man to say, though I believe in Christ, I shall not be saved if God has not
purposed it, I tell you there is none that ever did believe in Christ but was
saved, and any that do believe to the end of the world, may go to God and
challenge him upon his word: Nay, I may say, if Judas had believed and repented
and turned to the Lord, Judas had been saved.

Question. But you will say, If I be not elected, I cannot believe, it is in
vain for me to take pains; if the Lord has not purposed to give me faith, I
shall never be able to work it in my own heart, and therefore in vain for me
to temper with my own heart.

I Answer. That thou do not know that God has not purposed to give thee
faith, and therefore thou art bound to wait upon the Lord in the use of the
means. And that thou have not faith, do not lay it upon God, though it be true;
Faith is his gift, yet God does hinder no man from believing, God lays no
Blocks in any man's way: Nay, there is a great deal that God does to bring men
unto Faith, what means does God use? What workings are there? What strivings of
the Spirit? What Invitations? What Exhortations? the Word of the Lord is full
of them.

And let me say further, that if the Lord has given thee a heart in good
earnest to desire the gift of faith, the Lord will certainly give it out to
thee; I say, if the Lord has set a man's Heart and Will to the Lord, that a
man does from the heart desire Christ, that great gift of God, the Lord will
certainly give the gift of Faith; If thou knew the gift of God, and did ask
of him, he would have given thee living water: John 4. 10. If there had been a
Will in thee to have desired it, he would have given thee Water of Life; But if
there be not a Will in man to have Faith; Nay, the heart of man does secretly
oppose it; why, then let not man lay the fault upon God; But if the Lord has
given a Will, and a man's Will be not against the Lord, then there is a
beginning of God's work, and the Lord will certainly give out the gift of
Faith, and Christ, to a poor Soul, that shall be found waiting upon him.

And thus you have seen the several Temptations that may arise from the
Doctrine of Election.

Now follows something by way of Answer and Direction, for the preventing and
silencing of all Temptations of this Nature.

Matthew. 15. 24. But he answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.
SERMON XV.
I Come now to lay down some general Rules for the silencing and overcoming of
all Temptations of this Nature concerning Election. Rules to silence those
Temptations Gods people may meet withal concerning their Election.


And the first Rule is this; Rule 1.
Take heed that we do not give way to carnal reason: that we do not set carnal
Reason on work to find out this great and wonderful Mystery; take heed of the
very beginnings of carnal reason; when you begin to reason concerning Election,
as to the causer of it, why God should choose one, and refuse another; Seek not
to satisfy Carnal Reason in this; for know, that there is an infinite distance
between God and the creature.

And therefore for the silencing of Carnal Reason;

Consider first of all, That he is God, and thou art man; therefore do not
quarrel and contend with God, and seek to bring down God to satisfy thy reason
in this; Romans 9. 20. Nay but, O man, Who art thou that replyest against God?
Shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus?
The Apostle he brings in this for the silencing of carnal reason, that is too
busy in prying into God's Election, and will not be satisfied unless he has a
reason; Man, Who art thou? consider that thou art man, that thou art but a
child of Adam; and remember that as thou art man, so he is God, he is Jehovah;
he is an infinite incomprehensible Being, he is absolute, he is Independent, he
does not depend upon any creature; his will it is the rule of all goodness and
righteousness, he is God; it is not the will of man, nor the reason of man that
must be righteous; that must not be good which we will, and which we
comprehend; no, that is not the rule of goodness, but the will of God; and
therefore remember that he is God, and not man.

Secondly, To silence carnal reason, Remember that He is thy Maker. Shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, Romans 9. 20.
Why have thou made me thus? Why, he made thee, he fashioned thee, and is it
fit for the creature to contend with his Maker? Should the Potsherd go and
strive with his Maker? There is as great a distance betwixt God and the
creature, as between the Potter and the clay, nay, a greater distance between
God and us; Of the same lump he makes one a vessel of honor, another of
dishonor; were this remembered, we would not be so bold to call God to account.

Thirdly, For to silence carnal reason, consider, That the more a man wades
into this mystery with his own reason, the further he is and shall be from
satisfaction: for it is just as if a man should attempt to go and wade over the
Sea on foot, when a man sets the first step into the Sea, it may be he is up to
the knees, the next step up to the loins, next step up to the neck, and the
next step over head and ears, and can feel no bottom.

It is true, by faith we may go down into this great deep, and see the wonders
of God; by faith a man may go upon this great depth of the love of God, and
wonder at it, and cry out, O! the depth of the love of God! But if we go with
carnal reason, we shall be over head and ears; and the more reason, the further
from satisfaction, and he will confound his reason; If a man gaze upon the Sun
to know the nature of the Sun, and think to comprehend the Sun, the more he
gazeth upon the Sun, the more will the Sun confound the eye, that he will not
be able to comprehend the Sun; and so when the dim eye of carnal reason shall
gaze upon this glorious mystery of God, the eye will soon be confounded, and
we shall be further from satisfaction.

Fourthly, Consider for the silencing of carnal reason, That it is not possible
that a man should go about to satisfy his reason, but he shall dash against
many dangerous Rocks that will split him all to pieces: Many a man of learning
have thought to comprehend this mystery by reason, and so they have split
against many dangerous rocks of error, and made shipwreck of Faith; many have
come to reason against Romans 9. and have wished that it had been torn out of the
Book of God: O dangerous Rocks that men split themselves against, that will
have their reason satisfied in this deep mystery! I have known some (I hope
gracious) that have been miserably shattered this way, that would needs call
God to account, why God let Adam fall, and why God did not save all the world,
and why God should take one, and not another; and they have reasoned thus,
until they have reasoned themselves out of good thoughts of God, and out of
acts of Faith and Hope; and have reasoned themselves out of their duty to God,
and have been as poor creatures in the midst of an Ocean, and have found no
ground to set their foot upon.

And again consider, That the Devil will make use of carnal Reason in this
Mystery of God, to keep a poor soul in a dark and perplexed condition; there
is many a poor soul is kept in the dark, and led into a labyrinth that they can
find no path; they are kept in a fruitless condition many days and years, an
useless condition; they are kept from their present work and duty, by giving
way to their carnal reason in this great mystery.

And consider last of all, for the silencing of carnal reason, That it is an
impossible thing to attain to satisfy it, and therefore it is a vain attempt,
time is spent in vain, and thou layest out thy self in vain; while a soul seeks
that which cannot be, to know their Election in the first place, before they
come to Christ, and be found believing and obeying, and walking with God, I
say, it is an impossible thing for you to know your Election, before you
believe in Christ, and be a new creature: It is true, you are put upon it to
make your Election sure, ay but he does not say, find it out by reason, have
an account of it in the first place; no, make it sure by getting faith in
Christ, believing in Christ, fetch grace and strength from Christ, more grace
from Christ, adding grace to grace, and that is the way to make your Election
sure; that is the first general Rule that I shall lay down for the silencing of
this Temptation, Take heed that you do not so much as desire that your carnal
reason should be satisfied in this great mystery; no, you must rest in the
Will, in the good pleasure of God, or else you will never have rest.

Secondly, Rule 2.
a second Rule for the silencing of Temptations concerning Election is this,
When ever you are troubled in Spirit about your own Election, then flee to the
Covenant of Grace, flee to the Promises, the free, gracious, absolute promises
of the new Covenant; and do not say, well, here I will stand, and go no
further, till I make out my Election; truly that is the way to perish, to stand
there, and to go no further; no, when you are in the dark concerning Election,
and doubt of the love of God, then immediately flee to the Promises, run to
Christ, run to the free grace of the Father, run to the righteousness of the
Son, run to the gracious Promises held forth in the word of Reconciliation;
look to that which is nigh thee, to the Word, to the tender of grace and
reconciliation, look to those things in which you may agree with God, if
unbelief do not give him the lie, and if unbelief do not make you to lie
against the Truth, you may agree with God in those tenders of Grace and Mercy
which are before you; and therefore flee to them, look to the Scripture, the
Word of God holds forth gracious tenders and invitations for the relief of poor
souls; Isa. 45. 22. Look to me all ye ends of the earth, and be saved, for I am
God, and there is none besides me: There is a gracious word to flee unto, when
you are doubting concerning Election; and so, Let the wicked forsake his way,
and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he
will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, Isa.
55. 7. and so, The Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost,
Matthew. 18. 11. Another gracious word, and Come unto me ye that are weary, and
heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Matthew. 11. 18. and God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3. 16. and so in John 6. 37.
All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out: Here is another gracious word for poor souls to flee
unto. And so again in 1 Timothy 1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom
I am chief. O! How many gracious tenders and invitations are there in the Word
of God for poor souls to flee unto? And O that God would teach his people who
are tempted about their Election, and cannot make out their Election, presently
to flee to some free promise of the Lord held forth that is before you; and in
that you and God may agree, if unbelief hinder not.

There have been some Parliaments in England in which many good things have
been propounded for the welfare of the people; but all the Members have not
been satisfied in some things propounded; Now had they laid aside those things
in which all were not satisfied, and fallen upon those things in which all
might have agreed, a good work might have been carried on by them, and in due
time all might have been satisfied, but standing upon those things concerning
which all were not satisfied, it broke all to pieces; and so I may say of this
business of Election; it may be the Lord he is satisfied concerning thy
Election, it is clear to him, The foundation of the Lord stands sure, having
this seal, the Lord knows them that are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. But thou art not
satisfied, and thou resolvest to meddle with nothing till God satisfy thee
concerning thy Election; why that is the way to break all to pieces: Look to
that in which thou may agree with God, the word of grace that is before thee,
those Promises in which God and thy soul may meet, O fall upon them, and close
with God in them, and afterward in God's due time he will clear up thy
Election, and satisfy thee that thou art one that he has loved and chosen.
Only remember that is the second Rule, when we are stumbled about Election, Run
presently to the free Grace of God in Christ, and to the gracious promises held
forth in the Gospel.

A third Rule for the silencing of these Temptations, Rule 3.
whenever thou art in the dark concerning Election, pusled either about the
Doctrine of Election, or thine own Election in particular, Resolve to justify
God, to clear the Lord however it be, and say he is righteous: Lay that down
for a certain conclusion, Lord, thou art righteous, and thou have no iniquity
in thee, and can do no wrong, whether I understand thy way or not; the
Apostle in Romans 9. 13. speaks of God's taking one, and leaving another; As it
is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated: and at verse. 14. What
shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Is there
unrighteousness with God? It seems so, that God should deal thus unequally with
persons that are equal, that are in the same condition, Is this righteous? That
God should take one, and leave another, when both in the same condition, is not
this unrighteousness? It seems so, but it is not so, God forbid, says he, that
we should have the least thought that God should be unrighteous; no, that
cannot be; for God to take one, and leave another, it is no injustice; and it
is no act of God's Justice to take and leave, but an act of his Sovereignty:
For a Prince to pardon one Malefactor, and leave another to the righteous
censure of the Law, there is no injustice in it: for a man, when two persons
stand before him, and both in the same condition, to make one his bosom friend
and nor another, it is no injustice; this is the case with God; God will choose
bosom friends, choose one, and not another, it is the act of his Sovereignty,
and no injustice.

Indeed if God should condemn the innocent, there would be some color to
charge God with unrighteousness; if God should condemn a man or woman merely
because they are not elected, although that man or woman should believe and
repent, there were unfaithfulness in God; but God never did so, God never
condemned the believer, he never condemned the soul that returned to him by
Christ, therefore God cannot be charged with unfaithfulness: Therefore let us
resolve upon it, God is righteous: Justify God, though thou art in the dark,
and perplexed and troubled in Spirit about thine own Election, or the Election
of friends, yet do thou resolve and say, I will justify God, though God has
not chosen me, and my children, and though God has not chosen my friends, yet
no unrighteousness in him. Truly this is the way to overcome the Temptation;
and till a soul be brought to this, a soul that is troubled about his Election,
will never find rest, till he come to justify God, and lie at the feet of the
Lord, and say, Lord, though thou condemnest me, and all my children and
friends, thou art righteous; till we justify God, we shall have no peace in
our selves: What a restless condition was Job in when he stood quarrelling with
God's Decree? He never had peace till he came to Justify God, Job 42. 2. I
know that thou can do every thing, I will contend no more: When Job came thus
to justify God, then Job's Temptation vanished, and then the Lord turned unto
Job, and Turned again his Captivity, and doubled the mercies he had taken away.
That Is the third Rule.

Fourthly, Rule 4.
For the Overcoming and Silencing of these Temptations about Election; Remember
this, that whenever we are tempted about Election, that we presently fall to
worship the Lord Jesus: so it was with this woman in the Text, when she met
with this Temptation about Election; Christ said, I am not sent but to the lost
sheep of the House of Israel. What follows? She came and worshipped him: She
spoke not a word of Discontent, but falls down, and worshipped him. This is the
way to overcome the Temptation, when you are doubting concerining the love of
God, perplexed about Election, presently fall to worship the Lord, worship him.
Worship him, How?

Worship him, How to worship God.
First, With the Inward Worship of the Spirit. Fear before him, that is part of
his Worship: Reverence the Lord greatly in your hearts notwithstanding all,
that is part of his worship. Love the Lord, let your souls be breathing in love
toward him, cleave unto him, pursue after him with your Spirit, that is part
of the Inward worship; Commit your souls unto him, trust in him, cast your
selves upon the Lord, and the word of his grace, that is the Inward Worship;
Acknowledge your dependence upon him, resolve there to hang; say, Lord, my
whole dependence is upon thee, my blessedness is in thy hand, all that I expect
for eternity does depend upon thee; Go, and cleave, and clasp about the feet of
Christ, and by faith depend upon Christ, and say, Lord, here I will hold and
stay, and will not away, unless I be pulled away by violence from the feet of
Christ. This is Internal Worship, and this is that worship that gives so much
glory to God. Abraham believed above hope, and against hope, and gave glory to
God. When you are tempted about Election, thus worship him.

And secondly, Worship him with External Worship; There are two principal parts
of this Worship that will tend to the silencing of all temptations about
Election.

The first is Prayer. The second is Thanksgiving.

When you are tempted about Election, or doubt of the love of God, fall to
prayer; go and pour out a cry before the Lord, go and lament after him; and
say, though I do not know whether thou will accept of me, O Lord, yet I will
cry after thee, I will lament after thee; cry after himself, his presence, his
face, his favor, his loving kindness, go and cry after him; this is the way to
be rid of the temptation: And truly, this will be a discovery that God has
Elected thee: In Luke 18. you have Christ speaking there of the unrighteous
Judge, who neither feared God or man, but at verse. 7. you have him speaking of
the righteous Judge, and says he, Shall not God avenge his own Elect, which
cry day and night unto him? This is a good discovery that God has chosen that
soul, though the soul knows it not, when as it is crying after the Lord, and
resolves to cry, and not give over; They are his Elect that cry day and night,
and he will certainly hear their cry;

God will come in and manifest himself to the soul, and therefore when tempted
about Election, go to Prayer.

Another part of External Worship is Thanksgiving; an excellent Remedy against
this Temptation about Election: O! desire that thy heart may be put into a
thankful frame, look up to God for it, and plead with the Lord, that thy heart
may be put into a thankful posture; Consider what thou have to be thankful for:
Is there nothing* O certainly, if thou art not exceeding ungrateful, thou may
see something to be thankful for in the worst condition; O! the years of
patience and goodness of the Lord toward thee, think upon the bounty of the
Lord toward thee; Has not the Lord tendered his Christ to thee? And has he not
held forth his promises to thee? Has he not been working upon thy heart, to
overcome thy heart? Is not this worthy of Thankfulness? Those supports that
thou have met withal under affliction, have not everlasting Arms been under
thee? Surely thou must say it, that everlasting Arms have been under me, and
why do thou not bless the Lord that he has put underneath everlasting Arms?
Yea, has there not been some secret intimations of love, though thou have not
received so much as another? Yet, has there not been some secret hints of
grace and love? O! that is worthy of thankfulness. Yea, look to all the outward
salvations that thou have met withal; look to all the years of goodness, and
all the years of mercy; Has not God come to thee, and to thy Family, with many
sweet refreshments? What? None of these worthy of Thankfulness? O that thou
would learn to creep, if thou can not go! and every night when thou
look back, O say, here is another day of goodness; the Lord might have cut
me off, here is another day of patience; and in the morning when thou wakest,
think of it, the Lord might have cut me off this night; Here is another night
of patience; and see if this cannot draw forth thy soul in thankfulness.

I have heard of a young man very lately in the Town of Yarmouth, that being
very weak, and nigh to the grave, and under the apprehensions of the wrath of
God, and supposing that he was presently going down to the pit, he cries out, O
that God would spare me but two days! He would have accounted it a mercy to be
kept out of hell but two days: O! God has given thee more then two days,
many months, many years, in which the Lord has exercised his patience; O! may
not all this provoke thee to thankfulness? Well, if thou can not see any
thing to be thankful for, of that which God has done for thee, why then bless
God for what is in himself; O! Think upon the gracious Nature of God, think
upon the glorious Majesty of God, think upon all the Attributes of God, are
they not worthy of praise? His name it is glorious, and worthy to be exalted,
bless God for what is in himself.

Or Bless God for what he has done for others, if not for what God has done
for thee; see if thou can not get up thy heart to bless God for what God has
done for others; and look upon the grace that God has bestowed upon others;
and say, though I can see little in my self for which I should bless God, yet
blessed be God that God has given out of his Spirit to others, and manifested
his love to others, and has made others fruitful and serviceable, and that
there are so many to lift up the name of Christ in the world; and if by any
means the Lord will put thy heart into a thankful frame, the temptation will
soon vanish. Endeavor it all thou can, wait upon God, and look upon that
which is matter of Thankfulness, that thy heart may be put into a thankful
posture to bless God for something bestowed on thee, or something in himself, or
others, and the Temptation will soon vanish.

Fifthly, Rule 5.
When thou art tempted about Election, Resolve still to hold on in God's way;
though thou art in the dark, and perplexed in thy spirit for want of the
knowledge of God's love, yet resolve in the strength of the Lord to hold on the
Lord's way, to keep in his way, and to depart from iniquity; take heed of
turning out into crooked ways, desire to keep the way of the Lord, which is a
straight way; Say, well, though I do not know my Election, I do not know
whether I shall come into heaven, yet by the Lord's strength I will be found
looking toward Christ, I will be found looking to him, who is able to save to
the uttermost; This is to keep the Lord's way.

And so also, Resolve to be found walking in ways of Holiness; though I do not
know that I shall be saved; saved, or not saved, I will resolve to walk in
ways of holiness, and to depart from iniquity, take heed of every sinful way,
every crooked way. The Apostle in 2 Timothy 2. 19. speaking about Election, The
foundation of the Lord stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord knows them
that are his: Why then says he, Let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. And so I say, though Election be not sure to thee, be
sure to depart from iniquity, resolve to walk with God in his way; All this is
come upon us, yet have not we forgotten thee, Psalm. 44. 17. and so do thou say,
though all this darkness be upon my spirit, I resolve in the strength of the
Lord not to forsake him; though I do not know that the Lord will be for me, I
resolve to be for none else, my soul shall be for no other Savior, and I will
not be for any other way but the way of holiness, I desire to depart from every
way of iniquity: And as I said before, so I say again, if God shall bring up
the heart to this, Surely the Lord will not always suffer that soul to go on
doubting, but he will come and manifest his eternal love; if the soul shall
resolve thus in the strength of the Lord, to be found in the Lord's way, saved
or not saved, I will be looking to the Father through the Son, and walk in
every way of the Lord, and depart from iniquity, the Lord will not always
suffer that soul to go on doubting, John 14. 21. He that has my Commandments
and keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me, shall be
loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him. My
Father shall love him; that is, my Father shall manifest love to him; not that
God begins then to love, but my Father will come to that soul, though that soul
may walk in darkness, though that soul may for the present be in a sad
condition, and not see the face of God, and not know that God has loved him
from everlasting, yet my Father will manifest love to him, my Father will
manifest that he does love that soul: and says Christ, I will love him, and
manifest my self to him: Christ will come to that soul, and say to it, I see
that thou love me, and I know thou love me, thou have walked in the dark
night, yet thou have not turned out from me, thou have resolved to cleave to me
as to thy Savior, and have resolved to keep my way, and to depart from
iniquity, and now I see that thou love me, and I will let thee know that I
love thee, that is, that I love thee first, that I have loved thee from
everlasting. And thus you have the five general Rules to silence all
Temptations which may arise concerning Election.

Matthew. 15. 24. But he answered and said, I am not sent, but unto the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.
SERMON XVI.
FOr the Use of the point, and I shall speak but two words by way of
Application, because what I have spoken already, has been practical, if the
Lord make it to be so.

First, To those that have not attained to the knowledge of God's love.

Secondly, To those that through grace have attained to the discoveries of
God's love.

First, Use 1. To those that have not attained to the knowledge of Gods love.
To those that have not attained to the knowledge of God's eternal love toward
them, and I shall speak the words of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Wherefore the
rather Brethren give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure: for if
ye do these things, ye shall never fall: That Is the word of the Lord to you;
give all diligence to make your Election sure, rest not till your hearts be
established through grace in the knowledge of God's love. For

Let me tell you first, It Is of concernment to make our Election sure.
That it is a matter of great concernment. That which this Apostle does exhort
us to, to give all diligence to make our Election sure, it is that which does
concern your whole state; you had need give diligence to make it sure, it does
not concern your temporal estate, but it concerns your estate in another world,
all that you have to live upon in another world does depend upon it, you had
need give diligence to make that sure: What pains do men take to make that sure
that concerns their outward Estates? Men will make their Bonds and Bills sure,
their Evidences sure, their Titles to Lands and Houses sure; if there be any
thing amiss in them, what pains will men take to make them sure? O that God
would help us to give diligence in this great business that does concern
another manner of estate then that which you possess here! even all that you
have to live upon in the world to come.

Secondly, The adversary seeks to hinder souls in making their Election sure.
Let me say to you to stir you up to be diligent in making your Calling and
Election sure; why, You have an Adversary that takes a great deal of pains,
uses diligence to hinder you in this work; the Devils great design is to keep
you in the dark, to keep you in a puzzled and perplexed condition, to find some
flaw or other in your evidences, to cast some blot upon them, that you shall
not be able to read them; doubtless you will put God to it to leave you to be
tried in this at one time or other; God for the most part leaves his people to
be tempted concerning their Election, and therefore you had need give diligence.

Thirdly, Our comfort does depend upon the making Election sure.
Let me say, That your comfort does depend upon making your Election sure. All
your comfort in this world does depend upon it, the comfort of every condition
does depend upon it, the sweetness of every mercy depends upon it. Alas, if a
man had a thousand times more then he has, what is all he has without the
love of God? Your comfort depends upon it; Although your names be written in
heaven, yet you cannot have the comfort of it, till it be made sure to you;
though it be sure before God, yet you cannot be comforted, but you are as if
there were no thoughts of love in the heart of God toward you. Your comfort
depends upon it.

Fourthly, Our holiness depends upon the making Election sure.
Your Holiness does depend upon it, your usefulness, your fruitfulness, your
serviceableness in your generations does depend upon your knowledge of the love
of God; it is that which will make a Christian useful and serviceable, when as
his Election is made sure, when he comes to be established in the knowledge of
God's Election; Put on therefore (as the Elect of God, holy, and beloved)
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long suffering;
Col. 3. 12. Your holiness does depend upon it, and your usefulness in your
generation.

And truly, till that be put out of question to a soul, til the Lord gives some
degrees of satisfaction to a soul concerning his love, the soul is wholly taken
up, always taken up about that which concerns it self: O Lord! Do thou love
me? That Is the great question: And when it goes to God in prayer, Lord! Do
thou love me? And O that thou would make out thy love to me! The soul is
wholly taken up about that, and well it may; but when God comes to give some
satisfaction, O then the soul has a great deal of freedom to mind the things
of Christ, to put up many a Petition for others, and many a request for Christ
and his Kingdom, and the Interest of Christ, then his thoughts they run that
way; so that if you desire to be useful and serviceable in your generation, it
does engage you to look after this, to give all diligence to make your Election
sure.

Quest. But you will say, How shall we do that? O there is nothing in the world
that I would sooner do then that, but I know not how to make my Election sure.

I Answer, It is the work of God, it is the work of grace to make it out to
you; it is the work of free grace to give a soul assurance of that free and
everlasting love. But be found waiting upon God in this way.

First, How to make our Election sure.
Look up to the Lord to clear up unto you the mystery of the Gospel; if you
desire to make your Election, look up to the Lord, to clear up to your souls
the great mystery of Christ, that thou may know the Lord Jesus as he was
the gift of the Father, the gift of love, the gift of free grace; O that the
Lord would clear up to thee the great end of his giving that gift of Christ!
Wherefore was it that God sent his Son out of his bosom? Wherefore was it that
he gave Christ? And wherefore was it that Christ gave himself to die? What was
the end of the Father's sending Christ, and the end of the laying down his
life? It was to save lost sinners; God so loved the World, that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, John 3. 16. O! Look up to God, to clear up this great Gospel
mystery to you, the design of God the Father, in sending Christ; and the
great design of the Son, in laying down his life: It is through ignorance of
this Mystery, that many a poor soul is kept from establishment, and from
assurance of God's electing love.

But secondly, Wait upon the Lord to draw thy soul to accept of Christ; it is
not enough to have a discovery of the mystery, this will not save thee, though
a man know the design of God, and know the end of it, that will not save thee;
no, but wait upon the Lord to draw thy heart to rest upon Jesus Christ, as he
is held forth in the Gospel; see that there is a necessity that God the Father
should draw thee; No man comes to me (says Christ) except the Father which
has sent me draw him, John 6. 44. till he be drawn by the Father, he cannot
come to Christ, therefore that man is mistaken that thinks it is an easy
matter for him to come to Christ. O! Many a man does mistake faith of their own
working, for that faith which is of the operation of God. When God has beaten
many a soul out of his Brest-works, and the soul sees he can no longer defend
himself there, good works will not do it; then he takes up a resolution in his
own strength; well, I willgo to Christ, I will believe in Christ, if I cannot
have it by obedience, I will have it by believing: Ah! But he never saw that
there was an impossibility for him to believe, but he goes to Christ in his own
strength, and the faith is of his own working, and it is such a faith as Christ
will not own; no, when God deals with a soul in a saving way, he discovers to
it that it is no more able to believe in Christ, then it can obey the whole
Law, and that there is a necessity that he should be drawn of God; and in his
spirit he breaths after God, and says, Lord, draw me, for if thou do not
draw me, I shall never come to Christ; see a necessity of being drawn to
Christ; And when thou art drawn, give up thy self to those breathings and
workings of the Spirit of God; after thou have seen thy self in a lost
condition, and no possibility to help thy self, either by thy works, or by
believing; why then if the Lord open the word of Reconciliation to thee, and is
breathing sweetly upon thy heart, and moving upon thy spirit, while thou
hear the word of grace opened, and the tender of Christ urged, O then give
up thy self to those drawings of the Spirit of Christ, and do not hinder those
drawings by thy unbelief, but give up thy self to the Lord, and say, Lord, I
see thy hand only is able and powerful to draw souls to thy self, and I will
stand out no longer. That Is the second.

Thirdly, Be diligent to make the best improvement of Jesus Christ; when God
has discovered the mystery of Christ to thee, and in some measure has drawn
thy heart, and made thee to lie at the feet of Christ for life and salvation,
and for faith to believe in him; be diligent to make the best improvement of
Christ. Improve Christ for holiness and sanctification, if thou desire to
have Election made out to thee, improve Christ for holiness. The Apostle 2 Pet.
1. 5. exhorts them to this, Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue,
and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance
patience, and to patience godliness; and so he goes on, and then follows at
verse. 10. Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure; for if you
do these things, you shall never fall. In this way give diligence to make your
Election sure, improve Christ for holiness, for grace, for strength, for more
strength; be diligent in waiting upon the Lord for the carrying on the work of
holiness; let Christians endeavor to be continually in the exercise of grace,
and in the performance of every duty that the Lord calls them to; add grace to
grace, and wait upon Christ, that one degree of grace may be added to another;
knowledge to knowledge, faith to faith, temperance to temperance; truly it is
in this way that God comes in with discoveries of electing love; I do not say
it is for your diligence, and for your improvement of Christ, and adding grace
to grace; but this is the way: when the Lord does enable his people to be thus
faithful and diligent in the improvement of Christ, and in the exercise of
grace, and performance of duty to God and man, God comes in that way, and
gives a soul a more clear discovery of his electing love.

Fourthly, Desire the Lord to set a heavenly Bias upon your spirits, if you
desire to have your Election cleared and made sure; take heed of an earthly
heart; and O! Look up to God earnestly, that he would set a heavenly Bias upon
your spirits, that you may be able to say, Our conversation is in heaven, our
heart is there, from whence we look for a Savior; we groan to be clothed upon
with our house which is from heaven. Truly Brethren, if we look too much
downward, if we be grubling below, and be writing upon the dust, we shall
hardly see what is written in heaven: Though your names may be written in
heaven. O! the looking too much upon this world, keeps many a Christian from
seeing his name written in heaven. What pains will Astrologers and Star-gazers
(as the Scripture calls them) take to see into the second heaven, the starry
heaven? How often will they look up? And how long will they look up to see (as
they pretend) what is written there, what is the language of the Stars! And O!
What a shame is it to Christians that we should look up no oftener, and no
longer into the third heaven, that we may see our names written there? Truly
Brethren, it is no easy matter for a Christian to see his name written in
heaven, though his name may be written there; we shall hardly see it, if our
hearts be not much there, and our conversations much there; we use to say, if
children look off their Books, they will never learn their Lessons well; Truly,
if we look so much on the world, and so little into heaven, we shall hardly
learn to read our names written in heaven. But when as the Lord sees that his
people are desirous to have their thoughts in heaven, and their conversations
in heaven, the Lord will come and say to that soul, well, I see that thine eye
is in heaven, and thy heart in heaven, know for thy comfort, that thy name also
is in heaven, thy God is in heaven, thy Christ is in heaven, and thy portion is
in heaven. O! Beg of God that he would clap a heavenly bias upon your spirits.

Fifthly, Take heed of sinning against the Lord, take heed of giving way to any
sin; as you desire to have your election cleared up to you, take heed of
turning out into any crooked way. Let not Christians give way to themselves,
nor allow themselves in any way of evil. You know what the Apostle says in 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this
Seal, the Lord knows them that are his: And let every one that names the
name of Christ, depart from iniquity. The Lord knows them that are his; Ah!
but would you know your selves to be in that number? Take heed that you do not
give way to any sin, do not allow your selves in any way of sin, be not found
in any way of iniquity; every sin that is allowed, it will cast a blot upon
your Evidence, and you shall not be able to read it. This is the first Use unto
those that have not God's electing love cleared up to them; there is a
necessity that every soul should give all diligence to have their Election made
sure, it is matter of infinite concernment, and you have been taught in what
way to wait upon God to make your Election sure.

The second Use is to those that have attained to the knowledge of God's
electing love: And it calls upon them,

First, To be Thankful.

Secondly, To labor to walk worthy of so great a mercy.

First, To be Thankful. O consider that it is the free love and the free grace
of God that did make the difference between you and others, Is there not cause
then of Thankfulness? You were no better then the worst in the world, no better
then those that are cast out of God's sight into utter darkness; there is as
much evil in our hearts as in Judas his heart that betrayed Christ. O! It is
free grace that has put a difference; if God has made known to you that he
has chosen you, know that it is free grace that has put the difference; O!
Rich grace, free grace, that God should take you, and leave another as
deserving as you; O it is free grace!

And that we may be stirred up to Thankfulness, consider that all the mercies
that ever you do enjoy or hope for, spring from this Electing love! O! What
cause have you to admire this love? Electing love it was a fruitful womb, all
your mercies lay in it, your comforts they all spring from it; if the Lord had
not given you his love from eternity, he had never given you Christ as he did,
he had not given you the knowledge of Christ. All the mercies and comforts that
you do enjoy, do spring from this love; if it had not been for this love, you
had never known what pardon of sin had been, you had never known what peace
with God had been, what a mercy it is to be reconciled to God; your present
mercies they all lie in this womb of God's Electing love; O! what an engagement
is this to Thankfulness?

Secondly, Walk worthy of this love; Christians you that see your Interest in
Electing love, walk worthy of it, improve this your mercy, that great mercy,
the knowledge which God has given you of his love in Christ, improve it, let
it be an engagement upon you to duty.

To what duty does this Love of God engage unto.

First, What Duties electing love engages Christians unto.
Let this love of God to you engage you to a holy confidence, to a holy trust
in the Lord, and a steadfast relyance upon Christ and his grace in every state
and condition; the Lord would have you make this improvement, his love is
discovered for this end, that your faith may be strengthened, and your hope
strengthened, and made more firm and lively; Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of God's Elect, it is God that justifies, etc. Romans 8. 33. Thus does
the Apostle improve it, If God be for us, who shall be against us? I am
persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. Nay (says he) in all these things we are more then
Conquerours. Christ would have his people improve this love, for the casting
out of fear, perfect love casts out fear, it is casting out fear, though it
has not cast out fear; Fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure
to give you a Kingdom; he would strengthen them against fear by setting before
them the Father's Electing love; it is the Fathers good pleasure to give you a
Kingdom. O that we might improve this for the strengthening of our confidence!

Secondly, If the Lord has discovered his love, know, that it is an
engagement, as to Confidence, so to Holiness; a holy and unblameable walking
before God. The adversaries of this Truth pretend that this is a Doctrine of
Liberty: Ah! but there is no such tendency; Put on, as the Elect of God, bowels
of mercy. If you be the Elect of God, put on bowels of mercy, and so be you
like to Christ; I say, know that this is the end of God's Electing love: God
has chosen you, wherefore has he chosen you? Ephesians. 1. 4. According as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy,
and without blame before him in love: This is the great end of God's love, and
the discovery of it, that you may be holy; O! Know that if God has loved you,
you should be holy.

Thridly, Know that you are engaged to walk humbly. Who put the difference?
What was it that made the difference? This Doctrine of free Electing love has
taught you, that it is grace that has made the difference, not your free will
and improvement, but it is free grace that made the difference: The Lord saw us
so far from improving of that which he gave us, as any other; and therefore
this may silence all flesh before the Lord, let not flesh glory; Why? what have
thou to glory in? If thou be better then others, whence was it? It was from
free love, and therefore it engages thee to walk humbly with thy God.

Fourthly, It is an engagement to Love. O! love the Lord dearly; if the Lord
has made out his Electing love, you are engaged to love him again; show forth
much love, love to Christ, and love to the Image of Christ, love to the way of
Christ, love to the Truth of Christ, love to the Ordinances of Christ, love to
the Saints of Christ, As I have loved you, (says Christ) so ought you to love
one another, John 13. 34. As I have loved you; as much as if Christ should say,
this is the greatest argument that I can propound to you to move you to love
one another, I have loved you: If the Lord have loved you with this electing
love, and has discovered that his love to you, you are engaged to love him,
and his people, and whatever has the Image of God and of Christ upon it. And
so I have done this point, this great mystery, this Doctrine of Election.

I desire not to read this Verse again; there is one thing more which I shall
but touch, and so conclude.

I am not sent but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel.

The House of Israel.

What is the House of Israel? Why, the seed of Abraham, the posterity of Jacob,
whose name was Israel; the twelve Tribes they are the House of Israel, they
were the peculiar people that God chose out of all the Nations; he left other
Nations, and he chose them for his peculiar people, he chose them to be his
House, when he took them into Covenant with himself, and they took hold of his
Covenant, they became a Church of Christ, and this Church of Christ is the
House of God.

Israel is God's House: That Is the Point that I shall but touch, and so shut up
all.

Every true Church of Christ is the House of God. They are a House, and they
are the House of God. What was spoken of that Church, may be said of every true
Gospel Church; they are a House, and God's house, they are God's Household, they
are called the Household of Faith, Gal. 6. 10. And so again in Ephesians. 2. 19. Now
therefore, ye are no more Strangers, and Foreigners, but Fellow Citizens with
the Saints, and of the Household of God; And this is prophesied of by the
Prophet Micah, chap. 4. verse. 2. And many Nations shall come and say, Come, Let
us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob;
speaking of Gospel Times; the Churches of the Lord are called the House of God.
Christ as a Son over his own House, whose House we are, etc. Heb. 3. 6.

Now in a house there is a Master of the Family; why the Master of this
Household is Christ; every household has a Head, a Master, the Lord of the
Family; Christ is the Master of this Family, he is the Lord, the Head of the
Church: If they call the Master of the house Beelzebub, says Christ, how much
more shall they call them of his household, Matthew. 10. 25. Christ is the Head,
and the Lord, and he is the Master of his House, of his Church, the Master of
the great Family.

Secondly, The Members of this house they are fellow Brethren, fellow Servants,
sometimes they are called Children: Members of a Family, they are either
Children, Servants, or Friends that dwell in the Family; The Lord calls his
people his children, his servants, sometimes his friends, still he owns them,
the members of his house, are fellow brethren, and fellow servants.

Thirdly, In a great Household you have Officers and Stewards; Great Families
they have their Stewards, they are under their Lord to oversee the house, and
to look to the ways of the house, and to make provision for the house, and to
give them their meat in due season: In this House of Christ, and in every
Gospel Church, Christ has appointed his Stewards, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so
account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of
God: Christ has appointed Officers, as his Stewards, to dispense his good
things to his Servants.

Fourthly, In a House you have the Laws and Customs of the House; In Christ's
House there are Laws and Customs, he has left it on Record, the Laws of his
House are written, how he will have his House governed; all the Laws of his
House are written in his Word; it is not left to men to make Laws for Christ's
House, (No) but Christ himself as Head and Lord of his Church he has made
Laws for the Government of his House.

Fifthly, In a house or household, there is employment for them in the house; so
Christ in his house has employment for all the members of his House, some work
that he has appointed for every child and servant in his House, for every one
that is a Member of any visible Church or Congregation, which is the House of
Christ, there is work that is common to all that are in the House, Psalm. 134.
Bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord, which by night stand in the
House of the Lord: And again in Psalm. 135. 1, 2. Praise ye the Lord, praise ye
the Name of the Lord, praise him O ye servants of the Lord, ye that stand in
the House of the Lord, in the Courts of the House of our God. The duty lay upon
all in the House of God, to bless the Name of Christ; and there are some
particular works that Christ cuts out for every member: Christ would have none
in his house idle, there is some work that every one may do, that may be for
the good of the whole house.

And as this House has his Work, The privileges of the house of Christ.
so this house has its Privileges. O! there are special Privileges; the Lord
he is engaged to teach all in his house; it lies upon the Master of the house
to teach those that are in his Family; why the Lord Jesus the Head of the
Family has engaged to teach all that are in the Family, Isa. 54. 13. And all
thy children shall be taught of the Lord: Sions children, they that are of the
household of God, God does engage for it that they shall all be taught.

And this is another Privilege, Priv. 2.
That as the Lord will teach them, so he will defend and protect them, He has
promised special protection to his children in his House, Isa. 4. 5. And the
Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her
Assemblies, a Cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night; for upon all the glory shall be a defense: The particular Churches of
Christ under the Gospel, upon all their glory shall be a defense.

And this is another Privilege, Priv. 3.
That the Master of the House will do the servants work: You know what the
Church says, Isa. 26. 12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou also
have wrought all our works in us: Whatever he calls for from any of his people
in his house, he will do it himself, he will strengthen them to do it, his own
Arm shall be at work. This is a choice privilege that belongs to the house of
God.

Another privilege is, Priv. 4.
That they shall eat of the best, and drink of the best; they shall have a
feast of fat things, and Wine on thee Lees well refined: He will make such a
Feast in the day of the Gospel, upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, upon
every house of the Lord; the Lord engages to make them a Feast of Fat things,
his own flesh shall be set before them, which is meat indeed; and his blood,
which is drink indeed.

Another privilege is this, Priv. 5.
The servants shall sit down with the Lord and Master at Table: Servants have
seldom such a privilege in any house, to sit down with their master; but in
Christ's house all the servants shall sit down at Table with their Lord. O!
What a choice privilege is this, to sit at their Lord's Table?

Nay, Priv. 6.
while they sit at Table, their Lord will serve them. Such a privilege the
Lord promises to his people, Luke 12. 37. He shall gird himself, and make them
sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. He will cut out their
portion for them; he will see to it, that they want nothing that he sees good
for them.

And he will bless their provision to them; Priv. 7.
that is another privilege, Psalm. 132. 13, 14, 15. For the Lord has chosen
Zion, he has desired it for his habitation; this is my rest for ever, here
will I dwell. I will abundantly bless her provision: I will satisfy her poor
with bread. See the Lord will bless Zions provision, and make his people fat
and flourishing, for so is the Promise, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. Those that be planted
in the House of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall
still bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and flourishing. These
are the privileges of the Lord's house.

To shut up all with a word or two of Application.

If every true Church of Christ be the Lord's house, Use 1.
Why then, Let not men take it ill if any Church of Christ, in obedience to the
Rule of Christ, and to the Commandment of Christ, shall be watchful and
cautelous who they receive into the House of Christ: Let it be no offense, it
is a Churches duty, and it should not be any Offense, they must walk by the
Rule that Christ has left: Christ's house has a rule given them, and they
must not for a house full of gold and silver, go from the rule of the Lord;
Christ has left a rule how he will have those qualified, that shall be
admitted into his house, Psalm. 15. and Psalm. 24. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into
the hill of the Lord? And who shall stand in his holy place? He that has clean
hands, and a pure heart; who has not lift up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully. These places speak of Gospel times, men and women must be visibly
holy: And therefore let it be no offense to any that the Church walks by the
Rule of the Master of the Family; they must receive none but such as they can
judge to be those that are qualified according to the rule that Christ has
left; such as Christ has received, and no more; you your selves will be choice
whom you receive into your houses, and I pray let Christ have that liberty you
challenge to your selves.

Secondly, Use 2.
From hence it lets us see, that the sins of Professors, especially the sins
and scandals of Church Members, must needs be a great dishonor to Christ. O
that we could think upon it seriously, there is much sadness in it, that they
that have a profession of Christ upon them, the Livery of Christ upon them,
that they that are admitted into the house of Christ, accounted as children
there, and servants there, and friends there, that they should walk so as
Christ should be dishonored; Professors, look to it, and ye especially that
are Church members; your scandals, your open sins, bring more dishonor to
Christ, then the sins of the whole world; your sins are a shame to Christ, they
reflect to the dishonor of Christ, and shame to Christ: It is a sad thing,
that men should look upon Professors, and say, they are like the world; they
make a profession, Ah! but they are as greedy after the world as wicked men,
and they are as proud as the Devil himself; O that Professors might not give
occasion for wicked men thus to speak! for this will be a dishonor to Christ.
When you see a child rude and deboist, you will say, who is his father? Or,
who is his Master? What? Has he no Father? Or no Master? O! What a shame is it
to the Master of the House? And so for Professors, when men shall look upon
those of corrupt conversation, and they shall say, Who is their Master? What?
Christ their Master! And they speak so and so! And walk so and so! O that the
Lord would make them that have the profession of Christ upon them watchful in
this; Take heed that you give no occasion to the world to speak evilly of
Christ, who is the Lord and Master of his House.

Thirdly, Use 3.
It lets us see what a Privilege it is to be a Member of the Church of Christ,
and to have Right thereunto; Take that along. O! What a privilege is it? What
a desirable mercy is it? How will every one strive to get their children into
great men's houses? If they can but get their sons to be one of a Noble-man's
house, you think it to be a great privilege; O what a mercy and privilege is
it to be one of Christ's Family? How many are the privileges that they enjoy
that are in Christ's House? You had a taste of them before, and O that the
taste might draw all Christians to the performance of their duty! O! How did
David long and thirst after it? Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired of the
Lord, and but one thing; What is that? That I may dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire
in his Temple: O how desirous was David to dwell in the House of the Lord? And
he counts them blessed, Psalm. 84. 4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy House.
Now if it be such a mercy and privilege, take heed that we do not contemn it,
and take heed that you do not slight it, and say, it is no great matter whether
I be in the house of God or no, so long as I am a Believer: O! Take heed that
you do not despise such a privilege.

Fourthly and Lastly, Use 4.
What an engagement does lie upon all in Christ's house to be holy? This is an
engagement to duty.

First, Duties of Church Members.
It engages the Saints in Church Fellowship, unto the exercise of the grace of
Love; why they are all of one house, Duty 1.
and of one household, and and they are engaged to love one another, they are
engaged to seek the good of one another: you take it ill if a servant or child
should not regard what becomes of their fellow servants, and fellow brethren,
every one must seek the good of the other. If one House, we are engaged to a
great deal of love and tenderness that we should express toward one another;
not to mind our own things, but to mind the good of others; but especially in
the same house; we are bound to do good to all the household of Faith, but
especially in the same house; we have the strongest tie to love, and to help
one another, if in Christ's house.

And if this be Christ's house, Duty 2.
O! What duty do we owe to Christ, that are received into Christ's house? If in
Christ's house, we should keep Christ's Laws, the Rules of his house: O! what
Rules has Christ given us to walk by? Faith and Love, the great Commandment of
the Gospel: O! if in Christ's house, know that you are engaged to walk by
Christ's Laws.

And it engages you to do the work of Christ? Duty 3.
what is the work that is in Christ's house? Surely there is some work for
every one, Christ will not have an idle person in his house, some work Christ
lays before every member; O that we might be helpful; there is something in
which the meanest member may be serviceable to the house of Christ; wait upon
the Lord to know your work, and wait for strength to do it.

And we should bless Christ for the provision of his house. Duty 4.
O! how engaged are we to wait upon the Lord for the blessing the provision of
his house? what a mercy it is for the Lord to take us into his house, and send
us the best things, making us a feast of fat things, wine on the Lees well
refined, a feast here, and a feast in other Ordinance, the Supper? O! what an
engagement to thrive and grow in grace? It will be a shame to Christ, if his
people that enjoy so much, if they shall be still lean and ill-thriving: As the
Lord has taken us into his house, so let us look up to the Lord for his
blessing, and for the fulfilling of his Promise, he has said, That those that
are in his house shall be fat and flourishing, and well-liking; and shall have
strength to perform their duty. O that they that are in the Lord's house, would
wait upon the Lord for his blessing.

Matthew. 15. 25. Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord help me.
SERMON XVII.
I Come now in this 25the verse to consider the behavior of this Woman's spirit
under her temptations; she does not stand to reason about her Election, but she
presently comes and worshippeth him; She came and worshipped him, saying, Lord,
help. This woman she was under great afflictions at this time, such afflictions
as made her come and cry to Christ, Have mercy on me O Lord, thou Son of David,
my daughter is grievously vexed with a Devil: And this her affliction was
accompanied with Temptation; and by a second Temptation Christ would make trial
of her faith: And though she was under affliction, and this affliction
accompanied with temptation, yet she falls down and worshipped him, She came
and worshipped him, saying, Lord, Help. So that I shall close with this Truth.

That it is the duty of Saints to worship Christ, Doctr.
yea even then when they are in the midst of the greatest afflictions and
temptations.

It is clear from the words, and in the opening of the Point I shall First,
show you, What it is to worship the Lord, what is that worship which the Lord
does expect from his people, when in affliction and temptation.

Secondly, I shall give you Scripture instances for the Proof of the Point.

And then Thirdly, Consider the Grounds of the Point.

And then Fourthly, Make some Improvement.

First, What worship it is that God requires of his people when afflicted and
tempted.
To consider, What is that Worship which the Lord requires of his people when
afflicted and tempted.

1. This Worship it is either the Worship of the Spirit, Internal: Or

2. It is the waiting upon God in those Institutions of his own, which he has
appointed for his people to wait upon him in; which is External Worship.

This Worship first, is that of the Spirit. You will say wherein does it
consist?

Why it consists First of all, Wherein spiritual Worship consists.
In that holy fear and Reverence which we owe unto the Lord, and should be
acting toward God, when God brings into such a condition. Fear and Reverence
it is a part of Internal Worship: Fathers of our flesh corrected us, and we
gave them reverence, shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the Father
of Spirits? Heb. 12. 9. When as the soul is filled with a holy fear, fearful to
sin against God, and to dishonor him in affliction and temptation, when the
spirit is fearful to grieve the Spirit of God in affliction, when it is fearful
to take the name of God in vain in the time of affliction, by unprofitable and
unfruitful bearing of affliction; when the spirit is thus composed to a
reverend childe-like fear before the Lord in the time of affliction, this is
part of that Internal Worship the soul owes to God.

Secondly, This Worship consists in Love, as well as in fear; when the soul is
acting in love toward God in time of affliction or temptation, as that it dares
not conclude that God loves him the less, though he be afflicted, though he be
in temptation, so also he desires not to love God one jot the less,
notwithstanding all afflictions and temptations; when the desire of the heart
is toward God in time of affliction or temptation; O! when will thou come unto
me? says David, Psalm. 101. 2. And says the gracious heart, let me have God's
presence in affliction, rather then deliverance from affliction; when as the
soul is carried out to delight in God in the time of affliction, to rejoice in
God, and to glory in God, and to comfort it self in God, as David did when he
was s^rely distressed at Ziklag, yet he encouraged himself in the Lord his God,
1 Samuel 30. 6. Though God takes away many comforts, yet if he give himself, the
soul is looking toward his portion as a blessed portion; one God is better
then all the comforts that I have lost, I have lost friends and relations, but
one God and Christ is more excellent then all the creatures in the world; when
the heart is thus breathing in love toward God in time of affliction or
temptation, this is a part of that Internal worship it owes to God.

Thirdly, This Internal Worship is that Trust and Affiance the soul has, which
it places in God alone; when the soul is acting of faith in the Lord, The Lord
is my portion, my soul has said it, and therefore I will hope in him; I will
look toward him, I will rest upon his Arm, doubtless thou art our Father,
though all this has befallen us, doubtless God's intentions are gracious, it
is for my good that he does thus afflict me; doubtless the Lord can and will
make a good end of these afflictions, for that is his promise: Now when the
soul is thus roling upon God, and resting upon his promise, cleaving to the
faithfulness of God for the fulfilling of his Promise in time of affliction or
temptation, this is a great part of that inward worship which God does require
of the soul, when it shall thus believe in hope, above hope, and against hope;
as Abraham the Father of the faithful did, this is Inward Worship.

Fourthly, It consists in the submission of the soul to God. That Inward
Worship that God does require of his people in time of affliction or
temptation, I say it consists in the submission of the spirit unto God; when a
man desires to make a resignation of his Will unto God; If this cup may not
pass from me, thy will be done; when a soul is content to be at the dispose of
God, for the kind of affliction, and measure of affliction, and the time of
affliction; well, if God increase my burden, let him increase my strength, and
my soul shall glory in him; if the Lord will continue my affliction longer, and
I must drink of this cup again and again, yea the third time, if the Lord will
afford his presence in affliction, my soul desires to submit to the Lord; when
thus the heart is affected toward God, submitting, falling down before the
Lord, and making a resignation of his Will to the Lord's Will. This is that
special Worship of the Spirit, that Internal Worship that the Father of Spirits
calls for from his children in time of affliction.

But secondly, External Worship, what, and wherein it consists.
This Worship must be External as well as Internal, and it consists in the
giving honor to God in those ways that are of his own appointment, especially
in these two.

First, In the pouring out of the soul in supplication before the Lord.

Secondly, In speaking good words of God.

These are two great parts of that external worship that God calls his children
to in time of affliction; to speak gracious words unto God, and to speak good
words of God to his praise and honor.

First It is the pouring out the Supplication of the Soul before the Lord in
prayer; it is a special exercise that God calls his people to in time of
affliction and temptation, to be much in supplication pouring out their souls
before the Lord. Now this Supplication, this Prayer which the Lord does require
and does delight in, it is accompanied

First, With Humility; As you shall find in the example of this woman, her
prayer in the day of her distress, it was a humble prayer, a humble
supplication; one of the Evangelists observes, (the Evangelist Mark, chap. 7.
ve?s. 25.) that she came and fell at his feet; this woman came and fell at the
feet of Christ, and cried to him, Lord help me; It is a humble prayer that the
Lord does delight in, when the spirit lies low before the Lord, when the
creature is sensible of his own vileness, and shall acknowledge with Jacob,
That he is less then the least of all those mercies which he does desire and
expect at the hand of God, that if ever the Lord be gracious, it must be free
grace, something in himself that must move him; when the soul is enabled by the
Spirit of the Lord to put up such a prayer, this is a part of that external
worship that the Lord requires.

Secondly, You shall find that this woman's prayer was accompanied with
Fervency; her very expression does hold forth and declare the ardency of her
spirit; she cried before, O Lord, thou Son of David have mercy on me; and now
again she breaks forth into this expression, Lord, Help: Why, it is such a
prayer that God takes delight in, such a supplication as is sent up with a
holy fervency unto God; and indeed the Lord brings his people into the furnace
of affliction and temptation, that so he may kindle this holy fire of zeal and
fervency in their bosoms; the Lord does raise the storms, that so he may make
the Disciples to cry the louder. Now therefore when the spirit is thus carried
out to God, this is such worship as he requires and expects.

Again thirdly, We shall find that this woman supplication it was accompanied
with Faith; Fervency without faith could not avail; but there is an expression
of her faith, that Title which she gave to Christ, Lord; Lord help: she looked
upon him as the Lord of heaven and earth, so she applies her self to him in her
distress; infinite (...) power, he was the Lord, and had infinite power, he was
able to help; so she rests upon his all sufficiency: sure he that is the
Lord, the Lord of all, he has power enough in his hand, and grace enough in
his heart, he can do what he please, why such a prayer the Lord accepts of as
is accompanied with faith; the promise is made to faith; Whatever you ask in
my Name believing, you shall receive; and the prayer of Faith shall save the
sick: the prayer of faith can do great things.

Fourthly, This woman's prayer was accompanied with Constancy; she held on
notwithstanding the discouragements she met withal, they were very many and
great, the Lord (as you heard before) was silent to her a long time, when he
speaks he speaks a sad word, that he was not sent to such as she was, yet she
holds on; this discouragement might have beaten her off, and made her to have
said, well, I see that there is no hope, I shall lose my labor; but
notwithstanding all discouragements, she does continue in supplication, she
worships, and she cries, Lord help: It is constancy in Prayer that the heart of
God is taken with, Christ you know spoke a parable to this end, Luke 18. 1.
That men should pray always. The soul should continue with God, and abide with
God: Resolve not to go away from his feet, but there to sit, and there to wait,
and there to cry, till the Lord be gracious; this part of that external worship
the Lord requires of his people in time of affliction and temptation.

Secondly, The other part of external worship is in speaking well of God in
affliction and temptation. So does this woman, she spoke well of Christ when
she worshipped him, she calls him Lord; by which word she does First of all,
Exalt and honor Christ. Secondly, She Justifies him.

Both these are good words, which God takes well from his people in the time of
affliction or temptation.

First, She does Exalt him, she spoke to his honor; thou art the Lord
whatever I be, though I be a poor vile creature, as she acknowledged afterward
when Christ converted her, yet thou art the Lord; nay, though Christ should
debase her, yet she would exalt him: O this is an excellent frame of spirit, an
excellent part of that worship we owe to God. And as she does honor God, So

Secondly, She Justifies him; (O Lord) that very word does justify Christ in
all his dealings toward her: Thou art the Lord, thou art Jehovah, infinite,
free and absolute, and may do what thou please, and in all this thou have
done me no wrong, neither can thou do wrong, for thou art the Lord, I am thy
poor creature, thy vassal, but thou art the Lord; thus she justifies Christ.
Now when the soul is thus carried out in time of affliction and temptation, to
speak such words as may be to the honor of Christ, and so to speak, as to
justify Christ in all that has befallen it, Lord thou have done me no wrong,
thou art righteous, though my affliction be very great, though my temptation be
very prevalent, yet the Lord is righteous in all that has befallen me; if he
should afflict me seven times more, and heat the Furnace seven times hotter, I
could not say thou were unrighteous: When the soul is thus carried out (I say)
to speak well of God, to speak honorably of God, and to speak to the
justifying of God in his dealings, this is a great part of that worship which
we owe to God in time of affliction. And so you have seen the first particular,
What it is to worship the Lord, or what is that worship which the Lord does
expect from his people in time of affliction and temptation.

Secondly, I shall give you two or three Instances for the proof of the Point;
That it is the duty of the Saints thus to worship, whatever the affliction or
the temptation be, and that both with Internal worship of the spirit, and with
External worship, speaking good words unto God, and of God.

Thus it was with Job, Instance 1. of Job.
look into Job 1. 20, 21. Then Job arose, and rent his Mantle, and shaved his
head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, and said, Naked came I out
of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. Job he was under great
afflictions at this time, all his substance was taken away, a sad and
unparalled affliction, and no doubt but it was a day of great temptation to
Job, for that was the Devil's design to make Job blaspheme God to his face,
and therefore without doubt Satan did suggest horrible temptations, or else he
had not well prosecuted his design; and yet notwithstanding it was a day of
affliction, and a day of temptation, Job worshipped the Lord, expressed holy
fear and reverence, expressed love, and expressed his trust, his confidence,
and his submission; and he prays, and he praises, he spoke to God, and he
spoke well of God, all parts of worship, he fell down and worshipped, and said,
The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, blessed be the Name of the Lord:
And so David often met with afflictions and temptations, Instance 2. of David.
and yet you shall find him worshipping in diverse of his Psalms. Instance 3.
of Jonah.
Yea look upon Jonah, and take Jonah for an instance, and O that God would make
these his Saints patterns to us; Jonah 2. 2, 3, 4. He was in a sad affliction,
and his affliction was accompanied with temptation, he was as low in his own
imagination, as if he had been in the belly of hell, and yet even then, when in
the Whales belly, in the depth of affliction, and compassed round about with
sore temptations, Then Jonah worshipped the Lord, verse 4. Then I said, I am
cast out of thy sight, yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple. I said I
was cast out of thy sight; there is a temptation of distrust, when in that sad
condition, in the bottom of the Sea, yet will I look toward thy holy Temple;
and at verse. 7. When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my
prayer came in unto thee, into thy holy Temple: When he was in this condition,
he prayed, and he poured out his soul before the Lord.

I shall only give you one instance more, Instance 4. of Christ.
and that is of Christ himself, when as he was in a sore affliction, and his
affliction accompanied with temptations, then he prayed, Luke 22. 39, 40, 41,
42. And he came out, and went as he was wont, to the Mount of Olives, and his
Disciples also followed him, And when he was at the place, he said unto them,
Pray, that ye enter not into temptation. And he was withdrawn from them about a
stones cast, and kneeled down, and prayed, saying, Father, if th^^ be willing,
remove this cup from me: Nevertheless, not my Will, but thine be done: and at
verse. 44. it is said, being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly. His
affliction does increase, and his temptations do increase, and as they
increase, so he cries the more earnestly to his Father: Afflictions do not make
Christ cease to worship; no, he worships the more, and he cries the louder,
and prays the more earnestly.

Thirdly, Grounds of the point, why it is the duty of Gods people to worship in
time of affliction.
We shall consider the Grounds of the Point; Why it is the duty of God's
people, to worship God in time of affliction and temptation.

First, Because there is no affliction or temptation, but it is from the Lord,
it is his Messenger, it is of his sending; we have to deal with God in it and
it is fit that we should fall down and worship him, when God sends affliction,
Isa. 45. 7. I form the light, and create darkness; I make peace, and create
evil; I the Lord do all these things: It is not spoken of Natural darkness, the
darkness that is of the Air, that was not created by God, there is no creating
cause, withdrawing of light causes darkness; but God (says he) creates
darkness, he creates Metaphorical darkness, that darkness which he sends as an
affliction to his own people, I create it; there is no darkness but that which
is of the Lord's forming and creating: In the Creation of the world, God said,
let there be light; but God never said, let there be darkness: but now, when
God will afflict any of his people, he creates darkness, and there is no
darkness, till God say, let there be darkness; when God says, let there be
darkness in such a man's estate, all his comforts shall wither; when God says,
let there be darkness in such a man's family, there shall be darkness; for he
can turn the Sun, or Moon, or Stars into darkness; he can take away the head of
the Family, the children that are as the Stars of the Family; if God speak the
word, though there be never so many in the family, he can turn light into
darkness: and so, when God says, let there be darkness in such a man's spirit,
O then, though it was comfortable before, it will be as sad and as dark in the
inward man, even as it is with the Air at midnight; darkness is of God's
creating: and therefore whenever the Lord brings us into a state of darkness,
affliction and temptation, either outward or inward, it is time then to worship
the Lord.

Secondly, Ground 2.
We should then worship the Lord in time of affliction and temptation, for it
is the Lord only that can enable a man to bear temptation or affliction: there
is need (I say) that we should apply our selves to the Lord, for he only can
enable a poor creature to grapple with his affliction and temptation; If the
Lord help not, the proudest helper in the world shall stoop, and not be able to
bear up a man under the least affliction, especially when the affliction is
accompanied with temptation, and is wounding; A wounded spirit who can bear? It
is only everlasting Arms that can support under such a condition; surely
therefore it is our duty in affliction and temptation to fall down and worship.

Thirdly, Ground 3.
The Lord only can give a sanctified (...) of affliction; he only can do us
good by our manifold temptations; affliction it self cannot profit, sad
experience shows it, a man may have stroke after stroke, and yet receive no
profit, no spiritual advantage, I am the Lord thy God that teaches thee to
profit, Isa. 48. 17. God only can teach to profit; Blessed is the man whom thou
correctest and teach, Job 5. 17. When God's instruction and teaching go
along with his correction, that man is blessed, that affliction shall be
blessed: Affliction it self cannot do it, and therefore there is need that we
should apply our selves to God.

Fourthly, Ground 4.
God only can remove the affliction, and he only can rebuke the distemper, and
silence the temptation; for certainly both affliction and temptation (as I said
before) they are the Lord's messengers, they are the Armies of the Lord of
Hosts, they go, and they come at his command, he gives out the word, and he
bids affliction to charge, and it charge; and if he bids it to retreat, it
shall retreat; God only can deliver from affliction, and from temptation;
therefore surely it is our duty to worship in affliction and temptation.

Fifthly, Ground 5.
It is the end of all afflictions and temptations to bring the soul nearer to
God, to drive the soul nigher God: We are very prone to content our selves to
live at a distance from God; before I was afflicted, I went astray, says
David, Psalm. 119. 67. Now the end of affliction and temptation is to fetch home
the straggling sheep, to bring God and the spirit nigher together; therefore it
is fit that we should fall down and worship, for therein do we draw nigh to
God, when the soul falls down and worships God with Internal worship, fear him,
love him, trust him, and submit to him, and when it is pouring out its soul,
and lifting up the name of God, speaking good words of the Almighty; surely
herein the soul draws nigh to God, and so affliction attains its end.

Sixthly and lastly, Ground 6.
This is the way to ease and rest in our afflictions; we cry out for ease and
rest, that is the thing we seek after; the way to have ease and rest, is to
fall down and worship; for by so doing, the soul does cast its burden upon the
Lord. When it does thus fall down, and worship with the worship of the Spirit,
fear, and love, and trust, now the soul casts its burden upon the Lord, and
his burden being left there, it brings in unspeakable rest. I say, when the
soul by inward worship has gone to God, and left his burden upon the Lord, O!
it brings in ease to the spirit, whatever the affliction or temptation be.

Well then, to Apply this in a word.

First, Use 1.
What cause have we to be ashamed that we have come so far short of this Duty
in the time of affliction or temptation? We have been afflicted at one time or
other, who has been free? many of your souls have been exercised with
temptations, but O! What has been the carriage of our spirits under them? Have
we fallen down and worshipped with the worship of the Spirit? Have we been
putting forth acts of holy fear and reverence? Have we been putting forth acts
of love toward God? Have we been exercising trust and affiance in the name of
the Lord? which is a strong Tower, the righteous flee into it, and are safe:
Have we made it our work to be submitting to the Lord, to have our wills cast
into the will of God, to submit to God for kind, and for measure, and for
time? O! How far do we come short of this our duty? Have we been pouring forth
our souls to God in afflicted conditions, and tempted conditions? Have we made
it our work to cry the more earnestly being in an Agony, as Christ did? Have we
spoken well of God at that time? Have we not charged God foolishly, and spoken
unadvisedly with our lips? Truly we have cause to be humbled every one, either
we have not known our duty, or not minded our duty in the time of affliction
and temptation.

Nay, Instead of worshipping, Have not we been dishonouring God in the time of
affliction and temptation? Have not we been distrusting, murmuring, repining,
entertaining hard thoughts of God, speaking hard words against God? Have we not
neglected our duty, and said, what profit is there if I pray unto the Almighty?
Have we not thought that we have had to excuse from worship, when the
afflicting hand of God has been upon us? We have thought that affliction had
been our excuse from our duty; truly we may take up a sad complaint against our
selves, we are all guilty before the Lord, and O that he would help us to see
the evil of our hearts, that has past in the time of affliction and temptation!

But you will say, when some afflictions are upon us, alas we cannot pour out
supplications to the Lord; surely in time of affliction he does not require it;
he will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

But can our afflictions be worse then Jobs were? Can it be greater then
Jonahs? he was in the belly of hell; Can our afflictions and agonies be greater
then Christ's were? yet he prayed, and prayed the more earnestly; the more his
afflictions and temptations increased, the more he prayed: I know the Lord does
sometimes exercise his people with such conditions, such weaknesses, as they
cannot be much in the performance of this external part of Worship; they cannot
be much in speaking unto God, nor speaking well of God, because of that
weakness that is upon the outward man; and if that be the only hinderance, if
the spirit be not in fault, the Lord Jesus will make an excuse; Christ does
tender his poor servants and children in such a condition, when he sees the
spirit is willing, and the flesh weak; they shall not need to excuse
themselves, Christ will. But even then we are called upon to be much in giving
to the Lord that inward worship of the spirit, which may be given when we are
in the weakest condition; and the more we are hindered from the external part of
worship, the more should we be in the internal part of worship, the more should
the spirit be reverencing, and loving, and exercising acts of Faith and
Affiance, and the more submitting to the Lord, and lying low; this the Lord
calls for from his people in the worst condition: and we have cause to be
humbled that we are not found in the performance of this duty in time of
affliction or temptation.

Secondly, Use 2.
If it be a duty to worship in time of affliction, it is much more our duty to
worship when the Lord is pleased to free us from affliction and from
temptation; if God looks for Worship from his people when under affliction and
temptation, then much more he looks for worship from his people when free from
affliction and temptation: This is a duty that lies upon all Saints, to be
worshipping the Lord, not only with Internal, but External worship, to take all
opportunities of worshipping the Lord in public, and in our families in
private, to be pouring out supplications, and to be speaking well of God is our
duty: if in sickness, then much more in health; and if in adversity, much more
in prosperity; and if under temptation, much more in the day of freedom, when
the hand of the Lord is not upon us; it is our duty to take all opportunities,
and the best opportunities, and the fittest opportunities, both in our
families, and in public. Take heed that our encumbrances of the world does
not shut out our worship of God: Pour out thine indignation upon the Heathen,
and the Families that call not upon thy name: O that that Scripture were
remembered! Truly we are apt to complain when God lays his hand upon us, and
exercises us with affliction and temptation, our complaint is, that we cannot
worship; that is the grief and the burden, that we cannot worship the Lord, we
are taken off from our duty; if so, we had more need to take those fairer
advantages and opportunities of worshipping, while the Lord is pleased to
continue his course of mercy and goodness toward us: Seek the Lord while he is
near, and call upon him while he may be found; when afflictions come, we cry
out, God is far from us, and at a great distance, and we know not how to apply
our selves to him; but examine and see whether this may not be the cause,
because we have not taken our opportunity while he was near, we have neglected
to worship him while we had strength and ability of body, of pouring out our
souls to God, and speaking to God; and no wonder the Lord does take those
opportunities from us: and truly that proves a great burden to many of Gods
own people in the day of adversity, when God brings them into affliction, and
exercises them with temptation, and they see they cannot worship him in that
external way; O! that is their grief, that they have not laid forth themselves
in the worship of the Lord, both public and private, while the Lord gave them
space and opportunity; and therefore as we desire not to lie under that
pressure, which will be exceeding heavy to God's own people, take heed how we
neglect worship, either in our families, or in public, or in both; for if it
be our duty to worship under affliction, much more in health, peace, and
strength.

To draw to a conclusion, one word of Exhortation, and so I end.

Brethren, Let us look up to the Lord to teach us this lesson, Use 3.
to make Impression of this Divine Truth upon our hearts; there is a time a
coming that every one of us may be put to the exercise of it; and therefore
look up to the Lord now to teach you, that when affliction and remptation come,
we may through the Lord's strength be made able to fall down and worship, both
with Internal and External worship; O! that God would make those examples of
the Saints that were set before us, prevalent with us, to draw us on to our
duty; you heard how Job worshipped, and how Jonah worshipped, and Christ
worshipped in an Agony, in the midst of affliction, accompanied with great
temptations; O that we might look up to God to teach us this duty! that we may
be ready to fall down and worship, as Job was, when the evil tidings came that
all was taken from him, be falls down and worshipped, and blesses the Name of
God. O! Know, that we have need then to be pouring out our souls before the
Lord, and to be crying, as this woman did, Lord help, if ever we had need to
cry, then Lord help; when affliction is upon us, especially accompanied with
temptations, men and Angels cannot help, we had need to cry, Lord help.

But you will say, what is it that we should cry for to the Lord at such a
time? It is our duty to worship, and to be pouring out supplications, but what
is it that God expects that his people should cry for in time of affliction and
temptation?

Briefly thus, What Gods people should beg for in time of affliction.
We should cry, That the Lord would discover the cause of that affliction, and
that trial which the Lord does exercise his people with: Truly, it is not
without cause, and therefore it is not without cause that God does afflict us,
if need be you are in temptation, it is not without cause, and therefore it is
our wisdom and duty to cry to the Lord that he would discover to us why it is
thus with us, to know what is his mind and will toward us, what God aims at,
whether for correction or trial, or for exercise; wait upon the Lord to know
what is his end; it is an addition to our affliction, when as our way is hid,
and God's way toward us is hid, and we know not what God intends; therefore we
should be much in this request, fall down and worship him, and desire the Lord
to show us the cause, what is his end in this affliction, this trial and
temptation.

Secondly, Fall down, and worship, and pray that the Lord would take away the
sting of affliction; the sting is sin, the sting of death is sin, and the sting
of all lesser deaths, affliction, is sin; therefore pray that the Lord would
take away the sting; pray that he would not correct us in wrath, and that he
would not chasten us in his sore displeasure; that was David's request (Psalm.
6. 1.) that the affliction might not be accompanied with the Lord's
displeasure, but that the face of the Lord may be toward us, and the
comforting presence of the Lord with us in affliction; we should cry that the
Lord would take away the sting, and that his presence may be with us in
affliction, that he would not leave us in the fiery furnace alone, but
according to his promise, would be with us, when we go through the fire and
water.

Thirdly, We should cry, That the Lord would make us willing to bear our
affliction, whatever it be; that he would make our spirits submissive to him:
that should be the great request of a gracious heart, that the Lord would make
our spirits submissive unto him. O! What a gracious frame of spirit was David
in, when he was driven out from Jerusalem by his son Absalom? 2 Samuel 15. 25.
The Priests would have brought the Ark after him; No (says he) Carry back the
Ark of God into the City; If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation; But if he thus
say, I have no delight in thee, behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems
good unto him: Here was a gracious submissive frame of spirit under a great
affliction; if the Lord will use me no longer as an instrument, and I must
Reign no longer, let the Lord choose what instrument he pleases, and do with
me what seems good unto him. O! Beg that God would give us a submissive frame
of heart, that when the Lord leads us into any affliction, we may be found
submitting to the Will of God.

Fourthly, We should beg of the Lord, That He would strengthen us to bear our
affliction; that he would enable us to grapple with our Temptations, and so to
bear our affliction, that we may be no dishonor to his Name; so to bear our
affliction, as we may be to his praise. Surely the least affliction will crush
us, if we have no other strength then our own, we shall be soon crushed, when
under temptation: O! We had need cry, Lord help, we had need cry that the Lord
would put under everlasting Arms to bear up the spirit, and to enable us so to
carry it, as we may be an honor to Christ.

Fifthly, When we fall down and worship, Beg that the Lord would give a
sanctified use of the affliction or temptation, whatsoever it be: Our spirits
should be breathing after a holy improvement of all God's dispensations,
especially these dispensations of great afflictions or temptations; truly (as
you heard before) it is not in affliction it self to do this, we cannot profit
by it if the Lord does not teach; and therefore we had need go to him, and cry
to him, that he would give a sanctified use, that he would make affliction
attain its end, that he would bore our ear to instruction and correction; that
we may hear the rod, and him that has appointed it, that he would carry on his
own work, and would make use of this affliction for the subduing of our corrupt
nature, making us partakers of his Divine Nature. Thus we should fall down and
worship, and beg that God would give us a sanctified use of all afflictions.

And know Brethren, that we shall never have ease nor rest in our spirits till
we be brought into this posture, we shall be in a woeful turmoyl and perplexity,
as Noah's Dove, that found no rest till it came into the Ark; so we shall find
no rest till God brings us into this frame, bow the spirit, and cause it to
fall down and worship in time of affliction, there will be no sanctified use of
affliction; never expect any good by affliction, till God bring the spirit into
this posture, to fall down and worship, as Job, and Jonah, and Christ did; that
is an argument that the affliction is working the right way, when as the spirit
is thus subdued to God: now it is working for good, certainly God will make a
good end with that soul, when it is brought thus to fall down and worship the
Lord, to fear, and love, and trust, and submit to him, and to pray, and praise,
to speak to God, and to speak well of God in time of affliction: Now the
Physic works kindly, and the Lord is engaged by his word, that this shall work
together for good, even all afflictions; when it thus works, you may have
assurance of it, that all shall work together for good, God will make a good
end, as he did with Job, and you may be sure that God will make a good end with
you when as the affliction does thus work. And till this be done, never expect
deliverance in mercy, if the spirit be not thus brought off in time of
affliction or temptation, it is no mercy to be delivered; and this is a sure
Argument that mercy is at hand, deliverance not far off, when as the Lord shall
enable the soul thus to fall down and worship. When Jonah shall be looking
toward the holy Temple, though in the belly of hell, yet when he looks to God
through the Mediator, worshipping, praying, and praising, deliverance is not far
off: O that God would help us to be looking upon his, and other examples! Yea,
the example of this woman, when she was tempted and afflicted, she falls down
and worshipped, saying, Lord Help.

Matthew. 15. 26. But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens
bread, and to cast it to Dogs.
SERMON XVIII.
HEre is the third Temptation that this woman met withal for the trial of her
faith.

Christ first of all gave her no Answer, that was one trial.

Secondly, He gave her a denial; he tells her, that he was not sent to such as
she was: that was a greater trial.

But now in the third place, he gave her a repulse; he does not only seem to
deny her, but seems to beat her back, and that with shame and reproach; a very
sore temptation. Christ seems now to do his utmost to drive her away out of his
presence, by presenting unto her hervileness, her unworthiness, It is not meet
to cast the childrens bread unto dogs. The Jews are called the children, they
were the household of God, chosen and separated from all the world, and the
Gentiles, they were called Dogs, they were without, and without are dogs; they
were without the Covenant, and so were visibly unholy and unclean, and
therefore counted dogs, and called dogs. And the mercies that Christ the
Mediator was sent to dispense, are called childrens bread. It is not meet to
take the childrens bread.

It is not meet,] It is not good, it is not fair dealing, it is not honest, it
is not right; no, not in the sight of men, to take that which is provided for
children, and give it to dogs, it were a sin and a shame so to do; therefore
the Lord Jesus seems here to beat her back with a strong repulse; as if he
should say, I wonder at this woman's boldness, she being without the Covenant,
among the dogs, should desire the childrens bread; no, it is not fair dealing,
meet, right, nor honest, to take the childrens bread and cast it to dogs: and
thus she is beaten back, by presenting her vileness and unworthiness.

The truth that I shall close with, is this. The consideration of unworthiness
and vileness, Doctr.
proves many times a sore temptation to Christ's people.

God many times suffers his people to be tempted, and to meet with many sore
temptations about their own vileness and unworthiness. That is the temptation
that is now applied to this woman, that she was an unworthy creature, called a
dog.

Now to make it plain to you from Scripture, that this many times does prove a
sore temptation to God's people, when their eye has been kept intent upon
their own vileness; this was a great temptation to Moses, This was a temptation
to Moses.
and laid as a block in Moses his way, Exodus 3. 11. And Moses said unto God,
who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the
children of Israel out of Egypt? He looked upon his own unworthiness, he was
of a stammering tongue, and uncircumcised lips, when God would send him about
that great work of bringing the people of Israel out of Egypt; this was a
hinderance to Moses when he looked upon his unworthiness: O Lord, Who am I that
I should go to Pharaoh?

And so the Prophet Isaiah, he met with the same temptation, To Isaiah.
and it was a great discouragement to him, and made him cry out bitterly, Isa.
6. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips: He looked
upon his own unworthiness, and the unworthiness of the people, and then he
cries out that he was undone, I am undone: It was a mighty weight upon his
spirit, till the Lord sent his Angel to help him over this temptation, by
declaring to him that his iniquity was taken away, and his sin purged, as you
may see in the 6 and 7 verses.

And so this was a temptation to the Prophet Jeremiah, To Jeremy
his own unworthiness, when God would send him about some special service,
chap. 1. v. 6. Then said I, Ah Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a
child: He looked upon his own weakness, I am a child, I cannot speak,
altogether unfit for the service, and he would have declined it, and therefore
God thrust him upon it, v. 7. his unworthiness was a temptation to him.

And it was this that made the woman that had the issue of blood to come
behind Christ, To the woman that had the Issue of blood.
Matthew. 9. 20. and to touch the hem of his garment, she would have stolen a
cure, and gone away, and not have been seen, and so Christ should have lost the
honor; she was under a temptation, and it was from the sense of her
unworthiness.

And so the Centurion, To the Centurion
Luke 7. 7. what was it that kept him from Christ? It was the sense of his
unworthiness; Wherefore neither thought I my self worthy to come unto thee: I
sent to thee indeed: but I thought not my self worthy to come to thee; the
sense of his unworthiness kept him from coming in person to Christ: And so the
sense of unworthiness and vileness, does keep many a poor soul from closing
with Christ, it keeps many a soul from accepting the tender of grace and
reconciliation; it keeps many a soul from submitting to the righteousness of
God, which is the righteousness of faith.

But in the opening of the Point, The particular discoveries of unworthiness,
that prove matter of temptation to Gods people.
I shall show you what are those particular discoveries of unworthiness that do
many times prove matter of temptation unto God's people.

First of all, when as a poor soul does look upon his own sinfulness, and its
unworthiness by reason of sin; when as a man or woman come to see what sin is,
what a vile thing sin is, what an unclean and polluted thing sin is, such a
pollution, such a defiled thing, that there is no Sinck, no pit foul enough to
receive it, but the pit of hell; so unclean is sin, such an uncleanness as will
turn all in conclusion into the pit of hell. Now when a soul comes to see what
a vile thing sin is, and look upon himself, and see that he is the man; I am
the man, and I am the woman thus polluted and thus defiled, defiled all over,
within and without, heart defiled, and life defiled, and when the soul comes to
pore upon this, it proves many times matter of sore temptation; and especially
this sinfulness is matter of temptation in these two or three branches.

First of all, in the vileness and sinfulness of our hearts and natures; when
as men or women come to be acquainted with the vileness of their nature, and
see what rebellion is in the heart, and find that there is a by as upon the
spirit, that does carry it off continually from God, the heart inclined toward
vanity evermore; O! How do vain thoughts and sinful imaginations crowd in
continually? And they do defile the most holy Service that is taken in hand: O!
This proves matter of temptation: This body of sin and death, it made the
Apostle cry out, O miserable man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body
of this death* Romans 7. 24. It had been a pressing temptation, if the Lord had
not made a discovery of the way of deliverance and salvation to him; for a poor
soul is apt to fear, surely there is nothing of God in me, if there were any
seed of God in me, my heart would never be so vain, and the byas of my spirit
would never carry me out from God so, O! I fear I am not made partaker yet of
the Divine Nature. The sight of that woeful evil that is in the heart, proves
many times a sad temptation, that it is hard for a poor soul to get over it. And

Secondly, When the Lord does leave a poor creature to sin after mercy, and
against mercy, it has been saved by the Lord, delivered by his right hand,
pressed with such and such a mercy, and yet overtaken in the snare of sin;
sinning against mercy many times proves a sore temptation: O! I am afraid that
I am none of the Lord's children, mercy has not its kind work upon me, it
does not bring forth those fruits which the Lord may look for when he gives out
such mercies: sinning against mercy, many times proves a sore temptation.

Thirdly, When the Lord leaves a poor creature to fall again and again into the
same sin; O! this proves matter of temptation, when as the soul has seen the
evil of sin, and has bewailed it, has run to the Lord for strength against
it, yet has been overtaken again and again in the same sin; that I say proves
matter of sore temptation: Surely may the poor soul say, my spot is not the
spot of children, I have been overtaken once and again; whereupon the poor soul
may be tempted to cast away his hope and confidence, and not only tempted to
cast away its confidence, but tempted to depart from God, and to go out from
the ways of obedience; There is no hope (say they in Jer. 18. 12.) but we will
walk after our own devices, and we will every one do the imagination of his
evil heart: We have back-slidden again and again, and there is no hope for us,
we had as good go on, and take our fill in sin: This temptation is set on many
times by falling into sin. That is the first, That unworthiness by reason of
sin.

Secondly, Unworthiness by reason of that miserable, weak, and frail condition
that the children of men are in; the great distance that man is at from God,
this proves matter of temptation to many a poor soul, when he considers that he
is a poor piece of dust and ashes, and that there is an infinite distance
between God and the creature; he is from everlasting to everlasting, he is
Jehovah, and changes not: But we are poor creatures, that are of yesterday,
and are going down to the grave to day, and shall be in the place of silence to
morrow: O this proves matter of temptation and discouragement. Will the Lord
look down upon such a poor creature, and upon such a piece of dust and ashes?
Is it possible that the Lord should humble himself to take notice of me? And
besides that common condition of frailty which all men are in, the Lord is
pleased to bring some of his people into a lower condition then that which is
the ordinary state of man, and yet he is as low as dust: Yet (I say) the Lord
is pleased to bring some of his people into a lower condition then ordinary; By
affliction God makes man's state to be low, when he brings him into an afflicted
state; and when God makes man's comforts to be low, takes away those comforts,
and those relations which have been his refreshments, I say, when a man is
brought thus into a low and afflicted condition, this added to that common
condition of frailty, it sets at a great distance from God, and it proves
many times matter of discouragement and temptation to a poor soul: So it was
with Job, chap. 14. v. 1, 2, 3. Man that is born of a woman, is of few days,
and full of trouble; he comes forth like a flower, and is cut down; he flees
also as a shadow, and continues not. And do thou open thine eyes upon such
a one? Lord, (says he) Is it possible that thou should humble thy self so
far to look down upon such a one? That God should look down with the eye of
pity upon such a one frail man is, one that is brought so low, one that sits
upon the dunghill! Unworthiness by reason of frailness, proves a temptation many
times to Gods own people.

Thirdly, Unworthiness by reason of coldness and deadness in affection: When a
poor soul finds how dead his heart is toward God; O! I have a heart for the
world, and I have affections to friends and relations, there is love to
creatures, nay there is affection enough to vanity, but little or no heart for
God, there are not those breathings, those thirstings, those pantings after
God, not that first love which sometimes it has found to the Lord, and to the
things of Christ: O! This proves matter of discouragement and temptation: O! I
fear that the love of God dwells not in me, says a poor soul, I find my
heart so dead, and so strait toward God, open to the world, but strait to God:
O! I fear that the love of God dwells not in me; How can it be that God
should set his love upon such a one? Surely if the love of God were in me, I
should love the Lord more then I do. Deadness and coldness in affection toward
the Lord, it proves many times a sore temptation.

Fourthly and lastly, Unworthiness by reason of unusefulness and
unserviceableness to God, that is matter of temptation; when as a poor creature
sees that it can do little or nothing for the Lord, O! I am a barren tree, I am
a dry branch, I see that others are fruitful, I see that others have the
promise fulfilled to them, they bring forth much fruit, they are serviceable in
their generation, they are an honor to God, and do good to men; but as for me,
I know not wherein I can honor him, I know not wherein I can be useful or
serviceable, O I bring forth no fruit unto God, and therefore am afraid that I
am the Tree the Apostle Jude (verse. 12.) speaks of, without fruit, twice
dead, plucked up by the roots, whose end is to be burnt; This is matter of sore
temptation, and therefore hereupon there is many a poor soul that desires to be
out of the world; O Lord, I can do no good, it is best for me to be put into
the place of silence, I hinder some goodly Tree that would grow in my place,
and would bring forth more fruit; upon this many a poor soul hastens to the
grave. This is matter of temptation, and it is grounded upon this, a man's own
unworthiness and unusefulness, and unserviceableness to Christ in his
generation.

Quest. But you will say, Wherefore does the Lord suffer his people to be
tempted thus about their unworthiness?

Answ. Why, the Lord he has gracious ends. Satan who helps on this temptation
many times, he has destructive ends; but God in suffering of it, he has
gracious ends.

What are Gods ends?

First, Gods ends in suffering his people to be tempted about their
unworthiness.
God would teach us to learn this lesson, That the love of God goes not by the
worthiness of the creature; therefore God he suffers us many times to be bowed
down by looking upon our unworthiness even to temptation, because we would not
learn this lesson, that the love of God goes not by the creatures worthiness,
but that it is altogether free, and not for any thing in the creature, it is
only in the Breast of God; there is the ground of his love, no reason for it in
the creature: Go and take a woman of Whoredom, one that has played the
Adulteress, and yet beloved, that was to show forth and hold forth his love to
the children of Israel; What was there in such a woman that was lovely or
desirable? The woman of whoredoms; no more worthiness in the children of
Israel: Neither is there in any soul, and God would have us learn this; and if
we will not learn it, he will suffer us to be carried into the School of
Temptation, to learn us this lesson, That God loves not for any worthiness in
the creature.

Secondly, End 2.
God would teach us to learn this lesson, That the worthiness of the creature
is out of it self; therefore he suffers the soul to be brought into this School
of Temptation, and to be bowed down with the apprehensions of our unworthiness,
that we may know that the worthiness of man is out of himself; a lesson hard to
learn, for a man is apt to seek his worthiness in himself, and is loath to be
beholden unto any, no, not unto God, and not to Christ for his worthiness: We
have all learned this of Adam, it was the first sin, he would have his
worthiness in himself, he would not have depended upon God for it, but he would
stand by himself, and have no dependence upon his Creator, and so by seeking to
stand on his own legs, he fell down below the condition of a creature. And
truly, ever since the sons of Adam have imitated their Father in this, Man
desires and seeks to have his worthiness at home in himself, and he is loath to
go out for it; and therefore it is one of the hardest matters in the world, to
bring men to submit to the righteousness of Christ. Corrupt Nature, and Carnal
Reason (as it is corrupted) teaches men to look to their own righteousness;
Philosophers taught men, That men needed not to go out of themselves to make
themselves happy; for a man had all blessings in himself, and he needed not to
go out of himself: But Christ teaches another lesson; if ever man will be
happy he must go out of himself, and he must seek his worthiness elsewhere, he
must have it in the Son of God. Now that we may learn this lesson, God suffers
us to be brought into the School of Temptation.

Thirdly, End 3.
God has this gracious end, Thereby he does make his people more humble, and
lowly in Spirit, which is a gracious and Christlike disposition; though the
Devil he has no such end when he presents our unworthiness, to make us humble,
yet God will make that advantage of it: You may see how humble and how meek
this woman was when she was under this Temptation, in the next words, Truth
Lord, (says she) yet the dogs eat of the crumbs; all that thou have said is
true; thou have said I am a dog, truth Lord, so I am. Thus she does lie very
low at the feet of Christ, he calls her dog, and she lies the lower, she lies
at the feet of Christ. This is a gracious effect that God works by this
Temptation.

Fourthly, End 4.
By this God does make his people really to prize, and to live upon, and to
exalt the Fathers free grace, and the Sons worthiness and righteousness. I say,
in this school of temptation, God teaches his people to exalt really, and to
prize really, and to live upon the free grace of God the Father, and the
infinite worthiness and righteousness of Jesus Christ. O says a poor soul, if
I be so vile, so unworthy, O! what need is there of fleeing to the free grace
of God? What need is there of looking after the infinite righteousness of Jesus
Christ? O! This will make the soul desirous to live upon God, and to live upon
Christ, to build upon free grace, and to build upon the worthiness and
righteousness of Christ; and this will make the soul to exalt, and to lift up
this glorious name of God, and of his Son. O! What had become of me, if it had
not been for free grace? If free grace had not over-looked all my vileness, all
my sinfulness, all my distance from God, all my coldness of affection, all my
unusefulness, what had become of me if it had not been for the righteousness of
Christ? If Christ had not brought in everlasting righteousness, to cover all
this unrighteousness, O I had been miserable and undone. You see wherefore God
suffers these temptations.

Briefly, a word or two by way of Application.

First, Use 1.
It may teach us to take heed that we do not help forward this temptation upon
the spirit of those that are weak Christians: I say, Take heed that we do not
help forward this temptation, there is no greater temptation then when the soul
is kept and bowed down to look upon the vileness and unworthiness of the
creature; many a poor soul cries out (as David did) concerning his sin, O, my
sin is ever before me; so many a poor soul says, my unworthiness an vileness
is ever before me, my deadness is ever before me, my distance from God, my sin
of Nature, my sin of Heart, my relapses: Now take heed that we do not help
forward the temptation, by despising and undervaluing those that are weak, by
despising Christians for their weakness; O! it may be, as I said before, their
eye is upon it, they look upon it themselves, and therefore we should not so
look upon it as to discourage them, and not to cast off such as have any seed
of God in them because they are weak, but to cherish that which is of God,
though we may apprehend there is coldness, and deadness, and unusefulness; and
it may be the Lord has made them deeply sensible of it; but if there be but a
little wheat, though covered with chafe, do not cast it away; a little wheat
is precious: though there be but a little gold, and a great deal of dross, yet
if we can discern any of Christ's gold, we should help forward the work of
Christ, and not help forward the work of Satan.

But secondly, Use 2.
Take heed that we do not give way to this temptation, let Christians
(especially weak Christians) take heed that they do not give way to this
temptation, poring upon their unworthiness, as to be discouraged and to be
beaten off from Christ, and staved off from their duty. We may look upon our
unworthiness, and we ought to look upon our unworthiness, and O that we could
look upon our unworthiness more then we do, in God's way to look upon it, when
God does show us our unworthiness in God's glass, then we may look upon it
without danger; but now it is dangerous to look upon it when Satan presents
unworthiness, to behold it in the Divel's glass, it is dangerous, and proves a
very sore temptation.

Quest. But you will say, How shall we know when God presents unworthiness, and
when Satan presents unworthiness? How shall we know when it is duty to look
upon unworthiness, and when it is sin to look upon unworthiness?

Answ. How to know when God presents unworthiness, and when Satan presents it.
First of all, When God does present unworthiness and vileness to us, he does
also present himself to us; he does not present the unworthiness of the
creature, and leave it there, but when God shows his people their unworthiness,
he also shows himself; that you may look with one eye upon the Lord, as you
look with the other eye upon your unworthiness; so did the Church in Micah 7.
18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? Verse. 19. He will subdue our
iniquities, and thou will cast all our sins into the depth of the Sea. She had
looked upon her unworthiness, and upon her vileness, and had seen her iniquity;
but she also looked unto God, who is a God like unto thee? And truly when we
look upon our unworthiness, we may say, and we ought to say, O Lord! Who are
such vile, sinful, and unworthy creatures in the whole world as we are? But
take heed that we stay not there, and rob God of his grace, but even then look
up to the Lord, and say, Who is like unto thee? Who is like unto me for
unworthiness? But who is like unto thy Son Christ for worthiness and
righteousness? No God like unto thee; No Savior like unto Christ.

Secondly, When God presents our unworthiness and vileness, it is to make us
run nearer to himself; and it has that effect and that operation upon the
heart, when God shows a man or woman their vileness, it makes them run nearer
to God: But now when Satan shows sinfulness and vileness, it is to draw the
soul away from God, and so forsake its own mercy; when God made a discovery to
the Prodigal of his own unworthiness, it made him hasten to his father; that
discovery was from God, it made him hasten home; I will arise (says he) and go
to my Father, and I will say, Father, I have sinned against thee, and am not
worthy to be called thy son: When as the soul shall thus look upon its
unworthiness, and make the more haste to God, make the more haste to Christ,
flee the faster to the City of Refuge, that discovery is of God.

Thirdly, When God does discover a souls unworthiness, he does make the soul
(notwithstanding) thankful; he keeps the soul in a thankful posture,
notwithstanding the discovery of its unworthiness. So David, the Lord helped
him to see his own unworthiness, and the unworthiness of his people, yet David
in the midst of that discovery was kept in a thankful frame, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so
willingly after this sort? Lord, we are poor unworthy creatures, I and my
people, King and people; Ah but still his heart was kept thankful, and he is
the more thankful to God, that God should employ such in any service that is
done for him. But when as the sight of our unworthiness does make us to repine
against God, and put the spirit into a murmuring and discontented frame, that
discovery is not from God, but from Satan. When God leads a soul into the
discovery of unworthiness, yet he makes the soul thankful.

Fourthly, When God discovers unworthiness, it shall be no hinderance to the
soul in waiting upon God in his Ordinances; when Satan discovers unworthiness,
he does thereby endeavor to discourage and to beat off the soul from waiting
upon the Lord in the way of his Ordinances; This woman of Canaan she is not
discouraged, she goes on crying and praying; and Hezekiah and his people they
went on to wait upon the Lord, notwithstanding they were made sensible of their
unworthiness, and their want of preparation, according to the preparation of
the Sanctuary; but when a soul is discouraged, beaten off from prayer; it is
not for me to go to God, it is not for me to pray, and to wait upon God in his
Ordinances, one so unworthy; Surely this is from Satan, this is not the
discovery of God.

Fifthly and lastly, When as God discovers a man's unworthiness, it shall not
take him off from any service that God calls him to; when as Satan does
discover unworthiness, it takes a man off from that work which God lays
before him. Moses was taken off from the work of the Lord by the sight of his
own unfitness and unworthiness, he goes on to make many excuses one after
another, it was a great stumbling block in his way, and it did hinder him from
following God in that service that God called him out unto in his generation:
Moses, he looked upon his unworthiness, and he was under a temptation;
therefore thus you see and may know when God discovers unworthiness, and when
it is duty to look upon unworthiness; and on the contrary, when it is of
Satan, and when it is your duty to look away from your unworthiness; we may
see it, and must see it in God's glass, but not in Satan's, And O that God
would fasten this upon the spirit; let us take heed that we do not give way to
this temptation. Weak Christians, you that are apt to be discouraged with the
thoughts of your unworthiness, take heed of giving way to this temptation, for
you will exceedingly hinder your own comfort by poring upon your unworthiness
when Satan presents it; and you will enslave your own spirits, it will hinder
you from that freedom which Jesus Christ has purchased, and which Jesus
Christ tenders to you, it will hinder your souls from establishment, it will
keep you always in a weak condition, to be continually poring upon
unworthiness, to look upon your selves continually, and not to look back again
to God, to look upon your sinfulness, and not look upon free grace, to look
upon your unworthiness, and not to look upon the worthiness and righteousness
of Christ: This will keep your souls from establishment, and keep you always
in a weak condition.

But now, when God does present unworthiness, we may look upon it; only let us
remember what are God's ends, when as God does present unworthiness; Gods ends
are gracious, and O that we might have Gods ends in our eye when we look upon
our unworthiness! It is to teach us to know that God loves us not for our
worthiness, to teach us to know that we must have worthiness out of our selves,
to make us more low, more humble, meek in spirit, to make us to prize the
Father's free grace, and the Son's worthiness, and his righteousness. These are
God's ends, O that when ever we look upon our unworthiness, we might have God's
ends before us!

Quest. But what shall I do when tempted about my unworthiness? What to do when
tempted about our unworthiness.
Briefly thus.

Answ. If it be the portion of any soul to be under these temptations, under
these discouragements beforementioned; if it be a temptation grounded upon the
discovery of the sinfulness of our Nature, heart, and life; O flee to the
fountain, know that God has declared that there is a fountain opened, Zach.
13. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the House of David, and
to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness: Therefore when
you are bowed down with the sense of your own unworthiness by reason of sin,
look to the fountain, there is a fountain opened, and there is virtue in that
fountain to cleanse and take away all your sin and unworthiness.

And if your temptation be grounded upon the discovery of your weakness and
frailty, your distance from God, and this is helped on by your low and
afflicted condition, besides the common frailty of man; O know! That though the
distance be infinite, yet God has overlooked it, free grace has over-looked
it, and free grace can overlook, and free grace will overlook that infinite
distance that is between God any you: and know, that God does not judge of any
man by his outward low estate, by his outward afflicted condition; you are apt
to draw sad conclusions from thence, that God loves you not, and Satan he
tempts to conclude so, if God loved you, he would not deal so with you: Ah, but
know, that God does not judge so, neither can you judge of the love of God by
affliction.

And if the temptation be grounded upon the deadness of your heart, and
coldness of your spirit, look to Christ to warm you, look to the Son of God to
inflame your affections; but know, that you are not able to judge of God's love
by your love, you must not measure God's love by your love; not to conclude
that God has no love, because you have little love; you cannot measure God by
your selves, you should rather accept of his love, entertain his love, and look
to that love of God, to beget more love in your hearts, and to draw forth more
love in your hearts; we have cause to be humbled exceedingly that our love to
God is so little, but yet we must not measure the love of God by our love.

And if your temptation be grounded upon your unusefulness; O, you say, I am an
unuseful creature, more fitter for the dunghill then for any thing else; know
that God has some use of you, there is never a Christian living but God has
some use of it, though it may be you see it not; thou look upon thy self as
a poor unuseful creature, but God has some use of you: if God had not some use
of you, he would not continue you here, no, not a moment; God has appointed
several members in the body, and all are useful, not the least member but it is
useful in the body; I say, surely the Lord sees that you are of use to him,
although you are apt to say you are altogether unuseful. In a word, when
tempted about unworthiness, do as this woman did in the Text.

First of all, she does acknoledge all that Christ spoke, It is not meet to
take the childrens bread and cast it to dogs, says Christ in v. 27. Truth
Lord, says she. Let us learn to do so, when bowed down with the thoughts of
unworthiness and vileness; let us subscribe to it, that it is a truth, all that
can be said, and all that can be presented by Satan himself concerning our
vileness, we may grant that it is truth, I am unworthy, vile, and wretched.

Secondly, Take heed that this do not hinder the acting of faith; acknowledge
that it is so, and that we are as vile as it is objected; but let not the sight
of this hinder the acting of faith; this woman she acted faith gloriously
notwithstanding; Truth Lord, yet the dogs do eat the crumbs that fall from
their master's table; she makes this to be a ground of faith, even this very
discouragement, this very temptation, the sight of her unworthiness, this does
not discourage her; It is Truth Lord, but yet the dogs eat of the crumbs; and
so be you still in the acting of faith, and let not the fight of unworthiness
be any hinderance.

Thirdly, It is our duty still to wait upon the Lord in the midst of the
discovery of our unworthiness: Wait upon the Lord, and keep his way, and let no
discovery of unworthiness beat us off from waiting upon the Lord, and keeping
his way: this woman held on her way, held on to wait notwithstanding all her
unworthiness; she believes, and waits, prays, and waits, and her expectations
they are from the Lord. And so in the midst of the sense of our unworthiness,
let us do as she did, acknowledge God notwithstanding, be acting faith in
Christ, in the Lord's free grace, in those gracious promises which he holds
forth, and which he has given us in Christ, and be waiting upon God in the way
of our duty, keeping his way; and the Lord he will certainly make that soul
more then a conqueror of these temptations.

Matthew. 15. 26. But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the childrens
bread, and to cast it to Dogs.
SERMON XIX.
I Shall now consider this temptation in particular. In general it was her
unworthiness that was presented, more particularly, that she was one of those
Nations that did not belong to the Covenant of God. She was a Canaanite, she
was one that was a stranger to the visible Covenant of the Commonwealth of
Israel; she was none of the children of the visible Kingdom, she was a dog, one
without, and therefore Christ tells her, that she had nothing to do with the
childrens bread. This was the temptation.

We shall consider the Proposition as it is laid down by Christ, which is an
excellent truth, and worth the consideration.

That childrens bread must not be given to dogs. Doctr.


That is the proposition laid down by Christ. Or, The holy things of God, they
must not be profaned by giving them unto those that have no right unto them.

First, In the opening of this Proposition, I shall show you, Who they are that
are here called children.

Secondly, And then, Who are called Dogs.

Thirdly, What is that childrens bread that must not be given to dogs.

First then, Who are the children that have right to the bread.
Let us enquire who they are that are called children, who are the children
that have right to the bread?

I answer first, All they that are true Believers in Christ, they are called
children; I say, such as are really and truly believers, such as are the seed
of Christ, the travel of his soul, such as are begotten again unto God by the
immortal seed of the word, and born again of the Spirit, new creatures; these
are children indeed, they are called the children of the Promise, the children
of the Covenant, the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 26. To
as many as believed gave he this dignity to be called the children, the sons of
God: To as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name, John 1. 12. primarily and chiefly
they are called children of God, and these have right to the childrens bread.

But secondly, There are others that are called children, that is, Such as are
under visible and outward dispensations of the Covenant; I say, such as do
outwardly belong to the Covenant of God, such as are under the visible
dispensations of the Covenant of God; though possibly many of them may not be
under the efficacy, life, and power of that Covenant, yet if they be under the
visible dispensations, the outward dispensations, God owns them, and they must
be owned for children, Romans 9. 6. For they are not all Israel which are of
Israel; though they may be of Israel, the seed of Abraham, that the Apostle
speaks of there, and such as were under the outward dispensations of the
Covenant, the Covenant of their father did belong to them, yet says he, all
are not Israel that are of Israel; they are not Israel indeed, children of the
Promise, as Isaac was; they are not all the elect of God, though they may be,
and must be owned for children, because under the outward dispensation of the
Covenant: And in Mat. 8. 12. But the children of the Kingdom shall be cast out
into utter darkness; called children of the Kingdom, because under an outward
administration of the Covenant of grace, and yet possibly they may fall off and
apostatize; and such children of the Kingdom may be cast out.

Now persons are under an outward administration of the Covenant two ways, How
persons may be said to be under an outward Administration of the Covenant.
or by two rights, as I conceive.

First of all, by a visible profession of Christ, by a profession of faith in
Christ, that may give men right to a visible being in the Covenant of God, and
so upon that visible profession that is held forth, they may have right to the
Ordinances of God, and yet not belong to the invisible Covenant of God. For
Brethren, if a visible profession cannot give right to an Ordinance, there is
no man can have any ground for the administration of an Ordinance to others, if
not upon a visible profession, for there is no man can be certainly assured who
are the true Israel of God, and who belongs to the Election of God; no man can
have certain assurance of another man's condition, but as he judges in charity
upon his profession; so that an outward profession gives right to a visible
being in Covenant, and so to a partaking of the Ordinances of Christ.

Secondly, There is another way of right (as I conceive) held forth in the
Scripture, by which some persons have right to this visible Covenant of God,
and so to some Ordinances of Christ, (such as they are capable of,) and that
is, God's gracious owning of them; I say, God's gracious Declaration in the
Word, that he will own such and such, and will account them for his people, set
apart for himself; and so I conceive that the Lord owns and esteems of
Believers, and the children of believing parents: And as some by profession
have right unto the visible Covenant, so others upon Gods declaration of owning
in a visible way the seed of Believers; for so the Lord declared when he made
that everlasting Covenant with Abraham, that he would take in him and his seed,
and they should be visibly under the dispensation of the Covenant, which
promise seems again to be renewed even in the new Testament, Acts 2, 39. For
the Promise is unto yo^* and to your children; and says the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.
14. Else were your children unclean, but now are they holy. God's visible
owning of them, gives them a right to the visible Covenant, and so to some
Ordinances, such as they are capable of.

But you will say, it seems strange that any should be the subjects of an
Ordinance who are not capable of understanding what is done: Alas, children
have not the use of reason, and are not capable of understanding what is done,
and therefore sure ineffectual, and of no use, it is but setting the seal to a
blank.

I answer, That God always has instituted some Ordinances both in the Old and
New Testament, the subjects whereof have been merely passive. God to declare
his grace, will prevent poor creatures before they are able to know him, has
instituted some Ordinances, the subjects whereof have been merely passive.

What did the children of old understand of Circumcision? They were merely
passive, and yet that Ordinance I hope was not in vain, and seems to be more
suitable to God's grace now under the Gospel, to have an Ordinance the subjects
whereof should be merely passive, it declares the grace of God, that he
speaks so to them before they have any knowledge.

And whereas it is said, It is the setting of a Seal to a Blank.

I answer, If God has put in the names of the children of Believers into the
same Covenant with their parents, if their names shall be found written in the
Covenant,, why then to set to the Seal, will be no setting a Seal to a Blank;
but their names were written and put into the Covenant when made with Abraham,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed; and we no where read that their
names were blotted out; nay, we rather find them renewed, Acts 2. 39. For the
promise is to you, and to your seed: and therefore let none say, that it is
setting a Seal to a Blank, if God has written the names of children in the
Covenant. Indeed I know it is very dangerous to misapply an Ordinance of Christ
to wrong subjects, it is a giving holy things to dogs; but take heed that we do
not call dogs where the Lord does not call so; and take heed that we do not
blot out those names that the Lord has put into the Covenant.

But it may be you will say further by way of Objection.

If children belong to the Covenant of God, and the Covenant that the children
of believing Parents is under is a Covenant of grace; of necessity they must be
saved: Shall they be under a Covenant of grace, and not be saved?

I answer, Some may be under a Covenant of grace, and not saved; I say visibly,
in respect of the outward dispensation, they may be under the Covenant of
grace, and yet never attain to life and salvation; for when as we do Baptize
those who do make a profession of their faith, surely we look upon them as
Believers, and such as are in Covenant with God, and therefore we Baptize them,
because believers, and so in Covenant with God.

But now, is it not possible, nay is it not ordinary for many who make such a
profession of Christ, and are baptized upon that profession, to fall off, and
to come short of life and salvation? And yet I hope you will say the Ordinance
was not disorderly administered, though they that did make a profession do fall
off; so though all children of believing parents do not attain to eternal life,
yet the Ordinance is no more unduly administered to them then to others, for
both Professors and children may be under the outward administration of the
Covenant, which being may give right to an outward Ordinance, and yet not be
saved.

Object. But you will say, How shall we judge of any but by their profession
that they make of Christ; we cannot own any but such as make a profession, and
children cannot make a Profession.

I answer, We must judge as God judges, and own as God owns; take heed that we
do not disown what God owns; and if God will own the children of believing
parents visibly, and put them under an outward administration of the Covenant,
surely there is no danger of owning where God owns; God's owning is a surer
ground for us to go upon, then any man's profession: Now God seems to own the
seed of believers by his gracious promise: Nay, let it be considered, those
Prophesies that speak of the latter days, and of the Kingdom of Christ, and
the glory that shall be in those days, they speak of this, that God will then
more abundantly and visibly own the seed of his people; God will own them, and
God will bless them, Isa. 65. 23. They shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth for trouble; for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their
offspring with them. When the Jews shall come in, they shall be called the
blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them; their seed shall be
blessed according to Abraham's Covenant, when they shall come in again.

I know there are many gracious hearts that cannot believe this truth, and will
not, till Christ comes to reveal it; but if the Lord has handed in any beam of
light, shut it not out; This have I spoken, because it is in my way to show you
who are children.

But in the second place, Who are Dogs.
Who are Dogs? You see who are to be accounted children: who are Dogs? That
must be opened too, and let it not be offensive, because it is in the Text.

First, Dogs in Scripture are taken sometimes for all the Nations of the
Gentiles, all the people of the world (except the seed of Abraham) were called
Dogs, they were without the Covenant, strangers to the Commonwealth of Israel;
all, we and our fathers, all the Nations of the Gentiles; time was that the
Jews only were the children, and we and all Nations were called Dogs.

But secondly, All wicked men in Scriptute phrase they are called Dogs; The
Scripture does brand some sort of wicked men, and some degrees of wicked
persons by this name; In especial manner the Lord looks upon some wicked men as
dogs.

Who are they?

First, wicked men dogs.
Such as give up themselves to gross and notorious wickedness, such as are
openly scandalous, vile, and profane, Rev. 22. 15. For without are dogs,
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loves
and makes a lie. Without are dogs, and he shows who those dogs are that are
without, that shall be shut out of the City, when the new Jerusalem shall come
down from heaven; these are they that shall not have a name in that City: vile
sinners, they are called dogs.

But secondly, such as do oppose the Gospel of Christ, such as do reject the
Gospel, and oppose the Truths of the Gospel; such as come to hear for that end,
that they may snarl against the word; the Spirit of the Lord calls them dogs;
Phil. 3. 2. Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision:
the Apostle bids the Christians beware of them, beware of dogs, they that bite
and snarl, and set themselves to oppose the Truths of the Gospel, the Spirit of
the Lord calls them dogs.

Thirdly, They who do reject those wholesome reproofs, and counsels, and
exhortations that the Lord sends them by any of his servants; such as scorn
reproof, and hate reproof, that are ready to fly in the face of him that shall
reprove them when they do wickedly; What have you to do with me, meddle with
your own matters, and I will not be reproved by such a one as you are; the word
of the Lord calls such persons dogs, they are vile creatures, Matthew. 7. 6. Give
not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine,
lest they trample them under their feet, and turn again, and rent you. See here
what Christ speaks; Exhortations and reproofs they are not to be cast before
some men, such as have often rejected reproofs, and will not hear, the Lord
looks upon them as dogs, and they shall die in their wickedness.

Fourthly, The Scripture calls those dogs, tha^ sometime have made a profession
of Christ, and have turned away from their profession, such (...) have seemed
sometimes to be very forward, an^ very zealous, hot it may be in their youth,
after ^ward they fall off, and have lost their fruit, and have lost their
profession, and it may be not (...) much as Leaves upon them, but are turned
again to their old ways, 2 Pet. 2. 22. But it is hapn^ unto them according to
the true Proverb, the dog ^turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow that wa^
washed, to her wallowing in the mire; they have turned to their old course
again, they seeme^ sometimes to cast out sin; Ah! But they have returned to it
again: Such persons are vile, and the holy Ghost calls them dogs.

Fifthly, Persecuters of Christ, of his Truth and people, they are called dogs;
such as do not only bark against Christ, but even bite and rend his people:
Why, the Lord looks upon them as vile creatures, they are dogs in God's
account, whatever they are in the worlds; and so Christ calls them by David
his type, Psalm. 22. 16. for dogs have compassed me, the assembly of the wicked
have enclosed me, they pierced my hands and my feet. Those bloody persecuters
of Christ, that would not be satisfied but with the blood of the Lamb of God,
nothing but the shedding of his blood would serve their turn; even as the
Blood-Hound that hunts the Hind upon the mountain; the Lord calls them dogs,
barking dogs, biting dogs have compassed me round about.

But thirdly, What is the childrens bread that must not be given to dogs?

First, The gracious Promises of the Gospel; those sweet comforts that God has
laid up in the Promises, they are not the portion of wicked men; Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, says your God, speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and
cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned;
Isa. 40. 1, 2. God does not send comfort to wicked men while they remain such;
for all the promises of the Gospel, they are Christ's right, and Christ's
inheritance, they are Christ's portion; the Apostle says, They are all yea and
amen in him; now therefore they cannot be applied to any but to those that have
Interest in Christ; if promises be yea and amen in Christ, they cannot go
without Christ; he must be thy husband, or else thou have no right in them.

Quest. But you will say then, How shall men come to believe in the promises,
if they must not be applied to wicked men? How shall they come to have faith in
the promise?

I Answer, When the Spirit of the Lord does persuade the heart of any sinner to
accept of Jesus Christ, to rest upon Jesus Christ by a particular application:
as he is freely tendered in the everlasting Gospel: when this is done, I
conceive that soul has an Interest in Christ, and then right to all the
promises, for every mercy promised is to those that are in Christ, and
childrens bread is not to be cast to dogs.

Secondly, A place in the House of God is childrens bread; a name in God's
house, fellowshi^ with the Saints, this is childrens bread that be longs only
to those that are Christ's, at least visibly so, Isa. 56. 4, 5. see what God
promises(...) the Eunuchs, For thus says the Lord unto the E^ nuchs that keep
my Sabbaths, and choose the thing that please me, and take hold of my convenant;
eve^ unto them will I give in mine house, and within (...) walls, a place, and
a name, better then of sons (...) of daughters; I will give them an everlasting
(...) that shall not be cut off. This is made to him th^^ fears the Lord, and
desires to worship (...) Lord aright, and desires to sanctify the Sabba^ of
the Lord, he has right to this part of childrens bread, he has right to the
fellowship (...) Saints, and Church of Christ, and God in du^^ time will bring
him in, though he may be out. will give him a name in my house, and his nam^
shall be written there; the time is a coming the there shall be never a Saint,
but the Lord (...) bring him in, Behold how good and how pleasant it (...) for
Brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm. 133. 1 there is a large report of
Brethrens dwelling together in Unity; now they must be Brethren, (...) else
they cannot dwell together in unity; It is good and pleasant for brethren dwell
together Sons and daughters of the everlasting Father, (...) that not only by
Creation, but by Regeneration * If Sons and Daughters of the everlasting Father
O! Then, How good to dwell in the House (...) God? This is childrens bread.

Thirdly, Sealing Ordinances, The seals of ^he Covenant, they are childrens
bread, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord are childrens bread, and they are
not to be dispensed to any that are visibly unclean, and unholy; To instance
only in the Supper of the Lord, to show you a little that that is childrens
bread, and must not be given to any but children: For first, It is a Seal of
the Covenant; if the other Ordinance be a Seal, then that is a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace; and therefore they must be in the Covenant of grace, they
must not be strangers to the Covenant, that come to this Ordinance, that have
right to this Ordinance: They that are visibly strangers, and enemies unto God,
strangers to this Covenant, they cannot have a right to that Ordinance of Jesus
Christ.

Again, That Ordinance is a Love-Feast, and the Lord he makes it, to declare
that he is reconciled to all those his friends whom he invites: There was a
falling out between God and man, ^ut when it is taken up by Christ, God the
Father declares that he is a friend, and therefore he invites believers to sup
with him, which declares and makes it out to them that he is reconciled, he
makes a feast for this end, and therefore called the Lords Supper; they shall
come and sit at Table with him, that he may declare that he is really
reconciled, and bears no old grudge, but has forgotten all. Now therefore,
they that are enemies, that will not be reconciled, but profess enmity against
the Lord, they cannot have right to this Ordinance.

Again, It is a seal of our Communion with Christ and with the Saints. The
Bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? And so the
Wine, it is the Communion of the blood of Christ, the sign of it, the seal of
it, a seal of our Communion with Christ; and it is a seal of our communion with
the Saints; all that do partake of it, they prosess they are one bread
therefore it is an Ordinance that cannot and may not be dispensed to wicked men.

Besides, The Supper of the Lord is an Ordinance that is appointed for the
increase of grace * it is appointed for a Christians growth, therefore of
necessity there must be life before there can be growth, there must be a
principle of grace, before there can be increase of grace; It is true, it is
for the weak as well as the strong; and if there be any part of spiritual life
in the soul, that soul may receive it in Christ's way; but of necessity there
must be life, or else no right to the Ordinance; for it is appointed for growth
in grace, to make a weak faith strong, and so for the increase of every grace.

I might add, wicked men cannot perform the actions of the living that God
calls for in that Ordinance, they cannot eat and drink spiritually, they may
eat the bread, and drink the wine, but they cannot eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink the blood of Christ; if a wicked man, he cannot eat spiritually, and so
he prophaneth the Ordinance, the Body of Christ and the Blood of Christ he
becomes guilty of it, and the Apostle says, He eats his own damnation, if he
cannot discern the Lord's body, (1 Cor. 11. 29.) and eat spiritual by faith;
sad in the conclusion, he eats and drinks damnation of himself. That Is the
third piece of childrens bread, Sealing Ordinances.

I should have added a fourth, but shall pass it by because of the time, it
should have been this, Holy counsels and reproofs, they are childrens bread,
and I should have shown you in what cases we ought not to cast them before
dogs; When we have no call to speak, or when we have spoken often, again and
again, and they turn again, and tread it under foot, when it appears that they
sin obstinately, do not sin for want of light, but sin against light; when you
have born a sufficient testimony unto the Truth, or unto the ways of God, in
such cases and the like; that part of childrens bread must not be cast to dogs.

To shut up all with a word or two of Application.

First of all, It lets us see Brethren, Use 1.
that way of the Churches of Christ is justifiable by Christ; that way of
making distinction and separation betwixt person and person, betwixt the
precious and the vile, it is justifiable by the word of the Lord, it is one of
the hard things for the world to digest, this separation, this putting a
difference between man and man: but I pray know, that if any Church do act
according to the rule, to the word of Christ which they may not transgress, no
not for a house full of gold and silver, they must not give that which is holy
to dogs, cast not pearls before swine, (says Christ) Matthew. 7. 6. And it is to
take the childrens bread, and cast it to dogs. The Church do but walk according
to rule, let not men condemn it.

I know what is objected; Ah! They are a censorious people, they would be
Judges, they would judge all the world but themselves; they only are children,
and all the world are dogs.

No, we say not so, God forbid, We say there are seven thousand souls, besides
those we know, that have not bowed their knee to Baal; Ye^ surely, there are
many thousands (I am persuaded) of the people of God, that are children who are
not for the present in any visible House of God: But this I say, that so long
as they are so, they are not in the right place, they are where the dogs should
be, till they be in some visible House of Christ, they are not in the children
place, they set themselves among the dogs; the Lord would have them among
children, and there is a time a coming, when all that are children shall come
in, and without shall be none bu^ dogs.

And let me say to such as are the children of the Lord, and not in some
visible House of God; they cannot have their portion, they cannot enjoy
childrens bread, while out of Christ's house, they deprive themselves of that
bread which is their right, Christ will not have bread given, but in his House;
some Ordinances of Christ cannot be dispensed but in a Communion of Saints, and
if children will not come into a communion of Saints, they must not, they
cannot enjoy those Ordinances; and let it be no offense, if the Church
(according to their duty) do labor to keep the Ordinances of God from
pollution.

Quest. But you will say, What can it hurt me? Or, What can it hurt another,
though there be many wicked men in a Communion of Saints, that come and partake
of the Lord's Supper? What is that to me if I be prepared to wait upon the
Lord? What detriment shall I receive?

Answ. It is to thee; A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump: If a wicked
person be in the Church, it is to thee, and to the whole company, and if thou
do not that which is thy duty, thou art defiled by that wicked man. It is
true, if thou have done thy duty, brought it to the Church, then thou art not
defiled; but if thou have not done thy duty, thou art defiled, and it is to
thee.

I know what is urged, Did not Judas receive the Supper? And were there not
many wicked men in the Church of Corinth? And does not Christ say, the Tares
and the wheat must grow together? But these may easily be answered.

As for Judas, it is hardly made out that he received the Supper of the Lord;
but if he did, he was a close hypocrite not known to the Church. Hypocrites
there may be, but that is no plea for the admitting of those that are openly
scandalous.

As for those wicked persons in the Church of Corinth, it was defective, but of
right it should not have been so; Possibly the best Church may be corrupt, and
may tolerate wicked persons; but by rule it ought not to be so: When ye are
met together, and there be a wicked person amongst you, deliver such a one unto
Satan, for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus. Know ye not that a little leaven leaveneth the whole
lump? 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 6. But to pass by that.

Secondly, Use 2.
In a word, What matter of comfort is here to you that are the Lord's people?
The Lord looks upon you as children; all you that fear the Lord, and believe in
the name of his Son, you are the Lord's children, cared for and provided for by
the Lord. Provision is made by God himself, he will take care that you shall
have bread; Christ takes care for his children: O! This is childrens bread, and
I must not give the childrens bread unto dogs. O! That this might refresh your
souls, that Christ looks upon you as children, and that he takes care to
provide bread for you; He will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish,
Prove. 10. 3. Children, you shall have bread; you shall have Ordinances,
Promises, they belong to you, they are your bread, the Lord will in due time
give out that which your souls wait for; for the children shall have their
bread. O that the Lord would raise up our hearts to expect this when we come
before him in the Lords Supper: Let children look for their bread, wait for
bread from heaven to be given out, there is never an hired servant in Christ's
House but shall have bread enough; so the Prodigal did acknowledge: and if the
hired servants shall have bread, the children shall not famish. O! Wait upon
the Lord, who will give his children bread, and give it in due season.

Again thirdly, Use 3.
What cause have you to admire at the goodness of the Lord thus to you that are
his children? Children so provided for; O! The free grace of God to us poor
outcasts of the Gentiles: Time was when we were dogs; and that the Lord should
make them to be children that were dogs, set them at his Table that were cast
out, and give them childrens bread, that had not right, no not to the crumbs! O
the free grace of God, let us admire it, and let us debase our selves, and lie
low before the Lord, and say, O! What am I poor dead dog, that I should sit at
Table with the King, and that the King should own me? No cause of being lifted
up, but cause of lying low; for who are we poor dead dogs, that the Lord should
make us children, and bestow the portion of children upon us, giving unto us
childrens bread!

And to shut up all;

Let us look upon the Ordinances of the Lord as our Bread; Use 4.
look upon the Word, and look upon the Promises, you that are children, take
hold of them, improve them, they are childrens bread, they are provided on
purpose for you; And so that other Ordinance of the Supper, look upon it as
bread, and make use of it as bread. O that we might fetch out the sweetness of
it; for there is no piece of childrens bread but has a great deal of sweetness
in it; sweetness in the Word, and sweetness in the Supper; and O that we might
chew it, and fetch out the sweetness: What sweetness might we find in the
Supper of the Lord, if we did set faith on work? O! what abundance of the love
of God is held forth, and of the great mystery of godliness, God manifested in
the flesh? How much held forth of the sufferings of Christ, and the benefits of
the suffering of Christ? O that we might chew the Ordinance, and (as bread)
make use of it for our refreshment and strength!

Matthew. 15. 27. And she said, Truth, Lord; yet the Dogs eat of the Crumbs which
fall from their Masters Table.
SERMON XX.
IN these words that I have read, we have the carriage and the behavior of
this woman under those Trials or Temptations which she met withal; her carriage
is very gracious, it is such as does discover

First, A depth of Humility.

Secondly, A height of Faith.

She discovers first of all, A depth of Humility. Jesus Christ he had called
her dog; he had preferred others before her; he had told her, it was not meet
to take the childrens bread and give it to such as she was: Now she does
acknowledge all this, nay she does not only acknowledge it, but she submitted
unto it, nay she confirms it: Truth Lord; Christ had said, It was not meet to
take the childrens bread and cast it to dogs: Truth Lord; Whatever thou have
spoken, Lord, is true: Thou have said that I am a dog, Truth Lord; Thou have
said the Jews are children, Truth Lord; Thou have said it is not meet to bestow
childrens bread upon dogs, Truth Lord; yet the dogs eat of the crumbs.

And as we have a discovery of her Humility, so of her Faith; her condition was
low, but her faith was high; strong, and glorious.

First of all, By Faith she does answer the temptation, she finds out the
strength of the temptation, the scope of it where it lay, and the Spirit of the
Lord does unfold and resolve the difficulty. Christ had said the Jews were the
children, and 'twas not meet to give the childrens bread to dogs; there is the
temptation: She answers, Truth Lord, yet the dogs cat of the crumbs. It
discovers thus much, Although the Jews are the children, and they must be
served first, it is fit that they should have the first offer of mercy, it is
fit that they should have whole loaves set upon the Table, and full dishes, yet
the Jews are not so the children, that all others are excluded, the Gentiles
are not altogether excluded from mercy, the Gentiles may have the crumbs,
especially when the children grow wanton, and cast away their bread, the
Gentiles (though dogs) may have that which fall from their Table. Thus by faith
she does find out the force of the temptation, and is enabled to make an
answer to it.

Secondly, The strength of her faith does appear in this, that she does not
only answer the temptation, but she gains advantage by it, her faith is
strengthened, and rises higher, and waxes stronger; and that which was matter
of discouragement in it self, it is matter of encouragement and strength unto
her; Christ had said she was a dog, this is an encouragement to her, Lord, thou
have said that I am a dog, and if I be a dog, I am thy dog, thou art my master,
and therefore surely the crumbs that fall from my masters table do belong to
me; in all Nations, among all people the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from
their masters table; Lord, thou have said that I am a dog, but I will lie at
thy feet, and wait upon thee for crumbs of mercy that fall from thee. Thus her
faith is strengthened by that temptation, which in it self did tend to drive
her from Christ; that temptation that would have driven her from Christ, makes
her run to Christ; she is called dog, and she waits under the Master's table
for crumbs of mercy. Thus you see the carriage of this woman under the
temptation, she carries it very humbly, and with a great deal of faith and holy
confidence in the midst of these discouragements.

There are diverse useful truths in these words, I shall now close with one.

Truth Lord, (says she.)

From whence Observe, That the soul that is graciously and truly humbled before
the Lord, will justify the Lord in all that he speaks and does against it.

Whatever the Lord shall say, whether it be in a way of discovery of sin,
vileness, and corruption: Or secondly, whether it be a word of threatening: In
both these, that heart that is truly humbled, it will justify the Lord. When
God speaks himself, and gives rebukes from himself, or when God makes use of
men to be instruments in his hand, still a gracious heart that is truly
humbled, in all it meets withal it will justify the Lord, and say, Truth
Lord; the Lord is true, and the Lord is righteous in what he speaks and does.

First, When God comes and speaks in a way of discovery of sin, when the Lord
by his Spirit in his Word does come and rip open a man's heart as it were,
discovers its vileness to him, shows him what a wretched, sinful, polluted
creture he is; or when the Lord shall come and charge any particular sin upon a
man that he has committed, set his actual sin in order before him; when God
shall bind with the cords of affliction, as Job speaks, and then discover a
man's transgression; if the soul be truly humbled, it will say, truth Lord; I am
indeed as vile and as wretched, and as sinful, nay worse then I can be charged
with. When God came to make a discovery to Job of his own heart, in the 38, 39,
and 40 chapters, God took much pains to discover Job to himself, Job had stood
too much upon his integrity, upon his righteousness, he had not all along
justified the Lord in his proceedings; but when God came to make a discovery to
him, and show him what a poor, vile, frail worm he was, and ripped open his
heart, and showed him his corruption, Job then falls down, and cries, truth
Lord, Job 40. 3, 4. Then Job answered the Lord, and said, Behold, I am vile,
what shall I answer thee? I will lay may hand upon my mouth. verse. 5. Once have
I spoken, but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no further.
Behold I am vile, as vile as thou have discovered to me, Lord, I see it, and
therefore I will stand no more upon my own justification, but I will justify
thee; and truly so it is with every soul that is truly humbled, when God comes
and makes a discovery of its corrupt nature and life, and charge sin upon
him, it is so and so aggravated, thou have sinned against light, against
knowledge, against mercy and goodness; truth Lord, all is true, says the
gracious heart; yea, not only when God speaks in the way of discovery of sin,
the soul that is humble will cry truth Lord, and justify the Lord.

But secondly, Even then when the Lord speaks very sharply in a way of
threatening, the soul that is truly humble, it will justify the Lord; Psalm.
51. 4. Against thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight; that
thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when thou judge.
Here David he will justify the Lord in all that he spoke against him; as much
as if David should say, I have made this public confession, and have penned
this Psalm, that I might clear thee before all the world, that I might justify
God, what. ever God should do against David, or speak against David. I will
say, Lord, thou art righteous: He would justify God in all that God had spoken
against him; and yet God spoke terrible things against David by Nathan the
Prophet, 2 Samuel 12. 10, 11, 12.

Verse 10. Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house, because
thou have despised me, and have taken the wife of sriah the Hittite to be thy
wife. Verse 11. Thus says the Lord, Behold I will raise up evil against thee
out of thine own house, and I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give
them unto thy Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this
Sun. Verse 12. For thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all
Israel, and before the Sun.

See here what terrible things God threatens he threatens that the sword should
never depart from his house; That he would raise up evil against him out of his
own house, a terrible threatening: Nay, God threatens that he would give his
wives to his Neighbors, that should defile them before his face; a terrible
threatening: Nay, God tells him that this should be done before all Israel, and
in the face of the Sun: And yet Lord, I will clear thee when thou judge, and
justify thee when thou speak.

Take another instance in old Eli, and you shall see how he justified the Lord
when the Lord spoke against him; 1 Samuel 3. 18. at verse 11. Behold I will do a
thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that hears it, shall
tingle; and at verse 14. I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity
of Elies house shall not be purged with Sacrifice nor Offering for ever: Now
all this was told Eli at verse 18. And Samuel told him every whit, and hid
nothing from him: And he said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him
good. And so Hezekiah, take that instance, and see how he justified the Lord,
when the Lord spoke terribly against him, 2 Kings 20. 19. at verse. 17, 18. God
threatens Hezekiah because he boasted of his treasure, and shows it to the
Ambassadors of the King of Babylon, verse 17. Behold the days come, that all
that is in thine house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store to
this day, shall be carried unto Babylon, nothing shall be left, says the Lord.
Verse 18. And of thy sons that shall issue from thee, which thou shall beget,
shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the Palace of the King of
Babylon. A hard lesson, and yet he justifies the Lord; Verse 19. Then said
Hezekiah unto Isaiah, Good is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken. So
that you see that a gracious heart that is truly humbled before the Lord, it
will justify the Lord in all that he speaks against it; when he discovers sin,
or threatens punishment, still he will justify the Lord; and not only justify
the Lord in what he has spoken, but he will justify the Lord in what he shall
speak; if God should speak seven times worse, still a gracious heart that is
truly humble, resolves to justify the Lord, 2 Samuel 15. 26. says David, But if
he thus say, I have no delight in thee; Behold, here am I; let him do to me as
seems good unto him* He did not only justify the Lord in what he had spoken;
but in what the Lord should say; if the Lord should say, I will use David no
more, nor bring David back no more to his Throne, David in that justifies God,
and submits to the Lord.

But secondly, A gracious heart that is truly humbled, desires to justify God
in his Actings; when God shall act against him, as well as speak against him,
it will justify the Lord; if the Lord shall prefer others before him, in this
he will justify the Lord. Instance in this woman of Canaan, the Jews (the
children) they must have whole loaves, and full dishes, and they must be
preferred before her, yet she justifies the Lord, and says, Truth Lord. But I
shall make it out to you in diverse particulars, that you may see how a gracious
heart that is truly humbled, will justify the Lord in his actings.

First of all, If the Lord shall manifest more love, more grace, more favor
unto others, then to it self, though there be nothing in all the world that it
longs more after then after the enjoyment of the presence of God, yet if the
Lord shall be pleased to discover more of himself, and give out more clear,
full intimations of his love and grace to others then to it self, it desires to
justify the Lord. Christ (as I said) he will deal with the Jews as with
children, give them whole loaves, and full dishes, this woman she justifies the
Lord; and if the Lord will give more tokens of acceptance to others then to it
self, still it desires to justify the Lord: The heart that is unsound cannot
do this, nothing is more hard to bear, that the Lord should show more favor to
others then to them; so it was with Cain, the Lord showed more favor to Abel
his brother, then to him, God gave him a token of his acceptance, Cain could
not bear it; and so the Pr^digal's eldest brother; the father shows a great
deal of love to the returning Prodigal, and the eldest brother could not bear
it; I have served thee all my days, and thou have not dealt so with me; thou
have not killed the fatted calf for me. But the soul that is truly humble, it
will justify the Lord in this, if the Lord gives our clearer manifestations of
his love to others then to him, it will say the Lord is righteous, and does me
no wrong; the Lord is a free Agent; free grace, it is his commodity, and he may
bestow it where he pleases; and I have received more from the Lord then I have
improved, I have had more then I have been thankful for, more then I have used
for the Lord's honor; I have sinned so and so after mercy, and it is a wonder
that I have not sinned away all my comforts. Thus a soul that is truly humbled,
will justify the Lord.

Secondly, If the Lord gives out a greater measure of spiritual gifts to
others, the soul that is truly humbled it will justify the Lord in this
dispensation, it desires to say, as John Baptist, John 3. 30. He must increase,
but I must decrease; herein is my joy fulfilled; it desires to rejoice in this,
that the Lord may have any honor by others, though it look upon himself, and
see it is a barren wilderness; others, green trees, see others flourishing like
the Palm tree, and bring forth much fruit; although a gracious heart sees cause
to be humbled, and judge it self for not following on to know the Lord, for its
not following on to wait upon the Lord for such enjoyments, yet it also desires
to justify the Lord; not to complain if the Lord shall give out more to others
then to him; it knows in this also the Lord is a free Agent, and he may dispose
of his gifts, where, and to whom he please.

Thirdly, If the Lord should give out a greater share of temporal mercies to
others then to him, a greater estate, more riches, more honor, more friends
and relations, still a soul that is truly humbled, it will justify the Lord in
this dispensation: it will say, I have received more then I am worthy of, I am
less then the least of all thy mercies; I have more then I have used for Gods
honor, this is the portion that the Lord sees good for me; the Lord sees what
a naughty heart I have, I am ensnared with that little that I have, it is a
snare to me; therefore surely the Lord in mercy has denied much to me, lest my
heart should be ensnared, and therefore in this dispensation it will also
justify the Lord.

Fourthly, If the Lord should lay greater afflictions upon him then upon
others; in this dispensation, the soul that is truly humbled will justify the
Lord. So it was with Job; Job he was greatly afflicted, not any man living met
with so much as Job did, yet in Job 1. 20, 21. He falls down and justifies the
Lord; Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down
on the ground, and worshipped; and said, Naked came I out of my mothers womb,
and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord: See here what arguments he finds to clear the
Lord in this dispensation; though his affliction was very great, he falls down
and blesses the Lord, and at v. 22. it is said, In all this Job sinned not,
nor charged God foolishly. And so Aaron the High Priest, when the Lord smote
his two sons that they died, it is said, Aaron held his peace, Lev. 10. 1, 2,
3. And Nada^ and Abi^u the sons of Aaron, took eit of them his Censor, and put
fire therein, and put Incense thereon, and offered strange fire before the
Lord, which he commanded them not.

Verse 2. And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them, that they
died before the Lord.

Verse 3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is that the Lord spoke, saying, I
will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will
be glorified; And Aaron held his peace.

He spoke not one word against the Lord, but was silent, and justified the
Lord. And so David in Psalm. 39. when there was some sore hand of God upon him,
so that he cried out, I am consumed by thy rebukes, some affliction that did
even eat him up and consume him, yet he justified the Lord, verse. 9. I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it. And so in Micah 7. 9. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him. A
soul truly humbled will justify the Lord, even then when he lays greater
strokes of affliction upon him then upon others.

Fifthly, The soul that is truly humbled, it will justify the Lord when the
Lord seems to shut out his prayer; it calls, and cries, and waits, and yet the
Lord gives out no answer. O! how hard a matter is it for an unhumbled heart to
bear this? Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? Wherefore
have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? Isa. 58. 3. An
hypocrite cannot bear this; if God give not a present answer, it will wait no
longer: But now a gracious heart, that is truly humbled, it will wait upon the
Lord, though the Lord gives not out a present answer; yea, it will study
answers to clear the Lord; the Lord is righteous, and it is for gracious ends
that the Lord defers to hear; or, the mercy is not ripe, or I am not fit for
the mercy, it is mercy that I may wait upon God, mercy that I have such a God
to wait upon; the Lord might have cut off my life, and my hopes, and my
waiting; and therefore still the Lord is gracious, in that I have opportunity
to wait upon him. Thus a soul truly humbled, will justify the Lord, when the
Lord seems to shut out his prayer.

Sixthly and lasly, The soul that is truly humbled, will justify the Lord, when
the Lord shall lay him aside as one that is useless, when the Lord shall make
no more use of him in his work and service, but shall take him off from the
work of the Lord. God sometimes deals so with his own people; yet if the soul be
truly humbled, it will justify the Lord in this also; it is a hard matter to
submit unto it, but when the heart is put into a right humble frame, it will
submit and justify the Lord: And so did Moses and Aaron the servants of the
Lord, God told them that he would lay them aside, God calls to Moses and Aaron,
and tells Aaron that he must be high Priest no longer, commanded Moses to strip
Aaron of his Garments, and to put them upon another before his face, and bids
him go to such a place and die; and Aaron was obedient to the word of the Lord,
Numb. 20. 23, 25, 26, 27, 28. And so Moses, when his work was at an end, God
tells him that he must not carry the children of Israel into the land of
Canaan, but he must go up to the Mountain and die: He submits to the Lord,
Deuteronomy. 32. 49, 50. and Deuteronomy. 34. 5. And thus you see, a heart that is truly
humbled, it will justify the Lord both in his sayings and doings; when God
shall speak against him, and discover his vileness and sin, it will say, Truth
Lord; or when God shall threaten most severely, nay when God shall walk in
those ways that are hard to bear, yet a soul that is truly humbled, desires to
submit to the Lord, and to justify the Lord.

And secondly, When God shall not only speak himself, but when God shall make
use of men, yea wicked men, and shall set them to speak against it; when God
shall set them to revile, and set them to act against it, to persecute it; the
soul that is truly humbled, it will justify the Lord in that dispensation; so
did David, 2 Samuel 16. 7, 8. And thus said Shimei wheu he cursed, Come out, come
out, thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial; the Lord has returned upon thee
all the blood of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou have reigned, and the
Lord has delivered the Kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son; and behold
thou art taken to thy mischief, because thou art a bloody man.

Shimei he came and railed against David, it was a great indignity that was
done against David by that railing wretch, and he took up stones, and cast at
the King, at verse 6. and it was, when David was in distress, he was driven out
by Absalom from Jerusalem; he takes that advantage, he comes and rails, and
calls him the bloody man, and says he, the Lord has now avenged the blood of
thy masters house upon thee; yet David at this time justifies the Lord, verse
10. So let him curse, because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David; who
shall then say, Wherefore have thou done so? See here how David justifies the
Lord; though that which this raising man did object against David was false, he
calls him a bloody man in respect of Readiness house; David was clear in that, and
innocent: yet David he lays it to heart, and concludes that God had some
design in it; though in respect of Readiness house I am not a bloody man, yet I
shed the blood of Vriah. David he is silent; the Lord has bid him curse David;
and therefore David uses many arguments for to justify the Lord, and to quiet
his own spirit, and the spirit of others, as you may see verse. 11, 12. And
David said to Abishai, and to all his servants; Behold, my Son which came forth
of my bowels, seeks my life; how much more now may this Btnj amite do it? Let
him alone, and let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him.

Verse 12. It may be the Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord
will requite good for his cursing this day: And so David in patience does
possess his soul, and justify the Lord in that dispensation.

A word or two of Application, and so I shall conclude.

First of all, Use 1.
This calls upon us to be more in the practice of this duty; O that the Lord
would help all his people to learn this lesson! It is a hard lesson, we had
need look up to the Lord, that he would teach us to justify the Lord when he
speaks and acts against us; when he speaks himself, or when he suffers men to
speak against us: It is our duty (as you have heard) to justify the Lord, as
this woman of Canaan did, and as those in Micah 7. did, I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him: O that we could
make those holy men our pattern that we heard spoken of before! Look upon
Moses, upon Aaron, upon David, upon Hezekiah, upon Job, upon good old Eli, upon
this Woman of Canaan, O! How did they justify the Lord, when the Lord spoke
hard things, and stretched out his hand in a way of sore affliction? Still we
find them justifying the Lord, and O that we could look upon them as our
pattern!

To persuade us to this Duty, Motives to persuade us to the duty of Justifying
the Lord.
First of all, Consider, That it is the Lord; It is the Lord that speaks, it is
the Lord that acts; whenever there is any affliction upon us, it is of the
Lord; and if it be of the Lord, and from the Lord, why should we not justify
him? That was a prevailing argument with good old Eli, when as those terrible
threatenings came to his ear, That God would do that against his House, at which
both the Ears of every one that heard it, should tingle; and that the iniquity
of Eli's House, should not be purged away with sacrifice, nor offering for
ever: It is the Lord (says he) let him do what seems him good. He has power
over all creatures, as the Potter has power over the clay; and says David, I
was dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

Secondly Consider, That all that God speaks and does is God; and if so, Why
should we not justify the Lord? You know what Hezekiah said, 2 Kings 20. 19.
Good is the Word of the Lord: A hard word it was, that all his Treasure should
be carried unto Babylon, and his Sons also, and made servants there, and yet he
sath, good is the Word of the Lord. Whatever God does, is good; though it may
seem to be never so hard, yet there is some good in all that he speaks and
does; and the Lord does it for good, Does not thy Word do good? Every word of
the Lord is good, and does good to them that are his children, though it be a
hard word; yet all God's words, and all God's ways shall work together for
good; he will bring good out of them, if the heart be submitting to God, and
justifying the Lord in that dispensation.

Thirdly, Consider, That there is mercy in every dispensation; and that God
does afflict less then the sin deserves: Though the affliction may seem to be
hard, truly if we look into our own hearts and ways, we might see that there
is that which might provoke the Lord to afflict seven times more. The Church in
the Lamentations, when she came to consider how she had provoked the Lord,
though before she had cried out bitterly of her Wormwood and Gall, yet in Lam.
3. 22. It is of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not. We have provoked the Lord greatly, and it is mercy that
we are not consumed, mercy that we are out of hell, and therefore good cause
that we should justify the Lord.

Yea, and let us justify the Lord when he suffers men to speak against us: O!
This is a hard lesson to flesh and blood; but know it is a duty that God calls
for, when men do revile, and speak evil, and do accuse us so and so, still it
is our work to justify the Lord; Look back to that pattern of David in the
case of Shimei, and let us make it our pattern, whenever we meet with
revilings and hard sayings from men; he justified the Lord, though it was false
that which Shimei did accuse him of; That he was a bloody man in respect of
Readiness House, yet he justified the Lord; the Lord sees that I am a bloody man,
though not in that particular; and therefore says he, The Lord has bidden
him. Either thou art guilty or not guilty, when God suffers men to revile, and
speak evil, and to fasten such accusations upon thee; if thou art guilty, it is
thy duty to make use of it by whomsoever God shall discover it; make use of
that which comes out of the enemies mouth, to find out the evil that is in our
own hearts: But if thou art clear, and not guilty of that which thou art
accused of, yet in respect of the Lord, there is cause of justifying the Lord:
So David, though he was not guilty in that respect that Shimei said he was
guilty, yet says he, it is just with the Lord, and it is a righteous thing
that I should be thus accused by Shimei. And for the quieting of thy spirit,
use those Arguments that David did, Behold, the Son out of my Bowels rises up
against me, and therefore shall I think it a great matter for a stranger to do
it? So let us say, behold, here is that which rises up in mine own heart, the
corruptions in mine own bosom, that does me many an ill turn, shall I think
much that strangers do accuse me? And consider also that which David said, The
Lord does hear the curses of Shimei, and will do me good by it: And so, if thou
can approve thy heart to God, and art not guilty of what men do accuse thee
of, and that thou can say, it is false in respect of man, but in respect of
God, thou say, Truth Lord, Know that the Lord he can do thee good by it, and
that he will turn those very curses of men to thy good.

Again, One word of Use more, and so I shall conclude.

Look up to the Lord for this grace of Humility; O! What cause have we to give
up our hearts into God's hand, that he may make us truly humble? Surely we
shall never be able to justify the Lord, if the heart be not laid low, and
made truly humble. The Lord Jesus he had humbled this woman, he had laid her
very low, he had sanctified her affliction to humble her, she had met with
great afflictions, her daughter was vexed with a dvvil, the Lord sanctified
that affliction to humble her: And she also met with great temptations, three
sore Temptations we read of; and the Lord also sanctified those temptations to
humble her: And she had also met with discoveries of grace and love, the Lord
revealed himself very gloriously to her faith, or else she could never have
held out, the Lord also sanctified those discoveries to humble her, and lay her
low. Truly if this woman had not had a humble heart, she could never have
carried it so in the time of affliction, and in the time of this temptation,
but she would have flown in the face of Christ: Christ calls her dog, and tells
her, That it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and give it to dogs: if
her heart had not been humble, she would have discovered her self to have been
a dog, she would have barked against him; but she carried it very graciously,
and in all that Christ spoke, justified him, Truth Lord. O that we might go to
the Lord, and beg of God, that he would give out more of this grace of humility
to us! A proud heart will never justify God when he speaks himself, or when he
suffers men to speak; a proud heart will never take a repulse from God, nor
reproofs from men: O! There is need of the grace of humility that will enable a
soul to justify the Lord in whatever he shall speak, and in whatever he
shall do. The Apostle says, God resists the proud, but he gives grace to
the humble: He gives this grace to the humble, that they shall carry it
graciously when the Lord speaks against them, when the Lord shall make a
discovery of their hearts to them, of their Corruptions to them, of the
deserving of their Transgressions to them, they shall justify the Lord, and
say, Truth Lord, all is true. And when God shall suffer men to speak against
them, the Lord gives grace to the humble; they shall have this grace, made able
to justify the Lord.

And truly, When the soul is brought into this posture, when the soul is thus
truly humbled before the Lord, and can justify the Lord when the Lord speaks,
it is not far from deliverance: Salvation is nigh, Deliverance is at hand, the
time of God's Controversy is at an end. When God has thus humbled the soul
under his mighty hand, and made it willing to lie low, and to justify the Lord
in all that he speaks and does; surely the time of refreshment from the
presence of the Lord is not far off.

The Prophet Ezekiel he lay low before the Lord; there were discoveries of the
glorious Majesty of the Lord made to him, at the latter end of the first
Chapter; As, the appearance of the Bow that is in the Cloud in the day of
Rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about, this was the
appearance of the likeness of the Glory of the Lord: and when I saw it, I fell
upon my face: See here, he lay low before the Lord; and in Chap. 2. and Verse
2. What is said? And the Spirit entered into me when he spoke unto me, and set
me upon my feet.

And truly Brethren, When the Lord gives out such a frame of spirit, that the
heart is made so humble as to lie low before the Lord, and to justify the Lord
in what he speaks and does, the Spirit of the Lord is not far, Salvation is
not far off. As the Spirit did enter into Ezekiel, and set him upon his feet,
so the Spirit of the Lord will come into that soul, and fill it with joy and
refreshment from the Lord's presence.

Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the
evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say I have no
pleasure in them.
SOlomon having spent a great part of his life in following after vanity, and
being brought by the Spirit of God to a serious consideration of his ways, he
does write this Book of Ecclesiastes as the Book of his Repentance; and like a
true penitent, he takes care of the souls of others, and gives warning to all
men that they should take heed that they do not split against those Rocks
against which he cast himself. He is exceeding careful of the souls of men; and
in a special manner, he takes care of the souls of young men; he speaks once
and again to them, that they might be warned by him, and not spend their youth
in vanity, that they might not lose the comfort that they might enjoy by
enjoying God, and that they might not lose their opportunities of doing God
service in their youth.

Now because it is hard to make impression upon young men, they being very apt
to put the evil day far from them, and to put the good day far from them too,
the day of conversion and returning to God being the first of all good days,
the daybreak of Eternity; he therefore doubles his Exhortation to them: And he
begins in chap. 11. verse 9. there he gives one warning piece to young men,
Rejoice O young man in thy youth, * and let thy heart cheer thee in the days
of thy youth and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes: But know thou, that for all these things, God will bring thee into
judgment. Youth is very sinful, and it is very hard for young men to bear
reproofs. That Solomon speaks in an Ironical way, that it might make impression
upon their hearts; as if he should give them leave (...) do what they will, Let
thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine
heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: Take you^ pleasure, and run after
vanity, and scorn reproof^ and satisfy your lust as much as you will: do
(says he) But take this also with you; Know, that for all these things, God
will bring thee to judgment.

But how shall a young man be delivered from his folly? How a young man may be
delivered from his folly.
What remedy is there against this evil in youth? By what means may a young man
be cleansed?

He sets down a remedy in the Text, Remember thy Creator: If thou would be
turned from sinful vanity in thy youth; Remember God in thy youth. And he
presses the Exhortation with many Arguments; Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. Remember him! So I will (says the young man) I have
health, and strength, and time beforehand, I am but in the beginning of my
youth, and I may remember my Creator, though I do it hereafter. O! Take heed
(young man) says he, Remember now thy Creator; Take heed of delaying, take
heed of putting it off till another time, do it now, the future time is not in
thy power, thou know not what to morrow will bring forth, and therefore if
thou would remember God, do it now.

And good reason that thou should do it now, for he is thy Creator, thy
being and thy soul is from him, thy life is from him, and thy comforts are from
him; He is thy Creator, therefore remember him now.

And he presses this Duty, by the advantages which a man may have in youth of
seeking after God; and the disadvantages that will come by putting off seeking
after God in early years; There are evil days a coming (says he) and
therefore Remember now thy Creator, before the evil day come. There is the evil
day of old age a coming, and that Solomon describes by an excellent Allegory or
Metaphor from verse. 2. to ver. 7. In verse 2. he sets forth the evil day of Old
Age, While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not darkened, nor
the Clouds return after the rain; The Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars will be
darkened, says he; that is, all the powers, the faculties of thy soul, thy
understanding, thy affections, thy internal and external senses, thy memory,
thy hearing, and thy seeing, and all other helps, which he calls the Sun, Moon,
Stars, and Light, they will be darkened, there will be a decay in all the
faculties of Nature. The clouds return after the rain; The body will be full of
infirmities, a cloudy day it will be; the clouds return after the rain, after
the day when it has rained, insomuch as you think it would rain no more, the
clouds return again; and so in old Age, the clouds will return again and again
upon thee, there is a cloudy day a coming, and a dark day in old age, when thou
can not see to do thy work, and therefore Now Remember thy Creator.

And there is another evil day that he speaks of in verse 7. and that is, the
day of death. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was; and the
spirit shall return unto God, who gave it. Therefore considering all this, I
counsel thee to remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

The Proposition or Doctrine then is this: That it is the duty of all the
children of men, Doctr.
to seek after God in the day of youth.

Therefore the Scripture takes notice of some of the servants of God, and sets
them forth as patterns and examples, that every man should remember God in the
days of his youth. The Scripture takes notice of some good thing that was
found in Jeroboam's child, 1 Kings 14. 12, 13. Arise thou therefore, get thee
to thine own house, and when thy feet enter into the City, the child shall die;
And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall
come to the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward the
Lord God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam: In all the Family there was but
one good child, and there is notice taken of him, and the Lord thought of him
in mercy, that he did not see the evil that came upon his fathers house: The
Scripture takes notice also of Josiah, in 2 Chronicles. 34. 3. For in the eighth
year of his Reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of
David, his father: He was but sixteen year old, and yet then did he seek after
the God of David his father: And David he tells us, He trusted in God from his
youth, Psalm. 71. 5. For thou art my hope O Lord God, thou art my trust from my
youth. And O that young men would look upon these patterns; wherefore does God
take notice of them, and wherefore are they recorded in Scripture, but that
young men might make them patterns, and tread in their steps, to Remember their
Creator ^in the days of their youth.

But in the opening of the Point, I shall first show you what it is to remember
God.

Secondly, Show you what cause all men have to Remember God.

Thirdly, What advantage it is to Remember God in youth.

Fourthly, Make some Improvement.

First, What is it to Remember God.

First, What it is to remember God.
To Remember God is to know God; knowledge is the beginning of remembrance;
there is no man can remember that which he does not know; therefore that man
that is ignorant of God he does not remember God, neither can he, because he
does not know God. So then, when Solomon says, Remember thy Creator in the
days (...) thy youth, it is as much as if he should say, betimes seek after
the knowledge of God, to know him as he is in himself, and as he is in his Son;
to know him for your God, and your portion, and your Inheritance, and your
Savior; where there is no knowledge of God, there is no Remembrin^ of God.
Therefore the Prophet Isaiah dot^ press men to seek after the knowledge of God
and in the Name of God, threaten all those people that seek not after the
knowledge of God, th^^ though God made them, yet he will not save the^ if they
do not know him, Isa. 27. 11. For it is ^people of no understanding, therefore
he that man them will not have mercy on them. If thou do^ not know God, though
thou had outward lif^ from him, yet thou can not expect eternal lif^ from
him; for if thou do not know him, he wi^^ not have mercy on thee: And
therefore, To Remember thy Creator, is to know God.

Secondly, To Remember God, is to Trust (...) God, to lay the confidence of the
soul upon God, and upon God only; Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust (...) chariots, and
some in horses; but we will remember the name of the Lord our God: So much
faith in God, so much remembrance of God, when God is not believed on, and when
God is distrusted, when any thing beside God is trusted, then God is forgotten;
And therefore when Solomon says* Young man, Remember God; that is, seek after
faith in God; let them trust in God, let them not trust in their strength,
trust in their parts, let them not trust in their wealth, let them not trust in
their friends, their fathers to provide for them, no, let them Remember God,
let them put their trust in God, for that is a remembering of God.

Thirdly, To Remember God, is to Love God, to prize him, to have a high account
of God, to love him dearly above all things; for when God is not loved above
all things whatsoever, God is forgotten; We will remember thy love more then
wine: The upright love thee. Cant. 1. 4. We will remember thy love more then
wine; that is, our heart is affected with thy love, our heart is taken with thy
love; we find more sweetness in the love of Christ, then in the sweetest of
creature comforts; so that when Solomon says, Young man Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy youth, that is, set thy affections upon God betimes, prize
him above all thy comforts and enjoyments: if the heart be not set upon God,
the Lord is forgotten.

Fourthly, To Remember God, is to Serve God, and to obey God, to walk with him,
and to worship him, to honor him, this is a Remembering of God, Deuteronomy. 8. 11.
Beware that thou for get not the Lord thy God, in not keeping his commandments,
and his judgments, and his statutes, which I command thee this day: If thou
do not yield obedience to the will of God, thou forgettest God; but to yield
obedience to the Will of God, is to Remember God: So when Solomon says, Young
man, Remember God in the days of thy youth, that is, Walk with God, and take
heed of disobeying God, sinning against God; for if thou sin against God, thou
forgettest God; and therefore be found walking with him, and worship the Lord
in truth, for that is a remembering of him.

Fifthly, To Remember God, is to spend the thoughts of the heart upon God; When
a man spends many thoughts upon a person, or upon such an object, he then
remembers it; and so when the thoughts of the heart are spent upon God, then
God is remembered: But when God is not thought upon, but vain thoughts thrust
out the thoughts of God, there is no remembrance of God; the wicked they are
said to forget God; God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. And therefore
when Solomon says, Young man, Remember God; that is, young man, spend thy
thoughts upon God; thou have many thoughts in youth, do not let them run out to
base objects, to soul-destroying objects, but Remember God, let God be often in
thy mind, and let the thoughts of thy heart be spent on him, thy many
thoughts, and thy best thoughts, thy choice thoughts, let them be spent on God,
for that is a Remembering of God.

Sixthly and lastly, To Remember God, is to Endeavor after communion with God;
Seek to see the face of God, and to have the presence of God in and through
Christ, to walk with God, this is a remembering of God; when a man neglects his
friend, and has no communion with him, he is said to forget his friend; and so
that soul that seeks not after communion with God, that soul forgets God: And
therefore when Solomon says, Young man, Remember God; that is, let the
strongest endeavor and pursuit of thy soul be after God, that thou may
enjoy God, and act for God, and serve him. That Is the first particular, you see
what it is to Remember God.

But secondly, The Causes why we should remember our Creator.
The second thing is to show you what cause there is that all the sons of men
should Remember their Creator.

First of all, God is worthy, yea only worthy to be remembered: What is in any
creature, in any object, that does make it worthy of the thoughts of your
heart? Look unto God, and you shall find it infinitely more in him; Is it
Goodness, Kindness, bounty, Liberality, Wisdom, Power, and Greatness, Beauty
and Loveliness? Go all the world over, and find out all the excellencies that
you can name, and you shall find them all to meet and center in God; all
divine perfections are in him originally; there is Love and Bounty, Goodness
and Meekness, yea infinite grace in God; He is good, and he does good; and he
does good to the worst of creatures, even to those that forget him, while they
run away from him: Yea, the most forgetful of God, they have showers of mercy
poured down every day upon their heads. Now because of those excellent glorious
perfections that are in God, God is worthy to be remembered of the sons of men.

Secondly, He is worthy to be remembered, because he has Done so much to be
remembered; God has taken more care of this one thing, then he has done of any
thing else, besides the great work of the salvation of his people, that the
sons of men might remember him; when man went out from God in Adam, God saw
that man would soon forget him, man would have forgotten that there was a God;
now what a great deal has God done, that the sons of men might remember him!
He has written the remembrance of himself upon every creature, that
wheresoever man looks, either upward or downward, he shall see some footsteps
of God, something that God has done to remember him, he has engraven some
remembrance of himself upon every creature, Psalm. 8. 3, 4. verse 9. When I
consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon, and the stars, which
thou have ordained.

Verse 4. What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that
thou visitest him? When I saw (says he) the remembrance of God that was graven
upon the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and so upon every creature on the face of the
earth, why then at Verse 9. he cries out, O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is
thy Name in all the Earth.

Nay, The Lord has engraven the remembrance of himself upon all his
Providence; there is some remembrance of God upon every mercy, all those
mercies that have been made thy portion, which thou have enjoyed since thou
had a being; wherefore are they but that thy soul might remember God?

Nay, God has written his name upon his judgments in the earth, that he might
be remembered* wherefore God he does work wonderfully, that as his mercies are
wonderful, so his judgments are wonderful, wherefore does God do such great
things in the earth? Doubtless that he might be remembered, that men may say,
Verily there is a reward for the righteous, and a God that judges the earth.

Nay, God has set up Conscience in every man's soul, and wherefore has God set
up Conscience in every man, but that Conscience might put us in mind of God?
That every man's Conscience might speak for God, that it might stand up and cry
for God, Remember God; and Conscience does cry, and does speak, and men may
hear the cries of Conscience if they will not stop their ears: When men sin,
Remember (says Conscience) that for all these things God will bring thee to
judgment.

Nay further, God has engraven his Name upon his Ordinances, and the great end
is, that he might be remembered; This is the great end of the Ordinance of the
Lord's Supper, Do it in remembrance of me, says Christ; and so every
Ordinance, the Word that is preached to you, it is that you might remember God;
wherefore is Prayer, and every Ordinance, but that the sons of men might
remember God? He has engraven some remembrance of himself upon all his
Ordinances. See then what cause there is that you should remember God, seeing
God has done so much that he might be remembered.

Thirdly, There is cause that the sons of men should remember God; for God is
their Creator* Remember thy Creator. Now God being our Creator, it is but a
just and equitable thing that thou should remember God thy Creator; thy
being is from him, thy life is from him, thy soul is from him, thy comforts are
from him, all thy enjoyments are from him, thou have not the least comfort in
the world but what comes from God; he being thy Creator, it is but a just thing
that thou should remember him; yea, thy dependence is upon him, as he is thy
Creator; thy life is not only from him, but thy life is in his hand; and thy
soul is not only from him, but thy soul is in his hand; it is in his power to
kill and to save; to destroy both body and soul: And if there be so great a
dependence that man has upon his Creator, that not only thy comforts, but thy
breathing, thy soul, and thy eternity is in his hand, there is good cause that
thou should remember thy Creator.

Fourthly, There is good cause that we should remember God, for while you
remember God, you remember your selves; for all good comes to the creature by
remembering God, thy peace, and thy rest, thy comforts, thy satisfaction, and
thy contentments, thy establishment of heart, thy hope for life, for heaven,
for glory; there is not any good thing that a creature can enjoy, or hope to
enjoy, but it must come in by remembrance of God: And while you remember God,
you remember your selves; remembering God, thou enjoyest God, and enjoying God,
thou enjoyest all good whatsoever: good reason then that thou should
remember him. That Is the second particular.

Thirdly, I shall show you what advantage it is to man to remember God in youth.

First, The Advantages of remembering God in youth.
There is this great advantage; for the most part that soul that remembers God
betimes, in its coming unto God he finds the easy and the ready way to God;
the longer a man forgets God, the further he goes from God, every day he is
going from God, and therefore it will be the harder task to come back again; it
is a harder task to cast over a great Account, then to cast it up while lesser;
though in respect of God all things are alike, and God can as easily forgive
many transgressions as few, he can wash away great sins as well as small; but
yet when poor creatures come to look toward God through their unskilfulness,
they make it a difficult thing to find God, and to return to God, when they go
a great way from him, the greater account they have to cast up, it proves so to
man because of his unskilfulness, though to God all things are alike; So that
the sooner men begin to look after God, they find an easier way to come to
Christ, they have some helps in nature, that when a man is once turned to the
Lord, his natural abilities being sanctified, become great helps; so that young
men have more advantage, in respect that natural parts are more strong, the
Understanding, and Memory, and Reason, the Senses Internal and External, they
are all more vigorous; and these prove helps to a man, when once the heart is
sanctified, and the sooner a man turns to God, the more he has of these helps.

Yea, Christ is very ready to go out to meet such children and young men: Are
the hearts of young ones toward the Lord? The heart of Christ is toward them,
and he is mightily taken with such, and will go forth and meet them. The young
Progigal in the Gospel, no sooner did he think of returning to his fathers
house, but his father ran out to meet him.

But you will say, for ought we see, young men meet with as much trouble as
others, and when they come to remember God, they are afflicted as much as
others, and it proves hard to them as to others.

I answer, If it be so hard when they do return to God in youth, it would have
been much more hard if they had stayed till old age; and if they do meet with
difficulties and temptations, and it prove a hard way, it is because that the
Lord see^ it is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth; and I might add,
that the Lord will recompense all with abundance of grace, and with the
discoveries of himself. That is the first advantage that young men have many
times, for the most part, they find the ready way to Christ.

Secondly, They have this advantage, The Lord for the most part does discover
more of himself to them that begin betimes to remember God, then to those that
begin more later; Joel 2. 28. And it shall come to pass that I will pour out of
my Spirit upon all flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy,
your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions. Let not old
men grudge at God's dispensation, it is mercy to them that they shall dream
Dreams, but the young men shall see Visions; they shall have clearer
discoveries of God, and that is a great advantage.

Thirdly, There is this advantage, They that remember God betimes, they have an
opportunity of doing more for God then other men have; for when men begin late,
it is work enough to get the heart established in the knowledge of the love and
free grace of God; it is a great work, and a long time before the heart be
established upon Christ and the Promises; and till that be done, little work or
service is done for God. But when men begin betimes, they have time to get
their hearts established upon Christ and the Promises, and upon the free grace
and righteousness of Christ, and then they have time also to act for God, and
the Lord makes use of them to do him much service in their generation: And O
what a great advantage is that. So that you have seen the Point handled: First,
What it is to Remember God. Secondly, What Cause the Sons of men have to
Remember God. Thirdly, What Advantage it is for the Sons of men to Remember God
in youth.

Now by way of Application.

First of all, Use 1^
It discovers and reproves the folly and madness that is bound up in the heart
of the children of men. If this be the duty of all the sons of men, and a point
of great wisdom to remember God betimes, then this discovers the folly and
madness that is in men's hearts to forget God: How many in this Congregation (I
fear) may fall under this reproof, that have not yet emembred God? How many in
their youth, and how many past youth, that have not yet remembered God, that
have all their days forgotten the Holy One of Israel? O that the Lord would
convince poor creatures of this evil, not Remembering God. Shall I show you the
evil of it, and O that God would show you the evil of forgetting God.

First of all, The evil of not remembering God.
It is the Mother and cause of all other sins whatsoever; for it were not
possible that many should sin against God as they do, if they did not forget
God; all sin grows upon this root of Forgetting God. The Psalmist makes it the
cause of all evil that is committed, because men do forget God, Psalm. 50. 19,
20, 21, 22.

Verse 18. When thou saw a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and have
been partaker with Adulterers.

Verse 19. Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit.

Verse 20. Thou sit and speak against thy brother, thou slanderest thine
own mothers son.

Verse 21. These things have thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thy self: but I will reprove thee, and set
them in order before thine eyes.

Verse 22. Now consider this, YE THAT FORGET GOD, lest I tear you in pieces,
and there be none to deliver you.

As much as if he should say, here is the cause of this evil that is committed
by you, your Forgetting God; It were not possible that men should dare to sin
in the face of God, if they did not forget God. And it were not possible that
men should sin in secret against God, if they did not forget God; they forget
that God is an all-seeing God, and that for all these things he will bring them
to judgment; It is not possible that children and servants should lie, and
steal, and be unfaithful, if they did not forget God; if they did but remember
that he would bring them to judgment, and that no liar shall come into the New
Jerusalem; if men did remember God, they would not sin against God: But this is
the cause of all the sin in the world, Men's forgetting God.

Secondly, There is this Evil; It makes a man spend all his time in vanity, he
comes up and goes down to the grave in a momen, and has lost all the time that
he has lived. The truth is, he has not yet begun to live, that has not
remembered God, he has not lived to the end of his life, what is the end of his
life, but that he may remember God? But man forgetting God, his life is a
fruitless life, a vain life, he comes up, and sins, and lives in vanity, and
goes down to the pit, and never lives to the end of life, because man remembers
not God.

Thirdly, There is this evil in it; It makes men altogether unwilling and
unable to dye; as it makes their lives unprofitable, so it makes their deaths
dreadful; what is the cause that men fear death? Because they did not remember
God in life; if they had remembered God, if they had known God, and trusted in
God, and walked with God, they would not have been so fearful of death; but
when men come to be made sensible that they have spent no thoughts upon God,
but upon their lusts, and sin, and so brought their days to an end, they must
needs fear to go to God; see then how much evil there is in this great sin of
not remembering God.

But you will say, We hope that we do remember God, God forbid that we should
forget him. What? Forget God? We hope we shall never do that while we live.

O my friends, It is a harder matter to remember God, then the world dream of;
how many thousands in the world are there that forget God, that would be loath
to be told that they are forgetters of God? And yet I fear will be found so
another day; They that walk contrary in ways of sin, they are forgetters of
God, let them say what they will; though they may have a way of worship* and
prayer to God, and hear of God, and read of God, yet if they be found walking
contrary to God, such men will be interpreted by God to be forgetters of him.
Consider this all ye that forg^^ God; Psalm. 50. 22. speaking of the Hypocrites
^ Why, they had many prayers, and did many good works, are they forgetters of
God? Yes, their hearts were never upright with God, they never trusted in the
Name of God, they were never found serving of God, so as they might pleas^^
him; and therefore the Lord calls them Forgetters of God; O that the Lord would
convince you of this great evil of forgetting God.

Secondly, By way of Exhortation, I beseech^ you in the Name of the Lord to
Remember God* This day Remember God. Remember him, and Remember him in youth. I
shall speak a little to each of these.

First, I beseech you Remember God, to know God, to trust in him, to love him,
to obey him, and to spend your thoughts upon him; let the endeavors of your
heart be after the Lord; This is to Remember God. And O that God would call
upon you all, and call you up to such a remembrance of him. O remember how
worthy God is to be remembered, and remember what God has done, that so the
sons of men might remember him; and if after all this that God has done, after
all the remembrance that God has written of himself in his Word, and upon his
Works, and upon his Ordinances and Providence, men shall be found Forgetters
of God, as all sinners are; how sad will their condition be another day? You
have a memory for the world, and what, No remembrance of God! God only worthy
to be remembered, and of all things God only shut out! O my friends, Take heed
of this great sin, this Mother sin, Forgetting God.

But secondly, I beseech you to Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth;
Young man do not put off your remembrance of God; it may be you will say to me,
you will remember God hereafter; that is folly: The Wise man teaches you
better, and gives you better counsel; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth; As much as if he should say, Remember now thy Creator, in what part of
your youth soever you be; Remember Now thy Creator; Now seek after the
knowledge of Christ, if ten years old, Now Remember God, if fifteen years old,
if twenty years old, Now Remember thy Creator; yea, if thirty years old, and so
to every Age to which the word of the Lord comes, Even Now, Now remember thy
Creator.

And O that young men and young women would think upon the advantages that many
have by remembering God in youth; they were spoken of before. And let me further
tell you, for your encouragement young men, that to remember God betimes, it is
a great prerogative, and a great dignity to be the first in Christ; the Apostle
speaks of some that were first in Christ, and he speaks honorably of them,
Ephesians. 1. 12. That we should be to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in
Christ: And it was the honor of that people, that were first in bringing back
David; great honor was put upon them that went out first to meet David their
King. And so to be the first^ that go out to meet with Christ, the first that
honor him, the first that close with him, and believe in him; this is a
prerogative, and it is kindness that God will never forget, Jer. 2. 2. Thus
says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thy
espousals, when thou wentest after me in the Wilderness, in a Land that was not
sown, the kindness of thy youth I will not forget, says God. And the Lord will
say so to young men and young women that are looking after Christ, and remember
him betimes; thou remembredst me in thy youth, and I will remember the kindness
of thy youth, when thou leftest all to follow me, thy vanity, thy comforts, thy
contentments, that other young men closed with, and followed after, though they
lead to destruction; this kindness of thy youth Christ will remember to the
very last day.

And let none that hear me this day, think that they are too young, and it is
not for them to trouble themselves with such matters, to remember God, and to
look after God; as young as you have remembered God; Jeroboams child remembered
God; Josiah at sixteen years of age set himself to seek after the Lord: And I
pray consider, youth go the grave as well as others; nay, more die in their
youth then in their old age: O that young men would remember God betimes! And
there is none so young but must be accountable to God; there is sin enough to
condemn the youngest, if not actual sin, thou have a sinful Nature, and that is
enough to condemn the youngest that hears me this day. And therefore, O that
the Lord would persuade young men to remember betimes their Creator; and know
that it will be your comfort in the latter end: As the neglect of God in youth
will be a great deal of sorrow, when God smites, and comes to lay you upon the
bed of sickness, and ready to give out your breath, then it may be you will cry
out, Lord, Remember me; but how sad will it be to reflect upon your selves, and
to think that you have not remembered God? When as it has been the comfort of
many a poor soul that their work has been done, and when they have lain upon
their sick bed, they have given up themselves willingly to God, having gotten
the knowledge of God, and gotten faith in Christ, they are blessing God that
their work is done for them by Christ. O how sweet and comfortable will it be
to you young men, when you come to die, to see that your great work is done,
and that you have believed, and have nothing to do but to die? Solomon was very
pitiful to your souls young men, and therefore he calls upon you to Remember
your Creator in the days of your youth; And in the bowels of Christ I speak to
you this day, to study this lesson of lessons, To Remember Now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth.

And let me say to old men, if young men had need to remember God. Oh what
cause have old men to remember God? They that have lived many years, and not
remembered God, O it is high time that thou should make haste, thou art going
to the grave, the land of forgetfulness, where there is nothing can be done for
eternity, when once in the grave. O that God would persuade the Ancient! Such
as have neglected to remember God, that they would now remember their Creator:
and do not say I have misspent my youth, and I fear my time is over, and there
is no hope for me, I had as good go on in my ways of sin; O say not so; The
thoughts of the Lord are not as your thoughts, nor his ways as your ways, but
as the Heavens are higher then the earth, so are his thoughts above yours, and
his ways above yours. You have spent many years in sin and vanity, and
forgotten God, and your thoughts have been upon vanity it may be many years;
but the thoughts of the Lord to do good to his people, are from eternity. O
that Now you would at last in your old age remember God! Old men, I beseech you
to remember your Creator, there is hope; wherefore has God spared you so long?
Reason so with with your selves to encourage you to look to Christ, when
through Unbelief you say there is no hope, you have walked in sin, and God
might have cut you off, and it is infinite mercy that God has not cut you off;
but seeing the Lord has spared me, surely I may hope, though I have forgotten
God in the days of my youth, yet say, I will now remember my Creator, and seek
after faith in him. And know for thy comfort and encouragement, that there is
infinite thoughts of mercy in the Lord; Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and turn to our God, for he will abundantly pardon, Isa.
55. 7. O stay no longer, venture no longer, for there is one evil day upon you,
the evil day of old age is upon you, and there is another a coming: O Remember
God, and make haste to do it quickly, before the Sun, and Moon, and Stars be
darkened, before the body return to the earth, and the spirit to stand before
God that made it.

But I shall now come to press this duty upon Gods own people; for there are
many things that may evidence that this Duty is neglected by God's own people.
What is the Cause of all the dark and sad apprehensions of God to many of God's
own people? Why, Because they have not remembered God: What is the cause of all
those distrustful thoughts that do arise in the hearts of God's own people?
That our hearts are ready to saint within us? That God is no more trusted for
the things of this life, and for the things of Eternity? Why all these
distrustful thoughts, they spring from this root, not remembering God: when the
Disciples did distrust Christ, Matthew. 16. 8, 9, 10. Why says Christ, O ye of
little faith, Why reason ye among your selves, because ye have brought no
broad? Verse 9. Do ye not yet understand, neither remember the five loaves of
the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up? Verse 10. Neither the seven
loaves of the four thousand, and how many baskets ye took up. As if Christ had
said to them, if ye had remembered me, and my power, my works of providence, my
former goodness, it were not possible that ye should have distrusted, but in
that ye have so little faith, it is evident that ye do not remember me, and
what I have done. Truly if at any time we distrust God for the fulfilling of
any promise, it is because we do not remember God, we do not remember the
faithfulness of God in fulfilling Promises, we do not remember the former
experiences we have had of the goodness of God, and of the power of God; O how
much distrust is to be found in Gods own people? And because there is so much
distrust, it is evident that there is little remembrance of God.

Nay further, it appears that Gods own people are guilty of this sin, of
Forgetting God; Because there is so much coldness and deadness in our hearts to
God. O how much deadness in heart and affection in the things of God? What
little Love? What poor, weak Breathings after God? What little delight in the
Lord? Whence comes all this coldness of heart, this forsaking of our first
love? It comes from this root, because we do not Remember God; we do not
remember that he is altogether lovely and desirable, we do not remember that
his ways are beautiful; there is much deadness and coldness even in God's own
people, and therefore there is little remembrance of God.

Nay further, It appears that God's own people are guilty of this sin, because
there is so little done for God by them, and so much done against God; so many
failings, so many breaches of Covenant, so much scantness, so many haltings and
swervings in our walkings with God: Whence is all this? but because we do not
remember God, we do not remember what a God he is, we do not remember the Rule
that he has given us to walk by, we do not remember that he will be worshipped
in Spirit and in Truth; little is done for God, and that discovers that God is
little remembered.

Nay further, How many vain thoughts lodge in the hearts of God's own people?
O! How do the current of their thoughts run out to vanity? How many crooked
thoughts? How many fruitless, unprofitable, sinful thoughts? How few of the
precious thoughts of the heart are spent upon God? And whence is this? But
because God is not remembered.

Nay further, How little is God pursued after? How little do we prize Communion
with God? How little delight in the presence of God? How little do we seek
after the Image of God, and conformity to Christ? Whence is all this? but
because we do not remember that the enjoying of God is the souls happiness, and
that the enjoying of Christ is the souls perfection: so that by all this it
appears, that there is little remembrance of God even among God's own people.

And O what cause have we to take up a sad complaint against our selves, and
every one to smite upon his own breast, that we should be so negligent of this
Duty of remembering God? O what has God done for many of his people? How many,
how dear, how precious are the thoughts of God to his people? Psalm. 40. 5.
Many, O Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy
thoughts which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee:
If I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered. Now
that God should spend his precious thoughts upon us, and we spend so few of our
choice thoughts upon God, O what an ill requital is this? O what has God done
that he might remember us? He has graven the names of his people upon the
palms of his hands, Isa. 49. 16. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of
my hands: For a man to be so careful to remember his friend, as to cut his name
upon his own flesh, that is love indeed; why God has graven the names of his
people upon the palms of his hands, that so he might remember them: Yea, he
has taken upon him the relation of a Father, and has the bowels of a Mother;
Isa, 49. 15.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Now
Brethren and Christian friends, the consideration of God's remembering us,
should make us to be ashamed that we should think no more of him.

But you will say to me, what is there in God that we should remember him?

The Spouse in her description of Christ, says of him, that he is altogether
lovely; so I may say of God, he is altogether worthy to be remembered, in his
Nature, in his Essence, in his glorious Eternal Being; He is worthy to be
remembered in all his Attributes, his Wisdom, his Power, his Goodness, and
Loving Kindness, his Faithfulness, and his Truth, his Omnisciency and
Omnipresence; He is worthy to be remembered in all his Works, for God he has
done them for that end, that he might be remembered; both the works of Creation,
and works of Providence; He is worthy to be remembered in his Word, every word
of the Lord is precious as gold that is purified seven times. He is worthy to
be remembered especially in his Son; and O that we might spend more of the
thoughts of our heart upon God, as he has revealed himself in his Son; His
Name is Glorious, and worthy to be remembered, (Jehovah, our Righteousness.) He
is worthy to be remembered in his Love and Free grace, in his Promises, in his
everlasting Covenant made with poor creatures in Christ; we need not ask what
is in God that we should remember him, look where you will, and there is not
any thing in God but is worthy of remembrance; and therefore, O that the Lord
would stir us up to this duty, to remember the Lord, to spend the precious
thoughts of our hearts more upon him. David is a pattern to all you that fear
the Lord, he was continually in the remembrance of God, when he looked upon the
works of God, he remembered God; and when he looked upon the Providence of God,
he remembered God, yea he remembered God in the night season, Psalm. 63. 5, 6. My
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips: When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee
in the night watches. David was night and day spending the thoughts of his
heart upon God. And let me add something that may provoke and stir us up to the
practice of this duty, to Remember God.

First of all, This is the beginning of all good whatsoever; as the Forgetting
of God is the mother of all sin, so the Remembering of God is the mother of all
good; it is that which will make a man gracious, and act graciously in every
condition; if he receive mercy, his heart is carried out in thankfulness; if he
be in affliction, he is able to glorify God, and to honor God in the lowest
condition.

Secondly, The more we Remember God, the more shall we keep out base lusts and
vain thoughts; if the heart be not filled with the thoughts of God, it will be
filled with vain thoughts; the memory it is the storehouse of the soul, and if
God be not laid up there, that which is evil will be laid up; and therefore
when the soul straggles from God, then vain thoughts possess it: The more that
you remember God, the less troubled with vain thoughts.

Thirdly, Let me tell you, that there is no comfort nor sweetness like to that
comfort that comes into the soul by the Remembrance of God, Psalm. 63. 5, 6. My
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise
thee with joyful lips; when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee
in the night watches: It is as high an expression as can be of content and
sweet refreshment which David met with in the Remembrance of God. O the sweet
comfort and refreshment that comes into a gracious heart in the Remembrance of
God.

But you will say, It is not so always, the good man Asaph, he Remembered God,
and was troubled, Psalm. 77. 3. and therefore this does discourage many a poor
soul to turn to the Remembrance of God: for Asaph he was troubled, perplexed,
and terrified with the Remembrance of God.

But I answer, It was the good man's distemper, that he Remembered God and was
troubled, and he afterward saw his own mistake, and does acknowledge it; verse
10. And I said, this is my infirmity, but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most High. What? Did I say that I Remembered God and was
troubled? This is my Infirmity: It was not his Remembrance, but his Forgetting
of God that did trouble him; he did not Remember God so as he should have done;
He did not Remember God in his free grace, in his promises, in his Son; had he
thus Remembered God, it would not have been trouble to him; it may be many a
poor soul thinks it is trouble to Remember God, but this is a gross mistake,
for if we did Remember God as he is held forth in the Gospel, and in his Son,
it would be as David says, marrow and fatness.

Fourthly, The heart being much in the Remembrance of God, it does enoble and
put a high price upon the thoughts; till then men's thoughts are poor and vain,
and no good comes of them; the thoughts of the world perish, the thousand
thousand thoughts that are in the heart, if not spent on God, they are all
perishing thoughts; Psalm. 146. 4. His breath goes forth, he returns to his
earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. But now those thoughts that are
spent upon God, they are excellent, living, and noble thoughts, thoughts that
shall be established for ever, thoughts that shall run out into the great
Ocean, and never be buried, but you shall meet with them all again. O excellent
satisfying thoughts when spent on God!

Fifthly, You that are God's people had need Remember God more, for it is the
great difference between the righteous and the wicked; the wicked may do the
same works that the righteous man does, hear, and read, and pray; but all this
is without Remembering of God: he knows not God, he trusts not God, he loves not
God, he is disobedient to God: it is said of the wicked, God is not in all his
thoughts, Psalm. 10. 4. The great work of the Gospel is to deal with the
thoughts of men, and bring them to a right order, to bring the thoughts of the
heart to a subjection to Christ; 2 Cor 10. 45. For the weapons of our warfare
are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down imaginations, and every high thing, that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

Nay further let me tell you, that this will be the glory, and excellency, and
happiness of the Saints in heaven, that they shall remember God continually,
and the thoughts of their heart shall be established in the remembrance of it;
they shall not turn aside from thinking upon God, they shall have no more vain
thoughts, no more idle thoughts, but the thoughts of the heart shall run out to
eternity in the remembrance of him, and never forget him more.

Sixthly, The more we Remember God, the more of God shall we meet with in every
duty, in every providence, and in every way; there is such a gracious promise
in Isa. 64. 5. Thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness, those
that remember thee in thy ways: See here the promise is, That he will meet
those that remember him in his ways; not to a man that walking outwardly in
God's ways, but to him that walks with God, and that has the thoughts of
his heart spent upon God, it is God that he eyeth, and it is God that he seeks
communion with, it is such a soul that God will meet, as does thus remember him
in his ways.

But it may be some poor soul is afraid to look toward God, it cries out. O I
am so troubled with vain thoughts, and sinful thoughts, with a dead heart, and
a loose heart, and I cannot remember the Lord.

Why if thy soul be turned to the Lord in truth, the Lord will fulfill this his
promise; if thou set about the work, and give up thy self to wain upon God
in the Ordinance, thou shall have communion with him, God will meet thee, and
if God meet thee, then thy vain thoughts will vanish.

But may some soul say, my thoughts are worse then vain thoughts, my thoughts
are sinful thoughts blasphemous thoughts, which are suggested into my mind
even at that time when I should have communion with God, that I dare scarce
look toward God, I dare scarce remember him.

Why, yet do not give over thy duty, whatever thoughts should be suggested
into thy mind, but know for thy comfort, that those sinful thoughts, and
blasphemous thoughts which are cast in by Satan, they shall not be laid to thy
charge, if thy soul abhor them; it is true, if the heart did close with them,
and nourish them, then they become the souls; but when the soul abhors them,
and casts them out, and cries to Christ against them, it is not the souls sin;
therefore do not neglect thy duty because of these vain thoughts, but set thy
face to seek the Lord, and remember and know that the Lord will make good his
word, he will meet thee, and when God meets thee, all these sinful and cursed
thoughts shall be cast out. And thus you have heard Brethren, what
encouragement there is to remember God.

But you will say, It is a great Duty, and much depends upon it, how shall I be
helped to remember God aright?

First, Helps to remember God aright.
Be often looking upon the Book of the Creature, upon the works of Creation;
and look upon them for this very end, that thou may Remember God; for there
is a Remembrance of God upon all creatures, and if we be wise, we may make a
spiritual improvement, and be led to the Remembrance of God, by looking into
the Book of the Creature.

Secondly, Look into the Scripture, and consult with that, for there has God
declared his Name, his glorious Name is written in his Word; there are Letters
that God has written with his own hand, God has subscribed, I Jesus testify
these things. There is the hand of God and of Christ in the Book of the
Scripture; and therefore if thou would Remember God, converse with the Word
of God.

Thirdly, Wait upon God in every Ordinance, for all Ordinances are given for
this end, to Remember God; the Word, the Supper, every Ordinance of God is
given, that so the soul might see God, and Remember him; and therefore when
thou waitest upon God in any Ordinance, let this be the end that thou
propoundest to thy soul, to Remember God.

Fourthly, Lay up all the Love Tokens of God; Whatever Experience thou have
met with from God in making supply to thy wants, comforting of thee, supporting
of thee, these are tokens that come from God; and the mercy that he shows
thee, it is for this end, that thou may Remember him; and therefore lay up
all the experiences that thou have met withal, for they will help thee to
Remember God.

Fifthly, Labor to get your hearts established and assured in the Knowledge of
Gods love to thee, that thou may come to the knowledge of this, that God is
thy Friend, thy Father, thy nearest and dearest relation; for the ^ore the soul
knows this, the more it will Remember God. It is not possible that a child
should forget a loving Father, that a Wife should forget a loving and tender
Husband. O when a soul comes to know this, that God is my Father, my Husband,
this will help the soul to a sweet Remembrance of God.

Sixthly, Look up to the Lord to increase thy love to him; for the more love to
God, the more thou will Remember God; but where there is little love to God,
there is little Remembrance of God; and the reason that men Remember God no
more, is, because there is so little love in their hearts toward God; If a man
loved his friend, he would Remember him, and not forget him; O therefore be
ashamed that no more love should be sparkling in thy heart to God, when so much
love is flaming in the heart of Christ toward thee. And therefore Brethren beg
it of the Lord that he would shed abroad more of his love in your hearts, and
blow up thy spark to a flame, that thy soul may be filled with a constant
Remembrance of him.

Seventhly, Ure thy soul to holy meditation, and thinking upon God last at
night, and first in the morning, it will be a great help to keep up a constant
Remembrance of God in the soul: O let thy waking thoughts be toward the Lord;
Think of his Works of his Attributes, of his Son: there is enough for men to
spend millions of thoughts upon, and therefore let some be spent upon God:
as soon as man wakes in the morning, there are a multitude of thoughts strive
who shall get in first, there stands God, and Christ, and the World, and they
which get in first, have a great advantage to keep in the soul all the day
long; if the world gets in first, the heart is made worldly; but when God and
Christ is let in first, the heart is kept in a gracious frame all the day long;
and the more that your meditations are spent upon God, the more Remembrance
will you have of God.

And now Brethren you have seen your duty, and your neglect of duty, for which
you have cause to be humbled; and we have seen what cause we have to Remember
God, and what a great benefit comes in by Remembering God; and we have seen what
may be helpful to our souls in this duty. Now let us look to the Spirit of the
Lord to make them helps; for we have need of all helps, till we shall come
where the soul shall Remember God perpetually, and never forget him.

Heb. 6. 19. Which hope we have as an Anchor of the soul, both sure and
steadfast, and which enters into that within the Vail.
THe Apostle in the eighteenth verse speaking of the hope that is set before
Believers, and of their fleeing for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before
them; He takes occasion to speak of that hope that is begotten and raised in
the hearts of all Believers by the hope of Christ.

In verse 18. He speaks of the Object of Hope. Christ, he is the hope set
before believers; but in this 19th verse, he speaks of the grace of hope, which
hope we have as an Anchor to the soul, both sure and steadfast; this is spoken
of the grace of Hope, which is the sister of Faith: And this Hope it differs
from Faith thus; Faith looks unto God and Christ in the Promises, it looks unto
the word of the Lord that is given for its security, and it is the work of
Faith to close with the Word, and to hold fast the word of promise, which the
Lord Jesus does hand out to poor souls. But Hope, that looks to the good things
promised, and it waits ^or the good things that are laid up in the promises,
Hope eyes them, and waits for the full possession and fruition of that which is
laid up in the promise, and when the soul shall enjoy all those good things
laid up in the promises, then Hope shall cease.

Now that we may understand the nature of saving Hope, and the use of it, he
sets it forth to us by a Metaphor of an Anchor; which hope we have as an Anchor
to the soul, both sure and steadfast: Hope it is of that use to the soul, that
an Anchor is to a Ship; as an Anchor is to stay the Ship at Sea, that it may
arrive safe in the midst of all storms, and not be carried upon the sands, and
so broken to pieces; of that use is Hope to the believing soul, as an Anchor is
to the Ship: And therefore the Apostle does intimate to us these two things.

First, That the soul of a Believer is compared to a ship at sea.

Secondly, The hope of a Believer is compared to an: Anchor. Which hope we have
as an Anchor etc.

The soul is the Ship, and Hope, that is the Anchor of the Ship; yea, it is a
most excellent Anchor; and he fets forth the excellency of it by diverse
expressions, it is an Anchor of the soul, and it is sure and steadfast, and
which enters into that (...) eye of God; the Lord has a hand in ruling them,
the sea, though boisterous, yet it is before the Throne.

And further, it is a Sea of glass like unto crystal; there is held forth what
this world is before the Lord, it is glass, and it is transparent, even as
crystal; to the eye of God the world lies open, and he sees every thing that
is done in it: In a crystal glass the least more and spot is seen by the eye
of man; so the world before the Lord, and to the eye of the Lord, it is like to
a crystal glass, though the world in it self be never so muddy, and never so
filthy, yet the Lord sees all, he sees that which is at the bottom of the sea;
he sees into the bottom of men's hearts, he sees into the bottom of every man's
actions and intentions, there is not any thing in any man's spirit and
conversation but it is clear before the Lord, he sees it as through crystal.

Thus you see it confirmed by Scripture, that this world it is as the Sea, and
a believing soul that is in the world, he is upon a sea, as a ship upon the sea.

But I shall show you first, In what respect the world is as a Sea to a
believing soul.

Secondly, That every Believer is as a ship upon this sea.

First of all, In what respect the world is as the Sea. Why,

First of all, The sea is no place to dwell upon; no man builds upon the sea:
the sea is only for passage to pass over unto another land, it is for
transportation from one country to another, but no man dwells upon the sea.
Truly so is this world the world is not to be continued in, it is not for you
to abide long in, you are not to dwell here, it were the fondest thing in the
world to think of building a house upon the sea; truly so fond a thing is it to
imagine to continue here long, yet how deeply is this rooted in the heart of
man, and how little do they think that they are passing over the sea into
another world, how little is this thought upon and remembered? The Saints of old
they have confessed, that they were Pilgrims and strangers here, and that they
had here no abiding City, but they looked for one to come, whose Builder and
Maker is God, Heb. 11. 10, 13.

God's people are not at home here, this is no place to dwell in; here are
Tents, but no abiding City, there is no Mansion here upon the sea of this
world, the mansions are in heaven, In my fathers house are many Mansions, says
Christ, John 14. 2. And it is made as a discovery of an unsound Heart, the
description of a wicked man, that he dreams of continuance here, and does not
look upon the world as a Sea, Psalm. 49. 11. Their inward thought is, that their
houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations;
they call their lands after their own names.

Verse 12. Nevertheless, man being in honor, abides not, he is like the
Beasts that perish.

Verse 13. This their way is their folly.

It is folly to think of continuing here, the sea is no place to dwell in,
neither is this world any place to dwell in.

Secondly, The Sea is a most unconstant place, the waves of the Sea are full of
unconstancy, full of Instability; a great deal of instability is also in the
things of this world: The sea it is never constant, it is always in some
troubled motion, there is no rest in the Sea, the waters they are rising and
falling, ebbing and flowing, it is continually in an unsettled condition: Truly
thus is the world, and all the things of the world, they are full of
instability, there is nothing here that continues: He that had experience of
all these things, cries out, Vanity of vanity; that was the best he found in
the world, and in the comforts of the world; it is an unsettled condition that
God's own people are in while upon earth, there is nothing that does continue
long, all things vanish, and are gone in a moment, there is as much instability
in all things here below, as in the waves of the Sea; See what the Wiseman
says, Eccles. 1. 4. and so on, One generation passes away, and another comes.

Verse 5. The Sun also arises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the
place where he arose.

Verse 6. The wind goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North, it
whirleth about continually, and the wind returns again according to his
circuits.

Verse 7. All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full.

And so it may be said of all the comforts of this world, they are very
unstable; yea man himself he is full of instability, he never continues in one
stay, even the best of men; sometimes he is up, and sometimes down; abundance of
instability in their spirits and conversations, in their comforts and
enjoyments; in every thing like to the wave^ of the Sea.

Thirdly, The Sea is a Raging enemy, it is full of rage; they that are upon the
sea, they meet with nothing but tossing up and down: What a mighty combustion
is there in the waves of the Sea, especially when the four winds do rise upon
it? O how troublesome is the Sea then? Psalm. 107. 26, 27.

Verse 26. They mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths, their
soul is melted because of trouble.

Verse 27. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at
their wits end.

Truly thus it is with the state of God's people while in the earth, it is
their portion to be tossed up and down, even as upon the waves of the Sea. Joh
cries out of his tossings to and fro, Job 7. 4. When I lie down, I say, When
shall I arise, and the night be gone? And I am full of tossings to and fro unto
the dawning of the day: O what perplexities do God's people meet withal both in
their outward and inward man, sometimes lifted up, and sometimes cast down? Thou
have lifted me up (says David) and cast me down, Psalm. 102. 10. So Jonah, he
was lifted up, he had communion with God, and by and by cast down into the
bottom of the Sea. O what a raging enemy is the Sea, when the four winds
strive upon it? Truly there are dangerous winds that do stir up the rage of
this Sea, and make this world so boisterous to God's own people: The devil
raises a wind, yea sometimes all the four winds strive together; temptations of
all sorts, as Christ was exercised with, so are the people of God: The devil
raises many a cross wind to drive them back again, that if possible, they
might not look toward God and Christ: And there are winds that do arise out of
their own bowels, many times the wind of manifold corruptions disturb, the wind
of passion, the wind of pride, the wind of vanity, the wind of unbelief; and O
what disturbances do these winds make that do arise out of their own bowels?
There is such a combustion, that the poor soul is forced to run to Christ, and
cry out, O Lord, rebuke these disturbers: And if Christ should not arise to
rebuke them, the soul would be over-^et by them; such is the rage of this Sea
when the winds strive upon it.

Fourthly, The Sea is full of sands, and dangerous splitting Rocks. Truly so is
this world, there is the rock of persecution, and many a goodly ship is split
upon that rock; there is the rock of offenses, many are offended at the ways of
Christ, and offended at the people of Christ, and so split upon that rock.

This world is full of rocks, and full of Sands; it is true, if Christ be in
the ship, the passengers shall not be lost, though the ship may be split, and
all the burden of the ship may be loft. The Saints that have been split upon
the rock of persecution, they have lost all their comforts, and their lives too
(for the Name of Christ) in the Sea of this world; but though they have lost
their ship, the body, and all their loading, yet their souls have been saved,
and are arrived safe in heaven.

Fifthly, The Sea is full of Pirates and Robbers: The world is not without these
dangers to God's own people; there are many robbers that lie in wait to rob and
take away all their loading; the devil lies in wait to take away from the
people of God all their precious loading that they have been trading for, but
they shall carry it home to heaven in spite of all the devils in hell; yea,
their own hearts are robbers and pirates, and a man's own heart will do him more
hurt then all his enemies beside, a vain heart, a worldly heart, a frothy
heart, an unbelieving heart, these would rob us of all our comforts whatsoever,
and take away all the loading that is ^^ecious; but the Lord Jesus he is
Commander of the Sea, and he is nigh with a Convoy, and he will guard every
believing soul through all these robbers, and carry them safe to heaven.

Sixthly, The waters of the Sea are very salt and brackish, no man can drink the
Sea water without prejudice: Even so is this world, and the comforts of it,
they are all salt and bitter, and it is not possible that they should satisfy
and quench the thirst of any poor soul. How many men do deceive themselves,
they think that the world should satisfy their desire, and therefore their
desires are so eager after the world, but they shall find another day that
they are in an error; the waters of the Sea cannot quench their thirst; a
gracious heart will say so, and he knows it by experience, that it is better
for him to drink of the waters of life; and therefore he cries out, Lord, these
are all sour waters, yea the best comforts have some mixture of salt and
bitterness; Lord, give me evermore to drink of those waters of life that run at
thy right hand for evermore: It is true the men of this world that know no
better, they drink freely of this salt water, because they know not what sweet
waters are; but that soul that has tasted of the sweetness of Christ, and how
good the Lord is, that soul cannot be satisfied with all the comforts of this
life, but looks only to Christ, that he may satisfy his desire. And so you
have seen in these six particulars, that this world to a believing soul is as
the Sea. That Is the first.

But secondly, Every believer is as a ship upon the Sea of this World.
Every Believer is as a ship upon this Sea, they are making of a Voya^^ over
the Sea of this world to the Land of Promise, they are set forth from the
world, and from sin, and they are bound to the Land of Promise; that is the
state of every Believer, he is as a ship upon the Sea. Indeed Christ is the
Builder of this ship, Christ is the Owner of this ship, it is Christ that
lancheth the ship, and that loads the ship, all the precious Commodities that a
believing soul is carrying home with him, it is Christ's; he has the great
Venture in every believing soul, and if it should miscarry, Christ should have
the greatest loss, for he has the greatest Venture in the ship; and because
the Venture is Christ's, therefore Christ will go Master in the ship; his
presence shall be with his people all the time of their continuance upon the
face of this earth, he will not leave them till he has brought them into the
Haven of rest.

But I shall follow the Metaphor in two particulars, briefly thus. First, The
Ship at Sea cannot move without a Wind. Secondly, It cannot rest without an
Anchor.

First, A ship at sea cannot move without a wind. Many times it lies a long
time for a wind, and when the wind blows, then the ship moves, but it cannot
move without a wind; and truly so it is with the souls of God's people, they
cannot move without a wind, they are bound for heaven, but they cannot move the
least without the spirit of of Christ, though they have never so many
opportunities, and never so many Ordinances and Promises, yet if the Spirit of
Christ does not help the soul forward, the soul is becalmed, and cannot move:
It is true, the ship at sea may be ready, they may turn the Sayls to the
Windward, but not move till the wind blow; and so a believing soul may do
something when once the Spirit of Christ is in it, the soul may stand waiting
for Christ, and be breathing after Christ, but till the Spirit of Christ shall
breath upon the soul, and fill the sayls of the soul, it is not possible that
it should rid any way: And therefore the people of God have found, that it has
been for their advantage to cry out for the breathings of the Spirit of Christ;
so the Spouse in Cant 4. 16. Awake, O Northwind, and come thou South, Blow upon
my Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out. But

Secondly, The ship cannot rest without an Anchor; no more can any poor soul
rest without this Anchor of Hope; this anchor of hope is that which stays the
soul upon God, and keeps up the soul that it faint not, and sink not; It is
true indeed (as the Apostle says) If our hopes were only in this life, we were
of all men most miserable; If we had not a better hope and anchor then the men
of this world have, that have only hope for the things of this life. But this
saving Hope, which is the sister of Faith, that looks to the good things laid
up in the Promise, it is that which stays the soul, and keeps it safe and
steadfast in the midst of all storms whatsoever: If a ship lie at Anchor, it may
ride safe at midnight, though never so dark; And truly that soul that has cast
anchor upon Christ, it may ride safe in the darkest time, in the saddest
condition that can befall it, while upon the face of the earth, this great Sea;
If a ship has a good anchor, she rides safe in the midst of the greatest
raging sea, though the winds rise, though the waves be never so high: This
anchor of hope it causes a soul to ride safe in the midst of all temptations;
Hope keeps the heart up, Romans 5. 2. By whom also we have access by faith into
this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.

Verse 3. And not only so, but we glory in tribulations also, knowing that
tribulation works patience.

Verse 4. And patience, experience; and experience, hope.

Because we have this hope, therefore we rejoice in tribulation, in the midst
of all storms we rejoice; we can sing for joy, as Paul and Silas* did at
midnight, because we have Hope for our anchor, our ship shall ride safe in the
midst of this Sea.

But for Application, briefly.

First of all, Use 1.
It lets us see the misery of all men out of Christ; they that are without
Christ, are without hope; the Apostle puts them together, Ephesians. 2. 12. That at
that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
and strangers from the Covenants of Promise; having no hope, and without God in
the world. They that have no Interest in Christ, have no hopes to do their
souls good another day; they may have the hope of the hypocrite, that is like
the spiders web that will perish; but they have no true, solid, well-grounded
hope.

It is a sad condition for a ship to be at sea, and have no Anchor; wicked men
are at sea as well as God's people, and if you have no anchor of hope to stay
your souls when storms shall arise, and the wrath of God arise against you, how
sad will your conditions be? And truly thus it is with the greatest part of the
men of the world, their condition is sad, though they do not lay it to heart;
their ship is at sea, tossed up and down, and have no anchor: Every man out of
Christ, either he has no hope, no anchor; or secondly, If he has hope, his
hope is not sure and steadfast, it is no firm hope; or thirdly, his hope is not
cast upon a good ground; and if so, it is not possible that the ship should be
safe when the storms arise; for it is a very rotten place that most men out of
Christ do cast the anchor of their hopes upon; most men cast their anchor
downward, but this anchor of hope must be cast upward; it never takes place
when it is cast downward, it has no ground to fasten upon.

But when it is cast within the Vail, it takes hold upon the rock, upon God,
and Christ, and the Promise, that is more sure then heaven and earth; but most
men cast their anchor downward, their hopes is for the things of this life, and
that hope will not hold.

And some cast the anchor of their hope upon themselves, and that is a poor
ground to cast this anchor upon; the anchor of most men that live under the
Gospel, that are not brought home to Christ, their Anchor is cast upon
themselves, upon some works, some duties, some performances, upon something that
they have done; truly this is a rotten ground, and this hope will not stand you
in stead: there is no anchor will hold but that which is cast upward within the
Vail, therefore dear friends, I beseech you examine whether you have that
anchor that will hold, have you this hope that is cast within the Vail? O! that
God would cause you to look after this hope, you will not trust your bodies at
Sea in a ship that has no anchor, you will say it is as much as your lives are
worth if a storm should arise: Will you not trust your bodies where there is no
anchor, and will you trust your souls where there is no anchor? Yet this is the
folly of thousands, those that are called Professors, they will trust their
souls at sea without an anchor. Alas! What will they do when the storms shall
arise, when, when the wrath of God shall arise, what will you do? O! that God
would cause you to come to Christ, that you may have this anchor that is sure
and steadfast. That's the first.

Secondly, Use 2.
Let not God's people wonder that they meet with storms, temptations, trials,
and afflictions, and at the rage of men against you: Why, you are like a Ship
at Sea, and a ship at Sea has prepared for a storm, if the waves do beat upon
them, they are prepared for it, they are tossed up and down the sea, and yet
they hope they shall come to land: And therefore you that fear the Lord, do not
wonder at your temptations and trials, and that the wrath of men is against
you, this is the place for storms, heaven is the place of rest; the Lord by
this would imbitter the world to you, he will make you know that the world is
bitter, and that heaven is sweet; O! How sweet will heaven be when the soul
shall come out of the midst of great storms, and dark nights, and many
perplexities of spirits, many tossings in their conditions, both outward and
inward; the Lord by these storms will make heaven very sweet unto you; heaven
is the place of rest, though this be the place of trouble, and therefore do not
wonder at it. That Is the second.

Thirdly, Use 3.
What a mercy is it that God's people are kept and preserved any moment; It is
a mercy to be kept at sea, every man will say so; but especially to be kept and
preserved when the sea rages, there is no heart almost so hard, but will be
affected with such a mercy, to be kept in the midst of a storm, when they
expect to make their grave in the deeps, this is a wonder; and O what a mercy
is it that God's people are kept in this tempestuous world; it is a wonder that
your bodies are not broken, and that your spirits are not broken, and that your
comforts are not broken, when so many winds strive upon the face of the earth,
this sea; it is a great mercy to be kept, and therefore acknowledge it to the
praise of God; it does appear, and the Lord does make it evident, that the sea
is before the Throne. If the sea were not before the Throne of God; God's
people should be swallowed up every moment, the rage of men and of devils would
swallow them up; but the sea is before the Throne, before the eye of God; and
therefore wonder that you are safe in this raging sea.

Fourthly, Use 4.
It calls upon you that are the Lord's people to watch and pray, for you are at
sea; he that will not pray in a storm, he will never pray, the worst of men
will pray hard in a storm: The heathen Mariners, Jonah 1. 5. Then the Mariners
were afraid, and cried every man unto his god: therefore there is a Proverb,
That men go to Sea to learn to pray: Truly, the Lord sends his people to sea
for this end, that he might learn you to pray and cry mightily to him; the
Saints shall not need to pray when they come in heaven, there all their desires
shall be satisfied, and they shall want nothing, and therefore no need to pray:
But the Lord he sends you into the sea of this world, that he might learn you
to pray, and he raises many storms for this end, that so you might cry mightily
to the Lord: The Disciples when in a storm, they cried, Lord, save us, we
perish: Brethren, you are at sea, in the midst of storms, and therefore you had
need watch, and pray, and cry mightily, that you may be delivered from
temptations, and saved in the midst of your fears, and be delivered from the
Rocks, and the Sands, and from Pirates, and enemies, many dangers you are in,
and therefore remember what Christ says unto his Disciples, Watch, and pray,
that you enter not into temptation.

Fifthly, Use 5.
Engage the presence of Christ with you: If Christ be in the ship, all is safe;
you had need engage the presence of Christ with you every moment, for it is a
dangerous sea you are in, and if Christ be not with you, you will be split upon
some sand or other; and therefore, O beg the presence of Christ, do not set
forward in any duty, without the presence of Christ, Do not sail one League
without the presence of Christ, but urge it before the Lord that you are upon a
troublesome sea where there are so many dangers, and desire of God that the
presence of Christ may be with you; for if Christ be with you, all will be safe.

Sixthly, Use 6.
You that are the Lord's people, do you open the sayls of your souls to the
breathings of the Spirit of Christ; If you would make a Voyage to heaven, know
that you can do nothing till the Spirit of Christ breaths in you; indeed, you
may turn the sayls of your souls that way, and be waiting for the Spirit of
Christ, but till the Spirit breathe in you, you cannot sail one League: but O
what a comfortable Voyage shall you make, when the Spirit of Christ shall fill
your hearts with holy motions, and carry you Godward, and heavenward,
therefore wait for those breathings of the Spirit; as the Spouse in Cant. 4.
16. Awake O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that the
Spices thereof may flow out. And so do you, beg of God that the Spirit of
Christ may breathe upon you, and fill the sayls of your souls, that you may be
carried heavenward: Open your souls to the breathings of the Spirit of Christ,
and that is the way to make a comfortable Voyage.

Seventhly, Use 7.
You that are the Lord's people, if you be Christ's ship at Sea, look for good
Loading, be not content to go home empty; Christians should labor to be filled
with the Spirit, to be laden with the fruits of Righteousness; this the Lord
calls for; truly it is a dangerous Voyage that you make, and therefore you had
need be laden with rich Commodities, you had need seek after much of that
durable riches that abides for ever; the Lord does not love that the ship
should come home empty: O that you that fear the Lord would remember that you
have but once to pass over the sea of this world, and then there is an end for
ever, and therefore do not return empty, but O go and beg of the Lord, that he
would fill you with the fruits of righteousness, that you may go home laden
with Faith and Righteousness, so shall you be an honor to God, and there will
be much joy in heaven when you come home.

Eighthly, Use 8.
It is a word of much comfort to those that fear the Lord, and have an Interest
in Christ; know, though you be at sea, and meet with many storms, yet you need
not fear, you have an Anchor that will hold, it being cast upon a sure ground,
your Anchor it is entered, it is fastened upon the Father's free grace, and the
Son's everlasting Righteousness, which is sure and steadfast; and if so, do not
fear though storms arise, it shall go well with you, for Christ is the owner of
the ship, and he will go Master in the ship, and so long as the presence of
Christ is with you, you may be comforted, whatever you meet with. If Christ be
in the ship, he will rebuke the wind and the waves, yea he will tread upon the
proud boisterous waves that his people meet with; yea, and he will make his
people also to tread upon them too; and therefore fear not, for Christ is the
Master of the ship, he is with you, the Loading also is Christ's and (as I said
before) you need not fear splitting, and losing your Loading, for then Christ
should lose more then you: If thy soul should be lost at Sea, then Christ
should lose his honor, and his honor is more to him, then thy soul to thee;
and therefore let all Gods people be comforted in the midst of all storms, and
trials, persecutions, afflictions, and sufferings; though this world be a Sea,
and an evil sea, a troublesome sea, yet be comforted; for though the ship of
the body may be split, and all your outward Loading may be lost, yet so long as
Christ is the Owner of the ship, so long as Christ is in the ship, so long as
the Anchor of the ship is cast in heaven, there is not one passenger shall be
lost; for though the outward man be lost, yet the soul shall be saved in the
day of Christ.

I now come to consider what is the Use and the Excellency of this Grace of
Hope. It is an Anchor sure and steadfast, though it is not always sure to
sense, not always sure in apprehension. The hope of the Saints may have its
shakings, and it may seem sometimes to be cut off in their apprehensions, but
it is sure and steadfast in respect of the ground of it, in respect of that sure
hold it has upon God and Christ, it has sure hold upon that which is within
the Vail. And it is sure in respect of the event of it; The Event and Issue of
a Believers hope is always sure, it can no more be disappointed of his hope,
then the foundation of his hope (which is Christ) can be overturned; but that
which a believing soul has in hope, it is as sure as if he had it in hand
already. Lo, This is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us,
says the Church.

The Doctrine then is this, That the beleiving soul has Hope for a sure and
steadfast Anchor. Doctr. 2.


Or thus, This Grace of Hope it is a sure and steadfast Anchor to every
believing heart.

It is plain in the Text, Which hope we have as an Anchor both sure and
steadfast.

In the handling of this Point, I shall show you, First, What this Hope is.

Secondly, Make it out to you, That this Hope is the souls Anchor.

Thirdly, That this Anchor of the soul is sure and steadfast. And that will make
way for Application.

First of all, Our work is to enquire, What this Hope is. You may take this
description of it.

It is the work of the spirit of Christ upon the heart, whereby it is raised in
expectation of those good things that faith believes, and which God has
promised.

We shall open the parts of it, that we may come to know what this saving Hope
is, that is the Anchor of a believing soul.

And first of all you have the efficient cause of this hope, The efficient
cause of true hope is God.
and that is the Spirit of Christ, it is not all the world that can raise a
poor dejected heart to hope in God, it is not all the comforts of the world,
nor comforters in the world, that can make any poor drooping heart to cast this
Anchor of Hope in heaven; and therefore when the Apostle does describe the
condition of Natural men, he says of them, That they are without God, without
Christ, and without Hope. This is the state of every man by Nature, he has not
the least dram of saving hope, till the Spirit of Christ come^ to work upon the
heart. And therefore God is called the God of Hope, Romans 15. 13. Now the God of
hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope,
through the power of the holy Ghost. Here you see the efficient cause, it is
the work of God to raise up the heart to hope in himself, and it is the Spirit
of Christ that must cause the soul to abound in hope; That you may abound in
hope, through the power of the holy Ghost. And in Psalm. 22. speaking there in
the person of Christ, he confesses that it was his Father that did cause him
to hope, Psalm. 22. 9. But thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou did
make me hope when I was upon my mothers breasts. It was thou Lord that did
cause me to hope. God only is the efficient cause.

Secondly, The formal cause of hope.
For the Formal Cause of this Hope, we said it is an Expectation of the soul,
it takes its rise from faith, what faith believes, that hope expects, and
waits upon God for the fulfilling of; It is an Expectation of the heart.

Now this Expectation it is, First, A patient Expectation.

Secondly, An ardent Expectation.

Thirdly, A confident Expectation. All which do express the Nature of saving
Hope.

First of all, It is a Patient Expectation, it causes the soul to wait
patiently for the fulfilling of the Promise, to sit down at the feet of Christ,
and wait, even all its days, for the fulfilling of the Promise; and therefore
says the Apostle, Heb. 10. 36. For you have need of patience, that after you
have done the Will of God, you may inherit the Promise. As if he should say,
your hope will not hold out, if you have not patience, God has given you a
promise, but God does not presently fulfill the promise; and therefore that you
may hope till the Promise be fulfilled, you have need of patience; and truly,
Hope is nothing else but Patience lengthned out. It is a patient Expectation.
Secondly, It is an Ardent Expectation; What the believing soul does hope for,
it is earnestly carried out after; it is such an expectation as does make the
soul exceedingly Intent, and cause it to look every way, round about, for the
fulfilling of that which it hopes for; it is an earnest expectation: The
Apostle speaks in Romans 8. 19, 20, 21.

Verse 19. For the earnest expectation of the creature, waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God.

Verse 20. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by
reason of him who has subjected the same in hope.

Verse 21. Because the creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God.

The whole creation has a hope to be delivered from that bondage which the sin
of man brought upon it; and because there is a hope, there is an earnest
expectation, and the earnest expectation waits for the manifestation of the
sons of God. And truly where there is saving hope, it will cause the soul to
look after the fulfilling of the Promise, it waits earnestly, and groans
earnestly for the fulfilling of those Promises that it waits for: It is an
ardent expectation.

Thirdly, It is a Confident Expectation; though indeed it is true, the hope of
the best Saints may flag, yet when hope does work like it self, and act like it
self, it acts confidently; it is accompanied with holy confidence and boldness
toward God; when hope is strengthened, then it acts confidently, and confidence
is nothing else then hope strengthened; That is the second particular. You have
seen the efficient and formal cause of this hope.

Thirdly, What is the object of hope.
What is the Object of this Hope? I told you that it was an expectation of
those good things that God has promised; what God has promised, that hope
looks for the fulfilling of, all outward comforts that are needful refreshments
in their way; (Protection, Deliverance, Assistance, the Increase of Grace, and
the Carrying on of the work of God in the heart) whatever is laid up in the
Promise, that hope waits for the fulfilling of; but more especially, the Object
of a Believers hope it is Eternal Life, Tit. 1. 2. In hope of Eternal Life,
which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began. And in Tit. 3. 7.
That being justified by his grace, we should be made Heirs, according to the
hope of Eternal Life. So that Eternal life is the Object of a Believers hope.

Fourthly, The Concomitant of hope.
We have the concomitant of Hope, and that is Faith; It is an expectation of
those good things which faith believes that God has promised; so you see how
Hope stands toward Faith, they are twins, as it were, they are born and
brought forth together; Faith is the Elder sister, faith believes that the
promise is true, and hope looks for the fulfilling of the Promise, because
faith believes it; They grow up together, they are nourished together, and they
flourish together, and they languish together; when faith is sick, hope is
infirm, and when faith is lively, hope is active; yea, they will expire
together: when a believing soul shall come into the bosom of Christ, no need
of faith and hope. Faith that looks to the truth of the promise, and hope looks
to the good of the promise, that is the difference between faith and hope;
Faith closes with the Promise because it is true, and Hope that cleaves to it,
and expects the fulfilling of it, because it is a suitable good which God has
promised; so that by the opening of this description of hope, you may in part
see what that hope is which will be as an Anchor to a man's soul; That Is the
first particular.

But secondly, I shall make it out unto you, that this hope is the Anchor of
the soul; and I shall show you that it is of the same use to the soul that the
Anchor is to the ship.

First of all, The Anchor is useful in time of storms, the Anchor does keep the
ship from being driven up and down with various winds; if it were not for the
Anchor, the ship would sometimes be carried back again after it has gone a
great way in its Voyage: of the same use is Hope to a believing soul, it is
exceeding useful in time of temptation, when contrary winds blow, even such
winds as would drive the soul back again, if it were not for the Anchor of
Hope: It is said of Christ, That for the joy that was set before him, he
endured the Cross, despised the shame; and that we bear up against the strong
winds of temptation, and against all the discouragements that we meet with, it
is by this Anchor of Hope; if it were not for the hope of joy and glory in
heaven, it were not possible that a soul should bear up against so many winds
of temptation.

Secondly, The Anchor keeps the ship from tossing: When the waves roar, the
Anchor is then exceeding useful, it keeps the ship from being removed; for
though it may be moved, yet not removed, because the Anchor is sure; though the
waves rise never so high, and be never so boisterous, yet if they cast Anchor,
the Mariners lay them down to sleep, they are secure, because they have cast
Anchor. And of that use is this Grace of hope to a believing soul, the waves
many times rise high, afflictions, persecutions, David complains of it, Psalm.
38. 12. They also that seek after my life, lay snares for me; and they that
seek my hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit all the day long.

Verse 13. But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that
opens not his mouth.

Verse 15. For in thee, O Lord, do I hope, Thou will hear, O Lord my God. I was
not moved by this (says he) I cast anchor in thee, O Lord In thee O Lord, do I
hope, thou will hear me, O Lord my God: He cast Anchor in God, and then he lies
down and rests: And so in Psalm. 42. There were many waves that did rise very
high in his own spirit, and what does he do? Why, he casts anchor in God, as in
verse 11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within
me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance, and my God* Hope still in God, cast thy Anchor there, and then
rest, for I shall yet see the time to praise him, I shall overcome all storms,
and shall live to see a c^lm and therefore O my soul cast anchor in God, hope
thou in God.

Thirdly, The Anchor keeps the ship from splitting many times upon the sands
and rocks; when they are very near danger, almost running upon a rock, the
casting out of an Anchor sometimes does deliver them. Hope is of the same use to
a believing soul, it keeps the poor soul from splitting upon many discouraging
rocks that are in the way to heaven, Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living: If it had
not been for the Anchor of hope, I had split, I had fainted, and my soul had
been split, but I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the
living; the anchor of hope, it is that which keeps the soul from splitting upon
the rocks.

Fourthly, The anchor keeps the ship close to the place where the Anchor is
cast, that it shall not be removed far from that place; so the grace of hope in
this respect is also useful, it keeps the heart close to God and Christ, that
is the benefit of this anchor of hope: the men of the world that have not hope
in Christ, they live at a great distance from God and Christ, they dwell at a
great distance from heaven, they are far from God; God is not in all their
thoughts, because they have not this Anchor of hope; if the anchor of their
hope were cast in heaven, it were not possible that their souls should be at a
distance from God; the more there is hope, the more nigher God; it is want of
this lively hope that men are so far from God. That Is the fourth.

Fifthly, The Anchor is made sure by a Cable that is fastened to it; and so the
hope of a believing soul will do no good without a Cable, now this Cable it is
the word of Promise, it is the sure word of the Lord that keeps the soul fast.
If a Ship have a hundred anchors at Sea, if they be not fastened to a Cable,
they will do no good: and truly so is hope if it has not a Cable; if men
pretend to have hope, and that hope not fastened upon the word of the Lord, so
fast as it is cast, it will be lost. But the hope of a believing soul is
fastened upon the word of the Lord, the promise of the Lord, and therefore it
will hold.

Sixthly, The Seaman casts his Anchor at a venture, he does not know whether
his anchor will reach the bottom or no, he does not know whether his Cable be
long enough, or whether his anchor will take hold or no, and he does not know
whether his anchor will hold when it has taken hold, yet notwithstanding all,
he makes a venture when he has need to cast his anchor: and so it is with a
believing soul, when a soul comes first to God, he makes a desperate venture,
he sees his faith is weak, and his hope weak, and he does not know whether it
will take hold of the rock or no, will not my expectation fail? All this is
objected, but the believing soul makes a venture, faith is given, and it makes
a venture, he sees that there lies a necessity upon it, if I do not cast
anchor, I perish, the winds blow hard, and I see a rock before me, a gulf, and
if I do not cast anchor, I perish, and if I cast anchor, it may be my anchor
will hold, I have an invitation to it; Who is among you that walks in
darkness, and sees no light, let him trust in the Lord, and stay upon his God,
Isa. 50. 10. though it be in a storm at midnight; let him cast anchor upon me
(says God) let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God; this
the poor soul hears, and being encouraged by the Word of the Lord, it cast
anchor, and makes a desperate venture. That Is the sixth.

Seventhly, The anchor is useful, not only in a storm, but the anchor is useful
in a calm, when the ship at Sea is be calmed, and cannot sail, they cast
anchor; and so this anchor of hope it is needful in a calm, for if it were not
for this anchor of hope, a believing soul could not have any settlement in a
calm, though a man has never so much for the present, if he has not hopes
that his goods shall be increased, his heart will be disquieted; and so hope is
useful in the greatest calm, to hope that the present good that they have shall
not be lost, that that measure of grace and spirit that the Lord has given
them, shall be carried on from one degree to another, till he has perfected
it; if it were not for this, the heart could not have any peace in the greatest
of his enjoyments. And thus you have seen the second particular.

First, I have shown you what saving hope is.

Secondly, That this saving hope is the Anchor of the soul.

The third and last particular is, The anchor of a believing soul is sure and
steadfast.
To show you that this anchor of a believing soul is sure and steadfast: And it
will appear in these few particulars.

First, It is made of good mettle, it is that which will not bow nor break, it
is not as the hope of an hypocrite; the hope of an hypocrite is compared to a
spiders web, that breaks presently; the spiders web it is a poor thing to hold
a ship fast in a storm; but this saving Hope that the Spirit of Christ does
work in the heart of believers, it is made of good mettle, it was not dug
out of their own bowels, but fetched from Christ, it is Christ that is the
storehouse of all grace, it is made of gold, of tried gold, Their faith is
more precious then gold, says the Apostle, and so their hope is more precious
then gold, and more firm and solid then gold, the matter of it is sure and
steadfast.

Secondly, It is well wrought, and therefore it must needs be sure and
steadfast, for it is an anchor of Christ's own working; The God of hope sill you
with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope, through the
power of the holy Ghost, Romans 15. 13. and says the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope, by the resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead: The hope of the Saints it is a grace that is of
God's own begetting, it is an anchor of Christ's own making, and that which
comes out of the hand of Christ, must needs be sure and steadfast.

Thirdly, It is sure and steadfast, for the Cable that holds it is sure and
steadfast, and that is the Word of the Lord; now the Word of the Lord, which is
the Cable that a believers hope is fastened unto, it is twisted of many precious
promises, all being twisted together, must needs be strong, the least of them
is stronger then heaven and earth; Heaven and earth shall pass, but not one jot
or tittle of the word of the Lord shall fail, till all be fulfilled. The
promises they are the cable which a believing souls anchor is fastened unto, and
therefore it is sure and steadfast.

Fourthly, It is cast upon a sure ground. What is the ground that a believers
hope is cast upon. I answer,

First, The ground that a believers hope is fastened upon.
It is fastened upon Jesus Christ; first, upon Christ crucified, upon the death
of Christ, upon the sufferings of Christ, by which Christ has made
satisfaction for sin, and brought in everlasting righteousness, to cover the
nakedness of poor creatures, their love is fastened upon the wounds of Christ,
the sufferings of Christ. That Is the first ground for a believers hope to
fasten upon.

Secondly, The Anchor of a believers hope it fastens upon the Resurrection of
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God that has begotten us again to a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ; that is a main ground for hope to
fasten upon, the resurrection of Jesus Christ, the poor soul looks to Christ,
Christ dead and risen, and in that Christ rose from the grave, he has given
full satisfaction to his Father, he has paid the debt, and is a common person
for his people, that come to him by faith; so that the resurrection of Christ
does strengthen the faith of the soul exceedingly, it gives the soul assurance
that it shall be accepted with God the Father, because Christ is risen again.

Thirdly, It fastens also upon the Intercession of Jesus Christ. He is able to
save to the utmost all that come to God by him, for he ever lives to make
Intercession for them. Now this gives great encouragement to a poor soul that
is made sensible of his own lost condition, of being far off from God, it would
fain draw nigh, and know not which way to come; when this is discovered, that
Christ sits in heaven to plead for poor souls, and to make Intercession for all
that come to God by him, this causes the soul to give a venture to fasten upon
Christ.

Secondly, As the soul fastens upon Christ, so also it fastens upon God the
Father by Christ, it goes to the Fathers, and takes hold of him. First, It
fastens upon the free Grace of the Father, that infinite everlasting love which
did find out the way of Redemption for poor creatures, that love which gave
Christ at first, and which gives poor creatures to Christ, and which tenders
Christ in the everlasting Gospel, there the anchor of hope takes hold.
Secondly, Hope takes hold of the strength of God: He is a God mighty in
strength, he can overcome all difficulties, all enemies that are betwixt him
and my soul, he can overcome all my unworthiness, all my provocations, yea he
can overcome himself, his own wrath and displeasure, that which no creature can
do; this being presented to a poor soul that is in a sad doubting condition,
this helps (through grace) to draw the soul to Christ, and to fasten it upon
God. Thirdly, It fastens also upon the unchangeableness of God, and this gives
a sure hold to the anchor of hope: He is not as man that he should lie; Who is
it that has spoken? Who is it that tenders Christ to poor creatures? It is not
the word of him that is the true and faithful witness? Is it not the strength
of Israel that cannot lie, nor as the sons of men, that he should repent: Now
when the Lord does thus present his Son and Himself to a poor soul, Christ in
his death, his resurrection, ascension, his intercession, and his own free
grace and love, his strength, his faithfulness, this becomes a sure ground for
hope to fasten upon, and so you have seen the third thing handled.

A word of Application and I have done.

First of all, Use 1.
It lets us see the sad condition of all men that are without Hope, you will
say they are in a sad condition that are at sea without an anchor, and truly
this is the condition of many men, they are in a sad condition, for they are
without hope; and O that men would now lay it to heart to see what a sad
condition they are in without this anchor of saving Hope, you that are without
hope, it is not possible you should stand in a storm, however you may be quiet
in a calm, it is not possible that you should bear up in time of storm, and
therefore though men may seem to look toward God, and seem to make a progress
in God's ways, if there be not an anchor of Hope, they will be driven back
again, cross winds will arise at sea, and if you have not this anchor of hope
in Christ, and in the Father's free grace, they will be driven back again,
without hope it is not possible you should be near unto God, and keep nigh unto
God; and what a miserable condition is it to be without God in the world?
Truly, so long as you are without true saving hope, you are without God in the
world; so long as (...) are without hope, they are in a heartless and listless
condition, where there is no hope, there is no endeavor; What is the reason
that men are so slothful in looking after God? It is because that their hearts
are not established by hope in Christ, and in the Fathers free grace; where
there is no hope, there can be no right endeavor; if hope fail, all endeavors
fail.

Nay further, while men are without hope, they must needs be in a sinful
polluted condition, for it is hope that purges the soul, and purifieth the
heart; Having this hope, let us cleanse our selves, and he that has this hope,
he is pure, even as he is pure; he looks after purity, as God is pure: that men
go on to defile themselves, and to work all manner of iniquity, it is because
that they have no true hope toward God: Truly this does discover that many men
have no hope in God, because they live at such a distance from God, and are not
kept close to God; nay, they are contented to live at a distance from God, and
will not endeavor seeking after Christ: Wherefore I beseech you think upon it,
what a sad condition it is to be at Sea without an anchor, your hearts would
melt within you to see a ship driven with storms upon the rocks, and no anchor
to cast out; yet this is the condition of many thousands in the world, they are
at sea, and ready to split upon the rocks, and no anchor of hope; O that the
Lord would make many a heart sensible of it.

Secondly, Use 2.
As it is sad to be without hope, so it is more sad to have a deceitful hope;
for the disappointment of hope is the greatest torment that can befall a poor
creature; better never to have hope, then to have hope frustrated, to be
disappointed; the disappointment of hope proves shame and confusion of face to
men, Job 6. 20. they were confounded because they had hoped, they came thither,
and were ashamed, they were deceived of their expectation, and were confounded.
Better never to have hope, then to be disappointed of your hope: and in Job 11.
20. the hope of a wicked man shall be as the giving up of the Ghost, it shall
be gone in a moment; as a man in one moment he breaths forth his spirit, and
gives up the ghost, so the hope of a wicked man soon perishes. Now look to
your hope, that you may not have such hope as will be like the giving up of the
ghost, examine your hope, see whether it be such hope as the Apostle speaks
of, that will be as an anchor to the soul, both sure and steadfast; whence did
your hope arise, I pray examine that, whether it was from your selves, or from
Christ; if your hope be from any thing in your selves, it is hope that will not
hold, it is not sure and steadfast; examine what was the efficient cause of your
hope, how was this hope begotten in you? Did you see that it was out of the
hand of Christ, and that it was begotten in you by the mighty power of God? Did
the Lord cause you to see that it was not possible that you should create hope
in your selves, til Christ come and beget hope in you? Know certainly, if it
were not a hope of Christ's begetting, it is an anchor that will not hold.
Again, examine what it was that fastened your hope, Was it the word of the Lord
that made you to hope, the sure word of promise? Was it the word of man, or the
word of the Lord, if it were any thing but the word of the Lord that made you
to hope, your hope will not hold. Examine also upon what ground your hope is
cast, Is it cast upon the arm of flesh, or upon the arm of the Lord; whatever
hope is cast upon the arm of flesh will not hold. Examine also whether your
hope be cast upon the free grace of God, or upon the things of the world, your
prosperity in the world, there are thousands in the world that cast the anchor
of their hope upon the mammon of this world, because God has prospered them in
the world, and given them abundance of these outward good things, therefore
they hope that God loves them, and will give them another world; but if your
anchor of hope be cast upon your gold, or your great estate, and not-upon the
free grace of God, it will deceive you. Upon whatsoever it be cast beside God
and Christ, it will not hold; if it be cast upon your duties, your desires, and
good meanings, and endeavors, your prayers, and tears, your charity, if the
anchor of your hope be cast upon these, it will not hold; yea, if it be cast
upon your graces, your hope will not hold: for whatsoever is made the ground of
hope beside Christ, is the arm of flesh, even grace, and the actings of grace
in the soul, they become flesh, if made the ground of our hope. Now I beseech
you look to your hope, for certainly the hope of most men is not of the right
stamp, whatever they pretend: How do many deceive themselves, God is not in
all their thoughts, nor in any of their ways, and yet have hope toward God.
You say you have hope in God, and yet your hope does not purify your hearts,
but as wicked as ever, walking in the ways of your own heart, and satisfying
your own lusts, whatever these men pretend, they have not hope of the right
stamp, their hope is but as the spiders web, or as the giving up of the ghost.

Thirdly, Use 3.
Let me exhort you all to look after this saving lively hope, for it is that
which will keep your hearts from breaking in the evil time, at one time or
other the heart will break, if men have not this saving hope; therefore seek
after this saving hope, for it will keep you up in the midst of storms, in the
midst of evils, and establish you in the midst of good, it will do you good in
a storm, and it will be useful to you in a calm; you can never take comfort in
the good things you enjoy, and your hearts cannot be established in peace, if
not grounded in hope; therefore look after this lively hope, this anchor of the
soul; yea soul, would thou dwell with God, and live near God, and live upon
him continually? O then cast the anchor of your hope in God, true hope will
hold your souls close to him, that you shall not depart from him. Yea, would
you have your hearts made more holy, purified, and sanctified, and get victory
over your corruptions? O then seek after this saving hope; for that man that
has his hope cast on God, and Christ, that man is most free from corruption,
and most active for God; true hope it will make you able to suffer, it will
make you able to rejoice in tribulation; why now, do thou desire all this?
why then seek after this lively hope.

But it may be you will say unto me, how shall we obtain this hope? I see it is
exceeding useful, and of absolute necessity, how shall we come by it? where
shall we have this anchor to stay our souls?

For answer. How to obtain true hope.
First, Look to the free grace of God in Christ for it, it is he that does beget
this grace of hope in his people; look to those tenders that free grace makes*
God holds forth his self, and Son, and pardon, and life to poor creatures; Free
grace makes a render of all this unto you, and therefore look to this free
grace, that so you may have that hope which shall not be confounded and ashamed.

Secondly, Look to Christ for it especially, look to the resurrection of
Christ; that place 1 Pet. 1. 3. Blessed be God, and the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. Christ
is risen from the dead, he has paid the debt, and brought in everlasting
righteousness, and therefore look to the resurrection of Christ, for by eying
that, this lively hope may be begotten in you.

Thirdly, Look to the promise, to the word of the Lord; the word of the Lord is
written that you might have hope, Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. The Scripture is written that we
might believe, and in believing might have eternal life, and therefore consult
with the word of the Lord. You that desire to have hope strengthened, look to
the word and promises, and behold the freeness of them, and the
unchangeableness of God in them. O study the Scripture much, and beg that the
Spirit of the Lord may shine in them, and give you a sight in them, and so this
hope may be begotten in you.

Fourthly, Look to those patterns and examples of free grace that the Lord set
forth for you to look upon; the Apostle Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 16. says, He was a
pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting: That
the Lord should reconcile such an enemy, and set his love upon him that was
injurious to the Saints, one that thought he had sinned so much as that he had
outsinned mercy, yet says he, I obtained grace, that might be a pattern of
mercy; and therefore look to those patterns of grace and mercy that the Lord
has set forth before you, that so you may be encouraged to come and hope in
his mercy.

And to conclude all, do not go on desperately any longer, and do not say as
they said, Jer. 2. 25. But thou said there is no hope; No, for I have loved
strangers, and after them will I go. They resolved to go on in the imaginations
of their own heart, they said there was no hope, and they would do evil as they
had done. O let not this be the resolution of any poor soul, for though you
have no hope for the present, you are invited to come to Christ that you may
have hope; The word of the Lord is come to you that you might have hope, and
those patterns of free grace are set before you, that you might have hope. O
that the Lord would make you more intent in your spirits, in looking after this
anchor of hope; What will you do another day, when storms arise, and to have no
anchor? It will be a most sad condition for a poor soul, to see it self ready
to split, and to have no hope, no anchor to stay upon. O! who would venture to
Sea without an anchor? If you have no anchor when storms arise, you will be at
your wits end. O that God betimes (before it be too late) would make you as
wise for your souls, as you would be for your bodies.

FINIS.

