No PEACE 'till the KING Prosper.

A LETTER WRIT FROM A TRVE LOVER OF PEACE, To one that is both, modestly
inquiring, and Discovering the true and false Paths to a present PEACE.

That if the Parliament prevail against the KING, Peace cannot be; But if the
KING prevail, it must be; And if neither prevail, it will not be.

MATTHEW. 5. v. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers --

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University. 1645.

No Peace 'till the King Prosper.
A LETTER WRIT FROM A TRUE LOVER OF Peace, to one that is both, moderately
inquiring and discovering the true and false Paths to a present Peace.
HAd Reason and Religion at once so far forsaken us, as to cease all our
Prayers and endeavors for Peace, contrary to the many Laws of Christ, yet
even sense it self were sufficient to make us weary of War; for who smarts
not grievously under that Rod, and bleed not under that Sword, unless some
whose hands hold it, and (as the only Kings and Lords of the Time) bear rule
and master great Revenues and Riches by it, who would else be (as they were)
poor and powerless without it. Do we not see and feel our Goods and Estates
wasted and wrung from us by daily payments and Plunders? Our ancient Laws and
Privileges lost by Camp and Committee Orders and Ordinances? Are not our
Towns turned great Goales, and our Houses (if We be not in others) become
Prisons to us? Is not the dearest blood of our Selves, Children and Friends,
spilt in daily Fights and Battles? And (which above all should be dear unto
us) is not our Religion made away betwixt new Ordain'd-Directions, and old
allowed Sects and Heresies? So that, according to the known Laws of the Land,
for Minister or People to be a Protestant, is to be a Malignant; and to use
that Service and Form of Prayer, and Religion established by Law, for which
our forefathers dyed Martyrs, is to make us live and suffer as Malefactors. In
a word, is not our Livelihood, Liberty, Property, Religion, all gone, and
nothing left we can call our own, but a miserable life scarce worth the
owning? And that hardly to be counted our own neither, for the violence and
Tyranny of those who have the Sword in their hands, and us at their Command,
with no Law, and as much Conscience to guide it? He is a block, a stone, not a
Man, a Christian, that is not weary of War and greedy of Peace.

But as all desires meet in the end of Bliss, but vary infinitely about the
way; so of those who are all for the bliss of Peace, all are not of one
opinion about the means: some say, Subdue the King once, and we shall be for
ever quiet: and therefore upon every prosperity cry (and often prevail) for
more Men and Money to follow the blow, and make an end of all: so King and
Kingdom, all shall be ours, and no more need will be to Press more Money or
Men. Others say, let us engage to neither part; but stand upon our own
preservations and our Countries, indifferent against both: So We shall either
persuade or force a Peace, at least we shall be quiet. If you will have my
opinion, I believe both ways to be wrong, I shall desire your assent no
farther then you shall see and approve my reason for it.

I say then first, The War will not cease, if the Parliament prevail against
the King. For how then will they govern the Kingdom? If by the known Laws of
the Land, these will set the Crown on the Kings head again, which they have
taken off (for to have this Kingdom ruled without a King, is to those Laws
utterly unknown;) then the King will be in as good condition as He was, and
they in far worse (and that (surely) they do not mean.) If by new and
unknown Laws they must maintain an unknown, and unheard of Government, the
want of the Scepter must be supplied by the Sword, and that which was the
Mother of so great a change and Innovation of Church and State, must of
necessity be the Nurse to violence and War, so this will be an alteration,
not an end of the War. Nor can it (reasonably) be imagined, so long as the
King himself is, or any of His Royal Line Lives, or any of their Posterities
ever shall endure, or any of their Royal Allies have power abroad, or Loyal
conscience any place at home, that ever this will be a quiet Kingdom, when
robbed of its lawful Sovereign and anointed King, no more then a body without
bloodshed can be cut off from its natural Head. And were there a common
security against all this, guilt in the breasts that bred these Woes, will be
an enemy potent enough to maintain the War against others. if Divisions and
Iealousies turn not the Sword upon themselves, whilst they contend who shall
possess and put on the Regal Power, which the right and Royal owner is
divested off. So that, of necessity (for a long time at least, if not for ever)
the Kingdom must be governed by Force.

If it be said; Though not His Majesty that is, there may be a King: what then
can be expected, but Woe upon Woe to the Kingdom? Ask our Forefathers and
they will tell us, what calamity they suffered of old under Crown
Competitions: Till the two Houses of Lancaster and York were married, and so
made one, was not this Land a very field of Blood? And during the 30 and odd
80, of the blood Royal Slain in these Wars. Speed.
years of these cruel. Wars, what fearful Slaughters of Princes, Nobles,
and Commons, were made; whilst the doubtful Right of the Crown, was disputed
by the whole Kingdom; divided and enraged about it? Behold Germany, and it
will show us what a deere-price they have paid for the seizure of the Bohemia
Crown, albeit (that having been Elective) fair Right was pretended and
pleaded for the seizure? How many Millions of Pounds, and Lives, has that
Crowne-Quarrell cost them? Are not their Countries, Cities, Towns, Villages,
Houses, Lands, Estates, Goods, all destroyed by the Wars? Are they not
overwhelmed in a Sea of blood to this day, after six and twenty years of
reigning Wars and Woes, no sign of Peace appearing, or likelihood of their
end, till want of Men for War, or Bread for them, shall force it? He is a
Stone, that sees not, Marble, that melts not, to think how England, too like
poor Germany already, would be yet more miserably like it, should any Head,
but the right-borne, wear the English Crown. That, then should it be (as God
forbid it ever should) would be the beginning, rather then an end of the Wars.

Nor is Indifferency of Counties and Persons, the way to bring it to an end.
For so the King shall be oppressed (if not assisted) in His extremity, and the
Parliament will prevail; without a miraculous blessing it must needs be so: if
they have all the Purse of the Land, and most of the Power and People for them,
whilst We stand betwixt both, looking on, that should balance the force, or
cast it against them.

But by this means, necessity will enforce and effect a Treaty of Peace: The
unbloudy, doubtless, is the most blessed Peace (Cursed be he that is against
it! Thrice happy he, or they, who shall make it!) But what hopes then to see
it, when already all means have failed it? Will they, who upon even and equal
Terms of Strength, are unreasonable in their Propositions, by prosperity grow
more moderate? For His Majesty to yield to their demands, whatsoever they are,
is not to make an end of the debate, but Himself, (His Crown and His
Conscience, That may bring things to a Period perhaps, but not to a Peace:)
Victory can do no more but what it will, when the opposite Party is destroyed,
that before hindered it: And what can the King more yield, then what He has
already offered and assured for Peace? For Himself, half His Sword in the
Militia, and a good piece of His Crown; And for the Church, as much as can
consist with His In the Treaty at Vxbridge, the Militia offered by the King to
be put into the hands of twenty, of which the Parliament to choose 10. and so
the Forts and Castles of the Kingdom.
Honor and Oath to Almighty God, and the Peace of His Conscience? If this was
not thought price enough for the Purchase then, will it come at a rate more
reasonable, now? No; We have great reason to suspect, that, if where the power
is, mind had been ever truly to it, it would have come then. For, though it be
m^st sure, that the King, both in Reason and Religion, has been a vehement
Seeker of it, and offered so much to purchase it; and, as certain, that even
of them who sit at Westminster, and live in London, and in the Country under
Parliamentary power, many, for their parts, do heartily desire it, (foreseeing
the ruin of all without it:) it is to be feared, That the Authors and Actors
in these Wars, will not (for particular Reasons and respects) ever allow of
Peace; but whilst the power is in their hands, for ever abet and maintain the
War. They may think, that no Security can warrant their indemnity. If one
Parliament, for the present necessity, should pardon all, another (more free)
may revoke it: If the State should, particular Persons of ruined Fortunes, and
Families, will never forgive it: If they would; they should live the hate and
scorn of the Land, that now at pleasure rule it, and all their fellow
Subjects, and the King Himself in it. I would they did not both think, and
assuredly know, and believe it.

And will a County stand safe, if a Kingdom fall to ruin? Alas! what Lands
or Houses can be dry in a Common deluge? How can the Limb live, if the Body
languish? The Kingdom thus may fall into a Consumption (it must, if the vital
and substantial parts fail in an altering of the fundamental Constitution of
it) and these may be the last Limbs that fall, and that is all they get by their
Neutrality, to be the last. Nay, perhaps (by the just judgment of God and Man)
they may be the first; hated of both sides for their Indifferencies, and
destroyed by the prospering side, for not ayding the prosperity. Surely, as
those are Enemies to the Peace and Country that resist the King, and wage
War against Him with His own Weapons, People, Moneys, Means, and so
distress and drive Him to extremities, to defend Himself against them: So
those who do not assist the King, are not friends to the Peace of the
Kingdom. And if Divines say true, that he murders life, who can, and does not
preserve it, as well as he that destroys it, I dare excuse neither, of the
Blood that is shed in the interim; The Resistant from being positively guilty
of it all, and the Non-assistant, privatively engaged in the Guilt.

And though (I confess) it seem some Plea, that many in the Kings Armies, are
so insufferable in their Carriages, that even they breed a loathing of His
Cause for it; yet this will not hold good, till it appear, that the King does
not abhor and bewail the injuries of His good People, and yet, is in so
great extremity for want of Means and Supplies, that He knows not (to His
great grief) how to remedy it. Nay, it recoyles upon them; for did they join
hands with Him to assist with their lives and fortunes to uphold Him, in whom
their safety, as much as His own consists; this would not be done, and
suffered. For, then a due Pay, would maintain an exact Discipline; and the
first Offenders, having their due punishment, the rest would not dare to
transgress. Then the use of Foreign hands would be needless, most apt on
both sides to offend. Nor would cause be, to call in the Irish, to balance the
power of the invading Scots, to the impoverishing and endangering, if not
undoing of the Land.

To conclude then, (for my Lines have already exceeded a Letters bounds)
whosoever fears God, and honors the King, (as every Christian should) or
loves Church, or Kingdom, or Country, (as every Child of either ought) let
him take this to heart, and ponder it well, and he will see, there is no way
left to Peace, but to raise the King to prosperity; to assist Him with our
Means and Lives, Valiantly and Vigorously to hasten it; least for want of
ayding Subjects in the just defense of Himself, and the Throne by God
committed to Him; He be forced (as his Predecessors of old, and his Enemies
now) to sue and seek for help from others, His own People failing Him, the
sad, but only remedy for a disease so desperate, which is then left Him. A sad
and woeful case (God knows) to fall into such hands for cure, and he best
sees, what Calamities it may bring upon us, but to us it will be more sad, if
our guilt cause them all, because that had never been, if after all Supplies of
ours, sought again and again, our Native King had not been first forsaken of
us.

Nor let that which runs in some minds trouble us: That the King then will
come in Conqueror over us, and so rule us; And therefore the Scale of War is
to be kept in such a Poise, that He prevail not so far as to prosper and
subdue His Enemies: No, If He Conquer His Enemies, His Friends and good
Subjects will Conquer Him, by free Parliamentary advices to settle a shaken
State, and prevent like Conclusions in time to come, by wholesome Laws begot of
those bad manners which are past, and were so perilous to Him, and pernicious
to all of us. His own Prudence and Conscience will Conquer him, who has in
this School of War learnt (He and His Children with Him) that the happiness
of a King, consists in such a Government, as yields a Loving, not Rebelling
People; His own uncruell, and un-Tvrant Spirit, and disposition, will Conquer
him; So far from thirst of Blood, and severity of Vengeance, that Justice may
rather seem to complain of being cloyed with so great a Sweetness. Sir, if
you know me, you know me to be a Lover of my Religion, and Nation, and of my
Conscience, as my King; and so, I believe you to be, else this, had never come
to you, from

SIR, Your, and your Countries friend, A. A.


FINIS.

