(...). That is, ANOTHER PART OF The Mystery of Jesuitism; OR The new Heresy
of the Jesuits, Publicly maintained At PARIS, in the College of CLERMONT, the
XII of December MDCLXI. Declared to all the Bishops of France. According to the
Copy printed at Paris. Together with The Imaginary Heresy, in three LETTERS,
With diverse other Particulars relating to this Abominable Mystery. Never
before published in English.

LONDON, Printed by James Flesher, for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most
Sacred MAJESTY, 1664.

To my most honored Friend from whom I received the Copy.
SIR,
I Transmit you here the French Copy which you were pleased to consign to me,
and with it the best effects of your injunction that my weak Talent was able to
reach to; but with a Zeal so much the more propense, as I judged the
publication might concern the World of those miserably-abus'd Persons who
resign themselves to the conduct of these bold Impostors, and who may indeed be
said to be what the Athenians mistook S. Paul for, 17 Act. 18.
(...), Setters forth of strange Gods, as well as of strange and unheard of
Doctrines, whilst they take upon them thus to attribute as much to Dominus Deus
Papa, Gloss. in Extr. Jo. c. 22. Cum inter de verborum signif.
their Lord God the Pope, as to God Almighty himself. I stand amazed that a
Church which pretends so much to Purity, and that is so furious against the
least dissenters to her Novelties amongst Protestants, should suffer such
swarms of impure Insects amongst themselves; lest these Cancerous Members (in
stead of edifying the Church, and conducting Consciences) eat out, in fine, the
very heart and vitals of the common Christianity. For my part, Exetasis, sive
Tho. Albii Purgati^.
after I have seen what Mr. White has lately published concerning the Method of
the Roman Court in her Decrees, and of her rare abilities to discern, as he
there affords us the Prospect; I have no great reason to hope for any redress
of these Enormities: and then to what a monstrous growth this Head is like to
arrive, let all the World compute, by the strange pretenses of these audacious
Sycophants. Nor let any man wonder how those other Errors are crept into their
Religion, who in a day of so universal light permit such pernicious Doctrines
to be publicly asserted, to the dishonor of our B. Lord, the scandal of his
beloved Spouse, and the hinderance of that glorious Unity, which none does more
earnestly breath after then He who subscribes himself,

SIR, Your most humble and most obedient Servant.
21 Sept. 1664.
LESSIVS.

MOLINA.

S. IGNATIUS LOYOLA SOCIETATIS IESV FVNDATOR.

VASQUEZ

ESCOBAR

Optabilior est Fur quam Mendax assiduus; vtrique Perditionis haereditatem
consequentur

Eccles. 20. verse. 25.

THE New Heresy of the Jesuits, publicly maintained at Paris in the College
of Clermont, by Positions printed the xij. of December, M DC LXI.
Declared to all the Bishops of France, etc.
AS it is the constant duty of Bishops to stifle those Errors in their very
birth and cradle which tend to the ruin and subversion of Faith; so is it no
less that of Divines, to make discovery of those Errors to them; and, by
giving timely notice of them, to excite and stir up their Pastoral Vigilance.
You will therefore, My Lords, doubtless approve of the Information which is
made you of a New Heresy that has been publicly maintained by the Jesuits in
their College at Paris, in a Thesis printed and defended the twelfth of
December last.

The Position bears this Title; ASSERTIONES CATHOLICAE de Incarnatione, contra
Saeculorum omnium, ab incarnato Verbo, praecipuas Haereses.

CATHOLIC ASSERTIONS concerning the Incarnation, against the principal
Heresies of all Ages.



By which they sufficiently demonstrate that, abating some few Subtilties of
the Schools, they pretend We should accept whatever They oppose against these
Heresies, for Catholic Verities and Truths indubitable. In order hereunto

They propose for the Heresy of the Tenth Age, the Schism of the Greek Church,
and by these words declare the Opinions to which they expect our Assent, as a
mark and characterism of our aversion from that Heresy.

X. SAECULUM. Romanae Ecclesiae Caput, contra Graecos Schismaticos.
Hoc tandem Saeculo Schisma Photii invalescens Graecos ab Ecclesiae Capite
disjunxit.

Christum nos ita Caput agnoscimus, ut illias Regimen dum in coelos abiit
primum Petro, tum deinde Successoribus commiserit; and EANDEM QUAM HABEBAT IPSE
INFALLIBILITATEM concesserit, quoties ex Cathedra loquerentur.

DATUR ergo in E.R. Controversiarum Fidei Jadex infallibilis, ETIAM EXTRA
CONCILIUM GENERALE, tum in Quaestionibus Juris, tum FACTI. Unde, post
Innocentii X. and Alexandri VII. Constitutiones, FIDE DIVINA CREDI POTEST
Librum cui titulus, Augustinus Jansenii, esse haereticum, and Quinque
Propositiones ex eo decerptas esse Jansenii, and in sensu Jansenii damnatas.

Propugnabuntur, Deo duce, and auspice Virgin, in Aula Collegii Claromontani,
Societatis Jesu, die 12 Decembris, An. 1661.
The TENTH AGE. The Head of the Church of Rome, against the Schismatical Greeks.
It was in this Age that the Schism of Photius prevailing did separate the
Greeks from the Head of the Church.

We acknowledge Christ to be so the Head, that during his absence in Heaven he
has delegated the Government thereof, first to Peter, and then to his
Successors; and does grant unto them THE VERY SAME INFALLIBILITY WHIGH HE
HIMSELF HAD, as often as they shall speak e Cathedra.

There is therefore in the Church of Rome an Infallible Judge of Controversies
of Faith, EVEN WITHOUT A GENERAL COUNCIL, as well in Questions appertaining to
Right, as in matters of FACT. Therefore, since the Constitutions of Innocent
the Xth and Alexander the VIIth, WE MAY BELIEVE WITH A DIVINE FAITH, that the
Book entitled the Augustine of Jansenius is heretical; and the Five
Propositions which are gathered out of it, to be Jansenius's, and in the sense
of Jansenius condemned.

These shall be defended, by the assistance of God, and the favor of the
Virgin, in the Hall of the College of Clermont, belonging to the Society of
Jesus, the 12 day of December, in the Year 1661.
This Position contains in it two parts; the one concerning the Primacy of the
Pope, in which all Catholics do agree: the other touching that Infallibility
which these Jesuits do attribute to him.

We do not speak here of that which is by some Divines maintained, and which
only concerns the Judgments which the Popes have of such Truths as are
revealed by God in the Scriptures and in Tradition.

It is sufficiently known what has been upon this Subject the sense and
opinions of the Gallicane Church, and of the University of Paris, and what we
are to understand by this expression, Sententia Parisiensium, when we find it
upon this matter in the books even of the Jesuits themselves.

As evident is it also, that those amongst some of the new Doctors who would be
thought the most favorable to Popes, as Monsieur du Val, have not been afraid
to maintain, the Pope's being Infallible was no matter of Faith. Duvallius de
Suprema authorit. Romans Pontific. l. 2. q. 1.
Non est de fide Summum Pontificem esse Infallibilem. And, that the Opinion
which assures us he is not, is neither erroneous nor rash. Ibid.
Non est erroneum neque temerarium, temeritate Opinionis, dicere, Summum
Pontificem in decernendo errare posse.

But these very Divines (however studious of exalting as much as they could
possibly the Authority of the Sovereign Bishops) do acknowledge as a thing
certain, indubitable and constant amongst all Catholics, That they are not
Infallible in matters of Fact; That therein they may err, and That indeed they
are very frequently mistaken. Bellarm, de Sum. Pontif. l. 4. c. 2.
All Catholics (says Cardinal Bellarmine) accord in this, That the Pope,
acting as Pope, and with the Assembly of his Counselors, yea, even with a
General Council it self, may be deceived in particular facts, which depend upon
the information and testimony of men. And applying this general Maxim to a
matter of Fact, perfectly resembling that of Jansenius, which is, to consider
whether the Heresy of the Monothelites be comprehended in the Epistles of
Honorius, as the VI. General Council confirmed by so many Popes has defined
it, he adds; A General and Lawful Council cannot err in defining Points of
Faith, (as neither has the Sixth Council erred therein*) but it may err in
Questions concerning matters of Fact. Ibid. c. 11.
Generale Concilium legitimum non potest errare, ut neque erravit hoc Sextum,
in Dogmatibus Fidei definiendis; tamen errare potest in Quaestionibus de Facto.
And Cardinal Baronius affirms the very same, upon the same Subject of the Sixth
Ecumenical Council. We do not so strictly receive the Condemnation even of
General Councils themselves, as to what concerns men's Persons and their
Writings: For* no body doubts but that, who-ever it is, he may be deceived in
matters of Fact; and then is that expression of S. Paul to take place, We can
do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth. Baron. ad An. 681. n. 39.
In his enim quae Facti sunt, unumquemque contingere posse falli, nemini dubium
est.

All other Divines, even the most devoted to the Court of Rome, have hitherto
contained themselves within these limits; but the Jesuits will no more endure
either bounds or Examples in their excess and extravagancies. It suffices not
them to render the Pope Infallible, as some Divines may possibly have done:
They will have it, that Jesus Christ has absolutely imparted to him the very
same Infallibility which He himself possessed upon the Earth: and that as this
Infallibility of Jesus Christ extended to all, and not only to things already
revealed, but to those things which had never yet been so revealed, and that he
made known himself in saying them; so the Pope does also become Infallible, not
only in proposing to the Church what is contained in the revealed Will of God,
but in proposing to her likewise matters of Fact, which it is evident and
certain God has never yet revealed; as when (for Instance) the Question is,
Whether these Propositions are in a Book of the Seventeenth Age.

Nor are these any Consequences which we may naturally deduce from their
doctrine; they draw them thence themselves, and form Catholic Assertions of
them, conformable to the Title of their Position. There is then (say they) an
Infallible Judge of Controversies of Faith, even extrinsecal to a General
Council it self, as well for Questions appertaining to Right, as for those
which concern matters of Fact. And that you should not doubt what it is they
would signify by these Questions of Fact, (albeit the word Fact opposed to
Right renders it sufficiently perspicuous) they produce for an Example, and as
a new Consequence of this Infallibility of Jesus Christ communicated to the
Pope, That, since the Constitutions, we may believe with a divine Faith that
the Book of Jansenius is heretical, and that the Five Propositions do belong to
this Author. Unde, post Innocentii X. and Alexandri VII. Constitutiones, fide
divina credi potest Librum, cui titulus est Jansenii Augustinus, esse
haereticum, and Quinque Propositiones ex eo decerptas esse Jansenii.

Behold then here the Proposition which these men assert publicly in one of
the greatest Cities of the World; and it is worth observing, to note the
Original and the date of it. For those who now at present promote it so boldly,
had long since scattered the seeds thereof in some of their Writings; and it
was sufficiently evident that all their design was to be bottomed upon this
Error: they had likewise themselves advanced the Conclusions in one place, and
the Principles in another; but it was still with certain windings and
ambiguities of terms, which as yet furnished them with lurking-holes and
places of subterfuge; but now they discover nakedly and without disguise to the
Church what it is they pretend to establish in her. Let the whole Church take
notice of it then, and record it, That it was the 12 of December, in the year
1661, that the Jesuits openly published that monstrous Opinion which they have
been so long a-brooding: That it was upon this day they proposed as a most
Catholic Assertion, That whenever the Pope does speak out of his Chair, HE
HAS THE SAME INFALLIBILITY THAT JESUS CHRIST HAS, not only in Questions of
Right, BUT ALSO IN MATTERS OF FACT; and that hence we are to believe WITH A
FAITH DIVINE, that those Five Propositions are of Jansenius.

It will, My Lords, be needless to amplify much, in letting the world see that
this is not here only a solitary Error or simple Heresy, but a whole source
of Errors, and (as one may say) an Universal Heresy, which overthrows all
Religion.

For you know, My Lords, that the very prime Fundamental of Christian Religion
is, That our Faith is not supported upon the word of Men, but upon the Word of
God, which is Truth it self: and that it is That which renders it immovable
and altogether Divine; whereas it would else prove but Humane, were it upheld
by any other Authority less then that of God, and if we were not able to render
our selves that Testimony which S. Paul gives the Christians of Thessalonica,
To have received the Word which God has taught us by his Church; and that, not
as the Word of Men, but as the Word of God, and as in truth it is. Non ut
verbum hominum, sed, sicut est vere, verbum Dei. De error. Abailardi, c. 4.
Whatsoever is comprised in the Faith (says S. Bernard) is built upon solid
and certain Truth, persuaded by the divine Oracles, confirmed by Miracle, and
consecrated by the production of the Virgin, by the blood of our Redeemer, and
by the glory of his Resurrection* Totum quod in Fide est, certa ac solida
veritate subnixum* Oraculis and Miraculis divinitus persuasum, stabilitum, and
consecratum partu Virginis, sanguine Redemptoris, gloria resurgentis.

Whosoever therefore shall presume to affirm, that a Thing neither revealed nor
attested by God (as is that, to know whether Propositions are really an
Author's of these last Ages) is an Object of divine Faith, merely because the
Pope has said it, or does establish for a Fundamental of his Belief any humane
Authority and word of a mortal Man, subverts the Faith: or that makes a God of
the Pope, and of his Word a divine Word and a holy Scripture, is not only
guilty of Heresy, but of horrid Impiety, and a species of Idolatry. For
Idolatry does not consist merely in giving to Man the Name of God; but
infinitely more when we attribute to him those Qualities which are peculiar to
God, and when we render him those honors which are alone due to the Deity. Now
this entire submission of our Spirit, and of all out Intellectuals comprehended
in the act of our Faith, is no other then that Adoration which we pay to the
Prime Verity it self* and therefore, whosoever he be that renders it to the
word of a Man, (whatever rank he may hold in the Church) whoever says that he
believes with a Faith divine, that which he would not believe but because a Man
has affirmed it, does constitute Man in the place of God, transferrs to the
Creature that which is alone due to the Creator, and makes (as far as in him
lies) a kind of Idol of the Vicar of Jesus Christ.

And it is this, My Lords, which will doubtless cause you so much the more to
detest this Impiety, That the Promoters of this Doctrine have imagined they
shall make it pass under the shelter of that Respect which all Catholics bear
toward the Pope; and that none will presume to oppose it, for fear of
offending him. But were it possible to offer a greater affront to the prime
Minister of Jesus Christ, then to conceive they do him honor by a Blasphemy
so injurious to Jesus Christ? that he should suffer them to equal him with his
Master, by ascribing to him the same Infallibility which He alone possesses?
and that men should render that supreme Cultus of a Divine faith to his Words,
which is only due to the Word of God? If S. Paul and S. Barnabas, perceiving
certain persons ready to render them the same honors which they gave to their
false Gods, did rend their Garments, to testify their extreme grief and
resentment, and cast themselves in amongst the people to hinder them of their
purpose; we are bound to believe, that if the Pope were well advertised of this
fearful and prodigious excess, he would not fail with his whole Authority to
repress these profane Adorators; and that, as a Crime capable of losing him
for ever before God, he would not permit himself to be so much as once touched
with the least complacency of so detestable a Flattery: He would certainly
consider, even with trembling, the vengeance which God did execute upon that
last King of the Jews, for having only indulged the tumultuary Acclamations of
a People, who (after they heard him speak) cried out, The Voice of God, and not
of Man, Dei voces, and non hominis; since the Scripture informs us, that the
Angel of the Lord did immediately smite him, because he had not given the
honor which was due to God. Confestim autem percussit eum Angelus Domini, eo
quod non dedisset honorem Deo. In the mean while, how much less criminal were
the Adulations of these People then that of the Jesuits? That might possibly
be taken for some sudden transport of Joy, which is oftentimes not regulated by
Reason; and sometimes we find that even the Scripture it self gives to Judges
and to Princes the appellation of God: but here they attribute to the Pope, and
that deliberately, out of a formed design, and the establishment of a Dogme and
of a Theological Assertion, not a senseless Name, but one of the most
resplendent and glorious Titles of God, and the most incommunicable to the
Creature; which is, That the Word of a Pope should be so Infallible as it
should merit the submission of divine Faith to it, which cannot be rendered
without gross Idolatry to any, save to the Prime and Sovereign Verity.

For we cannot say upon this occasion what those are wont to affirm who
maintain the Infallibility of the Pope in matters of Faith, That in believing
what the Pope decides concerning them, they do not establish their Faith upon
the word of a Man, because he proposes only what has been by God revealed in
Scripture and Tradition; so as still their Faith is founded upon the Word of
God. We can say nothing like this upon the subject in hand, and in reference to
which the Jesuits pretend that the Pope is as Infallible as Jesus Christ, and
his Decision an object of divine Faith* When the Pope shall propose a matter of
Fact of a Seventeenth Age, as (for example) to divine whether heretical
Propositions have been taught by an Author of that Period, we cannot pretend
that he propounds a thing which is either revealed in Scripture or in
Tradition. Well he may say that so he judges it; but he cannot affirm that God
has revealed it: He may aver it of himself; but he cannot say, Dominus
locutus est, that God has declared it. In like sort, when it is Man which
speaks, and not God, those who assert that we may adhibit a divine Faith to a
Decision of this nature, do visibly perpetrate the abominable excess of those
blinded people, and join in their acclamation, Voces Dei, and non hominis.

Now if the Piety of the Pope do (as doubtless it will) preserve him from being
infected with this Sacrilegious Opinion; those who present him this poison will
nevertheless be as criminal as those miserable Flatterers who were the occasion
of the death of their King by their impious Elogies. For he is not an homicide
of the Soul or Body only, who effectively takes away the Life of one or the
other; but he is a Murderer also, who does that which is of it self capable to
extinguish either the one or the other. Cyprianus de Lapsis.
S. Cyprian names those Christians Parricides, that for fear of Persecution
offered their sucking Infants to the Idols: because, though they could not
(says S. Augustine) by this Idolatry, and in which the poor Babes had no part,
bereave them of that spiritual life which they had derived from their Baptism;
yet did they notwithstanding rob them of it, as much as in them lay. Aug. Ep. 23
In illis quidem interfectionem non faciunt; sed, quantum in ipsis est,
interfectores fiunt. Flatter not your selves, adds the same S. Augustine, In
lib. de Pastoribus, cap. 4.
(speaking of such as gave others occasion of sinning) that your Brother is not
yet dead through the scandal you have given him: He is not dead, and yet are
you an homicide. Et ille vivit, and tu homicida es. We may say the very same of
the Jesuits in relation to the Pope, into whom they strive to inspire an
Opinion so mortal, Non sibi blandiantur quia ille non est mortuus; and ille
vivit, and isti homicida sunt.

But it is not the Pope alone to whom they give an occasion of Scandal, they
offer it to all the Faithful in general, whilst they persuade them to
establish their Belief upon the Word of a mortal Man, and to submit themselves
to it as to the prime Verity, which can in no sort be done (as has already been
demonstrated) without a kind of Idolatry. So as the Jesuits do in a manner
the very same thing with those Heretics who would have men render Divine
honors to the Virgin. For as the true respect which we owe to the Virgin (the
most holy of all the Creatures) would not diminish the Crime of these Heretics
and their Disciples; so nor would the veneration that all the Faithful have
for the Head of the Church exempt them from the guilt of a very heinous sin
before God, if thus deluded by the Jesuits they should render to the Word of a
Man (howsoever conspicuous in the Church) this sovereign deference of Divine
Faith, which cannot be pai'd, without manifest impiety, but to the Word of God
himself.

Little do the men of the world consider the magnitude of these sorts of
offenses, since, being wholly carnal, they are not concerned but with things
altogether gross and exterior. These hypocritical Devotes permit themselves to
be easily transported with such excesses, because they conceive it a great
degree of Piety, blindly to embrace whatever it be that elevates those Things
and Persons to whom we owe respect: and hence it is proceeds that variety of
Opinions which they term Pious, without at all putting themselves to the
trouble of inquiring whether they are true or false; as if what were false
could be a fit object of Piety, or that the God of Truth might be honored with
a Lie. But you (my Lords) know, that those who are bred up in the sincere
spirit of Christianism, make a far different account of these matters. They
equally detest Lying, to whose profit soever it may possibly appear
advantageous, were it to the Pope, to the Virgin, were it even to J. Christ
himself. And, which one would hardly say, had not S. Augustine said it before
us, for this Father was not afraid to assert it, Aug. de Mendacio, cap. 20.
That if the Lying and the Calumny which is used to take away the temporal life
of a man be a detestable crime, much more abominable is that which tends to the
bereaving us of the life eternal; such as is all prevarication in matter of
Religion; yea though it were even employed in ascribing false praises to Jesus
Christ himself. Ibid. cap. 10.
Wherefore (says the same Father) it were an extreme folly for a Christian not
to be rather prepared to suffer all sorts of indignities, and even such as
strike a terror into holy Souls, then once condescend to whomsoever would
oblige him to corrupt the Gospel by any fictitious praises of J. Christ.

Seeing then (according to this holy Saint) it would be an abominable Crime to
attribute any false Praises to J. Christ himself, who, being God, is superior
to all Praises; how much greater is it to ascribe to a mortal Man, environed
with infirmities, (as the Scripture expresses it) the Praises which appertain
to God alone? But into what Labyrinths of Errors shall we not precipitate our
selves, if once we grant a liberty to our humane fancy to shroud its various
wanderings under a pretext of Piety? For, if Opinions must be tolerated, how
false soever they may be, because an ill-advis'd Piety judges them Pious; and,
if it be a plausible and sufficient reason to exempt Popes from Faults and
Errors obnoxious to humane nature, by pretending one may piously believe that
God, having entrusted them with the Government of the Church, will never permit
them to fall into any Errors which may be prejudicial to it, as the Jesuits
do from hence believe they have a right to invest the Popes in the same state
of Infallibility which J. Christ had, and that even in matters of Fact, when
they propose them to the Universal Church: why may they not as well pretend
they have the same right also of attributing to the Popes the same
Impeccability which J. Christ had, in all those concernments which relate to
the Government of the Church, and the functions of their Sovereign Pontificate?
why should not this latter opinion be as pious as the former? Would it not seem
incomparably more advantageous to the Church, that the Popes could not sin in
this manner, then to be Infallible in matters of Fact? And the Souls which are
purchased by the blood of J. Christ, have they not received infinitely more
detriment from the wicked Administration of some Popes, then they could ever
contract from their want of illumination or due attention in the understanding
of some particular Author?

A man that had lived in the Primitive Ages of the Church, resting himself upon
these Probabilities and Conveniences of humane Wits, would he not have
believed he had reason to say, That God would never permit that the Seat of S.
Peter should, for near one entire Age, be possessed by Persons so prodigiously
unworthy? Baron. ad An. 897. n. 4.
As Cardinal Baronius does with grief acknowledge it happened for during almost
the whole Tenth Age, by the power of the Marquess of Toscany; who domineering
with his Arms and Money over the Clergy and people of Rome, established such
Persons in S. Peter's Chair as were not only wicked in regard of themselves,
but were so also to the Church, by introducing most horrible Disorders; such as
the same Baronius complains were brought in by John the Xth, who made a Child
of five years of age Archbishop of Reims, upon which the Cardinal makes this
sad reflection: Tantum nefas, Ad An. 923 n. 11.
quo jura omnia Ecclesiastica sauciantur, ejus Pontificis authoritate
introductum, quem infamis foemina infami opera Petri solium intrusisset.

Would not this man have believed that God would never have permitted the Vicar
of him who said his Kingdom was not of this World, to undertake the disposal of
temporal Kingdoms, to depose some from them, and confer them upon others, Mr.
du Puis in his Treatise of the Rights of the King to the Kingdom of Navarre.
as Julius the IId did the Kingdom of Navarre, which the Kings of Spain now
possess to the prejudice of ours, and that by virtue only of a Gift pretended
to be received of this Pope, who took it away from its lawful King?

Would he not have believed that God would never have suffered that Schism
should have been introduced in the very Seat of Unity after such a manner, as
that the Church for almost forty years could not be able to discern its true
Pastor from him that was the Hireling and the false one, seeing it self
abandoned to two Mercenaries, each of which pretended to the Title and Quality,
in this only agreeing together, to keep the Church in a fatal Division; as it
happened toward the period of the Fourteenth Age, when one of these Anti-Popes
had his Seat at Avignon, the other at Rome?

Would he not have believed that God would never have permitted that he, whose
principal Office is to keep all Christians in Unity, should by his rash and
hasty Excommunications be the occasion of whole Kingdoms Defection from the
Catholic Communion, and by this means an infinity of Souls miserably perish by
Schism and Heresy; as it came to pass in England, In a Letter to Hen. IV.
touching the Venetian affair, dans les Oeuvres diverses, p. 874
through the precipitancy of Clement the VIIth, presented with so much Zeal to
Pope Paul the Vth, that he might thereby stop him from falling into the like
oversight in the difference with the Venetians, re-inforcing it also by the
Example of Leo the Xth in reference to Germany, and by remonstrating to him,
that he ought to consider he was now in the same Crisis and at the same point
in which Leo the Tenth lost Religion in Germany, and Clement the Seventh ruined
it in England; but, by which Clement the Eighth did preserve it in France?

Indeed to reason only from that which in our fond opinions would appear most
advantageous to the Church, and what we should be ready to judge ought to be,
according to our weak apprehensions, certain it is, that if those who seem to
be the Wisest men had been summoned to the Counsel of God what time he was
about the contrivance and model of the Church, they would, doubtless, have
thought it fitting that he should never have permitted his Lieutenants upon
Earth to fall into such disorders, so diametrically opposite to the duty of
their Place, and so prejudicial to those Souls which were committed to them.
But the Thoughts of God are immensely wide from the Thoughts of Men, and he has
by his most inscrutable Judgments resolved, that the Events should totally
confound all our pretended Wisdom, having permitted what we should have
believed he would never have permitted. And therefore all truly pious Persons
ought to acknowledge from so many sad and deplorable Examples, That God has not
thought good the Stability of his Church should depend upon the Sanctity, the
Wisdom and the Sagacity of one single Man, though he were the Head and Supreme
Pastor of it.

It is the religious reflection of Cardinal Baronius upon the Disorders of the
Popes of the Tenth Age: Ad An. 897 n. 5.
To the end (says he) that God might make appear his Church was not of any
humane invention, but an Institution purely divine, he has been pleased to show
that it should never lose it self or come to destruction by the Vices of
ungodly Popes, as Kingdoms and Commonwealths have frequently done through the
Crimes and the Vices of irreligious and ungodly Kings. Ut enim Deus
significaret eandem suam Ecclesiam nequaquam humanum esse figmentum, sed plane
Divinum inventum, oportuit ostendisse eam nequaquam pravorum Antistitum opera
perdi posse and ad nihilum redigi, sicut de aliis diversarum Gentium Regnis and
been statutis Rebus-publicis factum constat.

It is the very same in that kind of Infallibility which these Jesuits
attribute to the Pope, by a mistake altogether new and unheard of; which God
has permitted should yet be destroyed by so many Examples, that there is not a
Divine who can ever believe it to be true, without manifestly condemning
himself of Heresy: For if all the Decisions of Popes concerning matters of
Fact themselves were as so many Articles of Faith, there being hardly one able
Divine which does not oppugn some of them, there would in fine be none of them
but would be found to oppose the very Faith it self.

For instance, Who is there does not at present think that the Epistles
attributed to the first Popes were never any of those Popes Writings, but a
Work or Rhapsody rather of some Cheat and Impostor? And yet not only Pope
Nicolas commanded the Bishops of France to receive them, but his Successors
have inserted them into the Book of the Decretals, which they have by their
Authority Apostolical proposed to serve as a Rule to the Universal Church; and
in which they speak at least as much out of their Chair, as in their ordinary
Bulls. How then should one without gross impiety believe that these Epistles
are forged, P. Sermond P. Peta. and others.
as at present all able Churchmen believe them to be, yea even the Jesuits
themselves, if we are obliged to acknowledge the same Infallibility in Popes as
in Jesus Christ in Questions of Fact? Do we think the Infallibility of J.
Christ would permit us to propose to the Catholic Church pieces which are
evidently false and supposititious, for such as are genuine and true?

There is hardly any matter of Fact of more importance to the Church, then to
discern a Council whether it be General or not, Lawful, or Illegitimate. In
the mean time, has France been Heretical for not having acknowledged the
Council of Florence as Ecumenical; notwithstanding the Bulls of Pope Eugenius
the Fourth, and all those Declarations which he prefixed at the head of this
Council, to oblige the whole World to own it for a General one? Did the
Cardinal of Lorrain oppose the Faith, when he openly testified in these terms
to Pope Pius the Fourth what his Opinion was upon this Controversy, and that
of all France? As for the latter of those Titles which you would attribute to
our holy Father, taken out of the Council of Florence; I cannot deny but that I
am a Frenchman, brought up in the University of Paris, in which our Tenent is,
That the Authority of a Council is above the Pope, and that they are censured
as Heretics who maintain the contrary: That in France they acknowledge the
Council of Constance for General in all its parts: That they adhere to that of
Basil, and esteem that of Florence for neither Lawful nor General; and, That
all the French will sooner perish then be induced to believe the contrary.

This Letter of the Cardinal of Lorrain, which he directed to his Secretary
then at Rome to be shown Pope Pius IVth, is to be seen in the Collection of the
Memoires of the Council of Trent, published by the late Monsieur du Puis, and
printed by Cramoisy.

During the first difference of Pope Eugenius IVth with the Council of Basil,
he published a very authentic Bull by which he declared, that he transferred
the Council to Boulogne, and that whosoever should dare maintain this
Translation was unjust, did err both from the Truth and Catholic Faith. Fuit
igitur a Basileensi Civitate legitima pro tunc nostra Concilii dissolutio, and
asserentes contra sunt penitus ab omni veritate and fide Catholica alieni. And
yet, notwithstanding, the Fathers of the Council of Basil persisting that this
Translation was unjust and null, Eugenius was forced to acknowledge by another
as authentic a Bull, that, in effect, it was void, and that the Council was
always legitimately assembled from the beginning of it to that very time. You
may find both the one and the other of these Bulls in Raynaldus; the first in
the year 1433, and the latter in Anno 1434. Now, shall both of these be
embraced for Articles of Faith? And shall we be obliged to believe that the
same Council, at the very same time, was an Unlawful Conventicle, and a
Lawful Council of the Universal Church assembled by the Holy Spirit?

The same Raynaldus mentions a Bull of Eugenius the IVth against the Cardinal
d' Arles, Ad Ann. 1640.
who presided at the Council of Basil, wherein he is called Iniquitatis alumnus
atque perditionls filius. If the Suffrage of the Popes in the Judgments which
they make concerning Persons by their Bulls are to be reputed as Infallible as
that of Jesus Christ, we should be obliged to hold this Cardinal for a very
wicked Caitiff: But what shall we think if God have judged otherwise concerning
him; and that, far from willing us to detest him as a Child of Iniquity and a
Son of Perdition, he would have us to reverence him for one of the Blessed,
confirming his Sanctity by public Miracles, authorized by another Pope, which
was Clement the VIIth, who has by an authentic Bull enrolled him among the
number of the Happy, by declaring, not that he had done Penance after his being
a Child of Iniquity, but that he had always led a most heavenly, chaste and
immaculate life, as it is to be seen in that Bull of his Beatification recited
at large by Ciaconius?

These are some Examples which sufficiently discover to us the false pretense
of these Jesuits: But, without seeking farther, the very Authors of this
Doctrine find themselves plunged in Heresy by the undeniable sequel of their
Errors. For they maintain in this very Conclusion, That Pope Honorius has
taught nothing in his Epistles but what was most consonant and agreeable to the
Catholic Faith, concerning the two Wills and two Operations in Jesus Christ.
Duas in Christo Voluntates and Operationes fuisse profitemur; nec aliud a nobis
sensit Honorius, dum Operationem Christi unicam esse scripsit. Now, if this be
a point of Faith, as these Jesuits pretend, That the Book of Jansenius is
Heretical, and that the Five Propositions are of this Author, because two Popes
have affirmed it; and that we are obliged to consider what they say in those
Particulars, as if J. Christ had himself pronounced it; with how much greater
reason may we affirm the same of Pope Honorius's Epistles, which have both been
examined, condemned and Burnt by a General Council of the whole Church, where
the Pope himself presided by his Legates; and which has been confirmed, as to
this very point and Article, by two other General Councils more, and by a very
great number of Popes beside? For, if ever Popes speak out of the Chair, it is
then when they speak with the General Councils, and confirm them by their
Apostolical Authority.

And thus, doubtless, Leo, Epist. ad Constan.
Pope Leo the Second spoke out of his Chair, when in several of his Epistles
which he wrote to confirm the VIth Ecumenical Council, he did in particular
ratify the Condemnation of Honorius, and pronounced him Anathema; because he
had not enlightened the Apostolical Church (they are the express words) by the
doctrine of Apostolical Tradition, but suffered her to be defiled by a profane
Tradition. Qui hanc Apostolicam Ecclesiam non Apostolicae Traditionis doctrina
illustravit; sed prophana Traditione maculari permisit. And, by consequence, if
then when the Popes dictate from their Chair, whatsoever the Subject be,
(matter of Right or Fact) they have the same Infallibility with Jesus Christ,
and that all which they pronounce is an Article of Faith; it ought to be as
much a matter of Faith, that the Epistles of Honorius are Heretical, and the
person who denies it, after assent to this general Maxim, bears the most
notorious mark of an Heretic, (according to S. Paul) which is to be
self-condemned.

It would not signify in the least, to have recourse to that pretended
falsification of the Acts of the VIth Council, and the Epistles of Leo the
Second: For, as this pretense is altogether unmaintainable, frivolous and
extravagant, (as even the most devoted Bishops to the Jesuits have themselves
acknowledged in the last Assembly of the Clergy;) were there only this
miserable evasion to excuse us from believing with a divine Faith that Honorius
was justly Anathematized, and his Epistles legally condemned as replete with
Heresies, we must certainly have renounced our common Senses to form any other
judgment concerning that Pope, and not to hold his Epistles for Heretical.

But, as it is the property of Error to destroy it self, He that should be
engaged by this novel Opinion of the Jesuits necessarily to hold, that the
Epistles of Honorius are Heretical, by the same would find himself obliged to
acknowledge the Fallacy of this Opinion: For, how should he believe that all
Popes are endowed with a like Infallibility with J. Christ, what time they
speak out of their Chair, considering that Honorius slipped into an Error in a
conjuncture in which it is difficult to conceive but that he did speak out of
his Chair, seeing he spoke as a Judge in a Controversy of Faith, and in order
to the adjusting of the greatest difference which was then on foot in the
Church, and which had divided all the Oriental Patriarchs? And, for all this,
not regarding the judgment of the VIth Council, and supposing (what is
extremely ridiculous) that the Acts thereof were corrupted; how should it be
pretended that Honorius had in this encounter the same Infallibility with J.
Christ, since, having by his Letters approved the heretical Epistles of Sergius
Patriarch of Constantinople, either he understood it as he ought, and then he
erred in point of Right, by approving the heretical Opinion of one single Will
in J. Christ, which he had acknowledged to be in effect contained in this
Epistle of Sergius; or he understood it amiss, for accepting that in a
Catholic sense which Sergius had asserted in an Heretical, and so he had at
least erred in point of Faith?

So that the Jesuits can in no sort avoid the being Heretics in either sense.
For, if it be Heresy (as doubtless it is) to attribute to Popes, speaking e
Cathedra, the same Infallibility with Jesus Christ as well in Questions
pertaining to Right as to those of Fact, so as their Decisions concerning the
Facts themselves may be believed by a divine Faith, they are rank Heretics, as
being engaged to maintain this Blasphemy. And in case they pretend that this is
a true Opinion, they are nevertheless Heretics, because they oppose the Faith,
not submitting to the Decision of so many Popes and General Councils in
reference to the condemnation of Honorius, who (according to their Error) we
are by divine Faith obliged to believe had been justly condemned, because he
was so by Judges as Infallible as Jesus Christ, as well in matters of Right as
those of Fact.

I insist too long, my Lords, in refuting an Error so notorious. Give me leave
yet to represent to you one most pernicious Consequence. You have seen what the
design of this Position is, and how specious a Title they have prefixed before
it, Assertiones Catholicae contra Saeculorum omnium praecipuas Haereses: This
being so, what may we else imagine, when we shall see by the sequel, of that
which they oppose to these Heresies, but that they are Catholic Truths
maintained by the Church against these Heretics, and which we are obliged to
acknowledge under censure of being our selves Heretics, and of Apostasy from
the Communion of the Church? Never then (according to these Jesuits) must we
think of receiving the poor Greeks into the Communion of the Catholic Church,
or reunite these divided Members severed by so deplorable a Schism, but in
obliging them to confess that J. Christ has bestowed the same Infallibility
upon all the Popes which He himself has, in all that they propose to the
Universal Church; yea, even in matters which concern particular Facts. And, as
all the Heretics of these last Ages have embraced the Error of the Greeks
against the Primacy of the holy See, we must never open the doors of the Church
to them before they make profession of this fine new Article of Faith.

But admit we should not exact that so strictly of them, what an Obstacle do we
not lay in the way of their Conversion? what Scandal are we not guilty of? and
what pretext do we not afford their Ministers to decry the Catholic Church
before their abused People, by rendering her odious and contemptible, and by
confirming them in those their ancient Calumnies and Reproaches which they have
so frequently objected to the Catholics for equalling the Pope to Almighty God?

It Is well known, that it is from their Principles they have inspired Rebellion
into so many People. Should therefore Religious and Pious persons favor them
in this detestable design, that they furnish them with Arms to fight against
us, and suffer them to look upon the deference which the Faithful owe to the
Pope as an insupportable Yoke upon the Conscience, in things that do not at all
concern any point of Faith, and whereof the knowledge does not in the least
conduce to Salvation?

This is it (my Lords) which has chiefly obliged us to speak upon this
occasion: And it was highly necessary that the Catholic Divines should make
have to decry this Impiety, lest those Uncircumsised should take occasion of
insulting over the Armies of the living God. We were obliged to prevent them,
to the end they may see that we do no less abhor this excess in the Catholic
Church for the love of Truth, then they appear to detest her by the design
which they pretend to justify their faulty separation.

But if it be sufficient to acquit Divines of their devoir, that they represent
this public Complaint; it is not enough for the honor of the Church, and for
the entire reparation of this Scandal, that there have been only Divines which
have reproved it. It is You, my Lords, who ought to be enflamed with Zeal for
the Purity of the Doctrine whereof You are the Depositaries, for the Salvation
of the Faithful of whom You are the Fathers, for the Sanctity of the Church
whereof You are the Spouses, les Espouses.
for the Honor of J. Christ of whom You are the chief Ministers, to consider,
as in the presence of God, what your Duty is upon so important an Occasion, in
which the Faith of the Church is violated by a Capital Error which subverts
its very Foundation, where the Faithful are empoison'd with an Opinion which
tends to the changing of that Veneration into Idolatry, which they ought to
bear to their sovereign Bishop; where the Church is profaned by an Impiety
that dishonors and exposes her to the outrages of her Enemies; in sum, where
J. Christ is horribly offended by the Sacrilegious Parity which is put between
the words of his Servant and his own most Sacred Dictates, by making the one as
well as the other the Object of a divine Faith.

Happily some there be may reply, that this Extravagance deserves not half this
aggravation; and doubtless they will make use of it for a pretext to induce you
to connive at so foul an excess. But, my Lords, you ought to consider, that how
extravagant soever this Opinion may appear, it is promoted by Persons who may
give us just occasion to apprehend the strange Consequences of it. For it is
sufficiently evident, that it is not by chance, or through the blindness of any
particular man, that it comes thus to appear in the World: It is long since
that they have prepared and disposed all things for its production and
entertainment; though they never ushered it in with pomp, before they were well
assured all things were favorable for its reception, and that there was not a
Champion remaining who had the courage or confidence to oppose it openly.

Perhaps indeed their Pretense is not yet so far advanced as to draw a formal
Approbation from the Bishops: But that which they hope for is, (since I am
obliged to speak all) that their credit, and their power of being able to do
good or ill offices, will be a means to retain all the Bishops in silence, so
as none of them shall dare to condemn them, for fear of drawing upon them the
strength and displeasure of so puissant a Society; and, that the Sorbonne,
which they now reckon to be in their dependence, will never have the confidence
to Censure this Doctrine, whatever their aversion may be to it.

Thus they hope, that during this Silence, and whiles all the World is as it
were snorting, dum dormirent homines, this Cockle which they have sown in the
field of the Church will take root, and in time get strength: There they will
leave it to ripen, and, as they use to say, relinquent tempori maturandum, and,
when it shall be arrived to full maturity, produce the natural Consequences
that must necessarily spring from it. At present, indeed, they do but say
only, One may believe Particular Facts with a divine Faith; but they will
shortly pronounce that men are bound to believe them; which will be very easy
for them to establish, because it is but a necessary Consequence of their
Principle, since it is certain, that one may not believe any thing with a
divine Faith but what truly is of divine Faith, and that whatever is so ought
to be believed with a divine Faith when it is sufficiently proposed to us. It
suffices them for the present, that the Bishops do not condemn this Opinion;
but within a little while they will make the Bishops Approbators; according to
another of their Maxims, P. Bauny, Theol. Mor. Tract. p. 321.
viz. That the Church does approve all those Opinions which she suffers without
opposing.

It therefore highly concerns you (my Lords) to consider not only the Peril to
which the Church is exposed, but that also wherein you your selves are; lest
the Jesuits one day vouch you for abettors of their Heresy, and lest God
himself do lay it to your charge. For though there be nothing more false then
that the Church does approve all those Opinions which she does not repress; yet
is it no less true, (as both Councils and Popes have taught) that God does
impute the approbation of an Error to those Pastors which have not in due time
resisted it. Greg. l. 7. p. 2. Ep. 115.
Error cui non resistitur, approbatur: Qui non corrigit resecanda, committit.
Which induced the Second Council of Tours to declare, Council. Turon. 2. Anno
1567.
That the Shepherd seemed to be at an agreement with the Wolf, who (whiles it
was in his power) hindered not the spoil which he made in the Flock. And S.
Leo, speaking of those who neglected the application of those necessary
Remedies to the Evils of the Church, accuses them as plainly fomenters of them.
Leo Magnus, Ep. 4.
Qui multam saepe nutriunt pestilentiam, dum necessariam dissimulant adhibere
medicinam. But these are Reflections, my Lords, which it were needless to
represent to you, whose Zeal and Pastoral Illumination is more capable to
inform you what is most expedient for the Church upon this occasion, then all
the Discourses which can be made you. It is sufficient, that private Divines
display and lay open before you the sad Diseases and deep Wounds which they
have given to the Faith, and to say to every one of you in particular, what
once the Prophet said to God, Vide, Domine, and considera; Behold and consider
what Doctrine is taught in the Church whereof you are the Overseers. Their Duty
reaches no farther; after this, they may retire themselves to lament before
Almighty God in Humility and Silence.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
IT will be very conducible to the more perfect understanding of diverse
particulars in these Papers, especially as to what concerns the Five
Propositions, pretended to be in Jansenius, that the Reader did cast his Eye
upon the Provincials, or Letters written by Lovis de Montalte, and chiefly upon
the 17 Letters, etc. which the Interpreter of these Papers had subjoined to
them, were they not commonly to be had at every Bookseller's shop, and already
translated into English.

THE Imaginary Heresy. The First LETTER.
SIR,
I Would willingly send you something that were new concerning Church Affairs:
but what can be more said of them then that they are still where they were?
They perpetually talk of the Five Propositions, and threaten to treat them as
Heretics who refuse to acknowledge them to be in Jansenius: Some are preparing
to persecute them by secret Cabals; and others to defend themselves as well as
they are able by public Writings, which men read, and give their different
opinions of. Some commend them and say they are good, others that they are too
violent. It Is confessed that they prove very well what they pretend. M* the
Lieutenant Civil has made a very particular judgment of them, as pronouncing
them injurious to the Person of the King; whiles others find nothing in them
but Elogies of his Majesty, and the defense of his sovereign Authority. This
is all I can inform you of it in general; unless perhaps you would have me add
my own reflections, and the truth is there is an ample subject for them.

I must needs confess that I have long since admired at the patience of men,
and especially of the French, who were not wont to be reproch'd with that
fault: it is now at least ten years that they have been continually talking of a
thing that did not deserve to be discoursed of one day. What does it signify
whether the Five Propositions be or be not in Jansenius's book; whether men
believe any such thing, or whether they doubt of it? In the mean time, the
whole business of the Church seems to be engaged in this pleasant Question: Nor
do the Bishops who superintend the Clergy take notice of any other disorder
which they think worthy of their application. They discourse of nothing save
this in all their Assemblies: the Formularie is almost the only Canon which
men are now obliged to obey: and the only great Crime which is punished among
the Ecclesiastics by privation of their employments is, to but doubt of this
matter of Fact. A small grain of anti-Jansenism purges all kinds of defects, as
the least degree of Indifference in the Point sullies all their other virtues:
so as the most compendious way for one to make his fortune is, to appear
something zealous for the Formularie; be the man never so Ignorant or
Scandalous, this zeal supplies and covers all. In sum, never was the Spanish
Catholicon applied to so many uses as these Five Propositions.

Nor are they only our men of Learning who talk of these matters, the very
Courtiers entertain themselves with nothing else: and though the most
understanding persons discourse of it as of a thing really ridiculous and to
make sport, there are some Sr Politics that make a great business of it. One
would imagine to hear them speak as if all Religion depended on it, and the
whole State were concerned; so that there happen no Inundations, Tempests,
Storms, Shipwrecks, Poison or Plague which they do not attribute to this
Foppery. But what does most of all surprise me (as I said) is, that men should
thus persevere to be always talking of the same thing, and of so mean a
subject. For my own part, I protest to you, I am so tired with the Five
Propositions, and with all that Dispute, that their discourses of it would be
insufferable to me, did I not look on the whole affair with a particular view,
according to which it affords me a very strange prospect; and I shall impart it
to you. There is nothing, in my opinion, more wonderful in all the histories
of the Ages past, or in what has happened in our own times, and of which we
have been the spectators, then to contemplate the images of the Vanity of men's
Fancies, and withal to consider the infinite troubles and agitations which the
most inconsiderable Trifles have produced amongst them. Is it not (for example)
a thing worthy of astonishment, to behold all the Kingdoms of the World engage
themselves in a Quarrel betwixt Augustus and Antonius, the whole force of the
Roman Empire and neighbor States reunited in their Armies, and these Armies
together by the ears near Actium; when one shall consider that one Female was
the sole cause and pretext of this bloody War, which was to decide who should
be master of the Universe, and absolutely abolish the whole frame of the Roman
State? This signal event, and which drew such a consequent after it, had for
its beginning but the face of a Woman; and but for this weak passion Antony had
taken other measures, and in all probability nothing of what succeeded it had
happened: though for my part I am glad it did, since by it I perceive what a
piece of nothing Man is. Antonius, whiles he makes the whole World depend upon
him, does himself depend and dote upon a silly Woman. See here the cause of all
this stupendous Change, a prodigious image of the Vanity of all humane affairs.

You shall read in some of the Indian Histories, that one white Elephant was
the cause of the death of five or six great Princes, and of the desolation of
several Kingdoms. There was, among others, a King of Pegu who assembled an
Army consisting of a million of men, in which there were three thousand Camels,
five thousand Elephants, and two hundred thousand Horses, to take this Beast
from the King of Siam. He destroyed the whole Country of this poor King, ruined
his chief City, which was twice as large as ours of Paris, and in fine forced
him to kill himself after the loss of his whole Empire; and all this but for
one white Elephant. Yet had this Conqueror three already, he wanted only a
fourth for his Coach, and to procure that, he brought a whole Kingdom to
desolation.

We commonly look upon these Histories as on the Follies and Extravagances of
Barbarians; but, in my judgment, we should think otherwise of them. I find
nothing in them but what seems very worthy of Men, and exceedingly
proportionable to the stretch of their fancy, and so much the less vain, as
indeed they serve to discover to us the vanity and emptiness of all those
Enterprises which the world, forsooth, would make pass for so glorious and
important.

Do not imagine, Sir, that these Examples are only to be met withal in
profane Histories, as if that of the Church, which is the Kingdom of God, were
exempted from them. This were not rightly to understand in what estate God has
decreed it should yet remain in the world, which makes S. Paul say, that the
Creature is subject to Vanity; Vanitati creatura subjecta est. She is yet, Sir,
mingled with good and bad, Chaff and Corn; and so mingled indeed, that the
Chaff is a great deal more visible then the Wheat. Nor are those who govern her
always true Citizens of Jerusalem; they are oftentimes, says S. Augustine,
but Citizens of Babylon, whom God suffers to ascend the thrones of the Church,
to render them Ministers of his indignation. In fine, there is ever amongst the
honestest men some mixture of weakness, which they draw from their natural
corruption, amongst those solid benefits which they receive from God. We are
not therefore to wonder if amidst this multitude of Carnal men who fill the
visible Church, and the remanent defects of the most Spiritual, we find
instances of all humane disorders. Were there nothing but what were edifying
and serious in the exterior Government of the Church, she would (as one might
say) be too visible and easy to be discerned; by which the Faith of those who
adhere and submit themselves to her should not be sufficiently exerciz'd: But
God, having by a just judgment left her always sufficient marks whereby to
make her known to all humble and rational spirits, is pleased to obscure her to
the proud, and such as are carried away by the image of those visible disorders
to look on her as upon an humane Assembly which does no otherwise govern her
self then other Societies do.

For this reason it is that God permits that great troubles should be raised
for things of no moment, as well in the Church as in temporal States. What was
there (for example) more vain then the fancy which moved Justinian to condemn
the Writings of three Authors, for which he turned the whole Oriental Church
topsy-turvy, and the Western too, per superfluas Quaestiones, as Pope Pelagius
IId expresses it? and to what did all tend, but to the tormenting of several
Bishops, the banishing of some, imprisonment of others, the exciting of a
Schism in Italy, and all this to no purpose? For however this Emperor had
caused his Opinion to be approved by a General Council and diverse Popes; yet
did all which was at that time done come to nothing of it self a little while
after, since it both is and always was permitted, that men might believe what
they pleased touching those Authors Writings. So true it is, that matters of
Fact are not to be determined but by Reason and Truth, and not by Authority.

But such is the frequent conclusion of such enterprises: They seem to succeed
for a time, and soon after dissipate and vanish of themselves. But the misery
is, that men have commonly their spirits so narrow, they cannot stretch them
beyond their own Times. If they spy a Tempest coming against some particular
Book or Person, they presently give all for lost, and that such as succeed
after them will judge of it just as they do by the present face of the Storm
which terrifies them. I cannot but strangely wonder that Experience should not
yet disabuse them of this Illusion, and teach them to distinguish solid and
stable Judgments* which proceed from an inspection of immutable Truths, from
those which spring only from the blindness of a transitory Passion: since
these sort of Opinions are as variable as the Passions from whence they rise*
they are no sooner at an end, but that which appeared so important begins to
seem horribly ridiculous, and men are astonished that there should ever have
been any so simple as to have amused themselves about them.

There Is no question but that when the Cordeliers were at a difference between
themselves concerning the form of their Capuchon, when those who would be
called the Spiritual Brethren would have their Hood narrower, and the others
which they named the Brothers of the Communalty would have theirs of a larger
size, they thought their dispute wonderful considerable: And in good earnest
the quarrel lasted almost a whole Age, with infinite heat and animosity on both
sides; being at last, with much ado, determined by the Bulls of four Popes,
Nicolas IVth, Clement Vth, John XXIIth, and Benedict XIIth. But now it looks as
if really it had been only to make the World sport, when men but mention this
Dispute; and I verily believe there is hardly a Cordelier at present that cares
a rush for the size of his Capuchon. For so in truth a wise Friar would have
said when the Contest was at the highest, Let us but have patience a while, and
we shall both be laughed at.

The same might likewise have been said upon another Question sprung up about
the same time, and which is of a nature so thin and aerie, that it almost
vanishes with the touch.

It Is a certain truth, that what the Cordeliers eat or drink is as well
devoured as that which is eaten or drank by those who never made profession of
their Rule: This is undeniable. But there sprung a Question among them, Whether
the Right to those things which were so consumed by the Usage, as Bread and
Wine, appertained to them or not; or whether they had only the simple Usage of
them without any Right. The greater part, perceiving this to be a certain
degree of Perfection which cost them nothing but their quitting of all right to
those things which they devoured by the use, (since this renunciation did not
at all hinder the usage, for which they were only interessed) greedily
embraced the opinion, That the Cordeliers had indeed but the simple Usage of
things without any Title to them; That the Right appertained to the Roman
Church, and that there was the Poverty of which J. Christ gave them an Example.

Nicolas the IVth, who had been taken out of the Order of the Cordeliers, made
a Bull wholly advantageous to this pretension, and defined, That in effect they
had but the simple Usage, and that J. C. had given us the example of this
perfect Poverty, which consists in the general renunciation of all Right to
temporal goods.

Thus continued matters for some time: The Cordeliers ate and drank as well as
other men, though without right or title. But John the XXIIth, who was of a
fiercer humor, being raised to the Pontificate, found himself importuned with
this unprofitable Right which the Cordeliers attributed to the Roman Church,
from whence he saw to come no profit, and therefore he took a fancy to end this
Question without any regard to the Decision of his predecessor Nicolas.

The Cordeliers alarmed at this, being assembled in their general Chapter held
at Perouse, solemnly protested to adhere to the Definition of Pope Nicolas the
IVth.

But for all this, John took the adverse party, declaring by his Extravagant Ad
conditorem, that he cared not for this right to the bread and wine of the
Cordeliers, and other things which they consumed by the usage, since there
accru'd no profit by it to the Church of Rome: That the Cordelier Friars were
never the poorer, and that their intention was that none but themselves should
derive any profit from it. Nec Fratrum ipsorum intentio fuerit quod ad
quemcumque* alium quam ad Fratres dictarum rerum perveniret compendium. That it
was a dishonor that the Roman Church should interess it self for an Egg, or a
piece of Cheese. That in things which they devoured after that manner, the
Usage and the Right of usage was not to be distinguished; and that all this
aerie and spiritual refinement was but a pure illusion. In fine, he determined
by the Extravagant, Cum inter nonnullos, etc. That it was a plain Heresy to
affirm that Jesus Christ possessed nothing in this World, neither in particular
nor in common, and that he should have no title to the things which he used.

These Decisions of John the XXIIth appeared quite repugnant to those of
Nicolas the IVth, and the difference did so perplex Cardinal Bellarmin, as he
really professed they were not to be thoroughly reconciled.

He acknowledged that Nicolas the IVth did teach that one might separate the
Right from the Usage; and that John the XXIIth had declared the contrary.

He confessed also that Nicolas has determined that this is a holy Poverty; and
on the other side, that John the XXIIth looked upon it as Hypocrisy. And upon
these two points, unluckily takes the part of Nicolas against John.

But forasmuch as in the third point that concerns the Poverty of J. Christ the
Cordeliers Opinion is taxed of Heresy by John the XXIIth; that the two Popes
should not seem at variance in a point of Faith, he endeavors to piece them
together by distinguishing of the times.

He says therefore that J. Christ did possess Temporal things at one time, and
that he was absolutely bereaved of them at another: That so it is true, that as
to one season he prescribed us an example of perfect Poverty, by an absolute
renunciation of the possession of all things, as says Nicolas; and that it is
as true, he at another time possessed temporal goods which he made use of, as
John the XXIIth had decided it.

But this way of according the Decisions of the two Popes does not appear so
solid: For John the XXIIth does not pretend that J. Christ was master of the
temporal things he used at one certain time only, but that he was so always;
as appears by the general principle which he makes use of to prove it, which
is, That the Usage is unjust which is unaccompanied with Right: Whence it is
easily inferred, That J. Christ having made use of temporal things, and never
having used them injustly, he had always a Right to the Use of them.

But however the matter was, diverse of the Cordeliers did not take themselves
to be justly condemned, and maugre the Pope, they obstinately maintained that
their Bread belonged to the Church of Rome; so as the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria
being then at variance with the Pope about his Election to the Empire, they
joined themselves to him, and stoutly sustained his right against John the
XXIIth. The Emperor on his part upheld the Cordeliers, reproching to the Pope
as a foul Error his Decision touching the Poverty of J* Christ* In sum, the
animosity of both these Antagonists came at last to that height; that the Pope
(according to the style of that Age) excommunicated the Emperor, declared him
Heretic, favourer of Heretics, deposed him from the Empire, and caused all
the poor Cordeliers to be burnt that he could lay hands on. On the other side,
the Emperor enters Italy with a puissant Army, seizes on Rome, declares Pope
John (then at Avignon) unworthy of the Pontificate* creates a new Pope, or
rather Antipope, namely a Cordelier called Peter Ramuceus of Corbaria, who
chose the title of Nicolas the Vth, and who for the first action of his
Pontificate vacated the Bull of John the XXIIth against the Cordeliers, himself
excommunicating and deposing him.

But as all this proceeding was irregular and violent, our pretended Pope could
not maintain himself against John XXIIth, but was in conclusion delivered up to
him; yet did not this determine the difference, there were after this Appeals
to the Council, several Excommunications against Lewis of Bavaria, and such an
infinity of Procedures of Inquisitors against the Cordeliers, who were by this
time revolted all the world over, and especially in Italy, that it would here
be too long to rehearse the particulars. And thus was the success of this
pleasant Question, Whether the Cordeliers were owners of the bread which they
ate: For so it pleased God to humble men's pride, by suffering them to bring the
greatest Trifles to the very height and greatest of extremities; and by that to
let them see that they were all but mere Vanity themselves.

Thus it is we judge of things at present, because we are now freed from those
passions which did then disturb them; but then it was that they passed for very
serious matters indeed, and it had not happily been safe to have laughed at them.
There Is no doubt but it will be just so with our present Disputes, and that
within these fifty years they will all be put among the long Hoods, and the
Bread and Cheese of the Cordeliers. Verily, I have long since had these
Examples in my thoughts, and have looked upon them as equally expedient to
demonstrate to us the trifling folly of men's imaginations: The sole difference
which I can find is, that there are in the present controversy very many
things less reasonable then in the others which I have alleged.

1. For in earnest there is some real difference between a large Hood and a
narrow Hood; but it is not possible to find any between the Orthodox Faith and
the Heresy of our Age. The same individual person, without any alteration of
his Opinion, and all the world knowing he has not altered it, is Heretic in
the morning, and a good Catholic by after-dinner, A Curat who offers himself
to sign the Formularie with protestation that he does not engage in the belief
of the matter of Fact, and that his Bishop has declared he does not in the
least pretend to oblige any man to it, is imprisoned upon this as an Heretic:
Afterward, having signed the Formularie without revoking his protestation, and
solemnly refusing to revoke it, is freed out of prison as an excellent
Catholic.

2. Those spiritual Friars who were so far in love with their narrow Hood, that
they could not be brought to obey in it either their Superiors or the Pope
himself, were certainly in the wrong; because these exterior things absolutely
depend on the power of the Church, which no man may presume to disobey on
pretense of not being able to do it, since it is always in a man's power to
change a Hood when he pleases: But so is it not in the present Dispute, where
they command us to alter an Opinion upon a Question of no importance, or to
renounce that exteriourly which they permit us to retain in our hearts; both of
them equally impossible to conscientious persons; Reason it self not allowing
that one should change his Opinion without some new light and subject for it,
and Piety not permitting us to belie our sentiment without really altering it.

3. It is manifest that in the dispute 'twixt John the XXIIth and the
Cordeliers, they could fix no reproach of Heresy but upon certain Points
contained in the Scripture; and therefore this Pope expressly distinguished the
Question concerning the Right of the Cordeliers to temporal things from that of
the Poverty of J. Christ, and shows that he only applied the note of Heresy
to this Question, as believing the Opinion of the Cordeliers upon this point to
be repugnant to the Scriptures: But now they pretend here, I know not how, to
found an Heresy on the refusing to acknowledge a pure and simple Fact, which
every body knows cannot be established or proved by Scripture.

In sum, they disputed in those days in good earnest, Pope John the XXIIth
making them very well understand what he meant, and subtily answering the
others reasons without at all dissembling them, or making as if he did not
comprehend them: But in the present difference all the address is made to
consist in saying nothing that is intelligible. They perpetually talk of the
sense of Jansenius; but what is this sense of Jansenius? It Is a Mystery which
is forbidden to be revealed. Father Annat one day endeavored to do it, but
was like to have spoiled all; for 'twas told him, that they had condemned what
he called the sense of Jansenius: so there was an end of the Question. And
since that time men have been very tender of making any such offers, keeping
themselves within the inseparability of Fact and Right, for that the world,
which understands none of these terms, are not aware of the absurdity: If they
were, they would be astonished that men should presume to publish such an
extravagance, since, in one word, it is as much as to say, that it is the same
thing to affirm Jansenius has not taught those Propositions, as to maintain in
effect those Propositions: and that to say a friend of ours has not killed a
man, is all one as really to have killed a man.

Behold here the sole foundation of the Formularie, which those who are the
Authors of it have raised upon this Principle, That one cannot separate matter
of Fact from matter of Right. But since no humane Reason is able to suffer such
a violence upon it long, they have been forced to seek for other pretexts to
defend that which they had done. Most of the Bishops declaring in particular,
that it is a most absurd and stupid thing to confound matter of Fact with
Right, they pretend that they do not require our belief of the Fact: so as it
seemed that after this there remained nothing, and all were at an end; they
contest not the Right, nor require they our belief of the Fact: and yet, for
all this, the Heresy remains entire, because indeed the Heresy consists in
nothing. For at the same moment that they indulge you not to believe the matter
of Fact, provided you declare that you do not believe it, you are become an
Heretic without remedy. There is therefore visibly something of more
extraordinary in our disputes then was in those other Examples which I but now
produced; but if the Vanity be equal, the Injustice is here incomparably the
greater. And truly it is that which prevents a Reply I conceive some persons of
the World might make* which is, That they are verily persuaded there is nothing
more frivolous then all this Contestation* and that all those who have any
thing to do in it are equally ridiculous; it being as much a wonder there
should be people so obstinate as to maintain that Five Propositions are not to
be found in a Book, as to see there are others so impudent to avow that they
are there.

But however this Judgment may conform to the humor of the men of the world,
it is certainly most unjust in the reality of the thing. For in differences
which spring from mean and low considerations, the fault and the injustice is
not always of both parties; and oftentimes one may be persecuted for a
ridiculous matter, yet without being culpable or ridiculous. For Instance, Pope
John the XXIIth having simply enjoined the Cordeliers to obey their Superiors
as to the shape of their Hoods, they were doubtless to blame for their
obstinacy, though the thing in it self were but a trifle: But if he had
commanded them to say and acknowledge that their Hoods were large when as
indeed they were narrow, their disobedience had been excusable, and had they
been persecuted for so doing, they ought rather to have suffered patiently,
then to have obeyed him. I affirm the same as to our Point in difference. If
one should say simply to such as doubt whether the Five Propositions are in the
Bp of Ypres's Book, Speak no more to us of that, I should blame them for their
disobedience: But when they shall command them to acknowledge that those Five
Propositions are in Jansenius's Book, and to condemn them too in his sense,
they might reasonably reply, We do not know what that sense of Jansenius means
which you would have us to condemn, nor can we possibly meet with those
Propositions in all his Book: If they should persecute them for this, the
Persecution would doubtless prove but ignominious to the authors of it. And the
reason is plain, Because it is never a small and mean thing to be sincere, be
the matter or subject never so small in which one ought to appear sincere. So
as all the evil in these rencontres reflects on those only who would constrain
men to render to their Opinion in such frivolous Questions, since it is in their
power not to do it; whiles it is not so with persons of honor and integrity,
to dissemble what they believe, be the matter never so inconsiderable.

But I think all knowing persons will judge more equitably of the matter, and
that if Persecution be destined for one party, the derision will fall to the
share of the other. This is the sense which, for ought I perceive, all discreet
men are of at present. And therefore I believe I shall find but too many of
opinion with me, who will look on all this affair as upon a Picture of the
baseness of men. I could only wish that they did enlarge their prospect a
little farther, and discover the malice of the Devil, who serves himself of
this Chimaera for the raising of infinite real evils to the Church; and, on the
other side, the secret dispensation of God, who permits so many funest and
unlucky consequences to spring from so frivolous an occasion. For it is a
prodigious thing but to consider the mischiefs which this unfortunate
contestation has already produced, and what it is yet likely to bring forth.
Hitherto they have made use of it only to countenance all sorts of
licentiousness, and to render useless all those Divines who may be found able
to oppose it. In the mean time all kind of Zeal for the purity of Manners is
become suspected; nor is it now possible to do any thing that is solidly good,
but one is immediately accused of this Imaginary Heresy. Thus is this Affair,
so far as it has respect to men at least, a perfect image of their Vanity; on
the Devil's part, a subtle address and contrivance of his Malice; and as it
concerns God Almighty, a terrible judgment of his Justice, who is pleased to
exercise his Church, by this impertinent Dispute, with one of his most rigorous
Chastisements.

I perceive that to satisfy you entirely, I must be forced to add to these
reflections of mine on the present state of our affairs, some conjectures what
may in likelihood be the event of it hereafter. See then the Prophecy, which I
think one may safely pronounce, without being a Prophet.

Something I believe there is of certain in the success of this Contest, and
something of very uncertain. It is uncertain whether it will long continue, or
be quickly at an end; there are presumptions for both: Matters are too far
engaged to conclude so suddenly; and they are again too mean to subsist long.
But what appears most evident is, that in all appearance they will within a
while change face. This generation will pass, the Disputers of either part must
shortly go to their long home, in domum aeternitatis suae, and there will
spring up another generation of men who will not be concerned with our
Passions; and it is certain then, that all this Controversy will pass but for
a Comedy and a vain amusement; that they will conceive a just indignation
against the Authors of all these Troubles, so frivolous in their cause, and so
pernicious in their event; and that they will commiserate a world of gallant
and sober men, who in another Age would have been reverenced, and which the
present has treated with so much rigor and indignity.

I am, Sir, -- etc.
24. January, 1664.
The Second LETTER.
SIR,
THE whole Affair of Jansenism is in the very bottom of it but a mere Trifle,
think of it what you please; but there is no jeasting in the prosecution of it.
Father Ferrier (whose Writing you lately transmitted to me) has unworthy
designs on foot, and he pretends nothing less then to engage both the Church
and the State in the unjust Passions of his Society. 'Twere time the business
were therefore well looked after, and to prevent it if possible.

The Question is not now, whether the matter in controversy be tractable, or
so wild that there is no meddling with it. The end of writing should not be to
divert the World and make it sport, but to inform it of things which it
concerns men to know. And therefore one should less regard upon this occasion
the Niceness of those persons who reject all things that require any serious
application, then the Utility of those who have need that we untangle certain
terms which impede them, and may possibly engage them into dangerous surprises.
But since the Father Ferrier begins to signalize himself in this Affair, 'twere
good one knew what he were, that so we be not mistaken; for we should deceive
our selves to take him for an ordinary Jesuit. I assure you the Society do not
look upon him for such, since they put it in his head, and have entrusted him
with their most important affair, which is the persecution of Jansenism. But
otherwise, he is a Disciple and a particular friend of F. Annat's: And there be
some people say, that this Father invited him to Paris in spem futurae
Successionis, and with endeavor to resign a place to him, which he looks upon
as a benefit of his Society. I refer my self to the matter it self. But
certain it is, that he has done quite the contrary to what he promised at
Tolouse, when they began to treat concerning an Agreement.

The Agreement there was, That they should not stand upon the subscription to
the matter of Fact, nor the Formularie, but only a respectfull Silence,
according to the proper terms of the Project which M. de Comenges sent to
Paris, written with his own hand, and bearing this Title, The Project of the
Accommodation concerted between the Bishop of Comenges and Father Ferrier the
Jesuit. In the mean time the Father has so dexterously managed his negotiation,
that he has brought it to this pass, that it should not suffice to subscribe
the Formularie. Perhaps he has taken another resolution by the way, and another
Conscience too, it may be. For your Doctors of the Probability (such as is the
Father Ferrier, who has written a book of it) have this privilege, They change
their Conscience as men do their Clothes, and as the Rules of this Doctrine
permit them: so as they have one for Tolouse, another for Paris, and another
for Rome.

I shall not wonder at all, Sir, if this astonish you, for it is indeed most
admirable: But you are to understand, that these Gentlemen, the Casuists, are a
Corporation within themselves, who have their Laws, their Customs and
Reasonings quite different from those of other people; so as the surprise is
commonly mutual on both sides. The World is astonished when they hear the
Maxims which they teach; and they as much wonder when they learn that the
world does by no means approve of them. You were surpised when I told you of
the change of Conscience which these Casuists permit, and which they name
Mutatio dictaminis; and the Parliament were amazed also when Father Coton
publicly declared, that as he maintained in France that the King was not
subject to the Pope in Temporals, so he would affirm the contrary if he were at
Rome. But Caramuel is wonderfully troubled that the Parliament should make any
scruple at this double Conscience of F. Coton's, and therefore does handsomely
and ingeniously maintain it in his Fundamental Theology, n. 194. That F. Coton
is no-waies to be blamed for having in France embraced the opinion of the
French concerning the Independence of Kings, and at the same time to have
declared, that he should change his Sentiment when he changed the Country, and
that being at Rome he would be of the opinion that they were of at Rome. For
this same chopping of probable Conscience is so certainly indulged, according
to Caramuel, that he assures us it is as clear as the Sun at noon: Thesim istam
(says he) judico luce meridiana clariorem, n. 285. Edit. Francoford. So as the
poor Parliament, who took it seems offense at it, must needs be more blind then
those who at midday see no light.

It Is a prodigious thing, (says one in the world) that the Jesuit L' Amy
should dare teach that it is lawful for a Religious man to kill any who shall
but mean the publishing of the notorious Crimes of his Society, if there be no
other means to hinder him: and that it is strange, according to Caramuel, that
any one in the world should scruple at this pious doctrine of F. L' Amy; since
it is not only (says he) probable, but the contrary improbable in the opinion
of all the learned Casuists. Doctrinam Amici solum probabilem, and contrariam
improbabilem censemus omnes docti.

This was not an unprofitable Digression, seeing it serves to inform us what
there is contained in the quality of your Casuists, and which is one of the
most conspicuous of F. Ferrier's; for this Father is a wonderful Casuist. And
by this one may judge, that it is not altogether unlikely, but that as he came
to Paris under pretense of pacifying the differences of the Divines, so he now
promotes the same differences to the end he may still continue there. The
Doctrine of Probability and of shifting Conscience may well be allowed to go
so far, because the prime Rule which it follows is Utility. Now commonly these
Provincial Jesuits conceive it very profitable to come to Paris when they are
not there, and to dwell there when they once are. Whatever it be, to tell you
in one word who this Father Ferrier is; You must understand he is a great
Jesuit, a great Casuist, and a great friend of F. Annat: he does all by
corresponding with him, is his prime Minister, and the depositary of his most
reserved and secret thoughts; so that he is to be considered as a person
totally illuminated with all that is in F. Annat: and when you speak of F.
Annat, you have said all; for who should know any thing of this business, if he
do not?

He is the sole Author of this Formularie that has made such a noise. The late
Archbishop of Tolouse was only his property, and therefore it behooved him to
know what he thought when he did it, and on what grounds he settled it. He is
the principal instigator of all those persecutions which have happened to this
pretended Heresy. He therefore ought to know it better then any man, and is
the most capable to teach others to know it also: And it is indeed what the
Father Ferrier pretends to effect by his orders, and what he promises by the
very Title that he has given to this flying sheet, THE TRUE IDEA OF JANSENISM.

He is to let us see that it is not an Imaginary Heresy, as they have so
confidently published, but an Heresy in good earnest: and in effect the
Conclusions which he gathers from them against those whom he accuses are very
real ones; for he causes them to be excommunicated by the Church, and
overwhelmed by the Royal power; and these are indeed consequences to the
purpose. The Question is whether the Principles thereof be also solid: for it
were a very strange thing, if they should have no other support for these
severe Conclusions but visible Falsities and palpable Equivocations. Doubtless
men are never more concerned to reason discreetly, then when they are upon
positive resolutions of banishing persons from the Church and State.

If it should then appear that the whole Writing of F. Ferrier is but a mere
extravagancy of spirit without example, what may one conclude of the Rashness
of this Father and of his fellow- Jesuits? and what are we to think of an
Heresy which is founded only upon these Imaginations?

But to understand them rightly, we are to consider the state of the Dispute
when F. Ferrier did first enter upon it, and began to publish to the World his
new lights.

The Jesuits accused the Divines of Heresy, because they did not condemn the
Five Propositions in the Sense of Jansenius: and these Divines replied, that
this reproach was a visible, criminal and inexcusable Calumny: nor did they
content themselves to have said it, they proved it by a reason which is without
contradiction.

All Heresy does consist in a certain precise and determinate Dogme opposite
to the verity of Faith revealed in Scripture and Tradition, and which may be
known and expressed independently from the name of the Author; since all the
Verities of Faith are coevous with the Church it self, though they are not
often opposed till a long while after the beginning of the Divine revelation.
So that as these Verities of Faith were Truths long e're they were opposed; so
the Errors which were repugnant to these Truths were doubtless Errors before
any man had the boldness to maintain them.

This we generally find in all Heresies. The Doctrine of Arius is an Heresy;
but it does not consist in the vain and indeterminate words of the Doctrine of
Arius, but in this particular Position or Opinion, that the Son is not
consubstantial with the Father. It is the very same in all the rest: They all
maintain a peculiar and distinct Dogme independent from the name of the Author;
and when we do not know the Opinion any more, we say that we know the Heresy
no more; and if a man had never known it, he might well say that it never was.

This is sufficient, say the Divines, to repel that unjust Reproach which they
fling upon us, of being sectators of a new Heresy: For we sincerely protest,
that we entirely acquiesce in the Authority of the Universal Church; that we
embrace, without the least reservation, all the Dogms which She proposes to us
as of Faith; that we submit all our Understanding and Reason to her; and that
our hearts do not at all accuse us of holding any Doctrine which is repugnant
to her Decisions: so as we can say before God with confidence upon this
subject, Iniquitatem si aspexi in cord meo, non exaudiet Dominus. We do not
conceal our sense, but are ready to refer it to the Pope and to the Bishops,
and to accept them for our Judges: We have offered it several times, and have
this consolation, that those who are the most prejudiced against us, have
nothing to object against us. In fine, we are so far from embracing any
particular Doctrine on the Five Propositions, that though we do not acknowledge
the Jesuits for the Rules of our Faith, yet it is most true that we hold no
Opinion upon the matter of the Five Propositions, which they dare publicly
accuse of Heresy before the Pope or the Bishops.

How clear and ingenuous, Sir, is this Declaration, how truly Catholic and
exceedingly remote from all suspicion of Heresy? and that not only for
acquitting these persons of Errors, but for showing that they could not be
culpable of Heresy, if without their knowledge and consent they should happily
fall into some Error; since all the world knows that the crime of Heresy does
not consist simply in the Error, but in the Obstinacy to maintain and dwell in
an Error against the judgment of the Church. Now how is it possible that these
people should impudently maintain an Error they are totally ignorant of,
against a judgment of the Church which they know nothing of?

But this does not satisfy the Jesuits, and because they do not find their
reckoning in it, they continue their accusation of Heresy: and this is it
which has obliged the Divines to give them this defiance, and which is
certainly very urging; Either set the Heresy you impute to us distinctly and
clearly down; or acknowledge your selves Calumniators, for accusing us of an
Heresy which you cannot tell what to make of.

On this it is that the Jesuits have revealed the Mystery of their Politics,
and the whole secret of the Heresy. In stead of endeavoring to set down and
describe the Positions, a thing which upon trial did never succeed with them;
they entrench themselves, and have recourse to the uncertain expression of the
Sense and of the Doctrine of Jansenius, without any farther advance: You hold
(say they) the Doctrine of Jansenius to be Catholic; the Pope declares it
heretical; behold then your Heresy. But as they had to do with persons very
well prepared to defend themselves, so never was there an Equivocation
unriddled as this has been. They told F. Annat in express terms, that this was
a Scholastical Sophism, unworthy an old Logician, as he was. Nunquamne
intelliges, Dialectice senex, puerile argumentationis vitium? and they proved
it well too: For some of them, it seems, condemn his Sense and his Doctrine as
heretical, whiles others defend it for Catholic, without the least difference
between them concerning Faith; because it is not the same precise and
determined Sense which is thus condemned by some, and approved by others,
though they both of them call it by the same name; and that is but what we
daily meet with in the different explication of an Author. For there is ever in
these encounters this opposition of words, that some affirm the Doctrine of an
Author to be Catholic, and others that it is heretical; though neither of them
disagree touching the true Faith. The Fifth Council pronounces the Doctrine of
Theodoret to be impious and heretical: Father Petavius and many other Jesuits
deny it; are they therefore against the Faith of the Council? By no means;
since they defend Theodoret but by interpreting him after another way then did
the Council, and by giving him a Catholic sense.

It Is the very same case in the present Dispute. The Pope says the Doctrine of
Jansenius is heretical; other men say, We find no such matter in Jansenius. The
words have indeed an appearance of contrariety, but without implying the least
contrariety of Faith; forasmuch as the Doctrine which these Divines maintain to
be Catholic and of Jansenius, is not certainly the same Doctrine which the
Pope condemns for heretical and as being that of Jansenius. And the proof which
they bring is decisive. We do not (say they) maintain on the matter of the Five
Propositions any thing save the Doctrine of Grace efficacious alone, as it is
held by S. Augustine, and by the whole School of S. Thomas. Now it is clear that
the Pope does nowhere condemn this Doctrine, as he makes all the Church
believe, and indeed as both the Church and the Jesuits themselves do accord.
It is then certain that the Pope does not condemn that which we understand
under the notion of the Sense of Jansenius; as we likewise do not hold what the
Pope condemns under these terms; seeing, this Doctrine excepted, we have
nothing at all to do with the rest, but reject it in general, as we are ready
to do in particular, whenever the Church shall please to describe it in
particular, or to show us where it is.

And thus you have the whole state of this ten-years Dispute; The Jesuits
stand to their sense of Jansenius, and all men that will may perceive the
Illusion and Equivocation of the terms. But in fine, F. Ferrier is come up from
the very farthest part of all Languedoc to the aid of his Confraternity, and
has been chosen by F. Annat to publish this Heresy, and to answer all those
Writings which made it plainly out that it is but a mere Chimaera: but
especially, he undertook to reply to the Treatise of Just Complaints, which
expressly clears this Equivocation of the Sense of Jansenius. Now therefore it
is that we shall shortly come to know in what this wondrous Heresy consists,
or else we must never hope to understand it whiles we live.

What says this Reverend Father to us then? That it is expedient to publish the
true Idea of Jansenism: in effect it is very expedient, and there it was it
should indeed have been begun. For it is a wondrous strange thing, that men
should make such a noise about a business which no body yet understands. And
also (says F. Ferrier) because these Divines complain in their Writings that
we accuse them of an Heresy, without being able to determine what it is, I
find my self obliged to say their complaints are very unjust. It has been told
them a thousand times over that their Heresy consists in their believing and
maintaining that the Doctrine of Jansenius on the Five Propositions is
Catholic, although the Church condemn it for Heretical: which is (quoth he,
page 3.) a true Question of Right, that presupposes matter of Fact, viz. That
Jansenius establishes some Doctrine in his Augustine: and in this Question one
cannot divide the Fact from the Right; that is to say, one cannot hold the
Doctrine which is condemned for heretical, and at the same moment maintain the
Doctrine of Jansenius upon these Propositions not to be the same which the
Popes have condemned.

This is all the illumination that F. Ferrier affords us upon this point, and
to which all his Colors are reduced. After this it is to no purpose to hope for
any other, either from him, or from any else. He has done his utmost, was too
far engaged, and we are not to believe that any body will ever be able to
out-doe him. But in earnest, Sir, it is an Abuse beyond all humane patience, to
promote (as F. Ferrier does here) a thing so invisible as is this Heresy
without Dogme; and to make as if he understood nothing of so many convincing
reasons, by which the falsity of this pretense has been made evident; to stand
so obstinately in an Equivocation that has been so fully detected, and to
repeat in cold blood, seriously and gravely, Absurdities which have been a
hundred times overthrown, as if they were infallible Oracles. I profess to you,
Sir, I know not what to think of all this; unless perhaps the Jesuits may
imagine, that being (as they are) powerful in the world, they may lawfully say
and do what they please themselves; as being no more subject (like other men)
to the dictates of Reason and common Sense.

Was there any need that F. Ferrier should himself have discovered the Mystery
of this Heresy without Position, or, to say better, this Heresy without
Heresy? Did not the Cordelier Jubilee do it before him, and fully as well?
Every body derided it in this Friar, and so will they do in this Jesuit: so
as if this be all that he has to do at Paris, he may even go back again to
his Province: His staying at Paris will be no advantage to his Cause, and most
certainly blemish his Reputation.

But, says F. Ferrier, It Is a Question of Right, to understand whether the
Doctrine of Jansenius be Catholic or Heretical; as it also is to know whether
the Doctrine of S. Augustine be orthodox or not. But I maintain that whoever
says so, knows not what a Question of Right or a Question of Fact signifies.

We must do all we can then to penetrate through these natural or voluntary
Obscurities of F. Ferrier; and after this, if he render not up himself, I shall
esteem him for a desperado.

We are not to imagine that so soon as ever the words of Catholic Doctrine and
Heretical Doctrine come into a Question, it is presently a Question of Right;
since if so, several Contestations would likewise be reduced to Questions of
Right, which are merely but of Fact, being expressed by these terms: And for
instance* they would affirm that there is a Question of Right between the Fifth
Council and Father Petavius, seeing the Council condemns the Doctrine of
Theodoret as Heretical, and this Father maintains it to be Catholic; which in
the language of F. Ferrier one would name a Right.

But to know in very truth whether a Question be of Right, or of Fact, or of
both of them together, you are only to consider what both parties agree in,
and what they contest: for it is evident that the Question* does not fall upon
that which is accorded, but wholly on that which is disputed. When therefore
two persons are agreed that a certain Dogm or Position is heretical, and
question only whether this Dogm be of such an Author or not, the dispute is
only concerning the matter of Fact. The Jesuits and the Sixth Council do
consent that it is an Heresy to say There is but one Will in J. Christ; but
they are at variance whether this Heresy was taught by Pope Honorius: The
Council affirms it, the Jesuits deny it. This is only a Question of Fact,
though it be expressed by terms which look like matter of Right. The sense of
Honorius is heretical, says the VIth Council; The sense of Honorius is
Catholic, say the Jesuits.

When men agree on the contrary that an Author has taught a certain Doctrine,
and the dispute be whether this Doctrine be Catholic or heretical, the
Question is of the Right, not the Fact; because the Effect is agreed upon, and
the Right is contested. The Monothelites and the Sixth Council agreed that Pope
Honorius taught that there was but one Will in J. Christ: but the Monothelites
pretended that this Doctrine was Catholic; the Council maintains it for
Heretical* This is a Question of Right expressed by the same terms with the
other. The Doctrine of Honorius is Catholic, say the Monothelites; The
Doctrine of Honorius is heretical, says the Sixth Council.

But when they are not agreed concerning a certain Doctrine, whether it be
Catholic or Heretical, or has been promoted by some Author, there the Question
is concerning Fact and Right together, because both of them are disputed.

The Monothelites affirm that it is a Catholic Doctrine to say there is but one
Will in J. C. as Pope Honorius teaches; the Jesuits reply, the Doctrine is not
Catholic, and that it is falsely imputed to P. Honorius: Here the Question is
both of Fact and Right. But that which is strange is this, that when they
dispute in this manner concerning matter of Fact and Right, they both accord in
the expression. For the Jesuits, who neither agree with the Monothelites
either in the Fact or Right, do yet consent with them in this expression,
contrary to that of the Council, that the Doctrine of Honorius is Catholic.

It Is an easy matter by this Rule to detect the Illusion of F. Ferrier, who
maintains it generally in his Writings, that these are Questions of Right, viz.
to know whether the Doctrine of S. Augustine be orthodox or not, or this of
Jansenius heretical or Catholic. For it is evident, that insisting upon the
general terms, one cannot distinguish whether they be Questions of Fact or of
Right; whiles it is possible to form upon the Doctrine of S. Augustine, and on
that of any other Author whatsoever, Questions purely of Right, and Questions
both of Right and Fact, and Questions purely of Fact; as will appear by these
Examples.

The Semi-pelagians affirm that the Doctrine of S. Augustine concerning Grace
was not orthodox. The Calvinists, on the contrary, maintain that it is. The
Jesuits say the same. And the Church says so too.

Whiles we dwell here, one shall never come to know whether these Questions are
of Fact or of Right: but we shall easily discover it by the same Rule.

The Semi-pelagians acknowledge with the Church that the Doctrine of the
Necessity of Grace efficacious of it self for all good actions, was really S.
Augustine's; but they reject this Doctrine as not true, at least in regard to
the inception of Faith. And the Church, on the contrary, maintains it against
them, that it is both certain and very true, as well in respect of the
beginning of Faith, as of all other actions of Piety.

So as since the matter of Fact was not contested, and that the dispute was
only concerning the quality of the Doctrine, the whole Question between the
Church and the Semi-pelagians was purely concerning Right.

They say with the Semi-pelagians that the Doctrine of efficacious Grace per se
is not true: but, as they are a great deal less sincere then the
Semi-pelagians, they add, that this Doctrine is not S. Augustine's, which the
Semi-pelagians do not affirm. They are therefore agreed upon the Right with the
Semi-pelagians, and differ only upon the pure Fact: whereas they neither
accord with the Church about the Fact, nor the Right; though they consent with
her in this uncertain expression, that the Doctrine of S. Augustine is true;
because in particular they maintain that the Doctrine of efficacious Grace per
se is false, and not S. Augustine's, albeit the Church has ever acknowledged
both the one and the other of these two Points.

No wonder at all then, if in speaking to persons who were at variance, not
about the Doctrine of S. Augustine in general, but the particular Doctrine of
efficacious Grace per se, it has been said to them in a certain Writing, (which
F. Ferrier has abused) That it was a Crime, an Attempt and an Heresy to
condemn the Doctrine of S. Augustine of Heresy, which the Church has approved:
forasmuch as treating of the particular Dogm of efficacious Grace, they had
reason to affirm that they could not brand it with Heresy, without erring in
matter of Right and of Faith; whether one attacque it for not avowing it to be
S. Augustine's, as do the Jesuits; or acknowledge it for S. Augustine's, as did
the Semi-pelagians, and as those persons would seem to do to whom this Writing
is directed.

So that the difference which is 'twixt the Church and the Jesuits upon the
Doctrine of S. Augustine forms a direct Question of Faith, together with a
dispute of Fact. And of the very same nature is that between the Church and
Calvin on the same Doctrine of S. Augustine. For he attributing this Error to
S. Augustine, That God is the Author of Sin, and that he compells the Will to
good and evil, the asseveration which he makes of this general Proposition,
that the Doctrine of S. Augustine is orthodox, does not excuse him from a
double Error both of Right and Fact; since he takes that for a Truth which is
an Heresy, and attributes to S. Augustine a Blasphemy which was infinitely
remote from his thoughts.

But it may be that the Question concerning the Doctrine of S. Augustine might
be purely of Fact from another supposition. For if a man led by a false
persuasion, as was Calvin, that S. Augustine teaches God to be as well author
of Sins as of Good actions, should at the same time condemn the Blasphemy which
Calvin approves, and by a consequent of this Opinion refuse to acknowledge S.
Augustine's Doctrine to be orthodox; one could not justly accuse him of Error
in point of Faith, because he should condemn what the Church condemns; but of
an extreme Temerity only, to have fathered so impious an Opinion on S.
Augustine. But what would be strange in this encounter is, That he who should
affirm in the sense of Calvin, that the Doctrine of S. Augustine were orthodox,
would notwithstanding be an Heretic, because he did not do it but as
approving an Error which he imputed to S. Augustine; whereas he that should
say, as this person does, that the Doctrine of S. Augustine is not orthodox,
should be Catholic, because he would say it without any Error: so little
regard there is to be had, to be able to judge whether a man be Catholic or
Heretic, and whether the Questions concern matter of Right or of Fact, to
these wild and indetermin'd Propositions, which approve or condemn another
Doctrine without so much as showing it.

It Is what S. Augustine has himself decided, and in respect to himself, by
these words full of unction and charity: Whilst men (says he, L. 1. de
Trinit. c. 3.) imagine that I have held some false Opinion in my Books, which
in truth I never held, and that they condemn this Opinion; the law and dictates
of Charity advertise and command me, but with an injunction full of sweetness,
to be rather willing to be reproved by him who condemns this Error, in
attributing it to me without reason, then to be praised by those who would
maintain this Error, because they believed I had taught it. For though the
first did wrongfully, to attribute an Error to me which I never committed;
they had reason yet to condemn it: But the others are under a double mistake,
since they praise me for an Opinion which the Truth condemns, and approve an
Opinion which is condemned by the Truth.

True it is, that this person who should thus impute an Error to S. Augustine
would be obliged to say, that the Church has not comprised it in approving of
his Doctrine; which would be very rash and scandalous, because he would say it
without and against all Reason: whereas there are some occasions wherein one
might do the same thing without temerity or scandal, because one does it not
but upon great reason: the only Rule for these kind of things being, That it is
lawful to do them with Reason, but by no means without it. And therefore

It is lawful to accuse of Supposition the Council of Sinuessa, and it is not
so in reference to the Council of Nice: It is lawful to say that Theodoret has
been ill understood by the Sixth Council, but it is not lawful to say that
Nestorius was so by the Council of Ephesus: It is lawful to affirm that they
did not understand the Doctrine of Pope Honorius in the VIth Council, but it is
not so of the Doctrine of Pope Leo in the Council of Chalcedon.

That which makes that some of these things are permitted, and others of them
forbidden, is, that there is Reason to say it of some, but none at all to say
it of the other.

So that it is a very frail consequence which F. Ferrier derives in his
Writings, That if it be lawful to say the Pope did not well understand
Jansenius in condemning him, one might as well say of the Church, that she did
not rightly comprehend the Doctrine of S. Augustine in approving it; since it
being not permitted to do either of them without Reason, it were lawful to
do both when Reason required it. And the truth is, that one of them, which is,
to affirm the Doctrine of Jansenius was never thoroughly understood at Rome, is
very lawful, because there is great Reason to believe it; and the other, that
the Doctrine of S. Augustine was not well comprehended, is very unlawful,
because there is also no Reason for it; as will be demonstrated in another
Treatise.

One cannot therefore know in general whether it be lawful or not to affirm
that an Author has been ill understood by the Church, since it depends on the
particular Reasons which induce one to say it: Nor can one also know in
general, whether those who dispute whether the Doctrine of an Author be
Catholic or Heretical, are at variance upon the Right, or the Fact; since it
may be upon either of them: but one may clearly understand it by examining in
Particular what is agreed upon, or contested, both by the one and the other.

And hence it is they easily prove, that the present Contestation about the
Doctrine of Jansenius is a pure Question of Fact. For it would in truth prove a
Question of Right, if there were a certain precise Dogm maintained by some for
Catholic, and condemned by others for heretical.

But seeing the contrary is true, that there is no precise and determined Dogm
in the present Contestation* as appears clearly from F. Ferrier's not being
able to specify any, it is visible that the Question is but concerning matter
of Fact.

And therefore it must be acknowledged, F. Ferrier has not altogether failed of
the promise which he makes in the Title of his Treatise, to present us with the
true Idea of Jansenism. For this true Idea consisting in conceiving an
Imaginary Heresy, his Treatise is of excellent use for the forming of this
Idea; since in Heresy without Position, and without any Question concerning
Faith, (such as is what he presents us) is the true Idea of an Imaginary
Heresy. It Is true indeed, this is not his intention in it, but many times men
do things contrary to their intentions. Nor was it doubtless his design, to
show us that the Jesuits be Heretics: how-ever one might invincibly prove it
by an argument like that which he produces against the Divines whom he strives
to render Heretics.

He acknowledges no other matter of Fact in the Pope's Decision, which declares
that the Doctrine of Jansenius on the Five Propositions is heretical, then
this, Jansenius teaches some Doctrine on the Five Prepositions, which is
certain: he will have all the rest to be of Right; and thence concludes, That
the Divines whom he accuses, not denying this Fact, That Jansenius did teach
some Dogm upon the Five Propositions, and yet refusing to own that his sense is
heretical, deny a Right, and are Heretics.

If this argument be valid, behold the Jesuits arrant Heretics without
remedy: For there is no more to be said but the same, That it being certain the
Sixth Council has condemned the Doctrine of Honorius, this Decision comprehends
no other Fact then this, That Honorius teaches some Doctrine concerning the
Will of J. Christ, which is indubitable: and by consequent the Jesuits, who do
not deny this Fact, yet denying Honorius's sense to be heretical, deny a Right,
and are Heretics.

This obligation therefore the Jesuits have to F. Ferrier, that he has made
them rank Heretics, if you will believe him. But it were yet a great charity
to draw them out of this Heresy; they have a world of others, where it is
impossible to warrant them. The expedient is easy, it being only to show them
after how extraordinary a manner their F. Ferrier is mistaken. For it is very
certain, the matter of Fact which he specifies, That Jansenius has taught some
Doctrine, is to be found in this Question, whether the Doctrine of Jansenius be
Catholic or Heretical: But there yet occurrs another also very distinct and
far separate from Right, and which has been the whole subject of this
Contestation; and this it is he dissembles.

Perhaps F. Ferrier imagines, that when one submits a Book to the Pope, to
judge whether the Doctrine in it be Catholic or heretical, it is sufficient for
him to know that the Book teaches some Doctrine upon a certain matter; and that
thereupon addressing himself to God, he reveals to him, that this Doctrine, of
which he all this while knows nothing, is Catholic or Heretical. If
Ecclesiastical judgments were made after this sort, there would in effect be
no need to examine any other Fact then this* whether the Author in controversy
do teach some Doctrine upon a certain subject: and this Fact being always
evident, there would hardly be ever any Questions of Fact, because men seldom
dispute, whether an Author have some Doctrine upon a subject no matter what.

But because this Imagination comprehends in it a very gross Error, since it
supposes particular Revelations in the Pope, which should be the foundations of
these Decisions, it is evident that Ecclesiastical judgments are not made in
this manner. Neither the Pope nor Bishops can judge whether the Doctrine of a
Book be Catholic or Heretical without comparing it with Tradition. Now it is
impossible they should compare it with Tradition, without they distinctly know
it. Men never compare a Doctrine with Tradition which they know not but under
the general Idea of the Doctrine of an Author. For it is neither Catholic nor
Heretical, as Doctrine, nor as Doctrine of an Author. The Doctrine of God is
essentially true as being the Doctrine of God, because God is the essential
Truth. But the Doctrine of the Devil himself is not false as being the Doctrine
of the Devil, because the Devil is not false from his Essence, and because he
sometimes speaks truth, as when he acknowledged that J. Christ was the Son of
God. A fortiori, the Doctrine of a Catholic Author is not Heretical because it
is a Doctrine, and because it is his.

Of necessity therefore ought both the Pope and the Bishops, to judge rightly
whether the Doctrine of a Book be Heretical or Catholic, pass through the
examen of this point of Fact, That it is the Doctrine of this Book; and to
reduce it to some precise Position distinct and determinate, from whence first
to establish this Judgment of Fact, namely, that This Dogm and Position is of
such an Author; and after that this Judgment of Right, This Dogm is Heretical,
or Catholic.

It is of this distinct Dogm that they affirm these two things, viz. That it is
of such an Author, That it is Heretical. But they affirm it by two very
separate and remote Judgments, and formed upon most different Reasons.

They judge that this distinct Dogm is of an Author, by the very view of the
Passages, and the connection of his Principles.

They judge it to be Heretical, or Catholic, by the comparison which they make
of it with the Scripture and Tradition.

Thus it is the Pope and the Bishops should proceed indeed in condemning the
Doctrine of Jansenius. It was not enough for them to know that Jansenius
teaches some Doctrine on the Five Propositions; since it is ridiculous to
conclude from thence that this Doctrine is heretical: but they should
necessarily have reduced the vain, uncertain Doctrine of Jansenius to a precise
Dogm by a judgment purely of Fact, in judging that this distinct Doctrine is of
Jansenius, to be able afterward to pronounce the judgment of Faith, which
insinuates the Doctrine to be heretical.

There are not in the whole World things more separate and distinct then these
Conclusions, This Dogm is Jansenius's, This Doctrine is heretical. The one is
matter of Fact, the other of Right. The one is true ever since the Church has
been the Church, the other cannot be true but since Jansenius has written, and
was before that false. It may be true that this was such an Author's Position,
without his being an Heretic; and it may be as true that a Position is
heretical, without being such an Author's; because it is not therefore
heretical for being such an Author's, nor therefore such an Author's for being
heretical.

Now these two Judgments, more remote from each other then are the Heavens from
the Earth, are both comprehended in this single Proposition, The Doctrine of
Jansenius is heretical, which is the result; and thus it comprehends a Right
and a Fact really separated, though confounded in the expression. It may be
denied as to them both; and, were only the Fact denied, they are not those who
fall into the Heresy that do it, but those who accuse them of Heresy under
this pretext, as does the F. Ferrier.

For it is certain that of one part the Pope has formed this Judgment, namely,
This is Jansenius's Doctrine; but this is only a matter of Fact, and a Fact
not revealed either in Scripture or Tradition. It is also evident this Fact is
wholly separate from Right, and that it is comprised within the Pope's
Decision, which declares that the Doctrine of Jansenius is heretical. When
therefore F. Ferrier accuses those of Heresy who deny it, he falls himself
into the Heresy of establishing a point of Faith upon a thing which is neither
contained in the Scripture nor in Tradition.

He has therefore the choice after this, to say that this Fact has been either
revealed to the Pope, or not revealed. If he acknowledge it has not been
revealed to him, he falls into this Heresy of making an Article of Faith of a
matter of Fact which is nowhere revealed. And if he pretend a Revelation of
the Pope's, he falls into a double Error; one for admitting particular
Revelations in the Pope, which were to open a gate to all manner of Illusion;
and another for founding of Points of Faith upon these particular Revelations,
which is repugnant to the essence of the Catholic Faith, which is only
established upon Divine Revelation contained in the Scripture and in Tradition.

He is therefore guilty of Heresy, whether he do admit of these Revelations,
or whether he do not.

And, on the contrary, the Divines whom he accuses, for that they pretend
Jansenius has not been well understood at Rome, and that they attribute to him
a Doctrine which he nowhere maintains, are Catholics, whether they be, or be
not mistaken in this their pretension.

For it is no way necessary (to exempt them from error of Faith) that the Pope
should fall into an error of Fact. They are acquitted, whether the Pope be
mistaken in the matter of Fact, or whether he be not. If this be true, that the
Pope did not well understand Jansenius, they had reason then not to acknowledge
the Doctrine of Jansenius to be heretical. And if it be true that he did well
understand it, all that one ought thence to conclude is this, That these
Divines did ill understand it, and too favorably explained it, in attributing
to it a Catholic sense which it has not, and in overseeing another heretical
sense which it truly had; all which amounts but to a simple error of Fact,
which is neither a Crime nor Violence, but the most pardonable Mistake in the
world, and the most worthy of Man, according to that of S. Augustine, since it
all consists in taking the words of a great Bishop in a good sense: Qui error
(says the Saint) non solum humanus est, sed etiam homine dignissimus.

All the cruel Conclusions of F. Ferrier, and the Phantasm of his Heresy being
founded upon these false Principles, That the Question is de jure; That a Fact
is inseparable from Right; That there is no other Fact in the judgment of the
Pope, then to know whether Jansenius has taught any Doctrine on the Five
Propositions, are not only false, but criminal. Let him make choice of other
Subjects to dispute ill upon as long as he pleases: This is a thing which cries
for vengeance before God and man, to demand of the King (as he does)
Declarations so far remote from his Goodness and Justice upon Arguments so
contrary to common Sense. Let him distinctly specify, if he can, what this
Heresy is which he accuses these Divines of, and express it under other terms
then the ambiguous and uncertain words of the Sense of Jansenius, by which no
man can know them. And if he cannot do this, let him hold his peace, and
repent of these Extravagances; or rather make them some public reparation, as
indeed he is obliged.

This Argument is infinitely more pressing then what he emploies against these
Divines, page 5. in this manner.

The Jansenists (says he) cannot deny that they mock God and the Church, when
they demand that one should show them this Sense or Doctrine of Jansenius upon
the Five Propositions. And why, I pray, do they mock thus? Because (says this
Father) if they do know what the Sense of Jansenius is upon the Five
Propositions, they are ridiculous to enquire of a thing which they know
already. If they do not know what the Sense is, they are doubly to blame, to
publish that they are convinced that the Sense of Jansenius is Catholic, when
as they do not know what it is; and for refusing to submit to the Church in a
matter which is otherwise unknown to them.

They reply in a word to F. Ferrier, That the Divines, who are bound to act
according to knowledge, and who are not obliged to render the Bishops more then
a reasonable obedience, have cause to enquire what the Sense of Jansenius is
which they would have them to condemn, whether they do know it, or whether they
know it not. If they be ignorant of it, they have reason to ask, to be
instructed before they be urged to condemn it; because supposing they do not
understand it, they can neither truly averr that they do reject it, nor
promise truly that they will not embrace it; for peradventure they may be
engaged to do it without knowing of it, and perhaps fall into it before they
are aware.

Now if we suppose that these Divines do know what the Pope and the Bishops
understand by this Sense of Jansenius, they have so much the more reason to
demand, because they only know it by particular ways and such as are not
authentical: so that if they should themselves determine what the Pope
understands by the Sense of Jansenius, (as these Propositions are susceptible
of various senses) the Jesuits would not fail presently to say, that this were
not yet what the Pope understands, and what they ought to condemn; in fine,
that 'twere some other thing, without saying what; and so one should never have
an end. It were therefore much better they should make their addresses to those
who have the power to determine this Sense; that if they once did it, it might
clearly appear by condemning this Dogm together with them in which they had
comprehended the Sense of Jansenius; that one be not enwrapp'd in any Error.

But the plain truth is, These Divines both do know, and do not know the Sense
of Jansenius. They do very well know a Doctrine in Jansenius to be very holy,
very Catholic and most Orthodox, which is that of Efficacious Grace per se,
which infallibly causes the Will to act without imposing of a necessity. They
acknowledge the Catholic Doctrine of the free Predestination of the Elect,
received by the whole Church, and maintained by Bellarmine himself as a point
of Faith: and they do acknowledge no other Point upon the subject of the Five
Propositions.

But since it is evident by the universal consent of the Church, that this is
not that which the Pope and the Bishops mean by the Sense of Jansenius which
they condemn, but a certain Sense which was never known to our Divines before
Baius and Jansenius, according to those Gentlemen the Bishops of the Assembly;
a certain Sense contrary to the Doctrine of all the Catholic Schools, as these
very Bishops do assure us; a certain Sense different from efficacious Grace,
repugnant to S. Augustine, and which has been constantly condemned by the
Dominicans and the Jesuits, as F. Annat and M. Hallier have so deeply
protested, before the Constitution of Pope Innocent: It is this certain Sense
which these Divines do not understand, or at least which they but very
confusedly know. They know all that the Jesuits and the other adversaries of
Jansenius have said of it in diverse Books: But they see that their Explanations
do not agree together, whiles some of them place it in one Point, and others in
another.

All that they know of this Sense is, that it is different from Efficacious
Grace, and by consequent that they do not hold it, and that they reject it,
because they hold but this Doctrine, and that whatsoever Doctrine is repugnant
to it is false. So as in the necessity to which they are reduced for the
justification of their Faith, and to avoid the reproach which they cast on them
touching this uncertain, unexplicable Sense, they have reason to appeal to the
Bishops, who ought to know it, since they condemn it, and to the Pope, who
could not have condemned it without knowing it, to conjure them to explain it,
that so they may be enabled to confound their Accusers in showing the world how
free they are from any Error.

This is the only reason which makes them require with so much earnestness the
Explication of this Sense; for they have otherwise no such have to know it.
They hold the truth of the Doctrine of Efficacious Grace per se, and reject
whatsoever Error is repugnant to it: whether it be in attributing too little
to Grace, as the Molinists; or in destroying its liberty, as this pretended
Error of Jansenius's Sense should be. This suffices them; so as men molest
them not with the indetermin'd Sense of Jansenius, and they will soon leave
enquiring what it is. But if they continue their Persecutions thus upon this
point, they will be forced to continue the pressing of them to explain this
Sense; nor can they refuse to do it without an evident sign of Oppression. For
the Bishops cannot in conscience make them condemn it, without they know it;
and if they do know it, it is a foolery not to be understood that they should
refuse to declare it.

But, Sir, it is now time we took off our spirits from these subtle matters,
and which smell of the School, to oppose another Illusion of Father Ferrier not
a whit less dangerous, but somewhat more intelligible. This Father does upon
all occasions represent the present Church as divided in two Parties. The one
pompous and triumphant, as composed of the Pope, the Bishops, and of all both
Ecclesiastical, Secular, and Regular, who condemn the Sense of Jansenius as
heretical, who believe that matter of Fact is inseparable from matter of Right,
and that therefore it is not to be denied without being an Heretic. The other
poor and abandoned, as consisting but of a small number of Divines, who refuse
to acknowledge that the Sense of Jansenius is heretical, who hold that there is
a Fact separate from Right in the Decision of the Pope which condemns it, and
that therefore one may by consequence refuse to believe it without being an
Heretic.

This is the Idea which F. Ferrier gives us of the Church in his Treatise. But
as there is nothing more prodigious then this Idea, so is there also nothing
more false. God will never abandon his Church to that degree, as to suffer so
gross and visible an Error to reign in it. And every man may by himself be
convinced of the falseness of this fantastic Supposition.

For unless a man wilfully shut his own eyes, one cannot deny but there are in
the Church no less then four different Opinions upon the Formularie.

The First is that of the Jesuits, who affirm that matter of Fact is
inseparable from that of Right, and that quatenus so it cannot be denied
without Heresy.

The Second is that of a considerable number of Divines, who believe that
though it be no Article of divine Faith to hold that the Sense of Jansenius is
heretical, and that the Fact may very well be separated from Right; yet that
Christian humility obliges us nevertheless to prefer the Sense of the Pope to
his proper Illumination, and so they ought to believe the Fact by humane Faith,
and under that notion sign the Formularie.

The Third, and the most embraced, consists in affirming that a man is not
obliged to believe the matter of Fact as decided, either by divine or humane
Faith; but that one may for all that sign the Formularie without violating his
Conscience, because the Signature does never concern or fall upon the Facts.

The Fourth is the opinion of several other Divines, who are persuaded of one
part, that it is most false the Fact should be separated from Right, or that it
should be a point of Faith to hold the Doctrine of Jansenius heretical, or that
a man is obliged to believe it by humane Faith; but who believe on the other
part, that the Fact being contained in this Formularie, those who scruple it
cannot sign it without restriction, since the declarations which men make to
the Church ought to be entirely sincere, and free of all duplicity.

It is visible that in this difference of Divines each party condemns the
others, but after a sort very different.

The Jesuits, who make the first, ought by the necessary consequence of their
Opinion to condemn for Heresy, not only the last, who absolutely refuse to
sign that the sense of Jansenius is heretical, but those likewise who do not
believe it of humane Faith, or that believe it not at all, albeit they sign it.
For Heresy consists in the opinion of the spirit, and not in the omission of
an exterior action of the hand. A person who should not believe but with an
humane Faith that the Body of J. Christ were in the Sacrament of the Eucharist,
or that should sign it in infidelity, would be never the less an Heretic then
he who should absolutely refuse to sign it.

So as all those many Bishops that have caused none to sign, or that receive
restrictions concerning the matter of Fact, or that declare they do not require
the belief of the Fact, or that pretend not the Fact can be otherwise believed
then by humane Faith, are as much Heretics in the judgment of the Jesuits
and of F. Annat, as these Divines whom they particularly persecute. True it is,
their Politics oblige them to distinguish of two sorts of Heretics in France,
some of which they treat civilly, and others most outrageously. They place the
Bishops, Sorbonists, the Fathers of the Oratory, the Benedictines, etc. in the
first order, and whom they do not yet attacque but by consequence, though by a
very necessary one; whiles they range in the other those whom they immediately
design for ruin, that so they may with the greater force surprise the other.

Therefore it is sufficiently evident, that all those persons who have signed
the Fact, either of humane Faith, or without believing it, shall be never the
more acquitted for that, but be all Heretics in their turn, when they have
left off oppressing the others, seeing they must of necessity be so in the
opinion of the Jesuits.

But on the contrary, all these three last parties, who accord in this point,
that this Fact of Jansenius is very separable from Right, that it does not in
the least concern the Faith, and that one may safely deny it without Heresy,
ought, from a necessary consequence of this their mutual Opinion, condemn the
Jesuits both of Calumny and Error.

It is certain these four Parties reside in the Church; and that if one would
now consider which of them were the most numerous, one might safely affirm that
there are none more profligate and abandoned, and who have fewer sincere
approbators, then that of the Jesuits. Nor is this an aerie Supposition, but a
real Verity, to be discerned by every one that has a mind to it, that the
Jesuits stand almost single in this pretension, that matter of Fact is
inseparable from matter of Right, and that one cannot believe (without being an
Heretic) the Doctrine of Jansenius not to be heretical.

The most devoted to the Jesuits of the Bishops ask for whom the World takes
them, that they should believe them capable of so monstrous a Folly, as is that
of affirming that a Fact should be inseparably joined to Faith. They express as
much as one would wish in words, that they do not require the assent of Fact.
They receive the Subscriptions of those whom they very well know do not believe
it, and who declare as much before they sign. All the Curats of Paris do
solemnly approve, and by an authentic Act, the Distinction between Fact and
Right contained in the first Mandat of Paris: In fine, they proceed with
confidence that the Jesuits cannot find six Bishops in all France, and ten
Divines of the least considerable persons, who will sign this Proposition which
F. Ferrier maintains, and which is the basis of all his Treatise, The Fact of
Jansenius is inseparable from Faith, and one cannot reject the Dogm which is
condemned, without acknowledging it to be Jansenius 's. And in particular they
affirm, that he could not make M. Grandin sign, nor M. Moret, nor (amongst the
Doctors) M. Chamillart, nor Monsieur de Rouen amongst the Bishops.

It is certain therefore that the Jesuits are in a manner alone in their
erroneous opinions. And it is as true, that the Divines whom they persecute are
almost wholly united to the Church in this difference which is between them.

I confess they have yet some dispute with the other Divines, because against
the one they maintain, that one owes not so much as humane Faith to Decisions
de facto when there is any cause of doubt administered; and against the other,
that it was not altogether sincere in them to subscribe a Formularie which
clearly comprizes a Fact, without being fully persuaded of the Fact.

But this difference has relation to Manners only, and not to Faith; and in
this very difference they may make use of the authority of the one, to defend
themselves against the other.

Those who sign the Fact as of humane Faith, approve of their Doctrine touching
the Sincerity of Subscriptions.

Those who sign the Fact without believing it, approve what they affirm, That
the Church obliges none to believe the Fact by way of command; so as to the
truth they have this consolation, that in every of the Points whereof they are
accused, they are united in Opinion with the greatest part of the Divines of
the Church.

Whoever shall take the pains diligently to inform himself of the bottom of
these particulars, will clearly find that what I say is most true: And if any
man ask why the contrary appears to the World, that the Jesuits domineer
everywhere, and the Divines are oppressed* it is not very difficult to give a
reason for it: They are only to consider what Post F. Annat holds, and what
Power the place in which he is affords him, both at Rome and at Paris, to do
what he pleases as to this matter* They know nothing at Rome but from the
Instructions which he sends them: and he stands at the gate of all the
Benefices of France, to exclude who-ever stands in his way in any thing. Every
one has his particular business at Court; and those who have no other, either
for themselves or their Communalty, enjoy their repose in which they will not
be molested. Jansenism is the only affair of Father Annat; so as that people
may not be crossed in their particular businesses, they let F. Annat alone with
his.

Not that this Reverend Father with all his credit is yet arrived so far as to
be able to procure the Bishops or the Pope by any formal Decisions to support
these particular Absurdities of his Society; That matter of Fact is inseparably
annexed to Faith, and, That he who denies it is an Heretic: He is not so weak
a man as to attempt that at present. He satisfies himself that every one signs
the Fact simply, without taking notice of his intention, to make use of these
Subscriptions when time serves, and as may best conduce to his ends: nor for
the most part does he find any difficulty in it; since their spirits furnishing
them with expedients to sign, without believing the Fact either of divine or
humane Faith, their Interests easily persuade them to embrace them. They fancy
themselves not obliged openly to oppose F. Annat; but that they may safely
shelter themselves from this rolling tempest: and therefore suffer him freely
to oppress those against whom he is particularly animated; because they
conceive it their own fault that they do not seek their safety, as they do, by
a Subscription which (as they affirm) engages them to nothing.

By this means those who refuse to sign remain exposed to the unjust violence
of the Jesuits: Those who agree with them in certain Points, and condemn them
in others, blame them highly in those particulars about which they contest with
them; but they are very wary to defend them when they think they have reason on
their side. How infinitely are these Gentlemen mistaken (says honest M. Moret
in all his Sermons) not to believe the Decision de facto with an humane Faith?
But he is wary enough not to add, that the Jesuits are mistaken, who require
we should treat those as Heretics who acknowledge no Fact, which we can only
assent to but by humane Faith.

Yet is this manner of acting more tolerable then that of those who say nothing
at all in public concerning their intention, but join simply with the Jesuits
by an exterior signature, however different and remote in their sense. If they
did but say clearly what they reprove in those who do not sign, the diversity
of their opinions would render their authority less considerable: but whiles
they say nothing at all, such as only judge things by the outside take them
for approbators of the Opinions of the Jesuits.

It Is not therefore an universal Illusion, but an universal Baseness, which
makes these Divines to be oppressed; or rather, it is the Oppression of the
Church in general which renders their Oppression particular. Let every man
speak as he thinks, and they shall be fully justified: Let every man also
condemn them as he thinks, and they shall yet be more fully justified; seeing
it will appear that in all the Points on which they are accused they are united
with the greater number of the Divines of the Church. But the terror and dread
of F. Annat keeps all men's tongues bound to defend them, and lets them all
loose to condemn them; uniting in one equivocal expression persons that are
extremely distant in Opinion, that so F. Annat may seem to be followed of the
whole Church, whenas in truth he is in effect condemned by the whole Church.

Were there indeed no other Life besides the present, nor any other Judge save
Men, it must needs be confessed that F. Annat were a marvelous able man, for
knowing how to conceal with so much address the weakness of his Party. How
victorious in appearance is he, whenas in effect he is abandoned by all the
World? But this Father, whilst he thinks to cheat others, cheats himself
first; because the business in agitation here is of things which depend upon
the truth, and will be judged by the truth and not on appearance. It is not a
deceitful union in an equivocal expression which renders one orthodox, but a
real and veritable conformity of ones sense with that of the universal Church
in matters which concern the Faith.

So as these Divines, maintaining no other Doctrine upon the Fact of Jansenius
but that of the whole Church, which is, that this Fact has no relation to
Faith, continue Orthodox, whatever Cabal they contrive to oppress them. And
both F. Annat and the Jesuits, who would make it a point of Faith, are not
Orthodox, for all their power and credit, forasmuch as in this they are really
repugnant to the sense of the Church, into which they do introduce a Real
Heresy, under pretense, forsooth, of destroying an Heresy which is but
Imaginary.

One may therefore justly apply these words of J. Christ to the Jesuits,
which he spoke to a Bishop in the Apocalypse; Dicis, quod dives sum and
locupletatus, and nullius egeo; and nescis quia es miser, and miserabilis, and
pauper, and cacus, and nudus. You conceit your selves indeed rich, and
abundant by the number of your Sectators; whereas in the mean time you are
miserable, and objects of compassion: You are poor, abandoned, blind and naked;
since all those who seem so much to follow you, do in effect condemn you.

And one may on the contrary apply to these persecuted Divines those other
words of our B. Savior to another Bishop, in the same Book, Scio tribulationem
tuam, and paupertatem tuam; sed dives es, and blasphemaris ab his qui se dicunt
Judaeos esse, and non sunt. I know the Oppressions which you suffer, and the
poverty which they reproach you of; notwithstanding ye are rich, because the
most part of those who appear against you are in truth for you; and you are
born down but by people who pronounce themselves Orthodox, but who are indeed
replete with Errors.

Sir, I am, etc.
This 1. of March, 1664. Since this Letter was finished, I have received a
large Writing of F. Ferrier's, entitled Relation veritable, etc. A true
Relation, etc. I conceive as to what relates to the Heresy of which he
continues to accuse the Divines who are more Catholic then himself, you will
find nothing in it which is not here overthrown beforehand: But as to the
prodigious number of Falsities with which his Relation abounds, this Father
deserves to be particularly answered; and I am assured there will some body be
found out that will so do it, as the Jesuits will hardly find the advantage
they expected of their Impostures.



The Third LETTER.
SIR,
I Have already told you, and I repeat it again, that within one fifty years
men will look upon this pretended Heresy of Jansenism but as a rare example of
the Vanity of men's spirits, and rank the whole Dispute with that of the Cowls
and the Cordeliers Bread. They will then ask with astonishment what this Father
Annat and F. Ferrier were, that spoke such impertinent things in the Age they
lived in; and who those silly persons were that suffered themselves to be led
by their Dotages. But these, you will say, are Prophecies, and it is no hard matter
to make others like them, by taking 50 years time to prove the event of them. I
could easily answer you, that they are true, having already proved, that the
whole Concernment is but a Trifle, as I conceive I have sufficiently done; and
that as one cannot pronounce the same of all sorts of Disputes, one cannot
reasonably make the like Predictions of them.

But it being beyond my power to advance and hasten the future, to show you the
truth of my Prophecy, I choose to leave it off, or rather present you with a
picture of what is past, which is certain and invariable, and that will afford
us the most certain conjectures how one may foresee what is like to fall out
upon the like encounters.

It Is a Glass which very few persons consult, from I know not what weakness
natural to men's spirits. For as men live but in the time that is present; so
they are likewise concerned but with things that are present. Whatever is
remote from the instant which takes them up, vanishes and comes to nothing in
respect of them; and if possibly there remain any traces in their memory, they
are so weak and indiscernable, that they serve them but in little stead for the
reforming of those deceitful impressions which they receive from the present
Objects. If a man seem to have the advantage during the moment which employs
them, he loses the remembrance of all the past, which might have made him know
that this advantage is false and but imaginary. Thus, because the Jesuits
make a great bustle, and everywhere cry out on Heresy, men are astonished at
the bruit; and because there are but few that oppose them, men easily imagine
that they are in effect victorious.

In the interim, it is evident that this manner of boulstring their Judgments
but upon the present, subjects it to an infinity of Illusions. The passages of
the World discover not themselves to us in every moment, but by some of their
parts as they succeed one another; forasmuch as being thus consequent, they do
not subsist together: in the mean time it is by the union of the whole Body, and
of all its Members, that we ought to form a Judgment.

It would be sometimes very difficult to see the Church victorious over
Heresies in all its brightness, did we consider it but in a small part of its
permanency, during which she may be so overcast with a mist of Errors, that
one can hardly tell who has the better of it, Truth or Falsehood. Did not
Arianism seem a conqueror at Rimini, and the Catholic Doctrine so obscure that
(as S. Hierom says) All the World was astonished how they should become Arian?

To discover then the advantage of the Church over Error, our memories have
need of a larger comprehension of time: And then it is we shall see, that after
a swift and transitory blaze, Errors do wither away of themselves and come to
nothing; whiles the Doctrine of the Church subsists, and conserves it self in
the bosom of the Church, and in the hearts of her legitimate Children.

And thus, Sir, to judge rightly of the present Contestation between the
Jesuits and their Adversaries, we must not limit all our prospect at the
Question of Fact and of Right, to which it is for the present totally reduced:
But we should consider the several steps of every of its parties, the various
Points agitated between them, the success of their particular Disputes, and by
what progress they are arrived to the Point where they now stand, seeing it is
by this only we shall be able to discover who have lost or gained, advanced or
recoiled, whom we may believe sincere, and whom for Cheats and Infidels. In
fine, it is from hence one may form reasonable conjectures of the Success of the
remaining Contestation.

This is the Design which I have proposed to my self in this Letter, wherein I
will present you with a compendious Image of all this tedious War of the
Divines, which though it be not bloody, is no less considerable then the
temporal Wars, and whose Successes are altogether as great and important.

It was in the year 1626 that it began, upon occasion of a Book published by a
certain Jesuit named Garasse, entitled Sum de Veritez capitales de la
Religion Chrestienne, A Sum of the principal Verities of the Christian
Religion, etc. The late Abbot of S. Cyran having noted therein a prodigious
number of Falsifications of the Scripture and of the Fathers, together with
diverse heretical and impious Propositions, conceived that the honor of the
Church required him to undertake their Refutation, though at the same time also
his modesty made him resolve to conceal his name, as he has always done in the
rest of his Books. While the first part of this was under the Press, and the
noise of it spread into all parts, it gave occasion for a more through
examination of Garasse's Treatise. The Rector of the University complained of
it to the Faculty, who named Commissioners to examine the Book. But this
alarming the Jesuits, they quickly gave us to understand that it was not so
easy an enterprise to censure a Book of a Jesuit: For they so wrought with
the Magistrates by their Cabal, that M. de S. Cyran's Treatise was a long while
stopped.

Moreover, to traverse the Censure, F. Garasse bethought himself of a
Supercherie as worthy of the Jesuits as any thing had been practiced during
all the process of these Contestations. There was a bruit in Paris that the
Author of the Refutation was to show above Fifty heretical Propositions or
Errors in Garasse's Sum; and it was true: but that part which contained the
conviction of Garasse's Errors was not yet come out of M. de S. Cyran's Study*
However Father Garasse conceited he had found out a way to know what they had
to object against him. He chose Fifty Propositions in his Book, the most easy
to defend that he could find, and of which number there was not three of them
of those which M. de S. Cyran had accused in his Work. In consequence of this
he formed a Censure according to his own fancy, and by this address dazzl'd the
world for a time, and disturbed the Examination of his Book which was doing at
the Sorbon; so as his Examinators were much confounded, and they began
everywhere to say that they extremely wronged de Garasse, to accuse the Sum
of so many Errors.

M. de S. Cyran had a thousand difficulties to take off the impediments which
the Jesuits had contrived to hinder the publication of his Refutation, and to
disabuse the World of that wicked artifice of F. Garasse. However, he at last
obtained it, and maugre all the Cabals of the Society, and the tedious delays
which they granted F. Garasse to make his Retractation, his Book was in fine
censured for containing diverse heretical Propositions, Errors, Scandals,
Temerities, many Falsifications of passages of Scripture and of the holy
Fathers falsely cited, and perverted from their true and genuine Sense, with an
infinite of words unworthy to be written and read of Christians and Divines.

Nevertheless did the Jesuits testify upon this encounter some kind of
Prudence. For we must not refuse to give them their just merits when they
deserve them, since the occasions are so very rare. They did not persist in the
justification of Father Garasse, but relegated him a good distance from Paris
to one of their Houses, where they heard no more talk of him, and by this means
made an end of the business. Happy had it been that in allaying this difference
they had from their hearts also smothered the resentment which they conceived
against M. the Abbot of S. Cyran, who has since that engaged them into such
horrible excesses.

But they would not do it, and have since sufficiently testified that they
were not of the number of those wise men who love their Reprovers, and that by
warning them of their Faults give them occasion to reform them. They nourished
in their breasts a violent aversion against him who had done them this service,
and which was yet exceedingly augmented by another obligation of the same
nature which he rendered them some few years after, and which affords us the
second remarkable accident of this War.

Pope Urban VIIIth, touched with the miserable condition of the English Church,
which had been for thirty years without According to their false reckoning.
Bishop, having sent thither the deceased Mr. Smith, Bishop of Chalcedon, with
the Jurisdiction of an Ordinary; he, being there established, would make use of
his power in obliging the Regulars to have his approbation to enable them to
hear Confessions. This was an heavy Yoke to the Jesuits, who were wont to live
in that Country in an absolute independence. Therefore they made complaint to
the Bishop by their Provincial, and amongst other reasons they represented to
him that this Regulation did diminish their reputation,
and the Presents which the Catholics were used to make them. But when he
would not suffer himself to be wrought on by such perverse Arguments, they
stirred up so many troubles and factions against him, by decrying him to the
Ministers of State of the King of England, that the Bishop was constrained to
quit the Kingdom to seek his own security. These clandestine practices were
accompanied with the publication of two Books which the Jesuits wrote in
English, against Episcopal Jurisdiction, and the necessity of the Sacrament of
Confirmation; and the Clergy of England having sent these Books to the Sorbon,
there were thirty two Propositions censured by them the 15 of February 1631.

This Censure had been preceded some days before by that which M. the
Archbishop of Paris published against the same Books the 30 of January in the
same year; and by that of all the Archbishops and Bishops which were then in
Paris, who condemned them by a Pastoral Letter addressed to all the Bishops of
France the 15 of February 1631.

These strokes were very sensible to the Nicety and Pride of the Jesuits; and
accordingly did they rise up against these Censures after a terrible manner.
They writ against M. the Archbishop of Paris, against the Bishops, against the
Sorbon, and thought for a time that they had quite laid them on their backs.
But this boldness of theirs was not at all to their advantage in the sequel:
For this produced against them that famous Book of Petrus Aurelius, which
defended the Bishops and the Sorbon, and refuted the Errors of the Jesuits
with so much force, eloquence and perspicuity, that the Church was fully
revenged, and the Jesuits confounded.

Notwithstanding this Confusion, in stead of humbling, did but the more
exasperate them: They undertook Aurelius's Book by all the ways they could
possibly devise, by secret Calumnies* by public Sermons, by huge Volumes, by
small Treatises and Pamphlets, by Works in Latin and French; giving it commonly
no other Title then that infamous Book of Petrus Aurelius. And as the public
voice had attributed this work to M. de S. Cyran, whatever pains he took to
take off from himself so glorious a suspicion, they fixed it upon his person,
and strove to asperse him by a thousand kinds of Calumnies; and from that time
forward formed a constant resolution to decry as Heretics both him, and all
those who favored his Opinion. These were the several Contests of this
Hierarchical War; but the event and conclusion of it is remarkable, because it
is the picture of the success of all their other Disputes.

It pleased God to permit that the noise which was spread against M. de S.
Cyran should so prevail upon the spirit of a Minister of State, that he was
made prisoner at the Chasteau de Vincennes, where he was kept five years,
without other procedure then that of a certain irregular Information, which
they were forced to give over. But at the same time he so ordered it, that the
Truth triumphed at a greater height, even by the oppression of that person who
had so gloriously defended it. The Book of F. Celot (the most considerable of
those who undertook to oppose Aurelius) was condemned in the Assembly of Mante,
and this Father was compelled to disavow his Errors in the Sorbon. That of
Aurelius was approved by three consecutive Assemblies, printed twice at the
charges of the Clergy, and they ordered a most magnificent Elogy to be made him
by an injunction of the last of these Assemblies.

See here the issue of this Hierarchical Dispute, which I have recounted
without interruption, though during the time it continued there sprung up
another, which was followed with greater consequents: Namely, that concerning
Penitence, which took birth from the Book of Frequent Communion, composed by M.
Arnauld, Doctor of the Sorbon, for the justification of M. the Abbot of S.
Cyran his friend; in which he opposed several Points of the Morale of the
Jesuits, and particularly their facility to give Absolution for all sorts of
sins. For he maintained against them in this Book, That it was expedient to
deferr it upon diverse occasions, and men were obliged to do it in case of
Relapses, habitual Sins, and on the proximate occasions of Sin. There was
nothing did more sensibly touch the Jesuits then their being thus attacqu'd
upon this so nice a Point; because it is chiefly by this facility of Absolution
that they draw so many people after them. Whereupon they conceived it their
principal concernment to overwhelm both the Author and the Book of Frequent
Communion, together with all those who were either allied to his sense, or had
any friendship with him.

Upon this there followed on a sudden an horrible and universal insurrection of
all the Jesuits, who broke loose through all the parts of France, yea and
through all Europe, against this Book. There was everywhere nothing but
furious Declamations, bloody and outrageous Injuries, treating those who
approved the sense of this Book with no other name then that of Fourbs and
Traitors: And for the Author, he was an Heresiarch, a Schismatic, an Heretic
declared: and nothing less would appease them then the Blood and the Life of
those whom they called Cyranists and Arnaudists.

Great ones, (says their Father Seguin, in his Book entitled Sommarie de la
Theology de l' Abbe de Saint Cyran, and du Sieur Arnaud) to whom God has
imparted the power of judging men, you know better then I, and your Piety is a
public testimony, that the prime Justice is that which we render to God. Open
your eyes, and behold the mischief which threatens the State as well as
Religion, since the change of the one does never arrive without the destruction
of the other. It Is the worst of all remedies to temporize with a newborn
Heresy. The Church is assaulted at the Heart, and you ought to join the Royal
Sword with that of the Church to exterminate this Mischief in our days.

In this style were the Jesuits wont to speak in those times, nor is it at all
unlike their language at present. And for the Heresy of these Arnaudists, they
made no question of that, they reproch'd them an hundred for one: and as they
were all of their own invention, they daily forged new ones. Nor did they ever
trouble themselves to color them over by any passages drawn out of their
Books; but when occasion was, they invented also as well passages and Books as
Heresies.

Was there ever seen a more circumstantiated Imposture, and proposed after a
more terrible manner, then that which F. Seguin reproaches against these
pretended Arnaudists? My hand (says he) trembles with horror, when it finds it
self obliged (to disabuse the minds of those which have been prepossessed with
this false Maxim) to describe the bold impiety unto which this unhappy project
is arrived, to detourn, and, as I may so say, to snatch away Souls from the
holy Communion. I should not say it if the Piece had not been public; the
Scandal is not yet altogether taken away; they called it the Chaplet of S.
Cyran, which contained the spiritual exercises that he gave to some persons of
his own School. One of these Instructions intimated, That it was lawful for a
Soul to wish he might at the article of death be deprived of the holy Communion
of the Body of Jesus Christ, that so he might imitate the despair of the Son of
God upon the Cross, when he was abandoned by his Father. Is this the mouth of a
Man, or of an organ animated by some Demon that has composed this Exercise, and
vomited up this Blasphemy? Calvin himself never conceived it with more horror.

Who would ever have believed (upon hearing what this man has so confidently
said) that this Book, this Passage, and this Practice should ever be in rerum
natura, or have a being? And yet there is nothing more certain: The World has
been advertised of it, the Jesuits have been themselves confounded upon the
point; and yet would they not desist to re-produce this abominable Imposture
upon several occasions, by changing the Title of this Imaginary Book, sometimes
naming it the Rules of the Port Royal, and sometimes the Constitutions of the
Nunns of the holy Sacrament.

After this, no man is to wonder they had so many Heresies to charge on their
Antagonists: For being so firmly resolved to make them Heretics whatever it
should cost them, they could not fail of finding such as these: And so we see
new ones every day appear, which disappear again of course when they are worn
out, to give place to others.

There were some of them which it had been easy for them to justify, because
they were so gross and sensible. For when Father Brisacier by an example
accused them in his I. Book, p. 15. for condemning the Chaplet* in showing his
own Chaplet and in saying they were exempted; when he reproch'd them for having
no Images; there was no more to do but to lead the people to Port Royal, where
they might have beheld enough with their own eyes. When he accused them for
rejecting low Masses, they needed only to desire their assistance at those
which are every day said in that House.

But the Jesuits did not value the being convicted of Imposture, because they
knew that those Calumnies being published by so many mouths, would not fail of
leaving their Effects, some for some persons, and others for others. Therefore
they were diligent to accumulate them, that so there might be some for every
body. Thus F. Brisacier accused them all at once, part. 4. p. 24. for being the
Devil's Prelates, the Gates of Hell, and for erecting the Treasure of
Antichrist; because (says he) they abolish Indulgences, the Cult of the
Virgin, the Sacraments of Penitence and of the Eucharist, all the Virtues both
Theological and Moral. What will you have more?

There were certain Jesuits who, not to fail in matter of Heresy, and hinder
them from all possibility of Salvation, conceived it a more compendious way to
affirm, that they designed the destruction of the Eucharist, Sacraments,
Incarnation, Gospel, Jesus Christ, the Trinity, and, in sum, to form a new
Religion of Deists: and in order to this they invented the diabolical Imposture
of the interview of Bourgfontaine, where they feigned that M. Jansenius, M.
Caspean Bishop of Lisieux, M. du Bellay, M. de Saint Cyran, and M. Arnauld
(whom they plainly meant by the first letters of their names, and many other
circumstances) met together to confer about the way how they might destroy the
Incarnation and the Sacraments; and that in order to this design M. Jansenius
undertook to write his Book of the Grace of Jesus Christ, and M. Arnauld the
Treatise of Frequent Communion. The person who was made choice of to vend this
horrible Calumny was one Fileau by name, one of the King's Advocates at
Poictiers, who assured some friends of his, that he received it of a Jesuit,
as the Jesuits took the care to spread and maintain it. And although, by the
dates, they have made appear that M. Arnauld was but nine years old when they
suppose him to have undertaken the composing of the Book of Frequent Communion;
yet did not the Jesuits fail to insert this detestable Imposture twice more in
two several Books: the one in a Treatise of their Father Meynier entitled,
Port Royal of intelligence with Geneva; the other in that of a certain Jesuit
of Bourdeaux. Yea and one of these Fathers preaching in Bourdeaux, recited the
whole story to his Auditors out of de Fileau's Book.

These were here yet but accessory Heresies, and which only tended to make
what M. Arnauld had taught (of being obliged in certain cases to refuse the
giving Absolution, till they had given proofs of a solid Conversion) to pass
the more easily for an Heresy. And it was this Doctrine that they everywhere
assaulted with most violence. One cannot (says F. Brisacier) alter the nature
of Satisfaction by transporting it before Absolution, without losing this
illustrious title of Catholic. This is (quoth he) the very gate of
Desperation, it is the highway of Obduration, it is the wide gap for men to die
in final Impenitence, and without Sacraments; It Is the Cullender of Hell; it is
the leven to corrupt all the Priests, and to make them abuse the Discoveries
which they receive in secret.

All these Accusations were far more important then those which they now form
upon the Case of Jansenius. The Jesuits dispersed them with the same
assurance; they treated their adversaries after the same sort with Heresiarchs,
Heretics, Sectaries and Schismatics; they gave them the names of Sects, as
they do now at present. But let us see the event.

These bruits and Accusations gave a thousand traverses to the poor Divines
whom the Jesuits did in this manner decry: for they are always successful in
that. The Divines have continued to be oppressed, and the Jesuits have always
been very powerful in the World. Their Calumnies yet destroyed themselves,
have been confounded before the face of the whole Church, but still without any
punishment; they were still harkening to people so altogether unworthy of
belief: nor was there ever yet found one Jesuit of those which appeared in the
world who has had the Conscience to testify the least regret for the
Extravagances of his Society; a thing prodigious to consider. For what
Salvation can they hope in, that thus calumniate without Repentance? On the
contrary, they have rewarded those who helped to vend and distribute their most
execrable Impostures, whither within or without their Society. They procured
for le Sieur Fileau, for publishing the Fable of Bourgfontaine, a Brief of Pope
Innocent in his commendation, with Letters from some Noblemen in France. They
made Father Brisacier Rector of their chief House, because he was transported
to excesses which were altogether inhumane. By all which we may see sufficient
marks of their puissance, having been able to support themselves in a Cause in
which any else besides themselves had certainly been overthrown.

But God has in the mean time been pleased to show that his Truth is infinitely
stronger then all the men of the World; for in spite of all the Jesuits
credit, maugre the abandoning and oppression of these Divines, not only the
Calumnies of the Jesuits are dissipated, but the sincere Doctrine, which they
so furiously attacqu'd in the Book of Frequent Communion, has been more and
more authorized and practiced in the Church; and on the contrary, the Errors
of the Jesuits have been formally condemned there. They have censured in the
Apology of the Casuists the very same Doctrine which is opposed in the
Treatise of Frequent Communion. The Doctrine touching proximate Occasions and
Habitudes of Sin, (says the Church of Paris in her third Censure) in which the
Author affirms one ought not to refuse Absolution, is false, rash, scandalous,
and inductive to an evident peril of sinning. And the 29. Censure of M. the
Archbishop de Sens upon the same Propositions, and on that of Recidivations,
is, These very Propositions are pernicious, they have been invented to
entertain men in a desire to sin; they are injurious to Virtue, and to the
Sacrament of Penance: They destroy the judiciary Authority which resides in
Priests as Ministers of J. Christ, and render them partakers with other men's
Crimes.

Diverse other of the Bishops did expressly mark in their Censures the
precipitate Absolutions practiced and authorized by the Jesuits, as one of the
greatest Disorders of the Church; and those Five Illustrious Bishops of
Languedoc call them in their Censure Sacrilegious Absolutions.

And not only is this Doctrine of the Book of Frequent Communion authorized by
these Judgments of the Church; but it is well known that many great Prelates
enjoin the practice of it, as amongst the rest M. the Bishop de Alet testifies
in his Apology which he has recommended to all the Confessors of his Diocese:
for see how he speaks of it, page 11. As touching the delay or refusal of
Absolution, it is true that M. de Alet recommends to all the Confessors of his
Diocese the careful practice of the Rules of the Church in the dispensation of
the Sacraments, and especially that of Penance, that the use of it be not
profaned; which is, that they by no means absolve those who are in the
proximate occasion of any Sin, or that perceive themselves in a dangerous
condition, in which (in respect of their disposition, and upon experience of
their life past) it is morally impossible for them not to offend God: such also
as remain in any habitual mortal sin, and do not reform themselves, nor give
any sign of their sincere amendment; since it is the constant Doctrine of the
Church, and whereof the practice has been carefully reco^mended by S. Charles,
in the advice which he prepared for the Confessors of his Diocese.

In fine, the Sanctity of this Doctrine is so universally acknowledged, that
they oblige those who but dare to oppose it to most solemn Retractations. I
will show you an Example, both new and curious, which I have taken word for
word out of a Letter from Tolouse, where the thing happened.

A Religious person of the Order of S. Francis, of those whom they call de la
grand Observance, preaching this year in Tolouse January the 27, maintained
that Confessors were not to refuse or defer the Absolution of Penitents,
provided they assured them that they were very sorry for having offended God,
though they had never so often confessed the very same sins before; in the
belief, said he, that they ought to have, that the moment in which they should
refuse it them might be that of their Conversion. The whole City, not
accustomed to this dissolute Doctrine, being scandalized at it, the great Vicar
obliged this inconsiderate Preacher to make his public Retractation February
the 17. in these very terms which were prescribed him. When, about three weeks
since, I affirmed in my Sermon of the Cure of the Leprous, that the facility
and the promptitude with which Jesus Christ stretched forth his hand upon him,
was an instruction to Confessors of the obligation which lay on them to give
prompt and speedy Absolution to all Penitents, provided they profess themselves
sorry for having offended God, and that they would reform in the future; I did
not mean to say that Confessors were obliged always to believe the Deposition
of Penitents, which were to invalidate the authority which Priests have
received in their Ordination, as well to retain as to remit sins: But I
pretended only (generally speaking) that when they are indeed sincerely
repentant, and that the prudence of an honest Confessor does judge them so, he
may then absolve them. WHICH I HAVE SPOKEN WITHOUT PREJUDICE TO THE CHURCHES
CANONS, and to the Injunctions of this Diocese, which oblige Confessors to
defer Absolution to Penitents; especially in case of Habitudes and proximate
Occasion in a serious matter, etc. WHICH I ACKNOWLEDGE OUGHT TO BE INVIOLABLY
OBSERVED.

Thus has the Dispute concerning Penance and the delay of Absolution had the
same success with the rest. The power of the Jesuits has procured them
impunitie for their Calumnies and Errors. M. Arnauld and those who have
supported the Cause of Truth have had Persecutions for their share: But the
Truth has in fine both triumphed over these Errors, and all the power of the
Jesuits besides.

The Fourth Contestation, which is that of the Morale of the Casuists, is the
most considerable of all the rest for the greatness of the events. Every one
knows what authority the Casuists had acquired in the Church; and that albeit
the honest men did always govern themselves by Rules which were totally
contrary to their Maxims; yet they were, I know not how, got into possession
of magisterially deciding the Morals of the Church, and to make the Opinions
pass for indisputable which they pleased to agree upon, and those for probable
and safe in Conscience which they thought good to doubt of or to controvert.

It was above fifty years that this reign of theirs continued in the Schools:
and though this their license was become odious to many knowing persons; yet
the small resistences which had been made against them from time to time, were
too feeble to remedy so great an evil as had been fomented by all the power of
the Jesuits. It was not till the year 1656 that any body undertook to attacque
them in good earnest. He who made the first onset thought the best way to
accomplish his design would be, to represent them as they are in their native
colors, and render them ridiculous to all the world. And whereas they exalted
themselves like Masters of the Church, he treats them as the very abjects and
last of men, and, without troubling himself with opposing Casuist to Casuist,
he confounds them pel-mel, Suarez, Vasquez, Molina, Lessius, Filiutius,
Escobar, the head and the tail of the Jesuits, undertaking to render them all
alike odious and despicable.

There was never any design that to the Jesuits appeared more rash, who,
looking upon themselves as elevated to a degree so eminent in the Church,
looked down as from their sublime Throne on this Incognito, that durst presume
to attacque the whole Body of their August Society, (which is the name they
give themselves) and to accuse them for having corrupted all the Christian
Morality.

Nor were they ever heard to cry out so hideously through all France; The
Author of the Provincials was an Heretic, I, and more then an Heretic; He
borrowed all his reproaches against them from Heretics; He assaulted amongst
the Jesuits Morals the most undoubted Maxims of the Christian Faith. In fine,
to answer Fifteen of his Letters, it was enough to say, according to the R. F.
Annat, that they were Fifteen Heretical Letters. For this has ever been a
common Reproach with this good Father, to brand those withal who disapproved
the Doctrine of his Companions.

But above all, he could never sufficiently exaggerate the excess of boldness
of this Incognito, who should dare thus to condemn so many grave Authors. And
Father Ferrier does triumph in his Book of Probability, in setting out this his
Council of Casuists, and in opposing them to this unknown Theologue.

But in spite of all these fine Arguments of the Jesuits, maugre the infinite
numbers of their Partisans, and the weakness of this Adversary, they were
astonished to find themselves in so little a time the Fable of all France, and
all the world declaring against them, as themselves are forced to acknowledge
in their Apology of the Casuists. I do not question (says Father Pirot,
Author of that Book) but the Banishments and Martyrdoms have not been less
grievous and more easy to support, then the Abandoning which this Society
finds it self constrained to suffer amongst these Railleries: since in all
their retreats the FF. Jesuits were still entertained with honor in the
Provinces which received them, they had a respect to their Patience and their
merit; whereas on this encounter, whatever countenance they preserved, they
are basely treated.

The Book of Escobar, having been 39 times printed for an excellent Book, was
printed the fourtieth time as the most wicked and abominable Book that was ever
published, and to satisfy the curiosity only of those who had a desire to
search out the passages which the Author of the Provincial Letters had cited
out of him. The Curates of Paris, of Rouen, and of diverse other considerable
Towns of the Kingdom, rose up against these detestable Maxims. A very great
number of Bishops condemned them by authentic Censures, so as the Jesuits
could not so much as find one single Bishop who would openly take upon him
their defense; which, considering all the circumstances of this Affair, ought
to be taken for an infallible mark of the universal Consent of the Church in
the Condemnation of the Casuists.

The Jesuits at first vaunted, that the Pope disapproved what was done in
France. But the Pope has himself taken away this pretext so injurious to the
Holy See and the Church, by condemning likewise the Apology of the Casuists,
and in so manifestly consenting with the Judgments which the Bishops had
expressed against the Jesuits Morality.

I tell you here nothing but old stories, having only a design to recall them
to your memory; but I will now show you some newer ones, and that are more
rare, to let you see that the Moral of the Jesuits is as well disapproved at
Rome as elsewhere. A certain Professor of Boulogne, named Antony Merenda,
having conceived a very just horror at the unbridled licentiousness of these
Casuists, composed a considerable Work against them not many years since, in
which he chiefly opposes their Doctrine of Probability as an Invention of the
Devil, Commentum Diaboli. A Dominican Inquisitor of Pavia, named Mercorus,
published soon after a Book against the same Doctrine, and diverse other
Loosenesses of the Casuists. And in fine, after these last contestations
touching the Moral, a famous Prelat of Rome, called Prosper Fagnani, a person
that the Pope honored with a particular friendship, has inserted in a great
Volume which he has composed upon the Decretals, a large Treatise against the
Probability of the Casuists, where he represents this Doctrine as the fountain
of all sorts of Corruptions and Disorders, and treats it with Merenda as a
Diabolical Invention, Commentum Diaboli. In this Treatise he mentions with an
Elogy the pursuits which the Curats of Paris and of Rouen have made against the
Casuists: He inserts the Extracts which they proposed to the Assembly of
several dangerous Propositions of these Authors, and the Censures which have
been given them in the Low Countries: and had he been but acquainted with what
has been since done in France, there is no doubt but he would likewise have
mentioned the Censures of the French Bishops, as he does those of certain
Bishops of Flanders.

This was all done by consent of the Pope, and the Book it self is dedicated to
him; so as one may well judge it was not very welcome to the Jesuits. Yet
durst they never attacque him openly. But they made use of two Artifices to
have ruined this Work.

The First was, To bring Merenda's Book to the Inquisition, and endeavor to
have it censured upon some pretext, which in that Country they never fail of,
when they desire to blast a Book. And accordingly they soon succeeded, and we
have seen the Book of Merenda in the list of such as the Inquisition has
condemned.

The Second was, To instigate Caramuel, now a Bishop in Italy, to write against
Fagnani. He undertook it, and after his manner acquitted himself, that is to
say, with his ordinary Impudence. For he maintains in his Book the Doctrine of
Probability as an Article of Faith opposed to the Heresy of the Jansenists: He
will have all the Curates of Paris and of Rouen, together with all those
Bishops who censured the Casuists, to be arrant Jansenists, and of whose
authority there is no regard to be had. This put him well with the Jesuits,
who were marvellously satisfied with these goodly beginnings; but they were not
so with the consequence. For the Pope being clearly advertised by Fagnani of
these Intrigues, caused Merenda's Book to be fetched out of the Inquisition,
and condemned that of Caramuel, which continues so censured without remedy.

And thus, Sir, finished the War against our Casuists, by which it fully
appears that they are stuffed with an infinity of pernicious and impious
Maxims; that above all the Doctrine of Probability (which is the Source) is an
Invention of the Devil; and that therefore F. Ferrier, who has defended it, and
as many Jesuits as have maintained it, are Co-operators and Predicators of
that Serpent, Praedicatores Serpentis, as S. Augustine says; and that, on the
contrary, those who have opposed the Casuists, have done the Church one of the
most considerable services that Divines are capable of rendering her. Their
Doctrine continues still victorious, as that of the Jesuits quite withered and
come to nothing in the contest: But so is it not as to their Persons. The
greatness of the Service which these Divines have rendered to the Church has
diminished nothing of the Persecutions which they have for so long time
suffered; nay, on the contrary, it does but augment them, in provoking the
Jesuits to pursue them with the greater violence. Nor have the so many
Censures of the Moral of the Jesuits abated ought of their temporal power:
It Is known they still persevere in the very same Maxims that have been
condemned, nor do they themselves conceal them, yet in the mean time they are
permitted the administration of the Sacraments. Men would never suffer that the
Physicians of our Bodies, who had been known for Empoisoners, should continue
to exercise their faculty; whiles yet they permit these Physicians of Souls,
convinced to have governed them with their envenomed Maxims, to prescribe this
pretended spiritual Medicine, without giving any mark or caution to the Church
that they have sincerely renounced them.

But it is an Effect of the depth of God's Judgments, who imparts his Graces
on his Church according to measure, and boundaries them within the sight of
men's Sins. A great one it is which he has bestowed on her, in causing the Moral
of the Jesuits to be condemned by so many Bishops, and by thereby giving all
men an opportunity, who sincerely pursue their own Salvation, to renounce their
Conduct. But he has not altogether accomplished this favor; but suffers the
Jesuits to enjoy the same Authority, and to preserve themselves in the same
Credit which they formerly had, to the end they may serve him as ministers of
his Wrath, that those who deserve to be misled may be misled, and by their
Persecutions to prove those who are worthy to be proved. This is their
emploiment and office in the Church, not unlike to that of the King to whom God
directs these words in the Scripture, Vae Assure, virga furoris mei.

But I beseech you, Sir, do not imagine that it is the difference of Opinions
upon the quarrel of Jansenism which imports me to embrace these opinions. The
most Religious persons of the Church, and who have never been so much as
suspected of any kindness for that which they call Jansenism, have, I assure
you, no other Idea of the Jesuits. And amongst others the late M. the Bishop
of Cahors, being upon his Deathbed, expressly ordered M. the Abbot Ferrier,
great Vicar to my Lord Bishop d' Alby, to say from him to M. de Alet, M. de
Pamiers, and M. de Comenge, That he had done all he could to reduce the
Jesuits from their Errors, but that he knew them for people incorrigible and
without remedy; that he held them for the greatest Enemies of the Church; and
did earnestly desire that these Gentlemen would never have any thing to do
with them. This person performed his Commission, and said the same things to
some persons of great Quality, from whom we have received that which we here
mention.

I suppose, Sir, that you expect what I should say of the Contestation
concerning Jansenism, which is the most tedious and refractory of all the rest;
and that you happily think I could not say as much of that, that the Cause of
these Divines has had its Triumphs also; seeing the Jesuits produce whole
Volumes of Decrees, Briefs, Constitutions, Arrests, and Declarations which they
have obtained against them; and that the Letters of these Gentlemen make a
great part of those which have furnished the Inquisition of Rome any time these
ten years. But all this shall not hinder me yet from assuring you beforehand,
that the success of this War will not be at all inferior to that of the
others; and that you will there likewise see these Divines oppressed, the
Jesuits unpunished, and the Truth triumphing over their Errors. You are only
to follow me, as I do that of the various faces of this Dispute.

It began first in Flanders at the University of Louvain, it being there that
the Jesuits published those famous Theses against Jansenius, where they
accused him of an infinity of Errors. But the Doctors of Louvain repelled them
with so much vigor, that whiles they insisted on their Books, the Jesuits had
no cause to boast of their advantage.

A little after the Dispute came into France, upon occasion of the Sermons of
M. Habert a Parisian Divine, who in the Pulpit did publicly accuse this
Prelat's Book of no less then Forty Heresies. But the first Apology for
Jansenius having taught him a little to moderate his Zeal, he reduced these
Heresies to the number of Twelve, of which he continued to accuse him in a
Treatise which he writ against this Apology.

The second Apology for Jansenius, which appeared a little after, made him yet
to cut off Seven more: For Monsieur Cornet (how-ever enemy against this
Bishop's Book) durst propose but Five Propositions to the Faculty, and that
without naming them, though with a design of one day causing his Book to be
re-censur'd.

This abatement is very considerable, since we have already Thirty five
Heresies retrenched of the number, and that the Disciples of S. Augustine had
but to justify themselves of Five which remained, and those are the Five
famous Propositions. And this was easy for them to do: For they protested
that they maintained upon the Five Propositions but what was the Catholic
Doctrine of Efficacious Grace per se, which might there be included; and that
(seeing they were captious) it was reasonable they should except the sense of
Efficacious Grace before they condemned them. It was on this design they went
to Rome, not absolutely to defend these Propositions, but to supplicate the
Pope that he would distinguish concerning their diverse sense; and to except
that of Efficacious Grace per se. This was the scope of the Memorial which they
presented to the Pope upon this Subject, in which they prayed his Holiness to
cause them to distinguish, and examine the various sense of the equivocal and
maliciously-forg'd Propositions which had been presented to him; ut distingui,
and sigillatim examinari faciat varios sensus Propositionum equivocarum, and ad
fraudem fictarum.

The Dominicans of Rome were touched with the same apprehensions, lest they
should invelop the Doctrine of Efficacious Grace per se within the Censure of
the Five Propositions; and upon that sought for Audience seventeen times,
without being able to obtain it, and presented several Writings to the Pope, as
they are since printed in the Journal of M. de S. Amor, wherein these Fathers
maintain the sense of Efficacious Grace in these Propositions as the Augustine
Doctors do, with this only difference, that the Doctors spoke nothing of
Jansenius in the Writings which they produced at Rome, whereas the Dominicans,
who had not received the same order, expressly defended it, in maintaining that
it was conformable to their Doctrine upon the Five Propositions.

Had Pope Innocent granted what these Doctors desired, by excepting formally
the sense of Efficacious Grace per se, it could not have been denied but they
had had all the advantage, since that was all they demanded. But God was not
pleased to permit that they should obtain a thing which would have put an end
to a world of Troubles. The Censure of the Propositions was published without
distinction. But that the Truth should not suffer, God supplied this omission,
as well by diverse particular Declarations of the same Pope Innocent, who upon
all occasions testified, that he would by no means either touch the sense of
Efficacious Grace per se, or the Doctrine of S. Augustine; as by the general
Consent of the Church, where the Constitution was received but in this sense,
and with exception of Efficacious Grace per se, as being no way violated by
this Constitution.

After this the Doctors made no difficulty to submit to the Constitution of
Innocent; because they obtained by this Consent of the Church the same thing
which they had desired should have been inserted in the Bull it self, which is,
the exception of Efficacious Grace. And this sense being excluded by the
consent of the Jesuits themselves, and by that unanimous accord which
regulates the language of the Church, it was very evident they had no more any
thing which was good in them, and that one might absolutely condemn them, as
most sincerely they did, and as they have done ever since.

By this means those pretended Errors whereof they accused the Divines were
wholly destroyed, from Forty they were come to Twelve, from Twelve to Five,
and from Five to nothing. The Jesuits had but one imaginary advantage, and
these Divines had this real advantage, that the Doctrine of Efficacious Grace
per se was more and more acknowledged for orthodox by the whole Church.

There remained now but one Difficulty upon the matter of Fact, viz. whether
these Propositions were, or were not in Jansenius; but as that was not of
consequence, no body could ever have thought that such a Trifle should have
disturbed the Peace of the Church. Yet it did so notwithstanding, by means of
that blind passion which possessed the Jesuits to find out Heresy in their
Adversaries. For seeing all other means fail them, they consulted how to erect
an Heresy of a new kind, which had no other foundation but this question of
Fact. And upon this design it was that they promoted these extravagant
Propositions, That the matter of Fact was inseparable from the Right in the
affair of Jansenius; and, That whoever should deny that these condemned
Propositions were in this Prelate's Book, and should refuse to condemn them as
so in his Sense, were Heretics.

They enclosed this new Heresy in this mysterious word, of the Sense of
Jansenius, which is, according to them, I know not what of Unexplicable, and
it is impossible to express it but by these words. This is as it were the
Quintessence of the Heresy, the Secret whereof is only in the Jesuits
breasts. It Is a certain concealed Poison which only these Fathers know,
though, for its being Catholic, it be necessary, according to them, for all
the World to reject it without knowing it. For though they sometimes explicate
this Sense of Jansenius as they think good; yet is not this Sense of Jansenius
thus explained by them that which makes the Heresy of Jansenius, but a certain
other Sense of Jansenius which they do not explain at all. And to demonstrate
this to you, it is afterward that you have rejected all the Dogms in which
they comprehend this Sense of Jansenius, that they yet require you to condemn
the Sense of Jansenius, as something distinct and separated from all those
particular Dogms. For instance, F. Annat in his new Book encloses the Sense of
Jansenius within these two Principles; That this Prelate condemns all
Sufficient Grace; and requires us to believe that one cannot resist Efficacious
Grace. Who would not say to this Reverend Father, Well, Father, seeing this is,
according to you, the Sense of Jansenius, I reject these two Principles; I
receive Sufficient Grace after the same manner as does the School of S. Thomas;
I acknowledge one may resist Efficacious Grace, though in effect one does never
resist it, and that this power to resist does in the mean time subsist with
this Grace? See there your Sense of Jansenius condemned. But you must yet
condemn the Sense of Jansenius, otherwise there will be Yea and Nay between you
and the Church, and you will for all that remain an Heretic.

Therefore F. Ferrier, who after his manner explains the Sense of Jansenius
three or four times in his Relation, when he would describe in his Idea in what
the Sense of Jansenius does properly consist, is very cautious not to make it
consist in any of those determinated Dogms which he had attributed to
Jansenius; but pretends that it is solely comprehended in this general
Proposition, The Sense of Jansenius is Catholic. So as, according to the new
Philosophy of these Fathers, besides all particular Dogms, be they what they
will, yet the Sense of Jansenius must in general be condemned, and it is this
general and unexplicable Sense of Jansenius in which (according to the
Jesuits) consists the Heresy of Jansenius.

It must be confessed that since men did ever reason together, there was never
the like Extravagancy. But the consequence is yet infinitely more strange. For
albeit the greatest part of the world laughed at it in particular, yet they so
carried it in public, as if they were of it; and the Jesuits have the credit
to establish this unheard of Absurdity, to introduce the practice of a
Subscription which was never yet heard of in the Church, unless it were amongst
the Heretics, who are blamed for it by those who have defended the Church
against them. For it is requisite we should know, that since the Church was a
Church, one has never obliged either Religious men, or Schoolmasters, or
Clerks, or so much as simple Priests to sign. They were the German Lutherans of
the Confession of Ausburg who for one time only caused their Confession of
Faith to be signed by the Principals of the Colleges, and the Masters of
Schools: And they are reproved for it by Cardinal Bellarmine, as of an
insupportable Vanity and a Novelty unheardof in the Church of God ever since
the Apostles.

Now, that so strange a thing as this practice, to which there was never any
recourse in the most damnable Heresies, should be introduced in France, that is
to say, in a Church the free'st of the world, and the greatest enemy to these
Servitudes, and upon occasion of such Trifles; this is what is most stupendous
indeed, but in that manner which we admire the extraordinary effects of the
Fantasticalness of men. It is certain yet that the Jesuits could not have
better published to the world the excess of that credit which they have in the
Church, then by this means. It Is nothing to establish reasonable things; no man
can tell whether it be Reason or Force which has made them to be received: but
to make their power appear indeed, one should choose such things as these, which
are most excessively irrational.

I can say no more to exalt the power of the Jesuits; and we must acknowledge
that having succeeded in this Design, they are able to do whatever is not
impossible. But in this, as ill luck would have it, the Heresy of the Sense of
Jansenius, which they would universally establish, is one of those impossible
things; since to persuade the world of it, they must of course change the
common Sense of men: so as, in spite of them, the Cause of their adversaries
must of necessity vanquish in this last point, which is as it were the ultimate
Redoubt of the Jesuits.

I do not only say that it must needs be so for the future, and that all the
pretensions of the Jesuits upon the question de facto of Jansenius should pass
for ridiculous; but I say, it is already so, because they do pass for such
already amongst all persons who have any cognizance of those matters, and that
there are very few of them but are disabus'd. This I have demonstrated by other
proofs in my precedent Letters; and therefore I satisfy my self for this time
with a concluding one.

There are diverse Bishops in France who have boldly declared in the face of the
Church, that matter of Fact and matter of Right are different things in the
affair of Jansenius; that all Heresy consists in a precise Dogm; and that one
cannot with the least shadow of Justice treat those as Heretics whom they do
not reproach with any particular Heresy, because they do simply question
whether any such Propositions are in a Book or no. M. de Alet, M. de Vence, M.
de Beauvais, and M. d' Angers clearly promote all these Propositions as certain
and indubitable; and you may find them all comprehended in M. de Comenge's
Letter to the King, which is alone sufficient to ruin all the Impostures of
Father Ferrier, and all the Errors of the Jesuits. In the mean time these
Fathers with all their credit cannot find Five other Bishops in France that
dare formally to promote the Propositions, contrary to those which are
maintained by these Prelates. They may find some that may speak of the
concealed venom of the Heresy of Jansenism, because they are words which
signify nothing, and which they willingly yield to the strongest party. But
they could never yet find any that durst affirm that matter of Fact and matter
of Right were things inseparable, and that there was ever any Heresy without
some particular Dogm; because there is a certain stop to common Sense which
hinders those who have never so little wit from such a degree of Extravagance.

But you will say at least, that the Jesuits Cause has all the advantage at
Rome, because the Briefs are all in their favor. But let me tell you, Sir,
It Is true, the Calumnies of the Jesuits have rendered the Divines odious
there, because they are opposite to the unjust pretenses of the Roman Court
against the Sovereignty of Kings, and the Jurisdiction of Bishops; and
therefore perhaps they are not displeased at Rome at the Oppression which they
suffer. But since they have common Sense at Rome as well as at other places,
all that these Divines maintain here is received there, and as well believed as
in other places, and indeed more generally then in France it self; because
Passion has not so much disturbed their Reason and their Judgment. I do not
love to report things without proof; and therefore I shall allege one which is
very decisive upon this particular, viz. That even the Inquisition of Rome has
newly and authentically approved all that those whom they call Jansenists have
taught in France upon the Question de facto and de jure, which is so
ridiculously opposed by the Jesuits.

I conceive you will not require of me to show you that the Inquisition has
given this Judgment in favor of them under the express names of Jansenius and
Jansenists. You know well enough what Reasons they have to hinder them from
rendering them this exact Justice. But you ought to be satisfied that I show you
wherein they have rendered it in a Cause so like it, that it differs only in
the name. And now judge whether I do not make it good.

What do these Divines pretend? There is (say they) a very wide difference
between defending of condemned Opinions and such as are repugnant to the
Catholic Faith, which they attribute to Jansenius Bishop of Ypres, and
maintaining that Jansenius Bishop of Ypres has not taught those condemned
Opinions. The First would be prejudicial to the Church, and to their selves;
but the Second is not in any kind so. For, as all Divines acknowledge, there is
a great deal of difference between saying that the General Councils and the
Church can err in jure, in condemning an Opinion which does not deserve to be
condemned; and affirming that it can err de facto, in judging that such or
such a Proposition has been taught by a certain particular person. The Error
of General Councils or the Church in matter of Fact can cause no prejudice to
the Church; but the Error of a Council in matter of Right would be extremely
prejudicial to the Church. Therefore do we not pretend to defend the Errors of
the Five Propositions attributed to Jansenius; but that which we pretend is,
that there is no harm in believing that Jansenius is innocent, and at least to
acquit him from this ignominious Aspersion.

You see what these persons say, it is a summary of all their pretensions. Now
hear my History, and observe if you can where the difference consists which
distinguishes it from the affair of Jansenius. In the Council of Lateran, the
fullest of all the Councils since, there were no less then 1280 Prelates at it,
they examined the Works of Abbot Joachim, so famous for his Prophecies, and
among the rest a small Treatise which he composed on the Holy Trinity against
the Master of the Sentences. The Council finding in this Writing a corrupt
Proposition, condemned him for an Heretic, and the Condemnation is inserted in
the Canon Law. There was at the same time another Abbot, called Gregory de
Laud, Doctor in Divinity, who having undertaken to write his Life and
interpret his Prophecies, thought himself obliged to justify the Heresy which
was imputed to him by the Council of Lateran. This was an otherwise bold
undertaking then that of justifying Jansenius of the Errors which were charged
upon him. He did it yet without fear in the 67 Chap. page 281. of his Book
printed at Naples in folio, 1660. where he thus discourses. That none may be
scandalized at what we are about to affirm, they are to know, that there is a
vast difference between defending an Opinion condemned, and repugnant to the
Catholic Faith, which is attributed to Joachim Abbot de Flore, and the
maintaining that Joachim Abbot of Flore has not taught those condemned
Opinions. The First would be prejudicial to the Church and to my self; but the
Second not at all. For, as that most Learned person Dominicus Gravina
(according to his custom) says, There is a great difference between saying
that General Councils can err in matter of Right, by condemning an Opinion
which merits not that Censure; and affirming they may err in matter of Fact,
by judging such or such a Proposition was taught by an Author. The Errors of
Councils in matters of Fact can do no prejudice to the Church; but the Error
of a Council in matter of Right may be highly injurious to the Church. And
therefore we do not in the least pretend to defend the Error attributed to
Joachim by the Council of Lateran; but that which we pretend is, to defend the
innocence of Abbot Joachim, and to discharge him from this stain and ignominy.
Benetamen intendimus Joachimi innocentiam defendere, and eum a tali labe and
ignominia vindicare.

Well, you will reply to me, this is the Opinion of this Author* He speaks the
Jansenists very language, and the wonder is not great there should be a
Jansenist at Naples. But how shall I know that this is the Sense of the
Inquisition at Rome? This is that you are to make good. This Book has past the
Inquisition, where they have examined it with extraordinary care. For the
Prophecies which he authorizes are extremely curious. But happily this passage
escaped them? No, They particularly examined this 281 page, finding all the
rest very sound, and have changed only one place, which I shall sincerely turn
you to, as it stands in the page of the Corrigenda of the Book, printed by
order of the Inquisition the 6th of March this very year 1664. You see I bring
you no old stories for news.

In stead of these words in this 281 leaf, line 11, where it is said, Been tamen
intendimus Joachimi innocentiam defendere, that is, We pretend to clear the
innocence of Joachim; the Inquisition ordains you should put, Conabimur tamen,
si fieri potest, Joachimum defendere, that is, We will endeavor, if it be
possible, to defend Joachim.

O, how easy would it be to make Peace in the Church of France, were the
Jesuits but as reasonable as the Inquisition of Rome is upon this point! I
cannot devise why they should be so troubled to find Expedients to terminate
this difference. See here one to your hand, and the easiest in the world. There
is no more to do then to bid the pretended Jansenists for the future to say,
that they will no more defend the Innocence of Jansenius; Been tamen intendimus
Jansenii innocentiam defendere, but content themselves in saying, We will
endeavor, if we can, to defend Jansenius, Conabimur, si fieri potest,
Jansenium defendere. I dare pawn my word, Sir, that there would not be a man of
them who would refuse this Condition, and that would not be yet satisfied with
less; so reasonable they are and moderate. And with what justice can it be
refused them? Is it that Joachim's Book is more considerable then that of
Jansenius, which was without controversy one of the most knowing Prelates of
his Age? or that we owe more respect to a Constitution of P. Alexander,
then to the Decision of the most Universal of all the Councils?

Conclude we therefore, Sir, that the Jesuits have succeeded in the Dispute
concerning Grace, as they have done in that of all the rest, to torment men,
which is no such great wonder: It Is but the natural effect of violence. The Law
of the World is, That the weak succumb to the strongest; and therefore we are
not to admire, that a small number of Divines, who have nothing on their side
save Truth and Innocence, should be overthrown by the Jesuits, that is to say,
by an Army of thirty thousand men, who have for so long a time been so cruelly
resolved upon their Ruin. But what is most admirable is, to see in the mean
time the greatest part of the world persuaded of the justice of the Jesuits,
and that yet the Doctrine of those Divines should have more approbators then
ever it had, in which properly consists the Victory of Truth. This miserable
Question de Facto, this Sense of Jansenius, of which the Jesuits make such a
noise at present, is but a wretched corner of ground to which they are retired
after their having been beaten out of all their other holds, which have
hitherto been the subject of the Dispute; nor are they yet able to make that
good. They must either render, or precipitate themselves: that is, they must
either acknowledge that the matter of Fact (which is the present Controversy)
being no matter of Heresy, there can be no Heresy in all this; or, that
obstinately defending this Error, they fall into Heresy themselves.

I know very well yet, that this distinction between the Advantage of Persons
and that of a Cause is too nice and subtle for many persons, that being gross
and carnal, judge only of things by the external, and by the noise; and that
one cannot easily make them comprehend that the Cause of those who seem to be
oppressed is in effect victorious, and that of their Oppressors overcome.

The Miracles and incomparable Sanctity of the Primitive Christians could not
for 300 years abate this impression of their Senses in the spirits of a world
of Pagans, nor persuade them that the persons whom they killed had any Reason
on their side. There is nothing more ordinary then this Argumentation; He is
persecuted; It is therefore he is in the wrong; because he has not the
imagination which commonly joines the Idea of Pain with that of the Crime. But
God would make us see the error of this in the Christian Religion, on which
subject this has been most experienced, in causing, on the contrary, that this
Oppression of the Christians during 300 years, which encouraged those Pagans to
despise them, should prove one of the brightest and most divine marks to
distinguish it from the false Religions. For whereas the Kingdoms of the World
were established and subsisted by Temporal advantages of those only who
founded or maintained them; God would on the contrary have his Empire, which is
that of the Truth, should be founded and augmented by the Sufferings and Death
of those persons whom he employed to establish it; to show that he was stronger
then the World, in surmounting the World by that very Victory which the World
conceived they had over his Servants.

The Cause of Truth has almost gained the same advantage in these our Times,
both from the excessive power of the Jesuits which attacqu'd them, and the
extreme weakness of the Divines who defended it: all which contributed to its
Establishment, and to the making it appear with the greater Splendour; since
there is no man but must conclude, that the Jesuits Doctrine must needs be
very naught, and their Morality extremely corrupted, since all their power has
not been able to hinder it from being blasted by so many Censures: And that, on
the contrary, the Doctrine of the Divines must needs be very orthodox; since
they have made the Church approve it, against so mighty an Opposition. The more
puissant the Jesuits be, the more the Censures which have past concerning
their Doctrine should appear legitimate, just and authentic; since, in regard
of the Credit they have in the Church, it should not be hard for them to
procure reparation of the Church for the wrong which has been done them by her
unjust Censures. And the more the Divines are oppressed and abandoned, the more
ought that which has been done against them to be suspected, and what has been
done to their advantage esteemed just and legitimate.

Thus, by a most admirable effect of the Divine Providence, the power of the
Jesuits is the confusion of Jesuits; since it is an evident Conviction of the
Falseness of a Doctrine which the Church has condemned in their Authors. And
the oppression of these Divines, defenders of the Hierarchy, of Penance, of
Morality and of Grace, is in the mean time the reproach of the Jesuits, who
have so inhumanely persecuted them; and the glory and establishment of the
Truth, which they have maintained with so much success against this insolent
Society.

FINIS.
A Copy of a Letter FROM The Reverend Father VALERIAN, a CAPUCHIN, TO Pope
ALEXANDER the 7th.
Most Blessed Father,
AFTER I have kissed your blessed Feet, and made a most humble acknowledgment
of my devout subjection, etc. I F. Valerian, Milanese, Priest, of the Order of
the Friars Minors, called Capuchins, (being enjoined under pain of
Excommunication and other Penalties expressed in the Bulls of the Popes your
Predecessors) declare to your Holiness, that I have by a long series of years
exactly observed, that the Clerks Regular named Jesuits, whilst they thirst
after riches, dominion and glory above all mortal men whatsoever, publicly
commit and perpetrate many things which are prohibited, and omit many things
that are commanded under the penalty of mortal Sin, not showing the least token
of repentance, without which they become suspected of Heresy, whiles they
suppose those enormous commissions not to be prohibited; or, if conscious of
their Crimes, they continue to wallow in them, presumed guilty of Atheism. But
I explain my deduction by this Example.

Titius a Parish Priest in a City induces a public Notarie and four Witnesses
to frame a supposititious Testament, by which fraud the right Heir is deprived
of an Inheritance of a hundred thousand Crowns, which Titius seizes for
himself, by perverting justice before the Judge, whom, notwithstanding,
(together with the Notarie and Witnesses) he, in the Sacrament of Penance,
absolves from the Crime, as not at all obliged to make Restitution, defending
himself against the parties oppressed, and others that are highly scandalized
hereat, with all manner of other pious Works, (those only excepted which
hinder the procuring of riches, glory and dominion) such as Prayer, Fasting,
Alms, and whatever else have merit and commendation from the Austerity of Life.

This Fact involves, 1. the Crime of Subornation and falsifying in the public
Notarie; 2. Perjurie in the four Witnesses; 3. the Theft of 100000 Crowns; 4.
the perverting of Justice before a Judge; 5. the notorious Scandal of
Impenitence, and Impunitie for so many and so grievous Crimes; and lastly, the
extreme abuse of the holy Sacrament of Penance.

These Six Errors, under the guilt of mortal Sin, prohibited all men both by
the Divine, natural and positive Laws, whosoever does obstinately and
contumaciously deny, whether in these or others of like quality, is an
Heretic. To this Doctrine I firmly adhere, and having attested the verity of
the Fact, declare to your Holiness the foresaid Heresy, or (to say better)
Atheism of the Jesuits.

But before I proceed to explain not a few of these and the like Enormities,
together with the Circumstances of Place, Time, Persons, and other particulars
belonging to them, I shall first assert to your Holiness the innocence of this
my Declaration; not from any advantage arising from this suppression of
Heresy, (which of it self is sufficiently manifest) but by the very
Circumstances of my person. Namely, thus:

Since the year 1653 I have frequently signified to the holy Congregation De
propaganda Fide, and other Ministers of the Apostolical See, this my opinion
concerning the Heresy of the Jesuits; nor has any of them appeared to
disapprove my Zeal, which therefore I have reason to think pious, and not at
all unacceptable to them.

Above twenty years since I signified to the same holy Congregation Fourteen
Commissions and Omissions, wherein the General and two Provincials of the
Jesuits, and diverse others, together with their Assistants and Council,
remained contumaciously involved for many years; which I condemned as including
both Heresy and Atheism.

The Cardinals understanding by me, that the Jesuits had spread a report as if
I had been reproved for this Address to the Congregation, did of their own
accord and by their Letters Patent (corroborated with their Seal, and the
subscription of the most eminent Cardinal Borgia) commend and approve that my
Letter and Zeal, exhorting me to constancy in rendering my services to the holy
See Apostolic. I appeal then to the Archives of the same holy Convocation,
animated to make this Denunciation by a Person whom I am ready to produce, as
becomes the design in hand.

To Father Wadding a Jesuit, (pretended Chancellor of the University of
Prague) who endeavored my Reconciliation with the Society, I promised my most
humble services, upon condition he could prove that the aforementioned Fourteen
Crimes were not prohibited under penalty of mortal Sin. But he immediately
breaking off the discourse, departs in a rage, and was never seen by me since.
With like success, some years after, F. Nicolas Lensisius, Exprovincial of
Lithuania, (together with Baron Pramorus Dean of the Cathedral of Comacum) in
the presence of diverse Noble Persons, used much persuasion to induce me to a
better intelligence with the Society. But he not having the patience to hear me
read what I had written concerning those Fourteen Actions, suddenly departed,
nor so much as ever replied to the Letters which I had sent him on this
Argument, nor did I afterward see him any more.

Being by these and many of the like nature incited to denounce to the H.
Apostolic See this growing, or rather raging Heresy of that Society; I did
humbly (by an Epistle dated from our Monastery at Rome) admonish Mutius
Vitellescus, then General of the Society, concerning that Affair; a Copy
whereof I exhibited to Pope Urban the VIIIth of happy memory, and to some of
the Cardinals who are yet living, designing an Exemplar of the same to the
Emperor Ferdinand the Second; that my judicial Declaration being thus disposed
of, might appear the more innocent, when I found that Evangelical correction
did nothing avail.

But neither received I any answer from Mutius, nor observed any Reformation in
the Society. Thus may I have sufficiently asserted the sincerity of my
Declaration, as instituted according to the rule of the Holy Gospel, and the
Canons for the Conservation of Faith and purity of Manners. But it also
concerns my particular safety, which I supplicate you will protect against the
Jesuits, who desire nothing more then my ruin, yea, that I were even buried
alive, with as much indignity to those whose Asylum I invoke, as this my
personal welfare concerns the integrity of the Catholic Faith.

Your Holinesse's most humble Servant, F. Valor. Capuchinus.
28 April, 1659.
The Copy of a Letter from a R. F. Provincial to the R. R. F. General of the
Capuchins.
WHAT a Tragedy the Apologetick Libell of our Father Valerianus, lately
published against the Fathers of the Society, has raised amongst us, I will
briefly relate.

Upon the Eve of the Purification of the B. Virgin, there appeared in this our
Convent of Vienna the Auditor of the Apostolic Nuncio in a Coach, and with him
the Secretaries of the Emperor, attended with armed Soldiers. The Auditor
having called before him the F. Valerian, the Guardian of the Place being also
present, denounces an Arrest against him in the name of the Pope and the
Nuncio: But the Secretary commands him in the Emperor's name, to come without
delay immediately into the Coach, unless he would be violently seized by the
Soldiers. He willingly obeys, and is led to the Imperial Hospital, where he is
cast into the most public and infamous Prison, and committed to the custody of
the Soldiers, thence to be shortly brought forth, and (as he says) by the
command of his Holiness sent Captive to Rome.

In the mean time, behold the whole City of Vienna in an uproar; the greater
part of both Sexes and of all conditions astonished, and wondering at this lewd
manner of proceeding, detests it as scandalous, precipitate, and highly
prejudicial to Religion. As well Secular persons as Regulars of almost all
Orders, and even the Grandees themselves, run flocking to the Monastery,
compassionate the Father's condition; some of them of their own accord repair
to the Emperor, the Empress, the Apostolical Nuncio; and others of the Nobility
whom it concerned defend the case of Valerianus and of our Order, supplicating
that means may be found out to obviate the Scandal. In the streets are heard
the clamors of the People, Let the good Capuchins live; Let F. Valerian live;
He suffers thus for the truth, etc. Let the FF. of the Society perish; the
authors and promoters of all these Confusions. Thus they pursue them with
imprecations, casting dirt and stones at as many of them as come in their way.

I being at this time employed in visiting the neighboring Convents, no sooner
hear of this, but I hasten to Vienna, find the Apostolic Nuncio exceedingly
perplexed, and passing the nights without sleep; declare to him the danger of
so great a Tumult; pressing him to seek out some Expedient to appease the
present and future Scandals. He replied, That he did truly compassionate us and
the F. Valerian, but durst not disobey the Pontifical Mandats; requesting me,
that I would think of some means how to avert these imminent evils: and in fine
concludes, he would conform himself (Caution being given) to the disposal of
Caesar; affirming that he was ignorant of the manner of his Imprisonment.

From hence I go to other of the Nobility, and at length to the Emperor
himself; who hearing me very graciously, I declare, that I came not to plead
for the F. Valerian, or defend his Actions, but to implore Justice; that by his
Majesty's Mediation the said Father might be convened before a competent
Judge, his Process heard, and being found guilty, might be punished according
to his demerits, as he himself also desired: at least I earnestly beseech him,
that these Scandals might be repressed, and mature provision made for the
honor of our Religion, being my self no otherwise concerned in the affair. To
this I add, how much all men are astonished with admiration, that a Capuchin
of sixty years in the Order, for Life and Manners of highest reputation,
formerly Provincial of this Country, looked upon as one likely to be made
General of the whole Order, and in time advanced to the dignity of Cardinal;
that had deserved so well of the House of Austria, by whose negotiation and
dexterity the Marriage between the King of Poland and the Daughter of the
Emperor Ferdinand the IId succeeded happily; that had managed diverse Embassies
to the same King of Poland, the Sea Apostolical, and other Princes with
success; meriting no less of the Roman Church, Apostolic Missionary for many
years, defending the Faith by his Writings and Disputations, exposing his life
to perils, not without admirable advantage of Souls, the Conversion of
Princes, and even of some Preachers themselves: That, I say, such a Person,
allied by blood to many Nobles and Princes, should with an armed band be
surprised in his Convent, or his own House rather, no regard had to the Bodies
of so many Emperors and Empresses his Predecessors, nay of his Royal Father and
Mother resting in the Lord, in the Church of the same Convent, and like a
Malefactor against the whole World, as well as the City, be cast into a public
and infamous Gaol, and exposed as a laughingstock and spectacle of derision,
not cited, not heard, not sentenced, not condemned. I add yet farther, That no
less scandal to the detriment of Religion is to be feared and expected, in case
he, passing through so many Provinces, and universally known, should be led by
an armed Rabble Captive to Rome, whiles the people remain wholly ignorant of
the Cause.

To these Objections the Emperor replies; That he exceedingly compassionates
both the Religion and the F. Valerianus; that the manner of proceeding
displeases him; that he has no other part in this Affair, then that he could
not refuse the Apostolic Nuncio imploring the Secular Arm in the name of the
Pope; that he would confer with the said Nuncio, and endeavor to avert the
future Evils and Scandals. But in fine, the Emperor being totally disengaged
from this Concernment, it is concluded in the secret Council, that the foresaid
F. Valerian be dismissed out of Prison, and restored to his former Liberty,
(Caution being first given by the most excellent Marquis Prince of Baden and
Kinsman of F. Valerian, and his Nephew Count Magnus de Strasnits) not in the
Convent, but that he remain in the house of the Count de Weitenberg, 'til he
find some convenient opportunity to slip thither, without notice taking of his
Imprisonment, and there to remain 'til farther resolution from the Court of
Rome.

This Tragedy, though extremely scandalous, yet seems (Circumstances well
considered) to tend rather to the honor then to the disgrace of the Religion
and the F. Valerian. The Regulars of almost all Orders evidently favoring the
part of Valerian. Meanwhile, how busy the FF. of the Society are, and what
Reproaches and enormous Lies they everywhere vent against the F. Valerian, is
altogether incredible to be spoken. These particulars I thought fit to declare
to your most Reverend Fatherhood, and to inform you truly of the success of the
Tragedy; that you may at the Court of Rome, and wherever else it shall appear
necessary, defend the honor at least of the Religion, as it shall to you seem
good in the Lord.

Most Rev. Father, Your most obedient Son.
Vien. Austriae, 15 Feb. 1661.
A Copy of the Epistle of F. Valerian, Capuchin, to F. Ludovicus a Galice of
the same Order.
My Lewis,
SEeing you so earnestly desire of me those short Replies to the Particulars
which are so commonly objected against me, I send them here to you. In the mean
time, I beseech you to enquire what Crime of mine it is of that magnitude, that
it should be just to begin the Judgment with an Execution so severe and
violent, as an ingenuous person would abhor more then Death it self. I am
made a Spectacle to the World. Farewell.

From the Prison at Vienna, 8 Feb. 1661.

1. Qu. Why did thou, Valerian, accuse to the Pope the Society of the
Jesuits, as persons infected with Heresy?

Resp. Because they commit, and omit, unpunished, and without the least
Scruple, many things which do notoriously involve mortal Sin by the Christian
Faith: Because both the Gallican and Belgic Church has censured their Moral
Christian, as being repugnant to the Gospel, the State-Politick, and all the
necessities of humane life.

2. Qu. Why, Valerian, after the Denunciation frequently repeated, (the Pope
being silent) do thou not cease to declare?

Resp. I have not denounced once, that is sufficiently: I have only produced a
few Examples of heretical Commissions and Omissions; but there are very many
more, and those most Scandalous ones both against the Pope and the Church
Universal.

3. Qu. How did thou, Valerian, dare attacque the whole Society?

Resp. If I have rashly done it, let my Temerity tend to the honor of the
Society; and in that case, I promise to make it satisfaction with the peril of
my head.

4. Qu. Why, Valerian, did thou publish thy Apology in print, contrary to the
Decree of the Pope, forbidding it under pain of Excommunication?

Resp. That Decree concerns not Valerian alone, but extends to all the
Missionaries. I obeyed the Decree when I published not my Disputation with
Ororius, Habevo, and Calixtus; though it had been approved by the Apostolic
Nuncio, and the Ordinary of the place, before the Decree: I obeyed the Decree,
before I had published the greater part of my Philosophy. I published my just
Apology, because I was defamed by the Jesuits for an Heretic, condemned of
Heresy, destined to Punishment (if I went to Rome,) and presumed to such a
degree flagitious, that the tenth part of what was pretended deserved my
Expulsion even from the whole Order of the Capuchins.

5. Qu. Why, Valerian, did not thou demand the assistance and direction of
the Judge against these Calumnies?

Resp. I often implored it for several years together, but without remedy, or
reply.

6. Qu. Why feared you not, Valerian, the indignation of the Pope, for
publishing a thing contrary to his Decree?

Resp. I did never believe his Holiness would cut me off from the Communion of
the Faithful, because (in despair of Justice). I strove to assert my self a
Catholic, not flagitious, but a servant of God: But that a person considered
in particular circumstances is obliged under the guilt of mortal Sin and of
Excommunication from the Society of the Faithful, rather to undergo that
Infamy, then to dispense materially with the Pope's Decree, is an erroneous
Proposition, involving Heresy, and most pernicious to the Pontifical
Jurisdiction, as supposing it unjust, and plainly Tyrannical.

7. Qu. Why, Valerian, were thou not afraid, that by purging thy self from that
Infamy, thou should bring the Pope under suspicion of having denied thee
Justice?

Resp. I have in my Apology sufficiently declared, that all Popes, though
never so holy and prudent, are frequently mistaken concerning the verity of
Matters of Fact; and I perceive that Alexander the VIIth is yet wholly ignorant
of the truth of this Affair.

8. Qu. Why, Valerian, would thou not rather pass by the Infamy, then bring
the Pope under the least suspicion of refusing to do thee Justice?

Resp. That question is not worthy of a man in his right wits.

9. Qu. Why, Valerian, do thou so severely perstringe the whole Society of
the Jesuits, and publish thy Denunciation to the whole World?

Resp. I have the rather done it, because they traduce me; that the Jesuits
being smartly reproved, without calling me in question, it might serve for an
evident presumption of mine Innocence; that the Ear which was shut against the
truth by the artifice and power of the Jesuits, might be opened by the
loudness of this rumor.

10. Qu. Why, Valerian, did thou not fear the scandal which might arise from
these Dissensions of Catholics?

Resp. I did therefore publish my Apology, that all might understand the
Catholics were not defiled with the Heresy of the Jesuits, nor presuppose an
exorbitant Jurisdiction in the Pope un-bounded by laws: And that I am rather in
such cases obliged by the Canon Law to presume the Innocence of his Holiness.

11. Qu. Why, Valerian, did thou incline to revolt from the Catholic Faith,
and to pass over to the Heretics?

Resp. 'Twas never in my thoughts: nay, I came spontaneously and uncalled from
Prague to Vienna; where the first time I stirred out of the Monastery, I
presented my self to the Apostolical Nuncio, to whom I affirmed that I was
ready to answer before a Judge, and upon conviction of my fault forfeit even my
head to my Accuser. Notwithstanding this, I was imprisoned before the Pope
could take the least cognizance of it.

12. Qu. Why, Valerian, did thou signify to the Apostolical Nuncio, that you
would not go to Rome, though you might indeed be possibly dragged thither,
upon his Holiness's command?

Resp. I do not believe the Pope (were he conscious of the fact) would decree
me a secular Prison, to be guarded by Soldiers so far as Rome, for these very
Circumstances of my person; namely, that I am, First, actually engaged in
denouncing the Heresy of the Jesuits to the Pope, according to the Decrees of
other Popes his predecessors, commanding these Denunciations under penalty of
Excommunication: The chief Arguments of which Declaration I could not (as I
said) expound in five or six Epistles, which would hardly suffice for the very
first.

Secondly, The Crimes perpetrated by the Jesuits, as directed (say they) ad
majorem Dei Gloriam, were neither discovered, nor indeed observed by me at
Rome, but in the hereditary States of the House of Austria, from whence they
pretend to carry me away.

Thirdly, The acerbity both of a Prison, and of a Journey to Rome, cannot be
supported without my infinite confusion.

Fourthly, My old Age, craziness, and affliction of mind, (which those who thus
treat me ought to suppose) together with my many private inconveniences, are
things which I could no ways endure without imminent peril of death.

Fifthly, My destruction proceeding from Violences of this nature, would make
me appear infamous in their opinion who think well of my Judge.

Sixthly, So great an indignity to my person would even grieve and afflict the
very Order of the Capuchins, and my own Allies in blood and affinity, and would
in fine perturb no small part of the Christian World, to which I am known by
many signal and honorable titles.

Seventhly, There lies upon me the domestic care of my four Nephews, (who are
all of them (one excepted) under age; the Eldest being constituted Guardian of
his Brothers, but still under my direction.) The Education of these, and indeed
of all our Family of the Counts de Magnis, would actually miscarry and be
ruined in my absence.

The Imprisonment therefore and designed Journey to Rome is (considered with
these and other the like Circumstances) what, in the opinion of wise men, an
innocent and generous person would abhor more then corporal Death.

13. Qu. What is therefore the Crime which is objected against thee, the
infamy whereof should suspend the Judgment which is begun from an Execution
even harsher then Death?

Resp. That I cannot divine, being, as I am, imprisoned in the custody of
Soldiers, and in vain imploring to be heard, whiles the Apostolical Nuncio
denies it lawful for him to take cognizance of the affair.

14. Qu. In fine, Valerian, produce us some Canon, by virtue whereof you find
it lawful for you to dispense with a Pontifical Decree; for this Dispensation
is strongly objected against you.

Resp. Alexander Papa tertius, ad Archiepiscopum Ravennensem C.V.R. de
Rescriptis, etc.

Si quando aliqua, etc.

Alexander the Third, to the Archbishop of Ravenna, C.V.R. de Rescriptis.

If at any time it fall out that we enjoin something to your Brotherhood which
may possibly seem to exasperate your mind, you ought not to be troubled
thereat; but diligently considering the quality of the business concerning
which we write unto you, either reverently obey our Commands, or signify by
your Letters some reasonable cause why you cannot: for we will patiently suffer
it, when you refuse to do what has by wicked insinuation been suggested unto
us.

These three Letters are translated out of Latin, as they are to be seen after
the Appendix Albiana published with his Purgatio; where writing to the
Cardinals he thus concludes.
TErrent hujusmodi exempla, Eminentissimi PP. obsequentissimos sanctae Sedis
Filios, etc.

Such like Examples, most Eminent Fathers, terrify the most obedient Sons of
the Holy See, feeling by sad experience that rigor of Obedience which a
particular Order has arrogated to it self, (whether by the assistances of
Piety, or Carnal Wisdom, let those consider whom it concerns) who ought to be
regulated, not by the votes of Clergymen, but by Laws and Customs inflicted on
them by force, and by the aid of the Secular arm, which their Insinuations
have abused: and will doubtless (unless the Wisdom of your Eminences
intercede) oblige such as are skillful in Ecclesiastical Antiquity and the
Divine-Politick-Law, to inquire into the Remedies left by Christ to the
Children of the Bride-chamber, by which they may emancipate themselves into
that Liberty whereby the Faithful of other Patriarchates have formerly
maintained Communion with the Roman Church, without that Severity and
Subjection which the Western Church has by degrees admitted; the Holy See so
promoting wholesome Titles into Laws and Rites, that it has nevertheless left
place for Nature to abrogate the same, when they break forth thus into Abuses
and Servitude. But the Prudence and care of your Eminences gives us ground to
hope, that the Insolences of your equally arrogant and ignorant Ministers will
be corrected, before the force of Nature be compelled to exert it self beyond
the Sanctions and Decrees of our Ancestors. Which that it may succeed to the
good both of the Roman Church and ours, is the presage and prayer of

Your Eminence most humble Servant, Tho. White.


To which sense, but more clearly, is this Paragraph out of a Book entitled, La
Chain du Hercule Gaulois, ou les Essays continus Chrestiens, etc. sur quelques
importans points and inconveniens des temps, dedicated to Mademoiselle, by her
Confessor, and printed at Paris, M.DC.LI. where, speaking of the great
mischiefs arising from the disputes 'twixt the Jansenists and Jesuits, page
320. he has this ingenuous passage.

ET de vray, n'est il pas pitoyable de voir, qu' on puisse dire avec plus de
raison que du temps de l' Arianisme, qu' il semble que toute l' Eglise est
devenue heretic? Car, pose ce qui est vray, etc.

And to say truth, is it not a most deplorable thing to consider that one may
with more reason affirm it then in the very time of Arianism it self, that the
whole Church seems to become heretical? For admitting what is most certain,
that the Church has decreed Calvinism, Pelagianism and Semi-pelagianism to be
Heresies; and that the Doctors are those who sit in the Chair to be consulted
withal upon points of Religion: All Catholics are reduced to a most strange
perplexity. For if a man shall address himself to those who are of the
Jansenian party, they will tell him that those who are termed Molinists are
Pelagians, or, at least, Semi-pelagians; and on the other side, the Molinists
will bear him down, that their Adversaries are Calvinists, or else Novatians.
Now all the Doctors of the Church Catholic are either of the one or the other
party, (except it be some few, which are not yet resolved whether side to
embrace.) I leave you then to consider, to what prodigious streights the minds
of men are reduced, since this is held as a Maxim, That whoever fails in one
point of Faith, fails in all. To what other refuge then does this necessity
seem to compel us, but to have recourse to the Faith of the Primitive Church,
and to limit our selves to that pure simplicity of Belief, wherein we are
assured that our first Christian Brethren attained to Salvation?

ANno Domini 1554. die vero prima Decembris, Sacratissima Theologiae Facultas
Parisiensis, post Missam de Sancto Spiritu in aede sacra Collegii Sorbonae ex
more, etc.

In the year of our Lord 1554. the first day of December, the Venerable Faculty
of Divinity at Paris, after celebration of the Mass of the H. Ghost in the
Chapel of the College of Sorbon, and upon Oath taken, now the fourth time
assembled in the same place, to determine on certain Bulls which two of our
most holy Popes, viz. Paul the Third, and Julius the Third, have (as they give
out) granted to a sort of men who out of a singular affectation would be
entitled of the Society of Jesus, the which two Bulls the Senate or Court of
Parliament of Paris had sent to the said Faculty by an Officer, to be viewed
and examined by them: After recital of their obedience to the holy See, etc. it
follows,

Sed quoniam omnes, praesertim vero Theologos, etc.

But for that all men, and especially Divines, should be prepared to give
satisfaction to every one that desires to be enlightened in matters which
concern the Faith, Manners, and Edification of the Church; the said Faculty
have esteemed it their duty to satisfy what has been by the said Court
commanded and required. Having therefore diligently and frequently read,
repeated, and understood all the Articles of the said two Bulls, and, as the
gravity of the thing required, for many months, days and hours (as the manner
is) accurately discussed and examined it, they have by an unanimous consent
(but with all reverence and humility to the correction of the Apostolical See)
thus at last concluded.

This novel Society insolently arrogating to themselves the Name of Jesus, so
licenciously, and without any care in the choice, admitting all sorts of
persons, how flagitious soever, illegitimate and infamous, differing nothing in
their exterior Habit from the Secular Priests, in Tonsure, in Canonical Hours,
which they repeat in private, or sing publicly in the Churches, in Cloisters
and in silence; in choice of Meats and Days, Abstinences, and diverse other
different Ceremonies, (by which the state and order of Religions are preserved
and distinguished;) as having received so many and ample Privileges,
Indulgences and Immunities, especially in what concerns the administration of
the Sacrament of Penitence, and of the holy Eucharist; and that without any
difference or regard had to Places and Persons; and even in the Office of
Preaching, Reading and Teaching, to the great prejudice of the Ordinaries and
Hierarchical function, and that of other Religions, yea even of Princes and
Temporal Lords, against the Privileges of all Universities, and finally to the
exceeding regret and burden of the People: This Society seems to us to violate
the honor and discipline of the life Monastical, and to enervate and weaken
the studious, pious and necessary exercise of the virtues of Abstinence,
Ceremonies, and Austerity; nay, gives occasion of freely apostatizing from
other Religions; besides, it evacuates the due obedience and subjection to
Ordinaries, it unjustly deprives as well the Temporal as the Ecclesiastical
Lords of their just Rights, excites troubles and perturbations as well in the
one as the other Polity, induces a world of quarrels amongst the common
people, multitudes of dissensions, variances, contentions, emulations,
rebellions, and, in sum, an infinity of Schisms. All these particulars,
together with sundry others, having been therefore most diligently weighed and
considered, We pronounce and judge this Society to be (as to matter of Faith)
pernicious, contrary to the peace of the Church, subversive of the Monastical
Religion, and tending rather to Destruction then at all to Edification.

NOw whether this Censure of that Learned Faculty were not as prophetical, as
(by the consequence, and experience of one entire Age) we have found it just
and reasonable, let the religious and impartial Reader heartily determine;
since in this fatal period and Catalysis of true Piety, even this very Faculty
it self (the so famous Sorbon) has been perverted by these Atheistical
Sycophants, blasphemous and profane Wretches, from their primary station and
integrity. We have produced this Decree to justify what we affirm; and to let
all the world see how requisite it is to put a timely stop to their prodigious
Exorbitancies, by that noble and resolute example of the Gallican Church, which
God Almighty in his due season improve, to the consummate unity of all devout
Christians.

THE SENSE OF The FRENCH Church Concerning the Pope's Infallibility and Power,
Lately declared by Authority.
SInce the Bishop of Rome got so much Authority in the Catholic part of the
World, as to be able by his Ministers and Negotiations to attempt to govern
private Churches out of his own Metropolitan Diocese, there has been waged a
great War amongst Divines about the Quality of his Authority. And, as Man's
Soul by her Powers and Operations is twofold, of Understanding and Will,
Speculation and Practice: so the Divines Questions, the Gates by which such
Tenets get entrance into the Church, are also two-leav'd; the one opens to the
Power the Pope has to command assent to his Resolutions of Speculative Points,
the other to what Obedience is due to his Commands. The party whose interest it
is by application to the highest See to dilate their own privileges and
exemptions from the ordinary Government of the Church instituted by Christ, and
received by continual Tradition to our days, have striven with all their might
to possess the World, that both for assent to Christian Truths, and for
regulating of Discipline, Christ had given all power to Saint Peter and his
Successor; so that the whole Hierarchy in effect remained in him alone. The
rest, as far as not infected by them, maintained constantly the contrary; and
that, though the Pope was chief of Bishops, yet the Congregation of Bishops was
the Court from whence final resolutions were to be expected. The former Tenet
had of late gotten a great strength through the most parts of Christendom; but
the Divine Providence, when it found it fitting, raised the French Church,
which at the present is very flourishing, to set a bar to their great advance,
as may be seen by the Papers here inserted.

The substance of the Advocate General's Plea against a Thesis defended in
Sorbon concerning the Pope's Infallibility. Translated out of the French Copy.
I Do (says he) acknowledge my carelessness in having suffered to escape
unpunished those horrible Blasphemies which the Jesuits vomited out against
Jesus Christ, in a Thesis defended the last year in the College of Clermont,
which maintained that the Pope was as infallible in matters both of Fact and
Right as Jesus Christ himself. Has a greater Impiety been heard of? But it is
ordinary with them to teach erroneous Doctrines. And I believe it is from the
impunity of that Crime that the boldness has been taken to defend the like
Errors in Sorbon, against her Statutes, the Doctrine of the Gallican Church,
and the Maxims of State and of this Court. How? That the Pope with five or six
ignorant Divines with mercenary souls should be Infallible to make Articles of
Faith of whatsoever Passion, Interest, or Ambition shall suggest to him? Our
Ancestors have seen the fatal consequences and effects of this pernicious
Doctrine. Wherefore, lest this poison should spread it self farther, and this
pernicious Doctrine take root if it be left unpunished, I conclude the Thesis
shall be struck out and blotted, the Defendent and President constrained to
maintain the direct contrary, and the Syndic never to approve such like Theses,
under pain of being extraordinarily proceeded against. The Pope and Bishops are
not Authors of our Faith, but faithful Guardians and irrefragable Witnesses of
universal Tradition received from hand to hand, from Jesus Christ to us;
according to Vincentius Lirinensis, Quod semper, quod ubique, quod ab omnibus
creditum est, hoc de Fide est, etc.

Notes upon it.
Those who are acquainted with the Government of France, understand that the
Parliament of Paris is made of Members given to Learning and reading of
Fathers, and to the skill of Languages, particularly Greek and Latin, and by
consequence of Church Antiquities; and that the King's Advocate, who at this
present is called Monsieur Talon, is ordinarily one of the most eminent; and
that in matters of Divinity they are tenacious of the Decrees of the Sorbon,
the greatest Catholic University in our parts of the World, and whose Doctrine
passes for the Doctrine of the Church of France, especially their Ancient
Decrees.

It is again to be noted, that he says that the Tenet of the Pope's Personal
Infallibility in making Doctrines to be of new accepted for Articles of Faith,
is against the Maxims of the French Government; that is, that it touches upon
Treason: which if it be true in France, it can be no less in England; and he
cannot be truly loyal to his Country who obstinately maintains that Error.
The reason is clear: for, if that be true, the Pope may define and oblige
Subjects to believe that he can depose a Prince, and bind his Subjects to take
Arms against him, as was insinuated in a Letter confidently reported to have
been lately written from Rome to Ireland, by a great man of that Court; though
others say the Letter was counterfeited.

Extracted out of a Letter written from France to a Person of Quality.
The Jesuits having defended formerly that the Pope has the same
Infallibility with Jesus Christ, Monsieur Talon the Advocate General complained
of it publicly in Parliament; remonstrating that this was a most horrible
Impiety, and highly deserving open and corporal Punishment. Whereupon the Court
of the said Parliament has ordained that the President, the Regent, and the
Scholars which maintained it, should appear personally to receive a
Reprehension for the first time, and a denouncing of corporal and public
punishment, intended and resolved to be inflicted, in case any of them should
relapse into the like Blasphemy hereafter.

Notes upon it.
The Thesis mentioned is that against which was divulged the Paper entitled,
THE JESUITS NEW HERESY; which insinuates, that the Tenet of the Pope's
Infallibility was their former Heresy: which is a gentle Censure upon a
Doctrine able to introduce Heresies without number into the Church of God; as
is evident to whosoever shall consider how easy it is for a dozen of Divines
to be either corrupted or deceived; and yet our Faith by this Position is made
to depend on their Science and Integrity.

Note again, that the King's Advocate professes, that the Tenet of the Pope's
Infallibility in matters of Fact deserves public and corporal punishment;
which signifies no less then whipping, banishment, or some such like
punishment: and that it is a Crime deserving that the Civil Magistrate ought to
take notice of it. This Absurdity was invented by the Jesuits, in envy to the
great Scholar Jansenius; to the end that people might be persuaded he held
Errors not visible in his Books, of the which they calumniated him, and would
prove him guilty of them only by the Pope's Infallible word defining him to be
so: which mad Prank of theirs has made such a pother in France of late years.

A Decree of the Court of Parliament against a Theological Conclusion, intended
to have been maintained the 19 of January 1662/3. by Monsieur Gabriel Drouet of
Ville-neufve, Bachelor. Given the 22 of January 1662/3 at Paris.
Extracted out of the Registers of Parliament, and faithfully rendered into
English.
THis day the Court having deliberated upon what was by the King's Council
represented the 19 and 20 of this present Month, concerning a Thesis intended
to have been maintained the said 19 day by Monsieur Gabriel Drouet of
Ville-neufve in Britany, Bachelor in Divinity, at the Act called The great
Ordinary of SORBON, which contained in its Second Position, Christus Sanctum
Petrum ejusque Successores summa supra Ecclesiam Auctoritate donavit, Christ
gave Saint Peter and his Successors highest Authority over the Church; in its
Third, Romani Antistites Privilegia quibusdam Ecclesiis, sicut Ecclesiae
Gallicanae, impertiunt, The Bishops of Rome bestow Privileges upon certain
Churches, as upon the French Church; in its Eighth, Concilia Generalia ad
exstirpandas Haereses, Schismata, and alia tollenda incommoda, admodum sunt
utilia, non tamen absolute necessaria, General Councils are very profitable to
extirpate Heresies and Schisms, and to take away other inconveniences, but not
absolutely necessary; and many other Propositions contrary to the Authority of
the Church, to the Ancient Doctrine always received and conserved in this
Kingdom, to the holy Canons, to the Decrees of General Councils, and to the
Liberties of the Gallican Church; tending also to exalt the power of the Pope
above that of General Councils, and beyond the limits which have always been
most religiously conserved in the Church of France: having heard the Syndic of
the Faculty of Theology, and Monsieur Vincent de Meurs, Doctor in the said
Faculty, of the College of Navar, who was to preside at the said Dispute, and
the said Drouet the Respondent, who had all been sent for in pursuance of the
Decree of the 19 of this Month, as also having heard the King's Council in
their Conclusions; the Court has prohibited and forbidden, and does prohibit
and forbid, the said Drouet to defend the said Thesis; has ordained, and does
ordain, that it be suppressed, together with all the rest that shall be found to
contain such like Propositions; prohibits and forbids all Bachelors, Licentiats
and Doctors, and other persons, to write, defend and dispute, to read and
teach directly or indirectly in the public Schools or elsewhere any such like,
or other Propositions contrary to the Ancient Doctrine of the Church, to the
holy Canons, Decrees of General Councils, to the Liberties of the Gallican
Church, and to the Ancient Decrees of the Faculty of Theology of Paris, under
pain to be proceeded against according to their demerits. Prohibits the Syndic
of the said Faculty, and the Doctors who shall there preside at the Acts, to
suffer any such Propositions to be inserted in any Thesis. Ordains that this
present Decree be read at the general Assembly of the said Faculty of Theology
to be holden in Sorbon the first day which the Court shall command, in the
presence of two Counselors of the said Court, who, together with one of the
Substitutes of the King's Attourney-General, shall go thither expressly for that
purpose. To which Assembly shall be summoned all the Doctors of the said
Faculty, as also even the Bachelors of the first License. And this Decree shall
be Registered in the Registers of the said Faculty, and signified to the
Rectors, Deans and Proctors of the other Faculties, there to be Read and
Registered, and sent to other Universities, as also to the Bayliages and
Stewardships of this Jurisdiction, there to be likewise Read, Published, and
Registered by the procurement of the Substitutes of the King's Attourny-General,
who within one Month are to make Certificate thereof to the Court.

Given in Parliament, the 22 Jan. 1662/3. Signed, Robert.
Collationed.
Notes upon it.
The Error of the First Proposition lies in the word supra, above; for the
French Church holds the Pope to have the highest Authority in the Church, that
is, over particular men, but not over the whole Church: for so it professed in
the Council of Trent, that it was the Faith of France, received from the
Councils of Constance and Basil, that a General Council is above the Pope, as
also has been practiced by diverse General Councils.

The Error of the Second Proposition is, That the Privileges of Ancient
Churches (such as the French Church is) come from the Indulgence of the Pope,
and not from the Succession to the Apostles and Apostolical Founders of them
and their first Institution. The form of which Churches is to be the Rule to
all Christian Churches by whomsoever they are founded: nor is it lawful to
bring in new forms without violating Divine Right delivered in the constant
Tradition of the Church.

The Error of the Third Proposition consists in this, That it takes away the
Practice of the Church, begun by the Apostles, and continued to the Council of
Trent; is against manifest Experience, and, in effect, takes away all
efficacity of extinguishing Heresies and Schisms, reducing it to the weak
principle of the Pope's Infallibility and extraordinary Power: of which enough
is above delivered in proportion to these short Notes, to show how dangerous
the mentioned Errors are, and how necessary to be condemned and avoided by all
good Christians, as pernicious both to Church and State.

Postscript.
Since the foregoing News, it is advertised that the contrary to the
before-condemned Theses has been publicly defended by the Son of Monsieur Le
Tellier, one of the chief Ministers of State, the Archbishop of Paris himself
presiding.

FINIS.

