THE ARMY Brought to the BAR, Legally Examined, Arraigned, Convicted and
Adjudged.

THAT They are not the Self-denying Army, nor the Restorers of our Laws,
Liberties, and Privileges, but obstructors to the happiness of the King and
People.

James 3. 13, 14. Who is a wise man, and endued with knowledge amongst you? let
him show out of a good conversation his works with meekness of wisdom.

But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lie
not against the truth.

Printed in the year, 1647.

THE ARMY Brought to the Bar.
IT has been for these six years space and more, the complaints of diverse of
the inhabitants of this Kingdom, concerning the slavish servitude they endured
under the King and his Cavaliers; and there be others who complain of the
servile bondage they groaned under by the Parliament and their Committees, but
now it is justly to be feared, that there is a yoke of servitude far worse then
the two former, preparing to be put upon the necks of all Englishmen, by an
overruling Independent Army, who have assumed so much boldness and audacity
(having the power in their own hands) to control the Parliament, City, and
whole Kingdom, merely to drive on their own interests and designs.

And our servitude is like to be very miserable, if three things be considered.

1 The condition and nature of the servitude: It Is a martial servitude, the
worst of all: what will not the sword in the hands of such an ignorant
multitude do? our estates, lives, fortunes, liberties, and Religion, will
prostrate themselves at the glittering of a naked sword, all shall be within
the reach of a swords point, to be disposed of according to their pleasures and
commands.

2 The qualifications wherewith the persons are endowed who must rule us:
Namely the Armies Agitators, men of transcending knowledge and judgment,
especially one of them, of whom (by one that knows him) I am credibly informed,
can neither write nor read. If we were to be governed by men found in
judgment, and experienced in the Laws of the Land, we might expect a milder
servitude, but from them we must expect according to education, for as their
breeding is, so is their disposition, we cannot expect a gentle usage from men
of rude education, but if these and such as they be men rightly qualified to
give rules and Laws to a Parliament and Kingdom, then I leave it all
indifferent men to judge, then this proverb shall be verified, Sus Mivervam
docet: Idiots shall teach the learned, and men scarce fit to be subject, shall
become our Rulers: But yet let the Agitators and the rest of the Counselors,
remember this, that Malum concilium consultori pessimum.

3 The third thing which will cause our servitude to be very miserable if it
happens, (which I pray God I may never live to see) will be the strangeness
and unwontednesse of it: We were before happily governed by our King ( Charles
our dread Lord and sacred Sovereign, (whose days God prolong,) but now we
shall be miserably governed by many Tyrants, who would fain be Rulers and
Magistrates, yet can scarce tell how to be men. We were before governed and
ruled by Monarchy, we shall now be governed by Democracy, how will our English
necks be accustomed to such unwonted and uneasy yoaks, surely we must needs
kick and winch, which if we do, let them set fast (being good-horse-men
because Soldiers) lest they be cast out of the saddle to the ground.

Quest. But some may say (and I do verily believe many merely upon that ground
cleave to them) that they have been the only Instruments under God, of our
preservation and safety, and therefore their proceedings now may be warrantable.

Answ. It Is true, they have done very nobly (through God) in what they
undertook, yet one good act committed cannot be a veil to hide all other
offenses: shall a villain be pardoned for murder, because he has done some
worthy deeds before, God forbid? shall a man for some brave exploit before
performed be so far exempted as to escape punishment, if he be guilty of a
crime, No: the more Noble and brave their former proceedings were; makes their
present undertakings seem more horrible, for Nullius viri species vehementius
accessit, quam quae ab initio habuit dulcedinem: No Wine becomes more sour
then that which was at first the sweetest: so they, so long as they obeyed, and
honored the Commands of the Parliament, they were most notably victorious and
successful in all their enterprises, and none did better, but now having
revolted, and become like sweet wine turned to vinegar, and doing things,
neither warrantable by Law nor Reason, in this none did worse.

Quest. But again, some may say, there is no fear of any oppression, or
servitude, when as all their Declarations, Proclamations; and Letters do
signify that they entend, nay, protest they will endeavor to preserve the
prerogative and honor of the King, to uphold the privilege of Parliament, to
mayntain the Liberty of the Subject, to establish a true and sound Religion,
and to settle a firm and lasting peace in this Kingdom, and therefore before
all these be established, it is not necessary they should disband.

Answ. It Is true, it cannot be denied, that all their Declarations,
Remonstrances do signify, they do really intend, or at least pretend all
these, and first they will endeavor to preserve the honor and prerogative of
the King, and to settle him in peace and happiness in this throne, which they
will very hardly do, for the very tenants, and principles of an Independent run
cross, and quite blank against King and Monarchy. Now if such as go quite
contrary to me, may be said to go along with me, and if he be accounted my
advancer, who endeavors to pull me down, then will I believe that an
Independent will preserve a King, but again, if example may strengthen belief
in this particular, then this of Major Scot by name, (an Independent by
Religion, a Villain by his actions) is most remarkable, who (if fame has not
forgot to tell truth) being asked by Colonel Brown, whether he were come to
kiss his Majesty's hand, made answer, He had rather follow him to the
Gallows; O monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens, cui lumen ademptum: Now, if
this man's opinion being an Independent may go for the rest, (man did I call
him, more fit to be termed a Devil) I say if the rest agree with him in
opinion, being of one and the same Religion, then it is plainly seen which way
their hearts, and resolutions tend, although their Declarations (to delude the
World) seem and pretend to go quite contrary; this is that Sect, who being
employed as a Factor by the Clothiers of Barfould in Suffolk, runs away at one
time with the value of 1500 pounds worth of cloth (as I am credibly informed.)
I omit to recount many more (as that daring affront offered by Cornet Joyce) in
removing his Majesty from Holdenby, contrary to the pleasure of both Houses,
and his own royal assent. I omit that of Crumwel, who (when his Majesty
refused to sign a paper given him, by him) answered his Majesty, that he had
as good he had: yet in passing by these, and many more his Royal Majesty has
showed an incredible patience, yet though the Lion sleeps, he is not dead, but
keeps a Catalogue of all in his sacred breast, and will repay all with much use
upon the backs of some, although he be now their prisoner, if such as these
preserve the Prerogative of the King, then say men go upon their heads, when
they go upon their feet, and you may as well, --

2 Their Declarations profess to uphold the privileges of the Parliament, but
I beseech you tell me who are less upholders, nay, who are greater dissolvers
of the Parliament, and confounders of the privileges thereof, then themselves?
which is manifestly evident by several particulars. First, What was the
impeaching the eleven Members upon a mere bare pretense of some great thing
laid to their charge, when nothing could be proved against them, No, 'twas
merely their policy (under a pretense of frivolous slanders and reproaches) to
draw them out of the House, and to rob them of their birthright given them by
their Country) whereby (by their absence) their own party might be the more
prevalent to carry on their own designs, and upon this bare pretense they must
be forthwith suspended the House, although by the said house they were fully
cleared, yet for modesty sake (a thing very commendable in them) they upon
their own desire (and to satisfy the humor of the Army) absented themselves
from setting in the House, and yet for all this some of them are threatened,
some ^ought for, and some scandalous hue and cries sent after in a reproachful
way, some taken, and others searched, as Sir William Waller, who had leave
(with the rest) and passes from the Speaker, to go beyond sea, or any other
place whether they please. Now I would fain know by what authority they do
these things, they could not have their authority from the Parliament (they
having the Speakers pass to go at their pleasure,) It Is well known they had
their authority from themselves, and the root and ground of all this malice,
and calumny, and envy against them, is because they were not friends to their
proceedings as they desired, and yet their charge is not yet brought in
(because they pretend first to settle the more important affairs of the
Kingdom, which if it be not brought in before the Kingdom is settled by them,
the eleven Members shall never need to be afraid of their trial, and again,
was it not an incroaching upon the privileges of Parliament, to set them a
certain day, nay, a prefixed hour of the day, by which time they should send
them an answer to their demands (though unreasonable) or else they would do so
and so, march with their Army toward London, What was the result of the
Agitators of the Army, when they voted all them to be suspended the House, and
to sit there no more, or to sit at their peril: who sat in Parl. when the
Speaker and the rest fled to them? was not this a great diminution to the
privileges of Parl. but pray why are those that set then thus censured,
because they did not (contrary to their consciences) desert the house, and
their trust, and come to them, I pray assure me you that know the Laws of this
Land (of which I confess my self to be wholly ignorant) who have been the
faithfullest Patriots, those that sat, or those that deserted the house, I know
you will say those that sat, and mayntained their trust against all opposition
whatsoever; however if it be their fortune (I cannot say ill fortune) to be
driven from the house (though contrary to their privileges) by the power of
the Army, yet they will have many companions, and foelice est miseris socios
habuisse doloris, yet if it so come to pass, yet confident I am, that the time
will come again, when they shall set to do their Country service, and shall
enjoy (in spite of such an overruling Army) all their former Privileges and
Honor, and shall at last be accounted the best lovers of Peace, and their
Country.

I admire what blood ran then in our Nobles veins, when they so deserted the
Parliament, was all the Royal blood which was wont to run in our English
Nobles veins then lost, by my consent, if they commit the like act again, they
shall forfeit both their honor and dignity, if such as these (I mean not the
Lords) be the upholders of Parliaments, they are like to have good householders,
and if such acts as these be upholding, the Privileges of Parliament, I say no
more but, o tempora! o mores!

3 Their Declarations (I confess) demonstrate how that they will endeavor to
mayntain the Liberty of the Subject, which is a thing they as little intend as
the former, else what means their oppressing the Countries by their daily
needless Quarters (though it be not denied, they carry themselves very orderly
where they come, it is true and it is policy so to do, for thereby they make
their actions more plausible, and their ruling longer-liv'd then it would of it
self be, for if they should carry themselves any way unbeseeming, all would vie
with one hand and arm to subdue them; the fetching home of the King, and
settling him in his Throne (which I know they never intended) they declare to
the world to increase their number (many following the King as a Loadstone) and
to color and varnish their unjust and unheard of proceedings, they are
Politicians and will prove the better Statesmen: and they have already a little
learned to dissemble, because they would verify that ancient Proverb, Nescit
imperare, qui nescit dissimulare, witness else Cromwell (who being a member of
the Honorable house of Commons) (which place by his forementioned unheard of
authority, has long since unjustly forfeited) I say Cromwell in the house
declared that if the houses would but send the very shadow of their Commands to
them for to lay down their Arms, they would readily obey, and lay them down at
the House of Commons door, and ^ow they have verified this saying upon the
Houses command for their disbanding, sent to Bury, and several commands sent
them since. Let the world judge etc. And again, if they maintain the Liberty
of the Subject, what do they mean when they force the House (contrary to the
dictates of their own consciences) to recall and revoke their Votes, passed in
a free, and full house; and all this because it does not please the pallat of
the sweet toothed Army, (as I may justly term it) these be them that in all
their Propositions, and Remonstrances, speak for a free Parliament, and yet
none so much does force the Parliament as themselves. But we may see light
through the least crevice. I would fain know what confidence, and trust, the
subjects of England can repose upon any Vote the Houses passes concerning them,
when as their votes are beat back again (as I may say*) by the sword into their
own mouths, or if they come forth, they are not obeyed by a lawless, and
overruling multitude: what fruits, and enjoyements, can the subject have of
this Parliament, when as their votes are made void, and nulled (though contrary
to humaue reason, and their own privileges) yet by the threatening power of an
Independent Army. And by this their actions, they not only hinder the free
course of the Parliament, but they cause the people to loath Parliaments as
long as this generation lasts, and if the Parliament shall vote what they
desire our of fear, or condicend what they propound out of love; what English
man will ever again honor a Parliament? Furthermore, I desire to know what
security, and hopes these subjects can have who are lenders of the Public
Faith, for their money so lent, when as their greatest securities, the Excise,
and Bishops lands, and many other lies under the command of the sword of a
revolting Army.

I wonder what liberty the Citizens can expect, when Sir Thomas is the
Merchants Cash-keeper, and the Tradsmens shopkeeper. (pray God he gives a good
account) He commands all, the Tower key is the picklock key, whereby he may
enter every man's house at his pleasure.

I wonder what privilege the Apprentices will reap by their freedoms, when as
every tag, rag, shagd soldier will be free of any trade in the City, by the
Armies Copyhold. Is the Liberty of the subject, and the freedom of the City
like thus to be maintained? Judge all reasonable men, to reason it is
impossible, that that which is deliberately enacted by the Parliament can be of
force, when it is repealed again by violence.

4 Their Declarations, etc. Presents to the view of the world another false
glass, which is, that they will to their utmost endeavors procure to settle a
firm, and lasting Peace in this Kingdom. I believe they they will use their
utmost endeavors, and do (but what to do?) to procure all into their own
clurches, not to settle Peace and Unity: which if they do, let their military
preparations speak, their daily listings of men, there fetching Arms and
Ammunition from the Tower of London, the taking of Tilbury Blockhouses in
Essex, and their possessing themselves of many strong Holds in this Kingdom,
the placing Colonel Liburne Governor of Newcastle, and yet for all that, the
City, nor Kingdom must not raise a man for their own defense, for fear of
involving this Kingdom in a second war.

What means such acts as these? be such preparations for war as these,
settlers of a happy Peace in England? O reason, speak the truth! Fools do you
determine? Can he which comes thrusting with a naked sword at my breast, be
termed the saver of my life? Reason says no, and the same reason tells me,
that their present proceedings truly considered, shall not (neither ever can)
settle Peace in the land. But if they intend to settle Peace, for what purpose
do they surround and incompasse London, (Londoners look about you) and their
having the commands of some Forts thereof, is it to confirm Peace? believe it,
they that strive to settle Peace by the sword, distract it; however if all
these be the Mother of Peace, I fear the child will be stillborn, or if it see
the light, it will not live long, but will dye before the mother rises up, or
to speak plain, before the Armies lays down. But if it prove contrary to
expectation, and reason) that these their actions produce Peace, it is a way
newly found out, which our statesmen never knew: but they are Politians, and
Policy is but a circumstantiall dissembling, pretending one thing, intending
another; it is like to prove such a Policy; I fear their hearts do turn
tounges, to give their tongues the lie in this particular.

5. Lastly, their Declarations profess that they will be establishers of true
Religion in its purity. If they be the guardions and establishers of our
Religion, Actum est de nostra Religione, you may shake hands with true
Religion; if they settle true Religion, it will be the clean contrary way,
and under pretense of allowance to tender consciences, which they desire) all
Schisms, Sects, and dangerous. Opinions will (rush in; that gap is so wide
that many other Opinions destructive to the Common-waalth will rush in
unavoydably. Though I confess in things merely indifferent, and no ways
prejudicial to the Commonwealth, a respect is necessary to be had to tender
Consciences, but in things of great concernment (the word of God not sincerely
construed) is to bear more sway then a tender Conscience, for if a religion or
any thing else seises a man's genius, he will fly to the Altar of a tender
Conscience, though he has not a tender Conscience, or rather none at all, I
say he will make Conscience the shelter, and refuge for his villainies, but in
any thing which the word of God distinctly commands, and reason, and
experience, and examples confirms, in my opinion we must not control, nor
disobey it, under pretense, or coulor of a tender Conscience. I pray God such
ranging soldiers (used hereunto) do not open this gap to let in all manner of
four footed beasts, and two legged Monsters as themselves to graze in the
flourishing field of our true Religion. But if such actors, and acts such these
be the preservers of the Prerogative of the King, the upholders of the
privileges of Parliament, the maintainers of the liberty of the subject, the
setlers of a lasting Peace, the Establishers of true Religion, I shall desire
to use but one clause of the Letany before it bids adieu to us, and gives it
Vltimum vale to the world. which is, from such Preservers, Vpholders,
Maintainers, Setlers, and Establishers, good Lord deliver us.

But rule they will, for in reference to some Petitions presented to them, they
say, this, and this is the sense of the Army, whereby they make their sense the
supreme law of the Land.

And the unreasonablenesse of their proceedings is seen in two things.

1. In this, the tumult of the Apprentices on the 26. of July, forcing the
Parliament to unvote, what they had formerly voted, and disturbing and
affronting the members of both Houses (which truly I do not allow) must be by
them termed a breach of the Parliaments Privileges, and the contrivers and
abbettors thereof must be proceeded against according to law, and justice, and
themselves (though gu(...)y of the same crime) are scot free, and escape
unpunished, and escape unpunished, not because they have not merited any, but
because the sword says nay, they shall not suffer.

1 Now take a review of both their acts, the Apprentices came ('it is true) in
their persons, and compelled the Members of Parliament to revoake what had been
before voted upon the desire of the Army. But Vollitur causa desinet effectus,
there is never no effect without a cause; if the Army had not first (by their
unjust desires) compelled the Parliament by their Votes to alter the old
Militia, the Apprentices had never came in such a tumultuous manner to force
them (in the same kind) to revoake that which before upon the Armies unheard of
demands had been passed; so that if the Army had not first piped, and led the
way, the Apprentices would never have danced after them, for they fearce knew
the way to Westminster, so that the Army was the only cause of that mutiny.

2. The Army they ('it is confessed) came not in their own persons, but they sent
their power, and command (as their subordinate deputy) to them, and forced them
to revoke, and call in their Declaration wherein they were proclaimed Traitors
(yet they will be traitors upon record) or if they did not, they would do so,
and so, thus, and thus, and march with their whole Army up to London, as if
they would compel them by their presence.

Now the state of the cause stands thus, whether a deputy sent from a Ruler, or
an Ambassador sent from a Prince, be not as effectual, and of as much force as
the Prince, or Ruler in person, if so, then the Army are as deep in that crime
(nay deeper) then the Apprentices, seeing they can command as much by their
deputyes, as others can do by appearing in person; however it stands with
reason, that what is not allowable in the one, cannot be expedient in the
other, and yet the Army is not proceeded against, but Quod defertur, non
offertur.

Quest. But some may say that of the Apprentices was the more unwarrantable in
regard they forced the Speaker, and some of the other Members to fly from the
House. It Is true, the substance does work more upon man's nature then the
shadow, yet being the shadow is the Image of the substance, and the Deputy
represents the Image of his Lord and Master, the Army is as equal guilty of
the said crime as the other, yet neither are warrantable neither by Law, nor
reason, nor can ever such clashings strike good fire to the Commonwealth: but
how can the Speaker warrant that his absence, you say he was forced and
affrighted, and was not they that stayed behind forced and affrighted as well
as he and the rest, if so, how then comes it to pass that they deserted not
the House as well as the other, yet for their faithfulness in cleaving close
to their truth, they must be subject to the Votes of acompany of illeterate
Agitators, and a Council of War, and to desert the House according to their
pleasure: if this be just, and to uphold, nay if it be not to break the free
privileges of a Parliament, let themselves be their own judges. Again does it
become the Speaker and the rest, being placed as Magistrates in such authority,
to desert the House upon a pretense of fear, and leave the kingdom in the
lowest ebb, and in the greatest storm, like a ship in a tempest ready to
sink, no, 'twas not fear, I believe it was a thing called a guilty conscience
which made them fly.

2. There unreasonable proceedings are manifest in the manner of the Impeaching
the 11 honorable Members, they did not (as those which censure aright always
do) examine two things before they censure: first whether the parties censured
have done good or ill: secondly whether they themselves could have done better.
But they never have these considerations, but being turned by the wheel of
their own in terests, never regard how men's good names are as white balls,
which will infinitely get soil by tossing: but their censures against these 11
worthy Impeached Members, are like the butts of Rams-hornes against the walls
of Jericho, they lay level all their worthy deeds at once. But for all this,
the saying of a worthy writer may be fitly applied here. (...)mutatis,
mutandis, ille crucem pretium sceleris tulit, hic diadema, it may be verified
of them etc.

Now a word to London: o London, Sero sapium Phryges, the Phrygies were wise
too late; and so were you, it is too late (they being in) to keep Sir Thomas and
his followers out, it is too late (when the horse is stolen) to shut the stable
door, yet I dare say, and I verily believe, had the City but shown there
teeth at them, they durst not have approached; and I believe there were steeled
swords in the City, which would have pierced Crumwells skin, in spite of his
Iron sides, and there were sturdy Mastives in the City, which would have baited
that Bull into the Isle of Ely, from whence he came, and truly it would be a
greater honor to him to turn Brewer again in that Island, and for Colonel
Pride to assume his profession of a Brewers Clarke again in London, then in
being such evil instruments of the Commonwealth in the places they are for,
Praest^t in^p(...) esse; quam Impium.

I would speak one word (if without offense) to the revolted Citizens within
the City, and there erevolting Neighbors, S(...) and I would ask them one
question, what was there intention in lying Dormant to let the Army thus subdue
the City? I wonder what mercy either would have found, if the Army had come in
in fury? they would all have been in the same shocke of calamity; and misery;
friends, and foes are both a like in the eyes of such a multitude, what honor
have you achieved by selling and betraying the City (as Judas did our
Savior?) and although you have not Judas his first wages money, yet you may
have his last wages, and reward, (hanging) and truly it were a thing fit in my
opinion, that all those that were in this crime of revolting, should have
Revolter written in all there foreheads, to there utter Infamy to all ages, and
posterity^.

Quest. But some say, it is better it is thus ended, and that they stood it not
out against the Army, a great deal of precious blood is saved thereby?

Answ. To that I answer, some blood (I confess) must have been spilt, how
ever, 'twere better a little were lost, then all your Liberties lost, Come
Citizens, Libertas dici inaestim abilis, you applied a certain remedy to a
suspected disease, you feared shedding of some blood, which was but suspected,
and did not fear the losing of your Liberties, which is certain; if the City
had stood out in a general defense, much blood could not have been spent, for
Plus virtus unita valet, vis nihill vinci
Si meus null fides null sit, null manus.


And if the City had but done so, Term time, that Army would not have hurt it,
but they might have enjoyed their ancient freedoms, and Liberties, which now
they must bid adieu unto.

A word to Sir Thomas and the Army under his command, Gentlemen Soldiers, and
Agitators; you shall scarce be warm in your honor by these proceedings;
Thieves of honor seldom find joy, in there purchases, (stability never) you
seek honor (like Absolon) by indirect means, but you may (like him) be
pulled down with a vengeance, you aspire to preferment by wrong means, being
like them that ascend a pair of stairs on horseback, it is ten to one but
your beasts will cast you before you reach the top of preferment; Though Caesar
had not his equal, nor Pompey his superior, yet Fairefax may meet with both,
and although yet no rubs cross him in his undertakings, but all things smile
upon him with an auspicious reverence, yet before he attaines the Throne, many
lets must encounter him. There is a King, who when (like the Sun) he shall
arise again in our Horison, will by his glorious beams chase away these
numerous flies: I say there is a King, a Cavalier, a Bishop, a Presbyterian, a
Roundhead, and a true Englishman, all Antipodes to Independants; therefore
Fairefax hold thy hand, the beginning of thy Reign shall not come in our
Almanacks this year; Agitators leave plotting, and counselling, it is better
to desist betimes, then to be forced to it nolens, volens, A sword of Gold will
command an Englishman, more than a sword of Steel; Fairefax take warning,
beware, and look behind to what has been done, you sign all that is
presented to you from your Agitators, and your Council of War; your hand is
upon record for all, your back must hear all, it will sink you if you be not
strong backed; you must answer and appear for all, when Crumwell and the rest
of your Councillors will pull there necks out of the collar, though as guilty
as you they will set you in the Front of the battle to bear the brunt, when
they themselves will fall back to the Rear and be secure, o beware, bewise,
Praestat sero, quum nunquam.

A word to all true noble Englishmen, be patient you who have bin grinded by
the King, you that have been oppressed by the Parliament, and now been slaves
to this overruling revolting Army, or oppressed by any subordinate power,
derived from any of these three waits, and be patient all you that have lost
your goods and estates; Flebile principium melior fortunae sequata est, There
will come a time when all shall enjoy there own, when King Charles is settled
agai in his thrown and injoyes his own, which shall be my daily prayers, and
that this kingdom may flourish again with all the freedoms, liberties and
happiness it formerly enjoyed, which God of his infinite mercy grant, Amen.

Now Soldiers (Gentlemen Soldiers) I would term you if your proceedings
were answerable; if you wynch, it is to be feared you are galled, and if I have
any way incensed you, you must not stir; you are bound to the peace, your
hands are tide behind you in two regards. First, you go under the notion of
Saints, and Saints are not envious nor vindictive, you allow Liberty of
Conscience to do and speak, therefore you cannot exempt me, and in this
regard, though I thought not to have revealed my name; yet because you shall
see I do not fear, my name is,

Andrew, All Truth.

Courteous Reader;
IF in any thing in the foregoing Discourse thou have reaped any profit, I
shall think my self fully satisfied for my pains: there is nothing in it, but
what is as clear as the Sun. And as my Conscience commanded me, so have I
obeyed and published it, though contrary to my desire. If any thing therein
displease thee, thy pardon I humbly crave, and rest

Thine

FINIS.

