THE ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE Septuagint.

Written in Greek by ARISTEVS near two thousand years ago.

BEING His Voyage to Jerusalem, as Ambassador from Ptolomaeus Philadelphus,
unto Eleazar, then High Priest of the Jews: concerning the First Translation of
the HOLY BIBLE by the Seventy two Interpreters.

With many other remarkable Circumstances, no where else to be found.

First Englished from the Greek, by the Learned and Reverend Dr. John Done,
late Dean of St. Paul's.

Now Revised, and very much Corrected from the Original.

London, Printed for W. Hensman, and Tho. Fox, Booksellers in Westminster Hall.
1685.



To the Reader.
ALthough Time and Death, from our Cradles to our Graves, pursue us swiftly,
and, according to the Almighties Ordinance, overtake and seize upon our frail
and earthly parts, upon some sooner, upon others later: yet Excellent Acts,
like strong Eagles, break from their seizure, and soar above them in so sublime
a pitch, as neither Time, with all his Power and rusty Powder, with which he
blots and rubs out Brass and Marble, can quite obscure or extinguish them,
neither Death close in his dark-gaping Mouth (the Grave) their Nobleness.
Witness this small, yet ancient History, which this last Summer I made part of
my Exercise, to put into an English Habit.

That the Story is ancient, I may well say; for it is 1900 years since Aristeus
Writ it to his Brother Philocrates; which Aristeus, St. Hierom, in his Epistle
to the Pentateuk of the Bible, says, was Great Esquire.
Hyperaspistes to Ptolomeus Philadelphus, King of Egypt, Syria, Phenicia, and
Cilicia, and son of Ptolomeus Lagus, one of the great Captains of Alexander
Magnus, that divided his Conquests (the World) amongst them.

This Ptolomeus Philadelphus was a most accomplished young Gentleman,
virtuously disposed and so great a lover of Learning, as he had accumulated
into his Library according to some Authors, 1800000 Volumes, Argument of the
History.
Printing being not then risen in our Hemisphere, was by the said Aristeus, a
most Noble Person, and a great friend of (the then captive Jews) (as an
Instrument of God) for the Liberty and Freedom of them, (then his People)
practiced with Demetrius Phalerius, to tell the King, that his so abundant
Library was but poor, because it wanted the Book of Books, the sacred Volume of
God, which we call the Holy Bible: The King, virtuously covetous thereof,
demanded how he should best acquire it? Aristeus, waiting this desired
Occasion, proportioned his advice, that he should first set all the Captived
Jews, not only in Egypt, but also in Syria, etc. at free Liberty: and send
Ambassadors and Presents to Eleazar their High Priest and Pontiff. The King
willingly consents thereto, as to the Music of his desires, and prepares most
rich Presents, as a Table of Massy Gold, embellished with precious Stones,
Cups of Gold and Silver likewise adorned, sets at freedom the Captived by
public Edict, and sends as Ambassadors Aristeus, and Andrea, Prince and great
Captain of the Guard of his Person, with these Gifts, and diverse Talents of
Gold and Silver.

They go, deliver his Letters of Request and Commends, have gracious
entertainment, return with the 72 Interpreters Jews Letters, and also Eleazars
Presents to the King, and in especial, with the Sacred Volume and Word of God.

The good King adores the Books, feasts the Bringers, who after fall to the
Business, and Translated it out of the Hebrew into the Greek, the common
learned Language of those Times, made famous by the Sword of Alexander. And
this in brief is the effect of this Venerable History, which is by me thus made
yours.

And though I seem to Anticipate thus to you, yet it is as nothing; for in it
self, as you may further see, it is Elaborately and Eloquently Written by the
said Aristeus; and let no man wonder too much thereat, as thinking our Times
excel theirs in Eloquence: No; For who ever exceeded Demostenes the Greek, or
Cicero the Latin, therein?

Lastly, to speak the Praise of History, Libri sunt vasa memoriae, and worthy
Historical Books have in them a kind of Divine Permanency; and as Eminent
Persons should affect Noble Actions, so ought they to cherish the Registers, as
their Honourers.

For, has not Plutarch made those Giant Heroes, as Theseus, Romulus,
Alexander, Julius Caesar, and the rest, yet live? and himself, more praisfully,
longer then them all? So as an ignorant swaggering Fellow threatened his
Adversary to kill him if he had as many lives as Plutarch^ Did not Alexander
sigh for another Homer?

Lastly, (If I have in honor of the History) like one holding a lighted Taper
to the clear No^^^shining Sun, made an Appendix, showing the Antiquity and
Dignity of the Books, by the said S^^tuagint Translated, and the Excelle^^y of
their inspired Writer, Moses; and have therein been too prolixious, pardon me,
because of the Profundity and Worthiness of the matter: So I referr you to
that, and the rest;

and so rest Yours, John Done.

The Elenchus, or Contents of the following Book.
CHaracters of the Persons that were herein Aiders, employing and employed. p.
(1) Aristeus to his Brother Philocrates. p. 1. The Discourse that Aristeus held
with King Ptolomy, for the deliverance of the Jews. p. 10. The Request of
Demetrius Phalerius to King Ptolomy. p. 20^ Tenor of the Letter of King
Ptolomy, to Eleazar High Priest of Jerusalem. p. 23. Eleazar, High Priest, to
King Ptolomy, our most Illustrious Friend. p. 27. The Names of those which were
chosen of all the Lines and Tribes of the Jews to go into Egypt for the
Translation of the Law of Moses. p. 30. Of the Presents sent to Eleazar,
High Priest of the Jews, by King Ptolomeus Philadelphus. p. 33. Of the Vessels,
Cups, and Viols of Gold. p. 43. Of the City of Jerusalem and Region
thereabouts, as it was 260. years before the Birth of our Savior. p. 49. Of
the Priests. p. 53. Of the High Priest Eleazar. p. 54. Of the Fortress or
Castle of Jerusalem. p. 56. Yet more of the Town. p. 58. Of the Region about
Jerusalem, and of the Policy of the Countrey-people, or Pesants. p. 60. What
manner of men the Translators of the Law were. p. 66. Of the Answers made by
Eleazar upon certain points of the Law of Moses. p. 70. Return of the
Ambassadors into Alexandria with the Jewish Doctors: and how the King adored
the Holy Law seven times with Tears in his Eyes. p. 88. Answers of the Jewish
Doctors to Questions propounded by King Ptolomeus Philadelphus. from p. 96. to
154. The means used by the 72 Doctors in their interpreting the Law. p. 159. A
Discourse in way of Apology concerning the truth of this Story: Also diverse
Opinions of both Ancient and Modern Authorities and Fathers, concerning the
manner of the Translation. p. 170. Lasty, an Appendix in Honor of this Ancient
and Famous History, discoursing the Antiquity and Dignity of the Books, and the
excellency of their inspired Writer Moses. p. 175.
Certain Praecognita, or Characters of the chief Persons mentioned in the
ensuing History.
1. Of Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
PTolomeus, second of that Name, Surnamed Philadelphus, King of Egypt, of
Phaenicia, and of Cypres, Son of the first Ptolomeus, Son of One of the
Captains of Great Alexander, the third Monarch.
Lagus, began his Reign in the 271 year before the Incarnation of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

This Ptolomeus Philadelphus was endoctrined in the Science of good Letters, by
Strabo the Peripatetick: in which he became so excellent, that he was esteemed
one of the most accomplished Princes of his Time: but that which was in him the
most admirable, was, the Bounty, Debonarity, Sweetness, and Gentleness of his
Spirit, accommodated with the Manners and Complexions of all worthy and
deserving Persons.

By this means he entered so far, and before, in the Grace of all the World,
that every one in his thought wished he were King: And his Father, knowing his
right of Succession was to be so, and rejoicing in his hopes of him, made him
to be crowned King, and divested himself of all Authority, without reserving
any Power, Right, or Pre-eminence to himself, only a Superintendency over the
Guard of the King his Son, glorifying to be Father of such a King: For the
admiration he had of his high Virtues, kindled and gave occasion between them
both, of a most kind contention in mutual Offices, the Son yielding to the
Father, and the Father to the Son, in all, and by all, through instinct of
Devotion and Piety, so they gave lively touches one to the other in all
reduceable fitting Offices, which was cause that the People conceived a great
Fidelity and Amity toward them, so as it seemed, even the Divine Providence
prepared this Noble Spirit to introduce that great good amongst Humanes, as to
make them participants of the Laws, and Divine Illuminations wherewith God had
favored the People of the Jews above all the Nations of the World. And it
seems, that even then his Almightiness made a preparative for the Vocation of
the Ethnicks and Gentiles by Communication so of his holy Law; whereof Ptolomy
was the ordained Minister, to call the Seventy Interpreters into Egypt, As the
Latins now in Christendom.
to translate into the Greek Language, which then was the most used and vulgar
through the whole Universe. So as I am amazed at some fanatical Spirits, that
hinder us from the Knowledge of God, in not giving his Word in the Language of
the People wheresoever, as is appertaining to every one in Regard of Salvation.

I would ask those men, what Language spoke those Dames of Rome, Paula,
Eustochina, Melania, Susanna, Fabiola, Demetria, Furia, Flavia, Blesilla, and
others? For the institution of whom, Saint Hierom translated many Books of Holy
Scriptures out of strange Tongues into Latin, which was the natural Language of
the said Ladies. I would also know, who was more Wise, or better inspired then
St. Hierom? Further, it seems they either are, or would seem to be ignorant of
the Institution of the Emperor Justinian, who ordained, that those who sung in
the Temples, that they should sing high, and so intelligible, that all the
People might understand them.

But to return to Ptolomy; He undertook to erect a Library in the Capital City
of his Realm, Alexandria, the Charge whereof he gave to Demetrius Phalerius, a
Prince, and an Athenian Philosopher, who erected it so sumptuously, that there
was not the like in all the World: and it lasted until the first War of the
Romans against the Alexandrians? This King had to Wife Arsinoe, to whom he
caused a Statue to be raised, in height four Cubits, of one entire Stone,
called a Topaz, the which had been given to Bernice the Mother of Ptolomy, by a
Prince named Philemon.

2. Of Aristeus, the Author of this History.
ARISTEVS, the near Kinsman and Friend of King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, is named
by Praefat. in Pentateuchum Mosi.
St. Hierom Ptolomei Hyperaspistes, the Shield of the King, or he that defends
the King with his Shield, or Bearer of the Shield Royal, which seems to me,
that he held some such place about the King his Master, as we call at this Day
the Great Esquire of the Kings Body, he was the Principal Solicitor for the
Liberty of the Jews, that then were held Slaves throughout all the Dominions of
Ptolomy; for he made the first request for them, and obtained it. And for this
cause he was sent Ambassador with Andrea, Prince of the Guards belonging to
the King, unto Jerusalem, to deal with the High Priest Eleazar; who sent to
the King Ptolomeus six Doctors of every Tribe to go on with the Translation and
Version of the Holy Books of Moses.

He writ diligently his Voyage, where he shows openly, how and by what course
those seventy two Interpreters behaved themselves in the said Books. Justin.
dialog. cum Tryphone. Irenaeus Lib. 3. Cap. 25. Clemen. Alexander. lib. 1.
stro. Epiphanius de men's. and ponditibus. Eusebius. preparat. lib. 8. chap. 1.
Some have been of Opinion, that they Translated all the Bible: but it is more
likely to many that Hieron. in questionibus Hebraicis in chap. 5. Ezechielis,
and in cap. 2. Michiae. Iosephi praefat. in Antiquit. and lib. 12. Antiquit.
chap. 13. Philo. de vita Mosis. lib. 2.
they Translated but the five Books, that is Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, and Deuteronomy, which they call the Pentateuck, which is the Law of
Moses: for Aristeus speaks but of the Law of Moses, and it is not likely that
they touched the Books Historical, nor the Prophets; for if it had been so,
Aristeus would not have been silent thereof.

Moreover, that which they Translated, was finished in the space of seventy two
days, which is about two Months and a half, and that is a Time too small, and
therefore impossible to Translate all the Old Testament. Nevertheless, I am not
ignorant, that there was a turning of other Books of the Bible, that go by the
name of the seventy two Interpreters. But I am persuaded that they were not
then done in Egypt, unless that after they were returned to Jerusalem, they
Translated the rest of the Holy Books: although both in that and other
Opinions, I submit me to the deliberation of the Church, from which I will not
stray. But however, this Translation was manifestly Miraculous: which is
sufficiently showed, by that our Lord Jesus Christ and his Apostles, in
Allegations of the Law, use the Version of these seventy two Interpreters. I
have spoken these few Words of Aristeus, to the end the Reader shall not think
that this is that Aristeus Proconensis, that could be invisible when he listed,
making folks believe that he could dye and rise again when he would, of whom
speaks Suidas, Herodotus, Pliny, and Plutarch in the Life of Romulus.

3. Of Eleazer the High Priest of the Jews.
ELeazar, of whom Aristeus makes mention, was brother of Simon surnamed the
Just: He, after the decease of his Brother Simon, in the year of the reign of
Ptolomy Ptolomeus Lagus.
first of that Name 35. was made chief of the Synagogue of the Jews, by reason
that Onias, Son of Simon his Brother, was incapable of succeeding in his
Father's Place, as being under age: This Eleazar therefore received the Honor,
that in his Time the Holy Translation of the Law was made by the seventy two
Doctors, that he sent to Ptolomeus, second of that Name, King of Egypt, as
Aristeus has left by Writing.

4. Of Demetrius Phalerius.
Demetrius Phalerius was an Athenian Orator and Philosopher, as Cicero notes in
the first Book of his Offices, calling him a subtle and sharp Disputant, and in
the rest, an Orator little vehement. He had been Disciple of Theophrastus, he
was a man of such Knowledge, and excellent Carriage, that foreign Kings had him
in Admiration, and drew him to their Service, even Cassander King of Macedon.
And for this Reputation the Athenians gave him the Principality of the City and
Commonweal, in which he was Ten years in great Prosperity: But some of the
Citizens, having conceived Malice against him, chased and threw him out of his
Estate, and then he was honorably received of King Ptolomy, of whom we speak,
where he was Master of the Library Royal; the Athenians having formerly raised
to him 360 Statues of Marble, in despite cast them to the Earth, and judged
him to death as a Traitor; of which Demetrius being advertised, said, At
Virtutem non everterunt. Diog. Laert. in vit. Demet.
The Athenians have thrown down my Statues, but they cannot over-turn my
Virtue, for which they first erected those Statues. He was wont to say, that
Diog. Laert. ibid.
Eloquence was as necessary in a Commonweal, as a Sword in the Wars. He dyed
by the biting of an Aspick, and was buried in the Region of Busina, near to
Diospolis.

The History of Aristeus, Ambassador of King Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, treating
of his Voyage unto Jerusalem: and the first Translation of the Holy Bible, by
the Seventy two Elders.
Written in Greek 1900 years since.
Aristeus to his Brother Philocrates.
WEll knowing your Natural and good inclination (Philocrates) to have always
had in great esteem the knowledge of all things, and that you have been
desirous, and even greedy to understand the occurrences and passages of good
Exploits: I have deliberated to frame to you in Writing, a matter not only
excellent in it self, but well deserving to be known; which unto us is happened,
being sent of late to Eleazar, Excellence of this History.
H. Priest of the Jews.

But because these things shall be more easy to you, I shall first declare the
Causes for which we were sent; and then I shall come to the Progress of the
Matter, so as I shall shape my Discourse to Your understanding, and that the
most truly I possibly can, as well ^or the dignity of the Subject, as to
delight your Mind, desirous of all good Knowledges, assuring my self that man
has in him nothing more excellent and laudable, than incessantly to desire
Learning, either by means of Histories, or by the Objects of things themselves,
or by the course and Experience of Affairs. For the Spir^t of Man, though Rude
and un^urnished, is greatly adorned and embellished, when from the beginning it
delights to Taste and Relish those most nourishing, fair, worthy, and
excellent things that may conduct him by an infallible course, to follow Piety
and right Reason.

We therefore searching with great curiosity into the Knowledge of Divine
things, could not arrive at them; as not understanding the Divine Law without
being interpreted and rendered into our familiar tongue, for which cause we
undertook to go Ambassador to one only Person, who amongst his fellow Citizens
and others, for frankness and great worth was in the most esteem; and who only
did great Honor and Profit to the Citizens, he conversed with, but also to all
other Jews, of what other place, or whence soever.

Being then well in^ormed, that they had the Divine Law written in Hebrew
Characters, in skins of Parchment, we were joyful to accept this charge given
us by the King; as also for that the Colonies of the Captive Jews here desired
the same above all things of the world, who had been hither led by the Kings
Father, that had reduced into his Obedience the City of Jerusalem, and all the
Country adjacent.

But since we are fallen to make mention of that matter, it will not be
impertinent to give you light into the whole Discourse, that thereby you may
take your measures better, knowing well that it will be more advisable
carefully to inform you how to address your self to the service of God
Reverently, than to travel in the search of Humane Laws or Actions, be they
never so just. Which Inclination you have sufficiently manifested, since from
an Isle so far remote, you are come to this Country to see those things that
may serve to the cultivating of your Mind, without Regard to any place
whatsoever.

I have therefore here reduced to Writing: First, what has seemed to me worthy
of Memory, touching the Nation of the Jews, as I have in some measure
understood from the Learned and Wise Priests of Egypt: to the end that by this
means I might aid and increase by some means Your knowledge: For we ought to
have in Remembrance what good we have received from oaths; and particularly to
show all gratitude to those who relate to us: And principally You, who have
knowledge of Virtue, deriving from your Brother, not only Resemblance,
Proximity of Blood, and Lineage, but those those Principles that excite you
with the same impetuosity of Courage, to attain the Honor, Glory, and Beauty
of Virtue; assuring my self that neither the admiration of Gold, or Riches, nor
the appearance of any things more precious, conduce to any thing but
vainglory; neither will they yield you any such fruit as we may gather from
Knowledge, Education, and consideration of good Discipline.

For the rest, to the end it may not seem that we make show of ostentation in
being prolix in this Preface, we will return to our purpose, from whence we
have wandered.

Demetrius Phalerius, Master of the Kings Library, after the best care he
could, giving order to purchase Books from all Parts of the World: And
employing for that purpose, great numbers of Persons, as Factors, dispersed in
many places, who had in charge to buy and transcribe them; they so doing, and
that with Diligence, the design of the King was accomplished and executed, at
least in the best manner that was possible.

For the King asking him, in our Presence, how many thousand Volumes he had
collected for his Library; he answered, for the present he had no more than two
hundred thousand, and he hoped e're long to have to the number of 500000. But
Sir (said he) I have understood that the Laws of the Jews deserve to be Copied
and Translated, and to have place in your Library: And what hinders it,
answered the King, that they be not? have you not all things to serve you
convenient for that purpose? Demetrius Answered, that it was necessary that
those Laws should be Translated and Interpreted: because the Jews had in use a
Character peculiar to their Language, far different from the Egyptians,
adjusting and accommodating their Letters to the Tone of the Voice, and that
they were much deceived, who held they spoke the Syrian Tongue: for their
manner of Speech was far distant. To which the King replied, that he would
write to the High Priest of the Jews, to the end that all might be obtained
which was requisite, to bring this matter to an issue, as Demetrius required.

Then it came to my mind, that a fair opportunity presented for the freedom of
all the Jews which his Father Ptolomaeus Lagus had led Captive from Judea into
Egypt. For whose enlargement he had often entreated Sosibius the Tarentine, and
Andrea Captain of the Guard to the Kings Body. For these two Commanding in the
Army, had reduced to obedience all that were in Syria and Phenicia, filling all
those Regions with fear and terror: and then were the Jews some of them led
Prioners, others disposed in manner of Colonies, in such numbers, as there were
brought into Egypt to the number of 100000 men, of whom were chosen well near
30000 effective, who were established as the Guard of the Province.

True it is, before that time, many had been sent with the Persians and other
Companies that were commanded against the K. of Aethiopia under the leading of
Psammiticke: but those that were there, were not of so great number as those
which were led away only by Ptolomeus Lagus. For (as we have said) he trained
to Arms all those whom Age or Ability showed to be proper, and all the rest of
the People, as well Children, as Old men and Women, he made use of for
Colonies, determining with himself, that if at any time his men of War grew
insolent, because none could surpass them in course or necessity of War, he had
means to check their presumption, by such as might be drawn from these Colonies.

Now then seeking an occasion to bring about the Liberty of these poor men (as
I have formerly said) and having found my opportunity, I opened my desire to
the King, proposing after this manner.

The Proposition of Aristeus to King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, for the delivery
of the Jews.
IT is nothing strange, my Gracious Lord and Sovereign, if many times it
happen, that those very Affairs which we manage, thwart and run counter to our
Proceedings: for all the Nations of the Jews have one and the same Law, which
we desire to be ours, not only Copied, but also Translated into the Greek
Tongue. How then expect you to succeed in this Affair, when the greatest part
of them are here in your Kingdom kept Prisoners? unless it may please Your
August and Generous Spirit to request their Holy Books, after you have restored
to free Liberty those who live here in great calamity and pressure, having
before all things Regard to that God who makes your Kingdom flourish, and has
crowned You with great prosperity: which is the same God that has given them
that Sacred Law which we desire to have. For they worship that God who has
Made and Created all things, and is the very same, whose wonderful Works all
Mankind see and admire, though some not so clearly as others; for (Sir) We and
others Call him Jupiter, and not without reason, for it has so seemed good to
our Ancestors, because by him are Procreated and live all Creatures: the same
also they esteem the Directer and and Governor of the Universe. And although
he holds all Mortals in Subjection, nevertheless he neither frustrates nor
disappoints the Prayers and Vows of those, who illuminated with Spiritual
Light, implore his aid.

We then ought humbly to desire that he would incline our hearts to such good
resolutions, as to do good, and that freely to every one, and especially to
deliver and free those that endure Slavery and Bondage: for that since Mankind
is the Work and Creation of God, who has power to turn the heart and bend it
which way it pleases him. We many times after different Methods desire it
would please him to lead us to a Perfection of Goodness, as the principal Ruler
of all Hearts and Spirits.

By this acknowledgment, I conceive great hopes to consummate this Affair,
principally, because I know God to be favorable to those that pray for things
Reasonable and Equitable. For when men set themselves wholly to seek and
accomplish what has a tendency to Justice and Perfection of Goodness, God the
Lord of all things conducts and addresseth their Actions and Affections to
blessed and happy Effects and Ends.

The King, then as something gained, with a contented Countenance said to
Andrea, How many are there of the Jews detained Captive? He answered in few
words, more than 100000; It is a small Request then said the King, Aristeus
requires of us, Sosibius and some others then there present answered, It is a
thing (Sir) worthy Your Grandeur and Generosity, to make an agreeable Present
to God by their Deliverance, in testification of your Thanks and
Acknowledgement, and since the Governor of Heaven and Earth has raised you to
a greater Height than all your Predecessors, it is but just that you make thus
a greater and more solemn Expression of your Thanks.

The King then disposed to Banqueting and pastimes in a full Feast, and
Assembly of his Nobles, commanded that the Jews should be all searched out, and
that every man of them should be redeemed for the sum of 20 Drachms by pole, A
Dram is 3 shillings^ sixpence, that is, 3 Pound 1 d. 10. shillings the head.
and to confirm the same, that his Edicts should be issued, and that herein all
the dispatch and readiness should be expressed that was possible. And so it
seemed that God accomplished and brought to pass our desires, for he pleased to
put it into the heart of the King to set at Liberty, not only those that by the
Army of the King his Father were led Captive into Egypt, but also all others
that before or since, had been carried Prisoners into Egypt, by what means
soever: the sum then of those that were freed, The Talent is 600 French
Crowns.
amounted to 400 Talents.

Moreover, I hold it not beside my purpose to send you the Copy and Tenor of
the Edict, whereby you may understand the greatness of the Attempt, and the
frankness and gracious Inclinations of the King, who has been moved by the
Goodness of God for the Salvation of Many.

The Edict of King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, for the delivery of the Jews.
WE Will and Command all those that took up Arms under our deceased Father,
through the Country of Syria, and Phaenicia, entering the Land of Judea, and
there taking the Jews and leading them Prisoners, having imposed them their
Tasks and Employments in Town and Country, that they shall deliver and restore
them to full Liberty: Moreover, we Will that all the Jews that either before or
since have been taken and led away, in what fashion or manner soever, shall be
delivered frank and free, for the ransom we have set, that is to say, twenty
drachms for every head; which sum, the men of War shall receive from the Fond
of the Staple and Stores of Victuals^ and the rest shall be received from the
Allowance of the Kings Table, or be Reserved: For we are duly informed that
those Jews were appointed and led away Prisoners against the Will of our
deceased Father, and against right Reason: And that by the boldness and
insolence of the Men of War, they were carried into Egypt, and their Country
wasted and laid desolate; when it was sufficient to have the men of War of the
said Country under their power, and all the Province reduced to obedience.

Intending then to do and render Right to every one Universally, and especially
to those who receive injury from the unjust Power of others. Moreover, to
search diligently and particularly into all things that concern Right and
Equity, and to prefer Piety and Religion before all things. Our Will and
Pleasure is, that all Jews whatsoever, being bond and Slaves within this Realm,
in what part soever they be found, be it in the Colonies or elsewhere, or be it
in whatsoever manner they were brought into our Kingdom, shall be Delivered,
Enfranchised, and set at Liberty; for we are pleased it shall be so Done.

And to the end that no Person shall be interessed, or rec^ive damage, we
Command that three days after the Publication of this present Edict, every one
whom it does concern, shall bring before us their Requests, containing the
number of heads that every one has set at Liberty. For so it pleases us to
have it, for the profit of Us, and our Kingdom.

Declaring further, that the Goods of those who are not obedient to this our
Edict, shall be forfeited and Confiscate: And we give liberty to whosoever
will, to accuse and inform against their Contumacy or Contempt of our Will and
Pleasure.

This Edict being written, completed, and brought to the King, to know if his
pleasure were it should be Published in this manner, or that he would Correct,
and so Approve it. When he perceived that these words, viz. And those that
before and since had been led prisoners, were wanting, he inserted them out of
his Goodness and Bounty. He then made the of money presently to be doubled to
his Treasurer and Officers of his Finances.

Which Distribution was dispatched in the space of seven days. And there was
defrayed well near six hundred and sixty thousand Talents; for there were found
a great number of Children with their mothers, who were all set at Liberty, and
for every head of theirs, was paid by the Kings Command, twenty Drachms: Which
was discharged by the King, to his great Content and Satisfaction.

After all was done, he commanded Demetrius, by course of estate, to deliver
him the number of the Hebrew Volumes. For with these Kings it is in use to
comprise all things in Edicts, and to signify nothing, be it never so small a
business, without Writing; as well for greater State and Ceremony, as also that
Belief may more certainly be given thereto.

Therefore to the end you may, as it were, have all before your Eyes, ^ will
here insert the Tenor and Copy of the Request made to the King, by Demetrius,
and the Epistles which were sent for those that were franchis'd; so as you may
see the number, and of what Quality they were; and according to the Trades and
Professions by which they were distinguished, and how they were Registered and
enrolled. The Copy of Demetrius his Request to the King, was this.

The Request of Demetrius Phalerius to the King Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
GReat Sir, Since it has pleased you to give me Command to search in all
places for all manner of Books, to replenish and adorn your Library: I have
thought it fit and necessary that we procure and get the Books of the Jewish
Laws, and some others, that we are yet wanting and unfurnished of, and because
the said Books of the Jews are Written in Hebrew Characters, peculiar and best
known to the Jews alone, and therefore not yet fallen into your Royal hands,
nevertheless, that they may be gained and ranked amongst your other Volumes,
partly for the Wisdom contained therein; partly for their Sublimity and Divine
height of matter, of which Poets and Historians make often mention, as very
profitable to instruct to good manners, to form and address the Republic into
the fairest shape of Government, by reason of the Dignity of men therein
mentioned, the Dignity of matters therein treated; as Scripsit librum de
Judaeis, test Suida.
Hecateus Abderita plainly testifies.

These things seriously considered, (Great King) it would do well, may it
please you to write to Jerusalem, and to the High Priest there, that he would
send you Six men of every Tribe or Line, and that they be such as are of good
Parts and Quality, of venerable Age, best acquainted and Versed in their own
Law, that being all able Translators, they may with Judgment choicely select
and cull that course of Expression which may be of a piece and Harmoniously
agreeing amongst themselves. And this done (great Sir) shall hope you may
accomplish a course worthy of so excellent a Design, and at last suiting well
with with your Desire.

The King having read this Request ordered Letters should be drawn and sent to
Eleazar the High Priest, about this matter: In which were signified to him the
Deliverance o^ the Jews from their Captivity^ With the Letter, he ordained also
to be made ready Cups, Vessels, an^ a Table of pure Gold, with fifty Ta^lents
of Gold, and seventy of Sil^ver, for Oblations there to be offered with many
precious Jewels and stone^ of very great value: Command^ing the Goldsmiths to
finish these things with all speed, and the mone^ in Talents for the Oblations
to b^ raised forthwith. And because yo^ shall at large understand the King
alacrity in this Affair, I send yo^ here the Copy of the Letter the King Writ,
whereof the Tenor i^ as follows.

King Ptolomeus Philadelphus to Eleazer, High Priest of the Jews.
COnsidering the great Multitude of Jews inhabiting within our Territories, (of
whom some have been led from Jerusalem in the times when the Persians had the
Power, and others followed our deceased most honorable Lord and Father, being
joined with him, whereof many were received into his pay and ranked as his
Soldiers, and Military Men: the most faithful and trusty of which were
established in the strongest Forts for Garrisons, by that means to curb the
insolences of the Egyptians.) We since being come to the Crown, and having
singular Inclinations to exercise Liberality and Munificence toward all
Persons, and particularly to the Citizens, have infranchised and set at Liberty
more than a hundred thousand, ordaining that out of our Money a just ransom
should be paid to all those that held them Prisoners, valuing every head at a
certain rate, as desiring to govern with Reason, and to restore them to Peace
and tranquillity, whom the Impetuosity, Cruelty, and Disorder of War has
disturbed and diverted from Right and Equity. In which we think to have done a
good and pious act and a work grateful to the great God for all the great
favors received of his hands, making him this Offering, for having signalized
above all the world this our Kingdom with a most flourishing Peace,
Tranquillity, and eminent Renown.

And such others as have been Slaves and Bondmen in our Army, we have appointed
Soldiers in our Militia, and those that have been found more worthy for their
Faith and Fidelity, we have made Commanders, and preferred them to our Court.

Further, because it is our desire they and all others of their Nation, spread
and scattered throughout the Universe, may be thankful for our favors: we have
resolved to cause your Law Written in Hebrew Letters, to be Translated into the
Greek Language; and that our Royal Library be adorned therewith, as it is with
other Books: you will do well then as a thing very agreeable to us, and
answering our Design and Intention, if you elect out of every Tribe or Line of
your Nation, six of the most Aged Persons, and such as shall be found of the
best Breeding and Sufficience, and of greatest Authority in the Service of the
Law, and that have the best Style in Writing to make this Translation: for so
will the Truth thereof be better and more easily gathered, if the Set of
Interpreters be men of mature Judgment, and well exercised in the Law: well
weighing that to effect well and worthily such an Interpretation and
Translation: it is needful there should be Pains, curious Study and Reflection,
which may be found in the endeavors of Many who are more sharp, more subtle,
and more discerning than One alone.

Moreover, we judge that by the accomplishing so great a work, there will
redound to us great Honor and Glory.

For this cause therefore we have sent unto you, Andrea, Captain of the Guard,
and Aristeus, men of Honorable place in our Court, who have Commission on our
part to present you with Jewels for your sacrifices, and an Hundred Talents of
Silver for other uses.

Herein you will give us great content and pleasure, and express a courtesy
resenting Amity, if you have need of any thing, to require it for we will not
fail to furnish and accommodate you therewith immediately.

To which Epistle Eleazar answered as follows.

Eleazar, the High Priest, to King Ptolomeus Philadelphus, our most illustrious
Friend.
IF you are well (Sir) and the Queen Arsinoe, and my Lady your Sister, and my
Lords, your Children, God be praised; for health is a thing to be desired, and
acknowledged as due unto him, who is Giver thereof: As for us, we are in good
prosperity, praised be the Giver.

We have received your Letters, which brought us great Content, by reason of
your Counsel, Enterprise, and Design; as also for the love and good will you
bear us.

Having received them, we made a great Assembly of the People, to whom in a
long Discourse, we have made known your Liberality toward our Nation, and
exposed to view your Presents and Oblations, to the end they should understand
your holy Affection and Piety toward our God.

Showing publicly the twenty Vessels and Viols of Gold, the thirty of Silver,
which you have sent, the five cups of Gold, with the Table of proportion, and
the hundred Talents of Silver, to be employed for the Victims and other uses
requisite to the Priests: Which Jewels were to us presented by Andrea one of
your Princes, and Aristeus: Persons truly worthy of note, both for external
beauty, and excellency of Behavior and condition, as also rare Knowledge;
briefly, Lords worthy in all things of your Conversation and Justice, by whom
we have been fully informed of your will and intention, agreeing with the
Tenor of your Letters.

Wherefore we will wholly set our selves to endeavor to accomplish your
desire: For although it be a difficult thing to bring well to perfect effect,
yet for the Times to come it will be an Argument of our great Confederation and
Amity: For you have obliged our Citizens with a great, and as it were, an in
inestimable Beneficence. Whereupon we have offered to God the Sacrifice of
Thanksgiving for you, your Sister Children, and Friends; and the whole
multitude of people has prayed to God for your Prosperity, and that it will
please him to address your affection in all your Acts; and that God the Ruler
of all things, will make your Realm to flourish, and increase in Peace and
Glory: And that the Translation of the Sacred Law, may redound unto your Profit
and Advantage.

After these Sacrifices were accomplished, all the People being together; we
chose Persons of better Rank, and men of Honor and of good Life and Report,
being Six of every Tribe or Line, which we have sent to you, with the Holy Law,
which was left us, by the Inspired Writer Moses. Be it your pleasure (Sir) to
return them us, after the Translation of the Books shall be completed.

These are the Names of those that were chosen from all the Lines and Tribes of
the Jews to go to Egypt, to make the first Translation of the Holy Bible, or
Law of Moses.
Of the first Tribe. JOsephus, Ezechias, Zacharias, Ioannes, Ezechias,
Heliseus. Of the second. Judas, Simon, Somoelus. Adeus, Mathias, Eschemias. Of
the third. Nehemias, Josephus, Theodosius, Baseas, Ornias, Dacis, Of the
fourth. Ionathas, Auxeus, Heliseus, Annanias, Chebrias, Sacheus, Of the fifth.
Iasacus, Iacobus, Jesus, Cabateus, Simon, Leuis. Of the sixth. Judas, Josephus,
Simon, Zacharias, Somelus, Selemias. Of the seventh. Sabbatens, Jason, Jesus,
Theodotus, Ioannes, Ionathas. The eighth. Theodosius, Jason, Jesus, Theodotus,
Ioannes, Ionathas. The ninth. Theophilus, Abrahamus, Arsamus, Jason, Endemias,
Danielus. The tenth. Hieremias, Eleazarus, Zacharias, Baneas, Helisius,
Datheus. The eleventh. Samuel, Josephus, Judas, Ioathes, Chabel, Desitheus. The
twelfth. Isaelus, Ioannes, Theodosius, Arsamenus, Abiethas, Ezecelus. Number of
all 72.
Such was the Answer to the Letters of the King.

NOw I will declare to you the most succinctly I can possible, the beauty and
workmanship of the things we found in Jerusalem, being with Eleazar; and those
also which were sent to him: for all was wrought with singular Art, and of most
exquisite beauty; the King being therein so careful and intent to per^orm
abundantly all that was necessary for finishing so extraordinary Work, that of
his own proper motion he went and came, visiting every one of the
Master-workmen and Goldsmiths, whom he kept so close to their business, that he
permitted them no idle time for Sport or Debauches.


Of the Presents sent unto Eleazer, Chief Priest of the Jews, by King Ptolomeus
Philadelphus.
And first of the Table of Gold.
IT behooves then, that first we describe the Table, for it was a work of
admirable luster. The King desiring to show therein a Masterpiece of Work:
wherefore he demanded the measure and dimension of the Table which was in the
Temple of Jerusalem, and the ornaments of the same. When he knew the measure,
he asked if they would receive a greater. And being answered by some of the
Priests and others; if there where no let, a greater might have place there.

The King then replied, that h^ intended to give one five times bigger than
that was there, provided that might not be inconvenient for the Priests, by its
disproportionable quantity. Further, consideration ought not only to be had of
the Receipt and Capacity of the Place, but also of its Accommodation to the
Sacrifices thereon to be prepared, and that he was not without consideration,
that the Jews had not made that which they then had in their Temple of so small
size for penury and want of Gold: for when it was made, they abounded in all
Wealth and Riches: but that it seemed to him they had so proportioned it from
some reason of a perfect Dimension.

Therefore his Opinion was, that the Present would not be well and duly formed,
if the Table he intended to make, were Longer or Higher than the Other.
Therefore forecasting in his Thoughts, which were clear and ready to weigh
every thing with good judgment: he gave it in charge to the Goldsmiths that
were most ingenious, and of best capacity, to finish and accomplish the
Business, engraven and adorned with all possible Variety: commanding that those
who wrought in the Borders, Raisings, Floweries, Wrappings, Entortilations, and
such like; should amuse themselves only for Beautifying and Decoration: and
what was to be plain, should answer to the Measure and Dimension, and that in
all these things they should be exquisitely Careful.

This Table was two Cubits large, and a Cubit and a half in height, nor are you
to think it was covered with Plates of Gold superficially, ^or it was made all
of solid, massy, pure, and fine Gold; round about it was a Crown of twelve
fingers large, wrapped with Bars of Gold and other pretty Works in fair
passages, in manner of little threads, and enterlaced with little cords retiring
to the Canetils, a work very shining, and polished of the three sides, for the
Table was made in a Triangular form, and on every side wrought of the same
fashion: so that on what side soever one stood it appeared to be but one
Frontispiece and one Face. For if you came to behold it on one side, the plain
of the Table by the Crown with which it was bordered, discovered to your eyes a
most resplendant Beauty very admirable, and the outward work with the Rays and
Splendor of the two Squares so dazzled the eyes, that one could scarce behold
it; for the Table as we have said, was Triangular, and showed with one and the
same Front and Superficies on which side soever you turned.

It was also inchased with precious Stones fastened by Golden Buttons tied with
Loops, and these Stones were wrought so naturally within one another, that they
showed a String and Wreathing of such Subtilty, that to any ones thinking it
was not possible to be imitated. And those Stones were supported and stayed by
Buckles and Clasps of Gold for more firmness, and the Joints and Connextures of
Squares made with so great Art, knit and interwoven one within another, to keep
sure and join all the work, that in beholding them the Art was scarce
discernable.

Moreover, in the great Compass of the Crown that environed the Table by the
aspect above, there was a row of Stones in fashion of little Ovals that were
riveted, and locked together, and filed with little wreaths of Gold which raised
the luster: and these Oval Stones were thick set the one with the other; and
the whole Table was as it were encircled with this thread of Ovals. A little
above this Chain of wreathed Stones the Master Goldsmiths had labored a Girdle
of Flowers, and Clusters of all Fruits, interlaced and following together so
well, that by their eminent risings amongst the Bosses of the encircling Crown,
you might see Grapes clustered together; Ears of Corn, Dates, Apples, Olives,
Roses, and many such like; amongst which many Precious stones set and wrought
in Gold in their Color and Form, in their true and natural Resemblance;
representing those Fruits with admirable Art. And with this Adornment the
Cornishes and Frontispiece of the Table were enriched all round; and so was
this Work of Fruits corresponding with the Oval Stones abovesaid.

To all these Decorations are joined other burnished Works, cut in Sculpture;
and in part with wreaths and Verges of Gold, beautifying all the Circuit of the
Table: So that from the two parts which presented themselves to the sight, with
the Beauty of the Crown to the place where stood the feet of the Table, one
might see a like Beauty, and curiosity of folding; still full of luster which
part soever of the Table were turned.

They made the Plate of all the Table solid and massy, of the thickness of
four fingers: to the end that they might more firmly and fixtly bind in the
feet and tressles to support it strongly.

These feet were fastened to the Crown without being perceived how, and were
firmly joined with Buckles and Clasps: in such manner that the Table might be
supported and well fixed which way soever the Table were turned, and yet still
shining to the eye. In the Superficies hereof was represented in a fair work
the Flood of Meander, running with its circuits, returns, and windings; in the
Channel of which, one might see a Splendor of precious Stones, representing
its rolling waves, which Wreath was of Carbuncles, Emeralds, Agats, and all
other sorts of Precious Stones, sparkling with their native Luster.

Near to this Flood there was an interlaced Work as a Wreath of Hair, (a thing
admirable to behold) sh^wing in its aspect a Geometrick Figure, made of Cristal
and Amber, and this Figure was a Solid Square, whereof all the Squares were
equal, and the Angles of the four sides oblique. In this polished Figure was
showed the forms of the Beholders, as in a fair Mirror. For the rest, the
Ingenious hand of the Master workmen had made the feet of the Table like
Flower-de-luces, of which the Flowers turning shell-like backwards, sustained
the Table; the said Flower-de-luces thick with leaves, sprouting up as from
within: the foot was sustained and stayed in this manner.

There was a Stone of a Carbuncle, of which the length was twelve fingers;
having the form of a Rock made in a Precipice, and had about eight fingers in
breadth: and upon this stone was born up all the burden and weight of the
Tressle. Upon this rises up a Lyre or Herbstring, which twining about the
enclosure of a Vine, embraced it even to the top, the Grapes hanging about on
every side: In this Table were four feet alike in disposition and proportion of
workmanship, and of all four was one self-same perspective: and so well were
these things accomplished and perfected, with admirable Skill and Contrivance,
of men Inventive and Ingenious; that not only the aspect of things true was
made as it were false and delusory to the eyes, but also one might hear the
leaves rattle by stirring of a little wind moving them one against another: so
were all things labored even as it were to the Life and Nature, every thing
shaping a lively Image of what it was designed to represent.

Moreover, the Tressles of the Table were contrived moveable, and to be removed
on all sides; wherein there was a Secret of Workmanship which could not be seen
or perceived for the Greatness of the Work: and by the means of certain Clasps,
all was to be removed together although no one could perceive either Crevis,
Joint, or Rivet: For the Table was no more than a Cubit and a half big in all,
yet thereupon, was great Expense bestowed, and many Talents employed.

For after the King had resolved not to exceed the Measure and Size of that
which was in Jerusalem, all that he determined to lay out upon one much
greater, was employed, and much more, in the Decoration of this: Thus all was
done with great Skill and Design, and was very admirable and extraordinary,
according to the Kings wish.

Of the Vessels, Cups, and Viols of Gold.
THe two Cups from the foot to the middle, were cut all in a scaly work; and
betwixt every two Scales, riveted with Precious Stones, the radiant shine
whereof, cast such a reflection to the Eyes, that it wounded the sight with a
Glory. The Tower of these Cups was girt with a Sculpture of the Flood of
Meander, of the height of a Cubit; all encompassed and interlaced with variety
of Stones, of inestimable beauty and value. Near the Flood, there was a tress
of hairs of Gold, with tufts joined together from the Bowl above to the bottom,
being spread in clear ways like a net of Thread: In the middle parts whereof
were to be seen many Precious Stones, disposed in the form and figure of a
Scutchion, amongst which there was only a Space or Interval of four fingers;
whose Splendor made the Grace of the Work more agreeable to the Eye: upon the
lips and border of the Cups there was a Crown interlaced with Flower-de-Luces,
bunches of Grapes, intermixed one with another, and wreathed like Cordage, and
so running round: These Cups thus wrought with most rich Workmanship, held more
than two Mettrets.

But the Tankards of Silver were yet adorned and decorated with much more
Beauty, in full work and polish: for within they were so resplendant, that one
might see all things more to the life than in a Mirror. And it is not possible
to tell how the figures of all things were represented to the life, by the
Polish and sparkling brightness of them, which were so radiant and shining,
that if you set one of the Silver Cups by one of the Gold, then one of the
Silver, and so one of Gold; and so followed this method, they made an admirable
show, and impossible to be long looked on; for they cast such a lightning from
one side to another, with rays penetrating one another luster, that it even
dazzled and reverberated the point of the Sight, so that no soul was long able
to behold them: For if you turned your Eyes to a Cup of Gold, they were so
encountered with the order and splendor of the works variety, and with the
force of the light and flaming, which would so strike the point of the sight,
that you could hardly hold them from twinkling, so as you would be forced to
turn them elsewhere, or not too steadily to behold their lightning: And if you
looked upon one of Silver, a greater effusion of Light was shed abroad: So that
your eyes seized with dimness, you were not able to discern thoroughly the the
structure and art.

For the Vessels and Viols of Gold, they were wrought with such design, that
the middles were adorned with clusters of Grapes, the Verges and Lips with
bunches and encirclings of leaves of Myrrh and Olives, wreathed together in
fashion of a Crown, about all the mouth parts, and all set with Precious
Stones, agreeing with the spaces and convenience of the distances: So as, I
assure you, the Master-workmen, had expressed their Art in imbellishing and
adorning every thing, with an ambitious desire to grace the Design, and to
exalt the Magnificence of the King: So that in all the Treasures, nor in all
the Cabinets, nor what other thing soever, was not to be found any thing so
rich, so fair, or so precious, as were these Royal Works.

For the King, who had a tender regard of his Honor, there had employed all
care and diligence, and prodigally lavished his magnificence. For of his own
accord he came often to visit the Works, conversing and mingling his advice
with the Master-Goldsmiths, making them change, now this, now that, according
to his Liking.

Likewise he forbad them expressly, to stir from their business, till all were
finished and completed according to his mind, so that all was perfected with
great Art in a most extraordinary manner, as well for a testimony of his
illustrious Excellence and Degree, as also for the Dignity of the High Priest,
who was of so honorable a Character, for whom these things were intended.

Of great Value was the multitude of Stones, of which some were so Rare, as
that they are scarce known, yet being of mavelous Greatness, they amounted to
the Number of five thousand: And yet for all that, the Art was of greater value
than the Stones: And all being valued together, it plainly appeared that both
Precious Stones and curious Workmanship exceeded five times the Gold therein
employed, both in Beauty and Value. In fine, I hope what I have already
Written, may yield you some delight in knowing these rare and curious things,
and the true love and ingenious goodness of the King therein.

Now that which follows, will set forth the Discourse of our Journey to
Eleazar: And because you may at large understand all Circumstances, I will
describe to you first the Province, or City of Jerusalem, and then the Country
round it.

Of the City of Jerusalem, and the Country round it.
WHen we arrived near to Jerusalem, we discovered the Town, situate on the
Mountain, in the midst of the Province of Judea, opening thereby a far
extended Prospect to the View. On the top of the Hill is situate the Temple,
of a most graceful Figure, and Aspect, and very fair to the Eye:

About the same is a Girdle of three tire of Walls raised to the height of
seventy Cubits, and of convenient thickness in Proportion to the height, which
encompass all the Temple with an excellent Beauty and magnificent Work: The
sight of the Gates, the knitting and evenness of the Stones, the Frontispieces
and Buttresses, the faces of the Portals represent a beauty with great luster
and excellency of Workman ship, and one might ^lainly see, that in all this
structure there was a rich abundance of all things, and that no expense had
been wanting.

Without the the Temple, there was a Veil by which the Temple was closed; round
this Veil was hanged Travers from the magnificence of the Portals, yielding a
very pleasing Spectacle; and principally then, when a little Wind rose from the
Pa^ement, and entering within the Veil, ran from low to high, making undulations
and billows like Waves, and moving delightfully with Gales following one
another, reciprocally and successive blowing.

Within the Temple there was an Altar accompanied with a Chimney very properly
and conveniently built, accomodate to the place for the Victimes there to be
offered. The Stairs to ascend thither were fair and evenl^ disposed, agreeable
to the Mag^^cence of the Pla^e, both for comel^^ss, as ^^for the ease of the
Priests, who were invested with Garments of Linen very delicate and soft. The
forepart of the Temple looking to the East, turns the back of it to the West,
and the spaces thereof are adjusted with exact proportion, in all dimension and
show a Beauty very excellent, and Work of good Grace^

The Floor is paved with Stones, the Receptacles of the Waters which issue in
great Quantity for the use of washing the Victimes after they have slain them,
are hid in convenient Places; for in their Festival Days, many thousands of
Victims are offered, by means whereof is furnished out so great a Quantity of
Water, that one would judge there issued commonly a considerable Spring. But
this is a thing yet more admirable, and almost incredible: the greatness of the
Conveyances of these Waters which are under Ground in the Temple, and stretch
five Furlongs in Circuit. And to conduct these Waters into their Receptacles,
there are Pipes of Lead closed within the Walls, drawing in all parts under the
pavement of the Temple, by which the Waters void themselves after the Beasts
are washed: likewise many Spouts and openings near to the foot of the Altar,
which are unkown to all, but only those who serve the Sacrifices: and by these
too the Blood of the Offerings in like manner is cleansed and carried off.

We guessed the great quantity of Waters there shed by this means. The Jews
having led us to walk out of the Town more than a League long, they showed us a
place, where we might hear the report of the Waters that ran under the Earth,
which seemed to me to be such, as when one voids water by whole Tuns.

Of the Priests.
BUT all that is past was as nothing in respect of the Worth, Honesty, and
Silence of the Priests and their Services. For without any difficulty they
compose themselves to their Business, every one according to his Degree and
Charge, without staying for Orders: Some kindling the Wood, others the Oil,
some ^ring the Wheat^flour; others the Aromatic Odours, others the Flesh;
every one showing his Obedience with ^n admirable Dexterity. For taking ^he
Calves by the Thighs, though ^hey weighed more than two Talents, ^hey lifted
them on high, with an admirable speed, and not more hand^omely then easily: in
such a sort, as they never fayl'd to fix them at first in as good order as they
were to continue.

They did the same with the Far^els of Sheep and Goats, for all Offerings, and
Victims were to be without spot and fat.

Moreover, there was a place prepared for their Repose, where they all lay, and
rose most willingly and diligently, without being called or waked; and so
applied themselves to their Business in their Order, one after another: but all
with so great Silence, that although they were ordinarily about 700 Levites,
without re^kning a great Troop of those that offered the Victims, yet it seemed
as if they all had been but One Man^ all things were composed with so great
Gravity and Reverence to God.

Of the High Priest Eleazar.
WHat we had of greatest admiration, amongst other things, was, when we saw
Eleaza^ present himself to the Sacrifices in his Glory and Majesty, clothed in
his Habit and Robes, in Pontificalibus; shining all with the luster of precious
Stones for to his Accoutrements hung round little Bells of Gold, yielding a
sweet Harmony, amongst which he had also Pomegranats of mavelous Colors, and
all distinguished with variety of Flowers. Upon this Vestment he wore a Girdle,
which girt him very comely: and the work was of very fair Colors. Beneath his
Breast hung what they call the Rational, wherein there was twelve Precious
Stones of diverse Colors set in Gold, in which were inscribed the Names of the
Princes of each Tribe which had been the beginning: and all was most
resplendent and natural, (almost beyond belief:) his Head was adorned with a
Royal Bonnet, upon which was set a Mitre of incomparable Beauty, exalting the
Coyf to a majestic State. Beneath the Mitre hung a Plate of Gold upon the
forehead of Eleazar, covering his Eyebrows; wherein was inscribed the Name of
GOD in the Sacred Letters, a Spectacle in truth full of great Glory, and worthy
of such Mystery: for with this Dress the shine and reflection was of such show
and worthy Dignity, that it might beget an awful Sense and Apprehension in
those that beheld him: So as this High Priest represented to the Beholder as it
were the figure of a God. In short, every thing being by us contemplated, held
our Spirits in a suspense and amazement through their Beauty, for the manner
and decoration now of one thing and then another drew our Understandings even
by force maturely to consider them.

Of the Fortress or Castle of Jerusalem.
THence we ascended to visit the Fortress: It is situated near to the Temple
in a most fair seat, fortified with many Towers framed of Stones of extreme
Greatness. And by what we could understand and know it is the Bulwark and
Strength of the Temple, to the end that if there happened any Sedition, or
impetuous hostile Invasion, no Body should enter by force within the Cloister
of the Temple which is near: and is defended by the high Walls of this
Fortress, situated in a Place of precipitate steepness, having its Sentinels
and Ramparts, with Engines of War.

This place is kept and guarded by a ^arrison of lusty young Soldiers vigorous
and strong, which are maintained by all the Towers within, and are such as for
their merits to their Country, are esteemed of great Reputation: They have no
Liberty to go out of the Fortress, except upon Holy Days; and then with great
Solemnity only part of them, and to relieve the Guards, and they dare let no
Person in; for the Captain of the Plac^ there uses such watchful Diligence
when he goes forth, and amongst them makes such watch and diligent search, that
he cannot be circumvented by any Spy, as it happened to us; for but two of us
could get admitatnce, and that without Arms and by great Entreaties, and only
to see the Sacrifices: for he told us, and that with an Oath, that all those
who are of this Garrison, which are in number five hundred, have sworn to admit,
but at most five Persons at a time: Because the conservation and safety of the
Temple consists in the keeping of this Fort, which if it should be taken and
kept, the Temple had no other Security.

Of the Town.
THe greatness of the Town, by what we could judge, extends in compass some
forty Furlongs; A City certainly worthy to be regarded, both for the Beauty of
the Walls, and distribution of the Towers. It is distinguished into fair and
straight Streets, and those well paved, where there are many little Lanes and
Channels in fit and convenient Places: So that though the City be seated on a
Hill, all come up to it, and go down from it with great ease. At the Entries of
the Streets, there are cut out steps in form of Scaffolds, which one mounts by
Stairs like open Galleries, where the most eminent Persons walk higher than
others, that have means to walk by places, which are lower; and these banked
ways (as it were) are in the most principal Streets, to the end that those who
bear the holy things, should not be polluted with Filth and Dirt: By which one
may judge their Ancestors have wisely and with good reason, chosen such a Place
for the seat of the Town; making so fit a choice in all things whatsoever.

Of the Country round Jerusalem, and of the Policy of the P^sants or Country
People.
THis Country is spacious and fair, stretching from one side toward Samaria,
and the Neighboring Idumea, which is a plain Country: On the other side, the
Coasts are fair and fertile. And it is no marveil if this Region be so
abounding and fertile of it self, and plentiful in all good Fruits; being also
that it is manured by the industry and great care of the Country People: And
it is not here, as it is commonly seen about good and fertile Lands, where the
Pesants are idle, careless, and for the abounding Pleasures and Voluptuousness
of Cities, despise their Labors: And according as we see Youth is taken with
Delights and Ideleness, become effeminate and Tender. Which truly happened to
Alexandria, a City rich, Wealthy, and Abounding in all good things: Where the
Youth of the Country that used to follow Country works, diverting and amusing
their Rough Condition with the pleasures and ease of a Delicious Life, forgot
their Country Business and Labor, and became idle and sloathful.

And for such reasons doubtless, their Jewish Kings ordained that these
Peasants should make no stay in the City; and that no one of them should dwell
any where but in his Country-farm longer than 20 days; and that unless for
urgent, and important reasons, because they should not lose their time. For
which reasons it was ordained that all Processes and Controversies of Law suits
should be determined in five days, and never depend longer: And for this was
Published a Law, and the reason thereof delegated to the Judges and Ministers
of every Country, that the Pesants should not sojourn or make abode in the
Towns (as is said) because of the Demurs of their Suits, neglecting their
Country Business, which might cause damage and loss to the Revenues of their
Prince, diminishing his Tributes and Dues, arising from these Laborers.

I am the larger upon this, because we had Advice hereof in Discoursing with
Eleazar. The Peasants therefor are very careful and diligent in their Labors
and Menagery, by reason whereof in such a multitude of people, the Region is
planted all with Fruit Trees, abounding every where in Corn and all sorts of
Grain: The Vineyards clothed with Vines, nor is it possible to tell the number
o^ Palm Trees, Olive Trees, Fig Trees, besides Pastu^es ^or the raising of
Cattle, which they breed up in great Numbers. So as they have not only all
place, as it were, of choice for this purpose, but also a provident ca^e still
to dispose it for the Reception and Entertainment of so great a Number of
People; nor have they appointed this course for the Villages, but that thereby
they might fully furnish and beautify their Towns. Besides, there comes
abundance of Aromatic Drugs, of Gold, and Precious Stones to them from Arabia.
For this Province opens, as it were, a Fair or general Market, to all round
about for Traffic and Commerce.

The City is ^ull of Tradesmen, having no want of any thing that may be brought
by Sea, for it is accommodated by the neighborhood of the Ports of Ascalon, of
Iaffet, of Gaza, and of Acra. Cities founded by their Kings, for this purpose
of Accommodation; and those Cities we have named are a great Convenience to
this Town, as not being too near nor too remote, so as it is very ^asie to have
all things nec^ssary in a short time, with assurance of the ways to the Comers
and Goers.

The Country is washed throughout by the River Jordan, whose Water never fails:
This River having its source from the East, runs no less than sixty thousand
Paces: In the best and most fertile Countries on the Banks of this River
heretofore inhabited and Conquered those Valiant Troops of Jews, who in their
times Conquered the Country, and passed this River, being in number more than
six hundred Thousand.

This Jordan swells and increases in the Summer, and overflows the
Neighboring Fields like the Nyle; covering a great part of the ground, and
then falls into another River by Acra, both which empty at once into the Sea.
There are many other Streams that bend their course toward Gaza and Azota;
that have their turnings and windings through all the whole Province.

The force, strength, and assurance of this Region consists in places
inaccessible, and difficult to come at, and so are naturally strong, for all
the Country is environed with Mountains, Rocks, and Precipices cut straight
down as it were with a plummet. In other parts, it is enclosed with Rivers, and
Currents, so as the Valleys and the Plains are fortified with great Ditches and
Trenches. On the other side, the Ways are so narrow and troublesome with
Turnings and Windings, to and fro, that with great difficulty those that Travel
by Land, come to the great City. They say also they were wont in former times
to draw up Metals from the Mountains of the bordering Arabia: But since the
time that the Persians had Rule, this search of Metals was left off, the
Expense being more than the Advantage, and the labor fruitless; yet they say
this excuse was invented by the Inhabitants of those places, to the end that
their Lands should not be swallowed up in the hollowness of the Mines, so that
the Earth being open, no Passage could be afforded to Strangers in those narrow
Ways.

And so much for these things, Brother Philocrates, I have discovered unto
thee. Now I will declare what concerns the Law, and its Interpretation and
first Translation.

What the Translators of the Holy Law were.
THose that were chosen were very Honest and Virtuous men, excelling in all
Knowledge, descenced of Noble Race, and not only well versed in their own
Iudaick Learning, but also well acquainted and exercised in the Greek Letters;
for they were reserved men, and always ready to be employed as Ambassadors
upon occasion: For which they were, as it were, purposely bred, and as Proper,
and Able to Judge of those Things and Courses as the case required: And were
those that expounded the Public Rules, and resolved with great sufficience all
difficulties in their own Law: and had mavelous readiness, both for
Haranguing and giving Sentence: They were men clearly void of all barbarous
Incivility, of good and sweet Condition, and born as it were to follow their
proper manner of Living and Estate in a Mediocrity and most commendable
Modesty: still striving above all things to exceed all others in Wisdom and
good Knowledges, and in these endeavors consisted all their Study, esteeming
no search more than how to excel one the other in accessible graciousness, and
sweetness of hearing and answering: so that every one of them were esteemed of
in their Tribe, as men worthy to have Pre-eminence and Principality for the
Virtue that was in them.

And it is worth the noting in what Honor they held Eleazar, and in what
Respect he held them: For besides that he writ to the King to take care for
their convenient return, he recommended with a passionate desire, and tender
affection these reverent Persons to Andrea; desiring with many Entreaties and
Requests that we should with our Credits and Grace with the King, open them a
fair Access.

To which we made Answer, that as these things were matters of our special
Charge, so we should be careful to Discharge our selves answerably with all due
Care, wherefore we desired he would be at ease in that point, for they should
therein be absolutely free. I assure you (said he) I am upon this occasion in
no little pain, and not without just cause; for I know the King, a Prince so
diligent, a Lover of virtuous and worthy Persons, and how industriously he
seeks them; that there is no place free from his desires, when he hears where
such are, that excel, or are remarkable for Wit or Learning. And I have been
informed, that he uses to say what is most true, that in such manner of men
dwells and consists the strength and defense of his Kingdom: and especially
when he has near about his person good store of Wise and Just men who have
provident Counsel to give him, lest all should miscarry. Which I perceive well
by those he has pleased to send hither.

And we earnestly profess that we send not these persons to be assisting to him
in the Affairs of his Government, but for the Public Profit and an Universal
Good of all his people, in which regard nothing ought to be refused, nothing
that we will not endure. For though the form of Well Living consists in the
observation and accomplishment of Moral Precepts and Constitutions:
Nevertheless it is better learned and taught by the Knowledge and Experience of
the things themselves, than in the abstracted nakedness of Words. By this
speech and such like, we came to know what great affection Eleazar did bear to
these Persons.

Of the Answers made by Eleazar, upon certain points of the Law of Moses.
IT behooves also we touch briefly the Answers Eleazar made us to our
Questions: For knowing the Jews with great nicety esteem the observances and
differences of meats and drinks, according to their Law; and that of certain
Beasts, they esteem some unclean and infected: We therefore en^uired, saying,
since all things are of one and the same Creation, and receive one and the same
Substance; whence is it that some are rejected as Infectious, as well to Eat as
to Touch; so that, as it should seem, the Law treats more Magisterially than
Rationally.

Eleazar then Answered, you know not (said he) what force and virtue Custom
has as to Well-Living, and what Alterations and Changes she brings in Humane
Affairs: See we not that those who converse with the Evil, let themselves loo^e
to a course of Corruption in Manners, whereby they become Wretched all their
lives after: On the Contrary, those that accustom and habituate themselves
with the Wise and Intelligent, although they are yet ignorant, change from good
to better, and become happy and fortunate. Which our Lawmakers considering,
resolving all his Laws into Piety and Justice, he has not only taught us all
we ought to do by Words; but express^d all by Instanc^s, and forbidding us to
do Evil, has set before our Eyes the Causes why God has created every thing.

First, he has taught that God is One and All, by the Power of whom all things
are Governed and Subsist; and that He is present in all Places; and without
Whom, nothing can remain in its Being, be it never so Little; and that Nothing
can be hidden from Him, whatsoever men do upon Earth never so Secretly even
what men Do and Think within themselves, or what they Plod and Contract one
with another, all is to Him notorious and Naked before his Eyes. For He sees
the things To Come, as if they were Present: Moreover, he out of his gracious
Goodness teaches us that when any one sets himself to work Evil, he may assure
himself it cannot be Hidden, and proposes thus by all the Law, no other thing
than to show the Power and Strength of our good God.

Being then heedful of the beginning of these things, he shows, that other
People who have Opinion that there are many Gods, are themselves more powerful
than the Gods they by Folly adore. For they affirm foolishly, that the Images
and Resemblances they frame of Stone, or of Wood, are the Representations and
Shapes of those who have brought to light by their Inventions some Advantages
to the Civil Affairs of Life; and these they Worship, prostrating themselves on
their Knees before them. But they are out of their right Wits, and indeed out
of themselves; and if one demand of them what are their Inventions? they
allege something produced from Nature, as if it were indeed a thing produced,
created, and composed by the foresaid Inventors, although they never
contributed thereto, in which they sufficiently manifest their Perverseness and
Stupidity. For it is well known, that if there be question of any good
Invention, that there may be found at this day Persons more learned, more
subtle, and more quick to invent any Art, then they have done, who have been in
times past: yet they are not therefore adored as Gods, although the Sage Greeks
esteemed such Inventors worthy of Honor. What should I speak of the Egyptians
and their Neighbors, who are herein madder than the others, for these have
some of them brought in Divine Worship to brute Beasts, others unto Reptiles:
out of common Reason, and all Understanding, making Sacrifices to the Living
and Dead, immolating to them Victims? Wherefore the Wise and Understanding
Lawmakers, being instituted of God in the Knowledge of all things, has hedged
us in, and fortified us round as it were with a Trench and Palisado, and
distinguished us with a Wall of Iron, to the end, that being innocent in Soul,
and pure in Body, we might not mingle our selves in any sort with other
Nations, and that rejecting all fond and vain Opinions, we might adore one only
GOD, who has power above all Creatures.

For this, the Priests of the Egyptians, Princes of the People (although they
fail in other things) name us Men of GOD, and agree with us in many things:
because other People have not this Religion to Adore one only God, according to
the Truth as we do: For others give themselves over to Gormandisings and
Drunkenness, building upon Shadows, amusing themselves with no other things but
Pleasures and Belly-chear. Of which there is no one of us has so much as
thought, but all the course of our Lives is employed only to the Knowledge of
Virtue and Divine Power, to the end we fall not into Sin, nor be polluted by
the conversation of such People in any manner whatever.

He has also defended and armed us on all sides with Purity and Honesty, not
only in our Meat and Drink, but also in what we handle, touch, see, and hear;
for he has reduced and brought all things before our natural Reason, for as
all things have their Being from one Power, so with a most profound Judgment
has he appointed which we are to use, and from which we are to abstain. I will
allege you one or two for Example, to the end, that if you take heed to the
Words and plain Speech, you cannot think that Moses has taken such Pains to
ordain his Laws, because of Rats, Weasels, and such like things.

For it is necessary you understand, that he has very well and wisely ordered
all things to the Honesty of Living, having regard to Purity and Cleanliness,
and to the correction and amendment of Manners. And as for Birds, and flying
Fowls, he has permitted us to eat ordinarily of such as are tame, and are
different from others in Neatness and Cleanliness, and that live upon Grain and
Seeds, such as are Pigeons, Turtles, Peacocks, Partridge, Geese, and the like.
And such as he has forbidden us to eat, they are wild, ravenous; living upon
Flesh and Carrion, of proud Natures, inclined to Rapine and Prey, and such as
by force set upon others, and seek not their living, but to the damage, hurt,
and injury of the other Poultry who are gentle and tame; but those fierce ones
not only seize upon those of their own Kind, but also upon Lambs, Kidds, and
even upon Men yet living, or half dead.

Our Lawmakers therefore, noting this by way of Similitude, and by a borrowed
way of Translation, taken from the Nature of such Fowls, has pronounced them
unclean and infectious, as being willing to reduce and bring all things to the
consideration of Purity and Cleanliness of the Soul; to the end that every one
being admonished by ordinary and domestic Examples, may understand how it
behooves to use Equity and Justice^ and that it is not granted to Man, b^ he
never so strong, powerful, proud^ bold, and audacious soever, to ravis^ by
force that of another, nor to d^ injury to any Person, but that it i^
convenient, he should order the cours^ of his Life in imitation of the Fow^ I
have spoken of, who live by Grain^ leading a tame and tractable Life^ And that
it is not lawful to vex an^ trouble any Person of our own Kind^ nor ravage his
Goods by force, as d^ those Beasts he has prohibited us t^ eat; and not to use
Violence in an^ case which is figured by the Nature of Beasts, not wholly void
of Sense^ You understand then the Reason wh^ he has forbidden us the Use of
the said things, that is to say, because o^ the Inclination and Nature of ever^
Beast.

You may therefore now well con^ceive how our Lawgiver Moses hat^ been careful
in all things to corre^^ our Manners, and establish them b^ the things to which
we are accustomed, and therefore to regard the Nature of brute Beasts: for
where he has Licensed us eating the Flesh of four-footed Beasts, who have two,
and the Hoofs cloven; the Import is, that we ought to direct our Operations to
Justice and Bounty. By this cloven Hoof figuring to us, the Distribution of
Rewards and Punishments. For which cause we are cleft and divided from other
Nations: to the end we be not polluted with Sin by their Conversation and
Company. For many People of the Gentiles are sullied with Impiety by mixture of
one with another, and not only suffer the Provinces and Cities to be spotted,
infected, and dishonored with Sins against Nature, but are foully stained with
the unclean blood of Childbearing Women, having no shame or regret to commit
Incest with their own Daughters, from which things we are wholly Alienated.

Moreover, where he has noted to us the sign of this Forking, he has also
advised us to be recollected by the same Figure, in the same Animals; Reasons
for the Jews choice and diversity in Meats.
for he has added further, that they should be such as chew the Cud: By which
he manifestly admonishes us to have this Rumination in Memory, and in the
Course of our Life: for what signifies the chewing of the Cud, but that we
ought still to have in our Minds a continual revolving of our Lives and
Actions, and so by a frequent Meditation, the Duties, to which we are obliged,
and what we owe to all. Even as the Life of the Body is ever in our Thoughts;
so as our Spirit is nourished in bringing to mind her Employments. And for this
cause, he says in the Scripture, Have GOD still in thy Memory and Thought, who
has done for thee such great and wonderful things If this thou truly
considerest, thou shall find it great and admirable indeed.

For first, thou shall behold the Architecture of the Body, the Distribution,
and Transfusion of the Elements, the Connection and Ligatures of the Members; a
thing truly worthy of Admiration: But it will be more admirable, If thou have
regard to the Sense, which is given to every Member: if thou weighest the
Actions of the Understanding; if thou considerest the invisible Movements, and
how in each of them there shines a Vigor, and Vivacity of Spirit, from whence
have proceeded the Inventions of Arts almost innumerable.

Wherefore, not without cause, Moses commanded us to have in constant
Consideration, that all Things have been established and made Examples by the
Divine Power and Providence; for so has he finished and counterpoised every
Thing, agreeing with its time and place: recalling always to Mind the
consideration of GOD the Lord, Ruler and Creator of the whole Universe.

And if we will begin with what concerns Eating and Drinking; has he not well
and prudently commanded, that we should give Praises and Thanks to GOD when we
sit at Table? In which he has not permitted us to Devise or Discourse of any
thing in the World that should make us forget, or efface in our Memories, the
Power and Providence of GOD.

Wherefore he has appointed that we engrave upon the Doors and Portals of our
Houses such Inscriptions as should excite us to Thanksgiving, still to refresh
our Memories with the Thoughts of God, and his Goodness to us, by a most
evident sign, that all our Endeavors ought always to be, to mind us of
Sincerity and Equity, and that each Thought ought always to represent GOD
before our Eyes.

Also he has appointed, that not only when we Sit at Table, Order of Meats.
but when we Rise, we should praise the Works of God, not only in Word, but
also with a grave and composed Countenance: reducing to Mind the perpetual
Motion of the Heavens, and that this alternative and successive Nature is
Divine, and incomprehensible to Man. Thus to you is expounded the Reason of the
forking of the Cloven-foot, its Import, as also of the Chewing of the Cud,
which you inquired after: assuring you, that there is nothing ordained which is
superfluous or improper for the forming of the Mind, but by this Figurative
Manner and Use, he has accommodated all things according to Truth.

Also the said Lawgiver, by a like Figure, has admonished us from falling
into Injustice and Sin, by the hearing or too much relying upon our Eloquence,
Prattle and Jesting, which we may learn in the consideration of vile Beasts:
for the Weasels are of a filthy Complexion: as also Rats, and such like
Creatures, which he has forbidden us to handle or touch. For Rats, they make
all things foul, infectious, and hurtful: and are not only pernicious to eat,
but wholly unprofitable to Man in all things. And Weasels are a sort of Vermin
which are yet fouler, more infectious, and the most filthy and impure of all
those we speak of. For they conceive by the Ear, and bring forth their young by
the Throat, which is a thing detestable in Men, in what they hear and report,
receiving by the Ear any cursed Folly, to utter and be delivered of the same by
the Tongue and Report, and to exasperate the same by Words odious and bitter.
Of which often times there arises cause of great Inconvenience, and that which of
it self is nauseous and loathsome, they improve and amplify with an elaborate
wicked Invention by all means possible.

Wherefore your King, as we have heard, Calumniators, false Reporters, or
Spies. Some Copies call them Emplanists.
justly causes such Men to be punished capitally. I think (said I then) that by
such you mean the Emphanists: for the King punishes those without Hope or
Mercy, by Process, with Tortures and Sufferings, and even with an ignominious
Death. They are the same, (said Eleazar) for their Idleness and Negligence
brings nothing to Men but Mischief, and most dangerous Ruin and Destruction.

And likewise our Law commands to do no wrong or injury to any Person either by
Word or Deed. See then how I advertise you in short, and show you that all our
Demeanours by the Law, are directed to Justice and Equity: and that our holy
Scriptures allow not any thing that in Appearance is evil, nor ought to be done
impertinently and with Choler: But we are commanded that in all our Lives we
demean our selves toward all Men, in all our Conversations and Deportments,
justly and graciously, as having always in Mind God for the great Judge of
Secrets.

Now to whom could it seem otherwise, but that Eleazar had well and pertinently
spoken of those filthy Vermin, Reptiles, and of other Creatures also;
manifesting thereby very properly, that all the Letter of the Law tended to no
other end then Justice, and to shape and fashion well the Manners and
Dispositions of Men.

Further, he delivered himself concerning the Oblations of Calves, of Sheep,
and of Goats, raising thereupon a fair Discourse: showing, that it was their
custom to select such Beasts from the Folds and Herds, as were Tractable and
Tame, to make them their Offerings to God: never offering Sacrifice with wild
or hurtful Beasts: because those that made these Oblations, and offered them
should not entertain Savage Thoughts, or be elated with intractable P^ide, but
instructed by the Gentle and Innocent Nature of the Victims, and that they
should learn from such Instances, to become Humble and Patient, and in their
Sacrificing to have their Minds erect, as raised to God the Creator of all
things.

Hitherto, Philocrates, I have framed to you, by writing these memorable
things, considering the itch you have to learn and to know, which I have done,
to the end, that by this little you may understand the Majesty of the Law, the
Causes and Natural Considerations that are therein contained, and now I will
return from whence we have Digressed.

The Return of the Ambassadors to Alexandria, with the Doctors of the Jews; and
how the King adored the Holy Law seven times, with Tears in his Eyes.
ELEAZAR then, after the Sacrifices were performed, as was customary, having
chosen the Persons as is before specified, to send unto the King, he sent him
also many rich Presents, which indeed were very splendid. When therefore we had
tken leave, and parted from him very friendly, with his Salutation of Peace,
and were returned to Alexandria, our arrival was forthwith made known to the
King. And soon after Andrea and my self entered into the Kings Hall, and making
most humble Reverence, we presented to his Majesty the Letters of Eleazar. Then
the King, overjoyed that the Event of this Voyage had succeeded so well, having
obtained the Persons much to be wished for, made the Crowd of those that
attended on their Petitions and Suits, to quit the Place; and commanded, that
the Jewish Doctors should immediately have notice to attend, which was sooner
than they expected. For the Custom of the Country is, when any Ambassadors
arrive upon any Business they are sent about, it is not permited them to be
presented to the King, unless they are Ambassadors from Kings, or from very
Honorable States and Republics, nor without great difficulty to have
Audience, till thirty days after their Arrival, and sometimes longer, as the
King is pleased to make a Difference, with regard to the Degree of those that
sent them.

But the King, having cleared the Place of those he judged not necessary to
this Entertainment; continued in the Hall, expecting till the Doctors were
presented to make their Obeisance.

Who being introduced, did their Duties in delivering the Presents sent the
King from Eleazar. Likewise they Presented him with diverse Skins of Parchment,
exceeding fine, smooth, and delicate, bound up with a Binding very rare and
uncommon.

In which Skins was the Divine Law of Moses in Letters of Gold, The delivery of
the Holy Law, or Sacred Books of Moses, in Hebrew Characters to King Ptolomy.
and in the Hebrew Language, a thing very curious to behold.

Upon their presenting them to the King, sitting in his Chair of State, the
King presently turned toward them, taking notice of them all one after
another; and then required of them the Volumes of the Law: Then they unfolded
the Rouls wrapped up in these Skins of Parchment or Vellam aforesaid. Which the
King seriously beholding, remained as one transported a pretty space. After
which, he adored the Holy Law seven times, saying these Words: We give you
Thanks, my Masters, and much more him that sent you hither, and the High God
above all, of whom these are the Sacred Words.

Then the said Doctors, and all those who were attending the King, let fall
great Expressions of Joy with Acclamation, and there fell Tears of Joy from the
Kings Eyes; as we see many times, that exceeding Transports will draw Tears
from the Eyes, especially in Excesses of a more sublime and intellectual Nature.

Then the King required the Skins and Volumes of the Law should be folded up
again; which done, he saluted the Doctors, saying; Reason requires, grave Sirs,
that first we pay you Honor and Regard, in as much as We were the Occasion of
your coming hither, for which cause we give you our Hand with this Assurance,
that this very Day shall be to us the Day, that all the Days of our Life we
will hold Great and Memorable, and shall be solemnized every Year with
Feasting; in perpetual Memory of your Visit, as also of our Victory which we
obtained this day against Antigonus at Sea, wherefore it is our Will, that this
very Day you solace your selves in Feasting with us.

Forthwith he required the Princes should be invited: Amongst whom he did me
the Honor to make me to be seated. Moreover, he caused to be exposed to view,
all the rich Furniture, wherewith the Palace Royal was, upon great Festivals,
used to be decked; Likewise he commanded they should fit up Lodgings near to
the Castle, in the most splendid Manner they could; And in like manner the King
ordered, that the Feasts should be set out in the most Sumptuous and
Magnificent Fashion that was possible. And then the King enjoined Nicanor, his
chief Physician, to bid Dorothea Controuler of the House, (as from the Will and
Pleasure of his Majesty,) that he should, and that with all Diligence, deliver
out all things necessary for every one of the Doctors, as well for their
Accommodation, as for the Furniture of their Lodgings, and that without fail,
as from the Ordinance and Command of the King, which was forthwith accomplished
with great dispatch by many Hands, Conformable to the usage of great Cities,
when they prepare to make great Feasts and public Banqueting, whenas there
are selected Officers that are appointed to furnish every one according to his
Post and Station: Such were the Appointments of the King, Nature of good
Officers and Subjects.
who was not wanting to assist in Person, and his People, to speak Truth, were
such as spared for no Labor or Pains to execute his Orders; for with all
Alacrity and Cheerfulness they provided whatever was necessary and requisite,
putting in execution what the King required, with glad and cheerful Hearts.
Thus was the Kings Will exactly and freely complied with, in this and all other
Regards whatever.

For Dorothea was very Franck and Bountiful, and very Industrious in his Charge
and Employment, which was principally to have a due regard to the accommodating
these great and venerable Men, not employing what had been formerly Allotted to
such Uses, but fresh and valuable Stuffs, sparing nothing that was in his Power.

He assigned every one of them his Couch of Ease, besides his Bed, with fair
Carpets, as the King had commanded. Moreover, the King required the half of
them should be placed and seated at the Table, so as that they might front his
Person, and the other half distributed on each side his Chair of State^
Omitting nothing which any way might do them Honor, or contribute to their
utmost Content and Satisfaction.

After the Seats of the Table were duly fixed and proportioned for each; the
Kings command to Dorothea was, that all those who came from Judea, should have
Victuals distributed, and such as they Affect, after the Usage of their
Country, and Appointment of their Law; Nevertheless, that they should want for
no Plenty or Variety; as also for performing their Oblations, Vows, and
Sacrifices, according to the Custom of their Nation.

After all these Ceremonies, the King besought one of them, named Eleazar, the
most Aged of all those that came with us, to make his Orisons. Who, as he was
very Venerable, being then risen from his Seat^ began in this manner.

The Prayer of Eleazar.
God Almighty fill thee, O King, with all Goodness, and give Grace to thy Wife,
and to thy Children, and that thy plenty may be Permanent, without Alteration
or Change, all the course of thy Life, and theirs.

Hardly had he ended this Prayer; but there followed a Noise and Acclamation of
Joy, with a pleasant Murmur and Applause, that lasted a pretty while.

All things being thus disposed and prepared for Jollity, all the Company
betook themselves to make good Cheer, and those who waited on the Table,
repaired readily to their several Posts, which the Controuler had given them in
Charge. Amongst those who served at the Table, The Custom of Egypt was so.
were the Children of the King, and all the most considerable Peers and Lords.

The Answers of the Jewish Elders, to the Questions propounded by King
Ptolomeus Philadelphus.
WHen the time came, and a fit Opportunity offered for Discourse, the King, by
certain Pauses, began to ask them one by one in order, several Questions, as
they were marshalled at his Table according to Seniority: To him therefore that
was set uppermost, he made this Question.

First Question.
How he should conserve his Kingdom entire and safe to the end?

The Resolution.
AFter the Doctor had a little studied, he answered, You shall (great King)
dispose the Estate of your Kingdom well and wisely, if in all, and by all, you
propose to your self the Example of the Benignity and Indulgence of God for
your Imitation; using Patience and Gentleness; raising to Honor those that are
Worthy, and bringing down the haughty and ambitious proud Spirits to
Repentance, and a true Sense of themselves, by giving them due Example of
Humanity, Affability, and fairness of Access. To the other.

Second Question.
How he might bring all things justly to a fair Issue?

The Resolution.
IF in all things (answered he, great King) you have your Eyes open, and
Thoughts fixed upon your Actions, watching over your self in all things, you
will do nothing that will not be well done; and if you consider, that a true
Sense of our selves and right Reason, is no other than the Gift of God, of whom
we always ought to have the Fear before our Eyes, and present to all our
Operations, for that is the means never to go astray. To the other.

Third Question.
How he should have Friends agreeable to him?

The Resolution.
IF they know (Great King) that you have no Thoughts but what are employed upon
that which is just and profitable, and conducing to the public Good; and that
you are excited to it by considering how God supplies the Wants of Mankind,
providing Sustenance for the Necessities of the Body, and for the Necessities
of Life, bodily Health, and other Gifts and Abilities.

Fourth Question.
How he should acquire and conserve a solid Reputation in expediting of
Affairs, in doing Public Justice, and punishing Offenders?

The Resolution.
IF you carry your self as Reason and Equity requires, indifferent to every
ones Right; and if you proceed not against Malefactors according to your
uncontrollable Power, or with Partiality; You may get Knowledge in this Point
if you bear in Mind the Providence and wise Disposal of God, who grants the
Requests and Petitions of those are worthy; and to the Malefactors and Vicious,
he shows them, that he denies nothing but what is hurtful, and which appears
such by their own Experience, or by the Admonitions and Terrors of Dreams: also
he punishes not the Sins of Men neither in proportion to their great Demerits,
nor to his Almighty Power, but rather courts their Amendment, sweetly winning
them by mild and gentle Methods. To the other.

Fifth Question.
What he should do to be invincible in War?

The Resolution.
IF you put not your Trust in your warlike Preparations, nor in your own
Strength; but if you call upon God inces^antly to assist you in nothing but
what is just, then will he direct and conduct your Counsels and Forces. To the
other.

Sixth Question.
By what means he may make himself formidable to his Enemies?

The Resolution.
IF you be provided of good Artillery, and well disciplined, and have due
regard to your Stores and Provisions; nevertheless that you keep not your Eye
wholly on your Preparations, but raise it above them to God, who pulls back his
Arm before he stretches it out, and then exerts it to our greater Dread and
Amazement. To the other.

Seventh Question.
What thing may be to him most advantageous and best in this Life?

The Resolution.
THat is, Great King, to have a constant Apprehension that God is the Sovereign
Ruler of all Men; for we have not the Power of our selves to address our
Counsels to worthy Ends; but it is God who rules over all things, that
conducts and crowns with Perfection the Events of Humane Affairs. To the other.

Eight Question.
By what means he might keep his Treasure without Diminution, and leave it
un-impaired to his Children?

The Resolution.
IF incessantly you pray to God (great King) that he will give you good Advice
and good Understanding in what you are continually negotiating; and that you
command your Children not to boast themselves, or grow proud either of Riches
or Honor; but that they acknowledge and persuade themselves that God has
bestowed all that they have, and what they enjoy is from his free Gift and
Bounty; and that for their part, they possess nothing which proceeds from
themselves. To the other.

Ninth Question.
By what means he may bear patiently good and evil Fortune.

The Resolution.
IF you consider with your self (Great King) that all Mankind are created of
God, subject to this Lot, to be afflicted with great Misfortunes in the
Beginning, and after to arrive at Prosperity, and so to share good and ill
Fortune alternatively. For there is no man in this World that is not subject to
such Variety, or is priviledg'd from it. But it is requisite you pray to God
that he will be pleased of his free Goodness to reduce your Kingdom to
Tranquillity.

The King then approving this Reason, said, that they had answered all well and
pertinently. But after (said he) I have made one Demand yet more, I will leave
questioning, because we may return to our Rejoicing, passing the rest of this
day in Jollity; and six days hence we will bethink our selves of such Questions
as we intermit at present. And so he put forth this Question to an other.

Tenth Question.
What is the end of Magnanimity?

The Resolution.
IT is to be content when there happens cross Accidents af^^r you have provided
good Counsel to ar^rive at the end of your Affairs^ for God gives good Success
to Negotiations that are conducted by good and proper Council.

This Answer was received with Acclamations and Applauses by ^ll the
Assistants. And the King tu^ning himself toward the Philosoph^r^ which were
there in some number^

I am (said he) of Opinion, th^^ these Men are excellently skilled in Virtue,
and that they have great Experience in all things, being they have so readily
and pertinently, upon the sudden, answered to such high Questions, still
founding their Speeches always in God.

Then a Philosopher named Menedemus Eretriensis, answered the King in this
Manner: Truly Sir, considering that Man is a Divine Work, which one may know by
the Fabric of the whole World; it is a thing well-beseeming and reasonably
fitting, that we begin with God, and resolve into him all the force of our
Discourse. The King approving his Speech, all the Company betook them to make
cheer and to Jollity: and so the Feast lasted till Night with great Mirth and
Recreation.

Upon the morrow the Tables were disposed in the same order, and the Banquet
continued. And when occasion to make Interrogatories was presented, the King
began to address his Countenance to those, who in the Rank of Answering, were
next to those that the former day had been questioned, beginning at the
Eleventh, succeeding Ten precedent.

Eleventh Question.
What is the means to Rule well, and Govern a Kingdom happily?

The Resolution.
THat is, first to rule your self well, and not suffer your self to be
transported through self-Opinion by means of the Affluence of worldly Riches
and Honor; and not to aim at any thing by Oppression, or against Right,
through an imperious Annoyance: which if you consider duly (Great King) and
weigh well in your Mind, esteeming all things as they justly are; you will
reckon all that you possess as if it were nothing. Think also that God is full
of all Goodness, and stands not in need of any thing: Which Thought you ought
to fix deep in your Mind as firmly as your Humane Spirit can contain it; and
not too passionately to covet overflowing Abundance of worldly Greatness and
Riches, as thinking thereby to Reign better. To the other.

Twelfth Question.
How he ought to make choice of the best things?

The Resolution.
IF you have regard always to what is Just and Equitable; and if you esteem
things unjust and wicked to be other than Privation of Life: for God has
ordained great and abundant Goodness for just Men. To the other.

Thirteenth Question.
How I may avoid the Uneasiness that many times proceeds from Dreams?

The Resolution.
YOU ask me, Great King, a most nice Question; for such things as discompose
the Mind are out of Rule, since we are sometimes led by our Senses, arising
either from what has past, or from the Objects presenting themselves to our
view. Whence many times we fancy in our Dreams, we are sailing upon the Sea, or
are passing over Rivers; many times that we fly aloft with Wings, soaring from
place to place, and such like things as are ridiculous even to waking Thoughts.
Moreover, things to which we have great Appetite and Desire, disturb our
Fantasy in Dreams.

Wherefore, Great King, I am of Opinion, that with all your Might, in all you
say and do, your Intention should be purely addressed to Piety and Holiness, to
the end, that persevering in that manner, you may be guided and fortified on
all sides with Virtue, and so show your self impenetrable to all Sensuality.
And on the other side, that you never take by force from another what to him
belongs of Right; because the things wherein we most engage and employ our
selves waking, commonly appear in Phantomes to us again in our Dreams,
ins1nuated into our Fancies by the Appetites and Inclinations we had to them:
but when you level all your Affections, Operations, and Affairs at the Mark of
Virtue and Honesty, then sleeping and waking you will be at ease. To the other.

Fourteenth Question.
By what means he should do nothing indecently?

The Resolution.
IF in all things you consider what appertains to your Degree, and what is in
your Power; to the end there fall not from you any thing unbecoming your Royal
Dignity, either in Word or Deed: you must also bear in mind, that all your
Subjects are discoursing still of you, judging all your Steps, and censuring
your Courses. Further, consider how you are exposed to Flatterers, who dive
into your very Thoughts upon every Change of your Countenance and Carriage,
from which they will make use for their own ends: but in this, Great King, you
may well understand how to demean your self, not submitting your Ear to any
Person that may charm you with his Siren Flattery, or disguise the Truth by
Dissimulation; since God has endowed you with great Affability of Behavior,
accompanied with Gravity and Dispatch.

The King then received this Answer with great Joy and Applause, and gave all
the Company leave to seek their Repose, to prepare themselves for meeting at
the Feast the day following, which was ordered as the former. They being met,
and the time presenting it self for Discourse, as before, the King made this
Question to the first of those that had not yet spoken.

Fifteenth Question.
What thing is most difficult for a King?

The Resolution.
THat is, to Command Himself, and not to permit himself to be prevailed upon by
any exorbitant Appetites or Passions: for all Men have a certain Bent of
Inclination by which they many times permit themselves to be led according as
their Genius leads them, some to Banquets and Riot, others to Pastimes and
Pleasures, wherein the greatest part of the Multitude are immerc'd: But Kings
should have their Thoughts more elevated, as being excited by great Honor and
Glory to frame their Actions to Conquests, and design the taking of Cities and
reducing of Nations. Nevertheless, it is very commendable to keep a mea^, and
to conserve carefully what God has and shall give you, and not so much to
affect what is out of reason or unworthy the high Glory of your Place. To the
other.

Sixteenth Question.
What means he has to avoid the Envy of Any?

The Resolution.
IF before all things you bear in mind, that Riches, Honor, and Greatness, are
the Gifts of God to Kings, of which no Person has true right to dispose.
Wherefore, if any aim to partake of this glorious Prerogative to be un-envied,
he will never obtain his end, for it is the gift of God alone. To the other.

Seventeenth Question.
What he ought to do to oblige his Enemies?

The Resolution.
IF you become gracious and favorable toward all bountiful Persons, without
particular Respect of any: likewise in what you receive from others, not to
show your self ungrateful to the Services and good Offices you have received
from them, for that is a sign of the Grace of God. To the other.

Eighteenth Question.
How he may continue in Glory and Honor?

The Resolution.
IF toward others, and above all others, you excel in Bounty and
Magnificence, accompanying the same with a good Grace, never will Glory and
Honor abandon you: and it behooves you still to pray to God that such Virtues
may perpetually assist you. To the other.

Nineteenth Question.
To what Persons he should dispense Honor?

The Resolution.
THey commonly judge (Great King) that we ought to dispense Honor where we
especially love: but for my part I am of Opinion, that we ought to dispense all
we can to the Envious, and to be gracious and bountiful to them, according to
the utmost of our Power: to the end, that by such means they may be induced and
won to do what is good and profitable; in which Choice of our Favors, we must
implore the Aid of God, who inspireth the Understanding, to the end he may
accomplish in us this Perfection. To the other.

Twentieth Question.
What Persons he ought to gratify?

The Resolution.
FAther and Mother (Great King) before all Persons: for God has annexed a
great Commandment to the Duty we owe to our Father and Mother; allowing after
but a second place to Friends, whom he has styled proportionable in Nature.
Further, I esteem it (Great King) no small Happiness, that you engage all the
World to love you. To the other.

One and twentieth Question.
What is more worthy than Beauty?

The Resolution.
THat is Piety, for that is a Beauty excelling all other, and its Force
consists in Charity, which is a Gift of God, which you have, and with it you
will inherit all Virtue and all that is good. To the other.

Two and twentieth Question.
By what means o^e may recover Greatdess and Glory once lost.

The Resolution.
THat is (Great King) if you are full of Benignity, Affability, and gracious to
all the World (which are things charming and attracting the Love of the
People,) it is hard if you lose your Greatness. On the other side, great
Preparations for War give great Assurance: but those who fall into such
Accidents, it is necessary that they abstain from what occasioned them to fall
into such Inconveniences: and thenceforward they acquire Friends by giving
themselves to the Exercise of Justice and Equity; for good Works are the Gifts
of God. To the other.

Three and twentieth Question.
How he may live without Anxiety?

The Resolution.
IF you wrong no Man, and relieve every one, doing Justice to all the World:
for from so doing we reap such pleasant Fruits as we shall always live
pleasantly. Nevertheless, we ought to crave of God, that what Accidents happen
contrary to Expectation, bring us no Damage, as Death, Sicknesses, and such
like Inconveniences, which can do you no harm if you are full of Piety. To the
other.

Four and Twentieth Question.
What thing in this World is worthy the greatest Honor?

The Resolution.
THat is, to serve God; not so much with Sacrifices or Oblations, as with a
pure Heart and a sincere Conscience, and to conform your self to the Obedience
of a simple and active Faith. Which if you do (Great King) it will firmly
imprint this Truth in your Heart, That all you have done, and shall do
hereafter, will be evident and appear to all the World.

After this past, the King, with a loud Voice, saluted them all, ascribing to
them great Praise, as did also the Assistants; especially the Philosophers, who
were there present, and not without Cause: For these Persons were of great
Authority in all their Speeches, laying the Foundations of their Answers and
Opinions always in God. This done, the King returned to Feasting and Meriment.

The day following, the Tables were covered in the same manner as before, and
all the Lords as before being set at Table, the King taking his Opportunity of
Devising, began to interrogate those who followed the others in the foregoing
day of answering; and made this Question.

The twenty fifth Question.
I would know if Prudence may be taught?

The Resolution.
PRudence is a certain Dress and Ornament of the Soul, flowing from the Divine
Power, having this ^roperty to embrace what is good, and to refuse its contrary.

Six and twentieth Question.
What thing is most advantageous for the Health of the Soul?

The Resolution.
THat is Prudence, which non^ can procure or obtain unle^ God disposes his
Understanding t^ receive it. To the other.

Seven and twentieth Question.
How may one sufficiently yield d^ thanks to their Father and M^^ther?

The Resolution.
IF you give them no cause of Gri^^ in the World, though there scarce any to be
found who can (...) govern themselves, excepting Go^ Father of all Light, do
illumina^^^ (...) Understanding to every Actio^ (...). To the other^

Eight and twentieth Question.
How he might be made covetous to hear many things?

The Resolution.
IF you consider (Great King) how advantageous and profitable ^t is to know
every thing Created: ^or by that means proportioning and ^djusting what you
have understood ^o the quality of the times present, ^ou will have the choice
of what ^ill be most agreeable and conveni^nt for you, in which you ought
^^wayes to pray unto ^od, that he ^ill be your Succourer; for from ^im proceeds
all accomplishment of ^ood Works. To the other.

Nine and twentieth Question.
that he should do not to violate the Laws.

The Resolution.
^F you were persuaded that God has inspired those who have established the
Laws, for the Directi^on and Government of the Lives o^ us Mortals: you will
well follow the the other.

Thirtieth Question.
What Advantage may accrue to on^ from Parentage.

The Resolution.
GReat King, if we weigh the Accidents which happen to (...) we shall find,
when our Parents (...) into Adversity, we share with the^ therein, and are
mutually oppress^ and grieved with the greatness ^ their Sorrow. And if there
arrive (...) so any Prosperity and happy Fortu^^ to them, we are glad, and find
the Content and Satisfaction, in wh^^^ we solace our selves. And in truth our
Parents are so well advised t^^ they can intermingle their Af^a^ ami^ably
together, and that all thi^ between them be so well knit to^ther by the ties of
an inviola^^ Friendship: there is no place left any desire of a Life more
happy, nor is the same capable of any addition save only of Continuance, which
you are to beg of God. To the other.

One and thirtieth Q^estion.
How he might be free from all Fear.

The Resolution.
IF your Conscience be clear of all sense of past Guilt, setting God always
present before your Eyes, for ^he Guide and Conduct of all your Counsels to a
good and happy issue. To the other.

Two and thirtieth Question.
How he should be readily assisted with Recollection and a due Presence of Mind
at all Times?

The Resolution.
IF you seriously reflect how to the Vicissitudes of Humane Life all the World
is exposed, setting often before your Eyes the admirable Revolutions that God
has sent. Ho^ some are raised to Riches and Honor others pressed with
Calamities, an^ fallen into extreme Disgrace. T^ the other.

Three and thirtieth Question.
What Course he ought to take and pu^^sue to avoid being immersed in
Sen^suality and Idleness.

The Resolution.
THis to you (Great King) wh^ have the Rule of a great King^dom, and a
multiplicity of Affairs t^ manage is feasible. For in the di^^charge of so
weighty an Employme^^ it is impossible you should have an^ Leisure to fix your
Imagination u^^on any thing but your Affairs, sin^^ they will take up all your
Tim^ It is convenient therefore, that yo^ be always intent upon your Charg^
and that you pray to God, to give ^ou Grace to omit nothing of what concerns
your Employment. To the other.

Four and thirtieth Question.
By what Signs he may know those who would impose upon him?

The Resolution.
IF you consider with your self, what Freedom every one uses in your ^ehalf,
whether he has ever used the ^ame and so continues the same fa^^ion still, to
court you out of choice: ^r whether he gives you Counsel ^nly out of course,
and that his Con^ersation and manner of Life be the ^^me as before: And whether
he has ^orgot nothing of what the Duty and ^ffection which he owes you does
^equire; Briefly, if his Affections and ^ther Fashions of Proceeding are
va^^ed; God instruct your Understand^ng to foresee the Effect.

Then the King commended them all, calling every one by his name, whereat all
the Assistants rejoyced^ The next day, when the King espied his fit Opportunity
in the Feast, he began to Question the rest, as follows.

Five and thirtieth Question.
What is the greatest Neglect in the World.

The Resolution.
IT is to take no account of ou^ Children; and not to take due care for their
Education, to train them up in Virtue, and to form in them good Manners and
Behavior For in our common Devotions we entreat God not only for our selves
but also that it would please him to address our Children to all Goodness, and
to impart Wisdom and Science to them; which proceeds also from the Grace of
God. To the other.

Six and thirtieth Question.
How he should come to be a Lover of his Country?

The Resolution.
IF you persuade your self, that it is a happy thing to live and dye at home,
and that Travels bring nothing but Folly to the Poor, and Dishonor to the
Rich; since most men are of Opinion that Travelers have been banished their
Country for some Miscarriage, Debt, or Trespass. But you (great King) will
easily obtain what you demand in doing well, (as you do) to all the World, for
God will give you a happy issue in all your just Affairs and Actions. To the
other.

Seven and thirtieth Question.
What Course one ought to take, to live agreeably with his Wife?

The Resolution.
ALthough some kind of Women are nice and troublesome, and through their being
Opiniators grow perverse: Being also frail, by reason of the weakness of the
Sex, and subject to commit some Faults; yet nevertheless it behooves us to
comply with them, and to use them for our Advantage, not striving with them,
nor contradicting them with a froward Spirit; for it is necessary to address
our Life to a certain Butt or End, as the Governors and Pilots of Ships do in
observing Landmarks, which Steps are all conducted by the Order and Providence
of our great God. To the other.

Eight and thirtieth Question.
What Course he should take not to be deceived?

The Resolution.
IF you act in every occasion according to Reason, you will not suffer your
self to be lead away by the Insinuations of Detractors; but (as you are endowed
with a discerning Spirit) you will put a difference betwixt the Deeds and
Sayings of every one. By which means you will be out of danger of being
circumvented, accomplishing your desires in every Design which you shall lay
with assured Judgment; nevertheless you must imagine, that the skill of ordering
every Affair, the carrying it on, and the event of it, is the Work of the
Divine Power. To the other.

Nine and Thirtieth Question.
What he should do to avoid being Choleric.

The Resolution.
IF you consider (Great King) that He on whom the Lives of many depend, is the
occasion of a multitude of Deaths; when he executes his Will with Fury and
Passion, and it is a detestable thing to extinguish the Lives of many out of an
Affectation of Power: For when Subjects conform themselves to the Will of the
Prince, humbly yielding and complying: What Ground has he to disquiet himself,
and to enter into Passion? Moreover, he must remember, that God, who Guides
and Governs the Universal World, is no way subject to Wrath, nor heated with
Passion; whose Example the Prince ought to copy in his benign and gentle
Disposition. To the other.

Fortieth Question.
What thing is that which may well be foreseen by due Precaution.

The Resolution.
THat is to measure all things duly by the Line and Balance of right Reason;
and to conduct them to their intended End an Issue, and to reject whatever is
unprofitable and impertinent, as contrary to right Reason; in such sort, as
sounding the Intention in every Proceeding, we come to the head of our Affairs,
by good Counsel: But the Divine Virtue renders all Counsel assured and firm;
and Yours principally, because you are given to the Exercise of Piety. To the
other.

One and fortieth Question.
What is it to play the Philosopher?

The Resolution.
THat is, well and wisely to deliberate and consult all things that present
themselves and happen to us; and not to suffer our selves to be swayed by our
irregular and fond Appetite, but to despise all Vanities and Follies arising
from filthy Lust and sordid Lucre; and to be always ready to the
accomplishment of all good Works, by as good and just Measures; which to
attain, we ought to implore the Aid of God incessantly. To the other.

Two and thirtieth Question.
What is the Royal Virtue of Hospitality.

The Resolution.
IT is to show ones self not ungrateful, but bountiful to all the World,
repaying with increase the good turns you have received from another; in such
sort as you may bear away the prize of Courtesy. For God greatly exalts the
humble, bearing great Favor and love to those that lessen and impoverish
themselves liberally to raise the Virtue of others. To the other.

Three and fortieth Question.
What Works are of most duration?

The Resolution.
HE is esteemed to do a lasting Work, who has brought to pass a weighty
Business and worthy of Regard; and when it is such as the Beholders durst not
put their hands to it, by reason of the Difficulty and Excellency of the
Affair; and that he nevertheless suffers none that have labored in it to be
unrewarded. Not omitting likewise, to feed with such as he has obliged to
engage therein, with all Necessaries. God having regard of all things in this
World enriches men with variety of Gifts, allotting to some health of Body, and
of Understanding, and many such Goods. Wherefore (Great King) you, in the
imitation of God, ought to comfort the Afflicted; and to convert their
Calamities into Solace and Repose, as being assured that whatever is done by
Justice and Equity, is most permanent and lasting. To the other.

Four and fortieth Question.
What is the Fruit of Wisdom?

The Resolution.
THE Fruit of Wisdom is, when we have committed nothing whereof our Conscience
does knowingly reproach us, and when we have passed the Course of our Lives
Sincerely. For by such means (Excellent King) there is bred in our Minds a very
great Satisfaction, and an infinite joy, with a pleasant Complacence. For you
(Great King) can never want hope in God, conducting your Reign in true Piety
and Religion. These Answers heard, all the Assistants expressed signs of great
Approbation, crowned with a cheerful Applause. Then the King graciously invited
them to drink. The Morning after, when all the Company returned to the Table,
the King asked the rest in the following manner.

Five and fortieth Question.
What Course he should take never to be elated with Pride?

The Resolution.
YOU will never be swelled nor elated with Pride, if you keep your self in an
equality and moderation of Spirit, that is to say, if upon all Occasions you
have this Maxim engraven in your Mind, That you who bear rule over Men, are no
more then a Man yourself, reflecting also with your self, that God infatuateth
the proud and arrogant, and raises those who are lowly and humble. To the
other.

Six and fortieth Question.
What Counselors he ought to have about him.

The Resolution.
THey should be your Counselors (Great King) who have been long exercised and
versed in your Affairs, and such as you know bear you great Fidelity and Love;
and who know how to conform and suit themselves to your Condition: the Light of
God will discover those who are worthy such an Employment. To the other.

Seven and fortieth Question.
What is most Necessary to a King?

The Resolution.
THE love of his Subjects; for by that means he will make a Bond of
indissoluble good will: For the rest, God accomplisheth that which one chooses
for the best. To the other.

Eight and fortieth Question.
What is the end of a Speech or Oration in Pleading?

The Resolution.
IT consists, after you have proposed your Intention, in persuading that your
cause is good, confuting the Objections of your Adversary, and showing them to
be inconsequent, worthless and impertinent: But the main end is to pursue duly
the Point on every Occasion, and not to stray with Locutions; for the true
persuasion is a thing addressed from God. To the other.

Nine and fortieth Question.
How he should accommodate himself to diverse People in one Kingdom.

The Resolution.
DOing and administering Justice to every one equally; and by so doing you shall
Govern and Rule them as you list: for the rest, God inspireth men with Power to
discern the right of Kings. To the other.

Fiftieth Question.
In what things are we constrained to be sorrowful?

The Resolution.
IN the Calamities and Adversities of our Friends, and most, when we see that
such Calamities are of a long durance, and inevitable; and when they are
therewith so attacked, as to cause them to dye: For in such Griefs there is no
means how we can take off our Sorrow, (and if there were) there is no possible
hope of Remedy, nor any profit to be found against such Accidents, with which
all humane kind are so grieved. For to avoid wholly all Mischances, is a
business rather for a Divine Power, then a Mortal. To the other.

One and fiftieth Question.
In what thing a man deprives himself of Glory and Honor.

The Resolution.
WHen a man becomes untractable, and inaccessible, by fierceness and Pride: for
then Vituperation comes upon him, and privation of Honor follows him: for God,
who is the Governor of Glory, gives and takes it away, as seems good to him.
To the other.

Two and fiftieth Question.
What kind of men he ought most to trust.

The Resolution.
TO those who bear you such love, that neither Fear, nor Avarice, nor Ambition,
nor Covetousness, nor hope of Lucre, cannot at all have any Power to divert.
Nevertheless, the show of this Love is not easily to be discerned; and in the
same, it is needful to have Observation a long time, for those who are near to
a King, aspire to make themselves rich, and spare no means to get, by his
Favor, great Profit, and are naturally Traitors. But God conduct (Great King)
your Council, that they may sufficiently show you who are those that perfectly
love you. To the other.

Three and fiftieth Question.
What is that which conserveth a Kingdom?

The Resolution.
THat is, that the King take diligent care, and give order, that those who are
in Office, and have charge, commit no undue things to the prejudice of the
People: The which you know very well how to perform, for (as it seems) God
has given you a Spirit very excellent. To the other.

Four and fiftieth Question.
By what means he might keep Grace and Honor?

The Resolution.
BY Virtue: For she is the accomplishment of all great Works, and trips up the
Feet of Vice, as you have long experimented by your excellent Bounty toward
all Persons: Which in you is a sign of the Gift of God. To the other.

Five and fiftieth Question.
How in Time of War he might keep himself still in Tranquillity of Spirit?

The Resolution.
IF you propose in your Mind, to give order that your Lieutenants and Captains
commit nothing that is Evil; but that they contend by Virtue one with another
for the proof of their Virtue, and further, that they have in you a perfect
Confidence, that you will have their Domestic Affairs in a singular Respect,
if it happen that they lose their Lives for, and in your Service; By this means
you shall have no Occasion to be troubled, disposing all prudently by Divine
Clemency, which will inspire you to understand all that is good.

King Ptolomy receiving this Answer with great expressions of Joy, with a
cheerful Countenance entreated them all to drink, showing extreme Content and
Satisfaction.

The seventh Day, the Feast was prepared more great and more sumptuous than it
had hitherto been; because that many Ambassadors from Cities were arrived
there. Then all being set in their Order, the King finding occasion to devise,
asked the first of those that had not yet spoken their Advise in this same
manner.

Six and fiftieth Question.
How he might be resolved thoroughly by Reason, and by Arguments?

The Resolution.
IF you weigh well the Propositions which you shall hold, and the Persons which
speak, and the Subject whereof they treat: and that you often inform your self,
and that in diverse manners, and by long intervals of time, of the estate of the
above said Affairs: For the Bounty of the Spirit is an extraordinary Gift of
God, by which one may easily know and discern all things^ To the other.

Seven and fiftieth Question.
Wherefore is it that many cannot approach unto Virtue?

The Resolution.
BEcause Nature has Created al^ Humane Creatures subject to incontinence, and
prompt to Voluptuousness; from whence Injustic^ and Iniquity is engendered, and
Ava^riciousness does greatly abound. Bu^ the estate of Virtue whose Nature is
fixed on things sublime, casts away all those whom Voluptuousness does cause to
be alienated from her. For she commends before all things, tha^ Justice and
Magnanimity shall be observed, the which God gives, and is therefore the
principal Author. To the other.

Eight and fiftieth Question.
What is that which Kings ought to follow above all things.

The Resolution.
THat is the Laws: To the end that they ruling the lives of ^ubjects by just
and equitable Acts (as we have heard you do) Great ^ing, you shall gain by this
means ^^mortal Memory, if you follow the ^recepts and Commands of the most
^igh. To the other.

Nine and Fiftieth Question.
Who are those that one ought to elect for Offices and Magistracies?

The Resolution.
THEY are those that are averse to all things unjust, and ^^at are imitators of
your Actions: and that being drawn with the sweetness of Virtue, pursue
incessantly after good Works, that they may attain to Glory and Honor, to
which certainly, O Worthy King still following Virtue, you will a^^tain: For
God is he that crowne^ with Honor and Glory glorio^^ Justice. To the other.

The Sixtieth Question.
What Persons ought one to choose for Captains?

The Resolution.
THose that do most exceed Justice and Magnanimity, a^^ yet have more respect
to the Lives^ Men than to a bloody Victory: F^^ God is he from whom all Mort^^
receive infinite Goodness, the whi^^ you shall excellently imitate, if y^^
persist in doing good to your Su^^jects. To the other.

The One and Sixtieth Question.
Who is the Man worthy of Admiration?

The Resolution.
THat is he who does highly abound in Glory and Greatness, is opulent in
Riches, and sublime in Puissance: yet nevertheless yields himself affable and
kind, just and equitable to every one, as we have heard, Great King, you do;
and the same shall make you admired by every one: For it is God that has
engraven this Solicitude in your Heart. To the other.

The Two and Sixtieth Question.
What behooves him to exercise himself in, when he is at leisure, that he may
not thereby be drowned in Sloth?

The Resolution.
IT is necessary, with all imaginable care and diligence to consider the
Discourse which offer concerning the form and manner of living: which every one
ought constantly to have before his Eyes. Likewise, to bear always in mind, to
wha^ end, Property, and Virtue, were al^ things ordained: Because in the sai^
Discourse there is much good an^ honest pastime conjoined to the in^crease of
Knowledge. For amongst little and vile things, one finds ma^ny times something
that may pleas^ him to choose and take; for the re^^ (Great King) it seems well
to u^^ God has in a great measure so fa^voured you, that you will still b^
electing all virtuous behavior an^ kindness, by the great honor yo^ bear to
the study of Wisdom. T^ the other.

The Three and Sixtieth Question.
In what things ought Kings most to employ their time?

The Resolution.
IN the knowledge of Histories, and in reading Books, which treat of Affairs,
that most often present themselves to him: in which it is needful that^ he
employ much time. It beho^eth moreover, that he enquire for those Writings that
teach to conserve Kingdoms, and to correct the manners of men: which to
accomplish with such diligence as you do, God will give prosperity to your
Designs, in which he will grant you ^n excellent Glory far above other Kings.
To the other.

The Four and Sixtieth Question.
What Persons ought one to invite to Banquets?

The Resolution.
ONe ought to call those which are desirous to learn, and those who often think
how the Affairs of a Kingdom ought to pass, and that know how to recount the
Lives of Princes: for there is nothing more pleasant, nor more delectable then
such Company. For they are those that are well instituted and instructed in the
Beauty of Knowledge, and have God in high Reverence. The which thing it seems
you do accomplish well (Great King) as one may perceive, in that God has been
pleased to send you Prosperity and Happiness in all your Affairs. To the other.

The five and Sixtieth Question.
Which is most profitable for the People, either to choose over them a King
from a private Person, or to obey a King that was Son to a King?

The Resolution.
THE most profitable to the People is that which is most agreeable with Nature:
For although that some Kings Sons be sometimes Oppressors of the People, yet
those which from private Persons come to be exalted to such Sublimity and
Greatness, because they have experienced Poverty, and endured Calamities and
laborious Travels of private Persons, they are more cruel then bloody Tyrants,
and Rule their Subjects by force and intolerable Violence. Wherefore the
Ordinance received and accustomed, and the common fashion of doing, is much
more sure, and far better for Government, that it come from the King by
Succession, from Father to Son, as it is with you (Worthy and Great King:) for
your Greatness and Excellency consists not so much in Honors, Glory, and
great Domination, as in Clemency and Benignity. The which (by a Gift from God)
draws and attracteth the Hearts of all Persons to love you. The King accepted
this Answer with Praise, and turned himself toward the last, saying,

The six and sixtieth Question.
What is most profitable to a Kingdom?

The Resolution.
THat is, to hold and maintain the People in Peace; and to giv^ order that
Suits and Process of La^ should be immediately and without delay adjudged
definitively; for such things are executed when the Prince hates the wicked,
and shows Fa^vour and Kindness to good and ho^nest Men, and such as be
virtuous and that he esteems it a great thin^ to have saved the Life of one of
hi^ Subjects: as we have been informed you do (Great King) that abhor^ all
Murderers, disposing and tem^pering all by Justice: In which yo^ adorn to
Eternity the Greatness o^ your Deeds; God having inspire^ you with a Soul free
from all foul^ness of Vice, and illustrated the same with most excellent Virtue.

AFter these Answers, there arose a great Noise of Congratulations and
Applauses with an excessive joyful Acclamation, and the whole Hall was full of
joyful Shouts. The King then commanding silence, and taking his Cup, invited
them all to drink: then addressing his Sp^ech to the said Doctors, pronounced
these Words in the presence of all the Assembly. I repute this day (my Masters)
to be to me most happy by your Presences, for your Answers have ^rought to me
most great Profit and Instruction for the Government of my self and my Kingdom.

Thus all being ended, he ordained that to every one of the Doctors should be
delivered three Talents of Silver, and by and by gave to every one of them a
Page to wait upon them at their Table. So with great contentment to every one,
the Feast was ended with great Praise of the Kings Liberality; who above all,
showed a Countenance of receiving the greatest Satisfaction and most joyful
content.

I Have been hitherto Philocrates, thus prolix in the recital of the Business,
which I have done, for the great esteem I have had of such men, and of their
Wisdom: marvelling at the readiness of their Answers, being so pertinent to
that which was proposed to them upon the sudden: showing such Elegance in their
Speech, as if these Questions had been long time in premeditation: and that he
who proposed them, had thought of them long before he demanded them: and yet
their Answers to him were found so agreeable, as if they had long before
consulted together about them. Wherefore it is no wonder that they seem
admirable, not to me only, but to the Philosophers also, and to all them that
were present, assuring you that such things are more hard to believe than one
would imagine, in which I will not wonder, if the Faith of the Readers be
vanquished: For my part, what occasion have I to add Dreams or Falsities,
seeing that all which I have Written, is to be found in the Registers of the
King, where it is held the greatest of Crimes, to find any untruth in the least
thing of the World.

I assure you then, that this Recitation is most true, containing the Discourse
of all the things as they have passed in verity, without mixture of any Error;
for to this end, that I might best know the truth, I have used this Diligence
to search public Registers, where we may see recited the Banquets and Feasts,
together with the Interrogations also of the King; and the Answers which were
given him, and all even Word for Word; from whence I have borrowed what I have
here Written. For you know it has been the custom to Register and Inroul all
that has been done and said, every day from the time that the King began to
give Audience, It was a Custom to Register what was propounded and answered in
the Kings of Egypts Presence.
unto the time He went to Bed, without omitting any thing that he did, or was
said to his Majesty: A course truly, very profitable and well instituted: For
by that means the registered Acts of the precedent day being read, if any thing
were omitted in what the King had said or done, there might be Opportunity of
amendment.

Therefore, after I had diligently searched the Day Book of the King, I have
collected the same for you, here by Writing, as aforesaid; Well knowing the
extraordinary great desire you have to understand all remarkable Occurrences.

The means used by the 72 Doctors, in their Interpreting, or Translating the
Law.
THree days after these Feasts and Disputes were ended, Demetrius conducted
all these Doctors toward the Sea, into an Isle; and entering upon a Bank,
passed a Bridge which led toward the North, where the place designed for this
Assembly was, and where they should hold their Conference for their
Interpretation of the Law.

It was a House of Pleasant Situation, and most magnificent, upon the Banks of
the Sea, very stately and curiously decked and trimmed: where, above all
Conveniences, there was great silence for the tranquillity of the Spirit, and
repose of the Understanding. Moreover, there was all things necessary for Life,
carefully provided and prepared with great convenience and ease.

In this place Demetrius entreated them they would dispose themselves to the
I^terpretation of the Law, in which they began to proceed, disputing, and
conferring together of every thing, until they came all to one general accord
and consent, to resolve in a true sense advisedly. The which done, they set
down in Writing, that which was by them so composed and reduced into good
order, the most learnedly, and the most eloquently that they could, by the
Advice and Counsel of all, they put it apart, that the same might afterward
be put into the Hands of Demetrius.

Their Colloquies and Conferences lasted from the Morning until nine of the
Clock, and so rising from these Disputes, they went to take Recreation and Air
for their Health, after all things were sumptuously administered unto them. For
Dorothea, who had the same in charge, was therein so careful, that there was
nothing made ready for the Kings Person, but every day they had as much of the
same to every single Person, and he would once the day come to visit them with
courtship in his own proper Person, and they sometimes went to salute the King
with great Reverence, and so returned to privacy.

Every Morning it was their Custom to make their Prayers to God, after they had
washed their Hands in the Sea, as the Jews customarily use Lavations, and then
retired to their Readings and Interpretations.

I was so bold to ask them why they so washed their Hands before they made
their Prayers? to which demand they made this Answer: that this washing of the
hands did admonish them to do nothing wickedly, but to devote all their Actions
to Piety, and Sanctity: because that all the Works they did with their Hands
might be effected according to Justice, Truth, and Cleanness, as we have before
said.

To conclude, these Personages being in such Serenity of Air, Beauty of
dwelling, Tranquillity of Silence, Pleasantness of Repose, and Royal
Entertainment, finished the Work undertaken: and, which is a note of
Admiration, (they had so expressly ordered it among themselves) and followed it
with such care and diligence, that the Interpretation of the Law was fully
finished in the space of 72 Days. Demetrius then seeing the Translation and
Interpretation of the Law was so well and happily brought to an end, used means
that the multitude of the Jews, then being in Egypt, might be convocated to the
place where the Work was then perfected: to whom he showed how all things had
been done, beginning with all Circumstances of the Enterprise, and all in the
presence of the Interpreters. To the King all the Multitude attributed great
Praise, and gave infinite thanks, for being the mediate cause of so important a
good, and a benefit of such excellency: Likewise they shared a part of the
Honor to Demetrius, entreating him to show them that Favor as to have a Copy
for their Princes, for to have their Advice, and to deliberate upon the Profit
or Damage that might arise upon the same.

In this sort was the Law reviewed, re-known, and received in the assembly of
the Princes of the Jews, and of the Multitude, and of the Ambassadors of Towns.
And upon Proclamation made (the seventy two Doctors being present) that all was
well and holily Translated, and done after a most exquisite manner: it was
provided that nothing thereof should be changed, and that all things should
remain in the same estate without alteration of the least thing or tittle.

As the Translation was thus approved of all, and the Decree made for the
ratification of the same; Demetrius commanded that according to their custom,
they should make Imprecations and Maledictions against those which should
undertake or should presume to add any thing thereto, or to transferr it
otherwise by changing, effacing, or ordering any thing whatsoever it were,
unto that which was so perfectly now written. And when all was perfected and
accomplished in this manner, he ad^ured the Jews to hold, keep, and preserve it
inviolably for ever: the which they promised to do with great Joy and
Acclamation.

So Demetrius, finding himself greatly satisfied, especially because he had
been a great Conductor of the Work: and that he had given to the King such
Content in the happy execution and accomplishment of his charge, and of this
his Felicity, made great Complements to the King. Who having after with great
Diligence perused this Interpretation, and considered the profundity of the
Sense of the Lawmaker, which he admired with an astonished regard: he said to
Demetrius, How comes it to pass that none of the Poets or Historians have put
their Hands to this Law, being it is a thing of so high and perfect Excellency?
To which Demetrius answered, that no body never durst touch it, as well for the
reverence of the same, as also that God had forbidden it; so as some having
presumed to attempt it, have been chastised with Divine Punishment: whereupon
they have been constrained to desist from their enterprise: For, as testifies
Theopompus, which, by a recital of himself, says, that presuming to transferr
into his History some Secrets of the Holy Law, he was afflicted more then 30
days following with a perturbation of his Understanding: But calling upon God
in the Intervals and Cessations of the most vehement fits of this his Malady,
it was told him in his sleep, this Punishment was sent him from God, for having
presumed to profane and falsify things Sacred. So by this Vision he was
corrected, repented, and perfectly received his Senses again.

And, said Demetrius, upon mine own knowledge, I affirm, that Theodorus a
Tragic Poet, willing to usurp something from this Law, therewith to enrich his
Poesy, lost his sight: Nevertheless, advising with himself, and concluding
that this his Audaciousness was the cause of his Blindness, prayed to God for
many days, whereby he came again to Health.

The King, saying that this was wisely spoken, adored the Law: Commanding that
the Books of the same should be preserved the most curiously and carefully that
might be possible: and advising with the Interpreters, benignely and graciously
prayed them, that when they were in Judea, they would often come and see him.

Finally, he gave order, that they should be honorably returned back and
conducted into their Country, promising them, that how often soever, and when
they pleased to return, he would entertain them as his principal Friends: so
honoring them with fair Presents according to their Merits, and commanding
that all things should be made ready for the dispatch of their return, using
toward them all Royal Magnificence; He gave to every one of them three rich
Habilliments, and two Talents of Gold, and an excellent Cup of the weight of a
Talent. Moreover, Furniture to furnish a Chamber; over and above he sent to
Eleazer ten Table-beds or Couches of ease, which had the Feet of Silver, and
adorned with all that was necessary to the beautifying of them.

Further, he sent him a Present of thirty Talents of Cilicia, that is to say,
ten Robes, whereof the one was of Purple; and a fair Crown of an hundred
Tunicks of Crespe, of Viols, of Basins, and two Cups of Gold for the
Sacrifices. After, he entreated Eleazar, that when any of the said Doctors
should desire rather to return to him, then to remain in Jerusalem, that he
would not hinder them by any means, for he protested he made great esteem of
wise Men's Company; and that he would spare for nothing to draw them to him. In
which he should best employ his Riches, to all imaginable Content and Profit,
and not, as some Prodigal Princes do, in vain Trifles that profit nothing.

Behold here, my Philocrates, the Present which I promised you; in which I
hope, you will take more Pleasure, than in reading vain, fabulous Narrations,
being that you use to whet and sharpen your Understanding in the Contemplation
of the most great and Noble Actions: In which you have employed much time,
which has given me occasion now to write you things worthy and excellent, and
the best that I could choose, because that betwixt us I would kindle a kind
Contention and Emulation of amiable Virtue, for the desire to have an
intelligence of things more worthy to be observed, and which are the most
excellent.

The end of ARISTEUS his History.
Proofs concerning this History.
NOW follow sundry Opinions of diverse Authors, Ancient and Modern, concerning
this Business and Translation of the Law of Moses. And first, an Extract from
the fourth Chapter of the fifth part o^ the several Collections of Pietr^
Messie, in which there fell (says he) an admirable and miraculous hap^ viz.
How the 72 Interpreters being put severally into several Cells, b^ the
Commission of the King, without possible means to conferr the one with the
other, and that afte^ they had made, so separated, ever^ one his Traduction,
and being brough^ all together before the King with all their Traductions,
neverthele^^ were all found so conformable, tha^ there was not one syllable
more in the one than in the other: which could not be without the especial
Grace and Operation of the Holy Ghost; as says Saint Augustine, Ireneus, and
Tertullian, who says, he had seen in his Time, and in Alex^ndria, the very
Books written by ^he Hands of the seventy two Tran^lators, which were in Hebrew
and in Greek. As much also says Justin the Philosopher, in the Book of his
Ad^ertisements, that he made to the Pagans and Gentiles: where he says, that
King Ptolomeus made to be built, without the City of Alexandria, se^enty two
Halls, to lodge severally the seventy two Traductors, and there ^rovided very
honorably for them ^ll, of all that to them was necessa^^: In the which place,
the said ^ranslators remained, without one ^eing the other, until that such
^^eir Translations were perfectly ^^nished. And he affirms also, ^o have seen
then the Ruins and old Walls of these Buildings, which were kept as Relics
and things Sacred.

And although Saint Hierom and Ruffinus agree not in the number o^ the said
Chambers, the matter is no^ great. Seeing that according to Saint Augustine, and
many other Author^ every Translator made his Transla^tion apart, without
conference wit^ the other, yet all the Traduction^ were found conform.

And truly, however, when it i^ duly considered, it appears a great Mystery,
and may be held for a great Miracle of this Conformity of Styl^ and of Order,
to Translate a thing so long and so diverse, although al^ the Translators had
been togethe^ and that they had begun this Wor^^ at this time.

For we see that it is enough for tw^ men to accord in one only poin^ when they
are to mix something to^gether.

After the Translation was finis^^ed, the Jews that remained in Egyp^ and which
had been versed in their Law, recommended to the King this Holy Writing;
wherewith the King was right well content. And for certain, according to
Josephus, and Eusebius, King Ptolomy was astonished at the Holy Scriptures, and
ravishingly taken with their Mysteries: That he demanded of Demetrius Phalerius
(who had the charge of his Library) saying, How comes it that Lycurgus, Solon,
and other Law^ivers, are so silent of the Law of ^he Jews?

To whom Demetrius answered, ^aying, (Sir) This Law, as you may ^ufficiently
see, comes from God, so that no Lawgiver durst be so har^y to touch it, or
take from it any ^ract: For even Theopompus was ^rucken by the Divine Hand with
^erturbation of his Sense, and with ^ Cardiack Passion, for having a will ^o
mix the Holy History of the He^rews, by his Enriching it with elo^uent Words,
and rhetorical Colors.

But after returning to God, an^ commending himself to his Mercy, (...) was
revealed to him in a Dream, the his Disaster came upon him for so a^tempting to
embellish, and (as (...) thought) to enrich the Sincerity (...) the Holy
Scriptures with dressed Wor^ and trimmed Phrases, and to comm^^nicate it so to the
Pagans and I^^dels.

It comes also into my thought how Theodorus, a Tragic Poet, su^denly lost his
sight, for having tak^ one only passage of Holy Writ^ Argument of his Tragedy:
but ^^^penting him of the same, and doi^^ Penance for his Forfeit, he
re^^^vered his sight as before.

HItherto are the Words of P^^tro Messie, by the which (...) may see the
Diversity of Opinion that is amongst Authors, concerni^^ this Translation of
the Law of ^^^ses. For my self, it seems to (...) that Aristeus, which was
always p^^^sent, and that had conduced to the affair in part, meriteth that one
do him the Honor to give belief to his History, although some Doctors ^herein
vary.

A short Discourse of the Antiquity and Dignity of the Sacred Books, and
Excellency of their inspired Writer, the Prophet Moses.
By the English Translator.
AS the true God is the ancient of Days and Times; so it pleased him that his
perpetual History, contained (...) Holy Scriptures, should excel in Anti^uity
of Time, all other Histories and ^ritings of the World that can be ^^und; the
Writings of the Pagans, and ^ations, being all under these, and long ^^ter, and
that only of Moses, the Sub^^ct of this former History, contains the ^ccount of
years justly from the Creation and beginning of the World, even unto the coming
of the promised Redeemer. A reckoning (I say) so just and certain, that there
is no such to be found.

For to come to the Time wherein the Prophet of God, Moses, the first Writer of
Holy Writ, began to write manifestly under the Lord of Heaven and Earth; we may
gather, and without prejudice, of all that then could be done; as by a Passage,
amongst many other places, we read of in the seventeenth Chapter of the Book of
Exodus, where it is said, God Commanded him to write; and that in the same year
the People of Israel issued ou^ of Egypt, which was from the Creation of the
World 2513. Upon which w^ may advertise our selves, that the year^ are
calculated according to Verity of the said Scriptures, by the faithful Servant^
of God, which have happily traveled therein.

And therefore we need not rest upon the Calculation of Histories, Annals, and
humane Chronicles, or other Writer^ that have not entirely followed Holy
Scriptures, who are discordant amongs^ themselves, and many times directly
opposite to one another times.

Therefore, if we diligently search all Antiquities and Writings of men of all
Nations, that have any appearance of certain time, wherein those Writings were
made, and after confer those times with the things recited and inregistred by
the Holy Prophet Moses, and the time wherein he writ them; we shall see
manifestly ^he Excellency and Antiquity that he is herein above all men: For
the Fables and Disguisements of profane Poets, Greeks and Latins, which all
came a long time after Moses: Amongst them (I say) we shall see no other but
mani^est Dreams, Lies; and amongst other things notable, some Corruptions of
the Sacred Scriptures, long before Writ^en, of which, they having heard some
^^ckling, and received it as from hand to hand, or drawn it from his Writings,
^or heard it recounted by the Father to the Son, and they from their A^cestors,
which were the Children and Successors of the three Sons of Noah, who was the
second Father of huma^^ kind, and restorer of the Nations of all the World, all
issuing from his Posterity, after the universal Flood.

His three Sons, (as Holy Scripture has acquainted us with,) where Shem, Ham,
and Iaphet, of whom are descended all the Earth: And this before spoken, is
easily and sufficiently discovered in the Writings of the said Pagans, by the
proper Names of the said Children of Noah, and of their Successors, which of
long time before these Writings and profane Histories, had been named by Moses.

For the Pagans testify, that the People had made of these Ancient Fathers^
Idols, and Gods: As of Iaphet, Iapetus, they drew Iavan, Ianus, and Ion; and
because they were Names held in the Hebrew Letters, or value of them; they
accommodated them to their Tongues and Letters, and to make them more easy and
glib in their accustomed Pronunciation, came near, but with al^eration.

And if we will go more high, and weigh the old Times of the first Age which
preceeded the Flood, as we have it from that only History of Moses in the Holy
Bible: We shall easily perceive that the Pagan Poets and Writers have received,
even the Ancient Names, and mingled them amongst their Fables and Dreams, and
drawn them from the Holy Scriptures.

And so it shall appear plainly, that their false God, Vulcan, is not very hard
to unmask, that he was a mortal Man, and one of the Sons of the other Lamech,
the prime Bigamist and corrupter of Marriage; who descended of that accursed
Race of Cain: And this appears by the faculty of this Vulcan, which was a Smith
or forger of Armor: And Moses declares him so, and by his Name too, for he is
by him called Thu-vulcain; and every one any thing skilled in the Hebrew,
knows, that if they leave the first Letter, which is servile, and put to form
the Name, according to the manner of the Hebrews, it will appear mere Vulcain;
for their Letter Beth, B. having not a prick in him, is pronounced as our v
Consonant.

And for the name of Vulcain's Wife, by Moses called Nehama, which signifies
Fair in their Language, or, as speak the Latins, Venusta: It is a plain course
to discover vain Beauty, or their so much celebrated, unchaste, and wanton
Venus. A goodly Race and fair Family, of that accursed murderer, Cain.

And here may we see some of the proper Gods and Idols of the poor Pagans,
amongst that Anthill of such and other ill stolen Names, unhandsomely fetched
from the Holy Scriptures, with and by the subtilty of the Devil; to the end
that a wicked Troop of execrable Giants, violent oppressors of men, Thieves,
and Adulterous desperates, shaken off, and damned by the Word of God, of whom
the first Apostate and Liar, Satan, made his counterfeit Gods and Idols; the
old Serpent, expert and knowing in all malice, that there was no better way for
him to muffle and blind humane Judgment from the knowledge of the true God, at
first engraven in the Souls of men, but by this counterfeit device with
Posterity.

But to pass farther in our begun purpose, touching the fabulous Writings of
the Pagan Poets, we shall find, that their Discourse, in the best we can of it,
is but Corruptions of the Truth, in the Holy Scriptures of God, or things
therein revealed; turned by them into Dreams, and profane Narrations: As we
may see, in that they writ of the Creation of the World, Ovid. 1. de Meta.
Virgil, 6. Aeneid. Virgil Eglog. 4.5.
and Government of the same, of the Divine virtue that sustains and interiourly
nourishes all things; of the Consumption of Heaven and Earth with Fire at the
last Day, and also of the Restoration of the World, and of all things in such
good order, for all so many Confusions proceeding from Sin. All which things
they might obtain, and by some dark means draw from the Books of Holy Scripture
and Sacred Prophets, translated out of Hebrew into other Languages, or
understand something by means of the dispersion of the People of Israel,
Josephus antiq.
spread through all the Provinces of the Roman Empire, and through all the
Quarters of the World. For the Jews had for the most part leave in all Places
to hold their Synagogues, and to have public Lectures of their Law and
Prophets: When these Poets, Act. 18.20.
flatterers of men, turned all that, spoken of the Person of Christ, the
promised Redeemer, and that then was expected; Virgil. Aeneid.
falsely to apply them by flattery to their Princes, false Gods and Idols.

But let us leave all those Juglers and Liars, that durst be so profanely bold
to corrupt the pure Verity of God's Word, and speak we of the Gentiles
Writings, how long they came after Moses, and Writ since he: and that even they
have given Testimony to him and his Divine Writings, which may at least suffice
to convince all Contradictors, that Moses was in Nature, and before them all.
We understand, that his reckoning is a perpetual following all the years since
the Creation of the World, even unto his time, as it is easy to gather by his
Books, and his account of the Years, and Lives of the first Fathers, from Adam,
unto the Patriarch Abraham, and after, from his Successors, as from Father to
Son, to wit, Isaac, Jacob, Levi, Caath, Amram, and then Aaron, and Moses
himself, Children of the said Amram: And that he had express charge to Write to
the very last, the year since the Creation of the World, 2513. and of his Life
the 80. Year, and has continued his Holy Stories, even to the year of his
Death, and of the World, 2553.

Now since that time^ God has always so provided for the advancement of his
Glory, and the edification of his Church, that the perpetual History of her,
and the certain account of the years of the World, has been continued and
still put in Writing by his Prophets.

As it is to be seen in the Holy Books that treat of and contain the Government
of Joshua, and the Judges: then to Samuel, and the Kings of the People, unto
the Transmigration into Babylon, and of other Governors, which have succeeded
them, after their return from thence.

And finally, the Prophet Daniel has declared the rest of the time, that is,
The 490 years since the said Deliverance of the Jews, and return from Babylon,
by the means of Cyrus, Daniel 9.
King of Persia, even to the Death and Resurrection of Christ the Redeemer,
promised to the Holy Fathers, which is our Lord Jesus, the eternal Son of God,
true God, and true Man; who appeared living after his Death and Resurrection to
more than five hundred faithful Witnesses at one time, Luke 24.^
1 Cor. 15.
besides his other manifestations, and mounted visibly into Heaven in the year
of the World, 3961.

Now if we will lear^h all the Histories of all the Nations of the World, of
whom the Writings are arrived to our Age, the most Ancient time of which they
make mention shall be of their ancient Destruction of Troy by the Greeks. The
History whereof has been written by Dictis of the Isle of Creet, which is the
best Testimony they have for the present, and since, by Homer and many others.

And from this Destruction, Diodorus Siculus, renowned amongst the Historians,
began his Books; now the same, according with the common Judgment and
Calculation of knowing men, comes only to be about 358 years before the
building of Rome; the same time then falls to be in the sixteenth year of the
Government of Elon, Judge of the People of Israel, Judges 12.
mentioned in the Book of Judges. And the same was 316 years before the first
Olympiade, the reckoning of the Annals of the Greeks: So then the said
Destruction of Troy falls to be only under the year of the World 2838. When
therefore we shall give consent, that their Writings, the most certain, whose
Narrations we may best give Credit unto: Yet the Prophet Moses shall be found
much more Ancient then all the Writers of the World, what Nation soever, though
they are in great number, and of whom we see yet the old Books in these last
times in their proper Tongues.

And that he has put his hand to the Pen, and began to write his Divine
Revelations of the Creation and Conduct of the World even to his time, and his
sacred History and Prophesies touching the Church of God shall at least be 325
years before all other Writers, of whom there is any mention or news in the
World; that is to say, in the year of the World 2513.

Whereupon we note, even to this present, against all those profane Mockers
that have disgorged that enormous Blasphemy amongst others, that the World is
eternal and of it self: which if it were, so as they dream, and that it had no
such beginning as is written by Moses, they might find then by all, and in all
Languages, many Histories of infinite times, and many Chronicles of many Ages,
and of old times that have preceded Moses in the account of years.

But we see that there is no such, and that the holy Bible is found even in the
middle amongst all sorts of Enemies that strive to destroy, lose, abolish,
burn, and extermine from the World the Books of it, and for all thereto they
had so long time, yet nevertheless they never could, nor ever shall. For we see
the said Bible yet, in his proper Writing and Language, and of all others of
what Nation soever, the most celebrated and renowned: and if they could find
any History, which had been written before Moses was born into the World, yet
shall it contain their Time and Composition, with more years and ages, as we
can gather from the holy Scriptures, even to this present year 1633, since the
Nativity of Christ.

The which account of times past from the Creation unto this present year,
shall come to amount to 5563 years, but such Histories neither can be found,
nor ever were.

But for Moses, and his faithful Writings, even profane Authors and Histories
of the Gentiles themselves, have been, even as it were, divinely constrained to
bear Testimony, maugre their Calumnies, Lies, Dreams, and Disguisings, through
and by the invincible force of Truth. And so they have served for Certificates
to all Nations of the venerable and well known Antiquity of him and his Holy
Writs.

For some of them have noted, and writ thus, Trogus. Justinus.
(as a thing notorious of their times) to wit, That in the East parts, and of
Syria it self, there had been an Abraham, an Israel, and even a Joseph, who,
say they, was a Son of the said Israel, sold by his Brethren, and led into
Egypt.

Then how he was received into the Court, and held very dearly with the King,
to whom he foretold the grievous and great Famine; so as without the Divine
Counsel by him given, (whereupon the admonished King gathered up and made
Reservation of Corn before the time of the said Famine,) Egypt had perished.

And finally, how his Successor Moses, and all his People issued out of Egypt,
came to Mount Sinai, how they consecrated the Seventh day for their Sabbath, or
resting day: But I will leave this Discourse, though diversified from a spark
of Truth, that these Historians have mixed with their own Devices, as profane;
and in which they were poorly advertised and deceived, by the subtilty of
Satan, as we may well know by conferring their Writings with the Holy Bible.

And be it that these Scoffers of God and his Holy Word, dare be so bold to say
and affirm, that Moses, and his, have suppressed and abolished all Precedent
Histories, making their Writings to be before all others, thereby to Authorize
them the better; yet we will leave those their Calumnies to the Judgment of any
of sound Sense and Understanding: If that could be, or can have any place or
shadow of belief amongst men of sound Judgment or reasonable Discourse: For if
they will put into mature Consideration, the small means and contemptible
Quality in the World of these poor Israelites, but Shepherds and breeders of
Cattle; and, which is worse, People exposed to the Oppressions and hard
Servitude under their puissant Enemies, and evil disposed Neighbors.

Then who shall make comparison of them with great Kings and People of the
Earth, Babylonians, Egyptians, Syrians, Romans, and other Potentates, who with
all their Authority, their Edicts, Forces, and Armies, had never power to
abolish the Holy Books, written simply by our poor Shepherds; when they could
not conserve their Royal Libraries, favored of all the World! Truly, this may
well put to the blush these wiselings, that show themselves fools in so
speaking, and discoursing without Discourse, and will Judge of things without
inquiry.

Now for the Integrity of Moses, for us Christians, we are sufficiently cleared
and satisfied by the Authority Praise of Moses.
of the Holy Spirit of God, who has given excellent Testimony by all the
Scriptures, both in the Old and New Testament, of his Original and Lineage,
being descended from the latter Levi, Nephew of the Holy Patriarch Abraham:
Also of his miraculous Conservation and Deliverance from Death and Waters; from
whence he was drawn forth, and then had that name of Moses in their Language.

Then his Royal Education and Breeding, his Love to his afflicted People, and
his Magnanimity to despise humane Greatness, in preferring the just cause and
sufferance of Christ, the Redeemer then looked for, before all the Regal Estate
and great Treasure of Egypt.

Moreover, his sufferance long and bitter, for the defense of Right and Equity,
and for the Deliverance of the poor afflicted: His Divine calling to the Charge
and Government of his People, his Patience, Gentleness, and Perseverance with
such Faithfulness, in the difficult Execution of this weighty Charge, and the
singular gift of Prophecy, and of his Divine Miracles so strange and
supernatural, that they have been admired and celebrated of all the whole World.

But there is one point above all, very Remarkable, and which is more than
sufficient to overcome humane Reason, and to show the Integrity of Moses; which
is, that if he had would, he might easily, and according to the manner of men,
have had the Monarchy and Domination for his Children, and their Posterity,
upon all the People of Israel: And with the same, the two fertile Kingdoms,
reduced under his hand, and Conquered beyond Jordan. Nevertheless, he left his
Sons, Gersom and Eliezer, and their Posterity, private men, and of most simple
Estate, amongst the other Levites. And the same Children remaining subject to
the Sacrificers, Successors of Aaron, and to the Magistrates and Governors of
Israel.

More, that he has himself written and inregistred his own proper Faults; and
yet more notable, those of his House; as of his Brother, Sister, and Nephews,
and the most remarkable Judgments of God's Chastisements and Punishments of
them all.

Of which things, all his People were Witnesses, in number more than six
hundred thousand Persons: And if they could have contraried him for any
falsity, either for the present, or times to come: If he had been, I say, such
as they could have found any brack in his Actions, or in his Writings, or
falseness in either his Person, or any of his, in his Life, and his Miracles,
in his Writings or End. But on the contrary, all the Hebrews and Jews, which
have been since that time, and are now near 3000 years since; and that are
dispersed through all the World, who are in so great a number, that if they
were reunited into a body of People, and into a State, their multitude should
be innumerable, and might astonish the greatest Nation of the whole Universe.

All those, I say, have received from their Ancient Fathers, from their Kings
and Princes, and their Sacrificators and Ancestors, from Father to Son, and
from hand to hand, and with an admirable consent, even in the middle of so many
Confusions and Dissipations, have kept, and yet keep always in their Bibles,
the Holy VVritings of Moses, in their proper Letters, and Hebrew Tongue, as
Books most True and Veritable, Sacred and Divine: And such so known and
acknowledged in all Nations, with the excellent Testimony, Authority and
Holiness of them: that Christ himself has spoken of them, and the Prophets and
Apostles also in their VVritings and Alleagtions; I, and the most Ancient
Pagans and Strangers, cannot (with sound Sense) but acknowledge them.

And so, Reader, although I have been (as I formerly said) something prolix,
yet the Excellency of the Subject, forced and bound me to be so tedious herein,
to show, as an illustrious Addition, the worthiness of the Books and Divine
Writings, as their Antiquity, Dignity, as also the Excellency of their humane
Writer, from the Dictate of the most High: And being the matter whereof we
have formerly treated, I held it not impertinent, though I have dealt too
weakly in so worthy a Business, but refer the rest and it, to your charitable
Censure.

FINIS.

