Archy's Dream SOMETIMES Iester to his Majesty; but exiled the Court by
Canterburies malice.

With a relation for whom an odd chair stood void in Hell.



Printed in the year 1641.

Archy's Dream, sometimes Iester to his Majesty: but exiled the Court by
Canterburi^s malice. With a relation for whom an odd Chair stood void in
Hell.
THe brief reason of Archy's banishment was this.

A Noble man asking what he would do with his handsome daughters, he replied
he knew very well what to do with them, but he had sons which he knew not
well what to do with; he would gladly make Shollers of them, but that he
feared the Archbishop would cut off their ears.

Why I was exiled from Court having my jesting coat plucked off, few men are
ignorant of, neither do I much care who knows of it, in so much as my
Antigonist has now no power to apprehend them; if they should vouchsafe a
blundering murmour in my behalf, my name is as famous abroad, as he infamous:
I would not have his little Grace know so much if he were in authority at
Lambeth, house now, for the price of a pair of new shoes ears and all.

The Author.
Most (ingenious) Archy, scarce more Mundane felicity would I be ambitious to
enjoy, than to arive at so happy a Haven of knowledge, by which sufficiently I
might (without critical censure) divulge thy witty, admirable parts: when thou
were sailing on the main Neptune was then joyful of so rare a burden, and
thought it unfit to carry a wrinkled front, but smiled upon the, as if he would
have wooed thee to have been his companion, that thereby the watery Nymphs;
after their sports done, seeming pensive for their Metamorphosis, they might
have been infused with enforced alacrity: but storming Boreas owing thee an
ill office, broke prison, and in spite of Neptune Shipwracist the Pinnace
which so long she bore, and cast thee on a most unhappie shore.

But yet now at length receive comfort, Boreas is imprisoned, and Zephyrus with
gentle gales does blow, I am certain well thou know it, I am sorry thou
ever knevvst to the contrary; for me think it should be unfit to make thy
Muse que semper (...), which alvvaies was merry, go with blubbard cheeks:
but time which bringes all things to pass, has brought him (thy adversary, I
mean into far greater then ever thou were in. Of whom not since thou
dreamedst, which give me license to declare unto all men which shall desire
to know it.

Archy (sometimes Iester to his Majesty) was upon a night being prostrated upon
his bed, (to take natural rest,) very much troubled by meditating of the Arch
Bishop Lauds, unlawful actions. First by thinking how he being a clergy man,
delighted in nothing but exactions and then anon of the unheard of malice, he
bore against him; thus long time tumbling, and tossing, upon his unquiet bed,
at length, Morpheus, with his leaden maule arrested him, and then for a time
was he still. But not long so, but he was disturbed in his sleep, and dreamed
after this manner.

The Dream.
How that he was placed, on a pinnacle which reached far above Phoebe's
diocese and a little below him, he saw a poor Scholar, which was delivering
of a petition to one of the Stars, which so soon as she received it, caught
a fall and so lost the Petition, upon which the Scholar was forced to descend
for another petition, which he thought was presently done, but by that time he
was lifted up into Phoebus his chariot, by the reason of which splendor, he
could soon perceive any terrestiall creatures. But yet he could deceive the
poor scholar, as any as high as Phoebus, to whom he delivered his petition,
and she to Phoebus, who took it, and read it, the contents were these.

I the most unfortunate of the whole tribe of Levi, by spiritual assistance,
have had the privilege to declare my grievances which are these.

First we are abused by such a flat cap citizen, who if he perceive one of us
at one side of the way, he will be sure to cross over, on purpose to take the
wall of him. Calling the scholar saucy rascal, if he but offer to withstand
him.

Secondly, those which are able to buy great personages, have them, although
they have had never any nurture in an Academy, except out of a library of
notes, borrowed of some old clarke, or other, which he in former time had
gathered at several places.

Thirdly if we be not made of cannon proof, we are in danger of Episcopal
censure.

Fourthly, we must not preach more then the Archbishop of Canterbury, William
Laud, will allow off. For fear of the forfeiture of our ears. From these and
the like greevances, we most humbly desire great Jove to deliver us.

Which Petition was no sooner read, But Canterbury, was presented to my view,
who looked more like a spirit come out of purgatory, then one ready, to receive
the Papal diadem me thought I was straight, descended from Heaven to Hell,
where I saw blind Bonner, and Woolsey dancing a galliard, whipped forward by a
company of Hellish haggs, the three furies danced for females, Pluto set to see
the pastime, be hind whom set a company of men making chayres, who as fast as
they made chayres they were filled, only on was set by for whom I asked, they
answered for Laud; against he came thither all, which time were the three
Arch-Priests dancing, but anon, I saw a company of people which preferred bills
against Canterbury, why Rhadamant had the perusing, who passed his judgment
thus upon him saying.

It is but fit that he against whom that bil was preferred, should be for ever
banished Elysium because the law for his heinous offenses did require the same,
at which poor Canterbury quaked, and trembled; like a leaf ready to drop
down in Antumne: upon whom Cerberus looked very wishly that he might know when
he saw him again, by and by me thought a troop of the chief Regents servants
took him and bound him hand and foot, and so threw him into,^^arons boat,
which the followers of Pluto, made such an horrible noise, which awaked me:
notwithstanding for a time I lay speachlesse, not knowing where I was, at
length I came to my self, and so soon as I arose, I went to a noble friend of
mine, and told him my dream, who said to me, (that the day before) Canterbury
was carried into the Tower.

For which Archy said he was very sorry, but could not cry: by this may a man
perceive that though a man be never so Honorable, Puissant, Rich or Learned,
yet if his vices Obnubilate his virtues, he shall not be respected, but far
more contemned and abhorred then if he had never had such gifts bestowed upon
him. Why there is at this time scarce a child in the street, but dares speak
against him, which not long since no man durst speak a syllable against, but
that it should have been esteemed as petty treason.

But now the times are changed, and his pomp altered, and he now waits for a
trial which heretofore tried so many.

A Postscrip.
You which the dream of Archy now have read,
Will surely talk of him when he is dead:
He knows his foe in prison whilst that he
By no man interrupted but goes free.
His fools coat now is far in better case,
Then he which yesterday had so much Grace:
Changes of Times surely cannot be small,
When Jesters rise and Archbishops fall.
FINIS.

