(...) ARRAIGNMENT, TRIAL And CONDEMNATION of STEPHEN COLLEGE FOR
HIGH TREASON, IN Conspiring the Death of the KING, the Levying of WAR, and the
Subversion of the GOVERNMENT.

Before the Right Honorable Sir FRANCIS NORTH, Lord Chief Justice of the Court
of Common Pleas, and other Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer and Jail-delivery
held at the City of Oxon. for the County of Oxon. the 17th and 18th of August
1681.

I do appoint THOMAS BASSET and JOHN FISH to Print the Arraignment, Trial and
Condemnation of Stephen College, and that no others presume to Print the same.
Fr. North.

DVBLIN, Printed by Joseph Ray at Colledge-Green for a Society of Stationers,
1681.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The Humble Petition of Stephen College, now Prisoner in Your Majesty's Tower
of London,
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas your Petitioner being charged with High Treason, is under strait
Confinement, that he has not liberty to see or speak with any of his Friends
or his Children, and being lately informed that it is ordered Your Petitioner
shall come to his Trial at the City of Oxon. about the middle of the next Month.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays Your Sacred Majesty, That leave
may be given for Mr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. Robert West to come to him; and also
to have the use of Pen, Ink and Paper, in order only to make his legal and just
Defense; and also to have the comfort of seeing his two Children.

And Your Petitioner, as in duty bound, shall ever pray, etc. A true Copy,
Francis Gwyn.

At Hampton Court, July 28. 1681.
UPon Reading this Day at the Board the Petition of Stephen College, Prisoner
in the Tower, praying that in order to the making his Defense at his Trial /
which he hears is to be the middle of the next Month / he may be permitted to
see his two Children / to have the liberty of Pen / Ink and Paper / and that
Mr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. Robert West may come to him. His Majesty was pleased
to order / That the Lieutenant of the said Tower of London do permit the said
Stephen College to have Pen / Ink and Paper / and to see his two Children /
and the said Mr. Thomas Smith, and Mr. Robert West, and to converse with them
as often as he shall desire / in the presence and hearing of the Wardour who
attends him.

A true Copy. Francis Gwyn.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty, and to the Right Honorable the Lords
and others of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
The Humble Petition of Stephen College now a Prisoner in the Tower of London.
Humbly Shows,
THat Your Petitioner having been a close Prisoner ever since his first
Commitment, is altogether ignorant of the particular matters charged against
him, and of the Names of the Witnesses who are to prove the same; upon his
knowledge of both which, as well the matter as the manner of his Defense must
depend; and because upon the consideration of his Case, several matters of Law
may arise as well before as at the time of his Trial, in which, Council will be
necessary to assist him, and several matters of Fact preparatory to his Trial;
with which, under his Confinement, he cannot be furnished without the help of a
Solicitor, and he is like to be wholly incapable of receiving any benefit from
the privilege allowed by Law, of peremptory Challenge to several Jurors,
especially in a Country where he is absolutely a stranger, unless he may have
some knowledge of them before his Trial.

In full assurance therefore of the great Justice and Clemency of Your Majesty
and this Honorable Board, which he has lately had some experience of, and
does with all humility and thankfulness acknowledge, Your Petitioner does
humbly beseech Your Majesty and this Honorable Board, that he may have a Copy
of the Indictment against him, or the particular Charges of it; That his
Council and Solicitor may have free access to, and private conference with
him; and because their own private affairs or other accidents may call away
some of his Council from his assistance, that Mr. Wallop, M. Smith, M.
Thompson, M. Darnell, Mr. West of the Middle Temple, Mr. Holles of
Lincoln's Inn, Mr. Rotherham, Mr. Lovell, Mr. Rowny of Grayes-Inn, Mr.
Pollexfin, Mr. Ward of the Inner Temple, may be assigned him for Council, and
Aaron Smith for his Solicitor; and that he may have a Copy of the Jurors to be
returned upon his Trial, some days before his Trial.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
A true Copy, Francis Gwyn.

At Hampton Court, Aug. 11. 1681.
IT is Ordered up his Majesty in Council / That the Friends and Relations of
Stephen College a Prisoner in the Tower, shall have liberty of Visiting and
freely conversing with him; and the Lieutenant of the Tower having first caused
their Names to be taken in Writing / is to suffer such Friends and Relations to
have Access to the said Stephen College without any Interruption from time to
time accordingly.

A true Copy. Francis Gwyn.

THE TRIAL Of STEPHEN COLLEGE, etc.
Present, the
Lord Norreys. Lord Chief Justice North. Mr. Justice Jones. Mr. Justice
Raymond. Mr. Justice Levyns.
On Wednesday the 17th. of August, 1681. the Judges and Commissioners of Oyer
and Terminer and Jail-deliver, met at the Courthouse in the City of Oxford;
and after Proclamation for Silence, the Commission of Jail-deliver was Read,
and then the Commission of Oyer and Terminer. Proclamation was made for the
Sheriff to return the Precepts to him directed: The Justices of the Peace of
the County of Oxford were called over; and the Appearance of the Grand Jury
summoned to attend this Commission was taken. Lo. Chapter Just. North. GEntlemen,
You that are returned of the Grand Inqust, there has been a Sessions so lately,
that in all probability there will be no great matter to trouble you with at
this time. And so I shall not trouble my self nor you to give you any Charge,
because we know of no business yet that we shall need you for. The Court has
recorded your Appearance. You will do well to be in the way, either in the
Town, or hereabout the Court, that you may be ready if any thing should happen.
It Is necessary for us to have your attendance; but we know not of any thing
that we have in particular to trouble you with. We have an Indictment before
us, let us proceed upon that.


Cl. of the Crown. Jailer, have you your Prisoner?


Jailer. We will fetch him presently.


Then the Prisoner was brought to the Bar. Cl. of Cr. Stephen College, Hold up
thy Hand. (Which he did.)

Thou art here Indicted by the name of Stephen College, late of Oxford, in the
County of Oxford, Carpenter; For that thou as a false Traitor against the most
Illustrious, most Serene, and most Excellent Prince, our Sovereign Lord Charles
the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. thy Supreme and Natural Lord, the Fear of God in
thy heart not having, nor weighing the Duty of thy Allegiance, but being moved
and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, the cordial Love, and true, due,
and natural obedience which true and faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign
Lord the King, toward him our said Sovereign Lord the King, should and of
right ought to bear, wholly withdrawing and machinating, and with all thy
strength intending the Peace and common tranquillity of our said Sovereign Lord
the King of this Kingdom of England to disturb, and Sedition and Rebellion, and
War against our Sovereign Lord the King, within this Kingdom of England to
move, stir up and procure; and the cordial Love, and true and due Obedience
which true and faithful Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King, toward
him our said Sovereign Lord the King should, and of right ought to bear, wholly
to withdraw, put out and extinguish, and him our said Sovereign Lord the King
to Death and final Destruction to bring, and put, the tenth day of March, in
the Three and Thirtieth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. at Oxford, in the County of Oxford, Falsely,
Maliciously, Subtly and Traitorously, did Purpose, Compass, Imagine and
Intend Sedition and Rebellion within this Kingdom of England, to move, stir up,
and procure, and a miserable Slaughter among the Subjects of our said Sovereign
Lord the King to procure and cause, and our said Sovereign Lord the King from
his Regal State, Title, Power and Government of his Kingdom of England, to
deprive, depose, cast down and disinherit; and him our said Sovereign Lord the
King to Death and final Destruction to bring and put, and the Government of the
said Kingdom at thy will and pleasure to change and alter, and the State of all
this Kingdom of England, in all its parts well Instituted and Ordained, wholly
to Subvert and Destroy, and War against our said Sovereign Lord the King,
within this Kingdom of England to levy; and thy said most Wicked Treasons, and
Traiterous Imaginations and Purposes aforesaid to fulfill and perfect, thou the
said Stephen College the said tenth day of March, in the Three and Thirtieth
year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord the King with force and Arms, etc.
at Oxford aforesaid, in the County of Oxford aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously,
Subtly, Advisedly, Devilishly and Traitorously did prepare Arms and Warlike
offensive Habiliments to wage War against our said Sovereign Lord the King. And
thy self in warlike manner for the purposes aforesaid, then and there Falsely,
Maliciously, Subtly, Advisedly, Devilishly and Traitorously did Arm, and
one Edward Turbervill, and other Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord the King,
to Arm themselves; to perfect thy Traitorous purposes aforesaid, then and there
Advisedly, Maliciously and Traitorously did incite and advise. And further,
then and there Falsely, Maliciously, Subtly, Advisedly, Devilishly and
Traitorously did say and declare, That it was purposed and designed to seize
the Person of our said Sovereign Lord the King at Oxford aforesaid, in the
County of Oxford aforesaid. And that thou the said Stephen College in
prosecution of thy traiterous purpose aforesaid, would be one of them who
should seize our said Sovereign Lord the King at Oxford aforesaid, in the
County aforesaid. And that thou the said Stephen College thy said most wicked
Treasons and traiterous Imaginations, Compassings and Purposes aforesaid the
sooner to fulfill and perfect, and discords between our said Sovereign Lord the
King and his People to move, cause and procure, then and diverse times and days
as well before as after at Oxford aforesaid, in the County of Oxford aforesaid,
in the presence and hearing of diverse Liege Subjects of our said Sovereign Lord
the King, then and there being present, Falsely, Maliciously, Subtly,
Advisedly, Devilishly and Traitorously did say and declare, That nothing of
good was to be expected from our said Sovereign Lord the King; and that our
said Sovereign Lord the King did mind nothing but Beastliness, and the
destruction of his People: And that our said Sovereign Lord the King did
endeavor to establish Arbitrary Government and Popery against the Duty of thy
Allegiance, against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and
Dignity, and against the Form of the Statutes in this Case made and provided.

How say thou, Stephen College, Art thou Guilty of this High Treason
whereof thou stand Indicted, and have been now Arraigned, or not Guilty?


College. My Lord, I do desire, if it please your Lordship, to be heard a few
words.


L. Chapter Just. Look you, Mr. College, the matter that has been here read unto
you is a plain matter, and it has been read to you in English, that you may
understand it. It Is an Indictment of High Treason; now you must know, that no
Plea can be received to it, but either Guilty or not Guilty as to the Fact; if
you can assign any matter in Law, do it.


College. Will you please to spare me, that I may be heard a few words. I have
been kept close Prisoner in the Tower ever since I was taken: I was all along
unacquainted with what was charged upon me. I knew not what was sworn against
me, nor the persons that did swear it against me, and therefore I am wholly
ignorant of the matter. I do humbly desire I may have a Copy of the Indictment,
and a Copy of the Jury that is to pass upon me, and that I may have Council
assigned me, to advise me, whether I have not something in Law pleadable in Bar
of this Indictment.


Lo. Chapter Just. These are the things you ask, You would have a Copy of the
Indictment, you would have Council assigned to you, to advise you in matter of
Law, and a Copy of the Jury.


College. One word more, my Lord, I desire to know upon what Statute I am
Indicted.


Lo. Chapter Just. I will tell you for that, Is it not contra formam Statut. with
an abbreviation? Cl. of Cr. Yes.


Lo. Chapter Just. That refers to all manner of Statutes that have any relation to
the thing in the Indictment that is High Treason. For it may be meant contra
formam Statut. which are all the several Statutes that are in force concerning
High Treason. Now for those things that you demand, you cannot have them by
Law. No man can have a Copy of the Indictment by Law; for Council, you cannot
have it, unless matter of Law arises, and that must be propounded by you; and
then if it be a matter debatable, the Court will assign you Council, but it
must be upon a matter fit to be argued: for I must tell you, a defense in Case
of High Treason ought not to be made by Artificial Cavils, but by plain Fact.
If you purpose any matter of Law, the Court will consider of it, and assign you
Council, if it be reasonable. For a copy of the Jury, that you cannot have
neither, for there is no such thing as yet; there is no Issue joined whereupon
such a Jury should be impannelled. When you have pleaded to Issue, then we must
award the Sheriff to impannel a Jury to try that Issue. So as to what you say
as to want of preparation for your Trial, we cannot enquire what notice you
have had; and yet if you had never so little time, there is no cause why you
should not plead, though you were but just now taken and brought to the Bar to
answer it, and never heard of any thing of it before. So that I think you ought
to plead presently.


College. My Lord, I am wholly ignorant of the Law, I may ruin my self by
mistaking the Law; I desire Council, not to delay my Trial, but only to advise
me whether there is not something in Law proper for me to plead to this
Indictment, and those things I alleged were not at all to delay the Trial, but
only that I may not be wanting to my self in what I may by Law have.


Lo. Chapter Just. I tell you, Council cannot be assigned you till the Court be
possessed of some matter to grant it upon.


College. I had some Papers, my Lord, that were taken from me, which I desire
may be restored to me. I only plead that I may have my Birthright, and that
which the Law gives me; If I may have Justice, I desire no more. These Papers
were taken from me in the House over the way since I was brought from the
Prison; they were Papers that concerned my defense; some directions and
instructions how to manage my self in that defense. If you please to let me
have those Papers, I will not take up much of your time; I desire to have but
common Justice, and that which is my right by Law.


L. Chapter Just. That which you demand, Justice, you shall have by the Grace of
God to the best of our skill, without any partiality in the World. But you must
trust the Public Justice of the Kingdom. We are to be of Council for you, so
far as to see that all things proceed fairly on all sides. And when things come
before us that are fit for you to have Council upon, you shall have Council
assigned you; for we are tender of the life of a Man, as well as of the life of
the King, and of the public Justice of the Kingdom. But this is no reason why
you should not now plead. For the Papers you speak of, we will take an
examination of them afterward: If they were Papers that are necessary for your
defense upon your Trial, in God's Name you must have them restored to you; but
we know not which way you came by them, nor what they are.


College. They were taken from me just now, under the pretense of bringing
them to your Lordship.


Lo. Chapter Just. How comes any body to give you Papers? Nobody can solicit for
any one that is under an Accusation of High Treason, unless he be assigned so
to do by the Court.


College. God have mercy upon any man that is so accused then; for it is not
possible for him to make his Defense, if he cannot be at liberty to look after
it himself, nor any of his Friends permitted to do it for him.


Lo. chapter just. You can say whether you are Guilty or not Guilty without any
Papers.


Coll. My Lord, I know not but there may be something in Law for me to plead to
this Indictment, which I shall lose the benefit of if I plead. I humbly
conceive you are to be my Council, and as you are Judges, are to proceed
according to the Law. You are upon your Oaths to do me right according to the
Law.


Mr. Just. Jones. But till you have proposed a matter of Law fit for Council to
argue, there is no Council to be assigned you.


College. If I had those Papers, I could tell what I should plead. My Lord,
this is one thing, I am a Freeman of London, and I am not impleadable by the
Charter of London, any where out of the Liberties of the City in Pleas of the
Crown.


Lo. chapter just. You are indicted in Oxfordshire for High Treason committed here.
If there be not any thing of High Treason proved, done in Oxfordshire, you will
be acquitted. But a Freeman of London cannot have a privilege to commit
Treason in Oxfordshire, but must be Tried for it there.


College. Will you please to order me my Papers back that were taken from me?


Mr. Just. Jones. You ought first to plead. You have a right to demand Council
in matters of Law, but then it must be upon such matters of Law as you your
self propose to the Court, and the Court shall judge to be matters of Law fit
to be debated: Till then we cannot assign you Council.


College. It was so in the Trial of Lilburne, and in the Trial of my Lord
Stafford, there was Council assigned to them.


Mr. Just. Jones. Not before they pleaded to the Indictment.


College. Did not your Lordships, some of you that are Judges of the
King's Bench, say, that it was the right of the Prisoner to have a Copy of the
Panel, and of the Jury, before the Trial?


Mr. Just. Jones. No sure: Here are two of us that are of the Court, and we
never heard of any such thing.


College. Pray, my Lord, do me right, I am ignorant of the Law, and through my
ignorance may mistake.


Lo. Chapter Just. God forbid we should not do you right; you may expect it from
us; we are upon our Oaths to do all the Kings Subjects right.


College. I am ignorant in the Law, and it is impossible for me to make my
defense without the assistance of my Papers.


L. Chapter Just. Cannot you tell whether you be Guilty or not Guilty of this
Treason?


College. I can so, but I know not what error I may run my self into, if I
should plead presently, and lose the benefit that the Law may give me.


Lo. Chapter Just. All matters of Law are saved to you after you have pleaded.


College. Pray, my Lord, let me have my Papers again that were taken from me.


Cl. of Cr. You must plead to the Court, Guilty or not Guilty.


College. Shall I not have my Papers after I have pleaded?


Lo. Chapter Just. We will not capitulate with you. Move what you will then, but
till you have pleaded, we can enter into no other business.


College. I know not but I might plead some other thing to the Indictment.


Mr. just. jones. Propose what you will, if it be a matter in Law fit to be
argued, you shall have Council assigned you.


College. Pray, my Lord, let me have my Papers again. If it were not my right
to have them, or to have Council, I would not ask it; but if it be, I would not
lose what is my right.


L. chapter just. You must plead first. I know not but he may be criminal that
brought you those Papers: for we allow no Sollicitors in cases of Treason.


College. Some of those Papers were received from me in the Tower, and were
brought back to me, and taken away but to day, I desire they may be returned.


Cl. of Cr. Are you Guilty or not Guilty?


College. Those Papers tell me I have a Plea in Law, but what it is, I cannot
directly tell without my Papers.


Lo. chapter just. You must mention it, and propose it, and then we will do what is
fitting for us to do in it.


College. I have not that method about me, nor can I directly tell it without
my Papers; but it is something of Law about the Indictment.


Lo. chapter just. You are not bound up to forms of Law. For if you propose the
matter never so loosely, yet if it be a matter of avail, and that which the Law
is not clearly against you in, you shall have Council, and time to draw it up
in form.


College. I cannot propose the matter so regularly as if I had my Papers.


Mr. just. jones. You are not bound to propose it in formality of Law, my Lord
tells you, only let us know what it is.


College. I have a privilege in Law, I hope you will give me the benefit of
it.


Lo. chapter Just. We will deny you nothing that the Law gives you; but we cannot
give you council. It is not one particular case, but the common course of
Justice is concerned. Without a matter of Law arises, we cannot assign you
Counsel; if we would, we cannot in Justice till you have proposed the matter
which the Court thinks fit to be argued.


College. My Lord Coke says, It is the Birthright of every Englishman to
have Council in matters of Law, and Lilburne had it upon solemn Argument in his
Trial.


Mr. just. jones. What times were those? That was before the High Court of
Justice.


Mr. At. Genesis If there be matter in Law, it must be proposed to the Court, and
they are to judge whether it be a Point fit to be argued, and then Council is
to be assigned you, and not till then.


College. My Lord, I know not but there may be somewhat in Law for me to plead
to this Indictment, till I have my Papers I cannot tell what it is.


Lo. chapter just. We know nothing of your Papers what they are, you must answer
whether you be Guilty or not Guilty.


College. If I had my Papers, I would answer to it immediately; but I hope I
shall not be murdered.


Mr. just. jones. Have a care of aspersing the Court. Pray who intends to
murder you?


Mr. Serj. jefferies. I remember in Lilburn's Trial that he speaks of, such
words were used indeed.


College. My Lord, I hope I shall not be denied what is necessary for my
defense. This design is not only against me, but against all the Protestants.


Mr. Art. Genesis How long have you been a Protestant, Mr. College?


College. Ever since I knew what Religion was, Sir, I never was any thing
else. For Gods sake, my Lord, let me have the justice of the Nation, and what
by Law an Englishman ought to have.


Lo. chapter just. You must plead Guilty or not Guilty, or you must show some
matter that you will plead, that is proper for us to assign you Council. If we
should record your refusal, you would be judged to stand Mute, and Sentence
would pass upon you.


College. If I have a privilege in Law as an Englishman, I will not forfeit
it, if I can help it, for any thing in the world. Therefore I desire I may have
my Papers again, that I may see if I can plead any thing in Law; for if I have
a privilege by the Law, before I will forfeit it, you shall do what you please
with me.


Lo. chapter just. You Will have the advantage of all that matter that is in your
Papers after you have pleaded, if there be any advantage.


College. Pray, my Lord, order me my Papers that were taken away from me.


Lo. chapter just. They were not taken away by me.


College. They were taken away by the Keeper, under pretense to bring them to
your Lordship.


L. chapter just. I know not how you came by them. There came one to me last night
that is a common Solicitor, one Aaron Swith, and desired he might have liberty
to go and speak with the Prisoner. I told him, I did not understand till he
were assigned by the Court, that any could justify Soliciting for a man that
is accused of High Treason nor could any be of Council till they were assigned:
for a defense against Treason ought to be by plain matters of Proof and Fact,
and not by artificial Cavils. But if you will propose any thing of substance,
as a matter in Law which the Court shall think fit to be argued, propose it,
and then we will assign you Council.


College. Is it not my right that I ought to have a copy of the jury?


Lo. chapter just. Look you for that now, you cited the Opinion of the Judges of
the King's Bench. My Brothers, two of them that are here, who are Judges in that
Court, say, they know nothing of any such matter: But I must tell you, you have
liberty by Law to challenge 35. by your sight premptorily, without showing
cause. They are bound to look upon you when they come to be sworn, and if you
have any just cause, you may except against as many more as as you will. But
now we that proceed upon a Commission of Jail-deliver, are to proceed with
expedition; there are no particular men designed for a Jury that I know of. But
when you have pleaded, we shall award the Sheriff to impannel a Jury.


College. If the Law allow me the liberty of challenging, it does intend it me
that I may challenge those persons that I think will do me no justice; but
where they are strangers unto me, if I can have no information about any of
them by my own enquiry, or my friends, I may challenge my friends as well as my
foes: and should there be any person that has a prejudice against me, and I not
know it, he may chance to be one.


L. c. j. I hope they will be neither friends nor foes, but true men.


Coll. I know not that, my Lord.


Mr. just. jones. This that you say as to a copy of the Jury, is unseasonable.
There is no Jury, nor can be awarded till you have pleaded. There must be first
Issue joined, and that cannot be but upon your Plea of not Guilty. Therefore
you must plead first, and then say all you will.


Cl. of cr. Are you Guilty or not Guilty?


Coll. My Lord, may not I have a panel of the Jury?


Mr. just. jo. There is no such thing in being.


Coll. I know not what to say to it; pray, my Lord, let me have my papers.


Cl. of cr. You have heard the opinion of the Court, you must first plead.


Coll. I cannot plead first, I must lose my life if I must; I neither know who
accuses me, nor what it is they accuse me of: it is impossible I should defend
my self if I have not my papers.


L. c. j. We know not what papers you mean.


Coll. The Jailer took them from me, and one of the Kings Messengers. Pray, my
Lord, will you order them to be returned to me again: Let me but see whether I
have any right or no, and whether I have any thing to plead or no: When I have
perused my papers, I will propose it as well as I can to you. Pray, my Lord,
let me have a fair Trial.


L. c. j. We promised you a fair Trial, but you must put your self upon that
Trial by your pleading.


Coll. I cannot do that without my papers, my Lord. Let me but have them again,
and I will not delay your time at all.


L. c. j. You can tell whether you are Guilty or not Guilty, cannot you?


Coll. If I have a Plea in law against the Indictment, I hope you will not
hinder me of that which is my right. It is possible the Indictment does not lay
it right, either as to the matter of Treason, or as to the place.


Mr. just. jones. That is upon the Issue of not Guilty upon your Trial. If
there be not matter of Fact, or words proved that are Treason in this place,
you will have the advantage of it upon your Trial.


Coll. I know not, my Lord, but that the Indictment does mention something of
Treason, and something of Misdemeanour.


Mr. just. jones. That which is Misdemeanour, will not amount to a proof of the
Treason upon the Trial.


L. c. j. If they prove no Treason against you here, but only Misdemeanour, I
do not understand that the Jury can find you guilty of that Misdemeanour; for
it is another crime, and there is another sort of proceedings for it. In
Misdemeanour there are no peremptory Challenges; in Misdemeanour Council is to
be allowed for the Prisoner, but not in Treason.


Coll. Pray, my Lord, be pleased to order me my papers again: I know not what
to say without I have the assistance of my papers: when I have them, I shall be
ready to plead presently, according as I shall find I may by law. This I am
sure, I have done nothing, nor said nothing of Treason, and I pray for nothing
but Justice, and that which is my right. This is a most horrid conspiracy to
take away my life; and it will not stop here, for it is against all the
Protestants in England.


L. c. j. Mr. College, you do not only trifle, but run out into very great
extravagancies. Who has any conspiracy against your life? you shall be allowed
to give in Evidence any thing of any conspiracy against you, or contrivance
against you when you are upon your Trial. Now the Question is, Are you Guilty
or not Guilty? I see no use of papers that you can have as to the Plea.


Mr. just. jones. You will run into danger by spending of time.


College. Pray my Lord, order me my papers, they are in the hands of Mr.
Murrell the Jailer, and Sewell the Kings Messenger.


Lo. chapter just. When you have pleaded we will take it into consideration.


College. My Lord, it may be too late then.


Lo. chapter just. It Is a plain matter before you, whether you be Guilty or no. You
know what to answer.


Coll. I will give a direct answer, after I have my papers again.


Mr. just. jones. You can give an answer to that without papers.


Lo. chapter just. Consult with your own heart, and there you may receive an answer
to that Question.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. College; can any body tell whether you be guilty or no,
better then your self?


Mr. just. Jones. If you expect any papers, they ought to be framed by your
self; for by Law none can advise you what to plead.


College. I don't expect it in matter of Fact, but if matter of Law arise.


Mr. Just. Jones. But this is a matter of Fact, and therefore you may plead Not
guilty, as well without your papers, as if you had them.


College. But if there be any matter of Law, that I ought to have the
advantage of.


Mr. just. Jones. Then you ought to have no advice, till they be assigned by
the Court: for by the Law, neither counsel nor advice are allowable to you,
till the matter has been proposed, and the Court think fit to assign you
counsel.


Mr. just. Levinz. You talk of the Privilege of an English man; you have all
the privileges of an Englishman: You are here brought to an open Trial,
according to the Law, and by that Law you must Plead. Now if a man be Indicted
for High Treason, he is bound to plead either Guilty or not Guilty, unless he
has a matter in Law to excuse him from that Plea, which must be proposed to the
Court, and then Counsel will be assigned, and if so be matter of Law arises
upon any evidence that is given against you at the Trial, you may demurr upon
that Evidence, and pray Counsel of the Court to argue that demurrer, and they
will not deny you: but I think you must plead presently.


College. I suppose other persons that have been tried, have had Council
before they have pleaded.


Mr. just. jones. But never before the Matter was proposed to the Court.


L. c. j. It was so in the case of my Lord Stafford. The Court made him propose
his matters in Law, and so it was in Lilburn's case. He did insist upon a great
many matters in Law, and had the Books there himself.


Coll. I am wholly ignorant of the Law, my Lord.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Your Lordships are the Judges of Law in this case. The
Question here in short is, whether the Prisoner be Guilty or not Guilty, and
that being demanded of him by the Court, if he refuses, let him take the
consequence of it.


Coll. What is that pray, Sir George?


Mr. At. Genesis Judgment of High Treason. For if a person stand mute, and will
not plead to an Indictment of High Treason, the common Judgment of Pressing to
Death must not pass upon him, but an Attainder of High Treason.


Coll. Well, if it be so, I cannot help it. I thank God I am innocent of any
Treason, or any such thing.


L. c. j. Why don't you plead not Guilty then?


Coll. I do not refuse to plead, I am willing to plead with all my Heart, if I
may have my right.


Mr. just. jo. If you do not plead, you do refuse to plead.


Coll. Pray, my Lord, let me have my Papers.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give the Court an Account where you had those Papers.


L. c. j. Nay, we will not enter into any examination of that matter now, Mr.
Attorney; he can have no use of Papers to see whether he should plead Guilty or
not Guilty.


Mr. S. jeff. We know nothing of those Papers, we desire he may answer to the
Question shortly, whether he be Guilty or not Guilty; if not, we pray your
Lordships judgment.


Coll. I had them not all from one person, they were received from my own hands
some of them in the Tower, and being brought back to me, they were taken from
me to day, let me have but one of them: the Paper of instructions in point of
Law, that I may know what is my right, I would not throw away my life, if I
have any thing that is my right that can preserve it.


L. c. j. You are to give a plain Answer, whether you are Guilty or not Guilty?
now for that you have no use of Papers: For you can best tell whether you be
Guilty or not. If you can propose any matter of Law that you can have to plead,
do it.


Coll. If I have any Plea that I may plead besides not Guilty, I desire I may
have my Papers to consider of it, and that I may have Council assigned me.


L. c. j. If you have any such Plea, tell us the matter, and the subststance of
it.


Coll. I do not know what really are matters of Law, if I had those
instructions that are in my Papers, I could give you a direct Answer presently.


L. c. j. You ought not to have any advice to decline your Trial: When you
propose matter of Law your self, you may have advice upon it. But you ought not
to have advice to decline your Trial beforehand.


Cl. of cr. Are you Guilty, or not Guilty?


Coll. Mr. Attorney, pray let me have a copy of the Indictment.


Mr. At. Genesis Apply your self to the Court for it, we must receive our
directions from thence.


L. c. j. You have had the opinion of the Court, you cannot have it.


M. just. Levinz. You have been told nothing can be received from you but a
Plea of Guilty or not Guilty, and the Court have given you their opinion, and
that you cannot have a copy of the Indictment, nor Council assigned you, till
you offer something for them to be assigned upon.


L. c. j. And that was it which was done in the King's Bench in the case of
Fitz-Harris, which I suppose you meant when you spoke of the Judges Opinions.


Mr. just. jones. Nothing was done there till he himself assigned the matter in
Law that he would plead, and then Council was assigned him.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Mr. College was in the Court at that time, and can tell what
was done.


L. c. j. If you desire the Indictment read over again distinctly, that you may
have.


Mr. At. Genesis Ay, with all my heart.


Coll. Pray let me hear it again, my Lord, if you please.


L. c. j. Read it over again to him, and read it distinctly.


Cl. of cr. Thou art Indicted by the name of Stephen College late of Oxon. in
the County of Oxon. Carpenter, as a false Traitor.


Coll. I have observed one thing already, my Lord, I pray I may have Pen and
Ink.


L. c. j. Ay, give him Pen and Ink, let him make what observations he can.


Then the clerk read the Indictment through. Cl. of cr. Art thou Guilty of this
High Treason, or not Guilty?


Coll. This Indictment, if I understand it, says, there was a Plot and
conspiracy by me and others; now I know when my Lord Stafford was tried, they
did proceed to prove first, that there was such a Plot, and then that my Lord
was guilty of it; first, that there was such a conspiracy by the Papists, is it
not requisite they should first prove such a Plot and conspiracy there was,
before they go to prove me guilty of it?


Mr. just. jones. What, before you have pleaded?


L. c. j. When you have pleaded, the next thing is to try you, and to give the
Evidence, but what way the King's Council will take to manage your Trial, that
we cannot tell.


Mr. Just. Jones. But they are not to be directed by you, Mr. College.


College. It was so done in my Lord Stafford's case.


Lo. Chapter Just. He pleaded first however, you have not yet pleaded.


Cl. of cr. Are you Guilty or not Guilty?


L. Chapter Just. Do not trifle any longer, it is a plain matter, and requires a
very short and plain answer.


College. Your Lordships are my Council as well as my Judges, and I do desire
if I have any right to plead any other matter, you will be pleased to declare
it to me, for I am ignorant in the Law.


Mr. Just. Jones. We have declared our opinion already, that you have no right
to have any Solicitor or Council till matter of Law do arise.


Coll. Is it your Lordships opinion that I have no Plea in Law?


Mr. just. jones. Have you no Plea in Law?


L. c. j. He would have our judgment whether there be any or no.


Mr. just. jones. You your self know best, we know nothing you have to plead.


College. I cannot unless I have counsel, and my papers.


L. c. j. There does nothing appear to us.


Coll. I know nothing of the Law.


L. c. j. Then plead not Guilty, that is a ready Plea.


Mr. just. jones. You have heard our opinion over and over again. You have as
much counsel as is allowed in these cases, for every man is best judge of his
own case, what to plead, whether Guilty or not Guilty: You have had as fair
play as ever any man had.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. College has said he knows of no Plea in Law he has, and
therefore there is none; for de non apparentibus, and non existentibus, the
reason is the same.


L. c. j. In matter of Fact there is no Plea but not Guilty.


Coll. The Court are Judges in matter of law, and they are my counsel.


Mr. just. jones. And the Court have all of them declared they know of nothing
in Law that you have to plead.


Coll. Is not counsel to be allowed to one under my circumstances?


L. c. j. If you have any thing for Council to be assigned upon, you shall have
them.


Coll. If I am ignorant of that, and cannot propose it, shall I not have the
assistance of council?


Mr. just. jones. No, we have told you the Law plainly, and that which is
frequent in practice in like cases, and you must be contented with the same
measure.


Coll. My Lord, I am ignorant of the law.


L. c. j. Then rely upon the Fact, and plead not Guilty.


Coll. But if I have a right to any point in law, let me have it.


Mr. just. jones. You have a right if you will propose any matter of Law, but
we cannot propose it for you.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. College, no man ought to propose your Plea for you,
Ignoruntia juris non excusat.


College. Shall my ignorance destroy me, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. Sol. Genesis You have heard the opinion of the Court, you have a right to
propose any other Plea that you can your self, but you have no right to ask
counsel before you have pleaded.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. If Mr. College have such a thing as a Solicitor, I shall
crave leave to put that Solicitor in mind of the case of one that was indicted
of High Treason, for soliciting for one that was accused of High Treason.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall talk of that by and by.


L. c. j. The same methods are used in your case, as are in all cases of the
like nature, as far as my knowledge reaches.


College. If I have a right to the Law, I must not lose it for my own
ignorance of the law; but if you deny me both my counsel and my papers, you
take away the means of my coming to that right, and make me incapable of making
my Defense.


Lo. chapter just. You have been told you must plead before you do any thing.


College. This is the person, (pointing to a person by him) that had the
papers. Be pleased to command him that I may have them again: He said he had
order to take them from me, and bring them to your Lordship.


L. c. j. I know of no use you could have of any papers to plead Guilty or not
Guilty.


Mr. Sol. Genesis If there be in those papers advice in matters of Law, that you
have been told you ought not to have, till the Court has assigned you council
to give you advice.


Coll. Then if there be a right in law, and a privilege which I ought to have,
I must lose it by my being ignorant of it, and have no one to advise me about
it neither.


L. c. j. You may propose it, if you have any, if not you must plead to the
Indictment.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. My Lord, it has not been usual for us that are of the Kings
counsel, to enter into Dialogues with Prisoners at the Bar. The first thing
that is to be done in such cases, is for the Prisoner to Plead Guilty, or not
Guilty or to offer something to the Court that may be a matter in Law fit to be
debated* and this we pray may be done in this case, and that the Prisoner may
plead presently, or else we desire your Judgment.


Coll. Pray let me have my papers again, my Lord.


Lo. chapter just. You go in a circle, and run round from one thing to another, and
will receive no answer. We have told you our opinion, and we must tell you,
that though you hold long Discourses, yet you will be judged lost and (...) if
you plead not a legal Plea. Therefore you must plead Guilty, or not Guilty, or
offer something that may be a Plea in Law, and then you shall have the
assistance of council, but you must have none till then.


College. But shall I not have my papers my Lord?


L. c. j. We know nothing of them.


College. Pray my Lord order the man to give them to me, that took them from
me.


L. chapter just. We will order no such thing. He may be a criminal perhaps that
did give them you at first, but when you have pleaded we will hear any motion
you will make about them.


Coll. It may be I ought to plead that the words were spoke in another place,
then the place laid in the Indictment.


L. c. j. You will not need to plead any such thing, for if there be nothing
proved of Treason that you said or did in Oxfordshire you must be found Not
guilty.


Coll. Here is another thing, my Lord, I am indicted by the name of College
Carpenter.


L. c. j. What then?


Coll. I am not a carpenter but a joyner, is that any bar to it?


L. c. j. The addition signifies nothing, I do not know any difference betwixt
a carpenter and a joyner in Law.


Mr. just. jones. They might have indicted you by the name of Labourer and it
had been good.


Coll. Pray my Lord either give me my papers or assign me counsel, or else I
may throw away my life, for I am wholly ignorant of the Law.


L. c. j. When you have pleaded we will hear any Motion you will make, and do
that which is just upon it: but I see no use you can have of papers to plead
Guilty or Not guilty, which is the only question is asked you.


Cl. of cr. Are you Guilty, or Not guilty?


Coll. Will you promise me my Lord, there shall no advantage be taken against
me, if I do plead so?


L. c. j. We will make no bargains with you. Plead as you ought by Law to do.


Coll. If matters of Law arise, shall I have Counsel to speak to them?


Mr. just. jones. Yes you shall, you need not doubt it. Propose any matter now
fit to be argued, and you shall have counsel to it.


Coll. I am not capable of doing it. I know not when I have any right.


Mr. just. Jones. The Court is of council to you.


Coll. If you are my counsel, then have I any Plea in law to make?


Mr. just. Jones. You have heard the Indictment read, what say you? for you
must propose the matter.


L. c. j. We know of none but Guilty, or Not Guilty, if you can tell of any do.


Coll. I pray I may have my papers again; if there be no other Plea for me,
pray let me have my papers again.


Lo. chapter just. You have heard the Opinion of the Court, you must plead.


Mr. At. Genesis Certainly Mr. College, you cannot be Guilty of these things, you
need not scruple it, to plead Not guilty sure.


Coll. My Lord, having been kept a Prisoner, as I have been, without pen, ink
or paper, no conversation with my Friends, no knowledge of the Fact, and being
ignorant of the Law, not knowing where I have a right, nor when I have a right;
if you do force me upon this Plea, and it cost me my life, at your doors lie it.


Mr. just. jones. You will lose your life if you do not plead; if you plead not
Guilty, and are not proved Guilty, you will save your life by this Plea.


College. I am willing to plead what the Law requires of me to plead, and if I
have a right in Law, I would not lose it.


Cl. of Cr. Are you Guilty, or not Guilty?


College. Why then, as they have laid it in that Indictment, in manner and
form as it is there laid, I am not Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Culprit, by whom will thou be tried?


College. By God and my Country.


Cl. of cr. God send thee a good deliverance.


Mr. just. jones. Got Guilty is his Plea.


Lo. chapter just. Now he has pleaded, Mr. Attorney, he speaks of some papers, if
there be any Memorandums or any thing that must assist him, that is necessary
for his defense in his Trial in those Papers, it will be hard to deny him them.


Mr. At. Genesis If your Lordships please to give me leave* I will give you an
account of them. The Messenger just now did deliver these papers to be
delivered to the Court.


College. Pray speak out, Mr. Attorney, and let me hear.


Mr. At. Genesis When he came to Prison he had none, but Mr. Aaron Smith, the
Messenger informed me, did deliver them to him.


L. chapter just. Whose handwriting are the papers in?


Coll. He received them from me in the Tower.


Mr. just. jones. You received them from him first.


College. No.


Mr. At. Genesis What were the papers you delivered to him in the Tower?


College. The three pieces joined together that contains directions how to
govern my self, there is another of the same purpose which instructs me to
demand a copy of the Indictment, and of the panel of the Jury, and those were
instructions to tell me what the Law allows me.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is a Speech made for you that begins thus. Before you
plead, speak to this purpose. Pray, my Lord, I desire that may be examined, and
Mr. Smith may be called to give an account how he came to give the Prisoner
those papers; for here are abundance of niceties proposed for him to move, and
there will be a strange sort of proceedings at this rate, if men go about to
espouse the cause of Traitors.


College. I am no Traitor, Mr. Attorney.


Mr. At. Genesis You stand indicted of High Treason.


College. That is by a Grand Jury made up that morning, as I am informed.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is a list of the names of several men of the Country
returned to be of the Jury, and particular marks set upon them, who are good
men, and who bad men, and who moderate men.


College. Ought I not to have that paper, my Lord?


Mr. At. Genesis No I hope not.


Lo. chapter just. Whether they are material or not material, if we should judge
them not material for his defense, yet it will look like an hard point upon the
Prisoner, and to deliver them into an hand that they may be carried away or
stifled, in case there were a crime in the delivering of them that would not do
well on the other side: therefore I would have these papers put into some safe
hands, that what may be for the Prisoners use he may not want, and yet they may
not be taken away, if there be occasion to use them upon another account.


Mr. At. Genesis But if it please your Lordship, I desire you would enter into
Examination of this matter; for I have an account from London by a special
Messenger that there are several persons that go up and down to procure
Witnesses against the Kings Evidence, making it a public Cause; and here my
Lord, another paper which is a List of men as Witnesses picked up together
against the Kings Witnesses.


Lo. chapter just. He must have that, deliver him that presently.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis But my Lord, others have gone about and framed Witnesses for
him.


L. Chapter Just. You must give him a list of his Witnesses, for I see not what use
you can make of it.


Mr. Serj. jeff. This no man will oppose sure, if any thing that is delivered
to him be fit to be delivered, the person that delivers it must come and own
it; but before any person delivers any papers to the Prisoner, for him to make
use of against the Kings Evidence, we desire to know what those papers mean,
and who gave them.


Lo. Chapter Just. Look you Brother, we will have nothing of heat till the Trial be
over, when that is over if there be any thing that requires our Examination it
will be proper for us to enter into the consideration of it. But in the mean
while what hurt is there, if the papers be put into some trusty hands, that the
Prisoner may make the best use of them he can, and yet they remain ready to be
produced upon occasion, if a man be speaking for his Life, though he speak that
which is not material, or nothing to the purpose, that will be no harm to
permit that.


Mr. Serj. jefferies. With submission my Lord, that is assigning him Counsel
with a Witness.


Mr. At. Genesis If people are permitted to go up and down and ask counsel of
persons and bring it in papers to the Prisoner, it is the same thing as if
Counsel came to him. Here is a busy Solicitor and he gets advice from Council
and then he delivers it to the Prisoner, it is the first of the kind certainly
that ever was allowed; and if this be not to assign him Counsel, I know not
what is.


Lo. Chapter Just. What think you of our perusing the papers?


Mr. At. Genesis With all my heart my Lord.


College. If you take away all helps from me, you had as good condemn me
without a Trial.


Mr. At. Genesis You ought not to have helps to plead dilatories.


College. Not to help me to my right in Law?


Mr. At. Genesis We are to go upon the Fact now: And, my Lord, I pray your
jugdment about them, when you have perused them.

Then the Judges looked upon that paper that was called the Speech.
L. c. j. We have read enough of this to suppress it, and to examine it how
this came to his hands.


Mr. just. jones. Where is Aaron Smith?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, here is another that is worse than that, charging the
Justice of the Nation. Pray call Mr. Aaron Smith, and Mr. Henry Starkey.


Mr. Smith appeared. Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Smith, did you deliver these two papers
to the Prisoner?


Mr. Smith. Does any body accuse me that I did?


Mr. At. Genesis You are accused for it.


Mr. Smith. I desire proof may be made against me.


Mr. At. Genesis That will be done.


L. c. j. Look you we will not interrupt the Trial with it, Mr. Smith must be
taken into safe custody only to secure him, till we can examine it; not as
charged with any crime, but only that he may be forthcoming to be examined.


Mr. At. Genesis You do not make a direct answer Mr. Smith in the case, it will
be proved upon you.


Mr. Smith. Mr. Attorney, I know not what answer to make better than I have
given; our Law says no man is bound to accuse himself.


Mr. At. Genesis But our Law says, you shall be examined.


Mr. Smith. I come to give no Informations here Mr. Attorney: if I did I should
be then examined.


Mr. At. Genesis Here are Instructions given to the Prisoner, they say you gave
them.


Mr. Smith. I desire to have it proved.


L. c. j. Mr. Attorney, you will take a Recognizance of Mr. Smith, to be,
forthcoming during this Sessions.


Mr. Smith. I will not depart my Lord I assure you: And I hope Mr. Attorney
will take my word.


Mr. At. Genesis Indeed I will not Mr. Smith, because you have broken it with me
already, when I gave you leave to go to the Prison, I did not think you would
have abused that kindness, to give him papers.


Lo. chapter just. Well take his Recognizance.


Mr. Smith. It Is high time to have a care, when our Lives and Estates, and all
are beset here.


L. c. j. What do you mean by that Mr. Smith?


Mr. Smith. I said it not, meaning by it the Court, for I dealare Jabhor that
Expression to be so interpreted, that I reflected upon the Court.


L. c. j. Why do you use such loose Expressions then Mr. Smith?


Mr. Smith. Because I have been threatened since I came to Town, though I have
not spoke one word in any publik company since I came.


Mr. just. jones. It seems you will reflect here in the face of the Court, and
in the face of the Country, upon the Government, upon the justice of the
Kingdom.


Mr. Smith. No, my Lord, I have told you what I meant by it; I neither
reflected upon the Court, nor upon the Government, nor upon the Justice of the
Kingdom.


Lo. chapter just. You should have done well to have forborne such expressions as
those were.


College. Shall I not have the use of the papers, my Lord; will you not please
to deliver them back to me, now you have perused them?


Mr. just. jones. One of them is a Speech, and a most seditious, libellous
Speech, to spit venom upon the Government in the face of the Country. We
cannot tell who made it, but it seems to be beyond your capacity, and therefore
we must enquire into it: but we do not think fit to let you have the use of
that paper.


L. chapter just. For that which contains the names of the Witnesses, that you have
again: For the other matters, the instructions in point of Law, if they had
been written in the first person, in your own name, that we might believe it
was your Writing, it would have been something; but when it is written in the
second person, you should do so and so; by which it appears to be written by
another person: It is an ill president to permit such things; that were to give
you council in an indirect way, which the Law gives you not directly.


Coll. If I am ignorant what Questions to ask of the Witnesses, shall not my
Friends help me, my Lord?


Lo. Chapter Just. We will sift out the Truth as well as we can, you need not fear
it.


Coll. Some of those things I took out of the Books my self. And if you are
resolved to take away all my helps, I cannot help it, I know not that Mr. Smith
wrote one of those papers.


Mr. At. Genesis But Mr. Smith would have given four Guineys it seems, as a Bribe
to the Jailer, and he offered four more to let him have liberty to come to him.


Mr. S. jeff. It Is time indeed for Mr. Smith to have a care.


Keeper. It was Mr. Starkey that offered me the four Guineys.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray call Mr. Henry Starkey. (But he did not appear.)

Then the Court took a Recognizance of 100l. of Mr. Smith to attend the Court
durying the Session.


Coll. Pray, my Lord, let me have my papers delivered to me, I cannot make my
Defense else.


Lo. Chapter Just. We are your council in matter of Fact; and to give you your
papers, were to assign you council against Law, they being not your own papers,
but coming from a third hand.


College. Will you please to give me the paper that has the Questions in it,
to ask the Witnesses?


L. c. j. There are no papers with any particular Questions to any one Witness,
but only instructions how to carry your self in this case.


Coll. A great deal of it is my own, my Lord.


L. c. j. Mr. Attorney, truly I think that that does not contain matter of
Scandal may be transcribed and given to the Prisoner.


Coll. My Lord, I desire I may have that that has in the Margent of its the
case of Lilburn and Stafford.


Mr. just. jones. You shall not have Instructions to scandalize the Government,
all that is necessary for your defense, you shall have.


L. c. j. If he had writ it himself I cannot well see how you could take it
from him, and truly as it is, I had rather let him have too much, then too
little.


Coll. My Lord, I thought I might have had counsel to have assisted me, but if
I may have counsel neither before my Plea nor after, I that an ignorant, may be
lost by it, but cannot help it.


L. c. j. If matter of Law arise you shall have counsel in it.


Coll. I know not but it might have admitted of an Argument, that which if I
had had my papers, I should have offered to you.


L. c. j. Mr. College, we shall not go any farther now, I know not how many
Witnesses will be produced either of one side or another, but it is too late to
go on this Morning, and because we attend here only upon this occasion, we
shall go on with the Trial at two a clock in the afternoon.


Coll. My Lord, you will be pleased to order the papers for me to peruse in the
mean time.


L. c. j. We have ordered that you shall have a Transcript of the paper of
Instructions, leaving out that which is scandalous.


Coll. I desire I may have a copy of the whole.


Mr. just. jones. No, we do not think fit to do that.


Coll. Pray let me know which you do except against.


L. c. j. Look you Mr. Attorney, I think we may let him have a Copy of the
whole.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, before you rise, I desire, you would please to take the
Examination of Mr. Gregory, about Mr. Starkey.


L. c. j. Sweatr him. (Which was done.)


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know concerning Mr. Starkey, and what he did offer
you?


Gregory. When they came, by your Lordships permission, to Mr. College, they
brought some papers which they delivered to him: And afterward Mr. Starkey
took me aside, and told me it was hard usage that the Prisoner could not have
his Council permitted to come to him. Do him what favor you can, and I shall
not be ungrateful; so he clapped four Guineys in my hand, but I immediately
laid them down upon the Table, and would not take them.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire you would please to send for Mr. Starkey?


L. c. j. Let him be sent for.


Cl. of cr. You must go and take up Mr. Starkey.


Messenger. Must I keep him in custody? I don't know him.


Cl. of cr. No, you must order him from the Court to attend here.


Mr. just. jones. These papers College shall not be debarred of, for his
Defense, nor you, Mr. Attorney, from prosecuting upon them.


L. c. j. No, we will put them into such hands as shall take care about that.


Coll. Very few, my Lord, have appeared to do me any kindness, some have been
frightened and imprisoned, others are now in trouble for it.


Lo. Chapter Just. Well, you shall have the use of your papers.


Coll. May I have any Friends come to see me in the mean time?


L. c. j. They must not come to you in the Prison to give you advice; but I Will
tell you, since you move it, if my Brothers think it convenient, whilst the
Court does withdraw, any body of your Friends may come to you, in the presence
of your Keeper.


Mr. just. jones. Certainly you cannot think we can give a privilege to any
Friend of yours to commit any Demeanor to offer Bribes to any person.


Coll. I know not of any such thing.


Mr. just. jones. We do not charge you with it, but Mr. Starkey did.


Coll. I have been kept a strict close Prisoner, and if my friends are so kind
to me, as to help me in order to my Defense, I hope you will not be against it.
Pray, my Lord, let me have my papers.


L. c. j. You shall have them, but they shall be put into such hands as the
Court may have command over; they shall be in the Sheriffs Sons hands, and you
shall have the immediate use of them.


Coll. If there be any thing else in those papers necessary for my Defense, I
pray I may have it.


L. c. j. The Speech is not fit for you, what other papers would you have?


Coll. Another paper there is, that is something of Law.


Mr. Just. Jones. Nothing but libellous, and what is a scandal to the
Government.


Mr. At. Genesis You are to have nothing of matter of Law, but what you are to
propose your self.


Coll. If you take away all my helps, I cannot propose any thing.


Mr. Serj. jeff. To allow you those papers, is to allow you council by a side
Wind.


L. c. j. Look you, the papers of instructions shall be delivered to the
Sheriffs Son, who shall let you peruse it in this interval, and make use of it
in your Trial, but it must be in safe custody, to be used upon further
occasion, as the Kings Attorney shall think fit.


Then the Court adjourned till 2 in the Afternoon. Post meridiem. At 2 a clock
the Court returned, and Proclamation was made for attendance, and for the
Undersheriff to return his Jury.


Coll. My Lord, ought not I to have a copy of this Jury?


L. Chapter Just. No, they are to look upon you as they come to be sworn, and then
you are to challenge them.


Cl. of cr. Stephen College, hold up thy hand, and hearken to the Court; those
good men that you shall hear called, and personally appear, are to pass, etc.


College. Pray Sir let the way be clear, that I may see them.


Cl. of cr. Ay, Ay.


Coll. Pray, Sir, how many are there of the Jury that appear?


Mr. At. Genesis There are enough.


Cl. of cr. Make Proclamation for Information,


(which was done.) Cl. of cr. Henry Standard, (who was Sworn,) Richard Croke,
(who was challenged by the Prisoner,) William Bigg (challenged.)


Mr. just. jones. Do you challenge him peremptorily, or with cause?


L. c. j. If he do not show cause, it must be supposed it is peremptory.


College. I suppose he was upon the Grand Jury.


L. c. j. That would be a challenge with cause.


Mr. Bigg, No, I was not.


Coll. Then I do not challenge him; I know him not. He was Sworn.


Cl. of Cr. Thomas Marsh, challenged. Thomas Martin, did not appear. Gabriel
Merry, being almost a hundred years of age, was excused. Robert Bird, Sworn.
John Shorter, Sworn. William Windlow, Sworn. Edward Airs, challenged. William
Airs. challenged. And Richard Airs, challenged. Charles Hobbs, Sworn. Roger
Brown, Sworn. Timothy Doyley, Sworn. Richard Dutton, challenged. Ralph Wallis,
Sworn. John Nash, challenged. John Benson, Sworn. John Piercy, Sworn. William
We^^, challenged. And John Lawrence, Sworn.


Then they were counted, and their Names in Order, thus.
Henry Standard William Bigg Robert Bird John Shorter William Windlow Charles
Hobbs Roger Brown Timothy Doyley Ralph Wallis John Benson John Piercy John
Lawrence
L. c. j. Mr. Sheriff, there are a great many of the Jury that are not Sworn,
they are discharged, let them go out of the Court, and so you will make room
for the Witnesses.


Cl. of cr. Gentlemen, you of the Jury, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to
his Charge. He stands Indicted by the name of Stephen College, late of Oxford,
in the County of Oxford, Carpenter; for that he as a false Traitor, etc. proved
in the Indictment, mutatis mutandis, and upon this Indictment he has been
Arraigned, etc.


Mr. North. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen that are Sworn, this
is an Indictment against Stephen College, the Prisoner at the Bar, for an
endeavor to raise a Rebellion within this Kingdom wherein he is accused, and
the Jury find that he as a false Traitor against the Kings Majesty, contrary to
the duty of his Allegiance, on the 10th. of March, in the 33d. year of the
Kings Reign, at Oxon. here did traitorously conspire, and compass the death of
the King, and the Subversion of the Government, and to raise a Rebellion in the
Kingdom, and to slaughter his Majesty's Subjects, to put the King to death, to
levy War against him* and to deprive him of his Royal State and Government, and
to alter the Government at his own Will and Pleasure; and to accomplish this,
he did at Oxon. here prepare Arms for the carrying on the War, and excited one
Edward Turbervile and others, to arm themselves against the accomplishment of
this Design, and did declare his purpose was to seize the Kings person at Oxon.
and that he was one of those that was to do it; and to bring the said
Turbervile and other Subjects to his purpose, did falsely, maliciously, and
traitorously declare in their Hearing, that there was no good to be expected
from the King, that he minded nothing but the Destruction of his people, and
Arbitrary Government, and to introduce Popery. And this is laid to be against
the Duty of his Allegiance, against the Kings peace, and against the form of
the Statutes in those cases made and provided. The Prisoner you hear upon his
Arraignment has pleaded Not guilty, which Issue you are to try, and if the
Evidence for the King, which are ready to be produced, prove that which is laid
to his charge, you are to find it accordingly.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury. The
Prisoner at the Bar stands indicted of a very high crime, no less then High
Treason, and that too of the deepest dye; it is for an Endeavor to destroy the
King, to subvert the Government, to raise a Rebellion amongst the Kings
Subjects. And Gentlemen, those Instances that we shall give you, and produce
our Evidence to for the proof of that, are these. He laid his Design to seize
the King at Oxon. and he did not want his Accomplices to do it, but they were
not men, Gentlemen, that were Protestants, but men that were Rebels in the late
War, they were men of such a kidney, that he associated himself with, and these
were the persons that were to assist in this Attempt. In order to this he had
prepared Arms in an extraordinary manner, Arms of a great value for one of his
condition, who is by Trade a Joyner; for if a true estimate were taken of the
value of the Arms; I believe they were worth twice his whole Estate; he
prepared a good Horse, extraordinary Pistols, a Carbine, a Coat of Maile, an
Headpiece, and so being armed Cap-a-pee, with that design he came hither to
Oxon. And you will judge whether these be fit Tools for a Joyner.


College. I beseech you Sir, have you any body to prove this? if you have not,
you do hurt to the Jury as well as me, to speak it.


Lo. Chapter Just. Be patient Mr. College, and let Mr. Attorney go on to open the
Charge. I will tell you and the Jury too, that what he says further then he
makes good by proof and Witnesses, will serve for nothing.


Coll. It Is hard the Counsel should plead against me, and open things that he
cannot prove.


L. chapter just. I will do you all the right imaginable, and therefore I do tell
you again, if they do not prove it, all he says is nothing.


College. But I beseech you my Lord, since there has been such extraordinary
means, and methods used to contrive my Death, that the Witnesses may be
examined apart, and far from the hearing one of another.


Lo. Chapter Just. That we will take care of by and by.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. College. This shows your temper, you are very inordinate in
your way of expressing your self.


College. Mr. Attorney, I should not interrupt you, if I were not afraid this
was spoken to possess the Jury.


Mr. At. G. I hope to prove what I have said, or every word of it shall pass
for nothing.


Coll. It Is impossible for all the men on earth to prove it.


Mr. At. Genesis Gentlemen, these were the particulars I was opening to you, in
what manner he was armed, and how accoutred he came hither. We shall likewise
show you that he made it his business to persuade others to undertake the
Design, and join with him, and as if open War were already declared; he gave
out a sign, which was a blue Ribbon, a wrought Ribbon with letters in it, and
this was the mark and sign they were to know one another by. This was given out
by him frequently; and that it may not seem an extraordinary thing, Gentlemen,
though indeed it was a wild atempt, yet you will cease to wonder when you have
heard of the exploit of Venner, who with a few men raised such a commotion soon
after the Kings coming in, and the several exploits that have of late in
Scotland been carried on by a few discontented persons. So that men of the like
Principles, as we shall give you an account of this Gentleman's Principles what
they were, may well be thought to engage in such an extraordinary exploit. And
we shall prove what the encouragement was he was to have; for he boasted of
himself, that he should be in a little time a Colonel.


College. What, Sir?


Mr. At. Genesis A Colonel, a great preferment for a Joyner.


College. Yes, it was so.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall show to you that this was not a sudden unpremeditated
thing: for we shall prove that he had entertained the horridst malice against
the King that ever Subject entertained against his Sovereign: For we shall give
this evidence, and his Front will not oppose it, that he had made it his common
discourse in Coffee-Houses, and public Houses, (and I believe I could bring
you 40 and 40 Witnesses to it) to defame the King, and murder him in his
Reputation, and was one of the Accomplices with Fitz Harris, who lately was
executed for that venomous Libel: We shall prove that he justified it, and
maintained it to be as true as the Gospel. We shall give evidence that he
carried on the same design with that Arch-Traytor who was a Papist; and I
believe if this Gentleman were examined thoroughly, he would be found to be one
of the same Stamp, and acted by the same Principle; for I think that no
Protestant Subject would attempt such things as we shall prove to you. I
believe, Gentlemen, you have frequently heard, as none of us but have, that the
King has been traduced as a Designer of Arbitrary Government, and his
Reputation blasted maliciously, and falsely, as an Introducer of Popery: Whence
comes all this generally, but out of the Popish Quiver, who make it their
business to set the Kings good Subjects at variance amongst themselves; and
against their Prince, by styling the King a Papist, as this person has done;
nay, he has been so impudent as to report that the King was in the Plot
against his own life. We shall prove to you, how here and at other places he
has frequently done this. To go further, we shall produce to you the evidence
that he drew the King's Picture, and exposed him in all the reproachful
characters imaginable; and that the Picture might be the better understood, he
adds a Ballad to it: And that he may not have the confidence to say this is not
true, we shall produce to you a whole bundle of these papers, among those which
his Son made a discovery of, when they were sent to his Uncle to be hid, and we
shall prove him to be the Author of them; and yet that this man should have the
confidence to say he is a good Subject and a good Protestant, when by all ways
imaginable he goes about to ruin the Government, and defame the King! And
Gentlemen when we have given you this account by Witnesses, for I would have
you believe me in nothing, but according as I prove it, you will not wonder
then that he should say his Life is in danger, (for so it is indeed.) And if
any man ever was Guilty of High Treason, sure he is, and being Guilty of the
greatest Treason, he deserves the severest Punishment.


College. Pray Gentlemen of the Jury, take Mr. Attorney at his word, and
remember Sir, you desire not to be believed your self, but what you prove.


Mr. Ser. Holloway. May it please your Lordship, and Gentlemen, pursuant to
what Mr. Attorney has opened, we will call our Witnesses, and we will begin
with Mr. Dugdale, who was a Witness against my Lord Stafford, at his Trial in
Parliament, whose credit Mr. College did attest at that Trial, asserting him
to be an honest good man, and I believe his evidence will go in a great measure
thro^^l that Mr. Attorn. has opened, and when we have done with him, we hope
to second him with other Witnesses of as good credit, and that will say as much
to the purpose.


Then Mr. Dugdale was sworn. Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Dugdale, look upon the Prisoner,
and tell the Court whether you know him.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I do know him Sir. Mr. At. Genesis Will you give us an account
of your knowledge of him?


College. My Lord, I humbly desire they may be examined apart, and not in the
hearing one of another.


Mr. At. Genesis That with submission ought not to be in the Kings Case, though
we think there are none of them, that will speak any more then the Truth.


College. Here are several of them my Lord, they are all of a gang.


Mr. Serj. jefferies. Not of your gang, Mr. College.


College. I pray they may go out my Lord. (Which was done accordingly.)


Mr. Dugd. If your Lordships please, whether or no I may deliver in these
papers?


Mr. At. G. By and by, time enough when we ask for them, speak your own
knowledge.


Mr. Dugd. My Lord, I have been I think acquainted with Mr. College 2 years or
thereabouts. I have been several times in Mr. Colleges company, and truly
sometimes he has been mightily bent against Popery; he has at sometimes
uttered himself, because the King did not prosecute the Papists according as he
thought sufficiently, that the King was a Papist himself, that he was as deep
in the Plot as any Papist of them all, that he had an Hand in Sir Edmondbury
Godfry's Death. This Mr. College I appeal to your self, whether you have not
said it: And in this Town of Oxford you have several times told me that nothing
was to be expected from him, he would no nothing.


Mr. just Levinz. Who did tell you so?


Mr. Dugdale. Mr. College did tell me that there was nothing to be expected
from the King, but the introducing of Popery and Arbitrary Government, this I
belive Mr. College will acknowledge to be true.


Coll. Where was this spoken?


Mr. Dugd. This was spoken at a Coffee-House, called Combe's Coffee-House in
this Town, and at the Angel-Inn in this Town at a Barbers Shop; that day the
King went out of Town, we were in the same Shop.


Coll. Who was there besides?


Mr. Ser. jeff. Do not interrupt our Witnesses, let us have done with him, and
you shall have time to ask him questions after.


L. c. j. For your Instruction, I will tell you, your time is not yet come, if
you chop in, and interrupt the Witnesses, you will disturb any man living; but
your way is this, when he has delivered his testimony, ask him any questions
then, and he shall be bound to answer you, and in the mean time you shall have
pen, ink and paper, to help your memory.


Mr. Dugd. That day the King went out of Town, presently after he went, you and
I went into the Angel-Inn: and we went into the Barbers-Shop that is just
within the Inn, and being charging your Pistols there, you said Rowley was
gone, the Rogue was afraid of himself, he was shirked away, and here I appeal
to your own conscience, whether you did not speak it?


Coll. I know nothing of it. Mr. At. Genesis Don't appeal to him, it is nothing
for that.


Mt. Sol. Genesis Who did he mean by Rowley?


Mr. Dugd. The King. Mr. Serj. Holloway. Was that his common application for
the King?


Mr. Dugd. It was his common word concerning the King. And at other times
speaking that the King did not do those things that were fair, he has given
mighty great words against him: He has told me that there was no trust to be
put in him; for it was the People we must trust to, and we must look to arm our
selves, and that he would arm himself, and be here at Oxford, and he told me
here in the Town accordingly, when I came out of the Country, and he said that
he had several stout men that would stand by him in it. Their intention was, as
he said, for the rooting out of Popery, by which name he always termed the
Church that is now established by Law, as to be of the same nature the Papists
were. This I believe Mr. College will acknowledge.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, go on Sir.


Mr. Dugd. And at a time when he had Dr. Tongue at his House, he told me, that
as for Dr. Tongue, he had much ado with him, and he had been at a great charge
to keep him in order, that he was forced to neglect his own business to look
after him; for if he had not done so, the Rogue, as he said, had a mind to
fling all upon the Protestants, that is, the Dissenters; for he does not count
the Church of England to be so; that he had much ado to keep him in order; for
he had said he had drawn Papers to that purpose, but those papers are secured;
for where they are, I cannot tell.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were they that were to be with him in that design of his?


Mr. Dugd. He told me Captain Chinton, Captain Brown, and one Dr. Jews, and
he brought them into Town here, when he came with him.


Mr. At. Genesis To what purpose did he bring them?


Mr. Dugd. Expecting there would be a rising.


Mr. jones. Did he tell you that here?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, the Friday, I think it was, after the Parliament first sat.


Mr. jones. How did he express himself? what they had to do.


Mr. Dugdale. They were to be here, in case there were any rising, which he
expected.


Mr. jones. What use did he say he would make of them?


Mr. Dugd. For the defense of the Protestant Religion, against the King and all
his Adherents.


Mr. jones. What did he say he would do to the King? I would not lead you.


Mr. Dugd. He did not say what particularly.


Mr. jones. What did he say if the King did not yield to the Parliament?


Mr. Dugdale. If the King did not yield to the Parliament, he should be forced
to it.


Mr. jones. Where did you hear him say that?


Mr. Dugdale. At Oxford.


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Did you hear him declare this at London?


Mr. Dugd. He did say at London, he expected there would be something done at
Oxford, and that he would go thither with his Horse and Arms, and those
Gentlemen I named before would go with him. And he said, let them begin when
they would, he did not care how soon, his party was the greatest party.


Mr. At. Genesis What was that Capt. Brown? did you know him?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, I knew him very well; he did much frequent Mr. Colledge's
company; he was in the late Army against the King.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Did you see him have any Pistols?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, I have seen him carry Pistols about him.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Where, in his Pocket?


Mr. Dugd. I saw them in the House.


Mr. Serj. jeff. At Oxford?


Mr. Dugd. Yes. Mr. Serj. Hollaway. Did you see them in his hand?


Mr. Dugd. I cannot tell that, he had them in the House, I saw them there.


Mr. Serj. Hollaway. Did you see him in his Silk Armor about the
Parliament House, the Lobby, or any place?


Mr. Dugd. I cannot say that.


Mr. At. Genesis What did you know of his delivering any marks or signs for
persons to be distinguished by?


Mr. Dugd. I had as much Ribbon from him as came to forty shillings, with no
Popery, no Slavery wrought in it; and he gave it me to distribute among my
Friends in the Country, that they might be known by other persons that would
wear the same.


Mr. Jones. Where had you it?


Mr. Dugd. At London, from Mr. College.


Mr. jones. Where was it to be distributed?


Mr. Dugd. Among those that I knew to be Dissenters in the Country.


Mr. jones. Were you to come to Oxford; by agreement, with mr. College?


Mr. Dugd. I promised him to come to Oxford, and did so.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Well, go on, what more do you know?


Mr. Dugdale. At London I was once at a Coffee-House with Mr. College, and
with some of the members of the House of Commons; it was a little before they
met; and they were earnestly talking of the Parliament at Oxford; and of some
disturbance that was likely to happen here. And it was then fully agreed, and
Mr. College was by, that it would be the best way, out of every County, where
the Parliament had the best interest in the people, to leave one in every
County that might manage the people. This I appeal to Mr. College whether it
be true.


College. You appeal to me. Shall I speak now, my Lord?


Mr. jones. No, you will remember it by and by.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of any Pictures?


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray let him speak that over again which he mentioned last.


Mr. Dugd. Being in a Coffee-House with Mr. College, there were some of the
members of the House of Commons by; and speaking of a disturbance that might
happen here at Oxford; it was then agreed, that in every Quarter where the
Parliament had the most interest in the people, they should not all come up,
but some remain there to manage the people.


Mr. At. Genesis What do you know of any Pictures or Papers, have you any about
you:


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, I have one thing I have received from Mr. College, that is,
the Letter pretended to be intercepted to Roger L'Estrange.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, what account did he give you of it? who made it?


Mr. Dugd. He told me he was the Author of it himself, and he showed me it in
manuscript before it was printed; and he told me, he got one Curtis or his Wife
to print it; but he would never trust them again, for they cheated him of some
of the Gain.


Mr. At. Genesis Who was the Author did he say?


Mr. Dugdale. He himself.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray produce it Sir.


Mr. Dugdale. This and others he delivered to me to disperse.


Lo. Chapter Just. What is it mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis It is a Letter, and a great part of Fitz-Harris's Libel is taken
out; it seems College was the Author, and this is the Original of the Libel.


Lo. chapter just. Did he tell you this was of his making?


Mr. Dugd. Yes. Mr. At. Genesis Did he disperse them to any body else?


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, there were some given to one Mr. Boson, he had some at the
same time, and Mr. Baldwin had some.


Then the Paper was read. Cl. of cr. First Q. Whether they that talk --


Mr. At. Genesis Pray give my Lord an account what more papers and Libels he
delivered to you.


Mr. Dugd. I received one like this, I cannot say it was the same, where all
the Bishops were changing their Hats for Cardinal Caps.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Where is Rary Show; for it seems he has expounded the meaning
of that.


(Then it was produced.) Mr. Serj. jeff. I suppose it is his own cutting too.


Mr. Dugd. I heard Mr. College sing it.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Where?


Mr. Dugd. In Oxfordshire, and in Oxford Town, at my Lord Lovelace's.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Where at my Lord Lovelace's?


Mr. Dugd. At his House in the Country.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Who were in the company there?


Mr. Dugd. Sir Robert Clayton, Sir Thomas Player, Mr. Rouse, Mr. College.


Mr. Serj. jeff. You say you heard him in Oxford, and in Oxfordshire, and at my
Lord Lovelace's, where is that?


L. c. j. My Lord. Lovelace is here himself, and hears what he says.


Mr. Dugd. I might mistake the County, but I heard him sing it at Oxford Town,
and at my Lord Lovelace's House again.


L. c. j. Where is that?


Mr. Dugd. I cannot tell the Town.


Mr. Ser. jeff. How came you there?


Mr. Dugd. Sir Thomas Player did invite me thither.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Where is it in Oxfordshire?


Mr. Dugd. I cannot tell, it is four miles from Henly.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Was my Lord at home?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, he was.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Now for the Cut then; Did he show you this Cut?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, he told me he would get it printed.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Was it before it was printed then that he sung it?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, it was.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Who did he tell you did make it?


Mr. Dugd. He told me he was the Author of this Cut, and he gave me one, and we
sang it together presently after it was printed.


Mr. At. Genesis How did he describe it to you, when he showed it to you?


Mr. Dugd. That which has the Pack on the back of it, he described to be the
King; those that follow him were Topham, Cooper, Hughs, and Snow; and that
company of men there is the House of Commons.


Mr. Ser. Holloway. What was meant by the Pack?


Mr. Dugd. The Parliament and all his Retinue; and then here is the King in the
mire again, according as it is represented in the Long --


Mr. Ser. jeff. Ay, he goes on well. And this here is the Bishops which they
thrust into the Pack when they have got him down into the mire, and then they
thrust them all away, as it is in the Song, to hoot them away.


L. c. j. Did he make this explication to you?


Mr. Dugd. Yes. Mr. Serj. jeff. Who were the All?


Mr. Dugdale. King and Clergymen and all.


Mr. Serj. jefferies. Where was this he explained it?


Mr. Dugd. At London.


Mr. Ser. Holloway. Is there any thing relating to White Hall? what name did he
give that?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, he said, Louse-hall was White Hall, because of its poverty.


Then the Ballad was read. Cl. of cr. Rarp Show. To the Tune of, I am a
Senseless thing --


Mr. At. Genesis This shows you what sort of man he is.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Here you say he explained this with the Pack at the back to be
the King?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, he told me so.


Mr. Ser. jeff. What did he mean by the two Faces?


Mr. Dugd. That he was half Protestant, and half Papist.


Mr. Jones. Did he make any comparison between his own party and the Kings
party?


Mr. Dugd. He said they were but an handful to them.


Mr. Jones. To whom?


Mr. Dugd. To his party, that was the Dissenters.


Mr. At. Genesis Speak that out.


Mr. Dugd. That their party was but a handful to theirs.


Mr. At. Genesis Theirs and theirs, who did he mean?


Mr. Dugd. He meant the Dissenters, for the Church of England he reckoned among
the Papists.


L. c. j. Tell us the words he said.


Mr. Dugd. He said, his party was the true Church of England, and that which is
established by Law, were but Protestants in masquerade.


Mr. jones. Tell us when he made the comparison, what words he did use, and
upon what occasion.


Mr. Dugd. When he perceived the King at Oxford would not yield to the House of
Commons, he said, Let him begin as soon as he would, he did not care how soon
he did begin, for their party* meaning the King and his party, was but an
handful to him and his party, calling them the true Protestants, the others
were Protestants in masquerade.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he desire you to do, to be assisting in any thing?


Mr. Dugd. He always desired me to be true of that side, he hoped I was, and to
get good Arms for my self.


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Did he in Oxford desire this of you?


Mr. Dugd. No he did not.


Mr. Sol. Genesis For what purpose did he desire you to arm your self?


Mr. Dugd. He said the King had a design on the people to introduce Popery and
Arbitrary Government, and he expected every day when they would begin, and the
sooner the better, he would be provided for them.


Mr. Jones. Was that in Oxford?


Mr. Dugd. He spoke it in Oxford, and in the City too.


Mr. Jones. Did he tell you of any that were listed?


Mr. Dugd. He spoke of Capt. Brown, and Capt. Clinton, and Don Jews, and
abundance more he said he had.


Mr. jones. Did he tell you he had them here?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, about forty of them were there he said.


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Did he tell you of any that were listed, in order to the
coming down of the Parliament at Oxford?


Mr. Dugd. Not listed, but were intended to come down; and at Oxford he told me
they were come down.


Mr. just. jones. Were you in their company in Oxford here?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, I was.


Mr. just. jones. In the company of whom? name them.


Mr. Dugd. Of Capt. Brown, Don Jews, and several others of that Gang; I know
not their names, but I know their faces.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did he take notice to you that they were come down.


Mr. Dugd. Yes.


Mr. Sol. Genesis To what purpose?


Mr. Dugd. He expected there would be a rising in Oxford, and to this purpose.
Mr. College was one that debated it at Richard's Coffee-House, and it was to
be carried from thence to the King's Head Club, Whether it were not best to
leave a Parliament man in every County?


Mr. At. Genesis Where was this?


Mr. Dugdale. This was at Richard's Coffee-House in London, against they met
here.


Mr. At. Genesis We could give you an account of a volume of these things,
abundance of scandalous Pamphlets, both Songs, Libels, and Ballads, that were
made by this Gentleman, and all seized in his custody.


Mr. jones. But he sung this Libel?


Mr. Attorn. Genesis All these, Gentlemen, (showing a great bundle) were to be
dispersed over England.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. It was, it seems, expounded and sung by the Prisoner at the
Bar; he gave you the Ballad here at Oxford, you say, Mr. Dugdale.


Mr. Dugd. No, I heard him sing it here.


Mr. Jones. Pray, Mr. Dugdale, what was the use was to be made of this Ballad?


Mr. At. Genesis Come, go to the next, we call this Evidence to show you the
malice of the man.


College. Pray, my Lord, let me ask some Questions of Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Ser. jeff. Ay, now let the Prisoner ask his Questions (to do him right)
before we go to another Witness.


Mr. Dugd. My Lord, I have a word or two more about a Libel in manuscript; that
very day the Sheriffs were to be chosen, it was to be printed, and he told me
the Printer dust not print it, it was so dangerous.


Mr. Serj. jeff. What was it, can you remember any part of it?


Mr. Dugdale. No, but it was the worst I ever heard in my life, against the
King and Government.


Lo. chapter just. Now ask him what Questions you will.


Coll. Pray, when was the first time you gave this Evidence?


Mr. Dugdale. Truly, Mr. College, I don't keep an account of time, I cannot
give an account of time.


Mr. At. Genesis As near as you can, tell him.


Mr. Dugdale. I cannot tell whether it might be in June, I think it was.


College. How long before I was taken?


Mr. Dugdale. It might be about the time you were taken.


College. Pray, who did you give it before?


Mr. Dugd. I gave it to Sir Lionel Jenkins.


College. Where did you swear these particulars were done then?


Mr. Dugd. What was done in the City, I swore to be done there.


College. What City?


Mr. Dugd. London; the same words were said in the City of London, and over
again here. I have repeated, for the most part, only the words you said here,
but more was in the City than here.


College. Did you swear then, that the words you swear now were spoken at
London?


Mr. Dugdale. It may be we might not name Oxford then.


Mr. Ser. jeff. He says well; it might not be named then.


College. Then you did give in your Information, that I spoke these words at
Oxford?


Mr. Dugd. I was not examined about what was done at Oxford; but I believe I
have heard you speak the same words to me at my Lord Lovelace's, but I do not
know what County that is in.


College. I ask you positively, whether you did not swear that what you now
say was spoken at Oxford, was spoken at London.


Mr. Dugd. I did not name Oxford then.


College. But did not you say that was done at London, that now you say was
done here.


Mr. Dugd. Truly, you said them both at London, and here.


College. Pray, Mr. Dugdale, what had you to give this your information?


Mr. Dugdale. Truly I cannot say I have received the worth of a Groat.


College. Nor was ever promised any thing?


Mr. Dugd. No, I never received any thing, nor ever was promised, but only what
the King gave me for going down into the Country for my charges.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that the same Allowance you had when you were Witness for
the Popish Plot?


Mr. Dugd. Yes.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Have you any other Allowance than what you had before, when you
gave Evidence at my Lord Stafford's Trial?


Mr. Dugd. No, nor have got all that yet neither.


Coll. But pray observe my question, Mr. Dugdale, and answer it: Did you not
swear at London that I spoke these words there, which now you say I spoke here.


L. c. j. Pray observe, he says he did not then name Oxford; but in the giving
of his Evidence now, he tells you a series of what passed between London and
Oxford; and I must tell you further, if a Treason be committed, and the
Evidence prove it to be in two Countries, the King may choose which County he
will prosecute and bring his Indictment in, and give in Evidence the Facts in
both Counties. But you shall have your Objection to it afterward, and we will
take it into consideration. I tell you this, that it may not seem to you that
the Witnesses speak impertinently of what was done at London; but if nothing
was done or said at Oxford, then it will be taken into consideration, you shall
have it saved afterward, I only him it now, that you may not think it
impertinent.


Coll. I beseech your Lordship give me leave to speak one word; When he made
his Affidavit before Sir Lionel Jenkins there about seizing the King, about the
party I had, and the Arms I had provided, ought not he at the same time to have
said where I said those words to him? but he did swear then it was in London
that I said those words to him; and coming before a Grand Jury of honest
Gentlemen in London, they were so wise and honest as to do me Justice, and not
find the Bill; so their design failing there, then they changed it to Oxford.


L. c. j. You did not come to your Trial there, if you had so done, then they
would have asked him in particular what was said at Oxford, and what at London,
as it is now, being done in both Counties. But look you, if you will ask any
particular questions, do, for they have other Witnesses to produce.


Coll. My Lord, I only ask this question, Whether it be not rational to think,
that when he swore before Sir Lionel Jenkins, he should not swear the words
were spoken, and things done?


Mr. Dugd. He has said the same words to me at my Lord Lovelace's, as I lay in
Bed with him, and this I never mentioned but now in my Evidence.


Coll. What words did I say there?


Mr. Dugd. If you must have them repeated, they were about the King.


Coll. What were they?


Mr. Dugd. That he was a Papist, and designed Arbitrary Government.


Coll. Did I say so to you at my Lord Lovelace's?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, as we lay a Bed.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you lie together?


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Yes, yes, they were intimates.


College. I had not six words with you when you went to Bed; for you said you
were weary, and went asleep presently.


Mr. Dugd. I say you said this in the morning; for we had above an hours
discourse when we were a Bed, and all our discourse was about the Parliament
and the King.


Coll. Where was it I said those words in Oxford?


Mr. Dugd. At Combe's coffe-house was one place.


Coll. Was there no body by?


Mr. Dugd. No, but at the Angel-Inn there were several persons standing by.


Coll. Surely then some of those heard the words as well as you.


Mr. Dugd. It may be so, I am sure many at London have been by, as Mr. Starkey
by name, Mr. Boson, Mr. Baldwin? they have rebuked you for it, and I have
rebuked you too.


Coll. What words have they and you heard, and rebuked me for?


Mr. Dugd. When you have been railing against the King, and said, That he
designed nothing but the introducing of Popery, and Arbitrary Government, and
that he was a Papist.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. He loves to hear it repeated.


Coll. What Arms did you see of mine in this Town?


Mr. Dugd. I saw Pistols; you had a case of Pistols before you, and you had
some Pocket-Pistols.


Coll. None but one I borrowed of you, and that you had again; had I? pray
speak, did you see any more?


Mr. Dugd. It may be there might not, but there were Pocket-Pistols in the
room, and you had them in your hand.


College. He swore but now that he saw me have Pocket-Pistols, when it was but
one, and that was his own.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Hark you now, you talk of Pistols, do you know that he had
any Pistols in his Holsters at Oxford.


Mr. Dugd. Yes, he had.


Coll. Yes, I know that, I don't deny it.


Mr. Serj. jeff. I think a Chissel might have been more proper for a Joyner.


Coll. You say I was confederated with Capt. Brown, and other men.


Mr. Dugd. You have told me that Captain Brown had agood Allowance, and it was
pity he had not a better Allowance; and you would speak he might have a better
Allowance, for he was able to do good service when the time came.


College. From whom?


Mr. Dugd. Among you.


College. Among whom?


Mr. Dugd. You know there were several Gatherings among you that I was not
privy to.


College. What do I know?


Mr. Sol. Genesis You know money was gathered many times.


College. For what purpose?


Mr. Dugd. You never told me particulars; it was to distribute some where, I
had none of it.


L. c. j. He does not say these men were concerned with you, but you said so.


Mr. Dugd. You know, Mr. College* there were many Gathering of moneys.


Coll. Did I tell you there were any Gatherings for Capt. Brown?


Mr. Serj. jeff. He says you told him no particulars; if you have a mind to ask
him any more Questions, do.


Coll. Pray, Sir George, don't interrupt me, I am here for my Life. Did I tell
you there were any Gatherings for Capt. Brown?


Mr. Dugd. I do not say for him, nor whom you distributed it to; but you
gathered money one among another, and you have paid money.


College. I have paid money! when, and to whom?


Mr. At. Genesis You will not deny that, you confessed upon your Examination that
you gave a Guinny.


Coll. Sir, did you see me any more at Oxford, than in the Coffee-House, and at
that Inn, when I went out of Town, and was going home with the City-members?


Mr. Dugd. Yes.


Coll. Were you in my company any where, but in those two places?


Mr. Dugd. Yes I was with you at the Chequer.


Coll. Did you come a purpose to speak with me, or had you any business
particularly with me?


Mr. Dugd. Truly, Mr. College, I have forgot whether I had or no, I was in the
Room with you there.


College. Where is that Room?


Mr. Dugd. I cannot tell all the Rooms in that House.


Coll. Was it above stairs, or below?


Mr. Dugd. Both above and below, two days I was there with you.


Coll. Was there any of this discourse you speak of passed there between us.


Mr. Dugd. I know I was with you in those two places I mentioned before; you
called me aside to drink a Glass of mum, and there was none in the Room but us
two at that Coffee-House.


Coll. Sir, you came to Town but on Friday, I think, it must be Saturday,
Sunday or Monday this was, for we stayed no longer in Oxford.


Mr. Dugd. Nay, I came to Oxford, either Wednesday night or Thursday morning;
and I saw Mr. Hunt and you together the same day I came.


Coll. Did I explain any Pictures to you at London, or owned I was the Author
of them?


Mr. Dugd. Yes, upon my Oath, you have explained Pictures to me, and there is
one Picture that I have not showed yet, which you have explained what the
meaning was.


Mr. Serj. jeff. It Is your common Trade it seems.


Mr. Dugd. You told me you got them done.

Clerk reads, A Character of a Popish Successor, etc.


Mr. Ser. Holloway. How did he explain it to you* Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Serj. jeff. I would see what opinion he had of the Church of England;
there are some Churchmen, what are they a doing?


Mr. Dugdale. They are a parcel of Tantivy-men riding to Rome; and here is the
Duke of York, half man, half devil, trumpeting before them.


College. You have got somebody to explain these things to you, Mr. Dugdale.


Mr. Dugd. You did it, upon my Oath.


College. Oh, fie upon you, Mr. Dugdale, consider what you say.


Mr. Serj. jefferies. All this you did explain, it seems.


Mr. Dugd. And in one place of the other Libel, the King was termed a Rogue,
but they put him in by another name.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Where is it?


Mr. Dugd. It Is in Rary-Shew; In the Manuscript it was, Now, now the Rogue is
down.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Let me see it, I took notice of it, it is, Now, now the Giant is
down, here.


Coll. I ask you, Sir, Whether the Song which you say was sung at my Lord
Lovelace's, and other places, was the same with this?


Mr. Dugd. For the general it is, I cannot tell for every word: You sang it half
a dozen times there, and the music played to you.


Coll. I ask you whether it was the same with this?


Mr. Dugd. I cannot tell for every word you sang.


Coll. Was there any body by at my explaining of these Pictures?


Mr. Dugd. Mr. Baldwyn was by, and reproved and corrected you, that you would
be so open.


Coll. Was there any body by at Oxford, when you did hear me talk of Arming my
self?


Mr. Dugd. They were walking up and down in the Barbers Shop, and I know not
whether they did hear or no.


Mr. At. Genesis Was that Gentleman sworn at my Lord Stafford's Trial, Mr.
Dugdale?


College. Yes, I was sworn there, I acknowledge it.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he swear any thing on your behalf, for your credit, Mr.
Dugdale?


Coll. That was by hearsay, Mr. Attorney, at the Tower: I know nothing of my
own knowledge; but I did believe him another man than I find him.


Mr. Ser. jeff. No question, or else you would not have trusted him.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Stevens. (Which was done.) Do you give my Lord, and the
Jury, an account where you found this precious Ballad.


Stevens. The first draught I found in his Bedchamber.


Mr. Ser jeff. What, of all of them? which is it?


Stevens. The Rary Show, we found the first draught of it in his House, when we
came to search his papers, by order of Council, and the Printer that Printed
the Ballad, has told me since, he had it from him --


Mr. At. Genesis What say you your self? speak your own knowledge.


Stevens. And Mr. Atterbury was by when we searched the House.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, Mr. Atterbury will tell his own story.


Stevens. I have seen you on Horseback, with Holsters before you, with some
hundreds of men after you, coming out of the Bell-savage Inn; they said, you
were going to choose Parliament Men: I have known you three or four years, you
were Joyner to our Hall.


Mr. Ser. jeff. We call you to that particular of the papers, and you run out
in a story of a Cock and a Bull, and I know not what.


Lo. chapter just. Will you ask him any questions?


Coll. No, only this; Do you swear, upon your Oath, that you found the Original
in my House?


Stevens, Yes, Sir, you will see it with my hand to it, and some more of them.


Mr. At. Genesis And you found too those that were printed?


Stevens. Yes, both our names are to them, that were concerned in the searching
of them.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. You found the paper in the House?


Stevens. Yes.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. That is Towzer; but you have the Original of the Rary Show?


(It was looked for, but could not be found.) Coll. Pray, Gentlemen, observe,
he swears that is an Original.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. No, no, he found the paper in your House.


Coll. I ask about the Original of Rary Show.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. He says he saw a paper drawn with a Pencil that was like the
Original.


Atterbury. There was an Original drawn with a Pencil, upon Dutch Paper, it is
lost since, for we do not see it here now, which at the same time we found upon
Colledge's Table in his Bedchamber.


Coll. Did you find an Original of that in my Chamber?


Atterbury. Yes, we found a paper drawn with Black-lead.


Coll. Pray, Where is it?


Atterbury. I did see it, it was drawn in Black-lead, it was upon Dutch-paper,
and lay upon the Table in your chamber.


Stevens. Sure I am it was taken when we searched the House.


Coll. I am sure you could never find the Original of any such thing in my
House.


Mr. At. Genesis Then where is Mr. Sewel, (Who was sworn.) Sir, did you see that
trumpery taken?


Sewell. I had a Warrant to seize Mr. Spur, and his Brother-in-law, Mr.
College. So I went down to seize Mr. Spur, and search his House for such
papers as I should find. I could not find them in the House; but I enquired of
him, after I had searched, and could not find them where they were; because I
saw him at Mr. Colledge's when we first searched; he denied them a pretty
while, but at last he told me they were in the Hay-mow in the Barn. When I came
there, he was balling, and told me his Wife, Colledge's Sister had taken them
down, and carried them into a room where I had searched before, but could not
find them; and the man was angry then, so we run after his Wife, and found her
with all these papers in a bag.


Mr. At. Genesis Are these the same papers?


Sewell. Yes, and there were two other Cuts; the man himself is about the place
somewhere.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Swear Mr. John Smith.


Which was done. Mr. jones. Come, Mr. Smith, do you know Mr. College?


Mr. Smith. Yes.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Give us an account what dealings you have had with him, where,
and when; what he has said about the King; and tell us first whether you be
intimately acquainted?


Mr. Smith. We were intimately acquainted. The first time I heard Mr. College
discoursing any thing of this nature, that is, concerning Treason, or any such
thing, was once at a Coffee-House by Temple Bar; there I met College, and he
told me he was invited to Dinner, and he likewise invited me to it. I asked him
who provided the Dinner, he told me it was one Alderman VVilcox; I told him I
was a stranger, and did not care for going: He told me I should be very welcome
there, and at last prevailed upon me to go: And as I was going along, I asked
him what the Alderman was? He told me he was a man that was as true as steel,
and a man that would endeavor to root out Popery: Said I, that may be done
easily, if you can but prevail with the King to pass the Bill against the D. of
York. No, no, said he, you are mistaken, for Rowley is as great a Papist as the
D. of York is (now he called the King Rowley) and every way as dangerous to the
Protestant Interest, as is too apparent by his Arbitrary Ruling. This was the
discourse between the Coffee-House and the Tavern where we went to dine. When
we came in, I asked College again, whether the Alderman was there; he said he
was not there at that time: I asked him the second time what kind of man he
was, he said he was one that lived in his Countrey-House, and gave freely to
several people to buy Arms and Ammunition. And I asked him to what purpose? and
he said it was to bring the King to submission to his people; adding thereto,
that he wondered Old Rowley did not consider how easily his Fathers Head came to
the Block, which he doubted not would be the end of Rowley at the last. After
this discourse the Alderman came in; we dined, and every one went his own way
about his own business. Mr. College* then told me, if I would go with him to
his own House, I should see how he was prepared with Arms and Provision. Soon
after I met with him, and he desired me to go along and dine with him; and I
did so, and there he did show me his Pistols, his Blunderbuss, his great Sword;
and he showed me his Armor, Back and Breast; and he showed me his Headpiece,
which, if I am not mistaken, was covered over with Chamlet, it was a very fine
thing; and, said he, These are the things which will destroy the pitiful Guards
of Rowley, that are kept up contrary to Law and Justice, to set up Arbitrary
Power and Popery.


College. What did I say, Sir, about my Armor?


Mr. Smith. Thus you said; It was to destroy Rowley's Guards (those were your
words) that were kept up contrary to Law and Justice, to set up Arbitrary Power
and Popery. After I had dined with him, I parted with him. A little before the
Parliament was to meet at Oxford, I met him again; and were discoursing of
several things, what preparations the City were making, how they were provided
with Powder and Bullets; and for his part, he would go down to Oxford, for he
expected a little sport there, upon the divisions that were like to be between
the King and Parliament. Then said I to him, why, what is the matter there?
Why, said he, we expect that the King will seize upon some of the members, and
we are as ready as he. And, says he, for my part, I will be there, and be one
that shall seize him, if he secure any of the members, (and I believe he did go
down;) says he, you know how the City is provided: I told him, no, not so well
as he; but he told me all was very well. After he came up again, I met him
another time, and he told me, he went down in expectation of some sport; but
Old Rowley was afraid, like his Grandfather Jamy, and so ran away like to
beshit himself.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Did he say, If he had not ran away, he would have seized him?


Mr. Smith. He said nothing of that, but before, he said, He would be one of
them should seize him, if he seized any of the members. After this he told me,
that Fitzgerald and he had had a quarrel at the Parliament-door of the House
of Lords at Oxford; that Fitzgerald had called him Rogue; and, said he,
Fitzgerald made my Nose bleed; but before long, I hope to see a great deal
more Blood shed for the cause. After this again, when there was a discourse of
disarming the City, that my Lord Feversham was to come to do it, he told me, he
was well provided, and if Feversham, or any man, nay Rowley himself should
attempt any such thing, he would be the death of him, before any man should
seize upon his Arms.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Did he discourse any thing to you about Arms to provide your
self?


Mr. Smith. Yes, he did, I had an Armor from him.


Mr. Ser. jeff. What did he say to you about it?


Mr. Smith. He did desire me to get Arms, for I did not know how soon I might
make use of them. I had an Armor from him upon trial; he said it cost him 30
or 40 s. I had it upon trial, but it was too big for me, so I gave it him back,
and bought a new one.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did he tell you to what purpose you should arm your self?


Mr. Smith. No, he did not name any purpose, but he told me I did not know how
soon I might make use of it.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he say to you about any one's seizing the King?


Mr. Smith. He told me the Parliament were agreed to secure the King, and that
in order to it, all Parliament Men came very well armed, and accompanied with
arms and men; and he told me of a great man that had notice from all the
Gentlemen of England how well they came armed.


Mr. jones. What did he say of himself?


Mr. Smith. He would be one that should secure the King, if he seized any of
the members.


Mr. jones. When he had been there, what did he say?


Mr. Smith. If they had had any work, he was ready provided for them.


Mr. At. Genesis But pray tell us again what he said of the Kings running away?


Mr. Smith. He said Rowley was afraid, like his Grandfather Jumy, and ran away
ready to beshit himself.


L. c. j. If you have done with him, Mr. Attorney, let the Prisoner ask him
what Questions he will.


College. Mr. Smith, Where was this discourse I had with you?


Mr. Smith. Which do you mean, the former part or the latter?


College. The first discourse you talk of, what I told you going to Mr.
Wilcox's to dinner, and when it was?


Mr. Smith. You know best when it was, I cannot exactly remember the time, but
you know it is true.


College. Where was it?


Mr. Smith. As we went along thither we had the first part of it, and when we
came thither, you and I talked till Alderman Wilcox came in; and you and I were
alone together, and several persons that were there, were drawn into Cabals,
two by two.


College. Where?


Mr. Smith. In the room where we dined; and you know there was a little room
by, where some were drinking a Glass of Wine.


Coll. You say, by two and two the company were drawn into Cabals.


Mr. Smith. I tell you most of them were in Cabals, two and two together, only
those two Gentlemen that belonged to the Alderman went up and down, and gave
Wine.


Coll. What Religion are you of?


Mr. Smith. Is it for this man to ask me, my Lord, such a question?


Lo. chapter just. Yes, answer him.


Mr. Smith. I am a Protestant.


Coll. You were a Priest.


Mr. Smith. Yes, what then? and I am in Orders now.


College. That was from the Church of Rome.


Mr. Smith. Yes and that is a good Ordination: I came in voluntarily to
discover the Popish Plot, and was no Pentioner, nor received any Sallary from
the King. I have spent several pounds, several scores of pounds, but received
no recompense. And I was the Darling at one time all over the City, when I did
adhere to what they would have me to do.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Did not you swear against my Lord Stafford?


Mr. At. Genesis Were not you a Witness, Mr. Smith, at my Lord Stafford's Trial?


Mr. Smith. In that case I did give a general account of the design of the
Papists; they did not then question my Reputation, and I defy all the World to
say any thing against it.


College. Pray hear me Sir, if you please; the first discourse that you speak
of about Mr. Wilcox's being a good man for the Cause, and contributing money,
this was when we were at Dinner.


Mr. Smith. This was that day when we went to dinner with him, you know it very
well.


Coll. Where were the other Discourses I had with you?


Mr. Smith. Which part of them?


College. When I came from Oxford.


Mr. Smith. By the Ditch side, by your own House; I have two or three to prove
it, we were an hour or two discoursing together about this business.


Coll. What business?


L. c. j. He tells you of two Discourses, one before you went to Oxford, and
one after you came from thence.


Coll. He does say, that I discoursed him about our coming down hither to
Oxford, that the Parliament would secure the King, and that I would be one of
them that should seize him, and this was at the time when we dined with
Alderman Wilcox.


L. c. j. Not so, he says after that time, and before you went to Oxford, he
had such a discourse with you.


Mr. Smith. Yes, my Lord, so it was.


Coll. And does he speak of another time when I showed him the Back, Breast and
Arms?


Mr. Smith. Yes.


Coll. But he said, I discoursed then, that the City was provided with Arms,
and that the Parliament were resolved to bring the King to submission.


Mr. Smith. When I was in the House with him, he then said Mr. Wilcox gave Money
to provide Arms: I asked for what? he said, it was to bring the King to
submission to his People; and then he added, he admired that Rowley did not
remember how easily his Fathers Head came to the Block; and he doubted not but
that would be the end of him too.


L. c. j. He spoke of several times you know.


Coll. I do not know one word of it, nor can distinguish the times: But, Mr.
Smith the last discourse you say about Oxford business, was by the Ditch side.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. The Discourse about bringing the King to submission, was in the
way as you went to dinner.


Mr. Smith. The last Discourse when you returned from Oxford, was by the Ditch
side; but both before and after you spoke to me at that place about this design
of bringing the King to submission.


College. You said it was at Wilcox's at Dinner.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. You mistook him then.


College. Nay, Sir George, you took him not right.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. I have taken him right I assure you, and you shall see it by
and by.


College. He is the falsest man that ever spoke with a tongue.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear Bryan Haynes. (which was done. Tell my Lord, and the Jury,
whether you know this Gentleman, what converse you have had with him, and what
discourse he has had with you. Apply your self to Mr. Colleges business only.


Haynes. I suppose he will not deny but that he knows very well; I have been
acquainted with him ever since March last, before the sitting of the Parliament
at Oxford. My Lord, there was a Warrant against me for High Treason; and I made
my application to Mr. College, and desired him to go to a certain Person of
Honor in England, and ask his advice, whether I might supercede the Warrant by
putting in Bayl, and carry the Supercedeas in my pocket: Mr. College told me
he would go to this person of Honor, for he would do nothing of his own head;
and he bid me come to him the next day. My Lord, I came to Mr. College the
very next day, and I met him at his House, and I asked him what was the result,
and what advice he had from that person of Quality; he bid me be of good cheer,
that the Parliament would be, and sit at Oxford soon; that I should not value
the King a pin; for, said he, the King is in a worse condition than you or I;
for you shall see, said he, he shall be called to an account for all his
Actions.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Who should?


Haynes. The King; for all the world may see, says he, that he does resolve to
bring in Arbitrary Power and Popery: And, said he, unless he will let the
Parliament sit at Oxford, since he has called them together, and put the
people to charges in choosing of them, and them in coming down, we will seize
him at Oxford, and bring him to the Block, as we did the Logger-head his
Father. The Parliament shall sit at Guildhall, and adjust the Grievances of the
Subject, and of the Nation. And you shall see, said he, that no King of his
Race shall ever reign in England after him.


L. c. j. Where was this he said so?


Haynes. At his own House I met him; and he and I did walk all along from his
own House, over the Bridge that is against Bridewel, and so went all along till
we came to the Hercules-Pillars, and we had some discourse there; we went up
one pair of stairs and called for Beef; and all this discourse was in that very
place of the Hercules-Pillars.


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Do you know any thing of any Arms he had, and for what?


Haynes. But, Sir, said I to Mr. College, how can this be done, it is a thing
impossible. You pretend, you say, to the Duke of Monmouth, that he is a fine
Prince, and stands up for the Protestant Interest: Alas, said he, we make an
Idol of him to adumbrate our Actions, for fear we should be discovered. Do you
think the wise people of England shall ever make a Bastard upon Record King of
England: No, said he, for though we praise his Actions, yet we cannot endure
him, because he is against his own Father. But, said he, further, unless the
King do expel from his Council the Earl of Clarindon, cunning Lory Hide, the
Earl of Hallifax, that great Turn-coat Rogue, that was before so much against
the Papists, a Rascal, we shall see him hanged, and all the Tory Counselors;
except the King do it, we will make England too hot for him.


Coll. Who did I say this to, to you?


Haynes. Yes, to me.


Coll. Pray, how could this be possible?


Haynes. Yes, you knew my condition; and I intimated to you at that time, That
I was as much for Treason and Villainy as you: But then said I to him, how can
this be done? Here you have neither Officers, nor men of experience, nor men of
knowledge; nor you have no Ammunition, Seaport Towns, nor Ships. And besides,
the King, said I, has a great party in the Land, and the Duke of York
likewise; and for all the men of Estates, and the ancient Gentlemen, they will
not be disturbed, and to quit their Ease for a civil War. Oh, says he, you are
mistaken, for we have in the City 1500 Barrels of Powder, and we have 100000
men ready at an hours warning; and we have ordered every thing in a due method
against the sitting of the Parliament at Oxford; and you shall see England the
most glorious Nation in the World, when we have cut off that beastly Fellow
Rowley; and speaking of the King, he said, He came of the Race of Buggerers,
for his Grandfather, King James, buggered the old Duke of Buckingham; and he
called him Captain, and sometimes the King, and sometimes Rowley.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. This was pure Protestant discourse upon my word.


Haynes. Then he railed at Judge Pemberton; and, said he, let him try
Fitz-Harris if he dare; I shall see him go to Tyburn for it, I hope, a
Turn-coat Rogue. He was for the Plot whilst he was a puisne Judge, but now he
is Chief Justice, he is the greatest Rogue in the world. He is like one of the
Pensioners in the long Parliament. So one day I went along with Mrs.
Fitz-Harris, and Mr. Ivy, and he sent a man to me, and desired me to come to
the Hog in Armor; thither we came, and met him, and went to his Lodgings, and
there we dined. Then they made some persons of Honor believe, that I was a
person so and so qualified, and was brim full of the Plot; and he would put me
upon charging the King with the firing of London, and the murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, and said he, such and such Lords shall live and die by you;
and besides, said he, you need not fear, England shall espouse your Cause. But,
said I, the Law is like the Spiders Web, that catches the little Flies, but the
great Flies run through the Net, and make their escape; so it is with these
Lords, they put you and me on the danger of acting; and when they get off by
interest, a Jury of Twelve men will hang us by the Neck, and so I should
perish, whilst others triumphed, and only be a martyr for the Phanaticks. So in
discourse we were talking of the Libel of Fitz-Harris; The Devil take me, said
he, every individual word is as true as God is in Heaven; and said he, if you
do not join with Fitz-Harris in his Evidence, and charge the King home, you are
the basest fellow in the world, for he makes you slaves and beggars, and would
make all the world so; and it is a kind of charity to charge him home, that we
may be rid of such a Tyrant.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Mr. College, if you will ask him any Questions, you may.


Coll. Certainly, my Lord, the thing speaks it; he is not to be talked withal;
Is it probable I should talk to an Irishman that does not understand sense?


Haynes. It Is better to be an honest Irishman than an English Rogue.


Mr. Serj. jeff. He does it but to put you into a heat, don't be passionate
with him.


Haynes. No, I am not, I thank God he has not put me into an heat.


Coll. Where was this discourse about superceding your Warrant?


Haynes. At London.


Coll. When?


Haynes. It was before the Parliament sat at Oxon.


Coll. How long?


Haynes. I cannot tell positively to an hour or a day.


Coll. What month as near as you can?


Haynes. It was in the month of March.


Coll. Had you ever seen me before?


Haynes. Can you deny that?


Coll. I ask you whether you have or no?


Haynes. Yes, I have seen you in the Coffee-Houses bawling against the
Government.


L. c. j. Were you an intimate acquaintance of his before March last?


Haynes. No intimate acquaintance.


Coll. Then this is the first time you discoursed with me.


Haynes. Oh, no, my Lord. One and I fell out at the Queens-Head Tavern at
Temple Bar, and he set me upon the business, and John Macnamarra and others,
and truly I did the business for him: For we fell out, and did box, and our
Swords were taken from us, and I went to John Macnamarra, and told him, yonder
is such a man at such a place, now you may seize upon him.


Coll. What man was that?


Haynes. One Richard Ponre.


Coll. He belonged to my Lord Tyrone, I think, there were Warrants to take him.
Do you say I set you upon that?


Haynes. Yes, you were with me the night before, and Captain Brown, and they
gave us a Signal, a blue Ribband to distinguish that we were Protestants from
the Bishops men.


L. c. j. When were you to make use of it?


Haynes. When the King was seized.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Well, go on, have you any more?


Haynes. But, my Lord, further, after he came from Oxon. I met him, and said I,
Where are now all your cracks and brags? now you see the King has made a fool
of you; now you know not what you would have done. Says he, what would you have
us do? We have not done with him yet: For, said he, no servant, no man living
did know whether he would Dissolve the Parliament that day. I was that very
nick of time at the Lobby of the Lords-House, and there was a man came in with
a Gown under his arm, and every one looked upon him to be a Tailor, and no body
did suspect, no, not his intimatest Friends, except it were Fitzgerald, that
he would Dissolve the Parliament that day; but presently he puts on his Robes,
and sends away for the House of Commons; and when he had Dissolved them, before
ever the House could get down, he took Coach and went away, otherwise the
Parliament had been too hard for him; for there was never a Parliament Man but
had diverse armed men to wait on him, and I had my Blunderbuss and my man to
wait upon me. But well, said he, there is a God above will rule all.


Mr. At. Genesis Call Mr. Turbervile.


Coll. Hold, Sir, I desire to ask him some questions. You say the first time
that I saw you, you had this discourse with me.


Haynes. Do not use Tautologies, it is not the first time I have been examined,
I know how to speak as well as you.


Coll. Answer my Question, Sir.


Haynes. You know it was after I had made Affidavit before the Recorder of
London, a copy of which was carried to that Nobleman; And you came from him,
and returned me his thanks, and told me it was the best service I could do him.
I would not trouble the Court with circumstantial things; and you cold me I
should be gratified not only in my own property, but a reward for me and my
heirs for ever.


Mr. At. Genesis For what?


Haynes. I made Affidavit before the Recorder of London.


College. About what?


Haynes. Concerning one Fitzgerald.


Mr. At. Genesis Is it to this matter?


Haynes. No, nothing at all.


L. c. j. Let him ask any questions, what he will.


Coll. I ask when it was the first time you were acquainted with me so much, as
to know me well?


Haynes. As to the first time of intimacy, here is Macnamarra will take his
corporal Oath that I was as well acquainted with him as any one in the World.


Coll. Pray answer me, Sir; When was the first time I talked to you?


Haynes. The first intimate acquaintance we had, was when you put me upon the
design about Fitzgerald.


College. Pray Sir, you go too fast already, as you are still gallopping;
where was this discourse about his Majesty?


Haynes. I told you before.


Coll. What was it?


Haynes. I went to you after the Affidavit was made, and told you there was a
Warrant out after me, and desired you to go to That Nobleman, and desire his
advice what I might do, or whether I might supersede the Warrant. You told me
you could do nothing without advice, and you would go and advise with That
Nobleman.


College. My Lord, here is Mr. Turbervile come in, they will over-hear one
another, pray let me have fair play for my life. (whereupon Turbervile
withdrew.)


Lo. chapter just. Cannot you answer him? When was the first time you came
acquainted with him?


Mr. Serj. jeff. When was the first discourse you had with him?


Haynes. In April last.


Coll. You say it was before the Sitting of the Parliament, and that was in
March.


Haynes. I meant in March.


College. So indeed you said at first.


Mr. Ser. jeff. He never did say the day of the Month, nor the Month neither.


Mr. Jones. How long was it before the Sitting of the Parliament?


Haynes. Mr. Jones, truly I do not remember precisely how long it was before
the sitting of the Parliament, but I am sure it was before.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. I did take it that he said it was before the sitting of the
Parliament, and now he says, in the month of March. Pray at that time he talked
to you, did not he tell you of the sitting of the Parliament, and that they
would stand by you.


Coll. He has said it already, you need not direct him, Sir George, he goes
fast enough. But you say, Sir, the first time I ever was acquainted with you
was in March, then Gentlemen consider whether it be probable that at that time
I should discourse to him after this manner.


L. c. just. No, I will tell you what he says, He said the first time he was
intimately acquainted with you, was in March, he said he had before seen you in
Coffee-Houses, and he is sure it was before the sitting of the Parliament; for
he tells you the discourse you had, and by that discourse it appears, it
related to a Parliament that was afterward to sit. And then, to give you a
more particular circumstance, he says that you put him upon the making of the
Affidavit about Fitzgerald, and so you came acquainted.


Haynes. Ask Mr. Attorney. My Lord, that day he was taken and carried to
Whitehall before the Secretary of State; He said, I do not know who it should
be that should accuse me, I believe it is Ivy; as for Haynes, he was taken
the other day, he was an honest man.


Coll. You say I desired you to make an Affidavit, was it after that or before
I had that discourse with you?


Haynes. It was after. For I came and desired you to go to such a person of
Quality, and you went to him and advised with him; and then the next morning
such discourse as I told your Lordship and the whole Court of, he told me.


Coll. Did I speak these Treasonable words after the Affidavit made?


Haynes. You said I must make such an Affidavit concerning Fitzgerald.


College. But was this Treasonable discourse before you made the Affidavit, or
after?


Haynes. After the Affidavit made you told me this: when I came to his House,
and from thence we went to the Hercules-Pillars.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Will you ask him any more Questions, Mr. College?


Coll. Did you ever speak with me in your life before Macnamarra did call me
out of the Coffe-House to go along with you, where you would discover a Design
against my Lord Shaftsbury's Life?


Haynes. I told you I never had any intimate acquaintance with you in my life
before, nor did I ever speak with you before.


College. When was that discourse, I ask you once again?


Haynes. After the Affidavit made.


College. That night?


Haynes. Within a week or thereabouts after the Affidavit made.


Mr. At. Genesis Call Mr. Edward Turbervile. But Mr. Haynes, I would ask you one
Question, Did he deliver you any Ribband as a mark of distinction.


Haynes. Yes, here it is.


(and it was showed to the Court.) Then Mr. Turbervile was sworn. Mr. Ser.
Jeff. Pray Mr. Turbervile will you tell my Lord and the Jury what Discourse you
had with Mr. College, and where, and when.


Turbervile. When the Parliament sat at Oxon. about the middle of the week, I
cant be positive in the day, but I think it was in the middle of the week I
dined with Mr. College, Captain Brown and Don Jews Clerk of Derby-House, at
the Chequer Inn. After Dinner Don Jews went out about his own business, and
Captain Brown went to sleep; Mr. College and I fell talking of the Times, and
I was observing, I thought the Parliament was not a long lived Parliament. Said
he, there is no good to be expected from the King; for he and all his Family
are Papists, and have ever been such, you know it, Sir.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Nay don't appeal to him.


Turbervile. Said I, the King will offer some thing or other by way of surprise
to the Parliament, Said he, I would he would begin; but if he do not, we will
begin with him and seize him; for there are several brave Fellows about this
Town that will secure him till we have those terms that we expect from him.


L. c. j. Where was this?


Turbervile. At the Chequer Inn in Oxon.


L. c. j. What said he further?


Turbervile. He said he had got a Case of Pistols, and a very good Sword, and a
Velvet Cap; and I cannot be positive he had Armor on, but I believe he had.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he tell you he came down for that purpose to seize the King?


Turbervile. Yes, and he gave me a piece of blew Ribband to put upon my Hat, he
had a great quantity of it.


Mr. At. Genesis What was that for?


Turbervile. To be a distinction if there should be any disturbance when the
thing should be done.


Coll. What thing done?


Turbervile. I knew nothing but of your telling me of it.


Coll. Where was this?


Turberv. At the Chequer Inn in Oxon. M. College. You talk much and cannot
remember all you say.


Mr. At. Genesis What did he discourse to you about Arms and an Horse.


Turberv. I told him I had never an Horse, and nothing but a Case of Pistols;
he bid me I should not trouble my self, for he would get me an Horse.


Coll. What to do?


Turberv. To carry on your design, I know not what it was, but by your words.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Tell what he said of it at the Chequer Inn.


Turberv. He said there was a Design to seize the King.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he desire you to be one of them.


Turberv. He did desire me to be ready to assist.


Mr. jones. And how much of that Ribband had he, pray?


Turberv. A very great quantity, 40 or 50 Yards.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Pray Mr. Turbervile will you give your Evidence over again, and
let Mr. College attend to it.


Turberv. When the Parliament sat at Oxon. about the middle of the week, I
cannot be positive to a day; I believe it was either Wednesday or Thursday I
dined with Mr. College, Captain Brown, and Don Jews, who was formerly Clerk
of Derby-House. Don Jews after dinner went out, and Capt. Brown laid him down
on the bed, and Mr. College and I fell a talking of the Times, and I told him,
I thought this Parliament was no long-lived Parliament. Upon which College
told me the King and all his Family were Papists, and there was no good to be
expected from him. Then I replied, the King would perhaps surprise the
Parliament, or use some stratagem to bring them to his terms. Said Mr. College
again, I would he would begin; but if he do not, we will secure him till he
comes to those terms we would have from him; for here are several brave
Fellows, and many more are coming down that will join with it.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he name any one?


Turberv. No indeed, he did not; he himself had a case of Pistols, a Sword, and
I believe he might have his Armor on.


Coll. Did I discourse who were to join with me?


Turberv. No, Mr. College, you did not name any body to me, but Captain Brown
was with you.


Mr. At. Genesis Were you examined in my Lord Staffords Trial?


Turberv. Yes I was.


Mr. At. Genesis Was this Gentleman sworn to your Reputation there?


Turberv. No, not to mine.


Coll. Pray how come we to talk of such things, what occasion was there that I
should talk Treason of the King to you, was there any body besides us two there.


Turberv. No, Capt. Brown was gone to sleep, and Jews was gone out.


Mr. At. Genesis It was not at dinner that you talked so, Mr. College, he says.


Coll. Had they been at dinner with us there?


Turberv. Yes, and we had a Leg of boiled mutton to dinner.


Coll. Did you stay after dinner?


Turberv. Yes, and I lay with you afterward upon the bed.


Coll. I thought you had said Capt. Brown went to sleep there.


Turberv. Yes, but he was gone too, when we laid down together.


Coll. God forgive you, I can say no more, I never spoke one word of any such
discourse in my life.


Mr. At. Genesis Will you ask him any more Questions?


Coll. Mr. Turbervile, when did you give in this Information against me?


Turbervile. I gave it to the Grand Jury.


College. Not before?


Turbervile. Yes, I did.


College. When was it?


Turbervile. Truly I cannot well tell, I believe it was a day or two before I
came to Oxon.


Coll. Why did you make it then, and not before?


Turbervile. I Will tell you the occasion. Mr. Dugdale told me the Grand Jury of
London would not find the Bill; I did admire at it extremely; for I thought
every one that conversed with him might be an Evidence against him; he was
always so very lavish against the King and the Government. So then Colonel
Warcupp came to me, and took my Depositions, and then I came for Oxford.


College. What was the reason you did not discover this Treason before?


Turbervile. There was no reason for it, it was not necessary.


Coll. You were not agreed then.


Turbervile. There was no agreement in the case, there needs nothing of that I
think; but I am not obliged to give you an account of it.


College. God forgive you, Mr. Turbervile.


Turberv. And you too, Mr. College.


Mr. At. Genesis Then call Sir William Jennings.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Mr. Attorney, if you please, till he comes, I will acquaint my
Lord here is a Gentleman that has not yet been taken notice of, one Mr.
Masters, that is pretty well known to Mr. College; now he is a man, he must
acknowledge, of an undoubted Reputation, and I desire he may give your Lordship
and the Jury an account what he knows of the Prisoner; because he is so curious
for Englishmen, we have brought him an Englishman of a very good repute.


College. My Lord, I am charged with Treason in this Indictment; here are a
great many things made use of that serve only to amuse the Jury, I can
conjecture nothing else they are brought for; I desire to know whether the
Pictures produced are part of the Treason.


Lo. chapter just. Stay till the Evidence is given* and we will hear what you can
say at large when you come to sum up your Defense.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Pray, my Lord, will you be pleased to hear this Gentleman. He
will tell you what discourse he has had with the Prisoner at the Bar.


Then Mr. Masters was Sworn. Mr. Masters. Mr. College and I have been
acquainted for a great many years; and we have often discoursed. I have told
him of his being so violent as he has been several times. But a little before
the Parliament at Oxon. about Christmas last, after the Parliament at
Westminster, at Mr. Charlton's Shop the Woollen-Draper in Paul's Churchyard,
we were discoursing together about the Government, and he was justifying of the
late long Parliaments Actions in 40; and he said, That Parliament was as good a
Parliament as ever was chosen in the Nation. Said I, I wonder how you have the
impudence to justify their Proceedings, that raised the Rebellion against the
King, and cut off his Head. Said he, they did nothing but what they had just
cause for, and the Parliament that sat last at Westminster was of their
opinion, and so you would have seen it.


Mr. Ser. jeff. What did he say of the Parliament since?


Mr. Masters. He said the Parliament that sat last at Westminster was of the
same opinion that that Parliament was.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Pray afterward, what discourse had you about his Colonelship?


Mr. Masters. We were talking at Guild Hall that day the Common Council was,
the 13th. of May, as near as I remember; so I came to him, How now, Colonel
College, said I, what do you make this bustle for? You mistook me, and said,
Cousin, how long have you and I been Cousins? nay prithee, said I, it is not yet
come to that, to own Kindred between us, I only called you Colonel in jest;
Marry mock not, said he, I may be one in a little time.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Have you any thing to ask Mr. Masters? you know he is your old
acquaintance, you know him well.


(Then Sir William Jennings was Sworn.) Mr. jones. What is it that you know
concerning Mr. College at Oxford, Sir?


Sir William Jennings. My Lord, the first time that I heard any thing of Mr.
College, was, there was some company looking upon a Picture, for I knew him
not, nor never had any word of discourse with him in my life, any more then
seeing him in a public Coffee-House. But there was a Picture looking on by 7
or 8 or 10 people, I believe, more or less, and I coming and crowding in my
Head amongst the rest, looked upon this Picture. After the crowd was over, Mr.
College takes a Picture out of his Pocket; and, said he, I will give you one
of them, if you will. So he gives me a Picture; which Picture, if I could see,
I could tell what it was; it was written Mac a top, and there were several
Figures in it.

(Then the Picture was showed him.) This is one of the same that I had of him,
and I had not had it long in my custody, but meeting with Justice VVarcupp, I
showed it him, who bid me give it him, and so I did. The next thing I did see
Mr. College do, that was in the coffee-house, not the same day, but another
time: I saw him bring in a parcel of blue Ribband which was wrought, and these
words eight times wrought in it, twice wrought in every quarter of a yard, No
Popery, no Slavery. I saw him ^^^l to a member of Parliament, as I took him to
be, a yard of that Ribband for 2 s. and truly I was thinking he would ask me to
but some too, and I saw that Gentleman (I took him to be a Parliament Man) take
this Ribband and tie it upon his Sword. As to the other thing I have to say of
Mr. College, that very day the Parliament was dissolved he had been in a
quarrel, as he told me, with Fitzgerald, and I was standing in the
School-House yard, and he comes directly to me without my speaking to him or
any thing; but he comes and tells me Fitzgerald had spit in his face, and,
said he, I spit in his face again; so we went to loggerheads together, I think
that was the word, or Fisty-cuffs. So, said I, Mr. College, your Nose bleeds;
he takes his Handkerchief out of his Pocket and wipes his Nose, and said, I
have lost the first Blood in the Cause, but it will not be long before more be
lost.


L. c. j. Where was this?


Sir William Jennings. In the School-house Yard at Oxon. I never discoursed
with him afterward till I met him in London in Fleet Street one Sunday in the
afternoon, and I remember Captain Crescett was along with me. And when he came
up to me, How now, said I, honest Joyner? Says he, you call me honest Joyner,
some call me Rogue and Rascal, and I have been beating some of them; so that I
believe they will be aware of it. So I told Captain Crescett I never met this
man but he was always in a Quarrel.


College. Was it on a Sunday that I told you I had been beating of somebody?


Sir. Will. jenn. You told me so, Captain Crescett was by.


College. I remember I met you, but I did not tell you I had been then beating
any one. But pray, Sir William, when I met you after the Parliament was
Dissolved, and Fitzgerald and I had quarreled, did I say, That I had lost the
first blood in the Cause, but it would not be long e're more were lost. Sir
William, you are a Gentleman; as for the other men, they don't care what they
say, nor do I so much regard them; but you value your Word and Honor. These
were my words, and pray will you recollect your self before you be positive in
the thing, whether I did not say, I have lost the first blood for the
Parliament, (for it was upon my vindicating of the Commons, and Dr. Oats, whom
Fitzgerald had abused; and upon that the Quarrel began; so I said, when you
met me, and told me my Nose bled, I have lost the first blood for the
Parliament) I wish it may be the last.


Sir Will. jenn. Mr. College, If you please I will answer you as to that, I do
assure you it is the first time that ever I came upon this occasion in my days,
and I have declared it before, and do declare it now, I would rather have
served the King in three Engagements, then come in against you, or any man,
upon such an occasion. But I declare to you, upon the whole memory of the
truth, the words were as I spoke them at first, and no Parliament named or
mentioned. And, my Lord, moreover, I will tell you, when I did tell this story,
because Mr. Crescett that is here, is able to tell you whether I did not relate
the words within half an hour, or a little time after. Now I never had a
prejudice against you in my days, nor other concern, but having told Mr.
Justice VVarcupp this story, I am brought hither to testify it.


Coll. Sir William, I am sorry you did not better observe and remember my words
then.


Sir Will. jenn. I must needs say, I could not imagine what the words meant
when they were spoken, nor do I understand them to this day; but soon after
they were spoken, I related them to Justice VVarcupp, he being a Justice of
Peace.


Mr. Ser. Holloway. Gentlemen, we shall rest here, and conclude our Evidence
for the King at present, to hear what the Prisoner says to it, only with my
Lords leave I shall explain the words to you that are in the Indictment, and
tell you what is meant by compassing and imagining the death of the King. The
seizing the person of the King, is in Law a compassing and intending his death;
and so it has been adjudged in several cases, as in 1 Jacob, my Lord Cobham
and my Lord Grey's case, and several other cases; and so you may fully
apprehend what the Charge is, and may understand the words in the Indictment,
That if you are not satisfied with the general words of compassing the Kings
death, you may know, that the seizing his person extends to it


Mr. Ser. jeff. My Lord, we have done with our Evidence, now let him go on with
his.


L. chapter just. Now, Mr. College, you may say what you will for your defense,
and call your Witnesses that you have to produce.


College. My Lord, I have heard this Evidence that is against me, and I would
desire your Lordship to resolve me some Questions upon it; I think the
Indictment, is for Treasonable practices, for a Conspiracy; now I desire your
Lordship will be pleased that I may know from you, and the Court, whether in
all this Evidence given in proof against me, a Conspiracy is proved; or if any
thing appears besides what they say I said?


L. c. j. For a conspiracy in you, if the Witnesses speak truth, there is a
plain proof, and of the degrees of it: First of all, by your publishing Libels
and Pictures to make the King odious and contemptible in the eyes of the
people, and that you should be the Author of some of those Pictures, and they
were found in your custody.


College. I conceive that is not proved.


Lo. chapter just. If the Witnesses say true, it is proved.


College. They do not produce that, they do but say it.


Lo. chapter just. Mr. Dugdale swears, that at Oxford here, you showed him the
Picture, you sung the Song here, and expounded it at my Lord Lovelace's, and a
great many of them are found in your custody. Then that you prepared Arms, that
you showed Smith the Arms in your House, and having those Arms, you said you
would go to Oxford, and if there should be a disturbance there, you would
secure the King. And you did come to Oxford, where you hear what is said; for I
observe, Stephen Dugdale and Edward Turbervile speak of what was done at
Oxford. John Smith and Bryan Haynes speak of what you said at London before you
went to Oxford, and after you came from Oxford. Now I say, if these Witnesses
speak true, it is a strong Evidence against you, both upon the Statute of the 25
Edw. the 3d. and that of this King too. For my Brother Holloway told you true,
That whereas the Imagining the death of the King is High Treason, by the 25 of
Edw. the 3d. so a seizing of the King, and an endeavor to do that, is a
constructive intention of the death of the King; for Kings are never Prisoners,
but in order to their death. And therefore it has been held in all times, that
by the Statute of Edw. 3d. that was Treason; but then the Statute of this King,
in the 13th. year of his Reign, is more strong; for there it says, If any man
shall by any words, or malicious speaking, show the imagination of his heart,
that he has any such intention, that is Treason too.


Coll. My Lord, the Foundation of this Indictment is said to be laid here in
Oxford, as I suppose; pray, my Lord, here is only Mr. Dugdale and Turbervile
that swear against me for what I should say in Oxon. all the rest speak to
things said and done at London. Now, my Lord, I desire to know, whether they
have proved any Treasonable Practices, Conspiracy or Design against the
Government, I would feign know that, whether there be matter here to ground an
Indictment upon; for the one says in one place, the other in the other, which
may be distinct matters, and none of them swear Facts against me, but only
Words.


Mr. just. jones. Yes, providing Arms for your self and offering others Arms.


Coll. That I shall make this Answer to, I had only a case of Pistols and a
Sword, which every Footman and Horseman had, that came from London, I think.
But further my Lord, I would ask your Lordship, whether there ought not to be
Witnessesdistinct, to swear words at one and the same time.


Mr. just. jones. No, no, the Resolution of the Judges in my Lord Staffords
case is contrary.


L. chapter just. Look you, it has been often resolved, that if there be one
Witness that proves one Fact which is an Evidence of Treason, and another
proves another Fact, that is an Evidence of the same Treason, though they be
but single Witnesses to several Facts. yet they are two Witnesses to an
Indictment of Treason; that has been often publicly resolved, particularly in
the case of my Lord Stafford, mentioned by my Brother. And I Will tell you my
Opinion further, if there be one Witness that proves here what you said at
Oxford, and another that proves what was said in London, if they be in order to
the same Treason, it is sufficient; for if you do conspire to commit such a
Treason in London, and you come with such an imagination in your Heart to
Oxford to complete this Treason, tho your Design was not first formed there, I
think it is enough to maintain an Indictment of Treason, and they are two good
Witnesses, though but one speak to what was done at Oxford, but I must tell
you, in your case there are two full Witnesses to that which was done at
Oxford, besides Sir William Jennings.


College. That which Sir William Jennings speaks of, I told you before what it
was I said, It was the first Blood that was shed for the Parliament.


Mr. just. jones. The Parliament was dissolved before that which Sir William
Jennings speaks of, therefore you could not say it was to defend the Parliament.


Coll. Mr. Dugdale did say that I spoke such and such words in the Barbers Shop
in the Angel-Inne; there I was indeed at the time that he does speak of, and
the Barber was by, I do think, indeed it were convenient to have him here; but
I knew not where he would charge me, or what it was he would charge me with,
because I never said any thing in my life that was like Treason.


L. c. j. Mr. College, call any Witnesses you will.


Coll. But, my Lord, pray let me ask you one Question more; You take these
words distinct from any matter of Fact don't you?


L. c. j. No, complicated with the Fact, which was the Overt Act, the coming to
Oxon. with Pistols, to make one if there had been any disturbance, and to seize
the King.


College. Then, my Lord, I would ask you, whether, any Act of Treason done at
London, shall be given in Evidence to prove the Treason for which I am now
indicted, and which was given in Evidence before the Grand Jury, upon which the
Trial was there grounded.


L. chapter just. Any Act of Treason this is of the same kind. And I Will tell you,
that was resolved in Sir Henry Vanes case; those that gave you that paper
understand it. But I speak now to your capacity, and to satisfy your Question.
He was indicted for levying War against the King, he conspired in Westminster,
the War was levied in another County; the Conspiracy upon the Trial was proved
in the County of Middlesex, and the War in another place, and yet it was held
sufficient to maintain the Indictment in the County of Middlesex.


College. There was a War really levied, but God be thanked here is only bare
words.


Mr. just. jones. Yes, Actions too.


College. What Actions, my Lord?


Mr. just. jones. Arming your self and coming to Oxford.


Lo. chapter just. Well, I have told you my Opinion; My Brothers will speak theirs,
if they think otherwise.


Mr. just. jones. That is not your case neither, though I am of the same
opinion with my Lord; for here are two Witnesses have proved plain matter of
Fact at Oxford; the providing Arms your self, and encouraging others to take
Arms --


College. They name no persons.


Mr. just. jones. You will have my Opinion, and yet you will give me no leave
to speak; I had patience to hear you: You are told there are two Witnesses,
Turbervile and Dugdale, that prove your providing and having of Arms at Oxon.
and persuading others to take Arms, particularly Turbervile, He told you he had
no Arms, or but a case of Pistols, and he had no Horse; but you told him you
would provide him an Horse. And then there are two other Witnesses, Smith and
Bryan Haynes, they do not tell you of any thing done at Oxford, but they tell
you what you said in their hearing of what you had done in Oxon. and so I think
if the Witnesses are to be believed, there is a very full proof against you.


Mr. just. Raymond. I am of the same Opinion truly, and I cannot find, but that
there is proof enough by two Witnesses, Turbervile and Dugdale, of what was
done at Oxford. They swear matter of Fact, not Words only, but Actions also.


Coll. No Fact, but that I had Pistols and a Sword, and that I should tell Mr.
Turbervile I would provide him an Horse, which is still but Words.


Mr. just. Jones. But you shall hear anon for the full conviction of you and
all others, the Statute of the 13th. of this King read to you, and you shall
there see that such words are made Treason.


Coll. But I beseech your Lordship to tell me whether there must not be two
Witnesses to the same words at the same time.


Mr. just. Jones. No, it was the Resolution of all the Judges in the case of my
Lord Stafford in the presence of the Parliament, and the Parliament proceeded
upon it.


M. Ser. Jeff. In the same Trial where Mr. College was a Witness.


Mr. At. Genesis All the whole House of Commons prayed Judgment upon my Lord
Stafford, pursuant to that Resolution.


L. c. j. Come will you call any Witnesses?


Coll. My Lord, I do not question but to prove this one of the Hellishest
Conspiracies that ever was upon the face of the Earth, and these the most
notorious wicked men, an absolute design to destroy all the Protestants of
England, that have had the courage to oppose the Popish Plot. In which no man
of my condition has done more then I have done. I was bred a Protestant, and
continued so hitherto, and by the Grace of God I will dye so. If that they had
known of these words that I should speak, and such a design that I should have
before the Parliament sat at Oxon. and be with me in Oxon. when the Parliament
sat, if they had been good Subjects, they ought to have had me apprehended.
Turbervile came several times indeed, and dined with me. I did not bid him go
out of doors, nor invited him thither; he was a man I had no disrespect for,
nay he was a man I valued, thinking he had done the Nation service against the
Papists; that this man should hear me speak such words against His Majesty, who
was then in this Town, and know of such a dangerous design to attempt the
seizing of his Person, or that I should discover a great party that were ready
to do it, I think there is scarce any man of reason, but will say, if this were
really done and spoken by me, neither of them would or ought to have concealed
it, but discover it; none of them has ever charged me with any such thing, they
have been in my company since. I never had any correspondence with any of them
but Dugdale, then pray consider how improbable it is, that I should talk of
such things to Papists, Priests and Irish-men, who have broke their faith with
their own party, that faith which they gave under the penalty of Damnation, men
that have been concerned in Plots and Treasons, to murder and cut the Throats
of Protestants, that I should be such a mad man to trust these people, when I
could receive no manner of obligation from them, nor could give any trust to
them, they having before broke either Faith; especially, considering I could
lay no such Oaths and Obligations upon them, who was a Protestant; then it is
the greatest non sense, to believe that I would say these things before persons
whom I could never hope would conceal my Treasons, having discovered their own.
If they speak truth concerning the general Popish Plot, that could be no
obligation upon me to trust them with another; and they cannot say, that they
ever obliged me in any one respect. My Lord, I thank God I have had some
acquaintance in the world, and have been concerned with some persons of Honor,
Noblemen and Parliament men, that I know are as good Subjects as any His
Majesty has; these never found me a Fool, nor a Rascal, so great a Knave, as to
have any such thoughts in my heart, nor so great a madman, or so foolish, as
to go to discover them to Papists, Priests, and Irish-men, to men of their
condition, that were ready to starve for Bread. As for Haynes and Smith, that
run so fast through all their Evidence, the first time that ever I set my eyes
on Haynes, was in the Coffee-House that he speaks of; Macnamarra comes in, and
desires me to go out with with him, and I should hear the greatest Discovery of
a piece of Villainy against my Lord of Shaftsbury's Life, that ever I heard many
life. This Captain Brown, who is now dead, a man that I had not known but a
month before (for I think it was in March last when this was) could testify
for me; For I came to him, Captain, said I, here is a Discovery offered to be
made to me, of a Design to take away my Lord Shaftsbury's Life. Macnamarra asks
me to go to the Hercules Pillars, I went along with him, and took Captain Brown
with us. Afterward he fell sick in April, and is now dead, so I lost a main
Evidence in the case. He was the only man that was by at the time; God knows my
Heart, I speak nothing but the truth, I took him with me, Haynes began to
discover to us, that Fitzgerald had employed him to fetch over Macnamarra, and
if he would come in, and swear against my Lord of Shaftsbury, which was his
design, it would not be long e're his Head were taken off, and he said, He had
given in a Paper of High Treason against my Lord of Shaftsbury, I asked what it
was, He told me, That my Lord should tell Fitzgerald that he had a design to
bring this Kingdom to a Common Wealth, and to root out the Family of the
Stuarts. This he said Fitzgerald had given in in a Paper under his own Hand;
and I think he said, He had sworn it, and sent Haynes to fetch Macnamarra to
swear against my Lord the same things too. I writ down all the Heads of the
Discourse which Captain Brown heard as well as I. After he had said it, he
desired us to conceal it. Sir, said I, You are a stranger to me, and these are
great and strange things that you do tell us, Macnamarra and Brown and Ivy,
and others were there, which (if they were honest men) they would come and
testify. I thought them honest men, and that they had none of those wicked
designs in their Hearts, that now I find they have. So says Haynes, I do not
know this man, meaning me; Macnamarra told him, I was an honest man, he might
lay his Life in my hands. After he had spoken all this, he desired us to
conceal it; Said he, I will not only discover this, but a great deal more of
their Rogueries that I know very well; Said I to him again, I will not conceal
it, nor do you no wrong, for if this be true my Lord of Shaftsbury shall know
it to night; for where there is a Design to take away a Peer of the Realm, I
will not conceal it; but if it be false, and you have said more then comes to
your share, recant it again, and we will take no notice of it, only say you are
a Knave for speaking of it; he swore Dam him it was all true, that and a great
deal more, which he said he knew, about seizing and destroying the Parliament
at Oxon. about an Army in the North that was to be raised about the time of the
sitting of the Parliament at Oxon. of a French Army that was to land in Ireland
at the same time, that the D. of York was to be at the Head of them, and the
intention was, to destroy all the Protestants. Upon this, I was resolved, if I
lived, to come along with the Parliament, and if there was any such Design, I
was resolved to live and die with them, but I had no more then common Arms, a
Sword and a case of Pistols, and my Cap was a Velvet Cap, and nothing else. My
Lord, I had the Honor to be sent for, when the Parliament sat last at
Westminster, the Sessions in October, it was an Honorable occasion, and I
thank those worthy Gentlemen that sent me for the Honor of it, there I begun
to be popular as to my Name, for from that time they began to call me the
Protestant Joyner, because the Parliament had entrusted me. My Lord Gray was
pleased to send his Footman for me to the Crown Tavern behind the Exchange,
where there were several worthy Lords, Peers of the Realm, and one Hundred of
the Commons, that had dined there that day, it was the day before they sat;
after they had dined I came to them, and the Duke of Monmouth told me, They had
heard a good Report of me, that I was an honest man, that understood Building,
and they did confide in me to search under the Parliament House; they did not
really know of any Design, but they would not be secure, there might be some
tricks played them by the Papists, though we are not afraid of them, said the
Duke, yet we think fit to employ you to search under the Houses, whether you
can find any such practices. So accordingly my Lord, I did go, my Lord Lovelace
was one of the Honorable Lords, and my Lord Herbert that went with me, and
some of the Gentlemen of the House of Commons; and those worthy Protestant
Lords were pleased to thank me for my Service, and did believe I was active and
zealous to find out and discover the bottom of the Popish Plot, so far as it
came legally in my way to do it. My Lord, upon this occasion, there was a great
kindness from them to me, and I had upon all occasions testimonies of it; and
this very man who now swears Treasons against me (which God Almighty knows is
all false) did swear in his Affidavit before Sir George Treby the Recorder of
London (I did never see the Affidavit, indeed I was over night at Sir George
Treby's, but he was not then at leisure, but he drew it up next day, and swore
it) that there was a Design to destroy the Parliament at Oxon. and there was
not only his Oath for it, but it was the general belief, that some Evil was
intended them. All men had cause to fear and to suspect, the Papists did bear
them no good will; and making use of their own observations, they were
generally armed with a Pistol, or a Sword for themselves, in case they should
be attck'd by the Papists. In order to this, I did come down with my Lord
Howard, my Lord of Clare, my Lord of Huntington, and my Lord Pagett, those four
worthy Protestant Lords; and it was two days after the Parliament was sat, that
we came, and I went out of Town again with my Lord Lovelace, Sir Thomas Player
and Sir Robert Clayton; and I am sure, they were all in so great a fear that
London should be surprised and seized on by the Papists, but there was no
mortal man that ever heard of the Kings being seized, or thought of it, till
these men come and tell me, that I had such a Design, and came hither with that
purpose; but my Lord, I declare as God is my Judge, I would not have it thought
I speak it to save my life, were it as certainly a truth, as it is most wickedly
a falsehood, that I had had a design to seize the King, I know not of one man
who was to stand by me, Parliament man, or other persons whatsoever; And how is
it possible for me to attempt that, being a single person, with only a Sword
and a case of Pistols, let any man judge. And I do declare, I know of no
conspiracy nor Design, against the King or Government, I never spoke one of the
Treasonable Words in my life, that is laid against me, nor had ever any
thoughts of any such thing. God that is my Eternal Judge knows, that what I
speak is true.


L. c. just. Well, Mr. College, will you call your Witnesses, for I must tell
the Jury as I did at your request, concerning Mr. Attorney, that as nothing he
said, so nothing you say is to be believed upon your own Allegation; for then
no man would ever be guilty, if his own Purgation by words were to be believed.


Coll. My Lord, I thank God, I know my own innocence, and hope to prove it. I
have a Soul that must live to eternity, either in joy or misery, I act
according to those principles, and I hope I have some assurance of my own
Salvation when I dye: I would not call God to Witness to a lie, to save 1000
lives. My Lord, this is a villainous conspiracy against me, and if it take place
against me, it may go a great way, God knows how far. This is the 17th. or
18th. Sham Plot the Papists have made against the Protestants, to get over
their own; but I hope, my Lord, God Almighty will never suffer it. If they can
make me a Traitor, they will try it upon others, and so hope to sham off their
own Treasons; but I say, I hope God Almighty will never suffer it. My Lord, I
think the first Witness that swore against me was Mr. Dugdale; and I must call
my Witnesses as I have them here, I know no person of them hardly, and this tht
is done for my Defense was done abroad. My Lord, I have been kept close
Prisoner in the Tower, and none of them suffered to come to me, whilst the
Popish Lords have had the liberty and privilege to talk with their friends.
Here are VVitnesses I hope will prove that those are Suborned men, for
Macnamarra did tell me presently after the Parliament broke up at Oxon. and
whispered it to me in the Coffee-House; Said he, there is a design laid to make
us retract our Evidence, and go over to Fitzgerald. Said I, I suppose they
have been at that sport a great while. Ah, said he, they make large offers.
Said I, by whom? Said he, Colonel Warcupp has been at me, and he tells me --


Mr. just. jones. Macnamarra is not produced against you as a Witness at all.


Coll. No, but he told me this, that there was such a design; and, said he, I
will get you, and some other honest men; and he desired me to be by when he had
something more to tell which would do his business for him; but the next news I
heard of him was, he was put into Newgate.


Lo. chapter just. Call your Witnesses, Mr. College, and prove what you can.


Coll. Call Mr. Hickman.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I desire he may observe the same rule he desired about
our Witnesses, that he may call but one at a time.


College. Yes, yes, I will call them one by one.


L. c. j. Are not your Witnesses together? send to them.


College. My Lord, I don't know, I have not seen one since I come. This is not
the first time, my Lord, the Papists have designed to take away my life, though
it is the first time they go to take it away by a Law.


L. c. j. I know not of one Papist that is a Witness against you.


College. There is never a man of them, except Sir William Jennings, but what
was a Papists.


Mr. At. Genesis What say you to Mr. Masters?


College. Mr. Masters says nothing material, it was only a jocose discourse.


Mr. Serj. jeff. It was very pleasant discourse upon my word; you were as merry
as when you were singing of the Rary Show.


Mr. just. jones. What, do you make mirth of the blackest Tragedy that ever
was; that horrid Rebellion, and the Murder of the late King.


College. I never justified that Parliament in any such thing that they did
contrary to Law.


Mr. just. jones. He swears it.


Mr. At. Genesis Hickman does not appear, call another.


Coll. Call William Shewin, (who appeared.)


L. c. j. Look you here, Friend, you are not to be sworn; but when you speak in
a Court of Justice, and in a course of Justice, you must speak as in the
presence of God, and only speak what is true.


Coll. I would not have any body speak any thing for me but what is truth.


L. c. j. Now ask him what you will.


College. I don't know the Gentleman. But, pray, Sir, will you tell what you
know of these Witnesses.


Mr. Shewin. Name any of them that I know, pray, Sir, and I Will tell you.


College. Do you know Bryan Haynes?


Mr. Shewin. I know there is such a man, but I have nothing to say to him.


College. Do you know Turbervile?


Mr. Shewin. Yes.


College. Pray tell what you know of him.


Mr. Shewin. My Lord, I was in Turbervile's company on Thursday night last at
the Golden Posts at Charing Cross, and there I heard him say, that if I were at
Oxford I should hear strange things against College, and he would lay ten to
one that Mr. Bethel and Mr. Wilmore should be hanged at Christmas, and he
would lead him by the Gold-chain along Fleetstreet, and down with his Breeches
in the middle of the Coffee-House, with a Band about his neck and a Cloak.


Mr. Serj. jefferies. Did he say all these things against Mr. Sheriff Bethel, I
assure you he is a bold man.


Coll. What do you know of Mr. Smith?


Mr. Shewin. I know him by sight, but I have nothing in particular to say
concerning him. I have something to say to Macnamarra, Sir, if he were here.


College. Do you know any thing of this conspiracy in general?


Mr. Jones. What, of your conspiracy?


Mr. Shewin. I know that they did lay who should be Hanged at Candlemass, who
at Christmas, and who at several other times.


Lo. chapter just. What did you hear Turbervile say?


Mr. Shewin. Those words I spoke before about Sheriff Bethel, and about the
Amsterdam Coffee-House.


College. Did they say what time I should be Hanged? for the Discourse 'rose
about me.


Mr. Shewin. One told me that there was one that did design to be returned upon
this Jury, that was resolved to hang him right or wrong.


Mr. High Sher. My, Lord, I did hear there was such a one, and I left him out
of the Jury.


L. chapter just. For Mr. Sheriffs Honor we must take notice of what he has said.
He says he hear of a man that spoke something of that nature, and therefore he
left him out of the Jury.


Coll. Now it is possible these Witnesses were at the same sport.


Mr. Shewin. Was Mr. Peacock, Mrs. Fitz Harris Maids Father, or she here,
either of them Witnesses against you?


Mr. Serj. Jeff. No, they were not, Sir?


Coll. They did swear against me at the finding of the Bill.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. We have only called these Witnesses, if you can say any thing
against them, do.


Coll. Call Henry Hickman, (who appeared.)


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Where do you live, Sir?


Mr. Hickman. At Holborn-Bridge.


Mr. At. Genesis What Trade are you?


Mr. Hickman. A Cabinet-maker.


L. chapter Just. What do you ask him?


Coll. Do you know Haynes?


Hickman. Yes, very well, because he used to come to my House to a Popish Widow
that was a Lodger in my House where I live now; and this person was a Prisoner
at Haynes's when he was a Prisoner in the Fleet. I always had a suspicion he
was a Priest, not that I could accuse him really of any thing; but he several
times using to come to my House, I thought so of him, and discoursing with my
Landlady.


Lo. chapter just. Your Tenant you mean?


Mr. Hickman. Yes, my Tenant. I asked her what this Fellow was; said she, he is
a very dangerous Fellow, though he is a Papist, and I am one my self, yet he is
a dangerous person, and he does not much care what he swears against any one.


Mr. just. jones. This your Tenant told you, what do you know your self?


Mr. Hickman. Another time he came to speak with my Tenant Mrs. Scot, who is
now gone into Ireland; when he came to the House, he asked me, is Mrs. Scot
within? Yes, said I, Mr. Haynes, she is above; and up he goes, and there they
locked the door, and plucked out the Key; so I slipped off my Shoes, for I
thought there might be more danger from such people than I could discover any
other way. So I went up stairs, and stood at the door and hearkened, hearing my
Landlady talk something to him, he wraps out a great Oath. God dam me* said he,
I care not what I swear, nor who I swear against; for it is my Trade to get
money by swearing. Whereupon, my Lord, I came down as fast as I could, and a
little after I saw him go out, and as soon as my Landlady came down, said I,
Mrs. Scot, I desire you would provide your self as soon as you can; I would be
civil to you, and I would not put you to a non-pluss, because your Goods by the
Law will be seized for not departing according to the Kings Proclamation. So a
while ago, since this business of Haynes's swearing against my Lord of
Shaftsbury, I bethought my self of some other businesses I had heard. To find
out the Knavery, I went to the Fleet, where he has a very ill character, as
well amongst the Papists as the Protestants. Whereupon I asked one Fellow, that
was a kind of a Porter, if he knew any thing of him? Said he, Go you to such an
one --


Mr. Ser. Jeff. We must not permit this for example sake, to tell what others
said.


Lo. Chapter Just. Nothing is Evidence but what you know of your own knowledge; you
must not tell what others said.


Hickman. This I do say, I heard him say; and there are those that can produce
a Letter --


Mr. Serj. jeff. Bring those people, but you must speak nothing but upon your
own knowledge.


Hickman. I was at the Chamber Door, and looked in at the Keyhole, and he sat
down at the Window.


Lo. chapter Just. How long ago was it, pray?


Hickman. A year and an half.


Mr. At. Genesis You are an Eves-dropper, I perceive.


Hickman. I did not know what danger he might bring men into, because he was a
Papist. I have taken an Oath to be true to the King, and I will as long as I
live. For this Gentleman, I never beheld him, till last night, in all my days;
though he lived by me, I never saw him.


Lo. c. j. Well, call the next.


Coll. I never saw this Gentleman; but you see what Haynes has declared.


Mr. Serj. jeff. This man says he did say so.


College. And, for ought I perceive, he does accordingly.


Call Elizabeth Oliver: (Who appeared.) L. chapter just. Mrs. Oliver, stand up.
What do you ask her?


Coll. Do you know Haynes, pray; Bryan Haynes.?


Mrs. Oliver. Yes.


Coll. Pray tell the Court what you know of him.


Mrs. Oliver. I know him very well.


L. c. j. What do you know of him?


Mrs. Oliver. He writ a Letter in my Fathers name, unknown to my Father.


L. c. j. Did you see him write it?


Mrs. Oliver. I saw him write it.


L. c. j. Read it. By whom is it subscribed?


Clerk. By no body.


L. c. j. Why, how is it written in your Fathers name, when it is not
subscribed at all?


Mrs. Oliver. He writ it, as from my Father.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Whether did he bring it?


Mrs. Oliver. He sent it into the Country.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Can you write and read, Mistress.


Mrs. Oliver. Yes.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Who did he send it by?


Mrs. Oliver. The Carrier.


Mr. Serj. jeff. When was it dated?


Clerk. In 77.


L. c. j. Read the Letter. (Which was done.)


Clerk Reads.


L. c. j. What is all this to the purpose, unless your Father were here to
prove it was done without his knowledge.


Mrs. Oliver. My Father did not write it.


L. c. j. Was your Father in the Fleet then?


Mrs. Oliver. Yes, my Lord, he was a Prisoner then.


Coll. Mrs. Oliver, Do you know any thing more of him?


Mrs. Oliver. I have known him a great while, I know him to be a very ill man.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Must she tell you all she knows.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you ever know him forswear himself.


Mrs. Oliver. No, I do not know that.


Lo. chapter just. Come, call another; this is nothing to the purpose.


Coll. Call Mrs. Hall: (who appeared.) Pray, do you know Mr. Bryan Haynes.


Mrs. Hall. Yes, if I see him I know him very well.


College. What do you know of him.


Mrs. Hall. He lodged at my House, and came there the day before Fitz-Harris
was Tried, and there was a great discourse about his Trial, and I was enquiring
of him, and I told him I must expose my ignorance, I did not know what it was
he was tried for: And, said he, if you please to sit down, I will tell you:
Madam Portsmouth came to him, and went upon her knees, and begged of him, if he
had any kindness for his Majesty, that he would now show it at this juncture;
and she told him she had heard he had formerly acquaintance with one Mr.
Everard abroad, and therefore desired him to go now and renew it, and endeavor
to get him over, and, if he could possibly, to get over some others to make a
Presbyterian Plot of it. This is true, I very well know it: As for this
Gentleman, I never saw his face before; but those were the words I am sure.


L. c. j. What were the words?


Mrs. Hall. That they might make a Presbyterian Plot of it.


Coll. Did he say so?


Mrs. Hall. He said that the Duchess of Portsmouth did so.


L. c. j. What a story is this?


Coll. Did not he s^y that the Duchess of Portsmouth employed him too?


Mrs. Hall. No, this was about Fitz-harris.


Coll. What do you know more about Haynes?


Mrs. Hall. One night he had been about some business for me in Law with one
Mr. Woodward an Attorney at Law, and when he returned I was busy in the
Kitchen with my Maid about the House, and he came up to me; Madam, said he,
this night I had a message from the King; a Justice of Peace met me, and
brought me word that the King had sent into Ireland to enquire into the Loyalty
of my Family, and he has heard that my Father was a Loyal Subject, but he
understood strange things of me; but if I would come in, he would grant me my
Pardon. I told him, said he, I did not value his Majesty's Pardon a pin, for I
had done nothing that might make me stand in need of it; but I would do any
thing that might tend to the preservation of his Majesty's Person or Honor;
but to do such base things as are beneath a man, I will never do it; and he
wisper'd me in the ear as the accusing of several persons;) and since, he sent
me a Letter by his Mother in Law, Mrs. Wingfield, that I should not believe it,
if I heard he should accuse any body; but I might be confident he had not, nor
would not accuse any body.


College. Was he to swear against the Protestants?


Mrs. Hall. I did not enquire any questions; but he said, such base things he
would never do, as the accusing of several persons.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray Mistress, did you believe him when he told you he was so
honest a man?


Mrs. Hall. How do you mean, Sir?


Mr. At. Genesis When he said he would not do those base things, did you believe
him?


Mrs. Hall. I never saw his face before he came there to lodge; but I saw him
to be a man that made little conscience of what he said or swore.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you find him a bragging man?


Mrs. Hall. I had little discourse, but what he said of himself. But there is
one thing more about an Intelligence: When Thompson had written something in
his Intelligence concerning Bryan Haynes, he said he would write an Answer to
it; and accordingly he reads it to us: he said, he was going that evening to
get it put into one of the Intelligences: the words were to this purpose.
Whereas one Nathaniel Thompson had falsely and maliciously accused one Bryan
Haynes for speaking Treasonable words; he the said Bryan Haynes does declare,
that he challenges any man to charge him with it: but he owned he had an hand,
or was employed to put the Plot upon the dissenting Protestants.


Lo. chapter just. Did he publish that in the Intelligence?


Mrs. Hall. I never read it published; but he had writ it, and read it to us
several times.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you go to Church, Mistress?


Mrs. Hall. I hope I do.


M. Ser. Jeff. To what Church?


College. Call Mary Richards, Mrs. Halls maid.


(who stood up.) L. c. j. What will you ask her?


College. Do you know Bryan Haynes, pray.


Richards. Yes, he lodged there where I lived.


College. What do you know of him?


Richards. I know he writ that in the Intelligence my Mistress spoke of;
Thompson in his Intelligence, accusing him of having spoken Treason, he read
what he said he would put into the Intelligence: That he never spoke one word
of Treason, and he writ it for his own Vindication; that whereas Nathaniel
Thompson, in his Intelligence of the 18th. of June, had maliciously accused one
Bryan Haynes of Treasonable words; there was no such thing.


L. c. j. And that was to vindicate him, that he never did speak any
Treasonable words?


Richards. Yes.


L. c. j. Will you ask her any thing else?


College. I cannot tell what she says.


L. c. j. She says, he writ something that was in answer to Thompsons
Intelligence, to vindicate himself, that he never did speak any Treasonable
words.


Coll. But did you hear him say any thing of these words, that he was employed
in a Plot against the Protestants?


Richards. I read that, in what he writ to put in the Intellgence, that he
challenged any one to appear, and charge him with Treason; but, said he, I own
that I was employed, or had an hand, in putting the Plot upon the dissenting
Protestants: and he telling my Mistress he had a message from the King,
offering him his Pardon; I asked him why he did not accept the Kings Pardon.
Alas, said he, you do not understand what I was to do for it; I was to do such
base things so beneath a man, that I will never do them: I had Five Hundred
pounds offered me, besides the Kings Pardon, to do such base things as are
beneath a man to do.


Coll. What were the base things he said he was to do, and would not do?


Richards. I cannot tell, he did not say to me what they were.


Mr. At. Genesis When was this?


Richards. It was a week before he was taken.


Mr. At. Genesis That is two months ago.


Coll. It was since the Parliament sat at Oxford: But what was that he was
employed to do, did he say?


Richards. Why, he said in his Answer to the Intelligence, he was one that had
an hand to put the Plot upon the dissenting Protestants.


Coll. Call Mrs. Wingfield;


(who appeared.) L. c. j. What is your Christian Name?


Mrs. Wingfield. Mary.


L. c. j. What do you ask her?


College. Do you know this Bryan Haynes, pray?


Mrs. Wingfield. Yes, very well.


College. What do you know of him?


Mrs. Wingfield. I know nothing of him, but he is an honest man; he married my
Daughter, and always carried himself like a Gentleman, he scorns the thing that
is unhandsome, and never did any thing that is unhandsome in my life.


Mr. Ser jeff. Pray, how came you by this Witness? Have you any more of them?


Coll. I never saw her before, but I believe she has said something else in
another place. Did you ever say the contrary, pray?


Mrs. Wingfield. No body can say so; and I had done the Gentleman a great deal
of wrong if I had.


Coll. Call Mr. Whaley,


(who appeared. L. c. j. What is your Name, Sir?


Mr. Whaley. John Whaley.


Coll. Did you know Bryan Haynes?


Mr. At. Genesis Where do you dwell, Sir?


Mr. Whaley. At the Hermitage, beyond the Tower.


Coll. I don't know you, Sir; but what do you know of him?


Mr. Whaley. I never saw you, Sir, till to day; but that which I think I am
called for is this; though it was upon Sunday that I received this same
Subpoena to come down hither: but about six years ago, Bryan Haynes was a
prisoner in the Kings Bench, and he came down to the Cellar which I had taken
of the Marshal to sell Drink in; and coming down to drink in one of the Rooms
of the Cellar that belong to me, he took away a tankard, and went up with it.
One of the men followed him up; so I went to the Marshal to complain, and told
him of it: and the Marshal took him from the Masters side, and put him into the
common side. That is all I know of him any way, directly or indirectly.


L. chapter just. Why did you not indict him of it?


Mr. Whaley. I acquainted the next Justice of the Peace, who was the Marshal;
and he put him from the Masters side into the common side.


L. c. j. He was no good Justice of the Peace in the mean time.


Coll. Call Mr. John Lun, (who appeared.) Do you know Bryan Haynes, Mr. Lun?


Mr. Lun. I have seen him twice: the first time I ever saw him was, I went into
the Derby-Ale-House, to enquire for one Miclethwayte, a Kinsman of mine, and
there this Bryan Haynes was in a little Room next the Ditch, near the Door that
goes out there, as if he were asleep, and he roused himself up; and, as I was
walking there, Sir, said he, will you take part of a Tankard with me: (That was
his expression.) With that, said I, I do not care if I do. And the first thing
he began was the Kings Health, then the Queens, then the Duke of Yorks; then he
fell very foul against the Grand Jury, because they had not found the Bill
against College, who is a Gentleman that I never saw before in my life but
once, as I know of: and he said, my Lord Shaftsbury was a little Toad, but he
would do his business very suddenly. Then he raised upon the Parliament, and
said they were a Company of Rogues, they would give the King no money, but he
would help him to money enough out of the Phanaticks Estates. And he said, they
would damn their Souls to the Devil before the Catholic cause should sink.


Mr. Serj. Holloway. When was this?


Mr. Lun. It was three or four days after the Bill was brought in ignoramus by
the Grand Jury.


Mr. just. jones. Was he alone?


Mr. Lun. Yes, he was.


College. Is that all you have to say?


Mr. Lun. One thing more, my Lord. On monday last I was at Uxbridge, and a
Gentleman sent his man on purpose to let me know I must go to Colebrook, and
stay till they came thither. When I came there, I met Bryan Haynes at the Crown
Kitchin-window, and he was stirring a Glass of Brandy, and sweetning it with
Sugar. Said he, Sir, will you drink? Here is the Kings Health to you: So I
drank, and I asked him how he did? Do you know me, Sir, said he. Yes, said I, I
drank with you once. Says he, you have a good memory. So then a pint of Sack
was called for, and after that another, and then came down Mrs. Peacock; and
being very fine, all in her flowered Silks, I asked what Gentlewoman that was?
Said he, it is Mrs. Fitz-Harris. No, says I, it is not; they say she is gone.
But, said he, it is her maid; and Sheriff Bethel is to marry her. As I have a
Soul to save, I tell you nothing but what is truth. Thereupon said I, Sheriff
Bethel is able to maintain her; he has a good Estate. But, said he, it shall
be the Kings e're long.


Coll. So that here is a plain design against all the eminent Protestants.


Mr. Lun. So with that, my Lord, if it please your Honor, I clapped my Groat
down at the Bar, and went out of the Room. Nay, said he, let us have one Health
more: and so he had his Tankard, and I had mine.


Haynes. I humbly desire you to call for Mr. White, the Kings Messenger, who
was by. I never saw the man before he was at Uxbridge; and asking Mr. White who
he was, said he, His name is Lun, he was my prisoner two years.


L. c. just. What say you to the discourse he talks of at Fleet-bridge?


Haynes. My Lord, I am upon my Oath, and I never saw him in my life before I
saw him at Uxbridge.


Mr. Lun. I will take the Sacrament upon it, that what I have averred is true.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. I suppose you are both known, and then your Credit will be left
to the Jury.


Mr. At. Genesis There is Mr. White; pray, swear him. (which was done.)


Lo. chapter just. Do you remember that Haynes asked who Mr. Lun was.


Mr. White. It was at the Bar of the Crown Inn at Uxbridge, and I being there,
Mr. Lun came into the yard, and I knowing Mr. Lun asked him, How he did; He
said he was glad to see me; and he called for a pint of Sack to make me drink.
Haynes stood by, and he asked who he was and I told him; and we drank the Kings
Health; but for any thing of those words that were spoken there, Sir, I did
hear not one word of them, but he thanked me for my civility when I summoned
him up to Court, and seeing Mr. Haynes by, he asked who he was?


Mr. Ser. Jeff. And you, take it upon your Oath, that he asked you, who Haynes
was?


Mr. White. Yes, I do.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Pray did you hear any discourse that time as if there had been
a meeting upon Fleet-bridge.


Mr. White. Not one word of that?


Mr. Lun. I will take the Sacrament upon it, what I say is true.


M. Ser. Jeff. We know you, Mr. Lun; we only ask questions about you, that the
Jury may know you too, as well as we. We remember what once you swore about an
Army.


College. I don't know him.


Mr. Lun. I don't come here to give Evidence of any thing but the truth; I was
never upon my knees before the Parliament for any thing.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Nor I neither for much; but yet once you were, when you cried,
Scatter them good Lord.


College. Call Mr. Broadgate.


L. chapter Just. What is your Christian Name, Sir?


Mr. Broadg. Jeremiah.


Lo. chapter just. What do you ask him?


Mr. Broadg. My Lord, I am a stranger to the Prisoner at the Bar; what I have
to say, is concerning Mr. Turbervile, whom I met one day, and he asked me how I
did? said he, I owe you a little Money, but I will pay you in a short time; but
if you will go to drink a glass of Ale; no, said I, I am in haste, and do not
care for going to drink; said he, you shall go; so away we went, and when we
were sat, said he, When did you see Turbervile that was my Lord Powis's Butler;
said he, he was a great Rogue to me, and when I stood up for the Nations good,
he vilified my Evidence, and afterward he came to me with Doctor (...) to beg
my pardon; but I would not forgive him for the whole World: And speaking of the
Kings Evidence, said he, the Kings Evidence are looked upon as nothing, as poor
inconsiderable mean Fellows, and their Sallaries are lessened; and, said he, I
have had the greatest proffers from Court, of preferment and rewards, if I
would go from what I have said, and come upon the contrary; and he repeated it,
Yes, upon the Faith of a man, and from the Highest: But, said he, I have a Soul
and a Body; a Body for a time, but my Soul for eternity, and I cannot go from
it. He went over it again; I might have what I would if I would go from what I
have said, and come upon the contrary.


Mr. At. Genesis But he does not go from any thing of what he has said.


Coll. Did he say what he was offered, and by whom?


Mr. Broadg. He said he had very great offers from the Court, if he would
disown the Plot, and go upon the contrary.


Lo. Chapter Just. But he does not disown it.


Mr. just. jones. Nay, he had a Soul to save, and could not go from it.


Mr. Ser. jeff. You talk of the contrary, and the contrary; what did he mean by
that, what Plot should he disown?


Mr. Broadg. The Popish Plot.


L. c. j. He does not disown it, nor never did disown it.


Coll. He would have made a Presbyterian Plot of it now; for he cannot say I am
in the Popish Plot. Sir, do you know any thing more of him, or did he name me,
or that he was to swear against me, or any Protestant?


Mr. Broadg. No, only he said the Kings Evidence were vilified, and looked upon
as poor inconsiderable Fellows: But it seemed, if he would go on the other
side, he might have great preferments and rewards.


L. c. j. You make a wrong comment upon it, Mr. College; it was if he would
retract his Evidence, and disown the Plot.


Coll. I leave it to your Lordship and the Jury to make the sense of it.


Mr. Broadg. I saw Mr. Turbervile since I come hither, and he asked, Are you
come, Mr. Broadgate, to give Evidence against me? says I, I am come to declare
the truth, and nothing but the truth.


Mr. Ser. jeff. You might have staid at home for any thing material that you do
Evidence.


College. Call Mr. Zeal, (who appeared.)


L. chapter just. What is your Christian Name, Sir?


Mr. Zeal. John.


L. c. j. What would you ask him?


Mr. Ser. Holloway. Where do you dwell, Sir?


Mr. Zeal. In London.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Whereabouts?


Mr. Zeal. In Fetter-Lane.


Mr. Ser. Holl. What Countryman are you, Sir?


Mr. Zeal. Somersetshire.


Mr. At. Genesis Whereabouts in Somersetshire were you born?


Mr. Zeal. By Sir William Portmans, within six miles of him.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. What Trade, Sir?


Mr. Zeal. No Trade.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Have you any Estate.


Mr. Zeal. My Father has. I was bred to wait upon a person of Quality.


College. Do you know Turbervile, Sir?


Mr. Zeal. Yes Sir, I do.


Coll. What do you know of him?


Mr. Zeal. Sir, I know nothing but what Mr. Ivy told me with his own mouth.


L. c. j. Do you know any thing of your own knowledge?


Mr. At. Genesis Has Mr. Turbervile told you any thing?


Mr. Zeal. Not concerning Mr. College, he has not.


Coll. Ivy was amongst them.


Mr. Zeal. Yes, my Lord, he was the first that swore this Presbyterian Plot.


Coll. Can you say nothing of your own knowledge concerning Turbervile?


Mr. Zeal. Nothing but what Mr. Ivy told me.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. That is not of your own knowledge, and so it is nothing, for he
is not produced in this cause.


Coll. Pray, my Lord, give me leave to call Mr. Ivy.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Do if you will. (He stood up.)


Coll. What was that you heard Turbervile say of me, or of any Presbyterian
Plot?


Ivy. I never heard him say any thing concerning a Presbyterian Plot in my life.


College. Did not you tell Zeal of such a thing?


Ivy. No, I never did.


Coll. Hark you. Mr. Ivy; you have sworn against me, have you not?


Ivy. What I have sworn against you, or against any other person, is true.


Coll. What have you sworn against me?


Ivy. I am not bound to answer you.


Coll. Did not you call me out, with Macnamarra and Haynes, to the
Hercules-Pillars?


L. c. j. Look you, Mr. College, I will tell you something for Law; and to set
you right; whatsoever Witnesses you call, you call them as Witnesses to
testify the truth for you; and if you ask them any questions, you must take
what they have said as truth: therefore you must not think to ask him any
question, and afterward call another Witness to disprove your own Witness.


Coll. I ask him, was he the first time with us when I was called out of the
Coffee-house to hear Haynes's Discovery?


L. c. j. Let him answer you if he will, but you must not afterward go to
disprove him?


Coll. If he were sworn against me, I would not ask him any questions, for he
is among them.


Lo. Chapter Just. Ask him what you will.


Coll. I desire not if he have sworn against me, for truly I cannot expect a
good Answer from him; but he was by when Haynes made his discovery.


L. c. j. Will you ask him any questions?


Coll. I ask whether he has given any Evidence against me any where?


Ivy. I am not bound to answer you.


L. c. j. Tell him if you have.


Ivy. Yes, my Lord, I have.


College. Then I think he is no good Witness for me, when he has sworn
against me.


Ivy. I have sworn against him and others. You know that you and I have had a
great many Intrigues about this business in hand, and how we dealt with Mr.
Haynes.


L. c. j. Look you, he does not call you for a Witness for him, you can
testify nothing, and so you must be quiet.


Coll. Call Mr. Jews. (Who appeared)


L. c. j. What is your Christian Name?


Mr. Jews. William.


Coll. Pray, Mr. Jews, what do you know about Turbervile?


Mr. Jews. I know nothing at all, I assure you, of him that is ill.


College. Do you know any thing concerning any of the Evidence that has been
given here?


Mr. Jews. If I knew any thing relating to you, I would declare it; but I know
something of Mr. Ivy; it has no relation to you, as I conceive, but against my
Lord of Shaftsbury.


Lo. c. j. You would call Ivy for a Witness, and now you call one against him;
and that I told you you must not do: but Ivy is not at all in this case.


Coll. Do you know any thing of the rest of them; Haynes, or Smith, or Dugdale?


Mr. Jews. No more than what Mr. Zeal told me was told him.


Coll. Do you know any thing of a Presbyterian Plot?


Mr. Jews. If the Court please to hear me, I will tell my knowledge of that;
but I know nothing that affects him in the least, only that which concerns my
Lord of Shaftsbury.


L. chapter just. That is nothing to the purpose; call another.


Mr. Jews. There was not, to my knowledge, a word mentioned of your Name: I
will do you all the justice I can; if I knew any thing concerning you, I would
be sure to relate it.


Coll. I cannot say who can, or who cannot: I am a stranger to all of it.


Lo. chapter Just. Well, call your next Witness.


Coll. My Lord, There was a Petition presented to the Common Council of London,
wherein they set out, that they were tampered withal about a Plot against the
Protestants.


Lo. c. j. A Petition from whom?


Coll. I cannot tell from whom; from some of these witnesses.


L. c. j. Who preferred and signed it?


Coll. Mr. Turbervile was one. Pray call Dr. Oats.


L. c. j. The Prisoner calls upon you, Mr. Oats. What would you ask him, Mr.
College?


Coll. Where is the Petition to the Common Council, Doctor?


Dr. Oats. I have it here in my hand.


Lo. chapter just. By whom was it presented?


Dr. Oats. It was given by Mr. Turbervile and Mr. Macnamarra, to Mr. VVilmoe.


Lo. chapter just. Was you by when it was delivered?


Dr. Oats. Mr. VVilmore did deliver it to me before he was apprehended; for,
being to come down as a Witness, he was taken up, and committed to prison.


Lo. chapter just. Whose hands are to it?


Dr. Oats. I know Mr. Turbervile's hand, he will not disown it.


Clerk, Reads. It is subscribed Edward Turbervile, John Macnamarra.


L. c. j. Look you, Mr. College; what word is there in all this Petition that,
is a contradiction to what they have said now?


College. I did not hear it, my Lord.


Lo. chapter just. They say they are constant Witnesses for the King, against the
Papists; and they have been tempted to unsay what they have said: How does that
contradict what they say now?


Coll. I suppose they say they have been tempted to turn the Plot upon other
people, and to make a Plot upon the Protestants.


L. c. j. They have been tempted, they say, by the Papists, to unsay what they
have said; but the Jury have heard it read, and will give it its due weight.
Will you ask Mr. Oats any questions?


College. What do you know of Mr. Turbervile?


Dr. Oats. As to Turbervile, my Lord, a little before the Witnesses were sworn
at the Old-Bailey, I met with Mr. Tubervile: I was in a Coach, but seeing Mr.
Turbervile, I stepped out of the Coach, and spoke with him; for, hearing that he
was a Witness, I did ask him whether he was a Witness or no against College?
Mr. Turbervile said, He would break any one's Head that should say so against
him; for he neither was a Witness, nor could give any Evidence against him. So
after he came from Oxon. I met with Mr. Turbervile again; and, hearing he had
been there, I asked him if he had sworn any thing against College? He said,
yes, he had been sworn before the Grand Jury. Said I, did not you tell me so
and so? Why, said he, the Protestant Citizens have deserted us; and God dam
him, he would not starve.


Lo. c. j. Would he say so to you?


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, He said those very words.


Mr. Serj. jeff. It Is Mr. Oats saying, it is Mr. Turbervile's Oath.


Dr. Oats. Several times he did repeat it; but when I asked him what he had
sworn, He said I am not bound to satisfy peoples curiosities.


L. c. j. What say you to it, Mr. Turbervile?


Mr. Turbervile. My Lord, the first part of the Doctor's discourse, in part is
true; I met him just at my Lodgings, and the Doctor alighted out of his Coach,
and spoke to me, and invited me to come to my old Friends; for he told me they
had some jeajousie that I was not true to them: and he told me, if I would come
to the King's-Head Club, I should be received with a great deal of kindness;
and never afterward did I speak with the Doctor a tittle about any Evidence.


L. chapter Just. He says, you said you would break any one's Head, that said you
were an Evidence against College; for you were not, nor could be.


Mr. Turbervile. There was no such thing said by me.


Mr. At. Genesis Upon your Oath, did you tell him so?


Mr. Turberv. Upon my Oath, I did not.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Did you tell him that other passage, when you swore you would
not starve?


Mr. Turbervile. No, I did not.


Dr. Oats. Upon the word of a Priest, what I say is true. My Lord, I do say,
as I am a Minister, I speak it sincerely, in the presence of God, this
Gentleman did say these words to me, which made me afraid of the man, and I
went my ways, and never spoke with him afterward, nor durst I; for I thought
he that would swear and curse after that rate, was not fit to be talked with.


L. c. j. It Is very improbable that he should say so to you.


Mr. Turbervile. I always looked upon Dr. Oats as a very ill man, and never
would converse much with him.


L. c. j. Will you ask him any thing more?


Coll. Do you know any thing of the rest, Doctor?


Dr. Oats. I know nothing of Turbervile further, but that he did present this
Petition, wherein he says, he lay under great temptations to go on the other
side, and accuse some Protestants. And truly till I heard he was an Evidence at
Oxon. after what he had said to me, I did not believe it.


Mr. At. Genesis Doctor Oats, Mr. Turbervile has not changed Sides, you have;
he is still an Evidence for the King, you are against him.


Dr. Oats. Mr. Attorney, I am a Witness for truth, against falsehood and
subornation; and it can plainly be made to appear there is subornation against
the Protestants. And moreover, my Lord, --


L. c. j. Mr. Oats, you would do well to explain your self.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. If there be any subornation relating to Mr. Turbervile, or any
of the other Witnesses that have now sworn against College, make it out,
Doctor.


Dr. Oats. There is, my Lord, and there will be made further to appear in time
to come. To my own knowledge as to Mr. Smith, Mr. College and Mr. Smith had
some provoking words passed betwixt them at Richard's Coffee-House, and Mr.
Smith comes out and swears, God dam him, he would have College 's blood. So,
my Lord, when I met him; said I, Mr. Smith, you profess your self to be a
Priest, and have stood at the Altar; and now you intend to take upon you the
Ministry of the Church of England, and these words do not become a Minister of
the Gospel; his reply was, God dam the Gospel; this is truth, I speak it in the
presence of God and man.


L. c. j. Can you say any thing of any of the other Witnesses.


Dr. Oats. As for Mr. Dugdale, I was engaged for him for 50 l. for last Lent
Assizes, he wanted money to go down to the Assizes, having paid some debts, and
paid away all his money; and so I engaged for 50 l. that he borrowed of Richard
the Coffeeman. After he came from Oxon. I called upon him to hasten to get his
money of the Lords in the Treasury; which, as near as I remember, was ordered
him upon his Petition, for so I heard. And at that time, said he, Sir, I hear
there is a great noise of my being an Evidence; against whom, said I, against
several Protestants, my Lord Shaftsbury, and others, said I: I never heard any
thing of it; says he, there is no body has any cause to make any such report
of me; for I call God to witness, I know nothing against any Protestant in
England. After that I met with Dugdale at Richard's Coffee-house, and pressing
him for the money, and he saying he had it not just then, but would pay it in a
little time: Mr. Dugdale, said I, you have gone, I am afraid, against your
conscience; I am sure against what you have declared to me; said he, it was all
long of Colonel Warcupp, for I could get no money else.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Oats is a thorough-pac'd Witness against all the King's
Evidence.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. And yet Dr. Oats had been alone in some matters, had it not
been for some of these Witnesses.


Dr. Oats. I had been alone perhaps, and perhaps not; but yet, Mr. Sergeant, I
had always a better Reputation than to need theirs to strengthen it.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Does any man speak of your Reputation; I know no body does
meddle with it, but you are so tender.


College. Sir George, Now a man is upon his life, I think you do not do well
to affront his Witnesses.


Mr. Serj. jeff. I do not affront him; but now, my Lord, pray give us leave to
call our Witnesses. Mr. Smith, pray stand up.


L. c. j. Mr. Smith, do you hear what Mr. Oats has said?


Mr. Smith. No, my Lord.


L. c. j. Then speak it again, Mr. Oats.


Dr. Oats. Yes, my Lord, I will speak it to his face. He said, coming out of
Richard's Coffee-house, they having had some provoking words, as I understood
when I come in, God dam that College, I will have his blood; and, my Lord,
when I did reprove him, and said to him, Mr. Smith, you have been a Priest, and
stood at the Altar, and intend to be a Minister of the Church of England, these
words do not become a Minister of the Gospel; and he replied, God dam the
Gospel; and away he went.


L. chapter just. What say you to it, Mr. Smith?


Mr. Smith. Not one word of this is true, upon my Oath. It Is a wonderful thing
you should say this of me; but I will sufficiently prove it against you, that
you have confounded the Gospel, and denied the Divinity too.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Mr. Dugdale, you heard what was said against you.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, now Dugdale is come I will tell you something more. There
was a Report given out by Mr. Dugdale's means, that Mr. Dugdale was poisoned;
and in truth, my Lord, it was but the Pox. And this Sham passed throughout the
Kingdom in our Intelligencies; and this I will make appear by the Physician
that cured him.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. That is but by a third Hand.


Dr. Oats. He did confess that he had an old Clap, and yet he gave out he was
poysened; but now, my Lord, as to what I said before of him, I was engaged for
50 l. for Mr. Dugdale, do you own that?


Mr. Dugdale, I do own it.


Dr. Oats. I did press upon you to hasten the payment of it.


Mr. Dugdale. Yes, you did.


Dr. Oats. And did not you come to me and tell me, there was a noise of your
being an Evidence, it was in time just before my Lord Shaftsbury was taken up.


Mr. Dugdale. I never spoke to you till you spoke to me.


Dr. Oats. My Lord, He came, and said to me. There is a noise of my being an
Evidence; now I had not heard it then; but the day after I did hear it, and I
did justify Mr. Dugdale. because he had said to me that he had nothing against
any Protestant in England. So I did stand up in vindication of him; but, my
Lord, after he had sworn at the Old Baily I met him again, and pressed him for
the money, and urged him with it, why he had sworn against College, when he
had told me so and so before, and he said it was all long of Colonel Warcup;
for he could not get his money else; and Colonel Warcup did promise he should
have a place at the Custom-House.


Mr. Dugdale. Upon the Oath I have taken, and as I hope for Salvation, it is
not true.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Here is Dugdale's Oath against Dr. Oats's saying.


Dr. Oats. Mr. Sergeant, you shall hear of this in another place.


Mr. At. Genesis It Is an unhappy thing that Dr. Oats should come in against
these men that supported his Evidence before.


Mr. Dugd. My Lord, I say further, if any Doctor will come forth and say he
cured me of a Clap, or any such thing, I will stand guilty of all that is
imputed to me.


L. c. j. Mr. College, will you call any other Witnesses?


Coll. My Lord, I think this is not fair dealing with a man for his Life;
because these men be upon their Oaths, and deny the things again that my
Witnesses prove, therefore what they swear must needs be taken for truth: but
if my Witness comes and says such a thing upon the word of a Minister, and in
the presence of God, and which he is ready to maintain by an Oath, sure it is
not to stand for nothing; nor he to be hooted out of Court, because Mr. Dugdale
denies it upon his Oath, I do suppose he will not acknowledge it. But, my Lord,
I am the Prisoner, and cannot be heard as a Witness for my self: but God is my
Witness, he has said a great deal more to me formerly; and he has told me
when I have seen him with Warcup, and asked him why he kept company with
Warcup, and others; said he, I know they are suspected men, but I must keep
company with them to get my money; what would you have me do, starve. And when
I lent him money out of my pocket, and trusted him with my Horse, I dunn'd him
for money and could not get it; said I, will you pay me the 5 l. I lent you; he
put me off, said he, I shall have it, for the Attorney General has made up his
Accounts, and he is very kind to me; why then, said I, why have you it not;
said he, he is my Friend, and I do not question the getting of it; but here is
new work to be done, such work as my conscience will not serve me to do; there
is more Roguery, they will never have done plotting, and counterplotting; but
they will make a thousand Plots if they can to destroy the real one.


L. c. j. Can you prove this now?


Coll. No, it was spoken to my self; and no body was by but my self.


L. c. j. Then you should not speak it. But you asked the question whether a
man may not be believed upon his word, as well as he that is upon his Oath.
Your Witnesses are not upon their Oaths, but they may be Witnesses, and their
weight is to be left with the Jury; they will consider how improbable it is,
that these men should come, three men to one man, and all of them should speak
that which would make themselves Rogues and Villains; and that one man of them,
Smith, should say such words, as, God damn him, he would have his blood, and
God damn the Gospel: that Dugdale should confess he was wrought upon by Warcup
to testify against his Conscience; and that Turbervile should say to that
purpose, He would not starve; they have sworn the contrary, and so there are
all these three men's Oaths against one man's Affirmation; but it must be left to
the Jury.


Coll. There is his Affirmation against what they three say. He charges every
one of them, and it is but the single denial of every one of them to his Charge.


L. c. j. It Is improbable they should own themselves such Villains to him.


Dr. Oats. They must be so, if they will do what they have undertaken. I hope
my Word will be believed as soon as their Oaths.


Coll. It is not to be thought, but when they have sworn so against me, they
will deny any such thing when they are charged with it.


L. c. j. Have you done with your Witnesses? Or will you call any more?


Coll. What is said upon an honest man's word in the face of a Court, is
certainly to be believed as well as what is sworn.


L. c. j. It Is a Testimony, that is most certain, and must be left to the Jury,
they must weigh one against the other. But pray, Mr. College will you call
your Witnesses, for it begins to grow late.


Coll. There is Mr. Wilmore, that was a material Witness for me, who was
Foreman of the Grand Jury, that would not find the Bill upon this Evidence.
What he had to say I don't know, but I am informed it was very material for me.


L. c. j. It will be enough for him to clear himself, for he is charged with
High Treason, and by two Witnesses too.


College. Call. Alexander Blake.


Lo. chapter just. What do you ask him?


College. Do you know John Smith?


Mr. Blake. Yes, Sir.


Coll. Pray will you tell the Court what you know of John Smith.


Mr. Blake. I suppose you mean this Gentleman. Mr. John Smith, Gent. came to me
one morning, and told me there was one Haynes under Examination, and Haynes had
discovered very material things against some great persons: this passed, and
within few days after I met Mr. Smith at the Exchange Coffee-House, and having
saluted him, I desired him to drink a glass of Wine, and so we went to the Sun
Tavern, and when we were there, I asked him, what his sense was of Haynes, and
his Discovery? Said he, it is a Sham Plot: I asked him what he meant by that
Sham Plot? Said he, it is a meal-tub Plot. This is all that I know.


L. c. j. Would you ask him any thing else?


Mr. Blake. I know nothing more.


Coll. Do you know any thing of Turbervill or Dugdale?


Mr. Blake. Sir, I have no acquaintance with him, nor desire it. But I was
acquainted with this Gent. Mr. Smith, I know him very well.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. You say well, stand down.


College. Call Mr. Samuel Smith.


L. chapter just. What ask you him?


College. What he knows of Mr. Smith.


Mr. S. Smith. Mr. John Smith and I have had an intimacy and acquaintaince
several months, and since Mr. John Smith swore at the Old Baily against Mr.
College, and was gone out of Town, several people have talked with me
concerning him, and asking me what I thought of him? I told them, I believed he
was an honest man, however I would not believe otherwise till I knew a reason
of it. They told me, that he had sworn against Mr. College, that he was to
seize the King at the Parliament at Oxford, and that there was 1500 Barrels of
Powder, and it was to carry on a Presbyterian Plot: Said I, I will never
believe it, and the rather because he has said to me often, there was a Popish
Plot, but he does not believe any Presbyterian or Protestant Plot; and said I
further, as to his giving in any Evidence with Irish-men, I believe it the less
for that; for I have heard him often say, they were a company of Rogues that
had done the Protestant Interest more harm than ever they would do it good, and
bid me have a care of coming into their company, and many other such things,
that Mr. Smith here knows to be true. Then, my Lord, when Mr. Smith came home
(for I was very impatient till he did come home to hear every day such things
said against him) I went to see him. Said I, Cousin Smith, I have had great
confronts about you since you went away, but I hope you cannot be that ill man
you are represented to be, and truly I should be sorry it should be so: pray
Cousin, said I, I have put every man off with this, that I would suspend my
belief of you till I had spoken with your self; what is the Evidence you have
given? They say, you have sworn a Presbyterian Plot, or a Protestant Plot, a
Design of seizing the King at Oxon. and of so many Barrels of Gen-powder that
were provided. Says my Cousin, I did swear no such thing, nor never a word of
any such thing as a Protestant Plot, or a Presbyterian Plot, and pray do not
believe it of me. No, said I, I thought you could not swear any such thing,
because you have said often to me, you believed there was no such thing. I do
not believe it yet, said he, and as to whatsoever College said, I did not
believe it, for he did not believe it himself. And Mr. Smith told me after his
return that he did not know of any Protestant concerned in the Plot.


L. c. j. He does not say now it is a Protestant Plot.


Mr. S. Smith. So far from that, that he told me after his Return he did not
know any Protestant concerned in the Plot.


L. c. j. Mr. Smith, thus I understand you. You say that he said to you, That
he had not testified any thing of a Protestant Plot, nor did believe there was
any Protestant Plot, for he did not believe what College said himself: So by
that discoure it seems he did not deny, but he had testified against Mr.
College, but he did not believe there was any Protestant Plot?


Mr. S. Smith. No, my Lord, he did not deny but he had sworn against College.


Mr. just Jones. Nor that what he had said against College was true;


Mr. S. S. No my Lord, but he did not believe him, and he thought College did
not believe it himself.


Mr. Ser. jeff. It seems Mr. College thinks the whole Protestant Interest
concerned in him.


L. c. j. The question is Mr. College what you had in your mind, not what was
in the mind of all the Protestants.


Mr. S. S. This I do say, I would not speak more nor less than the truth, he
did not deny, but he had heard College speak those words he swore, but he did
not believe him, and I think Mr. Smith has said that at another time before
Mr. Gardner.


Coll. If he knew of no Protestant Plot, it was very unlikely that I should
attempt such a thing my self.


Mr. S. S. My Lord, I find Mr. Smith has been very passionate and very
inveterate of late against other men that he has given me a very good report
of before; And when I was talking of this, I was saying, if it be true that
people say of you, a man goes in danger of his life to converse with you. Mr.
Smith, said he, I do not care for all the men between Wapping and
Charing Cross, there is never a man that will forbear my company, but would do
or say as much as College has done or said.


Mr. J. Smith. It Is true, and I say so still.


Coll. It Is a contradiction in it self, That there should be such a design and
none but my self to do it. God my righteous Judge knows my innocence.


Mr. just. jones. You might say those words in hopes they would be of your
party and made so by your Libels and poisonous Pictures.


L. c. j. Come, call another Witness.


College. Call Mr. Tho. Gardner. But my Lord, how likely is it that I should
say, That I would seize the King, when he it seems says, he did not believe
there was one man to stand by me?


L. c. j. What say you to this Gentleman?


Coll. I never saw him in my life.


Mr. Gardner. Nor I you, Sir.


College. I know not three of all that come here.


L. c. j. Well, will you ask him any thing?


Coll. Pray, do you know Mr. Smith?


Mr. Gardner. Yes.


Coll. What do you know of him? Can you say any thing concerning this matter
that is sworn against of Treason?


Mr. Gardner. My Lord, this day fortnight I think it was, Mr. S. Smith, the
Gentleman that was just now up before me, sent for me to the Rummer in
Queen Street to drink a glass of Wine, where, when I came, I found him and Mr.
J. Smith that is here, whom they call Narrative Smith, talking very briskly
concerning one College, I suppose that is the Gentleman, and the Jury that
acquitted him, and he said that two or three of the Jurymen were Rascals and
Villains; and, says he, they talk up and down the Town as if I did intend to
Sham the Popish Plot, and to make a Protestant Plot; which, said he, I vow to
God, and I will justify it before God, and all the World, that I know of no
Protestant Plot, nor is there any Protestant concerned in a Plot to my
knowledge, but this College, and upon his Trial I believe he will be made
appear to be more a Papist than a Protestant; but says Mr. Smith to him, Now
you are known to be a Witness in this case, it will be a dangerous thing for a
man to converse with you.


Coll. Will it be now known that I am a Papist? No man could ever say so in
this World.


Mr. Gardner. Says he, I care not what all the world says of me, and I do not
value all the men from Wapping to Charing Cross, but that man that will shun my
company, will say and do as much to the King as College has done. But then I
was saying, methinks it seems an improbable thing, that such a man as College
should seize upon the King, or provide 1500 Barrels of Powder, and those other
things. Upon my word, said he, with some passion, clapping his hand upon his
breast, when Mr. College did say it, I did not believe a word of it; and upon
my Faith I believe College himself did not believe it when he told me so.


College. Do you know any thing more, Sir?


Mr. Gardner. No indeed, Mr. College.


College. Call Dr. Oats again


L. c. j. Well, what say you to him?


Coll. Pray, Dr. Oats, Mr. Smith charges me that I should speak some
treasonable words that time that Alderman Wilcox gave you a Treat at the
Crown-Tavern, you were there, and pray how long ago was it?


Dr. Oats. My Lord, I heard Mr. Smith speaking of it at the Old-Bailey, and if
you please to take notice, it was thus; This Summer was twelvemonth, or I am
sure a great while before Christmas the Alderman had invited me several times
to give me a Treat, and I had not time, other business calling me off, but
finding a time, I sent him word I would come and see him. He said he was a
Brewer and troubled at home with customers, but he would give me a Dinner at
the Crown Tavern without Temple Bar, that was the place fixed upon; there was
Mr. Smith the Counselor, who had been serviceable to me in several instances,
I did get him to go along with me, and Mr. College was with us, and I heard
Smith swearing at the Old Baily, that Mr. College and he had discourse from
the Rainbow Coffee-House where we met, and went together.


College. There I was invited by Alderman Wilcox.


Dr. Oats. But my Lord, I will tell my story, I am not to tell Mr. Smiths;
College did tell me he was invited; said I, You shall be welcome as far as I
can make you welcome. So College ahd I went together from the Rainbow
Coffe-House to the Crown Tavern: Now indeed College was very pleasant and
merry, and as I think, the discourse betwixt the Rainbow Coffee-House and the
Tavern was betwixt Mr. College and me; for Mr. Smith stayed somewhat behind or
walked before, I cannot tell which: When we came to the Crown Tavern we did, to
divert our selves till Dinner came up, enter into a Philosophical discourse
with one Mr. Savage, who was formerly a Romish Priest, but this Savage is since
pardoned by the King and is a member of the Church of England, and has been
Professor of Divinity and Philosophy beyond Sea. This as I remember was the
discourse before we dined till we went to dinner, it was concerning the
Existence of God whether that could be proved by natural demonstration, and
whether or no the Soul was immortal: my Lord, after dinner Smith went away; I
did not hear the least discourse of any such thing as he speaks of, and Mr.
Smith and College had no discourse in my hearing from the Coffee-House to the
Tavern; and when we were in the Tavern we did discourse about those two Points.
Counselor Smith, my Lord, will justify a great deal of this, and my Brother
too, who was with us. But when I heard Mr. Smith swear as he did about this
matter at the Old Baily, I did really, my Lord, in my conscience look upon him
to be forsworn in that particular.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. And he does swear you are out in this.


L. c. j. Will you ask him any more questions?


Dr. Oats. If your Lordship please he speaks of Mr. Wilcox to be a man that
contributed money to buy Arms, Powder and Shot, I think Sir George Jefferies
knows Alderman Wilcox is a man of another employment.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Sir George Jefferies does not intend to be an Evidence I
assure you.


L. chapter Just. Do you ask him any more questions?


Dr. Oats. I do not desire Sir George Jefferies to be an Evidence for me, I
had Credit in Parliaments, and Sir George had Disgrace in one of them.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Your Servant Doctor, you are a witty man and a Philosopher.


College. Call Mr. Thomas Smith.


L. c. j. What would you ask of him now?


Coll. Counselor Smith, here is John Smith, or Narrative Smith, which you
please to call him, has charged me with speaking Treason at our going to
dinner at Mr. Wilcox's, I remember you were there, and I think you and I, and
Dr. Oats and his Brother, and Mr. Godwin Wharton went together; I did tell Mr.
Smith of it, but I did not stir a step out of the Coffee-house with him, but
went away before him: How long ago is it since we had that Dinner?


Mr. T. Smith. My Lord, if your Lordship please, I do very well remember Mr.
Alderman VVilcox, so they called him, did desire to give Dr. Oats a Treat,
with some other of his Friends, at the Crown-Tavern without Temple Bar; but
really, my Lord, as to the certain time I do not remember it, but to my best
remembrance, my Lord, it was before Christmas last, and some time before
Christmas last. And, my Lord, I was there all the time, Mr. Smith was at that
time somewhat a stranger to me, something I had heard of his name, and I did
stay there all the while: I remember Mr. Alderman VVilcox was to go out of Town
that day; and truly, as to any thing of matter of Treason, or Treasonable
words; or any thing tending toward it; I am confident nothing was, or could be
spoken, and the room was a very small room, and our company did fill it up, and
the Table was so big, that there was little more than for the Servitors to go
about, so that any man might easily hear from the one end of the room to the
other. I remember there was some discourse betwixt Dr. Oats and Mr. Savage,
who I think has been a Jesuit, and it was about some points of Philosophy and
Divinity; but for Treason, I do not remember the least of it, and I am
confident College said not any such thing at that time, and my reason is this;
I very well remember Mr. College did set himself down upon one side of the
Table, and fell asleep, and unless he talked Treason in his sleep, there could
not be any such thing said, and if it had been said, it would have been heard.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Smith, did you never hear Mr. College speak any ill words
of the King?


Mr. T. Smith. Never in my life: And if I were now to take the Sacrament upon
it, I could say so.


Mr. Ser. jeff. You used to converse with him, Mr. Smith, did he never say any
thing like it to you?


Mr. T. Smith. Good Mr. Sergeant, you know I can take the Sacrament; pray let
us have no reflections.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Who did reflect upon you, I did not reflect upon you.


Mr. just. jones. Mr. Smith, did he never deliver you any of those Pictures?


Mr. T. Smith. No Sir, he never did.


Coll. Good Sir George don't reflect upon my Evidence. It seems Smith is
mistaken in the time, for he says it was at Christmas, but Mr. Smith says it
was some time before.


L. chapter just. Mr. Smith does not say so, the certain time he cannot tell
exactly; but your Witnesses say it was then.


Mr. T. Smith. I do speak as much as if I were upon my Oath; and I know what an
Oath is, I thank God; and what it is to speak before a Court of Judicature, and
I know, and do speak truth as much as if I were upon my Oath; and I do say I
did not hear College, or any one else that was in that company at that time,
speak any thing reflecting upon the King and Government, or any thing tending
toward it.


Mr. just. jones. Can you remember a matter so distinctly, which Dr. Oats says
was a year and half ago?


L. c. j. No, this Summer was twelvemonth.


Mr. just. jones. And can you tell so long ago, not only your own actions, but
testify to all other men's actions too that were in the room?


Mr. T. Smith. I cannot tell what Dr. Oates's memory is as to the time, but I
remember the place, the occasion, and the persons that were there.


Mr. just. jones. And you take upon you to have such a perfect memory, as to
the actions of all the persons that were in the room.


Mr. T. Smith. I do not speak of all that was done; but I say I remember no
such thing that was said, and I believe no such thing was said, and have given
you my reasons why. But, my Lord, that which I say further for Mr. College, is
this; I do hear something pretended, as if he provided Arms to go for Oxford. I
have known him this three years, or thereabouts; and, my Lord, I do know that
he did usually ride with a case of Pistols before him. And before that time I
had occasion to borrow his Horse of him, at the Election for Westminster the
last Parliament that sat there, and I had it then with a case of Pistols. I
likewise borrowed it at Michaelmas last, the same Horse, and the same Pistols
they were: I did at the same time see a Suit of Silk-Armour, which he told me
he did provide against the Papists, for he said he did expect we should have a
brush with them. Said I, do not trouble your self for that, they dare not
meddle; said he, this will do no harm. And, as I remember, it was a Suit of
Armor made of Silk, to wear under a Coat.


College. It was Silk Armor only for the thrust of a Sword. And I assure you,
my Lord, I had but one Suit, but one case of Pistols, and but one Horse, I had
two before, but they did not then make a Traitor of me, that was all that ever
I had; but if I had ten Horses, and never so many Armours, I declare it upon my
Salvation, I intended it for nothing but against the Papists, if they should
make a disturbance, and whatever I did was with that design, and truly, by the
Grace of God, I would not have been the last man then; but I see, whatever I
provided my self with for that, they have turned it all another way, that it
might be believed the Protestants were against the King and the established
Government.


L. c. j. Those observations may be proper for you at last: Go on now with your
Evidence.


College. My Lord, I am not a man of that great memory, I may forget it, and
therefore I speak it now whilst I think of it.


L. c. j. Set it down in your paper.


Coll. Smith says I talked with him coming from Richard's Coffee-House till we
came to the Tavern; I do declare it, I went away before him, and went away with
Dr. Oats.


L. c. j. Ask Mr. Smith that question, if you will.


Coll. Pray Sir, do you know who went together thither?


Mr. T. Smith. I dare not undertake to say that, I cannot tell whether he went
from the Rainbow-Coffee-House with us, or no.


Coll. He says after we had dined we divided our selves into Cabals, two and
two together: I do declare it, as that which is the real truth, I fell asleep
behind the Table, if any body was divided, it is more than I know; but Mr.
Smith, you can tell, because he says I spoke Treason to him when I was in the
room, he and I in one Cabal.


Mr. T. S. My Lord, I remember nothing of that, nor do believe it, for I told
you the room was so little that we could not divide our selves; and it is
impossible in such a little compass where we were, so many as we were, 14 or 15
of us; it may be one might talk to another that was next to him, but then the
company must hear, and whether they did so or no, I cannot tell, I do not
remember Mr. Smith's saying any thing to any particular person, but the great
engagement was between Dr. Oats and Mr. Savage, and about some questions in
Divinity, and that is the great matter I took notice of.


Coll. However, my Lord, I declare it, that was above a twelvemonth ago, and I
hope your Lordship and the Jury does observe that there was no new Arms were
found but what were provided a great while ago: All that know me, know I was
never without a case of Pistols and an Horse, though I was but a Joyner, and
there is no more that you see now. And as to what Smith said about our going
into Cabals, that you hear Mr. Smith denies.


L. c. j. Will you call any other Witnesses?


Coll. Yes, if it please your Lordship, Do you know no more, Sir?


Mr. T. Smith. I know no other thing, if I did, I would declare it.


Coll. Call Dr. Oates's Brother, Mr. Samuel Oats. My Lord, thus you see
Smith's testimony is false.


L. c. j. I do not see this contradicts his Oath, for he speaks of several
times that he did speak with you, one was at Wilcox's, which is this they speak
of.


Coll. Mr. Smith says there was only that great discourse going on in the room,
and there was no such things as Cabals which he speaks of.


L. c. j. What do you say as to this Witness?


Coll. Do you know Narrative Smith?


Mr. Oats. Yes Sir.


Coll. What do you know of him? Were you at the Dinner which Mr. Wilcox gave
your Brother?


Mr. Oats. Yes, yes, I was at that Dinner.


Coll. Were you at the Coffee-House when I went along with your Brother?


Mr. Oats. Yes, we went with you.


Coll. Did Mr. Smith go with us?


Mr. Oats. Yes, Mr. Smith followed us.


Coll. Did you hear any Treasonable discourse between us?


Mr. Oats. Not the least of a little word.


Coll. Did we go into Cabals two and two together there?


Mr. Oats. There was nothing at all of cabals that I saw, from the time of
going to Dinner; for we came just as Dinner was going into the room, as I
remember.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. What do you mean by cabals?


Mr. Oats. That is, as I discern by Mr. College, as if there had been cabals
amongst the company.


Mr. just. jones. That is, going by couples.


Mr. Oats. Yes, yes.


Mr. Ser. jeff. What did they talk of?


Mr. Oats. There was nothing at all spoken of?


Mr. Ser. jeff. What, did they say nothing all the while?


Mr. Oats. Nothing but matter of common discourse, matters of eating and
drinking, and talking of Country affairs, there were several that had Lands in
the Country, and they were talking of those things.


Mr. just. jones. Were you there all the while?


Mr. Oats. Yes.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Hark you, Sir, were there no disputations in Divinity?


Mr. Oats. Not at all.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Nor of Philosophy?


Mr. Oats. No.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Why, pray Sir, did not Dr. Oats and Mr. Savage talk very
pleasantly of two great questions in Divinity, the Being of God, and the
Immortality of the Soul?


Mr. Oats. There was not a word of that, but only of common discourse.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Are you sure there was no such thing?


Mr. Oats. Not that I know of in the least. I sat at Table with them.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Was it such a little room that you could hear all was said?


Mr. Oats. There was room enough.


L. c. j. People cannot give a perfect account of all things that have passed
so long ago.


Coll. I did not hear that discourse my self, because I was asleep behind the
Table; and perhaps Mr. Oats cannot remember it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Was it before Dinner, or after Dinner, that College fell asleep
behind the Table?


Mr. Oats. He was not asleep, to my remembrance, all the while.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Recollect your self, pray; was Mr. College asleep there?


Mr. Oats. I do not remember he was.


L. c. j. It Is impossible to give an account, and therefore Witnesses in
Negatives are of little value.


Coll. Did Mr. Smith and you and I go together?


Mr. Oats. Mr. Smith followed us.


Lo. c. j. How do you know that?


Mr. Oats. For you and I, and my Brother went together: You were a saying when
we came out of the Coffee-House in a jocose way, come Dr. I will go along with
you, and be one of your Guard. You spoke it in a jesting way; so you may, if
you please, said my Brother. And so he went by my Brother's side, and I went by
Mr. Colledge's side.


College. Do you remember how long ago that was?


Mr. Oats. It was the last Summer, but to say exactly what month, I cannot.


Mr. S. Genesis Mr. Oats, answer me this question, pray Sir.


Mr. Oats. Yes, Sir.


Mr. S. Genesis From what place did you go.


Mr. Oats. From Richards Coffee-House.


Mr. S. Genesis Who went along with College?


M. Oats. He came along with my Brother and me; for he said to my Brother, I
will be one of your Guard.


Mr. S. Genesis Who went along with Mr. Smith?


Mr. Oats. I don't know, I took very little notice of things.


Mr. Serj. jeff. It Is sufficient that he can tell who went with College.


Mr. Oats. I remember one thing: Mr. Smith would fain have persuaded me into
something that my Brother should talk, but I heard nothing; said I, do not
examine me upon such things, for I took little notice of any thing; but this I
can say, whereas he does charge Mr. Wilcox, the Gentleman did not speak five
words all the time he was there.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. He does not use to be so melancholy, I assure you.


Mr. Oats. I did wonder at it my self, but he was not long with us, for I do
not think he was there a quarter of the time; it seems he had a Son sick in the
Country, and he was going thither.


College. Have you any thing against Macnamarra?


L. c. j. He is no Witness here.


Coll. Do you know any thing against Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Oats. No, not I.


College. Then I can say no more to you.


L. chapter just. Call another Witness.


Coll. Call Mr. Bolron.


Lo. chapter just. What do you ask him?


College. Do you know John Smith?


Mr. Bolron. Yes.


College. What say you against him?


Mr. Bolron. May it please your Lordship, the last 25th. of July Mr. Smith, and
Mr. Mowbray, and my self were traveling from York toward London. We lay the
24th. at and the 25th. we were traveling toward London: Mr. Smith did ask me,
if I did remember what Discourse there was betwixt Sir John Brooks and I at
Ferry-bridge, when we were coming up before to London? I desired him to tell me
what discourse, and I would tell him if I did remember it or no. So my Lord, he
did say, the Discourse was, that Sir John Brooks did say, there would be
cutting of throats at Oxford, and that the Parliament did go provided, some
with 8, some with 6, some with 4 men, and they were to meet at Grantham, and go
together. This discourse I did remember, that Sir John Brooks said, they went
with Horse and Arms to secure them from High-way-men; and Sir John Brooks did
then further declare, that the Discourse was, there would be cutting of throats
at Oxford, which made them go with Arms to defend themselves. Mr. Smith did
further upon the 25, 26, 27, and 28th. of July (and it was our frequent
discourse) tell me, that he had given His Majesty an account of it, which
occasioned the Dissolving of the Parliament: That Discourse that was made to
the King, was, that Sir John Brooks should say, there would be cutting of
throats at Oxford, and that the Parliament Men went provided with 4 or 5, 6 or
10 men apiece; and he did tell me, he had given a further account, that there
was a Consult a^ Grantham, wherein it was resolved, that it was better to seize
the King, than to let him go on. Now, this I knew nothing of, but he would have
persuaded me to have given in this Evidence against Sir John Brooks, as to this
Discourse. But I declare, I did never hear it, and Mr. Smith was the first man
that ever I heard it from, I never heard it before in my life.


College. Would he have had you been an Evidence, and swore it?


Mr. Bolron. Yes; he said he had given an account of it to the King, and if I
did manage it rightly against my Lord Shaftsbury and College, he would make me
for ever; those two persons were mentioned all along. But I do declare it, I
did never hear them speak Treason against the King in my life. And he did
further tell me, that I must say so and so; for if we did not agree, it would
signify nothing. But, my Lord, I know nothing of the matter, I never heard any
one speak of it but Mr. Smith. My Lord, this is true, Mr. Mowbray was the man
that was by when it was discoursed.


Mr. just. jones. He would have had you sworn it, would he?


Mr. Bolron. I discovered it to my Lord Mayor.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you discover it?


Mr. Bolron. Soon after he came to Town.


Mr. At. Genesis When was it?


Mr. Bolron. Some time last week.


Mr. At. Genesis Was it on Saturday last?


Mr. Bolron. It was the beginning of the week.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Thou art such a Discoverer.


Mr. Bolron. My Lord, it is very true what I say. If I had known any such thing,
I would have discovered it.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Thou would have discovered it before that time, of my
conscience.


College. My Lord, he has been an Evidence against the Papists as well as Mr.
Smith, and therefore pray Sir George don't make your flourishes upon him.


Mr. Serj. Jeffer. He was an Evidence, but he had the misfortune never to be
believed.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you know any thing of any Pictures of Mr. Colleges making?
Have you seen Raree Show?


Mr. Bolron. Never in my life.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you not show it in Oxford?


Mr. Bolron. No, never in my life.


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Did you never declare to any Gentleman of Oxford, that
College made this Picture?


Mr. Bolron. I have seen the Character of a Popish Successor, but I never saw
Raree Show.


Mr. Serj. Hollow. Here is the very Gentleman, my Lord, that will make Oath of
it.


Mr. Bolron. He was supposed to make them, I did not know that he did.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. I do only desire one thing, I do not say, that you ever had
Raree Show, but did you ever tell any body that College made any of these
Pictures?


Mr. Bolron. I have heard of such a paper, but I did never see it in my life.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Do you know that Gentleman, Mr. Bolron?


Mr. Bolron. I know him not.


Mr. Ser. jeff. I would ask you, whether you ever had any discourse with that
Gentleman?


Mr. Bolron. Never in my life.


Then the Gentleman was sworn, being a Master of Arts. Mr. Ser. Jeff. What is
the Gentleman's Name?


Mr. Serj. Holloway. Mr. Charlett of Trinity College.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. Pray Sir, do you know that person there?


Mr. Charlett. My Lord, in the new Coffee-House that was by the Schools, that
was set up in the Parliament-time, there was a Gentleman that is in the Court
(I think) one Mr. Dashwood, and one Mr. Box were there together to drink a dish
of Coffee, and and hearing that some of the Evidence were there, we desired
their company up, and that Gentleman was one; and among other Discourse, they
were speaking of some Pictures, and they showed us the Picture of the Tantivies.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Did this man show it you?


Mr. Char. This very man; it was the Pictures of the Tantivies and the Towzer,
and he told me they were made by College, he was a very ingenious man.


Mr. Bolron. I know nothing of it, the Character of a Popish Successor I have
seen, but never the other, I never showed him any such thing.


Then the Pictures were shown him. Mr. Charlett. It was something like this,
but I cannot say for any of the other.


Mr. Bolron. The charcter of a Popish Successor, I say I have seen, and
College himself has told me he made the character of a Popish Successor, I do
not deny that I have seen that.


L. chapter just. Would you ask him any more questions?


Mr. Bolron. My Lord, I have something more to say concerning Mr. Brian Hains;
in January, February and April last, several times I was in his company, and I
heard him say, he knew nothing of a Popish Plot, nor of a Presbyterian Plot
neither, but if he were to be an Evidence he did not care what he swore, but
would swear and say any thing to get money.


Mr. just. jones. Did he tell you so?


Mr. Bolron. Yes, I did hear him say, to day he would be a Papist, to morrow a
a Presbyterian, he did not care for Religion, he would never die for Religion,
he would be of that Religion that had the strongest party. My Lord, he told me
so at my own House in Fleet Street.


College. He would say any thing for money, pray my Lord take notice of that,
for so I find he does.


Mr. Bolron. Then there is Dennis Macnamarra, and John Macnamarra.


Mr. Serj. jeff. We have nothing to say to them.


College. They have been Evidences against me, though you do not now produce
them, they are all in a string, but they are not now brought because my
Witnesses are prepared to answer them.


L. c. j. Will you call your next Witness.


Coll. Mr. Mowbray, pray, Sir, do you know Narrative Smith, as he calls himself?


Mowbray. Yes, my Lord.


College. What do you know of it?


Mowbray. I came up from York with him when I returned, after I was commanded
down upon the Kings account to give in Evidence against Sir Miles Stapleton, he
came to me the third of August, and called at my House in Yorkshire, and was
very importunate for me to come up to London with him, for he said, he had a
Letter come to him which commanded his presence at London very suddenly, and he
produced that Letter which he said came from a Gentleman of the Court, or some
Court dependent; so he read the Letter in Mr. Bolrons hearing. We set forward
on Sunday, and upon our journey to London he told me he had something of
importance to impart to me, so upon the Road he began to discourse of the
Parliament, and of the illegal proceedings and Arbitrary Power of the Two last
Parliaments, he said their proceedings were very illegal and arbitrary, and he
began to open some of the Votes, as that which they voted, that those that
should lend the King money upon the Crown Lands, should be enemies to the King
and Kingdom, and those that counseled the King to dissolve the Parliament; and
he repeated many Votes; and, said he, these are signs of Arbitrary Power, and
certainly they design to take off the King; so he proceeded further, to ask me
what was the Discourse of Sir John Brooks when we came up before, and he did
much importune me to say, that Sir John Brooks did affirm there would be
cutting of throats at Oxford, and that the King was to be seized there. I told
him, I could have no plausible pretense, because I had no acquaintance with Sir
John Brooks, nor did I come up with him; upon which he applied himself to Mr.
Bolron, and importuned him for the same, he asked me who I came up with, I told
him, I came up with Three members of Parliament, my Lord Fairfax, Sir John
Hewly and Mr. Stern; he asked what Discourse we had upon the Road? And he
asked, whether they had any Discourse that tended to justify their former
Votes? For he said, if they did think to justify any thing of those Votes, or
if they would not allow the King money, and stood upon the Bill of Exclusion,
he said, that was pretense enough for any man to swear that there was a Design
against the King, and that the King was to be seized at Oxford.


Coll. An excellent pretense indeed, and like the rest.


Mowbray. He would have tempted me to swear against my Lord Shaftsbury the
same. And he said, it would be well if I did appear on Colleges Trial at Oxon.
for it was a thing of great consequence; the Popish Plot was thrown out of
doors, and no man was looked upon that did speak of it.


Mr. just. jones. Was all this in the presence of Mr. Bolron?


Mowbr. No, my Lord, when he was discoursing about Sir John Brooks, Mr. Bolron
rid up to us, and he applied himself to him, because I told him I had no
plaufible pretense to swear against him, having no acquaintance with him.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Pray, Sir, let me ask you one question; when came you from
York?


Mowb. We set forward the third day of August from Wentbridge.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Pray who came with you in the company?


Mowb. Mr. Bolron.


Mr. Ser. jeff. That was a Sunday, as I take it.


Mowb. Yes.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Then pray, how long did you continue before you came to London?


Mowbr. I think we came in on the Thursday after.


Ser. jeff. When was the first time Mr. Smith came into your company?


Mowbr. Upon the road on Sunday.


Ser. jeff. Was that the first time?


Mowbray. Yes, He had been at York, and went further, and afterward came to us.


Ser. jeff. When did you come from York.


Mowb. About the Thursday before, if I be not mistaken.


Ser. jeff. Was it in a week before.


Mowb. Yes, within a week it was.


Ser. jeff. And you and Mr. Bolron came together.


Mowb. Yes.


Ser. jeff. And you left Mr. Smith behind.


Mowb. Yes.


Ser. jeff. And he overtook you upon the road.


Mowb. Yes: He was to go further into the North as soon as the Trial of Sir
Miles Stapleton was over; and therefore he did very much importune me to stay
in the Country till he came to go up with me.


Ser. jeff. What day was the Trial of Sir Miles Stapleton.


Mowbr. On the Monday before.


Ser. jeff. You are sure of that, and that Mr. Smith went further into the
North.


Mowbr. I see him take Horse.


Ser. jeff. But he did not come into the company of you and Bolron till the
Sunday after that.


Mowb. See ye, Sir, He did desire me to stay in the Country till he came, for
he had a business of great concernment to impart to me, but it would be a week
or a fortnight ere he came, but yet he came in a shorter time; for he said he
had received a Letter that brought him up.


Ser. jeff. You are sure of this.


Mowb. Yes.


Ser. jeff. And you did not see him from the Monday before, till that Sunday.


Mowb. No, no.


Ser. jeff. Now then, I ask you where was that place that he met with you.


Mowbray. At Wentbridge.


Ser. jeff. And then you came from thence toward London the next day.


Mow. Yes.


Ser. jeff. Now would I desire to know of you, for I perceive he did attack you
to say something against Sir John Brooks, and finding that you could not do it,
because you had no acquaintance, he applied himself to Bolron. I would know,
was it between that place and London.


Mowb. Yes, it was.


Ser. jeff. And after the third of August.


Mowb. Yes, it was after we set out.


Ser. jeff. I thought it had been the 24th. of July that you set out, and
continued your journey the 25, 26, 27, 28, and 29th. Alas, we have lost a great
deal of time between Bolron and Mowbray. Bolron said it was the 25th. they lay
at such a place, and you are gotten to the third of August; you are mistaken
certainly, as to point of time.


Mowb. See, Sir, I will look in my Almanac, it is all set down there.


Ser. jeff. Let us see now if your Oxford journey be as well set down, as your
journey to London is.


Mowb. Here is my Almanac, Sir. Mr. Jones. Here, look upon his Almanac.


Ser. jeff. Mr. Jones, I don't care for his Almanac, I had rather Mowbray and
Bolron could bring their Almanacks together, and I would have them compared, to
see whether the third of August in one, be the 25th. of July in the other. Did
you discourse with him upon the road the third of August, and not before; and
Bolron that came up with you, discourse with him the 25th. of July.


Mowb. I am mistaken, I find.


Ser. jeff. Ay, that you are, one of you most grossly.


Mowbray. See, Sir, here is my Almanac, whereby. I find that it is my mistake;
but pray see, Sir, here it is set down; the day we came out was the 24th. the
day we came to London was the 27th.


Mr. Ser. jeff. How did thou set out the third of August from that place, and
yet come to London the 27th. of July.


Mowbray. I will refer my self to Mr. Smith, as to the time we came up, and
here is my Almanac.


Mr. Ser. jeff. I will believe thy Almanac to speak truth, though it have
never so many errors about the changes of the weather, sooner than I will
believe thee.


Coll. I perceive the man is mistaken in the month and the time; but pray, my
Lord, will you please to see, for Justice sake, if the Almanac be new writ.


Lo. c. j. Look you, here is the matter, Mr. College, he was asked again and
again, what day it was, and he was positive to the third of August.


Coll. He was mistaken, but his Almanac is right.


L. c. j. He speaks rashly, that is the best can be said.


Mowb. It was a mistake of mine, Sir George, but my Almanac is right.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Nay, Mr. Mowbray, don't enter into dialogues with me, I only
make a little observation upon your Almanac.


Mowbray. It was only my mistake.


L. c. j. You are a rash man to affirm so: if you had an Almanac, you should
have consulted it, or referred to it.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Nay, we have lost a day even by your Almanac; for yours says
it was the 27th. you came to Town, Bolron the 28th.


Mowb. I refer my self to Mr. Smith, he cannot deny but he came up with us at
that time.


Ser. jeff. You were examined at Sir Miles Stapleton's Trial, was you not,
Mowbray?


Mowb. I was an Evidence there.


Ser. jeff. Did the Jury believe you?


Mowbr. They did acquit Sir Miles Stapleton.


Coll. That is nothing to the purpose; so was Mr. Smith too.


L. c. j. Would you ask any thing further?


Coll. Call Mrs. Mary Bolron.


L. c. j. If you have any more Witnesses, pray call them.


Mr. just. jones. Mowbray, was Bolron's Wife by when this discourse was?


Mowbr. No, she was in Town, she did not go down with him at all.


Lo. Chapter Just. Are you Bolron's Wife?


Mrs. Bolron. Yes.


L. c. j. Well, what do you ask her?


College. Mrs. Bolron, Pray do you know Mr. John Smith?


Mrs. Bolron. Yes, I do know him.


College. What can you say of him?


Mrs. Bolron. He sent several times for my Husband and Mowbray to my House,
something he would have them be concerned in, some business he had in hand.


Lo. chapter just. When was that?


Mrs. Bolron. Within this three weeks, since he came up from York Assizes.


College. You may see there was an understanding between them then.


Mr. just. jones. Did they go accordingly?


Mrs. Bol. Now and then they have gone to him, but they knew his business,
because they had discourse with him, as they said, upon the road, and they
would not go.


L. c. j. Would you ask her any thing else; what do you know more?


Mrs. Bolron. Nothing, for I am not one that stirs much abroad.


College. Call Mr. Everard.


Lo. c. j. What do you ask him?


College. As for Mr. Everard, I need not ask him whether he knows him, for
they know one another well enough: But Mr. Everard, that I would ask you is
this; what do you know of Mr. Smith, and of this contrivance against me?


Mr. Everard. Mr. Smith I have been to see of late, and he told me he knew of
no Presbyterian or Protestant Plot; and when my Lord Howard was tried, that is,
the Bill brought against him, he said he wondered how my Lord Howard could be
Guilty, and that both himself and I were joined as Evidence to that Jury, only
to put a gloss upon the Evidence; for, says he, I have nothing material to say.


Coll. Mr. Everard. Do you know any thing more concerning him, what he has
said at other times concerning me?


Mr. Everard. I have told you already what I have heard him say, that he
thought there was no Protestant or Presbyterian Plot, and that now of late
within this little while.


College. Pray Sir, was there not some discourse betwixt Justice Warcupp and
you in Lincoln's Inn Walks?


Mr. Everard. Is Justice Warcupp an Evidence here?


L. c. j. No, no.


College. It Is all but Evidence of a Presbyterian Plot; therefore, pray Sir,
what was the discourse between Justice Warcupp and you, what would he have had
you done?


L. c. j. I think it is not material, there is nothing of Mr. Warcupp in this
Trial.


Mr. Everard. If the Court does allow of it, I will freely tell it.


Coll. My Lord, the Papists design is to make a Protestant Plot to turn off
their own, and they begin with me, but if I should go, they would not be
satisfied with me, they would be at others.


L. c. j. There is nothing concerning a Presbyterian or Protestant Plot in the
case.


College. My Lord, if there be no Presbyterian Protestant Plot, and others to
join in it, how could I do it by my self; it is impossible I should have such a
design of seizing the King, and improbable I should speak it. Now, my Lord,
this man was solicited to come in for an Evidence of such a Plot.


Mr. Everard. That is true.


L. c. j. I tell you it is not material, Justice Warcupp is not concerned in
your Trial.


Mr. Everard. Justice Warcupp would have persuaded me to have sworn against
some Lords a Presbyterian Plot, but I deny that I know any such thing of them.


Coll. The Papists aim is not at me only, but at others.


Mr. Ser. jeff. We have nothing to do with what you and Justice Warcupp talked
of; for example sake, my Lord, let us have no discourses that concern third
persons brought in here.


L. c. j. Would he have persuaded you to say any thing that was not true?


Mr. Everard. He did not say positively those words, but this he said, I knew
seveveral Lords --


Mr. just. jones. Now here is Mr. Justice Warcupp's same traduced behind his
back in the face of the Country, and it is nothing to this cause before us.


Coll. My Lord, I desire to know what he knows of these things, and that he may
speak it out, it is a material thing for me and others: Here is a design of the
Papists to turn a Plot upon the Protestants, they begin with me, and if they
have my blood, who may feel the effect of it next I cannot tell.


Lo. chapter Just. Truly I think it not material to your case, and indeed it is of
ill consequence to have any man traduced behind his back, as Justice VVarcupp
is.


Coll. My Lord, Macnamarra told me, that that man would have seduced him to
have retracted his Evidence; upon my Salvation it is true.


L. c. j. We meddle not with Macnamarra neither, he is no Evidence against you.


Coll. Macnamarra has sworn against me at the Old Bailey, and at the finding of
this Bill, but they have laid him by upon some trick or other: I desire Mr.
Everard may tell what he knows.


Mr. Everard. I would not reflect upon any person, nor will I answer it, if the
Court do not think fit.


Coll. My Lord, this is foul play, if I die my self for my Country sake, I can
do it freely, and the will of God be done; I would have the truth out for the
sake of the Protestants.


Mr. Everard. I am very willing to tell the truth, if the Court think fit.


L. c. j. I see not that he says Mr. VVarcupp would have had him swear that
which was not true.


Mr. Ever. But this he said, if the Court will allow me to speak it; Justice
VVarcupp said, that certainly there was a Presbyterian Plot, and such things;
and that some Lords, some of the Protestant protesting Lords must be guilty of
it, and said he, certainly you know much of it, You know such and such things,
therefore you may safely swear it, if I knew it; so by argument he would first
prove there was a Plot and combination amongst those Lords, and then said he
this you may safely swear.


Mr. just. jones. What is this to your purpose, Mr. College, only Mr. Warcup's
name is brought upon the stage when he is not here to vindicate himself.


L. c. j. Would you ask him any thing else?


Coll. If he does know any thing more of any of them, I desire he would speak
it.


Mr. Ev. Concerning Mr. Haynes, he told me it was necessity that drove him to
speak any thing against the Protestants, and the hard Pay and the Gratitude he
did receive from the Citizens.


Then Mr. Jones acquainted the Court that Mr. Warcup was just come in, and
desired to vindicate himself. But the Kings other Counsel waved it, saying
there was no weight in it. Lo. chapter just. Where did he tell you this?


Mr. Ev. In the fields near Gray's Inn.


Lo. chapter just. How long since?


Mr. Ev. About three weeks ago. I asked him, Mr. Haynes, said I, I would not
draw you from your Testimony in any thing; but how can this be congruous to
what you have said formerly, That you knew nothing by them? The truth is, said
he, I will not say much to excuse my self, but my Wife was reduced to that
necessity, that she begged at Rouse's door, and craved some Salary, and Mr.
Rouse would not give her any; and, said he, mere necessity drove me to it.


College. He found better pay in another place.


Mr. Ev. And, says he, it is Self-preservation in the next place: for I was
brought in guilty when I was taken up, and therefore I was obliged to do some
things to save my Life.


Coll. Pray, my Lord, and Gentlemen, observe what this Gentleman says, Haynes
takes this course to destroy innocent persons for his own preservation.


Mr. Ever. Besides, he told me, there is a Judgment impending upon the Nation,
said he, either upon the King, or upon the people, I know not which; but these
Irish men's swearing against them, is justly fallen upon them for their
Injustice against the Irish in outing them of their Estates.


Coll. So he did it then by way of revenge. For his Countrymen, I have nothing
of their Estates, I am sure; therefore they had no cause to swear against me.
But, Mr. Everard, have you any more to say concerning any of them?


Mr. Everard. No more concerning those persons that have sworn against you, I
can say no more.


College. As to Dugdale or Turbervile?


Mr. Everard. No indeed.


College. As to this Presbyterian Plot, Sir?


Mr. Ever. If the Court does allow concerning other persons; but I would not
intrude any thing but what the Court shall think fit.


College. I know not but they may come in against me; therefore pray tell what
you know. Mr. Everard, do you know any thing more? Pray let me know what you
know.


Mr. Everard. Nothing of any person that has appeared against you as yet, but
what I have told you.


Coll. They may do, Sir.


L. c. just. And then we may properly hear him to them, and not before.


College. I desire to know who they are; pray let me know their Names.


Mr. Everard. Fitzgerald.


L. c. j. He has been no Witness here.


Coll. Call Thomas Parkhurst.


L. c. j. What do you ask him now he is here?


College. What do you know concerning Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Parkhurst. Sir, the latter end of the last November, when the Parliament
sat at Westminster, several times Mr. Dugdale having promised me his further
Narrative to publish, which he printed, I met him several times; one time I met
him at Richard's Coffee-House, and it was toward the evening before we went
away; he told me and Mr. Symonds, that he was to speak with Dr. Tongue; and he
told us, that this Dr. Tongue did lie at Mr. Colledge's; and he having spoken
the day before, and several times, of the danger he was in of his being
assassinated by the Papists, M. Symonds and I offered to go with him, we took a
coach; for we did not know where Mr. College lived: he had then a Rheum in his
Eyes, and was not well; so we accompanied him to Mr. Colledge's to speak with
Dr. Tongue. It was evening when we went; and whilst we took a pipe of Tobacco,
in our discourse we were speaking of the times, and of the danger of the
Papists; so College took down a steel Hat that hung up there, which he said he
had, and he said he had a quilted Coat of defensive Armor, and he said he had
a Blunderbuss in his House, and two Pistols. But I little thought of any thing
of this, neither did I know well what I was subpoena'd down for: But these Arms
I saw in his House, and it was only in discourse that he was provided against
the Papists; so I put the steel Hat upon my Head and pulled it off again, and
so did Mr. Symonds.


College. Did I say any thing, Sir, who I had those Arms against?


Mr. Parkhurst. At that time there was no discourse in the world, but of the
danger from the Papists; and he said he was provided for them, if they did come
to make any disturbance.


L. chapter Just. When was it, Sir?


Mr. Parkhurst. It was about the latter end of November. I have the Narrative
that I printed, which was the 23th or 24th; and I have no directions but that
to remember the time. So we carried Mr. Dugdale. home again in a Coach and gave
him a pint of Wine at his Lodgings.


L. chapter just. This does not contradict Mr. Dugdale at all.


Mr. Parkhurst. Mr. Dugdale does own this for a truth.


Mr. Serj. jeff. So may any body own it.


College. Where is Mr. Symonds? Pray, Sir, what do you know of Mr. Dugdale?
Mr. Symonds. What about, Sir?


College. I have your Name here, Sir, but I know not for what.


Mr. Symonds. I can say the same that Mr. Parkhurst did; that I suppose is the
busisiness. All I know of it is this: I was with Mr. Parkhurst and Mr. Dugdale
at Richards Coffee-House some time in November, I think it was about the
printing of Mr. Dugdales further Information; and Mr. Dugdale was saying Dr.
Tongue had sent for him, but spoke as if he was fearful of some danger in going
alone; so we proffered to go along with him, and we took a coach at the
Coffee-House-door, and went with him to Dr. Tongue, who lodged at Mr.
Colleges. When we came into the Room, Mr. Parkhurst and I thought fit we
should in civility withdraw, which we did; and Mr. College brought us down
into another Room, where we sat and took a pipe of Tobacco, and talking about
the common discourse of the times, about the Papists and the danger from them,
there hung up in Mr. Colleges Room some Arms; what they were, I dare not
charge my memory with to swear particularly, but I do think there was a Silk
coat of mail, and there was a cap of steel, and, as I take it, it was covered
with cloth or some such thing; what else I cannot well say: I think there was a
Blunderbuss and a case of Pistols: And all the discourse that I remember then,
was only this; Speaking of the Papists, and some fears as if there would be an
Insurrection amongst them, said he, Let the Papist Rogues begin when they will,
I am ready to defend my self for one. This is all I know.


College. Pray, Sir, how long ago was this? Dr. Tongue died before Christmas
at my House.


Mr. Symonds. I cannot tell exactly when it was; but during the Session of
Parliament I am sure it was, and as I take it, in November the latter end.


Coll. So then, pray, my Lord, see that these Arms they charge me withal, were
provided before Christmas.


L. c. j. But there is nothing that contradicts Dugdale's Testimony in this.


Coll. It does sufficiently contradict him.


L. c. j. I do not see that this does at all contradict what he has said; but
do you observe what you will upon it, when you come to make your Defense.


Stranger. A Gentleman below desires you to call Mr. Yates.


Coll. Pray, Sir, what do you know concerning Dugdale?


Mr. Yates. I know that Mr. Dugdale sent for me to a Coffee-House to bespeak a
Pistol for you, and told me that when I had made the Pistol, I should deliver
it to Mr. College. and Mr. Dugdale promised to pay for it when I had done it.
Now some time after I did some small matter for Mr. Dugdale, cleaned his
Pistols, or some small business; and Mr. Dugdale asked me if I would drink a
pint of Wine, which I agreed to; and being at the Tavern, Mr. Dugdale asked me
if Mr. Colleges Pistol were done. I told him no, it was not as yet. So I asked
Mr. Dugdale, because he had promised to give Mr. College a Pistol, what
obligation there was betwixt Mr. College and him, that he should give him a
Pistol? to which he answered, that Mr. College had been serviceable to him in
lending him a pair of Pistols to ride withal sometimes. So he gave him a Pistol
to satisfy him for the wearing of his Pistols now and then. I thought, said I,
Mr. College did impose upon your good nature too much, not but that I believe
Mr. College is a very honest man, and stands up for the good of the King and
the Government. Yes, said Mr. Dugdale, I believe he does, and I know nothing to
the contrary.


Mr. At. Genesis When was this?


Mr. Yates. A little after the Parliament sat at Oxford; for I never knew Mr.
College before Mr. Dugdale set me a work for him.


Coll. Mr. Yates, pray was there nothing in the Coffee-House about one that he
asked to go with him, when he said he knew nothing against me?


Mr. Yates. I heard one say --


Mr. Ser. jeff. You must speak your own knowledge, you must not tell a tale of
a Tub of what you heard one say.


Yates. I heard it affirmed --


Mr. Ser jeff. But by whom?


Yates. By a person in the Coffee-House.


Ser. jeff. Who was that person?


Yates. By one of the Servants of the House.


L. c. j. That is no Evidence at all: if you know any thing of your own
knowledge, speak it.


Ser. jeff. Is he here?


Yates. No, I think not.


Mr. ju. jones. How long do you think we must sit here to hear other peoples
stories.


L. c. j. If you know any thing of your own knowledge, I say, speak it.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray let me ask you that question again: When was this that he
said he believed he was an honest man?


Yates. It was about three weeks after the Parliament sat at Oxford.


Coll. Then he does me wrong now; for if I were an honest man then, it cannot
be true that he says of me.


L. c. j. Who do you call next?


College. Pray, my Lord, who has been sworn against me?


L. c. j. There is Stephen Dugdale, John Smith, Bryan Haynes, Edward
Turbervile, Sir William Jennings, and Mr. Masters.


College. Call Mr. Clayton. My Lord, at his House it was I lay in Oxford, and
that Dugdale says I spoke some of the Treasonable words: Pray Sir, do you know
what time I came to Oxford?


Mr. Clayton. I remember it very well, it was at the time the Parliament sat at
Oxford, about two or three days after it began.


Coll. Pray what Arms did I bring to your House, Sir?


Mr. Clayton. As to the matter of Arms, there was no other but a Sword and a
pair of Pistols; a pair of Pistols in his Holsters, and his Sword by his side.


Mr. At. Genesis Was there no Silk Armor?


Mr. Clayton. I saw none, if it please you; such a thing might be.


Coll. My Lord, I continued at his House from my coming in to my going out, and
that was till after the Parliament was Dissolved; and I came after they were
sat: But hark you, Mr. Clayton, Mr. Dugdale says he was with me at your House:
Did you ever see him there?


Mr. Clayton. I remember I have seen Dugdale at my House, but never in your
company.


College. Did you sell any mum?


Mr. Clayt. No, I never did sell any in my life.


College. Because he says we had mum there.


Mr. Clayton. I never saw him there with you, nor changed any word with him, as
I know of.


L. c. j. Was he never in the company of College at your house?


Mr. Clayton. Not that I saw.


Mr. just. jones. You don't know all the companies that come into your House.


Coll. My Lord, I am told there are some that came from the Town where I was
born that know me, and have known me this 24 or 25 years together, if you think
that material for me to prove whether I am a Protestant or no.


Lo. chapter just. If you will make out that, you may. But it is your Loyalty that
is in question. If you will produce any that can make it appear, that you use
to honor the King in your discourse, or so, that is something.


Coll. If I am a Protestant, then the design is plain, these men swear to make
a Protestant Plot, and turn the Plot off the Papists.


Mr. Serj. jeff. What Church do you frequent in London to hear Divine Service?


College. I have received the Sacrament several times, Sir George.


Mr. Serj. jeff. When were you last at the public Church?


College. I hope I may be a Protestant if I have not gone thither; but
however, I do use to go to Church.


Lo. chapter just. Well, call whom you will.


College. Is Thomas Deacon there?


Mr. Deacon. Yes.


Coll. He lives, my Lord, in the Parish where I was born. If you please Mr.
Deacon to give my Lord an account what you know of me from my childhood.


Mr. Deacon. I have known Mr. College ever since he was a youth, he was born
in the Town where I live.


L. chapter Just. Where is that?


Mr. Deacon. At Watford, a Town in Hertfordshire. There he lived till he was a
man, and married a Neighbors Daughter of mine, and lived there while he had
two children; I never knew but that he was a very honest man, frequented and
kept to the Church of England all along, and paid every man his own.


Mr. At. Genesis How long is it ago since he left that place?


Mr. Deacon. I cannot directly tell how long it is truly, but I think it is
eighteen years since you left Watford.


Coll. It Is fourteen years ago.


Mr. just. jones. You say fourteen, and they say eighteen.


Mr. Deacon. I say, I cannot exactly tell.


Coll. But Mr. Deacon, I have been in your Country lately.


Mr. Deacon. He used to come there once or twice a year generally to see his
friends I have heard him delare himself against the Popish Church always very
much.


L. c. j. Did you never hear him talk against the Government?


Mr. Deacon. No, never in my life.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Nor against the King:


Mr. Deacon. Nor against the King.


Mr. just. jones. Was he in your Country the last Easter?


Mr. Deacon. I think it was about Easter he was there.


Mr. just. jones. Was he at Church there then, and received the Sacrament?


Mr. Deacon. I know not whether he was there of the Lord's Day or no: He did
quarter at another Town, at Bushy, where he has a Brother-in-law.


L. c. j. Well, call another.


Coll. Mr. Whitaker.


L. c. j. What is your Christian Name?


Mr. Whitaker. William.


L. chapter just. What do you ask of him?


Coll. Whether he knows me and my Education.


Mr. Whitaker. Sir, I have known him this six and twenty years. I knew his
Parents, I know his mother, she lives now at Watford. I have known his
behavior to be very civil and good; a very good Churchman he was when he
lived with us; and I have inquired, and find he has the same Reputation in the
Parish where he last lived in Blackfryers: He was no Jesuit nor Papist, I dare
aver; he has flouted them and mocked them with their Wooden Gods, and the
like; for he never could endure that Persuasion.


L. c. j. He is not questioned for that, but for Treason.


Coll. Did you ever hear me speak any thing against the Government?


Mr. Whitaker. I never knew of any ill behavior of him in my life.


Coll. But did you ever hear me say any thing against His Majesty or the
Government?


Mr. Whitaker. Never that I know of. I knew him a Soldier for His Majesty, in
which service he got a fit of sickness, which had like to have cost him his
life; he lay many months ill, to his great charge.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Where was it he was in His Majesty's Service?


Mr. Whitaker. At Chatham-business.


Coll. It was under my Lord Rochester. But, my Lord, I have a Testimonial under
the Hands of seventy people of Watford, to give an account of my good behavior.


Mr. just. jones. He has been gone thence these eighteen years.


Mr. Whitaker. He has come there almost every half year, sometimes three or
four times in a year, because his mother lives there now, and he came to pay
his respects to her. His Children lived and went to School with us.


L. c. just. Come, who do you call else?


College. Mr. Neal.


Mr. Neal. I can say no more than the other men before me. I know the man, he
was bred and born at Watford, he lived there several years, he married a Wife
out of the Neighborhood, frequented the public Worship.


L. c. j. How long ago is this?


Mr. Neal. Sixteen or seventeen years ago. But then he used to come once or
twice a year into the Country.


Coll. Did you ever hear me speak any thing against the King or the Government.


Mr. Neal. No, never in my life.


Coll. How long is it ago since you were in my company last?


Mr. Neal. When you were in Town last I never heard you say any thing that was
ill.


College. How long is it ago since we were at the White Heart together?


Mr. Neal. It was about Spring.


Coll. I said right, my Lord, I was there about Easter. Pray did you ever hear
me speak for the King?


Mr. Neal. Truly the discourse we had I never used to keep in my mind, but I
never heard him speak any thing against the King or the Government.


L. c. j. Were you much conversant with him?


Mr. Neal. When he came down to give his mother a visit, and see his
Neighbors, we used always to see one another.


Coll. Pray will you call Mr. Tanner and Mr. Remington.


[Mr. Remington stood up.] Mr. Remington. I say I have known Stephen College
these forty years, and I have known that he was always an honest man. He was a
Soldier some time, but he always went to Church, was no Conventi^ler; and used
to visit his Neighbors when he came down to see his mother, and was always
looked upon to be a very good man.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. You say you knew him a Soldier, pray when was that?


Mr. Remington. About the time of Harwich business. That is all I can say.


[Then Mr. Tanner stood up.] Lo. chapter just. Come, what say you? what do you ask
him Mr. College?


Mr. Tanner. I have known Stephen College from a child forty years, he was
born at Watford, his Father worked with my Father, and great intimate
acquaintance we had with him, and saw him very often; I never knew any fault in
him, and I never heard a bad report of him in all the Town of Watford.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Have you seen him at Church lately?


Mr. Tanner. No, I have not.


Mr. At. Genesis I would fain know whether this man has been at Church himself;
he looks as if he had not.


Coll. I know not whether he has been at the Church you mean or no; but he may
be an honest man and a Protestant for all that.


Lo. chapter Just. Call another.


Coll. Mr. Peter Norreys.


L. chapter just. What do you ask him, Mr. College? here he is.


Coll. Do you know any thing concerning Mr. Smith?


Mr. Norreys. I was once in the Hercules Pillars, where was Sir William Waller,
Macnamarra, Mr. Joy, and five or six of us together; and Mr. Smith was there,
and we were talking concerning the Parliament approaching at Oxon.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Tell the Names of the rest.


Mr. Noreys. Sir William Waller, Macnamarra, Mr. Ivy, Mr. Jews, Macnamarra's
Brother, and I, and Mr. Smith.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Well said; we don't meddle with any of these, but Mr. Smith.


Lo. chapter just. Was John Smith there?


Mr. Norreys. He was there.


Lo. Chapter Just. Well, go on then.


Mr. Norreys. We were talking of the Parliament at Oxon. Says Sir William
Waller, most of the Parliament Men are afraid to go up to the Parliament.
Truly, said Smith, I hope they will be provided to go, if they do go. Says Sir
William Waller, I shall be provided with the rest of my friends; and Mr.
College said, I will go up with the rest of the Parliament Men; I shall be
provided too, says most of the Evidence; says Sir William Waller, Will you go
along with me, and I will provide you with an Horse; said he, I have an Horse
of my own, and if it please God I will have nothing else to do but to go along
with the Parliament, and I will not neglect it. This was all the discourse of
the company for that night.


College. Did you hear Mr. Smith say any thing against me?


Mr. Norreys. No, not a word at all.


College. But this were a material Evidence against others of the
Confederates, if they had been examined.


Mr. Norreys. My Lord, I was at the Amsterdam Coffee-House the 23. of June
last, and there was Mr. Denis Macnamarra; said he, Will you go, and I will give
you a pot of Ale.


L. c. j. There is nothing of Denis Macnamarra in question before us. If you
have any thing to say against any of the Witnesses that have been sworn, go on
with your Evidence, we must not hear stories of other people.


College. He would speak against some men that have sworn against me, but are
left out for some Reasons I know not. Pray call Mr. Thomas Norreys.


Lo. chapter just. What do you ask him?


Coll. My Lord, he knew me in this Country some fifteen or sixteen years ago.


Mr. T. Norreys. My Lord, I have been acquainted with Mr. College about
sixteen or eighteen years, and he has always carried himself very civilly and
well, and he kept to the Church for a considerable time as duly as any
Parishoner did.


L. c. j. How long have you known him?


Mr. T. Norreys. This sixteen years.


L. c. j. You live in this Country, don't you.


Mr. T. Norreys. Yes, at Aylworth.


Coll. I was at Astrop-wells last year. I believe Mr. Justice Levins saw me
there.


Mr. T. Norreys. Yes, I was there with you.


Coll. We did discourse commonly then concerning the Papists, Pray, Sir, did
you find me inclined to the Popish interest?


Mr. T. Norreys. You spoke very much against them.


College. Did you ever hear me speak against the King or the Government?


Mr. T. Norreys. No, I never heard it; for if he were my Brother, I should have
discovered it.


L. chapter just. How often have you seen him?


Mr. T. Norreys. Very often, and conversed much with him.


Collede. My Lord, as to the papers charged upon me that they were mine, I
declare I know not of them. Dugdale says I owned them, and the Letter and
several Prints; but, my Lord, I had done my self a great injury if I had done
or owned those things he has charged me withal. I never could make a Picture,
nor never did draw a Picture in my life; and that very person that he says I
owned I got it to be Printed by, has denied it before the King and Council;
for he there testified that he did not know the person that caused it to be
Printed.


L. chapter just. How came you to have so many seized in your House?


College. My Lord, here is Elizabeth Hunt, the Maid by whom they were taken
in, and who can give you an account of it. I cannot deny but that they were in
my House; but that I was the Author, or did take them in, is as great a mistake
as ever was made. Call Elizabeth Hunt. I do not know whether Curtis be in Town,
but this I am confident, he was examined before the King and Council, and He
and his Wise denied it.


Lo. c. j. He shall be called if he be here.


College. I know nothing of the Printing of them, nor was I the Author of them.


L. c. j. They were dispersed by you up and down.


College. That they were in my House, I believe, my Lord; and this woman will
tell you how, my Lord. Pray tell the Court how these Papers that are called the
Raree-Shew came to be in my House.


Eliz. Hunt. A Porter brought three bundles to our House, and asked whether my
Master was not within: I told him no, he was not. Said he, these Papers are to
be left here: said I, who do they come from: said he, it is all one for that,
you must pay me, and I must leave them here; so I gave him six pence, and he
left the Papers, but I never saw the man since, nor before. And, my Lord, I
never read them what they were; but I saw they were such sort of Prints as
those.


L. c. j. How long was it before they were seized?


Eliz. Hunt. A matter of seven or eight weeks.


Coll. My Lord, it seems they were put in a Box, and left in my Counting House:
I never touched them, but there they staid, for ought I know, till they were
taken.


L. c. j. You were Colledge's Servant, were you not?


Eliz. Hunt. Yes, my Lord.


College. My Lord, I neither knew the Printer nor the Author; but I heard a
man was in trouble about them, upon a By-Law in the Stationers Company


Mr. At. Genesis How came you by that Original?


Coll. Have you it there? I know of none was produced. But if I were a person
concerned, it were no Treason; and, my Lord, I hope you will do me that
Justice, to let the Jury know they are not Treason, none of these Papers. And I
do declare I know nothing of the Original, the Printer, nor the Author.


Lo. chapter just. You spend time in making observations out of order of time: When
you have given your Evidence, then make your observations.


College. I confess I may err as to matter of Order, for I was never in this
capacity before: But pray do you tell the Court how the papers came there, and
all the transactions; for I was a Prisoner when they came and searched.


L. c. j. No, it was eight weeks before you were taken they were left there.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Did you tell you Master soon after they were left there?


Eliz. Hunt. No.


Mr. Ser. jeff. Within what time did you tell him?


Eliz. Hunt. I believe it was a week or a fortnight.


Mr. At. Genesis Where was your Master all that time?


Eliz. Hunt. He was in the country.


College. My Lord, I did see them there, I must confess, I do not deny but I
saw them there, but I knew not whence they came, nor whose they were; nor did I
ever intend to meddle with them, nor concern my self about them. What have you
to say more?


Eliz. Hunt. Concerning Mr. Dugdale, if I may speak.


Lo. c. j. Ay, go on.


Eliz. Hunt. I went to receive the money of Mr. Dugdale that he owed my Master,
and asking him for it, he said he would pay me such a time to morrow morning,
if I would come for it; but when I came, he had not the money ready for me.
Sir, said I, I think it is very hard that you should keep my Masters money from
him, and yet you go and swear against his life too: what do you think we shall
do at home in the Family, if you keep my Masters money, and he be in Prison?
Said he, there is a great deal of do about my swearing against your Master,
more than needs; but as I hope for Salvation, I do not believe Mr. College had
any more hand in any conspiracy against his Majesty, than the child unborn.
Here is Dugdale, let him deny it if he can.


Dugdale. As I hope for Salvation I did not say so.


Eliz. Hunt. Upon my Salvation it is true what I say


Stephens. This was the maid that hid her Masters papers when they were
searched for.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. Be quiet; art thou entering into dialogues with the maid now.


Coll. Mr. Stevens, it is well known what a man you are to propagate Witnesses.
My Lord, she gave me an account of this in the Tower before I came away, that
Dugdale desired to speak with Mr. Smith, and told her that nothing that he had
to say would touch my life.


Eliz. Hunt. As I am alive it is true.


L. c. j. Mr. Dugdale denies it now.


Eliz. Hunt. He is not a right man if he denies it, for he told it me twice.


College. I told Mr. Smith of it, when he had leave to come to me: I told him
what the maid said he had said to her, and this was three weeks ago; said he, I
will speak with him with all my heart, if he has a mind to speak with me; for
he has said that he has nothing against her Master that can touch an hair of
his head, nor nothing that can touch his life; that he knew nothing of a Plot
or contrivance against the King; and if I could help it, I had as lieve have
given a hundred pound I had never spoken what I have. This he said to her.


L. c. j. You tell her what to say.


Eliz. Hunt. Sir, he does not tell me; for Mr. Dugdale said those very things
to me.


Coll. This is an account I had when I was a Prisoner; I could not direct her.


L. c. j. Do you deny what they say to be true, Mr. Dugdale?


Mr. Dugd. My Lord, she came to me for money, I told her I had it not ready,
but would pay her; and in the Shop, before the Apprentice boy, she desired of
me that I would write two or three words what I had to say against her Master,
and I told Mr. Graham of it. So, said I, I cannot tell, I have not the papers,
nor what informations I have given against him. So she came again the next
morning, and she was at me to write down what I said. I wonder, said I, your
Master will send you! had not he as good send Mr. Smith, who is his counsel?
And this was all the words we had.


Eliz. Hunt. My Lord, I do solemnly assure you, he said he would write down
what he had said against my Master, and would fain speak with Mr. Smith; for
there was more ado made about it than needs.


Dugd. Mr. Graham can tell what it was; for I came and told him immediately.


Lo. c. j. Did you tell her you had nothing to say against her Master that
would touch his life?


Dugdale. I could not say that I had said nothing against her Master, for she
asked me that I would write down what I had said; but I told her I knew not
what was Treason, that must be referred to the Court.


Mr. just. jones. Did he speak it openly or privately to you?


Eliz. Hunt. He did not speak it aloud; no body heard him but my self.


Dugd. It was in the Shop, and the Apprentice-boy was by.


Mr. just. Levins. Was this after he had been at the Old Bailey, or before?


Eliz. Hunt. Yes, it was after he had been at the Old Bailey, and after he had
been at Oxon. too.


Mr. just. Levins. Then it was before the Court, what could be made of it?


Coll. She had gone forty times for the money I had lent him out of my pocket,
and I lent him that when I had little more for my self.


Eliz. Hunt. I did tell him, Mr. Dugdale, if you cannot let me have my Masters
money, if you please to tell me what you have made Oath against my Master. Said
he, I cannot let thee have it now, but thou shall have what I have to say
against him; I will draw it up in writing, and thou shall have it to
morrow-morning. The next morning I came to him again, and, said I, I am come
again, what must I do? Said he, I have no money, such an one has not hoped me
to it. Sir, then said I, I hope you will be as good as your word, to let me
know what you have made Oath against my Master. Said he, I was about it
yesterday, but could not do it: But, Sweetheart, said he, (and took me by the
hand) I will give you a copy of it to day at ten of the clock; and if I do not,
I will tell it thee by word of mouth. So I came to the House at ten, and staid
till eleven, but did not see him.


Mr. just. Jones. You had a great mind to be tampering.


Eliz. Hunt. The first time, he asked me who was his counsel; I told him, Mr.
Smith; then, said he, I have a great desire to speak with him: So I told my
Master of it.


College. My Lord, you see it is but black and white, all this whole
contrivance upon me: she has proved I knew nothing of these papers, and indeed
I did not.


Lo. c. j. Do you call any more Witnesses?


College. There is my Brother-in-law that received those papers. Call George
Spur, and Sarah Goodwin.


(Mrs. Goodwin appeared.) College. Do you know any thing of the papers that
were carried to my Brother George Spur ^?


Mrs. Goodwin. Yes, I do. The Saturday after my Brothers confinement, about
eight of the clock in the morning, I having heard of it, came into the House,
and in a quarter of an hours time in comes a Waterman, and desires an handful
or two of shavings. I knowing not who he was, nor what he desired them for,
told him he should have them; so he went up to the working-shop togather them,
for he pretended that to be his business.


L. c. j. Whose Waterman was it?


Mrs. Goodwin. A Waterman, I suppose, that belonged to His Majesty, for he had
a Coat marked with R. C.


Coll. This is after I was in custody.


Mrs. Goodwin. Yes, it was the Saturday after. So no sooner had he the
shavings, but he goes out of the Shop, and comes in again with three of his
Majesty's Messengers, and they made enquiry after papers, and I being innocent
of concealing any papers, or any thing, said I knew of none; so they came to
one box that had the Tools for the men to work with, and they demanded the
keys: I told him, I knew not where the keys were: So they went to the next, and
found it open, but nothing did they find there; there was a Bed wherein
formerly my Brother's Servants did lie. Said one to the other, look well
whether there be not something hid in that bed; said I, I suppose there is no
such thing as you inquire for: if you please, you may take off the clothes, and
gave them free toleration to look; but for the chest, I would not deliver the
keys, because the man was not there that owned it. In their searching they
flung down the Wainscote, and did a great deal of damage to his Goods.
Gentlemen, said I, I suppose you have order to search, but none to spoil a man's
Goods. When they were gone, having found none, they threatened, God dam them
they would have them, for there they were. But I being ignorant of the
concealment of the papers, I requested the Maid and my Brothers Son, whether
they knew of any papers, and they satisfied me they knew of some prints that
were brought by a Porter, to be left at my Brothers, but they knew not whence
they came, nor what they were: and the same answer gave my Brother's Son, that
he did not know whose the papers were. But since his Fathers confinement, they
were laid up sure and safe, for they knew not what they concerned. Upon this,
my Lord, my Brother in-law George Spur, he comes into the House, and if it
please your Honor, I requested him to carry them into the Country to his
House, to secure them till we knew what they did concern, and who they did
belong to. Whereupon he replied, my Lord, that he was fearful to carry any
thing out of the House; said I, if you will please to take them of me, I will
carry them out of the House for your security, because his Wife looked every
hour (being with child) when she should be delivered, and he was fearful of
troubling her. So I carried them out of the House, and delivered them to him.


L. c. just. To whom?


Mrs. Goodwin. To my Brother-in-law Mr. George Spur. So at my going out, after
I had delivered them to him, in my way back again. I found a small Paper-book,
and a small parcel of Writings; who dropped them, or who laid them there, I
cannot tell. But taking them up unadvisedly, I put them among the Prints, which
I carried out; I delivered them to my Brother-in-law. This is all I have to say
as to the papers.


Stevens. Three parts of what she has said is false.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Well, hold you your tongue.


Stevens. Mr. Atterbury is here, my Lord, that searched the house.


Atterbury. Be pleased to give me my Oath, I will tell you what passed.


Mr. At. Genesis We don't think it material, but you were sworn before, stand up.


L. c. j. Tell the manner of finding the papers. This woman gives us an account
of a Waterman that came in, pretending to fetch shavings --


Atterbury. Upon my Oath it was not so. The Waterman was a Waterman that
brought me and two more of my Fellows, and the Waterman followed us into the
yard, but came after us: and being ordered to look for papers, I did search the
House; for I had Intelligence that there were papers there, but I did not find
them there. But upon finding the first papers, I made the more diligent search,
but could not find the rest I most chiefly sought after.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Did the Kings Waterman take any shavings by himself?


Atterbury. We were all together, we did not move out of any one Room, but
together; this Gentlewoman was in the House when I came, and there was a little
child, a girl, and this maid was there.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Did you come for shavings there, Mr. Atterbury?


Atterbury. No, I did not.


Mrs. Goodwin. The Waterman did though first.


Coll. Call George Spur. (But he did not appear.) But Mr. Atterbury, before you
go down, pray tell the Court, did you take any of these papers at my House, or
at my Brother-in-law Spurs House?


Sewel. My Lord, I took the papers, and I took them at Bushy at Spurs House.
And this woman carried out one half to Spur, and the maid carried out the other.


L. c. j. When did he carry them?


Mrs. Goodwin. The same day they searched for them, for my Brother came in at
the same time.


L. c. j. How do you know Spur carried any?


Mrs. Goodwin. He carried none out of the House, I carried them out of the
House and delivered them to him.


Lo. c. just Then they were in the House.


Mrs. Goodwin. They were in the Counting House?


Coll. My Lord, if they were in any other place, I know not how they came
there, for this was done after I was a prisoner; and Sewel says they were
removed when I was a prisoner. Where is George Spur?


Mr. Ser. jeff. It is admitted they were at your House, and taken thence, and
afterward carried to Spurs.


College. They carried them abroad, and handed them from one to another, and
took them into the Country, I know not what they did with them; but my Lord, I
neither know the Printer nor the Author, I declare it upon my life.


L. c. just. Have you any more Witnesses?


College. No, my Lord, I have not.


L. c. j. Will you that are of Counsel for the King call any more?


Mr. At. Genesis One or two if you please, my Lord. Call John Shirland. And it is
to this purpose, it seems very lately Mr. Bolron would have tempted him to have
forsworn himself.


College. My Lord, I hope, if they bring in any persons of new Evidence, I may
have leave to contradict them.


L. c. j. You need not fear but you shall be heard to them.


Mr. At. Genesis We shall prove Bolron to be a Subornor of Witnesses; and that
the Jury may know what he is, he and Mowbray have gone to give Evidence at
several Trials, and the Jury would never believe them when they were upon their
Oath.


Mr. Ser. Jeff. I think it needs not, time has been spent enough already.


Coll. No whispering, good my Lord.


Sir Geo. Jeff. Good Mr. College, you are not to tell me my duty here.


Mr. just. jones. It is not lawful for the Kings Counsel to confer together?


Coll. Not to whisper, my Lord, all ought to be spoken out.


L. c. j. Nothing ought to be said to the Jury indeed privately.


Mr. At Genesis But shall not we talk among our selves?


Coll. No, I hope, not of any thing that concerns my Trial.


Mr. just. jones. You are deceived in that.


College. I think it is Law, that all ought to be public, I beg your pardon if
I am in the wrong.


Mr. At. Genesis Swear John Shirland. (Which was done.) Pray give the Court and
the Jury an account of Bolron, what you knew of him.


Shirland. Bolron my Lord, last Whitson-Tuesday, would have given me ten pound
and an Horse to go down and swear against Sir Miles Stapleton. I was to swear I
was suborned by his Friends, and several other persons, which I have discovered
upon my Oath.


L. c. Just. Is this man sworn?


Mr. At. Genesis Yes.


Lo. c. just. Now call Bolron to confront him.


College. He offered you an Horse, as much as I offered Turbervile an Horse,
and I never offered Him an Horse in the world.


[Then Bolron appeared.] L. c. j. Is this the man, Shirland?


Mr. At. Genesis Did he give you Ten pound to swear?


Shirland. He bid me Ten pound and an Horse to swear against Sir Miles
Stapleton.


Mr. ju. jones. Did you ever see him, Bolron?


Mr. Bolron. Yes, my Lord, he was to have been a Witness against Sir Miles
Stapleton, and he pretended that he was suborned by Sir Miles, or some of his
friends.


Coll. What are you, Sir? Mr. Bolron, what is Mr. Shirland?


Mr. Bolron. He is a man lives by his Shifts: He has been whipped in Bridewel.


College. Do you know him, Sir? What is he?


Mr. Bolron. Even an idle man.


Shirland. You, once when you saw me, drew your Sword on me, because I would
not do as you would have me.


Mr. Bolron. I profess, my Lord, it is not so.


Mr. At. Genesis Here is Mr. Smith, hear what he says against Mr. Bolron.


Mr. Smith. As we were coming up along, he was speaking to me of College, and
told me, he had as much to say against him as any body; and if I would speak
for him, he would evidence againce Sir John Brooks for a discourse at
Ferry-bridge.


Mr. Bolron. I never did hear any such thing.


Mr. Smith. No man in your own Country will believe you.


College. They believed you no more, it seems neither.


L. c. j. Do you call any more Witnesses, Gentlemen?


Mr. Ser. jeff. No, I think, we need not.


L. c. j. Look you, Mr. College, as I understand it, the Kings Counsel will
produce no more Witnesses. You may make what Observations you will upon the
Evidence to the Court, and then must them make what Observations they will to
the Court; and then we will give the Charge to the Jury.


College. My Lord, I have only innocence to plead; I have no Flourishes to
set off my Desence. I cannot take the Jury nor the Court with an Oratory; I am
unhappy in those things. But, my Lord, I do declare, as to my own particular,
in the presence of God Almighty, that as to whatsoever is sworn against me, as
to the seizing his Majesty, providing Arms, or having any Design either at
Oxford or London, or any other place in the world, to seize upon the person of
the King, or to rebel against the Government established; I vow to God
Almighty, I never had such a thought in me: it is a truth, my Lord. My Lord,
they have sworn desperately against me, and it has appeared, I think, by very
credible persons, that they have contradicted one another. It has been proved
that it was a Design; that they were tampered withal; that they complained they
were in poverty, that they wanted maintenance; and they did confess they were
tempted to come over to swear against Protestants: and now the Lord knows they
have closed with it, and they begin with me. I hope the Jury have taken notice
that I have contradicted them sufficiently in what they have sworn; and that it
is not possible, if I had a grain of sense, for me to discover my self to be
such an one to Haynes that was an Irishman, and should speak all the Treason
that he has galloped through at first sight, that as soon as ever I saw him,
that I should speak so to him; I hope you will consider whether it consists
with common Reason, when there could be no probability of making any use of him
in the world. My Lord, all my Witnesses that I have brought, your Lordship can,
and I hope will sum them up better than I can; for I declare it, I have been so
concerned, that I have not been able to write half of it down. But I think
there is never a man that has sworn against me, but has been sufficiently
confuted by persons of integrity and Honesty, men of Principles, and men of
Religion; they are such, my Lord, that make conscience of what they say: they
are persons altogether unknown to me, most of them, as to what they had to say;
it was what they offered voluntarily; and I am certain they have had nothing
but their bare charges, if they had that, for their pains in coming hither;
and, my Lord, there is no probability that they should come and attest any
thing that is false, for me who am a stranger, for nothing: No man is a Knave
for nothing, as I believe these men are not. My Lord, I do declare it, I was
bred a Protestant, and I have lived so; I am so this very day; I have been a
lover of the Church of England, and of all the fundamental points of Doctrine
believed in it; I own the same God, the same Savior, the same Gospel, and the
same Faith; I never had a prejudice against any man in the Church in my life,
but such as have made it their business to promote the interest of the Papists,
and such I must beg leave to say there are amongst them: for there is no
Society in the world without some bad men; and these do promote the interest of
the Papists, by dividing the Protetestants and allowing none to be true
Protestants, but those that are within the Church of England established by
Law; which is a Notion so wide I could never close with that. I never had a
prejudice against any man but a Knave in my life. I have heard, I confess, some
of the Dissenters, and I have found very honest, just, pious, godly men among
them; men free from Oaths and all Debauchery; men that make a conscience of
what they say: not like some persons that say they are of the Church of
England, that carry themselves in their lives and actions, so as that no credit
can be gained to the Church by them. My Lord, I have been an hearty man against
the Papists; I have been an hearty man as any person of my condition for
Parliaments, which I look upon to be my Birthright, and under God Almighty,
the Bulwark of our Liberty; and I am sorry if any man should be an instrument
to create a misunderstanding betwixt the King and the Parliament: for I always
thought I served my Country, when I served the Parliament, and I served the
King, when I served my Country. I never made any difference between them,
because I thought them both one. I had the Honor to be entrusted by them
before, and upon that account I came voluntarily down hither. I rid my own
Horse, I spent my own money, and eat my own Bread; I was not beholding to any
man for the value of six pence all the while I was here. My Lord, I have ever
since the Plot has been discovered, endeavered with all my heart, and all my
power, to dedect and come at the very bottom of it: I have spared for no time
nor pains, what lay fairly in my way, in every thing to encourage those that
discovered the Villainies of the Popish Plot against the Life of the King, and
for the Subversion of the Religion and Government established by Law. Now
certainly it is not strange to the world; for I think all Christendom is aware
how plain the Popish Plot has been proved. These men that swear against me,
were they that used to follow me sometimes; they would say, it was they that
had come to save our lives, and yet we let them want Bread. That argument, my
Lord, was so fair, that I thought it unreasonable to see them starve: And I
have said sometimes to some honest considerable men, that it was hard they
should have this to say of us, that they should want Bread to eat that were the
Kings Evidence, to detect a Popish Plot wherein we our selves were concerned;
and that when they had saved our blood in our veins, they should be suffered to
starve. And one time, I think, some three or four Gentlemen of the City did
give me 42 s. or 40 s. and 8 d. or thereabouts; which I did distribute amongst
them: And they never came to me in my life, but to seek relief, they knowing
that I had a general acquaintance. And sometimes they thought it might be fit
to petition the Common Council of London to take care of them: Sometimes they
would speak to particular men that care should be taken of them. At other times
indeed it was not this sort of discourse they had with me; but they would
pretend they had something to discover of the Popish Plot, and so they would
apply to me as a man of some acquaintance. And the first time I saw Haynes was
upon such an account, the beginning of March last, and it was thus: I was at
Richard's Coffee-House at Temple Bar, where Macnamarra did desire me to go out,
and I should hear such a piece of Roguery I never did hear in my life, against
my Lord Shaftsbury. So I did go out with them, and I called Captain Brown, who
is since dead, to go with me; and we went to the Hercules Pillars, and Haynes
there discovered what I told your Lordship before, a design to destroy the
Parliament at Oxford, an Army that was to land in the North, another in
Ireland, and the Duke of York was to be at the head of them. My Lord, after I
had heard all out, he did desire us all to conceal what he had said till the
Parliament sat, and then he would not only discover this, but much more. He at
the same time told us, that there was a design of Fitz-Gerald's against my Lord
Shaftsbury to take away his life, and he was employed to come to his Cousin
Macnamarra to get him over to join in the design, and he should never want for
money, if he would but come over, and do as they would have him. After he had
discovered himself, Sir, said I, you are a stranger to me, and I never saw him
before in my days, if he had seen me, I cannot tell: But, Sir, said I, either
this is true, or this is false. If it be true, said he, it is all true, and much
more. So he up and told us much of Coleman, and of the reconciliation between
the Duke of Ormond and the Duke of York, and how he came to be Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, and how Plunket came to be Primate, and by means of whom, and the
Letters that passed, and how so much a year was given to Plunket for carrying
on the correspondence; and he told us so much, that I did wonder to hear any
man talk after that rate. After I had heard what he had to say, I told him,
Sir, said I, this is either true or false that you have said; if it be true, my
Lord Shaftsbury shall know it to night; for I will not conceal such a thing
concerning a Peer of the Realm: and if it were a color, he should know of it.
And I did send him word that night; and, said I, Sir, you ought to go, for your
own security and ours too, to swear it before a Magistrate. Said he, if I
should, I should be discovered. Said I, I cannot think you will be discovered;
if you swore it before Sir George Treby, or Sir Robert Clayton, they will not
discover you. So he agreed he would swear before Sir George Treby, and he did
go accordingly; but he being out of Town, I cannot have the Affidavit to
produse it. There was a Letter sent last Saturday-night to Sir George to
Bristol, and I hoped he might have been here to day. This was the first
acquaintance I ever had with Haynes The next time I heard of him, was upon this
occasion: Ivy comes to me in Richard's Coffee-House, and, said he, yonder is
the man that made that discovery, which I told you before that Haynes had said
to me; it was about a month or three weeks before the Parliament was at Oxford.
After the Parliament was dissolved at Oxford, Ivy comes to me, and I think it
was betwixt the two Terms wherein Fitz-Harris was Arraigned and Tried: I know
not the names of them, but he comes to me and tells me he had been with my Lord
Shaftsbury, and that there was a friend of his that would confirm all that
Fitz-Harris had discovered concerning the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey;
and, says he, my Lord of Shaftsbury has sent me to you to acquaint you with
it. Where is your friend, said I? He is without, said he. So we went out of the
Coffee-House, and when we came out of doors, there was this Haynes: we went to
the Crown-Tavern without Temple Bar, it was in the forenoon. When we came there
into the room, he examined all the corners, and cupboards, and places about the
room, to see that no body was there. When he thought all was secure, he began
to tell me he had been to acquaint my Lord Shaftsbury that there was a friend
of his that would discover the whole Intrigue of the murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey, all that Fitz-Harris had said, and much more: And he desired me that I
would entreat my Lord Shaftsbury to be instrumental to get him his Pardon
before he discovered particularly. Then I told him, I think it is convenient,
said I, that you discover something in writing, and give under your hand what
you can say. He was not willing to do that. Can you believe, said I, that my
Lord of Shaftsbury will betray you? Says he, I will not trust any body; I shall
be assassinated. Said I, if you will not give it to any body else, will you
give it to Mr. Michael Godfrey, Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's Brother? you can have
no jealousy of Him, that He will ever discover you: said he, if my Lord
Shaftsbury will engage to get me a Pardon, I will tell the whole truth: said I,
I will go to my Lord and acquaint him: so I went to both my Lord and Mr.
Godfrey, and Sir Edmundbury Godfrey's two Brothers both met me at my Lord of
Shaftsbury's House. This is the thing that he tells me; he would have me get my
Lord's Protection, and a Pardon for Treason: But the real truth is, He sent me
upon this errand: so I came to my Lord Shaftsbury, and the two Mr. Godfreys
were in the room; and after I had told my Lord what discourse I had with Him,
says my Lord, College, these Irish-men have confounded all our business; and
thou and I must have a care they do not put a trick upon us; this may be a
trick of the Papists to ruin us; and if they have such a design, if they will
not put it upon you and I, they are fools. Upon your Lordship, said I, they
may; but I am a poor inconsiderable fellow. Says my Lord, I Will tell you, Mr.
Godfrey; Mr. College has not only been an Honest man, but a useful and an
active man for the Protestant interest. So I told my Lord how far I had gone
with Him, and that I desired it might be put in writing: says my Lord
Shaftsbury, if he will put it in writing, I will go once again, for I have been
since I saw the fellow, with my Lord Macclesfield, and my Lord Chief Justice
Pemberton, and my Lord Chancellor, and I have told them that there is such a
person in general, but I knew not the man, as indeed my Lord did not; for only
Ivy was the person between them that my Lord knew: And I told them, says my
Lord, that he can confirm all that Fitz-Harris has said concerning the death of
Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, and that he would prove my Lord of Danby was in it, if
he might have his pardon; and my Lord said, they promised to speak to his
Majesty that it might be granted. But some time the latter end of the week I
heard it would not be granted; and both of these men followed me to know what
they should do. Said I, my Lord Shaftsbury knows not but that it may be a
trick; and, said I to Ivy, I wonder why he should conceal it all this while,
being a necessitous man, and 500 l. proffered by the King in his Proclamation.
Why, says Ivy, do you think there is no truth in it? says I, it is not my
judgment, but my Lord Shaftsbury and Mr. Godfrey's judgment too. He answered me
again, Fitz-Harris has desired he may have a pardon granted for himself and a
Frenchman; and if so be there were nothing in it, do you think he would move
for a pardon? Says I, did Mr. Fitz-Harris move for Haynes's pardon? How do I
know that, says Ivy again: Fitz-Harris's Wife told me so. Says I, let me speak
with Fitz-Harris's Wife, let me hear her say so, and I will believe you. The
next day he did bring her to me to my House; and this was the time and the
occasion that brought Fitz-Harris's Wife, and Haynes, and Ivy, and Mr.
Fitz-Harris's maid to my House; and I never saw Fitz-Harris in my days till his
Trial, nor had any communication with him. But, my Lord, she did talk with
Haynes, and confirmed it to me, that her Husband had desired a pardon for him:
why then, said I, he would do well to discover what he knows to my Lord
Shaftsbury; for I was with my Lord, and he says he will meddle no more, unless
he will give it under his hand what he has to say: And he did confess to me in
my own yard, for there we were together, that he saw my Lord of Danby come into
the Chapel at Sommerset-House, when the body of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey lay
under the Altar.


L. c. j. Here has been nothing of this made appear by proof.


Coll. My lord, I only tell you which way they introduced themselves into my
acquaintance.


L. c. j. You may observe what you will upon the Evidence, as we told you; but
you ramble from the matter you are to speak to. And as we told Mr. Attorney,
that what he said should go for nothing, unless he made it out by proof; so
must we say to you, what you say goes for nothing, further than you have proved
it. Now you have quitted the proof quite, and not spoke to that, but run into
other stories. I would have you keep your self to your proofs, and make your
observations upon them.


Coll. It Is, as I humbly conceive it, to my purpose but I hope my ignorance may
excuse me, if I err. I tell you the truth of things, thus it was.


L. c. j. Truth! Why if yours, or any man's word in your case, should go for
truth, no man that stands at a Bar could be convicted; for every man will say
he is an honest man, and all the plausible things in the world. Make you your
observations upon the proof that is proper for you to do; and urge it as well
as you can, and to the best purpose you can: but to tell us long stories of
passages between you and others that are not a whit proved, that is not usual,
nor pertinent.


College. I thought it had been to the point, when this man pretends to have a
familiarity with me, to show how his acquaintance begun.


Mr. just. jones. Why, do you think* it is an answer to him in what he proves
upon his Oath? Have you proved one jot of it? not that I have heard. It Is your
part to sum up the Evidence on your own side, and to answer that which is
proved upon you, if you can. Do that, and we will hear you speak to it as long
as you can. But to tell stories to amuse the Jury with that are not proved, and
to run out into rambling discourses to no purpose, that is not to be allowed,
nor never was in any Court of Justice.


Mr. Just. Raymond. Not one of your Witnesses have mentioned any thing that you
say.


Mr. just. Levins. I wonder, Mr. College, you should forget your self so much:
for you found fault with Mr. Attorney at the beginning for opening the
Evidence, and you were told, and the Jury were told at your request, that what
he said, and did not prove, passed for nothing. But I must tell you, it is much
worse in your case: for Mr. Attorney only opened what he might prove
afterward, but your observations are upon what has been proved already; and
yet you run out into stories of what has not been proved at all, after your
proof is past.


College. Sir, I could not prove this otherwise than by Ivy, who has been
sworn against me.


Mr. just. jones. Would you have the Jury to believe you upon your word?


Coll. There is no more than his Oath against me; and why my Oath, being an
Englishman, and a Protestant, should not be taken as well as his that is an
Irish man, and has been a Papist; I know not.


L. c. j. You go upon that ground that your word is to be taken, as appears by
your defense; but I must tell you, all the course of Justice were destroyed,
and no Justice against malefactors were to be had, if the word of him that is
accused should pass for proof to acquit him.


College. My Lord, I have given your Lordship an account of these fellows
conversations; and what other proofs to make, I know not: for I knew not what
they would swear against me, and I had not witnesses in my pocket to confront
them.


Mr. just. Levins. Well* the Jury have heard it over and over again, first upon
your request, that nothing is to be taken notice of that is not proved.


Coll. Pray, my Lord, then as to Haynes. My Lord, I do observe that there was a
witness for me, that did prove he owned he was one that was employed to make a
Protestant Plot, and another that did hear him swear, dam him, he would swear
any thing against any body for money; for it was his Trade.


Mr. just. Levins. Now you are right; speak as much as you will as to your
proofs.


Coll. My Lord, I think Turbervile and Dugdale swear as to the tenth of March


Oxon. I desire it may be proved I was in Oxford the tenth of March.


Mr. just. jones. You your self came down the middle of March.


L. c. j. I do not remember that they said the tenth of March.


Coll. Did not the Indictment say so?


Mr. At. Genesis It is only in the Indictment.


L. c. j. As to the time mentioned in the Indictment, it is not material; that
is the constant rule in Trials upon Indictments; as if an Horse be laid to be
stole the tenth, if it be proved the Prisoner stole it another day, it will be
sufficient, the time is not material; the question is whether the Indictment be
true in substance. Mr. College, my Brothers will all tell you that the Law is
so.


Mr. just. Levins. Though it is laid the tenth of March, yet if it be proved
the first or twentieth before or after, it is all one: So the thing be proved,
they are not bound to a day.


Coll. My Lord, the punctilio's of Law I know not, but it was the twenty fourth
or twenty fifth e're I came down.


L. c. j. Well, go on Sir.


Coll. Dugdale says I meant by the word Rowley, the King.


Mr. just. jones. He does so.


Coll. How does he come to know, that by that word I meant the King?


L. c. j. That we did ask him, and he says you used so to expound it.


Mr. just. jones. Why, look you, He said you and he used to have frequent
communication concerning the King and you did most frequently speak of the King
by the name of Rowley.


College. But I say, my Lord, I never spoke of the King by the name of Rowley
in my life.


Mr. just. jones. You say it, and he swears the contrary.


Coll. I don't remember that he says I declared it so, but he said I meant it;
for if I had declared it, then it had been the same thing for me to have named
the King downright.


Mr. just. Levins. Look you, Mr. College, as to that, when any witness had
done his Evdence, you had liberty to cross examine him.


L. c. j. Would you have him called up again to clear this?


Coll. Yes, if you please.


Lo. c. j. Stand up, Mr. Dugdale. I understood by your testimony, when Mr.
College and you discoursed of the King, you sometimes discoursed of him by the
name of Rowley, and that he explained that name to be the King.


Mr. Dugd. The first time I ever heard what Rowley meant, was from him; for I
asked him what he meant by the name of Rowley; I heard it before, but I did not
understand it.


Mr. just. jones. Where was it?


Dugdale. At Richard's Coffee-House.


Mr. just. Jones. What was the answer he made you?


Dugdale. He said it was the King.


Coll. Upon what occasion did I explain it to you?


Dugdale. Upon the account of the Pictures.


College. I know not which of the Pictures has the name of Rowley in it.


Dugdale. It was when we were talking of one of the Pictures you brought in
Rowley; and Mac was the Duke of York, and Rowley was the King.


Coll. Upon what Picture was it that I took occasion to explain the name Rowley
to you?


Dugdale. I am not certain.


Coll. Remember you have an account to give as well as I.


Dugd. You have so many Pictures that I cannot remember them; you have showed me
more than have been produced in Court.


Coll. Where had you that Picture from me that they call Raree-Shew?


Dugd. Truly I received of them twice at Richard's Coffee-House.


Coll. Twice, do you say?


Dugd. Yes, two of them at two several times; for you having promised me one,
you brought it according to your word.


College. When was that?


Dugd. I did not keep an account of the day of the month; and another I do
remember at the Green-Dragon-Tavern you thrust into my pocket, and Mr. Baldwin
was by at that time. And, said he, Mr. College, you will be so open, that you
will come to be discovered at last.


Coll. Then will I be willing to dye for it, if he and I and Mr. Baldwin were
at the Green-Dragon-Tavern together. When was it that I gave you any Pictures
there? was it since the Parliament at Oxon.


Dugd. Do I charge you since the Parliament?


Coll. I never saw Raree-Shew before the Parliament at Oxord.


Dugd. I do not say it was that; you gave me one of the others.


Coll. It Is strange you will stick to nothing. When was it we were at the
Green-Dragon-Tavern;


Dugd. We were there before the Parliament sat at Oxon, it was since Christmas.


Coll. What Picture was it I gave you there?


Dugd. It may be I cannot remember which of them it was, it was not Raree-Shew;
I suppose you gave me one of them concerning the Bishops, where you put Bishop
Mew kissing the Pope's Toe; for it was a Bishop with a patch on, and that you
told me was Bishop Mew.


Coll. I put it, did I make it?


Dugd. You said you were the Author.


Mr. just. jones. Mr. College; Will you consider upon what Mr. Dugdale was
called up about, the exposition of the name of Rowley.


Coll. I did examine him, and he has contradicted himself; for he has said at
the Green Dragon-Tavern I gave him a Picture of Raree-Shew.


Mr. just. Jones. He said no such thing, He said he did not know which it was.


College. I am certain he meant that then when he spoke it; for he named it
before, that he had two from me at Richard's Coffee-House, and one I thrust
into his pocket at the Tavern; and I say I never was at the Green-Dragon-Tavern
with Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Baldwyn, nor in the Tavern these three quarters of a
year.


Mr. just. Levins. Mr. College, you were in the right just now, to manage your
Evidence, in opposition to the other Evidence; go on that way.


Coll. My Lord, I don't know well what was said, for I could not hear half, nor
write a quarter of it; but, my Lord, I hope your Lordship has taken Notes of
it, and will remember it for me. You are my Counsel as well as my Judges.


L. c. j. In matter of Fact we are.


College. My Life and your Souls lie at stake to do me Justice; therefore I
hope you will take notice of what I have not had the opportunity to write down.
I have observed that every one of my Witnesses have spoken materially to
contradict what they have said, to prove that this was done for money, and that
there has been confessions from every man of them; that they were hired to do
it; that they did it for a livelihood; and one of them said; It was a good
Trade, dam him, he would do any thing for money: And I hope then you will
consider the improbability, that I should speak to an Irishman who I had never
seen before in my life; and that I should at the first dash utter all that
Treason that he gives in Evidence, I think it cannot consist with any man's
understanding to believe me to be so^ mad or so weak.


Mr. just. Levinz. That is as to Haynes only.


College. As to Smith now I suppose it does not come within the reach of the
Statute; for the Dinner that was made by Alderman Wilcox was made before last
July was twelvemonth; all the Witnesses do say it was before Christmas, and Dr.
Oats says it was in the Summer; I know it by a very good observation, because
I went to Astrop Waters after that, and I saw Sir Creswell Levinz at the Wells:
Now Sir you were there before this time twelvemonth. So then whatever he says I
said to him there, I cannot be charged withal by the Statute, more or less, if
I had never a Witness against him; but I have Witnesses that have contradicted
him sufficiently, that he is forsworn in that; and if so, he is not to be
believed in any thing else; for he says, He and I went to the Coffee-House
together, and we discoursed such and such things, which is not above half a
Bows shoot, and he made it I say a quarter of a miles discourse; if I had had
all the talk, the discourse could not be so long, though he had said never a
word: so you see what a kind of Witness he is. And Dr. Oates's Brother did say,
that I did go along with Dr. Oats, and offered to be one of his Guard, and I
did so, and went along with them, but Mr. Smith he came after. And as to what
he says he is sufficiently confuted, that is, about the going into Cabals after
Dinner; for it is proved, that I fell asleep behind the Table, and Dr. Oats
was discoursing with Mr. Savage upon points of Divinity; but I took no notice
of it, neither did I see Smith any more, but he went away, and so did the rest
of the company. But, my Lord, when Haynes was taken, Smith comes to me that day
to my House at the Ditch-side, and sends in a man for me, his man; I was
writing in my Parlour, and drawing the Design for Wainscoting Alhallows Church,
a Platform for it; his man told me, His Master would speak with me, and Haynes
was taken that morning: But as I understand since, it was by agreement and his
own consent, though he has pretended otherwise. You hear, says he, Haynes is
taken? Yes, says I, I do, he has been ever since 9 a clock before the
Secretary upon examination, and he was till 5 a clock at night examining: said
he, I believe he confesses a great deal: Said I, of what? Said he, of some
design of the Protestants: Said I, what, against the Government? I do not know
what they may affright him into; He is a great Rogue if it be true all that he
has said of himself: He says he was concerned in the Fire of London, and knew
of a design to destroy the Protestants then; of a Rebellion that was to be in
Ireland; of Plunket's being made Primate, and a great many of those things: So
that if he speaks truth, he has been a great Rogue, and as he has pretended
also, he was a great coward. So then I believe he may say any thing to excuse
himself: Says Mr. Smith, I wish you are safe. This was the very night before I
was taken.


Mr. just. jones. Have you proved any thing of this?


Coll. My Lord, Pray give me leave to tell you what is proof.


Mr. just. jones. You are not to repeat this, unless you prove it, Sir.


Coll. He spoke cautiously to me, as if he would have intimated to me he would
have had me run away. Said he, I believe you are not safe, I would have you
take care of your self, for you were concerned with him. Now, my Lord, if I had
been a guilty person, I had time enough to get away; and to prove this, I can
only say this was betwixt him and I. But, my Lord, you hear Dr. Oats says,
that this very Smith did swear he would hare my blood, and that was upon this
occasion of my vindicating Sampson, whom he had struck and abused; and I asked
why he did it? Said he, I value no man's life, if he affront me, if it is any man
in England, I value him not. My Lord, upon this occasion the words rise between
us; and when he came out of doors, and was going away Dr. Oats said, He swore
he would have my blood, and that was the occasion of his speaking that
Blasphemy.


L. c. j. Dr. Oats did say so.


Mr. just. Levins. Well, you are right now, if you will go on in that way.


College. My Lord, this is for Smith and Haynes, that Haynes should say it was
a good Trade, and dam him, he would swear any thing for money; and that Smith
should swear, dam him he would have my blood. I cannot sum up the rest of them,
for I have not them here.


Mr. just. jones. There is Turbervile, and Dugdale, and Smith; we will help you
as to the persons.


Mr. just. Levins. Pray keep to the business, and do not run out.


College. Pray, my Lord, I have one thing to say about Smith; He says I showed
him my Arms, which I have had for any time almost these three years, ever since
the Plot brake out. I have been armed ready to oppose the Papists, and I did my
duty in the City in person in the Trained-Bands, but Smith says these Arms were
to destroy the Kings Guards, but he does not prove that I was confederate with
any other person, but instead of that there were other persons that say with
his own mouth, that he did not believe there was any Protestant Plot; nay, he
did believe I said it only in wantonness. This is all, then how probable was
it, that I my self should seize the King, or destroy his Guards.


Mr. just. jones. You remember Captain Brown, Captain Chuton, and Don Jews,
Mr. College.


Coll. Did he swear they were all in my company at Oxon.


Mr. just. jones. Yes, Dugdale did.


Coll. My Lord, Captain Brown and Jews were friends to my Lord Howard, with
whom and other company I came down to Oxon. and they lay with me at the
Chequer, and they were in my company because they were Guests in the House, and
we came along together, but he does not say they were either of them armed more
than my self, nor was he ever in company with us; how then does he know we were
in a conspiracy?


Mr. just. jones. Because you told him at London first that they were such
persons.


Coll. I never saw Jews in my days till I saw him that morning I came down
from Oxon. and Brown I was not acquainted with a fortnight before. This is a
truth, but however they have sworn a Plot upon me at Oxon. and then come and
prove I declared these were the men, and spoke such and such words at London; I
desire your Lordships Judgment in this matter of Law, whether what be done at
London can be sufficient matter of proof in Law to maintain an Indictment
against me at Oxon. And if not, they do not prove legally that I have spoken
such words. Besides I conceive it is not a good proof, because there is but one
Witness.


L. c. j. Yes, look you, there are two Witnesses, Dugdale and Turbervile, as to
what you said at Oxon. and two Witnesses as to what you said at London, Haynes
and Smith, who testify what you said you would do at Oxon. Now in case you
came to Oxon. with any such intention, that coming to Oxford is an Overt Act,
and the Witnesses that speak what you said in London, is Evidence to maintain
the Indictment here, and to prove what your intention was.


Coll. Does that become an Overt Act if I go to Oxon. upon an honest occasion,
any other occasion, though I had said these words before.


L. c. j. If you came with that intent to joy with others, and with a real
purpose to seize the King, that is the Overt Act, and the words before prove
the intention.


Mr. just. jones. He declared it himself by his words.


Coll. Smith says that about a week after Wilcox's Dinner, I discoursed with
him at the Ditch side, that comes not within the compass of the Statutes. Then
there is twice of the 3 times he speaks of, the last day I do not remember when
it was.


Lo. c. just. All was in London that Smith speaks of you.


Coll. How comes that to be proof here, then nothing he says is to go for any
thing.


Mr. just. jones. Nothing will serve your turn; we have declared our opinions
once already, that if the Witnesses swear true, here are two Witnesses; nay, if
one were of what was done at London, and the other of what was done at Oxon. if
they be to the same Treason, they be two Witnesses in Law.


Coll. My Lord, I observe one thing upon Turberviles Evidence, he swears there
was a discourse in the Room when Brown was upon the Bed, but afterward if your
Lordship minds it, he says, I discoursed with him as he and I lay upon the bed.
Before he said when Brown lay upon the bed, and in the Room, and afterward
when we lay upon the bed.


Mr. just. jones. Both the one and the other.


College. But he said first one way, and then the other.


Mr. just. jones. Whilst Brown lay upon the bed, and when he was gone, whilst
you both lay upon the bed.


L. c. just. We will do you no wrong, therefore if you will, Turbervile shall
stand up and clear it.


College. My Lord, I believe those that have taken the passages can prove he
contradicted himself in that.


Lo. c. just. He said both. But the Jury have taken notes of the Evidence, and
will take notice of it.


Coll. As to Mr. Masters, the Evidence he gives was, he says that he and I
should discourse of the Parliament in 40.


Mr. just. jones. And the justifiableness of the late Kings Death, that they
had done nothing but what they had just cause to do.


College. He swears that I did say to him, that the late Parliament did not
cut off the Kings Head.


Mr. just. jones. And you said the last Parliament that sat at Westminster was
of the same opinion with that in 40.


Coll. I dare appeal to Esquire Charlton, in whose shop the discourse was. I
did not know that Mr. Masters was to be an Evidence against me, and truly they
have taken that course with me, by which any man may be destroyed with half
this Evidence, were they of good credit, let his innocence be what it will. I
have been used so barbarously in the Tower, kept from all conversation, and so
in an utter ignorance of what was sworn against me; for else I coud easily have
disproved Mr. Masters, if I had been in London, and had liberty to provide for
my defense; but they have taken a course to prevent that, and brought me hither
because it is impossible I should here defend my self.


Lo. c. j. You have not offered any Witness to impeach Mr. Masters credit.


Coll. Mr. Masters discourse He speaks of was in Mr. Charltons Shop, I durst
have appealed to him about it, for I know if he were here he would do me right.
Mr. Masters did say the Parliament cut off the late Kings Head. We held a
dispute upon that which I was not willing to enter into; I said they did not,
and we did then dispute whether they began the War against His Majesty: I said
they did not that I knew of, neither were they the persons, but the Papists
that began that War, and that broke off the Ereaty at Uxbridge, and that the
Papists carried it on to that sad issue, and put it upon the Protestants, that
they had the odium of it, but it was another sort of men that carried it on. I
said that I did always understand that Parliament to be an honest Parliament,
that minded the true interest of the Nation, and much of the same opinion with
the Parliament that sat last at Westminster. But before I said this, I said
they were persons altogether innocent of the Kings murder, and raising the War
against the King, I did always understand that so the Parliament in 40 were.


L. c. j. But they were guilty of a Rebellion, and are declared so by Act of
Parliament since His Majesty came in.


Coll. My Lord, I am unacquainted with the Law, I speak only my own sense of
it. And my Lord, I did excuse them as to the murder of the King, and the
beginning of the War, that according to my understanding they were not guilty
of it, and from thence I did maintain they were an honest good Parliament, and
much of opinion with the Parliament that sat last at Westminster, which was for
the true interest of the Nation.


L. c. j. And was that the true Interest of the Nation, to cut off the Kings
Head?


Coll. I did argue that with him some time, and I did tell him that it was the
Papists that did all the mischief.


Mr. just. jones. But he says no, upon his Oath, that when he had said, the
Parliament begun the Rebellion, and the Parliament did cut off the Kings Head,
you said the Parliament did nothing but what they had just cause for, and the
Parliament that sat last at Westminster was of the same mind.


L. c. j. Those were his words.


Coll. Pray let him be called again.


Lo. c. just. Let Mr. Masters stand up again.


Coll. Pray Sir relate the whole discourse that passed between you and I,
whether I did not argue with you it was not the Parliament cut off the Kings
Head, nor begun the war, but the Papists.


Mr. Mast. No, you did not say any such thing. We had a great deal of discourse
in the shop, and under the Arch, and the thing that was said, Mr. College, was
this. You did say to me that you did justify the late long Parliament of 40.
and then proceedings, and you said they were a Parliament that did nothing but
what they had just cause for: said I, how can you be so impudent to say so,
when they raised the Rebellion against the King and cut off his Head: said he
again, they did nothing but what they had just cause for, and the Parliament
that sat last at Westminster were of the same opinion.


Mr. just. jones. I did you no wrong in repeating the Evidence, you see, Mr.
College.


Coll. Did I not first dispute with you that, they did not begin the War, nor
cut off the King, but the Papists did it.


Mr. Mast. Look you Mr. College, you would have had it the King began the War.


Coll. Don't you say so, for I said the Papists began the War. Sir say no more
to me than what you will answer to God Almighty; for I always said the Papists
did all the mischief in the late times: and I wonder Sir you would not be so
just to His Majesty as to detect me for what I said then, if you did apprehend
it to be as you now say; but I am sure you did not nor could not.


Mr. Mast. Mr. College, it was so far from that, that I was afraid it was of
dangerous consequence, and I gave some Persons of Honor an account of it, and
I was sent to but on Friday last, to know what it was was said, and I was
desired and commanded to come down hither.


Coll. Pray Mr. Masters, you are upon your Oath, do me but Justice, and speak
upon your own conscience; look you to it that you speak the truth.


Mr. Masters. I will do you all the right I can in the world.


Coll. Then before the Court do you declare whether we did not discourse at
that time as I said, for this discourse was at Mr. Charltons shop at the
further end.


Mr. Masters. No it was at the entrance into the shop, Mr. College; and did
not we go into the Arch and talk there.


Mr. Serj. jeff. Mr. Masters don't trouble your self, your Reputation is not
upon the level with that Gentleman's.


Coll. I desire he may speak the very truth, and nothing but the truth.


Mr. Masters. I do as near as I can, and do you no wrong; you did not in your
discourse say the Parliament did not begin the War, nor cut off the Kings Head.


Coll. You did say to me they did cut off the Kings Head, and I told you no,
the Papists did.


Mr. Masters. I think you did say that the Papists had an Hand in it; but, Sir,
you have left out the most material part of our discourse, which was, that you
said they did nothing but what they had just cause for.


Coll. I do say, and it was my sense always, that the Parliament did not cut
off the Kings Head, for they were long out of doors before that came to pass,
and a new unhappy War was begun.


L. c. j. The War was a Rebellion on the Parliaments part, let us not mince the
matter, and so it was declared by Act of Parliament; and if you argued it after
that rate, it shows your temper, and that you are a very ill man; for they that
justify such things as to the time passed; would lead us to the same things
again if they could. Therefore don't go about to palliate it, ad faciendum
populum here, it is nothing to the matter, but only to show your principles, and
the Jury have heard what Mr. Masters says.


College. I was then a child, and do not know all the passages, but I speak my
sense.


L. c. j. You should not have justified such things.


Mr. ju. jones. Who appointed the High Court of Justice that tried the King and
condemned him but the Parliament?


Mr. just. Levins. It was the Garbage of that Parliament I am sure, that is the
Rump, but they called themselves the Parliament of England, and the Parliament
it was that begun the War.


College. My Lord, I did not know, nor don't know that it is proved yet, that
the Parliament were those that did cut off the Kings Head. I don't know, Mr.
Masters is pleased to say this of me; but I thought no evil, nor did he
understand it so I believe at that time, for he did not seem to take advantage
of my discourse. I know he talked violently and passionately with me, as he
used to do; and for Mr. Masters to say this of me now, is a great unkindness;
for I thought he was so much a Gentleman, that if I had spoken any thing that
had not become me, he would have taken notice of it then.


Mr. Ser. jeff. He did then he tells you.


College. Had I known of it, I am sure Mr. Charleton would have done me
justice, and set things right; but this I say, I did first excuse the
Parliament from being concerned in the Murder of the King, or that they did
begin the War, but the Papists did it: if it were otherwise, it was more than I
understood; and after that I said, I thought that the Parliament that sat last
at Westminster, did stand up for the Peoples Rights, after the same manner that
the Parliament in 40. did.


Mr. just. jones. What, just after the same manner, in raising War and
Rebellion against the King?


Coll. After I had discoursed it thus, my Lord, as I told you, it could not be
understood that I thought that Parliament would cut off the King's Head: And
therefore you that are my Jury, pray consider, and take it all together, there
could be no such meaning made of my words; for I did not conceive that that
Parliament were concerned in those things, but were a Parliament that stood up
for the rights of the people: Now if it were so, then the Parliament at
Westminster were of the same opinion.


L. c. j. I tell you, the long Parliaments levying War, is declared Rebellion
by Act of Parliament.


Coll. My Lord, if there has been an Act since that says they were guilty of
Rebellion, I declare it it is more than ever I knew before. This is the first
time that ever I heard of it.


Mr. Serj. jeff. You are a mighty learned Gentleman to talk of those points
indeed.


Coll. My Lord, I desire to know whether any words that were spoken 6 months
before they gave in their Depositions, can be a sufficient Evidence in Law
against me now.


L. c. j. It Is upon the Act of the 13th. of this King you speak.


College. Yes, my Lord, I take it upon that Statute.


L. c. j. I tell you, as to that part of the Statute which concerns
Misdemeanors, there is a particular clause for prosecution, by order of King or
Council; but as to that part of the Statute that concerns Treason, it must be
prosecuted within six months, and the Indictment within three months after.


Coll. What Statute is this Indictment grounded upon?


Mr. just. jones. All Statutes that concern Treason.


L. c. j. Upon the Statute of the 25 of Edw. 3. which declares the Common Law,
and the Statute of the 13. of this King, which when you have done, I will have
read to the Jury.


Coll. Then pray, my Lord, let me ask you one question; whether the Statute of
the 25th. of Edw. 3. does not say that there shall be two positive witnesses to
Treason?


Mr. just. jones. No, but there is another that does.


Coll. I am ignorant of the Law, and therefore I ask the question.


L. c. j. Well, I will tell you, there must be two witnesses in the case, but
one witness to one fact at one time, and another witness to another fact at
another time, will be sufficient Evidence to maintain an Indictment of Treason;
this was told you in the morning.


Mr. just. jones. And it was told you withal, that it was the resolution of all
the Judges in the case of my Lord Stafford when he was tried in Parliament.


Coll. They proved fact in that case, writing of Letters, and offering money to
kill the King; but nothing of fact is proved against me, but riding into the
Country with Arms that I had three years before.


L. c. Just. We will read the Statute of the 13th. wherein words are declared
to be Treason


Coll. I pray it may be read, if you please.


(Which was done). L. c. j. Look you here, to compass or imagine the
imprisonment of the King, and to express it by malicious and advised speaking,
when proved by two lawful witnesses, is Treason by this Act.


College. Now whether you will distinguish, that there must be two witnesses
to distinct places or times, or whether the Statute intends two witnesses to
every particular fact and words.


L. c. j. We told you our opinion before, that one witness to one fact, and
another to another of the same Treason, was sufficient. We are upon our Oaths
in it, and speak not our own opinions, but what has received public
resolution in cases of the like consequence.


Coll. What lies before these Gentlemen of the Jury, as done at Oxon. it is but
upon a single testimony.


Mr. just. Levins. Nay, Mr. Dugdale and Mr. Turbervile both swear the same
thing, your design to seize the King at Oxon. And it would be the difficultest
thing in the world to prove Treason against any man, if the Law were not so,
and a man might commit all sorts of Treason securely; for to be sure he would
never say the same things before two witnesses in one time, and the King would
be in no sort safe; for there would never be two witnesses to one and the same
thing: but that has been resolved often and often, over and over again,
particularly in my Lord Stafford's case, as you have been told.


Coll. My Lord, you say the King is not safe upon those terms, and no private
man is safe in the other way.


Mr. just. Levins. We say that the Law is so, and there is good reason for it.


Mr. just. jones. We must not alter nor depart from the allowed received Law.


L. c. j. I say the thing has been considered in other cases, and the Law has
been adjudged and settled. It was so resolved in my Lord Stafford's case, when
the Judges, by the command of the Parliament did deliver their opinion upon
that point moved by him.


Coll. There is nothing of Fact proved against me but a pair of Pistols, a
Sword, and an Horse.


Lo. c. j. We have told you the Law, and answered your question.


College. But as the case stands, if that be the law, all society and
conversation must be ruined by it.


Mr. just. jones. Pray go on, when do you think we shall have done else?


College. However I do not insist upon that so much, as that the testimonies
and oaths of these men are altogether invalidated, by substantial persons that
have here testified against them. I do declare upon my salvation, (I have
nothing else to say) I am wholly innocent, and the Jury are my Judges; and I
beseech them, as they will answer me at the great day of Judgment, where they
must appear as sure as I stand at this Bar now, that they do me right, and go
according to their own consciences; for if a man shall be sworn against by such
fellows as these are, no man is safe.


Mr. Ser. jeff. The worse, the better to be trusted by you.


College. I am sure it cannot be thought by men of common reason, that I
should speak Treason at that rate that they have sworn, and to such men, men of
their profession, Irishmen, and Papists, Traitors, that have declared they have
been in all manner of Rogueries, Murders, Plots, and Treasons. Therefore, my
Lord, I cannot do any more for my self, because I have no notes, and cannot
recite what has been said for me, or against me, but I do depend upon your
Lordship, and I hope you will inform the Jury rightly, and do me justice; and I
do pray the Jury that they let their consciences be satisfied, as they are
Englishmen, and as they are Christians, to consider how the case lies with me,
whether there has not been more occasion of talking of late, and whether a slip
of the tongue may be called a premeditated, malicious, advised speaking, I mean
my discourse with Mr. Masters. He talked with me as hot as fire, he was so
violent, and I did discourse him at that rate I have told you, and that is
truth, as I have a Soul to be saved: I did excuse the Parliament, that as I
understood it, they had no hand in the beginning of the War, or the murder of
the King. My Lord, as for the rest that have sworn against me so desperately, I
must say, that if the Jury did not as well consider my Evidence as theirs, yet
they might well consider, whether it consists with common sense and reason,
that I should speak to these men after this rate, when I could lay no
obligation upon them, nor have any confidence in them; necessitous persons,
that could not assist me one mite, men that were beholding to me to borrow
money of me, and that eat of my cost, that I had always been obliging to, and
not they to me. But I hope I need insist upon this no further, the whole Nation
is sensible what is doing, and what this does signify: They have begun with
me, in order to the making of a Presbyterian Plot, which they would carry on to
stifle the noise of the Popish Plot; and this is not the 1st, the 2d. nor the
10th. time that they have been at this Game; how many Shams have they
endeavored to raise --


Mr. At. Genesis Who do you mean by they?


College. The Papists.


Mr. At. Genesis There is nothing of Popery in the case, they are all Protestants.


Mr. Just. jones. They are all persons that have lately received the Sacrament.


College. They were all Papists, and I believe are so still; for Mr. Dugdale
did justify to me the Church of Rome in several things: And when I told him
that they were all Knaves and Fools that were of that Religion, he told me,
that many of their Priests were holy good men.


Mr. just. jones. Have you proved that?


Coll. I cannot prove it, it was betwixt him and me, my Lord.


Mr. just. jones. Then I hope you have done.


Coll. If I had sworn against him, he had stood in my place.


L. c. j. Have you done, Mr. College?


College. My Lord, I only desire the Jury to take all into their serious
consideration; I expect a storm of thunder from the learned Counsel to fall
upon me, who have liberty to speak, and being learned in the Law, understand
these things better than I, who must defend my self without counsel. I know not
whether it be the practice in any Nation, but certainly it is hard measure, that
I being illiterate and ignorant in the Law, must stand here all day, they being
many, and taking all advantages against me* and I a single person, and not able
to use one means or other either of writing or speaking. But Gentlemen, I do
declare and protest, as I shall answer it at the day of judgment, that as to
what these people have sworn against me either as to words, or as to any manner
of Treason against the King, the Government, the Laws established, I take God
to witness I am as innocent as any person upon earth. And therefore I must
beseech you be not frightened nor flattered, do according to your judgments and
your consciences; you are to be my Judges both in Law and Fact; you are to
acquit me, or to condemn me, and my blood will be required at your hands. And
whatsoever is said to you by others, you are my true Judges, you must give an
account of the Verdict you give; and therefore you must see that you do
Justice, as you will answer it at another Bar, where you must all certainly
appear, and the Lord Almighty direct you that you do me true justice, and I ask
no more.


Mr. Sol. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury. Here
has been a great deal of time spent, and truly I think for no other reason but
to divert you from the matter that is before you, and that you might forget the
Evidence that has been given. And therefore I will briefly repeat it to you,
that I may refresh your memories about what has been sworn. Gentlemen, the
Crime charged upon Mr. College is High Treason, in imagining and compassing
the death of the King; the proof of that has been by a conspiracy to seize the
King here at Oxon. which conspiracy he declared he was in, by showing Arms
prepared for that purpose, and by coming down to Oxon. with that intent; this
is the proof of his design to kill the King.


College. Is the conspiracy proved of that Mr. Solicitor?


L. c. j. Mr. College. We have had a great deal of patience with you, you have
spent a great deal of time, you must contain your self now, and let them go on.


College. Do not let him do me wrong, my Lord.


Mr. Sol. Genesis I will do you no wrong, Mr. College.


Coll. Sir, there is no conspiracy proved.


L. c. j. Look you, Mr. College, you have taken up a great deal of time, and
we have had much patience, because we consider your condition, and had rather
hear too much than be hard upon you; and because the Evidence was long and
difficult to repeat, now we have heard you, you must have patience to hear what
the King's Counsel repeat, and observe upon it.


Mr. Sol. Genesis As I was saying the fact that is charged upon him, is a design
to kill the King, the manifestation of that design is by preparing Arms to that
purpose, and by coming down to Oxon. to seize the King here, and that this was
his manifest intent to seize the King, the proof of it has been by witnesses,
that I think by and by you will have no objections against. These witnesses
were Dugdale, Turbervile, Smith and Haynes, these are the most material
witnesses to the Treason; there are two other witnesses indeed, but they are to
other circumstantial matters that I will take notice of to you by and by, and
make my observations upon them in their proper place.

Mr. Dugdale was the first witness that was produced, and his Evidence is very
full, he proves that Mr. College declared to him at the Coffee-house here,
that he was come down with an intent to seize the King, that he had an
expectation something would be done, that he was armed, and that he did advise
Mr. Dugdale to be armed too, for he was provided for the rooting out of Popery,
which he explained himself what he meant by it, that was the Church of England,
and the King and all his Adherents. He came hither armed for that purpose
Gentlemen, and did advise Mr. Dugdale to arm himself too, that he did declare
to him the King was a Papist, and all his Family were Papists, He was as deep
in the Plot, and as guilty of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey as any body
else. This was what he declared to Dugdale here, and this he swore to you when
he gave his Evidence.

The next Witness is Mr. Turbervile, and he is positive to the matter that is
laid in the Indictment, and swears to you expressly, that he did declare to him
at the Chequer-Inn, that they came down here in expectation of some sport, that
something would be done, that they did expect the King would begin with them,
but if they did not, they would begin with him, and they would secure him till
they had brought him to a compliance. He showed him his Arms, that he was ready
to engage in that design, and advised Turbervile to be ready too. And the
rather than Turbervile should not be ready, he offered to procure him an Horse.


College. Every man had the same Arms that I had, and I had had them long
before that time.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But every one had them not with the same intent, but Gentlemen,
because Mr. College interrupts me with an Objection, I will take notice of it
now by the way. He says those Arms he had before, and therefore they were not
provided for this purpose, Gentlemen, we do not pretend to prove when his
traiterous intent first began, and how long this Design has been hatching, but
such a Design there was, and such a Design he manifested to be in himself when
he made the Declaration to Turbervile, and advised him to arm himself, whether
he prepared them against that time or no is not material, if he had them
before, and if he had them first innocently, yet if he afterward designed them
for such a purpose, and showed them in a readiness for it, that is a sufficient
Evidence to prove this Treason.

So here are two Witnesses you observe against the Prisoner of this matter that
is laid against him in the Indictment, an intent to kill the King, they both
prove it positively upon him at Oxon. Mr. Dugdale speaks to matters precedent
to, for he tells you, his discourse before they came down, that they would come
down for that purpose, that they had an expectation something would be done,
and therefore he came down in an Equipage not suitable to his profession, for
you see he was by Trade a Carpenter or a Joyner, but armed on Horseback with a
case of Pistols, things that don't become such men to travel with, and he did
declare to Mr. Dugdale for what purpose he came down. The next Witness is Mr.
Smith, and Mr. Smith is as positive and full to this matter of Treason as any
of the rest.


Col. There is scarce a Carpenter or a Joyner in London but has Pistols when
he rides.


L. c. j. Mr. College, we must not suffer this, we had so much patience with
you that we expect you should be quiet now and not interrupt the Counsel.


Coll. My Lord, let me not be overborn upon, there is scarce a Poulterer in
London, but what has Pistols.


Mr. Sol. Genesis We had great patience with you Mr. College, and did not
interrupt you I am sure, but let you say what you would. I think I do you no
wrong, if I do, I am under correction of the Court, they will reprove me if I
do that which does not become me.


Mr. At. Genesis Did not you ramble I don't know how, and yet you were suffered
to go on?


Mr. Sol. Genesis He tells you of a discourse as he came from the Coffee-House to
go to a Dinner whither he was invited by Alderman Wilcox; and the discourse
was, that the King was as great a Papist as the Duke, and much more to that
purpose vilifying the King. The Alderman Wilcox was a man that gave money to
buy Arms to bring the King to submission. He objects against this, and says,
it is impossible such a discourse should be, and that all this should be talked
in so little a time, as in passing from the Coffee-House to the Crown Tavern
without Temple Bar.


Coll. Pray remember whose company it was proved I went in, Mr. Solicitor.


Mr. Sol. Genesis But Gentlemen, when you consider, how busy a man he was, and
how ready at talking of Treason, you will not think, but that this man might
talk much more than this; but this I mention to do him right, it being one of
the Arguments he used; and to give an answer to it, though when you consider it,
I believe you will think it not to need an Answer. But I would do him all the
right I can, and now you have heard it, you will consider the weight of it.

Gentlemen, he tells you of another discourse afterward that does relate to
his being here at Oxon. he tells you he had Arms in his House, and was ready
upon all occasions, and he showed Mr. Smith his Arms, and told him, these were
the things that were to destroy Rowley's Guards, as he said, which by the
Evidence is made to appear he meant the King by that name, his Arms he said
were for that purpose. That he would go down to Oxon. and there he expected
some sport, I know not what sport he thinks there is in Rebellion; you see what
principles he is of, that does maintain and justify the greatest and horrid'st
Rebellion that ever was in England, and says they did nothing but what they had
good cause for. He tells Smith that he thought the King would seize upon some
Members, and with that expectation he came down, but he was as ready as the
King, and would be one in the securing of him, if he meddled with any of the
Members. This proof Mr. Smith made; and that after the Parliament was
dissolved, he said that the King ran away, and was very much afraid. This is
proved by Smith likewise, and this College did declare after he came to Town.
Smith proves further, that he did wonder the King did not consider how easily
his Fathers Head was brought to the Block; and for Mr. Colleges part he did
declare, that he did believe this King would be served so shortly. And this
does confirm what his other Witnesses have spoken of his words at Oxon. Thus
then there are three Witnesses, though two are enough to convict a man, if they
be positive to the Treason.

Mr. Haynes. is the 4th. Witness, and he is as full as any of them. I do but
repeat it in short; you have had it so often canvassed by College, that I
believe you will easily remember it. He did advise Haynes that he should not
value the King at all, for the King should be called to account for all his
Actions; he said he would seize the King and bring him to the Block as they did
his Father, with an undecent expression of that blessed King not fit to be
repeated. And he said, they did intend when they had cut off him, never any
more of his Race should reign; this it was Haynes says, though there are other
matters. I would take notice of one thing more, and I need not but mention it,
you will remember it, and that is about the Libel of Fitzharris. Haynes tells
you upon discourse of that Libel, he said, that every word of it was true, as
sure as God is in Heaven. Now that was a Libel made by a Papist, an Irish
Papist, who has been tried, convicted and executed for it, and the horrid'st
Libel it was, that ever was Writ. And this is the Libel which this Gentleman,
who is so very conversant in Libels, and Books of that sort, avers to be as
true as God is in Heaven. This is the substance Gentlemen of that proof which
has been made to you; we have other circumstances to prove, that as he came
down with that intent to seize the King, and as he expected what he calls some
sport, so he did endeavor to begin the sport, he did quarrel in the Lobby of
the House of Lords with Fitzgerald, some blows passed, and Sir William Jennings
telling him his Nose bled, he did declare, I have lost the first Blood in the
Cause, but it will not be long before there be more lost. Thus after he had
come down, he endeavored to begin a commotion; for from little matters great
things do sometimes arise, and when all men were possessed with an expectation,
such as he himself did declare, he and others came down with an expectation
that the Parliament should be attacked; a little matter might have begun such a
commotion which no man knows what end it would have had.

Gentlemen, this has been our proof. Now the Objection made to this proof by
Mr. College is, That this is a Popish design to raise a new Plot; and cast it
upon the Protestants, and that these Witnesses are now to deny all the Evidence
they have given of the Popish Plot, and throw all upon the Protestants. This is
that he would persuade you to believe, but which I think when you do consider a
little of it, it will be impossible for you in the least to have such a
thought. For what are the Evidence that have proved this? who are they? men of
credit, that have been Evidences against the Popish Plotters, and against men
that have suffered for that Plot, men that still stand to the Evidence they
have given, and affirm it every word to be true, and one of the very men that
he brought says, that they still stand to it; for Turbervile who was one of the
Witnesses against my Lord Stafford was tempted by some persons to deny the
Evidence he had given against the Papists, but his answer was, no, I can never
depart from it, I have a Soul to save, that was true which I said, I cannot
deny it. If then the Witnesses which he would have you believe to be guilty of
denying the Popish Plot, do confirm what they have said as to that discovery,
that objection is taken off, and they do stand still to it that every part of
it was true, and aver the same thing; and yet forsooth these men are going
about to stifle this Plot.

Gentlemen, these are the men the whole nation have given credit to, the
Parliament having impeached my Lord Stafford upon the credit of them, (for it
was upon the credit of Dugdale and Turbervile that they impeached him, for
there was not two witnesses till Turbervile came in and made a second, and upon
their credit) after so solemn a Trial, where all the objections that could
possibly be made, were made; the House of Lords thought fit to find my Lord
Stafford guilty, and my Lord Stafford suffered for it, and died upon the credit
of these men. These are the witnesses, Gentlemen, that this man thinks ought to
be blown off with that frivolous objection, that they are persons he would have
you believe, who are guilty of a design to throw the Plot upon the Protestants.
But because he has desired to save himself in an Herd, by numbering himself
amongst the Protestants. I must a little observe to you what a sort of
Protestant he is, a man he would have you to believe, so popular for his
Religion, that he has obtained the name of the Protestant Joyner. But when you
have considered what his actions are, I believe you will a little suspect his
Religion. If the Protestant Religion allow any man to vilify the King, to
arraign the Government, and to throw off all manner of allegiance, then this
man is a Protestant: but if this be to act the part of a Papist, and if the
Papists could wish that such an infamy might be put upon the Protestant
Religion, that it should justify such a Rebellion as the late horrid one was,
and own such a Principle that it is lawful for any Subject to asperse and
vilify the King, as this man by those many and scurrilous Libels seem to do
it; if they could wish this Nation overturned, and the Government in confusion,
and the Church of England destroyed, the best Bulwark now in the world against
Propery, and the best or only refuge at this day left for the poor afflicted
Protestants abroad. Then whilst Mr. College does thus act the part of a
Papist, he does very ill to call himself a Protestant. Gentlemen, I cannot but
observe one thing to you, and it was the Evidence of Dr. Oats, when he did
first discover the Plot, and without his Evidence you would easily believe the
thing. He told you there were two ways they had to accomplish their design, by
direct murdering of the King, or if that failed, by putting all things into
confusion here, and raising Rebellion and disturbance amongst us, and the way
to effect that Rebellion, it was by having Emissaries sent among us, to work us
into a dislike of the Church, and by that means into a Rebellion against the
State. That some men were sent abroad for that purpose to preach at
Conventicles, some whereof were catched, and some did suffer. Now without this
Evidence it would not be hard to believe that such there are, and have been;
for all that know the History of our Reformation, do know that it was an early
practice among them, to raise Sects amongst us, to bring confusion first into
the Church, and the^ in the State. And we have already found the sad effects of
it.

Now Gentlemen, if College have all this while under the name of a Protestant
acted the part of a Papist, though I cannot say he is a Papist, nor that he is
one of those Emissaries, yet I may say he is not that good Protestant he
pretends to be. Gentlemen, I must now, to do him right, come to repeat the
Evidence that he has given against our witnesses; for Mr. Haynes he has
produced several witnesses, one is Mr. Hickman, who says he overheard Haynes
say to one that was his Tenant, that it was his Trade to swear, and he must get
money by it. This ^e overheard him, standing and listening at a door. You have
another man Lun, that is the next Witness, and he says that at the Fleet-ditch,
where he saw him, there he declared the same thing to him, that he would swear
any thing for money, and dam his soul rather than the Catholic Cause should
sink; and now He comes to prove a Plot upon him that is a Protestant, and in
his person upon all the Protestants of England, and this man would fain throw
off the credit of the Popish Plot, and turn it upon the Protestants. But
Gentlemen it is strange, that Mr. Haynes should have this discourse with Lun,
the first time that ever he saw him; for I am sure his own Witness Lun says it
was the first time, and that he should immediately talk to him at this rate is
somewhat strange: But for an Answer to it, this Lun we have confronted with the
Evidence of White the Messenger, who swears, that afterward meeting him at
Uxbridge, Lun asked him what Gentleman that was, and did not know Mr. Haynes,
and yet he takes upon him to prove, that he had spoke such words to him before.
I think there is never another material Witness against Haynes, except Whaley,
who was an under-Officer in the King's Bench; and he says, that Haynes whilst he
was a prisoner there ran away with a silver Tankard, but he never was indicted
or prosecuted for it, though he remained afterward in the House; and this was 5
or 6 years ago.

Now Gentlemen, I think the nature of this Evidence has not that weight, as to
take off the credit of what this man has said upon his Oath, especially when
this man's Evidence is so backed with the Evidence of other men, that I think
there is no Objection at all against it. For the other Witnesses, Dugdale,
Smith and Turbervile, are men whose credit has not been impeached, and they
have confirmed in substance what the Evidence of Haynes is; so that he does not
stand alone in what he here swears, but it is confirmed with concurrent Evidence
with it.

Then Gentlemen, for the Objection against Dugdale, Turbervile and Smith, they
produced Dr. Oats to you, and he must vilify the credit of those men, whose
Testimony, as to what he gave at first in discovering the Popish Plot, received
credit by being seconded by these men. And I cannot but observe it as a strange
thing, that this man comes now to vilify the Testimony of those, who have
given Evidence and been credited by the whole Kingdom; that he should come here
upon the word of a Priest to declare, that Mr. Dugdale was a man of very lewd
conversation, and was a person that had a foul Disease on him, when he
pretended he was poisoned. I remember this was an Objection that has been made
by the Papists to him, and I believe you have heard it often out of their
mouths; but it is the first time that ever I heard it from any one that is a
Witness of the Popish Plot, and pretends to stand up for the Protestant
Religion. Gentlemen, if any such thing as this could have been made out against
him, it had been made out e're now, the Papists would have taken advantage of
it; and when the Wit of all that party was bent against him, he could not have
escaped the having it proved, if it had been true, yet Dr. Oats takes upon him
now to vilify his credit, and takes up those Arguments the Papists have
maliciously suggested, but yet were never able to make out. This looks as if
the Doctor were again returning to St. Omers, that he is thus going about to
disparage the Evidence of Mr. Dugdale, which in great measure verified the
truth of that Discovery, which himself first made of the Popish Plot.

Against Turbervile, Gentlemen, I think, there has been very little at all
objected that can have any weight with you. Mr. Broadgate, as I suppose you
observe, has said enough to confirm Turberviles credit; for he has proved to
you, that when he was tempted to renounce his Evidence against the Papists, he
refused to do it, he had more conscience than to do it, he knew well enough
what he said was true, and as he had a Soul to save, he could not go from it.
This is the Evidence that he gives, and which certainly serves much to confirm
the truth of Turbervile, besides the strict Examination he has been under, and
beyond any thing that Dr. Oats, I think, has been able to contradict him in.

Dr. Oats contradicts Smith about His coming from the Coffee-House to Wilcox's
Dinner. He says, he did not come along with Mr. College, but College came
along with Dr. Oats, and Smith followed them. But, Gentlemen, you hear what
Smith has declared upon his Oath, that they came both together out of the
Coffee-House; and you hear what His Witness Mr. Smith the Counselor says: He
does not positively remember that circumstance, yet one would think he should;
for Oats says, Mr. Smith the Lawyer walked just before them, and College
followed. Mr. Smith that is the Witness for the King, He swears he came along
with College, but Mr. Smith the Lawyer being asked that Question, He does not
remember that. Then another thing is, Dr. Oats says, when they were there,
College was so far from discoursing of any treasonable matters, that he was
very merry in the company, and talking innocently, but Mr. Smith says, He was
so far from being merry or talking Treason, that he fell fast asleep, and slept
behind the Table. Gentlemen, these Objections you see what the weight of them
is, and how little the Evidence agree one with another, but there is nothing
that does contradict Mr. Smith in his main Evidence. It Is possible they may not
remember particular circumstances, whether Mr. College and Mr. Smith came
together, so they might come together for ought they know, and they may
remember any circumstance about their retiring, but they cannot take upon them
to swear it is not so, and their not remembering it does not prove it was not
so, and the circumstance it self is so trivial, that there was no necessity
they should remember it. So then no Evidence that comes from Dr. Oats can take
off that that is given by Smith, though if Mr. Smith were out of the Case, and
Mr. Haynes too, yet there is Evidence sufficient from Mr. Dugdale and Mr.
Turbervile, who are not impeached, and are both to the Fact and to the place.

There are two Witnesses more that I must mention, and they are Bolron and
Mowbray; They swear that Smith traveling upon the Road with them, would have
suborned them to swear against John Brooks, about a Discourse at some place;
but it happened, Gentlemen, they differ in point of time in their Testimony,
the one said it was the 25th. of July, the other was positive it was the 3d. of
August. But I think I need say no more of these men, but only to desire you to
weigh their credit. Bolron and Mowbray I confess have been Evidence against
several men that have been accused of the Popish Plot, but they have been so
unfortunte, as never to gain credit with any Jury. Mr. Smith has been believed
by the whole Court of Parliament; but if there were no more in the case, these
are two men that never were yet believed, men that have been sworn in their own
Country, where they are well known, and been Evidence upon Trials, but the Jury
have rejected their Testimony: But besides that, comparing the Testimonies, and
the difference that was between them, is a sufficient Evidence to confront all
that they have said.

I think, Gentlemen, this is the substance of what has been offered by his
Witnesses against the Witnesses produced for the King, except that of Mr.
Everard, who says something against Haynes, that Haynes should say he swore for
Self-preservation; and against Smith he says, that he heard him say, he did not
know of any Presbyterian Plot. I believe that may be true, and yet it does not
contradict Smiths Evidence against College; for Mr. Smith does not tell you,
that he is privy to any such Design of the Presbyterians, that he knows of any
Consultations that they held, or the ways and means by which they would arive
at the Treason charged upon the Prisoner at the Bar, but his Evidence is, that
this man declared there was such a Design, that there was a party would do it,
and that he would be sure to be one, and armed himself for that purpose; but
his not being privy to any Plot, or knowing the particulars, is no
contradiction to what he said.

This is that he has produced for his Defense, and by these things he has
endeavored to take off the credit of our Witnesses, and he would have you
believe that he is a very good Protestant though he does that which no
Protestant would do, and which is the Papists work; he has produced you
Witnesses that he has gone to Church, but I do not see he has produced any
Witnesses at all that are now conversant with him, his own Parishioners in
London; but if he had brought never so many Witnesses of his going to Church,
and of his conformableness to the Church, yet if he were guilty of these
practices, he must give me leave to suspect the Truth of his Profession; and I
think it a great piece of arrogance for him to take upon him the Title of a
Protestant, when he has abused that Title by such unsuitable practices: And,
Gentlemen, if such practices as these are, which we have fully proved, are such
as all good men must abhor, I cannot but reflect upon the condition of this
man, whose only Hopes is, that you should now forget your selves and become as
ill as he is. But as that cannot be presumed, so I shall not need to say any
more to you; you are men of that consideration that can judge between things,
and the appearances of them, and know very well how to give the due weight to
the Evidence we have given to you, as well as the Objections made by the
Prisoner; and so Gentlemen I shall leave it to you.


Mr. Ser. jeff. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury; It
has been a long time that has been spent in the course of this Evidence;
whether there has been Art or Design in protracting the time, on purpose to
obtrude upon the patience of the Court, or that you Gentlemen should forget the
force of the Evidence that has been given against the Prisoner at the Bar, when
there has been so much time taken up unnecessarily, when there was no occasion,
as I must needs say, there was not for such a tedious Defense, I leave it to
you to determine: But that which was truly intimated by the Court at the
beginning of the Trial, must at the end of this Cause be repeated, and indeed
go through it all, that we of the Kings Counsel, and what the Prisoner has
affirmed, that has not been given in proof, signifying nothing, and is not to
be any guide at all to you. You are upon your Oaths, and by the Oath you have
taken you are bound in conscience to give a Verdict according to the Evidence
that has been given to you, and that is your guide; so that what we opened and
have not proved, is no more to be believed than what the Prisoner has said for
himself in his own Defense; and whatsoever he says, if he make not god proof of
it, is no more to be regarded, than what we who are for the King have alleged,
and not made out.

So then this being in the first place premised, I shall take care as near as I
can to save time of the Court, and not to trespass on your patience Gentlemen
unnecessarily, in a Case whereupon as great a concern does depend, as perhaps
ever came to Trial at any Bar: For I say it is a Case wherein the Life and the
Liberty of the King is concerned, and that is the great concern of the Nation;
the Religion of the Nation is concerned; I would be understood aright, I mean
the Protestant Religion established by Law; for I know no other Religion men
ought to sacrifice their Lives and Fortunes for, but the Protestant Religion
established by Law; and when these things are concerned, it is a Case of great
consequence: God forbid any person, Protestant or other, should attempt the
Life of the King, and the Subversion of our Religion, and by stiling themselves
by the Name of Protestants, should excuse themselves from any such crimes.

For the Evidence that has been given, I shall not enumerate the particulars
against the Prisoner at the Bar, other than such as have been omitted, (if I
mistake not) by Mr. Solicitor.

In the first place are the things that happened at Oxon. for you have had it
already sufficiently told you by my Lords the Judges who are upon the Bench,
and who (under Mr. Colleges favor) are the Prisoners Judges in point of Law,
as you are in point of Fact. They have (I say) already told you what the Law is
in relation to Treasons; that in case the Treason be in two Counties, if the
Witnesses speak to the self same Treason, though to different Facts, that will be
two Witnesses to prove High Treason; and that there has been such a Case, the
Prisoner at the Bar, who he says is a Protestant (for his own Souls sake I wish
he were a good one) must take notice, that Gavan the great Priest who was tried
at Newgate, and convicted, by what Evidence? by one of them that is a Witness
now against the Prisoner at the Bar, that is Dugdale, his Treason was committed
part in London, part in the Country, of which part Dugdale gave Evidence; but
being both to the self same purpose, by the greater part of the Judges, who
were in the Commission, and present at the Trial, they were reckoned a
sufficient-Testimony to prove him guilty of High Treason: And I hope we do not
live to that age, that any Protestant whatsoever should come to trip up the
heels of the Popish Plot, by saying that any of them who suffered for it, did
dye contrary to Law, or without sufficient proof: for if Mr. Dugdale was not a
person fit to be believed, or if the rest of the Judges who tried Gavan were
out in the Law, then that man died wrongfully; for he had as much right to have
been tried according to the Law, as any other person whatsoever. Therefore,
Gentlemen, as to that matter, we must submit it to my Lords the Judges, who are
to give you an account what the Law is in all its particulars before you; but
as to the Fact whereof you are Judges, that is the great matter we shall apply
our selves to, and for that it stands thus.

Here is Dugdale that does give you an account what his design was in coming to
Oxford; how he came to be armed as an Index (Gentleman) of his mind. And pray
give me leave to put you in mind of one thing. You have first a Libel produced,
and read to you; a pretended Letter, wherein there are Queries that have been
taken notice of, and which seem to back the Evidence given by Mr. Masters; for
there is a vindication in those Queries of the proceedings of that Parliament
of 41. which he has confidence enough now at the Bar to justify too. But
Gentlemen, you were told by the Court, and you know it, that that Parliament
was guilty of High Rebellion: And even in those Queries he asperses not only
the Government, but every man that has any concern in it; for it takes notice
not only of the King, but of all his Council: never a Judge nor an Officer in
the Nation but is traduced by it; and which is most material, it was the
foundation of that Libel which has been mentioned to you, and which Fitz-Harris
was so justly condemned and executed for, that most traitorous and infamous
Libel in part of it has these Queries, and a great Paragraph of this Libel
makes up part of that Libel of Fitz-Harris, which our witnesses say Mr.
College was pleased to affirm was as true as God is in Heaven. Another thing
is this; this Gentleman, whose proper business it had been no manage his
employment at London for a Joyner, is best seen in his proper place, using the
proper Tools of his Trade. I think it had been much more proper for him, and I
believe you will think so too, than to come with Pistols and all those
Accoutrements about him, to be regulating of the Government: what have such
people to do to interfere with the business of the Government? God be thanked,
we have a wise Prince, and God be thanked he has wise Counselors about him,
and He and they know well enough how to do their own business, and not to need
the advice of a Joyner, though he calls himself the Protestant Joyner. What had
he to do to engage himself before his advice was required? How comes he to
concern himself so much, that after he had writ this Libel, wherein he is
pleased to take notice of Tyrants, afterward should go to make a Print, I mean
the Raree-Shew; and when Dugdale comes to enquire of him, what do you mean by
such a thing, the Tyrant shall go down? Says he, I mean by that the King. And
what do you mean by having them go to Breda? Why there he explains it, that he
puts all the Government, the Lords and the Bishops upon the Kings back; and
being asked what he meant to have done with them? Why the Bishops and the King,
and all were to go to Breda. These are the things that himself did acknowledge
he was the Author of, and these Prints he did cause to be made, and he is the
person that gives you an account, that it was but the conception and
imagination of Dugdale, that Rowley meant the King; but Dugdale being called
again, He tells you after some time, that he was under some difficulty to know
the meaning of it; and then College tells him it was meant the King, and so he
expounded it to him. And so Smith tells you of that same name of Old Rowley
again. Gentlemen, thus I tell you what has been omitted. The Evidence has
been long, and therefore we must be pardoned if we cannot exactly repeat it.
This is the Evidence that was done at Oxon. the next is Mr. Smith, who speaks
of what was done in London, and he is an Evidence both as to the word Rowley,
as to the coming with Arms, and as to the declaring to what end he came, and
what he had done: Mr. Haynes he tells you both before and after the same, and
that I must take notice of to you, Mr. Smith does particularly say he used
those words, which I hope every Honest man, and every good man, that desires to
preserve the Government according to Law, will hear with the greatest
detestation and abhorrence: He talked of the taking away the life of the late
King of blessed memory at such an impudent rate, that every true Protestants
blood would curdle at the hearing of it. And this he said not only to Mr.
Masters, but he justified it to Mr. Smith too.

In the next place you have Turbervile, who gives you all the reasons, how he
did not only tell of these things Himself, but encouraged Him to prepare
Himself accordingly, and he gave Him a mark, a Ribbon, with No Popery, no
Slavery. These were marks whereby they were to be known, and they were to be
one and all, as they call it, that when such a blow was struck, they should be
ready to fall in. There is one thing more that I take notice of, that is, what
was said by a Gentleman, Sir William Jennings, which is a confirmation of all
the other Evidence; that Gentleman who has appeared to you to be a man of
Honor even by the confession of Mr. College Himself, and by his own words;
for he said like an Honest man, and like a Loyal man too, that He would rather
engage Himself in three dangers for the Service of the King at Sea, than come
in cold blood to give Evidence against a man for his life at the Bar. And yet
this man who tells you this of Himself, and that very person whom College
Himself calls a worthy person, has given you this account, that when he told
him his nose bled, He answered him, It was the first blood lost in the Cause,
but it would not be long e're there was more lost; an excellent cause for a man
to venture his blood in. When he was told of this, he began to put it off, and
to use his own words, had a great mind to sham off the business, but in truth
there was no answer given to it. Gentlemen, the objections that have been made
against the Evidence that have not been taken notice of, I desire to take
notice of: I think against three of them there has been only Mr. Oats, and Mr.
Oats I confess has said in verbo Sacerdotis strange things against Dugdale,
Smith, and Turbervile. I have only the affirmation of Mr. Oats, and as ill men
may become good men, so may good men become ill men; or otherwise I know not
what would become of some part of Mr. Oates's testimony. And in the next place,
if these men have not sworn true, I am sure Mr. Oats must stand alone in the
greatest point, in which all the Evidence agree, that is the Popish Plot.

But Gentlemen, I must take notice to you, that it is strange to me, that ever
you upon your consciences should perjure three men, who positively upon their
Oaths deny any such discourses as Mr. Oats speaks of against them: I do put
that upon your consciences, whether you upon the bare affirmation of Mr. Oats
in this place, will convict three men, upon whose testimony the lives of so
many as have suffered, have been taken away, and as we Protestants do believe
justly. I say, whether you will do it upon the bare affirmation of Mr. Oats
against their Oaths.

In the next place, Gentlemen, I must tell you, besides the positive Evidence
of these Gentlemen, there is a circumstance of improbability in the very words
which he speaks of: Will any man tell me, that after such time as men have
given their Oaths, as Smith had given his that he was concerned, and so had
Dugdale and Turbervile too, that these men should come and voluntarily tell Mr.
Oats they were all forsworn; are these men such great Coxcombs as he would
have us; to believe? Is it so probable a thing, that any men of common
knowledge would do it? Do you think a man of that knowledge and consideration,
as Smith is an allowed Scholar, and a man of known Learning; and Mr. Dugdale,
who has been reckoned by all men to be a good Evidence; do you take these men
to be such absolute Novices, that they must seek an occasion to tell him they
were bribed off, and were forsworn? If you can think this, and if a bare
affirmation against these positive Oaths can prevail; Gentlemen, upon your
consciences be it.

In the next place, it is a strange sort of thing to believe that Mr. Smith
should come out of a Coffee-House, where a quarrel is pretended to have been
between him and College, but Mr. Smith does upon his Oath say he never had any
such quarrel with him, and that he should fall a damning and sinking against
College, and against the Gospel; that there should be such impudence in the
world in any man as to desire or wish such a thing! Gentlemen, these are
strange sorts of apprehensions, and men must have very strange thoughts, that
can strain themselves up to the belief of them.

In the next place here it is said by the Prisoner, Good Lord! what a condition
we shall be in! Here is a Plot put upon the Protestants, I hope in God there is
no Protestant Plot, but I also hope the whole interest of the Protestant
Religion is not involved in the Prisoner at the Bar, and all will be destroyed,
if Mr. College dies for his Treasons. Gentlemen, the question is not whether
there be a Presbyterian* or Protestant Plot, we declare we know of none, but
whether the Prisoner at the Bar have spoken such words, and done such things as
are sworn against him. And I would fain know what all the discourses we have
had about Irish witnesses and Papists signify, when in all the course of our
Evidence, there has been but one Irish, and never a Papist. But here have been
great discourses about Macnamarra and Dennis, and what it has been for, but to
make a noise, and raise a dust, I cannot tell; for in this cause there has not
been one Irishman besides Haynes, and never a Papist throughout the whole
Evidence: So that it is easy, if men think it will take with the Auditory, for
a person to cry out, Oh Lord! we are all like to be undone, here are Irish
Witnesses brought against us; and after all this stir, there is but one Irish
Witness, and never a Papist. And as for him, truly Gentlemen I must take
notice, that even College himself, till such time as he was taken, reckoned
him an Honest man.


College. Never in my life.


Mr. Serj. Jeff. It was so said. But I do say Gentlemen, suppose (which I do
not admit) that the Irishman he speaks of be out of the Case, not that the
Country is an objection against any man's testimony, God forbid it should be so
affirmed; for truth is not confined to places, nor to persons neither, but
applied to all honest men, be they Irish-men or others: But I say, set Mr.
Haynes out of the case, suppose there was no such man as Haynes in this case,
yet I must tell you, Gentlemen, you have as great a proof as possibly can be.

In the next place, I must take notice to you of some account that has been
given of him by himself: It is wonderful strange, when there was that kindness
of intimation given by the Court, that he should do well to prove his Loyalty,
as well as his Religion, that he did not produce some of his later
acquaintance. If this man that makes himself a Protestant, would have it
believed he is such, I wish he would have brought some of those men that knew
him at London to give you some account of him, and not to stretch backward
sixteen years to prove his Birth and Education; that is not the best account
sure a man can give of himself, to say after he has been talking at this
disloyal rate, that he is a good Protestant, because he was thought so 18 years
ago.

Again in the next place, here is an account of the Libels given by the old
woman that is his Sister: Truly she would have it, and that is another Libel at
the Bar, as though the man in the Red Coat, with R. C. upon it, had dropped
this kind of Libel in his House, and so he or somebody else put a trick upon
him; and because she would inveigle you to such an interpretation, she says
that they staid behind till the man in the Red Coat had fetched away the
shavings, and so here is a new Sham Plot to be put upon the Prisoner, by
dropping papers in his House; a pretty kind of insinuation. But Gentlemen,
against the Evidence of this Woman, you have the very person that was there,
the Officer, who swears that he and his Fellows came before the Waterman into
the House: But I suppose you observe how that notable talking maid and she does
agree; for the maid tells you there came a strange Fellow seven weeks before,
delivered these things into her hands, her Master was abroad, and she was not
to enquire whence they came, or what they were, but paid him six pence for
bringing those things. Now it is very strange that the Maid should pay for the
bringing of those things, and yet after that should imagine that somebody else
should put them there.

But now Gentlemen, in the next place, I must tell you another thing, which I
would beg you to take notice of: Here are two Gentlemen, Mr. Bolron and Mr.
Mowbray, and they have given you an account that they have been Evidence
against the Papists, they did well in it; but it has been their misfortune
hitherto they have not been believed; but whether they have been believed or
not before, is no guidance to you at this time; but that which is to guide you
is, whether or not they have given you now a testimony that you in your own
Consciences can believe. Now can you believe what they have said, nay can you
probably believe it without any circumstance to confirm it, against those
express objections that arise from themselves, and against the Oath of the
person, when the one tells you so exactly of the twenty fifth, twenty sixth,
twenty seventh, and twenty eighth of July, and the other tells you that Smith
took Post, and yet overtook them not till the Sunday after, which was the third
of August; and when the Almanac is produced, it was so far from making out
what they spoke of to be the same time, that whereas one said he came to London
the twenty eighth, the others Almanac says it was the 27th. then pray how do
these persons agree, when the one says that Mr. Smith talked with him upon the
road the 28th. and the other says that they came to London the 27th. These are
circumstances, Gentlemen, that you must weigh, and you may bring the North and
the South together as soon as their two testimonies, they are so far asunder.
Besides, Gentlemen, I hope you take notice of a person that was sworn, a person
of some quality, a Scholar in the University here, that says Balron (though he
denied it) did show one of these Pictures, and did discover they were Mr.
Colleges; and Balron himself, his own witness, tells you that he did
acknowledge one of those Pictures was his. It appears then how busy he was,
and concerned himself in what belonged not to his Profession.

So that upon the whole matter, after this long Evidence that has been given,
I must wholly appeal to your Lordship and the Jury; as to the Law, to your
Lordship and the Court; and as to the Fact, to the Jury: for I do not desire
any sort of Evidence should be strained against a Prisoner at the Bar, who is
there to be tried for his life. God forbid if he be innocent, but he should be
acquitted; but on the other side, consider the murder of that great King of
ever blessed memory is before you, and remember that base reflection which the
witnesses tell you of upon that horrid action; and as a great Evidence,
remember that seeming vindication of it at the Bar, which certainly no
Englishman, no Protestant according to the Church of England, can hear without
having his blood stirred in him. And these things are not only testified by
Dugdale and Smith, but by Gentlemen of known reputation and quality; and he
has a little discovered himself by that defense he has made against their
testimony. But know, Gentlemen, that the King is concerned, your Religion is
concerned, that Plot that is so much agreed to by all Protestants is concerned;
for if Dugdale, Smith and Turbervile be not to be believed, you trip up the
heels of all the Evidence and discovery of that Plot. Then I will conclude to
you, Gentlemen, and appeal to your consciences, for according to the Oath that
has been given to you, you are bound in your consciences to go according to
your Evidence, and are neither to be inveigled by us beyond our proof, nor to
be guided by your commiseration to the Prisoner at the Bar against the proof;
for as God will call you to an account if you do an injury to him, so will the
same God call you to account if you do it to your King, to your Religion, and
to your own Souls.


Lo. chapter just. Gentlemen, I shall detain you but a little, and shall be as
short as I can, for your patience has been much exercised already: It is a
burden, and a necessary one that lies upon us all, for there is nothing more
necessary than that such Trials as these should be entire and public, entire
for the dispatch of them, and public for the satisfaction of the world, that
it may appear no man receives his Condemnation without Evidence, and that no
man is acquitted against Evidence.

Gentlemen, there are these two considerations in all Cases of this nature; the
one is, the Force of the Evidence; the other is, the Truth of the Evidence. As
to the Force of the Evidence, that is a point in Law that belongs to the Court,
and wherein the Court is to direct you; as to the Truth of the Evidence, that
is a question in Fact arising from the Witnesses, and must be left upon them,
whereof you are the proper Judges.

As to the Force of the Evidence in this case, it must be considered what the
Charge is; it is the compassing the Death of the King, and conspiring to seize
the Person of the King, which is the same thing in effect; for even by the
Common Law, or upon the interpretation of the Statute of the 25. of Edw. 3.
that mentions compassing the Death of the King to be Treason, it has always
been resolved, that whosoever shall imagine to depose the King, or imprison the
King, are guilty of imagining the Death of the King; for they are things that
depend one upon another: and never was any King deposed or imprisoned, but with
an intention to be put to death, they are in consequences the same thing.

Now Gentlemen, in cases of Treason the Law is so tender of the Life of the
King, that the very imagination of the Heart is Treason, if there be any
thought concerning any such thing; but then it must be manifested by some
Overt Act, upon the Statute of the 25. of Edw. 3. but upon the Statute of the
13. of this King, made for the Preservation of the Kings Person, if it be
manifested by malicious and advised speaking, it is sufficient. This is as to
the Charge, and as to the Law concerning that Charge, I must tell you there
must be two Witnesses in the case.

Now then for the Force of the Evidence, the question will arise there, whether
this Evidence, admitting it to be true, is sufficient to maintain the
Indictment; so that if there be two Witnesses, you must find him Guilty. Now as
to this, Gentlemen, the Prisoner has beforehand called upon the Court, and had
their resolution; and I hope you will remember what has been said, and I shall
have occasion to trouble you the less. There have been six Witnesses produced
for the King; there are two of them, Sir William Jennings and Mr. Masters, that
are some way applicable to the Case, though they do not go to the Treason, they
are only to infer the probability of the Treason. This of Sir William Jennings
was upon the occasion of the bleeding of the Prisoners Nose, after his quarrel
with Fitzgerald, when he said, He had lost the first blood, and it would not
be long e're there would be more lost; which shows there were some
extraordinary thoughts in his Heart concerning some divisions, quarrels, and
fighting that he expected should be. That which Mr. Masters has said, (besides
what he offered concerning his Principles in justifying the Long Parliament)
was this, that when he called him Colonel, Marry mock not, said he, I may be a
Colonel in time; that shows some extraordinary thoughts were in his Heart.


Coll. Will not that bear a more favorable interpretation, my Lord? Must that
necessarily follow upon my saying, I might be a Colonel in time, and that more
blood would be lost? if I had expressed it so.


L. c. j. I say you had some extraordinary thoughts in your Heart.


Coll. I am, sure, the fittest to explain my own thoughts.


L. c. j. You would have done well to have explained it which way you expected
to be a Colonel.


Coll. It was not an expectation, for a may be, may not be; my word was,
mocking is catching: I thought he had called me Cozen.


L. c. j. Well Gentlemen, these are Witnesses I say that go not to the Treason,
but only relate and reflect somewhat to show there were thoughts in his Heart,
but no body could tell what they were, or know what he meant by them.


Coll. Then always they are to be taken in the best sense.


L. c. j. For the other Witnesses, Stephen Dugdale, John Smith, Bryan Haynes,
and Edward Turbervile, they are all of them, taking what they say to be true,
very full Witnesses. The Prisoner has objected as to two of them, because they
speak to nothing that was done in Oxfordshire, but Turbervile and Dugdale they
speak to what was said in Oxfordshire. Now for that I must tell you, If you
believe any one of these Witnesses, as to what was said in Oxford, and any of
them as to what was said in London, relating to the same Fact of Treason, they
will be two good Witnesses to maintain the Indictment, though the one is in the
one County, and the other in another; for if a Treason be committed in two
Counties, it is in the Kings Election where he will exhibit the Indictment, and
the Evidence from both Counties is good Evidence; that I take for Law, and
these four Witnesses, with that consideration that they are true, as I think
are full Witnesses to maintain this Indictment.

Why then the next Head is concerning the Truth of this Evidence, of which you
are to be Judges, and you are the proper Judges whether the Witnesses speak
true or no; therefore you must have your own Consciences to direct you in that
case, and what I shall say about them, shall be only for your Assistance.

Gentlemen, I shall not take upon me to repeat the Evidence to you, it has been
long; and for me to speak out of memory, I had rather you should recur to your
own Memories, and your own Notes: only I shall say something in general to
contract your consideration of it.

And as I told you at first, you must mind nothing of what the Kings Counsel
said, for nothing must have impression upon you, but what they proved; So you
are not to consider any thing of the Facts the Prisoner spoke of, that are not
proved neither; For common Justice is concerned in it, and no Justice can be
done at that rate, if the Prisoners own Affirmations or Purgation should be
taken. No man ever can be accused but he will be ready to say he is innocent,
and say as flourishing and popular things as ever he can for himself. And
therefore these things must not weigh with you further, than as what is said,
argues upon the Proofs you have had. And you are to consider upon the Proofs
what the Prisoner has produced, not what he says on the other side, for the
Proofs you have heard a great many Witnesses in general produced by him, that
say he was bred a Protestant, and has been an honest man, that they knew no ill
by him, that will be of little weight in a case of this consideration; for
unless he were a man that had committed Treason to the knowledge of all the
world, there is no man but can produce Witnesses that know no ill of him, nor
any Treason, nor Harm in him, therefore the Question wiill lie upon the credit
of the Witnesses produced for the King barely, and that will be the
consideration you are only to have, and you are to weigh them in the Balance
against the Witnesses produced against them.

Now Gentlemen, for these Witnesses I shall not repeat them to you, but only
this I shall observe in general, that Dugdale and Turbervile that are the two
most mateterial Witnesses relating to what was spoke in Oxfordshire, have the
least said against them. I do not remember, I profess to you I do not (but your
own Notes must guide you) that there was any very material thing said against
them except what is said against them by Dr. Oats, and Dr. Oats does say
against Smith, that he came out of the Coffee-House, and swore Dam him he would
have Colleges Blood, and when he reproved him, and said it was not fit for a
Minister of the Gospel to use such Expressions, he said God damn the Gospel, if
that be true it is a great Reflection upon the credit of Smith. He says as to
Dugdale, that when he was expostulating with him about his Evidence, he excused
himself, that he was in want of money, and was pressed to it, and being asked
whether he was pressed to swear against his Conscience, he said yes; and much
of the same kind he says as to Turbervile, that he said He was disserted and
would not starve. Now all these three Witnesses being called upon their Oaths
deny that which Dr. Oats testifies. Now if it were in an indifferent and
probable matter to have three men condemned, and set aside by the Testimony of
one is not equal, unless the man were of mighty extraordinary credit, and his
Testimony of more than ordinary weight. But then I must tell you this matter is
very improbable, that after Witnesses had sworn a thing they should voluntarily
acknowledge themselves to be forsworn, and that without any Provocation, they
should at several times come to this one man and declare themselves Rogues and
Villains, but if it were probable, here are three men's Oaths against one man's
Affirmation, this I say as to what concerns Dugdale and Turbervile, I do not
see any thing material against them, besides now if you believe them, they are
two Witnesses to the full matter of the Indictment, and two Witnesses to what
was done in Oxfordshire, and that satisfies all the considerations of Law.

As to the rest of the Witnesses, Bryan Haynes and John Smith, you have had
many Witnesses produced against them, I shall not undertake to repeat the
Evidence, it is your place and duty to weigh their Testimony, and I shall leave
it to your consideration.


Mr. just. jones. I shall add nothing to what my Lord has said, nor indeed can.


College. My Lord, I wish you would look upon your Notes, you would then find
there was much more Evidence, that you have not repeated against Turbervile and
Dugdale, besides what your Lordship urged.


L. c. j. If there be, I refer it to the memory of the Jury, I can remember no
more.


College. I desire nothing but Justice, and true Justice.


L. c. j. I am sure I design nothing else, you are a stranger to me, I believe
I have seen your face, but I never knew you by name till now. Look you, if the
Jury be like to stay, they may take something to refresh themselves at the Bar
before they go.


College. My Lord, I did see when the Bill was brought against my Lord Howard,
Mr. Attorney General and Mr. Solicitor were an hour and half with the Grand
Jury.


Mr. Ser. jeff. You must say nothing now my Lord has given the Charge.


Col. Let me have justice done my Lord, that is all I crave, that none may be
with the Jury.


L. c. j. Look you Mr. College, they might be with the Grand Jury, but as to
the Petty Jury there shall be a Bailiff sworn, and neither Mr. Attorney, nor
Mr. Solicitor, nor any body else shall come to them till they be agreed of
their Verdict.


Mr. just. jones. If that be the thing you ask, you shall have it according to
the Law.


College. And any Friend of mine may be by.


L. c. j. There shall be an Officer sworn to keep them.


Then the Court called for two Bottles of Sack, which the Jury divided among
themselves at the Bar, for their Refreshment, in the presence of the Prisoner.
After which a Bailiff Was sworn, and the Jury withdrawing to consider of their
Verdict, the Court adjourned for half an hour, and when they returned,
Proclamation being made for attendance, the Court sent to see whether the Jury
were agreed, who immediately came in to Court. Cl. of Cr. Gentlemen, are you
agreed of your Verdict?


Omn. Yes.


Cl. of Cr. Who shall say for you?


Omn. Foreman.


Cl. of Cr. Stephen College, Hold up thy Hand, look upon him you of the Jury:
How say you, is he Guilty of the High Treason, whereof he stands indicted, or
not Guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. of Cr. Look to him Jailer, he is found Guilty of High Treason; what Goods,
etc. At which there was a great shout given, at which the Court being offended,
one person who was observed by the Crier to be particularly concerned in the
shout, was committed to Gaol for that night, but the next morning having
received a public reproof, was discharged without Fees.

Then it being about 3 a clock in the morning, the Court adjourned to 10. at
which hour the Court being sat, and first Mr. Aaron Smith having entered into
Recognizance of 500 l. to appear the first day of the next Term, at the Court
of King's Bench.


Lo. c. j. Where is the Prisoner Stephen College?


Cl. of Cr. Set up Stephen College.


Then the Prisoner was brought to the Bar. Cl. of Cr. Hearken to the Court and
hold up thy Hand; Thou have been indicted and arraigned of High Treason, and
for thy Trial have put thy self upon thy Country, and they have found thee
Guilty, what can thou say for thy self, why the Court should not give
Judgment on thee to dye according to the Law.


Coll. My Lord, I have nothing more to offer, but only that I am innocent of
what is laid to my charge; I think it was severe against me, now contrary to
what was sworn at London: They swear now, I was to seize the King at Oxford. In
London they swore I would pluck the King out of Whitehall, but it is altered
since, and now it is to seize the King at Oxford, but be it either one or
the other (for the one is as true as the other) I am wholly innocent of either, I
never had such a thought in my life, God forgive them that have sworn against
me, I have no more to say, my Lord.


L. c. j. Look you, Mr. College, it is too late to profess your innocence, you
have been tried and found guilty; but because you say it now, it is necessary
for me to say something in vindication of the Verdict, which I think the Court
were all very well satisfied with: There were sufficient proofs to warrant it,
and the Jury did according to justice and right. I thought it was a case, that
as you made your own defense, small proof would serve the turn to make any one
believe you guilty. For as you would defend your self by pretending to be a
Protestant. It is wonder, I must confess, when you called so many witnesses to
your Religion and Reputation, that none of them gave an account that they saw
you receive the Sacrament within these many years, or any of them particularly
had seen you at Church in many years, or what kind of Protestant you were. If
we look to your words and actions, it is true, they did prove this, that you
were mighty violent and zealous in crying out against Popery, and the Papists;
but if we look to your actions, they savoured rather to promote the Papists
ends. For I must tell you, the Papists are best extirpated and suppressed by a
steady prosecution of the Laws against them, not by violent crying out, and
putting the people into fervent heats and confusions, for that is the thing the
Papists aim at; they have no hopes any other way to creep into the Kingdom but
by confusion, and after the Church is destroyed, that is, under God, the best
Bulwark against them. But you that cried so loud against the Papists, it was
proved here who you called Papists. You had the boldness to say that the King
was a Papist, the Bishops were Papists, and the Church of England were Papists.
If these be the Papists you cry out against, what a kind of Protestant you are,
I know not, I am sure you can be no good one. But truly I thought you would
have made better proof of that thing, when you called so manny witnesses to
that purpose: And then if we look to your Politics, what opinion you had of
the King, it was proved by your discourse, and by witnesses, that you could
have no exception to their testimony, that you did justify the late horrid
Rebellion, and the consequences of that was the murder of the best King in the
world, that you should go to justify the proceedings of that Parliament, and
affirm that they did nothing but what they had just cause to do. I say he that
will justify such a thing, if there were the same circumstances, would do the
same thing again.

Then if we look upon another part of your defense, as to your Arms, it was
objected you went armed to Oxon. and that was made the Evidence of the Overt
Act, when you said by words your intentions what you would do, that you would
make one to seize the King, that you did go armed, you did confess. I expected
you should have said, you only wore those things for your own defense upon the
road, as a Gentleman traveling, or went with your friends to accompany them
out of Town, and defend them from robbery; but you said you went to guard the
Parliament. I did not understand what you meant by it. I do not believe the
Parliament sent for any Guard, or intended to have any Guard. I do not believe
that any of them in their hearts thought they needed a Guard; for I believe
there was not a man that had any thing that looked like that, for any thing of
that nature. For we saw, that when the King by the necessity of his affairs,
when the two Houses differed so much, was pleased to dismiss them; they all
departed quietly, not a man was seen to be disturbed; there was no appearance
of any such thing, and how it should come unto your head, that were but a
private man, to go to guard the Parliament, I much wonder* Suppose all men of
your condition should have gone to have guarded the Parliament, what an
Assembly had there been? what a bustle might they have made, and what confusion
might there have been on a sudden? And though you say you are no man of
quality, nor likely to be able to do any thing upon the Kings Guards; or the
Kings person* yet if all of your quality had gone upon the same design that you
did, what ill consequences might have been of it? We see what has been done by
Massianello a mean man in another Country, what by Wat Tyler and Jack Straw in
this Kingdom? I confess I know not what you meant by it, but very ill things
might have happened upon it.

So that these things when I look upon them* and consider the complexion of
your defense, it makes an easy proof have credit. But I think there was a full
proof in your case; yet I say, if there had been a great deal less proof, the
Jury might with justice have found you guilty. And because you now declare your
self innocent of all you are charged with, I think my self bound to declare
here in vindication of the Country, and in vindication of the justice of the
Court, that it was a Verdict well given, and to the satisfaction of the Court,
and I did not find my Brothers did dislike it. This I say to you out of
charity, that you may incline your mind to a submission to the justice that has
overtaken you, and that you may enter into charity with all men, and prepare
your self for another life.

There is nothing now remaining, but to pronounce the Sentence which the Law
provides for such an Offense; which is this, and the Court does award, That you
Stephen College shall be carried from hence to the place from whence you came,
and from thence you shall be drawn on an Hurdle to the place of Execution,
where you shall be hanged up by the Neck, and be cut down alive, your
Privy-members shall be cut off, and your Bowels taken out and burnt before your
face, your Head shall be cut off from your Body, your Body be divided into four
quarters, which are to be at the Kings dispose, and the Lord have mercy upon
your Soul.


College. Amen. My Lord, I would know what time your Lordship is pleased to
appoint for my preparation?


Lo. chapter just. That will depend upon the King's pleasure: We do not use in
these cases of High Treason to precipitate the Execution, but we will leave
such order with the Sheriff to receive the King's pleasure, and obey it. He
will not do it so sudden but that you shall have notice to prepare your self;
but it depends upon the King's pleasure; for your body is to be at his dispose.


Then the Court adjourned. And on Wednesday the 31. of August, 1681. being the
day appointed by His Majesty for his Execution, He was according to Sentence,
executed over against the Gate of the Castle at Oxford.

FINIS.

