TAPEINAINOS, Humble Praise, Offered up in the Public Solemnity, June the 28th
1660.

Being a day of Thanksgiving for his Majesty's happy Restoration.

By T. A. an unwothy Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ in the work of the Gospel.

Non Deus humiles quibus dat gratiam ante datam humiles invenit; sed dando
gratiam humiles facit; hoc ipsum enim, gratiam, Deus per gratiam donat, ut
quisquis eam acceperit humiles fiat. Fulg. 2. 41. The humble shall see this and
be glad, and your heart shall live that seek God. LONDON, Printed for Luke
Fawn, at the Sign of the Parrot in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1660.

To the Right Honorable, Sir EDWARD HYDE Knight. Lord Chancellor of England, One
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
It Is a safe Rule, that Statesmen must have no more anger then will serve their
design; for subjection to powerful wrath is dangerous both ab intra, being a
constant disease, a fire that commonly consumes the house where first it
kindles; and ab extra, it betrays to ignoble acts, and the unavoidable censure
of the Sovereign. The last Century has been too fruitful in such instances.

And herein Prudence speaks her Mother tongue, and has learnt it from
Religion, which further says, Ira simulata charitas vera. Let Anger be the
dark shadow, Love the beautiful body, the one to fright the evil from their
ways, and deliver from death; the other cordially and constantly endeavoring
every man's peace, comfort, and joy. This is living in love, and living in (...)
etc. N^hi^ ^^pectu jacundius quam bonorum virorum cons. nsus. Plat. in 2 Epist.
God. Oh that all the Subjects of our Sovereign Lord were thus qualified, for
advancing his Title King of Saints. We have too long observed what Factions
have done for us, and for themselves. In patience the reasonable Soul may be
possessed, which the distemper of impatience does turn out to the courtesy of
others, and ^ unawares it is taken away. If Lust unto destruction were a
necessary or lawful concernment of Mankind, there would be less need of an
able Ministry.

My Lord, as I dare not here touch your Honors Name, choicest Pictures are not
for Tents and Boothes, so I cannot smother this common sense; for its generally
noted in your Honor with great applause, that your constant carriage does
rebuke the envy of those that would better conform to his Majesty's Royal
pleasure by endeavors for union.

I have good reason for this, and all dutiful Addresses to your Honor; for my
native Soil is the Inheritance of your noble and renowned Family, my Christian
name, with admission to the visible Church, and diverse comforts of my life, I
owe your near Relations, and as I may assert faithfulness, from former
Generations; so I shall most gladly engage me and mine.

Your Honors in all Duty and Service, Tho. Arnold.

DANIEL 6. 10. Now when Daniel knew that the Writing was signed, he went into
his house, and his window being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, he
kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before
his God, as he did aforetime.
FOr a Preface to this Text, take the History of the Penman.

1. His Descent was Noble, Of the seed Royal of Judah, Thought meet for a
Courtier to the greatest Earthly Monarch of his Cap. 1. 3.
time, and chosen Secretary to the King of Kings.

2. His Attainment was admirable, whether, 1. Natural, he was a lovely lad, in
whom was no blemish, Cap. 1. 4.
as the Spouse of Christ, all fair without spots; and as this is the ground of
natural love, uniting the heart of Shekem to Dinah, and Jacob to Rachel; so
it is likewise of spiritual 'twixt Christ and his Spouse, God and his Church
(perfectly beautified with his own comeliness) Ezekiel. 16.
and eternal love springs hence also; for as horrid deformity causes that
hellish rage in the damned to one another, and themselves, so celestial
beauties (shining with the rays of divine glory) move heavenly delight, called
by the Apostle, The bond of perfection. Love is the golden chain that does
unite glorified Saints together. 2. His acquired parts are no (...) Septuagint.
less rare, as Moses was as learned as Egypt could make him, so Daniel wanted
no Chaldean accomplishment, which had now engrossed the excellencies of all
neighbor Nations. He was fraught with all wisdom, understanding Science,
skilful in Letters, and the rarest Tongues. Now in this pure and well prepared
gold was set the Jewel; for, 3. His inspired Attainment graces all, an
excellent spirit is found in him, the spirit of the holy gods, said the
Magicians, who only had familiarity with the gods that dwelt with flesh, such
as the Witch of Endor conjured out of the Earth: But as his name Daniel
signifies the wisdom or judgment of God, and Nebuchadnezzar called him
Belteshazzar, after the name of his god, so he was incomparably inspired by the
only wise God.

3. His Preferment begins this Chapter, and who can better deserve it then our
Daniel. God promotes his servants by heathen Princes, and it is the interest of
greatest Monarchs to advance such, for it is an honor to them as the name of
Christ is blasphemed by disordered Christians, the treacherous carriage of such
has hardened the Turks against Christ, and a lewd servant is the shame of his
Master (for if his lewdness speaks his Masters temper, it is the greatest
disgrace; and if his Master cannot speak him into better manners, it is none of
the least) so it is an honor to be nobly served. Besides, they are most
faithful; Obadiah is a good Steward to Ahab, none in the Court more careful to
the King Ahasuerus, nor so ready to discover Traitors as Mordecai. Artaxerxes
is loath to have good Nehemiah his Cup Bearer go from his elbow. And moreover,
they ordinarily bring a blessing with them, this Laban got by Jocob's service,
and Potiphar; but especially Pharaoh by Joseph's.

4. In the next place we read of his danger, the cause whereof is envy; he was
now lifted up and made the fairer mark. Joseph's gay Coat was a light to the
Archers that shot so sorely at him. Persons in great places are commonly struck
at. The Adversarie's plot is this, by irreligion they would show their loyalty,
all the Courtiers were confederate herein; but these were Persians that worship
the Moon, (the emblem of worldly vanity) and will do any thing for their god
the world: No wonder then if some Court flies among us of the like disposition
are so fruitful in like From May 29. to June 28. is just 30 days.
devotions, and have neither troubled God nor man, so much as his Majesty with
their Petitions, during these thirty days, since (...) turn home. Our Monarch
may vye Petitions with theirs, though to their Caesar was engrossed Gods part
also, which with ours is sacred.

5. Here in the Text is his practice in his danger; godly exercise, and close
walking with God.

6. His reward twofold; 1. Evil from his Adversaries, who cast him into the
Lions den. 2. Good from God and the King, who preserved and promoted him.

7. And lastly, his great End accomplished, Gods honor is advanced and
established by the Kings decree.

The Text is fairly translated, He that will make no strife, shall find none
here, allowing only variety of terms to several Translators.

The Text opened, shows us (...), godliness in several parts, with their
harmonious dependence.

1. Constancy; but to be constant and faithful, there is required severity, and
strength of spirit; this he wants not, for

2. Here Is his secrecy; He goes into his house. Some reservations are
inconsistent with honesty; but here is no unhandsom shift, or treacherous
concealment; for

3. Behold his faith, looking (through his opened window) to Jerusalem, and the
Temple. And is he not over confident? is not this presumption? no, for

4. See his humility; he is upon his knees. Though a complement does not
always declare humility, yet many acts do a habit; for this

5. Observe his frequency in duty, three times a day, but are his addresses
according to the divine will? Yes, witness,

6. His piety, his service is holy, consisting of these two parts, Prayer and
Praise. But is he as thankful now as formerly, when in greatest state? does not
his danger shorten this part? no,

7. Lastly, His alacrity and equanimity is seen, in serving and praising God
now as he did aforetime.

Now because Wisdoms words are sweet to the soul, and variety makes a feast;
let us touch every flower in the Text, and taste the honey that our eyes may be
enlightened.

The writing was signed, so we read, and Tremelius Exeratum illud scriptum
esset, (...). Sept. Statutum decretum cum cognovisset.
(that learned Jew) and diverse other Translators with us: The Septuagint (of
great authority in the new Testament) read it, the Decree was established, all
to one sense; and Daniel knew it, or had taken full knowledge of it, yet he
adventures to his devotions: hence note,

1. The greatest dangers and difficulties, cannot terrify a godly soul from
his duty. Here are three good witnesses near at hand (and his companions) who
will Dan. 3.
not give Gods glory to another, nor his praise to graven Images, but will
rather offer themselves a burnt sacrifice then he shall want a service; and
this is from, 1. The law of God, his enemies had got a law against him, which
he will rather satisfy with his blood, then deny God his bodily service. It Is
safer to obey God then man. Princes have great power in their commands; upon
the command of Jacob and Abner, the young men sport away their lives to please
their Generals. It Is said, the Grand Signeur (to entertain an Ambassador)
commanded one of his Train to ride (in full career over a steep cliff) into the
Sea, and then asked the Ambassador how many such servants his Master had. Our
Lord has many such servants, we have Daniel, Paul, and many Worthies more. 2.
Their Heb. 11. Rev. 6.
love likewise does move them thereunto; this is strong as death, it crops the
fairest flowers in their prime, it brings strength and beauty to dust and ashes
in amorous persons of both sexes. The wives of dead heathens have contended
(urging before the judges, their love and loyalty that they might burn with the
bodies of their deceased husbands) and is spiritual love less powerful? surely
no. Paul counted not his life dear for Christ's sake, and Peter's love at last
constrained Acts 20. 24.
him to follow his Master in the like death, though a sadder spectacle being
crucified with his head down-ward: and

3. The sense of Gods love to them, makes them thus valiant. Stephen resigned
his soul to this revelation. Acts 7.
The goodship fears neither storms nor tempests if it has Sea room enough.
Gods love is not only a Fountain, but an Ocean; and Paul concludes, that
neither depths nor death can separate a godly soul Romans 8. ult.
there from.

Therefore let us be encouraged to zeal, and Christian valor, what thou want
in comfortable experiences, make up in faith. Christ is the Captain of our
salvation, Heb. 2. 11.
and we his Soldiers, and what makes soldiers adventerers in a field-fight;
or storm, not so much their present pay and maintenance, as the Generals
promise of Victory, Honor, Booty, and Preferment; therefore Heb. 3. 12.
this caution is added, Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God. If we believe not Gods promises, we
shall be terrified with the hardships of his service. Yet Daniel is wise and
retires himself.

Mat. 6. 6.
only into the House, and Chamber, but closet. Vainglory in Religion is an
undoubted sign of hypocrisy. Men do their best before those from whom they
expect their reward. Jehu will boast of his zeal, and show it to the world; he
has therefore the better acceptance with men, and the less with God. The
Pharisees in their religious duties, had this aim to be seen of men, and they
had their expected reward.

Let Us present an instance, it is better then a Play, or May Pole.

Here Is one stands in the corners of the streets, or Mat. 6. 5. (...), In
quibus fere habentur hominum conventus. B^za.
rather angles, turnings, and cross ways, to be seen four ways; it is the forum
or market where the greatest concourse of people is. The people flock about him
and thus admrie, see what a holy man he is, what a devout look he has, what
marks of mortification are in his face. Look (...) his A Plate of Brass upon
his brows, with the Dialogue inscribed.
Frontlet, he has the Law and fear of God before his eyes, what a demure
posture he stands in, (no butter shall melt in his mouth, for he fasts) behold
his religious habit, his large Philacteries on the Hemme and borders of his
Garment; Hence was a superstitious respect for the Hemme of the Garment.
there is holiness to the Lord, and many divine sentences wrought, take notice
of his patience and canstancy, he has stood here a great while, he makes long
and many prayers.

From this observation, the people are alarmed away with a Trumpet sounding a
call; why, what is the matter? O there is a merciful man doing his alms, and it is
pity but the world should know how good a man he is, what a bountiful alms is
here, this is a noble Benefactor, his charity declares that his ability is
great; a great man and a good man, this is a Rabbi indeed.

And this is their usual course in their Synagogues, ever sabbath in the midst
of their service (after the law written in parchment Roles is carried about,
and kissed Ipse vidi.
by all the people, as the wise Papists kiss their Crosses, Images, etc.) they
have a collection for the Priest, and the Collector (while gathering) turns to
the Priest, and tells aloud every man's gift, and the Priest or Levite blesses
him accordingly. But the truly religious man is better retired: for he seeks
the honor that comes from God alone; he that has rarities for the King, will
not open them in the way to the Court. Christ's spouse is a beauty, that will
not be blown upon. It Is held in Philosophy, that the motion of the Stellae
motus uon editsonum; Sancti non su^t sonantes.
Stars is without noise. True Saints are not sounding brass, or tinkling
cymbals that have but one note, no musical variety that makes a noise without
melody.

But though he be within doors his faith flies out; his windows were open; they
seldom shut their windows thereabouts, for they have white ceiled houses,
little Hag. 1. 4.
windows, and no glass, and he looks to Jerusalem and the Temple: Where Note,
Faith is an ingredient to all Christian services. Temple here prefigured
Christ, and how they agree we shall see. As upon Allegories, Parables, and
Similitudes, there may be an unhappy use of invention; (for particulars in such
cases, besides the scope, are not argumentative) so we must diligently regard
the main parts of resemblance.

1. It was an institution that the Temple should be respected 1 King. 8.
in Prayer, as does plentifully appear in the dedication thereof: So the Lord
said concerning his Son, Look unto him and be saved; and him had Jonah respect
to under the type: for we read, That he looked toward the Temple, when he was
in the depth of Iona 2. 4.
the Sea, and had lost the points of the Compass, he could not know East from
West; besides he was in the dark cave of the Whales belly, and was muffled and
blind folded with weeds wrapped about his head: This then was only the working
of his faith, toward the seat and center of Gods mercy, which is really Jesus
Christ, and in Gospel language is called our approach to God through him, and
asking in his name.

2. The Temple was the rarest piece in the world, for materials and
workmanship, the most rich and beautiful building; no such stately and
magnificent structure as the Lords house. The second Temple, that was yet
nothing to Solomon's, was admirable in Christ's time, 'twas glorious for outward
glory, and holy for external sanctity: so our Lord Jesus, the rarest piece that
ever the worlds eye saw, the fairest amongst men, never the like made of flesh
and blood. The Church sets him out to strangers in his colors of white and
red, and his Cant. 5. 10.
office a Standard bearer, which we corruptly read the chiefest: The goodliest
person in the Host is chosen to bear the Royal Standard, and his employment is
his highest grace. They that look no higher then his personal appearance shall
never now his worth; but believers lift up their eyes and see him displaying
the Royal Ensign of divine favor; and here is his glory.

3. The Temple was so holy that it sanctified the gifts, the Gold and other
oblations were hallowed by its holiness. So our Lord Jesus does our services,
though seemingly as pure as gold, yet they will not pass above, without his
image upon them. To our prayers there goes his incense, if he takes not up our
Rev. 8. 3.
names, in vain do we his.

4. The Temple was graced with the presence of God this was the chosen
habitation of the mighty God of Jacob. Jonah said his prayer came in unto him
in his holy Temple; hither he appointed all the Males to come three times a
year to meet him. Here Isaiah beheld his Majesty, and David his beauty, who
has recourse Isai. 6. 1. Psalm. 27. 4.
to a Temple-revelation, when he would Psalm. 63. 3. 4.
have his wish his fill of God. And this Christ owns to Philip, If thou have
seen me, thou have seen the Father. Job. 14. 8.
The Godhead is inseparably united to the Man hood in Christ, who is the medium
for communion between God and man, witness his own words, Thou father in me,
and I in them. God Job. 17.
gives us a meeting in grace which we embrace by faith in Christ.

5. From the Temple came the blessing; so David, They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the Psalm. 36.
fatness of thy House, 'twas the place of dole; here the Lord commanded the
blessing. In his Temple did every man speak of his honor, because there they
received his favor. Now this is Christ's singular prerogative, as without him
we can do nothing, so receive nothing, all comforts and spiritual blessings
(promoting us to heavenly 2 Cor. 1. 4. Ephesians. 1. 6.
places) we have through him, he entertains our faith with heavenly delicates,
joy unspeakable, Fides gratia and ^peratio dei, qua deus creditur, vita
purgatur and anima consolatur.
some Grapes of Canaan, first fruits of glory, the very substance of things
hoped for, though so little that it is but the evidence of things not seen.

6. Chr^^^ makes a likeness 'twixt his dying body, and the Temples overthrow:
Solomon's was destroyed, and another re-edified, with this promise; The glory of
the second Temple shall be greater then the first; which was true in Christ,
who says, Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up; and this
he spoke of his body, which shall now dye no more; and how glorious it is, those
that have seen him him since his ascension (as Stephen Acts 7. ult. and 22. 6.
11. Rev. 1. 13. 14, 15, 16.
at his dissolution, Paul at his conversion, and John in his Revelation) will
give some light. And hereby we obtain this comfortable hope, Tanta erit
disparitas inter corpus spirituale and natural, quanta sit inter corpus
natural and semen generationis. Observe.
that our bodies (that shall be) will as far exceed these in glory, as these
their seed, or dust whereof they are made. But though his faith be high, his
gesture is lowly and meek, he is upon his knees.

4. Whence we conclude, Our duty to God must be performed with humility; We
must serve the Lord with reverence, and James injoyns it in several Sam. 4. 9.
10.
of his terms, be afflected, mourn, weep, humble your selves in the sight of
God, and he shall lift you up. Our gesture in Prayer must declare an humbled
heart; it is superstitious to tie up our selves to any one gesture. The
Pharisees as we have heard, stood praying, and Christ approves that posture
(saying) when he stand praying, forgive. Mar. 11. 25.
Daniel kneeled, with many others (both dutiful postures) the servant stands
before his Master, the subject kneels before his Sovereign; we read much in
Scripture of another posture prostration, lying on the face, constantly used by
the Turks unto this day. Again,

5. Pious souls are frequent in holy duties; The Observe.
Turks fill their Mosques, or Temples seven times a day in their Cities, to our
shame. The Papists justly upbraid us with negligence and lukewarmness. A
fervent spirit, a heart hot in love gadly Romans 12. 11. (...), in most Copies,
and it is rejected for this mistaken sense, that Christians must be
time-servers. Psalm. 55. 17, 22, 29, 92, 14.
embraces every opportunity to discover it self. At evening, morning, and at
noonday will; * I pray, said holy David. They that be fat shall eat, and
worship. When we serve our selves of the creatures, we should remember to serve
the Creator. Corpulent bodies have left issue, and are soonest barren; but fat
souls in old age are most fruitful: but what is the duty?

6. Prayer is a daily exercise of Gods people, (most useful in times of danger
and distress) 'twas that which first drove man to God, when En^sh Genesis 4. 2^
(signifying calamitous man) was born, then began men to call upon the name of
the Lord. It Is a flower that springs from the miry pit of affliction. The
Israelites pressures made them groan; thus God tells Moses, I have seen their
affliction, and Psalm. 69. 1. 2. and 130. 1. Hos. 5. 15.
heard their cry. God (...) makes the day of evil for this end; he calls it a
seasonable, an acceptable time, when he is near, and promises help and
deliverance. Christ withdrew his invisible support from Peter to have his
Prayer, and when the earthen Vessel was sinking, and the waters coming in upon
his soul, this divine air and holy breath bubled forth, Lord save me, I perish:
We conclude this, remembering Christ to Thomas, Thou have seen the evil day, and
have prayed, but blessed are they that (live in this air, and) frequent this
duty, in their best and happiest days. In the midst of thy comforts, thou have
cause enough to come to God by Prayer.

And now have we made way to the last Observation, the most proper subject for
this day, Daniels praise: And the truth hence is,

7. The molestations of Gods people do not Observe.
obstruct his praise; this is evident in Job, a perfect Job. 1. 21.
man, very great in grace, and goods; in an hour he hears of the loss of
cattle, servants, children and all, he rents his mantle, and looks upon himself
stripped, as naked as when he was born, and yet cries out, Blessed be the name of
the Lord.

The next witness is David, a man beloved of Psalm. 42.
God, born to a Kingdom, accustomed to holy solemnities, and joyful feasts,
stripped of all his comforts, banished from Gods worship (so dear to him) pierced
with the Adversaries reproach (that cried, where is thy God?) yet in this
condition he stirs up his soul to an exercise of praise. We have likewise the
testimony of Paul and Silas, who received Acts 16. 25.
many stripes, were cast into Prison, and there set in the stocks; yet at
midnight, the dead time of the night, they sang praise to God.

To confirm this truth, We have three Arguments from the remains of comfort,
four from the fruit of sanctified trouble: And lastly, the command of God. God
seldom takes all, thou may find necessaries abiding: Now,



See Jacobs condition, an heir of the blessing, Genesis 28.
thou can not have a worse lodging, the blew heavens are his Canopy, the
earth his bed, and the stones his pillow, and here he indented with God, (and
conditioned to serve him during life) for bread to eat, and rament to put on.
Is Elijah's repast 1 King 19. 6.
beyond thy reach, a cake baken on the coals, and a curse of water? Can thou
not entertain thy friend as well as the old Propht? a man of quality, who
called back the young prophet, and it is like set the best before him (for it
was a dear banquet to the young man, it cost him his life, and what was it but
bread and water? Have thou not a handful of parched corn to eat, nor a draught
of water 1 Kin. 13. 19.
to drink, Hagars refreshment? which Christ values and says it shall be
rewarded, therefore thankfully received. But to leave times and places so
remote; It Is true we have a good Land, wherein more perish by wantonness then
want; with meat In licitis perimus.
(the workmanship of God) our bodies are destroyed, rather then with hunger.
The Peasantry in France, the mountaneers in Scotland, and the wild Who live by
trifoyl or honysuckle-grass eaten raw with a little of their butter.
Irish, would make the meanest amongst us thankful. But we will imagine the want
of necessaries, for it is possible though rare, and yet conclude thou have life,
and thence reason, to the praise of God.

The enjoyment of the greatest temporal mercy, will render ingenious Christians
grateful.

Ergo, This we have from Christ's own mouth (when he rebukes their needless care
for accommodations) Luke 12. 23.
The life is more then meat, and the body is more then raiment, life is the
capacity, the end and sum of all other comforts. It Is the first, and the last,
we willingly redeem it (when endangered) with the loss of our substance, we
spare not skin, flesh, or limb to preserve life, lancings, and Job 2. 4.
cutting, cures we undergo to save it. Life in Scripture is called a prey,
which is always taken (after the fight in victory) with joy and shouting. See
how this mercy is prized by a hopeless offender, pardoned at the place of
execution. But a godly soul may lose his living, and life too; what remains
beyond this to the praise of God? An. His Grace.

true grace, they have the immortal seed, the divine nature, the spirit of
Christ, and the life of God, therefore must needs be thankful. This Paul speaks
home to, Having, says he, access into this Grace wherein we stand, we rejoice
in hope Romans 5. 2. 3.
of the glory of God, and glory in tribulations. Oh Christian; what cause have
thou to be thankful, could thou understand thine estate, thy portion? We tell
you of Crowns, and Kingdoms, to raise an apprehension which yet never comes
near it: We read of a City paved with Gold, walled with Rev. 21.
precious Stones, twelve Gates, twelve entire Nihil in intellectu quod non fuit
prius in sensu.
Pearls, because the soul is instructed by sense even in things invisible. One
says, the compilers of the Turkish Alcaron formed their Paradise (of choice
Gardens, delicate fruits, rare beauties, restored virginities, and the like
carnal delights) Non quod ipsi it a putarunt sed quid alias vulgo afficere non
potuerunt.
rather from the heathen Poets, then the Jew and Monk assistant; not because
thus persuaded themselves, but otherwise they could not affect the people. And
therefore the Jews could receive no more then temporal promises and
possessions, because so long besotted with Egyptian sensual comforts, and
because so prone to Idolatry, God shamed their Idols with Temple-glory: As that
was typical to them, so all that the world and Ministry can say, is but
metaphorical and shadowy to the bright glory that shall be revealed. Thou
know (Christian friend) that thou can not always lay-out the possession
of thy experiences in divine praises, how then can thou deal with the
reversion. The recompense of Gods righteousness on us, calls for our highest
admirations, expressions can go no further.

Now from the fruits of sanctified trouble, we plead for Gods praise.

Ioh. 16. ult.
and troubles evidence this; they are the common badge of Christianity, every
mark of our high calling is a prize, and the deeper the scar, the more
honorable. This was Paul's evidence, his Religion (...). Gal. 6. 17.
might be read in these characters, the marks of the Lord Jesus born in his
body, he was so stigmatized and branded, for Christ that 'twas easy to know
whose he was. Well said that old Ignatius. Qui non cruciatus non Christianus.
primitive Saint, Now I begin to be a Christian, when his bones were crushing
between the teeth of wild beasts. Settlement on the Lees, and constant pomp is
rather for Dives then Daniel.

Paul insists upon Romans 5. 2, 3, 4.
the pedigree, and runs with grace in the; He says, the root and original is
tribulation. David feared not the roaring waters, shaking Mountains, and Psalm.
46. 3, 4.
most terrible tempests; for there was a River, the streams whereof made glad
the City of God. We gladly endure the falling of great storms after a drought,
that so the springs may rise: and James wills the rich to rejoice, in that he
is made low, and Jam. 1. 10.
adds the reason, because as the flower of the grass he shall pass away. The
flowers fading in our bosom, tell us what our joys and life will come to.

The vanity of our substance, does teach us the mortality of our bodies, and
prepares us for immortal glory.

carried away, and kept in Babylon for their good. Flesh Jer.
will bide longest sweet in cold weather. If he hedges up our way in sin, with
thorns of trouble, Hos. 2.
we may be thankful. He is wise, and can destroy the cause with its own effect,
sin with sorrow. The Scorpions oil cures the Scorpions sting. We should
therefore kiss the rod; for if we were not chastened of the Lord, we should run
on in sin, and Periissem nisi perijssem.
be condemned with the world.

Ergo, For this take the report of him, that often saw what was done above,:
John in his Revelation saw a company in white Robes, and palms Rev. 7.
of victory in their hands, before the Throne, and the Lamb crying with a loud
voice, Salvation, blessing, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and
might, be to the Lord, and the Lamb for ever. John wonders who these are, that
are so high in the praise of God; he asked one of the heavenly host that stood
by, who returns this answer; These are they that came out of great Tribulations
etc. The wrath of man is here turned to the praise of God by the saved ones.
The Prodigals misery made the music: He was lost, and is found, was the burden
of the Song.

It Is noted by one, That Princes are commonly unhappy in this, that nothing is
rare to them, their distance is so little from all comforts, that they cannot
ripen a desire before the enjoyment comes; herein our King is the happiest
under heaven. Clarior e tenebris is his also. Therefore the Saints that sleep
in Christ, shall have more glory then they that are found alive, and changed at
his coming, because every mercy takes it rise and height from the depth of
former misery; dissolution makes the resurrection exceeding glorious.

Lastly, to strengthen the former cords, and bind this sacrifice of praise, to
the horns of the Altar; Consider, God requires it.

Phil. 4. 6.
we should rejoice evermore, and in every thing give thanks joyful* as well as
mournful confessions, are his institutions. He will not have an evil report,
brought upon a good land; others discouraged from piety, for want of joy, his
commands we must not dispute, but obey. This should not stick betwixt God and a
Christian, as was said to Naaman, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great
matter, thou woulst have done it: how much more, when he says, Wash and be
clean; if God had enjoined a difficult and dangerous service, would thou have
disobeyed him? What command can be more acceptable then this, Be joyful, be
thankful.

Some rational inferences from these demonstrations will conclude our work.

Lady frets, if she want Isa. 3: 18, 19, 20, etc.
any of that bravery, and those ornaments, whereat the Lord chides when he sees
them on. Pluck feathers from young birds, and the blood follows. The Israelites
were sick of this pet in the wilderness; they could not be content with the
Lords allowance, though he gave them Angels food, bread of his own making, we
have nothing but this Manna, said they: We eat flesh in Egypt, who who shall
give us flesh to eat? They asked meat for their lust, and as there was sin in
the desire, so there was judgment in the grant. They get Quails, a rare bird, a
second-course dish, for lust and not for hunger; but while the meat was in
their mouths, the wrath of God fell upon them to their destruction. Physicians
say, that Quails are a dangerous meat, for they breed the Epilepsie, or
falling sickness. They did eat, and fell, and the meat wrought out at their
Nostrils. Those that seek things for themselves, (especially in doubtful times)
and despise the day of small things, are none of Gods people. 2. But say some,
this does not reach me, I disdain no mercies be they never so mean, but my
comforts are so small, my spirits so low, my heart so careful, that I am unfit
for an exercise of praise, and seldom excited hereunto. These are negligently
ungrateful, such were the Lepers. Before they were cleansed they could beg, now
they have nothing to move charity, but must fall to labor and work hard for
their living. Nine of the ten never acknowledge their clensing to be a mercy,
only one returns and is thankful, which our Savior approves, and reproves the
other.

Others with-old divine praise, through timerousness, and evil modesty and
sinful fear, that smother the praises of God with a multitude of jealousies,
possibilities of ill consequences, and the like. There were such in Christ's
time that believed on him, but were afraid to confess him, to whom he says, He
that denies me before men, him will I deny before my father; and his holy
Angels: Without Rev. 21. 6.
are the fearful.

3. Some are partial in the praise of God, that neither deny nor withold, but
lessen it, and shorten this part in times of trouble, contrary to the course of
Daniel here; he praised God now as he did aforetime in his greatest state, and
why should afflictions abate any thing of our praises, when divine love or
hatred is not discerned in the things of providence. The more this Garment of
flesh is worn, the clearer the Sun of Righteousness is seen through. We have a
gracious Father, that will not see us want; when this old suite of our natural
body is done, we shall have a new and spiritual one; and the soul that
possesses the least sense of divine love, is convinced of more mercy then ever
he can express in his best and highest praise. 'Twas Abraham's fault, that while
he complains of the want of a child, he prizes not the presence of his heavenly
father; Rachel was to blame, she had a loving husband, a fair estate, her
servants about her and one Son, which only encrased her desire, she named him
Joseph, cries, Addat Jehovh, takes him as the pledge of another, is all for an
addition, till at last comes Benoni, the Son of her sorrow, and death.
Inordinate desires for temporal comfort, with the ungrateful concealment of
blessings received, is very displeasing to God.

Hamans wrath be kindled, not Mordecai alone, but the whole Nation of the Jews
shall be a sacrifice to that flame; but the word of his friends would be
thought on. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom Ester ^. 13.
thou have begun to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely
fall before him.

It sometimes fares with Adversaries, as with those three men that cast in
Daniels companions into the fiery furnace; they were devoured of those flames,
prepared to consume Gods servants, who through his mercy were preserved. The
servants of God have a real spiritual defensitive against fires of wrath, and
waters of trouble, and it is Gods promise to his Elect, (who can never fall Isa.
43. 2.
below joy and praise) and molestations give them Acts 5. 41.
fresh occasions to glory.

The remaining Uses are more comfortable.

Table is a snare to him, Romans 11. 9. 10.
as a trap baited with a chick, his back is bowed down like a beast, he
converseth wholly with this worlds good, and cannot look up, he forgets his
God, Whereas (on the other hand) a godly man faith with Paul, though troubled
on every side, yet not 2 Gor. 4. 8. 9.
distressed; though perplexed, not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken;
cast down, but not destroyed. Grace has it is fresh springs always hottest in
winter. The spirit of consolation (as the wind) breathes where and when it
lists, by night as well as by day. Divine favor (as of old to the Israelites
in the wilderness) is a pillar of fire, clear and comfortable in the night of
adversity, when many times in the day of prosperity its cloudy.

2. So their carriage is contrary, the natural man is hardly drawn to
acknowledge, or bless God in abundance, Nebuchadnezzar in his pride has lofty
looks, which the Lord brings down, and thus vaunteth in his Palace (viewing
his Royal City) Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of
the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and the honor of m^ Majesty? here is
little thanks to God; for all this Daniel tells him, that before God has done
with him he shall be convinced of his interest, in all these things, and that
he disposes them, according to his own good pleasure. And look upon a
graceless wretch in distress, and he frets himself, curses, blasphemes; and
indeed his carriage is so uncomly, that it would trouble us to write or read
it. But with the gracious soul it is not so, he has his songs in the night, the
consolations of God are stronger for his joy, then tribulations can be for his
dejection; he has the oil of grace and gladness, which always gets uppermost,
and floats upon the waters of affliction, he triumphs over trouble, he blesses
and curses not.

hidden life, and comforts thereunto Col. 3. 3.
belonging in a safe hand. Its said, the Indians cast their Gold to the
Spaniards, and laughed to see the scuffle. Some great men will sport away too
much, yet scarce feel the loss of it. Thieves may break in and steal household
goods, but they cannot carry away Land. The Law secures our earthly, the Gospel
our heavenly inheritance. A Christian for Christ makes little of wealth,
liberty, and life too. Christ, when he bids his friends not fear them that can
kill the body, he backs his counsel with Arguments Luke 12. 4. 5.
from the depths beneath, and heights above the eternal rewards of the evil and
good; the one shall be killed and cast into hell; (better my body burn here,
then body and soul forever in hell, says the Martyr) And he further adds, He
that confesses v. 8.
me before men, him shall the Son of man also confess before the Angels of God.
He that witnesses a good confession with his blood, shall find the day of his
death, the souls birthday unto perfect glory.

And it concerns the people of God to be zealous, and valiant; for God keeps up
the stage of this world, that they may with honor act their parts; their
answer of God to the souls of them that were slain for the word of God, and the
testimony Rev. 6. 9. 11.
which they held, is this, that they should rest yet for a little season,
until their fellow servants also, and their brethren that should be killed, as
they were, should be fulfilled,

little, and did nothing with it, said the evil servant: I have made much of my
little, said the good servant; and what said the Lord? Thou shall have more.
The words of Christ to Nathaniel, Joh. 1.
we may well apply; Because, I said, I saw thee under the Fig Tree; believe
thou? (thou shall have more matter for thy faith to work upon) thou shall see
greater things then these. A Tenant that paid his Rent well in the Wars, shall
be better trusted by his Landlord in times of peace; have thou in thy
molestations brought me praise, thou shall not want consolations, says our
Lord. If a Son improve a small Stock-well, the father cares not how great his
trust be. What Christ speaks of himself, belongs also to Ministers; He whom
God has sent, and speaks the words of God (is faithful in Joh. 3. 34.
the discharge of his Ministry) God gives not his spirit by measure to him, he
shall not be Joh. 4. 14, 7. 38.
stinted in Gifts or Graces: so a Christian that in distress, speaks the words
of Gods praise, shall obtain his mercy without measure.

Cherubins in the Temple, is not only meant our protection from, and under
them, but our communion with them in holiness and praises; this is evident, in
that two Cherubins covered the mercy seat, where the Oracle was; thus
signifying that where Gods presence and his mercy is vouchsafed, there Men and
Angels rejoice. And this is drawn to the life in Isaiah's vision, where the
whole Quire sing, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, heaven an earth is
full of thy glory.

Though their joy be not always full, yet it always remains in them, and is
sufficient for the work of praise; though they have seemingly sad hours, yet
with the husbandman they plough in hope, and sow (...) hope, their tears are
spiced with joys, and they conclude (as Daniel here in greatest danger) their
supplications, with confessions of his praise. They trust the only wise God to
order their good in all conditions and providence, they thankfully take the
cup their heavenly father gives them; they say with their Savior, not ours,
But thy will be done. Amen.

Halelujah.

