THE SON OF GOD Walking in the Fire with the Servants of God. IN NINE SERMONS
Upon DAN. III. XXV. BY That Precious and Holy Man Mr TIMOTHY ARMITAGE, Late
Pastor of a Congregation gathered in the City of Norwich. Unto which is added
another SERMON Preached by him, upon Eccles. 9. 10. At the Entrance of one of
the Mayors there into his Office.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Cripps, and are to be sold at his Shop
in Popes-Head-Alley, near Lumbard-Street, 1656.

To the Reader.
THe Prophets, do they live for ever? as the holy Prophet Zechariah asks the
Question; wherein he also implies the Answer, Surely they do not live for ever;
which daily experience does bear witness unto; For we see that wise and good
men dye, as well as the foolish and brutish person: And it is no small Mercy
unto them (what ever it be to those who remain) that they may rest from their
Labors; yet were it not great pity that all their precious Labors should dye
and be buried in the dust together with themselves? Now although that gracious
and sweet-Spirited Man, Mr.. Timothy Armitage, the late Pastor to a
Congregation gathered in the City of Norwich, is now gone to his blessed Rest,
(of whose Death it cannot be said, as 'twas of that King Jehoram; That he
departed without being desired; for his absence is still very much lamented
(and not without cause) unto this day: Yet through the Lords good Providence,
some of his holy Labors that fell from him being taken up by the careful Hand
of a Christian Brother of that Congregation, who had the Pen of a ready Writer;
are here presented to the world (as some others also may, if the Lord please,
in time be brought, to light) whereby such as have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil, may easily perceive what a good Treasure there was
in the heart of that good man, whence such good things, both new and old, have
been brought forth. I doubt not but such a sweet savor of a gracious Spirit,
will so evidently appear all along through the Veins of these Sermons, to such
as are spiritual, and can savor spiritual things, as that should I go about to
write Letters of Commendation of Him or Them, I suppose it might be said to me
as the Samaritans sometime spoke unto the Woman that persuaded them to come and
see the Christ; Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard
him our selves, and know that this was a most choice and precious Man indeed.

And seeing it has been the Lot and Portion of the Saints, even in all Ages,
more or less to meet with manifold exercises, and sharp sufferings, in one kind
or other; yea sometimes even with Fiery Trials: and what afflictions may also
abide us in these latter Times, the Lord only knows: Therefore I cannot but
think, that the Subject of these ensuing Sermons (viz) The walking of the Son
of God with his Servants in the midst of the Fire) may be very seasonable and
comfortable to all the Servants of Christ, even in these and the after times.
What this our Dear and Reverend Brother spoke herein, was (as it seems) that
which he had the experience of not long before, having (as I am told) but newly
come out of the Furnace; I mean a most violent hot burning Fever: so that there
is the more cause to hope, that what came from his own heart, may (through the
Blessing of Christ) go to the Hearts of others also.

If any seeming Pleonasms, or Redundances, or deficiency in any Phrases or
words may appear to any herein, let them please but to consider, that these
Sermons are put forth not by the Authors own Notes, which (as it seems) are
very hardly to be read, but as they were taken from his Mouth in Preaching. I
shall only crave leave to mention one passage, lest possibly any might seem to
stumble or be offended at it, viz. That about the suppressing of Errors, in
page 118, 119. as if he did absolutely deny the exercise of the Magistrates
Power in any such matters, or in any case whatsoever; Whereas if his
Expressions be heartily taken, as they may, viz. That the Sword or Power of the
Magistrate is not to be exercised against any Person merely for the very
holding of an Error, if no more, without any manner of Civil disturbance or
circumstances of that Nature (for he speaks not at all of any such holding and
spreading of Errors) I know not any that will, or can affirm or maintain the
contrary, and so take any just offense at the Expression. I shall add no more,
but desire that the Blessing of Christ may accompany these holy Labors.

13d. 7m. 56y. THO. ALLEN.

The Table. Showing several things observable, in every particular Sermon in
this Book.
The first Sermon.
SEven Wonders or seven Miracles discovered in the Text. First, That the light
of the fire continued, and not the heat. Page 3 Secondly, That their number was
not diminished, but increased. 4 Thirdly, That the fire did burn their bands
asunder, but did not hurt them. ibid. Fourthly, These men were seen walking in
the midst of the fire. ibid. Fifthly, That the fire did remain fire, and yet not
burn them. ib. Sixthly, That they should be in the midst of the fire, and have
no hurt. 5 Seventhly, There was one among them like the Son of God. ib.
The Observation, That the Lord does oftentimes in a wonderful manner rescue
the lives of his Servants from death. 7 What restraints God lays upon the
Creatures, that he might rescue the lives of his Servants. p. 7, 8, 9, 10 The
first Ground of the Point. 10 How Gods Name is glorified by delivering his
Servants. 11, 12, 13
The second Ground of the Point. 15 The third Ground of the Point. 16 Quest.
What God requires when he works Mercies for his people. 17 1. Take heed that we
neither forget the Mercy, nor the God of the Mercy. ibid. 2. Not look with a
slight eye upon great Mercies. 19 3. Give nothing to the Creature, but all to
free grace. ibid. 4. Give back again to God, what God lends us. 20 5. Be
willing that we lay down our lives, when God calls for them. ibid. 6. We should
do something extraordinary for God. 21 7. Look upon all outward mercies in
reference to some spiritual mercy. 22

The second Sermon.
Use 1. To teach that the lives of the Saints are very precious to God, p. 28.
This is made out in four particulars. 30.
Use 2. To teach, that the souls of the Saints are much more precious to God;
and therefore our souls should be very precious to us. 34 Use 3. To teach us to
set an high price upon our lives. 37 4. Rules how to prize our lives. 39
Use 4. To exhort the Saints to trust God for ever. 45
The third Sermon.
The former Use further pressed, and directions given what to trust God for. 1.
For all the comforts of their lives. 52 2. For overcomming the evils of their
lives. 53 3. For the prolonging of their lives, amplified in three particulars.
54, 55 4. For spiritual Mercies. 57
Quest. When mercies received may be helps to trust God for the future; showed
in six particulars. 58 Quest. How to improve mercies so as to strengthen faith
for the future, in two particulars. 62 Two things premised, and two Cautions
how to rest on former experiences. 63
The fourth Sermon.
Wherein is showed who it was that bare witness to this Miracle, viz.
Nebuchadnezar. And a Question propounded, whether he was hereby truly
converted? Arguments for the Affirmative given by some, p. 73. And determined
in the Negative. 74
Doct. 2. That it is not in the power of greatest Miracles to convert a soul to
God, unless the spirit of Christ step in. 75 This is cleared by
Scripture-examples. ibid. By Scripture testimony. 76 And by experiences in our
own times. 78
First Ground of the Point, To put the greater glory on the word. 80 2. From
the desperate hardness of man's heart. 81 Use 1. Take notice what a Miracle of
iniquity there is in man's nature. 82 Use 2. What a Miracle it is that any soul
is converted. 83 A threefold Miracle is showed in the conversion of every
sinner; Of Wisdom; Of Power; Of Mercy. 84 Use 3. Bless God for his word, and
look to it more then to Miracles. 87
The fifth Sermon.
Doct. 3. God many times makes his peoples enemies to acknowledge and confess
that the Lord is with them, and that he has dealt graciously with them. 92 The
Point cleared by five Demonstrations. 1. Christ put up a petition to his father
for it. 94 2. Christ has promised it to his people. 95 3. God has put a power
into his Word to convince enemies, though it convert them not. 96 4. God makes
enemies often to be the eye and ear witnesses of his peoples mercies; and Agents
therein. 97 5. God works for his people in such away, that enemies are forced
to acknowledge the same, so freely, unexpectedly, suddenly, solitarily. 98
Two Reasons why God will make enemies to acknowledge this truth. 101 Use. 1. A
ground of Patience and encouragement to the Saints in tribulation. 103 Use. 2.
Let not wicked men look with delight on the miseries of the Saints. 104 Use. 3.
Let the people of God acknowledge this as a very great mercy. ib. Use. 4. Let
the people of God much more acknowledge the gracious dealing of God toward them.
105
The sixth Sermon.
Doct. 4. That all the persecutions which the Devil or his Instruments raise
against the Saints, shall not diminish their number, but rather increase them.
111 The point evidenced by manifold examples out of the history of the Church
in all ages. 112 The first Reason, God delights to walk contrary unto men 115
2. Reason, The Lord Jesus is a mighty King, and will improve his power for the
Saints. ibid. 3. Reason, From the impotency of enemies to hinder Christ's
Kingdom. 116 Use 1. To let us see the vanity of all attempts of men against the
truth and people of Christ, with an item to the Powers of the world concerning
it. ibid Use 2. To give a ground of patience and comfort to the Saints, against
opposition of men. 119 Doct. 5. That the Lord Jesus Christ is never nigher to
his people, then when they are in great afflictions, in fiery trials. 121 Some
instances given to prove it. ibid Quest. What presence of Christ the Saints may
expect in their trials, 121 1. His supporting presence. 2. His enlightening and
teaching presence. 3. His sanctifying presence. 4. His quickening presence. 5.
His comforting presence. A warning to the Saints to improve this Doctrine, they
not knowing what trials the Lord may ere long bring them into. 126
The further handling of this Point is in the eighth Sermon.
The seventh Sermon.
Wherein is considered the restraint the Lord laid upon the fire, it could not
hurt them, only loosed their bonds, whence note. Doct. 6. At the command of the
Lord, the fiercest of Creatures, shall not only not hurt his people, but shall
take part with them, and do them good. 130 Two Branches of the Point. 1. They
shall not hurt them. 2. They must do them good; both illustrated from Scripture
instances. 131, 132 1. Reason, The Creatures are Gods Host, they go along with
him, where he is a friend, they are friends. 134 2. Reas. From the Covenant and
League made with the Creatures, which has two Branches. 1. To do no hurt. 2.
To take part, and do good. 137 3. Reas. God has a special providence over his
people. 139 4. Reas. The Creatures are all reconciled in Jesus Christ. 140 Use
1. Take notice of the mighty power of the Lord, what a great King he is, that
has all Creatures at his command. ibid. Use 2. What a shame to man that he
should not be at the command of God. 141 Use 3. A strong Motive to those that
be strangers to God, to come in and submit to him; till then they are liable to
be harmed by the Creatures. 142 Use 4. It is not in tho Creatures power to do
good without God. 143 Use 5. Comfort to the people of God, and encouragement to
their faith. 145
The eighth Sermon.
Wherein the fifth Doctrine is further handled, Concerning the presence of the
Lord Jesus with his people in afflictions 150 1: Reason, The Lord Jesus knows
they have most need of his presence then. 1. Because of the weakness of the
flesh. 152 2. Because of the strength of Temptations. 154
2. Reason, The Lord Jesus remembers his Fathers kindness to him, in being near
to him in his afflictions. 155 3. Reas. Christ remembers his engagement to his
people. 158 1. By promise. 2. By a Law of Love written within him. 3. By the
Law of friendship. 4. That he may see to his work he is doing upon his people
by afflictions. Quest. By what way does Christ communicate so much of himself
to his people in affliction? 161 etc. Answ. 1. He raises up his peoples faith
to an high pitch. 2. He pours upon them the Spirit of Supplication. 3. He draws
the hearts of his people nigher to him. 4. He manifests much of himself by his
word which he sends with affliction. Objections Answered of such as complain
they have found little of Christ in their Afflictions. 164.
The ninth Sermon.
Use 1. To show the unparrallell'd love of Jesus Christ, who will never forsake
his in afflictions, no friend on earth like him. 173 Use 2. To draw in those
that be strangers to Christ, to submit to him, and get interest in him, that
they may have a friend in an evil day. 174 Use 3. There is not so much evil in
affliction then, as men apprehend. 176 Two things may make the people of God
not to fear afflictions 176 1. Because they shall certainly enjoy the presence
of Christ in affliction. 177 2. The presence of Christ will countervail the
bitterness of affliction. 180
Use 4. Let the people of Christ expect the presence of Christ in their
afflictions. 183 Object. But we have no promise of it now, as the Saints had
formerly. 84. Answ. 1. Though God speaks not now from Heaven, yet we have a
larger word written. 2. We have the spirit given more abundantly then at that
time to particularize the Promises to us. Where is showed how we may know it is
the Spirit that brings the Promises to us. 185, 186 Object. But sure Christ is
not with one in affliction; Why is it so and so with me then? Answered in three
particulars. Use. 5. To teach the people of God thankfulness, 1. Because God
leaves them not alone in their low conditions. 2. Because he affords them his
presence therein. 187 Objections of such as say they find not Christ's presence
with them in afflictions, answered; and directions given in such a case. 190,
etc.
THE First Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said* Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


THe School of Discipline, which God trains up his Children in; teemeth to have
very severe Sta^utes, and strict Orders that are not joyous to the flesh but
they are exceeding profitable for the Spirit: there is no School in the world,
in which there is more to be learned; the Lord Jesus himself is the head Master
in this School, who learned obedience perfectly by the things that he sufferd,
and so he knew how to teach his School (^s I may say) the Lord Jesus will teach
his Scholars all kind of weapons, that they may be fit for all assaults; he
will make them good at any exercise, before he leave them: In the 11. of
Hebrews, you have a Role of the several exercises they were put upon, beginning
at the 36. verse, Others had trials of cru^l mockings and scour^ings, yea
moreover of bonds and imprisonments* they were stoned, they were sawn asunder,
were tempted, were slain with the sword, they wandered about in sheeps skins,
and goats skins, being destitute, affl^cted, tormented; and he teaches them how
to conquer all these: The Apostle here does speak of these as Conquerors
through faith, in the verses foregoing, see what glo^ious Conquests they had:
In the 33, 34. verses Who through faith, subdued Kingdoms, wrought
Rig^teousness, ob^ained promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quench^d the
violence of fire, escaped the ^dge of the sword; out of weakness were made
strong, w^xed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Ali^ns: Here
are glorious victories that the Saints had through faith; over all the evil
that they met with in the world: you have an instance of this in the Text. In
the Chapter where the Text is, you shall read there of three Scholars of Jesus
Christ, that were put to hard exe^cises, they were put to it, to grapple with
he flames of fire; and they had all manner of disadvantage; and yet they went
on Co^querors; they had to deal with the wrath of the King, He was exceeding
wrath, and his count^^^^c^ c^^nged: They had to deal with the flames of f^re,
and flames that were made seven times hotter, than ordinary: So the King gave
commandm^nt (as you read in the 19. verse,) that they should heat the Furnace
seven times hotter* than ordinary: Again. they were bound hand and foot; for so
the King gave commandment in the 20, 21, verse. And they took them and bound
them, and cast them bound into the Furnace; yet the Lord he made his servants
Conquerors, notwithstanding all their disadvantages. You have in the Text, the
confession of the very enemies themselves; the King said, Did I not cast three
men b^^^nd into the Furnace: and Lo I see your men walking? I see four men
walking in the mid^^ of the fire, and they have no hurt: So then in the Text
you have witness given by the mouth of an enemy, unto that great deliverance
that God wrought for his three Servants: Lo said the King himself, I see four
men loose, etc. where, take notice of the several wonderful things, that God
wrought for these three children: See how many wonders there were in this
deliverance of theirs.

First of all, there was this wonder, That the The first Wonder, i^ the
delivering of the three Children.
light of the fire continued, and not the heat, ^iz. so as to work upon them;
this seems to be a great Miracle; that light and heat should be separated from
the fire; there was light; the King saw them walking in the midst of the fire,
and yet that fire did not burn: I say* this could not be done without a great
Miracle: It Is true they shall be separated in Hell; light shall be separated
from the flames of Hell: When God will show and testify the greatness, the
fierceness of his wrath upon the disobedient; there will be heat, but no light,
^ flames there shall be burning, and yet there shall be nothing but utter
darkness: Now when God will show a Miracle of Mercy to his Servants here upon
earth, God so disposes and orders it, that there shall be light and no heat.

Secondly, There was this Miracle* that their number was not diminished, but
increased: Lo I The Second Miracle.
see four men* says the King; Did we not cast in three, and lo I see four?
They had thought to cut off at once, all that were disobedient to the sinful
command of the King; they had thought that the flames would have consumed them
all three, that there should not have been one left: beho^d their number is
increased; since they begun to suffer, their number is increased, they have a
fellow Martyr, a fellow sufferer, that is in the midst of them.

Again Thirdly, Here was this Wonder, this Miracle, That the fire did burn
their bones asunder, ^he Third Mira^le.
but did not burt them: I see four men loose, says the King, ^id we not cast
three men bound into the furnace, and lo I see four men loose? And what a
wonderful work of God was this, that the flames that were prepared to devour
them, should help them, that the flames should burn their bonds, and not hurt
them?

Again Fourthly, Here was yet another Miracle, The Fourth Mir^cle.
that these men were seen walking in the midst of the fire; The fire was
prepared to be a Torment to them; but the Lord made it a sweet walking fire:
that which was pretended to torment them, it becomes a blessing to them; they
were walking each with other, and lifting up the Name of the Lord; ^n the midst
of the fire.

Fifthly, Here was this Miracle, That the fire should remain fire, and yet it
should not burn t^em: The Fifth Miracle.
I fee four men loose walking in the midst of the fire, says the King; So that
the fire was still fire; it was not quenched; some conceive that the Angel did
quench the heat of the fire, with some sweet dew, or by some fresh gale; but
the Text says, they were in the midst of the fire: now here is the wonder;
that it should be fire, and yet not burn; the heat of the fire was not absent
from the fire at this time; for the fire did burn their bonds after they were
in the midst of the fire, after they were fallen down: So then it was fire, and
when they were in the midst of the fire it burnt their bonds, and they had no
hurt; so that the burning faculty of the fire was not taken away, but only the
art of it was suspended for the present, by the Mighty Power of God.

Sixthly, Here was another Miracle, that they The Sixth Miracle.
should be in the midst of the fire, and have not the least hurt, that the fire
should not reach to the hair of their head, or that the smell of the burning
should not be upon their clothes: I see them walking in the midst of the fire,
and they have no hurt: that fire that burnt the men that cast them into the
fire, did not them the least hurt.

Seventhly and Lastly, That one was among The Seventh Miracle.
them that was like the Son of God: Now what does Nebuchadnezzar mean by thsee
words? Had this King any knowledge of the Son of God, of the Incarnation of
Christ? it was likely he had not, he was still an Hea^hen and still he
worshipped his Idols; but only he was convinced thus far, that the fourth man
that was among them, was was more then a man: there was some extraordinary
glory and splendour; some Divine Majesty did appear in his countenance, which
did convince him that he was more than a man; and so he calls him the Son of
God, but yet without all doubt this was the Son of God, that was among them; it
was none other but Jesus Christ, ^he came down to rescue, he came down to
deliver, he came down to walk with his Servants in the Furnace; here he
fulfilled his promise, When thou go through the fire, I will be with thee:

Object But you will sa^, Jesus Christ ^as not yet come in the flesh, Christ
had not yet taken the nature of ^an upon him; and therefore how could this be
the Son o^ God?

Answ. I Answer It Is true, Christ was not then come in the flesh, he had not
taken a body: that body that he did appear in, it was not the body Jesus Christ
has now in H^aven; it was not united Hypostatically unto his Person, it was
not that flesh he took afterward, and in which he now appears before his Father
for us: But yet the Son of God did sometime take up a body; yea many a time, in
which he appeared oftentimes to the Patriarks in the old Testament; as to
Abraham, and J^cob; and to Moses, and many others.

Object But you will say What bodies were these that the Son o^ God did assume
and tak^ up? Whether were they the bodies of men, or no?

Answ. I Answer It is most probable they were bodies that were created: The Son
of God when he appeared to the Patriarks, when he appeared to any of his
Servants, he had power to create himself a body at any time, to make a body of
nothing, and so to dissolve it in a moment to nothing, as to make it in a
moment, so to dissolve it in a moment; and thus did the Son of God appear in
the midst of these three Children, that it might be a sign unto them, and to
the Church

First, That the Son of God should afterward come and take the nature of man:
That he should come in the flesh to rescue the souls of his people, from the
flames of the wrath of God; that he should come to deliver them from Hell and
destruction.

Secondly, That he would be with his people in all Furnaces of Tribulations;
that when they walk through the fire, and through the water, he will be in the
midst of them: And thus you see a great deal of Mercy, and a great deal of
Miracle is in this Deliverance which God wrought for these his Sons: There are
very many Observations that the words will afford us; but I shall not stand to
name them, least the time prevent me, but shall close with one Point: And that
is this,

That the Lord does oftentimes in a wonderful Observe. What restraints God lays
upon the creatures, that be might rescue the lives of his Servants.
manner, rescue the lives of his Servants from death and destruction. I say the
Lord does oftentimes in a wonderful manner, rescue the lives of his Servants
from death and destruction: It Is very evident in the Text: I shall point you to
some Instances out of the word of the Lord that shall clear up this truth to
you, and confirm it: Therefore it is that the Lord shows his wonders in the
deep, that he might rescue the lives of his Servants from destruction: he has
discovered the foundations of the great Waters, and made a path in the midst
First Water.
of them, for the ransomed of the Lord to go through: Thus did the Lord rescue
the lives of the Isralites, when the Egyptiaens pursued them; as you read in
the fourth of Exodus latter end

Secondly* Sometimes God has laid a restraint Secondly, Fire.
upon ^^re, as well as upon the water: He has given command^ent to the flames
not to harm his Servants; For this, you see it clear in the Text, they wa^ked
in the midst of the fire, and they had no hurt; they were neither choked with
the smoke, nor their bodies confimed by the fire; for the Lord had laid a
restraint upon the fire.

Thirdly, Sometimes God has given command Thirdly, Bruit beasts.
to the ver^ br^it ^e^sts, not to hurt his people: He has re^cued the lives of
his ^ervants from the paw of the Bear and the mouth of the Lion: you read in
this Book of Daniel, the sixth of Dan. what Command God g^ve there, concerning
Daniel when he was cast into the Lions Den, in Dan 6. 22. My God, says he,
has sent his Angel and h^^h sh^t up the Lions mouths, that they have not ^urt
me: what a wonderiu^ wo^k was this, that the ravenous Lions should not eat the
flesh, that was set before them?

Again sometime ^e find; That God has Fourthly, Sea.
laid a restraint upon the devouring S^a-Mons^er; upon the great Levia^han; and
God has given commandment to that, not to hurt his Se^vants: This you have
clear in J^n^h; you read in Jonah, that the Lord prepared a Whale to swallow
him up; God delivered him from two deaths at once; from the Sea and from he
W^ale; and in the second of Jonah, the last verse, God gave commandment to set
the Prisoner at libert^, God spoke to the Whale, and the Whale set Jonah on dry
land.

Again, You shall find that Go^ has laid restraint upon vi^lent men, that
the^ have not been Fifthly, violent men.
able to take away their lives; He rebuked even Kings for their sakes; Touch
not mine Anointed, and do my Prop^ets no^^arm: you know what command God gave
to Laban, and what restraint he laid upon Esau, concerning Jacob in Gen* 31,
33. though it was in the heart of Laban to destroy him, and though Es^u came
out with an intention to take away his life; the Lord la^d a restraint upon
them.

Again, Sometimes you shall find that God Sixthly upon deadly Diseases.
has laid a restraint upon dead^y Diseases, upon violent sicknesses, such as
would have been destructive to the bodies of his Servants, God has laid a
restraint upon them; that though v^olent Diseases and D^stempers, have pulled
down his Servants from their strength, to great weakness, to the grave; God
has given command that they should not destroy them: And thus God dealt with
David and with H^^zekiah, and David does acknowledge it in the 30. Psalm. 3.
says he, O Lord tho^ have brought up my soul from the nrave, thou have kept me
alive, that I should got go d^wn ^o the pit: He was at the very grave, and he
Lord delivered him; and then a remarkable instance you have of Hezekiah: at the
38. of I a^ at the beginning of the Chapter, there is the very sentence of
death gone out against him, and a deadly Disease seizes upon H^zekian, he was
gone and quite gone, by the course of nature; he could not have lived, and yet
the Lord rescues his life; as you shall read in that Chapter, at the fifth verse.

Again, Sometimes you shall find that God Seventhly, upon the Devil.
has laid a restraint upon the very Devil himself: and has given him a charge
that he should not meddle, nor touch the lives of his Servants; and thus God
dealth with Job as you may see in the second of Job; there the Devil sought
after nothing more then the life of Job, fain would he have had his life; but
God would not grant it, in the 6. verse. of that Chapter, in the 5. verse, says
Satan, Put forth thy hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will
curse thee t^ thy face, verse. 6. And the Lord Answered, Behold he is in thine
hand, only save his life: There is nothing the Devil thirsts more after, then
the taking away the precious life; and therefore he set upon Christ with this
temptation, If thou be the Son of God cast thy self down; and so the Devil
does set upon many of the poor Servants of God many times with this Temptation,
Cast thy self down; make away thy self; and take away thine own life: Yet the
Lord is pleased to lay a restraint upon him, and keep up his people,
notwithstanding all those storms and temptations and they are yet in the land
of the living; and thus you see what care God takes for the lives of his
Servants; and in what a wonderful manner he does sometime rescue them from
death and destruction.

But you will say, What end has God in this? Wherefore does God do this?

First of all, and above all, in respect of his own Name; He respects his own
glory in it, therefore The first ground of the Point.
he suffers his people to be brought into such great straits and low
conditions, as none but God can deliver thence; He suffers them to be brought
down sometime, even to the very dust; that it may appear that none can deliver
but God, that does raise from the dead, and call things that are not, as if
they were: Now Gods name is glorified these 3. ways, by such kind of
deliverances as these.

F^rst of all, God does thereby draw forth great praises from his people: I say
such deliverances How Gods Name is glorified i^ delivering of his Servants.
draw forth great praises from his people: When God gives great mercies into
the hands of his people, he is pleased to put high praises into the mouths of
his Servants; in Ps. 149. at the 5. and 6. v. Let the Saints be ^oyful in
glory, let them sing aloud upon their beds: Let the ^igh praises of God be in
their mouth: Now my brethren, know this; That there is nothing on earth, that
God does more delight in, then in the praise of his people; he is pleased to
account it as a glory done to him; Who so offers pr^ise glorifieth me, and
therefore it is that God is said, to dw^ll in the praises of his people: See
that expression in the 22 Psalm. it is an expression of Jesus Christ in his
Agony, 22 3. v. Oh thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel! To inhabit the
praises of Israel, it is one of the most glorious Titles that is given to God; O
thou that inhabit^st the praises of Israel: The Lord delights more in the
praises of Israel, then in all the world beside; He delights there more then in
Heaven, if it were not for the presence of his Son; therefore it is one of the
dwellings of God, the praises of his people: Great Princes and Nobles, have
their several Palaces, so has God; sometime they leave the City, and go into
the Country, and places of Recreation: Why, thy Lord he is said sometime to
come down among his people, and he is pleased to dwell there, that he may
refresh himself in the praises of his people: It Is a house that God does
delight to dwell in for ever and for ever: when Faith shall cease, and Prayers
shall cease, the Praises of the Saints, the Halelujahs shall never cease, but
the Saints shall compass the Throne round about with their Praises, with their
Songs, with their Hallelujahs, and there shall God delight to dwell, there
shall God delight to inhabit for ever; and therefore because that God does thus
delight in the praises of his people, he works great deliverances, that so he
may greatly draw forth the praises of his people; that their hearts may be
abundantly enlarged to him: He will work such deliverances, as there shall be a
great deal of God in them, that so their hearts may be greatly drawn forth in
praises to God.

2. Again, God gets himself the glory in the second place, by confuting the
blasphemies of the enemies; and therefore it is that God does carry on such
works of deliverance, that he may stop the mouth of enemies, and confute all
their blasphemies: When God brings his people into a low condition, many times
enemies they rise high in their blasphemies against God and his people;
sometimes they cry out, where is now thy God? and sometimes they condemn the
generation of the righteous, and judge rashly, as those in Act. 28. did of
Paul, when they saw the Viper on his hand they said among themselves, No doubt
this man is a murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance
suffers him not to live: Now God many times he works great deliverance, that
he may confute the enemies of the Saints, that they shall see if they will not
wilfully blind their eyes: they shall see that God was in the generation of
of the righteous; in the Psalm. 126. v. 2. you may see there, God he made the
very Heathen to confess, that God was with his people; and that he had done
great things for them: Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done
great things for them; The Lord has done great things for them.

Thirdly, God brings glory to his Name, by such kind of Deliverances; for he
makes it appear that he has the sole prerogative over the times of men, and
over the lives of men; he will make it appear, that the times of his creatures,
are in his hand, and not in their own hand, and not in the hand of enemies.
Above all things in the world, God is said to keep this in his hand, the times
of men, and the lives of men: See what Dani^l says to Nebuchadnezzar, in Dan.
5. 23. And the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways,
have thou not glorified: See here, the breath that is in man's Nostrils, it is
in Gods hand, and he can withdraw it when he please; thy breath, it is in his
hand, and he will dispose of it, he keeps it in his hand, and he will not give
it out of his hand: and therefore when any life is communicated to any
creature, it is given him of God: Job, he will acknowledge this, that his life
was given out by way of favor, and free grace: Job 10. 12. Thou have granted
me life and favor: See here he does acknowledge it, that the giving out of his
life, it is Gods prerogative: It Is granted of God; Princes they grant such and
such a favor: so life and favor is granted of God; He will keep it in his own
hand; He will not make any Lease and Term to any man living, they shall have
it from Moment to Moment; the creatures shall have their lives from Moment to
Moment; but for any term, God will not, that shall be at his own disposi^g:
and therefore the Lord has exercised wrath and anger, when the creature has
gone about to make this their prerogative, to promise life to themselves, and
grant life to themselves; You know what is said of the fool in the Gospel, when
he had been very prodigal, he would make many promises to himself: Soul, says
he, thou have goods laid up for many years: why how does God take this? why he
is called fool for his labor; he reckons without the Landford and therefore
God he comes and turns him out of his Farm: Thou fool* says God* th^^ night
shall thy soul be taken from thee; it is Gods only prerogative; he makes it
appear so, the giving out of life is in his hand: and therefore it is said in
the Scripture, that the Issues from death, belong to God: See that place in the
68. Psalm. v. 20. *It Is our God that is the God of salvation, and unto the Lord
belongs Issues from death: Issue that is the way that God leads to death and
from death; The Door, the Gates of death* both to and fro, they belong to God,
to the Son of God, he keeps the door: Behold, says he, I have the keys of
Hell and death; so that the Issues to death belong to him; He shuts the door
when he pleases; and the Issues of death belong to him: he opens the door when
he pleases: Sometime a man has this conceit of himself; well, I am brought
lower and weaker, wasted and decayed in my strength and in my body; but there
is such a means as will surely help me: such a Friend; such a Physician, they
will certainly help me: if it were not for them I should despair, there is my
hope: why you are deceived, says God, I will have you know that I keep thee
door of life, and the Issues of life belong to me: if God shut the door of
life, man cannot get back again, notwithstanding all his friends; Again,
sometime a man is brought low, that friends give him over, and then we say he
is gone; all means are used, and none effectual, and we say, surely there is no
hope for him to come back again: You are mistaken, says God, I will have you
to know that the Issues of life come from me: and I will open a door for life,
and say, life come back again: and thus God makes it appear, that the Issues of
life belong to him, and that is for his glory: That is the first ground of the
Point.

Secondly, God does work such Deliverance Second Ground of the Point.
for his Servants, that so he may afford great matter of rejoicing, both to
themselves and to others: I say, that he may afford great matters of rejoicing,
great Mercies, and great Deliverances, they commonly bring along with them
great joy; it is not only a Mercy, but a Duty: great Mercies, call for great
joy: See it was their duty, in Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 3. When the Lord turned again
the Captivity of Sion, we were like them that dreamed, them was our mouth
filled with laughter, and our Tongue with singing: Then said they among the
Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them, the Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad, or rejoice. The Spirit of joy, it is the
life of Heaven, it is the inheritance that the Saints shall have there: W^ll
done good and faithful servant, enter into thy M^sters joy: Now God, whilst
they are upon earth, he will cause part of that joy to enter into them: that
they shall have some of that joy, now have a little taste of the joy of Heaven
whilst they are here upon earth: therefore God he will will work such
deliverance for his people, that they may see much of the glory of God in the
Mercy: much of the glory of God in the Deliverance, that so they may have their
hearts lift up to rejoice in God: Yea Again, God will have others to rejoice
with them; and therefore some Mercies are spreading Mercies: such a Mercy as
God gave to Sara^; See Gen 21. 6. And Sarah said, God has made me to laugh, so
that all that hear, will laugh with me, her own ^ffection was too narrow to
rejoice in the goodness of God: and therefore I sa^, God many times he gives
out such Mercies, such Deliverance^, that they shall be spreading Mercies: the
joy and the sweetness of them shall spread abroad, and his people shall say, we
rejoice in the goodness of the Lord; and all the people that fear his Name,
shall rejoice with us: That Is the second Ground.

Thirdly, God he works ^uch Deliverances for his people, that so he might
strengthen their confidence Thir^ Ground of the Point.
for the future, that he might encourage their hearts, and the hearts of many
that trust in the Lord, that whenever they are brought down into low
conditions, they might look back and see what God did sometime for them: See
what the Psalmist says, in Psalm. 77. see what a help this was, when he was in
a low condition; the 77. Ps. v. 10. Then said I; so this is my infirmity, but I
will remember the years of the right hand of the most High. I will remember the
years of the right hand, of the most High: I will remember those days, those
years when God did by his Mighty Hand, save and deliver me: This is an
encouragement for the future, to trust in God; he saved me at such a time, at
such a low condition: Oh he was there, the right hand of the Lord was stretched
out to What God requires when he works such mercies for his people? and how the
Servants of the Lord should express their thankfulness for such Mercies
received.
deliver; and why should we ever distrust the Lord again? surely that power of
the Lord can never be nonplust, that has wrought such great things for me;
Thus you see the Grounds: Here is no time for Application. I shall add a
fourth Particular, and that is this which will yet make the Point more useful,
before I leave it: What does God require of his people, when he works such
Deliverances for them? And how should the Servants of the Lord express their
thankfulness for such Mercies, when God does so and so rescue the lives of his
people?

First of all, Take heed that we neither forget the Mercy, nor the God of the
Mercy. I say, forget not the Mercy, nor the God of the Mercy; we are very apt
to look upon our mercies with a slight eye; we remember our wormwood and our
gall, but we forget our mercies, and the goodness of the Lord that did shine in
the Mercy: Now know, that there is a great provocation to the Lord: It was the
sin of Israel, that they forgot so soon what God had done for them: we read of
this, how they provoked the Lord and they turned back, says the Psalmist; and
you shall see ^ow God did take it as a great provocation, and God threatens
them for it: See how they forgot what God had done for them; Psalm. 106. 13.
They soon forgot his works, they waited not for his Counsel, and verse 21. They
forgot God their Savior which ^ad done great things in Egypt; and therefore
the Lord was wroth with them: Brethren, so should we take heed that we do not
forget our Mercies, and forget the God of the Mercy; forget not what God is,
and forget not what God has done for us: forget not what God requires of us:
Did God remember us in low conditions, and shall we forget him? shall we forget
him when he has raised us up? will not this be horrible ingratitude? does the
Lord remember us continually, and shall we forget him? Oh! we should get a
remembrance of God, and a sense of God, and the goodness of the Lord, written
in our hearts: Where does God write the name of his people? Why he writes their
names there, where he will not forget them: why see what the Lord says in Isa.
49. verse. 15, 16. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? they may forget* yet will I not forget
thee; Verse 16. Behold I have graven thee upon the Palms of my hands: See what
care God takes, that he might not forget his people; and so he would have us
not to forget his Mercies: Behold I have engraven thee upon the palms ^f my
hands; When a man would not forget his friend, he will ingrave his name upon a
Ring; but you will say, he will not forget, that does not only write it upon a
Ring, but upon his own flesh: And thus the Lord deals with you, Behold I have
engrav^n you upon the plames of my hands; and does the Lord thus take care to
remember us: Let not us forget him.

Secondly, we should not look with a slight eye upon great Mercies: Oh view the
Mercy, compass the Mercy, go round about it, tell the Towers, and see the
Bulwarks, see what Mountains of goodness and mercy shine in them! Oh see how
the Attributes of God do shine in them! God cannot endure that people should
despise affliction, his Chastisements; My son despise not the chastening of the
Lord, he cannot abide when men are careless, when they are sleighty under
affliction; and surely he will not endure that men should look slightly upon
mercies: My son despise not the goodness of the Lord, the mercies of the Lord,
the deliverances of the Lord; Let not them be looked upon with a sleighty eye,
look into the height of the Mercy, and the depth of the Mercy, and all the evil
that would have befallen us, if we had not enjoyed the Mercy.

And Thirdly, Take heed that we give nothing to creatures, but all to the free
grace of God; this God he requires in thankfulness, when he gives such
Deliverances; ascribe nothing to man, nothing to our selves, nothing to our
prayers, nothing to our faith: No, give all to God, give all to free grace;
look upon Ieb, take him for an instance, in the 9. of Job v. 16. If I had
called and the Lord had Answered, if he had given me my Petition; given me what
I desired, yet I would not say he has harkened to my voice: I would not say
it is for my prayers, or for my faith: No, I am poor dust and ashes, what is my
voice in Heaven? No, sure I will give all to him: I will say, surely the Lord
has heard his own voice, the voice of his free grace, pleading for me, he has
heard the voice of his Spirit pleading in me, and the voice of his Son, making
Intercession for me: I will not say the Lord has heard me; but that the Lord
may teach his people this; he gives Mercies before they have thoughts to seek
them: as in Ps. 21. 3. Yea, sometime God, he has exceeded the faith of his
people, to let them see that it was not for the worthiness of their faith,
though when God would give Mercies: Many times he sets his people a praying and
believing, but he does not give mercies for these. And therefore God he does
prevent their faith; as you may see in Psalm. 126. verse. 1. When the Lord turned
again the Captivity of Sion, then were we like to them that dreamed; like to
them that dream; as much as to say, When the Lord brought us back, we had not
faith enough to believe it, we could not think that the Mercy was real; when as
we came out of Babylon, we doubted whether we should believe it or no, whether
it was real or a dream: It was real, but it was not for their faith; and
therefore ascribe nothing to faith, nothing to means, nothing to prayer, but
all to the free grace of God.

Again Fourthly; we should give back again to God, what God lends us: That is
the Fourth way to express Thankfulness: Has God given us life; let us give it
back again to him: Has God given us strength? we should give it back again to
God: we should lay out all our strength for God: Improve it for God, and be
willing to suffer for God,

Again Fifthly, in the fifth place, We should be willing to lay down our lives
when God calls for them again: Thus should we express our thankfulness for life
given us: I say, be willing to lay down life freely and voluntarily, the next
time when God calls. When God has rescued any of our lives from the grave, why
all those days that are added, are freely given, and it is an addition of free
grace, more then we thought of, more then was expected: And therefore we should
freely be willing to lay it down when God calls for it: we should be willing to
lay down our own lives and let them depart; and so friends should be freely
willing to let that life go, that was so freely redeemed: Thus we should be
Volunteers to death, we should freely and willingly submit to God, as well as
dye in obedience, as in faith, and let it be our wisdom, often to look to what
Christ has done for his people, in matter of death and the grave; and set
faith on work every day; to see how the sting is taken out by Christ; and the
grave is made a sweet resting place: it is sanctified, it is perfumed, it is
sanctified that it may be a sweet resting place to the Saints.

Again, in the Sixth place, When God has wonderfully saved our lives, we should
seek to do something extraordinary for God; we should not content our selves
with ordinary service, says Christ, What do you more then others? in the 5. of
Mat. and the latter end; if you only love those that love you, what do you
more then others? or what singular thing do you? he would have his people do
some singular thing for him: and especially when God has done some singular
thing for them: and what says Hezekiah, when God had restored his life from the
grave, in Isa. 31. v. 19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do
this day: The living, the living, he shall praise thee, he that has life once
given and he that has life restored to him again; he that has life given from
the grave: The living the living, he shall praise thee: he shall speak of thy
glory* and testify o^ thy wonders: something more then ordinary is employed
there; That the living, he should live to God.

Seventhly, In the last place to conclude, Look upon all outward Mercies, in
reference to some spiritual Mercy, and never take up in the outward Mercy, but
let it lead you to the spiritual mercy: Alas what is life if it be not in
reference to spiritual Mercies? if it be not in reference to get more of God,
to get more glory to God: Life, what is it? a poor empty thing: it is true, life
it self is a mercy, a great Mercy; but yet though life be a blessing, a man may
dye betimes and be blessed: Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord: And on
the contrary, though life be a blessing, a man may live long, and be a cursed
creature ^or all this: See what is said in the Prophecy of Isaiah the 65 chapter
20. v. it is spoken of the days of the Gospel: There shall be no more thence an
Infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days; For the child
shall dye a hundred years old; but the sinner being a hundred years old, shall
be accursed: *It Is a prophecy of Gospel blessings; showing how it should be in
the latter days: a child dye a hundred years old: That is, the young men shall
have abundance of the glory of God: those that are children in years, shall be
old in grace, they shall have as much grace as those that were a hundred years
old: and the sinner a hundred years old shall be accursed; a curse, though he
live a hundred years: See then, life is not desirable, but in reference to
spiritual Mercies: Oh then rest not in outward Mercies: if God at any time has
give* any of your lives; for a prey, res^ not in outw^rd Mercies, but labor to
see further Mercy in it: that mercy is given in reference to further Mercy;
and wait for the Communication of it: It was well when He^ekiah could say that
God had done it in love to hi^ soul, in Isa. 38. 17. Thou have in love to my
soul, delivered it from the Pit of corruption, for thou have cast all my sins
behind thy b^ck: He looked more to the spiritual Mercy then to the outward
Mercy: Alas, it had been a poor small thing for life to be given, and my sins
not pardoned; if God had given me life, and not given it out of love; Oh it had
been a curse to my soul: and t^is does David bless the Lord for, in Psalm. 23.
3. He restores my soul, he leads me in the paths of righteousness, for his
name sake: It was after God delivered him from sickness, he bless God, he
restored my soul and my life, he does not take up there, but he leads me in the
pathe^ of righteousness for his name sake: I have further mercy my life is given
for further Mercy: God he will not restore that mercy of life only, but he will
convey me to further Mercy, seeing he has given me life, he will lead me in
the paths of righteousness, that I may life to the praise of his name. And this
should all our desires be, when God does such great things for us.

THE Second Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


I Made entrance into the words the last Lords day, There is witness and
testimony given of a glorious Miracle and Wonderful Deliverance that was
wrought for three servants of God. God had brought them forth to exercise their
faith: And to suffer; To suffer the wrath of the King, but yet the Lord
delivered them, he delivered them from the wrath of the King; he wa a violent
King; from the flames of the Furnace, and the Furnace was heated seven times
hotter then ordinary: they were bound hand and foot, and cast into the midst of
the fire; and yet they became Conquerors: The very enemies do witness as much:
The King Answered and said, lo I see fou^ men loose, walking in the midst of
the fire: Here are many Miracles in one; here is heat and light separated one
from the other: sight remains and yet the heat is taken away, and it burned
not, here is the wonder of mercy; it shall be a miracle of judgment in Hell,
there is fire that has heat, but no light: the hotter the flames are, it shall
be the darker, it shall be dark that day; but here when God will show a Miracle
of mercy, he takes away the heat, and the light remains: Lo, says the King, I
s^e four men, etc. Imagine, their number is increased, as another Miracle:
Whereas they thought that the flames should devour them all: and ^o their
number is increased since they began, to suffer: there were but three cast in,
and now there are four. Again, these four men were loose, And there is another
Miracle, they were cast in bound, with their Cords, and Chains, and Fetters,
but what ever they were, they were dissolved: See hear, God makes the very fire
to fight for them to loose them, to set them at liberty from death: Again, they
were walking in the midst of the fire; there is another Miracle: The
Adversaries thought it should have been a place of torment to them: but lo, it
proves to them a place of pleasure: it is to them a sweet walking place: They
walk together, and confer together, and praise the Lord together; and that is
another Wonder: Again, To walk in the fire, that the fire should be fire, and
should not burn them: it was still fire, the fire was not put out, as some
imagine, but the fire did remain fire; so the Text says, they were in the
midst of the fire; and the fire remained fire: and the fire did consume their
bonds, they fell down in the midst of the fire, and their bonds were burned by
the fire: that the fire should continue fire, and that the Lord should suspend
the burning act of it, that it should not burn them; here was another Wonder:
Again, they had no hurt, the flames consumed their Adversaries, and there was
not so much as the smell of burning upon their clothes: besides, the Son of God
was among them; there were four, and the form of the fourth was like the Son of
God: It was the Son of God, Christ took a body, he made himself a body when he
pleased: He came down to walk with them, to refresh them, to deliver them: Here
was held forth what Christ would be to his people, that he would deliver them;
that he should come to do his Fathers work, here was the promise fulfilled,
that Christ would be with his people in every fiery trial, in every affliction,
and in every Tribulation: The Son of God, he came down, and he makes a fellow
sufferer in all their affliction: so he makes good his promise to his people,
that if they go through the fire and water, he will be with them: The Point
insisted upon, is this:

That God does oftentimes in a wonderful manner, rescue the lives of his
Servants from death and destruction: The observation insisted upon
He lays a restraint sometimes upon the waves of the Sea they shall not take
away the lives of his people: You know Israel went through the red Sea; and the
Lord did lay a restraint upon the fire sometime: So in the Text, and sometime the
Lord did lay a restraint upon the fishes of the Sea; so in the case of Jonah:
and sometime the Lord did lay a restraint upon the devouring beasts: the Lions,
their mouths were shut up, they could not eat the flesh that was set before
them, when Daniel was cast into their Den: He laid a restraint upon violent men
in the world: He laid a restraint upon violent sicknesses and diseases; David
was delivered; and so was Hez^kiah, when the sentence of death was gone out: He
laid a restraint upon the very Div^l himself: Behold he is given into thy hand,
only save his life: and God he does this of his own accord, to be lift up, to
be the praise of his people, and that it may unanswerably confute the
blasphemies of enemies, he delights in the praises of his people: Oh thou that
inhabitest the praises of Israel: God comes many times out of Heaven to refresh
himself with the praises of his people: He delights to dwell there; it is the
House that God will take up into all eternity, the Saints shall compass the
Throne with Halleluj^hs, and there shall God be praised. Again, God he will
give great matter of rejoicing to his people, and therefore he works great
Deliverance many times, though they cannot whilst they are here on earth; They
cannot enter into their Masters joy, yet their Masters joy enters into them:
When the Lord turned again our Captivity, then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with rejoicing. I come to the Application of the
Point: Is it so that God does in a wonderful manner rescue the lives of his
Servants The Application of the Point.
from death and destruction: It let us see,

First of all, That the lives of the Saints are precious Psalm* 116. v. 15.
Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints, not that God
delights in the death of his Saints: he means their lives are precious, and
therefore their life shall not be taken from them, but upon good ground; they
are very precious in his sight: the Lord knows that he has the greatest Income
of glory that way; yea all the glory that God has in this visible world, is by
the lives of his Saints: if it were not for them God should have none to lift
up his name in the world, he should have none to make his name glorious here,
he should have none to pay him rent for all his great Farm: the world now, that
would be a great loss if God should loose all his Rent in the world: the men of
the world, they pay God no Rent, they bring nothing to God, that God can
accept; they deal with God, as those Husbandmen did in the Gospel, instead of
paying Rent, they fall upon his Servants and beat them, when God sends and
demands his Rent and Glory from them, they seize upon the Inhabitants as their
own, and seize upon all as their own: so that if God should not have a portion
from his people, that do from day to day bring in his Rent of Glory, he should
loose all his glory in this visible world; and therefore it is that the Saints
they have made this as an Argument, when they have been in low conditions, when
they have pleaded with God for their lives, they can tell God of the glory he
shall have thereby: So Hezekiah, when he was sick unto death, in Isa. 38. v.
18, 19. For the grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee, etc. as
much as to say; Oh Lord, if thou take me away, how will thou do for thy Rent
of glory in the world? Thou have Thousands of Thousands of Saints in Heaven, to
lift thee up; but there are but a few, a very few, to lift thee up in the
world, this visible world; and if thou take away my life, and I go down to
the dust, that dust cannot praise thee, though I shall praise thee among the
Saints and Angels; yet I shall not praise thee here in the land of the living;
nor shall I lift thee up here in the midst of the enemies, though I shall bring
glory to thee another way; yet I shall not bring glory to thee in this world:
And therefore Oh Lord, do this for thy servant: remember me for thine own name,
and for thine own glory; and so the Psalmist, David did use the same Argument
with God, in Psalm. 30. when he* there was sick and ready to go down to the
grave; he pleads with God in the 8. and 9. verse. What profit is there in my
blood, when I go down to the pit, as much as to say, Oh Lord, what will thou
not look to thine own glory: What shall become of thy gain, of thy Rent, that
should be brought in, here in the land of the living? if I go down to the pit,
I cannot lift thee up here in this world; there is a long time indeed even for
eternity, when thou shall be lift up by the Saints in Heaven; but it is but a
short time that thou shall be glorified in the land of the living, and thou
had need spare the life of thy servant, to lift up thy name in the land of
the living, What profit is there in my blood, if I go down to the pit? So that
still you see the lives of the Saints are very precious in the eye of God: Oh
that you that are the people of God, that you would believe this; it is worth
the pressing it upon you, that you would fix this truth upon your heart; that
your lives are very precious in Gods sight: if you be Some particulars to make
out to the Saints that their lives are precious in Gods sight.
not persuaded of it: I beseech you consider these particulars.

First of all consider, What a charge God has given to all his Creatures
concerning the lives of his Saints: do but remember their former charge. He
has given charge to the water, and charge to the fire, and charge to the
beasts in the earth and fishes in the sea; he has given charge to the earth he
has given a charge to violent men, he has given a charge to the Devil, to
Diseases and Sicknesses; surely does God take such pains and give such charges?
surely the lives of his Saints must needs be precious to him: did a man go up
and down in his family and give charge to every one from the greatest to the
least: Take heed you do not meddle with such a Box take heed that none of you
touch it: why then certainly it is precious, there is some precious thing in it;
such a charge ha^h God given concerning the lives o^ the Saints, he has taken
pains to go up and down in all his family: even the whole world. Heaven and
Earth, is his Family; and he has spoken to every one of his Creatures, to the
highest and to the lowest: Take heed you do nothing against the lives o^ my
servants; the very meanest of all the Creatures in the whole family shall not
say, but that they were warned; he commands the very stones in the field, as it
is in Job, making a League with the stones in the field, not to hurt his
servants; does God take such pains, and give such charges, you must needs
conclude that your lives are precious in his sight.

Again Secondly, Consider what a guard God has set about the lives of his
Servants: He has set a guard of Angels about them: He shall give his Angels
charge over th^e, that they shall keep thee in all thy ways; See what the
Apostle says in the first of the Hebrews, he speaks of the great privilege of
the Saints in the last verse, Are they not all Ministering spirits, sent forth
to Minister to them? There is not one of the Angels in Heaven, but has a
charge to guard the lives of his Saints; are they not all Ministering Spirits?
Why brethren, the best of them have a charge given them: from the highest to
the lowest, they have all a charge given them concerning the lives of his
Saints: and they are as watchful as may be: what says our Savior Christ in
Mat. 26. 53. do you think (says he) that man can take my life from me whether I
will or no? I go according as it is written of me. I go because my father ^ath
decreed it, no man can take my life from me, if I would rescue my self, I could
pray to my father, and he should send a Legion of Angels to rescue me, rather
then my life should be taken away from me before my time be come. And so the
like may be said of all the Saints: God would send more then twelve Legions of
Angels to rescue the lives of his servants out of every danger, and out of the
hand of every enemy, rather then their lives should be taken from them, before
it was determined of God: certainly the lives of his servants are precious to
him, he has set such a guard about them: a guard of Angels, that God should be
pleased rather to want attendance in Heaven, then hi^ Sain^s lives on earth,
should be in jeopardy: God he will spare them all out of Heaven, for to rescue
the lives of his Saints before they shall be cut off, before his time appointed
^e come.

Yea further in the third place, Consider that the Lord himself takes a special
care of the lives of his children; he will not trust the lives of the Saints
with the Angels; though the Angels be watchful, and as faithful as can be
desired in creatures; yet God himself he will have to do with the lives of his
Servants; his eye shall be upon them, and his hand under them; there is never a
moment in which God does not watch over them, and himself take a special care
of them; what he says of his Vineyard in Isa. 27. 3. may be said of every
particular Saint; I the Lord will k^ep it. I will water it every mom^^t, least
any hurt it, I will k^ep it night and day: See here, is a gracious promise; I
will keep it, and I will water it, and this shall be every moment this shall be
night and day: there is not a moment in the night, nor a moment in the day, in
which God has not special care of his people, from first to last; from the
womb he has a care of them, and so the Psalmist does confess in Psalm 22.
speaking of the watchful care of the Lord, of the goodness of the Lord, Ps. 22.
9, 10. Thou art he that took me out of the womb, thou did make me hope when
upon my Mothers breasts, I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God
from my mothers belly: See here, from the very womb, from the very beginning,
God begins to take the care of his people; he brings this to strengthen his
faith on God for the future, to uphold his soul now in his suffering: it is
spoken of Christ, surely the Lord he can do it he has not left me, he took
care of me: when I was in the womb, he began then to take the care of me, he
delivered me when I was in such straits, when I was almost dead, struggling to
get into this world, the hand of the Lord was helping of me: The hand of the
Lord was more to me then all creatures, he helped me: See at the beginning,
from first to last, God takes a special care of the lives of his Saints.

Fourthly, It will further appear, this great love of God; this great care of
God, will further appear; if we consider what a rate he makes men pay for the
lives of his Saints, when they take their lives away by violence: He will make
them know they have stolen precious Jewels from him: and he will make them pay
dear for it; you know what it cost Jerusalem, there was found the blood of the
Prophets slain, there was a great deal of blood lay upon them; the blood of
Abel, and the blood of Zacharias; and they shed the blood of the Prophets, and
Servants of God, and that blood became their overthrow; the blood of them did
throw down the Walls and Temple of the City; the streams of blood did sweep
away all the Inhabitants thereof: whenever the life of a Saint is stolen and
taken away, God presently sends Hue and Cry after it, and wheresoever God has
found the blood of his people, he has declared his wrath against them; he has
prosecuted the Law to the u^most against them: See what is prophesied of
Babylon; how does the Lord deal with her in the 18. of Revelation, when God
came to make inquisition after the blood of the Saints, it is said. And in her
was found the blood of the Saints, There God found his stolen Jewels, the blood
of his Saints: See how God does prosecute the Law against her in tha^ 18.
Chapter you read of most fearful judgments that came upon Babylon: God seizes
upon all her Riches, all her Glory, and they were all brought down in a day;
she her self was brought to execution, she was cast down, as a Millstone, cast
down into the bottom of the Sea, never to to rise again: what was the cause of
all this wrath and di^pleasure, and fearful judgments that was to come upon
Babylon? Why this was given as the reason, In her was found the blood of the
Prophets; So then still you see, and I beseech you believe it; there is nothing
in all the world more precious to the Lord, then the lives of his Servants.

Well 2ly. If the lives of the Servants of God the souls of his people: he was
content that his Son should come out of his bosom, rather then he would loose
one of the souls of his people; the Son was infinitely dear to the Father, more
dear to him then all the world; yea ten thousand worlds, and yet he will part
with his son, that he may rescue the souls of his people from destruction: Oh
how precious was the soul in the eye of Christ, what did he do? what did he
suffer to redeem the precious soul? how far did he come to fetch them? a mighty
journey the Lord Christ took from Heaven to Earth, that he might bring back
poor souls that were taken captive by the Devil, and rescue them from death and
destruction; what great hazard did the Lord Christ run when he was upon Earth?
Oh what mighty Armies? what Troops did Jesus Christ break through? Armies of
sins, and Armies of Devils, that was in his way; and yet he brake through them
all, to rescue the souls of his Servants: when he had broke through those
Troops, what depths did he descend into, that he might fetch up the souls of
his Servants? He was content to go into the depths of the Sea, the red Sea, the
Sea of blood; yea, into the depths of the Sea of his Fathers wrath and
indignation, that so he might fetch up the souls of his Servants, the depth of
the wrath of God, the depth of the infinite wrath of God, it is a Sea that has
no bottom, a Sea of wrath, that men and Angels should never have found the
bottom; they shall be descending lower and lower still, and never find the
bottom; and yet the Son of God was content to go to the bottom of wrath, of
all the billows of his Fathers wrath and displeasure* that so be might fetch up
the souls of his servants that lay under wrath; they could never have lift up
their heads above the billows of the displ^a^ure of the Almighty; if Christ had
not fetched them up, if he had not upon his own back carried them over: Oh how
precious were the souls of his Saints in the eye of God! The life of the Son of
God was precious to him, and yet his life was nothing to him in comparison that
he might save the souls of his people; if he had a thousand lives, he would
have laid them all down. Now I beseech you think of this, you that have a mean
account of your souls: O how precious is the soul in the account of the Son of
God? how great was the price that Christ paid for thy soul? and why do thou
undervalue thy soul, and art willing to part with this most precious treasure
in the world: it cost the life of the Son of God to purchase thy soul, and
would thou be content to sell thy soul for a trifle; and yet how many
thousands in the world do value a thousand things in the world above their
souls? and many they will part with their souls for a lust, for vanity, for
nothing, for a bag of earth, for an empty cloud of honor for a little
pleasure: Oh what undervaluing is this of thy poor soul: I beseech you remember
the worth of the soul; do but consider how precious it was in the eye of God,
you that do slight your precious souls: If (...) ^^ed your body, you care not
if the soul starve: Oh that you would remember, you will make a hard bargain,
though you win all the world and loose your own soul; what shall a man g^^e in
exchange for his soul? I beseech you for the Lords sake, have more care of your
souls, let your souls be precious in your eyes; it is more worth then all the
world, if you loose the things of the world, you may find them again, you may
gain them again; if you loose all the friends in the world, you may find them
all in the Son of God* he stands in all relations to his people; nay, if you
loose this life it self, yet thou may find life in Christ, thou may find
thy life again in the Son of God; but if thou loosest thy soul, thou art lost
for ever and thou art undone for ever; and thy soul once lost, cannot be found
again: Oh that men would account of their souls to be as precious as Christ
accounts of them! do not prefer the body, do not prefer the things of this
world before thy soul, and the glorious things that are concerning Eternity:
thy soul is more precious then thy life, would thou not put off thy life for
a trifle? and would thou put off thy soul for a trifle? life is precious but
the soul is more precious:

Thirdly, If life be so precious to God, the life Solomon says in that 9. of
Eccles. v. 4. For to him that is joined to all the li^ing thereis hope, for a
living dog is better then dead Lion. He knew there was nohing more excellent
then life; speaking of natural life, there i^ nothing more excellent then life:
A living dog i^ better t^en a dead Ly^n; a living dog, that is, ^ man in a vile
condition: a living dog, a man though he lives and be in a vile condition, in a
bad condition in a most desperate condition; looked upon from God as a dead
creature, that man because he lives is better then a dead Lion; better then
Princes and Potentates of the earth, though they did live never so gloriously:
Indeed if you look beyond nature, if you look to that condition that is after
life, why then their condition is no^ precious to the Saints; for their
condition is better then the condition of the greatest worldly men in the
world; and one that dies in the Lord Christ were he a dog, yet he is better
then the greatest Lion on the earth: but in natural things the wise m^n would
have you to know that life is the greatest treasure in nature; and therefore
when as the greatest love is expressed, it is expressed by laying down of life:
Here is love indeed, that a man lay down h^^ life: When Christ did express his
greatest love that possibly he could, unto his Saints he expressed it by laying
down of his life: I lay down my life for my she^p, says Christ, and Here is
love i^deed, here God commends his love to us, that whilst we were yet
sinners, Christ dyed for us; Here is the commendation of love, to lay down
life; nothing better then life to be given: and therefore you shall find that
God has given it as the greatest outward mercy: he reckons it as the greatest
outward mercy in times of distress; God sometime has promised to do this to
his Servants, that their lives, shall be given for a prey: that was promised to
Baruck, Jer. 45. verse. 4, 5. God tells him, the whole land shall be laid waste,
and evil shall come upon all flesh; yet this was the mercy promised, the
greatest outward mercy, He should have h^^ life for a prey; but thy life will I
give unto thee for a prey: as the greatest mercy that God could give him for
his faithfulness; his life should be given him for a prey: God would rescue his
life from danger, when it should seem to be taken away, God would rescue it as
a prey, out of the hand of danger, out of the hand of enemies: he would give
Baruck the greatest outward blessing that can be bestowed: and therefore I
beseech you prize your lives: I will tell you briefly how you should prize your
lives.

First, Take heed that you speak nothing against your lives: Oh that men and
women would remember Rules how to prize our lives.
what a precious thing life is: speak nothing against thy life; how common a
thing is this in the world? if a man meet with matter of coffeehouse,
presently they cast sad thoughts against their lives; and oh that God would
take me away; and oh that there were an end of my life: that I were in the
grave; and such kind of expressions: Poor creatures, do you know what you say?
is life so precious? and is it such a precious treasure? and does God make such
an account of it? and do you undervalue it? will you throw away your lives upon
every coffeehouse? will you part with such a Jewel? Oh the folly and the
madness of men's hearts; suppose that God should take you at your word; you say,
Oh that the Lord would take away my life; suppose now, that God should come and
say, Oh thou vile creature, have I given thee such a precious Jewel as life is,
that thou may improve it for precious ends, for glorious ends, that thou
may gain a portion in my self and son, which should make thee happy for
ever? have I trusted thee with sucha Jewel as life is? and do thou upon every
coffeehouse, throw life at thy foot? do thou come and throw it into my
hand, before I call for it? Well I will t^ke thee at thy word; this night shall
thy life be taken from thee; if God should be in good earnest, I doubt you
would call your words back again. Elijah, he spoke in a passionate way, against
his life, in the first of Kings and v. 19. but when God would have taken him at
his word, he went back again: See how he desires God to take away his life, at
the fourth verse, and He requested for himself that he might die, and s^id it
is enough now Oh Lord, take away my life* for I am not better t^^n my fathers,
for a little affliction; he is persecuted and driven into the wilderness; in
coffeehouse he sits down, and speaks words against his life; take away my
life, why should I live? why, God he takes him at his word, and Jezebel shall
take away his life from him; but at the tenth verse, the Prop^et goes back
again, and there it is his greatest complaint that he makes: and they seek to
take a^ay wy life; and yet before in his passion, he would needs dye: Lord take
away my life I am ^o b^tt^r t^en my Fathers: Now it is a most grievous sin thus
to sl^ght that which God has set such a ^igh pr^^e upon: O what care has God
of life? and what charge has God given all the Creatures in Heaven and Eearth?
Oh take not away the lives of my Servants; and God has set Angels over them to
keep their lives? and do thou account so meanly of thy life? will thou put
away thy life for a trifle, for every cross and coffeehouse that thou
meetest with in this world? what dishonor is this to God? and what
undervaluing of that which God counts so highly of?

But Secondly, Take heed that you act nothing against your lives take heed thou
do not go about to shorten thine own life; take heed thou do not go about
to cut off thine own life; this is a grievous sin, and high provocation: there
is nothing that the Devil seeks more then this, and this many times is a very
urging temptation, a pressing temptation: Oh take away thy life. Now I beseech
you remember how precious life is, what a precious Jewel it is in the sight of
God; and will you cast it away for nothing? will you cast it away to gratify
the Devil at his request?

But Oh I live a mi^erable life, say some, my life is a burden, nothing but
crosses, nothing but troubles in the world; it were a thousand times better for
me to dye then to live. I say, Should thou rid thy self of thy affliction?
or should thou not rather wait till God opon a door unto thee? what will thou
break chains? will thou break Gods chains? will thou break prison to be gone,
before God has set thee at liberty? Oh know God has worse chains: chains of
darkness.

But suppose thou live in the greatest affliction; why will thou sin to rid
thy self of affliction? is not the least sin worse then the greatest evil? to
sin against God, an infinite God? and if the least sin be worse then the
greatest evil, should thou sin to rid thy self of affliction?

Object. Ay but, I live to sin against God, that makes my life a burden to me;
Oh I bear about me a body of death, and I drag it about with me every day so
long as I live; it makes me weary of my life, and, I desire to dye rather then
to live:

Well, suppose it; Suppose thou live in sin, and suppose by taking away thy
life, thou do free thy self from sin: yet should thou have an eye to the
word of God; have thou any such rule that God has prescribed to free thy self
this way? Oh, why do thou not look to Christ, and fetch it from his
righteousness, from his blood, and from his death? should thou not go
thither to be free from sin? is there not pardoning mercy, and healing grace,
and washing for all kind of spots to the utmost? thou talkest of freeing thy
self from sin, and thou sinnest the greatest sin that thou can sin, if thou
take away thy life. I tell thee, thou had better live a thousand years and
sin all thy time against God, then sin this sin; and go about to do any thing
against thy life; why this is the greatest thou can do to God; thou give
God the lie: God holds forth grace and mercy in the Gospel, and thou give him
the lie: he tells thee in his word, that he is able to save to the utmost, and
thou give him the lie: and therefore I beseech you, remember your lives are
precious Jewels, remember what account God has of them, and do not act any
thing against them; do nothing against your lives.

Thirdly, If you would improve life; then gain as much of God as possibly you
can in the time of life, this is the way to gain by life; labor to gain the
knowledge of God, and of his Son; labor to get insight into the Mysteries of
the Gospel, the great Mysteries of Christ manifested in the flesh: Oh there is
an Infinite depth; it is worth the seeking after: Oh the p^ecious Mines of grace
in the Gospel; truly you cannot improve life better then this way; seek the
knowledge of God and of his Son; seek communion with God, and acquaintance with
him; get more grace from him more strength; more spiritual good things, this is
a rich improvement of a man's life; and will you not make the best improvement
of such a Jewel as life is? you will make the best improvements of your
estates, put off any commodity for the best advantage, and will you not put off
your lives for the best advantage? I tell you, it is a Stock, a precious Stock,
that God has given you to use: Oh why should you let the Stock lie dead by
you, and do nothing that may advantage your souls another day?

Consider again: this kind of improvement of life, makes a man's life more
glorious; if a man be not thus exercised, and thus lay out life, to seek after
God, and to get more acquaintance with him, get more communion with him, more
fellowship of the Spirit, more knowledge of Christ, more grace, more assurance
of his love; why it will make him scarce a man without this: Oh this makes a
man's life, a noble life, an Evangelical life; when as he is exercised in such
glorious things as these; but when a man does spend his life, and does nothing
this way, and does not give more of God and Christ, he lives like a beast; more
then like a man: a poor low, carnal, senceless drossie life, though he be never
so high and excellent in the world, though he be in the greatest outward
honor, that man lives a low life, and he will not continue in his honor, but
in the conclusion, becomes as ^he beasts that perish.

Fourthly* If you would prize your lives, labor to act as much as you can for
God in the time of life: this is a prizing of life, an improving of life: know
that life is given you for action; and when a man is dead, he does not act for
God: Oh therefore remember, that there is something that God has given every
one of you to do in this term of life: thereis some service, some work in your
generation that God expects at your hand, even in this life: and I beseech you
take the wisemans council that he gives you in the 9. of Eccl^s. v. 10.
Whatsoever t^y hand finds to do, do, it with all thy might, for there is no
working, no device, nor knowledge, nor wis^dom in the grave, w^ither thou art a
going; Improve your lives, says he, and what ever you do, do it with all your
might: consider what is the work you have to do for God in your generation:
what work you have to do for God, and what your hand finds to do, do it with
all your might; do not neglect but do what your hand finds to do, do with all
your might: life is very short, the work is long; and life is very short, you
need work while you have time, you need work while the day last: the night
comes upon every one of you when there is no time for to work, there is no
device, no knowledge nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou art going: Oh
labor to be for God every one of you in your places: Oh lay out your selves
with all your might, to do something for God; though the service you are to
perform in your generation may be tedious, may be laborious and toilesome to
the flesh; yet be willing to lay out your selves for God, lay down strength for
God, and lay down life for God; Why consider, there is a long rest that is
prepared for the people of God; this is the day time, and here you must work
for God; there shall come a time of rest, ye^ they shall rest in their grave;
there is sleeping time enough, and they shall rest in Heaven; and there they
shall rest enough, they shall rest for ever and for ever; and therefore be
content to do for God, and lay down all your strength for God: Oh there is a
resting time, a long resting time that is prepared for you; I have glorifi^d
thee on earth, says Christ to his Father, and now Oh Father glorify me in
H^aven: labor every one of you in your places* in your callings, to exalt the
name of God, to glorify God on earth: I would not have you glorify God* that
God may glorify you, that is not the end of your work; but glorify God,
because he will glorify you: because he has declared that there is rest for
you that are his people, and there is an eternal rest in which he will glorify
you with himself: Oh glorify him therefore with your lives, with your
strength, with your abilities, with your parts, with your riches, with all you
have, glorify God in your lives.

I shall conclude all with one word of Exhortation; does God rescue the lives
of his servants in such a wonderful manner? why, let his servants for ever
trust him: as great mercies do call for great thankfulness, so they call for
great faith in the Lord, expect a great deal of future confidence in him: when
he has declared his name to his people, when he has once made his goodness
and mercy, and power, and faithfulness, and truth to pass by before them in
some special providence, he expects then that they should trust him in the
lowest condition, in the faddest condition; that you should take hold of him,
and live upon him, he expects that you should reason upon former experiences;
and remember the years of the right hand of the most high: remember such and
such years when the right hand of the most High was declared, when God wrought
such works of deliverance, such and such wonderful mercies: the Lord expects
that such kind of deliverances should be engagements to trust in him; to trust
in him at all times. Many times we will not believe unless we see signs and
wonders; and the Lord he is pleased to condescend to our weakness; and Christ
he shows us a Miracle, yea he shows many wonderful works, mercies and
deliverances that he works for his people: and now God he may wonder at the
weakness of our faith, if after all these wonders we shall distrust him: See
what the Psalmist says, in Psalm 96. 10. Be still, and know that I am God:
why, in all your afflictions, in all your temptations, in all your crosses: in
all sad conditions God would have you to be still and know that he is God; and
when ever we have received any special mercy from God, we should urge this upon
our ow^ souls; if at any time we are ready to distrust God, and repine at any
of the dealings of God: Oh my soul be still and know that God is Jehovah;
remember the years of his right hand; remember what he did for such and such of
his servants: and for thee in such a condition; how he made his power and
mercy, and truth, and faithfulness to pass before thee, and will thou again
murmur, and repine, and distrust him? Oh my soul be still, and know that he is
God* know that he is Jehovah, and that he gives existence to his promises; know
that he is as good as his word, know that he is better then his word: when ever
any rebellious lust does rise up in thy heart after we have received mercies
(which is a great engagement, yet still beat it back with this, know that the
Lord is Jehovah: the Lord has a mighty Arm, and as he has done, so he will
do, and he will not leave his people: the power and the goodness of the Lord,
it should sound in our ears when ever we are in any strait: this is a
glorifying of God for mercies received: And Brethren, upon all occasions,
Remember the years of the mercy of the most High: See what the Psalmist says
(with which I will conclude all) Psalm 62. 11. God has spoken once; twice have
I heard this, that power belongs unto God: God has spoken, how has he
spoken? in some glorious deliverance he has spoken, in some great mercy: for
God speaks in his providence as well as in his words, and when God speaks in
his mercy, he expects that we should hear him: nay, that we should not only
hear him, but that we should hear him often; he expects that we should hear;
what should we hear! we should hear this, That power belongs to God, When
ever God works any glorious deliverance, this should sound in our ears, That
power belongs to God.
and mercy belongs to God, and loving kindness and free grace belong to God;
and so loving kindness it belongs to God: The Attributes of God, that do found
in ev^ry mercy, in every deliverance, and in some special mercies, we should
not hear it once but twice: God spoke once, and I heard it twice, that is,
often it is an allusion to an Echo; a man speaks sometime that it raises an
Echo; and the words will be repeated again, he shall hear it round about him,
the words sound again; he speaks once and it sounds twice, often, so there is
such a voice in many mercies, many deliverances; and many special providence,
they sound lovd as the Echo of a man does: The Lord speaks once we should hear
twice, that power belongs to God. Well, remember that the Lord expects that
thou should hear it often: and when ever thou art brought into a low
condition, remember this, what thou hear in thy former low condition, that
power belongs to God: and mercy belongs to God: And thus should we trust the
Lord in straites: former mercies are engagements for the future; and this is
part of the glory the Lord expects, this is part of the In-come that he desires
for mercy, for deliverance: poor creatures that have seen much in it* they
should never forget the loving kindness of God, when they are in straits, in
great straits, still to make use of former experiences, and to remember the
years of the right hand of the most High. Thus you hear what improvement there
should be of our afflictions.

THE Third Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


YOu know what Proposition was raised the last day, viz. That God does often
times in a wonderful manner, rescue the lives of his Servants from death and
destruction: You had then the Doctrinal part; I have since that, in another
place, made some Application, which I shall finish, God willing, at this time
time: we learned by way of Instruction. First, That the lives of his Servants
are precious in Gods sight; All the Income of glory that God has brought in
from this world, it comes in this way from the lives of his Servants: if it
were not for them, God should loose all his Rent; and therefore the Psalmist
does plead with God, when his life was brought nigh to the grave: In Psalm 30.
Lord, says he, what profit is there in my blo^d, if I go down to the pit? as
if he should say, Lord thou art like to loose thy Profit, thy Rent; if I go
down to the grave I shall not bring thee in that Rent of glory; Though I shall
glorify thee in another way; yet I shall not lift thee up here in this world;
I shall not make thy name glorious before the eyes of the sons of men, and in
the midst of thy adversaries: therefore Lord look to thine own Profit, says he:
The lives of the Servants of God are very precious to him, and therefore he
has given such charges concerning their lives: He has laid a charge upon all
his creatures: Fire, Water, Wild beasts, upon Fishes of the Sea, upon violent
men upon violent Diseases, Sicknesses, upon the Devils themselves; he has
ch^rged them all concerning his Servants; that they are not able to lift up a
hand against them: and therefore God has set such a guard about the lives of
his Servants; are they not all Ministering Spirits? so it is said of the Angels,
Hebrews ^. Are they not all mi^istring Spirits sent forth for the good of the
Saints? God will spare all his Angels out of Heaven, rather then the lives of
any of his Servants should be lost; yea the Lord he will not trust the Angels
themselves, but he takes special care of the lives of his Servants. I the Lord
do keep it, I watch over it every moment; And therefore also you find that men
have paid dear for his Jewels, when they have taken away the lives of his
Servants; he has always made Hue and Cry after them, and where ever he has
found the blood of his Servants, he has made them to pay dear for it. It is
said of Babylon, That when God made search for blood, he found the blood of his
Prophets there; and how suddenly was Babyl^n brought down? all Babylons goods
were forfeited presently, they were seized upon as ^elons goods, and ^he was
brought down with all violence, and she was cast down as a Millstone, into the
bottom of the Sea: Now if life be so precious to God, how precious is the soul
to God? Oh, the care that God takes of the souls of his people! Oh the pains
that Jesus Christ took to fetch the souls of his people! What a journey did he
come? And what a Sea of blood did he pass through? What an Ocean of his Fathers
wrath did he dive into? He was content to go to the bottom, when all the
billows of his Fathers wrath lay upon him; that so he might f^tch up the souls
of his people; and therefore if the soul be precious unto God and Christ, it
should be precious unto you; What will it profit a man to gain the whole world,
and to loose his soul: and therefore what ever you do, neglect not those great
Matters of Eternity, those matters that concern the soul.

Again, If life be so precious with God, why then you should prize your lives?
It is the will of God that you should look upon your life as precious: take heed
that you speak not against your lives; It was the Prophets failing, he would
needs dye in a passion; Lord, I am no better then my Fathers: and take heed
that you act nothing against your lives, it is the greatest sin that you can
sin: Improve your lives to the utmost, gain as much knowledge of God, and
communion with God in this term of life, as possibly you may; do as much for
God, act as much for God in the term of life* as possibly you may: This is the
way to put o^^ your lives for the best advantage. Though man has never so much
of the world, never so much o^ outward honor yet if his life be not spent in
this, in seeking after God in acting for God, he loses all his honor at last,
and become as the beasts that perish.

In the last place, We should trust God for the future; and I shall now press
this Use of Exhortation more fully upon Gods people: When eve^ you have seen
God in a way of deliverance, you should trust God for the future; it is part of
the Rent that God does expect for mercy, that they that have received mercy,
should for ever cleave unto God, and in all conditions put their trust in him,
Psalm. 62. v. 11, 12. God has spoken once, an^ twice have I heard this, says
the Psalmist, tha^ power belongs to G^d. he has spoken once, and I have heard
it twice: When God speaks in some remarkable providence, why this is the voice
o^ God, That power belongs to God, and free grace belongs to God.

1. Trust God first of all, for all the comforts o^ What we should trust God
for.
life, for whatsoever may make your lives comfortable; and that because that
life is more then al^ the comforts of it; and God that gives the greater, will
not deny the lesser; it is our Saviour^ Argument to his Disciples, in Mat. 6.
25. Therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what you shall
eat, or what you shall drink; nor yet for your body, what you shall put on; is
not the life more then meat, and the body then raiment? Is not life more then
meat? Is not the life of greater v^lue then meat, drink, and clothing? more
then a^ the comforts of life? it is more in the eye of God, the life of one
Saint, is more unto God, then all the creatures in the world. Now where God
gives life, he takes care for life, he takes care for the comforts of life: See
what provision God did make for the beasts in the old Law; there was a Law
given in the 25. of Deuteronomy. v. 4. That they should not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the co^n, and the Apostle does apply it; does the Lord take
care for Oxen? and so does he not abundantly care for men? and so our Savior
he tells us, the Lord takes care of the Ravens, and he feeds them: Does the
Lord take care of Ravens, and will he not take care of his Saints? Certainly
those that fear the Lord, he will fulfill his Promise, they shall want nothing,
that is his Promise. Psalm. 34. 10. They shall want nothing that is good for
them: they may want something of that they desire, because we desire, like
children, that which may be hurtful to us; but it is not possible that Gods
people should want any thing that is good for them: Why God is engaged to
maintain the lives of his people, and life is more then all the comforts of
life.

Secondly, Trust God for the overcoming of all the evils of this life: It Is
true, Gods people may meet with a great deal of evil in their way, there is
many Tribulations to go through; Now trust God, I say, for the overcoming of
them all; for they come all under the providence of your Father; what ever evil
thou fear should come upon thee, it comes under the providence of thy
Father: Now he has promised to be a Shield and a Buckler to his people, it is
part of his Covenant, to be their defense against all the evil of life; in Genesis
15. v. 1. Fear not, there says God to Abraham, For I am thy Shield, and thy
exceeding great reward; Fear not, I am thy Shield, and therefore I am able to
defend thee, to pro^ect thee, to deliver thee from all the evil that thou
fear; though there lay never so many evils in thy way, believe that God will
and can, notwithstandi^g them all, make your lives comfortable.

Thirdly, Let Gods people trust him for the prolonging of life, for the
preservation of their lives; though there is nothing that meets wi^h more
enemies, with more danger, then the life of man: and there is nothing so unable
to resist the evil that it meets with, as the life of man; it is true, it is very
easily taken away, as a vapor ^oon blown away; as a candle it is soon blown
out with every puff of wind, with the least affliction when God is pleased to
permit it: You know how soon King Asa his life was taken away, how easily was
his life taken from him, in Chron. 16. it is said He had a disease in his feet,
and one would have thought it had been far enough from the heart, that he might
have lived long enough for all that disease, and yet it turned him into the
grave, it threw his life down to the dust: There is nothing I say, more in
jeopardy, then the life of Man; and no man's life more in jeopardy then the life
of a Christian; and yet believe it, notwithstanding all this, your lives shall
be prolonged.

First of all till the determined time be come; They shall not be taken from you
the least moment before Gods determined time be come: our Savior, he was often
in Jeopardy of his life; he was often in the hands of his enemies, and yet when
he was in the midst of them, they were not able to lay hold on him, and this he
gives as the reason, because his tim was not yet come, his hour was not yet
come.

Secondly, Nay believe further, you that are Gods people, Your lives shall not
be taken away, till you have done that work that God has sent you into the
world for: So that you need not fear untimely death: I ^ay, your work shall be
finished before God cut off the Th^ed of your lives; it is said in Revel. 11.
see what is spoken there, concerning the two Witnesses, verse. 7. And when they
have finished their Testimony, the beast that ascends out of the bottomless
pit shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them: It Is
possible the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit, may make war
against the Saints, and overcome them, and kill them; but that shall not be
till they have finished their Testimony, till they they have done that work
which God put into their hand, and they were sent into the world for to do.

Thirdly, Nay further believe it for your comfort, that you shall not be cut
off till you be ripe in grace: Many of the Saints they are apt to fear untimely
death. I tell you, You that are in Christ, you may be confident of it, that you
shall not be cut down till you are ^ully ripe, see that Promise that is made in
Job 5. v. 26. Thou shall come to thy grav^ in a full age, like as a shock of
corn comes in hi^ season; it is a promise that is made to the righteous, Thou
shall come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of corn that comes in its
season: The Husbandman brings not in his corn till fully ripe, no more will God
take away his people til they be fully ripe; ^very thing is beautiful in its
s^ason; it is beautiful when it is fully ripe; God plucks his fruit when they
are most beautiful; it may be it is possible Gods people may be cut off young;
aye but yet they are fully ripe, it shall not be before they are ripe; God will
either ripen them betimes, or else he will ripen them in the very plucking; for
this, see another Promise that is made, in I^a 65. 20. There shall b^ no more
thence an Infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days, for the
child shall dye an hundred years old; but the sinner being a hundred years old
shall be accursed: There shall not be an Infant in days, there shall not be an
old man that has not filled up his days. An Infant of days, that is, one that
is a child in grace, while he is young: Well, the time is coming the time of
the Gospel, where there shall not be an Infant of days, nor an old man that
has not filled his days: a man fills his days when as he is full of grace,
full of the Image of God, when he is full of the fruits of Righteousness, then
has a man filled his days; when a man fulfils that which he lives for, then he
has filled his days: Why now God has made this promise to his people, That
they shall all fill their days; they shall be full of grace, they shall be full
of righteousness: So that before God pluck them, they shall be fully ripe.
Trust God therefore with your days, and with your lives; be confident that God
he will hold the candle of your life light; though there be many blasts, yet
God he will hold, he will maintain the candle of his peoples life: Be not you
negligent in your work, but let it be a spur to you, make all have for there
are many blasts that seek to blow out the candle of your life; make all have
you can to do your work; but do not distrust, the Lord will hold the
candlelight, till his peoples work be done. That is the third particular.

Fourthly, Trust God for spiritual mercies; even outward mercies should
strengthen our confidence to trust God for spiritual mercies; Truly Brethren,
this is the best improvement that you can make of mercies and deliverances,
when as you can see so much of God as should draw forth your hearts for ever,
in all conditions, to put your trust in God; Now know, that the outward mercies
were given for this end: It is one end I say, wherefore God gives mercy, that
so he might engage his people, for the future to trust in him; it would be a
great discredit to God, if his people after all experiences, he has given them
shall not trust in him for the future, and there is nothing that does provoke
God more then this. If Israel after all the experiences that God has given
them, after all the wonders they had seen in the Land of Egypt, and in the red
Sea, and after all this shall distrust God through unbelief, God does look upon
it as a great provocation: See what God says in Ps. 78. about the 19 20 verses,
it is said in v. 18 That they tempted God, yea they spoke against God, in the
19. verse. They said; can God furnish a Table in the wilderness? behold he smote
the Rock, and the water gushed out, and the streams overflowed, can he give
bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? Now it is said in the next
verse, therefore was the anger of the Lord kindled against them, therefore was
the anger of the Lord kindled, because they had seen his wonders at the red
Sea, and his wonders at the Rock, yet they distrusted him; can God prepare a
Table in the wilderness? this was a limiting of God, and this their unbelief,
it cost them dear: Therefore the Lord swear in his wrath, that they should not
enter into his rest.

Object. But you will say, Whether can any mercies or de^iverances that a man
has received, be any help unto him for the future?

Answ. I answer they may; and I will show you when; When mercies received, or
deliverances How mercies may be helps to the soul for the future.
are helps unto the soul, concerning his confidence and trusting in the Lord
for the future.

First of all, when the soul is careful to lay up the experiences of mercy;
when a man is careful to remember the goodness of God, a man may receive a
thousand mercies, a thousand deliverances, such as he might make experience of,
for his own benefit and for the help of others, and yet be never the beter: I
say, if they be not carefully laid up, if they be not carefully treasured up, a
man loses all the sweetness of them; for there are two things that God does
intend in every mercy. First of all, There is present comfort and refreshment
that he presently gives out, and then there is something in the mercy to be
laid up for the future; there is something in every mercy that God would have
his people lay up, something that will stand them in stead another day; now
when a man does not remember the mercy that the Lord dispenceth to him, though
he may take some comfort in them, yet he loses the greater comfort of them,
that which he should lay hold on is the fruit of experience, or else all the
mercy is lost.

Secondly, Mercies become helpful when as the soul can see the love of God in
the present ^^rcy; when the soul sees the love of God in every present mercy,
this puts life into the mercy; when the soul receives mercy, and does not eye
love in it, that mercy, it proves a dead mercy; or if there be any sense it
will not last long, because there was not special love seen in it: Now when the
soul can eye the love of God in the mercy, then is the heart affected with the
mercy, and then is the sense of the mercy most like to be continued: When a man
can look at every mercy, as the off spring of love, he will be careful to
nourish the sense, the remembrance of that mercy: one mercy that the soul can
see love in, is more dear, more precious, then many mercies: See it in
Hezekiah, he saw special love of God to him in that mercy, Is. 38. part v. 17.
But thou have in love to my soul deliv^red it from the pit of corrup^ion; for
thou have cast all my si^s behind thy back. Hezekiah was taken with the mercy,
why? because he saw the love of God in the mercy: Thou in love to my soul have
do^ it; and therefore he set a high price upon the mercy. Those fifteen years
that God added to his life, was more then all his life before, because he saw a
special hand of God here, and he saw the love of God here; and therefore this
was a long-lived mercy, it was remembered, it continued, it remained in
Hezekiahs heart so long as H^zek^ah lived.

Thirdly, Again Thirdly, present mercies b^come helpful to the soul for the
future, when as the heart is fully convinced of the unchangeableness of the
love of God to his people: When he is fully persuaded of this truth, That where
God loves he loves to the end, and where he begins in a way of mercy, he goes
on in a way of mercy, he goes all a^^ng in free grace, says the Psalmist, All
the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth, unto his people. When a soul is once
convinced, this will help much to turn mercies into experiences; and therefore
that Doctrine which does teach falling away from grace, that a man may be
beloved to day, and cast off to morrow: It Is a most uncomfortable Doctrine; and
it is impossible then that a man should make any experience at all of the
mercies that he has received: If God be changable in his love, if he cast off
his people that he has received in his free grace; why then though a man has
never so much of God to day, and know never so much, and have never so much of
the presence of God in the mercy, he can have no experience; and therefore that
which concerns the soul, it is to be grounded in the unchangeableness of Gods
love to his people.

Fourthly, Again Fourthly, A man may make use of present mercies to be helpful
for the future, if he be careful to keep faith in action, if he be careful to
keep faith upon the wings: To act faith in every condition upon the free grace
of God, and the mighty Righteousness of Jesus Christ; it is faith that puts a
luster upon all mercies; and if faith be down, a man cannot see the goodness of
God in any mercy that he has received; if says be dead then the sense of the
mercy is lost, precious mercies, they become useless, they are as a treasure
locked up, that a man cannot come by to make use of a treasure buried in the
earth, that will do a man little good; and therefore it concerns the people of
God to keep faith upon the wings; act faith and keep that fresh and lively; and
then all mercies and all deliverances that you have received, they will be
fresh in your eye; for faith puts a varnish upon the mercy, and though they be
old, yet faith will make them present as things new to come.

Fifthly, Mercies become helpful for the future. When the soul is careful to
keep up his Communion with God, when a man is careful to walk with God
continually, to fix his eye upon God, and to follow God fully in every thing,
to follow God wheresoever he leads him; so long as God and the mercy is kept
together, there will be abundance of luster and beauty in every mercy; but when
the soul is careless in maintaining his Communion with God, it loses then the
sense of all his goodness that formerly he tasted in every mercy, and they
become useless; even grace it self cannot comfort a man if God be not nigh, if
God by his spirit do not shine upon it: and therefore mercies much less though
they be never so great and precious mercies that a man has received; yet they
can afford no present comfort nor be a support to him, nor encouragement to
wait upon God for the future: but if so be God and the mercy be kept together,
then mercies become useful, and an help to the soul to trust in God for the
future.

Sixthly, Mercies are helps for the future, when as the soul is enabled by the
Spirit of prayer, to urge God with former mercies, and to lay them before the
Lord as engagements to help for the future; there is such an improvement to be
made of former mercies: When God does pour a Spirit of prayer upon his people;
and then, and then only do mercies that are past become a help to the soul or
the future: you shall see so the Saints have urged this with God, they have
pleaded with God, and put him in mind of his former kindness; so you may see in
the 51. of Isaiah about v. 9. Awake awake, put on strength. Oh A^m of the Lord,
awake as in the ancient days, etc. And so in the 22. Psalm. The Psalmist there
does use the right Argument wit^ God, he turns former mercies into Arguments,
to i^gage God for the future: in the 9 and 10. verses, But thou art he that
took me out of the womb, thou did make me hope when I was upon my mothers
breasts, I was cast upon thee from the womb, thou art my God from my mothers
belly: Thou art he that took care of me, when I could not take care of my self,
and when the care of creatures could do me no good, without the care of the
Lord: and seeing thou have done this for me, I am still encouraged to wait upon
thee, to trust in thee for future mercies Thus you see when mercies and
deliverances may be encouragements for the future; and how the soul may make
experiences of them.

Quest But you will say further, how should we look upon our mercies so as to
make the best improvement of them to strengthen our faith in the Lord, for the
future.

I Answer briefly.

First, Look upon them all, as the first fruits which God has promised to you;
this will mightily help to strengthen the faith of the soul for the How to make
the best improvement of mercies, to strengthen our faith in the Lord for the
future.
future: look upon all as beginnings of that which God does intend to do for
his people; as a spark of that flame of love that is in the bosom of God
toward his people, as drops of the Ocean of love, drops of those Rivers that
run at Gods right Hand, which he has reserved for his people. I say, look upon
all mercies that you have received as fruits of that which God has reserved in
glory for his people; and this will mightily help to strengthen faith for the
future.

Secondly, Look upon them all, as stays that God has given, staffs to hold in
your hands for the present; all mercies, all deliverances, all sights of ^od
all manifestations of his love, all experiences of his goodness: I say, look
upon them as stays and crutches that God has given into your hand for the
present, to lean upon while you are in this your Pilgrimage; do not build upon
them, you cannot build upon the best of your experiences, do not lay them as
the foundation, but only look upon them as helps in your way, and so use them
as helps for the present that God gives you, that you may Two things premised,
and a Caution how to rest upon former experiences.
more cheerfully go on to his self, and to his son to the rest in him, where
there is everlasting peace. And therefore here will I premise two things, and
give you a Caution how to rest upon former experiences; and so I shall end the
Point.

1. Know this, that it is possible that the soul may loose the sight of all his
experiences, they may be all out of sight; it is possible that a man may call
them all in question, the soul may be brought into such a sad condition, into
such a dark condition, that it may call in question all that ever it has seen
of God, and those very things that he did take as some special Tokens of love,
all manifestations given forth of himself, all communications of his presence,
of his grace; I say, all these they may be darkened out of sight. Or,

Secondly, Though they may be in sight yet God does many times bring his people
into such conditions as their former experiences cannot reach them; God may
come still with further and further trials, and such trials, I say, that all a
man's former experiences cannot reach them: his trial and temptations may be
above them all: And therefore here take these two Cautions when as you are thus
to follow experiences, and to make use of experiences.

First of all, Take heed that you do not make your own experience the first
ground of your trust: Make not, I say, any experience that you have had the
first ground of your trust, or confidence; I said before, experiences are good
helps, good Crutches, but they will make no foundation for the soul to build
upon: They are not the first foundation that is to be laid: No, you must learn
to trust God when you see him not, you must trust God before your trials; for
that is the most blessed thing. See what our Savior Christ says concerning
Thomas, in that 20. of Joh. 29. Jesus said to him Thomas, because thou have
seen thou have believed, but blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have
believed. The heart is so backward to faith, that it is well if it be by any
means at last brought off to believe; and therefore the Lord has condescended
to reveal himself to his people by experiences; but yet our Savior, he says,
it is more blessed to believe and not to see. Blessed are they that bel^eve and
have not seen: This kind of faith is that which brings most glory to God; to
believe a man before he try him, it is a great trusting of him and so it is an
honor put upon him; now to believe in God before the soul has tried him,
before he has had experience, this is an honor, a great honor that is done
to God; and this is the faith that will hold out, this will last; this kind of
faith it will uphold the soul in the greatest straits, in the lowest condition,
when sense fails and when experiences are gone out of sight, why then this
kind of Faith will hold up the soul: when the soul can trust the Lord though he
had not tried him, trust him, though God had not given experience; trust him
first of all because of his word, because of the word of his grace, that is
given forth to the soul, as a foundation to build upon, this is an honor
Indeed to God.

Secondly, Be careful throughout all your Caution 2.
whole course of life, that you rely more upon the word of the Lord, then upon
your experiences; throughout the whole course of your life, you will find this
more beneficial to rely upon the word of the Lord: and here I beseech you to
remember, that this life it is the life of Faith, it is the life of Faith, and
not the life of sense; in He^ven the Saints shall live by sense, they shall
have no need of Faith, the life of Faith is not proper for them; but the life
of Faith is proper to Gods people on earth, to believe and not see: Faith is
the evidence of things not seen; it is taken up with things not seen: I say,
this life it should be a life of Faith unto the Saints it is not a life of
sense: And consider moreover if God do give any spiritual sense, or if he do
give any experiences of his love, it is given for this end, that so he might
help the Faith of his people, that he might help their Faith, and strengthen
their Faith, that so he might encourage them for the future to trust in him; to
trust in him when they see him not, when all is dark and sad, when God seems to
be out of sight; I say, God gives encouragements for this end, that so he might
encourage them to believe; and therefore it is that oftentimes he trains up his
people in this way; he will strike the Crutches out of their hands, he will put
them to it, they shall walk alone by Faith; that all the sense of Gods dealings
with them shall be out of sight, they shall have nothing to rely upon; God will
put them to it, to rely upon him alone, upon a naked word of promise, upon the
word of grace, to rely upon him though they have nothing in the world to rely
upon,

2. Consider, though it be great mercy that the Lord is pleased to condescend
so far to the Creature to give spiritual sense, and many times experiences, by
which he will seal up his word and his grace to them, yet it is a greater mercy
that God has given a word of promise to rely upon, that is the greatest mercy
in the world; asurer foundation of hope, and that which will stand a poor
creature in stead when it is in the dark, when all the sense will be in the
dark, and experiences out of sight; but then the word o^ the Lord will endure
for ever; and so then to have a word of grace to rely upon, a word of promise;
this is the greatest mercy that God can show to poor Creatures: My Brethren, if
it were not for this, it were not possible that the soul should be at any
certainty; though God had given never so many experiences of his love, though
the soul had seen, and though it had felt, and tasted of love, and though it
had layen in the bosom of Jesus Christ, and been refresht with his love; yet
if the Lord had not given a word of grace to rely upon, aword of promise to
rely upon; It would be impossible but that ^t some time or other they would
call all in question, for it is not possible that otherwise the soul should be
supported in dark conditions, for why? when the soul begins to look toward
God, why it is filled with the sense of his own vileness, with the sense of his
own unworthiness: Oh that ^s one of the greatest discoveries that the Lord
makes: show the soul how vile it is in it self: and therefore I say, the soul
is ready to question all: all that God has done for it, though it has seen
God walk in a way of love to him; yet still, Oh it is too good for me, too good
for such a ^ile Creature as I am!

Again, The desire of the soul is carried migh^ily after God, when God comes
once to set his Face toward Heaven, it is filled with vast desires to God,
that it can never have enough, never be satisfied; and though God do come and
manifest himself by gracious Experiences; yet still it desires more of God: It
is apt to question, Have I any thing of God or no? Have I seen God or no? it is
very solicitous when it is once set toward Heaven, God makes it very
solicitous concerning the great matters of Eternity: it is filled with the
weighty thingsof Eternity, and the weighty business of Eternity; so though God
has come and has spoke, and the soul has seen God, and experiences of God;
yet because it apprehends such great weighty matters concerning the soul for
eternity; all experiences are called in question of Gods love and his favor to
him: A man is so careful in this case, that he will scarce believe himself:
nay, though he have seen Christ, and though he have felt him, and seen his
goings, still he will hardly believe himself, whether he has seen him or no?
you know Mary Magdal^u, she was very solicitous, she stood weeping; she saw him
and she would not believe her own sense; and so it is with a poor Child of God;
Oh it is so solicitous that though it have seen Christ, and experiences of his
goodness, and his favor and love; yet it will scarcely believe his own sense,
and he is apt to call all in question whether he has seen the Lord or no: So
that still, I say, after all experiences and the manifestations of love, the
soul would call all in question many, and many a time, if i^ had not a word of
Grace to trust to; and therefore the Saints are more beholden to the Lord for
his Word of Gruce to them then for all experiences: And remember this, That
though God has done uever so much for you, and you have seen hi^ goings in
your hearts; yet do not you make your experience the first Ground o^ your
trust, and do not trust to your experiences so; but look to the Promises as the
Promises, as the only Foundation that will ^ear up your heart for ever,
through all dark conditions; And so for Experiences, look upon them as Crutches
to lead you to the word of his Grace; but they are not to be rested in.

THE Fourth Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


I Have spoken out of these words. We have finished one Proposition: Namely,
That God does oftentimes in a wonderful manner rescue the lives of his servants
from death and destruction. I pressed you the last day, that Christians should
therefore trust in God; such as have seen his goings; should trust him for the
future, upon former experiences; when God speaks once in a remarkable
providence, he expects we should hear twice, again and again; In every low
condition we should hear, That power belongs to God. Trust him for the comforts
of life, and trust him for the preventing the evil of life; trust him for the
upholding of you in life, till his time be come, and your work be filled; only
be not you negligent, make have in your work; work the works of God while the
day lasts: but yet you may be confident the Lord he will not suffer the Candle
to be blown out till your work be filled: The righteous shall come to his grave
as a shock of Corn that comes in, in his season; I showed how far we may make
use of former mercies for the future to become great helps of Faith; when the
soul is careful to lay up the remembrance of them, when the soul can eye the
love of God, special love; when the soul is once convinced of that truth, of
the unchangeableness of the love of God; when the soul keeps up the wing of
Faith, and holds up its communion with God, can go and lay before God former
mercies, and use them as Arguments to plead with God for the future; as Gods
people have done; then do mercies become helpful for the future.

But how far should we trust Experinces? Why look upon them as Earnests of that
which God does intend to give, and look upon them as Crutches, as helps in the
way; so though all the experiences of God may be out of fight, for God may
bring his people into some condition that may be above Experience, Experience
cannot reach them: And therefore do not make your own Experience the first
ground of your trust; but trust first in the Lord, and the word of his grace
trust them more then all your experiences; the life of a Christian, it is the
life of Faith, and not of sense; the life of sense is in Heaven; but the life
of Faith is most proper here. Blessed are they that believe, and have not seen:
and if God do give Experience, and manifest his love and goodness to thee, it
is for this end that he might strengthen Faith; he will learn his children to
go alone: and therefore God many times has struck the Crutches out of their
hands, and all sights of God shall be gone, and God will make them to trust in
his naked word: Great use may be made of Experience; but yet I say, lay the
word of the Lord as your foundation, and trust that, for that will hold in all
conditions, in the greatest darkness, when Experience may be out of sight, and
you can see nothing.

We proceed.

He answer^d and said: Lo, I see four ^en loo^e, etc. Who is it here that bears
witness of this Miracle of deliverance? It Is Nebuchadnezzer the King: it was
one that was a proud insolent Monarch; one that scorned God, and defied the
most High, in the 15. verse of this 3. Chap. that commanded the people to fall
down and worship his Image, that he had set up; and in the latte^ end, Who is
that God that shall deliver you out of my hand? a persecutor of the Saints, one
that was filled with wrath against them: The King was ^xceeding wrath, and
comm^nded the Furnace to be heated seven times h^tt^r then ordinary: Yet here
Nebu-Nebuchadnezzer himself is forced to bear witness A Question propounded by
Inteapreters.
of the goodness of God to his people; He confesses it before all men: Did we
not cast in three? and lo I see four men loose walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt: There is a question propounded by Inter^^eters,
neither Nebuchadnezzer was truly converted or no? It seems there is much does
make for his conversion.

First of all; Here was a strong work of conviction that past upon him, he was
convinced of his sin, he was convinced of the glorious Majesty of God, to shine
in this Miracle: His conviction makes him cry out before all the world, before
all that were about him.

2. There is Secondly, A confession of his Error, and an acknowledgment of his
sin: Now he knows there is no God* but the true God: There was also in the

3. Third place, A rejoicing in his own disappointment, he rejoiced in that the
Lord had prevented him in the evil that he intended, that he was not able to
bring it to pass, his mischievous device against the Saints: as you may see in
verse 28 Then Nebuchadnezzer spoke and said, blessed be the God of Shadrach,
Meshach and Abednego, who has sent his Angels, and delivered his servants that
trusted in him, etc. There is a rejoicing here that they were delivered, and
that he was disapointed, that he did not succeed according to his will: Now
this seems to be a great measure of self-denial: What did not Nebucadnezzar do
as much in this as David did when he was disappointed? in the first book of
Samuel 25. when David had an intention to cut off Nabal: Abigal she comes to
p^rswade him, and in the 32 v. David said to Abigail, blessed be the Lord God
of Israel which sent thee this day to me. Nebuchadnezzar did seem to do as much
as David did here; he blesses God for his own disappointment.

Fourthly, this seems to make for him* that he did rejoice in the goodness of
God to his people, he does rejoice in their grace; as you may see in the 28.
verse, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, who sends his Angels and delivers
his servants that trust in him: He seems to rejoice here in their grace, in
that constancy of theirs that they did not yield to his command, and serve no
God but their own God; and he rejoiceth in the deliverance of the Saints:
Blessed be the Lord that delivers his servants; yea further, he seems to give
the glory to God: He does eye God in the deliverance; he takes notice of it as
from God, and blessed the Lord: Blessed be the Lord that sends his Angel,
and delivers his servants: Nay further, he takes care of true Religion, and
of Gods Name to be exalted; he makes Decrees, and sends it to all people, and
whosoever does act any thing against God, shall be cut in pieces, and their
houses thrown down and made a jakes: Thus you see what a great way he went, and
what a great deal Nebuchadnezzer did seemingly for God upon this his
conviction; and yet it may be it was but a conviction; and that there was not a
through work of grace at this time wrought upon his heart. Many works he did,
but yet they seem to be effects of a temporary faith. Nebuchadnezzer
notwithstanding all this, he fell back again to his old way of supposition; for
in the fourth Chapter, you shall read there of his Superstitious ways: He
dreams a Dream, and he fends for the Sorcerers to tell his dream, and he would
have cut them off because they could not tell him his dream, and reveal it to
him, which belongs to God to reveal secrets: So that though great conviction, I
say, post upon him, which did rise from the present sight of the Miracle that
was wrought, yet Nebuchadnezzer at that time, he was no^ truly brought home to
God: So then we may observe this Proposition of Doctrine, The second
Proposition of Doctrine


That it is not in the power of the greatest Miracles to convert a soul to God,
unless the Spirit of Jesus Christ step in: I say, it is not in the power of the
greatest Miracle, to convert a Soul to God.

Neither Miracles of Judgment, nor Miracles of Mercy will do it: Pharaoh, King
of the Egyptians, Instances to clear it.
he saw as many Miracles of judgment, as one would have thought, would have
broken the most stoniest heart, and made the most obstinat wretch to submit to
God; and yet notwithstanding Phar^ohs heart was not softened, but hardened. And
all those Miraculous works of Judgment, they made him harder: The people of
Israel, they saw Miracles both of judgment and mercy, and yet for the most
part, they were secure, hard hearted, unbelieving people, they were a burden to
God, and a provocation to his Spirit: All the time they were in the Wilderness,
what Miracles of judgmement did they see? God smote some of them with fire from
Heaven, and consumed them: God smote Miriam with Leprosy, in the 12. of
Numbers, for her murmuring: And the Lord consumed Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, in
Numbers 16. they were consumed, and yet the people rebelled against God; he
sent fiery Serpents amongst them, in the 21. of Numbers: another Miracle of
judgment, and yet notwithstanding for all that, they rebelled against the Lord;
They saw Miracles of Mercy also; What wondrous works did God do for them in the
Land of Egypt? What wonders at the red Sea, in dividing the waters, and made a
path of life and death to go through? life to the Israelites, and death to the
Egyptians: they saw his wonders in the Wilderness; God led them in the day
time by a pillar of light, and in the night time by a pillar of fire; He rained
Manna from Heaven, they eat Angels food, he gave them water out of the Rock,
Moses smote the Rock, and the water came out: He rained feathered foul into
their Camp that they all eat and were full: And many other Miracles of Mercy
they saw: many Mercies which are expressed in the 78. Psalm; but
notwithstanding for all this, you may see what this people was, at the 8. verse
of the 78. Psalm, A stuborn and rebellious generation, a generation that sets
not their hearts aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God: This is
the description that is given of their Forefathers, They were a stubborn
genera^ion, rebellious a generation, that set not their hearts aright, and
whose spirit was not steadfast with God:

Secondly, As we have instances to prove it, so we have the word of Christ to
prove it, to make it evident that it is not in the greatest Miracles of the
world to convert a soul to God: See what our Savior says, in that 16. of
Luke, and the 31. It Is the word of Abraham in the Parable; he said unto them,
if you hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will you be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead: The rich man in Hell, he desires that one may be sent
from the dead to give them warning; why Abraham tells them they have Moses and
the Prophets, let them hear them, and if they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they be persuaded though, one rose from the dead: The greatest
Miracle in the world what ever, it will no^ turn the heart to God, it will not
make them to believe in his name; though one should come from the dead thou God
should send an Angel, a Saint from Heaven, that should be as a flying Angel, to
fly up and down in the world, to speak the voice and tongue of an Angel, though
he should declare this to all the world, that the glory of Heaven is
unspeakable, incomprehensible, eternal, the joy is everlasting, they shall
never be able to declare it; though he should declare one hours enjoyment of
the presence of God and the Lamb, it is more worth then ten thousand enjoyments
of all the pleasures of the world; though he should declare it, that there is
but one way to Heaven, there is but one door o enter in at, and that is only by
Jesus Christ and his Righteousness, and should tell you of ten thousands that
shall not come there, that sought to enter in their own way, and by their own
works, and their own righteousness, and they are all shut out: though he should
further declare, that God has now set Heaven doors wide open, and that he is
willing that poor sinners, the worst of sinners, should come to him by his Son,
and they shall be accepted, and all their former iniquities shall be no block,
no rub in the way, he will embrace them as freely as if they had never sinned
against him; I say, if such a thing should be, it would be a Miracle of Mercy;
but yet for all this, it would not persuade the heart of one sinner to submit
to God. This could not overcome the heart of man to Jesus Christ. And again, on
the other side, if one should come from the dead, God should send one from the
pit of destruction to declare, to bear witness of the unspeakable Torments that
are there; and should declare, that way is broad, and many walk in the way to
destruction, and that unbelief it is the readiest way: Though he should declare
that every man and woman living; that seek not after Jesus Christ, and has not
an interest in him, are like, sooner or later, to come into the same Lake of
condemnation: It would be a tirrable Miracle of judgment; but yet all this
would not work upon the heart of one sinner: no, our Savior says to such men
and women that sit under the Gospel, and hear what I speak from day to day, and
thereby are not wonted to submit to God: Why, neither would they believe though
one should come from the dead.

Thirdly, The Point may be further cleared, by our own Experiences. I say, by
experiences of our own days; are there not many poor Creatures that have seen
Miracles of Mercy, that have seen God, many times in wonderful way of
deliverance toward them? at such a time they were in danger, eminent danger,
at such a time they were nigh to death, and what great promises, and what great
purposes came into their hearts and mouths: and yet notwithstanding all that
God has done for them, they have turned again to folly; nay, sometime they
have seen and tasted as it were of the power of the world to come, that God
has convinced them many times of the excellency of the way, and the necessity
of walking with him, and the happy condition of the Saints, and they it may be,
have had some tastes, some drops to cool their tongue; and though they have had
that Miracle of Mercy, yet notwithstanding their hearts have gone back again;
and they have not bin converted and persuaded to come to Christ, after a hearty
draught of his love and good ness, which might abundantly satisfy them: others
that have seen even Miracles of judgment; God many many times has wrought
strong conviction in their conscience, they have been as it were for the
present, hung over the flames of Hell, and great thoughts have been darted into
their spirits; convincing thoughts of the necessity of seeking after faith,
they have seen as it were the mighty consequence of the soul, the mighty
consequence of the things of Eternity, and yet have worn out all hints that
have been made upon conscience, and soon returned to their former ways of
folly; to folly and desperate madness; others taken up in vanity, taken up in
the world, others taken up in their own righteousness, and think themselves
whole, and need no Physician; notwithstanding all these Miracles of judgment;
how many are there that have seen them, and have felt them, and have not been
brought home savingly by them?

But you will say, how come this to pass! what cannot miracles of works bring
home a soul to God? what then? what miracles?

I answer first of all, God would have it so that he might put a great glory
upon his word, he will against Himself, and his Son, and his Gospel; why, God
is pleased to use his word as the battery which will do this great and glorious
work.

Secondly, It comes to pass from the desperate Why, art thou cast down Oh my
soul, why art thou disquieted? why, trust in God; Why trust in God. He repeets
it again, and again, and all too little to trust in God, and to have confidence
in God; but there is much more aversness in a natural man's heart to God; there
is an infinite distance, there is a contrariety; and it is a hard matter to
bring off a soul to close with God, to submit to him: the greatest Miracle in
the world cannot do it: why, when there is much peace in Gods heart, there is
war in the sinners heart; yea, when there is peace in Gods mouth too, there is
war in the sinners mouth: when God does call upon them, come and behold the
face of my Son, and behold the face of my righteousness, I give thee leave to
look to either me, so thou look to me through my Son: yet still he will have
his heart draw back, and he will look to God through his own righteousness, that
of a creature, or else run away from God, hide himself in his own shame and
confusion, and dare not come to God: And truly it is a very hard thing to
overcome the heart in this cause, to trust God, to rely upon him; the heart is
fille'd with sl^very, and it is a very hard matter to overcome that slavery that
is in the heart: I tell you, Miracles will not do it; though it should see
never so many Miracles when it is in that condition; Miracles would not
overcome the heart to trust in God to believe in God: Miracles, they declare
the power of God and the glory of God, hold forth the beams of his Majesty; ay
but there must be a declaration of the love of God and the mercy or God in
Christ; there must be a discovery of this to the soul, before he can come in
and submit to God, and trust in him, before the slavery can be overcome that is
in the heart. I tell you, you must have a word, a sure word, to go upon; for
the soul dare not go to God, he looking upon himself as stubble, and upon God
as a consuming fire; and still he keeps off from God: and therefore nothing but
the word of the Lord can persuade the heart to come in, and to trust, and
Application of the Point.
rely upon God.

Now let us make some Application: Is it so, that the greatest Miracle cannot
convert a soul to God* Why then

First of all, take notice what a Miracle of iniquity, many times against
miraculous judgments: why here is a strange stoutness, and hardness in every
man's heart: Oh what a dead sleep is every man by nature cast into! you will say
that man is in a dead sleep, that though he be shot at, it cannot wake him,
that he should sleep secure when the house is on fire about his ears; truly,
this is the condition of every man by nature* though God do lay Cannon shot
against him, and though God set on fire the world about his ears, yet still he
sleeps; what a strange condition is the state of nature? Let us all take notice
of it, and set us all bewail it in the presence of God, seeing how woeful it is,
and what we are like.

Secondly, If Miracles cannot convert a soul, he spoke, and it was done, it was
made, he spoke his word, and the world was created: but God speaks again, and
again, once and twice, and often, before the new creature is formed, before
Many Miracles in the conversion of a soul to God.
faith is created in the heart of man: and truly Brethren, you need not wonder
that so few are brought home to God; that is not the Miracle: but stand and
wonder that any should be brought home to God; there are many Miracles in the
conversion of the soul to God; I beseech you take notice of them: there is a
Miracle of First Miracl^ of wis^d^m.
of wisdom; there is a Miracle of wisdom, I say, in the conversion of a soul,
that God should find out a way to reconcile himself to a sinner, and then
re^oncile the sinner to himself; here is infinite wisdom to find out a way to
reconcile himself to the sinner, to find out a way to satisfy both justice and
mercy, that they should meet each other and kiss each other, and both be
satisfied; that justice should say, I have enough, and Mercy should say, I am
well pleased, and both be glorified in Christ: Brethren, here is a way that men
and Angels could never have found out, here is a Miracle of wisdom to
reconcile the sinner to God; also here is abundance of the wisdom of God, that
God should find out a way to make a rebellious sinner, come in and submit when
he had stood out long, and stood many batteries, that God had laid against him;
that the Lord should bring him in by a word of his grace; that God should come
and catch a poor soul, and take him before the soul be aware: here is abundance
of holy wisdom, truly none could do this, but only God.

And as there is a Miracle of wisdom, so there Secondly, Ther^ is a Mir^^le of
Power.
is a Miracle of power in every souls conversion: Oh wonderful power has God
put forth to overcome the creature, and to overcome himself: To overcome the
creature, to make a stubborn, stout hearted sinner relent, to shake the Oaks of
Bashan, and make the Cedars of Lebanon to stoop: Yet truly this is the work of
God, he put abundance of power into a word of his; and when an obstinate sinner
has stood out both the allurements of Mercy, and has out stood all the
batteries of Judgment that God has laid against him, God has sent out many
Armies of judgments, to bring him in, and they have returned back again, and
have not done their work; and that yet the Lord at last, should be pleased to
arm a word of his, a poor naked word of his with so much power, ^o give such
authority, and to give such commission, as to go and bring in the stout hearted
sinner, and make him fall down at the footstole of Jesus Christ; here is a
Miracle of power; and then that God should overcome all his wrath, and all his
fury and indignation, and say, it is not in me, I give thee leave to draw nigh
to me, in my Son, fury is not in me; that God should overcome himself to stoop
to the creature that the Majesty of Heaven should first stoop to the creature,
that the Prince should come and beseech the Rebel to accept of mercy offer the
first terms of peace, and not looking to the infinite distance that is between
him and the creature; but lay that aside, and beseech a poor creature to accept
of mercy; here is a Miracle of power.

And then there is a Miracle of goodness, a Miracle of mercy in every souls
conversion; a Miracle of mercy, that God should pardon the sin of his people
from Eternity; Oh the Miracles of mercy, writes the pardon, gives the pardon
into the Sons hand; that he should work it over by Covenant, and make all sure
for his people in Christ, even from Eternity, even to give Christ a pardon for
his peoples sins, many thousand years before the sins are committed; I do not
say the pardon is given out to them, before they are brought in to submit to
Christ, but it is given out into the hand of Christ; that if they come and
submit to Christ it is in his hand to give it out, it is already written and
Sealed; here is a Miracle of Mercy.

Again, that the Lord should so freely, and so fully b^ot out transgressions;
that he should make the sins committed to be as if they had not been committed;
there shall no more remain of them as if they had never been acted; to bury
them, to cast them behind his behind his back, to throw them into the depth of
the Sea, to carry them into the wilderness, into a land of forgetfulness, that
when they are sought for, they shall not be found, they shall be as if they had
never been; what a Miracle of mercy is this? that God should bear no old grudge
to a poor sinner, a Rebel, one that have stood out against him* and yet that
God should retain no grudge in his heart, but receive a poor soul into his
Bosom, as if he had never been defiled; to receive him into his own bo^els,
into intimate communion and acquaintance with himself in love* as if he had
never bin a R^bel; to bear no old grudg: here is wonderful rich mercy!

Again, for God to account the soul righteous, to look upon him as righteous,
when he is unrighteous; to look upon him as righteous in Christ, when he is
full of spots and polutions, and de^ormity in himself; at that very time to
look upon him in Christ, and behold him as righteous, as if he had no spot, no
defilement in him: Brethren, all these are Mi^acles of mercy.

Again, that God should pour out his spirit upon a poor lump of flesh; that his
spirit should work upon a poor creature, and take a poor creature into union
with himself, and communion with himself; that he should be working in the
heart, and cleanse a poor creature from pollution, both of flesh and spirit;
all these are Miracles: Miraracles of Wisdom: Miracles of Power: and Miracles
of Mercy, that does shine in the bringing home of a soul to God: And therefore
to conclude all; in the last place,

Let us bless God for his Word, and look more He that believes not the word, he
will not believe, though one rose from the dead: Nebuchadnezzar, he saw three
men that had a resurrection from the dead, they were dead in all their
accounts, they ^hought that they had been all consumed; they have an unexpected
life, they are all loose, walk^ng in the midst of the fire; and yet I say,
Nebu^hadnezzars heart was not firmly wrought upon by this Miracle; but he
returned again to hi^ own folly: And therefore, Oh praise the Lord for his
word, bless the Lord for his word; if it had not been for the word of his
grace, how should a poor creature have been brought in, and what should poor
creatures have relied upon? what foundation to build upon? what can give
boldness and confidence to a poor soul to draw nigh to God? truly it could not
be, it is impossible that the heart should be overcome, to submit to God,
without the word of his grace: Oh bless the Lord for his Word: we are more
beholden to the Lord for his Word, then for all Miracles that possibly can be
showed.

THE Fifth Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


THere is witness given to a Miraculous deliverance, that God wrought for his
three Servants, who through their faith, overcame the violence of the fire:
Nebuchadnezzar makes a large confession here. I propounded this question the
last time; Whether Nebucadnezzar was truly brought home to God or no; he did a
great deal, he spoke a great deal; there was a great work of conviction past
upon his spirit, he does acknowledge his Error, and sin, he does rejoice in his
own disappointment, that God did not suffer him to have his will; he does
re^oyce in the goodness of God that was showed to his Servants; he rejoices in
their constancy, that they did not obey the Kings command, worship his Gods: he
did rejoice in their deliverances; he does acknowledge that it was God that
delivered them; he takes care of the worship of God, to promote it, he makes a
penal Statute* That whosoever did profane the name of God, should be cut in
pieces; and yet notwithstanding for all this, we concluded probably, That
Nebuchadnezzar was not converted; for in the next Chapter, he ^eturned to his
old way of sin, of superstition; he dreams a dream, and he sends for the
Sorcerers, to tell ^im his dream, which belongs to God to reveal secrets, as
Daniel told him: So then we observed, that It is not in the po^er of the
greatest Miracle, to convert Observat.
a soul to God. Nebuchadnezzar saw great Miracles, Miracles of mercy and
Miracles of judgment: We told you P^araoh saw Miracles, and Israel saw Miracles
in Egypt, and at the red Sea. in the Wilderness; Miracles of mercy, and
Miracles of judgment; sometimes their plagues were wonderful, stung with fiery
Serpents: and Miracles of mercy, God he fed them with Man a and water out of
the Rock; and notwithstanding for all this, they were a stubborn Generation,
and dwelt in unbelief: our Savior tells us in that Parable, in the 16. of
Luke, but they are the words of Abraham. They have Moses and the Prophets, and
if they will not hear them and b^leeve, neith^r would ^hey believe though one
rose from the dead: Though God should show the greatest Miracle, yet that would
not convince them, that would not bring off their hearts to believe in the Son
of God: it is the hardest matter in the world to bring God and the heart
together, they are at such a great d^stance, Infinite distance; and the heart
of the creature is filled with such slavery, and lay under bondage* that it
dares not go to God, when God calls to behold his face in his Son, but run to
the bush, as Adam did; but though Miracles will not do it; it has a word of
grace, a sure word of grace, to draw nigh to God; and therefore we should look
upon that Miracle of iniquity that is in the heart of all the sons of Adam; it
is a strange thing that the heart of man should out-stand so many blows, that
so small a piece of flesh as the heart of man is, should withstand those great
batteries that God many times is pleased to make by judgments, wonderful
judgments, when he declares his wrath from Heaven to sinners; and consider what
a Miracle of mercy it is, that any soul should be converted, and brought home
to God; seeing Conversion is so hard a thing, and Miracles will not do it? What
a Miracle it is for a soul to be brought home to God! I show how many Miracles
were in this work: Miracles of wisdom; Miracles of power: Miracles of mercy: Oh
we should bless the Lord that has given us his word: we should prefer the word
before Miracles; we should not look to Miracles, but we should look to the word
of the Lord; God has made that to bring home souls; and therefore we are
infinitely beholden to the Lord for the word of his grace, that we have the
word of his grace to trust in. We proceed,

Consider who it is that bare witness to the Miracle: It Is Nebuchadnezzar that
was an enemy to the Saints, a persecutor, a scorner, a contemner of God. Who is
that God that shall deliver out of my hand? and yet the Lord makes him to bear
witness of that good he did his people: We shall observe then this: Proposition:

God many times makes his peoples Enemies to acknowledge and confess that the
Lord is with them, Observat. 3.
and that he has dealt graciously with them: God makes very enemies to confess
oftentimes, that he deals wonderfully, and graciously with his people: The
Church was confident of this in her affliction; therefore she was supported:
See that 7 of Mich. 9. 10. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me;
he will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness,
verse 10. Then she that is my Enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her
which said unto me, where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her, now
shall she be trodden down as the mire in the streets: Then she that is my enemy
shall see it, and shame shall cover her which says, where is the Lord thy God:
The Church was confident that she should not only see the footsteps of mercy,
but that God would make the very enemies to see it; She that said, where is the
Lord your God! she that sometimes insulted over me, and blasphemed the name of
my God; that said, where is your God? time is coming when she shall see it* and
I shall say, Lo here is my God, I waited for him, and he will save me, and she
shall see the deliverance, so as shame shall cover her; she shall be ashamed
that ever she opened her mouth against God: And the Church did not loose her
expectation, this was fulfilled to the Church; in the 126. Psalm, you shall see
the fulfilling there of this promise, that she took hold of the 126. 1. When
the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with singing; then said they among the Heathen, the
Lord has done great things for them: When God turned again Sions Captivity,
when he brought them out of the grave -- Babylon; the work was so wonderful,
that enemies could not but see that the hand of the Lord was in it, to give
poor Captives so much favor in the eye of Princes, that they should release
them, send them home, countenance them, help them in all they could, help them
to build the Temple of the Lord; this could not be if the Lord had not wrought
wonderfully for them: The Heathen were convinced, They said amongst the
Heathen, the Lord has dous great things for them. God makes the very enemies
to acknowledge his power and glory, and that he was with his people; in the 8.
Chapter of Exodus verse 19. God wrought a Miracle by Moses, and the Egyptians
stood out long, but they say in the 19. verse, Sure this is the finger of God:
Lo they had hardened their hearts, and would not be converted, at last God
works a Miracle, and makes them to cry out, sure this is the finger of God;
look into the new Testament, and you shall find that the Lord Jesus Christ did
extort confession from the mouths of his enemies; he made them to acknowledge
that he was the Son of God, and that God was with him in those mighty works
that he wrought: See the 6. of John and the 14. verse. There the multitude
followed Christ, when as they had seen the Miracles Christ wrought; then they
said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should com: into the world; and so
in the 7 of John, verse 47. When the Officers were to bring Christ to the chief
Priests, they returned with their conviction, and they answered, never man
spoke like this man; yea, when he was upon the Cross, in his greatest Eclipse;
seemed to be forsaken of all men, even his very friends forsook him, they all
forsook him and fled, and he was looked upon as a scorn to all the people; yet
even then did the Lord Jesus extort confession from their mouths; See the 27.
of Matthew. and the 54.

For the further clearing of the Point by Demonstration: The Point ^leared by
Dem^nstrations.
God makes sometimes the very enemies to confess that he is with his people,
and that he has dealt wonderously, graciously with them.

First of all you shall find for this, that Jesus Christ has put up a
Petition to his Father, he has Demonst. 1
made it his request to his Father that his Father would manifest so much of
himself to his people, that the very men of the world might be convinced that
hi^ Father did love him, that the world might be convinced that they were one
with God, and one with the Father and one with the Son; for this Christ prays
in the 17. of John, and the 21 v. That they all may be one as thou Father art
in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; that the world may
b^leeve that thou have sent me, verse. 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I
have given them, that they may be one, even as we are one, verse. 23. I in them,
and thou in me, that they may b^ made p^rf^ct in one, and that the world may
know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as tho^ have loved me that the
world may know that t^ou have sent me, and h^st loved them as thou ha^t loved
me: Christ he would manifest so much of himself, and of his goodness unto his
people, that not only they may see it, but that the very world may be convinced
when they see what God has done for his people, and what excellent Spirit God
has put upon them, that they may be convinced that God loves them as he loves
the Son, that they are one with the Father, as the Son is made one with the
Father,

Secondly, The Lord Jesus Christ has promised this to his people* h^ was
confident that because Demonst. 2
he prayed for it, it should be given out: he was never denied any of his
requests, and therefore he has made a promise to h^^ Churche^, that he wi^ do
such great things for the^, that the world shall be convinced that God is with
them: See the 3. of the Rev^lations and the 9. verse: Behold I will make them
of the Syn^gogu of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie;
behold I will make them to come and worship before t^y feet, and to ^now that I
have loved thee: He makes this promise to them, as a recompense to them for
their faithfulness, because they had kept close to the word in time of
persecution; now as a recompense of their faithfulness and love, Christ makes
this promise to them: Well, because thou have ventured all for me, because thou
have ventured thy name for me, thou have suffered reproach for me; I will give
thee a name, thou shall have a name in all places, where thou have been put to
shame; those enemies that hated thee, that made a scorn of thee; I will make
them to come and fall down and worship thee; I will make them to acknowledge
that God is with thee: this is a promise that Christ has given out, and he
will fulfill it to his Churches, those that have kept the word of Christ; those
that are faithful to the truth of Christ, to the ways of Christ, in the worst
times, though they may suffer reproach for a time, yet at last he will make the
very enemies to confess that he was with them: That Is the second Demonstration.

Thirdly, Therefore it is that God has put so much power into his word, to
convince the men of the Demonst. 3.
world, and to force them to make them acknowledge that the Lord is with his
people, and that he has loved them, and that he deals graciously with them; I
say, for this end the Lord has made his word powerful, he has made it sharper
then a two edged sword, that it shall serve not only for the conversion of
some, but for the conviction of many that are not really brought home to God;
The Gospel where it comes, it shall lay chains upon men, it shall lay a
restraint upon men; See what is spoken of the power of the word of God, in the
first Epistle of the Corinthians, and the 14. 24. 25. verses. But if all
Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is
convinced of all, he is judged of all. Verse 25. And thus are the secrets of
his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will he will
worship God, and report that God is in you of a truth. See the power that God
has put into his word for the convincing of the hearts of wicked men, that God
is in his word, and that God is with his people; the secrets of his heart shall
be made manifest, when he comes in, he shall fall down on his face, and say God
is in you of a truth: It may be, before he came, he had hard thoughts of the
people of God; it may be, he was ready to say, that folly was in them, and
madness was in them; nay, they were ready to say, that the Devil was in them:
Ay but when his conscience lay before the word; when he comes and sees your
way, when he hears that God speak in you, such a power shall go along with the
word, that it shall lay chains upon him; and it shall make him to fall down and
say I was deceived, I was wrong in that I did judge amiss of the people of God;
Now I see that God is in you of a truth.

Fourthly, Therefore it is that when God has dealt graciously with his people,
when he has given out great mercies; or great deliverances, he has ordered it
so, that their greatest enemies should be eye witnesses, and sometimes Agents
against their will, in doing good to his servants; you shall find it so, that
when God has so ordered to do great things for his people, he has made his
peoples enemies to be great eye witnesses, and ear witnesses: You see here in
the Text, how God does order the King Nebuchadnezzar, that he should be present
to see this Miracle, that so a work of conviction should pass upon his
conscience; it is a wonder that the King should be present, and would have
thought it should not have stood with the State of the King, to be with three
poor Captives, he might ^ave left them to his Officers; but God did ^o order
it, that he should see, that he should be present; and therefore in the 6. of
Dan. There you may see the Lord made him to be an eyewitness: After Dani^l was
c^st into the Lions Den, he could not sleep nor r^st that night, and he rose
betimes in the morning to see the Miracle, to see the wondrous deliverance that
God wro^ght for his Servants.

Yea, God makes his peoples enemies to be Agents sometimes, in doing good to
his Servants, though against their wills, that so he might convince them, and
ex^ort confession from them, that he is with his people: In the promotion of
Mordecai, which you read in the 6 o^ ^st^er; God did order it so, that the King
did command that Haman (Mordecais great enemy) should be an Agent in his
promotion; He was Arrayed by Haman with Royal Apparel; H^man was one that
sought Mordicais life, and God orders it, that this man Haman should be an
Agent in his promotion, that h^ should Array him, that he should lead his
Horse, and he should cry Thus shall it b^ done to the man whom the King will
d^light to honor.

Fifthly, Therefore it is that God many times Demonst. 5
works deliverance for his people, because he God works for his people in such
away, that Enemies mustt needs confess that Go^ is with his people.
works it in such a manner, and in such a way as must needs leave conv^ction
upon the hearts of the men of the world, if they be not given up to that
fearful judgment of hardness of heart: I say, if they be not given up to
hardness of heart; God works in such a way, that they must needs confess that
God is with his people.

First, The Lord he works freely for his people he works freely for his name
sake; when there is nothing at all in them, that might deserve the least mercy:
God many times gives out great mercies when they can apprehend nothing in
themselves: Nay, when the men of the world of look upon them and see nothing in
them; they themselves through their grace and humility, see nothing in
themselves, and the men of the world see nothing in them; why God should do
them good; yet the Lord then many times he gives out great mercies, and works
great deliverances for his people.

Secondly, As God works freely, so he works unrx^ectedly; and this helps to
work conviction in men's hearts, when God works unexpectedly for his servants,
when he gives out mercies contrary to expectation; when enemies conclude, Oh
they are brought down into such a condition, that it is impossible that ever
they should be brought up; yet the Lord he works unexpectedly, that so he might
work conviction in men's hearts: See that fourth of Micah, you shall see how God
works contrary to men's thoughts.

Verse 11. Now also many Nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her
be defiled, and let our eye look upon Sion.

Verse. 12. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they
ais Counsel for he shall gather them as the sheaves into his floor. And v. 13.
Arise, etc.

When they say, let her be defiled, and let our eyes look upon Sion; Why? she
is utterly undone, she is brought down; she is destroyed, she lay in her blood,
she lay in her heaps, she lay in her ruins; why you are deceived, says God; I
will work unexpectedly, above your thoughts, you know not the thoughts of the
Lord; you say, let your eye look upon Sion, you say her destruction is come
already; but you know not the thought of the thoughts of the Lord; I will work
unexpect^dly.

Thirdly, God he works sometimes suddenly, that he might give conv^ction to
men; when God gives mercies, he doe^ it sud^^nly; when God brings judgments
upon the wicked o^ the world, he does it suddenly, their dest^uction is li^e
w^arlew^nde; it shall not come like other winds that ^o rise by degrees; but
as a whirlewind it shall come suddenly, and carry them away before they think
of it; and so sometime he compares the judgments that he brings upon wicked men
as the b^^ach or a wall that comes suddenly, See the 30 of ^ai^h, and the 13.
verse, Therefore this i^iquity shall be to you as a breach ^e^dy ^o f^ll
swe^ling o^t in a high wali, whose breaking com^th s^^da^nly, at an instant.

And so when God works de^iverance for his people many times God works it in a
sudden way; look into the 1: 6. Ps^lm you shall see how suddainl^ God wrought
for his people, how suddenly he brought them forth from B^b^lon.

Verse 1. W^^n the Lord tur^ed again our Captivity we were like to them t^a^
dreamed.

Verse 2. Th^n was our mouth filled with l^ughter, and our ^^ngue with singing;
then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them.

Verse 4. Turn again our Captivity O Lord, as the streams in the south.

He prays and be^eeves that God would turn again their Captivity as the streams
in the sou^h; the streams of the South, they come suddenly; the streams there,
they do not arise as other Rivers, they come from several Heads, and so they
increase and come broader and broader, that when the rain falls mightily, then
the land floods come down suddenly; Why, in such a way does God work for his
people, their deliverances shall be as the Rivers in the South as streams in
the south, that shall come suddenly, in a moment, before enemies are aware;
And thus does God many times work conviction.

Fourthly, God he works soli^arily, he does it by his own Arm; when e^emies
can see none to roll away the stone, none to open a door of deliverance, why
then God himself he stretches out his A^me; when there is none to bring
salvation his own A^m shall bring salv^tion, he will role away the stone, he
will open a door of deliverance; and when God does thus work; this tends
mightily to the conviction of those that are bystanders.

Quest. If you ask but wherefore does God thus work? Wherefore does God make
very enemies to confess that he deals graciously with his people? Why should
they be eyewitnesses o^ it?

Answ First of all, because their eye looks upon the afflictions of the
Servants of God; and therefore God, he will make them to look upon their
mercies; they look upon the m^sery of the Saints, and they look upon them with
delight; and therefore God he will (...) them to look upon their mercies, and
see the^^ ^eliverances: They say, ^et ^ur eye look upon Sion, and let her he
def^led: Let our eye look upon her, that is, let us behold her ruin-in, let us
glut our sense, and say, thus we would have it: Let our eye look upon Sion: so
in the 22. Psalm, you shall find how the wicked do look upon the affliction of
Jesus Christ; for it is spoken of Christ, Psalm 22. verse. 17. I may t^ll all my
bones, they stare upon me; they look and stare upon me: When Christ was upon
the Cross, they stood looking upon him, and did stare upon him; the word
signifies, they looked with delight, to stand gazeing insatiably. When a man
looks upon an object that pleases him, he thinks he never looks enough, he
does enlarge his sense, to take in the speciousness of the thing, and he thinks
he never sees enough; the same word is used by the Propet Isaiah, 53. verse 11.
He shall see the travel of ^is soul and be satisfied: He shall see the travel
of his soul; he shall look upon it with delight, he shall gaze greedily upon
it; it shows his wonderful affection, that Christ looks upon his Spouse with
wonderful desire; that he looks upon the travel of his soul, to see the fruit
of his righteousness, to see the benefit of his death; he shall look upon the
travel of his soul, he shall gaze upon it with delight; and so do enemies, they
look upon the affliction of his people, and gaze upon it with delight: and
therefore God makes them to look upon the mercies of his people, the
deliverances of his people; they shall see their glory, God will make them
eyewitnesses, God will make them to confess that he has dealt graciously with
his people.

Secondly, God does (...) mercy to the sons of men; God would do even wicked
men good, and does them good even by this; while he works such conviction upon
their heart, by eyeing the mercies and deliverances that he does give out to
his people: God by this he would allure them he would make them to stand and
wonder, while God not only in word, but in his providence does proclaim before
them, Thus shall b^ done to the man whom the King delights to honor: At
least, God does this out of pity to men that they might not go on to contemn
the Gospel; God he will give a check for this; and therefore he works glorious
deliverances, that he might restrain them in the ways of persecution; and thus
does the Lord pity his very enemies: he is better to them then they are to
themselves: God he would lay rubs in their way, that they might not go leaping
and jumping to Hell: God he will not let wicked men d^^^ne themselves as they
would, if God should leave them to themselves: And thus does the Lord pity his
enemies. A word for Application; And so I conclude.

First of all, Here is ground of patience, and encouragement to the Saints in
all tribulations, in all adversities, in the midst of your greatest
afflictions, in the midst of all the persecution you meet with for Christ's
sake, for his Gospel sake; for his truths sake; though the world cast shame
upon you; tim^ is a coming that the Lord will roll away reproach, and he will
make your very enemies to see it, and they that have stood looking upon your
misery, with delight they shall be forced to look upon your mercy and therefore
here is a ground of patience to you in all daversity and what ever you suffer
from the world for Christ's sake; time is coming that God will make them to
condemn themselves, and to acquit you, they shall see your mercy, and they
shall say of a truth, God is with his people: It Is a ground of great comfort to
the Churches of Christ in the midst of all the opposition that they meet with,
for the keeping of the word of his patience: Oh see the promise that is made to
the Churches, in t^^ 12. of Zachariah, verse 5. And the Governors of Judah
shall say in ^h^ir hearts* the Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in
the Lord of Hosts their God,

I will put glory upon my people, says God, and I will ma^e their Governors
to acknowledge it, and they shall say, The Inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my
strength; they are the Pillars, they are those that bear up the Land; they are
our Chariots, they are our Bulwarks, the Lord Jehozah is with them, they shall
be my strength.

Secondly, Let it be an Item to the men of the world; Oh take heed how you look
with delight upon the miseries of the Saints, upon the afflictions of the
Saints! I tell you, God will not bear with it, he will punish you for it: how
did God threaten Edom, because he stood and looked upon his brother in the day
of adversity; he stood in the highway gazeing upon his brothers misery, and
delighted in it: I tell you, you that laugh at the misery of the Saints, God he
will make you lament and they shall not only rejoice, but they shall shout for
joy; the time is a coming, that he will make you to see the mercy, and that he
is with them, and deals graciously with them;

Thirdly, Let Gods people acknowledge this as a great mercy, that God should
work conviction many times in the hearts of the wicked, that he should deal in
such a way with them that might convince the hardest heart, that God is with
his people; I tell you, it is a great mercy, it is no ordinary mercy; admire God
in it, bless God for it, that God should thus reprove men, and convince men for
your sakes: The Jews did look upon it as a great mercy, in the 126. Psalm: When
God turned again our Captivity our mouth was filled with laughter and our
tongue with singing; Then said they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great
things for them. They looked upon it as a great mercy that the Lord should thus
convince the Heathen; it is a mercy, for they writ it, they penned it as a great
mercy, worth the singing, worth the glorifying of God for: that God should work
so powerfully upon the hearts of men, and make the Heathen say, The Lord has
done great things for them.

In the last place, to conclude all.

Does God make enemies confess that he has done great things for his people?
why then the people of God should much more confess that the Lord has done
great things for them: if enemies say it, you may well say it, you have more
cause to say it, that 126. Psalm, verse 2. They say among the Heathen, the Lord
has done great things for them; and what say the people of God? will not they
say so? yes, in the very next words; The Lord has done great things for us,
whereof we are glad: shall the Heathen say it, and shall not we say it? yes, we
are bound to say it, and to acknowledge, The Lord has done great things for
us, whereof we are glad: Remember, I beseech you: remember, God cannot endure
his mercies should be slighted; he loves that you should have great thoughts of
him and of his mercies, that you should say, he has done great things: When
God works deliverance for you, he will make the very Heathen to say so, he will
make by standers to say so; and shall not we honor him for the mercy, who are
the receivers of the mercy? shall not we say so The Lord has done great things
for us: shall Nebuchadn^zzar say. The Lord ha^h done great things for them; and
shall not the three children say so? yes sure, they will lift up the name of
God in their song: And therefore I beseech you all, you that have received
mercy from God, you should aggravate the mercy as much as you can, though not
compulsively, you should freely say, The Lo^d has done great things for us;
you shall find this always has been the frame of Gods people, to aggravate the
mercy, to aggravate the deliverance that God has wrought for them: See the 40.
Psalm and the 5. verse. Many O Lord my God are thy wonderful works which t^ou
have done an^ thy thoughts which are to us ward they cannot b^ reckoned up in
order unto the, if I would declare and speak of them, they are more then can be
numbered.

See what an aggravation there is of the mercy received, they are many, and
they are wonder^ul, and very many, more then can be numbered, they cannot be
reckoned up in order: and so Ezra, when he and the people received mercies, see
how they do agg^avate it, how they do acknowledge it, in the 9. Chap. verse 13.
And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespass, seeing thou ^ur God have punished us l^ss th^n our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy
Commandme^t? He knows not how to speak it; Oh it is a great mercy, he stands and
wonders at such a deliverance, such a mercy; and so aggravate all our mercies,
we should say with Ezra, seeing thou have wrought such deliverance, such
salvation, seeing thou have wrought in such and such a way; this is a great
engagement to God, when mercies are thus eyed and reviewed, when a man looks
into the depth of them, and eye the mercies; seeing thou have given such
deliverance, should we again sin against thee? he looks upon it as an
engagement to stand close, seeing it was great mercy: And Oh so should we in
all our mercies, as Ezra says, so we should say, Seeing thou have wrought such
deliverance for us, should we again sin against thee: Oh no, let thine mercies
be an engagement us to, to love thee, and serve thee, and for ever to cleave to
thee.

THE Sixth Sermon, on DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


I Have made some further progress in the words: We considered who it was that
gave testimony unto this miraculous Deliverance that God wrought for his
servants; It was Nebuchadnezzar, a proud and an insolent man, an enemy to God
and his people, and so he continues still in his heart; for it is probable, he
was not converted, not really brought home to God, for in the next Chapter you
may s^e he did return to his very old ways of Idolatry; he sent for the
Magicians to interpret his dream; and yet God makes him here bear witness what
he has done for his people.

So then we observed this Proposition, That God sometimes works such
deliverances for his people, as he makes his very enemies, and their very
enemies to acknowledge that God has done great things for them: It was said
among the Heathen, in the 126. Psalm, When God turned again the Captivity of
Sion, They sa^d amongst the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them.
The Lord Jesus many times did extort confession from the mouths of his greatest
enemies; Nevar man spoke like this man: And of a truth this was the Son of God:
And then for this thing did Christ pray, in the 17. of John, that his Father
would manifest so much of himself unto us his people, and pour out so much of
his Spirit upon them, that the very world might know that he has sent the Son;
and that he has loved his people with the same love that the Son is loved: and
this did Christ promise unto his people, to the Church of Philadelphia, in the
2. of the Revelations and the 9. verse: Behold I will make them of the
Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie; behold I
will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have
loved thee: Therefore has Christ put so much power into his word: that at
least it might lay chains upon wicked men and convince men many times that God
is in his word* and that God is in his people; When you Prophecy, says the
Apostle, and there comes in one that is unlearned; the secrets of his heart is
made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and report
that God is in you of a truth.

Therefore it is also that when God works great deliverances, he does so order
it in his providence, that his peoples enemies should be eyewitnesses, and
ear-witnesses, of what God has done for them, yea sometimes Agents, against
their wills, in doing good to the Saints: So Haman was an Instrument in the
promotion of Mordecai: Yea,

Therefore it is that God works in such a glorious manner, as must needs
convince; he works freely; He works suddenly, he works unexpectedly; and he
works solitarily: Now Gods very manner of working deliverance for his people,
does carry a great deal of conviction along with it: As,

First of all, wicked men they look upon the afflictions of the Saints; they
say, Let our eye look upon Sion, and let her be defiled; Therefore does the
Lord make them to look with astonishment upon their mercies and deliverances;
God has gracious ends, even toward wicked men, he would convince them by
this, he would lay blocks in their way, that they might not take the running
leap into Hell, that they might not go on in their violence, and persecution of
the Saints.

I proceed to what remains: Lo I see four men, and the form of the fourth is
like the Son of God.

There were three cast in, and now there are four: Now before we come to
consider who this fourth man was; By way, take notice of the wonderful
providence of God, that a fourth man should be added to them; that while they
were in the midst of the siery Furnace, while they were bearing witness against
the Idolatry of Nebuchadnezzar and his people; while they were suffering
Martyrdom for the Truth, and for the Name or God; here is a fourth added to
them: Certainly, their enemies supposed that fire would soon have devoured them
all, that there should not be one of the three left to bear witness any longer
against their wickedness and idolatry; but how contrary does God work to the
expectation of them? their number is not diminished; but Lo there were three
cast in, and now th^re is four four men loose walking in the midst of the fire:
Therefore we shall consider this Proposition by the way, before we come to the
Main.

Observat. 4.
That all persecutions that the Devil, or his Instruments, do raise against the
Saints, shall not diminish their number, but shall rather increase them. I say,
all the opposition and persecution that the people of God meet with, for the
name and cause of Christ shall not diminish their number, but shall rather
increase them.

I shall make it evident to you; Look upon Isreal's oppression by the
Aegyp^ian^, which you read of in the 1 of Exodus, 10. 11, 12* 13. Come say they
let us deal wise^y with them, let us increase their task, let us lay heavy
burdens upon them, etc. Thus they thought to have weakened their strength, and
to have brought them low, but did this stratagem prevail? no; you shall read in
the 12. verse, That the more they afflicted them the more they increased: And
therefore God did appear to that Church unto Moses, in the 3. of Exodus: God
shows Moses there, the vision of a Bush that was not consumed: this did hold
forth the state of Israel then: a Bush all on fire, and was not consumed; such
Bushes are all the Churches of Christ, that men of the world may set them on
fire many times. but though they burn, they shall not be consume^; yea the
hotter any fire of persecution be against the Saints, the more green shall this
Bush be, the more shall it flourish, take root and grow, and spread abroad her
branches till it fill the whole earth: This was represented unto Daniel in a
vision, in the third of Daniel: The Kingdom of Christ is set forth there by a
little stone cut out of the Mountains without h^nds, the stone was a growing
stone, and although there were many hammers at work to break this stone in
pieces, yet they have not, nor shall not prevail, but the stone grew more and
more, and became a Mountain, and filled the whole earth. Under the Gospel I
shall give you some instances of of it: To begin

First with Jesus Christ: It was a main design that the Pharisees had to keep
men from believing in Christ, therefore they resolved that they would take some
course to lessen the number of Believers; to lessen the number of his
followers; See in John, 11. what they feared, and what course they resolved to
set upon: 11. 48. verse, Oh say they, if we let him alon^ all men will believe
in him, and the Romans will come and take away our place; Therefore you shall
read in the 52. verse that they gave counsel to put him to death: to smite the
Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be sca^tered: they would put him to death that
they might not believe on him; Behold how contrary does God work to the
imaginations of these foolish men? for by that very thing, by the death of
Jesus Christ, is so many thousand, thousand, brought in to believe in him; they
would put the Lord of life to death, that they might not believe in him; and it
was the Fathers way to make men believe in him, if I be lifted up, Ioh. 12. 32.
And I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men to me: And they say, if he be
lifted up, there shall be none drawn to him; ay but If I be lifted up, I will
draw all men: if I be lifted up upon the Cross, if I be Crucified, by this
means will I draw all men to me. For,

First, Christ became a suitable object for a poor sinner; a poor guilty sinner
could never have looked upon a glorious Savior but Jesus Christ he is clothed
with garments of blood, that so by that means he became a reconciler: Without
shedding of blood there is no rem^ssion: Here is encouragement given to poor
guilty sinners, that apprehend nothing due unto them but wrath; yet by the
blood of Jesus Christ, by that new and living way they come in; and then God
the Father too he made a promise to the Son, that because he laid down his
life, he should have a multitudinous offspring: in that 53. of Isaiah, In the
day that he pours out his soul to death, he should see the travel of his soul,
and he should have a large portion; because he poured out his soul to death for
transgressors; so you see that the killing of Jesus Christ, and putting him to
death, is so far from lessening believers, that this is the way to draw in all
those multitudes of souls that were g^ven to Christ of his Father.

Secondly, Again, If you look upon the primitive Churches, you shall find that
the worlds persecution had the same effect upon them; there wa^ a great
persecution, a mighty storm, which you rea^ of in the 8. of Acts, persecution
begun first a^ J^rusalem; and by that means the Churches were scattered: Well,
did this tend to the hindrance of the Gospel, and lessen the number of
Believers? No* you shall read in that Chapter, tha^ God made this a means to
carry the Gospel to many, other Countries were brought in to bebeleeve in
Christ: the great City of Samaria; you read in the 6. verse. P^ilip went down
and Preached to Samaria; and this did tend to the furtherance o^ the Gospel: in
the 8. verse, They gave all heed, and there was great joy in that City: If you
look upon the Churches in those Ages, for the first th^ee hundred years after
Christ, there was a most ^errible persecution, there were ten persecu^o^s, ten
bloody Emperors that sought to root out the Name or Christ, and to dest^oy the
Saint; and therefore those that write of Ecclesiastical History, they tell us,
they devised all manner of torments; some speak of about twenty seven deaths
they devised to torment the poor Christian^; Many thou^ands, many millions,
suffered in the time of those persecutions; and yet this was so far from
^iminish^ng the number of B^leevers, that they were encrea^ed: the more they
were oppressed and persecuted, the more they increased; and therefor some of
them did observe that Juli^n he used all means to ^uppresse them; shut up all
their Schools that they might not have learning; and yet never had they more
learning then then: He devised all manner of torments to terrifi^ them, and yet
he saw they increased and multiplied so fast, that he thought at last, his best
course was to give over his persecution, not out of love but out of envy,
because that through his persecution they increased. And thus you see the Point
cleared, That the persecution of the Saints shall not diminish the number of
them, but shall increase them: For the Grounds of it, B^iefly,

First of all, God delights to walk contrary to The Grounds of the Point.
men; therefore he will have it thus. He loves to cross the imaginations of the
hearts of men of the world; and to set his ways against their t^oughts and
their ways; in the fourth of Micah, the latter end; they say, Let our eye look
upon Si^n; but what says God in the next verse? They know not the thoughts of
the Lord, neither understand ^^ counsel: When men dream that such a way* it
shall be the utter rooting out of the Gospel, they a^e might ly mistaken, says
God, my thoughes are ab^ve yours, my ways above yours: You know not the
thoughts of the Lord, for this very way shall increase multitudes: God delights
to walk contrary to men, and to oppose his gracious thoughts, to their cursed
imaginations.

Secondly, The Lord Jesus is a mighty King, all 2. Ground.
power is given into his hand, both in Heaven and earth; and all this power he
will improve for the Kingdom of Saints: all is given to him, and ^e will give
all to them: Neither life nor death, things present, nor things to come, they
are all yours: He has given all to them, and all shall make for their
advantage: In this the power of the Lord Jesus, King of Saints, is mightily
seen, that he can turn a^l opposition to advantage: the greatest persecution
that the Devils can raise, shall all turn to the advantage of Christ's Kingdom:
It is so with particular souls, all is yours, all is yours to do you good; life
and death is yours, all given you to serve you, and they shall work together
for your good, for your best good, for your eternal good; the Lord makes an
advantage of all unto his people; the Devil casts blocks in their way to hinder
them; he turns it to their advantage, and so they are helped nigher to himself.
all the evil of the world, yea all the evil of sin, and the Devil himself,
shall (though against their wills) help forward the salvation of Gods people;
and so Christ cause all to be for the good of his Church, for the good of his
Kingdom all opposition and persecutions which are raised to blow down the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ shall but establish it; for it is rooted, it is a Kingdom
that cannot be shaken: And then

Thirdly, Men cannot hinder the increase of Christ's Kingdom, for there is no
man able to hinder the work of the Spirit of Christ from working; 3. Ground.
The wind blows where it lists and so the Spirit of God, that breaths where it
lists, and where ever he please to breath; It is not possible for man to resist
his work: The work of Christ by his Spirit upon men's hearts, is a mighty work,
an irresistible work; and all the powers of Hell shall not be able to hinder
the work, it is a mighty work, and none shall let it.

To apply this briefly;

First of all, It lets us see the vanity of all the Application.
attempts of men against the truth of Christ, and the people of Christ, they
are but vain imaginations; men do but imagine a mischiefous device, that they
shall never be able to bring to pass; it is a vain thing for a man to go about
to silence the truth of Christ, or to destroy the Saints of Christ; I tell you,
the more the truth is trodden on, the more it shall shine; and as it goes with
truth, so it goes with Saints, the more trodden on in the world, the more loved
of God; all the wind of opposition that the Devils can raise from the world,
it shall never be able to shake them, though it may shake some particular
grains and ears, that they may fall to the earth, but yet they shall rise
again, every grain that falls, shall bring forth fruit, some thirty, and some a
hundred fold, the more thy are opposed, the more they increase; persecution
shall but sow the blood of Christ the thicker, and sow the ashes of the Saints
the thicker, and out of their very ashes shall new converts arise.

And therefore Oh that this might be an Item to An Item to the Powers of the
world
the Powers of the world to the men of the world that they seek not to suppress
either the truth or the people of Jesus Christ. For truly, the more they
endeavor it, the more they shall increase; if they cast three of them into the
Furnace, a fourth shall be presently added to them.

Object. But you will say, God forbid any should suppress truth, there is none
goes about such a work, but only to suppress error: and you will not say that
that is persecution; but that it is rather zeal for God.

My Brethren, To suppress error, it is a good work, it is a blessed work; but men
must be careful to do it in Gods way. Error in judgment will a great deal sooner
be suppressed by the sword of the spirit, then by any sword of man: I tell you
God has appointed a means for the suppressing of error, and men that stray in
their judgments, and that is to be convinced by the word of God, in matters of
faith men must be convinced by Gods word: Our weapons says Paul* are not
carnal but they are mighty through God, to c^st down strong holds, and sinful
imaginations: Paul did not use carnal weapons to bring down sinfu^ imaginations
in the hearts of men; he had used those weapons before he was brought home to
God, you know he went for power from the High Priests, to persecute all those
that believed in Christ; he went to authority to silence them, to stop their
mouths and all that he could do, because they pleaded error contrary to the Law
of Moses; but you do not read that Paul after his conversion, did use such
weapons, he does not call the help of Men, no says he, the Lord he has given
us weapons: Our weapons they ^re not c^rnal, but spiritual, and so they are
mighty through God: Brethren, I am persuaded it glads the Devil much, when he
sees men so violent against error, by drawing the sword against them: I say, it
glads the Devil to see men seek this way to suppress them, not that the Devil
hates error, or that he loves the truth, for he hates the truth, and loves
error; but he knows God will hardly bless that way of men, when men shall
neglect Gods Institution, and shall cleave to their own ways, and to their own
inventions; God will hardly bless that way of men, when his own way is
neglected.

Besides, Let men consider, that it is possible, that while men go about to
suppress error, they may suppress the truth for error; unless you will say any
man has an infallible spirit, or that any company of men has an infallible
spirit; if they have not an infallible spirit, then with what right can they
force another judgment, another conscience? men may, and do many times
suppress truth, under the notion of error; we know in the times of Popery, that
truth was persecuted that we now see to be truth; out great truth, our main
truth of justification by the free grace of God, and the blood of Jesus Christ
without work, without merits: I say, how was this truth persecuted? and how did
men seek to persecute this truth as error? many things have been persecuted as
error, which now we see to be truth; and why may it not be so now? does all
truth come into the world at once? and may not we persecute that which
afterward may appear to be a truth? Well let it be an Item to men, and let
them not suppress the truth of Christ: it is a vain imagination, and men shall
not be able to bring it to pass, but the more it is suppressed, the more it shall
shine, and the more the people of God are opposed the more they shall multiply.

Secondly, Here is a ground of Patience and strong consolation to the Saints in
the midst of all opposition and persecution, that they meet with, and may meet
with for the name, and truth, and way of Jesus Christ: Hear what Christ says
to you; fear not little flock; you think you are but a small number, there is
but a few that profess the name of Christ; and Oh if persecution arise it will
lessen the number: I tell you, fear not; that persecution shall not lessen the
number, but ^ shall increase the number: though the men of the world may strike
at the Tree, and they may beat off many of the branches yet the Lord Jesus he
will make use of every branch that is broke off, he will slift it and ingraft
it, and so all shall tend to the furtherance of the Gospel and of the truth and
of the way of God. But to Proceed.

I shall make some entrance into the main Doctrine: Here you see three cast
into the fiery Furnace, and Nebuchadnezzar saw four: Let us consider then who
this fourth man was: Nebuchadnezzar could not tell who it was; but he perceived
some glorious majesty, and therefore though he was ignorant of Christ: Yet
says he, The fourth is like the Son of God: the form of the fourth is like the
Son of God; that is sure, he is more then a man; God has sent his Angel and
delivered them, but this was in truth the Son of God. This Companion that is
added to the Saints in Tribulation, it was Jesus Christ, who did at this time
create himself a body, and came down visibly amongst men, that so he might
support them, and comfort them, and deliver them, that it might hold forth this
unto us, that he would come in his appointed time, to rescue his poor people,
that lay under wrath, from all the flames of his fathers indignation, and that
he would be present with his people in every condition: when they went through
fire and water, in the midst of every Tribulation they should enjoy him; so
then here is another main Proposition offers it self; and I shall but bring you
unto it, and leave the further prosecution of it:

The Proposition is this;

Observat. 5.
That the Lord Jesus is never nigher to his people, then when they are in great
affliction, in fiery trials I say, Christ is never nigher to his people, then
when they are in the greatest affliction: they never in joy more of the
presence of Christ, then in sad conditions.

The three Children, they never saw Christ so visibly as here they did, when as
they lay in the flames; The children of Israel, they never saw so much of God
among them, as when they were in the Wilderness, in the barren Wilderness,
where there was neither meat nor drink, nor clothing, for they had a great deal
of the special presence of God, and abundance of the power and goodness and
faithfulness of God, was manifested to them in a special manner, while they
were in that condition: Jacob he never saw such vision of God as at that time
when he was driven from his fathers House, when he was forced to fly to save
his life; he was in a sad conditihn, he had not a bed to lie on, he had not a
pillow to lay his head upon, but took a heap of stones to lay his head upon;
and yet in that condition did God come and manifest himself most gloriously to
him: he dreamed a Dream, and saw a Vision of the Ladder set up to Heaven, and
of the Angel Ascending and Descending, God was there in a special manner; so he
says, The Lord was there, and he was not aware; never did he enjoy more of
God, then in that condition.

Stephen, the first Martyr, never enjoyed more of God, he never enjoyed more
glorious Visions of Jesus Christ, then when he looked through a shower of stones
that came about his ears, and took away his life; he saw the arm of the Lord
Jesus ready to receive him, to embrace him in the everlasting arms of his love
he had heard much of Christ in his everlasting Gospel; but he never saw him
before with his eye. John the Evangelist, there is another instance, if you
look into the first Chapter of the Revelation of John, about the 9. verse. you
shall see; there where he was, and in what condition he was in, when he
received those gloriou^ Revelations; he said he was banished into the Isle of
Patmos for bearing witness to the Name of Christ, and the truth of Christ: he
was a Martyr and fellow sufferer, and when he was banished from all friends and
comforts, and left naked and destitute of all comforts, the Lord Jesus does
draw nigh, and does reveal the most glorious Mysteries concerning his Churches
to John: The primitive Churches never enjoyed more of God, then at that time
when they were most persecuted by men; in the times of those 10. bloody
p^rsecution, the Churches had abundance of the presence of Christ, abundance of
the Spirit of Christ, and abundance of the grace of Christ, abundance of holy
zeal, and abundance of activity for God; it was poured out upon them, the Lord
Jesus never took so much delight to walk among them, as when they were in the
midst of the fiery persecution. What presence of Christ the people of God enjoy
in p^rsecution?


Quest. If you ask me, But what presence of Christ is it that the people of God
do enjoy in their great afflictions, and in the midst of their fiery trials?

Answ 1. First of all, they have most of the supporting presence of Christ;
never more of the supporting presence of Christ, then in sad conditions; he
supports the inward man, and he supports the outward man; he upholds the
spirits of his people in sad conditions, and he makes their spirits able to
bear their infirmity: Now here is a wonderful work of the Lord, that he should
strengthen the spirit of a poor creature with such mighty power, as to resist,
and to keep out the violence of such mighty trials, such great afflictions:
There is nothing that the Devil seeks more, then to drive affliction home to
the spirit, that so he might crush the spirit and conquer the spirit, when he
can get in, and ceaze upon the spirit, then he becomes master, and creats a
deal of sm^rt and vexation: Now the power of the Lord Jesus is seen, in that he
does support and strengthen the spirits of his people; that when they have but
a little strength, no strength, and yet are able to hold out, notwithstanding
they are so strongly besieged, and so straightly girt many times round about with
afflictions; yet he makes that little strength to hold out at that time, that
so he is pleased to renew their strength, to give fresh supplies, and to remove
the disease, and so the power of Christ is seen in supporting the outward man;
many times in the midst of great afflictions: when the Saints meet with great
afflictions; afflictions of the body, crosses, such afflictions as might even
overwhelm the outward man, and they have but little strength many times, yet
the Lord does so bless that little strength, that though they meet with
crosses, that little strength shall not fail, till such time as the Lord do
bring deliverance to them.

Secondly, As they have the supporting presence of Christ in the affliction, so
they have the inlightening presence of Christ; and that is a great mercy:
commonly the Lord never teaches his people more then in affliction; when Christ
gets them into the School of affliction then he instructs them, there he does
open men's ears, and he does seal up men's instruction to them, when Christ draws
nigh in affliction: I know afflictions in themselves, cannot teach, but when
Christ draws nigh* they learn a great deal in affliction; they never see more
of God, and of themselves, never more of their corruptions, and vileness that
is within them; never see more of the power and way of God, and the mysteries
of Christ at that time, when Jesus Christ draws nigh with his enlightening
presence:

Thirdly; Jesus Christ draws nigh with his sanctifying presence, his people
have more of his sanctifying presence in their greatest trials, when Christ
draws nigh to sanctify their afflictions, to subdue their corruptions, and to
strengthen their graces: the fruit of their affliction, shall be to purge them
from sin; afflictions themselves cannot do it, afflictions themselves harden;
but when the Lord Jesus Christ draws nigh in affliction, the Saints do enjoy
abundance of the sanctifying presence: and through their afflictions they are
made partakers of the Divine Nature; their corruptions are subdued and
mortified.

Again fourthly, They never enjoy more of the quickening presence of Christ,
then in affliction: I say, the quickening presence of Christ: many times dead
hearts, how are they raised up, when Christ draws nigh to them? how are they
elevated above themselves and their own strength, because they are mightily
acted by the Spirit of Christ? in the fifth of Hosea, you may see there, how
God does promise his quickening presence in the time of their affliction; Hosea
5 last verse, I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face: in their afflictions they will seek me early: They
were dead-hearted people, and they had lost all activity for God, they were not
carried out with desire after God, they would not stir up themselves to take
hold of him: Well, says God, I will make them prize me, I will fling them into
affliction, and then in their affliction I will draw nigh to them with my
quickening presence; and in their afflictions, they will seek me early.

Again fifthly and lastly, The Saints never enjoy more of the comftoring
presence of Christ, then they do in the time of their great affliction: in the
2. of the Song of Solomon, verse 6. what says the Spouse there in her greatest
afflictions? His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace
me, As Christ does support in affliction, so he does embrace in affliction; he
commonly never revea^s more of himself, never gives out more glorious
manifestations of himself, then in the time of affliction: I will bring her
into the Wilderness, see that place, Hosea 2. 14. I will bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably to her: she shall have my comfortable
presence in the Wilderness, I will speak comfortably to her; and so David, he
had experience of it, in Psalm 23. Thou art with me, and I will fear none ill,
though I walk in the midst of the shadow of death: I will fear none ill, thy
rod, thy staff^ does comfort me: never more consolations of Christ are given
out to poor creatures then when the Lord brings the^ into great trials: he
deals as an indulgent Mother with her child, never manifests more love then
when the child is sick; though a Parent does restrain love before; yet then she
mani^ests her love the child shall know that the Parents love it, and then she
shall bring out all her sweet meats, in the time of sickness: and so does the
Lord bring out a great deal of sweet meats, they have more sweet meats, and
sweet drinks that the world knows not of, then in the day of tribulation, in
the day of affliction; when it is sad and dark with the outward man, they have
meat to eat that the world knows not of, they have the comfortable presence of
Christ that the world knows not of: they have never more of the comfo^table
p^e^ence of Christ then when they are brought into great straits, and low
conditions.

I shall have no time to come to the Application; but only let me say this to
you: You k^ow not what use you may have of this before another Sabbath, the
Lord may bring you into afflictions; and therefore remember this truth, hide it
in your heart, that so upon all occasions, you may make use of it; and if God
do bring you into afflictions submit willingly and readily to him, submit to
low conditions, submit to trials, submit to persecutions; know this, that Jesus
Christ manifests his presence; and this is the way to manifest his presence, I
will abundantly comfort you in all your afflictions you lay under, and that you
meet with for his names sake; and let it help to strengthen your faith; and
truly you had need to streagthen your faith in times of affliction, there is no
time in which the heart of men, good men are more ready to faint and give over,
then in times of trial; how did David cry out? and how did Christ cry out in
his great a^fliction? Oh my God my God, why have thou forsaken me? In
affliction we are apt to think that God has forsaken us; Sion s^id in her
affliction, the Lord has forsaken me: in her affliction she said, the Lord
has forsaken me: and thus an unbeleiving heart is apt to question in times of
affliction, Oh is God amongst us? as Israel said when they were in wants and
great straits; Oh then their unbelieving hearts were discovered; though they
had seen his Miracles, they tempted God, and said, is God amongst us? And the
best of Gods people in time of temptation and affliction, may be apt to
question, is the Lord with us? Now therefore strengthen your faith in the day
of adversity, that so you may not faint and dishonor God, and look unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, that beholding the Lord Jesus Christ, your faith may be
strengthened; remember that it is his way to give out much of himself to his
people in times of affliction; and therefore never say, is the Lord wi^h us?
but expect to meet with God; conclude the Lord is with you, and he will be with
you in the time of affliction; and remember you shall never have more of his
supporting presence of his enlightening presence; his comforting presence; his
sanctifying presence; and of his quickening presence: I say, you shall never
have more of the presence of Christ, then in such sad conditions: strengthen
the feeble hands and knees, and look to the Lord, that your faith may be
strengthened.

THE Seventh Sermon On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said. Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.
The handling of the Doctrine lastly named, is put off to the next Sermon, this
not being preached in the same place with it.



FRom Nebuchadnezzars Testimony of this Miraculous Deliverance that God wrought
for his Servants: This Proposition was handled the last day: God often times
works such deliverance for his people, as he makes their very enemies to
confess, that he has done great things for them: He made the very Heathen to
confess that God has done great things for his people: When God did turn again
our Captivity, in the 126. Psalm, They said among the Heathen, the Lord has
done great things for them. I will make them o^ the Synagogue o^ Satan (says
Christ) which say they are Jews and are not, but do lie, I will make them to
come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee: but this
P^^nt is concluded; and therefore I shall proceed; For I desire to keep time,
and to be short in these morning Exercises: Well then, let us go on, and look
upon the Restraint that God laid upon the fire: Consider the effect of Gods
command, and the effect of his prohibition; God had given command that the fire
should not burn them, that the fire should burn and dissolve their chains, and
their fetters that were upon them; they were cast in bound, bound hand and
foot; but God had commanded, and the fire obeys; it takes part with the three
Children, to loose their fetters, and set them at liberty; they were cast in
bound: And low, now says Nebuchadnezzar, I see four men loose, God had laid a
prohibition upon the fire, and it obeys the commandment, that it should not
burn them, that it should not touch their, bodies it should not stop their
breath, that it should not so much as singe one hair of their head, or scorch
their garments, and the fire is obedient to the word of the Lord; they were
walking in the midst of the fire, and they had no hurt: I shall put the
particulars together, because I would make have, they hold forth this
Proposition.

Observat. 6.
That at the Commandment of the Lord, the fierceest of Creatures shall not only
not hurt his people, but shall take part with them, and do them good. I say, At
the command of the Lord, the fiercest of Creatures, shall not only not hurt
them, but shall side with his people, to take their part, and do them good: The
fire cannot hurt, nay the fire takes part with them, nay the fire sets them at
liberty.

First of all, I shall show you that the Creatures* cannot hurt.

And then secondly, That they must of necessity take part with the Saints, and
do them good.

First of all, they cannot hurt; The water of the Red Sea, it could not destroy
the Israelites; The Lions, though fierce creatures, yet they could not open
their mouths against Daniel: The most violent men of the world cannot hurt,
when God lays a restraint upon them; you know Laban was not able to speak so
much as a hurtful word to Jacob* because God met him, and laid a restraint upon
him; Take heed that thou speak to Jacob neit^er good nor evil: God would
persuade his people of this, in that 54. of Isaiah, verse, 15, 16. God would
let them know that they were not able to lift up a weapon without him; nay,
they could not so much as make a weapon without him; the Smith could not so
much as blow the fire to form a weapon without the Lord; Thus says God, I have
power over all creatures, and over all the actions of creatures; a weapon
cannot be lifted up, for the workman cannot so much as lift up his hand to blow
the fire, unless God permit him; ^ Dog cannot bark against a man, unless God
give leave, the barking of a Dog will do little ^urt; yet a Dog could not so
much as bark against Israel, when the Lord lay a restraint upon them; God would
carry them quite out of the land of Egypt, and not one Dog should move his
Tongue at them; as you may see in the 11. of Exodus, verse. 7. you see the
creature cannot do the least hurt; for a Dog cannot do so much as bark, he
cannot do so much as move his Tongue, when God lays a restraint upon them.

Secondly, The creature cannot hurt, but they must do good to Gods people, at
his command; if the Lord will make choice of any creature to do his people
good, he will effect his own design, it cannot be hindered, he will do them
good by any thing he will do them good by any creature; by the most violent
creature: Who would have thought that the fire should have done these three
children good? that the fire should take their part? and yet the fire at the
command of the Lord, does loose their bonds, and sets them at liberty: Who
would have thought that the waters at the red Sea should have done the
Israelites good? and yet they were abundantly useful to them in their passage
through the red Sea; you shall read in the 14 of Exodus, verse. 22. that the
children of Israel walked through the Sea, and the waters were a wall to them
on the right hand, and on the left; the creature that might have been their
destruction, became security to them; their way was made strait to them, they
could not go out of their way, for the Sea was a wall to them on the right
hand, and on the left: Who would have thought that the Ravens should have done
Elia^ so much good? that the hungry Ravens, creatur^ that are of so greedy an
appetite, should spar^ meat out of their own bodies, to feed the Prophet? yet
so it was, as you may read in the first book of Kings, 17. verse. 6. God makes
the very Ravens to be careful Nurses to Elias; when he was in the Wilderness
they brought him his meat in the morning, and in the evening: Who would have
bin thought that the belly of the Whale should have a protecting place to
Johah? that it should save him from destruction? yet God he made use of it, and
he made the belly of the Whale to be a place of safety to Jonah, the Whale kept
him safe till she carried him and set him on shore: So that you see God can do
his people good by any creature, he can make them all to be useful. Sometimes
he works by improbable means, and sometimes by impossible means: I say,
sometimes God does his people good by improbable means; to have Honey out of
the Rock, and Oil out of the Rock; you will say this is improbable, and yet
this is his promise that is made to Israel in the 32. of Deuteronomy. verse. 13.
And he made him to suck Honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the flinty Rock:
He speaks of the fruitfulness of the Land of Canaan God made the barren places
fruitful, and he made the very Rocks to bring forth, yea the very flinty Rocks
to be fruitful; the Rocks gave them Honey, and the Rocks gave them Oil: That
is, (as I conceive) God made the very Rocks to bring forth trees, and trees
brought forth pleasant fruit, the Rocks brought forth the Olive Trees and the
Date Trees, and so they had Honey out of the Rock, and Oil out of the Rock. You
know that it was impossible that Israel being carried into Babylon, they should
be carried again into their own Country, and while they were in Babylon, they
seem to be in the grave: What a mercy was it that God should stir up their
enemies to be a defense to them? and to have them to be assisting of them? and
to stir them up to the work of the Lord, to work in the Temple? you know God
wrought by that means: And so how improbable was it, that Joseph's accusation by
his Mistress, that his fetters, his chains should be his advancement? and you
know God wrought that way, and he made Joseph to be lift up, and made the
second man of Pharaohs Kingdom.

Yea God works sometimes by Impossible means; you see it was impossible that
the fire should have been a protection to these three Children, to loose their
bands, and set them at liberty, and be a place to walk in; and yet it was at
the command of the Lord. He can turn the very stones into bread; He can send
bread out of Heaven, as to Israel; and give water out of the Rock, as to them
in the Wilderness; He cannot only work without means, but by impossible means:
And thus you see at the command of the Lord, all creatures must obey; He can do
his people good by Improbable means, and by Impossible means;

For the Grounds of the Point; Why creatures The Grounds of the Point.
cannot hurt, but they must do good to the people of God?

First of all, Because they must all go along with God; and where God is a
friend, they must be a friend; where God will not hurt, they will not hurt, for
they all go along with him: Balaam could not go against the word of the Lord:
If Balack would have given him his house full of Gold and Silver, he could not
go against the word of the Lord: and therefore when he would have had him
cursed the people: Oh says Balaam, How should I curse, when God has not
cursed, and defy when God has not defied? This is the voice of all Creatures;
how shall we curse, when God has not cursed? and how shall we hurt, when God
has not hurt? they are all obedient to the word of the Lord, to the command of
the Lord; all creatures obey that word of the Lord that he gave them when he
first created them; see the 148. Psalm, what is spoken there of all the
Creatures of God, they obey that Law he gave them.

Verse 6. Who has also estdblished them for ever and ever, he has made a
Decree which shall not pass.

Verse 7. Praise the Lord from the earth you Dragons and de^p waters: And so in
the 8. verse, Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapors, stormy winds, fulfilling h^s
word: They all obey that Law of God that God gave them, they all keep their
bounds, they willingly obey the Word, the Command, of their Creator; and
therefore it is that the Sun does rise and set, that so might fulfill the word
of the Lord; the Sea that ebbs and flows, and so all creatures they keek their
Motion and their Station that so they may fulfill the word of the Lord; and keep
that Law that God gave them at the first Creation, when he put them in order,
and set them in their bounds. Yea, sometime God does give another word to them,
he does alter the Law that he made at their Creation; and he gives a new word
of command, which is contrary to nature, and then also the creatures they obey
that word of the Lord; See what God commanded in the second Book of Kings. 20.
9. 10. verses.

Verse 9 And Isaiah said, this sign shall thou have of the Lord, that the Lord
will do the thing that he has spoken; shall the shadow go forward ten degrees,
or go backward ten degrees?

Verse. 10. And Hezekiah answered, it is a light thing for the shadow to go down
ten degrees; nay, but let the shadow return backward ten degrees.

Verse. 11. And Isaiah cried unto the Lord; and he broughe the shadow tne
degrees backward, by which it had gone down in the Dial of Ahaz.

See, God he can alter the Law of nature, and at his command, the Sun shall not
only go forward, but it shall go backward; if God say, Sun stand still, it
shall not move; and if God say, Sun go back, it goe^h back ten degrees: Thus
you see that all the creatures, they obey the word of the Lord, they fulfill
every command of God; if he say to the wind, wind arise, arise and blow, it
presently fulfills his word; if he send them about any work, and he say, go and
carry destruction upon your wings, to such a party, to such an enemy, they
presently fulfill the word of the Lord; and then if he say, go and blow such a
man profit, carry blessings in your wings, the wind that presently fulfills
the word of the Lord; they are all his creatures; therefore they must go along
with the Lord; they are all his servants, and therefore they attend him; they
are all the Army of the Lord; and all the Host in Heaven and earth are his
Army, and therefore they must obey the word of their General; they must obey
his word of Command, they are all at his Command: And therefore I say, where
God is a friend, the creatures they must needs be friends, they cannot do hurt,
for they all go along with God.

Secondly, The creatures they cannot hurt, but they must do good to the people
of God, for God has made a Covenant with all the creatures for his people;
There is a League made with all the creatures, even with the meanest of
creatures; God has not left one out of the League: See the 5. of Job, verse
23. For thou shall be in league with the stones in the field, and the beasts of
the field shall be at peace with thee. Now because God has made a league with
them* therefore of necessity, First of all they must do no hurt, for that is
one end of their League and Covenant: When there was a League made between
Laban and Jacob; see what is the end of it, Genesis 32. 52. and that thou shall
not pass over this heap, and this pillar unto me for harm: that is the end of
the League and Covenant, that so they that are in League and Covenant, may not
harm one another: Now God has made a Covenant for his people, with all the
Creatures; that is, God he has laid an Injunction upon them, that they shall
not do the least harm to his Servants.

Object. But you will say, may not Creatures be hurtful to the Servants of God?
May they not perish by fire and water, and have their lives taken away by
Creatures? Was not Stephens life taken away by stones? how then does God make a
League with the ston^s in the field?

Answ. I Answer, It Is true they may, when God commands them to take away the
life of his own people; but still I say, they cannot do them hurt, they do but
take away their lives, if they could send them to the torments of Hell, send
them to the pit of destruction, that would hurt them indeed; but they cannot
hurt them, though they be instruments to take away the lives of the Saints, yet
they do them no hurt; for they do but send t^em to their Fathers house, they
help them the sooner to God, to rest in the Arms of Jesus Christ, where they
shall rest for evermore.

Secondly. Because there is a League with the Creatures, they shall do them good
When Jehosaphat entered into Covenant with Ahab, there was an engaging to do all
the good he could, my men are as thy men, my horses as thy horses, and all
that is mine as thine: And so says God to the Creatures, I have put so many
particular good things, good qualities into your nature, that so you may convey
them to my servants; and therefore I charge you be serviceable to them, give
out all the good you can, let them enjoy all the good that I have given to you,
for I made you for their sakes: and therefore of necessity they must give out
the good that God has given them, they must do the people of God all the good
they can, because God has made a Covenant with the Creature: And this Covenant
that God has made with the creature, is grounded upon the great Covenant, the
everlasting Covenant that he has made with his people in Jesus Christ, there
comes in all the good that we receive by creatures; God has made an
everlasting Covenant with his Son, in which he has promised to be their God;
to take them into Union and Communion with himself, to be their portion, and to
give himself to them: And therefore because God has given himself to them, all
creatures also are given to be useful and beneficial to them.

Thirdly, The Third Ground of the Point, The Creatures must needs do good, they
cannot hurt, but they must do good to the people of God, because of Gods
watchful eye over them; the more hurtful and violent any creature is, the more
does the Lord set a watch over them, his providential eye is over his people; I
say, the Lord does watch over them with a special, providential eye: See what
is said in the Prophecy of Isaiah, concerning his Vineyard; I the Lord will
keep it, I will watch over it every moment, least any hurt it: I will keep it
night and day, least any hurt it: I will keep it night and day: See then there
is a special eye of providence over the Saints that are the Lords Vineyard; and
therefore it is not possible the Creatures should hurt it. God he watches over
his Vineyard for this end, least any hurt should befall it; I will watch over
it every moment; it is true other wicked men, they are kept from harm by a
common providence of God, they have rheir lives preserved; but still it is but a
common providence: But there is a special eye, and a special providence of God
over his people, least any hurt should befall them; there is no time, no
moment, that God does lay aside his watchful eye, and not watch over his
people; And therefore there is no time that any harmful creature can step in to
his people to do them hurt; they all come under the providence of God, every
creature comes under the providence of God; and therefore the Lord he is able
to prevent the harm.

Fourthly, The Creatures they are all given to Jesus Christ, as he is King, as
he is the great King: All power is given to him in Heaven and earth: Now Christ
he has reconciled the Creatures, and therefore the crea^ures cannot be hurtful
to the Saints; the Lord Jesus Christ has reconciled the creature: He has
reconciled all things in Heaven and Earth, and made them all friends; and
therefore the creature shall not do harm to the people of God: See the Promise
that is made to the Church, in a special manner it shall be fulfilled in the
latter Ages; Hosea 2. 18. And in that day will I make a Covenant for them with
the beasts of the field, and with the fouls of Heaven, and with the creeping
things of the ground; and I will break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battle
cut of the ^arth, and I will make them to lie do^n safely: This Promise is made
to the Churches in the latter days. When they shall enjoy abundance of Jesus
Christ, when they shall shall enjoy abundance of Jesus Christ, when they shall
have abundance of the Spirit of Christ; why then shall those promises be
fulfilled in a great measure, they shall enjoy peace with the Creatures: In
that day I will make a Covenant with them, in a special manner, with the beasts
of the field, and with the fouls of Heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground; and I will break the bow, and sword; and there shall be no hurt in all
my holy Mountain: we are all reconciled to God by the blood of Jesus Christ;
And therefore they cannot hurt the Saints, but do them good.

Briefly to make Application, and so conclude.

If the fiercest of Creatures you see cannot hurt; Application.
The fire it cannot hurt, but it must do good, when God commands; take notice
then of the mighty power of the Lord: Oh know that he is a great King, and his
name is dreadful over all the world; do but look upon the powerful command of
God, what effect it has upon the Creatures: It Is impossible they should
transgress, he has set them bounds that they cannot pass; they are all ready
to obey his Command; if he say go, they go; and if he say come, they come; why
this will make it evident. That God is a God of infinite power, to command so
many Creatures, so many thousand thousand Creatures, as God does order every
day; and that God should make them obedient to every command of his, that none
can transgress the least command; but they must fulfill his word; when he sets
them about it; Oh this declares that God is a God of infinite power, and does
what he pleases.

Secondly, What a shame is it to the sons of men that they will not submit to
the Lord? Will not the Creatures rise up in judgment against men? When the
Creatures fulfill the word of the Lord, and you disobey the word of the Lord;
shall God have more service from senceless Creatures, then from the sons of
men, that was made Lord over them? Certainly this will be their iniquity
another day, and the very creatures will condemn them: See what God says to
that fire; fire, burn not: it cannot so much as touch the hair of the head: If
God say to the fire, fire, burn their bands asunder; set my children at
liberty, the fire it burns their bands and fetters, and sets them loose, that
they were able to walk in the midst of the fire.

And so all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, they all keep their
bounds; Hitherto shall thou go, and no further; the Sea, a raging Element, it
obeys the word of the Lord: The Lord says to the Sun, Sun run thy race, it
obeys; stand still, it stands still, and is obedient: Now shall all Creatures
in their places obey the word of the Lord, and shall not man? Oh what a shame
is this to the sons of men, that they should disobey the word of the Lord? That
God should speak but one word to the Creatures, and they should obey, and that
he should speak so many to the sons of men, and they not obey: That God comes
again, and again, and speaks in his Ordinances, and still man walks contrary to
God: when he lays a command upon them; this is the command, That you believe in
Jesus Christ, and renounce all your own righteousness, and rely upon the
Righteousness of the Son of God, and still men disobey: What a shame is it, for
man to disobey, and all the Creatures that the Lord has given to him, to obey?

Thirdly, Here is a great Encouragement, and strong Motive, to those that are
strangers to God, to come in and submit to him: Oh that the Lord would persuade
your hearts to come in and submit to him! So long as you are strangers to God,
see the danger you are in; you are liable to be harmed by all Creatures in
Heaven and Earth; they are all at the command of the Lord; they all obey his
word; If God say to the least of Creatures go and take away the life of man;
avenge my quarrel upon such a Rebel, the Creatures obey: The Lord can arm the
least of his Creatures: a fly, he can make that take way the life of man; And
therefore it is a miserable condition, to be a stranger to God and Christ, to be
out of Covenant with God; you have no Covenant made for you and therefore you
are left to harm of the Creatures every day: Oh that the Lord would persuade
you to come in, to cast away your own righteousness, and to submit to the
righteousness of the Son of God, and to make a close with him, and with his
Son, and then all Creatures, will take his part: and if God be your friend,
they will be your friend; and if God will not curse, they will not curse; and
if God will not hurt you they will not hurt you; for they are all obedient to
the command of their Maker.

Again in the fourth place, To make haste; This may let us see, that it is not
in Creatures to do us good without: I say, it is not in the power of Creatures
to us the least good without God: We are apt to look too much upon Creatures;
you expect too much from Creatures, and too little from God; and therefore it
is that oftentimes we are disappointed: I tell you, they cannot do us the least
good, without the command of God; the very meat you eat, it cannot refresh you,
unless it have a command from God, and a blessing from God, and the very
clothes that you wear, cannot warm you, unless they have a command from God;
there is no creature can do you good unless it have a command from God, and a
blessing from God: I beseech you take notice of it: Oh we are apt to propound
such and such things to our selves if we had such a portion of the creature:
men think, Oh if they had such an Estate, so much riches; and if they were in
such places of honor, and if they had so much wealth, and such and such a
creature, such and such friends and relations: such meat to eat, and such drink
to drink; and such clothing to put on; then they should be satisfied, and their
lives made comfortable; I tell you, my Brethren, it is a great mistake; if you
had those very creatures you would have, still they could not satisfy you, nor
make your lives comfortable: If God do not come along with the Creature, the
Creature cannot satisfy you: God he can make your lives comfortable in the
want of Creatures; it is as God will come in; and it is as God will bless: See
what Job propounded to himself, in that 7. of Job, verse. 1^. When I said, my
bed shall comfort me, my Couch shall ease my complaint: Though Creatures be
never so likely of themselves to comfort a man, if God will not make use of
them, they cannot comfort: What more likely to give Job ease, then his Couch,
then his Bed? he had wearied his body; and his Bed and his Couch is a place of
ease; but I cannot find it so, says Job, I expected that it should ease me, I
will lay my head upon my Pillow, and take my rest, but I could not find it;
no, it terrified my thoughts: and truly friends, you may think of all the
Creatures you enjoy, you may think that the Creatures will comfort, but if God
does not make use of it, it cannot comfort you; and if God will make use of any
Creature, it shall comfort you: If God make use of imprisonments, bonds and
fetters, they shall be engagements to you, and make you sing in the Stocks at
midnight; God can say to the Creatures go and comfort: You know when God
commanded the heaps of stones that Jacob laid his head upon, to give him
comfortable sleep, he slept well that night, he slept better upon his heap of
stones, then he did upon his pillow, when God makes use of the Creature to
comfort: and therefore do not think you have comfort from Creatures, as
Creatures; it is God that must come in and bring comfort to you, for God can
make every Creature comfortable; and the best of Creatures cannot comfort, if
God do not come in.

To Conclude all.

Fifthly, Here is matter of great comfort to the people of God; it may be a Prop
to their faith, to their confidence; if they consider this, that all the
Creatures are at Gods command, and God can make use of any Creature to do them
good; he ^an make use of their Bonds; it is a mighty comfort to you that are
the people of God, to remember this upon all occasions, where ever you ar^, in
your way, in your journey, in your voyages, whether you be at Sea or Land;
still remember, that all the Creatures they are your Fathers Host, they all
fulfill his Command, they cannot disobey his Law, they cannot hurt you without
commission: Nay, though they be hurtful, yet he can do you good by them: Oh how
quietly may Gods people walk in the midst of all Creatures, when they are at
Sea, and when they are on land? in the midst of dreadful Creatures, they may
wall safely, for why? they are at your Fathers command, and they cannot do you
the least hurt, though they be hurtful in themselves in their own nature; and
therefore upon all occasions strengthen your faith in the Lord: What shall we
say to these things, says the Apostle in the 8. of the Romans, the latter end:
If God be for us, who can be against us? I tell you, you may challenge all the
Creatures in Heaven and Earth, if God be with you; if he be your portion, if he
has received you into Covenant, and you have made a close with God: And
therefore in all places and dangers, walk by faith; strengthen your faith in
the mighty power and goodness of God, that has the Command and Rule over all
Creatures.

THE Eighth Sermon On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said, Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


I Have handled many Propositions out of these words; The last day, we
considered that Addition that God made unto these Martyrs while they were
suffering for his Name sake: There were but three cast into the fire, where as
their enemies looked that they should have been all consumed, and none left to
bear witness any longer against their Idolatrous ways, the Lord makes an
addition to them; there is a fourth that joins himself to them to bear witness
with them unto the truth of God, which they suffered for.

Hence we raised this Proposition.

That all the opposition and persecution that the peopl of God meet with for
the Name and Truth of Christ, shall not diminish their number, but shall
increase them

I showed how the children of Isra^l were multiplied by those oppressions, and
heavy burdens that were laid upon them in Egypt; the more they oppressed them,
the more they increased, says the Text: I gave you an instance in Christ; what
counsel did the Scribes and Pharasees use, in the 11. of John, to hinder the
number of believers: If we let him alone, all men will believe in him; Now they
thought they would take a sure course that none should believe in Christ; They
put the Lord of life to death; smite the Shepherd and the sheep will soon be
scattered; but this did not diminish the number of Believers; no, God did out
reach them, and made this the way to bring in men to believe in Christ: If I be
lifted up, says Christ, I will draw all men to me; The Lord Jesus by dying,
becomes a suitable Object to poor guilty, unclean sinners, which durst not else
have drawn nigh to the glorious Fathers: and Because he p^ured out his soul as
an offering for sin: his Father gave him a portion with the great and mighty, so
that the number of Believers were increased, and not diminished by this
mischievous device against ^im. The Primitive Churches persecution that was
raised in Jerusalem; it did help to the increase of the Gospel, and number of
Believers; The Apostles and Brethren were scattered, in the eighth of the Acts,
so they carried the word up and down, and by their means many were brought in
to God: Samaria, a great City, many in it were converted; They with one accord
gave heed to what Philip spoke, and there was great joy in that City. I showed
you out of Ecclesiastical story, that all the persecutions, those bloody
persecutions the Church me^ with, did not diminish, but did increase the number
of Believers: The Lord delights to walk contrary to wicked men; to cross the
corrupt imaginations of the men of the world; In those things wherein their
deal proudly, he will be above them; he will let them know, that his thoughts
are above thy thoughts, and his ways above their way^. When they say concerning
Sion, Let her be defiled, and let our eyes ^ook upon her, let us see her
desolation. They know no^ the thoughts of the Lord, nor understand his Counsel:
for the event shall be quite contrary their expectations. The Lord Jesus is a
great King; and therefore it shall be so; All power is given into his hand in
Heaven and in Earth, and he will order all for the advancement of his own
Kingdom: all is his, and he has given all to the Saints: All is yours, all
shall do them good, all shall further and increase their graces, and the
increase of his Kindom; There is none can hinder the Lord from pouring out of
his spirit, there is none can hinder the Spirit from working; and therefore all
opposition cannot hinder the increase of Believers: The wind blows where it
lists, and so the Spirit of the Lord, breaths where it it pleases: Man may as
well stop the Sun in the Firmament, or hinder the Sun from shining* and the
wind from blowing, as the Spirit of the Lord from working grace; he darts in
beams of light, beams of conviction, to the hearts of Creatures; and his work
is an irresistible work, all the powers of Hell and darkness shall not be able
to hinder his work; Therefore I conclude this Point, with an Item to the men of
the world; To take heed how they seek to oppose the truth of Christ, and the
people of Christ; this is not the way to diminish their number, no* the Lord he
will out reach them in all their design^ of persecution; the hottest
pe^secution shall but increase the ^umber of the Saints; they shall but sow the
blood of Christ and their ashes, the thicker, and if one fall to the ground, a
hundred shall rise up in their stead.

But I entered into a second Point; in which I shall proceed: After we
considered who this fourth man was; Neb^chadnezz^r saw four men loose, walking
in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fo^rth is
like the Son of God, it was indeed the Son of God: It was the Angel of the
Covenant, the Lord Jesus, who did assume a body at this time, and came down to
refresh his Servants in the fire: It holds forth this, That he would in time
come to deliver poor servants from the flame; of his Fathers wrath; That he
would be present with his people in all afflictions, in the midst of all their
fiery trials:

The Proposition then entered into is this.

That the people of God never enjoy more of the presence of Christ, then in
their lowest conditions.

When they are in great afflictions and fiery trials, the Son of God is with
them. Here you see it in this fiery trial; Israel never saw more of God, then
when they were in the barren Wilderness: Jacob never had such glorious visions,
as when he was driven from his house and home, when he was separated from all
creature comforts, had not so much as a Bed to ly on, nor a Pillow to lay his
head upon, but laid him down upon a heap of stones; then had he those glorious
Visions of the Ladder set up to Heaven, and of the Angels ascending and
descending. Stephen never saw such glorious Visions of Jesus Christ, but when
he was under a shower of stones that took away his life; He looked up, then and
he saw the Heavens opened and the Son of God at the right hand of the Father,
ready to recieve him. The Apostle John never had so glorious Visions, as when
he was b^nished to the Isle of Pa^mos, then did Christ reveal those glorious
Mysteries, written in the Book of Revelations, concerning the Churches, to the
end of the world. The Primitive Churches enjoyed most of Christ in the times of
persecution they enjoyed most of the presence of Christ, and most of the mind
of Christ, most purity, and most holiness, they had most of the supporting
presence of Christ, then his left hand is put under to support a poor Creature,
when it is in a low condition, in a sinking condition, in an afflicted
condition: He supports the inward man, and he supports the outward man; he
makes a little strength to go a great way, as the Oil in the widows cruse, till
such time as he sends deliverance unto his people: They have never more of the
enlightening presence, of the teaching presence of Christ, then in such
conditions: Affliction is Christ's School, in which he teaches his people many
precious Lessons; they have never more of the quickening presence of Christ,
then in such conditions: never more of the Sanctifying presence of Christ, he
is pleased to make use of affliction, to knock off that unevenness many times
that is upon their Spirits, and make them partake ^^ of his own nature. They
have never more of the comforting presence than in such conditions; he brings
his people into the Wilderness there he allures them and there he speaks to
them; then he puts under his left hand to support them, and then his right hand
embraces them: But, What are the grounds of the Point? Why does Jesus Christ
manifest most of himself to his people in their afflicted conditions. The
Grounds of the Point.


First of all he knows that then they have most need of his presence. If ever
they have need of comfort; if ever they have need of strength, of teaching,
quickening, guiding; it is then when they are in afflicted and low conditions,
then is a mercy sweet, when it is in sea^on; and then it is seasonable, when a
poor creature stands in need of it: The Lord Jesus knows that they have need of
his presence in low conditions.

First because of the weakness of the flesh; And,

Secondly, Because of the strength of temptation.

1. Because of the weakness of the flesh: He knows his peop^es fram^, and
remembers that they are but dust; and therefore he pities them; He knows how
unable they are to bear, and how little time they are able to hold out; and
therefore sometimes the Lord Jesus has spoken comfortable words to his people,
when they have expressed a great deal of weakness in them: See in Mat. 26. when
the Disciples could not watch with him; at the 41 verse, they could not watch
with him one hour, though he was in great extremity, and they might have
expected a sharp reproof from him: the Lord Jesus he looks upon them, and he
pities them, he rather excuses them, and comforts them. Oh The Spirit is
willing, but the flesh is weak: He knows what the weakness of flesh is, for he
was partaker of our flesh and blood, he remembers it since he was in the days
of his flesh how weak the flesh is; he is partaker of our flesh and bl^od,
says the Apostle; he knows what it is for a poor creature to grapple with
fears, with inward fears, ever since he poured out his strong cries unto his
Father, with tears: none in the world are so sensible of affl^ction, as they
that have gone under the same affliction themselves; the Lord Jesus he is
sensible of all the weakness, of all the sorrow of his people; he knows by
experience what they mean; he knows what it is to be weak, and he knows what it
is to be in fear; he knows what it is to grapple with the wrath of his Father;
he knows what it is to want his Fathers Countenance; he knows what it is to be
acquainted with sorrow, with grief; there was none so acquainted with them as
he: See what the Prophet Isaiah says of him, in Isaiah 53. verse. 3. He was
despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrow, and acquainted with grief; and
we hid, as it were, our face from him: A man of sorrows, and acquainted with
grief: grief and sorrow were his greatest acquaintance, when he was upon earth;
they were his acquaintance from the beginning of his life; and they were his
companions, from first to last, from the womb to the Cross, they were the
acquaintance that Christ could never shake off; his old acquaintance, when all
his friends lest him, when his Disciples le^t him; in affliction did they leave
him; but his grief did not leave him, he was always acquainted with it, and he
was acquainted with all sorrows, with all grief, grief of all sorts; he knows
what spiritual sorrows are; and therefore he will pity people his under them: a
natural man cannot pity a poor creature that groans under spiritual sorrow, he
knows not what they mean, what it is for a poor creature to groan under
corruption, and cry out of the want of a believing heart, and of the want of
Gods presence; but now the Lord Jesus is acquainted with these sorrows also he
had experience of them in his own person. The woman that has been in Travel,
pities another that is in the same case; the Lord Jesus, he newly come out of
Travel, he remembers his pangs still; and therefore he pities door creatures
when they groan under grief and sorrows, for he was acquainted with them
himself.

2. Again secondly, He knows they have most need of his presence, in afflicted
conditions, because they are most nigh to temptations; and he knows what
temptations are; he knows the strength of Temp^^tions; he knows that it is the
Divils policy, to drive home temptation to the spirit of a poor creature at
that time when it groans under affliction; and therefore he knows that then a
poor creature, if ever, stands in need of the presence of the Lord Jesus; when
Sat^^ stands at the left hand to resist, Christ had need to stand at the right
hand to comfort and support, and strengthen; and therefore the Apostle says;
that he was tempted in the days of his flesh; in that 2 of Hebrews, verse. 18.
Being tempted, he ^^ able to succor those that are tempted: he knows by
experience what it is for a poor creature to b^ tempted; he knows that
temptations are most grievous to a gracious heart: Temptations are worse then
afflictions, and therefore though a poor creature stands in need of succor in
affliction, yet much more in temptation; When temptation goes along with
affliction, Oh then the Lord Jesus knows that there is need of his pr^sence:
When a City is besieged, and the Inhabitants within it be disquieted, and the
enemy has raised their Batteries, and makes breat ^s upon the Walls, and
their Provision grows low, Then, if ever, they have need of relief: Truly so it
is with a pour tempted soul; when it is afflicted Batteries are made against
the Spirit; provision, strength, is little, knows not how to hold out; then the
Lord Jesus, he is their friend; and therefore in such conditions, he usually
makes have to afford his presence: That the first Gro^nd of the Point.

The Lord Jesus knows, if ever, then they have need of his presence* when they
are in low conditions, for then the flesh is weak, and then temptations are
strong.

Again secondly, The Lord Jesus manifests most of himself to his people in low
conditions, because he remembers the kindness of his Father, when he was in the
same condition; I say, he remembers the kindness of his Father unto him, when
he was in low conditions; now he will requite this kindness upon them, that
kindness that God the Father did show to Jesus Christ when he was in
affliction, and in low conditions; I say, be will requite it upon his people,
it makes deep impressions upon the heart of Christ; the love that his Father
showed him when he was here in the days of his flesh, when he was in weakness,
and was in perplexity, and was in distress, he can not forget it: You know what
impression Jonanathans kindness made upon David, because Jonathan showed him
kindness when he was in distress; his kindness made impression upon his heart,
tha^ he could not forget it; he inquired for some of his children, that he
might requite the love of their Father, which he showed to him when he was in
low conditions; Jonathan showed him kindness; when Saul persecuted David,
Jonathan stepped between David and him, and was as a faithful friend to David:
and therefore says David, I will requite his kindness; if I can find but one
poor Mephibosheth, that calls himself a dead Dog; yet David shows a great deal
of kindness to him, to requite the kindness of Jonathan: And so does Jesus
Christ, he goes up and down to inquire in the world, where is the Seed of God,
the Sons and Daughters of the most High, that I might show them kindness for my
Fathers sake: Oh he showed me kindness when I was in distress, and therefore I
will do the like to them, when they ere in affliction and low conditions: Oh
says the Lord Jesus, I remember since your Father and my Father, took care of
me when I was helpless; he formed me in the womb, and he took me out of the
womb; he guarded me all my life long, Thirty years and upward, when I was in
the midst of the world, with Bears and Tigers; I remember how he sent his
Angels to comfort me when I was wearied out by Satan's temptations; Nay, I
remember when he stood by me, when all left me and fled; when all left me, that
I had none in the world to stand by me, the Father stood by me; and therefore I
will lay all this kindness upon you his seed: The last kindnes^ that the Father
showed to the Son, it took mighty impression upon him; that his Father did not
le^ve him alone, but was always with him; And therefore Christ he often makes
mention of it, i^ that 16 of John, verse. 32. The Father has not lef^ me alone,
but he is with me all my life long; he never left him alone: yea, when he was
in his affliction and low conditions, the Father did not leave him alone; See
that 16. of John, verse. 32. B^hold the hour comes, yea is now come, that ye
sha^^ be scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone; and yet I am
not alone, because the Father is with me: This made deep impression upon the
heart of Christ; that the Father did not leave him alone, when he was in his
affliction, when he was persecuted, when all his friends upon earth fled from
him, then the Father did not leave him* And therefore the Lord Jesus Christ, he
did often retain this Kindness; and he will not le^^^ the Sons and Daughters
of God alone in low conditions, but he will be present with them; though they
be in the fire and water, he will be sure to comfort them with the same
consolation, wherewith his Father comforted him, when he was in the same
distress; That Is the second Ground of the Point.

Thirdly, Christ will show most of his presence i^ afflicted conditions,
because he remembers his Engagement, he is engaged then to manifest most of
himself.

First of all He is engaged by his Promise and C^venant; He has promised to be
with them always; he has promised never to leave them nor forsake them: as the
Father promised to be with him in trouble, so he has promised to be with them:
You may see his Fathers promise to him, in Psalm 91. 15. He shall call upon me,
and I will answer him, I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and
honor him. Now as the Father made a promise to be with the Son in trouble, so
has he made a promise to be with his people in trouble: See that promise in
the 43. of Isaiah, verse. 1. 2. how he has promised to be with his people in
all Tribulations, in the midst of the fire and water, and fiery try als;
nothing shall separate betwixt him and them, he is always making good his
Promise; and therefore he will fulfill it to them.

Secondly* He is engaged by a Law of Love: There is a Law of Love written in
the heart of Christ; he takes delight in his people, they are ^^e joy of his
soul: in the 16. Psalm. at the b^ginning of it. it is spoken there of Christ;
All my delight is in the Saints, says Jesus Christ, and these that are
excellent upon Earth; All my delight is in them, next to the delight that
Christ has in his Father; to that Infinite, Incomprehensible Light; his
delight is in his Saints, in his people; and therefore because he loves them,
because he delights in them, he will be present with them; he loves their
presence; wherever they are he loves to be with them, though their condition
be never so sad; though they be in prison, it shall be a Heaven to Christ,
because he bears dear love to them, he loves to see their face; he loves to
hear their voice, he loves to enjoy Communion with them; he loves to be giving
out of himself to them: and therefore be made it his great request before he
went to Heaven that his Father would make room for his people, as you may see
in John 14. beginning of the third verse: And if I go and prepare a place for
you; I will come again and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there you
may be also: he tells them, he would have them with him in the same place; they
shall enjoy the same glory. and they shall have no worse room then he: And he
besought his Father, John 17. 24. That those who were given him of his Father,
might be with him: Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which thou have given me; for
thou ^o ^e^st me before the foundations of the world.

Father, I desire that they may be with me; I desire thou should bid them as
welcome to Heaven as thou bidst me; and that they may p^^take of the same glory
as I do, that they may ^e in the same place that they may always see ^y (...)*
and I may see their faces, for my delight is in them: Heaven could not content
Christ with^^^ the presence of his Saints: and it is a second, Heaven unto
Christ, to be present with them here upon earth; wherever they are, or whatever
their condition, though be never so low; though they be in prison, in chains,
in the stocks, the Lord Jesus loves to be with them; he carries them about in
his heart, and therefore he cannot be absent from them.

Again Thirdly, He is engaged by a Law of Friendship, to be most of all present
with them in their low conditions; the Law of friendship binds him to it.
Affliction is a Touchstone, it discovers fained friends, and real friends; it
shows whether a friend be Cordial or no: By the Law of Friendship, a man is
bound to stick to a friend in the midst of all his adversity, and then there is
most need of a friend: It was a reproof unto Hushai, that Absalom gave him in
that second of Samuel, 16. 17. Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why went you
not along with your friend? David was a friend to Hushai, and says Absalom to
Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? why wentest thou not along with thy
friend? This shall never be said of the Lord Jesus Christ, that he broke the
Law of friendship: It shall never be said of Christ, is this thy kindness to
thy friend? Why wentest thou not along with thy friend? Thou wentest not along
with thy friend, but thou forsookest thy friend, when thy friend had most need
of thee; no, the Law of Friendship is i^ Christ's heart, and he will keep it;
and therefore he will stick close, and most close to his people, when they are
in low conditions.

Again Fourthly, There is a fourth engagement. He is present with his people
most of all in low conditions; in afflicted conditions, because he is engaged
to l^ok after h^s work, it is the work of Christ's own hand; he sends afflictions
for that end, to work something in the heart of his people: and therefore he is
engaged to see what becomes of his labor and pains, that he may not loose his
cost and labor: When a Physician gives a Purge to a P^tient, he is engaged to
see what becomes of his Physic, how it works; So the Lord Jesus Christ, the
great Physician, he never gives any bitter Purge, any bitter Pill of affliction
to his servants; but he looks upon himself as engaged to look after it, that he
may look after his Physic, and see how it works: the very presence of Jesus
Christ will help the Physic, if it work too much, or too little; if the soul
despise, the chastening of the Lord, or faint under the chastening of the Lord;
the Lord Jesus can by his presence he^p: When the Gold Smith pu^s his Gold into
the Furnace, then he is engaged to be present to look after his Gold; and so is
Jesus Christ when he duts his people into the Furnace of affliction; he is
engaged to look after his precious Gold, that so none may be lost and consumed
in the fire: You see the Grounds of the Point.

Quest. If you ask me, how does Christ give out much of himself in affliction?
By what way or means does Christ communicate much of himself in affliction:
Briefly for answer:

Answ. First of all, he does raise up his peoples faith unto a high pitch; many
times, I say, he raises up their faith to a more then ordinary pitch, he
clears the eye of faith, and strengthens the eye of faith: Now the more the eye
of faith is cleared and strengthened, the more it sees of Jesus Christ: Now the
Lore he does mightily strengthen faith; many times in affliction faith is
strengthened, for faith is left alone many times, and then it works best; all
props are taken away, God takes away all sense, many times, and leaves faith to
work alone; now faith never works better then when it is alone; it meets with a
great deal of opposition; and faith is strengthened by opposition; the nature
of faith does take his rise by opposition; the more opposition it meets with,
the higher it rises: The woman of Canaan, what opposition did her faith meet
with? that which was a discouragement to her, yet from that discouragement, her
faith takes a rise; and because Christ says; she is a dog, therefore she is
confident that she shall have Crumbs of mercy before she goes away: When faith
is put to extremity, then it becomes strong: When faith is exercised in
extremity; I having wavered a long time, at last it sees that it must either
believe or perish, believe or sink; it fares in such a condition, as with a man
that is to pass over a River, he being afraid that the Bridge should not bear
him, stays long before he dare venture; at last he sees the River swell higher
and higher, he goes to make an offer, and pulls back his foot; he dare not
venture; at last the water swells up to the neck of the Bridge, and he sees
there is no way but one with him, either he must venture upon the Bridge, or
else perish in the water; and then he considers, that many have gone over that
way, and many have been saved that way, and it has born up many, thousands
have gone over before, well he ventures: and so does many a poor soul waver
many times, draw back his foot, dares not venture upon Christ, can he bare me
up? and will he bear me up? may I venture? God he puts faith many times to it,
puts it to such a strait that the soul must venture or perish, believe in
Christ alone, or perish; faith here many times takes a rise; that is the first
way whereby Christ does coummunicate much of himself in affliction, he many
times lifts up faith, and strengthens faith; Now the more strong faith is, the
more it sees, the more it apprehends of God.

Secondly, He pours out the Spirit of Supplication many times upon his people
when they are in low conditions; he makes them to cry out, to cry a main to
him, as he cried to his Father in his distress, he puts up his cries; He puts
up his requ^sts with strong cries and tears, and he was heard of his father;
And so the Lord Jesus he does pour out of his spirit upon his people, that he
may stir up their souls in such a way as Christ is taken with; Let me see thy
face, and let me hear thy voice, says he, for sweet is shy voice, and thy
countenance is comely, it is melody to Christ; Christ draws nigh to hear the
melody; and the nigher Christ draws the more evidently the soul sees him.

Thirdly, The Lord Jesus by affliction, or in affliction he draws the hearts of
his people nigher; Then he does bring them back many times from their
wanderings, from their straglings: Before I was afflicted I went astray, says
David. The Lord Jesus by affliction, he brings them nigher to himself, he
causes them to wait more upon him, to eye him more, to keep closer unto him,
and to take heed of straggling: Now the nigher the soul is brought to Christ,
the more it sees of him, though it be not for our waiting not for our
believing, our walking, that Christ does manifests himself: Commonly when Jesus
Christ manifests much of himself, he will draw his peoples heart to look
toward him, and wait upon him.

Fourthly, He manifests most of himself in affliction, by his word which be
s^nds along with affliction: Commonly, I say, when Christ does afflict his
people, he sends his word along with affliction, some word of instruction, or
some word of promise, or some word of Counsel; there is some word or other that
goes along with affliction, that so Christ may teach them before they go out of
that sti^g: Now the word of grace the word of Promise, it is the Chariot on
which Christ rides; he does by them draw nigh, by his word he draws nigh to the
soul: and therefore when the word comes with evidence, Christ comes along with
the word, and then the soul sees most of Christ, because Christ sends such a
word to the soul in affliction; which word he comes along with and in which
word he conveys himself to them.

Quest. It may be some of God people will say, Alas if this be true, that
Christ manifests most of himself in affliction, what shall become of me? I have
had no such experience, I cannot say that I have had most of God in affliction,
I have not enjoyed the presence of Christ in many afflictions.

Answ, Why art thou one that have closed with Christ, and received the mercy of
the Gospel? Why then certainly it cannot be, but that thou have seen something,
or thou might have seen something of Christ in affliction; do not say thou
see nothing of Christ in affliction; do not say thou have not enjoyed any of
the presence of Christ in affliction; have not been supported by Christ in
affliction; and is that nothing, say thou to support a poor creature under
affliction? Have thou not been supp^^^ed by the strength of Christ or by some
word ^^ Christ in affliction? And have thou not said as David said, I had
perished in my affliction, if thy word had not been my stay? has not Christ
given thee some secret Refreshment in affliction? surely he has been nigh to
thee and thou wett not aware; he has fed thee in affliction, and thou did
not take notice of it; Joseph he sed his Brethren and they did not know it was
Joseph; And so Christ he does give sweet refreshments to his people, and they
do not take notice of it; they do not consider that it is Christ that supports
them: Oh thy Spirit had sunk under affliction, if it had not been Christ that
had upheld thee!

Object. Ay, But if it had been Christ that had supported me in my affliction,
I should h^ve gained by my affliction, I should have seen the benefit of my
affliction; but I see nothing at all, affliction is come and gone, and left
nothing behind.

Answ Have thou seen nothing, no, benefit? Why resolve again to walk through,
though thou have not seen, thou may see; and these afflictions that have been
laid upon thee, though they be gone, the fruit of them may be to come: When man
takes Physic, you cannot expect that he should have health the same day,
strength the same day, he must wait some days after; and see how his strength
comes in, and then afterward he perceives the benefit of his Physic; and so it
is with affliction, God may, and does do his people good by affliction, though
they saw little benefit while they were under affliction: The rain does make
the earth fruit^^l: but the growth of the corn it is not seen presently; wait a
while, stay a Week or a Fortnight, and then look into the Field and you shall
see the rain was beneficial to the Field, and so it is with afflictions, they
are as rain, when the Lord Jesus comes along with them he makes them very
beneficial to his people; Ay* but the growth is not discerned presently: No,
stay a while; But do not thou say in unbelief, I shall get no good by my
affliction; no thou have got good by thy affliction; The Lord has said it, he
has said That All things shall work together for their good; he has said,
that He will purge away their sins; he has said, that We are made partakers of
his Divine Nature, by affliction: and therefore give not way to unbelief; do
not by unbe^ief, shut out the blessing; but believe that it shall be as God
has spoken; and though thou have not seen the accomplishment of the promise,
go and wait upon God, watch over thine own heart; look to thy self, the Weeds
grow as well as the Corn: you know how it was with Hezekiah, and therefore we
had to need watch over our own hearts, and know thou shall get good by
affliction; for God has spoken it, and it shall be accomplished unto thee in
the Lords due time; for the Lord wll fulfill his word.

THE Ninth Sermon, On DAN. III. XXV.
He answered and said* Lo I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the
fire, and they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.


YOu may remember the Proposition in hand; Namely, That Christ is never rigler
his people th^n when they are in great afflictions, in fi^ry trials: He entered
into the Furnace here; into the fiery Furnace, that he might save his people
harmless: I gave you the Grounds the last day; why Christ draws nigh to his
people, and why he does communicate most of himself in their afflicted and
lowconditions.

First of all, he knows that they have most need of him, they have most need of
him because of the weakness of the flesh; and because of the strength of
temptation; he knows the flesh is weak; and therefore he expresses pity and
compassion to his Disciples, when they could expect nothing but fury from him,
they could not watch one hour, when he stood in need of them; and yet the Lord
Jesus pities them; The flesh is weak, but the Spirit is strong; he knows what
the weakness of the flesh is; and he himself was partaker of our flesh, that he
might know experimentally what the weakness of the flesh is; and therefore well
might Isaiah say, He was a man of sorrow; a man of sorrow, and acqua^nted with
grief; he was a man of sorrow all his days, and he had no other acquai^tance
almost but grief and sorrow when all his acquaintance left him, his grief and
sorrow followed him, even to the very grave; and therefore there is no grief,
no sorrow, but the Lord Jesus had experience of it, that he might know how to
pity his people in their weakness, and when they lie under their burdens.

Again, He knows the strength of temptation, he knows what it is for a poor
creature to be tempred, for he was in all things tempted like unto us, says
the Apostle: He had experience of all manner of temptations; he knows how to
releeve his people under temptation, he knows, their straits, when they are
besieged; he knows how the force of Satan's Batteries are; he knows that in
their weaknesses the Devil takes advantage against them, and then above all
other times endeavor to drive home the darts of his temptation into their
Spirits; and therefore the Lord Jesus because they have most need of him, he
pities them, and relieves them at that time.

Again, He remembers the kindness of his Father to him in his low condition,
and therefore will show the like kindness to his people in their low
conditions; he remembers that his Father did not leave him in his straits, and
therefore he will not leave them in their straits: The kindness that God the
Father showed to his Son when he was upon earth, took such an impression, made
such an impression upon the heart of Christ that he can never forget it; but he
will always labor to requite it, by showing the like kindness to the people of
God in their distress: Oh how was he taken with that kindness, that The Father
would not leave him alone? how often does he make mention of it; I am not
alone, but the Father is with me? and therefore he enquires for some of the
Saints of God, that he may show the like kindness unto them: David remembers
the kindness that Jonathan showed him, when he was in his low condition; and
therefore David enquires for some of his children; Is there none left of the
house of Soul, that I may show kindness to for Jonathans sake? though there be
but one poor lame Mephibosheth, one that is lame of his feet, that is no fit
companion for a King; yet for Jonathans sake, and for the kindness Jonathan
showed to David: David shows great kindness to Jonathans son, took him, and set
him at his Table: so does Jesus Christ deal, he remembers the kindness of his
Father, the kindness the Father showed him in his low condition; says he, is
there none of the seed of God? are there none of the children of the most high,
that I may show kindness to, for the fathers sake? Because he showed kindness
to me in my low condition; and though he can hear of none but poor lame
Mephibosheth, yet he shows kindness to them, takes them into communion with
himself, sets them at Table with him, and in the midst of their low conditions
will afford his presence* because his Father and their Father did not leave him
alone when he was in low conditions. Again, The Lord Jesus he is bound unto
this by many engagements; I say, he is bound to be present with his people in
low conditions; He is bound by his Word, by his Promise, by the Law of love
that is in his heart: All my delight is in the Saints, and those that be
excellent; it is a second Heaven to him, next to the presence of the Father, he
delights to be in the presence of his Saints, and therefore because he delights
in them he will be present with them, though they be in the prison, in chains
and fetters, though they be in the fiery Furnace; yet it is a Heaven unto
Christ to be with them; for all his delight is in his Saints; He is bound also
by the Law of friendship, to be with them in low conditions; a friend is tried
in adversity; it was a reproof to Hushai, when he left David in straits; and
therefore says Absalom, is this thy kindness to thy friend that thou would
not go along with thy friend? It shall never be said so of the Lord Jesus, it
shall never be said of him, Why did thou not go along with thy friend? for he
will go along with his friend in the greatest adversity: he will not leave
them, but afford them his presence.

Again, He is bound because his work is in hand; A Physician is bound to look
after his Patient, because he has given him a Purge: And so the The Lord Jesus
is bound to look after his Patient when he has given him a Purge: Goldsmiths
is bound to look after his Gold when he has put it* into the Furnace: And so
the Lord Jesus is bound to look after his Gold when it is in the Furnace of
affliction.

But I come to the Application.

First of all for Instruction: This lets us see the wonderful unparalel love of
Jesus Christ; I beseech David was left of his best friends; Father and Mother
forsook him: and Jesus Christ was left of his best frsends, they all forsook
him and fled; and truly this may be the condition of any man upon earth, cast
out and forsaken of friends, of most friends, of best friends: will a friend
venture his own life for a friend? will a man keep his friend, when some deadly
infectious disease is upon him? when he has a plag^e sore upon him? will he
^hen lie down in the bosom of his friend? when a man is condemned to the
flames of fire, when a man is cast into the fire, will a friend follow him into
that condition? Truly such friends you will hardly find upon earth; but this
is the friendship of Jesus Christ to his people: when he first looked upon them
he saw how many plague sores, infectious diseases were upon them, and yet that
could not hinder him from drawing nigh, and affording his presence, and from
working mightily by his spirit, upon their hearts: Nay, when they are brought
to fiery trials, to great afflictions; yet even then he will not leave them,
and he will not forsake them; and this makes the love of Christ the more
remarkable, that he should thus condescend when he was at the highest, for he
is now advanced above the Heavens, he sits down at the right hand of the
Father, he is at the highest condition, and yet he is pleased to condescend to
the lowest condition, he is pleased to come down when they are in the depths,
in the greatest straits that possibly can be; what love was that the Spouse
speaks of in the 5. of Canticles, and the last verse: she speaks a great deal
of the beauty of Christ, and in the last words she makes her boast of her
Beloved: This is my Beloved, and this is my Friend, Oh Daughters of Jerusalem:
I will compare with you all; I will compare my friend to all the friends in the
world; This is my Belov^d; and this is my friend; she compares him for for his
beauty; and so you may compare him for his love; you may make your boast of the
Lord Jesus; you may say, This is my Beloved, and this is my friend.

Secondly, What a strong Motive may this Doctrine be unto such as are strangers
unto Jesus Christ is, which will be present with his friends in their lowest
conditions? Oh that every man would set down and consider that which Solomon
speaks of, to remember the days of darkness, which will be many; many days of
darkness may come upon the earth, what a favor will it be to have a friend in
the darkness? a friend that will stick by thee when thou art in the dark a
friend that thou may take hold of his skirts when thou art in the dark Entry;
a friend that will hold thee fast when thou art in the dark: such a friend is
Jesus Christ to all that do embrace him: Oh what a favor, what a mercy will it
be, to have a friend stand by thee, that is both able and willing to help thee,
when all Creature Comforts shall fail, when the very strength of body shall
fail? to have a friend stand by to help and succor? and truly such a friend is
the Lord Jesus: what says the Psalmist, in the 73. Psalm, verse. 26. My flesh
and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for
ever: heart and flesh fail, and then there is a strength above nature; the Lord
then is the strength of my heart, and of my flesh and blood: What a mercy will
it be, to have one stand by you, when you go through the valley of the shadow
of death, a friend then to comfort, a friend then to uphold? such a friend is
the Lord to his people; David was confident of this, therefore you see how his
faith triumphs in the consideration of it, in Psalm. 23, verse. 4. Yea though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill; Why? For
thou art with me; see what a mighty confidence was raised up in David's heart;
and what was the ground of it? The presence of the Lord? Though I walk in the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none ill: why? For thou art with me;
he does put cases of the most uncomfortablest condition that may befall him;
valley of the shadow of death, though I be brought down from the Mountain, and
walk in the valley; and though this valley be a dark way, though it be a shadow
of death, that is, though it be never so dreadful; and though it be so nigh
that all the world cannot save you, even then, when I am in such a condition,
and walk in the valley of death, I will fear none ill, for thou art with me; so
long as I have thy presence, my soul is upholden: you read in the 4. of
Revelations, at the 6. verse, that the world is like a sea of Glass: I saw
before the Throne a sea of glass: there the world is shadowed out unto you, and
the condition of men that are in the world, the world is like to a sea of
glass: and Oh that men would remember this; if it be a Sea of Glass, what need
have you of a friend to stand by you? you that are Travelers in the world, you
walk upon a Sea of Glass; Oh what need have you of a friend to take you by the
right hand; to uphold you? there is none but Jesus Christ, none but his
presence can uphold you in this Sea of Glass: and if this world be a Sea of
Glass; Oh what need have we to take Jesus Christ into the Ship, into the heart,
that so he may be our Pilot, and he may guide you safe? Oh do but think in what
steed Jesus Christ will stand you, when the storms arise, and the waves shall
beat when it may be the body of the Ship shall be split, in pieces; Oh what
will it be then for a Savior to uphold the Spirit, to bear up the spirit, and
take the soul upon his own shoulder, to bear it above wrath and amazement? Now
do you apprehend this to be desirable? Oh that the Lord would make your hearts
to close with Christ, to accept of Christ, and the tenders of mercy now held
forth in these days of grace! I tell you, the time is coming, when you shall
see weakness written upon the tops of the Mountains; they will say, look to
your selves, for we cannot help you; now will not the presence of Jesus Christ
be desirable to you in such a condition? Oh then I say, accept of him, he
freely tenders himself to you now in this day of grace; and Oh that the day of
grace might not be slighted! his presence is desirable in such a strait; and
is he not now desirable, that so you may have him in such a time of need?

But Thirdly, This let us us see, that there is not such great evil in
affliction as men apprehend; men fear affliction, and flee from affliction as
from Toads and Serpents, and connot endure to think of affliction, cannot
endure to think of the day of darkness: I say, there is not so great an evil
in affliction as men apprehend, for the Lord Jesus is present with his people
in affliction; and there is no reason why you that are the people of God should
inordinately fear affliction, and why you should inordinately seek to be
delivered from affliction; seeing you may possibly enjoy more of the presence
of Jesus Christ in affliction, then ever you did in other conditions? would ^
loving wife be afraid to go into a dark place when she shall meet with her
Beloved? Why should you be afraid to go into a dark place when you shall meet
with the presence of Christ? Remember that Expression of the Martyr, when he
was ready to suffer death, he breaks forth into this expression. Come fire, and
come wild beasts; Come rack of the body; Come breaking of the bones; Come all
the torments in Hell, that all the Devils in Hell can afflict with, I care not
so I can meet with the presence of Jesus Christ: Remember how many of the
Martyrs have ventured into the flames to meet with Christ? they have willingly
sacrificed their lives that they might meet with Christ: shall Peter venture
into the water, and shall the Martyrs venture into the fire, and shall you be
afraid to enter into an afflicted condition, where you may meet with the
presence of Jesus Christ.

There are two things that make the people of 2 Things that make the people of
God to fear affliction.
God to fear affliction inordinately:

1. First of all, Either they do not believe that they shall meet with the
presence of Christ in an afflicted condition. Or

2. Secondly, They do not believe that the presence of Christ will countervail
the bitterness of affliction.

Now I shall endeavor to clear both these, and to persuade you that are the
people of God: First of all, that you shall certainly meet with Christ in
affliction: And then that his presence will countervail the bitterness of
affliction.

First I say, You shall certainly meet with Christ in your affliction; for
first of all* he has spoke it, he has promised it, he has set a part the
time and place of his own appointment; he has given out the word, the word is
out of his mouth, and it is under his own hand written, it is under his hand and
seal, that he will meet with his people in afflicted conditions, he has said
in the 5. of Job verse. 19. that he will deliver thee in six troubles, and in
seven; and every Promise is under the Hand and Seal of Christ: and so in the
43. of Isaiah, God promises there, to be with his people in all their
afflicted conditions; in their greatest afflictions: In the 43. of Isaiah, and
the second verse, When thou passest through the water, I will be with thee, and
through the R^vers, they shall not overflow thee, when thou passest through the
fire thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee: the
fire, that is in the greatest straits: in thy greatest affliction, when the
waters are ready to overwhelm thee, I will be with thee, and lift up thy head;
I will be with thee in fiery trials, when flames are ready to consume thee, I
will be with thee: I say, you may be confident of it, because the Lord Christ
has given it under his hand and seal, that he will give your souls a meeting
in such a condition; is there any thing that can hinder Christ from performing
this his promise; he cannot forget his word, he cannot mistake the time and
place, he cannot be hindered by any outward impediment: I say,

1. First of all, He cannot forget his Promise, though he has spoken many
years ago, yet the Lord he cannot forget his promise; he is always mindful of
his promise: See in the first of Chron. and the 16. Chapter, and the 15. verse,
He is mindful always of his Covenant, the word which he commanded to a thousand
generations: though the promise* be given out never so long ago, suppose it be
a thousand generations, yet the Lord he is always mindful of his promise,
always mindful of his Covenant, to a thousand generations; a man may promise
his friend to meet with him, but it is possible a man may forget his promise,
but so cannot God, he is ever mindful of his promise.

Again, He cannot mistake the time, happily a man though he has promised, yet
he may mistake the time, he knows not how the time passes, and so may be
deceived; but it cannot be so with God, he knows all times, all creatures;
Foreknow^ unto God are all his works, from the beginning of the world, Acts 15.
18. Nay, he cannot be hindered by any impediment; his Father will not hinder
him; he was willing to spare him out of Heaven for many years together, that so
he might be present with his people, and all creatures cannot hinder him from
performing his promise; see the 27. of Isaiah, verse 4. Fury is not in me, who
would set the Briars and Thorns against me in battle? I would go through them,
I would ^urn them together; The greatest opposition was briars and thorns to
Jesus Christ; briars and thorns before devouring fire, will soon be burnt; and
therefore upon this you may be confident, seeing the Lord Jesus has given out
his word, he will keep time and place with you.

Again Secondly, You may be confident of his presence in affliction, because
affliction is, for this end, it is the main end that Christ in affliction may
meet with his people, that he may draw them into ^igher communion with himself,
that they may see more of him, and that they may enjoy more of him, and he
enjoy more of them; that he may make use of affliction to remove that which is
in the way between him and the soul, to subdue corruption, and to strengthen
faith, and to draw forth grace, to heighten the holiness, and the grace of the
soul; and to comfort the heart, and all that the soul may enjoy more communion
with Christ; he does take his people into a by-Lane, as I may say, in every
affliction that he may speak unto them; he took the Spouse into the wilderness
that he might speak to her; and so does Jesus Christ when he takes his people
into a by-way, it is, that he may speak something more to them, that he may
speak freely, and speak something that may be for their good; he does not speak
in affliction, because he delights in affliction, he does not delight in their
afflictions; he does not afflict that he may be satisfied: no, afflictions they
are not their punishments, for God has satisfaction at the hand of Jesus
Christ, and therefore it relates to something to come, that he may with this
Chastisement draw the soul more nigh, and see more of him, and enjoy more of
him, more of his presence, of his love, more communion with him, that he may
comfort, strengthen and support, and sanctify: and therefore seeing it is the
end, the main end of affliction, that Jesus Christ and his people may meet and
converse together; certainly Gods people must not slight this his afflicting
them, must not slight this main end of God.

Object. But if Christ do meet with his people in affliction, the presence of
Christ cannot countervail the bitterness of the affliction.

Answ. But it will to the full, for there is that in the presence of Christ,
which may supply the wants of all creatures: I say, there is all goodness, all
sweetness gathered together in the Son of God, which is scattered up and down
in Creatures, and therefore in Heaven the Saints need no creature comforts,
they need not the light of the Sun, nor the light of the Moon; and there all
recomfortable relations are broken a pieces, there is no husband, nor wife, nor
child, Master, nor servant; why? because the good of ^ll these lations do meet
in Christ, and the good of all these relations shall be supplied by the
presence of Christ, and therefore Christ tells his Disciples in Mat 22. 30. In
the Resurrection, (says he) they neither marry nor are given in Marriage, but
are as the Angels of God in Heaven: they neither marry nor are given in
Marriage; that which is the most comfortable relation in earth there is no need
of in Heaven, it is too poor, too needy for Heaven, there shall be no marrying
nor giving in Marriage; and ^o the comfort of all other relations shall be
found in Christ. In him there is a perfection of all goodness, of all
sweetness; now you cannot meet with the fullness of these in any condition;
there is a fullness of joy in Christ, a fullness of good in Christ; what says
the Psalmist in Psalm 16. v. last. In thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. there is a fullness of joy in the
presence of Christ, there is not a fullness of sorrow in any condition, no,
there is a mixture of Mercy in every condition; the evil that a Soul meets with
is not infinite, there is not a fullness of sorrow, but in the presence of
Christ there is a fullness of joy, there is that which can abundantly
countervail the evil that is met with in any condition; if all the evil under
the Sun were met together in one condition, and a Soul brought into it, yet it
might find in the presence of Christ that which may answer that condition, the
presence of Christ will comfort, and support, and raise up a Soul in that evil
condition; and therefore you shall find that the presence of Christ has made
the Saints to rejoice in Tribulations, to joy abundantly. The Apostles rejoiced
that they were counted worthy to suffer for the Name of the Lord Christ: it
does fill the Soul with holy joy, heavenly Raptures, yea the presence of Christ
has been astonishment to the Soul many times when it has been in a sad
condition: see what Paul says of himself in 2 Cor. 12. 2. I knew a man in
Christ about 14 years ago, whether in the Bo^y I cannon t^ll, or whether out of
the Body I cannot tell, (God knows) such a man whether in the Body, or out of
the Body was caught up into the third Heaven: some think this vision of Paul*
was when he was in a sad condition, it was immediately after his conversion,
when the light of his Body was taken away by blindness: Now it is supposed
when Paul was blind in hi^ Body he had this Vision of Christ; you may see what
abundance of sweetness he found in Christ, it carried him beyond himself, he
was carr^ed out with holy Raptures; I knew not where I was, (says he) whether
I was in the body, or was taken out of the body, I cannot test, the Lord he
knows! and therefore still I say there is no cause why any of Gods people
should inordinately fear affliction seeing you may meet with the presence of
Christ in that condition, and the presence of Jesus Christ, will countervail
the loss of all Creature comforts, and the sweetness of it will be equivalent
to the bitterness of it, let thy condition be never so low: That Is the third
Use.

Fourthly, Let the people of God expect the presence of Christ in their
affliction, in their low condition; seeing Christ has promised his presence,
do you expect his presence, look for his presence: Oh that we might labor to
improve our affliction for this end, that we may meet with more of Christ, that
we may enjoy more of the presence of Christ in our affliction; truly there is a
great deal lost, Gods people loose abundance of sweetness which they might
enjoy both in Ordinances and in affl^ction, if their hearts were raised up to
look for the performance of that which Christ has promised; if we would
believe that Jesus Christ will be as good as his word: did our souls expect the
fu^lfilling of this word, that ^e shall see the presence of Christ in
affliction; why then should we be so loath to suffer for Christ, and be
unwilling to submit to low condit^ons, seeing it is the will of God that we
should suffer? Therefore I beseech you, you that are the people of God, get
your hearts enlarged in affliction, that so you may get above your ^ffliction,
if that you shall certainly meet with the presence of Jesus Christ in your
afflicted conditions; he has spoken it, he has given out the word, and
therefore he will fulfill it; what confidence had the people of God in their
affliction, when they remembered this? I will fear* none ill; though I walk in
the valley of the shadow of death; And see what David says, in the 27. Psalm,
the beginning of it, The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom should I fear,
the Lord is the strength of my li^e, of whom should I be afraid? I cannot tell
who the enemy is, who is it? he looks and he fi^des none in all the world, whom
should I fear* and be afraid of? so long as the Lord is with me, I see no such
enemy; and therefore I beseech you that you would look after the presence of
Christ expect the presence of Christ in all your afflictions that you meet with.

Object. But you will say, I have no such word as David had, David might well
bel^eve that the Lord would uphold him; for David had a particular word God
spoke to David, he ^ware to David, He swore by his Holiness that he would not
fail David; and so others of the Sain^s, they had a particular word* the Lord
spoke to Joshua, Fear not, I will not leave thee, be courageous, but we have no
such word, and therefore how should we expect to meet with Christ in afflicted
conditions.

Answ. I Answer first of all, Though God does not speak now from Heaven by
Visions, he does not reveal himself by Vrim and Thu^mim. as unto David* yet we
have a larger word then David had, and Joshuah had; the Scripture is larger
now, we have abundance of the word; there was but little of the Scripture writ
in Da^ids time, and less in Joshuahs time, there was none of the written word,
but only the Book of Moses; but now we have the word of God complete, we have a
sure word, a large word, and it is full of gracious invitations and
encouragements; and therefore the Saints now may be encouraged as well as they
to whom God spoke.

Secondly, Yea Secondly I say, God has sent forth more of his spirit now in a
Gospel way, in a way of Gospel dispensation, there is a great deal more of the
Spirit of Christ poured out. Now it is the work of the Spirit, the Office of the
Spirit, to particularize those promises to the soul, to take the promises and
bring them home to this and that particular soul: Now where the Spirit of God
comes, ^^ comes with evidence, and he brings home the word of grace to the
soul, that the soul cannot gainsay it, nor resist it.

Object. But you will say, How shall I know it is the Spirit of God that does
speak to me?

Answ. I Answer, The Spirit of God always speaks according to the word of God;
I say, it speaks according to the written word that is given to us, it speaks
according to the word of grace, for the spirit and the word do bear mutual
testimony one of another.

But I Answer, It Is in the power of the Spirit to resolve the soul; the Lord
Jesus sends forth the Spirit with so much evidence, ^s to convince the heart
that it is the spirit that speaks; the Lord Jesus he is able to persuade the
soul that it is not a delusion; but speaking according to the word of grace, it
is indeed the voice of the Father, the voice of the Spirit that speaks.

Objct. But you will object further; If the Lord Jesus be present with m^
according to his promise; if the Lord were present with me in affliction; why
how is it possible that it should be thus with me as it is? How is it possible
that there should be so much deadness, and so much of the world, and unbelief?
Surely the presence of Christ is not with me in my affliction.

Answ. I Answer to such a poor soul, that looks after the presence of Christ,
and fain would enjoy the presence of Christ, but cannot see him in affliction;

I say first of all, Undoubtedly there is the presence of Christ with thee, and
thou can not but thou may see something, if unthankfulness does not lie
before thine eyes; he is there, the Lord Jesus is there, and he will make good
his word; certainly if he has promised to be with his people in afflicted
conditions, he will make good his word; an^ he is with thee at the door, though
he may be behind the Curtain, and undoubtedly he is not far; as I said before,
Joseph was with his Brethren when they did not know him; and so the Lord Jesus
is present with his people, and they do not see him, he does feed them, support
them, and maintain their lives, and they not know it.

Secondly, Yea I say secondly, That if thou do not see more of the presence
of Christ, the fault is in thee, it is not in the Lord, not in the word of the
Lord, he is present according to the word that he has spoke; and therefore
Christ may be present and thou see him not because through negligence thou
do not stir up thy self to take hold of him, thou give way to a slothful
spirit, and so thou do not stir up thy self to take hold of him, or else thou
do not exercise faith in thy afflicted condition, and then no wonder though
Christ be with thee, and thou see him not: Faith is the eye of the soul, and
if that be shut Christ may stand at the right hand and the soul not discern
him: and therefore I say, stir up thy faith, go to the Lord to strengthen thy
faith, and stir up thy faith, Faith shows Christ, represents Christ to the
soul; Faith takes hold of Christ, and brings the sweetness and the comfort of
his presence to your souls.

Or it may may be it is through unthankfulness, that thou do not see the
presence of Christ, thank thine unthankful heart; I tell thee, thou have a
great deal of thanks to give, and thou say Christ i^ not with thee: who is it
that supported thee? who is it that put under his hand? was there more str^ngth
in thee then in others? Surely there was an everlasting Arm put under to
support thee in thine affliction; and is not here matter of thankfulness? And
this you may be sure, all ye people of God, the heart of God is always toward
you; though his face is not toward you, his hand may seem to be against you,
yet his heart is always toward you; and therefore still, I say, the people of
God ought to expect that they shall see and enjoy the presence of Christ* and
shall meet with him in every affliction.

Fifthly and Lastly, What cause of thankfulnes^ is here? What cause has the
people of God to be thankful to Christ that has made this comfortable
provision for them (as this?) that he is pleased to walk in such a gracious
way, and to afford them most of his presence at that time that they stand most
in need of it? Here is matter of thankfuln^^^ that the Lord should not leave
you alone, but a^^ord you his presence; Here is matter of double thankfulness
that the Lord Jesus should not leave you alone in your afflicted condition^: Oh
it is ^n uncomfortable condition to be left alone; Woe to him that is alone;
says the wise man, if a man fall and be alone who shall help him up? and how
miserable had it been if we had been left alone in such conditions, in
afflicted conditions, when we were fallen low? but the Lord has not left his
people alone.

Nay, here is further matter of Thankfulness, that he should afford his own
presence to his people; If the Lord had sent a Messenger to comfort a poor
afflicted Creature, we should have thought it a great mercy; but that he should
afford his own presence in affliction, that he should come himself to support
and strengthen, what a double mercy is this? This is more then if he had sent
twelve Legions of Angels to comfort in afflicted conditions: Oh what is the
presence of Christ? it is the greatest good in the world, it is life eternal,
it is the beginning of Heaven, and shall be the fullness of Heaven hereafter; the
fullness of joy, is the presence of Christ, it shall be the greatest misery to
loose the presence of Christ; and therefore that is a most dreadful threatening,
when God does threaten to depart from a people; see how God does threaten
Jerusalem, in Jeremiah 6. 8. Be thou instructed Oh Jerusalem, least my soul
depart from thee, least I make thee a desolate land, not inh^bited, Least my
soul depart from thee: Now when God departs, what follows? nothing but
desolation; So in the Prophet Hosea, see there what a dreadful threatening it is
for God to depart, in Hosea 9. 12. Though they bring up their children yet well
I bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; yea w^ also to them when I
depart from them: There is all threatenings summ^d up in this, and more cannot
be said (w^ unto them when I depart from them.) You see it will be the greatest
evil in the world to be shut out from the presence of God it shall be the
Torment in Hell so depart from Christ: Why then it is the greatest mercy to
enjoy the presence of Christ; if God go away, all blessings go away with him;
Woe to them if I depart, now on the contrary, when the Lord Jesus comes unto a
soul, all blessings come along with him; when Christ comes to a poor afflicted
creature, Oh what sweetness comes along with Christ? there is comfort, and
there is refreshment, there is grace, and there is holiness, and there is
support, there is life and light, all come along with the presence of Christ.

Object. Ay but if I could find the effects of these, may some soul say, I
shall labor to thirst after Christ, if I could find these effects of Christ's
presence, why then I may be comforted, but alas I find not the effect of his
presence, and how then should I think it to be his presence that is with me?

Answ. I say Believe; Believe that Christ is present with thee; I speak to
every soul that has made a close with Jesus Christ in the tenders of grace; I
say, it is thy duty to believe that he is with thee in thy afflicted condition:
Believe it, though thou see not the effects of his presence, and that is the
way to see; believe that he is present according to his word, and through the
grace of God, thou shall see the effect of his presence; only Christ would have
us to believe his word, Christ would have thee believe that he keeps time and
place with them, and that he is with them in afflicted conditions; yea he deals
with his people as Jobs friends dealt with him, they came to visit Job in his
affliction, but sat them down seven days, and spoke not a word unto Job, and
at last they found an opportunity to speak; even so does Jesus Christ, it may be
he may sit seven days and not speak a word to his people, he may come to the
soul, and not speak a word to the foul in an afflicted condition; all the time
he sits by them, and looks on them, and his heart is toward them, and his
bowels relent, and he will break out at last, and he will speak unto them; it
was long ere Joseph did reveal himself to his brethren, when they were in
straits, but at last he breaks out, and says he, I am your brother; and so the
Lord Jesus he may sit long before he speaks a word; O^ but at last he will
break out, and then shall thou see that Christ was present with thee; and
therefore it is thy duty to believe that the Lord Christ is with thee in thy
affliction, though thou see him not, though he be behind the Curtain; and
believe that thou shall see the effect of his presence, he will not go away and
leave no blessing behind him; surely where he comes he brings a gift with him,
he does not come empty; and therefore believe that thou shall see a blessing
left behind; it may be thou may not see ^^e gracious effects of the presence
of Christ in thee, but believe the time is coming when thou shall see; a friend
may come with a Present to a friend, but no^ presently give it him, it may be
he will sit with him a long time, and when he is ready to go away he will give
the gift to him; and so the Lord Jesus Christ, he never comes empty, and he
comes and sits long before he gives out that grace, that strength, that
comfort, that is in his hand ready to give, but undoubtedly Christ will give it
before he goes away; and therefore it is the duty of all his people to wait upon
him for the giving of that grace that he has promised to their ^ouls; and
therefore when Christ comes to a soul, manifesting of himself is expressed to
the soul by his supping with the soul, see Revel. 20. Behold I stand at the
door and knock, if any man hear my voice and open the door, I will com^ in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me: If any man open the door, I will
come in and sup with him; he does not say, I will come in and breakfast with
him, or Dine with him, no, he shall have my comforts before I go away, though I
be at the last Meal, I will be sure to sup with him, though he break his fast
with sour herbs and dine with sour herbs, yet I will be sure to sup with him,
and he with me; before I go away I will open my Bottels, and pour out my
Flagons of Wine, and he shall taste of my D^^ties before I go; and therefore
the Martyrs cried out, He is come, he is come, meaning the gracio^^ presence of
Christ to their souls; the Lord Jesus will at last manifest himself to his
people, and will be present with them in their afflicted conditions, according
to his word: and it is the Lord Jesus his will, that his people should expect
his presence, though he do not give it out to them presently, yet wait for it,
and he will abundantly satisfy your souls before he go^^ away.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached in Norwich, upon the day of the Mayors entering into his
Office.
ECCLES. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither
thou go.
WE shall not seek far for the sense of the words, we shall find the sense in
themselves: Some conceive that Solomon spoke in the person of the natural man,
or the Atheist, who keep this Counsel; Follow after the world, enjoy thy
pleasure and thy profit, and do it with all thy might, for thou have no long
time to enjoy them in; there is nothing in the grave, and therefore now take
thy fill. But I rather conceive that Solomon spoke here as a Prophet, in the
person of a Prophet, and spiritual man, and gives better Counsel then this,
from the seventh verse, unto the end of the Chapter. He gives advice in the
seventh verse, to take the comforts of those things that God has given: And
upon this Account, Because the Lord accepts thy works: Go thy way, eat thy
Bread with joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry heart, for God now accepts thy
works: And so in the ninth verse: Live joyfully with thy Wife whom thou love,
all the days of the life of thy vanity; not with the Harlot, as the Atheist
would have spoken; but with the wife whom thou love: And so also this Counsel
in the Text, seems to be given by Solomon, in the person of a spiritual man:
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no
working in the Grave, etc.

The wise man here gives counsel unto all men to improve the time of life, he
calls all men to activity in the time of life: And first he declares wherein
men ought to be active, Whatsoever thy hand finds to do: Whatsoever is in
thine hand to do (as some read it) Whatsoever God puts into thy hand to do, in
thy general or particular Calling, more especially in the great Affairs that do
concern the world to come, whatsoever thy hand find to do in relation unto the
state of Eternity, whatsoever thy hand find to do; a man finds that sometime
which he seeks, and sometimes that which he seeks not: After thou have
sought out the mind of God, and do know what is his will concerning thee;
when thy hand has found out what to do, then do it with thy might; or if the
Lord shall prevent thee with his goodness, and shall discover his will to
thee, when thou soughtest not after it; Oh then give up thy self to work the
work of God, and do it with all thy might: And then he shows in the second
place, how men must work these works of God; do it with all thy might, with all
diligence, with all faithfulness; lay forth thy self to the very utmost for
God; do it with thy might: This he presses with two Arguments.

First, There is no work in the grave, there is no work to be done there, that
is the place of rest, t^ere is no possibility of working; if thou would work
afterward, thou can not, thou shall not be able to work, there is no
possibility of working for God, and for thy soul, when once in the grave; there
is no believing, there is no repenting, there is no turning to God, when once
in the grave; if it be not done before thou come there, it is like to be
undone for ever; There is no work in the Grave.

And secondly, as there is no work in the grave, so there is no device, nor
knowledge, nor wisdom, there is no means to accomplish work; if there were any
work to be done in the grave; there is no means to accomplish this work, there
is no knowledge in the grave. This Argument is further backed by the
consideration of the hastening of that estate of death, where there shall be no
possibility of working; there is no work in the grave whither thou go: He
does not say there is no work in the in the grave whither thou shall go; but
whither thou go, thou had need make have; for thou art going Thou, and
Thou, and every one, thou go to the grave, thou art making post have
thither, thou art going every moment, thou art every moment stepping over the
Threshold of Eternity: And therefore the Result of all is this.

Whatsoever God shall lay before thee to be thy work, whatsoever thou have to
do for God, or for thy soul, in the great business of Eternity, do not dally
with it, do not defer it, do not put it off, there is no work in the grave,
there is no possibility of working there: If thou would, there is no means to
accomplish work there: And this condition is hastening upon thee, thou art
stepping into the grave every moment, thither thou go; therefore he says,
what thou do, do it with thy might.

I shall fasten upon this one consideration to prosecute at this time.

Observat. That it concerns every living man to do with his might, whatsoever
he has to do for God, or for his own soul, in that great business that does
concern Eternity.

It concerns every living man and woman, to do with all their might, what ever
they have to do with all their might, whatever they have to do for God, or for
their own souls in the great business that does concern Eternity.

I shall here show you, First, what it is for a man to do with his might.

Secondly what are those things that God requires of every one of you to be
done with your might; And that will make way for the Application.

First of all, What is to do with thy might?

To do with thy might; First, is to do with diligence, to do diligently, to
take all opportunities of doing for God; yea seek opportunities, not only
embrace opportunities, but seek opportunities of doing for God: Our Lord Jesus
Christ went up and down doing good, in the days of his flesh; he sought
opportunities to serve his Father, and to serve the sons of men.

The Sun carries his light up and down the world, and visits poor Creatures
that are in darkness; when a man is faithful in taking opportunities to do for
God, in seeking opportunities, when a man works with diligence, then he works
with his might.

Again secondly, To do with thy might; to do with a man's might, is to do or
work resolutely; to do with resolution, not to be beaten back by
discouragements, and by opposition, that does lie in the way; never did any
work meet with so much opposition, as the great work of our Redemption by
Christ; But he brake through Devils and all the powers of darkness that were in
his way, he did with his might the work of his Father, for he did it with
resolution: To go on notwithstanding all storms, all winds that blow, though
never so many dangers lay in a man's way, though there seem to be Lions in the
way, great enemies, great persecutions, loss of name, loss of estate, loss
of friends, to go through evil report, as well as good, to break through the
strife of Tongues, and the strife of hands: This is to work Resolutely, this is
to do with a man's might.

Again thirdly, to do with a man's might, is to do faithfully; when a man works
faithfully, and sincerely, when he does not warp nor turn aside; when he is not
biased nor drawn by the allurements of the world: In the 33. of Deuteronomy. it is
said that Levi did not know his own Father, nor his own Mother, nor his
children: he did the work of God with all his might, for he did it faithfully:
And when the cause of God was in hand, he knew no friend, he knew not his
Father, he knew not his children; Get thee behind me Satan, says Christ to
Peter, a dear friend, a chosen Disciple; yet when Peter will dissuade Christ
from doing the work of his Father, Peter is a Satan, he is an adversary; get
th^e behind me Satan* And so, what do you mean to vex my heart? says Paul,
when his friends dissuaded him, I am ready not only to be bound, but to dye at
Jerusalem for the name of Christ. When a man works faithfully, then he works
with his might.

Fourthly, when a man works spiritually, then he works with his might: When his
heart goes into the work, when the spirit goes into the work, when a man is
content not only to give God the outside, but his heart shall be engaged, and
that shall bow to God, and submit to Christ: If he do not find that his heart
and spirit is engaged in the work; he cannot be satisfied: It is said of good
Josiah, in the 2 of Kings, 23. verse. 25. there was none like to him, there was
none like before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, with all his
soul, and with all his might: He turned with his heart and soul, his heart and
Spirit was engaged in it; and therefore now he did it with his might.

Fifthly, when a man works with his might he works speedily; I say speedily: Our
Lord Jesus did the work of his Father with his might, and he began betimes, in
the morning; he was called the Hind in the morning; he was hunted betimes in
the morning; He began betimes to work the works of his Father: when he was
thirteen years of age, he was found disputing among the Doctors, and says he,
Wist you not that I must do the work of my Father? To begin betimes in the day
of youth, to take the best season, the fittest opportunity to do for God; when
a man does speedily, then he does with his might.

Sixthly, When a man does strenuously, when he does with all his strength, with
all those abilities God has given him; when he is content that God should have
all that he has; that God should serve himself of the best he has, and
rejoice that he has any thing for God; when a man lays down himself, and lays
down all at the footstool of God, and says, Lord take me, and take mine, and
improve me to the utmost of thy self; it matters not what become of the
Creature, so God may be glorified; when a man works thus, he works strenuously
and with all his might.

Seventhly and lastly, when a man works constantly: When a man holds out unto
the end, when he is willing to abide with Jesus Christ, yea to abide with
Christ in his tribulation; when he is willing to serve the Lord all the six
days of his life; when he is content that his works and his life should be
finished together, and not one before the other: Thus it was with our Lord
Jesus Christ when he was upon the Cross, his work and his life were finished
together* when a man works thus to the end, this man works with his might. That
is the first Particular, we hasten to the second: You have heard what it is for
a man to work with his might.

The second follows: What those things are that every man ought to do with his
might.

I shall speak first to Sinners, and then to Believers, and show both their
works: Something the Lord requires of both to be done thus, with all their
might.

If Sinners ask what is their work? I answer; What the work of sinners is to be
done with their might.
First, their work is to know themselves: To know that they are poor and
miserable, blind and naked, that they are lost and undone; that they are
without light, and without life, and without strength, and without hope for
eternity; that they have sinned, and cannot satisfy; that they have lost
themselves, and cannot return of themselves; that they have done evil, and
cannot do better of themselves: If free grace do not prevent them, they are as
poor wandering sheep upon the Mountains; they are like to wander, and wander,
and wander for ever, till they be separated everlastingly from the Lord, if the
good Shepherd of souls do not go forth to seek and save them: That is the first
thing that does concern them to know, seek after this knowledge, and that
speedily, with all your might.

Secondly to know the Lord Jesus; it concerns the sinner to search after the
knowledge of Christ, to know that he is the only Mediator between God and man;
to know that all pardon, all peace, and all grace, and all strength, and all
holiness, it must come in through the blood of Jesus Christ; that this Lord
Jesus is freely held forth to lost sinners; he is tendered by free promise, or
Covenant of grace: and that men are invited every where to return to the Lord,
to deny themselves, their own works, their own righteousness, their own
worthiness, and to submit to the righteousness of the Son of God, that
everlasting righteousness that Jesus Christ has brought in by his blood. To
seek after this knowledge of Jesus Christ, is the second great work that sinners
have to do.

Thirdly, To believe in Jesus Christ; this is an other work: To believe in the
name of Jesus Christ, Oh this is the great work! when poor sinners came to
Christ, and asked him what work they should do: How they should work the works
of God? he tells them, that this is the work of God, To believe in the Name of
Jesus Christ, Joh. 6. 29. this is the work of God, this is the great work, the
first work, all other works are not accepted, till this be done: This is the
first born of graces, this is the beginning of the souls strength; and till
this be done, all other works are lost, because, without faith, it is not
possible to please God; All the time of their continuance in unbelief in the
wilderness, it was a time of temptation and provocation; this is the great
work, the work of God, which meets with most opposition; all within a man, and
all the powers of darkness do make against it; and therefore it concerns poor
sinners to seek after this great work of God, with all their might; they can
never begin too soon, never begin too speedily; it is a mighty work, if you had
hundreds of years to live, you would find time little enough to believe in, to
exercise faith in. I shall go no further with sinners, for till this work is
done, nothing is accepted. And therefore, Oh that God would persuade the hearts
of poor sinners to know that this is their work, To know themselves, and to
know Christ, and to believe in his Name! Oh that the Lord would stir them up to
seek after it with their might!

But what is the work of Believers? What must What Believers must do with their
might.
they do with their might?

First of all, To seek after further knowledge of their God, and Communion with
him, acquaintance with him, fellowship with him; to know more of him in his
Attributes, in his Son, in his Word, the mysteries of his Kingdom; to know the
truth of the Times, the will of God concerning you. Oh, this is a great work,
it concerns you to seek after this with all your might: to wait upon God in all
means for it.

To wait at wisdoms Posts, to climb upon every Sycamore Tree, where Jesus
Christ is wont to pass by; to set your souls under every Golden-Pipe, where
there is saving knowledge of Christ to be Communicated to you, or further
acquaintance with God; Breath more after him, thus did David, in Psalm. 63. O
God thou art my God, early will I seek thee, my soul thirsts for thee, my
flesh longs for thee in a dry and thirsty Land, where no water is; He does
not only thirst; but he longs: Now longing is a mighty strong desire; How
dangerous is it to the Creature, if longing be not satisfied? With this desire
of longing was David's soul carried after further acquaintance with God, further
enjoyment of him; That Is the first.

Secondly, The second work that you have to do with your might, you that have
interest in Christ, is to get your hearts fully rooted, and fully established
upon the promises, that you may not be left at uncertainties in the great
matters of your everlasting welfares; to get your hearts built, I say,
establi^hed upon the Promises, rooted in Christ, to get your Acquittance
cleared up to you, clearly written, and wait till the Lord shall teach you to
read it; that you may be able to say as the Apostle, in Romans 8. 33. Who shall
lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies, it is
Christ that dyed, and is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, and
makes intercession for us; I say, you had need be perfect in your evidence for
Heaven; there may come a time of darkness, black clouds may come over all your
comforts, and present enjoyments: a black night of temptation may be upon you,
the Devil may cast a mist before your eyes; and therefore you had need be
perfect to read your evidence for Heaven, that you may be able to read, and to
know your interest in Christ, in such a condition as that is: Oh do this, make
have to do this, do it with your might.

Third* To serve God in your generation, is another work you have to do with
your might; to serve God in your generation is that you have to do, and Oh that
you would do it with all your might, to honor and lift up God upon earth, to
make him glorious, to lift him up by your praises, to lift him up by your
conversations, by your obedience, by your shining in the midst of a crooked and
sinful generation: The Lord he has put his Name upon you Christians for this
end; he put his Spirit into you to enable you to this: He expects more from you
then from others; the eyes of the world are upon you, and God shall either reap
honor, or dishonor by you; therefore it concerns you, I say, to do the work
of your generation with all your might, to seek wherein you may be serviceable
to the Lord how you may advance his Name: That is the third work, to lift up
God by the service of your Generation.

Fourthly, It concerns you to get your hearts made sensible of the perishing
condition of the Creature, of the fading condition of all things under the Sun,
that you are fading Creatures, your life fades, and comforts fade: The Lord
would have you seek with all your might, to have such impressions as these made
upon your spirits: it is a hard matter to receive them; and therefore God bids
the Prophet cry, in Isa. 40. The voice says cry, What shall I cry? all flesh is
grass, and the glory of it as the flower in the field, the grass withers, and
the flower fades. The Prophet must cry, and cry again, before men will hear
this, before this impression will be made upon the spirits of men, That they
are fading men, and their comforts are fading; That they are as grass, and
their comforts as the grass: You had need live in a continual converse with
your fading condition, dye daily, see death at a distance, and grapple with
death at a distance: Put your selves into a dying condition, and say often, Oh!
what if this were my last? What if I were now to breath forth my soul? What if
now to shoot the Gulf of Eternity? What have I now to rely upon? What have I to
carry me through? How shall death be conquered? How shall the sting be taken
out for me? You had need I say, converse with death at a distance, and live
continually in the sense of your dying condition; that so death may not be
terrible when it comes, that you may know before hand how to conquer it, and
that it is conquered by the blood of the Lamb.

Fifthly, Another work that you have to do with your might, is to do good to
your friends, and to your Relations. Christians, give out the good things to
your Relations, and do it speedily, do it with all your might: Impart the
knowledge of God to your Relations, Christ finds Andrew, and Andrew finds Simon
Peter; Christ finds Philip, and Philip finds Nathaniel; Oh come, says he, we
have found the Savior, the Messiah, 1 John 41. 45. You have but a little while
to be with your Relations, and they are gone, they are taken from you, and you
from them; and therefore with all your might work this work, and do them good,
and give out good to your Relations. That is the fifth work that you have to do
with all your might.

Sixthly, In all your waitings upon God, see that you do there with your might;
I say, when ever you wait upon God in every Duty, in every Ordinance,
whenever you draw nigh to God, the Lord requires you should do it with your
might. In the second of Samuel, the 13. it is said there, that David when he
danced before the Ark, he did it with all his might: And so in the second of
Chron. 28. It is said there, that David when he offered unto the Lord, he
offered with all his might. And so that place, in 2 King. 23. and 25. It is
said that King Josiah turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
might; what ever you do in the matters of God, do it not lazily: If you pray,
do it with your might, and if you hear, let it not be done, but with all your
might; and if you speak, do with your might; because these are mighty things,
and they have relation to the business of Eternity.

Seventhly and Lastly; To mortify your corruptions, to get your lusts
mortified, subdued, cast out, your souls more conformable to Christ; this is an
other work, and the last work that I shall name, that you Christians and
Believers have to do, and that with your might: To get your lusts mortified and
subdued; Do it with your might, do not look upon it as an easy matter, as a
frivolous business; Do not go out against such Giants with straw and Bulrush:
But Oh! get the complete Armor of God, go forth in the name of Christ, in the
strength of Christ, with the blood of Christ, with with the promises of Christ,
it is a work of great concernment; and therefore I beseech you do it in good
earnest, go out in the Name of the Lord, and do this great work in good
earnest, that your corruptions may be mortified, and more of the Image and
likeness of Christ may be imprinted upon your Spirits. And thus have I showed
you (my Brethren) what it is for a man to do with his might, and what are those
works the Lord puts into your hands to do with all your might: You have heard
what works are put into the hands of sinners, and what works are put into the
hands of Believers: And now I shall make some short Application, and I have two
words to speak.

First, The one a word of Caution and Direction. The other a word of
Exhortation.

First in the first place, a word of Caution and Direction is needful; and let
this be the first Caution.

That though God call upon you to work with your might, yet he does not put you
upon it, to work to pay your debt, To discharge that great debt of ten thousand
Talents of transgressions: My Brethren, if you had a thousand hands to work
with, if you could work as much as the very Angels, it is not possible you
should work so much as should discharge the debt: for you could not pay the
least farthing of that which is owing to God: No, know my Brethren, the Father
of mercies has pittyed poor Creatures, he sent his Son, the Lord Jesus Christ
for this end, to marry poor Widdow-souls, that were left in an infinite debt,
and could not discharge it; he has sent his Son to to pay the debt of every
widdow-soul, that is content to be espoused to Christ; he came from Heaven for
this end, he wrought with his hands, he had no other way to pay the debt, he
left himself poor; The Lord Jesus was rich, but for your sakes he became poor;
he had no way to pay the debt, but by working with his hands; he wrought hard,
he wrought till he sweat, he wrought till he sweat drops of water and blood; he
wrought three and thirty years together, that he might pay this great debt that
was owing, that his people did owe to the Father. And therefore take heed you
do not go about, to work to discharge your own debt: do not work to pay your
debt; but work because your debt is paid and discharged by Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Take heed you do not work for your living; God calls upon you to
work with your might, but he does not put you upon it to work for your living:
Life is not from your works, neither should Christians live upon their works;
The life of your joy, and the life of your peace; the life of your comforts,
the life of your righteousness, it is not from your works; the Lord never put
you upon it, to work for this end: no, Christ has wrought enough for his
people, that they might live as his people: he has provided for their
maintenance, to fill their cup; he has provided for their clothing; he put
mighty righteousness, everlasting righteousness upon you; It is not now to do,
and live, this is not the Covenant. But the Covenant of grace is, live and do:
fetch life from Christ, and then do, and do with all your might, because life
is given freely by Christ.

Thirdly, God does not put you upon it to work to purchase love, to purchase
favor, or to purchase Heaven: I say, you are not to work to purchase the
favor of God by your works, to purchase Heaven by the works of your hands;
Alas Adam in innocence could not do it: he could not yearn life by working: And
how shall poor Creatures in a fallen estate be able to purchase, and yearn life
by their own works? No* if you will seek salvation by works, you rest upon your
works; and if you rest upon your works, you break your works, and both you and
your works are like to be lost for ever: and therefore know my Brethren, you
are to do your utmost for God; if you could do ten thousand times more, all is
too little for God: But know, that life and salvation is not purchased by your
doing; work as much, and do as much for God, be as diligent in doing the work
of God as if life were to be purchased by works; but when you have done your
utmost, renounce all, and know, that by your own works you are no more nigh to
Heaven then the very Publicans and Harlots; It is by the door of grace only,
that you must enter into life: That is the third.

Fourthly, When God calls you to work with your might, he does not call you to
work with your own strength: I beseech you take this Caution along with you,
that poor Creatures may not think that they are able to do that which they are
called upon to do: I say, the Lord does not call you to work in your own
strength; And therefore know, that without Christ you can do nothing; you are
not fit for the least work, for the least duty: All your sufficiency must come
down from Heaven: you cannot believe, you cannot repent, you cannot obey, you
cannot give glory to God, unless this power be given you from on high, you
cannot move toward God in any gracious action, unless the Lord comes in with
strength: O therefore, when ever you are to work for God, go and set your
selves under the promise; the promise of strength and assistance, Go and look
for strength to Christ; do not act in your own strength: Oh let your souls open
to the breathings of the Spirit of Jesus Christ: The soul never acts
graciously, but when it is acted by the Spirit of Christ: Oh know that you are
as a Ship becalmed upon the Sea, and you cannot sail, till the spirit breath
upon you, and fill the sail of your affections, and carry you Godward, and
Heavenward; and therefore let Christ be your strength, wait for his strength,
that you may say, Now I live, and yet not I, but it is Christ that lives in
me: I act, and yet not I, it is the Spirit of Christ that acts in me: I pray,
and yet not I: I believe, and yet not I: I obey, and yet not I, it is the
Spirit of Christ that acts in me, it is his strength that helps me. This is the
fourth Caution: I beseech you take heed you do not work in your own strength;
you will spoil your works.

Fifthly, Take this Caution, do not present your works your selves to God: When
you have done your work, go to Jesus Christ, and desire him to carry your works
home: Christians know, it is not for you to carry your work home, it is the
Office of Christ; and therefore make use of Christ, and say, Lord present this
Sacrifice, this Duty; do thou wash it with thine own blood, and cover it with
thine own righteousness: I tell you, your works are not pleasing, unless they
come out of the hands of Jesus Christ; Christ must wash your works, and perfume
your works, and sweeten your works, and present your works with acceptance to
the Father; and therefore when you have wrought with all your might, let Jesus
Christ present it to God your Father, and his Father.

Sixthly, Take heed that when you work with all your might, you work not for
your own end: I tell you, good works may be spoiled if you work for your own
end, if self come in: a man may work the work of a Magistrate, or the work of a
Minister, but if self come in, if vain glory be his end, if the praise of men,
if his own profit: If the glory of God be not the end he propounds to himself,
that man will be called by Christ another day, a worker of iniquity: We have
cast out Devils in thy name, and yet says Christ to them, I know you not,
depart from me, ye workers of iniquity Oh this is the dead fly that spoils the
Box of Ointment, when a man does it for vain glory, to be seen of men, to get a
name in the world, and to raise their estates in the world, when they do
public works for private ends; how ever it seems to be glorious, it is
abominable; and therefore when ever you work for God, make God your principal:
Begin in his strength, and end for his glory.

The second word, is a word of Exhortation, and I will conclude with that; let
me speak in my former order, first to Sinners, and then to Believers, and I
will be but short.

First to Sinners, You that have not yet wrought the work of God; you that have
not given up your names to Christ, in whose heart the great work of faith is
not yet wrought, You that are found this day working the works of darkness, the
works of iniquity; Let me speak a word to you, let me reason with you thus, in
the name of the Lord Jesus, my Master, and yours: What do you think of it my
dear friends? does it not concern you? Is not this a work put into your hands,
to seek after an interest in Jesus Christ? to believe in his name, to give up
your selves unto him? is not this work that is put into your hands, that God
has given you to do in this moment of your life? Does it not concern you to
believe in the name of Christ, think you? Without faith it is not possible to
please God: If you be found in a way of unbelief, you are found in the way of
wrath: It is said the wrath of the Lord does hang over the heads of
unbeleevers: If in a state of unbelief, you are in an estate of wrath; if in an
estate of unbelief, you are lost, and your works are lost; whatsoever you do
without faith, your works cannot be accepted; without faith you cannot please
God, without faith you cannot enter into life: And now what think you my dear
friends, is it not a work that concerns you, to seek after faith in Jesus
Christ? If you grant it, let me further urge it upon you; Oh if this be your
work, then do it with your might: Oh that the Lord would stir up your hearts to
do it with your might; There is but a moment to seek faith in, there is but a
moment to seek after an interest in Christ; and if this be not done now, O when
shall it be done? If it be not done now, it is like to be undone for ever: there
is no work in this kind in the grave; there is no repenting in the grave, no
believing in the grave; there is no turning to God in the grave: Oh that the
Lord would persuade your hearts of a necessity of seeking after Christ, and
getting an interest in him; and do it I beseech you speedily, and diligently;
the Lord has put it into your hand, and therefore now seek after an interest
in Christ with all your might.

To you that have an interest in Christ, I shall say no more, but what I said
before: I laid you your work before you, get more acquaintance with God; get
your hearts established upon the truth of the promises, that you may not be
left at uncertainties; and lift up God in your generations; and get your hearts
made sensible of your frailty, to dye daily, to wait upon God with all your
might in Ordinances; to get your hearts subdued, and your corruptions
mortified: This is your work; and Oh that the Lord would help you to do it with
all your might.

To you that are the Fathers of the City:

I have one word to you from the Father of Heaven: Oh that the Lord would make
you willing to receive it, and to do it with all your might: There is something
that is your work, that the Lord requires you should do with all your might: I
shall but briefly give you a few hints, and shall leave it to the blessing of
the Lord.

First of all, There is a work of Judgment and Justice that the Lord has put
into your hands: I say, the first work that God has put into your hands, it is
a work of Justice, to punish sin; to punish sin is the work that is in your
hand to do, to pu^ish the breaches of the moral Law, and the contempts thereof:
that Law of nature which is written in the heart of all men, the Lord has put
it into your hand to punish the breach of this Law: What ever your hand finds
to do in this case, I beseech you do it faithfully, do it with your might: God
requires it of you, that you should do it with your might; yea let your hand
find out sinners, let your hand do this work of the Lord, to punish the
drunkards, and the swearers, and the profane persons, the deceiver, the liar,
and the stealer, and all other workers of iniquity: here is no fear of smiting
Christ; smite here and spare not; where there is no danger of smiting Christ,
smite on and spare not, do it with all your might; the Lord lays it before you
as your duty.

Secondly, There is a work of Righteousness and Equity, that the Lord puts into
your hands to do: and Oh that you would do this also with all your might: to
judge betwixt man and man; do it faithfully, to accept no man's person, to know
no friend in the matter of Justice, but to decide every man's cause with
wisdom, and with faithfulness, and with sincerity; not to know Father, nor
Brother, nor Son, nor Daughter, as Levi did not in the cause of God: That so
Justice and Righteousness may run down as a mighty stream: That there may be no
oppression, that there may be no complaining in our streets; This is the second
work that the Lord puts into your hand: And Oh that you would do it with your
might.

The third work is a work of Mercy; There is a work of mercy; the Lord puts
into your hands to relieve the poor, and the needy, and the fatherless, to take
care that the poor be provided for, that they may have work, that they may have
employment, and that they may have maintenance; this is a work of mercy, that
the Lord puts into your hands to do: Oh it is one of the crying sins of
England; it is the sin of the whole Land; and Oh that it were not the sin of
this City, that the poor are not yet employed and provided for; that God would
put it into your hearts to do it: Oh that some blessed hand might find out this
way to employ the poor; this would be an acceptable work of mercy: Know that
the Lord has given you something for the poor, though I think every man has a
propriety in his estate, yet I also think that God has given every man
something for the poor: and truly before God, the poor has a right in it,
though not to take, yet it is your duty to give, and to provide for them: And I
fear if this work do not go through the whole land, that there be not some
provision made for the work of the poor, and for the relief of the poor; That
God will level this Land, and that God will bring down all the pomp and pride,
and stain the glory of all flesh in it; this is a work of mercy.

There is a fourth work; and that is a work of Piety that God puts into your
hand, to seek the good of poor souls; to provide that all that are under your
power in this City, may be instructed in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus, to
send into the dark corners, (the Suburbs of this City, and not only to confine
men to the heart of the City) but send to them that will not come out for it:
The Lord Jesus came to seek as well as to save; and therefore send forth to
seek them; they know not what they do in rejecting the means of life: But Oh
send to seek them, and instruct them in the knowledge of the Lord, that they
may not perish for want of provision: And what though (my Fathers and Brethren)
every man cannot see his way clear to take a Pastoral charge of such a people,
where he knows there is but little of Christ, yet if he do the work, what
though he do it not under that notion: If he preach Christ to them, if he bleed
for them; If his desires be to instruct them, and be willing to instruct them
in public and private, and to pray for them, that the Lord would give them
repentance, and bring them into the number of Christ's Sheepfold: I say, if
this work be done, what though it be not done under that notion? why should the
work of the Gospel be hindered? If in all other things men be conscientious, and
able, and fit to teach and instruct the people in the knowledge of Jesus Christ,
this will be a work of Piety,, to send into the dark corners of the City, that
there may be no place in which the word of the Lord shall not be heard.

There is a work of Love to Christ, and of wisdom to your selves, and I will
name no more; I commend this to you, as the last; And Oh that your hand would
find to do it, a work of love to Christ, and of wisdom to your selves; And
that is to protect the Saints, and those that have an interest in Christ, and
desire to walk unblamably before you, if they be such as walk according to the
Law of God, and not disobey the Law of Magistracy, it is the work of the
Magistrates to protect them: The Magistrate is set up to be a praise to them
that do well; What though they may differ from you in particular opinions? I am
p^rswaded it will not excuse before Christ, not to have protected them: If you
be convinced that they are such as fear the Lord, and desire to walk
conscientiously, It is your work to be a wall to them, and to protect them, so
they walk regularly, and in the fear of the Lord: The people of God, they are
the strength of the Land, who ever they be, they are the strength of the Land,
they are the strength of a City; They protect you, and therefore it is your
work to protect them. The godly in a City, they protect the City, they are the
safety of the City; God said he could not destroy Sodom, so long as Lot was
there, and could do nothing so long as righteous Lot was among them; they are
the strength of a City: I beseech you see what is said in the second of
Zechariah, verse 5. And the Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God:
Such as fear the Lord of all ranks, they are the strength of the City, and the
time is a coming, when the Governors of Judah shall say so, The inhabitants of
Jerusalem are my strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God; they have great
interest in God, and therefore they are my strength, they are the strength of
the Governors, and they are the strength of the City: And now let me say to
you as Paul said to Agrippa, Believe you this? (Oh you Fathers of the City) do
you believe this, that the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, they are your strength,
and the strength of the City in the Lord of Hosts their God? do (...) believe
this? I know you believe it, (...) the Lord will cause you all to believe (...)
people of God, what ever they be, they are (...) strength of the City: you
shall say it one day, all the Governors of Judah shall say That the Inhabitants
of Jerusalem are my strength in the Lord of Hosts their God: And now I have
humbly presented this Counsel, as from the Lord: I have laid before you what is
your work,

1. There is a Work of Justice.

2. A Work of Equity.

3. A Work of Mercy.

4. A Work of Piety.

5. A Work of Love to Christ in the protection of his people; And a work of
Wisdom to your selves, which will be your strength.

And now let me say to all Christians, and Christian Magistrates; Let me say to
you all, what ever is your work, what ever is in your hand to do: Oh that the
Lord would help you to do it with all your might: What is in your hand to do as
Christians, as Magistrates; Oh that the Lord would help you to do it with all
your might! I shall not need to press it further upon you both, as Christians:
The Devil works with all his might, and shall not Christians work with their
might, and Magistrates work with their might? He goes about night and day
seeking whom he may devour, and shall not you go about night and day, seeking
whom you may save? And seeking whom you may punish, for contemning the Law of
the Lord your God? The Devil compasses the earth, (Whence come thou? I come
from ^^^^^assing the earth) And Oh shall not Christians (...) ^ith all their
might, when Satan does with all his might? sinners do with all their might, and
shall not Christians do with their might? It is said of sinners, That they draw
iniquity as with Cart-ropes; It is the expression of the Prophet, and in the
seventh of Micah, it is said, they sin with both hands; they do evil with both
hands, aye, earnestly, and they do it with both hands; and if they sin with
both hands, shall not Christians do good with both hands? Shall they sin with
all their might, and shall not you do the work of God with all your might? Let
me say further to you, Christ did the work of the Father with all his might,
and your work with all his might, (the work of your salvation) he wrought three
and thirty years together, he sweat hard: And Oh! shall not you in a way of
love, in a way of obedience, labor to do for God with all your might, seeing
Christ has done for you with all his might? Let me say to you, you are not put
upon it, to work for life, and righteousness, or for Heaven: but only to
express your thankfulness, your love, and obedience; and therefore well may
you work for God, you have a great deal of work, and you have but a little time
to do it: Sinners you are hastening to the grave: Oh work for God with all your
might.

Christians you are hastening to the grave: Magistrates, you are hastening to the
grave; Oh then do what ever you find to do for God, with all your might: There
is no work as a Magistrate nor as a Minister, nor as a Christian, in the gra^e,
whither thou art going; here is all the working time that you shall have for
eternity, you have six days to work in: And you that are Believers, shall have
a long rest, you may well work a while, though you sweat hard for it; there is
no more time to work in, but a long time to rest in* an everlasting Rest,
eternity of Rest, that shall never have an end: your rest is long; And Oh make
have, there is no possibility of working more for God hereafter: If you do not
finish your work now, you cannot finish it in the grave: You had need work, the
Candle is set up, and you have but little of the Candle left: Oh if you do not
finish this work of God before this Candles end be out, there is* nothing but
darkness in the grave: There is no wisdom, no device, etc. If there were
work, you could not see: But there is no believing, no repenting, no doing for
God, no further time to be serviceable to God; but a time of receiving for the
Saints, and a time for the wicked to be punished: And therefore, What ever thy
hand finds to do, do it with all thy might, for there is no work, nor device,
nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou go.

And so much for this time.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 1. line 12. read seems. p. 4. l. 17. r. bonds. p. 5. l. 15. r. act p.
6. l. 10. r. was. p. 9. l. 22. r. grave. p. 11. l. 31. r. the. p. 16. l. 5. r,
they, for now. p. 17. l. 28. r. this. p. 21. l. 15. blot out as, r. in as dye.
p. 41. l. 26. r. open. p. 43. last. v. r. get. p. 49. last v. blot out time. p.
68. l. 27. r. grace p. 73. l. 6. r. whether. p. 74. last v. r. superstition. p.
75. l. 7. r. past. and l. 9. r. not. p. 77. l. 13. r. though, and l. 25. r. to.
p. 78. l. 18. r. terrible. and l. 30, r. in a. p. 81. l. 27. blot out either.
p. 93. l. 25. r. done. p. 99. l. 6. r. off. and l. 28. r. his. p. 100. l. 3 and
4. blot out the thought of. p. 101. l. 5. r. but for that. p. 103. l. 30. r,
adversity. p. 107, last line but one, r. to us. p. 115. l. 29. r. whether. p.
119. l. 10. r. our. p. 121. l. 22. r. condition. p. 125. l. 19. r. comforting.
p. 130. l. 22. r. Lo, for Low. p. 132. l. 2. r. quiet. p. 133. l. 6. blot out
been, and put it into the end of the next line, and l. 8. r. Jonah, last line
but one, r. improbable for impossible. p. 135. l. 24. r. so it might. and l.
26. r. keep. p. 143. l. 18. r. without God. p. 144. l. 32. r. encouragements.
p. 148. l. 28. r. Father. p. 149. l. 14. r. they, for their. and l. 16. r.
their for thy. and l. 21. r. contrary to their. p. 150. l. 27. r. deliver his
poor. p. 154. l. 23. r. poor. p. 156. last line but one, r. are. p. 160. l. 4.
r. be though. p. 161. l. 22. r. puts. p. 162. l. 2. r. Lord. p. 164. l. 26. r.
Gods p. 165. l. 17. r. fed. p. 166. last line, r. need to. p. 173. l. 5. A
Goldsmith. p. 181. l. 11. r. relations.


