THE ARMIES VINDICATION, Wherein these five things are proved: First, That
there is a Supreme and Sovereign power always residing in the People, over and
above Kings. Secondly, That all Kings have been, and still are, subject to, and
under Law. Thirdly, That the People have power, not only to convent, but to
censure, depose and punish their Kings for their Tyranny and misgovernment.
Fourthly, That no Nation is so strictly tied to any one form of civil
Government or Law, but it is lawful for the People to alter the same to
another form or kind upon occasion. Fifthly, Amongst all forms of Civil
Government, Aristocratical or Popular is best and safest for the People.


Besides, Here is showed, that to claim any Crown by an hereditary or
successive title, is upon a false and unjust ground.

In reply to Mr. William Sedgwick.

Published for the Kingdoms satisfaction By ELEVTHERIVS PHILODEMIVS.

1 Cor. 7.21. But if thou may be made free, use it rather.

Printed for Peter Cole, at the sign of the printing press, in Cornhill, near
the Royal Exchange. Anno 1649.

To his Excellency, Thomas Lord Fairfax, Lord General of the Parliaments
forces, and the General Council of War.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
HAving spent some time in looking over the histories of Nations, our own
Records, and Statutes, with several other works of Statists, Politians
Lawyers, I found that saying truly verified of Solomon* In much wisdom is much
grief, and he that increases knowledge increases sorrow; and what he
afterward concludes of all his own works and labor, I observed to be most true
in them, touching Polities and civil government, Behold all was vanity and
vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun. For indeed men have
acted and written either in reference to Princes, to humor and please their
lusts and will, or like the unwise builder (the blind leading the blind) have
built upon the sand, upon unsound bottomes and false principles. And therefore
as Christ in the controversy between him and the Pharisees touching divorce,
sends them back to the original and first institution of marriage, and to the
Fathers of the first age of the world, as being the first and best pattern; and
Paul to reform the abuses in the Lords Supper, calls them Corinthians to the
first institution. So there is no better way to have a Commonwealth settled in
peace and righteousness, then to look back at the beginning, when men walked
by the exact and even rules of equity, justice, conscience, and kept the clear
and plain principles of reason and nature: this is the Land-measure and
Standard whereby the faulty measures coming after are to be corrected and
amended.

How this light first came to be less'ned, and then by degrees afterward upon
the matter quite extinguished in some Kingdoms, and darkness to break in, as
Soveraignities, Monarchies, Kings prerogatives, arbitrary power, regal
immunities, Crowns hereditary and successive, etc. (all bloody and black
Characters of Tyrants and conquest) it is easy to be seen, and I shall shortly
(by the good hand of God assisting me) give you and the whole Nation good
satisfaction.

In the mean time I have thought good to publish this small Treatise, and
howsoever I question not, but your present work and way is clear to you, yet to
the nation generally it may serve in some good stead, as to satisfy the
weaker, confirm the stronger, inform the ignorant, and leave the wilful and
obstinate without excuse.

For the man with whom I deal, I have nothing here to say, neither indeed would
I have said any thing to his work, considering what for a man he is, but that I
perceived it was in the mouth of some, much cried up, people it seems, that
are not able to put a distinction between wind and words, nor know any
difference between railing and reason.

And now my Lord and Gentlemen, upon you at the present is the eye of the
nation: you are as a city set upon a hill, all Kingdoms about us, are looking on
you, and great things are hoped for, and exspected from you, and this I must
needs tell you, the cause of Christ lies much now upon your actings, if you do
the work of the Lord negligently, unfaithfully, fearfully, oh my bowels do
yearn, and I tremble to think what dishonor will come to Gods great name, what
scandal and proach to the glorious Gospel, what sadness and sorrow too the
souls of the righteous, and what triumph and joy there will be in the tents of
wicked men. But I hope better things of you, though I thus speak, I need not
tell you how much you have seen of God, and how his powerful presence has
gone all along with you to this present time, neither need I tell you by what a
strong arm and a strange providence you have been brought up to this work. But
if you should now ask of me (as the young man did of Christ) what lack we yet?
I would say, constancy and faithfulness to the end will crown, not only this,
but all your former actions.

Methinks I could say more to you, then Mordecai did to Hester, Who knows
whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? We know, (and
blessed be God for it) the Lord has made you his Isreal's Saviors, and by you
has wrought deliverance for his people, he has put much glory already upon
you, now therefore stand fast, quit your selves like men, you have the prayers
of the Saints with you and for you; and for the enemies their defense is
departed from them; and the Lord is with you, fear them not.

But seeing the Treatise is short, I shall not make too large a forespeech: I
well remember your expression in the Remonstrance, calling upon every man to
contribute what help he can; and truly there is all the reason in the world for
it, that every one now should lay himself out to further so honorable and good
a work. And for my part according to the small portion I have received I shall
not be wanting in your vindication, but for the things by you proposed, and
your prosecuting of them; to wit, that the King may be brought to his trial,
the enemies of our peace punished, hurtful Laws nullified the peoples
grievances and oppressions removed, freedom and liberty of conscience (without
danger to the State) granted, and a better form of Government settled, as I
shall undertake the just defense thereof, so I shall shortly make it more
manifest to the whole nation, that there is nothing in all things desired of
you, nor prosecuted by you, but what is according to justice, reason, nature
conscience, and what the Lord himself does allow and call for: In the mean time
my prayer shall be for the blessing of God to be upon your labor, and his
powerful protection over your Persons: Sirs I am

Your Honors devoted servant, E. P.

To the Reader.
Friendly Reader,
HOwsoever the Proverb be true, he shall find work enough, that has to do
with the multitude, and it is a hard thing to please all; nevertheless I have
undertaken this work, in hope to satisfy all such, who are not (...) absurd
and unreasonable, but knowing men, moderate and impartial. And confident I am,
did thou know how free I am, and disingaged in respect of any private
interest, thou would consider the more seriously what is here written, and
reap the more profit by it. For my name, had I intended to have made it known,
I could have set it down, and so have told it thee my self, but thou may
perceive my meaning is to conceal it, and therefore thou needst not to enquire
further; only thus much for thy satisfaction, I have purposely forborne it,
that in reading thou may not have thy mind taken up with any thing but about
the matter.

I make account I shall save Mr. Sedgwick the labor, and all other Royallists
of replying, because I have in part don that my self namely collected all such
Objections as I conceive carry any show of contradiction to the particulars
here asserted, and shall very shortly set them forth with a full refutation.
Reader, the main business is Liberty.

Liber captivus avi fere similis est,
Semel fugiendi si data est occasio,
Satis est: nunquam post illum possis prendere
A thing desired of all living creatures, and therefore much unbeseeming man to
strive for bondage. Me thinks when J consider how the world has been befooled
by Kings, J could even weep and laugh, to see what tame asses men have been, to
be ridden and beaten by them. But the Lord is now risen up and doing his great
work, throwing down and breaking to pieces the proud powers of the earth both
civil and eclesiastical. It is good therefore thou consider where thou art, and
what the place of thy standing is, he that hides himself under straw or chafe
will have small relief thereby when fire shall be put thereto and consume it.
All powers and places in opposition to Christ are but as dry stubble, which the
Lord is now about to destroy with the brightness of his coming.

But I shall not hold thee up with any longer discourse, only one thing I
shall acquaint thee with, there are some faults escaped which I have observed
since it was printed, and in some places greater then J wish they were, the
which J could not help being out of town when it was don, and the badnesse of
my hand may in part excuse the printer. And so J bid farewell till thou do
hear again from me.

The Armies vindication, in answer to Mr. Sedgwicks calumniation.
WHAT moves Mr. Sedgwick to show himself such a bitter and cruel enemy to the
Army, and at this time to heat the furnace of his tongue seven times more then
it was wont to be heat, may in part be gathered from the Scripture set down in
the Title page: 2 Timot. 3 9. But they shall proceed no further, etc. but more
clearly a little after, where he speaks of his sermon at Windsor, Overturn,
overturn, overturn: mentioning withal Mr. Saltmarsh his message, depart from
the tents of these unrighteous men: and Mr Pinnels admonition. The thing is
thus, he has deeply engaged himself concerning the Armies ruin, and the safe
return of the King and his Posterity to their glory and greatness: and having
with much confidence and boldness a long time thus affirmed, he begins now to
fear, lest this should be added to his doomsday-prophesie, and so whilst he is
lifting up himself, and intruding into those things which he has not seen, his
folly be made manifest to all men: to use his own words. Hence he grows angry,
and flies in the face of the Army, calls them dogs and devils, that their ways
are beastly, cruel, absurd, monstrous: men led by a dark and foul Spirit,
enemies to the Spirit and to the cross of Christ, and much more to this
purpose; as if they would at his calumniations and slanders fall down before
him, and give all up to him; that so it might not come to pass, which he
foresees already is at the door, and shortly will be in all men's mouths,
Sedgwick, the false prophet: God has not spoken to him in these things, but he
has prophesied a lie in his Name.

Oh that Mr. Sedgwick could take notice of the visible and senceable reproof of
God upon him, that blindness has happened to him in part, and professing
himself to be wise becomes a fool, if the thoughts of the snare which he is
fallen into, lay upon his heart, he would give glory to God, and with Job
humbly say, behold I am vile, what shall I answer th^e? I will lay my hand upon
my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer; yea, twice but I will
speak no further. Job. 40, 4, 5.

The Epistle Dedicatory is as the rest of the Pamphlet, invective and
slanderous: Thus he begins, You drive furiously over the necks of KING and
Parliament, Laws Covenants, Loyalty, Privileges, and no humane thing can stand
before you. Here Solomon's words are verified, Eccles. 10.13. The beginning of
the words of his mouth as foolishness, and the end of his talk is mischievous
madness. You found not any thing in the Remonstrance looking this way, but
expressions often to the contrary, and were you as charitably minded toward
His EXCELLENCY, and the General COUNCIL of WAR, as you are to the Malignant
Party, you had ground sufficient to judge otherwise: But howsoever God will ere
long clear their innocence, and bring forth their righteousness as the light,
and their judgment as the noon day, when by his gracious hand assisting them,
our Laws, Liberties, and Privileges shall be recovered, the which by KING and
PARLIAMENT have been trodden under foot.

But he tells them, The Lord is here upbraiding your unbelief: and after page
13. The Holy GOD will no longer suffer you to wear the name of Saints and
godly, but will discover you to be white sepulchers, and cause your rottenness
to come forth. But how may we know that the Lord has called Mr. Will Sedgwick
to this work, and that it is the spirit of Christ speaking in him, and he the
man appointed to pour contempt upon the Army, and to trample upon them as
mortar: Must we take it as granted, because he says it: What if the Army
should say in the words of Nehemiah, And lo I perceived that God had not sent
him, but that he pronounced this Prophecy against me, for Tobiah and Sanballat
had hired him. Therefore was he hired that I should be afraid, and do so, and
sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might
reproach me. My God think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these
their works, and on the Prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the Prophets that
would have put me in fear. Neh 6.12, 13, 14.

Is there no ground for them to think, that the Malignant spirit drives on his
old design here in Mr. Sedgwick, namely, to have the Army disbanded: this has
been a long time sought after, and several ways attempted to effect it: But
it seems seeing all other means fails him, he now studies to make the Army
fly by a false prophecy, as if our worthy Nehemiah and the rest, would give
over the building through a needless and foolish fear.

And indeed they have all the reason in the world to think that God has not
sent him: for the statutes of the Lord are perfect, right, pure, clean, true,
and righteous altogether: Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not
evil and good. Where we find (as in his writing is abundance) contradiction,
falsehood, flattery, the wicked justified, the righteous condemned, evil called
good, and good evil, darkness put for light, and light for darkness, bitter
for sweet, and sweet for bitter, Gosple Truths and Ordinances are scorned and
derided, etc. there we may groundedly conclude, that such a one was never
thereto called of God.

But it seems here to be Mr. Sedgwicks case, as it once happined to Antonius,
when he angled some dived under water, and put fish upon his hook, which he
cast up and thought he had taken them. If I should lay his fish together in a
heap, a man would soon perceive by the kind who put them upon the hook. For
instance, look here good Reader, out of what water is this fish taken, and what
fish is it? speaking to His EXCELLENCY and the General COUNCEL of WAR, he tells
them, It pleases me to pour contempt upon you, to be shod with scorn and
indignation, and so trample upon Princes as mortar: If this be not the spirit
of Antichrist, then was it never in any man. But let us see how Pope-like he
sets his foot upon the neck of Princes: Destruction your practice, it is your
work, it is your end, you cannot see beyond it, your faith understanding, God
(may I use your own words page 22. you lie grossly) is sunk into your bellyes,
and your rule your strength, your confidence is only in sensual and brutish
things, you act against God, and God against you, your souls loath him, and
his soul loathes you.

And of the whole Army he says, Never were men caught in such a snare of the
devil as you are: you are true to nothing, neither God nor man: your ways are
beastly, cruel, absurd, monstrous: you continue in arms against command of God
and men, you are a company of deceivers and mountebancks, that talk of curing,
saving, delivering, but all wast, spoil and destroy the people. You are gone
from all principles of goodness, from the Lord to the world: you are become
through blindness and ignorance enemies to the spirit, you love not the life
of Christ, you know not the mind of God, neither have any communion with God:
Amongst you is the greatest enmity and malignity to the spirit of God, and the
greatest pride, hypocrisy, self confidence, and spiritual wickedness: you
are manifestly guilty of the present oppression upon the poor people, and the
intolerable burden of Free Quarter, and unreasonable taxes, you exspect the
King should turn, not to God, but to your form of Religion and Government, and
cannot count any thing a change, but yielding to your way, which if he should,
he should be seven times more the child of the devil. You are tugging and
pulling down the Kingdom in pieces to satisfy your self with dominion: you
hope for nothing, but for deceit, falsehood and treachery: you speak evil, but
cannot speak good: you never spoke any good of the King or any other but in
scorn.

Here is some of the fish which Mr. Sedgwick has cast up: we need not to
describe them, they show themselves what they are, and the black lake out which
they are taken. But is this Mr: Sedgwicks voice, oh poor man, truly I pity
thee; and howsoever no Rabshekeh, Ishmaelite, or Shimei, could hardly have
uttered greater slander and more falsehood, yet considering the temptation thou
lie under, and what a depth of delusion God has suffered thee to fall into,
thou art rather to be pitied then punished. Michael the Archangel durst not
bring against the devil a railing accusation; but you durst rail at the people
of God, and charge them with notorious untruths, but take heed, lest the
strength of that prayer reach you. "Let the lying lips be put to silence which
speaks grievous things proudly and "contemptuously against the righteous. Psalm.
31.18. Because I am willing that the Army should take notice what Mr. Sedgwick
writes, as well for them, as against them: Thus he charitably expresses
himself at first: Your eternal state is sure, it is your present wanderings that
are here condemned. Here is some comfort for you soldiers: but will he stand
to this? not all, for presently with the same mouth (not minding what he had
said) he puts them all out of Heaven, and out of all hope of salvation, and
shuts them up in the bottomless pit; and this with as much confidence and
certainty, as if God had revealed to him what their future state should be:
lets hear the sentence against the Army. The Lord (says he) appoints you a
portion with hypocrites and unbeleevers, where shall be weeping and knashing of
teeth. Again, page 11. If you adhere to that you have proposed, you forsake
your own interest, and espouse the devil, the God of this world, the destroyer,
and will perish with him. What their eternal salvation sure, and yet may
perish with the devil? this is no true light, the Spirit of God witnesses
otherwise. But again, page 18. You are cursing, dividing, and so are in the
kingdom of darkness, and of the devil: and often, You are no Saints. page
23.24. And in page 35. he passes a final doom, where he says; "You are
reserved to be punished from the presence of "the Lord, this is your second
death. As this vain and rash judging of his, shows by what spirit he is led,
so it is not worth the answering; only it bewrayes great weakness and
darkness in him, and that he is not himself: For who but Mr. Sedgwick, or a
man under such distempers, would write so vehemently as he has don, against
the Army (of which more in its place) for rash judging of others, whereas I dare
clearly affirm, there is hardly a precedent of any one man that fell so foully
and grossly in this very thing as he himself has done.

Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguat ipsi. For his perverting of the
Scripture Phil 3.18.19. scandalously applying it to the Army, I mind it a thing
in him neither new nor strange: for the rest of his works show what a proper
gift he has to wrest and abuse the sacred word of God* Yet not to pass over
the place altogether silent, there seems to be something here which is close
and hid: wherefore is Phil. 3.18 19. quoted, and commented upon? it is to make
the Army contemptible and odious: Paul says many are enemies to the cross of
Christ, etc. ergo, the Army. It was a cunning devise of Nero when he hurled the
Christians to dogs, seeing the mastives would not touch them, to clad them in
bears skin, to kindle the fury of the dogs that they might take them to be
beasts and not men. I will not say it is a studied plot of Mr. Sedgwick, but
outwardly he does Nero like: he sees there are no swords drawn against the
Army, Gods former power and presence with them (howsoever he often jeeres at
it) has by this time convinced the enemy, so that he has no mind unto any
new engagement: But what does he now? seeing the mastives will not touch them,
he will clad them in bears skins, make them vile and odious, say, they are
rebels, traitors, thieves, murderers, even the vilest and worst of men; and
thus he will kindle the fury of the dogs, that is, have the Army to be taken
not for men, but beasts, and so they shall do God good service, whosoever
destroys them. But this will not do it, nor help to bring about your
prophecy. Thou shall hide them in the secret of thy presence from the pride of
man, thou shall keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
Psa. 31.20.

Let us hear what follows. It Is not only men that suffer from your violence,
but the Lord: You are gone so far in dissolving the foundations of government
that you reach to the Lord. These miserable broken powers are now the Lord. A
man that wants distinction, thrusts all things confusedly together.

But to answer, First, Is the punishing of bad Governors a dissolving the
foundations of Government? does a Physician destroy the body by removing of
corrupt and filthy humors from it?

Secondly, Howsoever there is no power but of God, yet may people change the
kind of powers, nullify some Laws and Ordinances, and take others up; and not
come near the bowels of the Lord, neither act any thing that is unlawful. It
is an unquestionable truth, that Monarchy, Democratie, and Aristocratie, are
the powers of God, each in is self a lawful form of Government: and it is as
unquestionable, that so the case may be, as the use of one may be laid aside,
and another set up, and God much seen and honored in the change. In saying,
these broken powers are now the Lord: not the Lords power: we understand your
phrase, and your godding of all things, but it is a matter out of our way, and
therefore I will not turn to it.

Howsoever Mr. Sedgwick in speaking against the Army, his teeth are spears,
and arrows, and his tongue a sharp sword, yet for the King and his party, th
words of his mouth are smoother then butter, and softer then oil: oh, he is
careful to deal gently with the young man, and no marvail, he sees much beauty
in Absalom.

The King and Parliament (says he) cry unto God in their distress: and quotes
Isa. 63.16. to be the words of their prayer, and presuming that he knows the
mind of God, peremptory concludes, that The Lord ownes them, and will hear
"their cry and deliver them.

Here Reader thou art given to understand, that by the Parliament he means
such Members as are now in the hand of Justice for raising a new war, and other
treacherous plots tending to the ruin of the whole Kingdom: the owning of the
King and them, is as much to say, that God will countenance and justify all
their falsehood, unfaithfulness, murders, or what else it be that the Army has
to object and prove against them. But Mr. Sedgwicks prophesies are not yet
received amongst us above Scripture. We believe in our hearts, and confess
with our mouths, Thou art of purer eyes then to behold evil, and can not look
on iniquity. Thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither
shall evil dwell with thee. Vain glorious fools shall not stand in thy sight,
thou hate all workers of iniquity: Thou will bring to perdition them that
speak a lie: The man of bloods and of deceits Jehovah does abhor. What you lay
to the Armies charge page 1. I know no man to whom the words more truly may be
applied then to your self. In this work you manifestly show, that you have
deeply revolted, and that after you had escaped the pollutions of the world,
you are again entangled therein and overcome: and with the dog returned to your
own vomit: you have been exalted to heaven, and are brought down to hell. Does
it not bewray a man greatly fallen from God, and what he had is taken from him,
even his wisdom, largeness, goodness: having been formerly zealously earnest
against sin, and a professed enemy to all unrighteousness of men, should
afterward undertake to defend the grossest and vilest wickedness, plead for
it, yea, rail at such, and reproach them as do appear against the same, that it
may have a just and condign punishment. I hope the Lord by this means will
open their eyes, whom you have bewitched, giving out that your self is some
great one, The great power of God. Truly unless there be a strong delusion
(...) the strength of delusion, or strongest impressions of error fastened upon
their minds: if there be not (I say) an infatuation and besottednesse upon
them, joined with such a pertinacy and stiffenesse, that howsoever Mr.
Sedgwicks doctrines are palpable errors, and such as may be felt, yet they will
adhere to him, there is enough in this (we will not mention his other good
works) to let them see, what he calls light, is darkness it self, and speaks
against the mind of God, as clear as the sun that shines at noon day: for
that bold assertion God will deliver them, the time shortly will show it, but
howsoever for you to be found an untrue speaker, it is a thing now so common
and usual with you, as it is not admired at, such is the hand of God now
against you.

Having ended with the Epistle Dedicatory, we come now to the book, which
hardly admits of any division, or laying out into parts, because the whole
contains little else but bitter invectives and grievous accusations against the
Army; and howsoever there is scarce a leaf but some charges or other against
the Army are in it, yet all is one thing often repeated.

The matter of charge in one word is Apostasy, that His EXCELLENCY and the
General Council of War in their present acting are deeply revolted, with this
he begins page 1. But let us see the ground work upon which he builds, the
reason wherefore he charge them with backssl^ding; it is because the Army
Remonstrance calls for justice and judgment, to have the land purged of innocent
blood, and that there may be such a peace settled on earth amongst men, as may
be to the glory of God on high: at these proposals he takes exception, blots
much paper with foul aspersions against the Army for framing them, seeks with
great swelling words to affright them, and to hinder them from prosecuting so
just and necessary a work. I confess if the Army were turned Royalists, so
basely revolted as he acknowledges himself to be page 31. and were cast back
into such blindness, as to make "the "King glad with their wickedness, and
the Princes with their lies, as he does, (to his shame be it spoken) they had
no need (following such a cursed principle) to carry forth the work of the
Lord any farther: but they dare not show themselves such broken reeds,
wandering stars, light and unconstant, neither frame their tongues to such
flattery, might they gain the whole world. Besides it appears by his writing,
that outwardly he can be any thing, and every thing, apply himself every way,
and so cares not what oppressions be laid upon men's persons, state,
consciences, nothing can reach him: But others truly fearing God, abhor such
crooked ways, and know that by the Law of God, nature, and nations, they are
bound to seek freedom in a just and fair way for their bodies and souls: and
therefore the apostasy falls on himself, and he is become like one of the foxes,
in the Prophet, who has seen a vain vision, a lying divination, saying, the
Lord says, albeit he has not spoken: with lies making sad the hearts of the
righteous, whom the Lord has not made sad; and strengthened the hands of the
wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, promising him life. But
mark, Mr. Sedgwick, what the Lord speaks concerning such Prophets. My hand
shall be upon the Prophets that see vanity and divine lies, they shall not be
in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in the writing of
the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel.

In page 2. having laid some disgrace upon the Remonstrance, he proceeds to
show them the evil, and folly of their principles, and with such plainness as
the wise and soberer sort of them shall be convinced, the rest condemned in
themselves; and to satisfy the Readers expectation, he takes in hand, the
first part of their preamble (as he calls it) which is the Armies tender regard
to the freedom and liberty of Parliament: his answer to it is this, that they
deal deceitfully with the world, conceal their own principle, which is, that
the powers of the world are to be broken, the Parliament is one of the powers
of the world, and that they are called to break it in pleces, and upon this
ground they know they act.

Cocks feeding on garlic overcome others; but how? with rankness of breath
not strength, If a man should here fly, it must be for the smell, not the
matter:

For First, It is untrue that they hold such a Principle, neither do they act
upon, the ground he mentions.

Secondly, Their former practice is a clear proof to justify what they say, for
had they not been tender this way, they might have prevented a great deal of
their own sufferings, and not been so long under several grievances.

Thirdly, At this time there lay a necessity upon them to move, for otherwise
they had not been faithful to God for the power put into their hands, neither
had answered the trust of the people, who continually besought them in all
parts of the land to prevent their slavery and bondage which was ready to break
in, and so all their former expenses of blood and goods, vainly spent and
wasted.

Fourthly, It is so far from their thoughtt to break the power of Parliament,
or to think they are called thereto, as their greatest study and endeavor is,
how the Parliaments Power may be best improved for the common good of the
people, and every ones interest.

Whereas in the Remonstrance it is declared, that things are brought to the
utmost Crisis of danger, and also showed how, and by whom: his answer is, it is
true but you make an ill use of it. For the rest, he tells us his dream of two
in the kingdom, the one our life, and a wicked one, which is wrath. As there is
nothing in it, so there needs no answer, only because I guess what he would
have said, a word thus: The more we depend upon a wise Physician, the more will
we observe his directions, and be the carefuller to use what he prescribes: so
every godly man the more his trust and dependence is upon God, the more he will
serve Gods providence in the use of means, and not only the ordinary, but as
the Remonstrance well notes it, upon Public necessity or extremity go
further, yet so, as good cautions be duly observed. This point is excellently
set forth in the Remonstrance, page 4.5.6. and Mr. Sedgwick was so wise as
seeing the strength thereof, to let it alone.

Next, he charge the Arm, with woeful fears, and why? because they say the
public affairs calls upon every man to contribute what help he can. It does
not not always argue fear to call for help in danger, neither is all fear
simply unlawful. But his answer indeed is woeful. Vain is the help of man: it
is to offer help to a wicked world, cease ye foolish men, etc. We have not
only precepts for the lawfulness to call for others help, but the Saints in
all ages have practiced it before us: for howsoever man's help is vain rested
in, yet God gives in Power to the creature, whereby succor and deliverance is
obtained* Again the worse the world is, the more need there is of help, that
enormities and abuses may redressed, and righteousness, truth, and peace
restored. But Mr. Sedgwicke council is if a man see his house a fire, not to
move or seek to quench it, but leave it alone till it be burnt down to the
ground: because they say in the Remonstrance, and seeing no effectual help
from else where to appear, he takes them sharply up, your curse is not to see
when good comes, we see salvation is nigh, God a present help, etc. and
afterward (but somewhat closely) we have the salvation and help told us, what
it is, to wit the Treaty.

First, That which he calls good we know to be evil: it was as the forbidden
fruit, pleasant to the eye of some, and a thing to be desired, but death went
along with it: for the Treaty, we know the bottom of it, and its rise, in what
shop is was forged, the dependences upon it, the drift and scope thereof,
namely to bring about a malignant plot, to destroy the useful power of
Parliament, the right and Privileges of the Subject, to exempt the Grand
Incendiaties from punishment, to suppress the free exercise of true Religion
and power of Godliness, and to subject men's consciences to humane Ordinances.
For the good therefore of the Treaty its only extended to him, and such
Royallists as should enslave themselves to the will and lust of Princes, as for
conscientious of men, it was to deprive them of peace, comfort, and safety.

Secondly, Whereas he says, You are blind and cannot see the Lord an
effectual Savior. This is not so, for they do see God to go all along with
them, and in every undertaking have large experience of his power and presence.

Lastly, For the curse you may take it home, it is yours not theirs, for were
you not blind, you would see God, where he appears, and powerfully shows
himself in his administrations, and not publish such vain and ridiculous
visions concerning the King, as gives occasion to some of laughter, to others
of tears, and to all, of pit^ying and bewayling your folly and blindness: But
I spare you.

It follows in the Remonstrance, In conscience and duty to God and men, we
hold our selves obliged, etc. In answer to this he says many words, the sum
in short is this, that they are not upon a sure foundation, nor dare they come
to a strict examination of their own ground: kn^w not which of these two to
take, for their principal God or man, with several other reproaches.

The beast Bonosus not being able to defend himself with his horn, poysoneth
the dogs with his dung. Nothing have we yet met withal in his writing, but
either unsavory meat, or swelling words, and large accusations without proof.

I answer, First, They are upon a sound foundation, and for the ground of their
undertaking this work, they did examine it, and find it to have a sound
bottom: not hurried blindly upon weak passions of fear, jealousy, necessity,
etc. but grounded on a clear call from God and men. Have ye not read what David
did when he was an hungered, and they that were with him? If David and his
followers in necessity, and to save their lives, did that which was not
according to the letter of the Law. Exodus 29.32.33. Levit. 8.31. and 24.9. yet
according to the intent of the Law: for the Ceremonial rites were to give
place to moral precepts. Without all doubt, then in greater necessity and
extremity, as when it is not only to save men's lives, liberties, privileges,
but Religion and the true worship of God: if men act not in some things
according to the letter of humane law, yet the intent of the law is observed,
which is the safety and good of the people. If a man have maliciously set his
house on fire, I may lawfully break in and quench it, if I can; if not cast it
down: duty and conscience puts me upon it (yea, though I have no leave or
permission) if my self and others otherwise should suffer.

2. As we are to do good to them that hate us, love our enemies etc. So also to
endeavor that justice and judgment may be executed on evil doers, and so doing
we are not the less godly and spiritual men.

3. What some of the Army have told him it comes not here into consideration:
nevertheless, if nothing were told him but what he relates, there is nothing
in it to the matter he brings it for.

4. It is his mistake to think that it is to decline the perfect way of Christ
to go the ways of the Heathen: for so far as the Gentiles were righteous,
just, sober, faithful, we may and ought to walk the same way with them.

5. Though we must live under law, submit to Governors and be subject to them,
nevertheless we know that all Governors likewise are under the same law, and
some laws of men are prejudicial and hurtful to the people, and therefore when
God by providence, puts in a fair opportunity for the suppressing of evil
Magistrates, and redress of bad laws, the mercy should be improved with
thankfulness.

6. For the example of Phinehas, you did well only to name it and let it pass:
for indeed it is beyond your measure to take off the strength of it. This we
learn from it. 1. Zeal of justice in the cause of God, is a means to procure
Gods mercy to man. 2. The Lord justifies and rewards men, for the zeal of his
glory, though in the carrying on of the work there be some breach of rule or
order: Phinehas was but a Priest's son, no ordinary Magistrate, nor proceeded
he with the Malefactors judicially, neverthelsse (carried forth by the mighty
power and presence of God) thrust them through suddenly, and because this might
seem blameworthy in the eyes of men, and might procure much il will,
considering the persons whom he killed, the man being a Prince in Israel, and
the other a Princes daughter of Median: therefore God himself gives witness,
saying Phinehas has turned my wrath away from the children of Israel, while he
was zealous for my sake among them, that I consumed not the children of Israel
in my jealousy.

In the last place, Reader thou art to take notice how Mr Sedgwick has not yet
forgotten his mother Romish tongue; I pray thee ask of him where he learned to
say Saint Paul, what! Mr. Sedgwick to speak in the speech of Ashdod, not the
Names of Baalim yet out of his mouth; I verily thought the power of God in the
new Covenant had taught him to say Ishi, no more Baali; we will therefore only
leave out the word Saint, and Paul's words may well be applied to him, you walk
as a man, are you not carnal? Speaking in the Remonstrance, how that rule of,
Salus populi suprema lex, is of all others most apt to be abused: he puts it
off with a few bad words, calling them, a company of deceivers, and
mountebanks, adding God is only the salvation of the people, the which thing
howsoever true, yet impertinatly brought in: unless he means that men should
neither eat, drink, labor, etc. because the Lord is their salvation.

Next he finds fault with them for two or three pages, telling them, you are
triming your way to seek love; his answer to these 2. or 3. pages is, abusing
the words of Solomon Pro. 30.19, 20. to vent out a great deal of wrath and rage
against the Army, you are gone from all solid principles of goodness: fly from
one secret place to another to hide your selves from shame: you eat up King,
Parliament and People to satisfy your carnal love of safety; while you think
to make your selves more vendible, you make your selves more abominable: this
is all, and what think Reader, has he not reached home to these otht other
pages? A thing looked upon under water, howbeit straight, smooth and fair, yet
standing so it, seems crooked, rough, and deformed: So when a man looks upon
another through the water of ill-wil and prejudice, his wisdom shall be taken
for folly, zeal for madness, sincerity for hypocrisy, justice in him called
cruelty, in a word, whatsoever he says or does, spider-like it is turned to
poison.

Now follows No more Addresses to the King, and how the Parliament turned to
the course of a Personal Treaty. Concerning this, First he says, You do in
favor to your selves, abuse the Parliament, and in most things accuse others
of those things that you your selves are guilty of: It is a full Charge; but
where is his proof for this? how does he make it good? Here he uses the common
practice of false accusers, but I shall leave that to some other pen: and why
not the falsehood as well?

2. Whereas in the Remonstrance the instability of the Parliament is showed,
and the evil practices of the King's party: Here he says, they are too harsh
and without any molifying oil, etc. First, it is clear to every man that has
sense, that Mr. Sedgwick is not sometimes at home to take an account of his own
soul; he taxes the Army as over harsh and too large in opening the faults of
others, whereas, he (pitiful man) has written six or seven sheets and all for
the most part are accusations against the Army, and the grossest and vilest
that can be, aggravated to the highest.

2. That the Parliament for their sins are scattered and broken: This in part
is true, to wit, such Members as turned aside to their crooked ways; the Lord
has led them forth with the workers of iniquity: but peace shall be upon the
rest.

3. That the whole Kingdom is full of discontent against them. I believe it is so,
and more discontented will they be when they shall more clearly understand,
their particular treasons, and bloody designs, in joining with Malignants, and
their underhand plottings to raise up farraign and domestic forces to destroy
the Army and the well-affected through the Kingdom.

4. That the King's party are struggling to get from under their intolerable
afflictions, but cannot. No marvail, seeing they grow worse and worse, and like
mastives are the fiercer for their chain: and you Mr. Sedgwick seek to increase
their misery, by your daubing with untempered mortar, prophesying peace and
safty to them, and that their deliverance is at hand, (and you know who did so
Ezekiel. 13.) by which means they are hardened, and so fatted for destruction.

5. To that which you say of the Army, that they are not like the good
Samaritan, but are as flesh flies, or the man possessed with Devils, seek the
lands ruin to the furthest. As the Lord has hitherto spoken for them, cleared
their innocence in spite of Hell, and maugre all the powers of darkness; so
he will in this present work be a witness for them, and make it manifest to the
world (by settling a wel-grounded peace) what they have desired, fought for, and
sought after, and what hard things they have suffered for the good of the
Nation: The Righteous shall see it and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her
mouth.

We have next, his Story, and it is a woeful one. First he says, Once our King
and Parliament, or people, lived quietly and lovingly together, embraced in the
arms of Divine Goodness, prospered together as husband and wife. When was this
once? It is so known an untruth what he speaks, as I need not say any thing to
it, only wish him hereafter to pray with David, set a watch (O Lord) before my
mouth, keep the door of my lips. I could multiply instances of the continual
dissentions and differences between King and Parliament, from the beginning of
his Reign down al along to this present Parliament: and for the People, such as
were most sincere and pious lived not quietly and lovingly together with him,
but suffered extremly under him, even to the spoiling of their goods,
imprisonment, banishment, and some loss of life: and this only for the truth
sake.

2. In calling the King husband, and the Parliament wife: as the former was
false, so this is foolish.

And 3ly Is that true, that the Army have always lusted after the royal bed:
What? always, how are they then deeply revolted and turned back to the world?
In page 43. you say, they have been led up into the high things of God, and did
all things in the Spirit of God. But I shall not press it further.

4. I perceive you are a stranger to the groundwork of the Treaty, it is too
wonderful for you, and therefore have stated the thing amiss; it was to
advance the King's party, stop the course of Justice against Capital offenders,
that such as had notoriosly cheated the Kingdom might not be questioned, the
people brought again into their former bondage, such as would not, nor could in
conscience submit to their Church Government and other forms might be
suppressed, and under the name of Sectaries banished the Kingdom.

Lastly you say, There is a blessing in this Treaty, destroy it not: and tell
us how the Lord will come in as a thief in the night, and steal away the evil.
I answer, You may see the Lord is already come in, not in the night, but at
noonday, and has discovered the deceitfulness of it, the snare is broken and
we are escaped, and blessed be the Lord who has not given us as a prey to
their teeth.

Mr. Sedgwick is now come to examine their Reasons given in against the Treaty,
and here he finds sundry faults; First, Because they would make their own and
the puplick interest to be one.

Answ. 1. Howsoever such as have engaged for the public, are in some things to
be considered apart, and so their particular safety to be provided for: yet
does it not follow that they have therefore no interest in the public, or what
is offered to us by them is not the public, but their own particular interest?

2. I do not well know what he means by generally the people of the Land; if he
intends the King's party, all Papists and other malignants, I confess they go
not with the Remonstrance, but desire rather to see all things in the condition
they were in before these wars began: but for others (and this is properly the
public interest) they are one with the Army, holding fast to their first
principles, namely, To be free from all arbitrary and tyranical power, whether
in King or Parliament, to enjoy all their rights, privileges, and liberties,
to have all hurtful laws and customs removed, not to have their consciences
lorded over by any; to have justice done impartially upon offenders, and such a
Government to be established as most tends to a public peace and safety: And
therefore whereas he says, These devised things you propose, the people know
them not, affect them less than they know them: Unless by people he mean
Royallists, Delinquents, Malignants, and other treacherous plotters and their
adherents, it is not true: for the public do desire them, call for them, and
have a long time contributed their estates and engaged their persons in hope
that these things would at last be procured.

His Second Exception is, Because the Remonstrance propounds, That all power
should be in the hands of the Parliament, and that to be certain and in the
hands of a subordinate officer to call etc. There is a great deal here left
out, which makes the matter more full and clear, but I let it pass, let us
consider his reasons against this: It is to throw down a King and lords, and to
set up the people.

Ans. 1. The exorbitances and abuses of Kings and Lords may be taken off, and
yet their persons remain, and as much power left them as is their due. 2. The
rights and liberties of the people are above the places of Princes: for Kings
(if duly chosen) were set by the people for the better enjoying of their rights
etc. and therefore there is still in the people a standing power to alter their
former choice, and course of choosing if they se another way to be better for
them. 3. If by setting up of the people, he mean the exercising of that power
which God has given them, in changing one kind of government and setting
another more safe and profitable for them, it is well proposed: As he that
helps a man (being unjustly thrust out of his possessions) to set him into his
own again, is no way blameworthy.

2. He says, should you not rather propose, that all power, dominion and reign
should be given to the Lord? I must ingeniously profess here is a riddle, and
I understand it not: But good Sir, in your next, tell us what power or dominion
is taken from the Lord, in seeking to have good laws established, righteous
judgment executed, enormities removed, righteousness and peace practiced
amongst men. We have nothing more in his answer, but much harsh and bitter
language. It is said of Jews the Eleventh, he had a conceit, that every thing
did stink about him, all the odoriferous perfumes and fragrant savours they
could get could not ease him, but still he smelled a filthy stinch. It much
grieves me, that Mr. Sedgwick has so ill an opinion of the Army, that how
precious and sweet soever their Proposals are, yet all to his thinking is dung
and trash.

A Third Exception is, and a fault which he finds in them, That they all along
carry the interest of the public in opposition to the King's. Here he makes a
tedious and long discourse, and multiplieth words without knowledge: First he
says, The public has its interest in the King, and the King his interest in
the public. There is so much said in the Remonstrance, from page 16. to 35.
that if he had duly weighed and considered the same, he would not have written
as he does. It is not the Army as Swordmen that have cut the knot in pieces
and divided them, but indeed (as it is there abundantly proved) the King's il
courses, it is of himself that the union is dissolved, and he wholly lost his
interest in the public: for further satisfaction herein, I refer the Reader to
the Book; and Mr. Prin's Charge against the King: and the several Remonstrances
and Declarations of Parliament to the same purpose.

2. To omit his godding again of the creature, he tells us, how God is the God
of Kings more than of common men, assuming their titles: kingliness agrees with
all Christians: It is a bastardly religion that is inconsistant with the
majesty and greatness of the most absolute Monarch.

Ans. 1. Take notice Reader that in all this, there is not one word which
relates to the matter in hand. 2. As the Lord honoreth good Kings, so he is
terrible to wicked ones, cuts them off and powers out cuntempt upon them. 3.
Howsoever we grant that true religion is not inconsistant with monarchy, yet
we know, and experienee shows it, that there is no kind of civil government
more averse and opposite to the Kingdom of Christ and less helpful to it than
Monarchy. For the rest, which is the gathering all into one God and man into
one person, God and the King into one person: to mention it, is conviction
enough.

A Fourth fault which he finds with them is, In putting all the enmity against
godliness and the power of it on the King's part, and charging it upon him as
his interest, and assuming all religion and godliness to themselves. Here first
of all, he makes a large discourse in praise of himself, and speaks much in his
own behalf as the like I never observed in a man truly fearing God: It is
personal and therefore I pass it over: yet so, as I wish him hereafter to
remember that counsel of Solomon, Let another man praise thee, and not thine
own mouth, a stranger and not thine own lips. It was their custom at the
Olimpick games, that the winner should not put the garland on himself, but some
other was to do it for him.

Now to the Answer, which is very large, but summarily thus: A justifying of
the wicked, and condemning the righteous. Touching the Army he says, Their
ways are dark and slippery, crying up the Lord the Lord, when they do the
works of the Devil, they have not the power of godliness: And for the King's
party, They do not oppose them for purity, and are in their principles more
righteous than they, and many of their persons more sober, patient, loving,
gentle, yea, more knowing in the things of God than they. He further tells them
they are led to the destroying of others, as righteous as themselves, and are
kept off from the sight of their own iniquity: Next he mentions Romans 2.1, 2.
and Matt. 7.1. and hereupon sharply reproves them for accusing of others, and
whilst he is speaking it, accuses them to go besides all law and right, to
set up will and power, that they shed the true innocent blood of Christ, spoil
the temple of God, harden their hearts to pride, malice, and wicked insulting
over their brethren, and much more to this purpose: then speaking of the King,
he says, They persecute him whom the Lord has smitten, and he is the apple of
Gods eye, and that God has declared (and so much they know) rich mercy to the
King and his party in his book called The Leaves of the Tree of life. Thus
Reader I have in brief given thee a true account of all that he has written
from page 12. to page the 20. I shall here only in short take some few
observations and so go on.

1. What a bold challenge that is, page 12. where he Chalengeth the whole earth
to accuse him of any injustice to God or man: Now can there be greater
injustice, than to charge Gods people with manifest falsehood and untruth: Thine
own mouth condemns thee, and not I, yea, thine own lips testify against
thee. I hope I may without exception or offense use his own words, page 50. You
may read your description excellently penned long ago, 1 Timothy 4. speaking lies
in hypocrisy.

2. Is it not also great injustice to God (if not to prefer, yet) to equalize
Satan's working in wicked men, with the Spirits working upon the souls of the
Saints.

3. What sober, considerate, or wise man, as he is reproving another for rash
judging and uncharitableness, would at the same time show himself so
uncharitable and rash in the very same thing, as there is scarce a president or
example before of the like.

4. Is this Mr. Sedgwick's Justice upon the Armies Remonstrance; when there is
a true report made of the King's grievous crimes and miscarriages with his
party, not having any thing at all to gainsay the truth of the relation, to
vilify and reproach the reporters?

5. In sending us to his book, we take good notic of it, and what he there
says of the rich mercy to the King and his party: and from it do observe, how
extremly he is carried away with vain fancies, and publishing idle dreams to
the world: The Spirit speaks expressly clearly and with fullness of certainty,
which evidently demonstrates that in these things he speaks not by the Spirit
of God, seeing his words fall to the ground. In page 19. he begins to take into
consideration some grounds laid down in the Remonstrance why the King is not to
be received again to peace, nor restored to his Office and dignity, and
promises to let them see how much their injustice is against God and
themselves in that which they profess for justice.

1. Says he, you insist upon this page 24. God has given him so clearly into
your hands to do justice, and afterward God has given a double judgment
against him etc. and page 5. God makes have to judgment and has appeared at a
severe avendger. To this his answer is, The King is the greatest sufferer in
the kingdom; has God judged him? and why will you not submit to his judgment?
will ye take it out of Gods hand? when did God chasten or judge men, then give
him to men to chasten again? or when did Gods people fall upon punishing after
God has done it? is God weary or remiss, that you would have men take it into
their hands?

Ans. 1 It is a bad consequence because a man has bin a great sufferer,
therefore, no more should be inflicted: God punished Phaeraoh many ways and
greatly too, yet he hardening his heart had afterward, heavier sorer and deeper
plagues.

2. Men in the execution of justice upon offenders, take not judgment out of
Gods hand, but rather indeed are Gods hand in the work.

3. When God gave in a witness against Acan, that he had troubled Israel,
howsoever that was a Divine punishment upon him, yet did the people afterward
stone him to death, and so the Lord turned from the fierceness of his anger.

4. What weariness or remisness in executing judgment do men impute to God,
who having by his providence cast into their hands a principal offender, if
they according to his desert proceed to justice against him. The truth is, in
his Answer there is not one word that comes directly home to the matter for
which he brings it.

Secondly (he says) You argue page 24. no remorse appearing proportionable to
the offense: if that could be seen, you would regard it with a proportionable
tenderness toward him. Again you say, There is no change of heart, no
repentance, no free nor full yielding to all the parts of a public and
religious interest. This he refutes thus, Herein you destroy and deny that free
mercy of God upon which you have lived a long while, manifest that your
profession of the Gospel was indeed but in letter, not in power: God loves
first before we can, but you must receive good before you can give, you know
not the heart, nor can you judge of the Kings principles, they are too high for
you, If he should turn to you he should be but seven times more the child of
the Devil.

Howsoever Mr. Sedgwick for his own turn, takes some broken pieces of the
Remonstrance and touches not the strength of the matter, yet so much he takes
out as he cannot answer. But to the point, 1. It is agreeable to Gospel truth,
and walking in the power thereof, for Saints upon just occasion to lay open the
unrighteousness of men, and to endeavor that punishment* may be inflicted,
whether it be in an eclesiastical or civil way. 2. Observe the looseness of his
arguing, God loves first. What Is the inference? therefore offenders, as
murderers, thieves etc. ought not to be punished. 3. If I see and taste the
fruit I can easily discern what the tree is, without digging to the root. He
tells us page 31. The speech shows what is within, and cites Matthew. 12.34,
35. hence we may undoubtedly conclude, that men apparently and visibly wicked,
are corrupt and unfound within. 4. What the King's principles are, which are so
mysterious and deep we search not after them, his known principles are known to
be dangerous and destructive to the Nation, and he holds them without change or
amendment. 5. Is Mr. Sedgwick in good earnest and speaks as he thinks; that the
King should be seven times more the child of the Devil if he should turn to the
Army? What! in a condition better than they? yea, seven times better: surely
then they are very bad. In page 12. he says, He understands not the utmost of
the religion they walk in. This seems to make the accusation the more probable,
but many others less prejudiced against the Army, and better principled in
religion, know it is false, and that they are as holy and pure in conversation
as he himself, howbeit, with less noise, sound not a trumpet before them as
the hypocrites do.

Thirdly, He brings in the Remonstrance arguing against the accommodation,
because there is no equal balance of affairs, page 24. your meaning is (says
he) as you often express, the King's forces are wholly subdued. Here he is
short, Noble enemies require no more but to get their enemies into their power,
then they show mercy; for this he brings Elisha's example, 2 King. 6.22. and
add how the Lord never brings us down, but that he might restore us and lift us
up again.

Ans. 1. It is sometimes so far from commendation, to spare an enemy gotten
into our hands, as that not to do justice upon him, exeedingly displeases God.
To omit many instances, it is memorable in Ahab's case, what sad tidings the
Prophet brought him for letting Benhadad to escape, Thus says the Lord,
Because thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter
destruction: therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his
people: 1 King, 20.24. So Saul, his sparing of Agag when he was in his hands,
was one cause that the Lord did rend the Kingdom of Israel from him. Again,
what has been more frequently practiced by noble enemies than severity and
justice upon such as they have gotten into their power? who of all the Kings of
Canaan taken in war by Joshua, were not afterward by his appointment put to
death? So Samuel did Agag: and Jehu Ahaziah King of Judah. 3. Touching Elisha's
example in sparing the Syrians, it teaches us thus much, that in our own cause
we must render good for evil, and if our enemy hunger, feed him: and from his
words to the King of Israel we may gather, that men used not to kill such as in
the field were taken captives, and stood not out in hostility: But there is
nothing from the place to be collected, that justice may not be executed upon
some offenders for special and notorious crimes, whether subdued in war or
taken any other way.

Fourthly. The often caused war to maintain his interest against the public
interest this constantly and unweariedly; So the Remonstrance. At this Mr.
Sedgwick grows angry, and falls into passion: You lie grossly says he: But
wherein? These things which you propound were never thought of in the beginning
of the quarrel. The Parliament always professed never to alter the Government,
to protect the King's Person etc. Afterward we have something said in scorn of
their present form of government, with his fiction and dream touching the King.

Ans. 1. Touching the time when some things are to be proposed, it is the
necessary occasion which must always be considered: In civil affairs we see
what at one time may be born, others afterward upon just and good ground may
abolish and take away; or otherwise we should deny men the use of their sense
and reason.

Secondly, We know it is no Parliament principle that their votes and agreement
should be taken as the Laws of the Medes and Persians which alters not:
their constant practice is to alter and change as they see reason for it, and
therefore it is the weakest reasoning that can be, to argue the Parliament
voted so and so, therefore it must stand: For instance, the Prelates with their
courts, cannons, service book, and other dependances are abolished, and that by
vote of Parliament, now put case they should be (which God forbid) again
re-established, ask of a Royallist if there might not be enough said to
justify the Parliament in this latter act. Thirdly, For the odium and disgrace
which he puts upon their present form of government, calling it a headless
monster, a hoddy-doddy, an all-breach, able to affright solid and serious men
to their arms, and if he should fight against any thing, he should fight
against it, and page 12. brats of their own brain. Jn reading this, it makes me
think how Nichomachus in Plutarch very fitly answered an idiot, that could see
no beauty in the famous Helena painted by Zeuxis, take my eyes said Nichomacus
and you shall think her to be a goddess. J will not here speak how
treasonable his words are, as moving strongly to rebellion, and to raise a new
war, and to cause commotions again in the land: But J see it is true, In the
multitude of words there wants not sin, and he that refraineth his lips is
wise.

Fourthly, He should have cleared the King of the things laid to his charge, as
to have been the author and contriver of a most unjust war, and is consequently
guilty of all the innocent blood rapine, spoil, and mischief to the Kingdom,
as in the Remonstrance, page 24. add the loss of Rochel in France, by his
lending ships to the French King; and the Isle of Ree and Cales voyage, and the
ground and reason of the quarrel. How he endeavored to stir up factions and
differences between the honest party in England and Scotland, that he might
take advantage by such division: his open declaring in Parliament, that he owes
no account of his actions to none, but to God alone. What has been reported
about his Fathers death, and Marquis Hambleton, his design in bringing up the
Northern Army, and his large offers to the Scots Army to be brought up to
London to awe the Parliament, his usual breaking of his promises,
protestations, oaths, as in many particulars might be named, his sending over
the Jewels of the crown to be pawned by the Queen for powder and ammunition, to
fight against the Parliament, and the Privileges, rights, and liberties of the
subject. How he made 1500 widows in one morning as Mr. Henderson told him. And
concerning Ireland, how clear it is by many several passages, and by the
examination of Mar-carte, and Macquire, etc. that the pretense of men for the
King of Spaines service a year or two before the rebellion in Jreland was but a
color to keep some in arms for a foundation of that rebellion: how the Jrish
rebels call themselves, the kings and Queens Army, the first clause in the oath
enjoined by the supreme catholic council at Kelkenny in Jreland, was to
maintain his royal prerogative against the puritants in the Parliament of
England. Jn one of his letters taken at Nazeby he commanded the Earl of Ormond
to give particular thanks to Mustarre and Planket the two Arch-rebels in
Jreland: so diverse of the Jrish rebels had private passes from the King for the
heading of the rebels there. J Iet pass loans, shipmony, monopolies,
Knighthood, enlarging of forests, enclosing of commons, engrossing of
gunpowder, his unparrell uxoriousnesse and affections to the Queen, and
compliance with the Pope, etc. Now all these things Mr. Sedgwick should first
have answered, before he should have affirmed, Jf there be any, reason for a
Prince to take up arms against his subject: he has, and why so? because there
attempt is to destroy the King, and overthrow the very foundations of
Government, and a little before, the life of the King and his posterity is
aimed at. Answ. The premises granted to put him by, is a thing lawful and
necessary (of which more hereafter.) And this may be done without destroying
the very foundations of government, unless by foundations he means some
particular form or kind of government, but that is not proper to say, for the
foundations of government, is indeed that absolute entire and independent power
residing always in the people, and this foundation cannot be destroyed, J
mean the right and habit of it: though the use and exercise may be wrung'd
from them: so that to change and alter in respect of the form or kind of
governments by virtue of the said power it is in the peoples liberty whenever
they see just cause and reason for it.

Fifthly, For the rest, which is, first reproaching the Army, as to be their
design only to attain their end, malice, ambition, and revenge. And secondly,
That the King shall put all into Gods hand, and shall receive it again in the
life and glory of God. This is capable of no other answer but reproof and pity.

To follow Mr. Sedgwick in his own order, next he comes to answer page 26.27.
etc. which is the second part of the question, and a second reason against
accommodation: The safety of an agreement, here he takes some words out of the
Remonstrance, That the King has forfeited all his power into your hands; that
the people are free to make the best advantages, and page 27. having him and
his party captivated, and in their power. Reader, I profess unto thee in the
word of truth, here I have read over some leaves, and have done my best to see
what is in his answer, but for several pages together, as 23, 24, 25, 26, etc.
I find nothing therein, for I esteem not his calumniations, rash-judging,
self-prayse as any thing; and for this be thou thy self a witness.

Says he, We have all this while to justify our selves in this war, said, that
our war was but defensive, and if it prove otherwise, we must repent of it.
Answ. It is not always a fault to change from a defensive to an offensive way
and course. A man being set upon by a highway-robber, or pirate at sea, may at
first resolve only his own safety, and yet afterward seek to wound and kill
the enemy, and justly too* To apply this, when the war first began between the
King and Parliament it was unknown to us, what murders, massacres, and spoils,
he would commit, in and upon the land, and people. Again his former
perfidiousnesse, treacheries, and destroying plots, were not then so publicly
and clearly understood as since; and therefore no marvail there is a change
from defensive to offensive, seeing he has given the cause, and so no argument
of lightness, hypocrisy, self ends, in persons thus changed.

Secondly, He is large in giving out what was in their minds when they began
the war, That the King and His party were wicked men, not fit for the places
and power they had, they were Saints, and no body fit to rule but they: glad
when the Parliment took arms, think themselves the only true Lords, and
except the King would become one of their Saints, etc. Answ. It was a reason
which Elias laid down, why he was willing to die, I am no better then my
fathers; for men eminent in grace, gifts, office, etc. to have things laid to
their charge, which they never knew it, has been practiced in all ages, Mr.
Sedgwick is not the first, that has bent his tongue like a bow against the
godly this way. Tiberius on a time hearing certain persons speaking
unreverently of Augustus, acquainted him therewith, to whom Augustus answered,
let it not trouble you Tiberius that any man speaks ill of us, it is
sufficient that no man is able to hurt us: Gods presence with and protection
for the Army is such, as bad tongues cannot hurt them, neither darken their
splendour and beauty in the eyes of honest and godly people.

3. Next he blames them in saying, This miserable inconvenience of a Treaty,
this insnaring Treaty, and because they call it a preposterous and
self-deserting way. page 27. And hence he takes occasion to tell them that they
have defiled their cause, count all their own because they have fought for it,
they are no Saints, yet he scorns that cause that is subject to ruin and
destruction.

Answ. 1. What is said in the Remonstrance touching this last Personal Treaty,
is true enough, for who but Malignants and Papists were the first contrivers
and abetters thereof. The Lord Goring in his former intercepted letters could
tell us so much, that if the King could cudgel the Parliament into a Treaty the
King had brought his design to perfection: and it is reported of the King
Himself that he should say, if such a thing could be brought about, then it
should not be in the power of men or devils to hinder him from bringing all his
designs to his own hearts desire.

Secondly, For men to act for public rights, and to hinder wicked designs is
no base and accursed way, but an approved path, walked in by the Saints in all
former ages.

Thirdly, It is not faith but fancy, when God gives in means and ways of
preservation and safety, not to observe the providence in the careful use of
them.

Fourthly, He charge them to be of a base and poor spirit, and unbecomming
Christian Soldiers, to speak of persons engaged, the party adhering, and to
think the King will be revenged on them, for their eminent activity against
him. It is (says he) a principle very destructive to continue the disturbance
of a nation, to save our lives: afterward he shows what he would do himself
in such a case.

Answ. 1. It is easily observed what is the main drift and scope of his whole
dicourse in many pages here together, namely a direct crossing and
contradiction of Christ's counsel, Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as
doves: but according to his principle, a man cannot be a sheep, unless he
run himself into the lions mouth: nor a dove, without falling purposely into
the snare. Because the Army, to the doves innocence join the serpents prudence,
that is, seek to avoid danger so far as lawfully they may, hence he cries out,
Fear a snare, and the pit have taken hold of you. I laugh at your destruction,
and mock when your fear comes, you are no Saints, you live not in God, etc. as
if a provident care of safety, stood not with the fear of God.

Demosthenis upbraiding the Athenians with improvidence and incircumspection,
presented to them an innocent fool, who being struck on the one cheek, laid his
hand on the place where he received the blow, and being smitten on the other
did the like, never using either of his hands to defend himself from further
blows. Such idiots and blocks Mr. Sedgwick would persuade men to be, take
blows and stand still, and never seek to avoid the stroke, though God have put
means into their hands, and may lawfully escape the danger.

But Secondly, It is a great mistake of Mr. Sedgwick, to think that continuance
of the Army is destructive to the Kingdom, and that their disbanding would be
for the peoples peace, good welfare, he harps often upon this string, whereas
there is nothing more clear than the contrary.

Thirdly, For the rest of the answer, it is only what he has, and what he can
do, propounded in four heads: and I pass it over, if any man can make use of
it much good may it do him.

From page 27. to 37. we have a tyresome discourse of two things, The Armies
badness, and his goodness: their fear, his faith.

1. Whereas it is in the Remonstrance, We might challenge all story for one
instance in the like case: howsoever he grants a good use of story, yet in them
it is a dull thing etc.

Ans. 1. I never observed this principle before, Because men profess the
Kingdom of Christ, and have a light of truth and justice, that therefore they
should be incapable of the use of former story: does Religion take off from a
Christian, because a Christian? what is proper to every man, as a man moral,
civil, natural? 2. If there be a good use of story as he grants, then might
they at this time well challenge it reasoning the greater to the less, as
thus: If all Nations keeping their interest, and proceeding according to equity
and justice, have upon fewer and lesser crimes refused personal treaties with
their Kings, and called them to an account and done justice upon them according
to their facts: there is all the reason in the world, that the like be done to
this King whose exorbitances and enormities are beyond most parrellel instances:

Enquire (says Bildad) of the former age, and prepare thy self to the search
of the fathers; for we are but of yesterday. Sundry Histories and Authors might
be produced to manifest that Emperors and Kings not only have been restrained
for their Tyranny and misgovernment, yea, for not committing the evil which
this king has done: Take for instance (his name sake) Charles the Ninth King
of France four or five several conclusions of Peace were solemnly made and
ratified between the King and the Protestants, but no sooner made and
proclaimed, but presently violated of the King and the popish party, by
massacres and and new treacherous plots to extirpate the Protestant party; so
that every accommodation proved but a seminary of a new and more bloody war
almost to the utter ruin of France. In the year 1592. when a public peace was
made, and all differences to outward appearences, buried in eternal oblivion,
the King contrary to his faith and Oath caused the Admiral of France (the
Protestants chief pillar) as he departed from the Counsel to dinner, to he
shot with a Harquebuze, which carried away the forefinger of his right hand and
wounded him in the left arm. The King to color his treachery, swears with an
excreation to the King of Navarre and others who complained of this outrage, to
take such exemplary justice on the offenders, as the Admiral and his friends
should have cause to rest satisfied, command them to be pursued, appoints three
of the Parliament to make Information against them, protests after this again
and again, to be exeedingly sorry, that this Act touching His Honor, that He
will be revenged for it, so as the memory of it should remain for ever, writes
to Governors of the provinces, chief towns, and Magistrates, that He would take
such order as the Authors of so wicked an Act should be known and punished. And
to His Ambassadors to foreign Princes, That they should make it known to all
the world, that this Outrage did displease Him. And for the Admiral's safety He
commands the Captains of His Guard to give him as many of His Guard as he
pleased; to suffer no Papists to enter his lodging; and advises all the
Gentlemen Protestants then in Paris to lodge about the Admirals lodging. But
all this Court Holy Water was only to keep every bird within his own nest, and
a pitfal to entrap the chief of the Protestants: for the same day after dinner,
the King and Queen mother, the Duke of Guize, and others, take counsel to
murder the Admiral, and all the chief Protestants, the night ensuing, not only
in Paris, but through out all France, whilst they were sleeping in their beds.
Which most tyranical barbarous Tradgedy was accordingly acted, the Admiral
slain in his lodging, and his head cut off, carried to the King and Queen
mother, who causing it to be embalmed, sent it to the Pope and Cardinal of
Lorrain for an assurance of the death of their most capital enemy: all the
Protestants, Noblemen and Gentlemen, lodging in the Admirals quarters undergo
the like Butchery, the streets of Paris are strewed with Carkeises, the
pavements, marketplaces, and river dyed with Protestant blood, about ten
thousand of them being thus treacherously massacred in their beds, at such a
season when they thought themselves most safe, and that on the Lords own sacred
Day, a very unsutabe time for such a bloody profane, infernal sacrifice. No
sooner was this matchless treachery of this King against his own natural
subjects executed, but He avowes and justifies that which he but the day before
so solemnly and openly disclaimed, as a means to cut off al commotions for time
to come: of which we shall say more in its proper place.

2. He brings forth their main evil surmisings (as he calls them) as how apt
Princes are to break such accommodations, and how easy it is for them. Page
29. his answer hereunto is, that they are pursued with fear and wrath on every
side.

Answ. The simple believes every word, but the prudent man looks well to hi^
going. Do they in the Remonstrance manifest a jealousy and fear? what have
they now done? is there not a cause? for who knows not that it has been the
continual practice, of all such Kings when they have quieted the people by an
hypocritical and feigned yiedling to their proposals, and gotten themselves
into the Throne again, to pick quarrels, make breaches and commit greater
outrage and insolences, than ever they did before, without regard of faith or
oath.

Hear what Mr. Prinne says to this thing in his Sovereign power of
Parliaments. Part 2. page 34. It has been (says he) the constant practice of
most of our Kings (as John, Henry the 3. Edward and Richard the 2. with others,
who after war and differences with their Parliaments, Lords and Commons, upon
ACCOMMODATIONS made between them, as soon as ever they got possession of their
castles Ships Ammunition seized by their Subjects, break all Vows, Oaths,
Covenants made unto them, oppressing them more than ever, enlarging their own
prerogatives and diminshing the subjects liberties, (yea taking away many of
their lives against law, oaths, promises pardons) on purpose to enthrale them,
which still occasioned new Commotions. And a little after brings in this
Observation, Well then might the Royal Prophet give us this Divine caution, Oh
put not your trust in Princes: Surely men of high degree are already laid in
the balance, they are altogether lighter than vanity, both in their oath and
promises.

Again, This same Mr. Prinne in the Appendix page, 74. Commends it as a Maxim
held by the Nobles of Alphonso King of Castile, a cruel and treacherous Prince,
That a Tyrant being offended will at some time revenge himself, and therefore
they MUST NOT TRUST HIM UPON ANY RECONCILIATION.

Thirdly, For the rest, it is only his Prophecy touching the restitution of the
King to His ancient rights. How his suffering has made him a Royalist that
never cared for him, (mark it Reader who taught him that) the poor suffering
oppressed King and His Party shall have his compassion, and for the Army they
are upon foolish ways, hope for nothing but deceit and falsehood and treachery:
fear compasses them about on every side like Cain: safety flies from them, God
looked upon them every way with sadness and wrath: and much more of this
language. But I have metwithit so often as I am now quite tired out: I am glad
that His Excellency and the Council of War can so patiently bear it, it is a
great adition to their goodness and largenes of spirit.

The Eagle being provoked by the night-crow with her clamorous noise and
screeching to fight yet will not stir up to battle, howsoever the crow be too
weak for her.

And ti is attributed to a Horse as his praise and acting argues great courage
and mettle to him, when dogs bark at him and run after him, he will not turn
against them but runs forward as if he neither saw them nor heard them,
although he can easily trample them under his feet^

For the other particular which is a large praising of himself, I shall say
very little to it, seeing it relates not to the public cause for which I have
engaged: neither is it material to set down his words, for howsoever they are
a heap, and a huge one too. (see page 32, 33, 34, 35.) yet in short it all
amounts to this much: He dwells in that mountain where there is no hurtful
thing, fears no surprises being in a state not apprehensive of danger, sees no
evil, knows no evil, he lives where there is no more curse, death, nor sorrow,
etc. He can bind Kings, yea, the devil, and cast him into the bottomless pit,
dissolve all his works, and secure him within his own bounds, that he shall no
longer destroy the earth.

Christ says, If I bear witness of my self my witness is not true. But
leaving that question whither he speaks the truth: this is a truth without
question, that in this boasting practice, he walks contrary to all sober,
meek, humble, and self-denying Christians both past and present. If this do
not argue a man to be a boaster, proud, heady, high-minded, then I know not
what does: we judge the emptiness of the vessel by the lowdnesse of the sound,
brass tinckleth more then gold, and a bladder is soon blown up, but when it is
most swollen there is nothing in it, but a little air. The tree Alpina brings
forth the fairest blossoms of all trees, but the be suspects it to be
venomous, because it is so glorious, and therefore neither tastes it, nor
comes near it. If self praising may be admitted as a ground or reason to
suspect a person so doing not to be sound, Mr. Sedgwick surely more then any
man I know, gives cause of such a suspicion, in making himself so glorious with
his own mouth.

Two things I shall here commend to the Readers observation. 1. In page 49.
speaking of the Army, he says, Your condition is well-expressed, Esaias. 65.4,
5. which say, stand by thy self, come not near me, for I am holier then thou:
and often he taxes them for counting themselves Saints, righteous, holy, etc.
and judging the King and his party otherwise: whereas in the mean time, in 8 or
9. pages together, he has little else but calling the Army, dogs and devils,
and himself a Saint; they in Satan, darkness, hell; he in God, light, heaven;
they all fear, himself all faith; they deceivers, hypocrites, liars, but he
righteous, sincere, true; speak out Reader, have thou ever seen more palpable
grosnesse?

2. Jn page 34. he expresses himself thus: if you find any world in me, you
shall do me right to afflict it, break it, let it suffer, etc. It Is the best
thing J find in all his book, and it gives me the more encouragement to speak
to him of his error and failing, and the greater hope I have of his amendment:
now if the tree may be known by the fruit, and the speech shows what he is
within, as a stinking breath argues rotten lungs, and filthy inwards, then
without doubt this follows, to wit, that there is a great deal of world in
you, many sinful lusts, and vile affections, which need afflicting and
breaking: look upon these words, they are your own, page 36. and specially
applied to his Excellency and the General Counsel of War, You are cast out
and gone out, and live out the blessed and glorous presence of God, and so are
Dogs rated by God into a filthy kennel of base things, and are as fearful as
dogs.

I do not set this down as if in other places there were not the like words,
but to lay it before you (as a glass) that you may see there is world in you,
and what an unruly tongue you have to power out evil things. If any man seem
religious, and bridleth not his tongue, but deceives his own heart, that man's
religion is vain. Likewise your boasting and glorying, it is a thing altogether
unbeseeming a Child of God: The Saints have scorned and loathed it, it is no
song of Zion; Paradise excludes it, in the new Jerusalem are no self-praisers,
but all praysers of God: it is the spirit of Antichrist to say, I am, and none
else besides me: the dialect and tongue of a Pharisie and hypocrite, to say, I
am not as other men. But specially I must tell you of a world and wickedness in
you, (I say not a word of wickedness) which is your idle fancies and dreams,
Lord, what a deal of froth and foolery is there forth in the world under the
name of William Sedgwick: and that late Nonsense, The Spiritual madman, shows
how more and more Satan beguiles you and carries you on with stronger
delusions. Now the good God for his Christ's sake heal your error and restore
you to sobriety, truth, and the spirit of meekness.

Having ended with his Answer to the Armies exceptions against the Treaty: next
he leads it unto two Objections mentioned in the Remonstrance

1. Their former declaring for the King and compliance with Him, And here he
repeates some of their words, 1. Partly necessitating us for the present
prevention of that mischief to the public they were running into in that kind
as we apprehended. 2. That moderation was but hypocritical. 3. We aimed not at
the strengthening our selves to the ruin of any person, but to prevent etc. And
afterward you repeat and say, 'Twas error, unbelief and carnal counsels.

To let pass how he says, There Is no kind of men can be such complete and
neat knaves as a Jesuit, a Pharisie, an old well-studied-Professor of religion:
And also his bold speech, That he knows their ways and hearts.

His answer contains a threatening, to shame them for iniquity of holy things,
and to show the abomination of their Reformation.

1. He says, "It was not their sin to carry out principles of "goodness and
tenderness to all.

I answer, It was Jehoshaphat's failing, and the Lord blames him for it,
saying, Should thou help the ungodly? Which shows that aid and assistance
yielded to some may be unwarrantable as the case stands.

2. For his saying, In your turning, now you turn not to God. The answer is, If
God justify, who can condemn? His heaping up reproachful words proves nothing,
only argues an il governed tongue.

3. Is the fight of sin and godly sorrow for it, a miserable and dark principle
and a very wicked practice? We know better: The Apostle says, If we say we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And therefore
in the Remonstrance, they speak as Saints and true Christians, when they say,
We find matter of acknowledgement before the Lord concerning our error,
frailty, unbeleef. For indeed, the days of faith, are as the days of the
year, some fair sometimes foul, one while a sunshine summer, another while a
long and tedious winter: A Christian soul between faith and fear, is like a
piece of Iron between two Loadstones the one drawing one way the other drawing
another way. Gal. 5.17. As a valiant man may startle at the sudden discharge of
a piece of Ordnance behind his back, who otherwise having time to collect and
summon his spirits would not fear to stand at the mouth of a charged Cannon in
a good cause: Thus it is with the godly and so it seems to be the Armies case,
a sudden gust or storm coming unawares startled them: But since the Lord
having drawn up their spirits, filled what was empty, and laid in promises on
their hearts of his presence and protection: Now they fear not what man can do,
but in the strength of God are resolved to break through all difficulties, go
forward in spite of all opposition, hold their own, and stand fast in the
work, making this use and advantage of their former slip, to look the better to
their steps and walkings, and seek in their actings Gods glory the more.

The Second thing is, The Covenant, which oblieges to the preservation of the
Kings Person and Authority. Here (as his manner is) he takes out of the
Remonstrance some pieces and broken sentences, as that clause page 55. In the
preservation of true Religion and Liberty of the Kingdom: so page 57. If it
have an evil sense it calls for repentance: 'twas betwixt man and man. Page 59.
And after (says he) you would exclude God from being any thing but a witness.

Before I come to his answer, I shall propound some few things to the Readers
consideration:

1. A Covenant though lawfully made, yet if afterward it cannot be performed
without sin, in such case it binds not, neither may it be kept: For it is a
truth without dispute, we may not do evil that good may come thereof.

2. That Covenant is not binding where the condition or thing is not performed
upon which the promise or tie was made. For instance, the people oblieging
themselves, to preserve the Person of the King and His Authority, intended
withal their own Safety, Liberties, Rights: upon this ground, I say, they
Covenanted, namely, the public safety: seeing therefore the public good is
inconsistant with the preservation of his person and authority, that covenant
binds not, for when something is promised for such a cause, and afterward is
found not to be, that promise is void. so Amesius.

3. If men either implicitly or knowingly bind themselves to break any Law of
God or rule of justice, in such a case the engagement holds not; specially in
that particular, and so far as that clause extends. To apply it, if men
oblige themselves to preserve the Kings Person and Authority, etc. and God in
the mean time calls for justice, their obligation must give place to his
commandment.

But it will be objected how Joshua and the Elders of the Jews, kept covenant
with the Gibeonites, Joshua 9. howsoever devoted to destruction. I answer, that
covenant was lawful: see Deuteronomy. 2.26. Josh. 11.19, 23. Judge. 2.12.14. 2 Samuel
21.1, 2.29, 14. Deuteronomy. 20.10. By all which places it appears that they only
of the Canaanites were devoted to destruction, who did not seek for peace; for
if they would sue for it upon these conditions, to wit, abjure their idolatry,
embrace the true religion of the Jews, and submit themselves, their land, good,
and all they had to their dominion it was to be granted them.

Fourthly, It is no binding oath when either there wants power and right in the
administrator, or the persons taking it are not capable of the thing put upon
them: and here to speak my mind freely, I have not yet seen a clear ground
either for the one or other touching that covenant.

Fifthly, Take notise when persons enter into covenant about things, out of
their power and right, such covenants are neither lawful nor to be kept. I
would willingly know what was meant by the preservation of the Kings person and
authority; whether notwithstanding all the tyranny and oppression he should
commit, it was yet intended to preserve him from justice, and to keep him in
his place of government; if so, then it was an unlawful covenant,
protestation, oath, because they had no right or power to do such a thing: it
being a thing against the Law of God, nature, and nations, and so went beyond
their bounds. But if in taking it, it was intended, by preserving the person of
the King, his authority, etc. so far as it should be agreeable to justice, law,
conscience, it was tolerable, and no otherwise.

These things premised, the less will serve in reply to his answer. 1. To that
he says, God put the preservation of the Kings life and authority into the
covenant on purpose to save him after all his sufferings. Answ. 1. This is
only his saying, and we may deny it with as much reason, truth and authority.

2. If God save him not (he means a temporal salvation, or else speaks
impertinently) then he put him not into the covenant for such a purpose; for
Gods counsel and purpose shall stand.

But 3. Charity thinks no evil; it is the rule of love when speeches or actions
are doubtful in themselves, and in their report; and may be taken either well
or ill, always to interpret them in the best part. The preservation of the
Kings person is in the covenant, but how? if we will judge charitably (seeing
nothing is explained) it is thus, the covenanters intended the glory of God in
the Kings preservation, that is, obliged themselves so far as it be lawful
and honorable.

Secondly, That oaths and covenants should be the main pillars of humane
societies, we grant, but there is one thing which you still want, and that
makes you to err, namely distinctions: do you mean all covenants and oaths, I
desire to think better of you; and that your meaning is only just ones; but
howsoever hereafter learn to make distinction, and it will prevent much
stumbling in you.

3. That these are the last and perilous times spoken of 2 Timothy 3 1. we will
take it so; and do observe your Greek (...) accusers, you speak also of
applying that text; you need not go far to make application: for certain,
if your pamphlet were divided into ten parts nine of the ten would be found
vile slanders, and false accusations. It may be the Lord will smite you, and
make your heart tender for it.

Mr. Sedgwick by this time is near come to the proposals, that the Person of
the King may be brought* to justice: but before he takes of that, he tells us,
This is a strange remedy against civil wars, to lay aside treating. Answ. 1.
We may well desire to have that laid aside, which we assuredly know was devised
and carried on to the prejudice and hurt of the public, and so a remedy worse
then the disease. 2. You mistake your self to say, treating is laid aside, for
it is neither so nor so: unless you will say, that a sick man lays aside the
means and remedy of health, when he refuses bloody and murderous mountebancks
and quacksalvers, and make choice of honest able and faithful physicians.

Secondly, Speaking to the Army, you say of the King, page 41. Jf he were in
power you would shrink out of the Kingdom. Answ. 1. Jn this you show much
lightness and contradiction, say and unsay, and indeed know not what you say:
sometimes in your prophetical fooleries you cry up the King, that when he
comes again to be in power, he shall be meek, merciful, full of divine
goodness, and in particular do assure the soldiers that he will forget the
wrong they have done him; and here you threaten them, if he were in power they
would shrink out of the kingdom. But 2. J verily believe (howsoever like
Caiaphas, probably he knew not what he said, yet) in this he speaks the very
truth, that is, if he were in power, honest men would shrink out of the
Kingdom. For as a Lion at liberty, after some restraint, is more fierce,
cruel, bloody then he was before; so he, following the steps of former tyrants,
would exercise more cruelty outrage and oppression then ever he did before he
was hunted, taken, and shut up. That is a remarkable passage in the seventh
book of the Remembrances of Monluc one of the Marshals of France, and a professed
Papist, speaking of the massacre at Paris, The King, (says he) never forgot
the chase that the Admiral gave him from Meaux to Paris, swifter then ordinary,
kings sooner forget a good piece of service then any offense. Afterward he
says, J wonder how a man so wise as the Admiral in worldly matters, could
trust the King, but he paid well for it, for it cost him his life and many
more. This witness is true, and this thing well to be thought of by his
Excellency, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell, and such men: for confident J am, were this
King again in his power, notwithstanding all his promises, protestations,
oaths, he would not forget how they chased him in such a place, made him run
for it at such a time; and they should be served just as the Admiral of France
was, if he could not be revenged on them some other way.

George Bucanan (King James his own tutor) records a memorable story to show
the falsehood and dissimulation of Princes in their treaties with the people.
Durstus the eleventh king of Scotland, giving himself to all deboistnesse,
first* banished his fathers friends from him, as the troublesome reprehenders
of his pleasures, and sending for the most vicious young men to be his
companions, gave himself to luxury and venery; he prostituted his wife
(daughter to the King of Britain) to his companions, and banished her. At last
the Nobles conspiring against him, he awaking as it were out of sleep,
considering that he should find no place of safety, neither at home nor abroad,
being equally hated of strangers and subjects, thought best to counterfeit
repentance of his former life, for so he might retain his Crown, and afflict
punishments on his enemies. Wherefore recalling his wife from exile, he first
of all endeavored to reconcile himself to the Britains: then calling the
chiefest of his subjects to him, he ratified with a most solemn oath the
oblivion of his former courses, he committed every most wicked person to
prison, as if he reserved them for punishment, and religiously promised, that
he would do nothing hereafter, but by the advice of his Nobles. When by these
things he had given assurance of his sincere mind, he celebrated the agreement
with pastimes, banquets, and other signs of public gladness: and now all
men's minds being taken up with joy, he called most of the Nobility to a Supper;
where, when he had shut them up (improvident and unarmed) in one room, sending
in his assasnates, he slew them every one. But what follwed, this inhumane
action so incensed and exasperated the rest with new flames of wrath and
revenge, as ( ad muisum portentum tollendum, eonjurantibus) all agreeing
together to take away this detested monster; gathered a great army and slew him
in battle with his wicked confederates.

The like falsehood and dissimulation he sets down of James the Third King of
Scotland, upon promise of reformation, the Nobles dismissed him, but he
immediately falsified his oath, and thought upon nothing but revenge, blood, and
slaughter: whereupon, knowing him to be so false and perfideous, they would
yield to no terms of peace, but slew him in battle as a common enemy. I shall
close this point with Bodins Observation, If a Tyrant (says he) he but shaken
and not quite overthrown, he will commit horrible murders of the best Citizens,
to satisfy and settle his tyrrany: For a tyrant that has esaped the hands of
such as had conspired against him, he becomes mad and furious like a wild
beast, that sees his own blood. Lib. 6.

3. He makes much ado, about offering to God the blood of men as a sacrifice to
appease his displeasure etc. This he calls an unparrelled wickedness.

Ans. As God makes inquisition for blood, so the standing law is, He that
sheddeth man's blood by man shall his blood be shed. It Is who so, whether Kings,
Lords and Commons, the Commandment takes all in indiffinitly without respect
of persons: Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer which is
guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death, Numb.. 35.31. Thine eye
shall not pity him, but thou shall put away the guilt of innocent blood from
Israel, that it may go well with thee, Deuteronomy. 19.13. Signifying that the rooting
out of sinners turns away Gods wrath from a people: according to Solomon, to
do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord than sacrifice, Prove.
21.3. Thus Solomon took away the innocent blood which Joab shed from him and
the house of his father. Thus the fierce wrath and anger of the Lord was turned
away from Israel when they took the heads of the people and hanged them up
before the Lord against the sun, Numb. 5.4. Thus when seven of the sons of Saul
were hanged up in Gibeath of Saul, after that the Lord was entreated for the
land. 2 Samuel 21.6.14. Thus we see what Gods will is to appease wrath, and what
the people of God have formerly done, and therein pleased the Lord. To say
therefore as he does, It Is such u sacrifice as was never yet by the darkest
heathens invented. It shows his ignorance, not only in humane history, but his
great contradiction and opposition to sacred truth, and his seeking to have the
land remain defiled and full of blood and other pollutions, that God may yet
plague us yet seven times more: Besides, there is nothing here propounded and
desired by the Army, but what the Parliament has resolved long since in the
Declaration of August 18. 1642. in these positive words: The Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, do declare, That all such persons as shall upon any
pretense whatsoever, assist His Majesty in this War with Horse, Arms, Plate,
or Money are Traitors to His Majesty, the Parliament, and Kingdom, and shall
be brought to condign punishment for so great an Offense. And this they have
since seconded in sundry other Declarations and Impeachments. Fourthly. For
that most notorious falsehood of his (because his Excellency and the Council of
war crave that justice may be done) to say, It is the foul and black design of
a few unbeleeving people. I let it pass, the Lord I know will rebuke him for
it, For as in this, so in all the rest he manifests himself to be one of that
number, who have said with our tongue, we will prevail, our lips are our own,
who is Lord over us? But for the persons upon whom you have laid so grievous an
aspersion, this is their comfort and rejoicing in the Lord, that as God knows
their hearts so he knows the sincerity and singleness of them, that they look
at his glory in seeking after the public good. As the clouds can neither
lessen the light of the sun, nor let the course thereof, because at the last
they are scattered by the heat of the sun which shines out most comfortable:
So the innocence of their persons and justness of their cause, shall disperse
and drive away all black clouds of calumniations, and the mouth of him that
speaks lies shall be stopped.

Now we come to the great work propounded in the Remonstrance, That that
Capital and grand author of our troubles, the Person of the King may be
brought to Justice, for the Treason, Blood, and Mischief, he is there guilty of.

Here I find Mr. Sedgwick in his answer to say very little to it. But 1. That
no Law takes hold of the King. 2. The crown is his birthright and inheritance:
for the rest it is either a justification of the King, as to be better then
they: or bitter reproaches.

Because this is a high subject, and a business a foot, I shall therefore
speak the more largely to it, not de facto but de jure: for the Treason, Blood,
etc. laid to the King: I shall leave that charge to others more concerned in
it, only I shall show what justly and lawfully may be done in such a case.

And for the Readers clearer information and better understanding of the point,
I shall here assert 5. things.

First, That there is a supreme and Sovereign power always residing in the
people above Kings.

Secondly, That all Kings, in all places, and at all times, have been, and
still are subject to, and under Law.

Thirdly, That the people have the power, not only to call their Kings to an
account, but to censure and remove them for their tyranny and misgovernment.

Fourthly, That no nation is so tied to any form of civil government, but that
it is lawful for the people to alter it into another form or kind upon
occasion.

Fifthly, That amongst all the forms of civil Government, Aristocraticall or
popular is best and safest for the people.

For the first, That every Magistrate, (be he Emperor or King) is inferior to
the whole Kingdom and people, it may plainly be demonstrated.

1. Because he is not only their servant, but creature too, being originally
created by, and for them: now as every creator is of greater power and
authority then its creature, and every cause greater then its effect, so the
authority and power of the people, which creates the Prince and his princely
power, and enlarges, limits, or restrains it, as there is cause, must needs be
greater then the Prince or royal power. And though Principallities, (as
generally considered) be of God, yet the constitution of Princes and their
several degrees of power are merely from men: hence it is that Peter speaking
of Kings and their supremacy, calls them (...) every creature or ordinance of
man. 1 Pet. 2.13. because originally instituted, limited, and continued, by,
and for the use and service of the people, whose creatures (as we said)
ministers and servants they are, and ought to be, and from them receive their
whole jurisdiction, power, and authority.

Besides howbeit principallities as generally considered, be indeed of God, yet
the constitution of all Princes and their several degrees of power are merely
from men: and this cannot with any show of reason be denied. For if the regal
authority of Princes were merely from the Law of God and nature, it should be
the same, and like it self in all Kingdoms; but it is not the same and like it
self in all kingdoms, but as every people please and make a free choice of:
nevertheless every form and kind of government is equally lawful, and good
in it self (whether Monarchy, Aristocratie or Democratie) as all, on all sides
do acknowledge.

2ly. It is a thing neither probable nor credible, that any free people, when
they voluntarily incorporated themselves into Kingdoms, of their own accord
set up an elective King over them, that there was such stupidity and madness
in them, as absolutely to resign up their sovereign and popular power,
authority and right to Kings and their heirs for ever, and to give them an
entire, full, and incontroulable supremacy over them, and so to make the
creature inferior to the creator, the derivative greater then the primative,
the servants more potent then themselves, and thus of free men to make
themselves slaves, and for their more safety to be more enslaved. But the
contrary appears by the peoples constant practice in all ages, as we shall
manifest hereafter.

But admit (which with sense cannot be imagined) that such a thing had been so,
yet the Fathers could not take in their posterity with them: neither oblige
them any way in point of equity and conscience, to confirm and observe what
they foolishly had done: but their children afterward might lawfully; yea, and
ought to stand fast in the liberty which the law of God, nature and nations had
made them free, and not be entangled in the slavish yoke and bondage of their
forefathers. Hence Amesius in his cases of Conscience, lib 5. cap. 22. Qu. 2.
resolves, that all fatherly power is in procuring the good of children, and
shows in the next cha. That liberty in natural estimation is next to life it
self, and of many preferred before it.

3. Common reason, Law, and experience manifests that the whole or greatest
part in all public or natural bodies is of greater excellency, power, and
jurisdiction then any one particular member. Thus in all corporations the court
of Aldermen and common counsel is of greater power then the Major alone, though
the chief officer: so the whole bench then the Lord chief Justice; and the
whole Council then the President. And it is Aristotle's express determination,
Polit. lib. 1. cap. 2. and lib. 3. cap. 8. and lib. 4. cap. 8. what form of
government soever it be; whatsoever seems good to the major part of the
people, that is more excellent, and to be preferred before any part or member
thereof; and that it is unfit the part should be before the whole: and he gives
for it his reason thus, The people know what is profitable, necessary, and good
for them, better then their Kings, who are their public ministers: and thus
concluding, itaque majorum rerum potestas jure populo tribuitur. Therefore
power of the greater things is by right the peoples.

4. This may also appear by the histories and records of all Kingdoms in the
world, where Tyrants forced not in by conquest and held not possession
afterward by force. In the Roman state both under their Kings and Emperors,
the chief power in all things of highest concernment, was always in the Senate
and people; and so much Bodin grants, That the people hadt he chief Sovereign
power of enacting and confirming Laws, the Senates decrees being of no
validity, unless the people ratified them, and if any of their Kings, Consuls,
Emperors, or Generals did things without their consent (as making war,
concluding peace, etc.) it did not bind but was merely void, unless the Senate
and people together in a great assembly ratified the same by a public Law.

But to let pass foreign examples, our ancestors in this Kingdom, (which
shows what power was invested in the whole body of the people) have not only
constrained our Kings by threats yea, force of arms to summon and continue
Parliament* but likewise compelled them to give their royal assents to Magna
Charta, Charta de Foresta, Confirmatio Chartarum, Articuli super Chart as, with
sundry other public statutes of right and justice for common good, and the
subjects safety; and to ratify them with their hands, seals, oaths,
proclamations, against their will and liking, which forced assents have been
afterward justified, and held good in law, to bind these kings and their
followers to the due observation thereof; for where the laws are convenient,
necessary, or essential for the Kingdoms welfare, the Subjects just liberty,
and safety, and such as the King by duty and oath is bound to assent to, there
if they compel the King to give his assent in case of denial the assent is
binding, and shall not be void by Duresse, because the King does no more then
he is obliged by oath law and duty to condescend unto, and the people (whose
power is above him) may justly require.

5. And now in answer to Mr. Sedgwick affirming the Crown to be the Kings
birthright, a thing which I utterly deny, and have clear reasons against it.

For 1. Howsoever here in England the Crown has gone often by descent, yet
never was it granted absolute successive, and heretary but arbitrary and
elective. Hence many of our Kings have come to the crown without any hereditary
title by the peoples free election, and afterward obeyed as lawful Kings.

Thus Anno. 975. after Edgars disease not Ethelred the heir to the former King
but Edward crowned. So Edmund heir to King Ethelred refused, and Canutus a
stranger elected, and crowned. So Edmund and Alfred both heirs, set a side, and
Harald and Hardiknute elected and crowned Kings. I might also show how upon the
death of King Harald it was enacted by the English Nobility That none of the
Danish blood should any more reign after them. So after William the first, not
Robert the elder brother but Rufus the younger brother chosen: So after the
desease of Richard the first, John Earl of Morton was crowned and Arthur the
right heir refused.

The like might be manifested of other nations how their kings did not reign
heretarily and by succession from father to son, but those were chosen Kings
amongst them which were held worthy, which election was made by the people, and
revokable by them at any time: and whenever the Crown went now and then by
succession, it was by usurpation rather than right. From humane Histories we
might come to the holy Scriptures, and show that the original creation and
constitution of the Isralites Kingdoms proceeded only from the authority and
power of the people, and that solely by Divine permission rather than
institution, as is apparent by Deuteronomy. 11.14, 15.

And howsoever the Lord did sometimes immediately nominate the persons of those
that should reign over them, as Saul, David, Jehu, Jeroboam etc. yet the people
did constantly confirm and make them Kings, and gave them their royal
authority, none being made Kings by Divine appointment, but such as they
willingly accepted, approved, and confirmed to be kings; Gods previous
designation being but a preparative to their voluntary and free election.

Moreover, It is very clear that the kings of Judah and Israel were subordinate
in power to the people, and not only counseled but usually overruled by them,
in all matters of public concernment; for though they asked a king, yet they
reserved sufficient authority to themselves, to restrain him, and to order and
dispose of the public affairs as they thought good. But these things we have
reserved to a larger treatise.

2. Howsoever, Bodin contrary to Aristotle, Tacitus, Lipsius, Toloso, Machavel,
Kirchnerus and the greatest Polititions prefers succession before election of
Kings and instanceth several nations to be heretary; yet this I say, quo jure?
from the beginning it was not so, for every heretary Crown, is through custom
not of right, howsoever people have let it pass, and admitted them in such a
way, yet this has been still in the people a free act, and it was in their
liberty and power to have chosen any other.

3. Whereas some Kings require an oath of their subjects, that their heirs and
successors shall enjoy the Crown after them, and the grounds of taking this
oath, is, upon an opinion that the Crown goes by succession from father to
child (so that in their understanding they give not any thing away from
themselves, but only acknowledge what they conceive the person already is) Now
this oath being given, and taken upon a false ground cannot bind in point of
conscience, because if they knew it was not the others right they would not
swear, neither meant they in the least to pass away any thing of their own
right, for they thought it was the others properly before.

And here by the way, observe how vain and groundless that common question
(pro and con) is amongst Politicians, Statists, Civilians, and some Divines,
whether succession or election be the better, as if truly and rightly there
were some such thing as succession, whereas it is neither so nor so. I confess
after a Kings desease, the people may elect and crown the son and his sons son,
but that any such thing can be claimed or challenged as a birthright, it is
altogether untrue, there is no Kingdom in the world where the crown descends
from the father to the son by any true and proper succession: the most that can
be is not simple succession, but a succession limitable and conditional, that
is a promise on the peoples part (for some considerable causes) that the son
shall be crowned after the fathers death if he be fit to govern, and they see
it is for their good. But that any people should absolutely bind themselves to
have the son reign over them after the fathers death should he be a fool, a
knave, a madman, a tyrant, either such a thing was never meant, or if it were
ever so, such people therein showed themselves either to be fools, knaves,
madmen, or children, as doing a thing against all reason, all right, the
manifest law of God, and very light of nature.

And this we further add, That whatsoever covenants or contracts have been
between former Kings and our Ancestors about succession, and what acts of
Parliament, laws, statutes they have made about it, they are no way binding to
us, neither are we thereto related or concerned in the same. If two men make a
contract together, that the son of the one shall marry the others daughter, if
these children be under age, they have liberty and power (especially their
fathers being dead) to do as they think good being come to age, neither does
that pre-contract bind them, but they are still free, and may dispose of
themselves as they see good, that is, they have liberty and power to marry any
other if they see it more convenient and necessary. So I confidently affirm,
whatsoerer Crown Contract has been made by our forefathers in our nonage,
pitch where you will touching this succession, we have our liberty to take or
refuse and are in point of conscience no more bound to crown the heir of
William the Conqueror, Henry the Eight, James the Sixth of Scotland, or this
King Charles than any other man: but if we will (to be like other nations)
still have a King, such then is our liberty and freedom now, that we may (yea
and ought) to elect and crown such a one whom we shall find to be best
qualified and fittest for us.

Now we come to the next general Head, That Kings are, and ought to be bound by
Laws, and are not to be exempted from them. I shall not at this time show the
flattery and vanity of some Sycophants and Parasites, who affirm, that people
may not prescribe any law to their Prince: that Kings are above law: Now
touching that senseless distinction of Bodin and others, who hold that the
Supreme Magistrate, howsoever bound to the laws of God, of Nature, and Nations,
yet are free from all Civil laws prescribed by themselves: nor that Court
destinction between Law directive, and coactive, what Kings should do; and
what Kings may do: This I say with Pareus, Superior Magistratus est subjectus
legibus divinis and suae republicae: The supreme Magistrate is subject to Gods
laws, and to the laws of his own Commonwealth. Comment: in Romans C. 13. dub.
6. yea, more strictly obliged to observe his own laws than subjects, and
departing from the law becomes a Tyrant: and therefore the whole kingdom which
is above the King, may not only bind him by laws, but question him, and punish
him for the breach of them: And this is a most certain truth (howsoever by some
slavish pens opposed) that all Kings are so far bound to the laws and customs
of their kingdoms, that if they violate and alter them at their pleasure, they
may truly be called Tyrants according to Aristotle, and herein absolve their
people from their aleagence which they have made unto them. Take for instance,
the united Netherland Provences, who for this very cause did declare Philip
King of Spain to have fallen and cut himself off from the Seignorie of the
Netherlands, and caused a new form of an oath to be drawn in manner of an
abjuration of the King of Spain, every one swearing duty and obedience unto the
Estates by the public officers and magistrates of every town and province, the
which thing was, and still is by all Protestants and reformed Churches
justified and approved lawful.

I could here set down many such examples of other Nations, who by their laws
required their Kings to be subject to their laws as well as any other, yea all
nations (except where tyrants have reigned) have always had some law to
restrain their kings from excesses and abusive courses. Besides all good
Emperors and Kings in all ages have professed and practiced the same. Trajan
acknowledged that the Prince was not above law: and giving the Sword to any
Praetor or Co^mander, he would say, Hoc gladio contra me utitur, si in
rempublicam peccavero. The like said Theodosius, and Valentinian, Emperors:
Digna est vox Majestate regnantis in legibus alligatum se Principem profiteri.
lib. 4. cap. d. leg. prin. So Antiochus the Third, King of Asia, is, commended
that he writ to all the Cities of his kingdom, If there should be any thing in
his letters which should seem contrary to the Laws they should not obey them.
These men knew it is God only that may do in heaven and in earth what he
pleases, as for man (whether Emperor or King) he is under law and therefore
must do nothing but what is lawful, just, and right.

And for more authentic proof we could produce the Kings of Israel and Judah
who had no arbitrary power to do what they pleased nor exempted from laws, but
inferior too and obliged by them as well as subjects: this is evident by
sundry impregnable texts, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. Josh. 1.1.8. 1 Samuel 8.11. to 19. and
12. 14, 15.20 etc. Ezekiel. 46.18. The Jewish Doctors from these words I will
visit their transgression with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the
children of men. 2 Samuel 7. write that it was a custom in Israel, If their Kings
transgressed against the law of the King, they were to be scourged for it.

But the question is not so much, whether Kings are under law (for this now
begins now to be generally granted) but the question is, If Kings do break law,
what is their punishment, and who shall do it. The answer to this belongs
properly to the next point yet something I shall say to it in this place. For
my part I have not yet seen in any man's writing, new or old (though never so
great a Kings-man) any clear and convincing reason, that seeing Kings are
subject to laws, both the law of God and of men, wherefore they should have any
immunity or be privileged from punishment appointed by law to such and such
offenses more than other men. Plainly thus, If King or Prince be a Murderer, a
Traitor, a Pirate, an Adulterer, perjured etc. why the punishment due to other
murderers, traitors etc. and for the like crimes inflicted upon them should not
be executed upon the other, King, or Prince, what the custom has been, or what
partial laws foolish and ignorant men have made, I count as nothing let reason,
justice, and Divine precepts be considered. Hence let us take light and
information. First, as for the law of God, it goes generally and takes all in,
quisquis, siquis quicunque: whosoever, if any man, what mansoever, if a
murderer, an adulterer etc. let him die the death: Kings and Princes are not
here exempted.

And Secondly, In the point of Justice, it is without any dispute. For (...) is
Justice of (...) to part, or divide in two. Hence (...) Judge, (as it were
(...)) because he cuts a thing in two equal parts. So in the definition,
Justice is Perpetua constansque voluntas jussuam unicuique tribuens. And for
distributive justice which according to Logicians is, either rewarding or
punishing this later Judicatory Justice is, qua Paenis debitas aequalitur
unicuique distribuit, which distributeth due Punishment equally to every one.
Again, If the offender because he is great, (as a king or prince) should
therefore be spared, it were directly to depart from Justice both in propriety
of speech and true definition (...) that is a right judgment not respecting the
person, to wit for his greatness, power, place, wealth etc.

Thirdly, For Reasons I have this to say, Wherefore Kings should be punished
according to law if not more yet as much as other men. 1 Because by their ill
example they do more hurt than other men. 2. Their sins do more provoke God and
draw down Divine wrath upon a nation and therefore there is the greater reason
that the Land should be purged of such pollutions.

3. The taking of this course would be very much for the public good and
safety: for if princes knew they should be punished as other men for their
crimes according to law, they would be as careful as other men to observe and
keep the same.

Oderunt peccare mali formidine paenae. 4. The practice of this would be a very
helpful means to save their souls; for whence comes it to pass, that they care
not what they do, but because whatsoever they do, they know no man will
punish them for it.

5. If this course were taken, there would not be such horrid and execrable
ways used to get Crowns, as poysning and murdering of fathers, brethren, etc.
but conscience then, and a desire to do good, would be the chiefest motives
leading men thereunto.

6. In constitution of a Prince, whatsoever is confirmed upon a man in respect
of office and authority, it does not any way make a change upon his Person,
neither puts him at any distance touching subjection to the Law more then he
was before; this relates only to a qualification, that is, the people judging
him to be fit, he is invested with a power and right to administer justice; but
for his personal estate that remains the same as formerly, neither is he by
this exempted from Law either directive or coactive, more then when a man is
made a Judge, Justice of peace, or the like.

In this case, Civil Magistrates, and Church officers are alike; what office or
function soever a man has in the Church of God, he is still under the power of
the Church, and for his person, the Church-censure can reach him still as it
did before. For the institution of Pastors, Teachers, or Elders, does not in
the least exempt or privilege such eclesiasticall officers, from the highest
censure of the Church more then any other member, if there be just cause to
proceed against them. And there is something to this purpose in the Popish
Cannon Law, how in case of heresy the Pope cease ipso facto to be Pope,
loses his spiritual jurisdiction and authority, and deserves justly to be
really deposed. Can. si. papa 40. Carer. Azorius Antonine 3. part: showing that
the office of a Pope adds nothing to the person of the man, for howsoever he is
above the rest for his place, yet he is still subject to the Law, and under
censure; yea, to be deprived of jurisdiction and Papacy, in case he prove an
heretic.

For conclusion then, this I positively affirm, and will stand to it, Where
Kings are under Law, and receive their Crowns from the people upon
protestation and oath to keep the Laws, and where the supreme Sovereign power
of a nation is invested in the Senate and people, there Kings for their Tyranny
and misgovernment may be convented, judged, and punished: neither are they more
exempted from the highest civil punishment then Eclesiasticall officers are
from the highest Church-censure, their persons are still in the same
consideration as other men's persons are, and therefore for their transgressions
(as other men) may be judged and punished.

Now to come to the third particular, which is, That the people have power not
only to convent, but to censure, depose, and punish their Kings for their
Tyranny and misgovernment. For the confirmation of this, I shall desire the
Reader to take notise: 1. What reasons there are for it. 2. What Law. 3. What
Scripture proof. 4. What prefidents and examples both of other nations, and
Kingdoms, as likewise of our own. 5. And lastly, what the judgment is of
learned men touching this thing.

Reas. 1. It is an undoubted rule of divinity and policy, that it is more
expedient that one man die (though a Prince or King) then the whole nation
should perish. John 11.50. and 18.14. If the right eye, or right hand offend,
it must be plucked out and cut off: as in the natural body if a member be so
corrupt and putrified, that unless it be taken away the whole body is in
danger to perish, in such a case for prevention and health sake, every one will
allow the cutting it off: so in the politic body, when the safety of the whole
lies in the removing of one or more unfound and bad members, it must be don,
and it is necessary it should be so: for it is a maxim in Philosophy, that
totum non subjicitur parti, sed pars toti; so again, totum non regitur motu
partis, sed pars totius, to which that is agreeable in the Poet: --
immedicabile vulnus
En se recidendum est, ne pars sincera trahetur.


Reas. 2. Kings being the people officers, ministers, creatures (as we said) it
must needs follow that they are responsable to their masters and makers, and
being found unfaithful stewards, they have power to displace them of their
trust and office. If the keeping of a city or castle be committed to a man, and
he betrays the same to the enemy, or dismantles the walls and fortifications,
to expose it unto danger, is it questionable in such a case, whether the State
putting him into that trust, may not call him to an account, and punish him
justly for it?

Reas. 3. When two men contract and covenant together upon certain conditions
and terms, if one party break the agreement, the other is set free, and no
further bound to him either in point of Law or conscience. When Kings break
their coronation oaths and promises, keep not the conditions and terms upon
which they were elected and crowned, but become tyrants, the bond and knot
between subjects and them is essentially broken, neither is there any tribute,
duty, custom, or alleagance, etc. from the people any further due unto them.

I know no faster bond or knot between any two parties, then man and wife; the
relation between Kings and subjects I am sure is not nearer, nevertheless all
grant adulterium etiam vinculum ipsum matrimonii solvit, adultery in either
person breaks even that very bond and knot of marriage: why therefore a subject
breaking his covenant with the King, in being a traitor, should be punished for
it, and the King breaking his covenant with the people in proving a tyrant or
traitor to the people should not be punished likewise: I am sure there is no
man living able to give a just reason for it.

Reas. 4. If men by Law may be punished; yea, and great punishment is inflicted
upon them, who are only as instruments used by Princes, to accomplish their
wicked designs and merely act to please them; surely it is against justice,
reason, and all conscience, that the first mover and grand author should escape
unpunished; Gods example teaches otherwise, who in all ages has punished the
author of sin more severely and extremely then the instrument; we see many
times the adulterous mother punished for her whoredom, yet the bastard spared,
but that the bastard should suffer and the mother escape it is an example
unheard of.

Reas. 5. Howsoever men may remit the wrong or injury, as it it in reference to
themselves and their own interest, nevertheless as the transgression
respects Gods Law, and so far as God calls for judgment and punishment, it is
not in their power to spare or pardon, though they may do with their own what
they will, yet what is the Lords they may not alter, mitigate, qualify, etc.
but they ought to proceed according to the directions and rules which he has
prescribed to them, I say, without addition, or dimunition, strictly,
punctually and precisely. I shall end this point with the words of Bodin: I am
of opinion (says he) that no Sovereign Prince, neither yet any man alive can
pardon the punishment due unto the offense which is by the Law of God death, no
more then he can dispense with the Law of God, whereunto he is himself subject:
And if it be so, that the Magistrate deserve capital punishment, which
despenseth with the Law of his King, how shall it be lawful for a Sovereign
Prince to dispense with his subjects from the Law of God? And further, if the
Prince himself cannot give away the least civil interest of his subjects, or
pardon the wrong don to another man, how can he pardon the wrong don unto
ALMIGHTY GOD, or murder wilfully committed, which by the Law is death, for all
the pardon he can give. vide lib. 1. de Reip. cap. 10.

Secondly, As for Lawyers law, it is just like Mr. William Prin, it speaks
every thing, and any thing, and nothing: Thus their law and he, are like the
Dutch man's hose, you may wear them how you will, put them up or down, for they
are made to serve both ways: but for that whirligig and busy body I do but
mention him by the way, for there is an Independent piece coming forth to show
his lightness, contradiction, extreme pride and malice.

What punishment by law is due unto a Traitor, it is so obvious and well known,
as to cite Statutes for it, would be, but as a vain repetition: Now the Law
clearly resolves 28. Hen. 8. C. 7 That. if the King become an open enemy to the
kingdom and subjects, to wast or ruin them, or shall seek to betray them to a
foreign nation he becomes a traitor to the realm, and hereupon does forfeit
his very title to the Crown. Bracton says the King, is the highest Justiticiar
in the kingdom: Licet in justitia recipienda minimo de regno suo comparitur,
but as low as any in receiving justice. lib. 3. cap. 9. fol. 167. etc. This
indeed is law, for what is law ((...)) according to the strict Etimologie a
proper signification, but an equal distributing to every one his own, whether
it be reward or punishment; and therefore whenever any thing has been
enacted to privilege kings and princes from personal punishment, in case they
transgressed against God and men, and should prove Tyrants, Traitors,
Murderers, Pirates, Witches and what not, I do avouch, it was no law, to speak
truly and properly, it was not (...) but (...) as contrary to the law of God,
and nature as light is to darkness; and these were right Antinomians, as
opposing and denying law to establish their own wicked and lawless decree:
Law, is ratio naturalis, natural reason, but it is no principle in nature, to
punish the lesser, theft, murder, treason, tyranny etc. and spare the greater
thieves, murderers, etc. to execute the bastard and quit the mother as we said
before.

Again, It Is without dispute, when Princes prove Tyrants, their deposition is
justificable by law. Now to know a Tyrant King James describes him thus: A King
governing in a settled kingdom cease to he a King and degenerates into a
Tyrant so soon as he leaves to rule by his own laws. If this be true, (as it
is most true:) then it is the highest degree of Tyranny, condemned and abhorred
by God and all good men, when the King begins to invade his subjects persons,
rights, liberties etc. to set up an arbitrary power imposes unlawful taxes,
raises forces, plunders wastes and spoils his kingdom, imprisons, kills, and
banisheth his most faithful and best people in an hostile and wrathful manner,
whom he ought to protect and rule in peace: and whether this King have not thus
done, even our enemies themselves being judges?

There is one thing remarkable in the aforesaid speech, where he says, He
cease to be a King. Hence I gather, that a King degenerating into a Tyrant,
has no benefit, nor any thing to help himself in point of law, by any Statute
containing an immunity or exemption of the Kings person from punishment, as
death it self: for whatsoever is provided in such a case it is only in
reference to a King, but when he cease to be a King, he loses the benefit of
all such acts of Parliament, neither is there any Statute broken if he
personally suffer for his crimes.

Thirdly, For Scripture proof or presidents, Zuinglius positively affirms, that
the Israelites might not only resist but also depose their kings for wickedness
and idolatry, yea, that all the people were justly punished by the Lord because
they removed not their wicked Kings out of their places, and brings sundry
instances for it. Explinat. Aut. 42. That God did punish the people for their
kings enormities, it is evident by Jer. 15.1, 2, 3, 4. 2 King. 21.11, 12. and
Chap. 23.26. and 24.3. and the history of the Kings and Chronicles in sundry
other places clearly show so much: the which thing surely God in justice would
not have done, had not the people power to hinder, censure and depose them for
their sins.

It is said of Amaziah King of Judah, 2 King. 14.19. That they made a
conspiracy against him in Jerusalem and he fled to Lachish, but they sent
after him to Lachish and slew him there: not privately but openly, as acted by
public authority for his great impiety, as having broken his oath and
covenant; whereupon we read not of any complaint, inquisition proceeding or
punishment inflicted on those that slew him after his death, either by the
people or his children as there was upon those that slew king Ammnon, but being
slain, they (to wit the persons who had put him to death) brought him on
horses, and he was buried in Jerusalem, and all the people of Judah made
Ahaziah King in his stead. Which plainly shows that what was formerly done by
the greater part of the States at Jerusalem was afterward confirmed by common
consent, and executed by command of those which might lawfully do it.

Fourthly, For examples, all histories are full, nothing more frequent than to
read, how people having the supreme power would judiciously convent, censure,
depose, yea and judge their kings to death for their evil and wicked courses.
Thus amongst the Romans, the Senate and people together proceeded against Nero,
Julianus, Vitellius, Maximinius, Heliogabulus etc. I speak not of Traquin the
proud expelled the kingdom by the people. So other Emperors likewise, being
found unfit and unable to govern the kingdom, have been deposed and others
elected and crowned in their stead: as Cbilderiek, Charles the third, Justinus
the second, Wenceslaus, all put off: and Pepin, Arnolph, Fiberius, and Rupert
Count Palatine of Rhine chosen and set in the Empire. The Cumaen State usually
arraigned and punished their Kings juditially if they saw cause.

Thus the French by authority of a public Council and through the prudent care
of the officers of the Realm, deposed Childerick the first, Sigebert,
Theodorick, and Childerick the third: So Gyl, for his grievous taxes and other
miscarriages they chased into Soysons: Theoduricus because he vexed and
oppressed the people, was by the auth ority of the State deprived of all
dignity.

Touching the Kings of Spain, we shall find in Histories and good Authors,
that frequently for their tyrranny and misgovernment they were deposed by their
subjects: as Theo-discle the tenth, Vttiza, and other Gotish Kings, as infamous
monsters were chased from their thrones. So Don Pedro the first, Ordogno,
Alphonso the great Astronomer, kings of Castile for their cruelties, murders,
and treacheries, all rejected and deprived of their Realms. Ramir of Leon and
Garcia King of Gallieia both deposed for their vicious and base doings.

In Hungaria, Peter the second, and Solomon the first (to omit some others) for
their great insolences, and injustice were both deposed, the first afterward
banished, and the other kept in prison till he died. So the Bohemians deposed
and banished Boleslaus, Rufus, Berzinogius, Sobeislaus, Vladislaus: and twice
imprisoned Wenceslaus for his drunkenness, neglegence, and cruelty.

In Poland the people have deposed imprisoned or expelled out of the kingdom
many of their Kings for their oppressions, and injustice, as (amongst others)
Miesco their second King, Boleslaus his son, Myoslaus, Henry etc. Neither have
the Swedish Kings been used otherwise, but for their cruelty, treachery, and
tyranny have been thrust out of their thrones and Realm by the people, as
Halsten, Aminander, Burgerius, Magnus, Henry, Christierne the first and second,
and others elected and crowned in their stead.

So in Denmark, Humbus, Ericus, Christierne, father and son, censured and
deposed by the State for their licenciousnesse and misgovernment: Not to
mention Canutus, Magnus, Suano, put to death by the people. I pass over
Canades King of Persia, Dionysius the younger King of Sicile, Timocrates of
Cyrene: Andronicus Emperor of Constantinople by the people rejected upon just
cause.

For Scotland, If George Bucanan and others of their own Historians write truth
as there has seldom ever bin good King thereof so very few of them (begin with
this man's father and so go up) that ever died an natural death. But touching
the point in hand: how frequently the Parliaments and Nobles there have
questioned their Kings, imprisoned, deposed, yea judicially censured them, for
their tyrannies, oppressions, whoredoms, murders, falsehood and evil
adminstration; you may see at large in the aforesaid Bucanan: some I have taken
out of him: as Durstus and his sons, so Dardan, Luctack, Conarus, Ramack,
Fereuhard, Euginius, Constantine, Ethus, Donald, Lugrac, Megal, Edward, Baliol,
James the third: all these have been sentenced and rejected. I mention not such
(though he does many) whom the common people for their intolerable baseness
murdered and put to death. To which I might add, this man's Grandmother, whom
they imprisoned and caused to abjure and resign her Interest in the Crown and
kingdom to her Infant son; and at last was solemnly arraigned and condemned to
death by the Parliament of England and beheaded at Fatheringham Castle, all
which proceedings against her, as her Deposition, Imprisonment, ahd Execution
has hitherto been justified as lawful.

To come now to our own nation, many examples we have upon record in our
Chronicles concerning the matter in hand: I shall at this time but only touch
things in a brief way: King Vortigen after six years reign for his negligence
and evil government was deposed from his crown by his subjects, and his son
Vortimer chosen and crowned in his stead. Speed Chron. page 207.266.267.
Sigehert King of the West Saxons using exactions and cruelties upon his
subjects was put by his place and Kenwolfe made King in his steed. Speed hist.
page 229. So Ofred King of Northumberland for his ill government was expelled
by his subjects and deprived of all Kingly authority. Speed page 245.246.
Ethelred (the son of Mollo) so far offended his subjects that they took up
arms against him and slew him at Cobre. Beornerd King of Mercia, because
governed the people, not by just Laws, but by Tyranny, was expelled the kingdom
and Offa chosen and crowned. Mat. Westminster. pa. 275. The like was Edwins case King
of Mercia and Northumberland, for his misgovernment, tyranny and oppression,
and following vain, base, and wicked Counselors was removed from all kingly
dignity, in whose place Edgar was elected King.

I might have mentioned Archigallo one of our ancient British Kings in times
of Gentilisme, for some misorders was deposed by the people, when he had
reigned almost five years, and his brother Elidurus chosen in his room. So
Emerian another old British King deprived of all kingly honor and dignity, and
Yowally promoted to the crown. Fabian par. 2. chap. 49. p. 30.31. and chap. 46.
p. 34.

Since the conquest (as they call it) King John disavowed by his Lords and
Commons, for wasting, burning, and spoiling the kingdom like an enemy,
electing Jews of France for their King* Speed p. 585. Edward the second for
his misgovernment put down, and Edward his son elected and crowned. Walsing.
hist. p. 398. Again Anno 1399. King Richard the second for sundry misdemeanors
objected against him in 32 Articles in Parliament and breach of his coronation
oath, was judicially deposed, and Henry the fourth elected and crowned in his
stead. So in Anno 1462. King Henry the sixth Queen Margaret and Edward their
son by Parliament dishinherited of their right to the crown and Edward the
fourth made king.

Here I shall end this point with a few proposals to the Reader. 1. Thou may
observe when a King proves a Tyrant it is the peoples own fault, if they
relieve not themselves, and recover their ancient rights and liberties. 2.
Note, what mischiefs and miseries, this Monarchy and King-craft brings with it,
for it is no small disturbance and trouble to a nation to be forced to take up
arms against a tyrant, and bring him to punishment. 3. (And mark it well)
according to the fact, so tyrants have been punished more or less: that saying
in former times has been held for a maxim, fiat justitia, mundum^^at. 4. Here
also thou may observe, how false to their trust, and prejudicial to the
kingdom, the late Treaty was, for what men, unless ignorant in State matters,
dull of action, slavishly minded, fearful and unbelievers, or such as have
cozened and cheated the country, and so made account by a general act of
indemnity to escape punishment ( hanging I should have said) would ever have
moved in such a way, as being free from a tyrant (with great expense, and much
precious blood) would seek to set him up again, and so by degree to be in
greater slavery then before.

Lastly, For the opinion of learned men whether Papists, Lutherans or
Calvinists they do unanimously hold that Kings for their tyranny and
misgovernment may be censured and deposed by the people, because I have
proposed to my self to be brief, I shall only mention a person or two. There
is a book entitled de Rege and Regis Institutione written by one Joannes
Mariana a Jesuit, wherein I find his words thus, A Tyrannical King continuing
incorrigible after public admonitions of the whole State, if there be no hopes
of amendment, may not only be deposed, but put to death and murdered by the
whole State, or any particular persons by their appointment; yea, without it,
if he be declared a public enemy by the whole State, and in case the whole
State cannot publicly assemble by reason of such a Princes known notorious
Tyranny, then in such a case it is lawful for any private man to murder him to
free the country and Kingdom from destruction. Lib. 1. c. 9. Howsoever I shall
not stand to justify all that he says, yet his book was dedicated to Philip
the third King of Spain, and published by his special privilege afterward
reprined at Mentz in Germany, Cum privilegio sacrae Caesariae Majestatis, and
permissa Superiorem. Danaeus allows, not only subjects actual resistance, but
deprivation of Kings, where princes set themselves to subvert Religion, Laws,
Liberties. Polit. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 6. So Zuinglius, When princes shall deal
perfideously and contrary to the rules of Christ, they may be deposed by the
consent and suffrages of the whole, or at least the greatest part of the people,
God helping them therein. Explin. Art. 42. And howsoever Calvin pleads as much
as a man can for Tyrants and wicked Magistrates, yet thus he says, I always
speak of private men, for if there be any popular Magistrates constituted in
the behalf of the people to restrain the lusts of Kings, (such as heretofore
were the Ephori who were opposed to the Lacedaemonian Kings, or Tribunes of the
people against the Roman Senate, or the Demarchi against the Athenian Senate,
the which power peradventure as things are now, the free Estates in all
kingdoms enjoy when they assemble.) I am so far from inhibiting them to
withstand, the raging licenciousness of kings, according to their duty, that if
they connive and wink at Kings outragiously encroaching upon, and insulting
over the poor communality, I shall affirm that their dissimulation is not
without wicked breach of faith, because they deceitfully betray the liberty of
the people, of whom they know themselves to be appointed protectors by the
Ordinance of God. Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. Sect. 31.

Fourthly, That no Nation is so strictly tied to any form of Government or Law,
but it is lawful for the people to alter the same into any other form or kind
upon occasion. We prove, and for the first thus.

1. Because all forms of Government were ordained for the peoples welfare,
protection peace, etc. and therefore in case any one becomes incompatible or
inconsistent with the public safety, it may be changed without injustice, and
grounded upon that first and chief Law of all commonwealths, Salus Populi
suprema Lex esto, the safety of the People let that be the last Law; grounded
also upon that saying of Christ, Mark 2.27. The sabbath was made for man, and
not man for the sabbath. Whence I reason, look as man was before the sabbath,
and the day made as serving to the preservation and safety of him, and so his
life to be preserved by omitting the observation of the sabbath. So man being
before the Government, and Government ordained for his safety, there is no form
of Government, but he may omit the use of it, if it be for his peace, profit
and welfare.

2. It is a received principle of nature and reason, eodem modo quid
constituitur, dissolvitur, in what manner a thing is constituted, it may be
dissolved: Again, Omnia quae jure contrahuntur contrario jure pereunt. The
Apostle Peter (as we have already noted) calls kings and their supreamacy, a
humane creature or ordinance of man, because the same took its original and
rise from men, and therefore that form of Government is changable and revocable
as the people (whose creature the form is) shall see reason and cause for it.
As the potter has power over his pots, and the goldsmiths may alter and change
his vessels and cups from one form to another: so here.

3. Howsoever all Government in general be of God, yet the kinds of it are left
arbitrary to men's institution and free election: here I say people have
liberty, to take or leave, as to lay aside one form and establish another, when
they see it is more to the preservation of humane society, and the advancement
of Gods glory. Thus Aristotle and all Politicians hold, all forms of Government
are changeable. Lambertus Danaeus Polit. Christ. l. 3. c. 6. page 217. speaks
thus, When the Laws of a Kingdom or Commonwealth are not observed, but
manifestly and obstinately violated by that Magistrate, to whom and whose
family the supreme Government is granted under certain conditions, I say, that
Kingdom or Government so granted and conferred on conditions, may by all godly
and Christian people with a safe conscience be taken from him, and another form
of Government erected by a public Edict of the States gathered together; if
the safety of the Commonwealth shall so require* so he.

4. This is manifest by the diverse alterations of the Monarchy in this
kingdom, which has been sometime divided into seven, sometimes into five,
otherwhile into three or two kingdoms; and at last all reduced into one. So by
the great changes and alterations which have been made in foreign Realms: as
sometimes Monarchy quite abolished and changed into Aristocraticall or popular
estate. Thus the Switzers and Grisons departed from the Roman Empire, and
became 18. commonwealths, every one holding their estate (divided from other)
in Sovereignty. The Venetian Commonwealth was at the beginning a Monarchy,
afterward changed into a popular Estate, and now by little and little changed
into Aristocratital, yet so tacitly, in such a quiet sort that the change can
hardly be perceived. So the Thessalians, and people of Sicile threw of
Monarchy, and had a Popular State. The Samians, Corcyraeans, Rhodians,
Cnidians, and almost all the commonwealths of Greece after the victory of
Lysander were from Monarchy changed into Aristocraties.

So again some nations have changed Aristocraticall into popular government; as
the Sabeans, Sabirites, Trezenians, Amphilolits, Chalcidians, Thurians, Chions,
the Argives, the people of Delphos, Tarentum, many more which I omit.

And from Popular some have changed into Aristocratie, as the Venetians,
Syracusians, Lacedaemonians, Thebans, Heracleans, Cumaeans, Megarenses, the
Luques, Rhaguses, Genes, and other.

Sometimes also the frame of Aristocratical government has been altered into
Monarchy, and it is well to be noted, what Bodin notes as to be the cause and
reason of such a change, namely, conquest and Tyranny: and sets down many
examples for it. Lib. 4. de rep: c. 1. The Jews indeed desired such a thing,
but how extremely they offended God therein, the sacred history shows, who for
asking a King gave them a King in his wrath. And thus much for the first
particular. Now we come to the other, viz. That such Laws and ancient customs
as people find to be hurtful, unprofitable or inconvenient, they may remove.

For 1. Many things which were convenient and necessary in former times, and
therefore established in after ages are found unuseful, because there is not
the same reason and cause for them as then there was.

2. There is no man of such parts and gifts, or so qualified, as to foresee in
all things, what will be safest and best for the generations after him; and
therefore as many things must be left to every age, so the people in every age
must look to their own safety and preservation, as to have such Laws in use, as
are for the present public good, and what is otherwise to take off the force
and stop the execution of them.

3. Seeing the will of man (and that often) without reason, is the ground of
Law, according to his saying: Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas.
It is therefore the more necessary to consider what the Laws are, and how they
are grounded; for we know, man's will is full of darkness, deceit, self-end,
and what pleases one, is to another hurtful and unprofitable.

4. What skillful and prudent physicians will not change their way and course
of physic, if they see the same proves dangerous and destructive to their
patients, and follow some other and better rules of art. Statesmen are the
peoples physicians, and therefore they ought to lay aside al such old Laws and
customs as are unprofitable and unusefull, and ordain wholesome and good ones
in the room thereof.

5. We see that men change in condition, and one age is not like another: our
ancestors some generations past, were so and so, but their posterity now are
otherwise in condition, and therefore great care should be taken, that we have
such Laws, as are best and fittest for the time; and to say the truth, herein
consists much true policy: men choose not a garment by the largenes, neither
of the fineness of the cloth, but by the fitness, and how well it will serve
the person that must wear it: I do take notice what a number there are, now (
Taylor-like) in London and thereabout, making garments for the Nation and to
clothe the people with new laws; now howsoever I profess not my self to be
one of that trade, yet I wish well to the work and humbly desire, that they do
not so much mind largness and fineness, as to have things fit and to come well
home to the Nation, in a good accommodation, and a general satisfaction.

6. Howsoever it cannot be denied, but we have many good laws amongst us,
nevertheless, such is our burden and misery, that they are like good mettel in
a pot or vessel, so covered over with dross and scum as the beauty and
brightness of them shines not forth: Now here is State wisdom which discovers
a man to be versed in Politics, who studieth and labors how to remove the
dross, rather than promiscuously and without any destinction or difference to
throw al away, as the scum so the precious and pure silver also. Whosoever breaks
a hedge, a serpent shall bite him. I know it is an ancient maxim of some
Politicians, That we must not change any thing in the Laws of a Commonwealth
which has long maintained it self in a good estate whatsoever apparent profit
may be thereby pretended. Again, Legum mutatio omnium erat peri culosa. But I
have formerly proved it lawful, yea necessary to alter and chang the laws of a
kingdom. Yet so, as I shall desire all such as are specially concerned in this
great work, to observe these cautions or rules.

1. That it be done with mature deliberation, good forethoughts, not hand over
head, as to thrust in men's sudden and present conceits. Men in their sleep,
imagine they eat, drink, walk etc. and question not but it is all real and
true: but being awake they perceive it was only a dream. It is not enough that
a man is confident, and persuades himself it is so, but it is needful to
enquire whether it be sleeping or waking, examine well how it is bottomed and
grounded. My Antigonist (I dare say) thinks he prophesies right things,
whereas poor man, he only dreams, and when the Lord shall awake him of this
sleep he will see and confess so much.

2. Whatsoever law or custom shall be taken away, yet it must not be, till
after due examination, and finding upon proof sufficient cause and reason for
it. Otherwise it may happen, as it did to Alexander, killing Parmenio in have,
afterward he repented and found the miss of him.

3. It must be minded, that the public Interest be especially provided for,
and not to profit a few to the prejudice of many.

4. It is a principal maxim in Sate-policy, when any law or custom is to be
abrogated, To consider how far it is hurtful and in what regard and what sense
or liking the people have thereof, and so to proceed either speedily, or to
come thereunto by little and little without forcing of any thing. Physicians
observe, that violent medicines in some cases raises up the humors and
disperse^h them so through the whole body, as the party becomes more
distempered, and made the more uncapeable of health, and so the less hope of
recovery: Nevertheles, in some other cases, quick and strong physic does well
and safe. Gal. de simp. me. facult. c. 15.

5. This also must be looked to, What shall be next and come into the place,
when such and such things shall be taken away: a man may pull down both sides
of a house, who has not the skill and art to lay one stone orderly and as it
should be to build a new and better. I do ingeniously profess there are many
thnigs yet in Church and Commonwealth which I wish were taken away, and to me
they do appear faulty: but ( hic labor, hoc opus) if they were removed, what
should come in their room? that needs some consideration, both what, and how?
In The Peoples Agreement, I observe they are much for pulling down, and it is
soon said there needs, not many heads or hands for such work: now I could
heartily wish, that these men or some other, would satisfy the Land, if every
particular by the Parliament should be granted, how we might have their rooms
and places filled again. It is an easy thing to tell where the sore is, and to
show it, but to make a salve to heal it is more difficult.

6. I do find in sundry Histories, when the laws and customs of a nation has
been changed, howsoever the thing was good in it self, and some men had therein
what they desired, yet afterward great troubles and miseries have ensued,
because the greater part saw no ground or cause of such changes, neither
apprehended the benefit and usefulness thereof. And therefore it is the
judgment of the wisest Politicians, whenever a State intends to alter the
form of Government or Laws, to let the people see beforehand, upon what ground
and just cause they will do it, and what convenience, safety, and profit the
public shall have thereby. This will not only so take with the people, as to
make them willing and desirous of the thing, but to contribute to the work what
they are able that it may be well e^ected. Now to the last point, what form of
Government is best.

This is a great question among Politicians, largely debated, and diverse men
are diversely minded; for my own judgment herein it is this, Monarchy is the
worst. And my Reasons for it are these:

1. Because a great Part of the land is unnecessarily detained, and kept away
from the public use and profit of the people, to maintain an unuseful
creature. What a number of Courts, Palaces, Mannours, Parks, Forests besides
other Rents, Revenues, Customs etc. there goes to maintain this King-ship, it is
hardly credible; and how it is employed it is worth the noting. Now what more
absurd and inconsiderate than for a people to be at such unreasonable expense
and charge to keep one of whom they have no need or use at all, but can do much
better without him. We read how the Prince of Crange gave money to one Bellazar
Gerard (who named himself Frances Guyon) to buy him provision, and therewith he
bought pistols, powder, and shot and killed the prince. And what else do Kings
many times with the great treasury allowed them by their subjects, but procure
ammunition and raise up forces to murder and destroy them.

The children also of Kings, are no small burden and unnecessary charge to a
nation, considering their excessive riot, and expenses. We speak not of
doweries and other portions: and what serve they for, or what profit have the
people by them? the truth is, there is little or no good expected, if they
prove not a curse and plague to the kingdom, we think it is well and take it as
a great mercy: Would it not therefore be better, what is needlessly wasted on
them to be converted to some pious and charitable uses.

3. Look upon Monarchy and compare them with other forms of government, and
this you shall certainly find, that whenever corruptions and abuses break
forth in a State they are not so easily, suddenly, and thoroughly suppressed in
the former as in the latter: and no marvail: for 1. As they have their original
and rise usually from the Court, so the King will labor what he can to uphold
and defend the same. Hence it comes to pass (as many sad examples in this land
show) that enormities, have so long continued and grown to such a height as the
people have been forced to make war against the Prince, and with the loss of
much blood and other charges to reform the same which otherwise would never
have been don. But where there is a free State you have no such inconvenience;
neither indeed are such abuses and corruptions ever seen, but if they did
appear the matter would not be so difficult to suppress them there. 2. Put
case the King has no hand in these abuses (which would be a strange thing) yet
are they not easily reformed, because what he hears and sees it is by other
men's ears: whereas in the other Government, magistrates are abroad to see and
hear what is amiss with their own eyes and ears.

4. If things be compared together, this we shall find in a Monarchy, the
officers and ministers of State are usually (as the King) corrupt men, abusers
oppressors of the people, and little or no help is to be had of relief and
satisfaction. But in the other Government, places are not open for such men, or
should they once appear to be such, the people know a way soon to right
themselves. Besides where the people choose their own Magistrates they must needs
be the best: For Princes do not use to put men into office so much for the
public good, as how to carry forth their own private interest.

5. This misery and mischief ordinarily goes along with Monarchies a
slaughtering and murdering of the people by some devilish plot or other,
pressing them forth to so me unnecessary war, to satisfy their lust and pride,
or imposing intolerable taxes upon them, having some treacherous design in
hand: But in a free State there is no fear of such things neither indeed can they
happen.

7. If one form of Government may be held better then another for Religion and
the gospels sake: then our position is certainly true, that Monarchy is the
worst, for by experience in all ages, under the Kings of the earth the truth
has had least favor, and greatest opposition, and most have suffered death
for the witness of Jesus Christ; and therefore these powers of the world shall
be first broken in pieces and consumed by the stone cut out of the mountain
without hands, when the God of heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall never
be destroyed. Moreover it is remarkable, what frequent changes and alterations
of Religion there are, where Kings do reign, as from Papists to Protestants,
from Protestants back to papists, from them again to protestants; as it was in
Henry the eight, Edward the sixth, queen Mary, and queen Elizabeth's days: but
in the other the course of Religion has no interruption by the disease of
Magistrates, though they change, yet Religion alters not.

7. Where the Government is a Free State, there men are encouraged to the study
of wisdom, truth, justice, etc. because not titles there, but good parts make
men capable of honor, authority, and place; neither is there a door open for
them to come in by bribery and flattery, but chosen by their fitness, gifts,
and abilities. In Monarchies much preferment goes by succession, the Kings
cosins though fools or knaves by birth challenge great authority.

8. According to the proverb new Kings new Laws: hear what Bodin speaks (I
mention him the oftener because he is a great kingsman) We commonly (says he)
in the changing of Princes, new designs, new Laws, new officers, new friends,
new enemies, new habits, and a new form of living: for most commonly Princes
take delight to change and alter all things, that they may be spoken of, the
which does many times cause great inconveniences not only to the subjects in
particular but also to the whole body of the State. de Rep. lib. 6. c. 4. But
no such prejudice or peril is incident to the other form of Government,
whatsoever things are publicly altered, it is maturely don, and upon good
ground, and for the general profit and welfare of the people.

9. This form of Government for which I stand, must needs be the best, being
the mediocrity or mean between the two extremes, Monarchy and Anarchy; that one
should rule alone, is against that common maxim, plus vident oculi quam
oculus, two eyes see more then one; or that none should govern or al: it is so
absurd and senseless as no man pleads for it, only a malignant scandal raised
up against some honest men.

10. If men would not be blind they might clearly behold a senceable and
visible hand of God against this throning of Kings (specially taking in one
after another by succession) is Saul also among the Prophets, but who is their
Father? what greater shame and dishonor can a nation lie under, then to take
the son of a known and apparent adultresse, and make him their King? what this
man's wife is, and what his own mother was, and his fathers mother, to go no
higher, it is fit it should be considered of, no marvail God has punished us
by such a race, where no zeal of God nor justice of law has been showed
against such open whordoms from one generation to another, only talked and
laughed at whereas by the Law of God open adulterers should be severely punished.

11. It is worthy of remembrance, what marks of Sovereignty some do reckon up,
as being the Rights and prerogatives proper to Monarchs, I have not the time to
name them now, only from them this follows undeniably, that Monarchy is
Tyranny, I will not add tolerable to it; for granting unto Kings such
Soveraignties, there is nothing left the people but mere slavery, and therefore
people should be less senceable then beasts, if they would remain in bondage
under Monarchy, being able to free themselves in a just and honorable way, and
to set up such a form of government, whereby they might enjoy more liberty, a
thing not only good in it self, but naturally desired by all men, and deemed by
the wisest more precious then gold or pearls, according to Tityrus in Virgil:
Libertas, quae sera tamen respexit inertem,
Candidor post quam tondendi barba cadebat,
Respexit amen, and longo post tempore venit.


But here I wonder how men giving such sovereignty to Kings, should prefer
Monarchy before all other forms of government it is as plain contradiction,
gross ignorance, and base flatery as a thing can be.

12. I desire also the Reader to take notice, that for the Reasons which are
brought in favor of Monarchy, they may be thus answered. 1. Whatsoever is said
for the usefulness of it, not only may be the very same be said of the other,
but much more and better, as tending to the public good and profit. 2.
Touching their similitudes taken from God, the body a family, bees, cranes,
etc. there is nothing can be more gathered from them, as applied to the matter
in hand, but that the Commonwealth should be carefully looked unto. 3. For the
antiquity of Monarchies, I grant them to be of a long standing (though later
then the other) Josephus makes Cain to be the author, but it is generally held
that Nemrod was the first man, and by other Tyrants after him held up with
great violence, rapine, and bloodshed. And whereas it has enlarged it self far
and near, and lasted long; this I mind to be a judgment of God laid upon the
nations of the earth, to scourge them for their impieties, and great
wickedness against the King of Kings.

13. Touching the things objected against the form of Government, which I plead
for, they are either taken upon misunderstanding, or very frivolous, and not
worth the answering: nevertheless we shall shortly speak something thereto. But
for the present this shall suffice. Only let me acquaint thee Reader, before I
break off, which is, That all such as prefer Monarchy before the other kind of
Government, do it with distinction, for though they hold the former in the
nature of the thing to be more excellent then the later; yet in this they all
agree, that as certain conditions may be, in respect of times, places, and
persons, the Government here defended is more necessary and useful. Now what
reason and cause there is, for us to change Monarchy into a free State, in
reference to this present time, the place, our persons, and condition, I leave
the same to the two great Counsels of the Land to consider of.

Imprimatur G. M.


