Secret and Family PRAYERS With brief Helps for the more Devout RECEIVING OF
THE Lord's Supper.

And better Observation of the LORD'S DAY, as also to further the needful
Duties of Catechizing, Visiting the Sick, and Personal Instruction. Fitted for
the Use and Benefit of the Inhabitants of Cartmel in Lancashire.

If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them,

S. John 13. 17. CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes, for the Author. 1677.

June 15. 1677.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Page Procan. Ri. Minshull. Theoph. Dillingham. Rad. Cudworth.


THE PREFACE AND EPISTLE To my loving Neighbors and Pastoral Charge.
HAving now for a long time observed not only your frugal, charitable, and
industrious way of Living as to the World, but moreover in reference to many of
you, your more pious Care for the good Education of your Children, and your own
Spiritual Welfare; as also your maintaining Order and Unity above many others
in the Worship of God: this has been unto me, and I hope shall continue to be
the cause of no little joy and contentment of heart. Yet having withal seen
some among us hitherto not so diligent as they ought to be, either in keeping
holy the Lords Day, or in receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or in
sending for the Minister to visit them when sick, or in improving when in
health the duty of Catechizing and Personal Instruction, that both themselves
and those who live with or under them might be better informed in the Ways of
God: I have in the ensuing Book as to each of these respects, hinted those
things, which if duly considered, may prove a suitable and seasonable Remedy.

And particularly because as to the promoting of Religion in each Household,
there is a more general want of Family-Prayers, too easy to be taken notice
of, I have herein especially endeavored to make provision for the performance
of that part of your Duty. There are I hope but few so negligent of their own
Welfare, as not to consider how natural and necessary it is for all reasonable
creatures by Prayer and Thanksgiving to acknowledge God in al^ their ways, and
to give him the Glory du^ unto his Name for all the benefits they receive from
him, and to seek his Blessing upon what ever they undertake, and daily to
recommend themselves and all their concerns to his continued Grace and good
Providence.

There may be more who having helps put into their hands for this purpose, will
not so much as find leisure to make use of them; as if this would not indeed
rather further then hinder their lawful Affairs; or as if they could have any
greater and weightier business then thus to seek the Lord while he may be
found, and call upon him while he is near; Or as if, when the most in a Family
will both find time and get together twice a day for set meals for their
Bodies, they should not much rather strive to do so, once at the least, for set
and solemn Prayer in order to their Souls eternal Happiness. If your estate be
more plentiful you may spare the more time; if your condition be meaner on
Earth, you have more need to seek by Christ a Treasure in Heaven. Say not
therefore, you are to provide for Wife and Family, and so have no time to
regard your Soul by a solemn and serious performance of Duties; but remember
that the same God who commands you to follow your particular Callings as Men,
injoins you likewise to follow your general Callings as Christians, and that in
the first place. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness S. Mat.
6. 33. Ph. 2. 12.
ousness thereof, and all other things shall be added unto you. And also with
the greatest labor. S. John 6. 27. Labor not (i. e. not only) for the food
that perishes, but (chiefly) for the food that endures to Everlasting Life.

Should we pray to God every day in the week not once or twice but many times,
for eternal Blessedness, and continue to do so with greatest earnestness,
while our life and breath is continued, if but once this Petition at last be
granted us, will it not be richly worth our pains, and fully requite all that
we have done? Or having every Work-day in the week 23 hours and an half to eat
and drink and work and sleep in, is it any great matter to redeem half an hour
or a quarter of an hours time, wherein to work out our Salvation, to prepare
our Souls for Death, Judgment and Eternity, to read some portion of Gods Word,
and to praise him for the Mercies we have received, and to Pray unto him for
such as we have need of? If a man's house were in a flame he would not let it
burn, and say, I have no time to quench it. If a Neighbor call us to sit at
our doors, to talk or dine with them we can find leisure for it. When therefore
the Blessed God calls upon us to be diligent this way among others to make our
Calling and Election sure, should we foolishly say, that we have no time for
this, though indeed one of the main Works which we were sent into the World
about! Oh let not such vain excuses keep us from our Duty, lest the Righteous
God for our pretending now want of time to serve him in, be provoked at last to
give us an Eternity to suffer in.

Others, I fear, will be ready to make light of these Helps because of their
groundless prejudices against all Book-Prayers, not rightly understanding
either their benefit or lawfulness, but I beseech you let it be well
considered, how many Christian Duties and Virtues we may be daily put in mind
of by these Prayers, which if we strive to follow with answerable Practices, as
we ought to do, and as we hereby beg of God to enable us to do; surely this
course must in all reason be allowed to have a very considerable influence into
our more Holy and Circumspect Walking. Besides you know how natural it is to
all Mankind when they have any petitions or thanks to prefer but to an earthly
King, to take good advice beforehand that they may be delivered in as decent
and grave form of words, and as reverent a manner as may be; certainly then
Christians in this respect should be much more careful, if possible, how they
present the desires of their Hearts to the most High God, the Eternal Majesty
of Heaven and Earth. But alas with many, such have been the licentious Rambles
of their fancy in sudden Prayer, so bold and rude have their descriptions been
of Almighty God, so rash their Sayings concerning him, or concerning
themselves, and so many untrue or doubtful things have they uttered; that they
have not only shamed that way of address to God, but dishonored and hindered
true Christian Devotion, which has suffered extremely in the thoughts of many
by such extravagance. And some, as experience has shown, finding that they
could not pray in their Families ex tempore or on the sudden as they have been
urged, without many vain repetitions and broken impertinent expressions, have
quite left off the Duty it self.

It Is true some few may attain an habit of uttering their Desires freely and
becomingly upon any occasion; yet the most, though wellminded People, are so
defective both in their Conceptions and Utterance, that they greatly need the
Assistance which is here offered them, and ought by no means to be discouraged
from performing thus safely and piously their known Duty toward God;
especially considering, that when we pray for such things as are contained in
the Scriptures which are from the Spirit of God; and when by the same Blessed
Spirit helping our infirmities, we are enabled to Pray for those things
fervently and sincerely, we do truly pray by the Gift or Assistance of the
Spirit, whether the Prayer we use be written in a Book, or imprinted in the
Memory, or suddenly uttered; and such a Prayer is acceptable unto God who looks
not at the outward varied expressions of the Tongue, but the inward holy
Affections of the Heart. And so our Savior prayed in or by the Spirit, when he
repeated the same requests at several times; and so still do all plain and
honest-hearted People, when they devoutly use that form of Prayer which he has
taught us, or any other after that manner judiciously composed.

The Prayers, Directions, and Catechisms of the following Book, I have for the
most part collected out of several approved Authors of great Judgment,
Learning, Piety, and Christian experience, only fitting them with needful
Alterations and Additions for your easier use and benefit. And in the whole you
have comprehended those things which make for your greater Holiness here and
Happiness hereafter; which are often more fully explained by the public
Ministry of the Word; and which agree with the sense of the most and best
Christians in the truly Catholic or universal Church, beginning at Jerusalem,
and dispersed throughout S. Luke 24. 47.
the whole Christian World. Yet I doubt not but many deceivers and deceived who
have cast off the Ordinances of Christ, and lately taken up a new Religion of
their own devising, building their Altars of false Worship besides the Altar of
the Lord, these will be ready to revile me for my pains, to call me Deceiver,
as some did the Apostles themselves, to prate maliciously against me, and to
oppose and gainsay what I am doing, that they may hinder your being benefited
thereby. But I beseech you, do you hold fast the form of 2 Cor. 6. 8.
sound Words or Christian Doctrine which you have received in Faith and Love
which is in Christ Jesus; adhere to the Spirit, Ministry, and Ordinances of
Christ; keep in the Communion of his Saints and People; and as you have the
true Religion, so be true unto your Religion by living accordingly, and my Soul
for yours, by the Grace of God, you shall not miscarry. Be not offended at the
bad lives of some, there will be tares among the good Wheat 'till the Harvest.
Be not offended at the errors and heresies Acts 20. 30.
of others, of your own selves (says the Apostle) shall men arise speaking
perverse things to draw away Disciples after 1 Cor. 11. 19.
them. And again, There must be Heresies among you, that they which be approved
may be made manifest among you. There will be unstable and unlearned People who
will boldly wrest the Scriptures to 2 Pet. 3. 16.
their own destruction. But remember how God has given Pastors and Teachers
for the Work of the Ministry, etc. Ephesians. 4. 12, 14.
That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Therefore be not carried about with diverse
and strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing that the heart be established
with Grace. Hold fast the Profession of your Faith without wavering. Mark Heb.
13. 9.
them that cause Divisions and avoid Heb. 10. 23.
them. Let not your soul come into their secret out of Curiosity, least when
you forsake his ways, God justly forsake your Understandings, and leave you to
your selves, and so you be led by your corrupt Natures, to close sooner with
that which is evil then with that which is good.

And if at any time you cannot fully answer such objections as cunning
Deceivers may make against any thing contained in this Book, or in our holy
Religion, do not (as some have done) therefore presently turn to them without
any more ado; do not think that because you cannot answer them, that no body
else can; do not suffer your selves and your Religion to be so soon, so sadly
and shamefully parted; but in the name of God I most humbly and most earnestly
beseech you, take the pains to acquaint me with them, or with my consent and
assistance to consult such faithful and able Ministers of Christ, as will help
you most clearly to see the weakness and falsehood of those arguments which so
much puzzled you before. Remember I beseech you, that this is the advice of one
whom God by his gracious Providence and Holy Spirit has made your Overseer and
the Guide of your Souls; of one who has the same care for your Salvation that
he has for his own; Who can as truly rejoice to see the fruit of his labors
in your Holy Walking; as you can to reap a plentiful Harvest after your
Labors, or to see your Children do well according to your care and trouble
about them. Of one concerning whom with others Christ has said, He that
hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me. Remember that
this is the advice of one who is always near you, and is in some measure
acquainted with your Condition and is ever ready to direct and assist you as
your Necessities shall require. Remember that this is the advice of one who is
devoted to the Work of the Ministry and the Service of your Souls, and so may
more reasonably then others that are not so set apart, expect, (as it is his
daily Prayer) to be led of God in the ways of Truth and Holiness that he may
lead you in them to, and to be blessed of God that he may be made a Comfort and
a Blessing unto you. Remember further that this is the Advice of one who having
lived long among you, sincerely loves you, and has no other design upon you,
but by all Good means to promote your Happiness, and to prevent your utter
Undoing; of one lastly, who is ready to spare neither Cost nor Pains for your
real Good, as in other things, so in helping you to practice what is contained
in this Book, which I entreat you to accept of and to use as a testimony of my
Unfeigned Desires of your Eternal welfare, recommending both it and you to the
Blessing and Protection of Almighty God, and ever remaining

Your Servant for Christ's sake J. A.

Ephesians. 6. 18, 19. Praying always, with all prayer and supplication in the
Spirit, and Watching thereunto with all Perseverance and Supplication for all
Saints. And for me, etc.
S. Mat. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.
Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the Families that call not on thy Name.
S. Mat. 6. 6. But thou when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou
have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father who
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.
1 Cor. 11. 26, 27, 28. For as often as ye eat this Bread and drink this Cup,
ye do show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat this
Bread and drink this Cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. But let a Man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and
drink of that Cup.
S. Luke 22. 19, 20. And he took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave
unto them, saying, this is my Body which is given for you, this do in
remembrance of me. Likewise also the Cup after Supper, saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you.
We may sometime begin our Closet Prayers admiring with S. Augustine Gods
glorious Conf. l. 1 c. 4.
Perfections. WHAT art thou O my God? what art thou I beseech thee, but the
Lord my God? for who is Lord besides our Lord, or who is God besides our God? O
thou Supreme, most powerful, most merciful, most just, most secret, most
present, most beautiful, most incomprehensible; most constant and yet changing
all things; immutable, never new, and never old, and yet renewing all things,
ever in Action, yet ever at rest, heaping up, yet needing nothing; creating,
upholding, filling, protecting, nourishing, and perfecting all things.

Thou love, and yet thou art not transported; thou art angry, yet never art
unquiet; thou art jealous, yet void of fear; thou do repent, yet art thou
free from sorrow; Thou requirest profit at our hands, yet who has any thing
but of thy Gift? Thou payest debts when thou owe nothing; Thou forgivest
debts and yet thou loosest nothing.

And what shall I say, O my God, my life, my joy, my holy dear delight? or what
can any Man say when he speaks of Thee? and woe be to them that speak not of
Thee, but are silent in thy Praise; for even they who speak most of Thee, may
be accounted to be but dumb. Have mercy upon me O Lord, that I may speak unto
thee, and praise thy Name.

Amen.


A Prayer for all Conditions of Men.

Note that one alone may say, We, and Our, and Us, as usually in the Lords
Prayer, because of the Communion of Saints. O God the Creator and Preserver of
all Mankind, we humbly beseech thee for all sorts and conditions of Men, that
thou would be pleased to make thy ways known unto them, thy Saving Health
unto all Nations. More especially we pray for the good estate of the Catholic
Church; that it may be so guided and governed by thy good Spirit, that all who
profess and call themselves Christians, may be led into the way of Truth, and
hold the Faith in unity of Spirit, in the bond of Peace, and in Righteousness
of life. And we also commend unto thy Fatherly Goodness all those who are any
ways afflicted or distressed in Mind, Body, or Estate, that it may please thee
to comfort and relieve them according to their several necessities, giving
them Patience under their Sufferings, and an happy Issue out of all their
Afflictions, and this we beg for Jesus Christ his sake.

Amen.
A Prayer for the King and Kingdom.
ANd that in one Blessing we may all of us be blessed, I beseech thee, O thou who
art the Maker and Savior of all Kings and Nations of the earth, to bless our
dread Sovereign Lord King CHARLES with the richest Blessings of thy Grace.
Strengthen him with the faith of Abraham, endue him with the mildness of Moses,
arm him with the magnanimity of Joshua, exalt him with the humility of David,
assist him with the counsel of Hushai, beautify him with the wisdom of
Solomon, and replenish him with the Goodness and Holiness of them all; that so
he may be a powerful Protector of his People, a religious Defender of thy
sacred Faith, a bountiful comforter of thy Holy Church, a glorious Triumpher
over all his enemies, a gracious Governor of all his Subjects, and a happy
Father of children to rule this Nation by Succession in all ages. O let his
Reign be prosperous, and his Days many; let Peace and Plenty, Love and Piety,
Justice and Truth, and all Christian virtues flourish in his time. Let his
People serve him with honor and obedience; and let him so love and serve Thee
here on Earth, that he may hereafter everlastingly reign with Thee in Heaven
through Jesus Christ our Lord.



Here may be added the Prayers or Thanks-givings in the Book of Common Prayer
upon their several Occasions. Sometimes also the Creed may be repeated with
that pithy Ejaculation said before it, [Lord I believe help my unbelief] And
the Ten Commandments, with that short Prayer after them, Lord have mercy upon
us, and write all these thy Laws in our Hearts we beseech thee.

Here also may be said the Morning or Evening Collect respectively, on our own,
and the behalf of those that belong to us. O Lord our Heavenly Father, Almighty
and Everlasting God, who have If in the Morning.
safely brought us to the beginning of this Day, defend us in the same with thy
Mighty Power, and grant that this Day we fall into no sin, neither run into any
kind of danger, but that all our doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do
always that which is righteous in thy sight through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

Lighten our darkness we beseech thee, O Lord, and by thy great Mercy If in the
Evening.
defend us from all perils and dangers of this Night for the love of thy Son,
our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
A general Thanksgiving.
O Most gracious God, I give thee humble and hearty Thanks for all thy Goodness
and Loving kindness to me and to all men. I bless thee for my Creation,
Preservation, and all the Blessings of this life; but above all for thine
inestimable love in the Redemption of the World by our Lord Jesus Christ; for
the means of Grace and for the hope of Glory. And I beseech thee give me that
due sense of all thy Mercies, that my heart may be unfeignedly thankful, and
that I may set forth thy Praise, not only with my lips, but in my life, by
giving up my self to thy Service, and by walking before thee in Holiness and
Righteousness all my days, through Jesus Christ my Lord; to whom with Thee and
the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
A devout Prayer which may be used at any time by one alone.
GRant me O gracious Lord in what lawful undertaking soever, a pure intention
of Heart, and a steadfast regard of thy Glory; let Christ be my pattern, thy
Word my rule, and thy Spirit my guide in all that I do. Possess (I beseech
thee) and ravish my mind continually with thy Love, and let my delight always
be to be embraced in the Arms of thy protection. Be thou, O holy God, light
unto mine eyes, music to mine ears, sweetness to my taste, and a full
contentment to my heart. Be thou my Sunshine in the day, my food at the table,
my repose in the night, my Clothing in nakedness, and my succor in all
necessities.

O Lord Jesus, I give thee my body, my Soul, my substance, my fame, my friends,
my liberty, and my life; Dispose of me and all that is mine, as it seems best
to Thee, and to the glory of thy blessed Name. I am not now mine but thine,
therefore claim me as thy right, and love me as thy Child, and keep me as thy
charge, and defend me against those that would deal injuriously with me.

My Lord my God, I beseech thee to give me patience in troubles, humility in
comforts, constancy in temptation, and Victory over all my ghostly enemies.
Grant me sorrow for my Sins, thankfulness for thy Benefits, fear of thy
Judgments, love of thy Mercies, and mindfulness of thy Presence for evermore.
Make me observant of my Superiors, courteous to my Inferiors, friendly to my
Equals, loving to my Friends, and charitable to my Enemies; Make me ready to
pleasure all, and loath to offend any. Give me Chastness in my Affections,
modesty in my countenance, gravity in my behavior, deliberation in my speech,
Holiness in my thoughts, and Righteousness in all my ways. Let thy Mercy
through Christ cleanse me from the guilt of my transgressions, and let thy
Grace bring forth in me the fruits of Everlasting Life.

Lord let me be obedient without arguing, humble without feigning, patient
without grudging, pure without corruption, merry without lightness, sad without
mistrust, sober without dullness, true without doubleness, fearing Thee without
desperation, and trusting in Thee without presumption. Let me be joyful for
nothing but that which pleases Thee, nor sorrowful for any thing but that
which does displease Thee. Let my labor be my delight which is for Thee, and
let all rest weary me which is not in Thee. Give me an awaking Spirit, and a
diligent Soul, that I may seek to know thy Will; and when I know it truly, may
perform it faithfully to the honor and glory of thy ever Blessed Name; for
these and for all other needful Mercies, which thou, O God, would have me to
pray, or to praise Thee, I continue to say, as Christ our Lord has taught us.
Our Father which art, etc.

The Blessing.
LEt thy Peace, O God, which passes all understanding; let the Blessing of the
holy undivided Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; let the virtue of
Christ's blessed Cross and Passion be with me, and remain with me and mine, now,
and at the hour of Death, and to eternal Ages. Amen, Amen.



They that have more Leisure may oftener use the foregoing devotions alone
Morning, or Evening, or at any time of the Day when they best can.

Such also may make use of this following Morning Prayer for a Family on the
Weekdays, as many as can well be spared being present. A Family Prayer for the
Morning on Work-days.
O Most holy and ever blessed Lord God, we thine unworthy Servants do here
acknowledge, that as we were born in sin, so we have lived in iniquity, and
broken thy righteous Laws in thought, word, and deed, following too much the
desires of our own will, and not caring as we ought to be governed by thy Holy
Word and Spirit; but O gracious Father, we beseech thee for the merits of thy
Dear Son to forgive us all our sins, and not to inflict upon us those
Punishments which are due unto us for them. And do thou we pray Thee sanctify
us throughout in Body, Soul, and Spirit, and lead us in the ways of Truth and
Holiness, and make us in every respect such as thou would have us to be.

And here, O Lord, from the bottom of our hearts we praise thy Name for all thy
Blessings bestowed upon us, concerning this or a better Life; Particularly we
praise Thee for the Mercies of the last Night and this Morning; that thou have
preserved us from such dangers as might have fallen upon any of us; and for our
Refreshment by moderate rest and sleep. Oh that this Day we may be kept from
the evil of Sin, and so, if it may be thy Will, from the evil of Punishment.
Enable us to watch over our Thoughts, that good Meditations only may enter into
our minds, and Holy desires and purposes into our Hearts. Help us to set a
watch before our Mouths, and to keep the door of our Lips that we offend not
with our Tongues.

Help us also to watch over all our Actions, that we may do hurt to none, but
all the good we can to all, as we would have others deal with us, That in all
we do thy Word may be our Rule, thy Spirit our Guide, our Savior our pattern,
and thy Glory our end. That we may be wise and modest in our Carriage,
temperate and sober in our Diet, diligent and cheerful in our Business; that
we may abide with Thee in our particular Places and Callings by a conscientious
performance of the Duties thereof; that we may undertake nothing upon which we
may not desire thy Blessing, and wherein we may not expect thy Direction and
Assistance.

That we may be crucified to the World, and the World unto us, by the Cross of
Christ; that we may be content with such things as we have, and not use any
unlawful means for our own relief, knowing Thou have promised, never to leave
us nor forsake us. That we may so pass through the things of this Life, that
finally we loose not Everlasting Life and Happiness in the enjoyment of thy
Self. And all we beg upon the account of Christ, in whose Name we continue to
pray unto Thee, saying, Our Father, etc.



But because the busy Country Life usually on the Weekdays calls and
disperses most in Families early in the Morning to their several Works and
Employments; it is very needful (especially when Morning Family-Prayers cannot
be had conveniently) that each one grown to years of Understanding before they
go out of their Chambers, or before they begin their Work, should kneel down by
themselves, and in short beg Gods Blessing and Presence with them the following
Day; which they may do by the Collect for the Morning It is set down gotten by
Heart, saying after it the page the 6. the Lords-Prayer understandingly,
devoutly, and deliberately.

Or this. PRevent us, O Lord, in all our Doings by thy most gracious Favor,
and further us with thy continual Help; that in all our works begun, continued
and ended in Thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain Everlasting Life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.



Or in the Morning on the Weekdays you may pray by your self thus. O Most
gracious God, and merciful Father, I thine unworthy servant do here
acknowledge, that as I was born in sin, so I have lived in iniquity, and broken
thy Righteous Laws in thought word and deed, following too much the desires of
my own Will, and not caring as I ought to be governed by thy holy Word and
Spirit; Here thou may confess to God those sins thou art most guilty of.
and am therefore liable to all shame and misery both in this Life, and that
which is to come. But O Heavenly Father, I beseech Thee for the Merits of thy
dear Son to forgive me all my sins, and not to inflict that punishment which is
due unto me for them. And send thy Holy Spirit into my heart, which may assure
me, that thou art my reconciled Father, and that thou love me with an
unchangeable Love. And let the same thy good Spirit lead me in the ways of
Truth and Righteousness, and crucify in me more and more all worldly and
carnal lusts. Here beg strength against those sins thou are especially in
danger of.


And here, O Lord, from the bottom of my heart, I thank Thee for all thy
Blessings bestowed upon my Soul or Body. Here praise God for special Blessings
concerning thy self or others.


[Particularly for any measure of Refreshment given unto me the Night past, and
that thou have brought me safe to the light of another Day.] Leaving out the
three last Lines, and saying (Particularly for the Mercies of the Day past) it
will also be a Prayer for the Evening.


O Lord, I pray Thee continue to be gracious unto me; let thy Fear be always
before my eyes, and thy Grace so rule in my heart, that whatever I shall think,
speak, or do, may tend to thy Glory, the Good of others, and the peace of my
own Conscience.

I now recommend my self, and all my concerns, together with all near Relations
and those that belong unto me, to thy merciful Direction and Protection,
entreating Thee to keep us from all evil, and to give a Blessing to all our
honest and lawful Endeavors, and to make all thy Providence toward us to
work together for our good.

Here thou may pray for special Mercies for thy self or others.
Bless, O Lord, the Kings Majesty and all the Royal Family, with all inferior
Magistrates under Him. Bless the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. Comfort all
that are sick and comfortless. And O Lord, keep me in a continual readiness by
Faith and Repentance for my last end, that whether I live or die, I may be
thine, accepted of Thee through Christ Jesus my only Savior, in whose
prevailing Name I sue for these and all other needful Graces and Mercies, and
continue to pray unto Thee, as he himself has taught me, saying, Our Father,
etc.



Praying alone, unless removed out of the hearing of others, speak with a
whispering rather then a loud Voice, as Hannah did 1 Samuel 1. 13. She spoke in
her heart, only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard. Thus, not being
heard of others, they cannot suspect you to affect any vain glory in what you
do. Yet you will find this way useful both to stir up your Affections, and to
help your Attention of Mind, by keeping you from many wandering and distracting
thoughts which you would otherwise be liable unto.

Note further, that when alone in Secret you may sometimes makeless use of a
set Form of Prayer, and take more freedom in opening your Heart and particular
Condition unto God as he shall enable you. He knows, and will graciously answer
your humble and sincere desires. Greater heed is to be taken for Method and
Expression when we pray with others that they may join with us to their
Edification.

At Evening on the Weekdays when the Family is come together, at the fittest
time before they go to their Rest, let the Governors themselves, or some Child
or Servant whom they shall appoint, reading first some portion of Scripture if
they have time, distinctly and leasurely read one of the two following Prayers.
A Family Prayer for the Evening on the Weekdays.
O Lord, the Creator of the World, and the Redeemer of Mankind, who know all
things, and can do what thou please, and have done us very much Good
already, and promised to do more for us, if we be obedient, then we can ask or
think; we here fall down before Thee in the lowest manner, to express our fear
and reverence to thy Almighty Power; our admiration of and submission to thy
unsearchable Wisdom; our hearty love, and thankful acknowledgment of thy
wondrous Goodness; our trust and confidence in thy Faithful Promises; with our
ready and sincere purposes to perform all Obedience to thy holy Commands.

There is nothing, O Lord, so afflictive to us, as the remembrance that we have
at any time offended thy Sovereign Authority. We are heartily sorry for the
breaking any of thy Righteous and Good Laws, and therefore beseech Thee for the
sake of Christ to pardon the same unto us, and that we may abhor the thoughts
of doing so again, ever resolving by thy Assistance to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live Righteously, Soberly, and Godly in this present
World; and to strive to be like our Savior Christ in meekness and lowliness of
Spirit, in Purity and Zeal for thy Worship and Glory, and in being ready as we
have opportunity, to take the more pains that we may do the more good in the
World.

Oh do thou, we pray thee, strengthen in us these resolutions which thou have
inspired us withal, and ever further them by thy continued Grace, that no
sudden desires, ineffectual purposes, or partial performances, may deceive or
lead us into a false Opinion of our selves; but that we may bring forth
actually, and with a constant Spirit, all the fruits of Righteousness which are
by Christ Jesus, to the Praise and Glory of thee our God.

O let us be so sensible of thy great kindness to us, and of our many
engagements unto Thee, that we may love thee our God and Savior with all our
heart, soul, and strength; that we may strive to credit our Religion, and
glorify thy Name all the ways we are able, with all that we are, have, or can
do; that not only by the special Duties of thy Worship, but also by the right
management of our outward Affairs, and our moderate use of the good things of
this Life, we may serve Thee, and be brought nearer unto Thee. Thus we pray
Thee let Religion be the very business of our lives, and let our greatest
pleasure be to please Thee in every thing, and our highest design to attain
that Blessed Immortality which Christ Jesus has promised.

Lift up our affections, we entreat Thee, more and more to those things above
where He is; that Heaven may have our hearts while this World has our bodies;
and we may have perfect Contentment of mind in Well-doing, and patient
suffering; and the good hope we have of being eternally beloved of Thee the
Lord of Heaven and Earth, may make us rejoice evermore.

Free us, O Lord, from all inordinate cares for the things of this Life; from
all distrust of thy good Providence; from all repining at any thing that
befalls us; and enable us in every thing to give Thanks; believing that all
things are ordered by the greatest Wisdom, and shall work together for the good
of those that love Thee. We doubt not of thy Fatherly Affection to those that
study in all sincerity to approve themselves unto Thee; and therefore still
resolve to leave our selves entirely to thy wise Counsels, that thou may
dispose us into such a condition as thou see best in this World. Oh remember
us but of our Duty; quicken and excite us to it; strengthen us in the doing of
it; support us under all discouragements; advise us in all difficult cases; and
comfort us with a steadfast Belief of thy holy Word; and we shall ever be giving
thanks and praise unto Thee who dealest so bountifully with us.

Moreover with our selves we desire, O Lord, the good of all Mankind,
especially that thou would be merciful to thy whole Church, and
particularly that thou would bless that part of it which is planted in these
Nations wherein we live; inclining the hearts of all Ranks and Degrees of Men
amongst us to follow after things which make for Peace, Unity, and Godliness.
But O gracious God, as we are in duty bound in a more peculiar manner, we do
most earnestly beseech Thee, on the behalf of this place of our Abode, that our
Minister being directed and assisted by Thee, may be made a Blessing and a
Comfort unto us; and that we likewise having our Conversation as becomes the
Gospel of Christ, may be a Blessing and an Encouragement unto him.

Give, we pray Thee, repentance unto Sinners, and increase of Grace and
Strength to all thy faithful Servants; Reduce those among us that wander out
of the way; raise up those that are fallen; confirm and settle those that
stand, and grant them a steadfast Resolution to persevere in Faith, Love, and
Obedience. Relieve and comfort all those that are in any Distress; make the
Earth to bring forth her increase in due season; and let all honest and
industrious People be succeeded and blessed in their Labors. Remember all
those who are nearly related to us, or to whom we are indebted for our Birth,
Education, Instruction, or Promotion; Thou who art rich in Mercy reward and
recompense their care and love. Grant Forgiveness and Charity to all our
Enemies; Continue good will among all our kind Neighbors. Assist those that
are Dying and leaving this World, and fit their Souls for a better Place; and
let us also with them after our own last sickness, in due time through Christ,
obtain a glorious Resurrection and Eternal Life.

And here, O Lord, we do from our very Souls render unto Thee most humble and
hearty thanks for all thy Blessings and Benefits bestowed upon us concerning
this Life and that which is to come; but more especially we praise Thee for the
mercies of this day; for any measure of success thou have given us in our
lawful Endeavors; that thou have defended us from such dangers as might have
fallen upon us. We beseech Thee likewise of thine infinite Goodness and Mercy,
to defend and protect us and all that belong unto us this Night; and let us be
refreshed with moderate rest and sleep, and so raised the next Day more able
and willing to set forth thy Glory, in the conscionable Duties of our Places
and Callings. These and all other needful Mercies, we ask of Thee for the
alone merits of Jesus Christ, in whose Name we continue to pray unto Thee as he
himself has taught us, saying, Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be
thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, give
us this day our daily Bread, and forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us, and lead us not into Temptation, but deliver us from
evil, for thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever and ever.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy love O Heavenly Father, thy comfort and
consolation O holy and blessed Spirit be with us, and remain with us this night
and for evermore, Amen.

Another Family Prayer for the Evening on the Weekdays, Saturday especially.
O Most blessed and eternal God, thou alone art the fountain of our Happiness,
and the rest and satisfaction of our Souls. Thou art infinitely more great and
glorious in thy Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, then either our words can declare,
or our hearts can conceive. We therefore thine unworthy Servants do here most
humbly adore and worship thine incomprehensible Majesty; acknowledging that we
were not only born in sin, but in the course of our Lives have violated thy
Sacred Laws, and many ways transgressed our Duty as to Thee, our Neighbors,
and our Selves; so that if Thou should deal with us according to the
strictness of thy Justice and our own deservings, we could expect nothing but
shame and misery, both in this life and that which is to come. But, O God, we
beseech Thee do thou help us penitently and believingly to cast our selves upon
thy Mercy, and the Merits of Jesus Christ; and for his sake graciously forgive
unto us the sinfulness of all our thoughts, words, and ways, and let thy Spirit
witness with ours the comfortable assurance of that Forgiveness.

And for the future, let us not be tempted by the allurements or
discouragements of the World, wilfully to allow our selves in the omission of
any the least known Duty, or in the Commission of any the least known Sin. And
because this is thy Will even our sanctification, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that
thou would sanctify our Understandings, that being renewed in the Spirit of
our Minds, we may have a Spiritual Discerning of the things of Thee our God;
that we may know what it is that Thou requirest of us, in those several Places,
Conditions and Relations Thou art pleased to set us in. That Thou would
likewise enable us to submit our wills to thy Blessed Will in all things; and
to make it our daily care and exercise to keep our Consciences clear and
unreproveable in thy sight.

That Thou would help us to set our Affections upon things above; that we
may love thee the Lord our God with all our Heart, and with all our Soul, and
with all our Strength; and that Christ may be the Chiefest of ten thousands
unto us, Him whom our Soul loves. That we may present our Bodies a living
Sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto Thee, which is but our reasonable Service.
That so being sanctified throughout, we may be whatsoever Thou would have us
to be; that we may leave whatsoever thou would have us to forsake; that we
may patiently suffer whatsoever Thou layest upon us to endure; that we may
freely, cheerfully, and readily do whatsoever thy Command obliges us to do.

And because Thou requirest that we should grow in Grace by all those means of
Grace and Salvation which Thou art pleased so plentifully to vouchsafe unto us,
Oh that Thou would help us to walk yet more holily in respect of Thee our
God then ever; that we may be more fearful of offending Thee, and more
solicitous to please Thee then ever we have yet been; being more wisely zealous
and active for thy Glory, and more reverent in the use of all things that
relate unto Thee.

That thou would give us an universal Good Will toward others in the World;
that we may love our Neighbors as our Selves, and love even our Enemies for
thy sake; and be more careful that we do hurt unto none, but deal justly and
mercifully toward all, as we would that they should do unto us.

That thou would help us to perform more and better then ever those Duties
which we owe unto our selves; that we may live yet more in the exercise of
Meekness, of Humility, of Temperance and Contentedness of Mind.

Thus, O Lord, that thou would help us to serve Thee all our days in the
Uptightness of our Hearts, improving all opportunities of doing and receiving
Good; preparing for our great Change from time to Eternity; and in every
respect, by a constant watchfulness over all our Thoughts, Words, and Actions,
so behaving our selves, as those that know and steadfastly believe, that we have
Thee an everliving God to serve, that we have precious and Immortal Souls to
save, that we have endless Woes to avoid, and Everlasting Happiness to seek
after.

And, O God, with us, we beseech Thee likewise to bless all those that desire
or stand in need of our Prayers; and to communicate of thy Grace and Mercy
according to their and our several wants and necessities. Oh do Thou enlarge
the Church and Kingdom of Christ, weaken and destroy the Power of Sin, and
Antichrist; be favorable in particular to these Nations wherein we live,
vouchsafing to us those Mercies we stand in need of, and turning from us those
Judgments which our sins may cry for. Bless our Magistrates and Ministers;
bless those that are near unto us by the bonds of Nature, with all such as
suffer sickness or any other affliction or misery. Bless this Place, and grant
that real Godliness, Saving Knowledge, Peace, and Truth, may flourish here more
and more.

Accept of Praise for all thy Mercies hitherto vouchsafed unto us. Continue, we
pray Thee, thy merciful Protection over us this night; keep us from sin, and
the dangers that a Night may bring forth, let us be refreshed and raised the
next Day more able and willing to serve Thee in the Duties of it. These and all
other needful Mercies we humbly beg for the sake of Christ, continuing further
to pray unto Thee as he himself has taught us, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. See the Lords Prayer and Blessing, page 23.




Concerning the Lord's Day.
LEt it always be remembered before it comes, to prepare for it; and when it is
come, to keep it Holy. It has been honored 1 by God the Father, forming
thereupon the Elements of the World, 2 by God the Son, rising from the Dead,
and appearing several times after his Resurrection, 3 by God the Holy Ghost
descending with his miraculous Gifts and Graces upon the Apostles and Others, 4
by the Christian Church making it the time of her Solemn Assemblies.

Let us not therefore profane any part of it, but be now as careful for the
Welfare of our Souls, as we are upon other days for our bodily Sustenance.
Excepting such time as is for works of absolute Necessity, which cannot be done
the Day before or the Day following; let us with Cheerfulness spend it wholly
in hearing the Word of God read and taught; in private Devotion and public
Prayers, which are both for the Morning and Afternoon; in acknowledgment of
our offenses to God, and amendment of the same; in reconciling our selves
charitably to our Neighbors where displeasure has been; in often Receiving
the Communion Canon 13. of those 103.
of the Body and Blood of Christ; in Visiting of the Poor and Sick, and using
all good and sober Conversation.

Thus we shall please the Will of God, and conscientiously obey our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Governors, Vide late Act for the Lord's Day.
who strictly enjoin the same by their Power derived from God. Thus we shall
have a more deep and lasting sense of God and Religion impressed upon our Hearts,
and so live more holily the Week following.

Besides prudent and good Men have observed their outward worldly Affairs most
prospered that Week, which they began with a diligent and religious Observation
of the Lord's Day. But However that is, most certainly, if we duly sanctify
this Day of Rest here, we shall celebrate an Everlasting Rest and Sabbath
hereafter. If now we sincerely and willingly join with the Congregations of
Gods People, to worship him as we ought to do, we shall in due time join with
the Blessed Company of Saints and Angels above to sing his Praises for evermore.

Psalm. 118. 24. This is the Day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and
be glad in it. V. 20. This is the Gate of the Lord, the Righteous shall enter
into it. Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the
House of the Lord. Revel. 1. 10, I was in the Spirit on the Lord's Day. Acts 20.
7. And upon the First Day of the Week, when the Disciples came together to
break Bread, Paul preached unto them. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Upon the First Day of the
Week, let every one of you lay by him in Store as God has prospered him. A
Morning Prayer for the Lord's Day which may be used by more together, or by one
alone for the reason mentioned page. 4
PRaised be thy holy Name, O God, for all thy favors and benefits bestowed
upon us from time to time, concerning this, or a better Life. Blessed be thy
Goodness for the Mercies of the last Night, and this Morning; that thou have
brought us to the beginning of another Christian Sabbath. Oh let not our former
unfruitfulness hinder thy present Blessing and Assistance in what we have to
do; but do thou we pray Thee in Christ Jesus pardon and mend us both at once.
And help us now so to remember and esteem this thy Day, as to lay aside all
secular businesses and diversions, and to apply our selves to all those private
and public Duties which concern the Sanctification thereof; not doint after
our own ways, nor finding our own Pleasures, nor speaking our own words; but
consecrating our own selves and services to thy more especial Worship; spending
the whole Day in works of Religion, Necessity and Mercy.

Be graciously present with all those Assemblies of thy Saints which do on this
Day meet together for thy Worship and Service. More especially be pleased to
direct and assist the Minister to whose charge we belong; that he may speak to
the Consciences and Conditions of this People. And do thou remove from us all
irreverence, distraction, dullness, prejudice, and unbelief in hearing of thy
Word, that having the same accompanied by the Power of thy Spirit, it may be
effectual for the further enlightening of our Minds, the quickening of our
Affections, the bettering of our Hearts, and the amendment of our Lives. And
let us think we have done nothing in Hearing, Reading, Praying, Receiving,
Singing of Psalms, Confering, Meditating, till in all we have glorified Thee
our Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier, till our Souls be brought something
nearer unto Heaven, unto thy Self; And all we beg upon the account of Christ,
saying further as he has taught us, Our Father, etc.

A Family Prayer for the Evening on the Lord's Day.
OEternal God, and most Gracious Father, we thine unworthy servants do here
cast down our selves at the Footstool of thy Grace, acknowledging that we were
conceived in sin, and have actually in thought word and deed transgressed thy
Holy and Righteous Precepts; so that if thou should look upon us as in our
selves, we could not expect any thing but thy Wrath and our own Condemnation.
But, O holy Father, for Jesus Christ thy dear Sons sake, for the Merits of his
Obedience and Bloodshed, we beseech Thee to have Mercy upon us, pardoning to us
all our sins, and freeing us from the Shame and Confusion which is due unto us
for them.

And we pray Thee inspire thy Holy Spirit into our Hearts, that by his
Illumination and effectual Working, we may have the inward sight and feeling of
our sins and natural corruptions, and not through Custom be blinded or hardened
in them. That we may more and more loath them, and be heartily grieved for
them, endeavoring by the use of all good means to overcome, and to get out of
them. Oh let us feel the Power of Christ's death killing sin in our mortal
Bodies, and the virtue of his Resurrection raising up our Souls unto Newness of
Life; that living in thy Fear unto thy Glory, we may die in thy Favor, and in
thine Appointed time, attain unto the Blessed Resurrection of the Just, unto
Eternal Life.

In the mean while, O Lord, increase our Faith in the sweet promises of the
Gospel, and our Repentance from dead works; the assurance of our hope; and our
love unto thy self, and thy children, especially those whom we shall see to
stand in need of our help and comfort; that so by the fruits of Piety and a
Righteous Life, we may be assured that thy holy Spirit does dwell in us, and
that we are thy Children by Grace and Adoption. And grant us, Good Father, the
continuance of Health, Peace, Maintenance, and all other outward things, so far
forth, as thy Divine Wisdom shall think meet and necessary for us.

And we beseech thee, O Lord, to be merciful likewise to thy whole Church, and
particularly to these Kingdoms wherein we live, vouchsafing to us those Mercies
we stand in need of, and turning from us those Judgments which our sins may
cry for. Preserve the Kings Majesty, bless all the Royal Family; bless our
Magistrates and Ministers, this place, those that are near unto us by Kindred
or Neighborhood; be graciously present with all our Christian Brethren that
suffer sickness or any other affliction or misery; grant them patience to bear
thy Cross, and Deliverance when, and which way it shall seem best unto Thee.
And O Lord, let us not forget our last End, and those accounts which then we
must render unto Thee. In Health and Prosperity make us mindful of Sickness,
and the evil Day that is behind; that these things may not overtake us as a
snare, but that we may in good measure, like wise Virgins, be found prepared
for the Coming of Christ to call us by Death unto Judgment.

And here, O Lord, we do from our very Souls, render unto Thee most humble and
hearty thanks, for all thy Blessings bestowed upon us, concerning this Life and
that which is to come. We praise Thee especially for Christ the Fountain and
Foundation of all thy Mercies we ever yet received, or hope hereafter to
receive from Thee. In him we praise Thee for the Mercies thou have this day
bestowed upon us, or given us occasion to remember, whether concerning the
Creation of the World, or the Redemption of Mankind. We praise thee for thy
holy Word and Sacraments, and seasons of Grace yet vouchsafed unto us. We
praise Thee that by thy good Providence we have been preserved and provided for
to this very moment; entreating Thee likewise to continue thy Merciful
Protection over us this night.

And, O Lord, we beseech Thee let those saving Truths which have been delivered
unto us, sink down into our Hearts, and spring up in our Conversations. Let us
keep up such holy Purposes and heavenly Affections as may have been wrought in
any of us whilst attending upon Thee. Let our lives be in some measure
answerable to the means we enjoy. Let the fruit of this Day appear in us the
Week following, and all the days of our Lives following. Henceforth let our
resolution of pleasing Thee, and doing good in our Generation be more
confirmed; let the felicities of Heaven be more esteemed; let our desires of
Earthly things be more abated; let the Breathings of our Souls after a fuller
enjoyment of thy Self be more enlarged; Let our sins, those of our holy things,
be pardodoned, our persons and performances accepted, and our Souls eternally
saved; And al upon the alone account of Jesus Christ, it whose prevailing Name
we continue to pray unto Thee, saying, Our Father, etc.



As for those who are furnished with Bibles and the Book of Common Prayer, I
shall direct them if they desire it, how to use part of the Morning and Evening
Service according to the Liturgy by themselves, or with their Families.

But because many Pious Divines are of opinion that the Reverence due to the
Book of Common Prayer, is best preserved by employing it only in the Public
Divine Service; or in Private where there is one in Holy Orders to officiate:
And because we should always strive to be present at the Public Service of the
Church on any Holy Day, especially on the Lord's Day, and such Festivals as are
in Remembrance of our Savior Christ; You have to the former here added one
Prayer more which you may use on any such Festival in Remembrance of our
Blessed Savior, that is to say, On the Days of his Incarnation, Birth,
Circumcision, Epiphanie, Presenting in the Temple, Passion, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Mission of the Holy Ghost. A Prayer upon any of the foresaid
Festivals in Remembrance of our Blessed Lord and Savior.
O Most glorious God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
lights, from whom comes every good and perfect Gift; it is our bounden Duty
and our great Privilege, constantly to acknowledge Thee with joy and
exaltation of Spirit, in remembrance of thy infinite Bounty to us, and to all
the World. Every day tells us how good Thou art, and every one of thy Creatures
calls upon us to magnify, love, and serve Thee, who have made so many of them
to serve us. But this Day gives us occasion to remember thy more special and
extraordinary kindness to us the Children of Men, which calls for our highest
Praises to be joined with those of the blessed Company above, who are never
weary of giving Honor, Glory, Blessing, and Thanks to thee our merciful God
and Savior.

O how great was that Love which an Angel came to give notice of! and which a
multitude of an Heavenly Host celebrated with songs of Praise, when thou
sentest thy dear Son in the likeness of sinful Flesh, and in the form of a
Servant, to minister to our necessities, to relieve our misery, and to be the
Way to everlasting Life! Oh the Riches of thy Grace, that after Mankind had
forfeited all the rights of thy Creatures, and had contemned and despitefully
used many of thy Messengers, Thou would in such Mercy create us again unto
good Works; and for that end appear thy self most gloriously among us in the
Person of Jesus Christ!

We thank thee, O Lord, that thou have assumed our Nature unto such a nearness
to Thee, as we are not able to understand. We thank Thee, for the glad tidings
which Jesus has brought us from Heaven, that thou will be reconciled unto us,
and admit us again into thy Favor: and that he has observed the whole Law,
and fulfilled all Righteousness; and shown us in our Likeness, what thou
would have us to do, and to be.

We thank Thee for the Redemption which he has wrought for us by his Blood and
meritorious Passion. We rejoice in the Victory which he has gotten over hell
and the grave by his Resurrection from the dead; and in his glorious Triumph,
when he ascended up on High, and led Captivity captive; And in his Royal Power
wherewith He was invested, when He sat down on the Right hand of the Majesty on
High; And in those Gifts which he received for Men, even for the Rebellious
also, that the Lord God might dwell among them.

Blessed be thy Eternal Goodness which has made him a most merciful and
compassionate High Priest, and given us so great assurance, that he is become
the Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him.

Blessed be thy Goodness, which has sent the Holy Ghost, and continued to us a
succession of Pastors and Teachers, to be the Guides of our Souls, and to
minister to us those pledges of thy Love which our Savior left us, in the
Communion of his Body and Blood.

O God, that our hearts enflamed with ardent love to Thee, who have loved us in
such a wonderful manner, could ascend up to Heaven in these devout
Meditations, and not come down again but with desires left in them still
aspiring thitherwards! Oh touch our Souls so powerfully with a sense of these
things, that with an hearty zealous Affection they may ever look toward Thee,
and our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Oh fix our eyes on him, as he was
here on earth, that we may learn of Him, his humble and meek obedience to thy
Commands; and as he is now in Heaven, that we may trust Him for the performance
of his precious Promises, and patiently wait till he carry us also to that
glorious Place.

Since he appeared among us to destroy the works of the devil, and died to
redeem us from all sin, and rose again that he might bless us in turning every
one of us from our iniquities, and is made Lord of all, that he may govern us
by his Laws, and reward or punish us according to our works; Preserve in our
minds, we beseech Thee, a constant and lively sense of this great End of his
whole Undertaking for us; that he may see the fruit of the Travel of his Soul
in us, and our whole life may be a serious study and endeavor to imitate Him,
by purifying our selves as he is pure.

Oh that thy Fear and Love may keep us from abusing any of the good things
which thou have allowed us for our bodily Refreshment; grant that we may
receive them thankfully as from thy Hand, and enjoy them moderately as in thy
Presence, with bowels of Mercy to those who are in need, with a taste of better
spiritual Delights, and Heavenly Joys, and with hunger and thirst after the
Fullness and Perfection of those Joys, when our Lord Jesus shall come to show
us his Glory, and entertain us with eternal Satisfaction in his
incomprehensible Love. Amen.



Here you may add the Collect for the Morning or Evening respectively set down
page 6. Concluding always with the Lords Prayer.

The following Prayer for the Sacrament may be used by one alone after a
Private Prayer; or by more after a Family Prayer; at convenient times before
Receiving. ANd as for those of us in this (Place) or (Family) who intend to
receive the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, pardon, Lord, we pray Thee our
former not hungering and thirsting after it, our not Preparing for it, not
Partaking of it so often as our necessities and opportunities have required.
Enable us now, we earnestly beseech Thee, being duly prepared, to come as
worthy and welcome Guests unto thy Table. Give us a Lively sight and sense of
our sins and imperfections, of our wants and weaknesses, that we may hunger and
thirst after Christ and his Righteousness, expecting from his Fullness to be
supplied in whatsoever our Souls may stand in need of. Let us be enabled
rightly to discern the Lords Body, and feelingly to understand the relation
between the Signs, and things signified, applying both unto our selves in their
proper use. To this end, Enlighten our Minds more and more with the Knowledge
of Jesus Christ, and of his Gospel; especially of the great work of our
Redemption by his Blood, and his unspeakable Love shining forth therein; as
also of the Covenant of Grace, and Seals annexed thereunto.

Work in us an unfeigned Repentance, bewailing our sins past, and resolving to
leave them for the time to come, and to serve thee in Righteousness and
Holiness all the days of our Life. Endue us also with a true and lively Faith,
that we may not only receive the outward Elements of Bread and Wine; but
inwardly partake of the Spiritual Blessings and benefits of our Saviors Death;
that so we may be assured of the forgiveness of all our forepast sins, and be
better enabled to withstand Temptations for the time to come, that thereby our
Souls may be enriched with all saving Graces, strengthened unto all good
Duties, and nourished unto Everlasting Life.

Inflame our hearts with most fervent Love toward Thee, and our Neighbors;
yea, even our Enemies, for thy sake; and link our hearts together in an Holy
Communion, as it becomes the true Members of Jesus Christ. And being thus in
some measure prepared, let us yet look up to Thee, to pardon our
Unpreparedness; Let us still continue our dependence upon Christ for his
Assistance, as knowing that we are not sufficient of our selves, so much as to
think any thing, but our Sufficiency is of God. And when we come to thy Table,
let us not coldly and formally perform this high and holy Service; but with the
exercise of Faith, Love, Repentance, Reverence, with the renewal of our
Purposes of better Obedience, with inward Fervency and Devotion, in some such
manner as may be pleasing unto Thee, honorable unto Christ, and comfortable to
our selves. Let us so show forth the precious Death of our dearest Redeemer,
that in remembering the same, we may be unfeignedly thankful, and sincerely
praise Thee the blessed Trinity in Unity, unto whom be ascribed and given all
Honor and Obedience now and for ever.

Amen.


Another Prayer which may be used in secret some time before the Sacrament. O
Eternal and blessed God, I prostrate my self with humble Reverence before Thee
the Searcher of hearts, not to excuse but aggravate my faults; for I confess I
have not given Thee that Honor, Worship, and Service which I owe to my
Almighty Creator. Nor laid to heart, as I ought, thine infinite Love in Christ
my Redeemer: Nor duly followed the godly Motions of thy Holy Spirit, which thou
have sent to renew and sanctify my Affections, and draw me to thine Obedience.
I have not lived up to the Faith which I profess, but behaved my self too often
as if I neither dreaded the threatened Punishments, nor duly valued the promised
glorious rewards of my Lord Christ, who will judge the World in Righteousness,
and render to every one according to their Works. O Lord, I have done so much
Evil, and so little Good; been so eager in the pursuit of the things of this
World, and so cold and unconcerned many times about those of Eternity; so
unmindfull of my promises, unthankful for thy Benefits, and unfruitful in the
Knowledge of Christ, that it is a wonder of thy Patience and Goodness, that I
am still alive, and not cut down like a barren Tree that cumbers the ground;
that I am not lamenting these follies in weeping and gnashing of teeth, which I
now mention with so little sorrow and bitterness of Spirit. For ever adored be
thy forbearing Mercy, which has so long spared me an unprofitable servant, who
have so many ways in thought, word, and deed, offended thy Divine Majesty. Here
reckon up those particular sins which thou art conscious of.
Oh continue I beseech thee to be gracious unto me, and for Jesus his sake give
me a truly penitent and believing Heart; and by the virtue of that Sacrifice of
himself, which he offered once for the sins of the World, let all my sins be
done away and remembered no more. And for this and all other thy great Mercies,
I resolve to offer unto Thee by Christ, the Sacrifice of continual Praise and
Thanksgiving, and I present my body a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto
Thee, which is my reasonable Service; And I dedicate my self absolutely to thy
Obedience; Oh therefore give me Grace ever to fear Thee, and to walk humbly
with Thee, and to preserve a tender sense of my Duty toward Thee.

O Lord, I purpose by thy Assistance, that hereafter I will never willingly
depart from thy Precepts; oh do thou strengthen me to perform what I have
purposed; that I may never be so unreasonable as to return to those sins which
are the burden of my Heart; and grieve thy Holy Spirit; which rent the Flesh,
and shed the Blood of the Lord Jesus; and which I have so often, and so
solemnly protested against.

And now that I am going to thy Holy Table to commemorate the Sacrifice of my
Savior, to remember his love in Dying for me; to give thee further testimonies
of my love to Thee; and receive new tokens of thy Love to me: O Lord, vouchsafe
to make thy self powerfully present to my Mind. Represent thy self, and thy Son
Jesus so lively to my thoughts in all Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Holiness, and
Truth; that I may never forget Thee any more; but more seriously reverence
thee, and love thee, and rejoice in thee, and trust thee, and obey thee, all
the days of my life. Imprint the very image of thy Son upon me; that I may
carry him ever in my Heart, and have his life and death continually before mine
Eyes; and in all things conform my self to his Will, and fashion my self after
his Holy Example. Come, Lord Jesus, and possess thy self of my whole Man.
Purify me from all remaining filthiness either of the Flesh or Spirit. Bring
in all thy Heavenly Graces along with thee into my Soul. And be my perpetual
Defense, by giving me a fuller communication of thy Holy Spirit, and more
mighty aides to do my duty toward Thee, and toward all Men.

And for that end, compose my unsettled thoughts before I approach to receive
the holy Mysteries; that I may attend Thee with a full and clear conception of
their meaning; with an actual Belief of thy whole Gospel; with most sensible
love to thee, and desire to be more like thee; with thy high Praises in my
mouth, and joy unspeakable in my heart. May I presume most gracious Father, to
ask such tastes and relishes of thy wondrous Love in Christ Jesus, that I may
never be able to delight in any thing so much, as in the remembrance of it. But
mine eyes may be ever toward the Lord; and I may hunger and thirst perpetually
after thy Righteousness, 'till I am rendered meet to be translated to that High
and Holy place, where I shall see Thee, not as now in mysterious
Representations; but openly and as it were Face to Face. Amen. Lord Jesus; who
art able to save to the uttermost all them that come to God by Thee; In thy
most blessed name and words I continue my humble Prayers, Our Father, etc.



I would entreat those who have never yet received, or but seldom, to read at
their leisure, and with good Deliberation, the Doctrine of the Sacrament in the
Church Catechism: as also the whole Order of the Administration thereof set
down in the Book of Common Prayer; by which, together with what is contained in
the two foregoing Prayers, may be learnt, in good measure, what is needful
both in our Preparing for, and Partaking of that Holy Ordinance.

And yet to further your more profitable and comfortable Receivimg, you may use
these following Helps.

Some brief helps to Meditation in Receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper.
FIrst, When the Sermon is ended, and thou art adressing thy self to the
Banquet of the Lords Supper, meditate how lovingly thou art invited to be a
guest at this Holy Table. Hoe, every one that thirsts, come ye to the Waters;
Come, buy Wine and Milk without money, and without price: Eat ye that which is
Good, and let your Soul delight it self in Fatness. Take, Eat, this is my Body
which is broken for you; Drink ye all of this; for this is my Blood which was
shed for the Remission of Sins.

Secondly, As Abraham when he went up to the Mount to sacrifice Isaac his Son,
left his servants beneath in the Valley: So when thou come to the spiritual
commemorative Sacrifice of the Lord's Supper, lay aside all earthly thoughts and
cogitations, that thou may wholly contemplate of Christ, and offer up thy
Soul to him, who Sacrificed both his Soul and Body for thee.

Thirdly, Set thy self as in the Presence of God, with awful and reverent
thoughts of thy crucified Lord. If the blessed Apostle S. Peter, seeing but a
glimpse of Christ's Almighty Power, thought himself unworthy to stand in the
same Boat with him? how unworthy art thou to sit with Christ at the same Table,
where thou may behold so much of his infinite Grace and Mercy displayed? Yet
if thou come humbly, in Faith, Repentance and Charity, abhorring thy sins
past, and purposing unfeignedly to amend thy life henceforth, let not thy
former sins affright thee, for they shall never be laid to thy Charge; and this
Sacrament shall seal to thy Soul, that all thy sins are fully pardoned, and
clean washed away by the Blood of Christ. For this Sacrament was not ordained
for them who are perfect; but to help penitent sinners toward Perfection.
Christ came not to call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. And he says,
That the whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick. Bathe thou
therefore thy Soul in this fountain of Christ's Blood; and doubtless, according
to the Promise, Zech. 13. 1. Thou shall be healed of all thy sins and
uncleanness. Not sinners, but they who are unwilling to repent of their sins,
are debarred this Holy Ordinance.

Fourthly, When the Minister begins to read the sentences of Scripture before
the Offertory, let them be considered by thee to stir up thy Charity to the
Poor. Let Gods bounty to thee in Spirituals, provoke thy Mercy to others in
Temporals. Hoping to be refreshed with the saving benefits of Christ's Death; be
willing to thy Power to refresh the bowels of his poor Members: What we do to
them, we do to Christ; and who would not thus relieve Christ, who made himself
Poor to make us Rich in the best things?

And now the Sacrament being begun to be administered, apply thy self with
diligent Attention, and fervent Devotion to go along with the Minister in all
Actions, Rites, Prayers, Confessions, Readings, Exhortations, or Thanksgivings,
which are used in, and about the Holy Sacrament.

When therefore thou see the Minister putting apart Bread and Wine on the
Lords Table, and consecrating them by Prayers, and rehearsal of the words of
Christ's Institution, to be an holy Sacrament of the blessed Body and Blood of
Christ; then meditate, how God the Father, of his mere love to Mankind, did set
apart and seal his only begotten Son, to be the All-sufficient means, and only
Mediator to redeem us from sin, and to reconcile us to Himself, and to bring us
to Glory.

When thou see him break the Bread; meditate how Jesus Christ was put to
death as to his humane Nature; and his blessed Body wounded and pierced, and
both Soul and Body, as we may say, broken asunder for our sins; and withal,
call to mind the hainousness of them, and the greatness of Gods hatred against
them, seeing his Justice could not be satisfied but by such a Sacrifice.

When he is drawing toward Thee with the consecrated Bread, and offering it
unto thee, then meditate, that Christ himself comes unto thee, and both
offers, and gives indeed unto thy Faith, Himself, and all the merits of his
Death and Passion, to feed thy Soul unto Eternal life. The bread of the Lord is
given by the Minister; but the Bread which is the Lord is given by Christ
himself.

Ejaculations and Meditations which we may use while the Minister is giving the
Bread and Wine to others.
1. O Holy Jesus, I behold thee stretched upon the Cross, with thy arms spread,
ready to embrace and receive all Mankind into thy Bosom.

2. I see the Symbols, the Holy Bread, and the blessed Cup, but I also think of
thy Authority ordaining these Rites; of thy voice blessing these Symbols, of
thy Mercy reaching out my pardon, thy Holy Spirit sanctifying my Spirit, thy
blessed Self making intercession for me at the eternal Altar in Heaven.

3. Thy infinite Arms of Mercy are reached unto us, and our Arm of Faith
reaches unto thee: blessed be Jesus who will be joined unto Servants.

4. I am helped by these outward signs, blessed Savior, to remember thy Body
and thy Blood; but by these I do not feel thy Wounds. My Lord had the smart,
but we the ease; his were the Sufferings, but ours the Mercy; and after he had
paid the Price, we got the Purchase. Oh that my heart therefore by love and
desire might reach out after him, and by joy and delight ever rest in Him!

5. I desire to know nothing, but Jesus and him crucified. O let the power of
thy Cross prevail against all the powers of Darkness. Let the Peace of thy
Cross give me Peace with God, and in my own Conscience: Let the Victory of thy
Cross mortify all my evil and corrupt affections. Let the Triumph of thy Cross
lead me on to a state of Holiness. And let the Wisdom of thy Cross make me wise
unto Salvation.

6. Thou will not dwell in a polluted House; make my Soul clean, and do thou
consecrate it into a Temple, O theu great Bishop of our Souls, by the
indwelling of thy holy Spirit: and let the Members of Christ never become the
instruments of Unrighteousness.

7. O God my God, assist me now and ever greatly, and graciously: Grant that I
may not receive Bread only, nor Wine only, for man cannot live by that; but
that I may eat Christ, not by Papal Transubstantiation, but by Sacramental
Participation.

8. I am nothing, I have nothing, I desire nothing, but Jesus my Savior; make
haste, O Lord, behold my heart is ready, thou have opened my heart to receive
Thee into the seat of Love; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

As thou eatest the Bread, thankfully praise God for the saving benefits of
Christ's Death. And further think with thy self, As verily as I now cat this
Bread, so verily was Christ's Body broken for the sins of the World; and if I
sincerely believe in Him, as I now desire to do (unfeignedly devoting my self
unto him, relying upon Gods Mercy in and through him, being willing to be
guided by his Word, and sanctified by his Spirit) so verily are my sins
pardoned for the merits of his precious Death.

Here before the Cup be brought to thee thou may use one or more of the
foregoing Ejaculations. Thou may also have time to bless God for the Death
of Christ; to meditate upon his Sufferings; to admire the greatness of his Love
in dying for thee, resolving to take the Cup of Salvation, and to pledge his
love with love; to renew thy Covenants with God, to reinforce thy purposes of
better Obedience; to beg of God strength to perform such Duties as thou have
formerly neglected, against such sins and temptations as have too easily
prevailed against thee; to pray also for all Patience under such troubles and
afflictions as may befall thee before another Sacrament Day come about.

Having received the Cup at the Ministers hand, in the instant of Drinking, and
as soon after it as may be, meditate on Christ's Hanging and Bleeding upon the
Cross; giving him hearly thanks for his love in Dying for us. And having poured
the Sacramental Wine into thy stomach, say with thy self, As verily as I have
received this Wine, so certainly Christ's Blood was shed for the sins of the
World; and if I sincerely believe in him, as I now desire to do, (unfeignedly
devoting my self unto Him, relying upon Gods Mercies and his Merits, and being
willing to be guided by his Laws and sanctified by his Spirit; and resolving to
continue in his Love and Service to the end) so certainly are my sins forgiven,
by the virtue of his Obedience and Bloodshed.

And now having received the Sacrament of Christ's blessed Body and Blood, out
of a conscientious respect to his Command, with a desire thankfully to remember
his precious Death: consider, that he who has given thee his Son, will with
him give thee all things else; so far as will be for thy true Good. Therefore
now, thou may here further represent unto God through Christ, all thy needs,
and the needs of thy Relations, signify to him the condition of thy Soul;
complain of thy infirmities; Pray for help against the enemies of thy
Salvation, tell him of thy griefs, represent thy fears, thy hopes, and thy
Desires; look up to God to make the Blood of Christ unto thee, a quickening,
comforting, strengthening, justifying, sanctifying Blood. And as thou feel
the Sacramental Wine which thou have drunk, warming thy cold stomach; so
endeavor to feel the Holy Ghost cherishing thy Soul with the joyful assurance
of thy being reconciled to God, and accepted unto eternal Life.

Furthermore, because it is said 1 Cor. 16. 17. The Cup of Blessing which we
bless, is it not the Communion of the Blood of Christ? the Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For we being many, are
one Bread, and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread. It must be
remembered by thee, that though all the faithful are many; yet they are all but
one Mystical Body, whereof Christ is Head. And therefore thou must love every
Christian, especially those Receiving with thee, as thy self, and a member of
that Body.

When the Minister has given the Bread and Wine to all the Communicants be
ready to join with him again in the remaining Prayers and Praises. And after
you have given Thanks, and finished your private, and public Devotions; go
home, but do not presently forget what you have been doing in this solemn
Ordinance. They that as soon as the Office is performed, part with Christ, and
carry their mind away presently to worldly Interests, or to sensual Merriments,
these may be suspected to be too indifferent as to the things of God. They have
(as one says) brought their Lord into the house, and themselves slip out at the
backdoor. Otherwise does the Spouse entertain her beloved Lord. Cant. 3. 4. I
found him whom my soul loves, I held him, and would not let him go. Spend
therefore the remaining part of the Day, partly in the entertainment of thy
Lord, with acts of love and delight, with thanks and praise unto Him for his
Favors; partly in after-examination, in reflecting upon thy Behavior when
thou were before the Lord; and partly in strengthening of thy purposes, and
confirming thy Resolutions of better Obedience, that so there may be some fruit
seen of this day, in many other days that follow, till the Solemnity shall
return again.

Remember thy promises renewed unto God, bind thee to watch against sin, and
unto Holiness all thy life, as much as upon the Sacrament Day. Moses coming
from the Mount where he had been conversing with God, his face did shine, Exodus
34. 30. When thou go from the Table where thou have had sweet Communion with
thy God, the face of thy conversation must shine so with holiness, that others
may take notice of it. It is said of the High Priest and Elders, that observing
the language and carriage of the Apostles Peter and John, they marvelled, and
took knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus, Acts 4. 13. So thy words
should be so gracious, and thy works so exemplary after a Sacrament, that all
those who behold thee, may take knowledge, that thou have been with Jesus; that
at his Table thou did sup with Christ, and Christ with thee.

A Prayer after the Sacrament.
BLess the Lord, O my Soul; and all that is within me, bless his Holy Name.
Bless the Lord, O my Soul: and forget not all his Benefits. Who forgiveth Psalm.
103.
all thine iniquities, and satisfies thy Soul with good things. Who redeemeth
thy life from Destruction; who crowns thee with loving Kindness and tender
Mercies. O merciful Lord, I humbly thank thee for Christ the Fountain and
Foundation of all thy Mercies vouchsafed unto me from day to day. O gracious
Redeemer I yield thee all possible Thanks, that thou have this day refreshed my
Soul with the Sacrament of thy precious Body and Blood.

Seeing O God, that thou have so loved me as to give thy Son, and that thou, O
Savior, have so loved me, as to give thy self to die for me; help me, I pray
thee to pledge thy Love with love, henceforth hating and forbearing what thou
forbiddest, loving and practicing what thou command. Oh that my prevailing
love to Thee may quench and kill in me all inordinate love of the World and the
Vanities thereof. Oh that walking in the strength of that Heavenly Food which I
have now received, I may overcome the difficulties of this Life, and perform
better the Duties of my Place and Calling, and withstand more constantly the
temptations which I am most liable unto.

O God, seeing thou have not withholden thy only Son, how shall thou not with
him, as I humbly desire, freely give all needful Blessings to me, and all that
I am especially bound to pray for. Here make thy special Requests for thy self
and others.


And whereas I have this day renewed my Covenant with thee, and my purposes of
better Obedience; strengthen me, I beseech thee, that I may pay the Vows which
I have made, and do as I have purposed. Oh that whatever is in me vicious, and
contrary to thy Holy Will, may by virtue of this Sacrament be rooted out of me,
so that my Heart may become thereby a fit habitation for thy Spirit. Let it be
to me a seal of the Pardon of my sins, the confirmation of my Faith, the
provision of my Pilgrimage, and the joy of my Soul, let it be my peace and
support in the time of Affliction, and my comfort and strength in the day of my
Dissolution.

Let me hereafter walk more evenly and closely with Thee, in the performance of
my Duty, with a contented Mind, whatever trials or troubles befall me before
another Sacrament come about. Grant that I may still hunger and thirst after
this Bread of Life and Cup of Salvation, and that I may with a pure mind and
chaste affection receive it often, so as to grow in Grace and Godliness, and be
preserved in Body and Soul to everlasting Life through Jesus Christ, in whose
name and words I further continue to pray unto thee. Our Father, etc.

An Expedient to further Peoples often and orderly receiving the Holy Communion
in the Parish of Cartmel.
IN the Order for the Administration of the Holy Communion, we have, among
others, this Rule both pious and reasonable, viz. That every Parishioner (that
is, all above sixteen years old) shall communicate, or receive the Sacrament at
least three times in the Year, of which Easter is to be one; for the better
observation whereof, let it be remembered.

1. That by Gods assistance, if no great inconvenience hinder it, there will be
a Sacrament at the Church upon the first Lords Days of (December, April,
August,) especially for the Inhabitants of Stavely Division, or the West of
Broughton, and part of Allithwait, that is, the Inhabitants of Stavely,
Farigge, Hasslerigge, Field-End, Over-Carke, Wood-Broughton, Ainsome, and part
of the Church-Town to Headless-Cross, or of any other place in that part of the
Parish. And that the Sunday before each of these three Sacrament-Days, there
will be a Sermon at Stavely Chapel in the After noon.

2. That there will likewise be a Sacrament upon the first Lords Days of
(January, May, September) especially for the Inhabitants of Cartmelfell, or the
East of Broughton Division, that is to say, the Inhabitants of Cartmelfell,
Ayside, the Greaves, Barbar-Green, Field-Broughton, Hampsfield, and the Grange,
or of any other place in that part of the Parish.

And that the Sunday before each of these three Sacrament Days, there will be a
Sermon at Cartmelfell-Chappel in the After noon.

3. That there will be a Sacrament on the three first Lords-Days of (February,
June, October) especially for the Inhabitants of Allithwait Division, that is
to say, the Inhabitants of Birkby, Allithwait, Templand, Kentsbank, Kirket End,
Lindal, and both the Newtons, or of any other place in that part of the Parish.

And that the Sunday before each of these three Sacrament Days, there will be a
Sermon at Lindal-Chappel in the Afternoon.

4. That there will be a Sacrament on the first Lords Days of (November, March,
July,) especially for the Inhabitants of Holker or Walton Division, that is to
say, the Inhabitants of Browedge, Backbarrow, Speel-bank, Origge, Beckside,
Burnses, Walton, Part of the Church-Town, Holker, Carke, Flookborough, or any
other place in that Division.

And that the Sunday before each of these three Sacrament Days, there will be a
Sermon at Flookborough-Chappel in the Afternoon.

Concerning Catechizing.
That we may believe and live as we ought to do, and that the Lords Table may
be furnished with more knowing and worthy Communicants; Parents,
Family-governours, and Teachers of public or private Schools are entreated, as
the Laws of God and the Constitutions of the Church require, to be careful to
instruct those under their Tuition and Charge; and particularly in the Church
Catechism, that they may be able to give an account of the same when thereunto
called.

The Church Catechism.
Question. WHat is your Name?
Answer. N. or M.

Quest. Who gave you this Name?
Ans. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member
of Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?
Ans. They did promise and vow three things in my name. First, that I should
renounce the devil and all his works, the pomps and vanity of this wicked
World, and all the sinful lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, that I should believe
all the articles of the Christian Faith. And thirdly, that I should keep Gods
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as they
have promised for thee?
Ans. Yes verily; and by Gods help so I will: And I heartily thank our heavenly
Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation, through Jesus Christ
our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may continue in
the same unto my lives end.

Cat. Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.
Ans. I believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth; And in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born
of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and
buried, He descended into hell, the third day he rose again from the Dead. He
ascended into Heaven, And sits at the right hand of God the Father Almighty:
From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. I believe in the
Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness
of sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting.

Amen.
Quest. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy Belief?
Ans. First, I learn to believe in God the Father, who has made me, and all
the world. Secondly, in God the Son, who has redeemed me, and all Mankind.
Thirdly, in God the Holy Ghost, who sanctifies me, and all the elect People of
God.

Quest. You said that your Godfathers and Godmothers did promise for you, that
you should keep Gods Commandments. Tell me now how many there be?
Ans. Ten.

Quest. Which be they?
Ans. The same which God spoke in the twentieth Chapter of Exodus, saying, I am
the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bondage.

I. Thou shall have none other gods, but Me.

II. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, nor the likeness of any
thing that is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Water under
the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them. For I the Lord thy
God am a jealous God, and visit the sins of the Fathers upon the Children, unto
the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and show mercy unto
thousands in them that love me and keep my Commandments.

III. Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.

IV. Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day. Six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord
thy God. In it thou shall do no manner of Work, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, and thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger
that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the
Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seventh day: wherefore the Lord
blessed the seventh day and hallowed it.

V. Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long in the Land
which the Lord thy God gives thee.

VI. Thou shall do no murder.

VII. Thou shall not commit adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not steal.

IX. Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor.

X. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors Wife, nor his Servant, nor his Maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is his.

Quest. What do thou chiefly learn by these Commandments?
Ans. I learn two things; my duty toward God, and my duty toward my Neighbor.

Quest. What is thy duty toward God?
Ans. My duty toward God, is to believe in him, to fear him, and love him with
all my Heart, with all my Mind, with all my Soul, and with all my strength; to
worship him, to give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon
him, to honor his holy Name and his Word; and to serve him truly all the days
of my life.

Quest. What is thy duty toward thy Neighbor?
Ans. My duty toward my Neighbor, is to love him as my self, and to do to all
Men as I would they should do to me. To love, honor, and succor my Father and
Mother. To honor and obey the King and all that are put in Authority under
him. To submit my self to all my Governors, Teachers, Spiritual Pastors and
Masters. To order my self lowly and reverently to all my Betters. To hurt no
body by word, or deed. To be true and just in all my Dealings. To bear no
malice nor hatred in my Heart. To keep my hands from picking and stealing, and
my tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering. To keep my body in
temperance, soberness, and chastity. Not to covet nor desire other men's goods;
but to learn and labor truly to get mine own living, and to do my duty in that
state of life, unto which it shall please God to call me.

Cat. My good Child, know this, that thou art not able to do these things of
thy self, nor to walk in the Commandments of God, and to serve him, without his
special Grace, which thou must learn at all times to call for by diligent
Prayer. Let me hear therefore if thou can say the Lords Prayer.

Ans. Our Father which art in Heaven, Hallowed be thy Name. Thy Kingdom come.
Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this day our daily
Bread. And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against
us. And lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil.

Amen.
Quest. What desire thou of God in this Prayer?
Ans. I desire my Lord God our heavenly Father, who is the giver of all
goodness, to send his Grace unto me, and to all People, that we may worship
him, serve him, and obey him as we ought to do. And I pray unto God, that he
will send us all things that be needful both for our Souls and Bodies; and
that he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins; and that it will
please him to save and defend us in all dangers ghostly and bodily; and that he
will keep us from all sin and wickedness, and from our ghostly enemy, and from
everlasting death. And this I trust he will do of his mercy and goodness,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore I say, Amen. So be it.

Quest. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?
Ans. Two only, as generally necessary to Salvation, that is to say, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.

Quest. What meanest thou by this word Sacrament?
Ans. I mean an outward visible Sign of an inward and spiritual Grace, given
unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same,
and a pledge to assure us thereof.

Quest. How many parts are there in a Sacrament?
Ans. Two: the outward visible Sign, and the inward spiritual Grace.

Quest. What is the outward visible sign, or form in Baptism?
Ans. Water: wherein the person is baptized, In the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Quest. What is the inward and spiritual Grace?
Ans. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness: for being by nature
born in sin, and the children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of
Grace.

Quest. What is required of persons to be baptized?
Ans. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin; and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises of God, made to them in that Sacrament.

Quest. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?
Ans. Because they promise them both by their sureties: which promise, when
they come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Quest. Why was the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper ordained?
Ans. For the continual remembrance of the sacrifice of the death of Christ,
and of the benefits which we receive thereby.

Quest. What is the outward part or sign of the Lord's Supper?
Ans. Bread and Wine, which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Quest. What is the inward part, or thing signified?
Ans. The Body and Blood of Christ, which are indeed taken and received by the
faithful in the Lords Supper.

Quest. What are the benefits whereof we are partakers thereby?
Ans. The strengthening and refreshing of our Souls by the Body and Blood of
Christ, as our bodies are by the Bread and Wine.

Quest. What is required of them who come to the Lords Supper?
Ans. To examine themselves, whether they repent them truly of their former
sins, steadfastly purposing to lead a new life; have a lively faith in Gods
mercy through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of his death; and be in
charity with all men.

When the Sacrament comes every fourth month to be administered for any of the
Divisions above mentioned Page 62, 63.
, the respective Church and Chappel-Wardens thereof are desired to give timely
notice unto a fitting number of Servants and Children within the same, to be
catechized on the Sacrament Day for the said Division, or on some other day of
that Month. Thus the care of this needful exercise will be more equally
shared among them, and the duty it self more constantly performed.

And the better to observe an Order in thus calling the Youth to Catechizing in
the said Divisions, it may be convenient to begin in the Higher End of each of
them, and so to go by House-rows as much as may be through the whole, taking a
convenient number of Families at a time.

Concerning Personal Instruction.
THe like course, so far as it shall be found convenient, may be used
concerning Personal Instruction, whereby, as the younger sort in several
Families, come to the Church to be catechized; so the elder People in the same,
or the like number of Families, may come to the Ministers house, or he go to
theirs, to discourse with him in a plain familiar way, of the most necessary
Gospel Truths, and Christian duties, which most nearly concern Gods honor and
worship and our eternal Salvation.

To this purpose we may improve the Church Catechism, or the following
Profession of Faith, and Catechism consisting but of 12 Questions and Answers;
endeavoring fully to understand, and to practice the things therein cantained,
though the very words be not by each one so fully remembered.

Inhabitants that are most knowing, grave and virtuous, should be forward thus
to entertain holy Christian Conference with their Ministers about such weighty
and excellent things, because in this respect by their godly Examples they may
do very much good in drawing on others who need it. For by this means, Truth
may often be defended, error avoided, sin and wickedness hindered, Piety and
Goodness promoted and encouraged; Thus peoples mistakes may be rectified, their
doubts removed, and that hurtful strangeness that is too often between them
and their Ministers taken away. Moreover, thus the weak and ignorant may be
better informed, the careless and secure awakened and converted, the wavering
confirmed and settled, and the public Ministry of the Word and Sacraments,
made more effectual and profitable. In short, by this means none shall be hurt
or shamed, but all that are willing to it, and sincere in it, shall (God
assisting) be bettered, credited, comforted, edified, and greatly furthered by
a conscientious improving their present opportunites, and the precious time of
this life, in order to an happy Eternity.

Bishop Tailor in a Preface of his to his Treatise of Repentance. I hope (says
he of himself) I have received many of the Mercies of a repenting Sinner, and
have felt the turnings and varieties of Spiritual Intercourses, and have been
taught something of the Secret of Souls. And I have (says he) often observed
the advantages in Ministering to others, and am confident that the greatest
benefits of our Office may with best effect be communicated to Souls in
personal and particular Ministrations.

Mr Thorndyke speaking of some Persons neglecting formerly to Administer the
Sacrament, The way (says he) to have reformed us, should not have been to leave
off Communions, but to make them more frequent, and to endeavor that there
might be more Personal Instruction, by which People might be better fitted for
frequent Communion.

Dr H. Hammond of the Power of the Keys Cap. 4. Sect. 104. There will (says he)
be little matter of doubt or controversy, but that private, frequent,
spiritual Conference betwixt fellow Christians, but espicially (and in matters
of high concernment and difficulty) between the Presbyter and those of his
Charge, even in the time of Health; and peculiarly that part of it, which is
spent in the discussion of every man's special sin, and infirmities, and
inclinations, may prove very useful and advantageous (in order to special
Directions, Reproof, and Comfort) to the making the Man of God perfect. And to
tell Truth, if the pride and self-conceit of some, the wretchlesness of others,
the bashfulness of a third sort, the nauseating and instant satiety of any good
in the fourth, the follies of Men, and artifices of Satan had not put this
Practice out of fashion among us, there is no doubt but more good might be done
by Ministers this way, then is now done by any other means separated from the
use of this; particularly, then by that of Public Preaching (which yet need
not be neglected the more when this is used) which has now the fate to be
cried up, and almost solely depended on; it being the likelier way, as
Quintilian says, (comparing public and private Teaching of Youth) to fill
narrow mouthed Bottles (and such are the most of us) by taking them single in
the hand, and pouring water into each, then by setting them altogether, and
throwing never so many bottles of water on them.

Mr Baxter in one of his Prefaces to his Reformed Pastor: My advice to you is
this. See that you obey your faithful Teachers, and improve their help for
your Salvation while you have it; and take heed that you refuse not to learn
when they would teach you. And in particular, see that you refuse not to submit
to them in this Duty of private Instruction. Go to them when they desire you,
and be thankful for their help. Yea, at other times when you need their
Advice, go to them of your own accord, and ask it. Their Office is to be your
Guides in the way of Life. If you seek not their direction, it seems you either
despise Salvation it self, or else you are so proud as to think your selves
sufficient to be your own Directors. Shall God in Mercy send you Leaders to
teach and conduct you in the way to Glory, and will you stoutly send them back,
or refuse their Assistance, and say, we have no need of their Direction? Is it
(says he) for their own ease or gain that they trouble you, or is it for your
own everlasting Gain? Remember that Christ has said to his Messengers, He that
despises you, despises me. If your obstinate refusal of their Instruction do
put any of them to bear witness against you in Judgment, and to say (Lord, I
would have taught these, and admonished them better, but they would not so much
as come to me, or speak with me) look you to it, and answer it as you can, for
my part I would not be then in your case for all the World.

Mr Gurnall says of many, If the Minister stay for them till they send for him
to instruct them, he may sooner hear the Bell go for them, then any messenger
come for him. You must (says he of such) seek them out, and not expect that
they will come to you. I confess (says he) it is no small unhappiness to some
of us, who have to do with a Multitude, that we have neither time nor strength
to make our addresses to every particular Person in our Congregations, and
attend on them as their needs require; and yet cannot well satisfy our
Consciences otherwise. But let us look to it, that though we cannot do to the
height of what we should, we be not found wanting in what we may. Let not the
difficulty of our Province make us like some, who when they see they have more
work upon their hands, then they can well dispatch, grow sick of it, and sit
down out of a lazy Despondency, and do just nothing. O, if once our Hearts were
but filled with Zeal for God, and Compassion to our Peoples Souls, we would up
and be doing, though we could but lay a brick a day, and God would be with us.

In the sixth general Council at Trull in Constantinople it is thus decreed
Can. 78. That they that are baptized ought to learn the Belief, and on the
first day of the Week to say it over to the Bishop or Presbyter.

It would be endless to reckon up the sayings and exhortations of eminent
Divines to this purpose; let it suffice to add further our warrant from God in
holy Scripture.

Acts 20. 20, 28, 31. And how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you,
but have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and from house to house,
Take heed therefore to your selves, and to all the flock over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood. By the space of three years I ceased not to warn
every one, both night and day with tears.

S. Luke 12. 42. Who then is that faithful and wise Steward, whom his Lord
shall make Ruler over his Household, to give them their portion of meat in due
season?

Col. 1. 28. Whom we preach; warning every man, and teaching every man in all
Wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.

Mal. 2. 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek
the law at his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts.

S. Mark 4. 34. And when they were alone he expounded all things to his
Disciples.

Hebr. 5. 12. Ye have need that one teach you again which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, and are become such as have need of Milk, and
not of strong Meat.

1 Cor. 4 1. Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
Stewards of the Mysteries of God.

Hebr. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves;
for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give an account; that they may
do it with joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you.

1 Thessalonians. 5. 12, 13. We beseech you Brethren, to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake, and be at peace among your selves.

A brief Explication or Profession of our Faith, taken out of Scripture, for
the better understanding, and improvement of the Apostles Creed.
I Believe that there is one only true God, who is a Spirit infinitely
glorious, and being One in Nature, is yet Three in Persons; the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost; which are three and one after a wonderful and
mysterious manner. The Father God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and yet
not three Gods, but one God infinite in Being, Wisdom, Power, and Goodness: the
Maker, Preserver and Disposer of all things; the must just and most merciful
Lord of all.

I believe that Mankind being fallen by sin from God and Happiness, under the
wrath of God, the curse of his Law, and the power of the Devil, God so loved
the World, that he gave his only Son to be their Redeemer; who being God, and
one with the Father, became Man also in the same Person, by taking to him our
Nature; as to which he was conceived by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and
born of her without sin, and named Jesus Christ; and having lived on earth
without sin, and wrought many miracles for a witness of his Truth, he gave up
himself a Sacrifice for our sins, and a Ransom for us, in suffering death on
the Cross: and being buried, he rose again the third day, and afterward
ascended into Heaven, where he is Lord of all, in Glory with the Father.

And having ordained and appointed that all that truly repent, and believe in
Him, and love him above all things, and sincerely obey him, and that to the
death, shall be saved; and that they that will not shall be damned; and
commanded his Ministers to publish thus much, and to preach the Gospel to the
World; he will come again, and raise the bodies of all Men from death, and will
judge all men according to what they have done in the Body.

I believe that God the Holy Ghost, the Spirit proceeding from the Father and
the Son, was sent by them to inspire and guide the Prophets and Apostles, that
they might fully reveal the Doctrine of Christ, and by multitudes of evident
Miracles to be the great witness of Christ, and of the Truth of his holy Word;
and also to dwell and work in all that are drawn to believe; that being first
joined unto Christ their Head, and into one Church, which is his Body, and so
pardoned and made the Sons of God, they may be a peculiar People sanctified to
Christ, and may overcome the world, the flesh, and the devil; and being zealous
of good Works, may serve God in Holiness and Righteousness, and may live in the
special love and Communion of the Saints, and in hope of Christ's appearing, and
of everlasting life.

I do heartily take this One God in the Trinity of Persons, for my only God,
and my chief good; And this Jesus Christ for my only Lord-Redeemer and Savior;
And this Holy Ghost for my Sanctifier and Comforter; and the Doctrine by him
revealed, and witnessed by his Miracles, and now contained in the Holy
Scriptures, I do take for the Law of God, and the rule of my Faith and Life.
And repenting unfeignedly of my sins, I do resolve, through the grace of God,
sincerely to obey him, both in Holiness to God, Righteousness to Men, and in
special love to the Saints, and in Communion with them, against all the
temptations of the devil, flesh, or world, and this to death.

The Catechism, or Christian Doctrine and Practice.
Note that the first eight Questions and Answers contain the foregoing
Profession; and the four last do express the Particulars contained in the two
words Holiness and Righteousness, and in the Ten Commandments.

Question 1. What do you believe concerning God?
THere is one only God in three Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost who is Infinite in Being, Power, Wisdom, and Goodness: the Maker,
Preserver, and Disposer of all things, and the most just and merciful Lord of
all. 1 Cor. 8. 4, 6 1 John 5. 7. 1 Timothy 1. 17. Psalm. 139. 7, 8, 9 Isa. 40. 17.
Revel. 4. 8. Psalm. 147. 5. Nehem. 9. 6. Psalm. 135. 6. Revel. 15. 3. Exodus 34. 6.

Quest. 2. How did God make man, and who Law did he give him?
God made Man for himself, after his own image, in Righteousness and true
Holiness and gave him a righteous Law, requiring perfect obedience upon pain of
death. Prove. 16. 4. Genesis 1. 26, 27. and 2. 16, 17. Romans 6. 23. Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Gal. 3. 10.

Quest. 3. Did man keep or break this Law?
Man being tempted by Satan, did wilfully sin; and so fall from God and
Happiness, under the wrath of God, the curse of the Law, and the power of the
Devil: so that we are by Nature dead in sin, and prone to do more evil
continually, and to grow worse, and to depart yet further from God. Genesis 3.
Romans 5. 12, 18. and 3. 23. and 6. 23. Ephesians. 2. 12. Hos. 14. 1. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3, 5.
Gal. 3. 10, 13. Acts 26. 18. Genesis 6. 5. 2 Timothy 3. 13. Hos. 13. 2. 2 Timothy 2. 16.

Quest. 4. How was Man redeemed?
God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son to be their
Redeemer; who, being God, and One with the Father, did take to him our Nature,
and became Man, being conceived by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and born
of her, and called Jesus Christ, and having lived on earth without sin, and
wrought many Miracles for a witness of his Truth; he gave up himself a
Sacrifice for our sins, in suffering death on the Cross, and being buried, he
rose again the third day, and afterward ascended into Heaven, where he is Lord
of all in Glory with the Father. John 3. 16, 17. 1 John 2. 2. John 4. 42. Romans
9. 5. John 10. 30. and 17. 11. Heb. 2. 3, 4. and 4. 15. and ^. 14. 6. 1 Timothy 2.
5. Luke 1. 27, 31, 35. Mat. 1. 18, 20, 23. Heb. 4. 15. and 7. 26. Acts 2. 22.
and 7. 36. 1 Timothy 2. 6. Mat. 27. 31, 35, 60. Tit. 2. 14. Heb. 9. 26. 1 Cor. 15.
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 12. Acts 1 9, 11. Ephesians. 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. Acts 10. 36. and 2. 36.
Romans 14. 9. Mat. 28. 18. Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22.

Quest. 5. How, and on what terms is Salvation offered in the Gospel?
Our Lord Jesus Christ has ordained in his Testament, that all they that
receive him by a true effectual Faith, and that by Repentance forsake the
devil, and all his works, the pomps and vanities of the world, and the sinful
lusts of the flesh, and heartily turn from them unto God, shall freely receive
the pardon of their sins, and become the Sons of God and Heirs of everlasting
Life; And that if they sincerely love and obey him unto death, they shall be
glorified. And that they that will not do all this, shall be damned. And this
he has commanded his Ministers to preach to all the World. 1. Cor. 9. 14. Heb.
9. 15. Col. 2. 6. John 1. 12. Mark 16. 15, 16. Gal. 5. 6. Jam. 2. 24. Acts 26.
18. Luke 24. 47. Acts 5. 31. and 11. 18. and 20. 21. and 3. 19. and 2. 28. and
8. 22. and 26. 20. Luke 13. 3. Mark 4. 12. Isa. 55. 7. and 1. 16. Ezekiel. 18. 21
to 32. and 33. 11. to 20. Mat. 19. 27, 29. and 10. 37. Luke 14. 26, 27, 33.
Tit. 3. 5, 7. Heb. 3. 14. Col. 1. 23. John 15. 1. to 12. and 8. 31. Romans 11.
22. Heb. 10. 26, 38. Rev. 3. 12. 2 These. 2. 12. Mark 16. 15, 16. Mat. 28. 19,
20, 21.

Quest. 6. How did Christ reveal and prove his Doctrine.
The Holy Ghost was sent by the Father and the Son, to inspire and guide the
Prophets and Apostles and Evangelists, that they might truly and fully reveal
the Doctrine of Christ, and deliver it in Scripture to the Church, as the rule
of our Faith and Life: And by multitudes of evident uncontrolled Miracles, to
be the great Witness of Christ, and of the Truth of his Holy Word. Joh. 14. 26.
and 15. 26. 1 Pet. 1. 10, 11, 12. and 2 Pet. 1. 21. 2 Timothy 3. 16. Joh. 16. 13.
Ephesians. 3. 3, 5. and 2. 20. and 4. 11, 12, 13. Mat. 28. 20. 1 Timothy 6. 14. Isa. 8.
20. Rev. 22. 18, 19. Heb. 3. 2, 3. and 2. 3, 4. Acts 2. 22 and 19. 11. to 19.
Gal. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. John 14. 12. and 3. 2. and 10. 25, 37, 38. 1 Cor. 14.

Quest. 7. How are men brought to partake of Christ and Life?
The same Holy Spirit does by the Word enlighten men's Understandings, and
soften and open their Hearts, and turn them from the power of Satan unto God,
by Faith in Christ: that being joined to Christ the Head, and into one Church
which is his Body, and freely justified, and made the Children of God, they may
be a peculiar People unto him, zealous of good Works, serving God in Holiness
and Righteousness, and living in special love and Communion of the Saints, and
in hope of Christ's coming, and of everlasting Life. Acts 26. 18. Joh. 6. 44.
Romans 8. 9, 10, 11. Acts 16. 14. Ezekiel. 36. 26. Acts 15. 9. 1 Cor. 6. 11, 19.
Col. 1. 18. and 2. 19. Ephesians. 5. 30, 31, 32. and 3. 17. 1 Cor. 12. 13, 27. Romans 3
24. Gal. 4. 6. Joh. 1. 12. Gal. 3. 26. Tit. 2. 14. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Romans 8. 1. to
14. Gal. 5. 17, 24. 1 John 2. 15. Gal. 6. 14. 1 John 3. 8. Luke 1. 74, 75. 1
Pet. 1. 22. Joh. 12. 34, 35. Ephesians. 2. 19. Heb. 10. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 7. 2 Pet. 3.
11, 12. Tit. 1. 2. and 3. 7.

Quest. 8. What shall be the end of the Righteous and of the Wicked?
The Lord Jesus Christ will come again at the end of this World, and will raise
the Bodies of all Men from the dead, and judge all men according to their
works: And the Righteous shall go into everlasting Life, and the rest into
everlasting Punishment. Acts 1. 11. 1 Cor. 15. 1 These. 4. 16, 17, 18. Joh. 5.
22, 27. 2 Cor. 5. 10. Romans 2. 6, 7. Mat. 25. 2 These. 1. 8, 9, 10. and 2. 12. 2 Timothy 4. 8, 18. Luke 10. 11. Joh. 17. 24. and 12. 26. Mat. 13. 40. to 43.

Quest. 9. What are the public means which Christ has appointed to Salvation?
Christ has appointed that fit Men shall be ordained Bishops and Pastors in
his Church to disciple the uncalled, and baptize all that are Disciples in the
name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and to congregate his Disciples, and
to oversee and guide the several Congregations, and each Member thereof.
Particularly to teach them the Word of God, to pray and praise God with them
and for them; to administer the Lords Supper in remembrance of him; and to
bless them in the Name of the Lord: Especially on the Lord's Day, which he has
appointed for Holy Communion in such works: Also to rebuke with authority the
scandalous and unruly, and to reject those that are obstinately impenitent and
unreformed.

It is therefore the Peoples duty to join with such Churches in the foresaid
worship of God; and to know, hear, submit to, and obey these their Guides that
are over them in the Lord, and to avoid Discord and Division, and to live in
Unity, Love and Peace. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 15. Romans 10. 7, 8, 14, 15. 1 Timothy 3. 1, 2. 2 Timothy 2. 2. Acts 14. 23. Acts 2. 42. and 20. 7, 28. Ephesians. 4. 11,
12, 14. Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18, 21. Mal. 2. 7. 1 Cor. 12. 17, 28, 29. Col. 1. 28. Acts
26. 18. Jam. 5. 14. Neh. 11. 17. and 9. 5. and 8. 4, 5, 6, 8. 1 Cor. 10. 16.
and 9. 13, 14. and 11. 24. Number. 6. 23, 24. Deuteronomy. 10. 8. 1 Chr. 23. 13. Heb. 7.
7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 9. 1 Cor. 4. 1. 1 Timothy 4 13, 14, 15. Rev. 1. 10. Acts 20.
7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. Mark 1^. 2, 9. Joh. 20 1, 19. Tit. 2. 15. and 1 9, 11. 1 Timothy
5. 1, 19, 20. and 3. 5. Tit. 3. 10. 1 Cor. 5. 4, 5, 11, 13. Acts 2. 42. Heb.
13. 7, 17, 24. 1 These. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 16. Luke 12. 42. and 10. 16. 1 Cor. 1.
10. and 3. 3. Romans 16. 17. Ephesians. 4. 2, 15, 16. Col. 2. 2. 2 Cor. 13. 11.

Quest. 10. What are the secret Holy Duties which every one must use.
The secret Duties of Holiness are frequent and serious Meditation of God, and
his Word and Works, of our own sin and danger, of our Redemption, of our Duty,
of our Death, Judgment, and the endless Joy or Torment after it: The diligent
examination of our own hearts, and watching over our thoughts, affections,
words, and actions: The mortifying of our sins, especially unbelief, error,
hardness of Heart, pride, worldliness, sensuality, and hypocrisy: The exercise
of all Graces; watching against temptations, and resolute resisting them: And
secret Prayer unto God. Psalm. 104. 34. and 119. 97, 99. and 1. 2. and 63. 6.
and 77. 12. and 143. 5. and 119. 59. Hag. 1. 5. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Psalm. 50. 22. 2
Cor. 13. 5. Psalm. 4. 4. Prove. 4. 23. Mat. 5. 28. and 12. 34 and 15. 18, 19.
Psalm. 119. 113. and 39. 1. Mar. 13. 33. Luke 21. 8, 34. 1 Cor. 10. 12. Col. 3.
5. Heb. 3. 12, 13, 14. Mat. 24. 4. Luke 12. 15. Romans 13. 13, 14. Mat. 6. 6, 16.
1 Cor. 3. 18. Jer. 17. 9. 1 Pet. 2. 1. 2 Timothy 1. 6. and 4. 7. Acts 24. 16, Mat.
26. 41. 1 Cor. 16. 13. Ephesians. 6. 11. to 19. 1 These. 5. 17. Acts 10. 9. Luke 6. 12.

Quest. 11. What private duties of Holiness must be performed with others?
The private duties of Holiness to be performed with others, are these; Parents
and Masters must teach their children and servants the Word, and fear of God,
and pray with them, and for them; and hinder them from sin. Children and
Servants must willingly learn and obey. Husbands and Wives must be loving,
faithful, and helpful to each other, especially in the best things which
concern their eternal Welfare. We must seek advice in the matters of Salvation:
especially of our Teachers: we must friendly, prudently and faithfully admonish
and exhort one another; using gracious and edifying Conference, and a winning
Conversation. Ephesians. 6. 4. Deuteronomy. 6. 7. and 11. 18. Josh. 24. 15. Psalm. 101. 2, 3.
Acts 10. 30. Genesis 18. 19. Prove. 22. 6, 15. and 25. 13. 1 Samuel 2. 23, 29. Col.
3. Ephesians. 6. 1, 5, 6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 21. 18, 20. Mal. 2. 7. Jer. 6. 16. and 50. 5. 1
Cor. 14. 35. Acts 2. 37. and 16. 30. Romans 15. 14. Heb. 3. 13. Ephesians. 4. 29. 1
Pet. 3. 1, 2. Jam. 3. 13. Acts 12. 5, 12. Col. 1. 3. and 4. 3. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 10.

Quest. 12. What are the necessary duties of Righteousness and Mercy toward
Men?
The necessary duties of Righteousness and Mercy toward Men are such as these;
Superiors must rule for God, and the Commongood, with justice and mercy:
Inferiors must willingly obey them in the Lord. We must deal truly, and be
diligent in our Places and Callings; We must love our Neighbors as our selves;
and do as we would be done by; behaving our selves to all Men in meekness,
harmlesness, sobriety and truth: not wronging any in their Bodies, Chastity,
Estates, or Names, no not in desire, but forbearing and forgiving one another,
loving our very Enemies; and doing good to all according to our Power. Deuteronomy. 1.
17. 2 Chr. 19. 6, 7. Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. Josh. 1. 8. Isa. 56. 1. Zach. 7. 9. Romans
13. 1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Ephesians. 6. 1, 5. 1 Cor. 7. 20, 21. Col. 3. 20, 22, 23,
24. Mat. 19. 19. and 22. 39. and 7. 12. Ephesians. 4. 2. Phil. 2. 3, 15. Mat. 10. 16.
Ephesians. 4. 25. Tit. 2. 12. Col. 3. 25. 1 Cor. 6. 7, 8. Mat. 5. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,
27, 28, 39, 44, 45. Ephesians. 4. 28. Exodus 20. 16. Psalm. 15. 3. Col. 3. 13. Ephesians. 4.
2. Mat. 5. 44. Gal. 6. 10. Heb. 13. 16. Mat. 25. Phil. 2. 4, 20, 21. 2 Cor. 8.
11, 12.

Concerning the Sick.
FIrst, When thou find thy self visited with sickness, thou art presently to
remember that it is God who with rebukes does chasten Man for sin, and
therefore let thy first care be to find out what it is that provokes him to
smite thee; and to that purpose examine diligently thine own heart and ways,
and confess thy sins humbly and penitently unto God, begging most earnestly his
Mercy and Pardon in Christ Jesus, and putting on sincere and zealous
Resolutions of forsaking every evil way for the rest of that time which God
shall spare thee.

Secondly, That your own Heart deceive you not in this so weighty a business
which is for Eternity, it will be your Wisdom, before your Disease prevail too
much upon you, to send for some godly Divine, your own Minister especially,
under whose care you live, and who may be best acquainted with your Condition;
using his help to settle your Conscience aright, and to make your Peace with
God. And to that end, open your heart so freely unto him that he may be able to
judge, whether your Repentance be such, as may give you Confidence to appear
before Gods dreadful Tribunal; and if it be not, that he may help you what he
can toward the making of it so.

Thirdly, Let it be remembered, that there is also a Private Communion of the
Sick, which People generally are so far from seeking after, that though we
often, and earnestly desire them, they are but few comparatively, who, as S.
James enjoins Chapter 5. 14. Call or send for the Elders of the Church, or
Ministers of Religion, to pray with or over them, and to perform such other
Duties belonging to the Visitation of the Sick, as may fit them if they
recover, for a more holy Life; or if they die for a more happy Death.

Lastly, Take notice that I have not here set down any Prayers for the Sick, as
is usually done in such Books of Devotion, because I would have Neighbors
oftener to acquaint me with their sickness, in order to my Visiting of them; And
then as occasion shall require, I shall be ready to help them to such Prayers
and Meditations as may be suitable to their Condition, which they may make use
of in my absence.

Grace before Meat.
O God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and enjoying of these thy Gifts,
give them strength to nourish us, and us Grace to serve and please Thee,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
After Meat.
Gods holy Name be blessed and praised, for these and all other his Benefits
vouchsafed unto us; he save his Church, our King, Queen, and these Realms;
comfort the afflicted, and send us Peace in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
A short Grace before Meat.
O God bless these thy good Creatures unto our use, and us unto thy service,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
After Meat.
We praise thee, O God, for these and all other thy Mercies bestowed upon us,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.
Or this. Enable us, O, God, with thankful hearts to live in the strength of
these thy Mercies, to thy Praise and Glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Amen.


Children or Servants may be taught to say the larger, or at least, the shorter
of these Graces, when Parents or Family-Guides please not to do it themselves.
It is a duty of daily Practice to own and praise God as being the Author and
Giver of all our outward Enjoyments, and to crave his Blessing upon them. It is
very unseemly for Christians to go to their Meals like brute creatures, we are
taught better by the Holy Scriptures. S. Mat. 14. 19. S. John 6. 9, 10, 11.
Acts 27. 35. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4, 5.

FINIS.

