THE ARRAIGNMENT and Conviction of Sr Walter Rawleigh, At the Kings Bench-Barre
at WINCHESTER. on the 17. of November. 1603.

Before the right Honorable the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberline, the Earl
of Devonshire, Lord Henry Howard, Lord Cecill, Lord Wotton, Sir John Stanhope
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Popham and Andrews, Justice Gaudy,
Justice Warberton, Sir William Wade, Commissioners.

Coppied by Sir THO: OVERBVRY.

LONDON, Printed by William Wilson, for Abel Roper at the Sun over against St.
Dunstons Church in Fleetstreet. Anno Dom. 1648.

THE ARRAIGNEMENT and conviction of Sir Walter Rawleigh, At the Kings Bench
Bar at Winchester 17. November. 1603.
AFTER that Sir Walter Rawleigh was brought to the Bar, he sat upon a
stool within a place made of purpose for the prisoner to be in, and expected
the coming of the Lords: during which time he saluted diverse of his
acquaintance with a very steadfast and cheerful countenance. When the
Commissioners were all assembled, having stood up a while he desired the
Marshall to ask leave of the Lords that he might sit, which was presently
granted. Then the Court proceeded in his Arraignment according to the ordinary
course; unto which Sir Walter did orderly and willingly dispose himself: as
the Jury was culled to the book, he was asked whether he would challenge any
of the gentlemen impanelled for his Jury, he said he knew none of them, but
hoped they were honest men, and so desired the Court to take their choice of
them. The Jury being sworn, who were Sir Ralph Conisbie, sir Thomas Fowler,
sir Edward Peacock, sir William Row Knights. Henry Goodier, Roger VVood,
Thomas Walker, Thomas VVhitby Esquiers. Thomas Higate, Robert Kempton, John
Chawkie, Robert Brumley Gentlemen. The Indictment was red by the Clearke of the
Crown Office, the effect whereof was as follows.

THat he did conspire and go about to deprive the King of his government, and
to raise up sedition within the Realm, to alter Religion, and to bring in the
Romish Superstition, and to procure foreign enemies to invade the Kingdoms.
That the Lord Cobham, the ninth of June last, did meet with the said Sir Walter
Rawleigh: Cobham was then in Durham House in the Parish of St. Martins in the
Fields, and then and there had conference with him how to advance Arabella
Steward to the Crown and Royal Throne of this Kingdom, and that then and
there it was agreed; that Cobham should treat with Aremberge, Ambassador from
the Archduke of Austria, to obtain of him 600, thousand Crowns to bring to
pass their intended Treasons: It was agreed that Cobham should go to Albert
the Archduke, to procure him to advance the pretended title of Arabella, from
thence knowing that Albert had not sufficient means to maintain his own Army
in the Lowcountreys: Cobham should go into Spain to procure the King to assist
and surther her pretended Title. It was also agreed the better to effect all
these conspiracies that Arabella should write three Letters, one to the
Archduke, another to the King of Spain, and another to the Duke of Savoy, And
promising three things; First, to establish firm peace betwixt England and
Spain; Secondly, to tolerate the Romish and Popish Superstition; Thirdly, to
be ruled by them for the contriving of the Marriage, and for the effecting of
these traiterous purposes, Cobham should return by the Isle of Jersey, and
should find Sir Walter Rawleigh Captain of the said Isle of Jersey there, and
take counsel of him for the distributing of the foresaid Crowns as the
occasions and coffeehouse of the Subjects should give cause and way: And
further that Cobham and his brother Brook did meet on the ninth of June last,
and Cobham told Brook all the Treasons, to which Treasons Brook gave his
assent, and did join himself to all these: And after on the Thursday
following Cobham and Brook did traitorously speak these words. That there
would never be a good world in England, till the King and his Cubs (meaning his
Royal issue) were taken away, and the more to disable and deprive the King of
his Crown, and to confirm the said Cobham in his intents, Rawleigh did
traitorously publish a Book falsely written against the most just and royal
title of the King, knowing the said book to be written against the King, which
book Cobham afterward received of him; And further for the better effecting of
these traiterous purposes, and to establish the said Brook in his intents,
Cobham did deliver the said Book to him on the fourteenth of June, and on the
sixteenth of June for the accomplishment of the said conference and by the
traiterous instigations of Rawleigh, did move Brook to incite Arabella to write
to the three foresaid Princes to procure them to advance her Title, and that
she, after that she had obtained the Crown, should perform three things, viz.
To establish a firm peace betwixt England and Spain; Secondly, to tolerate
the Popish Religion with impunitie; Thirdly, to be ruled by them three in the
contracting of Marriage by their assent: And for the better effecting of these
Treasons Cobham upon the 17. of June by the instigation of Rawleigh did write
Letters to count Aremberge and delivered the said letters to one Matthew de
Lawrencie, who delivered them to the Count for the attaining of 600000.
Crowns, which money by other letters Aremberge did promise to perform payment
of, and those Letters Cobham did receive on the 18. of June, then did Cobham
promise Rawleigh that when he should have received that money, he would
deliver 8000. Crowns to him, to which motion he did consent. And afterward
Cobham offered Brook, that when he should have received that money, he would
give 10000. Crowns thereof to him, to which motion Brook did assent.

Master Sergeant Heal opened the matter, and delivered the effect of the
indictment; In whose speech this was observed, that he charged Sir Walter to
have intended the Intitling of the Lady Arabella Steward to the Crown, who he
said had no more title thereunto than he had himself, and further said after a
little pause, that he for his own part did disclaim and renounce all title
thereunto. whereat Sir Walter Rawleigh smiled. The Sergeant concluding Mr.
Attorney Cook began, and with a long disourse amplified (with vehement words
and actions) the several treasons whereof Sr Walter stood indicted, wherein he
so far moved Sir Walter that he many times offered to make answer for
himself before the Court would give him leave; protesting Mr Attorney told him
news he never heard of before, and that his memory (by reason of his
sickness) was so feeble that he could not remember so many circumstances as
Mr. Attorney tired him withal; But Mr. Attorney pressed the Lords that the
Kings evidence ought not to be broken, or dismembered, whereby it might loose
much of its grace and vigor: notwithstanding it was yielded, when M. Attorney
came to his proof, Sir Walter Rawleigh should have leave to answer his
several points as they were objected: In Mr. Attorney diverse things were
observed which were said and used in his narration or evidence. Some captiously
noted that he said this treason did tend not only to the overthrow of true
religion and destruction of all our souls, but even to the loss of our goods,
lands, and lives: But it seems he meant reciprocally: others thought him
full of impertinent phrases and complements, and specially when he spoke of
the Kings issue or of the Lords, after he said he would say nothing of them,
then he would presently fall into gross and palpable adulation of them to
their faces: but in their commendations he spoke nothing but truth: some noted
his care and diligence in delivering to the people that the King said he would
loose lands, crown, and life before he would suffer a tolleration or
alterration in Religion; and that to these Traitors (for Cobham and Gray were
upon the bye) he had done nothing rigorously, nothing unnaturally: nothing
precipitatly, not rigorously, because no torture used: not unnaturally, because
the brother was not pressed (further then he would) to accuse his brother: not
precipitatly because of the long time his gracious Majesty had promised before
he would bring them to their Arraignment: this was much to the satisfaction of
the people, but this he was commanded to deliver: All the assembly could have
wished that he had not behaved himself so violently and bitterly, nor used so
great provocation to the prisoner: which the better sort imputed to his zeal
in the Kings service, and to the passion which overwhelmed him in the cause of
his Country: as when he brake forth into these and the like speeches: This
horrible and detestible Traitor, this maine Traitor (for the rest were upon the
bye) this instigator and seducer to treasons, he that has a spanish heart, you
are an odious man, see with what a whorish forehead he defends his faults: this
is he that would take away the King and his Cubbs, O abominable Traitor: but
many that prejudicate of Mr. Atturneys nature would hardly be persuaded but
those speeches proceeded out of the insolency of his own disposition given to
triumph upon poor delinquents, and men in misery, honest men have reason to
think the best: And as the Attorney was noted, so was the carriage of Rawleigh
most remarkable, first to the Lords (principally to my Lord Cecill) humble, yet
not prostrate; dutiful, yet not dejected, for in some cases he would humbly
thank them for gracious speeches, in other acknowledge that their honors said
true, as in relating some circumstances: And in such points wherein he would not
yield unto them, he would crave pardon, and with reverence urge them, and
answer them, as in points of Law, or essential matters of fact; toward the
Jurie affible, but not fawning, not in despair nor believing, but hoping in
them carefully persuading them with reasons, not distemperately importuning
them with conjurations; rather showing love of life then fear of death.
Toward the Kings Council patient, but not insensibly neglecting, not yielding
to imputations laid against him in words, and it was wondered that a man of his
heroic spirit could be so valiant in suffering, that he was never overtaken in
passion: But when it was insinuated that it was said that it would never be
well till the King and his cubbs were taken away, he said that Mr. Attorney
used him basely, barbarously, and rigorously, and that he was abase slave and
a wretch that spoke the words, but he received comfort in these base words of
Mr. Attorney for he hoped that it should be the worst he should be able to do
against him.

The accusation may be said to be of two parts, viz. Personal against the
King, and publicly against the State and quiet of the Realm. Both high
Treason, the personal Treason was of two sorts. The first a conspiracy against
the Kings life: the second a practice to disable the Kings title to the Crown
of England. To prove that Rawleigh intended the Kings death, the confession of
George Brook was enforced, who said that his brother my Lord Cobham told him
that he and my Lord Gray were but upon the Bye, but the said Cobham and Sir
Walter Rawleigh were upon the maine for it, and should never be well till the
King and his Cubbs were taken away. And further said that he thought in his
conscience that the said speech of the Kings Cubbs proceeded from Rawleigh. And
it was further declared, that the confession of George Brook was enforced, and
not voluntarily made, until Sir Griffin Markham, and Watson the Priest had
vouched him for the knowledge of some farther purpose, than the surprising of
the King. To this Sir Walter answered that George Brook would say anything of
him, but he thanked God he never spoke with him; for if he had spoken but five
words he perceived that it had been enough. Then my Lord Cecil said that indeed
he thought that George Brook had a spleen to Sir Walter, but his brother my
Lord Cobham and he were good friends, and therefore he could not tell whither
he hated Rawleigh so much as to do his brother so great a displeasure, and
said, that my Lord Cobham might if he did practice (as himself confessed) with
Spain, give Sir Walters name in to credit him withal, as a man that favored
him, and on whom he did presume more than he had reason. To prove that Rawleigh
practiced to scandalize his Majesty's Title to the Crown. My Lord Cobhams
confession was produced, That Sir Walter delivered him a Book concerning the
Kings Title, but told him withal, that it was a very foolish book which he
delivered to his brother George to consider of, and George Brook confessed that
his brother gave him such a Book, whereof he read only the Titles of the
Chapters, containing matter against the Kings Title and Line. And it was not
omitted by the Attorney, that this Book was delivered upon occasion of my
Lord Cobhams coffeehouse. Rawleigh confessed that he had such a book which
he never read, but it was entitled, A Defense of the Queens proceedings
against Mary Queen of Scotland, And constantly denied that he delivered it to
my Lord Cobham, but that my Lord Cobham took it out of his Study (if he had
any such of his) without his knowledge, he protested: Here my Lord Henry Howard
signified that my Lord Cobham was asked in his examination whither Sir Walter
gave him the book, or that he took the same? and he said that Sir Walter gave
it him: But that since he had told some (who were again with him) that whereas
he had said that Sir Walter gave him the book, the truth was he took the same
of himself out of his study when he was asleep. Then my Lord Cecil asked Sir
Walter, where he had the book; and he said he took it out of my late Lord
Treasurer Burleighs study after he was dead. My Lord Cecil desired to know
whither out of that which was left to him or to his brother? And he said out of
that which was in my Lord Treasurers house in the Strand. Whereupon my Lord
Cecil published, that after his Fathers death, Sir Walter desired to search
for some Cosmographycall descriptions of the West Indies which he thought
werein his study, and were not to be had in print, which he granted, and said
he would as soon have trusted Sir Walter as any man: though since (for some
infirmities of Sir VValters) the bonds of his affection had been cracked, and
yet reserving his duty to the King his Master (which he could not despence
withal in his service) he swore by God he loved him, and found a great
conflict in himself, in that so complete a member in a commonwealth was
fallen away. But he must needs say that Sir Walter used him discourteously to
take the book away and not to acquaint him therewith: Nevertheless he said he
need not to make any Apology in the behalf of his Father, considering how
usual and necessary a thing it is for Counselors and those in his place to
intercept and keep all such kind of writings, for whosoever should now search
his study (or at least his Cabinet) should like enough find all the famous
libells that ever were made against the Queen that dead is: and shall also
find diverse made against the King our Sovereign Lord that now is, since his
coming to the Crown: Sir Walter said that the book was a manuscript, and had
noted in the beginning with my Lord Treasurers own hand, this is the book of
one Rob. Snag, and affirmed that as my L. Cecil had said, he thought a man
might find also in his house all the libells that had been made against the
late Queen: But M. Attorney said that he was no privy councellor, nor he
hoped never should be: my Lord Cecil answered that he indeed was no councellor
of state, yet he had been often called to consultation: Sir Walter thought it
a very severe interpretation of the law to bring him within the compass of
Treason only for this book written so long agone as it was, whereof no man had
read more than the Titles of the Chapters: and which was burned by George Brook
without his privity; admitting that he had delivered it to my Lord Cobham, not
advancing, nor approving the same, but discommending it, as Cobhams first
confession was; and he put this case, If he should come to my Lord Cecil (as
often he had done) and find a searcher with him with a packet of libells, and my
Lord let him have one or two to peruse, this he hoped was no treason. To prove
this treason against the State and commonweal my Lord Cobhams confessions
were read to this effect. That it was agreed between Sir Walter Rawleigh and
him that my Lord Cobham should deal with Count Aremberg to procure six hundred
thousand crowns, that Count Aremberge did promise to satisfy his request, to
the intent to advance the Title of Arabella: and that it was likewise concluded
that Cobham should (under pretense of traveling) Go into the Low Countries,
into France, and Spain, and carry three letters from the Lady Arabella to the
Archduke, to the Duke of Savoy and to the King of Spain to obtain the said
sum of Crowns, and thereby to promise three things unto the Princes. First
that there should be a peace concluded with Spain. Secondly, that there should
be a toleration of Religion in England. Lastly that she would not marry but by
the direction of the said Princes. And that she should come back by Iersey, and
there he should meet with Sir Walter Rawleigh and then they would agree how to
dispose the money to discontented persons (whereof he thought he should find
many at his return) and that Sir Walter should have a great number of crowns
from the said Count Aremberge, And that Sir Walter thought that the best
course to trouble England was to cause division in Scotland: And my L. Cobham
further accused Sir Walter, to have b in the only instigator of him to all
these treasons. And one Mat. de Lawrencie, a merchant of Antwerp that was used
between Count Aremberge, and my L. Cobham, confessed that Sir Walter Rawleigh
supped with my Lord Cobham one night when he came to my Lord Cobhams house, and
that they three went alone to Sir Walter Rawleighs house in the Strand by
water, and that the said Matthew de Lawrencie delivered a letter to my Lord
Cobham from Count Aremberge at Durham-house, and immediately Sir Walter went up
with my Lord Cobham into his chamber, and Matthew de Lawrencie tarried below:
Sir Walter confessed that he knew very well, that Matthew de Lawrencie held
intelligence between Count Aremberg, and my Lord Cobham, and so did the Lords
of the council know, that it had been so these seven years by license of the
Queen: But that he knew to what purpose it was now of late he denied, other
then he took it to have been concerning the business of the peace with Spain,
for that my Lord Cobham said that his brother George Brook was very loath to
accuse him, Sir Walter proceeded, and asked, whither my Lord Cobham had accused
him or confessed any such thing. It was answered that my Lord Cobham had been
asked whither he had spoken any such thing concerning his said brothers
unwillingnesse, and he would make no other answer but that he had: however he
said it proceeded out of a discontented mind from the said George Brook, which
M. Attorney said was a confession of their pretense in law. Then Sir Walter
Rawleigh, said that if my Lord Cobham had accused him as they alleged, he
ought to renew his accusation to his face, that so he might not be massacred by
heersay, and affirmed it was Sir Nicolas Throgmortons case. There was further
urged against Sir Walter for intending to make away the King the testimony of
one that had been lately at sea, who was in the Court in a blew cassock and
deposed. That being at Lisbone not long after the coming in of the King into
England, a Portugal Gentleman asked him whence he was, and said of of England:
Then he asked whither our King were crowned or not, and he answered he hoped so
by this time, whereupon the Portugal said that my Lord Cobham and and Sir
Walter Rawleigh would make him away before it were long, Sir Walter made
light of this rumor and of the witness, and said that he thought it might be
so; for that my Lord Cobham knowing that he had written a book and presented it
to the King, to move his mind not to make his peace with Spain, hearing him
one day at his Table dispute very violently against the peace, told him in his
Gallery presently after, he need not be so much against the peaces, for he
should have seven thousand crowns to labor for it, and that he thought it to
be a toye nor knew how to deserve it, yet his answer was let me see the money,
and then I will answer you to the purpose. And my Lord Cobham told him further,
that he would offer a great sum of money to my Lord Cecill and to my Lord of
Northumberland to the same end, but he dissuaded him from it, and told him,
they would hate him as long as they live for it. And Sir Walter said further,
that the occasion of my Lord Cobhams accusation was this viz. When as Sir
Walter perceived by the Lords that they had the said Matthew de Lawrencie in
jealousy to do some bad offices between Count Aremberge and my Lord Cobham
(who as he thought was justly condemned upon these advertisements) that he
observed my Lord Cobham that night (when my Lord Cobham brought him home to his
house) to go back past his own stayres toward his Countesses lodgings, with
the said Matthew de Lawrencie, as if he had been very sorry to have parted with
him. Then he writ to my Lord Cecil to signify to him that in his judgment if
he apprehended Matthew de Lawrencie presently, it might be a means that he might
intercept their intelligence (perhaps not yet ripe) And if otherwise Mat. de
Lawrencie might perchance be shuffled away, and so left it to his Lordships
consideration: And afterward my Lord Cobham had constantly denied these
matters upon his examination, this letter was showed unto him as though Sir
Walter had induced him to all the inconveniences he had fallen into, which
after he had read, he desired to read it again. And upon assurance it was Sir
Walters Letter, in a great passion he brake forth into these speeches; Oh
Villain! Oh vile Traitor! has he used me thus? Nay then I will tell you all,
and thereupon in madness and persuasion of the wrong that Sir Walter had done
him, he delivered the right accusation, the substance whereof was not denied,
though M. Attorney noted that he considered of a second time before he entered
into passion, Sir Walter appealed to all that knew my Lord Cobham, that he was
as passionate a man as lived, and said, that in his choler he had accused his
friends of greater matters than these, and had been sorry for it afterward.
The Kings Council replied that the confession of George Brook of the foresaid
speeches of my Lord Cobham touching himself, and Sir Walter, for a further
plot than they two by any way could excuse, must stand good in law, in that
those speeches were uttered (as it appeared) before those matters came out, and
before my Lord Cobham had conceived the spleen against Sir Walter upon the
sight of this letter. And further produced my Lord Cobhams confession. That Sir
Walter after his first being before the Lords, did write unto him the said
Cobham, that he had been examined of many things concerning him, but he had
cleared him in all: Now the Lords protested that all this while he was not
asked one question touching my Lord Cobham, and therefore the Attorney
inferred that he writ this out of a fearful and guilty conscience, to
confirm my Lord Cobham in his denial, against he should be examined: Sir
Walter hereupon declared that my Lord Cobham put him in trust to pass the
Inheritance of certain fee farm lands for him, and gave diverse jewels of
great value for his security, which were in his bosom at the time of his
apprehension, and that my Lord Cobham had a Cabinet worth thirty pound, which
Master Attorney should have had for his favor: and that at his return from
the Lords with private restraint to his own house; my Lord Cobhams footman
came to him to know what was done in the business: and he unwilling to have it
known that he was restrained, dispatched the footman, saying he would write to
his Lord, and so did by Captain Kemish. Besides for that which he writ of the
said business, and acquainted my Lord Cobham that he had been examined, and
that he had cleared his Lordship: he did write so in this regard, that though
he were not examined of my L. Cobham, yet he talking with my Lord Cecil, and
his Lordship telling him he was glad there were no more in the action than
there appeared, and that he hoped such a one was not in, S. Walter said that my
Lord Cobham was absolutely clear: and my Lord Cecill replied he did hope so,
and thought no less: all which was said in regard my Lord Cobham was thought
to be discontented. But afterward my Lord Cecil said, Sir Walter you have
Kemish against you who carried the letter and toare out that sheet, which
concerned the Lords of the Council (for so was my Lord Cobhams confession) and
he has been offered the rack for it, but what he has confessed, I as yet know
not: Answer was made by Sir William VVade, that Kemish had confessed he
carried a letter, and knew nothing at all of the contents and that indeed he
was told that he deserved himself to be put to the rack for it: well said Sir
Walter the Rackkeeper was called for, was he not? Sir William VVade said,
that it was privately reported, that Kemish had his Masters letter back from my
Lord Cobham, but Sir Walter confessed no such matter. But concerning that he
was charged withal, for practicing to make a combustion in Scotland, he
confessed the words of my Lord Cobhams accusation to this effect, That he
thought the best course to trouble England, was to cause sedition in Scotland,
and said that he had thought so any time these twenty years, and so it had
been also held by the wisest men in this Kingdom: And he had delivered his
opinion to be such diverse times to the Lords of the council, and he thought
that there were few there but were of his opinion: Sir Walter also offered to
the consideration of the Jury, that my Lord Cobham had not subscribed his
accusation; Then the Lords requested my Lord Chief Justice to deliver whether
subscriptions were necessary by the Law, and my Lord Chief Justice said they
were not: Nay said Sir Walter, pardon me my Lord, for this, by your Lordships
favor, I take to be the course of examination in this kind. After that the
examinate has confessed, and his confession is written, it is all read over
again distinctly and deliberately to him, that he may be sure to say nothing
but truth: and then in confirmation that it is undoubtedly true, and that he
will stand thereunto, he is to subscribe the same. Now my Lords, if my L.
Cobham did accuse me thus rashly out of his passion, and afterward when he had
read it again, began to relent, and (with sorrow for the wrong he had done me)
refuse to set his hand thereunto, then I say my Lords I have reason to take
hold of it: And it is well known to you my Lord Cecil, and my Lord of
Northampton, how he has recanted his accusation, moreover he has most
penitently sorrowed for this injury he has done me, and could never be quiet
in his conscience till he had purged me. Master Attorney said, that in my Lord
Cobhams accusation there were many things, that he had recanted, but there was
no essential point prenominated, which he had recanted: And my Lord Cecil
said, that the reason, that my Lord Cobham gave, why he would not subscribe,
was, because he thought he was privileged by his degree: wherein he appealed
to my Lord Chief Justice, who answered that it was a great contempt to refuse
to subscribe, but it did not appear that thereupon he did subscribe. Then
Master Attorney delivered that it was Sir Walters policy to have but one
witness, because he thought that one witness could not condemn him. Sir
Walter thereupon furiously started up, and said to him, Master Attorney, you
must not think that all that makes for me is policy, and all that makes
against me is plain, and God reveals it. I were well fitted for justice, if
you should come to be my Judge, what indifferency is there in this my Lord
Chief Justice? Remember I beseech your Lordship the statute of the first of
Edward the Sixth ^ath this That no person shall be condemned of treason unless
he be accused by two lawful accusers, and those to be brought before the
party, if they belong to England. And remember too the statute of the 13 of the
Queen. No man shall be arraigned of treason, without the oath of two sufficient
and lawful witnesses brought face to face. My Lord Chief Justice said, the
statute of the first of Edward the Sixth, was repealed by the first and second
of Philip and Mary, and reduced all trial of treason to the course of the
Common Law. And that the statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth extended to
such offenses as were mentioned in the said act to be committed against the
Queen that dead is. And that all was now put to the Common Law, and that by
the Common Law one witness was sufficient concerning presumption, some of the
Judges said: That by the law a man might be condemned without a witness, only
upon presumption. As if the King (whom God defend) should be slain in his
Chamber, and one is seen to come forth of the Chamber with his sword bloody
being drawn, were not this evident both in law and opinion without further
inquisition? And my Lord Chief Justice said that one witness accusing himself
too, was very great testimony; especially in this case. For it was not to be
imagined that my Lord Cobham would do himself so much harm, as to adventure
the loss of his honor, lands of so great worth, and his life, for any spleen
to Sir Walter, unless the matter were true, and therefore the accusation was
very strong against Sir Walter. Note that the treasons against Queen Elizabeth,
which by the statutes of the thirteenth of her reign were to be proved by the
oath of two witnesses, were death or bodily harm intending to death, imagined
against her, levying of wars within or without the Realm against her, plots
to depose or deprive her, publishing her to be a Tyrant, Heretic, Infidel,
Schismatic, Usurious, etc. Sir Walter proceeded and urged, that though these
statutes lived not, yet he knew very well the reason of these statutes and
equity of them lived still. But howsoever I am sure (said he) the law of God
lives for ever. And you shall find it in Deutronomy in the seventeenth
Chapter. In ore duorum aut trium testium peribit qui intersicitur. Nemo
occidatur uno contra se dicente testimonium. And in the nineteenth Chapter. Non
stabit unus testis contra aliquem: quicquid illud peccati, et facinoris fuerit.
Sed in ore duorum aut trium testium stabit omne verbum. Diverse other places of
the old Testament are to this pupose, confirmed by our Savior too in the
eighteenth of Mark, and the eight of John, and by Saint Paul, Corinth 2. 13,
And by the whole consent of the Scripture. And if the Common Law be as Brooks
says (who was a great Lawyer) then there ought to be two witnesses: For he
says a trial is by verdict, and by witness, wherein my Lord Chief Justice
said he was deceived. But said he you tell me of one witness, let me have him.
Prove these practices by one witness, and I will confess my self guilty to
the King in a thousand treasons. I stand not upon the Law, I defy the law, if
I have done these things I desire not to live: whether they be treasons by the
law or no. Let me have my accuser brought to my face, and if he will maintain
it to my face, I will confess my judgment. Here my Lord Chief Justice being
required to signify his opinion of the law in this case, he said it was not
the law to have the witness brought to his face, considering he accused
himself also: To the which the rest of the Judges agreed Sir Walter replied,
it was not against or contrary to the law: Howsoever I do not expect it of
duty: And yet I say you should deal very severely with me if you should
condemn me and not bring my accuser to my face. Remember a story of Fortescue
a reverend Chief Justice in this Kingdom; Tells of a Judge in this Kingdom
that condemned a woman for murdering her husband, upon the presumption or
testimony of one witness (as it seemed) and after she was burned, a servant of
the man's that was slain (being executed for the same fault) confessed that he
slew his Master himself, and that the woman was innocent. What did the Judge
then say to Fortescue, touching the remorse of his conscience for proceeding
upon such slender proof, Quod nunquam de hoc facto animam in vita sus ipse
purgaret. That he could never be at peace of conscience whilst he lived,
although he but gave consent upon the verdict of the Jury. But my Lords for the
matter which I desire, remember too the story of Susanna: Daniel thought the
Judges fools because they would condemn a daughter of Israel without asking
the witness a question: Why then my Lords, let my accuser be brought, and let
me ask him a question, and I have done: for it may be it will appear out of
his own tale, that his accusation cannot be true, or he will be discovered by
examination. But yet principally my Lords remember what is said in the xix. of
Deutronomy, Si steterit testis mendax contra hominem accusans cum
prevaricatione, stabunt ambo, quorum causa est ante dominum, in conspectu
sacerdotum, et judicum, qui fuerint in diebus illis. And I will tell you,
Master Attorney, if you condemn me upon bare inferences, and will not bring my
accuser to my face: you try me by no law but by the Spanish inquisition. If my
accuser were dead, or not within the land, it were something. But my accuser
lives, and is in the house, and yet you will not bring him to my face. About
this time my Lord Cecil asked him, if he would take issue upon these points
upon my Lord Cobhams testimony: if my Lord Cobham would now justify under his
hand his accusation, and it might be that he would (by the advice of the Lords)
join issue with him, Sir Walter made no direct answer thereunto, but still
besought them to bring his accuser to his face. My Lord Cecil then replied, Sir
Walter, it cannot be granted you: you have heard your self that the Law will
not dispense with it. It may not be forgotten that before Rawleigh had been so
importunate to have his accuser brought to his face, he used very probable
reasons to the Jury to satisfy them, how silly and foolish an enterprise this
was, whereof he was accused, and how unlikely a thing it was that he should
enter into it. First, said he that I should make choice of my Lord Cobham of
any man living: A man of no following, nor of no force; that I should dream of
disturbing of the state, now every body was so glad of the Kings coming, and
of unexpected peace: and now the state was greater, and stronger than ever it
was. That I should be so simple to expect money from Spain: for I knew how much
that Kings revenue was impared, and his treasure intercepted. I also knew well
that where he had usually in his Havens, 6 or 7 score sail of ships, now he
had not six or seven sail of ships: I knew well too that his Jesuits begged
from door to door in Spain: and I knew well that the King of Spain was
bankrupt, as was protested by most of the Merchants of Christendom: And could
I imagine then that in his poverty he could disburse six or seven hundred
thousand Crowns? or if he had been in case, could I think it so easy a matter,
to obtain such a sum of money of the Spaniard? do Princes so easily now a days
part with such Masses of money? I knew that the Queen of England disbursed no
money to the States of the Low-countryes (though it were partly for her own
security) before she had the Brill and Flushing in pawn. I knew likewise She
disbursed no money into France (though for the like occasion) till she had
New Haven in pawn, and afterward more warm security: Nay, the Citizens of
London would not lend their Queen money, till they had her lands in pawn.
What pawn had we to give the King of Spain? What did we offer him? Or how
could we invent to offer to him the letter of an Arabella, whom he could not
choose but know to be of no following, what a mockery is this? what would I make
my self? A Cade? A Kett? A Jack-Straw? Against these probabilities, the
presumptions before alleged, were laid altogether, to fortify my Lord Cobhams
accusation, in the ordering whereof Master Attorney showed great wisdom and
care in his Majesty's business. And whereas Sir Walter had urged, that it was
not likely the King of Spain would be so easily persuaded to provoke the King
of England to a war, considering his bad fortune in six or seven enterprises
against this State, and what he had lost by war with England: Master Attorney
said he was so much the more likely to desire revenge, and to entertain the
least hope thereof. But Rawleigh answered: All you suspicions, and inferences,
are but to fortify my Lord Cobhams accusation; My Lord Cobham is the only man
that does accuse me. My Lord Cobham lives and is in the house, let him
maintain his accusation to my face. My Lord Cobham has confessed himfelfe
guilty, he is merely at his Majesty's mercy: and without doubt shall highly
offend the King, if he go back from his word, wherein he has abused his
Majesty, and so is to look for no mercy, but shall surely dye. On the other
side he has accused me to instigate and draw him into these treasons, and if
it be so, then I have been the overthrow of him, his honor, estate and all. He
is a man of a most revengeful nature, as all the world knows, who would he be
more willingly revenged on, then on him who has been his utter overthrow?
Why then my Lords if he will not displease the King in hope of mercy and
compassion (which is his only plea) If he will be revenged on the man that
brought him to all this, that has ruinated him and his house, then will he
justify his accusation to my face, then good my Lords let us be brought face
to face. My Lord of Northampton replied, Sir Walter you have heard it cannot be
granted you, pray importune us no longer. No longer said Rawleigh? it touches
(my Lord) upon my life which I value at as high a rate as you do yours. At last
Sir Walter was asked, whither he would say any more. Then he directed his
speech to the Gentlemen of the Jury, saying, you have heard the proofs, I pray
you consider that these men (meaning Master Attorney and the rest of the
Lawyers) do usually defend very bad causes every day in the Courts against men
of their own profession, as able as themselves: and if they can do so, what
may they do with me, that never studied the law till I came into the Tower of
London: That have been practiced in other affairs, and am weak of memory and
feeble as you see, for he was feign to have pen and ink to help his memory in
the long speeches that were made against him. But remember the godly saying of
Saint Augustine, Si judicaveritis tanquam jam judicandi estis. If you would be
content to be judged upon suspicions and inferences, if you would not have your
accusation suscribed by your accuser. If you would not have your accuser
brought to your face (being in the same house too) where you are arraigned, if
you would be condemned by an accusation of one recanted and truly sorrowful
for it, if you in my case would yield your bodies to torture, loose your lives,
your wives, and children, and all your fortunes upon so slender proof. Then am
I ready to suffer all these things. Now after Master Sergeant Phillips had made
a very long repetion of all the accusation. Master Attorney asked Sir Walter
again whither he would say any more. Rawleigh answered if he would say any
thing he would answer him. Master Attorney told him the Kings council must
speak last. Nay by your leave (said he) he that speaks for his life shall
speak last. Are you contented said Master Attorney that the Jury shall go
together: yea, in Gods name said Sir Walter. Then Master Attorney entered into a
speech to this effect: Now Jesus Christ shall be glorified, Jesus Christ shall
have a great victory this day, as great as when it was said vicisti Galilee.
Now Sir Walter I will prove you to have a Spanish heart. See with what a
vvhoorish forehead he has defended his fault: he has deceived my poor Lord
Cobham as Eve was deceived with an apple, by a letter in an apple, and has
seduced this poor Lord to write I know not what to him against his conscience:
But he could not sleep quietly till he had revealed the truth of it to the
Lords, and voluntarily of himself written the whole matter to them with his
own hand but yesterday, which I will read with a loud voice though I be not
able to speak this sennight after: and so pulled my Lord Cobhams letter out of
his pocket, which was in effect thus to the Lords, vizt. That Sir Walter had
written a letter to him a week before to entreat him for Gods sake, to
signify unto him by his letter that he had vvronged him in his accusation, and
told him that the Lords had appointed to meet at Master Atturneys house, to
consider of his cause: and that it was better to be constant in denial than
to appeal to the King, and that he should take heed of Preachers by my Lord of
Essexes example. Now it was (writes my Lord Cobham) no time to dissemble,
and therefore he protested unto their Lordships before God and Angels: That the
accusation of Sir Walter was substantially true. And further confessed that
Sir Walter had dealt with him since the Queens death to procure him a pension
from Spain, to give intelligence when any thing was intended by England
against them. This letter was wonderfully esteemed by Master Attorney and
most effectually applied with many quaint Phrases against Sir Walter, who
ansvvered nothing to those speeches which were personal, having said before,
that they were used only to bring him into detestation of the world, but
spoke to this effect. Now it shall appear that my Lord Cobham, is an
unworthy, base, silly, simple poor soul. Master Attorney said, Is my Lord so
poor? Yea, (said he) in Spirit. Would to God you were so (quoth Master
Attorney:) Sir Walter proceeded; I will tell you the troth. It is true I got a
poor fellow in the Tower, to cast up a letter tied to an apple (for so Cobhams
letter was conveyed) in at my Lord Cobhams window, when the Lieutenant was at
supper, (which I was loath to have spoken of, least the Lieutenant should be
blamed, but all the Lieutenants in the world could not have helped it) wherein I
entreated him for Gods sake to do me right, and to right the truth unto me:
because I knew not whither I should be arraigned before him or no: and hereupon
he writ to me how he had wronged me: and herein I did nothing that was
dishonest for ought I know; but I sent him a letter again, (because I heard he
should be arraigned first) and desired him to publish my innocence at his
arraignment; But that notwithstanding he writ unto me again, which letter I
have now about me (being all my hope) and I beseech your Lordships to peruse
it. Master Attorney would not have it read, but said, My Lord Cecill mar not
a good cause, My Lord Cecill replied, Master Attorney, you are more peremptory
then honest, you must not come here to show me what to do. Then Sir Walter
desired my Lord Cecil perticularly to read it, because he knew my Lord Cobhams
hand, which at his request my Lord Cecil did. The letter was to this purpose.
That whereas my Lord Cobham did not know whither he or Sir Walter should be
first arraigned, and because the blood of Sir Walter, and undoing of him, his
posterity should not be required at his hands at the last day. Therefore he did
by this letter confess, that he had wronged Sir Walter in his former
accusation, and that Sir Walter was innocent of any such practices, and this
was true as he hoped to be saved: hereupon Sir Walter desired the Jury to
consider what a man this was, and what his testimony was, yet if it were worth
any thing. The protestations which he had made to clear him, were more violent
then those which he had made against him. And the reason that might draw my
Lord Cobham to write this last letter in accusation of him, were greater then
could be alleged to persuade him to write the letter in his excuse: here my
Lord chief Justice desired my Lord Cecil, and my Lord of Northampton to
satisfy the Jury, that there was no condition of favor promised to my Lord
Cobham for writing this last letter: which they both did protest to their
knowledge. Nay said Sir Walter I dare say your Lordshipps would not offer it.
But my Lord Cobham received a letter from his wife, that there was no way to
save his life but to accuse me: which was said upon the going together of the
Jury. Concerning the matter in my Lord Cobhams letter of standing to his
denial, and to admit no preachers by the misfortune of my Lord of Essex; and
his desire of a pension from Spain. I protest to God said Sir Walter they are
false like as the rest. Saving that this I do confess; That my L. Cobham
offered me a pension, and I (alas my Lords) loath to cast him away, and being
confident that I had dissuaded him from those humors, did conceal it. But
that ever I dealt with him for any such pension is most untrue. And for the
meeting of the Lords at Mr. Atturnies house, he heard so he protested by hap
by a child of his. After all this, the Jury went together and staid above half
an hour, and returned with their verdict, Guilty. Then my Lord chief Justice
asked what he could say why Judgment should not be given upon him. He said he
knew the Court was to give Judgment after their verdict, and so was willing my
Lord should proceed. Then my L. chief Justice pronounced Judgment against
him in this manner, viz. Sir Walter Rawleigh, you are to be conveied to the
place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of execution, and
there to be hanged till you are half dead, your members to be out off, your
bowels to be taken out, and cast into the fire before your face (you being yet
alive) your head to be cut off, your quarters to be divided into four parts,
to be bestowed in four several places, and so (said my Lord chief Justice)
Lord have mercy upon your soul. Sir Walter upon this, humbly desired, that the
King might know the proofs against him. And that he did persist in his
loyalty, notwithstanding the said verdict (which he would pray his said Jury
might never answer for) And further said, the death of him and my Lord Cobham
should witness between them. Only he craved pardon for concealing my Lord
Cobhams offer to him. And humbly besought the King to have compassion on him,
he was a poor gentleman and had a poor wife, and a poor child, raw, and
unbrought up: he had much forgotten his duty in concealing my Lord Cobhams
fault. So Judgment being given as aforesaid, and he having talked a while with
the Lords in private, went back with the Sheriff to the prison, with admirable
erection, yet in such sort, as a condemned man should do.

The proceedings against Sir Walter Rawleigh Knight, At the Kings Bench Bar,
in Westminster, The 28. of October, 1618. Together with his execution at
Westminster, on the 29 of October Anno the 16. Iacobi Regis etc.
UPon Wednesday the 28 of October, Anno. Dom. 1618. The Lieutenant of the Tower
according to a warrant to him directed, brought Sir Walter Rawleigh from the
Tower, to the Kings Bench Bar at Westminster: where the Records of his
arraignment at Winchester was opened; And he demanded, why execution should not
be done upon him, according to the judgment therein pronounced against him.

To which he began in way of answer, to justify himself in his proceedings in
the late voyage,

But the Lord Chief Justice silenced him therein, saying, there was no other
matter there in question, but concerning the judgment of death, that formerly
has been given against him, The which the Kings pleasure was, upon some
occasions best known to himself, to have executed, unless he could show good
cause to the contrary.

Unto which Sir Walter Rawleigh said, that he was told by his Council, That in
regard his Majesty since the said judgment, had been pleased to employ him in
his service, as by Commission he had done, it made void the said judgment, and
was a verification unto him.

But the Lord Chief Justice told him, that he was therein deceived, and that
the opinion of the Court was to the contrary.

Wherewith he was satisfied, and desired that some reasonable time, might be
allowed him to prepare him self for death.

But it was answered him, that the time appointed was on the morrow, and that
it was not to be doubted, but that he had prepared himself for death long
since.

And I am glad said the L. Chief Justice, that you have given the world so good
satisfaction of your Religion, as by some books published by you, you have.

And so Master Attorney General, requiring in the Kings behalf, that
execution might be done upon the prisoner, according to the foresaid judgment.
The Sheriffs of Middlesex, were commanded for that purpose, to take him to
their custody, who presently carried him to the Gate House.

From whence, the next morning, between the Sheriffs of Middlesex Sir Walter
Rawleigh was brought to the old Palace, in Westminster, where a large Scaffold
was erected for the execution.

Whereupon, when he came with a cheerful countenance, he saluted the Lords,
Knights and Gentlemen, there present.

After which, a Proclamation was made for silence, and he addressed himself,
to speak in this manner.

I desire to be borne withal, for this is the third day of my fever, and if I
shall show any weakness, I beseech you to attribute it to my mallady, for this
is the hour in which it is wont to come.

Then pawsing a while, he sat, and directed himself toward a window, where
the Lord of Arundel, Northampton, and Doncaster with some other Lords, and
Knights, sat and spoke as follows,

I thank God of his infinite Goodness, that he has brought me to die in the
light, and not in darkness, (but by reason, that the place where the Lords,
etc. sat) was some distance from the Scaffold, that he perceived they could
not well hear him, he said, I will strain my voice, for I would willingly have
your honors hear me.

But my Lord of Arundel said, Nay, we will rather come down to the Scaffold,
which he and some others did.

Where being come, he saluted them severally, and then began again to speak
as follows, viz.

As I said, I thank God heartily, that he has brought me into the light to
dye, and that he has not suffered me to dye in the dark prison of the Tower,
where I have suffered a great deal of misery, and cruel sickness, and I
thank God, that my fever has not taken me at this time, as I prayed to God
it might not.

There are two maine points of suspicion that his Majesty as I hear, has
conceived against me.

To resolve your Lordships wherein his Majesty cannot be satisfied, which I
desire to clear, and to resolve your Lordships off:

One is, that his Majesty has been informed, that I have often had plotts with
France, and his Majesty had good reason to induce him thereunto.

One reason that his Majesty had to conjecture so, was, that when I came back
from Guyana, being come to Plymouth, I endeavored to go in a bark to Rochell,
which was, for that I would have made my peace, before I had come to England;

Another reason was, upon my flight, I did intend to fly into France, for the
saving of my self, having had some terror from above.

A third reason is, his Majesty had reason to suspect, was the French Agents
coming to me, besides it was reported that I had a Commission from the Frech
King, at my going forth, these are the reasons that his Majesty had, as I am
informed to suspect me.

But this I say, for a man to call God to witness, to a falsehood at the hour
of death, is far more grievous and impious, and that a man that so does
cannot have salvation, for he has no time of repentance, then what shall I
expect, that am going instantly to render up my account. I do therefore call
God to witness, As I hope to be saved, and as I hope to see him in his
Kingdom, which I hope I shall within this quarter of this hour, I never had
any Commission from the French King, nor never saw the French Kings hand
writing in all my life, neither know I that there was a French Agent, nor what
he was, till I met him in my gallery at my lodging unlooked for, If I speak
not true, O Lord let me never enter into thy Kingdom.

The second suspicion was, that his Majesty had been informed, that I should
speak dishonorably, and disloyally of my Sovereign; But my accuser was a base
french man, a runnagate fellow, one that has no dwelling, a kind of a
Chymicall fellow, one that I knew to be persideous, for being by him drawn
into the Action of fearing my self at Winchester, in which I confess my hand
was touched, he being sworn to fecresie over night revealed it the next
Morning.

But this I speak, now what have I to do with Kings; I have nothing to do
with them, neither do I fear them; I have only now to do with my God, in
whose presence I stand, therefore to tell a lie, were it to gain the Kings
favor, were vain: Therefore, as I hope to be saved at the last judgment day,
I never spoke dishonorably, disloyally, or dishonestly of his Majesty in all my
life; And therefore I cannot but think it strange, that that Frenchman being
so base and mean a fellow should be so far credited as he has been.

I have dealt truly, as I hope to be saved, and I hope I shall be believed: I
confess, I did attempt to escape, I cannot excuse it, but it was only to save
my life.

And I do likewise confess, that I did faigne my self to be ill disposed and
sick at Salisbury, but I hope it was no sin, for the Prophet David did make
himself a fool, and suffered spittle to fall down upon his beard, to escape
from the hands of his enemies, and it was not imputed unto him: so, what I did,
I intended no ill, but to gain and prolong time till his Majesty came, hoping
for some Commiseration from him.

But I forgive this Frenchman and Sir Lewis Stewkelye withal my heart, for I
have received the Sacrament this morning of Master Deane of Westminster, and I
have forgiven all men, but that they that are persideous, I am bound in charity
to speak, that all men may take heed of them.

Sir Lewis Stewkeley, my keeper and kinsman, has affirmed that I should tell
him, that my Lord Carewe, and my Lord of Doncaster here, did advise me to
escape, but I protest before God, I never told him any such thing, neither did
the Lords advise me to any such matter: neither is it likely that I should tell
him any such thing, of two privy-Councellors: neither had I any reason to tell
him, or he to report it; for it is well known, he left me 6,7,8,9 and 10 days
together alone, to go whither I listed, whilst he rod himself about the
Country.

He further accused me, that I should show him a letter whereby, I did signify
unto him, that I would give him ten thousand pounds for my escape; But God cast
my soul into everlasting fire, if I made any such profer of 10000 pounds, or
1000, but indeed I showed him a letter, that if he would go with me, there
should be order taken for his debts when he was gone, neither had I 10000 pound
to give him, for if I had had so much, I could have made my peace better with
it otherwise, then in giving it to Stewkeley.

Further, when I came to Sir Edward Pelhams house, who had been a follower of
mine, and who gave me good entertainment. He gave out, that I had there
received some dram of poison, when I answered him that I feared no such
thing, for I was well assured of them in the house, and therefore wished him to
have no such thought; now God forgive him for I do, and I desire God to forgive
him, I will not only say, God is a God of revenge; But I desire God to forgive
him, as I do desire to be forgiven of God.

Then looking over his noate of remembrance, well said he, thus far I have
gone, a little more, a little more, and I will have done by and by.

It was told the King that I was brought per-force into England, and that I did
not intend to come again; But Sir Charles Parker, M. Trefham, M. Leake, and
diverse know how I was dealt withal by the common-souldiers, which were 150 in
number, who mutined, and sent for me to come into the ship to them, for unto me
they would not come, and there was I forced for to take an oath, that I would
not go into England, till that they would have me; otherwise they would have
cast me into the sea, and therewithal they drove me into my Cabin, and bent
all their forces against me.

Now after I had taken this oath, with wine, and other things, such as I had
about me, I drew some of the chiefest to desist from their purposes; and at
length, I persuaded them to go into Ireland, which they were willing unto, and
would have gone into the North parts of Ireland, which I dissuaded them from,
and told them that they were Red-Shankes that inhabited there, and with much
ado, I persuaded them to go into the south parts of Ireland, promising them to
get their pardons, and was forced to give them 125 pound at Kinsall, to bring
them home, otherwise I had never got from them.

I hear likewise, there was a report, that I meant not to go to Guyana at all,
and that I knew not of any mine, nor intended any such thing or matter, but
only to get my liberty, which I had not the wit to keep.

But I protest it was my full intent, and for gold, for gold for the benefit of
his Majesty, and my self, and of those that ventured, and went with me, with
the rest of my countrymen: But he that knew the head of the mine would not
discover it, when he saw my son was slain, but made away himself.

And then turning to my Earl of Arundel, he said, My Lord, being in the
Gallery of my ship, at my departure, I remember your Honor took me by the hand,
and said, you would request one thing of me, which was, that whither I made a
good voyage or a bad, I should not fail, but to return again into England,
which I then promised you, and gave you my faith I would, and so I have.

To which my Lord answered and said, it is true, I do very well remember it,
they were the very last words I spoke unto you.

Another slander was raised of me, that I would have gone away from them, and
left them at Guyana.

But there was a great many worthy men, that accompanied me always, as my
Serieant Major, George Rawleigh and diverse others, which knew my intent was
nothing so.

Another opinion was held of me, that I carried with me to sea, 16000 pieces,
and that was all the voyage I intended, only to get money into my hands.

As I shall answer it before God, I had not in all the world in my hands or
others to my use, either directly or indirectly, above a hundred pound, whereof
when I went I gave my wife 25 pounds thereof, but the error thereof came as I
perceived, by looking over the Screvenors books, where they found the bills of
adventure arising to a great sum, so raised that false report.

Only I will borrow a little time of M. Sheriffs to speak of one thing, that
does make my heart to bleed, to hear that such an imputation should be laid
upon me, for it is said, that I should be a persecutor of the death of the
Earl of Essex, and that I stood in a window over against him, when he
suffered, and puffed out tobacco in disdain of him, God I take to witness, I
shed tears for him when he died, and as I hope to look God in the face
hereafter, my Lord of Essex did not see my face, when he suffered, for I was a
far off in the Armory, where I saw him, but he saw notme.

I confess indeed I was of a contrary faction, but I know my Lord of Essex was
a noble gentleman, and that it would be worse with me when he was gone; for I
got the hate of those which vvishad me well before, and those that set me
against him, afterward set themselves against me, and was my greatest enemies,
and my soul has many times been grieved, that I was not nearer him when he
died; because as I understood afterward, that he asked for me at his death,
to have been reconcyled unto me.

And these be the material points I thought good to speak of, and I am now
at this instant, to render up an account to God, and I protest as I shall
appear before him, this that I have spoken is true, and I hope I shall be
believed

Then a proclamation being made, that all men should depart the Scaffold, he
prepared himself for death: giving away his hat, his cap, with some money, to
such as he knevv, that stood near him.

And then taking his leave of the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and others of his
acquaintance, and amongst the rest, taking his leave of my Lord of Arundel, he
thanked him for his company, and entreated him to desire the King that no
scandalous vvriting to defame him, might be published after his death, saying
further unto him, I have a long journey to go, and therefore I will take my
leave

And then putting off his doublet, and govvne, he desired the headsman to show
him the Axe, which not being suddenly granted unto him, he said I prithee, let
me see it, do thou think that I am afraid of it, so it being given unto him,
he felt along upon the edge of it, and smiling, spoke unto M. Sheriff saying,
this is a sharp medecin, but it is a physician that will cure all diseases.

Then going to and fro upon the Scaffold on every side, he entreated the
company to pray to God to give him strength.

Then having ended his speech, the executioner kneeled down and asked him
forgiveness, the which laying his hand upon his shoulder he forgave him.

Then being asked, which way he would lay himself on the block, he made answer
and said, so the heart be straight it is no matter which way the head lies: So
laying his head on the block, his face being toward the East, the headsman
throwing down his own cloak, because he would not spoil the prisoners gown,
he giving the headsman a sign when he should strike, by lifting up his hands,
the executioner struck of his head, at two blows, his body never shrinking nor
mooving, his head was showed on each side of the Scaffold, and then put into a
red leather bag, and his wrought velvet gown thrown over it, which was
afterward conveyed away in a mourning coach of his Ladies.

Sir Walter Rawleigh's Letter to the King the night before his death.
THe life which I had most mighty Prince, the law has taken from me, and I am
now but the same earth and dust out of which I was made. If my offense had any
proportion with your Majesty's mercy I might despair, or if my deserving had
any quantity with your Majesty's unmeasurable goodness I might yet have hope,
but it is you that must judge and not I, name, blood, gentility, or estate I
have none; no not so much as a being, no not so much as a vitam planta: I have
only a penetent soul in a body of iron, which mooveth toward the lodestone
of death, and cannot be withheld from touching it, except your Majesty's mercy
turn the point toward me that expels. Lost I am for hearing of vain man,
for hearing only and never believing nor accepting: and so little account I
made of that speech of his, which was my condemnation (as my forsaking him does
truly witness) that I never remembered any such thing, till it was at my trial
objected against me. So did he repay my care, who cared to make him good, which
I now see no care of man can effect. But God (for my offense to him) has laid
this heavy burden on me, miserable and unfortunate wretch that I am. But for
not loving you (my Sovereign) God has not laid this sorrow on me: for he
knows (with whom I am not in case to lie) that I honored your Majesty by same,
and loved and admired you by knowledge, So that whither I live or dye, your
Majesty's loving servant I will live and die. If now I write what seems not
well favored ( Most merciful Prince) vouchsafe to asscribe it to the council
of a dead heart, and to a mind that sorrow has confounded. But the more my
misery is, the more is your Majesty's mercy (if you please to behold it) and
the less I can deserve, the more liberal your Majesty's gift shall be: herein
you shall only imitate God, giving free life: and by giving to such a one from
whom there can be no retribution, but only a desire to pay a lent life with
the same great love; which the same great goodness shall bestow on it. This
being the first letter, that ever your Majesty received from a dead man: I
humbly submit my self to the will of God my supreme Lord, and shall willingly
and patiently suffer whatsoever it shall please your Majesty to afflict me
withal,

Walter Rawleigh.

The Copy of Sir Walter Rawleighs Letter to his Wife, the night before his
death.
YOu shall now receive ( my dear wife) my last words in these my last lines.
My love I send you that you may keep it when I am dead, and my counsel that
you may remember it when I am no more I would not by my will present you with
sorrows ( Dear Besse) let them go into the grave with me and be buried in the
dust. And seeing that it is not Gods will that I should see you any more in
this life, bear in patiently, and with a heart like thy self. first I send
you all the thanks which my heart can conceive, or my words can rehearse for
your many travailes, and care taken for me, which though they have not taken
effect as you wished, yet my debt to you is not the less: but pay it I never
shall in this world. Secondly, I beseech you for the love you bear me living,
do not hide your self many days, but by your travailes seek to help your
miserable fortunes, and the right of your poor child. Thy mourning cannot
avail me, I am but dust. Thirdly you shall understand, that my land was
conveyed bona fide to my child: the writings were drawn at midsummer was
twelve months, my honest cosen Brett can testify so much, and Dolberry too, can
remem^er somewhat therein. And I trust my blood will quench their malice that
have cruelly murdered me: and that they will not seek also to kill thee and
thine with extreme poverty. To what friend to direct thee I know not, for all
mine have left me in the true time of trial. And I perceive that my death was
determined from the first day. Most sorry I am God knows that being thus
surprised with death I can leave you in no better estate. God is my witness I
meant you all my office of wines or all that I could have purchased by selling
it, half my stuff, and all my jewels, but some one for the boy, but God has
prevented all my resolutions. That great God that rules all in all, but if you
can live free from want, care for no more, the rest is but vanity. Love God,
and begin betimes to repose your self upon him, and therein shall you find
true and lasting riches, and endless comfort: for the rest when you have
traveled and wearied your thoughts, ver all sorts of worldly cogitations, you
shall but sit down by sorrow in the end. Teach your son also to love and fear
God whilst he is yet young, that the fear of God may grow with him, and then
God will be a husband to you, and a father to him; a husband and a father which
cannot be taken from you. Baily owes me 200 pounds, and Adrian 600 in Iersey I
also have much owing me besides. The arrearrages of the wines will pay, your
debts. And howsoever you do, for my souls sake, pay all poor men. When I am
gone, no doubt you shall be sought too, for the world thinks that I was very
rich. But take heed of the pretenses of men, and their affections, for they
last not but in honest and worthy men, and no greater misery can befall you in
this life, then to become a prey, and afterward to be despised. I speak not
this (God knows) to dissuade you from marriage, for it will be best for you
both in respect of the world and of God. As for me I am no more yours, nor you
mine, death has cut us asunder: and God has divided me from the world, and
you from me. Remember your poor child for his fathers sake, who chose you,
and loved you in his happiest times. Get those letters (if it be possible)
which I writ to the Lords, wherein I sued for my life: God is my witness it
was for you and yours that I desired life, but it is true that I disdained my
self for begging of it: for know it (my dear wife) that your son is the son of
a true man, and who in his own respect despises death and all his misshapen
and ugly forms. I cannot write much, God he knows how hardly I steal this
time while others sleep, and it is also time that I should separate my thoughts
from the world. Beg my dead body which living was denied thee; and either lay
it at Sherburne (and if the land continue) or in Exeter-Church by my Father and
Mother; I can say no more, time and death call me away, The everlasting,
powerful, infinite, and omnipotent God, That Almighty God, who is goodness it
self, the true life and true light keep thee and thine: have mercy on me, and
teach me to forgive my persecutors and accusers, and send us to meet in his
glorious Kingdom. My dear wife farewell. Bless my poor boy. Pray for me,
and let my good God hold you both in his arms. Written with the dying hand of
sometimes thy Husband, but now alas overthrown;

Walter Rawleigh.

FINIS.

