Die Jovis, 13. Martii. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament assembled, that this House
does give thanks to Master Arrowsmith, for his great pains taken in the Sermon
he preached on the 12 of this instant March in Christ-Church London, before
the Members of both Houses of Parliament: and giving thanks to Almighty God for
his blessing to the Parliament, for their late good success at Shrewsbury and
Weymouth. And that the said Master Arrowsmith is hereby desired to print and
publish his Sermon, which is not to be printed or reprinted by any, but by
authority under his hand.

John Brown, Cler. Parl.

Die Jovis, 13. Martii. 1644.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament that Master Solicitor and
Master Nicholas, do from this House return thanks to Master Arrowsmith, and
Master Vines, for the great pains they took in the Sermons they preached at
the entreaty of both Houses at Christ-Church yesterday (being a day appointed
for public thanksgiving) and that they do entreat them to print their
Sermons. And it is Ordered that none shall presume to print their Sermons, but
whom they shall license under their hands writing.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I appoint Samuel Man to print my Sermon.

John Arrowsmith.

ENGLANDS EBEN-EZER OR, STONE of HELP.

Set up in thankful acknowledgment of the LORDS having helped us hitherto.

More especially, For a memorial of that help, which the PARLIAMENTS Forces
lately received at Shrewsbury, Weymouth, and elsewhere.

IN A SERMON Preached to both the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, (the Lord
Major and Aldermen of the City of LONDON, being present) at Christ-Church
LONDON, upon the late solemn day of Thanksgiving: March 12.

By JOHN ARROWSMITH, B. D. Published by Order of both Houses.

Hos. 13. 11. O Israel thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help.
2 Chronicles. 14. 11. Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or
with them that have no power. Help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee: and
in thy name go we out against this multitude. O Lord thou art our God; let not
man prevail against thee. LONDON, Printed by ROBERT LEYBURN, for SAMUEL MAN,
dwelling in PAUL'S Churchyard, at the sign of the SWAN. 1645.

To the right HONORABLE, the LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe Glorious Temple had a beautiful gate. Hag. 1. 9.
Such is a Gratulatory Epistle to a Sermon of Thanksgiving. Acts 3. 10.
Our Estates and Liberties bless your Honors. Religion and Learning do no
less: I shall therefore here mention a few of the many good offices done for
them.

Whereas the public worship of God was much embased, Is. 1. 25.
you have been careful to take away the glittering tin of specious Ceremonies,
together with the ugly dross of known Superstition. Gal. 6. ^2.
Let popish Spirus bewail the want of making a fair show in the flesh, which
so many desire; let them cry out, and say, There is not so much State and
bravery in the service of God, as heretofore: I dare be bold to tell the World,
Vitulus aureus occidit, Serpen^ aeneus sanat.
that much more holiness will be found in your brazen Serpent, then ever was
in their golden Calf. It is not long since Christians of the greatest zeal
were injured by certain Sons of Levi even as of old the sons of Eli, 1 Samuel 2.
12, 13, 14.
with their flesh-hock of three teeth, offered violence to the people, when
they came to offer sacrifice. You have wrested from them their flesh-book, and
broken the three teeth thereof, which were illegal Canons, ensnaring Oaths,
and rigorous High Commission-censures. Not long since Professors in England,
Amnon-like, were lean from day to day, 2 Samuel 13. 4.
by reason of the love they bare to Romish fopperies, as he to Tamar, (many
affecting the garb of Rome in their most solemn worship, Ver. 6. 7. 14.
as Amnon pretended to lorg for meat of Tamars dressing: Others proceeding, as
he did with her; to a carnal knowledge of that Whore.) But after your happy
assembling, the hand of God wrought an happy change in their hearts, Ver. 15.
17, 18.
and made them generally hate this Tamar, as much and more then ever they loved
her. You have now not only turned her out, but boulted the door by an holy
Covenant, to endeavor the extirpation of Popery and Superstition. Not long,
since there were many pens and tongues fully employed in decrying the Lords
day, and disputing against the morality of the fourth Commandment. An
employment to be for ever abhord; Gen 7. 2, with Chap. 8. 20.
because as Noah took to himself clean beasts by sevens, six for propagation,
the seventh for sacrifice, which was accordingly offered up, at his coming out
of the Ark: So the Lord who allows us six da^es for civil affairs; would have
the seventh sacrificed to himself as an whole burnt offering. Yet, as
Antiochus took away the daily sacrifice, these men had almost taken from us the
Sacrifice of days; but you have restored it, by a most pious and wholesome
Ordinance, April 1644.
according to the good hand of God upon you. And whereas one of the breasts of
our common Mother* has been dried up of late, or rather yielded much blood
instead of milk; you have already made some, and (we hope) are about to make
further provision for the other, lest the coal which is left us be quenched, as
the woman of Tekoah said to David; 2 Samuel 14. 7.
lest Cambridge become as a cottage in a vineyard, Is. 1. 8.
as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers.

After such high and holy services, be it far, exceeding far from you all to
dishonor him who has said ye are Gods, Psalm. 82. 6.
by an ungodly conversation: If it be not, if any root of bitterness, do
spring up hereafter in either House, I shall crave leave to represent the
danger thereof as in a parable. A certain Priest having to do with a great men
that was resolute in sin, yet desirous of absolution, and perceiving be did not
understand the latin tongue, instead of absolving him, said as follows.
Gerhard. L. C.
Dominus Noster Jesus Christus, Ioc. de Poenis. 117.
teabsolvat, si vult; and remittat tibi peccata tua, quod ego non credo; and
perducat te ad vitam aeternam, quod est impossible, My Lords and Gentlemen,
the parable be to them that hate you, and the interpretation thereof to the
sworn enemies of Jesus Christ. That not so much as one of you, who continue
members at this day, will at anytime prove a stone of offense, by the errors of
his judgment, or irregularities of his life; that every one will become an
Eben-Ezer, a stone of help, in that sense wherein Joseph is called the
sheepherd, Genesis 49. 24.
the stone of Israel, is the hope, and shall be the prayer of

A worthless but willing servant of Christ, his Church, and your Honors John
Arrowsmith.

A SERMON Preached to both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT, at Christ-Church London, upon
the late solemn day of Thanksgiving, Mar. 12. 1644.
1 SAMUEL 7. 12. Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen,
and called the name of it Eben-ezer, saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.
GReat conjunctions of heavenly bodies are usually attended with notable
changes. I am full of hope (right Honorable and worthy Senators of the
Kingdom, and of the City) that your present conjunction will operate much to
our future advantage. Verily, it is a blessed sight, now when England is melting
in a furnace of civil war, to behold the Parliament and London running thus
into one wedg, and meeting to magnify God together. It put me in mind of what
we read in Psalm. 122. 3, 4. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is compact
together, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord unto the testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. This is our Jerusalem,
hither are the Tribes come up to day, the representative Tribes of the Land,
and that for no other end but to give thanks; to prepare an habitation for him
who is said to inhabit the praises of Israel, Psalm. 22. 3.

I have pitched upon a Text affording many choice materials for such a
structure, if a wise Master Builder had it in hand. But the plain truth is,
it is a work more fit for Angels then men: praising of God is their trade; we
are all but bunglers at it. Yet because even the little children to whom John
writes have leave to lisp and stammer out the praises of their heavenly Father;
in obedience to his and your commands I shall set upon the duty, hoping for
assistance from him, and attention from you.

Satan's first design is to hinder men from holy duties, his next to create
disturbances in them. Israel being here met to fast and reform, Satan stirs up
the Lords of the Philistims, to bring into the field against them a formidable
Army. The Lord of Hosts fights for his people, puts their enemies to the rout,
and enables them to pursue the victory.

Then Samuel took a stone, to wit, after the men of Israel had gone out of
Mizpeh, the place of their abode when the enemy set upon them, and pursued the
Philistims, and smitten them until they came under Bethcar, the place of their
retreat: ver. 11. And set it between Mizpeh and Shen, Iunius reads it between
Mizpeh and that rock, conceiving Bethcar (of which before) to be the proper
name of a Rock, See Doctor Willet upon this place.
and knowing Shen to be elsewhere taken in such a sense, 1 Samuel 14. 4. And
called the name thereof Eben-Ezer: Eben, signifies a Stone, Ezer help. To the
end, that if Israel should be silent, this stone might speak the goodness of
God, this lapis adjutorii, reminde them of the mercy received between these
two places, Samuel not only imposes the name, but adds the reason of it,
saying, hitherto has the Lord helped us.

So as here we have 1 The Monument, a stone set up in a fitting place, and
named Eben-ezer. 2 The Motto, Hitherto has the Lord helped us. 3 The mannager
of the work, Samuel the Prophet, and Judge of Israel at this time.


Which three parts, will naturally yield three observations suitable to the
present business.

1 That the Churches help is from the Lord. 2 That the Churches duty is to
commemorate help received. 3 That principal men, are to have a principal hand
in the duty of praising God for his help.
The truth of the first of these observations, viz.

That the Churches help is from the Lord, Obs 1.
appears by Psalm. 121. 1, 2. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from
whence comes my help, my help comes from the Lord, which made heaven and
earth. It comes two ways.

1 Immediately, from himself alone. The Lord often raises help to his people,
as he framed the world, out of nothing; and is therefore said to create it. Be
ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for behold, I create
Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy, Isa. 65. 18. Whom had Christ to
cooperate with him in the work of our redemption? He alone helped us out of
hell, Glass. onomat.
of which some understand that in Isa. 63. 5. I looked and there was none to
help, p. 445.
therefore my own arm brought salvation. Psalm. 118. 22.
This stone which the builders refused is the true Eben-ezer, not a monument
but an efficient of help, such help as no created strength could have
administered; for should all the Angels of heaven bring their perfections into
one, it would not make a ransom sufficient for one soul. The Holy Ghost in
like manner, when we know not what to pray for as we ought, is graciously
pleased to help our infirmities, Romans 8. 26. when we stick fast in the mirie
dungeon of sin and ignorance, he vouchsafes to let down drawing cords of love
for the helping of us out, Gratia reparatrix bonam volantatem inspirat ut sit;
deinde bon^e voluntati aspirat, ut moveatur: primum operatur eam, deinde per
eam. Hugo de Sanct. Vict.
as Ebedmelech did to Jeremy. The work of conversion is wholly his. He first
bretahs a good will into the soul causing it to be, then breathes upon that
will in the soul causing it to move, works it first, and then works by it.
Hence is it that some of those who assert the efficacy of his grace, entitle
their books de Auxiliis, of helps. Yet, me thinks, the word comes far short of
expressing it fully, the Spirits concurrence being such, as is not only
assistant to us, Non intelligit divina beneficia qui se tantumm^du a Deo
iuvariputat. Lactant. de salsa relig. l. 1. c. 11.
but operative of all in us. A consideration that moved Lactantius to tax the
heathens, for giving the chief of all their gods no higher title than of
Jupiter, resolving it into Iuvans pater, a helping father. That man (says he)
understands not the influence of God, that looks at him only as an helper.

But so scant is the language of man, (...). Basil.
when applied to the things of God (whom to apprehend is difficult, to utter
impossible) that for want of a better term, even we Christians, must be forced
to content our selves with this of help.

2 Mediately by the creatures whether visible or invisible, or of a mixed and
middle nature. The Lord helps by all these.

1 By visible creatures. As when he rained hailstones from heaven upon the
Amorites, Ios. ^0 11.
slaying more with them then the children of Israel did with the sword: Judge.
5. 20, 21.
when the stars in their courses fought against Sisera, and the river Kishon
swept his soldiers away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. When the sea
gave way, the rock gave water, and the heavens gave bread to Israel. When both
fire, and water, and air, took our part against the Spaniards in 88, which
furnished the General of their forces at his return (after the defeat of that
Armado, which by themselves was styled Invincible) with this excuse, That his
master sent him to combat not with elements but with men.

2 By invisible. Such are the Angels, whom the Lord has appointed to encampe
round about them that fear him, Psalm. 34 7.
and to become ministering Spirits to the heirs of salvation. Heb. 1. last.
O the bowels of our God! Mittis unigenitnm, immittis Spiritum; and ne quid
vacet in coel^stibus ab opere sollicitudi us, Angelos mittis in minesterium.
Bern.
The Father sends his Son to redeem us, the Father and Son send the Holy Ghost
to comfort us, and, that whole heaven may be set on work for the Churches
help, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost send the good Angels to watch over us.
Manifold are the good turns which these invisible helpers do us, though we
take notice but of few. If Daniel be to be rescued from the hungry Lions, Dan.
6.
an Angel stops all their mouths; Lot from the flames of fire and brimstone,
Genesis 19.
the Angels hale him out of Sodom. 2 King. 6.
If Elisha be in danger of being surprised by a great host of men, a greater
host of Angels appears in his defense; Acts 12.
Peter of having the work of his Ministry at a stand by his being kept in
hold, an Angel opens the prison door, and sets him at liberty. If Jacob be in
his way home wanting protection against Esau, Genesis 32.
the Angels of God meet and guard him; Elias in the Wilderness wanting meat, 1
King. 19.
an Angel turns Sewer and serves it in; Acts 27.
Paul in a storm wanting comfort, an Angel stands by and cheers him. Luke 10.
If Lazarus give up the ghost, the Angels take his departing soul, and carry it
into Abraham's bosom. Suppose the son and heir of a King returning from his
travel in foreign parts, the Master of the Ceremonies meets him at the Port
where he landeth, conducts him to Court, and leaves him in his fathers
presence: So it fares with a dying Saint; he has been traveling in this world
as in a strange country, is now returning back to God; it is a part of the good
Angels helpfulnesse to meet him at the port of death, so to convey him home
from thence to the enjoyment of his Father, and of full beatitude in him.

3 By creatures of a mixed and middle nature. Such are men, visible in their
bodies, invisible in regard of their souls. Now there is no sort of men that
contributes not more or less to the help of the Church; either freely, or
against their wills by an overruling providence, turning that to the Saints
advantage, which was intended for their harm. But two sorts are especially
noted in Scripture for their helpfulnesse.

1 Godly Magistrates. When David was set up to be King, his Inauguration is
thus expressed, Psalm. 89. 19, 20. I have laid help upon one that is mighty; I
have exalted one chosen out of the people: I have found David my servant, with
my holy oil have I anointed him. Before Moses his pious government, Israel was
as an helpless child without a nurse: he is compared to a nursing Father
carrying that people in his bosom as a sucking child, Numb. 11. 12. Have I
conceived all this people? have I begotten them, that thou should say unto
me, Carry them in thy bosom (as a nursing father bears the sucking child)
unto the land which thouswarest unto their fathers? No nursing father ever had
a more froward child than Israel was, yet Moses held out; and might be held
forth as a pattern to you, Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, had you
not made him so already. I remember Austin in his Confessions prayseth God for
furnishing his nurse with milk; and for giving her an heart to impart it to
him, who had perished without it. Well may this whole Assembly join with me
upon this solemn day of thanks in blessing God for enabling you to do the work
of nursing Fathers so well, and so long: as also for inclining your hearts
(though you daily meet with frowardness more then enough) to undergo with so
much patience the manifold troubles of Church and State-nursery. May it still
be continued to us! may fresh supplies of the Spirit of Christ be vouchsafed to
you when ever ye meet! that gasping Ireland, trembling Scotland, bleeding
England may all have help from the Honorable Houses.

2 Godly Ministers. The Prophets in Ezra 5. 2. were Fellow-helpers with
Zerubbabel and Ieshua. Theu rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Ieshua
the son of Iozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem:
and with them were the Prophets of God helping them. Paul styles himself and
his Fellow Laborers in the Ministry, helpers of the Corinthians joy, 2 Corinthians. 1. last. The request put up to him in a Vision by the man of Macedonia
was no other but this, Come over and help us, Acts 16. 9. When he goes about to
draw as it were an Inventory of the Churches goods in 1 Corinthians. 3. end. her
wel-gifted pious Teachers are made the Inprimis of it. All things are yours,
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. Time was when such were very highly
esteemed in love for their works sake, 1 Thessalonians 5. 13.
and had in honor for their helpfulnesse. Satius est ut Sol non luceat, quam
ut non doceat Chrysostomus.
Insomuch as when Chrysostom was like to be silenced, the people cried out, We
had better want the shining of the Sun than the preaching of Chrysostom. When
Nazianzen was taking his leave of Constantinople, where he had been Preacher,
an old man was observed to fall into passion, and heard to cry, saying, Go
father if you dare, Aude pater, and ^ecum Trinitatem ipsam ^^ce.
and take away the Trinity with you, as if God would not stay after he was gone.

Yea, there was a time here in England some few years since, when the whole
religious party throughout the Kingdom reckond upon their able and
conscientious Pastor's as a principal part of their treasure, till some of
late began to make it a piece of Religion to throw dirt in the face of our
Ministers, even of the most godly among them.

As when Sfetigrade in Epirus was besieged by the great Turk, Turkish History,
p. 321.
a Traitor within (knowing how much the Garrison soldiers abhorred the tasting
of whatsoever they deemed unclean) threw a dead dog into the well which
furnished the inhabitants with water; upon the discovery whereof the soldiers
chose rather to die then to drink: and so the City was yielded up. In like
manner, now when the Church is so straightly besieged on every side, many
otherwise well affected, begin to refuse the water of life held out in the
public Ministry; only because of that noisome carrion of exceptions and
aspersions, which some have treacherously cast upon the persons, the calling,
yea, the Doctrine, of most of our best and ablest Preachers: The good Lord send
some happy hand, by which this dead and deadly dog may be removed, and all
lovers of truth and peace brought to drink as before; that so the giving up of
a goodly City into enemies hands, may be timely prevented.

Having done with the proof, I shall now in the application hereof present you
with matter of Encouragement, of Terror; and of Advice.

1 Of Encouragement to the people of God. We have an Almighty helper on whom we
may rely with confidence how many soever our extremities, how strong so ever
our adversaries be, Matthew. 16. 18.
We may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man can do
unto me. Heb. 13. 6. The keys of Rome will show themselves more potent then
the gates of hell, if ever they finally prevail against the Church. Take a City
besieged by Land, if the sea be open it may be relieved: block it up both by
sea and land, yet so long as heaven is open, it may receive help from thence.
That Is the Churches case when she is at her worst. To one that supposed the
Emperor would with all his Forces fall upon the Duke of Saxony, (who was the
chief protector of Protestants) and demanded saying, Where will Luther be
then? That man of God returned this quick answer, Aut in Coelo aut sub Coelo,
either in heaven or under heaven; because he expected protection from heaven so
long as he lived, and knew he should have possession of heaven when ever he
died.

2 Of Terror to the Churches enemies. Know ye (if any such be here) that the
league betwixt God and his people is both defensive and offensive, they have
the same common friends and foes. If any shall set themselves against God,
Judge. 5. 23.
his people strike in to help the Lord against the mighty, if against them, God
strikes in, and appoints salvation for walls and bulwarks. Isa. 26. 1.
When salvation it self can be destroyed, then may you that are opposers of
Christ and his ways, hope to find a succesfull issue of your undertakings. But
if these walls be too high for your scaling ladders, these Bulwarks too strong
for your batteries; then Malignants go and get you some other trade, for
believe it, you will never thrive upon this: You may for a time like Samsons
foxes, carry firebrands sufficient to burn the corn in Gods field: but remember
how it fared with those foxes. Were not they themselves burned together with
the come which they set on fire? The course you take will certainly tend to
your own ruin. for when you shall have endeavored all you can to undo the
people of God, the God and helper of that people will be sure to find out a
way of undoing you, according to Zephan. 3. 19. Behold, at that time I will
undo all that afflict thee.

3 Of Advice to this Honorable Auditorie in two particulars. If the Churches
help be from the Lord, Then

1 Let the Lord be acknowledged in all the help that we of this Nation have
received. The holy Ghost speaking of Victories is wont to ascribe them wholly to
God, and though mention be made of the instruments, to carry the praise of all
to him. Thus Judge. 4. 15, 23. it is not said that Barak and Israel defeated
Iabin and his host before the Lord, but the Lord disconfited Sisra, all his
charets, and all his host, with the edge of the sword, before Barak. And God
subdued on that day Jabin the King of Canaan, before the children of Israel,
Also in Judge. 7. 18. where we read of the sword of the Lord and of Gideon, the
sword of the Lord is set before the sword of Gideon, as that which both gave
the commission to Gideons sword, and enabled it for execution. Vain men may
imagine themselves able by their prowess and policy to help and save a
sinking State: but what says Job. Chap. 9. 13. If God will not withdraw his
anger, the proud helpers do stoop under him?

Remarkable is that reproof which was fastened upon Pope Adrian the sixth. He
having built a fair College at Lovain, caused this inscription to be written
upon the gates thereof in letters of gold, Trajectum plantavit, Lovanium
rigavit, Pareus in 1 Cor. 3. 6.
Caesar dedit incrementum (i.e.) Vtrecht planted me, there he was born; Lovain
watered me, there he was bred up in learning; Caesar gave the increase, for the
Emperor had preferred him. One to meet with his folly and forgetfulness,
wrote underneath Hic Deus nihil fecit, Here God did nothing: because all three,
planting, watering, and giving increase were ascribed to creatures. Beloved in
the Lord, take we heed of saying in such succesfull seasons as this is, the
Parliament has planted by their Counsels, the City watered by their supplies,
the Armies given increase by their valor; lest we also be charged with an Hic
Deus nihil fecit, God has done nothing in all this: because indeed, beside
what he acts of himself alone, whatsoever is well performed is his work,
though creatures have a hand in it. Lord, thou will ordain peace for us: for
thou also have wrought all our works in us. Isa. 26. 12.

2 Let the Lord our God be depended upon, and sought to in his own way for the
further help we have need of. Let us come boldly unto the throne of grace, that
we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. 4. last.

Here I shall endeavor to show you three things.

1 That we of this Nation have need, great need of further help. It appears
thus. There would not be so much struggling as there is in the womb of this
Kingdom; so much roughnes, both of the sword and of the pen, if there were not
Esaus in it as well as Jacobs. As when the Jews were employed in building the
second Temple ( the glory whereof was to be greater then the glory of the
former) though the structure were not so magnificent, Hag. 2. 9.
because of the personal presence of Christ, who appeared and taught in it)
there was a Sanball at, a Tobiah, and other adversaries to the work: So now at
the raising of this second reformation (which is like to have more of Christ in
it, though less of outward pomp and state) many thousands are found to oppose
it by force of Arms, beside the swarms of pernicious Sects, that like great
heaps of rubbish lie in the way, and hinder the setting up of that building
which in likelihood would have prevented them, had it been erected sooner.

2 That the help we need, is much more then the best of men are able to afford
us. Well may England cry to God as David does, Psalm. 68. 11. Give us help from
trouble for vain is the help of man. The Parliament has already done what lay
in them for the making up of breaches by the faithful endeavors of their
Commissioners in the late Treaty. Si nobis cum bominibus tantum res esset
(tametsi non nisi Caesares Reges and principes essent) nostro Evangelio illes
mox vinceremus, ac vel intra unius anni spatium totum mundum converteremus, cum
tam clara sit veritas, etc.
The Assembly does what they are able toward healing the saddest of all
divisions, I mean those that the servants of Christ are engaged in one against
another. Yet may it be said at this day, as in Ier. 8. 15. We looked for peace
but no good came, and for a time of help, but behold trouble. Trouble not like
to be removed by humane power and diligence; because all the forces Satan can
raise, are resolved to continue it, if they can. Luther preaching upon that in
Ephesians. 6. 12. We wrestle not against flesh and blood, Hic autem Diabolus ipse
regnit rationem obstruens, etc.
but against Principalities against powers, etc. has a passage to this
purpose, Were we to deal only with men, though they were all Kings and
Emperors, we should quickly overcome them by the Ministry of the Gospel, Malus
and neqvam host is est; inque, uno digita prudentior and astutier quam
universus mun^^^.
and be able to convert an whole world in the compass of one year. Divine
truth would soon captiuate humane reason, were it not for those obstructions
made in men's understandings and wills, by the workings of Satan, who has more
craft and subtlety in one of his fingers, then the world has in its whole body.

3 That we are to seek help from God in his own way. Be entreated, right
Honorable, to consider the nature of the work you have in hand; Lunae radi is
non maturescit botrus.
and to remember that the grapes of Reformation can never be kindly, and
thoroughly ripened, but by beams of the Sun of righteousness: the moonshine
of created abilities is too weak for such a production. Seek we therefore to
God for help; and see we do it in that way which Israel in this Chapter took,
and whereby they obtained the help in the Text: which I shall not wander from,
so long as I fetch all my directions out of the bowels of this Story. Do it.

1 In away of real amendment. Samuel here verse. 3. exhorts them to that as
they hoped for deliverance; they accordingly put it in practice, ver. 4. Then
the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and served the Lord
only. By Baalim Sanctius understands their He-Gods, by Ashtaroth their
She-Deities. Be they he is or be they she is, Gods or Goddesses, which had
formerly been worshipped, all are now put away. Israel gives them a bill of
divorce, says, Is. 30. 22.
Get ye hence, Hos. 14. 8.
what have I to do any more with Idols? We also have had our Baalim and
Ashtaroth; our prelaticall innovations, popish corruptions, Arminian
subtleties, Socinian blasphemies. It concerns us so to put them away, as to
serve the Lord only for time to come: which how any Nation can do that gives
an universal liberty to all kinds of worship, is not easy to conceive; though
one of late have made his address to both Houses of Parliament in behalf of
such a liberty. Bloody Tenent, propos. 6
I must profess for my own part that this proposition laid down by him, viz.
It is the will and command of God, that since the coming of his Son the Lord
Jesus, a permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian
consciences and worships, be granted to all men, in all Nations and Countries,
was to me one of the greatest scandals I ever yet met with in print. O bloody
Tenent! O speedy way of embroyling states, of massacring Churches, of erecting
a Pantheon in every City! That of Omnium Deorum among the Romans, of Omnium
Sanctorum among the Papists, offended me less than this of Omnium Sectarum
from the pen of a Protestant. Sure I am One God, one mediator, one faith, was
Catholic Doctrine in Paul's time; Ephesians. 4. Delicata res est, non patitur
alienum.
and that Religion is so dainty as not to admit of such mixtures. Be you also
well assured, Beloved Christians, that in this case every variation from unity
is a step to nullity: that if ever England (which God forbid) came from one
Religion to all, she will quickly run from all to none.

2. Of solemn humiliation. Such was theirs, Verse. 6. They drew water and
poured it out before the Lord, Vid. Sane^t. and Trin. in loc.
and fasted that day, and said there, we have sinned against the Lord. These
actions of drawing and pouring out water are by some thought to be
hieroglyphicall. Empty a vessel of any other kind of liquor, it leaves some
relish or color or smell behind it; as when honey, wine, or oil is poured
out. Not so upon the effusion of water: which is therefore fit to signify the
pouring out of men's hearts in such a manner as to leave none of their sins
unconfest, unrepented of. To make it more solemn, fasting is added to their
humiliation, as that which helps devotion to wings. Chrysostom says, that
Prayer without fasting, is a soldier without a sword; able to do but little
service. And yet of the two, fasting may be the better spared. I shall not be
afraid to assert, that fasting ing without prayer is a sword without a
soldier, able to do no service at all. With Israel here we should confess, as
well as fast. A Nation or person become speechless is near unto death. Quod
bomo detegit Deustegit.
If we desire to have the Lord cover our sins by his pardoning grace, we must
discover them in humble acknowledgments.

3 Of earnest supplication. I will pray for you unto the Lord says Samuel to
the people ver. 5. and they to him ver. 8. Cease not to cry unto the Lord our
God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistims. (...) is
the phrase that is used concerning Elias, Jam 5. 17. He prayed in his prayer:
we translate it, he prayed earnestly: as if that which is not earnest were no
prayer. They in Jonah 3. 8. are directed to cry mightily unto God. A whispering
devotion is seldom answered with a loud echoe from heaven. Ask (says Christ)
and it shall be given; seek and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. Ask, seek, knock, there will be need of all three. Do you want
ablessing ask it of God, have you asked, yet still continue to want ^ seek it
out, have you sought, yet cannot find: knock, and the treasury where it lies
shall be opened to you. Was there evermore need? has not peace taken her
leave? does not truth look toward the threshold? It would be most strange and
ominous if the Church should not be found upon her knees, now when Rome and
hellare conspiring against her: if when three Kingdoms are beleagur'd by Popish
confederates, they should not be garrisoned with praying Saints.

4 Of lively faith in Christ, without which all the former are invalid. Samuel
here verse. 9. took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt-offering wholly
unto the Lord* thereby turning both his own and the peoples eyes upon the Lamb
of God, John 1. 29.
which was to come and to take away the sin of the world. Quicquid docetur,
oratur aut vivitur extra Christum idolatria est coram Deo and peccatum.
Whenever you approach the throne of grace let it be your principal care to
exercise faith in the Lord Jesus: out of whom all our learning is but duncery,
all our duties but drudgery, all our devotion but formality; yea idolatry, if
Luther may be believed. Incense of old was a type of his intercession; blood a
type of his satisfaction, one of these was to cover the mercy seat, the other
to be sprinkled upon it Levit. 16. 13, 14. He shall put the incense upon the
fire before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercie-seat,
And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger
upon the mercie-seat, etc. to intimate that from God no mercy is to be
expected but through the satisfaction and intercession of Jesus Christ; no help
to be sought at any time without eying of these.

The second observation, which I am now to undertake, runs thus.

The Churches duty is to commemorate help received. Obs. 2.
See it both required and practiced.

1 Required, Exodus 17. 13, 14. Joshua discomfited Amalek and his people with
the edge of the sword, and the Lord said unto Moses, write this for a memorial
in a book. Psalm. 102. 16, 18. When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall
appear in his glory. Ingratus est qui beneficium accepisse se negat quod
accepit, ingratus est qui dissimulat, ingratus qui non reddit; ingratissimus
omnium qui oblitus est.
This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall
be created shall praise the Lord. Should Scripture be silent, nature it self
would read a lecture to this purpose. Hear one of her high priests; He is an
unthankful man that denies a benifit received; so is he that dissembles it,
together with him that requites it not: but of all the rest he is most
unthankful that has forgotten it.

2 Practiced. Senec. de Benefic l. 3. c. 1.
Behold, Saint Paul recording his deliverance, from the teeth of that roaring
lion Nero, in 2 Timothy 4. 17. The Lord stood with me and strengthened me, and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. David his preservations, Psalm. 31.
21. Blessed be the Lord: for he has showed me his mavelous kindness in a
strong City. It will be needless to multiply instances out of the Psalms:
seeing Hosanna, and Hallelujah, Benedic, and Benedicatur, God bless, and
blessed be God, prayer and praise epitomize that whole book. I shall rather
choose to hint you to some of those courses which the Saints of old took for
the registring of mer^ies.

They had

1 Their festival days. Such were the Purim, viz. the fourteenth day of the
month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same; kept yearly as the days
whereon the Jews rested from their enemies, and the month which was turned
unto them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day. These were
made by them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to another,
and gifts to the poor. Hest. 9. 21, 22, 26. in memory of what the Lord had done
for them, in breaking that snare, which the malice, pride and power of Haman
had twisted for the whole Nation.

2 Their Eucharisticall Songs. As in Exodus 15. for the overthrow of Pharaoh, in
Jud. 5. for the defeat of Jabin and Sisera, in 1 Samuel 18. for the slaughter of
Goliath. Out of all which instances if it be noted, that women were wont to
bear a part in such songs (for we read of Miriam in the first, of Deborah in
the second, in the third of women out of all the Cities of Israel) that
observation will lead us to the right understanding of a place in Psalm. 68. 11.
mistaken by some, as if it allowed women to preach; because the word there
rendered Preachers according to the old translation, (...) Annunciat^icum.
God gave the word, and great was the company of Preachers, is a word of the
feminine gender. Whereas the true meaning of Gods giving the word is his
affording matter of joy and glad tidings in the course of his providence; and
the Preachers spoken of are nothing else but the company of women that
published the same in their songs: as may be further cleared by a passage in
the same Psalm ver. 25. The singers went before, the players on instruments
followed after; amongst them were the damsels playing with timbrels.

3 Their significant names. Which were sometimes imposed upon persons. This
course Joseph took to perpetuate the memory of mercies received by him in
Egypt, Genesis 41. 51, 52. He called the name of his firstborn Manasseh: for God,
said he, has made me forget all my toil, and all my fathers house. And the
name of the second called he Ephraim: for God has caused me to be fruitful in
the Land of my affliction. The like was afterward done by Moses in reference
to what befell him in Midian, Ex- 18. 3, 4. He had two sons by Zipporah, the
name of the one was Gershom, for he said I have been an alien in a strange
Land. And the name of the other Eliezer; for the God of my father, said he, was
my help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh. Sometimes upon places.
Thus Abraham, when his Isaac had escaped, and a ram been accepted instead of
his son, called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh, as it is said to this
day, in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen. Genesis 22. 13, 14. And Jacob when
he saw the Angels of God that met him, said, This is Gods host: and he called
the name of that place Mahanaim, i. e. two hosts: either because the Angels
appeared in two companies, one on each side of him, for his better security; or
because there was now an host of Angels added to that former host of men women
and children, which he carried along with him. Sometimes upon peculiar
monuments erected on purpose. Such was Jacobs El-Elohe-Israel, Genesis 33. 20.
Such Moses, his Jehovah-Nissi, Exodus 17, 15. Such also Samuels, Eben-Ezer in my
Text.

Enough has been said to convincemen of this duty, as also to inform them
about it. The most proper way (as I conceive) to enforce the practice of it at
present, will be to parallel the mercies of this story and Text, with those of
this age, and day.

The first mercy we meet with here is the conventing of Israel at Mizpeh in a
National assembly, ver. 5, 6. Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and
they gathered together. Abulens. and Lyranus apud Salianum.
Interpreters are of opinion, that the Philistims whom they were subject to had
so tyrannized over them, as to hinder all such conventions; least being ouce
gathered together they should consult how to free themselves: Indixit Samuel
generalia comitia Ibid.
that Samuel notwithstanding had now called a Parliament, and got them to meet.
What devices have been used in former times, one while to keep off, another
while to break off Parliaments here in England, he is a stranger in our Israel
that does not know. I had almost said he is an enemy to it, that is not
affected with deep sense of the goodness of God in calling, and confirming (this
which you all have the happiness to behold, and I the honor to speak unto) this
blessed Parliament; Is. 22. 23, 24.
fastened by a late Act, and made as a nail in a sure place, for the Kingdom to
hang all her vessels upon, from the vessels of cups, even unto all the vessels
of flagons, as the Prophet Isaiah speaks. Wherefore here, before we go further,
let us set up one Eben-Ezer saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped us.

A second mercy which this story acquaints us with, is, The Lords hearing the
prayers that were then put up for Israel, ver. 9. Samuel cried unto the Lord
for Israel, and the Lord heard him. Has he not done the like for us? was he
ever a God hearing prayers more then of late? Our devotion has not had a
miscarrying womb, but been fruitful in deliverances: neither have her breasts
been dry; for three Kingdoms all this while have been nursed up in the bosom
of prayer. The Jews were wont to stand when they prayed, and from thence men
learned to say, Sine Stationibus non subsisteret mundus, The world could not
stand but for this standing in prayer. But for it, Ireland perhaps by this time
had not been at all, Scotland had been all in blood, and England giving up the
ghost. Each of these Nations may say for it self as the Psalmist does, Verily
God has heard, he has attended to the voice of my prayer: Blessed be God that
has not turned away my prayer, nor his mercy from me. Psalm. 66. 19, 20. We
may in reference to them all erect a second Eben-Ezer; for herein also the Lord
has helped us; both helped us to pray, and helped us to speed.

A third mercy is the Lords defeating their enemies, and that so, as to make
Israel isntrumental for its own preservation, in the 10. and 11. verses, The
Philistims drew near to battle against Israel: but the Lord thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the Philistims, and discomfited them, and they
were smitten before Israel. And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and
pursued the Philistims, and smote them, etc. We are assembled this day to
praise God for showing the like favor to us in more then one or two places.

It may be observed out of Scripture that the Lord has still been delighted in
taking to himself a denomination from some fresh and recent mercy. Genesis 14.
19.
In one of the first ages of the world he is styled the possessor of heaven and
earth; as having not long before made the one for his throne and the other for
his footstool. After he had revealed himself by many promises to the Fathers
he is frequently called, Genesis 28. 13.
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Exodus 3 15. and alibi passim.
When he had newly broken the yoke which Pharaoh had put on his peoples neck,
Exodus 20. 2.
then, I am the Lord, says he, that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out
of the house of bondage. Having at another time delivered the same people from
Babylon, he renews in his style the memorial thereof, Jer. 16. 14, 15. The
days come, says the Lord, that it shall no more be said, the Lord lives,
that brought up the children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt; but the Lord
lives, that brought up the children of Israel from the land of the North.
After the Word was made flesh, 2 Cor. 1. 3. ibid. c. 11. 31.
the amiable Title which the New Testament gives him, is this, The God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Col 1. 3. and elsewhere.
It is not long since he was pleased to crown the endeavors of our men of war
with a triple victory, that so with a threefold cord of love he might draw us
to thankfulness. Let him therefore be styled, at least for this day, The God
of our Parliament and of their forces at Scarborough, at Shrewsbury, and at
Weymouth.

I am not able to parallel our success with theirs in all things. The chapter
tells us of a defeat occasioned by miraculous thunder; here was none such: only
an artificial thundering on both sides, and that on ours blessed to the
discomfiting of our enemies. Yea our three Commanders in chief, in those three
forementioned places, what were they else, but (to use the Poets expression)
Tria fulmina belli? yet in two particulars they may be compared.

1 Isreal's victory, which the Text relates to, was unexpected. They were met
together at this time to consult, and not to combat; not to fight and kill,
but to fast and pray; to reform, and not to embattail themselves. Yet now does
God give up their enemies into their hands. Tell me, was not the gaining of
Shrewsbury unexpected by all men here? the regayning of Weymouth a thing which
but few of us had in our hopes? Has not the Lord in both these, yea, and at
Scarborough, Is. 64. 3.
done terrible things which we looked not for? Have we not received Weymouth
especially, as Abraham did Isaac, Heb. 11. 19.
even from the dead? may we not say upon this occasion, mutat is mutandis, as
the man in the parable did of his son, Luke 15. 32. It is meet that we should
make merry and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; was
lost and is found?

2 Israel got the victory, though the Philistims had the advantage. It seems
by the tenor of the story, that full men set upon such as were fasting; armed
men upon such as were naked: Israel for ought we read, being furnished with no
other weapons but their prayers and tears, Salian. Annal.
and sacrifices. Only when the Philistims were discomfited by the thunder they
('it is thought) took up the weapons, that fell from their amazed enemies, and
with them did execution in the pursuit. It Is easily found which side the
advantage was on at Weymouth. Were not our numbers inconsiderable? were not the
few men we had well-nigh spent, and worn out with watching and other military
duties? yet did they prove more then conquerors, by getting, not only victory,
but booty; recovering what they had lost before, and withal possessing
themselves of what the enemy had laid in. Let us therefore bestow another
Eben-ezer upon this; and say once more, Hitherto the Lord has helped us.

I hasten to the third and last observation, viz.

That principal men are to have a principal hand in the duty of praising God
for his help. Obs. 3,


Climb we up to the full explication of this truth by certain steps: which are
these. Every creature is made to praise God in its kind; Men are more bound to
this duty then other creatures; Christians more then other men; Professors
eminent for their places in Church or State more than other Christians.

1 Every creature is made to praise God in its kind. Praise ye him Sun and
moon, praise him all ye stars of light, praise him ye heavens of heavens, and
ye waters that be above the heavens: Praise the Lord from the earth, ye
dragons, and all deeps, Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy winds
fulfilling his word, mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all Cedars,
beasts and all cattle, creeping things and flying fowls. Psalm. 148. 3, 4, 7,
8, 9, 10. They do it accordingly, Psalm. 19. 1. The heavens declare the glory
of God; and the firmament shows his handy work.

2 Men are bound to this duty more then other creatures.

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful
works to the children of men. Let them exalt him also in the congregation of
the people, and praise him in the assembly of the Elders. Psalm. 107. 31, 32.
The whole world is a musical instrument; every string is so tuned, as to be
fitted for resounding the great Creators praise: But man of all visible
creatures is the only musician that knows how to play upon this instrument.
The rest can praise God but Objective, by being the objects of man's meditation.
They do all bring, as it were, their several sacrifices unto him, and lay
them down at his feet: he is the Priest that must offer them up for the whole
Creation.

3 Christians more then other men.

That place in Psalm. 65. 1. deserves more then ordinary consideration. Praise
wayteth for thee o God in Sion. The Saints pour out their hearts to day in
thanksgiving to God; Quasi dicat, heri elaudavimus propter besternum be
^esicium; hodie expectat te laus propter novum and hod ernum.
the next day, yea it may be the next hour there comes a shoale of new
mercies: he must be acknowledged also in them; and therefore praise is said to
wait, till the blessing arrive, as being at hand, ready to be tendered upon all
occasions. According to the Original, Praise is silent for thee o God: Coppen
in Ioc.
perhaps to imply that when the Saints set themselves to pay this tribute,
(...) Tibi silentium.
they are struck into a silent admiration of that rich bounty and grace, which
supplies all their wants; wondering that the Sun of righteousness should
vouchsafe to shine upon dunghils, and wanting words to express the goodness
of their Master to such unprofitable servants. Praysewayts, silently wayts, and
that in Sion. It Is due from all Quarters of the World, but it waits for God
only in Sion: None have it in a readiness for him but the members of that
Church, whereof Sion was a type. All thy works shall praise thee o Lord and thy
Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. 145. 10. Unto him be glory; but where? in the
Church, by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3. 21. Great reason there is why it should be
so. For the Church is more indebted to God, than all the societies in the
world. They receive but drops of blessing to her showers. Ezekiel. 34. 26. I will
make them, and the places round about my hill (meaning his holy hill of Sion) a
blessing: and I will cause the shower to come down in season, there shall be
showers of blessing. No wonder then if the Spouse have doves eyes, Cant. 1. 15.
Behold, thou art fair my love, thou have doves eyes; lifting up themselves to
heaven, when ever she either eats a grain or drinks a drop: while the rest of
the world have hogs eyes; devouring the acorns that fall from the tree, without
so much as looking up, or ever considering whence they come.

4 Professors eminent for their place in Church or State more than other
Christians. I gave them the name of principal men in reference to Micah 5. 5.
where we read of Gods raising up against the Assyrian seven shepherds and
eight principal men, i. e. a competent number of Office-bearers to withstand
the fury of the enemy, under Christ, who was their peace. Such are to have a
principal hand in this duty.

1 In regard of the depth of their interests. They as being more concerned in
the public welfare than Christians of a more private station, are bound to
observe the wheelings of providence more than others; and to acknowledge the
hand of the Lord in every turn. Hence are Church Officers called upon so
expressly, with so much importunity, both in the beginning, and in the end of
the 135. Psalm. Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the Court of the
house of our God, praise ye the Lord, for the Lord is good; sing praises to his
name, for it is pleasant, ver 2, and 3. And again, in the 19, and 20. verses,
Bless the Lord o house of Aaron; bless the Lord o house of Levi. Beza in
Argumen. Ps. 136.
Beza gives a good reason why that clause, for his mercy endures for ever, is
so often repeated; no less then six and twenty times in one Psalm. It Is done,
says he, to make it appear that we may not content our selves with
acknowledging mercy in the lump, but should take a distinct view of each
single favor: as the Psalmist there begins with the goodness of God in
general, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good. Psalm. 136. 1. but
afterward descends to particulars, and to every one of them annexeth the
forementioned clause. For example, it well becomes us at this time, not only
to say in the language of that Psalm, O give thanks to the Lord of Lords, to
him who alone does great wonders, who remembered us in our low estate, and has
redeemed us from our enemies, ver. 3, 4, 23, 24. but more distinctly, To him
that blessed our forces at Plymouth, for his mercy endures for ever; and
prospered them at Scarborough, for his mercy endures for ever: Who delivered
Shrewsbury into our hands, for his mercy endures for ever; and gave us our
lost Weymouth again, for his mercy endures for ever. This if men of the
deepest interests shall neglect, who then will be found to do it? will not God
be a looser by this omission? yea, will not they be loosers themselves, whose
engagements to the Common wealth, or to the Church, are such as that they must
needs stand or fall with it, whatever becomes of other men? Super tribus
consistit mundus; super lege, and cultu sacro, and Retributione beneficiorum.
The Jews have a saying, that the world stands upon three things, The Law,
holy worship, and retribution. Now we can make retribution to God no other way
but by thankful acknowledgements, which we therefore have cause to be
punctual in. Aloys. Novar. Schediasm. p. 149. n. 99.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of salvation, Psalm. 116. 12, 13. he alludes to the cup of blessing used
in their peace offerings, which were always accompanied with solemn thanks to
the most High for his saving health. Have you a mind to take the shortest cut
to ruin? be unthankful. Expect showers of blessings from heaven no longer
then we continue to send up vapors of praise: for as trumpeters delight to
sound where they may be answered with an ecchoe; so does God delight to give
where he is answered with thanksgiving.

2 In regard of the height of their relations.

Who was the sweet singer of Israel, but David the man that was raised up on
high? 1 Samuel 23. 1. The higher he was raised the more sweetly did he sing, and
warble out the praises of God, insomuch as, if the penmen of Scripture should
come to be differenced by their characters, Solomon happily would be styled The
Preacher of wisdom; Jeremiah the Prophet of lamentation. Saint John the
Disciple of love, and Saint Paul the Apostle of grace: but the style of the
sweet singer of praises must be reserved asdue to David, more than to any of
them all. It Is a maxim in divinity, Beneficium postulat officium. Those whom
God calls to the highest places, he calls withal to the highest services: and
such is this of thanksgiving. Prayer is an high and holy duty, but (if it be
lawful to compare them) praising will be found to excel it in some respects.
As the martyr said when she was at the stake, Now farewell hope, and welcome
love* because she was then going to heaven, where hope being swallowed up in
fruition, was to have no longer being ( For hope that is seen is not hope, Romans
8. 24.) so may a dying Christian say, Now farewell prayer, and welcome praise,
for in heaven there will be no use of prayer; because all wants shall be
supplied without asking, or rather because there shall be no want of any thing
the soul can wish: but of praise there will be use to all eternity. Revel 7 10.
Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb shall be
the song even of those, that have obtained salvation to the utmost, by the Lamb
with him that sits upon the throne. David accordingly seems to have plied this
somewhat more then the other duty, though he was abundant in both. He tells us
in Psalm. 55. 17. of his praying thrice aday, Evening and morning and at noon,
will I pray and cry aloud. But as on purpose to put his soul in tune here,
that in heaven it might make the better music; he multiplies praises even to
seven times in a day, Psalm. 119, 164. Seven times a day do I praise thee,
becanse of thy righteous judgments.

The Application hereof follows.

What now remains, (O ye principal men, Lords, Commons, and Citizens) but that
you be exhorted to have a principal hand in this duty of praising God for his
help; and called upon to do what ye ought, both for the substance of the work,
and manner of performing it?

1 For the substance of the work. Know and remember that God must be praised
with your hearts, your parts, your lips your lives, and your estates.

1 With your hearts. Psalm. 103. 1. Bless the Lord, o my soul, and all that is
within me bless his holy name: The deepest springs are wont to yield the
sweetest waters: they are the sweetest thanks that proceed from a depth within.
Gratitudinis ad animum tota aestimatio redit.
For as Seneca well, the value of thanks resolves it self wholly into the
frame and disposition of the heart. Senec. de Benefic. l. 4. c. 21.


2 With your parts. You are men of great and vast abilities; o consecrate them
all to God. The Spirit of man, Solomon says, is the candle of the Lord, Prove.
20. 27. Suffer not your bright candles to burn downwards; employ not your parts
in the things of this world altogether, not at all in the things of hell; left
they sweal quite away, without doing any considerable service to God or man.
Great parts are like great Ordnance: if the Fort wherein they are planted be
yielded up to Jesus Christ, they are of excellent use against the Serpent and his
seed. But so long as Satan holds the Fort, no men more mischevous to the Church
than those that have the best natural and acquired abilities; yea none in so
dangerous a condition in reference to their own souls. I must be bold to tell
such, as abuse their wits and other endowments in the service of Satan against
the truth, that their lightsome candles will but serve to light them to hell;
and their large parts to enlarge their condemnation there.

3 With your lips. Psalm 16 9 with Acts 2. 26.
Psalm. 51. 15. O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy
praise. The tongue is called a man's glory, partly because speech is a thing
wherein men excel beasts; and partly because it is given him to glorify God
withal. Praise and thanks should be offered up when ever we draw near to him
in any duty, particularly when ever we pray. Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for
nothing: but in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving, let
your request be made known unto God, with thanksgiving. Expect no acceptance of
those prayers wherein there is not some spice of that. Oration sine laud, est
thuribulum sine prunis. Luther.
Prayer without praise is a censer without burning coals, from which there can
no sweet savor ascend.

4 With your lives, for therein lies the life of thankfulness. He is the most
thankful that is the most fruitful Christian. There must be Gratiarum actio a
doing of thanks. Else if our thanks be not accompanied with obedience, John.
19. 3
we do but play Jews-play with Christ; saying, Hail King of the Jews, and
smiting him. Physicians judge of the heart by the arm; feel the pulse, that
they may know the state of the vitals. How beats the pulse of thy conversation?
according to that will God judge of the soundness, or sickliness of thy
constitution. Would you render real thanks? Remember what you have lately
sworn, namely, to go before each other in the example of a real reformation.
Ezekiel. 20. 37.
The Lord had caused the Land to pass under a rod, a rod that fetched blood at
every lash, before we would be brought into the bond of that Covenant Believe
it, he that whipped us to it, will whip us for it, if it be not kept. The curses
ingrost in that flying roll Zech. Ver. 2, 3, 4.
5. will be sure to over-take us, for swearing falsely by the name of the Lord.

5 With your estates: Honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3. 9. Christ
will never trust Judas more. The Saints are now his purse-bearers; and from
them it is expected that they should willingly disburse, (...),Matthew. 21. 3.
when ever the Lord has need in his members: This is the duty of every day;
especially solemn days of thanksgiving. Eat the fat and drink the sweet, and
send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared; for this day is holy unto
our Lord: neither be ye sorry, for the joy of the Lord is your strength. Nehem.
8. 10. That joy which enlarges the heart at such a time should take away
straitness of hand. Thanksgiving days should be giving days. Upon the first
day of the week, let every one of you lay by him in store as God has prospered
him, says Saint Paul, prescribing an order concerning the collection for the
Saints, 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. Why upon the first day of the week? Chrysostom hints
to this reason* because then in the use of those Ordinances that were dispensed
on the Lords day, the spirits of Christians resenting the goodness of God more
then at other times, would be more ready to give the Saints a taste of theirs.
You that have this worlds good, 1 John ^. 17.
shut not up your bowels now, from those of Melcomb, Weymouth, and Plymouth,
that need so much; and deserve so well. Let the consideration of those late
mercies we have received be a means to open all obstructions of heart and
purse, and to procure mercy from you, for those persons by whom, and places
where we have received them.

2 For the manner. This great work of praising God must be performed
unanimously and cheerfully.

1 Unanimously. We should all glorify God with one mind and with one mouth,
Romans 15. 6. which is utterly impossible so long as through difference in
opinion and affection, that event is looked at as a cross by one, which
appears a rich blessing to another. There will hardly be one mouth, where there
is not one mind: God will hardly be glorified, where there is not a sweet
conjunction of both. Cleopatra dissolved an union of great price, and drank it
in an health to Marcus Antonius. Divisions are Satan's Drinke-offerings: No such
drinkers of health to hell as dissolvers of union. If my soul might have its
wish, I should not desire, what Austin did, to see either Paul in the pulpit,
or Rome in its pomp: but the thing I would beg should be Union. Next to a full
and clear sight of its own union to Jesus Christ; my soul should long for
nothing more in all the world, than union of the King to his Parliament, and of
the godly throughout the Kingdom among themselves. Who ever lives to see these
things may sing his Nunc dimittis with Simeon, Luke ^. 29, 30.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation.

2 Cheerfully, Psalm. 149. 5, 6. Let the Saints be joyful in glory; let them
sing aloud upon their beds; let the high praises of God be in their mouths.
The birds chirp most in the fairest weather; succesfull seasons are joyful
seasons to thankful Saints.

Yet because, as poison conveyed in flowers is most dangerous, in that it
presently takes the brain, so there is nothing more deadly than poisoned joys:
to the end your cheerfulness may be kept within Scripture bounds your rejoicing
be such and none but such as becomes the Gospel, I shall here present you,
before I conclude, with a short character of Christian joy. It Is a spiritual
affection that has the Holy Ghost for its Father, Faith for its Mother, Prayer
for its Midwife, the Word for its Nurse, Sincerity for its Keeper, and
trembling for its Handmaid.

1 The Holy Ghost for its Father, we find it called joy of the Holy Ghost, 1
These. 1. 6. They in Nehemiah kept the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem, with
gladness, and thanksgivings; they offered great sacrifices and rejoiced, for
God had made them to rejoice with great joy; Cap. 12. ver. 27. 43. Light is
sown for the righteous, Ps. 97. 11. Spiritual joy is a light shed from heaven,
it springs not out of ones own bowels, as the carnal joy of worldings does;
but is as seed cast in from without, and the Seeds-man is the Holy Ghost.

2 Faith for its Mother. Joy of Faith, so it is called, Phil. 3. 25. Believing
ye rejoice, says Peter, with joy unspeakeable and full of glory. 1 Pet. 1. 8.
In the ring of graces, faith is the diamond; joy the sparkle of the diamond.
Phil. 3. 3.
Hear Saint Paul, We are the circumcision which worship God in Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus. Holy men have their rejoicing only in Christ; they
are made partakers of Christ only by faith. Such as desire to have joy as a
flower blown in their hearts, must be careful to water the root of faith; for
from thence it springs.

3 Prayer for its Midwife. John 16. 24. Ask, and ye shall receive, that your
joy may be full. Rejoice evermore, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. and presently after, pray
without ceasing. as if he had said, Cease to pray, you will cease to rejoice;
pray without ceasing, so shall ye be able to rejoice evermore. The
cheerfullest Christians are usually those that are fullest of Prayer. After
Hannah had poured out her soul before the Lord, her countenance was no more
sad. 1 Samuel 1. 15, 18.

4 The word of God for its Nurse. (...).
Prove. 12. 25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it stoop; but a good word
makes it glad. A soul sick of sorrow is directed by the Word of grace to an
able Physician. Upon Philips preaching Christ, there followed great joy in the
City of Samaria, Acts 8. 5, 8. Then Philip went down to the City of Samaria,
and preached Christ unto them. And there was great joy in that City. Where the
Priests are clothed with salvation, there the Saints shout aloud for joy. Psalm.
132. 16.

5 Sincerity for its Keeper. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world. They are the upright in heart for whom the light of gladness is sown,
Psalm. 97. 11. It comes up in no other soil. Any kind of sin may nip joy in
the bud, hypocrisy kills it at the root. True joy can never breathe in an heart
obstructed with by-ends. In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare
(such a snare as will be sure to strangle his joy; that appears by the
opposition there made) but the righteous does sing and rejoice, Proverbs 29. 6.
They in 1 Chronicles. 29. 29. were able to rejoice in the service then in hand; why?
because with perfect hearts they offered willingly to the Lord.

6 Trembling for its Handmaid. Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Do you lend an ear to this, who are members of the
Honorable Houses; for the Psalmist speaks it to such as are Rulers of the
earth, Verse 10. Your affections should be proportioned to Gods dispensations.
His manner is to feed the Church with bitter-sweets: her care should be to
mingle trembling with her joy. Be pleased to reflect upon the war which your
selves have managed, and consider whether providence have not seemed to
delight, as it were in checkerwork; a white and a black, a success and a blow,
whether for the most part, ye have not had a white in the North, for a black in
the West; or a black in the North (as at this day) to tremble at, when ever you
had a white in the West. Wherefore rejoice in the Lord at present; Philip. 4. 4.
and again I say rejoice: but do it with trembling to think of provoking the
eyes of his glory, Is. 3. 8.
whose power is able to confound us in a moment. Tremble, but with rejoicing to
think how many places the Lord of hosts has appeared for us in of late, as
glorious in holiness, Exodus 15. 11.
fearful in praises, doing wonders.

Now unto him that is able to do (and has done for us) exceeding abundantly,
Ephesians 3. 20, 21.
above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us;
Unto him be glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world
without end. To him that has helped, and does help; in whom we trust, that he
will still help us more and more, to him be praise, and thanks, and dominion,
for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

