The Arraignment, Trial, and Condemnation of FROST The Broker, Who was
Condemned for Clipping and Filling His Majesty's Coin.

On Thursday, June 17th. 1675. To be Hanged.

With a Character of his Life and Conversation, not only before he was taken
but since his Imprisonment, in the Marshalses.

Now Brokers all a warned be,
Here is your brother Condemned you see.
Printed for John Millet. 1675.

THe wages of sin is death, and the way to Live long is to live holy; a sad but
true Example we have here before our eyes. At Horselydown lately lived one
Frost, by Trade a Broker, who having raised his fortune very much in a little
time, not honestly, but sinfully: his Conscience being like the rest of the
Trade, as large as the Kings Highway, made it his business to gull and cheat
all that came near him or had any thing to do with him: instances of his
hellish practices might be here recited, but I shall give you but a few which
are as follows.

First, I am informed that he has been the occasion of undoing many poor
Families which have been driven to straights for want of sale for their goods,
and having great families to maintain were forced either to borrow money for a
Week, paying for a Week three shillings in the pound, using of it, and if they
brought it not at the very Day he would arrest them, or demand unreasonably,
for their breach of promise, and by his threats get five or ten shillings out
of these poor souls, that had more need have had so much given to them, and if
they left any thing upon pawn, he did in like manner, retaining their goods for
less then a quarter the worth of them, because they had not money to fetch them
on the very Day they promised: and further, he would when any dyed that uses
to deal with him, though they owed him never a Farthing, to wright down so much
delivered to such a man, and would make the poor widows pay it, many poor
Fatherless children are bound to curse him: he would make false bands fifty
pound deep, when persons have been dead, though they owed him nothing.

But I proceed to his takening, the manner was as follows.

This Frost was one that frequented one Mr. A. Bovvling-green at R^driff four
or five Days in a Week, and there he was observed by a gentleman that used the
green, to bett very much, and was often a changing of money, and it was
observed that he put the money that he changed or won in one pocket, and that
which was clipped he took out of the other pocket: sometimes he was observed to
put away forty shillings at a time, this being his practice for a considerable
time: several of the Gentlemen that had won money of him, and changed money
with him observed that always they had such money of him, spoke to Mr. A. about
it, and told him of such a Man they had so much clipped money that they were
afraid to put it off for fear they should be apprehended for clipping of it;
vvhereupon this Mr. A. Mr. of the Bovvling-green, acquaints one Mr. D. at the
Tovver, and Mr. D. gave Mr. A. a guiny to change with Mr. Frost, who
accordingly did the next time Frost came to the green, who gave him Eighteen
shillings and sixpence in clipped Half-crowns of old King Charles coin: D. having
received this clipped money quickly takes a guard and goes to seek for to
apprehend Frost, being come near Horsly-Down, gets one S. H. of St. Barmonsey,
and desires him to assist him in the taking of a suspicious person; away they
go to Frosts house, and knocking at the Door, comes William Griffin his Servant
who was hired for a year, they demand entrance, and charged him with
treason, he flies in a doors and shuts them out, they get a fledge and break
open the Door, where they found one B. a Butcher, which was formerly accused
for the same fact, standing Just within the door with a drawn sword in his
hand, he made an attempt at the first, but there being a strong guard soon
secured him, and presently came Mr. Frost, running out of his garden in his
shirt; as he was coming in a doors their drapt a shilling out of his Drawers,
this they found to be clipped: now they march up stairs, where they see many
things that were suspicious; Mr. D. demands the Key of the Closet, he said it
was below, he would go fetch it, but I will go with you says D. no sooner were
they come down, but they found 8 pound of old King Charles coin, with the Keys,
and looking under the table they find a great Drawer for to hold a great pair
of Sheers, and also some clippings, and looking into the Closet, there they
found waits, smoothing stones, and several other things tending to the same
purpose, and some of the filings and clippings was melted down, and some
unmelted; now they have good grounds to apprehend him, so they take him and
carry him before a Justice, and upon the examination of the witness, Mr. D.
attested these things; and one Mr. VV. that is now a the Prisoner at
Marshalses, and a bill found against him last assizes, ordered by Mr. Frost, or
some of his concerns, purposely to take off him from being a witness against
him, and continues still prisoner, but this said VV. did swear that he saw the
same Frost a clipping, he being sent for to Mr. Frost, house, which is near
Jamaco house at Redriff upon business of paying and receiving of money for Mr.
Frost, this said W. was admitted up stairs, where he found Mr. Frost a cliping,
and his man a filing; he said he saw them work about a quarter of an hour.

And another time he came and found Mr. Frost, and William his Man a Melting of
Clipings in the Melting Pots, which was shown in the Court: some of his
Clippings he sent to one Mr. G. a Goldsmith in Southwark, near the meal-market,
and other to Mr. G. in St. ^oolis-street, some were bought, and other Returned,
he saying he bought it of Our-Landishmen, being Spanish-money he melted it
down: several of the Witnesses, at least Ten in number, who seeing and
receiving sums of money, and Inquiring one of another, they found that Sixteen,
or Eighteen shillings in the pound was Clipped money, this they swore against him
in open Court, June 17. 1675. Where he was Arraigned for Treason: his
Indictment being Read, he pleaded not guilty: But upon strict examination of
the Witnesses, the Jury brought him in guilty: whereupon Sentance was past
against him; he seemed to be very much cast down, and dejected: though all the
time of his Imprisonment he has lived very wickedly, spending his time in
drinking and gaming, and swearing, not considering the Shortness of his life;
the very day he was condemned, he played at Tables in the morning, and seemed
not to be concerned at all, till the Judges came whose Names were as follows.

Sir Thomas Twisdale Knight and Barron Knight. Sir Richard Rainsford Knight.
Sir Edward Thorlon Knight. Sir John Howel Knight, Recorder of the City of
London.
The Judges being come, as great a throng of people as could have been, had it
been an Assize for the whole Circuit.

Frost was immediately brought forth, who no sooner perceived the Judges, but
his Brazon-face begins to gather paleness, and his hands and all his body
shake, he that before seemed not to fear death, now is ready to dye for fear.

When the Sentance was past upon him, he said he must submit to the Judgment
of the Jury.

He did not seem penitent at all, and little hopes there can be that he will;
he that has been so wicked in all his practices all his life; but God is
all-sufficient, to whom, let us all like Christians, put up our prayers for
him, who as yet cannot pray for himself; let us be earnest with God for his
poor soul, that soul and body may not both Dye together.

With Frost was tried his Man, by name William Griffin, his Indictment being
for Clipping, upon his Examination, he was found not Guilty, and so Cleared.

Now let this be a warning to all Brokers, how they grind the face of the poor,
for you may see, that sin brings shame. The ill effects of sin appears in
Frost, who got an estate, but not honestly, and it thrived with him according;
he was not contented with his unreasonable gains in his trade, but like a Rabel
to the King, as well as to his Maker, Clipps, and Filles his Majesty's Coin,
and lived to suck the sweetness of this sin, it is thought some years, but God
would not suffer him to rain in his sin any longer, and now he may see if sin
be not an unprofitable thing. If he had lived honestly he might have lived many
years, but his wicked practices has now brought him to open shame, and to just
Condemnation of Death; and let us leave him where sin has brought him, to
prepare for his journey to the other World, his time being very short in this;
On Wednesday next it is Reported he will be executed at Kennington gallows,
where he will not want Eyes to behold him, and I pray God they may not want
hearts to pray for him: may his sad end be a warning to others, and it will be
the joy of his heart, who wishes nothing more then that you would be careful
to fear God, and honor the King, and then you may expect a blessing and to
fill up the number of your days.

FINIS.

