The Arraignment, TRIAL AND CONDEMNATION OF Robert Earl of Essex, AND HENRY
Earl of SOUTHAMPTON, At Westminster the 19th of February, 1600. and in the 43
year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth: For Rebelliously Conspiring and
Endeavoring the Subversion of the Government, by Confederacy with TYR-OWEN,
that Popish Traitor and his Accomplices; of whom, these following, viz. Sir
Christopher Blunt Sir Charles Danvers Sir Gillie Merrick and Henry Cuffe
Were the 5th of March following, by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed. The PEERS had to their Assistance the
Learned JUDGES. Counsel for the Queen. Sir Henry Yelverton, the Queens
Sergeant. Sir Edward Cook, the Queens Attorney General; afterward Lord Chief
Justice of England. Mr. Bacon, afterward Lord Chancellor.


London, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, Sam. Heyrick,
at Grayes-Inn-Gate in Holborn, and Matthew. Gillyflower in Westminster Hall. 1679.

THE Arraignment AND TRIAL OF Robert Earl of Essex AND HENRY Earl of
SOUTHAMPTON At Westminster the 19th of February, 1600. and in the 43 year of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
A Spacious Court was made in Westminster Hall, where the Lord Treasurer
Buckhurst sat as High Steward of England, under a Canopy of State, where sat
also about the Table the Earls, Barons and Judges of the Land according to
their degrees.

The Judges were these.
The Lord Chief Justice Popham, and the Lord Chief Justice Anderson. The Lord
Chief Baron. Justice Gawdie. Justice Fenner. Justice Walmesley. Justice
Warberton. Justice Kingsmill. Mr. Baron Clarke.
These sat all in the Court next the Bar before the High Steward. Seven
Sergeants at Arms came in with Maces before the High Steward, and laid them
down before him in the Court. The King at Arms stood on the one side of the
High Steward by his Chair of Estate, and one of Her Majesty's Gentlemen-Ushers
with his White Rod in his hand on the other side. The Clerk of the Crown and
his Assistant sat before him to read the Common Indictments and Examinations.
The Captain of the Guard (Sir Walter Rawleigh) and Forty of the Queens Guard
were there to attend the Service. Then the Sergeant at Arms made three O Yes!
and Proclamation, That the Lord High Steward of England commanded Silence, and
to hear the Commission read, upon pain of Imprisonment. Then the Clerk of the
Crown read the Commission, whereunto the Earl of Essex was very attentive.

Another Proclamation was made, That the Lord High Steward of England commanded
all Justices, to whom any Writs had been directed for this Service, to bring
them in, and certify the same.

Another Proclamation was made by a Sergeant at Arms, That the Lieutenant of
the Tower of London should return his Precept, and bring forth his Prisoners,
Robert Earl of Essex, and Henry Earl of Southampton.

Then the Lord High Constable of the Tower, the Lieutenant of the Tower, and
the Gentleman Porter, who carried the Ax before the Prisoners came first in,
and the Prisoners followed and made their appearance at the Bar, the Gentleman
Porter with the Ax standing before them, with the Axes edge from them, and so
the Lieutenant delivered his Precept into the Court.

The two Earls (which were Prisoners) kissed one another hands, and embraced
each other.

Another Proclamation was made, That the Sergeant at Arms to the Queens Majesty
do return his Precept of the Names of all the Peers of Robert Earl of Essex and
Henry Earl of Southampton, the which he delivered into the Court accordingly.

Another Proclamation was made, That all Earls, Viscounts, and Barons of the
Realm of England which were Peers of Robert Earl of Essex, and Henry Earl of
Southampton, and summoned to appear this day, do make answer to their Names
upon pain and peril that will fall thereon.

Then the Lords were called, and answered and appeared as follows: Edward
Earl of Oxford. Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury. William Earl of Derby. Edward Earl
of Worcester. George Earl of Cumberland. Robert Earl of Sussex. Edward Earl of
Hartford. Henry Earl of Lincoln. Charles Earl of Nottingham. Thomas Viscount
Bindon. Thomas Lord De la Ware. Edward Lord Morley. Henry Lord Cobham. Henry
Lord Stafford. Thomas Lord Gray. Thomas Lord Lumbley. Henry Lord Windsor.
William Lord Shandois. Robert Lord Rich. Thomas Lord Darcy. George Lord
Hunsdon. Oliver Lord St. John's of Bletso Thomas Lord Burleigh. William Lord
Compton. Thomas Lord Howard, Baron of Walden.


Then the Earl of Essex desired to know of my Lord Chief Justice, whether he
might Challenge any of the Peers or No, whereunto the Lord Chief Justice
answered, No: And Mr. Attorney General alleged a Case in Henry the Eighths
time, of my Lord Darcy, whereupon the Earl bade them go on.

[When the Lord Gray was called, the Earl of Essex laughed upon the Earl of
Southampton, and jogged him upon his sleeve.]

Then they were called to hold up their Hands at the Bar, which they did. And
then the Clerk of the Crown read the Indictments. That being done, they were
bid to hold up their hands again, which they did, and another Indictment was
read, whereunto the Earl of Essex was attentive. After which the Clerk of the
Crown asked them whether they were Guilty or Not Guilty, they pleaded Not
Guilty; and for their Trials they put themselves upon God and their Peers* They
spoke this severally.

Then my Lord High Steward in a few words gave the the Peers a Charge,
requiring them to have a due regard of their Consciences.

Sergeant Yelverton's Speech.
First he began to open the Evidence, and showed the effect of the Indictment,
and held it in his hand and said as follows;

May it please your Grace (speaking to the High Steward) about the eighth of
February last my Lord of Essex (there Prisoner at the Bar) went about with
Armed men very rebelliously to dis-inherit the Queen of her Crown and Dignity,
which when it came to Her Majesty's Ear, She of Her abounding mercy, sent to
see if it were possible to stop the Rebellion; and who did She send? She sent
(my Lord) no worse persons than my Lord Keeper, my Lord Chief Justice of
England, the Earl of Worcester, and Sir William Knowles, all which went in Her
Majesty's name, and commanded the Earls and their Adherents very strictly to
dissolve their Assemblies, and to lay down their Arms; but he knowing it, very
treacherously imprisoned the said Lords and Counselors by her Majesty so sent,
and altogether refused Her Majesty's Authority, and diverse of their
Confederates cried out, Kill them, Kill them, thereby putting Her Majesty's
Council in fear of their Lives; and withal, left them with Sir Jo. Davis to
keep safe, lest they themselves should miscarry in the City; but, my Lord, I
must tell you this by the way, that my Lord of Essex can no way excuse nor
shadow this his Rebellious Purposes, nor turn his Actions to any other intent,
for, the sending of Temple his Secretary into London the night before
manifests his determination, without scruple or question; for by that means
he was in hopes to have had the help of the Citizens Her Majesty's most Loyal
and Loving Subjects; and he used not only his best endeavors to strengthen
himself abroad, but also fortified his House at home with strong Defense and
Ammunition, all which were tokens of his inclinations to a sudden and
unexpected Rebellion, and well confirmed in the opinion of all the World, when
he withstood diverse of Her Majesty's Subjects standing in Her Highness right,
and defense of her Peace against him and his Confederates. Good my Lord, I
beseech your Grace, and you my Lords that are the Peers, to understand, That if
any man do but intend the Death of the King, it is death by the Law, for he is
the head of the Commonwealth, and all his Subjects as Members ought to obey and
stand with him: But as for this Rebellion being duly considered, contains in it
many branches of Treason, which are and will be directly proved; which being
found to be so, my Lords, who are their Peers, are to find them guilty; hereof
need to be made no doubt, for it is more manifest than the Sedition of Cateline
to the City of Rome, and consequently England is in no less danger; for as
Cateline entertained the most seditious persons about all Rome to join with him
in his Conspiracy, so the Earl of Essex had none but Papists, Recusants, and
Atheists for his Adjutors and Abettors in their Capital Rebellion against the
whole Estate of England. My Lord, I much wonder that his heart could forget all
the Princely Advancements given him by her Majesty, and be so suddenly
beflinted, as to turn them all to Rebellious ends; but it seems this
overweighing a Man's own Conceit, and an aspiring mind to wished Honor, is like
the Crocodile, which is ever growing as long as he lives, your Lordships knows
in what sort they went into the City, with Armor and Weapons, and how they
returned to Essex-house again, as you my Lord Admiral and my Lord of
Cumberland, with others of their honorable Peers do know, which makes me
wonder they do not blush to be so forward to stand upon their Trials without
Confession, when their intended Treasons are in all men's judgments palpable.
For my part, my Lord, I can conjecture nothing hereby, and it will not easily
out of my conceit, but that there is some further matter in it than as yet
appears, but my hope is, that God of his mercy that has revealed their
Treasons, will not suffer the rest of his, or any others to the hurt of the
State, or prejudice to her Majesty's most Royal Person, whom I pray God long to
preserve from the hands of her Enemies: Amen, cried the Earl of Essex and the
Earl of Southampton, and God confound their Souls that ever wished otherwise to
her Sacred Person.

Attorney Genesis May it please your Grace, the Lords Chief Judges, which are the
Fathers of the Law, do know, that the thought of Treason to the Prince, by the
Law is Death; and he that is guilty of Rebellion, is guilty of an Intent (by
the Laws of the Land) to seek the destruction of the Prince, and so adjudged
Treason; and I will prove this unto your Lordships by two several Cases: First,
he raises Power and Strength in a settled Government; the Law will not suffer
it, but it is construed as in case of High Treason; he that does usurp upon it,
the Law does intend that he has purposed the destruction of the Prince; he
that does assemble Power, if the King does Command him upon his Allegiance to
dissolve his Company, and he continue it, without any question it is High
Treason. He that does levy Forces to take any Town in the Princes Dominions, it
is so likewise; but my Lord of Essex has levied Power to take the Tower of
London, and to surprise the Queens own Court; then this must needs be higher
than the highest, and he that does fortify himself against the Princes Power,
must needs be within the compass of Treason; and by your favor, my Lord of
Essex, I will now speak a word unto you; for I know you can speak as well as
any man, That whereas you say the Law of Nature compelled you to do this, which
in Judgment you have, though most treacherously attempted. I will in a word
disprove your own judgment, admitting you must make that freely your Argument.
First I will open the Quality of your Rebellion. Secondly, the Manner of it.
Thirdly, I will touch the Circumstances; and lastly, I will observe the Person.
The Quality has High Treason; for which I think I shall not need to say any
more. For the manner of it, I hold it an unnatural Act, for a natural Subject
to commit Treason against his natural Sovereign; and methinks it cannot be by
any probability denied, but that this High Treason is, and must, be both
against the Law of God, Nature, and Reason; and under your Graces Favor, my
Lord, the manner of it being of so high a Nature as it is, must needs be High
Treason, which was not only carried in their Hearts, but for a continual
Remembrance kept in a black Purse, which my Lord of Essex wore on his Breast
next to his Skin. Let me note unto you my good Lord, that they being both born
under the Government of this Princess, and so highly advanced by Her Majesty's
Favor, should have trembled once to think of such Rebellion as they have
Enterprised. Does not my Lord of Essex now enjoy his Earldome of Essex by the
Gift of Henry the Eighth to his Father? Was not he made Master of Her Majesty's
Horse at twenty two years of Age? One of Her Majesty's Council? to be Earl
Marshal of England? General of Her Majesty's Forces in Ireland? and lastly,
has he not received diverse Gifts and Sums of Money (to his own use) of Her
Majesty's Gracious and Princely Bounty, to the Value of thirty thousand Pound?
yet all these were as cleverly forgotten, as if they had never been. Now shall
I show you the Person whom this concerns, even Her Majesty's Sacred Person,
against whom their Attempts have been, only for the Undertaking of Gods Cause,
and exercising of Justice with admirable Mercy; and though I cannot speak
without reverent Commendations of Her Majesty's most Honorable Justice; yet I
think her overmuch Clemency to some, turns to overmuch Cruelty for her self;
for though the Rebellious Attempts were so exceeding heinous, yet out of her
Princely Mercy, no man was Racked, Tortured, or pressed to speak any thing
further, than of their own Accord, and willing minds, for discharge of their
Consciences they uttered; and then, to see the Mercy of God that will have the
Truth known, it is admirable beyond the Conceit of Man's Capacity: For they
being severally examined, notwithstanding, all agreed directly, without
varying. But when Her Majesty sent a Counselor of State to have the Earl come
before Her, when she heard of his Rebellion, for no other End or Purpose but
for his Admonishment, he refused to come; and having a guilty Conscience, and
suspecting his Treasons were laid open, took consultation to surprise the Court
and the Tower of London, all at one instant, and for his purpose had appointed
Blunt the custody of the Gates, Sir Jo. Davis of the Hall, Sir Charles Danvers
of the Presence, and himself of Her Majesty's Person; whereupon Blunt said, Ah!
in what humors shall we find them in at the Court? this was not all, for the
Earl he must call a Parliament, and he would decide matters not making for his
purpose, but now in Gods most just Judgment he of his Earldom shall be Robert
the last, that of a Kingdom thought to be Robert the First, which, my Lord, did
not any whit amuse himself to give order, that if he and his Accomplices should
miscarry in London, then the Counselors which he caused to be imprisoned in
his House should be slain, it was plain Treason in him to stand out, being by
them charged to dissolve his Company upon his Allegiance; what shall I need to
stand upon further proofs, it is so Evident, and, my Lord, himself will not
deny, but that he had a Schedule containing in it diverse of his Friends names,
which, as I conjecture, must needs contain some other matter, for he durst not
let it come to light, but burnt it: and as for Owen Salisbury, Davis and
Tresham, they must have the Guard of the Lords of the Council, to use them at
their pleasure.


Essex. Will your Lordship give us our turns to speak, for he plays the
Orator, and abuses your Lordships ears and us with slanders, but they are but
fashions of Orators in corrupt States, considering some Privileges which we
might challenge; equal answers and equal hearing were indifferent, for unless
it will please your Lordship that we might answer to every particular, we shall
soon confound our own memories, and give liberty and advantage to our Enemies
whereupon to lay hold for lack of precise answer to each particular Objection;
and seeing now, my Lord, that you have undertaken the place of a Judge, I
beseech you, as you prove against, we for our selves may answer what may fall
out to be fit.


Here the Lord of Essex was interrupted, and not allowed to speak until Henry
Witherington's Examination was read, which imported thus much:

Witherington's Examination.
That upon the Sunday Morning he was sent for to Essex-house, where he found
the place guarded with many Gentlemen in Arms, who told his Uncle that came in
his Company, that he feared they were come into an ill Action; my Lord of Essex
bade him very welcome, and entreated him to go with him, for he feared hurt of
some private Enemies. And when Mr. Withrington perceived the Council were
stayed, he feared danger to them; for he heard some bid* Stab them; and others,
Let us make an end of them, we shall have the fewer to deal withal. And he
proves further, that Order was left, That if the Earl should miscarry in
London, then the Lord Keeper and the Lord Chief Justice should be killed, and
also when the Council had commanded him upon his Allegiance to dissolve his
Forces, he answered nothing; he likewise saw my Lord of Bedford brought in that
Morning, and Mr. Witherington fearing he might be drawn on to his destruction,
prayed him only to follow him, for when opportunity served in London, they
would leave the Troop, and that they followed the Earl into London, and on a
sudden lost him.

Essex. I will not (I protest to God) speak to save my life, for those that
prosecute it against me, shall do me a good turn to rid me of my misery, and
themselves out of fear; as for Mr. Withrington, he does much disparage himself
if he says so, for I protest to God upon my Salvation, I never heard such
words as Kill him, Kill him, and Mr. Withrington came voluntarily to my House,
unsent for, and in the fore-noon did come into our Company, and took to heart
as much as we did whatever we went about; and these are but Reports; for he
that is The Witness is now sent into the Country about some employments, but if
it had been a Secret, Mr. Withrington being privy thereto, might have been a
good Witness, but being so openly spoken (as you say) a hundred more might have
testified it, yet none spoke it besides. And as for locking up the Council, I
protest to God it was done in Charity, and without disloyalty, but intending
only to save them, lest they should take hurt, considering the people abroad in
the Streets with a great and sudden out cry, said, We shall be slain. At which
time we thought our Enemies had been come to beset the house, for my intent was
no otherwise than Loyal to Her Majesty and them.


Earl of Worcest. They proved in Court upon their Honors, that they heard the
words, Kill them, Kill them, but they would not charge my Lord of Essex that
they were spoken either hy his privity or command.


Attorn. Genesis Yea, my Lord, you had three hundred men in Arms in your house,
why did you not dissolve them, being commanded upon your Allegiance from the
Queen to do it?


Essex. They hearing rumors of men about my house against them, put them into
such a fear and ecstasy, that it was not in my power suddenly to dissolve them,
or to quench their passions, and the rather for that Sir Walter Raleigh desired
Sir Ferdinando Gorges, to leave their Company, or else they would be all lost,
so that they stood amazed, and knew not what to do.


Southampton. Mr. Attorney you speak all this as if it were as true as the
Gospel.


Essex. Good my Lord, let me entreat you to mark the Circumstances, word was
brought that men were sent for into the Country to take us in our own houses;
then we conceiving the thirsty appetite of our private enemies, took our selves
to our Arms, and were glad to stand upon our guard for our own defense. But, as
for the Lords of the Council that came to my house, we being before advertised
that we should be beset, thought it the securest way for those of the Council
to keep them there, not knowing what mischief would ensue.


Attorn. Genesis My Lord, your Grace sees that this is without color or question,
for my Lord Chief Justice has proved it plain, that they would not dissolve
their Company that was up in Arms, being charged upon their Allegiance so to do.


Essex. Good my Lord, know whether it were in my Lord of Southampton's power or
in mine to withhold their purposes so suddenly: For, not long before Sir Walter
Raleigh had sent to my house to have Sir Ferdinando Gorges to come to him to
Durham-House, and we fearing him to be a private Enemy, would not suffer Sir
Ferdinando to go thither, but returned answer, that he would meet him on the
water upon equal terms, where Sir Walter Raleigh used the former Speeches to
Sir Ferdinando Gorges, wishing him to leave our Company, or else he would be
undone; and whereas we are charged to have dealt with Papists, I assure your
Lordship, and it is most true, that Papists have been hired and suborned to
Witness against me, as by the means of one Sudall, who was a Seminary Priest,
and sent into Ireland to deal with Sir Christopher Blunt, whom he thought to be
inward with me, to touch my Honor and Reputation. Then Bales the Scrivener in
the Old Bailey has confessed under his hand to forge and counterfeit my hand in
at least two Letters, and these two honest Gentlemen can witness it.


Attorn. Genesis I by my troth this is true, but it was by the procurement of one
of your own men.


Essex. Thou swearest it, but it is not on a Book; that man thou say I
procured to do it, his name is John Daniel an arrant Thief, one that broke a
Standard of mine, and stole a Casket of my Wives, and many other things. It is
very probable that I should trust him so far, that had before betrayed me, is
it not? But it is well known who set him at work to attempt against me so much
as he has done, to procure my hand to be counterfeited, and yet this man by
your Judgment must be a practiser in such matters by my own consent; well, Mr.
Attorney, I thank God you are not my Judge this day, you are so uncharitable.


Attorn. Genesis Well, my Lord, we shall prove you anon what you are, which your
Pride of Heart, and aspiring Mind has brought you unto.


Essex. Ah! Mr. Attorney, lay your hand upon your Heart, and pray to God to
forgive us both.


Raleigh. That Sir Ferdinando Gorges told me upon the Water, that my Lord of
Essex had put himself into a strong Guard at Essex-house, and this is like to
be the bloodiest day's work that ever was, wishing him to go to Court with
speed for prevention thereof. Then Sir Walter wished Sir Ferdinando Gorges to
refuse their Company, else he would be undone. To this Sir Walter was sworn.


Essex. Whatsoever Sir Walter Raleigh has said, differs altogether from that
which Sir Ferdinando told us at Essex-house upon his Return from the Water.


Attorn. Genesis Well, my Lord, what can you devise to say for Sir John Davis,
another of your Adherents? that Papist, for he has confessed that he is a
Papist and a Catholic, and drawn in by Sir Christopher Blunt, one of your
chiefest Council, and that he called for a Seminary Priest upon his convertment
to absolve him.


Essex. If Sir John Davis were such a man, it cannot be but strange to me to
hear it; although I cannot search into the Secrets of his Heart to accuse him
inwardly, yet I have seen him dutifully come to Prayers, and to the Service of
God in my own House with me, and behaved himself very Godlily, and of this I
can be witness: and as for Blunt (God is my witness) I have been so far from
Popery, as I have so earnestly dealt with him to reform himself, insomuch, that
he has told me, I have been very passionate: But whereas you say we have
committed Treason, first prove that true.


Sergeant Yelvert. Why, my Lord, if you deny the raising the Power, why should
so many men come to your house that day?


Southampt. By your favor, Mr. Sergeant Yelverton, a word I hope; for my
coming thither, it was not strange news, and when I came that same morning to
Essex-house, I protest I had not above ten or twelve men attending me, which
was but my usual company, therefore far from purposing to raise a Tumult.


Attorn. Genesis Why, the reason of that was, for that you thought all London
would have risen with you; but good my Lord, I beseech your Grace to hear the
Oath of Sir Ferdinando Gorges, whose Evidence was read, and himself there in
person did justify the same.


Sir Ferdinando Gorges his Confession.
He deposes, that in January last the Earl of Essex wrote to him a Letter,
wherein he complained grievously of his misfortunes, and the miserable Estate
he stood in, whereof he purposed shortly to free himself; and therefore prayed
Sir Ferdinando Gorges to come up to London to him; who coming accordingly, the
Earl told him how mightily he was crosed and discredited by his private
enemies, which he could not endure; for, says he, I have 120 Earls, Barons,
and Gentlemen that participate in my discontented humor, and will join with
me, and I desire your help and counsel therein. One especial Friend I have in
the Court, whereby I have intelligence from time to time: And I hold our selves
indifferently affected by the Citizens of London, and hope to have a good Party
in Wales: He confessed also that they had two several Meetings at Drury-house
to Consult of these Matters, and the Projects were, whether it were better
first to surprise the Court, or to take the Tower of London, or to stir in the
City. But most agreed first to surprise the Court, and then and there Sir John
Davis took Pen, Ink, and Paper, and set down, That some should keep the Hall,
some the Court-Gates, some the Guard-Chamber, and some the Presence Chamber;
saying, many of the Guard had been the Earl of Essex his Servants, and were
preferred to the Queen by him, and will be more indifferent to deal with than
others, and so my Lord shall have a way through his own Guards to come to the
Privie-Chamber, and the Presence of the Queen. And Sir Ferdinando Gorges said
to the Earl of Essex, Alas, My Lord! what is so small a number of men able to
do in so worthy an Action? and so dissuaded the Earl from surprising the Court,
and rather bade him submit himself to the Queens mercy, than proceed any
further. And that the Earl of Southampton said at Essex-house, Is it not three
Months since this Plot began, and shall we resolve on nothing? Then upon a
sudden they all agreed first to stir in London, where they assured themselves
of great favor: and after the Council was locked up, this Deponent followed
the Troops into London, and after some advice the Earl of Essex sent him back
again with a Token to deliver to the Lord Chief Justice only, by color of
which Token he set at Liberty the Lord Keeper and the rest. Lastly, he
confirmed that he told Sir Walter Raleigh first upon the Thames of my Lord of
Essex his making his House a Guard, and putting his Friends into Arms, as it is
delivered by Sir Walt. Raleigh.

Queens Counc. They desired that the Examination of Sir Cha. Danvers might be
read, which being produced, was then read to this effect:


Sir Charles Danvers's Examination.
He confesses that before Christmas last the Earl of Essex entered into
Consideration, how he might secure himself to have access to the Queens
Presence without resistance, and that the Resolution was agreeable to certain
Articles written with the Earl of Essex his own hand, and sent to the Earl of
Southampton to surprise the Court, and that there were diverse Consultations
about it, and the Points were these: First, to take the Tower, for it would
command London, then to surprise the Court, and after, the Court being taken
and possessed, to have assembled the rest of their Friends, and to have
presented themselves to the Queen; and that being done, and the Guard secured,
Sir Christopher Blunt should keep the outward Gates of the Court, Sir John
Davis the Hall and Watergate, Sir Charles Danvers (this Deponent) should keep
the Presence and Guard-Chamber, and seize upon the Halberts and Pentioners
Battle-Axes. The Intent was to surprise the Captain of the Guard at the Court,
or at his own House, and some others; and then to surprise the City of London:
And that the Earl of Essex resolved (these things being accomplished)
immediately to have called a Parliament to reform Disorders and private
Grievances: That this Deponent utterly disliked of these Courses, and after the
Alarm was given at Court, he persuaded the Earl rather to flee into Wales, or
other parts beyond the Seas for his security, and avoiding the imminent danger
he was fallen into, than to trust to the City. And lastly, he protested, for
his own part, what he had done in the business, was merely for the Love he bore
to the Earl of Southampton, and not for any Malice or private Discontent
otherwise.

[When this was read, Mr. Attorney General produced the Examination of Sir John
Davis, which contained in effect as follows.]

Sir John Davis's Examination.
He says, that the Earl's Purpose was, to possess himself of the Court, and to
take the Tower of London; and that they had several Meetings of Consultation
together with the Earl of Southampton, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Jo. Littleton,
Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir Charles Danvers, and this Deponent. And these
Matters (he confesses) the Earl of Essex set down all with his own Hand, viz.
Sir Christopher Blunt to keep the outward Gate of the Court hismelf* this
Deponent the Hall and Watergate, and Sir Charles Danvers the Presence and
Guard-Chamber; then my Lord of Essex and his Forces would have come by Land,
and so have possessed the presence of the Queen. The question was asked the
Earl of Essex (as this Deponent says) how he would deal with Offenders, and
such as resisted him after he should be possessed of these things. He resolved
them by way of Answer, that he meant to admit them all to an Honorable Trial.

There is another Examination of Sir Christopher Blunt's, I pray let that be
read.

Sir Christopher Blunt's Examination.
He says, that four or five days before the Insurrection in London, the Earl
of Essex set down diverse Articles with his own Hand, with Petitions to the Earl
of Southampton, Sir Charles Danvers, Sir John Davis, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, Jo.
Littleton and this Deponent, which were to the Effect, before remembered; and
further this Deponent remembers, that the Earl of Essex his purpose was,
(after these things should be overpassed and settled) to alter the State of
Government; And further this Deponent confesses himself to be reconciled to
the Pope; and moreover says, that the Earl of Essex said, he looked not that
any should be troubled for Religion and Liberty of Conscience; that he received
Letters from the Earl of Essex the twentieth of January to come to London,
whereupon he came.

The Earl of Rutland's Examination.
He says, that being in London with the Earl of Essex, he heard him cry out
in the Streets, England is bought and sold to the Spaniard; and confesses,
when they had been possessed of London, their Purpose was to have taken the
Lord Keeper with them to the Court, with the Earl of Essex his Company, and
that the Earl of Southampton and Sir John Davies were in special Confederacy
and trust with the Earl of Essex in these Causes. Lastly, That the Earl of
Essex said, he was sure of Sheriff Smith: and this Deponent specially noted,
the Earl of Southampton was very much discontented.

Lord Cromwell's Examination.
He says, he never heard of the matter till the same Sunday-morning; when the
Earl of Essex, coming through Fleet Street, where this Deponent lay, and being
sent for by a man of my Lord's, he came into the Street to him, where my Lord
and diverse of his followers took him by the hand, and bade him welcome, praying
him to go along with him; and the Earl of Essex cried, It is for the good of
the Queen, and of you all, my Masters. First, he went to the Mayor's House, and
then to Sheriff Smith's House; and being in Gracious street, and hearing of the
Proclamation, the Earl of Essex said, Where is the Sheriff? let him bring
Muskets and Pistols; for I am credibly informed out of Ireland, that the
Kingdom of England is sold to the Spaniard: and so upon the Proclamation the
Deponent left him and his Company.

Lord Sands his Examination.
He says, he was sent for, on Sunday-morning, the same day, by the Earl of
Essex, and coming to Essex-house, he found then but a few there; but in a short
time after, came the Earl of Southampton with the rest. This Deponent agrees
in diverse other Circumstances with former Examinations. He confesses, he went
with the Earl into London, and came back with him to Ludgate, and there being
repulsed, he heard my Lord of Essex cry Charge, Charge, and call for his Horse:
and he says, that Sheriff Smith was as far in the Matter as the best of them.

Mr. Attorney. Here Mr. Attorney urged, that there was a Combination; and one
Pashell affirmed the burning of a black Purse by the Earl of Essex, which my
Lord confesses, but says, that there was nothing in it, but a Key of an
Iron-Chest, which he took out, and burnt a Paper in the same Purse, which did
not contain above five or six Lines of secret Matter; and for that he would not
have so much as their Names drawn into question, which were altogether ignorant
of these Occurrents, did throw the Purse and Paper into the fire. And al^o
Pashell confesses further, that when the Earl of Essex came out of London, to
his House, he told them, that he was beloved in the City.


Lord Mounteagle's Examination.
He says, He had no foreknowledge of these Matters, but confesses, he
followed the Earl of Essex down Fleet Street, intending to go to the Mayor, and
so to his House in Seething-Lane. And this Deponent, being with the Earl of
Essex in Gracious Street, confesses, he did hear the Earl (when the Lord
Burleigh came with the Herald of Arms) command some of his Followers, to bid
the Herald stay, for he would not hear him abuse the Queens Name. He says
also, he went back with the Earl to Ludgate, and they were repulsed.

Mr. Attorney. Now, my Lord, I beseech your Grace, and you, my Lords, that be
the Peers, let the due Consideration of these several Examinations and
Depositions enter into your Hearts; and do but note, they have all agreed and
jumped together in each particular point, notwithstanding they were all
severally examined; but I must needs think it the just Judgment of God, in his
mere Mercy toward our Sovereign, to have the Truth so marvellously revealed,
coming from them of their own Accords, without Back or Torture to any of them.


Essex. Mr. Attorney, I answer then this for that point, the self-same Fear,
and the self-same Examiner, may make these several Examinations agree all in
one, were they never so far distant; but good my Lord, let me entreat your
Lordship to consider who they be that testify this against me; My Lord, they
are men within the danger of the Law, and such as speak with a Desire to live,
but I think they have much to answer for between God* and their Souls, and me:
I see they charge me with the Surprising of the Tower; but upon what ground do
they speak? they had only some particular Notes of my Friends names, but ever
very scornfully dashed at me; For when my Friends persuaded me to any course,
this was my purpose; to have come with eight or nine Honorable Persons, who
had just cause of coffeehouse (though not equal with mine) unto her Majesty,
and so by Petition, prostrating our selves at her Majesty's feet, to have put
our selves unto her Mercy; and the Effect of our Desires should have been, that
she would have been pleased to have severed some from her Majesty, who, by
reason of their Potency with her, abused her Majesty's ears with false
Informations: and they were Cobham, Cecil, and Raleigh: For we thought my Lord
Cobham carried himself in such factious and dangerous Courses, as he told her
Majesty many Untruths, which was a principal Cause (as I think) of withdrawing
her Favor from us. And to that intent, to remove such from her Highness (I
confess) was the only Desire we had to present our selves in all humility
before her Majesty, but without any purpose of Hurt to her Highness: for, I
protest before God, I do carry a Reverent and Loyal Duty to her Majesty as any
man in the World. But now, my Lord, seeing that I have heard the Testimony of
Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and himself here in Court to testify it, I will say no
more, but that if it please her Majesty to be merciful unto him, I will be
glad, and pray for it; yet whatsoever he has said, let my Life and his Dealing
testify the truth: and, Sir Ferdinando, speak nothing to touch thy self, and
speak what thou will to me; for I see thou desire to live, yet speak like a
man.


Lord Admiral. I desire, for the better satisfaction of my self and
fellow-Peers, that Gorges might unfold openly what other Secrets have passed
between him and my Lord of Essex, touching the State.


Essex. Ah, my Lord Admiral, assure your self, in faith, no Treason; but yet, I
pray thee, good Sir Ferdinando, speak openly, whatsoever thou do remember,
and with all my Heart I desire thee to speak freely.


Gorges. All that I can remember, I have delivered in my Examination, and
further I cannot say.


Essex. Yes, Ferdinand. If ever you knew any other matter which contained any
Thought of Treason or Disloyalty, speak it; for they are things not to be
forgotten.


Southampton. Good Sir Ferdinando, satisfy the Court, what was intended among
all our Conferences and talk of our Enemies, and Discontentments, and
Consultations, what was our best Course for our Defense against them?


Gorges. Some delivered their minds one way, some another; but, by the Oath I
have taken, I did never know or hear any thought or purpose of Hurt or
Disloyalty intended to her Majesty's Person by my Lord of Essex.


Lord Admiral. I desire to know, for the better satisfaction of my Conscience,
whether my Lord of Essex did at any time deliver out any Articles in Writing
under his hand, therein laying open the Projects of his Purpose for Surprising
the Court and Tower.


Southampton. It was a foolish Action, I must needs confess, the going through
the Town, and that was suddenly passed over; but my Lord's purpose to have men
planted at the Court, was, in regard he feared hindrance by private Enemies,
that would have stopped his passage to the Queen: which, I protest, he intended
to no other end, but to prostrate himself at her Majesty's feet, and submit to
her mercy; as ye have formerly heard.


Cobham. My Lord of Essex (quoth the Lord Cobham, standing up) let me know, I
entreat you, why you lay such Imputations upon me, as you have delivered.


Essex. My Lord, I have forgiven all the World, and therefore you shall not
need to insist upon these Circumstances; for I lay not my Cause upon ought that
shall do your Lordship any harm for my sake; for, I protest, my heart bears you
no Malice, but what I spoke was freely, and in Gods presence, hoping her
Majesty would have heard us and our Complaints, being but true; And I do
further assure your Lordship, that I never spoke it out of Fear of Death, or
Desire of Life.


Bacon. My Lord, may it please your Grace, whatsoever my Lord of Essex has
here denied, in my conceit it seems to be small. I speak not to any ordinary
Jury, but to Prudent, Grave, and Wise Peers: And this I must needs say; It is
evident that you, my Lord of Essex, had planted a Pretense in your heart
against the Government; and now, under color of Excuse, you must lay the Cause
upon particular Enemies. You put me in remembrance of one Pisistratus, that was
come into a City, and doting upon the Affections of the Citizens unto him (he
having a Purpose to procure the Subversion of a Kingdom, and wanting Aid for
the accomplishing Humor) thought it the surest means for the winning of the
hearts of the Citizens unto him, and so in that Hope entered the City, and cut
his Body over-thwart, to the end they might conjecture he had been in danger:
and so by this Means held the same Conceit as you and your Accomplices did,
entering the City of London, persuading your selves, if they had undertaken your
Cause, all would have gone well on your side. And now, my Lord, all you have
said, or can say, in answer to these Matters, are but Shadows; and therefore,
methinks, it were your best course to Confess, and not to Justify.


Essex. May it please your Lordship, I must plead Mr. Bacon for a Witness; for
when the course of private Persecution was in hand, and most assailed me, then
Mr. Bacon was the man that proffered me means to the Queen, and drew a Letter in
my name, and in his Brother Sir Nicholas Bacon's name, which Letter he purposed
to show the Queen, and Gosnal was the man that brought them unto me; wherein I
did see Mr. Bacon's hand pleaded as orderly, and appointed them out that were
my Enemies, as directly as might be; which Letters I know Mr. Secretary Cecil
has seen, and by him it will appear what Conceit he held of me, and no
otherwise than he here colors and pleads the Contrary.


Bacon. My Lord, I spent more hours to make you a good Subject, than upon any
man in the World besides; but since you have stirred up this Point my Lord; I
dare warrant you this Letter will not blush: for I did but perform the part of
an honest man, and ever labored to have done you good, if it might have been,
and to no other end: for what I intended for your good, was wished from the
Heart, without Touch of any man's Honor.


Essex. Well my Lord, I do here protest before the Living God, that an
Honorable Grave and Wise Councellor has lamented and grieved at the Courses
he has seen taken, and therewith has wished himself often dead, and this I
speak upon Credible and Honorable Information; but I can prove thus much from
Sir Robert Cecil's own mouth; that he, speaking to one of his
Fellow-Councellors, should say, that none in the world but the Infanta of Spain
had Right to the Crown of England.


Here Sir Robert Cecil stepped forth into the Court (having kept himself
private till then) and humbly desired Leave to speak to Essex.

Sir Rob. Cecil. The Difference between you and me is great; for I speak in the
Person of an honest man, and you, my Lord, in the Person of a Traitor: For well
I know, you have it at Will. The Pre-eminence has been yours, but I have
Innocence, Truth of Conscience, and Honesty to defend me against the Scandal of
slanderous Tongues, and aspiring Hearts; and I protest before God, I have loved
your Person, and justified your Virtues; and I appeal to God and the Queen,
that I told Her Majesty, your Afflictions would make you a fit Ser-Servant for
her. And had not I seen your ambitious Affections inclined to Usurpation, I
could have gone on my Knees to Her Majesty to have done you good; but you have
a Sheep's Garment in Show, and in Appearance are humble and Religious; but God
be thanked we know you; for indeed your Religion appears by Blunt, Davies and
Tresham, your chiefest Counselors for the present, and by promising Liberty of
Conscience hereafter. I stand for Loyalty, which I never lost, you stand for
Treachery wherewith your Heart is possessed; and you charge me with high
things, wherein I defy you to the uttermost. You, my good Lords, Counselors
of State have many Conferences, and I do confess I have said the King of Scots
is a Competitor, and the King of Spain a Competitor, and you I have said are a
Competitor; you would depose the Queen, you would be King of England, and call
a Parliament. Ah my Lord, were it but your own Case the loss had been the less;
but you have drawn a number of Noble Persons and Gentlemen of Birth and Quality
into your Net of Rebellion, and their Bloods will cry Vengeance against you.
For my part, I vow to God, I wish my Soul was in Heaven and my Body at rest, so
this had never been.


Essex. Ah Mr. Secretary, I thank God for my humbling, that you in the Ruff of
your Bravery came to make your Oration against me here this day.


Cecil. My Lord, I humbly thank God that you did not take me for a fit
Companion for you and your Humors, for if you had, you would have drawn me to
betray my Sovereign, as You have done; but I would have you name the
Counselor you speak of, name him, name him, name him if you dare, if you
dare, I defy you, name him if you dare.


Essex. Here stands an Honorable Person (meaning the Earl of Southampton) that
knows I speak no Fables; he heard it as well as I.


Cecil. Then my Lord of Southampton, I adjure you by the Duty you owe to God,
Loyalty and Allegiance you owe to your Sovereign, by all tokens of true
Christianity, and by the ancient Friendship and Acquaintance once between us,
that you name the Counselor.


Southamp. Mr. Secretary, If you will needs have me name the Counselor, it
was Mr. Comptroller; whereupon the Secretary falling down upon his Knees, said,
I thank God for this day, and upon his Knee, desired the Lord High Steward,
that a Gentleman of the Privy Chamber, (or one that might have Access to the
Queen) might go, and humbly entreat Her Highness to command Mr. Comptroller to
come before your Grace.


Here the Lord High Steward calling Mr. Knevet (a Gentleman of Her Majesty's
Privy Chamber) said unto him, go Mr. Knevet unto Her Majesty, and let Her
understand Mr* Secretaries Demand.

Cecil. Mr. Knevet, You shall have free Access unto Her Majesty, tell Her, that
I vow before the God of Heaven, that if she refuse to send Mr. Comptroller,
whereby I may clear my self of these open Scandals; I will rather die at her
Foot, (as her Subject and Vassal) than live to do her any more Service in this
Honorable Degree, wherein her Highness employs me. And withal, let me adjure
you Mr. Knevet, that you do not acquaint Mr. Comptroller with the Cause why you
come for him. Mr. Knevet went, and not long after returned with Mr.
Comptroller, to whom the Lord High Steward repeated the Cause why he was sent
for, and desired him to satisfy the Lords, whether Mr. Secretary did use any
such Speech in his Hearing, or to his knowledge.


Mr. Comptroller. I remember that once in Mr. Secretaries Company, there was a
Book read, that treated of such matters; but I did never hear Mr. Secretary use
any such words, or to that effect; whereupon Mr. Secretary thanked God, that
though the Earl stood there as a Traitor, yet he was found an honest man, and a
faithful Subject; withal saying, I beseech God to forgive you for this open
wrong done unto me, as I do openly pronounce, I forgive you from the bottom of
my Heart.


Essex. And I, Mr. Secretary, do clearly and freely forgive you with all my
Soul; because I mean to die in Charity.


Bacon. My Lord, you may now perceive that my Lord of Essex went about to
procure matter, and to give over on the instant.


Southamp. Well, I beseech your Lordship, let me satisfy your Lordship and the
rest thus much, that for my own part, I did never know the Laws. Now to show
the Causes that made me adventure so far as I did: The first occasion that made
me adventure into these Courses, was the Affinity betwixt my Lord of Essex and
me, I being of his Blood, and marrying his Kinswoman; so that for his sake, I
should have hazarded my Life: But what I have by my forwardness offended in
Act, I am altogether ignorant, but in Thought I am assured never. And if
through my Ignorance, in the Law I have offended, yet I humbly submit my self
to Her Majesty, and from the bottom of my Heart do beg Her Gracious Pardon if
it please Her; and I hope that neither your Lordship nor any of the Peers will
hold any of the former Resolutions spoken of by these Orators, for any
Certainty which depends no otherwise than one upon another. For if any foolish
Speeches have passed, I protest, as I shall be saved, that they were never
purposed by me, nor understood to be so purposed by me, to the Hurt of Her
Majesty's Person.


Essex. I beseech your Lordship to understand me, and assure your self, that
what I now speak, is not with any Desire (I protest) to spare one Drop of my
Blood; and because some Honorable Persons are interessed in the Cause, I would
(under favor) signify, because the Point has been so much urged by Mr.
Attorney, that at our Being in London when we were past Paul's, word was brought
me, that the Chain was drawn at Ludgate, and that my Lord of Cumberland was
there; which when I heard, I was right glad: for if there had been Cause, I
would have been glad to have put my self into so Honorable a Persons Hands as
his; but it was a false Report, for my Lord was not then come thither. After
which I went to Sheriff Smith's House, and after my coming thither, I sent the
Sheriff and Mr. Alderman Wats to my Lord Mayor, desiring him to come to us; if
he would not, to send four of his Aldermen to see if we demeaned our selves
Loyally, with Intent to put our selves into their Hands to use us as they
would, or to put us into any Prison; yet in regard of our private Enemies, and
the Fear of their Treachery, we desired them to shut their Gates; and this was
the end for which we went into the City.


Attorn. My Lord, if you had no other Purpose, why did you go into
Gracious-street and Fanchurch-street, crying out all the way you went, England
is bought and sold to the Spaniard?


Southamp. Mr. Attorn. I protest (as I hope to have mercy in Heaven) I never
heard my Lord speak any such Word, neither did I hear of the Proclamation you
speak of, made by my Lord Burleigh and the Herald at Arms; neither did I see
them, and I deny (my Soul and Conscience bearing me Witness) that I ever knew
of any Intent and Meaning, or did ever mean or intend any Treason, Rebellion or
other Action against my Sovereign or the State; but only what I did, was to
assist my Lord of Essex in his private Quarrel; and fore Mr. Attorney you have
urged the matter very far, and you wrong me therein, my Blood be upon your
head. As for my Lord of Rutl. whereas he infers against me to be a persuader
and inviter of my Lord of Essex to these Actions, he wrongeth me exceedingly;
for he was never the man that saw me once discontented, and therefore had small
ground or reason so to say. And you Mr. Attorney, whereas you charge me for a
Papist, I protest most unfeignedly, I was never conversant with any of that
sort; I only knew one White a Priest that went up and down the Town, yet did I
never Converse with him in all my life.


Essex. My Lord, and you that be our Peers, I beseech you give me hearing thus
far, not that I will speak it for the safeguard of my life, but with this my
desire I charge the Souls of all them that be our Censurers or Triars, because
out of a Form and Custom of speaking, these Orators would make them more odious
that come to the Bar, that I may not be thought to have done this upon
revenge: for within these few days I purposed to have received the Communion,
to be a testimony that I was far from bearing of Malice to any, not so much as
to my private Enemies. But the falling out between the Earl of Southampton and
the Lord Gray happening on a Sunday, hindered my Intent; for so soon as I knew
of it, I found my affections to stir on it exceedingly; yet I have since that
time labored and by my Prayers to God earnestly desired, that I might be armed
with Patience to endure all afflictions. And here I protest before the
ever-living God, as he may have Mercy on me, That my Conscience is clear from
any Disloyalty, Thought or Harm to Her Majesty; and my Desire ever has been
to be free from bloodshed, as Mr. Dove can witness. But if in all my Thoughts
and Purposes I did not ever desire the good Estate of my Sovereign and Country
as to my own Soul, I beseech the Lord then show some Mark upon me and my Soul
in this place, for a just Vengeance of my Untruths to all the World. And God
which knows the Secrets of all Hearts, knows that I never sought the Crown
of England, nor ever wished to be a higher degree than a Subject. I greatly
endeavored to have brought my Conscience to Peace, only by seeking to secure
my Access to the Presence of the Queen, that I might speedily have unfoulded my
Griefs unto Her Majesty against my private Enemies, but not to have shed one
drop of their blood: And this, my Lord, I speak, to the end I might put off all
imputation of being an Hypocrite or an Atheist; for I was never Papist, neither
did I ever favor any Sectary (as my Lord of Canterbury knows, and can
testify:) for my Religion it is sound, and as I live I mean to die in it.


Bacon. Well my Lord, may it please your Grace, you may see how weakly he has
shadowed his purpose, and how slenderly he has answered the Objections against
him. But my Lord, doubting that too much variety of Matter may minister
occasion of forgetfulness, I will only trouble your Lordships remembrance with
this only Point, rightly comparing this Rebellion of my Lord of Essex to the
Duke of Guises, that came upon the Barricadoes at Paris in his Dublet and Hose
attended upon with 8 men; but his Confidence in the City was such, (even as my
Lord's was) but when he had delivered himself so far, and that the shallowness
of his own Conceit could not accomplish what he expected, the King for his
defense taking Arms against him, he was glad to yield himself, thinking to
color his pretents, turned his practices, and alleged the occasion thereof to
be a private Quarrel.


Essex. My Lord, I must confess it was my fault to stand out and to maintain my
House with defense and resisting; but I will not deny but that my Lord of
Southampton and Sir Charles Danvers did persuade me to Parley with my Lord
General, which I hope your Lordship will remember I did yield upon some
indifferent Terms and Conditions; Which were, first, That I might have an
Honorable Trial. Secondly, That I might deliver my Griefs my self to the
Queen. Thirdly, That I might go in safety. Fourthly, That I might have my
Minister with me. And lastly, (which I chiefly beg of Her Majesty,), That she
would be pleased to redeem some that were with me in the House, and guiltless
for Knowledge, Intent or Action, of what was by me purposed. All which I thought
good to remember, and so humbly submit the same to* Her Majesty's gracious
Pleasure.


Sergeant at Arms. Then Proclamation was made. Lieutenant of the Tower,
withdraw your Prisoners from the Bar. They being removed, the Lords and Peers
went together into a private place made of purpose behind the Canopie and Chair
of Estate; then the Two Chief Judges and the Lord Chief Baron were sent for in
to them to deliver their Opinions in Law: After half an hour they came all out
again, and each man took his place; which being done, the Sergeant at Arms
begun at the punie Lord, and called Thomas Lord Howard, who stood up
bare-headed; then said the Lord High Steward,


Lo. Steward. My Lord Thomas Howard, Whether is Robert Earl of Essex guilty of
this Treason whereupon he has been Indicted, as you take it upon your Honor,
or no?


Lo. Tho. Howard. Whereupon the Lord Thomas Howard made answer, bending his
Body and laying his Left Hand upon his Right Side, said, Guilty, my Lord, of
High Treason. After which manner all the Peers found him guilty one after
another from the Punie to the highest, and so delivered in like sort upon their
Honors. Being called over anew, they found Henry Earl of Southampton guilty of
High Treason also.


Sergeant at Arms. Then the Sergeant at Arms commanded the Lieutenant of the
Tower to bring his Prisoners to the Bar again.


Clerk of the Crown. Then the Clerk of the Crown speaking first to the Earl of
Essex, said, Robert Earl of Essex, you have been Arraigned and Indicted of High
Treason, you have pleaded Not Guilty, and for your Trial you have put your self
upon God and your Peers; the Peers here (who have heard the Evidence and your
Answer in your defense) have found you Guilty: Now what can you say for your
self, why you should not have Judgment of Death?


Essex. I only say this, That since I have committed that which has brought
me within the compass of the Law, I may be counted the Law's Traitor in
offending the Law, for which I am willing to die, and will as willingly go
thereto as ever did any: But I beseech your Lordship, and the rest of the Lords
here, to have consideration of what I have formerly spoken, and do me the right
as to think me a Christian, and that I have a Soul to save, and that I know it
is no time to jest; lying and counterfeiting my Soul abhors: for I am not
desperate nor void of Grace now to speak falsely. I do not speak to save my
life; for that I see were vain; I owe God a death, which shall be welcome, how
soon soever it pleases Her Majesty. And to satisfy the Opinion of the World,
that my Conscience is free from Atheism and Popery, howsoever I have been in
this Action misled to transgress the Points of the Law in the Course and
Defense of private Matters, and whatsoever through the weakness of my Wit and
dullness of Memory, or through violent Courses, (if there be any violent that
seek either life or death;) or if I have omitted or may have uttered any thing
otherwise, yet I will live and die in the Faith and true Religion which here I
have professed.


Clerk of the Crown. Then the Clerk of the Crown demanded of Henry Earl of
Southampton, What he could say for himself, why Judgment of Death should not be
pronounced against him?


Southampton. My Lords, I must say for my part as I have said before, That
since the ignorance of the Law has made me incur the danger of the Law, I
humbly submit my self to Her Majesty's Mercy; and therefore my Lord High
Steward, and my Lord Admiral, I beseech you both, that seeing you are Witnesses
I am Condemned by the letter of the Law, it would please you to let the Queen
know that I Crave her Mercy. I know I have offended her, yet if it please her
to be Merciful unto me, I may live, and by my Service deserve my life. I have
been brought up under Her Majesty, I have spent the best part of my Patrimony
in Her Majesty's Service with danger of my life, as your Lordships know; if
there were any that could challenge me, that I have ever heretofore committed
or intended Treason, or any other thing prejudicial to Her Majesty or Estate,
God let me never inherit his Kingdom, neither would I desire Mercy: but since
the Law has Cast me, I do submit my self to death, and yet I will not despair
on her Majesty's Mercy; for that I know she is Merciful, and if she please to
extend it, I shall with all humility receive it.


Lord Steward. My Lord of Essex, the Queen's Majesty has bestowed many
Favors on your Predecessors and your Self; I would wish therefore that you
likewise would submit your self to Her Majesty's Mercy, acknowledging your
Offenses, and reconciling your self inwardly to Her Majesty, by laying open
all Matters that were intended to prejudice Her Majesty, and the Actors
thereof; and thereby no doubt you shall find Her Majesty Merciful.


Essex. My Lord, you have made an honorable Motion; do but send to me at the
time of my death, and you shall see how penitent and humble I will be toward
her Majesty, both in acknowledging her exceeding Favors to my Ancestors, and
to my self; whereby I doubt not but the penitent suffering of my Death, and
sprinkling of my Blood, will quench the evil conceited Thoughts of Her Majesty
against me. And I do most humbly desire Her Majesty, that my Death may put a
period to my Offenses committed, and be no more remembered by her Highness. If I
had ever perceived any of my Followers to have harbored an evil thought
against her Majesty, I would have been the first that should have punished the
same in being his Executioner; and therefore I beseech you, my good Lord,
mistake me not, nor think me so proud, that I will not crave her Majesty's
Mercy, for I protest (kneeling upon the very knee of my heart) I do crave her
Majesty's Mercy with all humility; yet I had rather die than live in Misery.

Then the Lord High Steward, after a few exhortations unto the Earls to prepare
themselves for God, told them, seeing the Law had found them Guilty, it
followed of course that he must proceed to Judgment.

The Earl of Essex replied very cheerfully, and said, yea, my Lord, with a very
good will, I pray you go on.

Then the Lord High Steward gave Judgment as follows:

You must go to the place from whence you came, and there remain during Her
Majesty's pleasure, from thence to be drawn on a Hurdle through London Streets,
and so to the place of Execution, where you shall be hanged, bowelled, and
quartered; your Head and Quarters to be disposed of at Her Majesty's pleasure,
and so God have mercy on your Souls.


Essex. My Lord, I am not a whit dismayed to receive this Sentence, for I
protest Death is as welcome to me as Life, and I shall die as cheerful a death
upon such a testimony as ever did man. And I think it fit my poor Quarters that
has done her Majesty true Service in diverse parts of the world should be
sacrificed and disposed of at her Majesty's pleasure; whereunto with all
willingness of heart I have submitted my self. But, one thing I beg of you my
Lords that have free access to her Majesty's person, humbly to beseech her
Majesty to grant me that (during the short time I shall live) that I may have
the same Preacher to comfort me, that has been with me since my troubles
began, for as he that has been long sick is most desirous of the Physician
which has been and is best acquainted with the Constitution of his Body; so do
I most wish to have the comfort and Spiritual Physic from the Preacher which
has bin and is acquainted with the inward griefs and secret affections of my
Soul. And my last request shall be only this, that it will please her Highness
that my Lord Thomas Howard and the Lieutenant of the Tower may be partakers
with me in receiving the Sacrament, and be a witness of it in token of what I
have protested to be true in this life, for my Loyalty, Religion, and peace of
Conscience, and then whenever it shall please her Majesty to call me, I shall
be ready to seal the same with my blood.

The Lords promised they would move the Queen for his requests.


Essex. I humbly thank your Lordships.

Then the Sergeant at Arms stood up with the Mace on his shoulder, and after
Proclamation was made, said thus: All Peers that were summoned to be here this
day, may now take their ease, and all other Persons attending here this Service
may depart in her Majestice Peace, for my Lord High Steward is pleased to
dissolve this Commission.

As the Lords were rising, the Earl of Essex said, My Lord De la Ware, and my
Lord Morley, I beseech your Lordships, pardon me for your two Sons that are in
trouble for my sake. I protest upon my Soul they knew not of any thing that was
or should have been done, but came to me in the morning, and I desired them to
stay, and they knew not wherefore. And so Farewell, my Lords.


His Epitaph.
There sleeps great Essex, Darling of Mankind,
Fair Honors Lamp, foul Envies prey, Arts fame,
Natures pride, Virtues Bulwark, lure of Mind.
Wisdoms Flower, Valors Tower, Fortunes shame,
England's Sun, Belgia's light, France's Star, Spain's thunder,
Lisbon's lightning, Ireland's cloud, the whole Worlds Wonder.
FINIS.

