A PLEASANT COMEDY, Entitled HEY FOR HONESTY, DOWN WITH KNAVERY.

Translated out of Aristophanes his Plutus, By THO: RANDOLPH.

Augmented and Published by F. I.

Dives Fabula sum satis superque*
At Pauper satis and super Poeta.
London, Printed in the Year 1651.

TO THE Truly Virtuous and Accomplished Gent.
The Publisher of this COMEDY wishes Health and Happiness everlasting.

Noble Gent.
IT was the happiness of my stars, to have known you long ago, as the very
Eye of our Garden of England; all which both admire and love you: And it is the
height of my ambition, to salute your hands, that love Honesty, with the
Comedical advancement of Honesty. I am confident, what Aristophanes and his
Translator have pencill'd in this kind, you love to own, though drawn out in a
weak Sciography. But you had rather see it performed in men's lives, then
personated on the Stage; rather represented in action, then acted in
speculative representations. I crave your courteous Patronage, sufficient
Panoply even against Envy it self. I prostrate it to your judicious Test (at
vacant hours) to approve of, and of my self too, who am

Your humble Servant and Admirer, F. I.

The Preface to the Reader.
READER,
THis is a pleasant Comedy, though some may judge it Satirical: It Is the more
like Aristophanes the Father: besides, if it be biting, it is a biting Age we
live in; Then biting for biting. Again, Tom Randal, the Adopted Son of Ben
Johnson, being the Translator hereof, followed his Fathers steps; They both of
them loved Sack, and harmless Mirth, and here they show it; and I (that know
my self) am not averse from it neither. This I thought good to acquaint thee
with. Farewell.

Thine, F. I.

To his worthy Friend, F. I. On the setting forth of this excellent COMEDY.
TO join things so divided in this Age,
Shows thy rare masterpiece of Wit right sage.
Out of the Athenian-Sea to draw it forth,
Commends not only learned skill, but worth.
I mean both Honesty and Wealth: so rare
Do these two Planets in Conjunction share
Of one man's breast: Their diverse Aspects shine
Malign (like Saturn) in Sextile or Trine,
To each ingenuous soul. I know, our Nation
Would fain obscure this luminous Constellation:
But thou have rescued it and set it free,
In the bright Orb of Ingenuitie.
Go on brave soul! let each Heroic spirit
Know it is allied to Riches as by merit.
Vindicate them: while Muck-worm-minded men
Feel the sharp dint of thy incensed Pen.
Doom them to Dunghils; and thy potent scorn
Not lend them hose to put on head or horn!
G. P.

The Argument or Subject of the Comedy.
CHremylus an honest decayed Gentleman, willing to become rich, repaireth to
the Oracle of Apollo to enquire how he might compass his design: The Oracle
enjoyneth him to follow that man whom he first met with, and never part from
his company. The man he met is the old blind God of Wealth disguised. After
this, Chremylus calls his poor (but honest) Neighbors to partake of his
happiness. The honest party rejoice at the news; Rascals only and vicious
persons are discontented. Plutus is led to the Temple of Esculapius, by whose
art and help he recovereth his eyesight. At this Knaves are even mad, they
m^rmure and complain exceedingly. Likewise the Goddess Poverty, that aforetime
had great power in the Land, complains that her scepter is almost broken to
pieces: thereupon she raises wars, but is rou^ed; she also is vanquished in
disputation of the necessity of Poverty. Knaves again salute Weeping-crosse, as
well as Pennylesse-bench. Nay, the Pope himself is even starved. Lastly, to
vex them more, the God of Wealth is introduced married to Honesty.

The Actors Names.
Scene, London.

Plutus, the God wealth. Chremylus, an honest decayed Gentleman. Carrion his
servant. Blepsidemus, Friend to Chremylus. Four Country Swains.
Scrape-all. Stiff. Clodpole. Lackland.
Dull-pate, Son to Scrape-all. Chremyla Wise to Chremylus. Honesty, Daughter
to a Scrivener. Clip-latine, a poor Curate. Dicaeus, a rich Parson.
Penia-pennilesse, Goddess of Poverty: Soldiers.
Caradock. Brun. Higgen. Termook.
Mercurius, God of Theft. Gogle, an Amsterdam-man. Never-good, a Sequest^ator.
Jupiters Vicar, the Pope. Boy, servant to Gogle. Neanias, a young Gallant.
Anus, an Old woman. Aristophanes, the Poet. Translator, T. R. A crew of
Tinkers, etc. Ghost of Cleon.
Hey for Honesty, down with Knavery.
Act. 1.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Plutus stumbling on the Stage, after him Chremylus and Carrion* Carrion.
OBonny Jove, and the rest of the b^on gods that dwell in the Tipling-house of
Olympus! There be metals and hard things in the world, but nothing so hard as
to be bound Prentise in Bedlam, and have a Fool to ones Master: my very Livery
is faced with his Worships foolery. Our condition is miserable; for if our
Masters but dine at the Ordinary of mischief, the poor Serving-man is sure to
be fed with the scraps of misfortune: We must share of our Masters misery, we
are but Tenants, they will not let us be Freeholders to the petty Lordships of
our own corpusculous Fortune; damnable Fortune! how fatally have thou sold the
tenure of us, to him that will pay us our wages! It Is very true that I tell
you: And now see the perverse effects of all. O how I could cuff Apollo! I have
a quarrel to Apollo, that wryleg'd, ridling, fidling god, that snorts out
Oracles from his gilded brundlet. They say, this same Gaffer Phoebus is a good
Mountebanck, and an excellent Musician; but a deuse on him, it does not seem
so, he has sent my Master home so sick of Melancholy, that I da^e swear, this
scurvy Tom Piper of D^lphos did not play him so much as one fit of mirth, not a
lig or Sellengers-round. And now see how he follows a blind Puppy in the tail,
contrary to Law or Reason: For we that have our eyes should lead, not follow the
blind. The very Dog in the Chronicles, that had his eyes, stood upon his royal
Prerogative, of going before the blind Beggar of Bednal-green. Nor can he be
content to do it himself, but he must make me too guilty of the same
ignorance. If I but ask him a question, he has not so much manners as my
Granam's Sow; I cannot get him to grunt me an answer: yet I cannot choose but
speak, though my hedge of Teeth were a Quick-set, my tongue would through. You
sir, that say you are my Master, if you do not tell me why we follow this
blundring guide, be sure, I will never leave vexing and tormenting you: you
shall tell me, that you shall.


Chr. O the Age we live in! Sir, quintessence of impudence! To what a fine
pass are you arrived?


Car. Nay it is even so Sir: Your sword and buckler man must take the wit upon
him for once.


Chr. But if you do not learn your distance b^er; look, is not here a
Crabtree-Cudgel* beware of weeping-Crosse.


Car. Master, I am priviledg'd: Do you see my Feather? so long as I wear this,
it is Shrove-tuesday with us Prentises, perpetual Shrove-tuesday.


Chr. But if I take off your Feather, then we shall have you presently
crest-fa^'n, and then my Crabtree Tutor here may read a Lecture of Ethics to
your saucy Shoulders.


Car. Why, and if it do sir; you shall find that I have as valiant Shoulders
as another man. Come exercise your cudgel: You Masters are like Roman
Magistrates, you have Rods of authority; yet try, see whether you or I will be
first weary. Come you Trifle, all the Cudgels in Christendom, Kent, or
New England, shall never make me quiet, till you show me who this is we follow.
Why, sweethoney, sugar-cinnamon, delicate Master, if I did not wish you well,
do you think I would be so inquisitive? In dud la you must tell me, and I shall
be satisfied.


Chr. Well, I have not the power to conceal thee any longer; for of all my
servants, thou art so trusty, true-hearted, faithful and honest, that I dare
swear there is not an arranter theif amongst 'um.


Car. Now heaven bless your Worship. I have always had your Worships
commendations, pray Jove I may deserve it! Proceed good Sir.


Chr. Well, thus it is: In the days of my folly, I was a just, precise, and
honest man.


Car. 'Twas in the days of your folly you were a Precisian, I my self was
almost half a one once, but I am converted.


Chr. Well, being honest, I was by natural consequence very poor.


Car. Who knew not that? Though I know not what your honesty was; yet I am
sure there is never a gut in my belly but may swear for your poverty. Nay, and
you had no more wit then to be honest in this wise age, 'twere pity but you
should live and dye a beggar.


Chr. But others, such as your demure Cheaters,


Car. That have the true gogle of Amsterdam;


Chr. With some corrupted Law-gowns, Ployde^s Pupils.


Car. That can plead on both sides for Fees;


Chr. With Round-headed Citizens, and Cuckolds,


Car. I sir, and Townsmen.


Chr. These, I say, grew rich the while.


Car. Damnable rich. Faith, master, such miracles have not ceased in these
days: I have known many in these times have grown rich out of a poor estate,
the devil knows how not I.


Chr. Therefore I repaired to Delphos to ask counsel of Apollo, because I saw
my self almost arrived at Gravesend, to know if I should bring up my son
suitable to the thriving trades of this age we live in, viz. to be a
Sequestrator, or Pettifogger, or Informer, or Flatterer, or belonging to
Knights o'th Post, or a Committee-mans. Clark, or some such excellent (...),
clothing himself from top to toe in knavery, without a welt or guard of
goodness about him. For I see, as the times go now, such thriving education
will be the richest portion I can leave him*


Car. I Sir, leave but your son, the legacy of Dishonesty, and J will
warrant him he shall out-thrive all Westminster Hall, and all --

To your demand what did Don Phoebus mutter?
What answer through his Laurel-garland stutter?

Chr. You shall hear. He bid me in plain terms, whomsoever I first met
withal, him I should follow, and never leave his company till he came home.


Car. And was this piece of darkness the first you met with? Now in my
conscience he was begot at midnight, goodman Midnight, and retains the quality
of the season. None to meet but Blind-man-buffe, that winks at all faults!


Chr. This is the very man.


Car. Troth, and he may tell you your fortune, Gypsie-like, and all out of your
pockets too; He may show you your destiny: He looks like one of the blind
whelps of my old Lady Chance. Ha, ha, ha! Master, though you be born to lands,
I see a poor Servingman may have as large inheritance of wit as a Justice of
Peace. Why, and't please your Ignorance, any man of brains might easily
understand the Gods meaning: why, he bids you bring up your son to claim the
grand Charter of the City, viz. to be as arrant a Knave as his Countrymen. For
truly,

A blind man may see, though he never see more,
That the way to be honest, is the way to be poor.

Chr. The Oracle does not tend that way; there is some greater mystery in it,
if this old Cupid would but tell us who he is. Come let us follow him close,
perchance we may find out some other meaning.


Car. On other meaning perchance we may pitch.
This is the way to be weary, though not to be rich.

Music. Exeunt ambo. Act. 1. Scaen. 2.
Enter Chremylus, Carrion. Car. Master, we have run a terrible long wild-goose
chase after this blind Beetle: for my part I sweat every inch of me, one drop
fetches another. As for my shoes, you must needs give me a new pair. Their
ungodly souls are even ready to depart, they are giving up the ghost: And yet
we walk like the emblem of silence; we have not put our blind Gentleman Usher
to any interrogatories. You sir, Homer the second! first I command you in fair
terms tell us who you are: if commands will not serve the turn, my cudgel shall
entreat you.


Chr. You were best tell us quickly too.


Plu. I tell you, the Devil take you.


Car. Do you hear what he says, master? The good old Gentleman bids your
Worship good morrow.


Chr. He speaks to thee that asked him so clownishly. Sir, if you like the
behavior of a civil Gentleman, do me in courtesy the favor as to tell me who
you are.


Plu. Why, all the Devils in hell, and as many more confound thee too.


Car. Nay, nay, take him to you, master: keep your Apollo's Oracle to your
self; I have no share in it.


Chr. Now if thou do not tell me, by Ceres I will use thee like a Villain as
thou art.


Plu. Good Gentlemen, let me be beholding to you for one infinite favor.


Chr. What Is that?


Plu. Why, to let me be rid of your company.


Car. Master, be ruled by a wiser man then your self, for once, and follow my
counsel: Let us take this same old Appius, that has lost the use of his natural
spectacles, and carry him to the top of the castle-hill, and there leave him to
tumble down and break his neck ere he come to the bottom.


Chr. Let it be quickly then.


Car. I, and then we will leave him to be hanged the next Assizes, for being a
cessory to his own death.


Plu. Nay, good merciful Gentlemen!


Car. Will you tell us then, you Owl?


Chr. You Bird of the Night, will you tell us?


Plu. I will never tell you: for if you but once know who I am, ten thousand to
one but you will do me some mischief, you will never let me go.


Chr. By heaven we will, if you please.


Plu. List then and give ear: for, as far as I can see, being blind, I am
constrained to tell what I thought to have concealed. I am Plutus the rich God
of wealth: my father was Pinch-back True-penny, the rich Usurer of Islington;
my mother, Mrs. Silverside, an Aldermans widow: I was born in Golden-Lane,
christened at the Mint in the Tower; Banks the Conjurer, and old Hobson the
Carrier were my godfathers.


Car. As sure as can be, this Plutus God of wealth is a pure Welsh-man, born
with his pedigree in his mouth, he speaks it so naturally. I Will lay my life he
was beg^t and bred in the Silver-mine that Middleton found in Wales.


Chr. Thou had bin a very Rascal, if thou had not told us thy name had
been Plutus the God of wealth.


Car. God of wealth! art thou he? O let me kiss thy silver-Jolls!


Chr. Thou art welcome to me too. But art thou Plutus God of wealth, and so
miserably arrayed! O Phoebus, Apollo, O gods and devils, and Jupiter to boot!
Art thou Plutus the rich son and heir to Pinchback True-penny!


Plu. I am he my self.


Car. But art thou sure that thou thy self art thy self? art thou he?


Plu. I am the self-same Plutus Rich, the self-same son and heir to the
self-same Pinch-back True-penny: marry till my eyes are open, I shall never be
heir apparent.


Chr. I, but how came thou so miserable nasty?


Plu. Forth from Patrochus den, from Hell at Westminster; conversing with some
Black ones there, whose faces since their baptism has not been washed.


Chr. And why go thou so lamentably poor?


Plu. Jupiter envying the good of miserable mortals, put me poor soul into
these dismal dumps.


Chr. Upon what occasion, pray thee.


Plu. Jle tell you,
In the minority of my youthful days
J took a humor, an ingenious humor,
To flee the company of Rogues and Raseals,
And unto honest men betake my self.
Jupiter spying this (mere out of envy)
Put out my eyesight, that J might not know
Knaves from the honest, but to them might go.

Chr. Was this from Jove? why none but honest men,
Honor his deity.

Plu. Why what of that? this heathen god accepts
As well the Pilgrim-salve of wicked men,
As the religious incense of the honest.
Thus does the Letcherous god, that has already
Cuckoldiz'd half the world, and placed his bastards
By mortals fires, envy virtuous minds.

Chr. To leave off versifying, if thou had thy eyesight,
Would thou be true to fly from vicious persons?

Plut. I* I protest I would.


Chr. And wholly employ thy eyes to pious uses.
To go to'th' company of honest and ingenuous souls.

Plut. Only to them; for I have not seen so much as one of them this many a
day.


Car. Why, what if you have not, you blind Puppy-dog? What a wonder's that?
Why, I that have as good Eyes as any man in the company, can hardly find many:
They have more wit now a days then go abroad openly. Virtue by that means
would become too cheap and common. I remember, J saw one once, but he died
young for grief, that he had not wit enough to be a Knave; every one laughed at
him for being out of Fashion. Had he lived till now, J would h'showed him at
Fleet-bridge for a Monster. J should have beggered the Beginnning 'oth' World;
The strange Birds from America, and the Poppets too. J would have blown a
Trumpet Tarantara, If any man or woman in Town or City be affected with strange
miracles, let them repair bither. Here within this place is to be seen a
strange Monster; A man that has both his Ears, and but one Tongue; that cannot
carry two Faces under one hood; that has but one couple of Hands, and on each
Hand five honest Fingers. And what is more strange, he has but one Heart; who
dares, as if he were none of Adams Posterity, be honest at this time 'oth'
year; and will give every man his due in spite of his teeth.

Js not this as rare as a Blazing Star to look on?


Plut. Well, now you have heard all; pray give me leave to be gone.


Chre. Not so by Jove; for now we have a greater desire to stay you then ever.


Plut. I told you so, I thought you would be troublesome.


Chr. Nay, I beseech you leave us not now* for though you should take Diogenes
his Lanthorn and Candle and search from Noon to Night, you could not find an
honester man from the Tropic of Cancer to Capricorn.


Car. Sir, I will swear and be deposed for my Master* he is as arrant a Cancer
as any Capricorn in Christendom.


Plut. I know they all promise fair, but when they have once got me, they lay
aside their threadbare honesty; as if being grown rich, it were a disparagement
to be virtuous any longer.


Car. Yet all men are not knaves.


Plut. Yes most, if not all, by Jove.


Car. Pray Sir, though you put my Master in, let me me be excepted. Body of me,
call me knave in a crowd! If I be not revenged, and that soundly -- You were
best take heed of your general Rules. Could not you have said (you blind
Bussard) for ought I can see you may be one among the rest; but to speak it so
peremptorily?


Chr. Nay, if you but knew what you should gain by staying! Mark me, I can cure
thee of thy blindness: I can do as great miracles as Enston waters.


Plut. Truly, as blind as I am, I can see when I am well. Have my eysight
restored? I hope, I shall never live to see that day.


Chr. What says the man?


Car. He has a natural desire to be wretched, To play at blindman-buff all his
life time. Good Mole, what do thon above ground?


Plut. No, no, if Jupiter did but know of this project, he would powder me into
a pretty pickle.


Chr. Hear me man, he cannot sowse thee worse then he has already, to make
thee run stumbling over the world: I warrant, thy shins have cursed him a
thousand times.


Plut. I know not that, but me thinks my buttocks begin to quake with very
thought of him.


Chr. I think so; but what the Devil makes thee so timorous? I know if thou
should but recover thy ey-sight, thou would not value Jupiters command at
three half pence, but break wind in his face to counter-thunder him.


Plut. Nay, do not tell me so good Wickedness.


Chr. Have but patience, and I will plainly demonstrate that thy Command is
greater then any Nubicog Jupiters.


Plu. Whose? mine? Am I such a man, so powerful?


Chr. I tho, if thou had but wit and eyes enough to see it; for first, I ask
you what does Jupiter reign by?


Plut. Why, by that which he rained into Dana's lap, a shower of silver.


Chr. And who lent him that silver?


Car. Why, who but Plutus; and yet the beggarly Jove pays him no Use nor
Principal: Well Jupiter, we shall have Plutus lodge you in Ludgate shortly, to
take up your Shop, and make your thunderbolts there, and cry lamentably, For
the Lords sake, Bread, Bread for the poor Prisoners; unless you can morgage
the golden or silver Age to give better security to your Creditour.


Chr. Ask, why do men sacrifice to Jove, if not for Silver?


Car. By heaven, for Silver. No penny, no Pate^-noster, quoth the Pope. Does
goodman Jupiter think we'll pray, to wear out our Stockings at knees for
nothing?

No, of all prayers, this is the result,
Jove make me rich, or pray quicunque vult.

Chr. Is not Plutus then the Author of grand sacrifices? where would the
Directory lie, if it were not for the new Act of the Priests maintenance? Nay,
if we were to sacrifice a Bull or Ram, do you think the Butcher would give it
to the god for nothing? No, no, if Plutus should not purchase devotion with his
coin, the Olympian Kitchen would smell of nothing but Lent and Fastingdayes all
the year after.


Plut. Why, I pray, may I put Jupiter out of Commons when I please?


Chr. May you? I marry may you. Do not thou maintain him? He l^ves at thy
charges. Jupiter had not best anger thee, lest thou take an opinion and starve
him.


Plut. Say you so? Is it by my courtesy they sacrifice to Jove?


Chr. Yes, altogether; for whom is he honored by?


Plut. By reverend Priests.


Chr. And do thou think the Levitical men would not disband, if there were
want of pay or Tithes? It is most certain, money is the Catholic Empress of
the world, her commands are obeyed from Spain to the Indies.


Car. It Is true Master, had I been rich (But I curse my Stars, I was born under
the three-penny Planet, never to be worth a groat) I should have scorned the
degree of Sword and Buckler; but now for a little silver and a threadbare
Livery, I have sold the Fee-simple of my self and my liberty, to any
worshipful piece of folly that will undertake me.


Chr. I have heard your Gentilizians, your dainty Curtezana's, in plain
English, your arrant Whores of Venice, such as are ready stewed for any man's
appetite: if a poor man desire to sin a little, they presently sit
crosse-leg'd; but if a rich man tempt them, at the sound of his Silver they
cannot hold their water. Why, the Whores of Picthatch, Turnbull, or the
unmercifull Bawds of Bloomsbury, under the degree of Plutus, will not let a man
be acquainted with the sins of the Suburbs. The Pox is not so cheap as to be
given gratis: The unconscionable Queans have not so much charity left as to let
you damn your selves for nothing.


Car. It Is very true that my Master tells you: For Pluta^ch reports in the life
and death of Besse Bron^bton, that she never unbutton'd to any of the guard for
nothing.


Chr. But you may think this is spoken only of bad men, such as have
prostituted their souls to the world; As for good Round -- they desire not
money, no good souls not they.


Car. What then J pray?


Chr. Why, this wishes for a good Trooping horse; that, for a fleet pack of
Hounds.


Car. J, when they are ashamed to ask money in plain terms, they vail their
avarice under some such mask or other: but he that wishes for a Horse, makes
silver the intent of his journey; and they that beg for Hounds, it is money they
hunt for.


Chr. All Arts and Crafes amongst men were by thee invented. I, and the seven
Sciences (but for thee) they could never have been so liberal.


Plut. O horse that I was, never to know my own strength till now!


Chr. It Is this that makes great Philip of Spain so proud.


Car. Without thee ( Plutus) the Lawyer would not go to London on any Terms.


Chr. All the Generals, Hopton and Montross, are by thee maintained: 'Troth,
all the Troopers or Footmen without thee would never be contented with
free quarter only, there must come Taxes, Contributions and Excise to boot.

Did not Will Summers break his wind for thee?
And Shakespeare therefore writ his Comedy?
All things acknowledge thy vast power divine,
(Great God of Money) whose most powerful shine
Gives motion, life; Day rises from thy sight.
Thy setting, though at noon, makes night.
Sole catholic cause of what we feel or see,
All in this All are but the effects of thee.

Plut. O heavens! can I do all these things you talk of? Ill tide this wretched
blindness of mine, that would never let me see what Command or Power I had:
All the world for a pair of Eyes and a Looking-glass! Sure now the Delphian
gate and J have good wits: for we jumpt together in this opinion, that it is an
excellent thing for a man to know himself: J shall love a Nosce teipsum as long
as J live for this trick. Can J do all these things?


Chr. All these? J by heaven can thou, and millions more then these. Why
there was never any man weary of thy company (O god of wealth) Thou art a
welcome guest where ere thou come. There is plenty of all things: Plenty of
Love.


Car. And pienty of VVhite-bread and Butter.


Chr. Plenty of Honor.


Car. And plenty of Cheese-cakes.


Chr. Plenty of Friends.


Car. And plenty of Bag-puddings.


Chr. Plenty of Servants.


Car. And plenty of Furmenty.


Chr. Plenty of Health.


Car. And plenty of Custards.


Chr. Plenty of Command.


Car. And plenty of Pease-porredge.


Chr. Never any man has enough of thee. If he can change a Groat, yet he
despairs of a Bed till he can get a Tester. Then he procures a full Jury of
pence to be empannell'd for the finding out of a Shilling. That done, the
ambitious Niggard will fain usurp a Crown, which must be made a Noble one: And
that is never safe, till it have a good Angel to guard it. All this obtained,
he cannot without a Mark be reckoned a man of notice: Nor has he a patch of a
Gentleman, till he be worth a Piece.


Car. The good old Gentleman thinks he has jested all thiswhile handsome grave
graypated quiblets. Good heaven, what pretty things these wits are, when they
are out of date!


Chr. When the Purse is full, the Pouch gapes; and when the Pouch has his
bellyfull, the great Chest yawns-wide enough to swallow (...) ^dies, and
Goldsmiths-Hall, and the Devil to boot; and yet when all is done, they think
themselves as poor as I^us, if their estates do not out-value Doomsdaybook.


Plut. You say true, Sir: yet methinks I am afraid of one thing.


Chr. What is that?


Plut. That I shall never attain to that ^utopia you speak of, it is a country
so hard to conquor; Castles in the air are very impregnable.


Chr. Sir, upon my word, let not that trouble you: Do your endeavor, and i will
warrant you shall see as perfectly as any Lynceus in Christendom.


Plu. Then Lynceus! what was he?


Chr. One that could see the very motes in the sun, and the least things in the
world.


Plu. I can see the least in the world already, I thank you for nothing: I can
see less then any Lynceus living. But how can thou, poor mortal worm, take
off the sequestration of my eyesight, and restore me to perfect seeing again?


Chr. Do not doubt it; For thy delinquent Eyes
Shall be admitted to compound, and see most perfectly.
Be of good hope: the Delphian god has sworn,
And therewithal brandished his Pythian Laurel,
That Plutus should out-look the stars to blindness.*

Plut. Ha, ha, ha! How does he know so much? I never was acquainted with that
same Apollo in my life. I remember I have been foxt at his Oracle at
Temple Bar. I am afraid this Apollo is one of your fellow-Juglers.


Chr. Cannot a man persuade you? have not I said it?


Plut. Well then, do you look to it.


Car. So we had need, for you cannot your self.


Chr. Take you no care, I will do it though I die to morrow before breakfast.


Car. Marry and that were a miserable thing to go to the grave upon a fasting
stomach. Pray master, when you take in hand the cure of Plutus his eyes, let
poor Ca^yon have a finger in it.


Chr. A finger in it! That were the way to put out his eyes.


Car. It Is strange, master, you should have no more understanding: my meaning
was, you would accept of my help, (good Mr. Chremylus.)


Chr. Well sirrah, we will; and some other fellow-partners too, some of our
plundered neighbors that are enjoined for penance to fast four days a week,
for having surfeited on too much honesty.


Plu. Marry heaven forbid, I shall be ill holp up with such miserable helpers
as they: the hungry Rascals will go near to devour me quick like Irish
canibals. No, let me be blind still, that my eyes may never be conscious to the
plundring of my flesh and bones in pieces. 'Twere a miserable spectacle for
them to begin with.


Chr. I warrant, you need not fear that: if they once grow rich, they will rather
feed on Rost-beef and Marrow-bone pyes, like Committee men, then cosen the
worms of so lean a carcass. Sir Carrion, where be your couple of Footmen?


Car. Here master, what should I do?


Chr. Run and call my honest poor neighbors, you shall find the miserable
drudges tugging at the Plough-taile for their Landlords. No, now I think on it,
the Excise-men came to day and fetched them away for contribution. Go to them,
you know the way to the Office near Cuckolds-Pound, London. Tell them in their
ears, that we have Plutus at home, and will share him amongst us: we'll divide
him into several messes, and each man take his part by seniority. But stay, do
you hear: beware of Knaves, and of Veale.


Car. Veale it seems is not so good. But what shall I do with this Leg of
Mutton here? I dare not venture the safety of it amongst 'um; the villains
carry dangerous teeth about 'um.


Chr. We Will take care for that: meet me at home two hours hence.


Exit Chr. Car. O what a plot are we going about! I could laugh for joy.

Now may I forsake my dump,
And bestir my hob-nail'd stump,
Skip about and ^risk and jump:
Honest men are turned up trump,
I shall find them in a lump,
But* every Knave must have a Thump.
o what a plot is this, to blow up all the knaves in a kingdom together, nay in
all the world, put in Turks, Jews, Pagans and Jnfidels! Why, Catesby and Percy
were punies. Garnet and Digby and Faux, if they had gone about such an honest
Gunpowder treason as this, they had never had their heads upon poles a
Daw-catching over the Parliament House. Well, they were hanged for knaves and
fools; but we shall thrive, and be wise and worshipful, and honest too, for
Carion's a man in the plot.

This is a stratagem was never such,
That honest men alone now should be rich.
That honest men should thrive by right, not wrong.
London, take heed; for thou wilt be poor ^re long.

Exit Carrion. Act. 1. Scaen. 3.
Enter Scrape-all a Farmer, and Dull-pate his son. Scrap. J live at
Islington, and J have heard
Plutus is come to Westminster: Sure, sure,
He Would take it ill if J forbear to visit him,
He knows J am his kinsman:
For J was kin to Pinch-back True-penny
His Father, who did live at Islington,
An Usurer almost next door to me.
Most opportunely here he comes, J see.
God save you sir! your poor kinsman salutes you.

Plut. Who Is this? my eyesight fails me; what is your name?


Scrap. Scrape-all your kinsman, lives at Islington


Plut. O J remember; are you honest now?
J have a humor to love honest men.

Scrap. The Country thinks so, J'm converted lately:
Dull-pate my son is also here come with me:

Plut. Of what profession is he?


Scrap. A Parson verily.


Plut. What would he have?


Scrap. A Benefice, two or three,
An't like your Worship.
He Is a true Scrape-all, of the Scrapealls blood;
True Dull-pate Scrape-all, He has past the Synod.

Plut. O, has he so! J thought to have sent him thither.
J have few Livings left now to bestow.
My golden Prebends which J had at Paul's,
You know are sunk ith dust: For other places
The best the Synod has 'um. Yet your son
Dulpate, J know he cannot want preferment,
He looks so learnedly, and goes in black too.
He may change habits, it is allowed of now
As the world goes. Is he not a Tradesman?
He Would thrive the better, if he can snuffle handsomely.
Was he ever trained up at the Universities?

Scrap. Yes out of both; that is, never of either.


Plut. However he will be rich. Let him leap over
The Steeple Houses, and teach in private;
His vails will be the fatter: Tithes and Cures
He must preach down as Antichristian,
And take as much as both. He has an excellent name,
A thriving name! I think you said 'twas Dulpate.

Scrap. Yes Sir. Now thank your Patron, and be gone.


Dulp. Thankatus and Godamericatus vester dignitas.


Exit Dulp. Scrap. He gives your Worship thanks and god-a-mercy.


Plut. I have no skill in Physiognomie:
But sure thou will be rich, Dulpate, and wealthy.

Scrap. Uncle, we thank you: will it please you know
The entertainment of ou^ poor cottage?

Plut. No, it is against the complexion of my humor
To visit any man's house: I never got
Any commodity by it in my life.
For if I chance to light into the clutches
Of some vile Usure^, he buries me
Quick under ground, or keeps me prisoner closely
In his old Chests, where without sheets I lie,
But his Indentur^s keep me company.
And if J fall into the prodigal hands
Of some mad roaring Tytire tu, he spends me
Upon his lecherous Cocatrice; or playing
Throws me away at passage: So am J turned
Stark naked out of doors, with not so much
As a poor Purse to make a Nightcap of.

Scrap. It seems you never met with moderate men.
But this is my disposition: when oceasion
Serves, no man more liberal: when opportunity
Jnvites, no man more thristy.
Come, let us go in. O how my wife shall joy
At sight of thee, as much as for a French Hood
Or Taffata Kirtle! Thou art my best beloved.

Plut. J easily believe it.


Scrap. Who would not tell thee
The truth of things, J wish that he were louzy
(Sweet rogue) at Beggers-bush, or else confined
To the perpetual regiment of Bridewell.
Come my dear Uncle, come! O how J love
The silver-hairs of thy most delicate chin!
Though J be rich by wickedness and sin.

Exeunt ambo. Finis Actus primi.
Act. 2.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Carrion, Clodpole, Lackland and Stiff, 3 Rusticks. Car. Come along you
old Hobnails. J'le have your horses shod with gold of Ophir or Peru* Ha, you
old Muck-worms! J'le make your Hog-trough paunches so fat, that the leanest of
you all shall outweigh the Archbishop of Spalato. What an Esopical roaring
Lion am J, to lead this army of Asses into the field! Come, my masters, old
friends, you that have eat many a bushel of salt, J would say garlic in his
coompany* Make haste you Plough-lacquies, Boots his kinsmen. You neighbor
Lackland, set the best foot forward. And you goodman Clodpole, old Snaile with
a slimy nose, if you make not haste, they will have done scrambling ere we come.


Clod. Now by the rood of my Granam's soul, J'ch go as vast as my legs will
bear me. What would you have of an old man, that is grown crazy?


Car. Crazy!


Clod. J, crazy. Do you think a man that has one voot in the grave can trudge
as vast as zuch a young knave as thou? When J was a stripling of thy age, J
could have trickt it ivaith, Mr. Ficar knows, with the best of the Parish.


Lackl. Neighbor, neighbor, J'le tell you what I do devise you now, this is
my pinion.


Car. Your pinion, you goose? and what is your pinion?


Lackl. Marry this is my pinion now: This saucy knave may do it to uflout us.
It Is best ^o command of him what is his masters contention in ^ending vor us
now la.


Car. Why have not I told you? My master zends for you to change this nasty
condition of yours into some delicate happiness. You shall be rich, you
Rogues, all of you Justices of Peaces, Lords, Emperors, or what is more,
High-Constables.


Clodp. Very well said. But I will be none of his Peaces nor Lords; let me be a
High-Constable. I will have a new v^aile as zoon as I come to my honors, and
thou shall be next to exzeed me in my house-of-Office.


Lackl. I, but neighbors, how shall this be defected? Let him dissolve us of
that now, it seems not possetible, so it does not.


Car. Why you Villiago's, my master has brought home an old lame, rotten,
mangy, toothlesse, saplesse, bald-pate, rusty musty crusty fusty dusty old
Dotard, just such another as my neighbor Stiff or Lackland, or you Clodpole
with a slimy nose, with a great bunch-back.


Lackl. A bunch-back! Nay then thou art a meszenger of gold. Hah neighbors,
that was not a bunch-back, I warrant you la, they were huge bags of gold.
That Is another pinion of mine, neighbors, what do you jecture in that?


Car. You jecture like an ass: That bunch at his back was but a natural budget
of old mischiefs.


Lackl. Do not think to play the Jackanapes with me for nothing. Have I not
here a good cudgel? if thou do, thou shall be clapper-de-claw'd.


Car. I wonder what you take me for: what dishonesty did you ever know by me?


Clodp. Dishonesty, zay you! None, not we. It Is a very honest Monky: Yet I have
zeen him, neighbors, zit in Bridewell, when the loving vetters have been close
friends to his legs.


Car. Very true; at the same time you were one of the Justices of hell,
Radamanthus had newly resigned his office to you.


Clodp. Now the murrain founder thee, thou parlous wag, thus to 'buse thy
betters! Sir, look you deveal unto us why your master has vited ^s from our
natural poccupations.


Car. Prick up your ears then, and I will tell you. My master has brought home
Plutus to enrich you all. Thou shall be Mayor of the City; can not thou sleep
on the Bench? Thou shall be Baily; have not thou wit enough to tell clocks? And
all the rest of your frozen-bearded Neighbors, understanding Aldermen.


Lackl. Nay zo they be Aldermen, it is no matter vor Understanding: it is a
beggarly quality vit for none but poor Scholars and Losophers. But has thy
master got Plutus, and shall we all be rich in good zooth, Carrion?


Car. I in zooth neighbor Lackland, as rich as Midas, if you had but asses
ears.


Lackl. Nay, vor if that be all, I shall do well enough I warrant you, mine are
of a pretty length already: it does me good at the heart neighbors, zo it does.


Stiff. Vaith would Mr. Olip-latine our Ficar were here too. He Is an honest
man, he reads Common Prayer* we can vollow him and understand him; He will not
meddle with Diricks-stories nor Extrumperies. He has but poor twanty Nobles a
year, think of it Neighbors.


Clodp. Vaith and thou say right neighbor Stiff, and he gives us good
destructions once a month, as good as a Nomine.


Lackl. I, and I like him: He Is none of the Hum-drums, he will clap it up
quickly, especially if there be a match at the Alehouse,


Clodp. Mass, and he will drink Sack and Claret as fast as any Synod man.


Stiff. I, neighbors, and he is none of them that be proud; he will not scorn
to drink with his poor neighbors too: if Plutus would give him twice twanty
Nobles, I would not think it too much.


Lackl. I warrant, our Propriator would hang himself vo^e he would allow it.


Clodp. It Is no matter, we'll tition Plutus our selves vor him.


Stiff. Nay neighbors, and lets tell him he will cursten and bury after the old
way. I warrant, when Mr. Clip-latin's gone, we shall never have such a man
again to fit the parish. Every one loves him, but Never-good the Sequestrator,
that --


Lackl. When Plutus comes, we'll think of him. Vaith neighbors, shall we be
rich? What will my neighbor Rem-all do? He Will get him a Satten-doublet, and
scorn his proud Landlord: And Steal-all the Tailor, and Noise the Ballad-singer
will ride about in Coaches, and all the rest of um too.

Vaith, shall we have Plutus! shall we be rich! I shall even throw away my
leatherslops and my pitchforks. O it joyces my heart! Neighbors, it is as good
news as a pot of ale and a tossed in a vrosty morning.


Stiff. I could give a penny for a May Pole to dance the morris vor arrant joy.
Shall we be rich ivaith!


Car. Now will I with the Cyclops sing,
Threttanelo, Threttanelo.
Which Polyphemus erst did ring,
To the tune of Fortune my foe.

Chor. Threttanelo, Threttanelo:
And sing we all merrily, Threttanelo, Threttanelo.

Car. Bleat you like Ewes the while.


Chor. Ba, ba, ba, ba, ba, ba.


Car. Like frisking Kids full merrily go, Threttanelo, Threttanelo.


Cho. And sing we all --


Car. Dance out your coats like lecherous goats, Threttanelo, Threttanelo!


Cho. And sing we all --


Car. Let us this Cyclops seek:
To the place where he sleeps let us go, Threttanelo.

Car. Put out as he lies
With a Cowl-staffe his eyes, Threttanelo.

Cho. And sing we all merrily,
And sing we all --

Car. But now you shall see
I Circe will be,
And turn you to hogs ere I go, Threttanelo.
Go grunt you all now
Like your mother the Sow, Threttanelo.

Cho. And sing we all --
And sing we all --

Car. But come you Pig-hogs, let us leave jesting. I restore you to your old
Metamorphosis, as you may see in the first leaf of Virgils Bucolicks. I will go
the next way to the Cup-board, and fill my guts like an Emperor. And then if
you have any thing to maund me on a full stomach, you may ply me in what you
please.


Music. Exeunt omnes. Act. 2. Scaen. 2.
Enter Chremylus and Stiff, Clodpole, Lackland. Chre. Honest neighbors,
welcome: I will not bid you good morrow now. That was my salutation in the
days of poverty: that stinking complement never fitted my mouth, but when my
breath smelt of onions and garlic. Gramercy old blades, for coming. Let me hug
you. Oh what a sweet armful of friends is here! If you be but valiant now, and
defend Plutus, the least of you all shall have wealth enough to confront
Prester-Iohn, and the Grand Signior too.


Clod. Jf that be all, my life for yours. Valiant! Why Mars himself was an
arr^nt coward to me; I have beat him at voot-ball above twenty times. Jf you
did but zee me once, J warrant you would call me goodman Hector as long as I
lived for it. Did you not zee how J cuffe with Hercules for a two-peny loaf last
Curmasse? Let Plutus go! No, let me return again to Onyons and Pease-porredge
then, and never be acquainted with the happiness of a Surloyn of rost-beef.


Chre. Well neighbors, march in. J see Blepsidemus coming toward. He has heard
of my good fortune, that makes him foot it so fast. Jn the days of my poverty
all my friends went on crutches; they would come to me as fast as black Snails:
but now they can outrun Dromedaries. This it is to be rich and Now I have a rich
Lodestone lies under my Threshold that draws in all their Iron Spurs.

He that will have his friends about him tuck,
Must have the alluring bait of golden muck.

Ex. omnes. Act. 2. Scaen. 3.
Enter Blepsidemus, Chremylus. Blepsid. What should this be? or by what means?
it is strange
That my friend Cremylus is grown so rich;
I scarce belive't, because I know him honest,
Yet every Barbers shop reports it boldly.
It Is very strange he should grow rich 'oth' sudden.
And then it is stranger far, that being grown wealthy,
He calls his poor friends to be part'ners with him;
I am sure, it is not the courtesy of England.

Chr. Friend Blepsidemus, welcome; I am not the same beggarly Chremylus I was
yesterday. Be merry, true-blew, be merry; thou art one of my friends too, I Will
put you all into a humor of thriving.


Blep. Are you so wealthy sir, as report speaks?


Chr. So wealthy? ha, soft and fair. Cozen
Blepsidemus, J shall be anon:
Things of great consequence have some danger in them.

Blep. Danger? What danger?


Chr. Why, J'le tell thee all. Jf we bring this business to pass, we shall be
brave blades, Be drunk with Sack and Claret every day; glutted with roast Beef,
Pasties and Marrybone-pies: but if our hopes be frustrate, we are undone, we
must to Leeks and Onions again.


Blep. All is not right, J fear, J do not like it,
Thus suddenly to thrive, and thus to fear;
Makes me suspect my judgment and his honesty.

Chr. What honesty?


Blep. Jf those your sacrilegious hands have plundered
Apollo's Temple, and enrich't your Coffers
With Gold and Silver, ravished from the Altars.
Jf you repent, yet do not mock your friends:
Perchance, you have invited all your neighbors
To hear you make a learned Consession;
To shake hands from the Ladder, and take leave
Of their dear Chremylus at the fatal Tree:
No, you shall pardon me, ^me not in the humor,
To take a walk toward Paddington to day.

Chr. Marry heavens forbid! there is no such cause nor matter.


Blep. Nay, trifle now no longer: it is too manifest.


Chr. You do me wrong, thus to suspect a friend.


Blep. Before Jove, J think there is not an honest man,
But drossie earthy muck-worm-minded Vassals,
And these full soon morgage their Souls for Silver:
Jove's image for the States --

Chr. By heaven I think thou art mad. Do thy naked brains want clothing,
Blepsidemus? for J see thy wit is gone a wool-gathering.


Blep. J see Chremylus is not Chremylus, for me thinks
Who has lost his honesty has lost himself.

Blep. As sure as can be, some gib'd Cat that died issuelesse, has adopted thee
for her Heir, and bequeathed the legacy of her melancholy to thee. It is
impossible thou should be so mad else.


Blep. Thy countenance so often changing, and thy eyes
Unconstant gogling, call thee guilty Chremylus,
Of a dishonest juggling soul.

Chr. Nay, good Raven, do not croak so. J know what your croaking tends to. Now
if J had stolen any thing, you and the Devil would have put in for a share.


Blep. Do I do this to claim my share, what share*


Chr. Come there is no such matter my fingers have not learned the sleight of
hand. Picking and stealing is none of their profession.


Blep. O it is some learned distinction; What, you will say
You did not steal, you did but take it away;
Well, it is not good to equivocate with a Halter,
Gregory is a cunning Disputant:
An argument of Hemp is hardly answered.

Chr. What melancholy Devil has possessed thee? J am sure it is no merry one.
This madness does not smell of Edmonton.


Blep. Whom have you plundered then? whose Bung is nipt.


Chr. No man's.


Blep. O Hercules! Whose tongue speaks truth?
In what cold Zone dwells naked honesty?

Chr. I see, friend, you condemn me ^'re you know the truth.


Blep. Come, do not jest your neck into the Noose,
Tell me betimes, that with the Key of Gold
I may lock up the Vermin's mouth. Informers
Are dangerous cattle, if they once but yawn;
As bad as Sequestrators, but l'se undertake.

Chr. I will not have you undertake any thing for me; you will be at too much
charges: Sir, my intent is to enrich all honest men.


Blep. Why, have you stolen so much?


Chr. No faith, a little will serve the turn, there are so few of them. But
sir, know J have Plutus himself at home.


Blep. Who, Plutus? God of wealth.


Chr. The same, by heaven and hell.


Blep. What, heaven and hell by Westminster Hall, where Lawyers and Parliament
men eat French-broth? Have you Plutus, by Vesta?


Chr. Yes and by Neptune too.


Blep. What Neptune? Neptune of the Sea?


Chr. By Neptune of the Sea, or any other Neptune in Europe. He is the
smal-leg^d Gentleman-Ushers god; for his Chariot is drawn with Calves.


Blep. Why do you not send him about among your friends?


Chr. What, before he have recovered his ey-sight?


Blep. Why, is Plutus blind?


Chr. By Jove is he.


Blep. Nay, J did always think so; and that is the reason he could never find
the way to my house.


Chr. But now he shall at a shorthand.


Blep. What, Brachygraphy? Thomas Sheltons Art?


Chr. No, I mean suddenly.


Blep. He shall be welcome: But why do you not get some skillful Oculist for
him? Have you never a Chyrurgion about the town that has Eyes to sell of his
own making?


Chr. Now the Spittle-house on the Puckfist tribe of them. If a man have but a
cut Finger, the Cure of it shall be as long as the Siege of Breda: Physicians
and Surgeons are good for nothing but to fill Graves and Hospitals.


Blep. Sure then, that is the reason none but Sextons pray for them.


Chr. No, i will have a better device; he shall go to the Temple of Esculapius.


Blep. Come let us make haste, To be rich as soon as we can. Dives qui fieri
vult, Et cito vult fieri --


Chr. We will get a Fieri facias of the Lawyers. They pick all the wealth out
of the Country-mens pockets. Have but patience, J will warrant thee as Rich as
any Alderman.


Offer^ to Ex. Act 2. Scaen. 4.
Enter Penia and meets them. Pen. Must J needs meet you, you old Dotards? Are
you not ashamed of your gray Coxcombes? you are going about a fine piece of
impudence, to undo me and all my children. But J shall plague you for it.


Cir. Now Hercules and his club defend me!


Pen. J le cut your throats, and slit your impudent gurgulio's, you Calves at
threescore: How dare you undertake such confederacy? but you shall throttle
for it, by all the ash-colored cattle about me.


Blep. What creature is this with the Redoker face? She looks as if she were
begot by Marking-stones.


Chr. By stones sure: it is some E^ynnis that is broke loose from the Tragedy.


Blep. By Ieronymo, her looks are as terrible as Don Andraea, or the Ghost in
Hamlet.


Chr. Nay, it is rather one of Belzebub's Heralds.


Blep. Why so?


Chr. Why, do thou not see how many several Coats are quartered in her Arms?


Pen. So, so; and who do you think I am?


Blep. Some Bawd of Shoreditch, or Turnbul Broker of Maidenheads, etc.


Chr. Why woman, why do thou follow us? we have done thee no wrong.


Pen. No, good honest Scavengers, no wrong! By the skin betwixt my eyebrows,
but I Will make you know it is a wrong. Is it no wrong to cast me out of every
place, and leave me no where to be in?


Chr. Yes, thou shall have the liberty of Hell, and all good kindnesses the
honest Devils can do thee, for my sake. But what art thou? why do not thou
tell us who thou art?


Pen. One that will be soundly revenged on you all, for committing more then
gunpowder treason against a poor woman, that has not so much as a tooth in her
head that means you any harm.


Blep. We will not trust so much as thy gums for all that. Who art thou?


Pen. I am Poverty, Penia Poverty, eldest daughter of Asotus Spend-all, of
Brecknockshire; One that has kept house with you this thirty years and
upwards; I have sat winter and summer at your Great-grandfathers table.


Blep. O Apollo and the rest of the Spittlehouse gods! tell me how I may run
away.


Chr. Nay, stay you cowardly drone.


Blep. Stay! no not for the world, I will not keep Poverty company; there be
vormine about her which I would be loath should cosen the worms of my carcass.


Pen. Dare you grunt, you unethical Rusticks, being taken in the fact?


Chr. Stay Coward, shall two men run away from one woman?


Blep. One woman! I, but it is Poverty; Penia Poverty, or Penia Pennylesse.

No Tiger so cruel: I had rather fight with Mall Cutpurse and my Lady Sands
both together at quarter-staffe.


Chr. Good Blepsidemus stay.


Blep. Good Chremylus run away.


Chr. Shall we leave Plutus thus?


Blep. How shall we resist this warlike Amazon, the valiantest of all Tinkers
truls and doxies! She has made me pawn my Bilbo-blade and rusty Headpiece at
the Alchouse many a time in arrant policy. Let us run; there is no hope of
safety but in footmanship. Our valor is clean contrary to Achilles, for our
greatest security lies in our heels. Let us run: Stone-walls are not defense
enough, her hunger will break through and devour us.


Chr. Take thy Porredge-pot (man) for a Helmet, thy Ladle for a Spear, and a
Sword of Bacon, and thou art armed against Poverty cap-a-pe: And then Plutus
shall come and cut her throat, and raise a trophy out of her miserable carcass.


Pen. Da^e you snarl, you Currs, after the contriving such damnable injury?


Blep. What injury, you old Beldame! We have not ravished thee, I am sure; thy
beauty is not so much moving. Do think we mean to lie with Red-Oker! to
commit fornication with a Red-Lattice! I know not what thy lower parts can do;
but thy very Forehead is able to burn us. Let thy Salamander-Nose and Lips live
in perpetual flames, for me; Jove send thee everlasting fire! There is no Cupid
in thy complexion: a man may look upon thee, without giving the flesh occasion
to tempt the spirit: i^ all were made of the same clay thou art, Adultery would
be a stranger in England.


Pen. O immortal gods, is it no injury to restore Plutus to his eyesight! Now
Furi^s put our all your eyes, and then consume all the dogs in Christendom,
that there may be none to lead you!


Chr. What harm is it to you, if we study the catholic good of all mankind?


Pen. What catholic good of mankind? I Am sure the Roman catholic religion
commands wilful poverty.


Blep. That is because Plutus is blind: his blindness is the cause of that
devotion. But when Plutus can see again, we will kick you out of the Universe,
and leave you no place but the Universities: marty those you may claim by
custom, it is your pennylesse bench; we give you leave to converse with
sleeveless Gowns and threadbare Cassocks.


Pen. But what if J persuade you its necessary that Poverty live amongst you?


Blep. Persuaded! we will not be persuaded; for we are persuaded not to be
persuaded, though we be persuaded. Thus we are persuaded; and we will not be
persuaded to persuade our selves to the contrary, any ways being persuaded.


Pen. If J do not, do what you will with me; leave me no place to rest in, but
the empty Study of that pitiful Poet, that has botcht up this poor Comedy
with so many patches of his ragged wit, as if he meant to make Poverty ^ Coat
of it.


Blep. (...) Tu^pana, kai Cophona^ (...) Jack Dolophin and his Kettle-drum
defend us.


Cor. But if you be convicted and nonplust, what punishment will you submit
your self unto?


Pen. To any.


Blep. Ten deaths: other Cats have but nine, Gram^lkin her self. Let us be sure
Povery die out*right, I begin to be bowsie in he^ company* Let Us march.


Exeunt ambo. Pen. Yet I thank Jove I am better acquainted in City and Country,
then these think of. In the City many that go in gayclothes know me; in the
Country I am known for Taxes, Excise and Contributions: besides I have an army
royal of Royalists, that now live under the S^questration-Planet, J shall
muster them up if need be. But first I will go ma^shal up my Forlorn-hopes of
Tat^erdemallians, welsh, English, Scols, and Irish. J hope to give these Round
-- a breakfast, for all they vapor now; I hope to bring 'um under my dominion
shortly.


Exit Penia. Act. 2. Scaen. 5.
Enter Scrape-all, Clodpole, Stiff, Dicaeus, and Poverty. Clodp. Naighbours,
I'ch hear we must chop Logic with Poverty; 'cha wonder what this Logicking is,
tid never know yet te year: they zay one gaffer Aristotle was the first vounder
of it, A bots on him!


Scrap. Cha remember my zon went to the Varsity, and I ha heard him say a fine
song:

Hang Brerwood and Carter in C^akanthorps garter,
Let K^kerman too bemoan us:
J'le be no more beaten for greasy Jack Seaton,
And conning of Sandersonus.
At Oxford* or Cambridge 'twould make a man a hungry to hear 'um talk of
Gismes and Argations, and Pretticables and Predicaments, and gatur Antecedens
and Pro^ums and Postriorums, and Probo's and Valleris. Cha think this Logic a
hard thing next to the Black-Art.


Stiff. Naighbours, an't be zo, what a murrin ails us! why, shall we venture
Plutus on Pretticables and Predicarments? shall we lose all our hopes by an
Argo valleris? This is my pinion, this same Poverty will prove the best
Computant of um all: why, she cannot choose but repute (as Mr. Ficar says)
very well, and most tregorically.


Dicae. Tregorically! Categorically neighbor; Sir John meant so I warrant you.


Stiff. Why, tregorically, and catergolically; The and Cater, there is but an
ace difference, therefore bate me an ace quoth Bolton, and I say she will
repute very well and tregorically, for she has ever kept company with Scholars
ever since my memory or my Granams either. No, let me take my Catergorical
Flail in hand; and if J do not thresh her to death with lusty arguments, let me
never live to problem again at a Peaserick.


Dicae. Naighbours, be content. Poverty stand you on one side* and I^le, stand
on the other; for I will be opposite to you e diametro, and teach you to know
your distance. Thus I dispute. The question is, Whether Plutus ought to receive
his eyesight? I say I, and sic probo.

If it be fit that good and honest men,
Whose souls are fraught with virtue, should possess
Riches and wealth, which Heaven did mean should be
The just reward of goodness: while proud Vice,
Stripped of her borrowed and usurped robes,
Should have her loathed deformities unmasqued;
And vicious men that spread their Peacocks trains,
Have carcasses as naked as their souls.
But if once Plutus should receive his eyes,
And but discern 'twixt men, the world were changed:
Then goodness and full coffers, wealth and honesty
Might meet, embrace, and thrive, and kiss together;
While vice with all her partners starves and pines,
Rotting to dirt and filth, leaving to hell
Black souls. Who better counsel can devise?
Ergo it is fit Plutus receive his eyes.

Clodp. That Argo has netled her, I warrant. Thou shall be Plutus his Professor
for this. What has my she- Bellarmine now to answer?


Dicae. As the mad world goes now, who could believe
But pur-blind fate and chance did hold the scepter
Of humane actions? Who beholds the miseries
Of honest mortals, and compares their fortunes
With the unsatiable pleasures of gross Epicures,
Whose bursten bags are glutted with the spoils
Of wretched Orphans: who (I say) sees this,
But would almost turn Atheist, and forswear
All heaven, all gods, all divine providence!
But if to Plutus we his eyes restore,
Good men shall grow in wealth, and Knaves grow poor.

Stiff. In my pinion this simple-gisme --


Dic. Fie neighbor, it is a Syllogism.


Stiff. Why simple and silly is all one: be what Gisme it will be, sure 'twas
not in true mud and fig tree, there was never a Tar-box in the breech of it.


Pen. O Dotards, how easily you may be persuaded to die as arrant fools as you
were born! If Plutus recover his eyesight, and distribute his riches equally,
you shall see what will become of your Anabaptistical Anarchy: what arts or
sciences would remain. If every Vulcan be as good as your selves, what Smug
will make your Worships dripping-pans?


Dicae. Why he that makes the Fireshovels and Tongs* or if all fail, Quisque
est fortun^ suae faber, we'll make our driping pans our selves: we can do more
then that, we can preach to our selves already.


Pen. Who would coble your shoes, or mend your honorable stockings?


Dic. O there be Sermon-makers enough can do that bravely: the only
Metaphysics they are beaten in, Rem acu*^angunt.


Pen. Who would carry you up to London, if the VVaggon-driver should think
himself as good a man as his master?


Dic. Why we would ride thither on our own Hackney-Consciences.


Pen. Nay if this were so, the very Tailers though they damned you all to hell
under their shop-boards, would scorn to come to the making up of as good a man
as Pericles Prince of Tire.


Dic. Marry that were a happy time for the Low Countries: the Spanish Pike
would not then be worth a Bodkin.


Pen. There would be no Presbyters to directorise you, no Landresses to soap
you, no Plough-men to feed you, no Inne-keepers to fox you, no Sycophants to
flatter you, no Friends to cheat you. Ergo you have brought your hogs to a fair
market.


Stiff. How she proves her self a Sow in conclusion!


Dic. 'Twas in Conclusion, that it might not be denied. Me thinks Poverty
disputes very poorly, and that is a wonder; for likely the naked truth is on her
side.


Clod. Yet she remembered an Argo, and that made her argument not so weak and
impudent: in my pinion this Argo is a Quarterstaffe at least.


Dic. And ( Poverty) what good turn can you do us, except it be to fill our
ears with the bawlings of hungry brats and brawling bastards? No doubt you can
bring us a flock of fleas and a herd of lice to store the pasture grounds of
our miserable Microcosmes; the unmannerly hogs with hunger betimes to desire us
to defer our breakfasts a fortnight longer. You can give us field-beds, with
heaven for our canopy, and some charitable stones for our pillows. We need not
expect the felicity of a horse to lie at rack and manger; but yet our asses and
we must be content with the same provender. No Rost-beef, no shoulders of
Mutton, no Cheese-cakes, no Matchivilian Florentines:

And whence our greatest grief does rise,
No Plumb-porredg, nor no Plumbpudding pies.
Ergo ( Poverty) I will answer your arguments at the whipping-post.


Lackl. That was strong and piercing for Plumb-porredge: for truly one
porrenger of Plumb-porredge is an argument more unanswerable then Campians ten
Reasons.


Dic. Aliter probo sic. Your poor creatures have not wherewith to bu^y
themselves; but it is not fit that the soul should go a beging for the charges
of the bodies funeral. Ergo falleris Domina Poverty.


Pen. You do not dispute seriously, you put me off with trifling ^gations. Thus
I dispute. If I make men better then Riches, I am to be preferred before
Riches. But I make men better: for poor men have the better consciences,
because they have not so much guilt, J call their empty purses to witness.
Aliter probo sic. J moralize men better then Plutus: Exemplum gratia: Plutus
makes men with pufft faces, dropsy bodies, Bellies as big as the great Tub at
Heidelberg; Noses by the virtue of Malmsie so full of Rubies, that you may
swear, had Poverty had dominion in their Nativities, they had never had such
rich faces: Besides, they have eyes like Turkycocks, Double-chins,
Flapdragon-cheeks, Lips that may spare half an ell, and yet leave kissing room
enough. Nay, it is the humor of this age, they think they shall never be great
men, unless they have gross bodies. Marry I keep men spare and lean, slender
and nimble; mine are all Diminutives, Tom Thumbs, not one Colossus, not one
Garagantua amongst them; fitter to encounter the enemy by reason of their
agility, in l^e danger of shot for their tenuity, and most expert in running
away, such is their celerity. Ergo, Irus is a good soldier, and Midas is an
ass.


Scrap. Troth she has touched Midas; she has caught him by the worshipful ears.


Dic. Nay it is no wonder if they be slender enough, you keep them with such
spare diet: they have so much Lent and Fasting-dayes, that they need not fear
the danger of being as fat as Committee Men. If a man should see a company of
their lean carcasses assembled together, 't would make him think Doomsday were
come to town before its time.


Pen. Moreover, that which is most noble is most preferrable. But Poverty is
most noble. Minor I prove thus: Whose houses are most ancient, those are most
noble: But Poverties houses are most ancient; for some of them are so old, like
Vicaridge-houses, they are every hour in danger of falling.


Clod. What a silly woman's this to talk of Nobility houses! Does not she know
we are all Levellers, there is no Nobility now.


Stiff. Neighbor, I think so too: I am an Unpundant too, I think.


Dic. Nay she does not dispute well. Her Man was born in Bedlam, her Minor was
whipped in Bridewell, Ergo her Conclusion is run out of her wits. For well said
M. Rhombus, Ecce mulier blancata quasi lilium. Now I oppose her with a Dilemma,
alias the Cuckold of Arguments. My Dilemma is this: Citizens and Townsmen are
^ich, for there is the Co^nucopia; Ergo, Riches are better then Poverty. Nay, i^
Riches were not in some account, why would Jupiter be so rich? for you see he
has engrossed to himself the golden age of (...), and the silver age of
Shillings and Six-pences, and left us nothing but the brazen age of Plundring
and Impudence; for Tinkers Tokens are gone away too. To conclude in one
syllogism more, J will prove my Tenet true by the example of (...) Queen of
Hell; she would turn the Clark of her Kitchen out of his office, and not suffer
him to be the Devils manc^ple any longer, if he should bring any lean carcass
or any carrion-soul to be served up at her table. Her chief dish is the larded
soul of a plump Usurer, basted with the dripping of a greasy Alderman; the
sauce being made with the brains of a great Congerheaded Lawyer, buttered with
the grease of a well-fed Committee-man, served up for want of sawcers in the
two ears of an unconscionable Scrivener. Ergo, Poverty, you may go and hang
your self.


Pen. O for the Barbados! J have no place left for my entertainment.


Dic. Come brethren, let us kick her out of the Universe.


Pen. O whither shall J betake my self!


Dic. To the house of Charity.


Pen. To the house of Charity? that is an old ruined cold lodging, as bad as a
Correction house. Good your worships, take some pity on miserable Poverty!


Dic. Did you ever hear such a solecisme?


Lack. Troth master, J never knew it in my life: All our Parish was ever
against it.


Clod. And ours too, and J think all England over.


Dic. Poverty, then J say thou shall have a Justice of Peaces charity, the
whippingpost; thou shall be lasht under the statute of sturdy Rogues and
Beggars: look for no pity, it is charity to pity those that are rich: Go get
you packing.


Pen. Well, sirs, though you put Poverty away now, yet you or your heirs may
be glad to send for me ere long.


Exit Poverty. Clod. It shall be to the gallows then, by my consent: if you
mean to prevent it, the best way is to go and pine away quickly.


Stiff. Farewell old Rag of Babylon, for we must be rich, and therefore
worshipful.

Exeunt omnes. By your leave Mr. Parson.


Music. Act. 2. Scaen. 6.
Enter Clip-latine a Parson, Dicaeus a Parson, Clod-pole, Stiff, Scrape-all.
Dic. Last night J laughed in my sleep. The Queen of Fairies tickled my nose with
a Tithe-p^gs tail. J dreamt of another Benefice, and see how it comes about!
Next morning Plutus the God of wealth comes to my house, and brings me an
Augmentation and a good fat Living. He said he came to visit me: as sure as can
be J am ordained to be rich at his Visitation, it is better then the Bishops or
Archdeacons. Now must J be one of the Assembly, and walk demurely in a long
black Cl^ak at Westminster, forgetting all my Greek and Latin.


Clip. Faith brother, that have J done already: my name's Cl^p-latine truly; J
read a Homily, and pray by the Service Book divinely.


Dic. Divinely, quoth a! Thou must take Ex tempore in hand, or else thou will
nere be rich in these days.


Clip. Do you hear, neighbors! shall us leave the Common Prayer?


Stiff. God forbid, Mr Ficar! why 'twas writ in David's time; and Thomas
Ste^nhold and John Hopkins joined it to the Psalms in those days, and turned
it into such excellent Meter, that J can sleep by it as well as any in the
Parish.


Clod. Besides, naighbour, we don't know this new Sect what they pray, we cannot
vollow them in their Ext^umperies.


Clip. You see the case is clear, Sir: J am for the King and the Prayer Book.


Stiff. Well said Parson, we shall love thee the better for that, hold there
still.


Dic. Yet (Brother) because thou art of our cloth, I Will speak to Plutus for
thee. Thou shall have twenty pounds per annum standing stipend, and the love of
thy Parish because thou take nothing of them, Do mark me? Twenty pounds, I
say. I must be gone.


Exit. Dic. Clip. A good saying and a rich. Now shall I surfiet in a Satin
Cloak; from twenty nobles to twenty pounds! O brave!


Scrap. We are glad of it vaith Mr. Ficar.


Clip. Come Neighbors, upon this good news, lets chop up and to my Nost
Sn^go's, he will be glad to hear of it too. I am resolved to build no more
Sconces, but to pay my old tickets. Come let us in and drink a Cup of stingo.


Stiff. Vaith Vicar, thou give us good destruction still.
Come in, come, come.

Act. 2. Scaen. 7.
Enter Blepsid^mus, Chremyl^s, Ca^ion. Blep. O the divinity of being rich! Now
Plutus is come. But who is Plutus? Why, he is the Noblemans Tutor, the Princes
and States fl^et of Pl^te, the Lawyers Littleton, the Major and Aldermens
Fur-gown, the Justice's Warrant, the Constable and Bumbailies Tip-staffe, the
Astronomers Blazing star, the Mathematicians Record or counting table, the
Cavaliers Service Book, the Presbyterians Directory, the Independens Extempore,
the Popes golden Legend, the Friars Nun, the Monks Breviary, the Worldlings
God, the Prelates Cannons, and Bishops Oath, etc. -- I could reckon more, but
he is the very Ladder to worship and honor. I must be rich, and therefore
honorable, and proud, and grave.


Chr. O gentleman-like resolution!


Blep. Yet now I think on it, J will not be grave; for grave bodies do naturally
descend to base Conditions, which is clean contrary to the complexion of my
humor; yet J will cry hum with the best in the Parish. J will understand as
little as the (...) Citizen of them all.


Chr. Marry, and that is a proud word, Blepsidemus.


Blep. I will sleep as soundly at Church and snort as loud at Sermons as the
Churchwarden himself, or the Master of the Company.


Chr. O infinite ambition!


Blep. I will entertain none for my Whores under the reputation of Ladies,
unless they be Parsons daughters.


Chr. O! because they may claim the benefit of the Clergy.


Blep. I will daign none the honor of being my worships Cuckolds, that is not
a round-headed Brother of the Corporation.


Chr. He'el make it a principle of the City Charter. Horns of such making, will
be of as great esteem as the Cap of maintenance.


Blep. Hereafter Gentlemen, hereafter, I say, in contempt of a penny quart, I
will throw P^spot-lane in the face of Py-corner: J will be foxt no where but at
Round-headed Inns, that J may be honestly drunk, and carry it with the greater
gravity and safety. The soul of Sack and the flower of Ale shall be my drink,
that my very Urine may be the quintessence of Canary.


Chr. Why then, V^spasian might desire no greater Revenue, then the reversion
of your Chamber Pot.


Blep. But come let us withdraw, and carry Plutus to the Temple of Esculapius;
Carrion make ready the necessaries, see you play the Sumpter-horse with
discretion. Let us make haste, for J long to be worshipful.

Come friends, this day gives period to our sorrow,
We will d^own ca^es in bowls of Sack to morrow.

Ex^unt am^o. Act 3.
Scaen. 1.
Enter Penia Poverty, Higgen, Termock, Brun, Caradock, and an Army of Rogues.
Pen. Soldiers, you see men Poverty* despise
Since God of Riches has recovered eyes;
Let us invade them now with might and main
And make them know their former state again;
March forth brave Champions, though your Noble Valors
Be out at Elbows, show your selves to be
Patches of worth, rags of Gentility.
Brave Blades, arrayed in Dish-clouts, dirty Plush,
Like the grave Senators of Beggars-bush;
With Poverty, sole Empress of your States,
Spend your best blood, you have no wealthy Fates:
Me thinks I see your Valors, and epsy
Each rag, a Trophy of your Victory.
Come B^un, thou worthy Scot of gallant race,
What though thou lost an arm at Chevychase,
Resume thy valor. And thou Caradock,
True Leek of Wales, Pendragon's noble stock
Stir up thy* Welsh-blood to encounter these,
With zeal as fervent as thy toasted Cheese.
And thou brave Red-shank too, Termock by name,
VVonder of Red-shanks, and Hybernia's fame.
To conquer these, or scatter them like chaff;
Or lick them up as glib as Usqu^baghe.
And Higgen thou, whose potent Oratory*
Makes Beggars-bush admire thy eloquent story,
Come bravely on and rescue me from danger,
Else Poverty to you will prove a stranger,
Which heavens forbid.

All. Poverty, poverty, poverty for our money!


Pen. Nay, without money Sirs, and be constant too.


All. Poverty, poverty, poverty, our Patroness!


Carad. Cats plutrer a nails; Her were best by her troth take very many heeds,
how her make a commotion in her stomachs; if her ploud be but up twice and
once, her will tug out her Sword, and gads nigs, let her take very many heed,
her will carbonado very much Legs and Arms. By St: Taffie, I'se tear the most
valiantest of them all into as arrant Atoms as there be motes in the Moon. Try
he dare whose will; I tickle their hoopsir Dominees, else, never let her sing
hapatery, while she has live any longer. If her do not conquer them upside
down, let her never while she lives in Heuiope, god bless her, eat Coush-bobby
with the man in the Moon. Her Coshen Merlin her Countryman, has told her in a
Whisper, very a many much tale of her valor above forescore and twenty years
since.


Pen. Bravely resolved; O how I love thy Valor!
It Is sweeter then Metheglin, I all Canarvon cannot afford a Comrade half so
noble.

Ter. And Termock vill shpend te besht ploud in hish heelsh in the servish.


Pen. Renowned Termock, thanks from our Princely self.


Ter. Nay, keep ty tancks to thy self, Termock is ty trushty shubsheckt.


Brun. And aies was gang with thee Mon. Aies have bin a prupder good man in the
Borders. Aies fought blithe and bonny for the gewd Earl Duglasse: Aies show thy
foemen a Scutch trick. Aies mumble their crags like a Sheeps-head or
Cokes-nose, Ais I do not let me bund to Sup with nothing but Perk and Sow-baby.


Pen. Well said brave Brun, hold but thy Resolution,
And never a Soldier breathing shall excel thee.

Brun. Nay's mon, aif I cannot give 'um mickle rashers enough my self, aies
gang home to my Belliba^ne and get lusty Martial Barns, shall pell mell their
Noddles: What gars great Higgen?


Hig. Attend, attend; I Higgen the grand Orator
Begin to yawn, lend me your Asses ears;
Give auscultation. Higgen, whose Pike-staffe Rhetoric,
Makes all the world obey your Excellence
By cudgelling them with Crab-tree eloquence.
By lusty Doxies, there is not a Quire Cove,
Nobler then I in all the bowsing Kens
That are twixt Hockly 'ith' hole and Islington.
By these good stampers, upper and nether Duds;
I Will nip from Ruffmans of the Harmanbeck,
Though glimmer'd in the fambles, I cly the chates:
I Will stand the Pad or Mill, the Churches deneir.
Nip bungs, dupp gibbers leager, lowze and bowse.
Liggen in strommel, in darkmans for pannum
Should the grand Ruffian come to mill me, I
Would scorn to shuttle from my Poverty:

Pen. So, so, well spoke, my noble English Tatter,
Lead up* the Vant-guard, muster up an army,
An army royal of Imperial Lice.

Hig. And J will be the Scanderbeg of the Company,
The very Tamberlane of this ragged rout;
Come follow me my Soldiers --

Brun. Yaws grand Captain, fir, suft and fair; gar away, there be gewd men in
the Company. Aies Captain, for aies have more scutch Lice, then thou have
English creepers, or He British Goats about him.


Hig. What then? my I ice are of the noble breed,
Sprung from the Danes, Saxons and Normans blood;
True English-born, all plump and all well savored:
Take warning then good sir, be not so proud,
As to compare your Vermin sir, with ours.

Ter. Pleash ty shit grash, let nedder nodder of them my shit Empress have te
plash of ty Captain, J am te besht of edder odder. J have seen te fash of the
vild Irish. Termock knows vat it is to fight in the Pogs like a valiant
Costermonger, up to the Nosh in ploud. Not to make much prittle and prattle to
none purposh* Termock has fight under Oncale, for her King and Queen in te
wars. Vat, J speak tish by te Shoes of Patrick, if that Termock be the Captain,
thou shall beat ty foes to pieces and pashes.


Carad. Is Caradock no respected amongst her; Her Lice are petter a pedecree as
the gooddst of them all. Her Lice come ap Shinkin, ap Shon, ap Owen, ap
Richard, ap Morgan, ap Hugh, ap Brutus, ap Sylvius, ap Eneas, and so up my
shoulder. An't her Lice will no^ deshenerate from her petticree precious Coals.
Her ancestors fought in the Wars of Troy, by this Leck, as lustily as the Lice
of Troilus. Nay, by St. Taffie, the Lice of Hector, were but Nits in comparison
of her magnanimous Lice. Do not disparage her nor her Lice, if her love her
guts in her pelly.


Ter. But if Termock have no Lish, sall l e derefore not be te Captain? Posh on
her Lish. Termock hash none grash a Patrick; no such venomous tings vill preed
in hish Country.


Hig. I will be Captain, for my Robes: re martial:
True martial Robes, full of uneureable wounds.
My Doublet is adorned with thousand scars,
My Breeches have endured more storms and tempests
Then any man's that lies perdue for Puddings.
I have kept Sentinel every night this twelve month;
Beheaded Ducks and Geese, spitted the Pigs,
And all to Victual this camp of Rogues.

Carad. 'Faith, and her clothes are as ancient a petticree* as thine, her fery
Dublet is coshen sherman to utter P. ndragons Sherken, or else Caradock is a
fery rogue by Saint Taffie.


Pen. You shall not thus contend, who shall be Captain;
I Will do it my self, Come follow me brave Soldiers.

Brun. I faith! she is a brave Virago mon.


Carad. By St. Taffie, she is an Amashon, a Debora,
A Brunduca, a Joan of Oleance,
Pucelle de Dieu, a Mall C^tpurse, a Long-meg of Westminster.

Ter. She sall be te Captain, for all tee, or any odder in English land.


Hig. Whips on you all! follow the Femine gender?
Fight under the Ensign of a Petticoat?
An act unworthy such brave spirits as we:
Remember our old Virtues, shall we forget
Our ancient Valou^s? Shall we in this one action
Stain all our honor, blur our reputations:
Can men of such high fortunes daign to s^oop
To such dishonorable terms? How can our thoughts
Give entertainment to such low designs?
My spirits yet are not dissolved to whey,
J have no soul, so poor as to obey,
To suffer a smock rampant to conduct me.

Brun. Aife thou's keep a mundring mandring, mon, i'se gang to Edinborow. The
Deill lead your army for Brun, aies no meddle, Adieu, adieu.


Carad. Ah Brun! Blerawhee, blerawhee.


Ter. Ah Brun, Brun! Shulecrogh, fether vilt thou, fether vilt thou?


Brun. What yaw doing mon to call Brun back; and you be sules, I Will stay no
longer.


Carad. Ah Brun, Brun! shall be Captain, by all te green Sheese in the Moon.
Brun shall be Captain for Caradock, if her would not give place to Brun* her
heart were as hard as F^int-shire.


Ter. Brun sall be te besht in te company, if tere were a tousand tousand of
'um.


Hig. I Will not resign my right, J will be Captain.
It Is fit I should: Has not my valor often
Been tried, at Bridewell and the Whippingpost?

Pen. Let Higgen then be Captain, his sweet tongue
And powerful rhetoric may persuade the Rout.

Carad. Cats plutter a nails, Higgen shall be Captain for her Ears; yet
Caradock will be valiant in spite of her Teeth.

Ho brave Captain Higgen!


O^n. Higgen, a Higgen, a Higgen.


Hig. So then Soldiers, follow your Leader: Valiant Brun
Lead you the Rear; you Termock shall command
The Regiment of Foot. Generous Caradock
Have you a care of the Left-wing.

Carad. O disparashment to her reputation! Brutus hish Coshen look the whing.
Think you her will flee away. Her will stand to it tooth and nail, while there
be skin and bones in her pelly.


Brun. Let the Army gang to the Deill. Aies no meddle.


Ter. Stay tere man, vat to^ do Brun?


Hig. My brave co^radoes, Knights of tattered Fleece,
Like Falsta^s Regiment, you have one shirt among you.
Well seen in plundring money for the Alehouse.
Such is the fruit of our Domestic broiles,
We are returned to ancient Poverty
Yet (seeing we are lousy) let us show our breeding.
Come, though we shrug, yet lets not leave our calling:
Leiutenants Rampant, bravely all trained up
At the well skilled Artillery of Bridewell;
March on brave soldiers, you that near turned back
To any terror but the Beadles whip.

Brun. St. Andrew, St. Andrew.


Car. St. Taffie, St. Taffie.


Hig. St. George, St. George.


Ter. St. Patrick, St. Patrick.


Pen. Saints are discarded.
But Andrew, Taffie, George, and Patrick too
May the whole ^esse of them be all propitious!

Hig. If any do resist us, let us throw
Our Crutches at them. J have here
An empty sleeve to strike out all their teeth,
Besides a ma^kin to wipe all our wounds.
Be valiant, and as ear'st the Spanish Cobbler
Enjoined his eldest son upon his deathbed:
See you do nothing, that may ill beseem
The Families you come of; let not the ashes
Of your dead Ancestors blush at your dishonours;
Increase your glory of your House; for me
J'le never disgrace my noble Progeny.

Car. Caradock disgrash her Petticree? No, by St. Prutus bones; her will fight
till her stand, while tere be legs in her beels. If her pe killed, her will not
run away.


Brun. Aies gar away? Aies not budge a foot by St. Andrew.


Ter. Termock disgrash hish fadders and mudders? Termock will stand while tere
be breath in his breech.


Act. 3. Scaen. 2.
Carrion, Clodpole, Lackland, Stiff, Scrapeall, to them. Carrion whips them. they
run. Pen. Higgen, Scandebeg, Tamberlain, grand Captain Higgen.


Hig. Soldiers shift for your selves. We are all routed.


Pen. Is this you would not disgrace your noble Progeny?


Hig. My Ancestors were all footmen. Running away will not disgrace my Progeny.


Exit. Carad. O disgrash to peat St. Taffie's coshen! Use the true Pritti^h no
petter?


Pen. Caradock, will you and your Lice disgrash her Progeny? The Vermin of
Hector and Troilus would not do so for all Achilles Myrmidons.


Car. Her do follow her petticree from head to foot: Her Grandsire En^as ran
away before.


Exit. Carad. Brun. Marry ill tide thee mon, use a mon of our Nation no better.


Pen. Generous Brun, I thought you would not have budg'd a foot by St. Andrew.


Brun. What of that woman? Aies no endure Poverty,
The Scuts love mickle wealth better then so.

Exit. Brun. Pen. Will Termock too disgrash his Fadder and Mudders?


Ter. Termock runs for te credit of his heels to look the Reshiment of foot.


Ex. Ter. Pen. Now, woe is me, woe is my Poverty!
That can find grace or mercy in few places.
What shall I do? If my whole Army fly,
I must run too; if I stay here, J die.

Exit. Pen. Act. 3. Scaen. 3.
Carrion and the Rusticks, Clodpole, Stiff, etc. Car. So now you see Carrion for
his valor may compare with Don Quixot or the mirror of chiva^ry. Come, come
along you old fortunate Rascals, you that in the days of Queen Richard fed
upon nothing but barlybroth and puddings, you shall be rich you rogues all of
you, feed hard at the Counceltable.

How daintily will thou become a scarlet Gown, when such poor snakes as I
shall come with Cap and Knee, How does your good Lordship? Did your Honor
sleep well to night? How does Madam Kate and Madam Ciss, have their Honors any
morningmilk-cheefe to sell? Will it please your Lordship to command your
servant to be drunk in your honours-wine-seller? Your Honors in all duties,
and so J kiss your Honors hand.


Clod. Thou shall kiss my Honors tail. Then will I again say, Fellow, how
does thy honorable Lord? tell him he does not congenerate from the noble family
he comes of: I would have some confabilitation with him concerning a hundred of
his Lordships pitchforks. But I am going to the Bench, and with the Committee
to firk up the proud Priests before us, and humble the Country. Tell him Madam
Kate is as sound as a Kettle: thou should have concourst with her Ladyship,
but she is skimming her Milk-bowls, and melting her dripping-pans as busy as a
bodylouse. Now fellow go into my wine-cellar to play on my sack-buts, and take
no care for finding the way out again. But sirrah, see you drink my Honors
health: your see I can tell what belongs to Lordships, and what is more to good
manners. But what is the news abroad, my honest Coranto stilo novo sub (...).


Car. I know not what to say, but that my master is Emperor of Constantinople,
a second Tamberlain; we shall have nothing but glary Beef and Bajazers in
every Cup-board. Plutus has left stumbling; the puppy is nine days old, and
can see perfectly. Gramercy Esculapius! it is pity but thou should have a
better beard then Apollo thy father. O Esculapius, the very Pultise of
Surgeons, and Urinal of Physicians!


Clod. Vaith neighbors, then let us make bone-fires: this news is as sweet as
Zugarzopps.

(He sings.) My Jane and I full right merrily, this jollity will avouch,
To witness our mirth upon the green earth, together we'll dance a
clatter-do-pouch. clatter-de-pouch, clatter, etc.

Lack. And then will J kiss thy Kate and my Cisse, as soon as J rise from my
couch.
The wenches i will tumble and merrily jumble,
Together we will dance a clatter-de-pouch.

Cho. clatter-de-pouch, clatterde -- etc.


Car. Jle kiss if J can our Dary-maid Nan,
Together we'll billing be found:
Let every slouch dance clatter-de-pouch,
Together we'll dance a Sellengers round.

Lack. J will not be found at Sellengers round, although thou do call me a
slouch. Banks's horse cannot prance a merrier dance Then rumbling and jumbling
a clatter-depouch, clatterde etc.


Cho. Then rumbling etc.


Exeunt Clodpole, Lackland. Enter Mrs. Chremylus, manet Carrion. Mrs. Here Is
rumbling and jumbling indeed. I was spinning my daughter a new smock, and they
keep such a noise I cannot sleep for um. Passion of my heart, I wonder what
news there is abroad, and why that knave Carrion makes no more haste home.


Car. Now will I be an Emperor, and contemn my Mistress


Mrs. Cari what news Carrion?


Car. I cannot answer them to day, command the Ambassadors to attend our will
to morrow.


Mrs. Why Carrion, I say!


Car. Go give him my gold-chain and precious jewel.


Mrs. What are you mad?


Car. And a rich cup-board of my daintiest plate.
Well, let me see what it will cost me now,
For to maintain some forty thousand men
In arms against the Turks.

Mrs. Sir, do you know your self?


Car. Suppose I lend some twenty thousand millions.


Mrs. Some twenty thousand puddi^gs.


Car. And send two hundred sail to conquer Spain, and Rupert too, and fright
the Inquisition

Out of their wits --


Mrs. If any be out more then thou, I Will be hanged.


Car. The King of Poland does not keep his word:
And then my Tenants for my Custom-house
Are twenty hundred thousand pounds behind hand.
In Haberdashers-Hall, or the I Will of Tripoly.

Mrs. Take that for your Haberdashershall, or Isle of Tripoly.


(she cuffs him) Car. Traitors; my guard! where are my Beef-eaters? O my old
Mrs. was it you? why, are you not drunk with mirth? I was in good hope ere this
to have seen you reeling in a French hood. Well, have at your old petticoat.
Madam, I have news will ravish you, my dainty Madam; a bushel of unmeasurable
joy.


Mrs. Then prithee tell thy comfortable message; and if it tickle me in the
telling, I will give thee a pair of high-shooes more then thy quarters wages.


Car. Listen then while I anatomise my whole discourse from the head to the
heel.


Mrs. Nay good Carrion, not to the heel.


Car. But I will, though your heel were a Polonian, or a French heel, which is
the fashion.


Mrs. Nay do not molest me, Carrion. I am very squeamish, and may chance have a
qualm come over my stomach.


Car. Then I begin. First we came to the god leading Plutus, then most
miserable, but now as happy as Fortunatus his Nightcap. First we made him a
Dipper, we duckt him over head and ears in water, we made him ^n Anabaptist.


Mrs. Alas poor soul, 'twas enough to have put him into an ague: one would not
have used a Water-spaniel more unmercifully.


Car. No, nor a cursed queen in a cucking^ool, Mrs. You see what creatures these
dippers are. J warrant when the young Lasles were a dipping, the blind Rogue
could see that well enough. Well, Mrs. coming to the Temple of Esculapius,
where all the altars stood furnished with reaking pasties and ^ot pippin-pies, O
'twas such sweet religion, my mouth watered at it. Just upon the hearth they
were beathing a great black-pudding, to stay the gods stomach till breakfast.
Here we laid Plutus in a cradle and rockt him asleep.


Mrs. O the folly of such Simpletons, lay ^n old man in a cradle!


Car. And why not? is he not a child the second time? Next, every man made his
own bed: the liberal god allowed us fresh peasestraw.


Mrs. And was there no more lame and impudent creatuers at this Spittle-house?


Car. Of all sorts, mistress. There was a young heir newly crept out his
wardship, that had been sick of a young Lady three years and upwards.


Mrs. Just as I am of Chremylus. Sir, seeing you are of good parts and
properties, you may presume to come sometimes into my bedchamber.


Car. No mistress, the Dary-maid shall serve my turn. Next was a pretty
waitinggentlewoman, that with dreaming of her Lord, was fallen into a terrible
Greensicknesse.


Mrs. Now by my holidame, J could have cured that my self; if she be troubled
with the maidenhead-grief, J can give her as quick deliverance as any
Esculapius in Europe.


Car. Many Lawyers were troubled with the itch in their fingers; many young
Heirs in a consumption; burst Citizens so overswell'd with interest-mony, that
they were in danger of breaking; many Treasurers, Sequestrators and Receivers
came for help, for they had received so much moneys, that they had lost their
eyesight, and could not see to make accounts: there were Townsmen came to have
their brow-antlets knocked off, Presbyt^ians for the Directory, Cavies for the
Service Book; some Tradesmen and Scholars, that had long fed upon costive
Usurers, being much bound, came to the Temple to be made solluble.


Mrs. Nay, if he be so good at it, I Will go and see if he can cure me of my
corns; they vex me so wonderfully, J cannot sleep for um.


Car. Marry Jove forbid, mistress! should your corns be cured, how should my
master do for an Almanac to foretell the weather? Pond, Booker, Allestree,
Ieffry Neve Gent. nay nor Merlinus Anglicus, are not half so good Astronomers
as your Ladyships prophetique toes.


Mrs. Mass if it be so, J shall save him two pence a year, rather then put him
to the charges of an Alman^ck. But was there any more?


Car. Yes there were many Country-lobs, that having surfeited on the
glory-bacon of their Milk-maids favors, were fain to repair to the next
Alehouse for purgations. Deaf Scriveners came for their cares; Silenced
Ministers to be cured of dumbness; many Scholars of Colleges, whose gowns
having been sick diverse years of the scu^f, desired the god to do them the
grace as to change the color of that disease into the black-jaundies.


Mrs. And did he cure them all?


Car. All but Neoclides; a blind fellow, and yet such an arrant thief, that he
sto^e all things he set his eyes on. To proceed: the Monk put out the
^allow-tapers, bid us sleep, and whatsoever hissing we heard, to see and say
nothing. There we slept soundly, and in the honor of Esculapius snorted most
devoutly. Marry J could not sleep: for there was an old woman with a pitcher of
peaseporredge at her head lay next to me. Now I had a great zeal to devour the
delicious pillow: but putting forth my hand, I espi^d the bald Friar eating the
religious cakes, and cracking of the consecrated nuts. So I thinking it a piece
of divine charity, studied how to cheat the old Beldame.


Mrs. O sacrilegious Varlet! were not afraid of the god?


Car. Yes, lest he might cosen me of my pease-porredge. The woman perceiving me
put forth her hand: then I fell a hissing like a Winchester-goose on S. Georges
dragon; the woman snatched back her fangs, and for very fear smelt like the
perfume of a Polecat: in the interim I supt up the porredge; and my belly being
full, I laid my bones to rest.


Mrs. And did not the god come yet?


Car. O mistress, now comes the jest: when the god came near me, my devotions
a posteriori sent him forth most ridiculous orisons; the Pease-broth in me was
so windy that I thought I had an Aeolus in my belly; my guts wambled, and on
the sudden evaporated a clap or two of most unmanerly thunder, the very noise
of it broke all the Urinals in the Spittle-house, and saved Esculapius the
labor of casting Jupiters water; it frighted his poor Apothecary out of his
wits, as he was making Saturn a glister (...) and for the smell, Penacea* told
her father that she was sure it could not be frankincense.


Mrs. Yes, but was not the god angry that you kept your backside no closer?


Car. Who he! It Is such a nasty Numen, he would be glad if your close-stool
were his alms-tub, that he might feed upon your meat at second hand.


Mrs. Nay, but leave your windy discourse, and proceed with your tale.


Car. At length two snakes appeared, and lickt Plutus eyes: then Aesculapius
beating Aigus his head in a mortar, tempered it with a look beyond Luther, well
minced with the roasted apple of his eye: the whole confection boiled in a pint
of christalline humor, which being dropped into his eye with the feather of a
peacocks tail, he recovered his sight in the twinkling of an eye.


Mrs. But how came the god of wealth blind?


Car. How! Because Honesty is like a Puck-fist; he never met it but once, and
it put out his eyes: besides, the rich Rogue had too many Pearls in his eyes.


Mrs. And what are we the better now his eyesight is restored?


Car. Why thus: None but honest people shall grow rich now; there is the wonder:
my master Chremylus shall be an Earl, and you from the Cream-pot of Rusticity
shall be churn'd into the honorable Butter of a Countess.


Mrs. Nay, they were wont to call me Countess before: and I shall do well
enough for a Countess, I warrant you. I thank my stars, I can spin as fine a
thread for woollen, as any Countess in England. Well Carrion, now I am a
Countess, Mrs. Ficar shall not sit above me in the Church; I will have as fine
a stammel-Petticoat and rich Stomacher as the proudest of them all. Pi^thee
Carrion go to the Goldsmith, buy me a ring, and see it be well enamored.


Car. You would say enameled. But Mrs. what will you do now?


Mrs. I will go in to present the gods new Eyes with a basket of Pippins and a
dozen of Churchwardens.


Exeunt ambo. Enter Plutus, Chremylus. Plut. Good morrow to the morn next to my
gold:
First bright Apollo, I salute thy rays,
And next the earth* Minerva's sacred land.
Truly (...) soil, Athenian city.
How my soul blushes, and with grief remembers
My miserable blindness! wretched Plutus,
Whose hood-winkt ignorance made thy guilty feet
Stumble into the company of Rascals,
Informers, Sequestrators, Pettifoggers,
Grave (...), Sycophants and unconscionable Coridons,
And Citizens whose falls Conscience weighed too light
In their own seals, claimed by a principal Charter
The Cornucopia proper to themselves.
When good just men, such as did venture lives
For Countries safety and the Nations honor,
Were paid with their own wounds, and made those scars
Which were accounted once the marks of honor,
The miserable privilege of begging,
Scarce to have lodging in an Hospital.
And those whose labors suffer nightly throes
To give their teeming brains deliverance
To enrich the land with learned merchandise
The sacred Traffic of the soul, rich wisdom:
Starve in their studies, and like moathes devour
The very leaves they read, scorned of the Vulgar,
Nay, of the better sort too many times,
As if their knowledge were but learned wickedness,
And every Smug could preach as well as they:
Nay, as if men were worse for Academies.
But all shall be amended. I could tell
A tale of horror, and unmask foul actions;
Black as the night they were committed in.
I could unfold a Lerna, and with proofs
As clear as this deer light, could testify
How I unwilling kept them company.

Chre. O heaven forbid! what wicked things are these?
Yet such there be, that ^lock into my company,
In swarms as if they would d^voure me quick,
That throng so fast, as if they would crow'd my soul
Out of her house of clay: while every man
Employes his supple hams, and oily tongue
To fained complements and importunate service.
I could not walk the Exchange to day, but straight
Each head was bare, every officious knee
Bowed to my honor, and enquired my health;
And which is more intolerable, snow-whiteheads,
Whose every hair seemed died in innocence.
With that one leg which was not yet in the grave,
Croucht like so many Tapsters. These springtide friends,
These swarming Flies, bred by the summers heat;
Should but adversities black cloud appear,
With lowering looks, theatning a winters storm,
Farewell my summers swallow: these are friends
To Cremylus cupboard, and affect I see
My Oysters and my Puddings, it is not me.

Exit. Enter Mrs. Cremylus. Mrs. Marry gods blessing oth' thy soul! Now a
hundred good morrows to thy eyes. I have brought the a dish of Pearmains and
Pippins, with a dish of Lordings and Ladyapples, and some of our country fruit,
half a score of Russetings.


Plut. O it is unfit, my eyesight being restored,
To accept a kindness till I have bestowed one.

Mrs. Marry and muff! I can be as stout as you if J please. Do you scorn my
kindness?


Plut. Apples and Nuts, weel eat 'um by the fire,
Where the rude audience shall not laugh at us:
'Twere an absurdity in a Comic Poet
To make a musse of sweetmeats on the Stage,
Throwing a handful of ridiculous Nuts
To catch the popular breath and ignorant praise
Of preaching Cobblers, Carmen, Tinkers, Tailors.

Mrs. Nay, it is even true, the good old Gentleman speaks very wisely; you may
believe him, if you please. I Will be sworn, this morning, the Lay- Clergy,
while they were a preaching at Bell-ally in Colemanstreet, I came by with my
basket; the hungry Rascals in pure zeal had like to eat up my Ginger-bread, had
there not been Popish pictures upon it; I had much ado to keep them from
scrambling my Apples too, had not the sets of my old Ruff looked like so many
Organ-Pipes and frighted them. But faith rake-hels, (and you mend not your
manners) (...) complain to Mr. Goodwin and the 'mittees too. Come in good
Gentleman, though I have never a tooth in my head, yet i will crack Nuts with my
Gumms but i will bear thee company.


Exeunt ambo. Finis Actus Tertii.
Act 4.
Scaen. 1.
Caron Solus. Ca. To be rich is the daintiest pleasure in the world;
especially, to grow rich without ventring the danger of Tiburn or Whipping.
Every Cupbord is full of Custards, the Hogsheads replenished with sparkling
Sacks. The veriest Gippo in the house will not drink a degree under Muscadine.
All the Porredgepots are arrant Barbary gold. All the Vessels in the house,
from the Basin and Ewer to the Chamber Pot and Vinegar-bottle, are of
Middletons silver. The Kitchen and Buttery is entire Ivory, the very purity of
the Elephants tooth. The Sink is paved with the rich Rubies, and incomparable
Carbuncles of Sir John Oldcastle's Nose. The Conduit runs as good Rose Water as
any is in Aristotle's Well. The Dish-clouts are cloth of Tissue, and from the
skirts of every Scullion drop melting streams of Amber grease. We the poor
servants play at Even and Odd with archangels, and at Cross and Pile for
Jacobusses, in a humor, to out Philip the King of Spain. My Master is
sacrificing a Sow, a Goat, and a Ram for joy; But J could not endure the house,
there is such a smoke from the reaking of the roast, that though it please my
stomach, my eyes are offended with it.


Enter Gogle and his Boy carrying his Shoes and Cloak. Gog. Boy follow me, for
J have a zeal to be rich;
My devotion leads me in the righteous path
To Plutus god of wealth. Profane poverty
Is a Carthusian, and a grand delinquent,
One of the malignant party up in arms
Against the well-affected.

Car. Say Brother, who are you, whose righteous Shoes conduct you hither?


Gog. Ananias* Gogle, verily.
A devout Brother, that has often been plundered
By wicked persecution: but last night
My dreaming spirit f^retold J should be rich
And happy made by Revelation.

Ca. Gogle, or Cogle, a Geneva brother
Of sanctified snuffling, a pure Elder
Oth' precise cut, or else past Ordinances.

Gog. No, but a zealous Saint of Amsterdam,
Whose Nose is forward to promote the cause;
Crosses are Romish Jdols, yet misfortune
Has put so many dismal Crosses on me,
Till every cross was spent, and sent away
On superstitious Pilgrimages: fie upon it,
That zeal and ignorance should be convertible.

Car. What would you have, dear brother? for J think
J have heard you Exercise at Bell-alley.

Gog. It Is true, but yet
J come to Plutus Conventicle now.
It Is he can cure my troubles, he brings joy
To the fraternity of Amsterdam,
To the Geneva brotherhood, and the Saints
Whose pure devotions feed on Bunbury Cakes:
He can restore my wealth, give me abundance
Of holy Gold and Silver purified,
Jncrease my talents spent upon the Sisters,
That J may thrive again as did my father
That reverent Saint Gogle, Patience Hypomo^e
A holy Tailor and a venerable Parson.

Ca. Say Brother, may a Tailor be a Parson?


Gog. It Is very fit: For first, his sacred Parchment
Can take the measure of Religion;
And from the Cloth of a good Conscience
Make up a Suit for honest Conversation:
Sewed with the thread of Goodness, stitcht in the Seams
With twisted Silk of Piety and Innocence*
Lined with good Thoughts and charitable Actions:
The sacred shreds and snips of holy Carsey
May chance to mend the Garments of the Righteous,
If Satan come to rend their guiltless robes.

Car. But were you not in miserable condition,
Before that Plutus came to speak amongst you?
He speaks with golden eloquence, believe't:
For now your zealous bags are full again
With holy silver, and good Brotherly gold;
You cannot fall to desperation,
Having so many Angels to defend you.

Gog. Yea certes: therefore now I find god Plutus
Has made me Collector of his contributions.
I must needs thrive, therefore I take occasion
To give the god the greatest gratulation.

Car. But tell me, zealous brother, why does that boy
Carry that Saint-like Cloak, and upright Shoes?

Gog. Cloaks are for Saints; they preach in Cloaks all now:
Gowns are all Popes: no Sermons without Cloaks.
This holy Cloak and I these thirteen years
Have freez'd together, and these upright Shoes;
Not upright once, till their ungodly soles
That always went awry, were rightly mended
By a religious conscionable Cobbler,
With Leather liquor'd in most zealous tears.
These shoes, I say, ten winters and three more
Have traced the Conventicles of the Brethr^n.
These shoo^s, this Cloak J come to dedicate
To Plutus, in requital of h^s kindness.

Car. What, your shoes come for Consecration?


Gog. Now fie upon your Popish Consecration!
This Cloak is not a rag of Babylon.
I offer these as Presents: this same is
A well-affected Cloak; and zealous shoes,
Never profaned with irreligious toes.
Such precious gifts they are, such devout presents,
He cannot but accept them verily.

Enter Never-good. Nev. O hone a cree o hone!
My empty purse and belly weep for sorrow,
And every string and gut poures lamentations.
I was a Sequestrator once, and used
To find occasions of Delinquencie
Committed against the State, like a Promooter.
But now my guts have sequestered my belly,
And let it out to others. Wretched state
Of them that die in famine! But in me
Jerusalems dearth is here epitomized.

Car. Garret Ostle-bridge was down, welladay, welladay.


Nev. As I was wont to inform against Malignants,
So now my guts give informations
Against my teeth and stomach. Wretched Nere-be-good!
J now must pine and starve at Pennylesse-Bench,
Who starved Orphans and delinquent Prisoners,
Like a Committees Marshal. Now I see
What it is to want a little honesty.
Oh that the Philosophers truly had defined
The Moon Green-Cheefe! J would desire the man
That dwells in such a blessed habitation,
To roast me one poor piece before I die,
That for my Epitaph men might write this Note,
Our Sequestrator had a VVelsh-mans throat.

Gog. Now verily I find by revelation,
This is a Varlet of no honest fashion;
Who 'cause he had no honest occupation,
Is fallen into most wretched tribulation.

Nev. O hunger, hunger! Now good sky fall quickly,
Or J shall die ere it rain Larks. Who could
Endure to have his goods confiscate thus
By the blind puppy Plutus! Well, young Cerberus,
I Will hire the Furies to pull out thy eyes,
And once more put thee to the trade of stumbling.

Ca. This is a Rascal deserves to ride up Holborn,
And take a pilgrimage to the triple-tree,
To dance in Hemp Derricks Caranto:
Lets choke him with Welsh Parsley.

Nev. Good friend be merciful, choke me with Puddings and a Rope of Sausages,
And I will thank you here and after death;
For I shall die I fear for want of choking.
Where is the god that promised golden mountains
To Enrich us all: is this the gold he gives me?
He has not left me coin enough to purchase
A mess of Portage, like my brother Esau.
Empson and Dudley, happy were you two
Being the prime Sequestrators of your age,
That you were hanged before this day of famine.
I pine and starve, live to outlive my self,
Turn Ghost before J die. Blind fornicator
Plutus has sequestered the Sequestrator.

Gog. J tell thee out of zeal to the Cause thou lie.


Nev. So my good zealous Brother of ignorance,
And what says your Amsterdam Nose? you think
That every man turns Factor for the Devil,
A Reprobate, that comes not every night
To hear your fine reformed Basket-maker
Preach in his VVicker Pulpit: you shall not think
To have my money thus, you shall not think it.
Prate any longer here, mutter again,
And J will make thy pretty Brotherly soul
Come snuffling through thy sanctified nostrils.

Ca. Nevergood, J know was always fierce


Nev. Yes indeed sir, for now my Panch is empty;
J'de have you know, J have an excellent stomach.

Ca. J will do what J can to make this flesh
To have a Combat with this furious spirit.
Ananias Gogle, do you see this Heretic
^ow he triumphs against the Lay-preaching Brotherhood?
Go to him man, and beat him.

Gog. It Is a strong Reprobate. He would sequester me
Were J not for the Cause. J will not touch him*
He will defile my purest hands; he is
A lump of vile corruption. Breathe the other way;
Thy very breath's infectious, and it smells
As if thou had caught the Pox of the Whore of Babylon.

Nev. So sir, you dare not fight.


Gog. J will not fight. It is thy policy to have me fight,
That J might kill thee, and pollute my hands
With swinish blood. No, no, J will not fight
To make my self unsanctified.
J will dispute with thee, Nose against nose,
And valiantly J dare to snuffle with thee,
Jn the defense of silver-purified.

Nev. Would Plutus had no better Champion to defend him!
Then such as only snuffle in the Cause.
J would presume by my own proper valor
To make a breach into the strongest Cupboard,
Were it as strong as Basing-house or Bristol.

Gog. Avaunt thou Synagog of iniquity,
J see thou art oth' Popish tribe: Necessity
Does make thy Guts take Purgatory penance,
Brings thee to shrift and shift, makes thy teeth observe
Unconscionable Fridayes, profane fastingdayes,
With Lent and Antichristian Emberweeks.

Nev. It Is much against my conscience, my devotion
Lies toward the Kitchen. If J change my faith,
J will turn fat Presbyter or Anabaptist.
J never loved this heresy of fasting,
Plutus has put me out of Commons. Yet my Nose
Smells the delicious odor of Roast-beef.

Ca. What do thou smell?


Nev. J say, J smell some Cavaliers Roastbeef.


Ca. Out on thee Varlet, J warrant thoud'st fain sequester it.
Jf the despair of dining vex thee thus,
J can acquaint thee with a liberal Duke
That keeps an open house.

Nev. J charge thee by the love thou bear thy stomach,
By all the happiness of eating puddings,
And every Pie thou meanest to eat at Christmasse, To tell me who --

Gog. Now out upon thee for a roguish Heretic!
^is not a Christmas, it is a Nativity Pie.
That superstitious name, J know, is banished
Out of all England, Holley and Ivy too.

Ca. Why? go to Paul's, Duke Humphrey wants a guest;
If his Rooms now be clean from Soldiers Horse-dung,
There you may stay and walk your bellyful:
Bid your self welcome, never pay your Ordinary,
Nor say no Grace, but thank your self for hunger.

Nev. O misery of men, that J the health
And lover of my Country should thus pine
And die for want of Porredge! See you Chimney,
What sweet perfumes, what comfortable smoke
It breaths; that very smoke does smell of Mutton.
Well, J shall die, and all the Worms will curse me
For bringing so lean a careasse to the grave.

Gog. Answer to me.


Nev. What, to those narrow Breeches?


Gog. Do not profane my Breeches. For these Breeches
I tell thee were in fashion in the Primitive Church.
Answer to me.

Nev. What will you Catechize me?


Gog. Art thou a Farmer?


Nev. No, heaven forbid, J am not mad,
To live ^y Dung and Horse-turds.

Gog. Art thou a Merchant?


Nev. 'Faith J can walk the Exchange,
Put on an Indian face, spit China fashion,
Discourse of newfound Worlds, call Drake a Gander,
Ask if they hear news of my Fleet of Ships
That sailed by land through Spain to the Antipodes
To fetch Westphalia Bacon. J can discourse
Of shorter ways to the Indies, spend my judgment
On the plantation of the Summer Isles.
Censure Guiana Voyage, deam of plots,
To bring A^gier by shipping unto Dover.
Then of Prince Rupert's ships, and how the Pope
May make St. Dunstan draw the Devil to the Peak,
To make him kiss his own Breech.
This can J talk with Merchants, in the close
Invite my self to Dinner at their houses,
And borrow money never to be repaid
Till the return of my silver Fleet from Persia.

Gog. Now fie upon thee, have thou no vocation,
No honest calling? then art thou not a Lawyer?

Nev. No faith, J am not; yet know a trick
To bring my neighbors into needless suits,
And undertake their actions: make 'um pay
For such a motion at the Dogs-head ^avern
A mark or two; disburse a piece or two
For Affulavits at the Mitre: sell 'um
For twenty shillings an Injunction,
Writs of Rebellion, Chancery Decrees,
A Nisi prius, or a Latitat.

Car. Poor souls, they have very hard words for their money.


Nev. When this is done, I sit and laugh at them:
Then they may buy a Writ of Execution
And go and hang themselves. For J feed on them
All the Term long, live with them in Va^ation,
Cheating them by Bills of Return.

Gog. Vile Rascal, have thou no other shift?


Nev. Faith yes, sometimes
I feed on One and twenties, cheat young Heirs,
Bringing them acquainted with some cozening Scrivener,
To ease them of the burden of too much earth.
Sometimes I woe old widows, go a sui^ring*
Unto the thirds of an Aldermans estate*
Sometimes prick up my self and grow familiar
With the proud wealthy Citizens wanton wives,
And by the fortitude of my back maintain
Both back and belly.

Gog. O sink of sin, and boggards of corruption!
Have thou no honest calling?

Nev. Yes J have: J know a trick to snuffle at Bell-Ally,
Rail at the Steeple Houses, and the Popish Bishops,
And the Tithe-scraping Priests, Sir-John-Presbyters.

Gog. Out on thee Villain, foe to the holy Cassocks.
J do remember thee in the Archbishops time,
Thou made me stand ith Popish pillory
With Prin and Bur^on, only for speaking
A little sanctified treason.

Car. But we will be revenged; we'll have him dragged
Through all the town by Alewives, and then hanged up
Upon a Sign-post, for conspiring with
Sir Giles Mompessons, in the persecution
Of innocent Tapsters.

Gog. Come, seeing he has no zeal nor ardent love,
Let Us strip him naked, till he freeze and grow
As cold as Charity.

Nev. What will you plunder me? where is your warrant Ho?
Do, sanctified thieves, plunder: yet J shall live
To see my little Anabaptist come
To his twelve Godfathers, thence to the Ladder;
Where having nosed a tedious Psalm or two
The holy hemp must gird your sanctified windpipe,
While you in honor of the righteous cause
With a wry-mouth salute the souls at Paddington,
And turn a Tyburn-Saint.

Gog. Pull off his profane and irreligious Doubler,
Anathematize his Breeches, excommunicate
His impious Shirt: there is not a rag about him,
But is heretical, full of Babylon lice,
Like the foul sinock of Austria.

Nev. So, do it if you dare: that J may live
To see your fine precise Geneva-Breeches
Hang in the Hang-mans wardrobe. Ho bear witness.

Car. Nay faith your witness is not here: a Mandrake
Has frighted him: the hue and cry was up
'Twas time to trust the safety of his neck
Unto the swiftness of his heels. Come, come,
Uncase. So now Ananias Gogle
Lend me your cloak to cloak this Sycophant.

Gog. My cloak! his Romish carcass shall not be arraied
In these pure innocent robes: shall any bastards
Of the vile generation of Pope Joan
Defile my cloak, that has these thirteen years
Wiped my belovep nose, whose very snot
Is reverenct by the brethren? No, he may bring
These garments to the Mass, profane uni there,
And make my cloak a reprobate, and commit
Adultery with the seven hills: besides,
He is an Idol; and I verily think
It were idolatry to let this cloak
Embrace a Pagan. No, good cloak, nere turn
Apostate from the faith of Amsterdam.
Good cloak, be not akin to Iulians jerkin:
Though thou be threadbare, thou shall nere be turned;
No, no, it is fitter Plutus have thee.

Car. No, Plutus shall have this, '^is fresh and new:
Your cloak is threadbare; your too fervent zeal
Has almost made it tinder.

Gog. What, Plutus have his cloak! Oh it is the skin
Of a pernicious snake. O Popery!
A profane Cope, or the Levitical smock,
I mean a Surplisse, is not more unlawful.

Car. As it is now: But wipe your nose on it thrice,
It Is sanctified; you know the brotherly snot
Has enthusiastique operations in it.

Gog. I am persuaded. Let him have it then.
But what shall be decreed of my upright shoes?

Car. We Will hang them on his head. How his Brow-antlets
Become their furniture! By S. Hughs bones,
He looks like the very ghost of a shoomakers shop.

Gog. O swear not by St. Hugh, that canonized Cobbler.
Come holy brother, let us drag him hence.

Nev. Do, Scundrels, do: but if I once come a fequestring,
I Will go to Dr. Faustus, true son and heir
To Beelzebub, whom the great Devil begot
Upon a Succubus, on Midsummer Eve,
As Hell was sowing Fernseed. This D. Faustus
The Mepiastophoius of his age, the wonder
And the sole Asmodaeus of his times,
Shall by his Necromantick skill (Fortune my foe)
In the Black-art lend me his Termagant,
Old Almegroth, o^ Cantimelopus,
Or some Familiar else an hour or two.
Thence I Will to Phlegeton, and with him drink
A cup of Hells ^lapdragon, and returning
Spue fire and (...) into Plutus face,
To roast the rottch apple^ of his eyes
With Srygian flames that I revomitize.

Exit Nev. Gog. We fear not Dr. Faustus: his Landlord Luciferd
Says that his Lease with him is out of date;
Nor will he let him longer tenant be
To the twelve Houses of Astrology.

Car. Let Dr. Faustus do his worst. Let me see if this Termagant can help you
to your Clothes again.


Enter Anus. Car. But stay, what worm-eaten Hag is this? Holy brother, let us
away to Bo-peep, we shall be seen else. Do you not perceive that old Beldame of
Lapland, that looks as if she had sailed thither in an egg-shell, with a wind
in the corner of her handkercher? I am not so much afraid of Dr. Faustus, as of
that witch of Endor.


Exeunt Gogle, Carrion. Act. 4. Scaen. 3.
Anus sola. An. Hey ho! methinks I am sick with lying alone last night. Well, I
will scratch out the eyes of this same rascally Plutus god of wealth, that has
undone me. Alas poor woman! since the shop of Plutus his eyes has been open,
what abundance of misery has befallen thee! Now the young Gallant will no
longer kiss thee nor embrace thee: but thou poor widow must lie comfortless
in a solitary pair of sheets, having nothing to cover thee but the lecherous
Rug and the bawdy Blankets. O that J were young again! how it comforts me to
remember the death of my maidenhead! Alas poor woman, they contemn old age, as
if our lechery was out of date. They say we are cold: methinks that thought
should make um take compassion of us, and lie with us, if not for love, for
charity. They say we are dry: so much the more capable of Cupids fire; while
young wenches, like green wood, smoke before they flame. They say we are old:
why then experience makes us more expert. They tell us our lips are wrinkled:
why that in kissing makes the sweeter titillation. They swear we have no
teeth: why then they need not fear biting. Well, if our lease of Lechery be
out, yet methinks we might purchase a Night-labourer for his dayes-wages. I
will be revenged of this same Plutus, that wrongs the orphans, and is so
uncharitable to the widows. Ho, ho, who is within here!


Enter Scrape-all. Scrap. Who's there?


An. A maid against her will this fourscore years. Goddy-godden, good father:
pray which is the house where Plutus lives?


S^rap. Ma^ry follow your nose, you may smell out the door, my little damsel of
fifteen, but fifteen times over. In my pinion, this young Less would make a
pretty Maidmairian in a Comedy to be presented before Plutus.


An. Now god save all. By your leave sweet Grandsire! J will call forth some of
the house.


Scrap. What need that? cannot J serve the turn?


An. No marry can you not. Nay, as old as J am, J will not bestow my widows
maidenhead at second hand on such a frosty Nestor. J will have March or April;
J scorn to commit fornication with December.


Scrap. Nay good Autunme, do not misconceive me: J asked if J could not bear in
your errand or no. But J see master Chremylus coming.


Enter Chremylus. An. Alas good sir! J have endured the most unjust and
unsufferable injuries, since Plutus has regained his eyesight, as ever poor
woman did since the days of Queen Edmund. Alas sir, life is not life without
natural recreation.


Chr. How Is this? some Promooter of the feminine gender!


An. No by my chastity, but an honest matron of Turn-bull, that have paid scot
and lot there these fourscore years, yet never was so abused as now.


Chr. What abuse?


An. Unsufferable abuse, intolerable injuries.


Chr. Speak, what injuries?


An. An injury unspeakable.


Chr. What is it?


An. Alas sir, it is lying alone. O the misery of lying alone! would J had been
below ground ere J had seen this minute of adversity. Ah Turnbul-Grove, shall J
never more be beholding to thy charitable shades! Ah 'twas a good world when
the Nuneries stood: Oh their charitable thoughts that took so much compassion
on poor women, to found such zealous bawdy-houses! Had not Cromwell been an
Eunuch, he had never persuaded the destruction of such places set up for such
uses. 'Twas a good world too in the days of Queen Mary: a poor woman might
have desired a kindness from a lusty Friar in auricular confession. But Plutus
eyes are like Basilis^s, they strike us dead with adversity.


Chr. What ails this Skin-ful of Lechery? alas poor Granam, do thou grieve
because thou want money to go drink with thy gossips!


An: Ah do not mock me sir: it is love, parlous love that has so enflamed my
heart with Bavins of desire, that J am afraid he will make me the very
bone-fire of affection.


Chr. What meant the knavish Cupid to set this old Chark-coal on fire?


An. I Will tell you sir: there was a young Gallant about the town, one Neanias.


Chr. J know him.


An. He being a younger brother, had no lands in taile-tenure, but City-widows.
He was but poor; but as fine a well-favour'd Gentleman, it did me good at heart
to look on him. J ministered those things he wanted; and he recompensed my
kindness in mutual love: as I supplied his wants, so he succored my
necessities with all possible activity: I would not have changed him for
Stamford, though he jumped the best in London.


Chr. And what did this pretty Pimp usually beg of you?


An. Not much: for he reverenced me wonderfully, partly for love, but more for
venerable antiquity. Sometime he would beg a Cloak.


Chr. To cover his knavery.


An. Sometimes a pair of Boots.


Chr. To exercise his horsmanship.


An. Sometimes a Peck or two of Corn.


Chr. For which he paid a bushel of affection.


An. Now and then a Kittle for his sister, a Petticoat and French-hood for his
mother. Not much: all the good turns I did him in the day, the conscionable
Youth requited ere midnight.


Chapter This was nothing indeed: it seems he did reverence you, (as you say)
partly for love, but more for your venerable antiquity.


An. Nay, he would tell me too, that he did not ask these things for his
midnight wages, but only in love. He would not endure to wear any thing, but
what I paid for, out of a mee^ desire to remember me.


Chre. This was infinite affection! Could he not endure to wear anything but
what you paid for? 'Twas dear love this, pretty love tricks 'faith; you may
see, how the wanton youth was enflamed with your beauty.


An. I but now, the unconstant Wag has not the same measure of respect; I sent
him a Custard yesterday, and he would not accept of it, because it quaked like
my worm-eaten --. I sent him other sweetmeats too, but he returned me answer,
that certainly J had breathed on them, for they smelt of my Gums. Moreover, he
bid me despair of a nightlabourer, and never more expect him at midnight
again. For Plutus has made him rich without me; adding withal, That once J was
young: Ostend was once a pretty town. The Milesians in the days of yore were
valiant: and in the days of King Henry the English were sturdy fellows at the
battle of Agin-Court.


Chre. Faith, J commend the stripling for his wit. It Is none of the worst
conditions. Now he is rich, he will have the best and plumpest Cockatrice of
the City; when he was poor he was content with Porredge. There be many of that
profession, that maintain themselves by hugging the skin and bones of an
Aldermans widow.


An. I, but erst, he would have come everyday to my door.


Chre. Perchance a begging.


An. No, only to hear the melody of my voice.


Chre. Like enough, It could not choose but please him to hear what excellent
Music your Jews-trump could make, now all your teeth are out.


An. If he had but seen me sad and melancholy, he would have kissed me with
such a feeling of my sorrow, and have called me his Chuck and Helena.


Cre. 'Twas only to have one of Leda's Eggs to his Supper.


An. How often has he praised my fingers?


Chr. It Was when he looked for something at your hands.


An. Many a time has he sworn that my skin smelt sweeter then a Musk-cat.


Chr. He meant a Po^e-cat: did you not believe him? It Was when his Nose first
smelt of Hippocrasse, or else the perfume of your white-leather was so strong,
he could not endure it.


An. O how it comforts me to remember how he would call my eyes pretty
sparkling ones.


Chr. It Was cause they pinckt like the snuff of a Candle. Faith the Gentleman
had his wits about him: he knew how to get the old wives provision, the
Viaticum she had prepared to carry her to Gravesend.


An. Therefore, my friend, Plutus is to blame to promise relief, when he does
us such intolerable damages. How do you think J can endure to lie alone, when
so many sprights are walking? How shall J keep off the Nightmare, or defend my
self against the temptations of an Incubus.


Chre. Alas good Relic of antiquity! pay thy Fine and take a new Lease of
Lust. Faith J pity thee; what would thou have him do if he were here?


An. Marry, that since J have deserved so well of him, that he do me one
kindness for another. Good old Gentlemen, either let him restore me my goods,
or stand to his bargain. The Conditions not performed, the Obligation is of
none effect: my Lawyer resolves me, J may recover of him.


Chr. Noverint universi per praesentes, your Lawyer is a Coxcomb. Did he not
do his duty every night? J warrant you, he had as lieve have tugged at an Oar
as a --. In my mind, he has performed his part of the Obligation.


An. But he promised never to forsake me as long as J lived.


Chre. No more he has not; why? thou art now dead: Thy flesh is mortified,
only thy impotent lust has outlived thee a twelve month or two. Thou art but
a mere Carcass, nothing but Worms-meat.


An. Indeed grief has almost me't^d me into dust and ashes. Half-putrified J
walk up and down like the picture of Deaths-head in a charnel-house. But see
yonder is my Gamester, my Cock oth' game: he is marching to some banquet or
other: it is Sh^ove-Tuesday with him, but Lent with me. O grief, to be bound
from flesh!


Chr. It seems he is going to a feast, by his torch and garland.


Enter Neanias. Nea. I Will kiss the old Hag no more,
She has no moisture in her:
If ever I lie with a Less ere I die,
It shall be a youthful sinner.
Give me a Less that is young,
I ask no greater blessing:
I Will nere lie again with Fourscore and ten,
A carcass not worth the pressing.
I will not embrace her again,
To set the Town on a scoffing:
I Will never make more Death-widdow a Whore,
And cuckold the innocent Coffin.
Who Is this? Good morrow Venus, O good morrow
Old Duck, old Helen! Tell me, sweet Helen,
How have thou done this three thousand year young Pullet!
How have thon done ere since the wars of Troy?
Has the Cuckold Menelaus cast his (...)?
But what old goat is this? It Is Agam^mnon.
You Agam^mnon, is your (...)
As old as Helen? Tell me, old Helen, tell me,
When do the lecherous worms and thee begin
To act adultery in the winding-sheets?

An. What says my Duck; would have me go to bed?


Nea. What, my old Sweetheart! How come thou gray so soon?
Thou can not be so gray; J will not suffer't,
J will not be deceived, J will pull off
Thy cozening Perriwig.

An. So sir: J was not gray when J gave you my Smock off my back to make you
Night-caps. You swore J could not be above fifteen, when I translated my
Stammel-Petticoat into the masculine gender, to make your Worship a pair of
Scarletbreeches.


Nea. I shall never abide an Almanac while I live:
The Julian Account's an ar^ant Coxcombe;
But the Bissextile is an arrant Villain.
J will curse every Bissextile in the County of Europe.
Tho^ could not possibly be gray so soon,
Except a hundred Leap-years had conspired
To jump together, to make thee old oth' sudden.

Chr. He talks as if he had not seen you since the Conquest:
How many Jubilees past since he was last with you?

An. Now fie upon him! How long do you say? It Is no longer then yesterday, by
the faith of a woman, since he had the fruition of me, and swore J was as young
as Hecuba.


Chr. Then it is not with him as it is with others: for being drunk, he has
the use of his eyes more perfect then when he was sober.


An. No, the peevish fellow, now he is drunk, he sees double, and thinks me
twice as old as J am.


Nea. O Neptune, and the other graybearded gods,
Can you with all the Arithmetique of heaven
Number the wrincles of this Beldames forehead?
These many ru^s and furrows in thy cheek
Proves thy old face to be but Championground,
Tilled with the plough of age, well muckt with sluttery:
It Is time for thy lust to li^ sallow now.
Can any man endure to spend his youth
In kissing winters frozen lips? can veins
That swell with active blood, endure the embraces
Of such cold ice? Go and prepare thy coffin,
Think on thy winding sheet. When I was poor,
Cold limbs and empty guts persuaded me
To lie with skin and bones. Necessity,
As cruel as Mezentius tyranny,
Made me commit adultery with a carcass,
A putrified Corpse, a Bawd oth' Charnelhouse.
But now good dust and ashes, pardon me,
These arms shall never more embrace thy corpse.
Thou stews of clay, thou mud-wall of mortality,
Go rot and moulder; and if thy impotent lust
Must needs be satisfied, know Hell is a hothouse,
Perchance some hot-rein'd devil may undertake thee;
I Will lend a halfpeny to pay Charons boat-hire.
No, I will now choose me a good plump Lass,
As moist as April, and as hot as May,
Whose Damask-check shall make the Roses blush,
Whose lips at every kiss shall strike a heat
Into my veins, breathing through all my soul
An air as warm and sweet as the perfumes
That smoking rise from the dead Phoenix nest.
Now come my boon Companions,
And let us jovial be:
Thouh th Indies be the King of Spains,
We are as rich as he.
As rich as any King of Spain,
In mirth, if not in wealth:
Boy fill me then a bowl of Sack,
I Will drink my Mistress health.
My Mistress is but fifteen,
Her Lips is all my bliss:
Go tell her I will come at night,
And then prepare to kiss.
You my she- (...) may go s^ort the while,
Or kiss your Monky. I will take my torch,
Set her on fire, and let her smoke to Acheron.

An. O fire, fire! shall I die no better a death then the top of Pauls-steeple?


Chr. Nay take heed how you set your torch too near her; One spark will set her
a flaming, for she is made up of Saltpeter, very gunpowder well dried and
ready pruned, mee^ touch-wood, and as dry as any tavernbush.


Nea. It Is true, she will quickly take; the fire of lust
Has (...) her into tinder, some of hells brimstone,
But to make matches, and she e'll fit the Devil
For a whole tinder-box. Come my dainty Girl,
Let us be friends; why should we two fall out?
Sweet be not angry, I do love thee better
Then water gruel: Come, let us play together.

An. Now blessing on thy heart! What play shall we play, that which we played
at the other night?


Nea. Here, take these Nuts.


An. Alas my honey, I am past cracking.


Nea. They are to play with.


An. What play?


Nea. Even or odd, guess you.


An. What shall I guess?


Nea. How many teeth there be in thy head.


Chr. I Will guess for her; perchance three or four.


Nea. Then you have l^st, pay your nuts: she has but one,
An o're-wo^ne grinder; it is a gentle beast,
She has forgot to bite: Good innocent gums,
They cannot hurt; -- No danger in her mouth,
Till she eat Braw^. -- Her charitable tongue,
Like the old Rebels of Northamptonshire,
Cannot endure hedges of teeth should stand
To make her mouth enclosure.

An. Well sir, you may abuse me: but by Cock and Pie, (god forgive me that I
should swear) were I as young as I have been, these nails that by a good token
have not been pared since eighty eight, should have scratcht your face till it
had been a dominical one, and as full of red letters as any Ponds Almanac in
Christendom, 'twere suitable to your prognosticating Nose. J think you are
mad; would any but an O^lando or Ieronymo have used a poor woman so? Do you
think I will endure to be your bucking-tub to be washed with the dregs of your
wit*


Nea. He did you a courtesy, that would wash you soundly.


Chr. O by no means: why she is painted Sir.
If you should wash her, then my Ladies fucus
Would drop away; her Cerus and Pomatum
Being rubbed off, would to the world betray
The rugged wrincles of her slabber'd face.
Take but the white-lome from this old mudwall,
And she will look worse then Gamaliel Ra^sey.

An. Are you a Bedlam too, old frosty Squire?
Are you fourscore, and yet your wit an infant
Not come to age? Come, I will be your Guardian.

She beats him. Chr. Good Mr. Neanias, sweet young master,
If you do not save me from this Medusa,
Her Gorgons head will ^urn me to a Stonebottle,
And then throw me at my self, to make me beat out my own brains.

Nea. Nay take her to your self, old impudent Goat,
To ravish a Maid before her Sweet-hearts face,
O most inhumane! Yet you may do it for me,
J will resign my interest: so farewell.
^uch joy unto you both. O Hymen, Hymen,
What a fine couple of sweet Loves are here,
To keep their wedding in the grave, and get
A son and heir for Doomsday --

An. No prithee do not think so, J swear by Venus J would have none but thee,
though P^gasus and Buccphalus came a wooing to me.


Nea. Yes you may have him: yet J cannot leave thee
Without a tear to quench my flames of love. He weeps.
Well now farewell: live happy in his love,
Venus and Cupid bless your marriage-sheets,
And let you snort this hundred years together.
Jle grieve the while, and Sacks best virtue try,
To drown my cares: sorrow (you know) is dry.

Chr. Nay by Hecate you shall not put a trick on me thus. J have not outlived
my wits: J were mad if J would run my self into another Scylla, having such a
dangerous Charybdis of my own at home. Good Mr. Neanias, J did not think she
had been your mistress: J will not for all the world do you such a wrong as to
be your Corrival: love her alone for me.


Nea. Yes to be dor'd. Good wickedness, no more:
Do not entreat me to endure the noose;
J shall go marry her, be the fool her husband,
But you will come and kiss her; send your men,
Your Serving-men to fox me in your cellar,
While you the while shall cuckold me at home:
O what a brave Actaeon should should J be!
What have you nere a journy-man, or Baily
To put her off to? or, if all fail, no Chaplain*
I am no freeman, therefore the City-charter
Will not grant me the privilege of such harness;
Pray bear your Cap of maintenance your self.

Chr. Come leave this jesting, i will endure't no longer;
I will not let you hate this pretty Less.
S life it may prove her death: These wanton girls
Are very subject to eat chalk and coals.
S'lld, too much grief for you, with thoughts of love,
May chance to generate the green-sicknesse in her.

Nea. Nay, I do love her dearly, wondrous dearly,
Her eyes are Cupids Grubstreet: The blind archer
Makes his love-arrows there; bright Gloworms eyes,
No rotten-wood out-shines their glorious luster,
Feign would J kiss her.

An. Faith and thou shall my little periwinckle.


Nea. No, heaven me bless!
J am not worthy of such happiness.

Chr. Yet she accuses you.


Nea. How, accuses me? what heinous fault,
What sin, what sacrilege have J committed
Against the reliquies of her martyred beauty?

Chr. You mocked her, she says, you told her, The Milesians were valiant in
the days of yore. Faith do not hit her in the teeth with contumelious proverbs.


Nea. Hit her in the teeth, why it is impossible:
Hit her in the gums we may, but no man living
Can hit her in the teeth with any thing.
Jle not fight for her, take her to your self:

Chr. Pray good sir.


Nea. J reverence your age; it is your gray hairs
That are such potent suitors, 'twere a sin
To deny any thing to a snow-white head.
None else but only you should have obtained her;
Therefore rejoice, be gone, and stink together.

Chre. J know your meaning, you are weary of your stale Whore, you deal with
her even as they do with horses, when they are no longer fit for the Saddle,
turn them over to the Carmen.


An. J will not live with any but with thee.


Nea. But what an Ass am J thus long to talk
With an old Bawd, that lost her maidenhead
Above two thousand years before Deucalions flood,
Who living as long a Whore, turn Bawd in the days of King Lud?

Chr. Nay, since you have drunk of the Wine, you must be content with the Lees.


Nea. J but her Lees are bitter, sour as Verjuyce,
Mere Vinegar, Vinegar; J will sell her
For two pence a quart, Vinegar, Vinegar, in a VVheel-barrow.
J will go in and sacrifice my garland to Plutus.

An. Jle go in too, J have some business with Plutus.


Nea. But now J think on it, J will not go in.


An. My business is not much, J ^are not greatly,
If J stay with thee.

Chr. Come young man, be of good courage, she cannot ravish thee.


Nea. J believe that too.


An. Go in, Jle follow thee in the heels, J warrant thee.


Chr. She sticks to him as close as a Cockle.


Nea. Come Beldame follow me,
And in my footsteps tread.
Then set up shop in Turnbull-street
And turn a Bawd ere thou art dead.
And when thou art dead;
This shall of thee be said,
Thou lived'st a Whore, and died'st a Bawd,
Jn hell the Devil's Chambermaid.

Act. 5.
Scaen. 1.
Mercurius knocking. Chr. Who Is this that knocks, the door so hard! what, no
body? Can they walk invisible? I Will lay my life this is a piece of St. Dunstans
ghost that pulls me by the Nose so? Good ghost mistake me not, J am not the
Devil, J am honest Carrion every inch on me. Well, I see the doors can cry for
nothing, I see no body, I Will go in again.


Mer. So ho, ho, ho, Carrion, Carrion, Carrion stay, I say stay.


Car. Stay let my Nose alone, 'twill abide no jeasting; Sir, was it you, that
was so saucy with my masters doors to knock them so peremptorily? they shall
bring an action of battery against you.


Mer. If you had not come quickly, I would have broke them open. Go run, call
forth your master and mistress, the men and the maids, your self, the Dog and
the Bitch, the Cat and the Kitlins, the Sow and the Pigs.


Car. My master and mistress, the bastards their children, the men and the
maids, my self, the Dog and the Bitch, the C^t and Kitlins I will call forth:
but the Sow and Pigs would desire you to have them excused, they are not at
leisure. Why what is the matter?


Mer. Why Jupiter will put you all into a sack together, and toss you into
Barathrum, ^errible Barathrum.


Car. Barathrum, what is Barathrum?


Mer. Why Barathrum is Pluto's boggards: you must be all thrown into Barathrum.


Car. I had rather the messenger were you know what. Mercury, why what wrong
have we done Jupiter? I remember he has many a time sowr'd our drink with his
thundering, but we have done him no injury, but once I broke his shins at
football in Tut^le.


Mer. It Is worse then so; you are guilty of a sin
That hell would fear to own. Since Esculapius
That Urinal, restored god Plutus eyes,
Men have almost forgot to sacrifice:
But they were wont to offer Hasty-puddings,
Spice-cakes and many dainties; nay I know
Some that have spent whole Hecatombs of Beef
To give the gods their gawdies: now they would be glad
To eat the very brewesse of the pottage;
A rump or flap of mutton were a fee
For Jove's own breakfast; for a rib of beef,
Though it smelt of every Gippo's scabby fingers,
May any Scullion be chief Cook of heaven.
Men have I say forgot to sacrifice.

Car. And shall: Beggarly Jove does not deserve it.
He never did us good: we are not beholding
To any of your louzy gods. Old Plutus,
Plutus has purchased our devotion,
Gold is the Saint we reverence.

Mer. Nay faith I care not for the other gods,
Let them go stink and starve; let Cuckold Vulcan
Go earn his meat by making spits and dripping-pans,
And with his Tinkers budget and his Trull
Venus, may mend one hole and make ten for it.
Let Phoebus turn VVelsh-Harper, go a begging,
And sing St. Taffie for a Barley-crust.
Let Cupid go to G^ubstreet, and turn Archer:
Venus may set up at Pict-hatch or Bloomsbury;
Juno turn Oyster-quean, and scold at Billinsgate;
Bacchus may make a Drawer at a tavern,
Call for Canary for the man in the moon.
Minerva has been always poor: Brainebastards
Were never borne to many lands. Great Jove
May pawn his thunderbolts for oaten-cakes.
For them I care not, but these guts of mine:
Is it not pity Mercu^y should pine?

Car. Nay now I see thou have some wit in thy Pericranium.


Mer. VVhilome the Ale-wives and the fat-bum'd Hostesles
Would give me jugs of Ale without Excise,
Filled to the brim, no nick nor froth upon them:
Besides they would make me Froizes and Flapjacks t^o,
Feed me with Puddings, give me brokenmeat
And many dainty morsels for to eat.
O shall I never more begrease my chops
With glorious bits of Bacon! shall M^rcurius
Stretch forth his legs for want of Buttermilk!

Car. Nay this injustice thou deserve to see,
For injuring those that have done good for thee.

Mer. Alack and welladay,
Shall I never the Custard see,
Which the fourth day of every month
Was consecrate unto me?

Car. Alack and welladay,
In vain doust thou pray (...) I fear:
The Custard is a deaf god,
And cannot so quickly hear.

Mer. If Custard cannot hear,
Come Shoulder of mutton to me,
Black-pudding also with pudding-pies,
And a mess of Furmentie.

Car. Alack poor Mercury!
For thy case J do much condole.
Thou never shall steal again any meal
Or Spitchcock at Hockly-u^'-hole.
Come faith, since Thieving is out of fashi^, (Do remember when thou stolest
Apollo's Spectacles and Vulcans Crutches*) learn to beg. Suppose I am a rich
Gentleman, and thou a lame fellow; perchance I may be in the humor to give
thee something.


Mer. Kind Gentleman, for the Loords sake bestow something on a poor lame
Cripple, that has halted before his best friends upward and downward, any time
this dozen years: this leg, i will stand to it, has been lame ever since the last
dearth of corn, god be with it. heaven preserve your limbs, Jove keep your feet
out oth' setters, your legs out oth' stocks, your heads out ot'h pillory, your
necks out oth' halters, and other such infirmiti^s poor mortality is subject
to. May you never know what it is to want till you are in poverty. Good
Gentlemen, take compastion on a wretched mortal, that has been troubled with a
deadness in his arms, that he has not had the lawful use of his hands in
picking and stealing this many hours.


Car. Sir, sir, you must have the lash; I Will have you whipped for a vagiant
person.


Mer. This is a Justice of Peace's charity: if this be that you would be in the
humor to give, ^ray keep it to your self.


Car. Faith act a poor Soldier: men are charitable to men of arms.


Mer. A word with you generous sir. Noble sir, thou seem to be a man of
worship, and J am one that have seen the face of the enemy in my days, and
ventred a bloody nose in defense of my country. Good sir, lend me a Crown till
the next taking of Basing-house, and by all the cold iron about me, you shall
be presently paid upon the surrender. Noble Gentleman, do not make known my
necessities; I would have scorned to have asked such a kindness of Hopton or
Montrosse; I had rather have starved in the leaguer, and fed upon nothing but
sword and buckler; and yet Hopton is a noble fellow, many a timberpeece have J
spent in his company.


Car. What service have thou been in?


Mer. Hot service sir, supping at the very mouth of the Martial porredge-pot, J
have scall'd my lips with kissing valor. Did you never hear how J routed a
Regiment of Ormonds Foot?


Car. Never sir, how J pray?


Mer. Sir, by this good sword if it be not true, J am an arrant liar, and never
saw the wars in my life. Sir, J advanced my spear, ran with a furious tilt at
them, and unhorsed every man.


Car. Of the Regiment of Foot.


Mer. You are in the right sir, 'twas by a metaphor. Then sir the Ensigns of my
reputation being displaied; a valiant Frenchman, he was born at Madrid in Spain
--


Car. By a metaphor.


Mer. Challenged me the duel at Backsword: we met at the first thrust of the
Rapier.


Car. By a metaphor.


Mer. He shot me clean through the body.


Car. By a metaphor still, the Rapier shot you through.


Mer. On my cr^dit sir, 'twas a musketbullet: for when the Fort saw me have the
best on it, they levelled a Canon at me ready charged.


Car. By a metaphor, with a musket-bullet.


Mer. And shot off both my arms. That being done, J caught him by the throat
with my right hand.


Car. When your arms were off.


Mer. Drew out my weapon with my left, and cut off his head. J was proceeding
to have run him through, but he asked my pardon, and I was merciful and saved
his life.


Car. When his head was off.


Mer. You will not believe me now, if the self same man be as live as J. Prince
Rup^rt knows what service I did at Marston-moore when J run away. But now to be
contemned! O Poverty, foe to Valor!


Car. Thy valor? Thou look as if thou had no stomach at all.


Mer. Would J had a roasted Ox to encounter with. J have showed my valor in
Bohemia against the Imperialists, in Poland against the Turks, in Holland
against the Spaniards, in Utopia against the roundheads, and is it questioned
in England? J was once a fresh water soldier, but J was seasoned at the salt
Isle of Ree: there was my masterpiece of valor.


Car. What was that J pray?


Mer. Why sir, J fought courageously; J was in all the dangerous services, and
had misfortunes in all. First sir, J was drowned in the landing, had both my
Legs shot off in the assault, and ran away in the retreat as all the rest did.


Car. How? when your Legs were shot off in the assault?


Mer. What of that? have J not VVings on my Doublet?


Car. Why the^, you did not run, you did but fly.


Mer. Flying is running away by a Metaphore.


Car. Come thou will get nothing by this lying warfare. Let me try the Gypsy.


Mer. From Egypt have J come
With Solomon for my guide:
By C^iromanties J can tell
What fortunes thee betide.
A Chaldee me begot,
Old Talmud was his name;
In Hieroglyphics he excelled,
Through Nilus ran his fame.
Come let me see thy hand,
Thou Wives have yet had none;
But Bastinadoes at a time
About threescore and one.

He picks Carions pocket. Car. Well, thou art an arrant Gypsy: at what
neighbors house did thou learn this? S'foot, how came thou to know it? I
had just threescore and one indeed. Well, I will give thee something: But O
Mercury, my Purse! I'lutus his blessing is run out of my Pockets. I will have
you hanged, you rogue. There were seven thirteen-pence-half-penies, would have
paid the Hangman for above half a dozen of you. Good Mercury, thou shall so^
what I Will do for thee.


Mer. Well, if you will entertain me into your family, there is your Purse
again, and take heed how you meet with Gypsies.


Car. Entertain thee? Why, what can thou do?


Mer. Why, let me be your Porter. (...) have a Ianus heart, though not two
faces.


Car. A Porter! can thou grumble soundly at a rich man's gate to keep out the
poor Almsmen? can thou bark like grisly C^rberus? No, 'twill not do, my
Master needs no surley Bandogs, we shall keep open house. The office of Porter
is thrust out of doors.


Mer. Make me your Merchant.


Car. We dare not: Get you to the streights of Gibraltar, we need no busy
Factors, we have wealth enough: we will have no Merchants, we shall not sleep
for them at nights, They will dream of nothing but new America's, drink the
Canaries, snort out Terra Incognita's, nose the Bermudas, ravish Virginia, talk
of the fortunate Islands, or choke us up with Terra del Fogo's. No, no, I will
have none of our family walk like the Antipodes with his heels upwards; if he
should fall headlong into heaven, he might put out the Man in the moon's
candle, and leave him to find his way to bed in the dark.


Mer. Let me be your Fool to make you merry.


Car. A Fool! Let me see: we are all rich, and therefore likely we must have
some fools amongst us. But what need that, we have as good, we have some of
them that fortune favors.


Mer. Then let me be your Jugler.


Car. Not for Zorobabels nightcap. These Hocus-Pocusses seldom come aloft for
their masters advantage. You think to pick our pockets by sleight of hand, and
show us a trick for our money: J do not like these feats of activity; therefore
Presto be gone, we will have no Juglers.


Mer. Then let me be your Poet: J'le make you Shows and Masks, Comedies and
Tragedies, Pastorals, Piscatorial Sonnets, Canto's, Madrigals and Ballads, till
you are so tickled with laughter, that you cannot stand.


Car. A Poet! no, it is a little too beggarly a trade; and it is a soloecisme if
wit should meet with wealth in these days. Fie upon it, I cannot endure
jestings, Poetical furies, J had as lieve they should break wind backward. Your
rank wits will abuse their betters. And for shows, rascally shows, it is pity
they are not hanged for their impudence: There cannot be a gross sin in a
Congregation, but some men's vinegar-brains must be a rubbing of it. J warrant
if J should but marry a Townsmans daughter to day, they would make an Actaeon of me
by to morrow, dub me Knight of the forked Order. Poor shallow scundrels there
be that never drank any Helicon above a penny a quart, and yet venture to make
Ballads as lousie as themselves. Wry-mouthed villains, who cannot answer to the
question, if they should be asked how many of their empty Noddles go to the
making up of a complete Coxcomb. But yet J do love a show, if it be a merry
one. Well, thou shall be our houshold-Poet, for houshold-Chaplains are now out
of date like old Almanacks; every man can now say grace, and preach, and say
prayers to themselves, or (which is better) forget to say any at all. Well, get
thee in, prepare things fitting for the sacrifice. If this fellow had not good
store of trades, he had missed of all preserment. Well now, this Poet shall
make ballads on all the hypoc^ites of the town, he shall rhyme all the
Anabaptists out of their wits.


Enter Attorney, Tinker, Miller, Tailor, Shoemaker, etc. At. O that Plutus his
eyes were scratcht out! J can have no more Fees for Latitats nor Outlawries.


Tink. Nay, J am a Lad of metal, of all that but gold and silver, can make no
profit of my brass nor Latin: there is no need of making more holes then one
now, and that is a wicked one for my neck to slip into.


Miller. My double Toll fails me, O this grinds me to peece^.


Tail. O it is the worst stitch that was ever sowed with the needle of
misfortune. O iron age, that like the Ostrich makes me feed on my own Goose!


Shoo. O this false Cordwainer Plutus, that stretches the leather of my flesh
on the Tree of fatality; that unmercifully puts me into the Stocks of
adversity, and gives me no relief at the Last.


Tail. Nay he has made me so slender, that I can measure me by my own Yard,
three quarters quarter and half nail. This crosse-leg'd infelicity, sharper
then my needle, makes me eat my own Cabbage.


Shoo. Nothing but a general insurrection like a shooing-horn can draw on help.
Let us combine and patch together.


Om. Agreed, agreed.


Exeum. Enter Dull-pate solus. It is a sign Plutus has lost his eyes, when
Dull-pates grow rich: if my name had not been Dull-pate, I had lost half my
preferment. It is thought J have as many Ecclesiastical Livings as Spalato had
in England; Never a fat Benefice falls now adays, but J catch it up; J can
have 'um now without lustful Simony, in taking Bishops kinswomen in^o the
bargain. J have often wondered how it comes about that my head is so black, but
the hairs of my chin gray: A merry fellow once told me, 'twas because I used my
chops more then my brains. It Is true indeed, I fare well, because J was born
under a rich Constellation, but the learned sort under a poor Psanct. As for
example, here comes the Pope, Jupiters Vicat. -- bless thy wicked Holiness!
thou, the Devil, Cardinal Richli^u, and the French faction at Court, have
brought all the wars into England.

Enter Pope selus. Pope. Who can instruct me which is Chremylus house?


Dull. Grave reverend Father, (...)'s the (...) with you?
How does your (...)?

Pop. Ill as ill may (...),
Since Plutus eyesight is restored.

Dull. What is the cause of this your heaviness:
Does the proud Emperor refuse to kiss
Your sacred toe? or does it vex your Bonnyface
To lose your Peter Pence? what is the cause
Great catholic Bishop, Monarch of the Church,
The supreme Judge Ecclesiastical,
That you are thus perplexed? why do you not curse ^m
With your Bell, Book, and Candle, that molest you?

Pop. O J am dead with hunger, a saucy hunger,
With heresy as bad as Arrianisme,
Knawes on my sacred guts. J the great father
And Prince of Rome have not a crust,
Not a brown crust to know on. Jove's own Vicar,
Nay Jove himself on earth, would beg on knees
For one small piece of Sawsedge. This sad morn,
For a broiled Sprat J paun'd my triple crown,
And now for one Red-herring will J morgage
All Peter's large possessions.

Dull. Aha great Pope, can your Pontificial teeth
Be glad to gnaw upon a catholic Tripe?
Can your great metropolitan stomach feed
On a Hogs-cheek? it is strange, me* thinks, that you
Being the universal Bishop, should not
Have one poor porredge-pot in all your Diocese,
Never a soul in Limbo ready fried?
Is all the Roast in Purgatory spent?
Are all your Bulls devoured? faith kill a Bull,
Good Pope, a Bull, to make your Holiness Beef.
There must be meat somwhere or other sure,
Or can you open heaven and hell at pleasure;
And cannot Peter's Keys unlock the Cupboard?
Why sure our Ladies milk is not all spent,
No Relics left, nor chips oth' Cross to feed on?
Sure at (...) or ^t Compostella.
None of the Capuchins at Somerset*house*
How can it be an't please your Holiness?

Pop. O no: since Plutus has received his eyes,
Indulgencies are grown cheap, and at no price:
An absolution for a Rape made now
Is nothing worth.
Give me but one poor crust before J faint,
And J will canonize thee for a Saint.

Dull. Or let me purchase for a Muttonbone
Your Apostolical benediction.

Pop. A mess of Broth or rib of Beef from thee,
^n my esteem shall meritorious be.

Dull. Nay J will have it more, such a donation
Shall be a work of supererogation.

Pop. O how J thirst!


Dull. M^ reverende Pater, cannot you drink a cup of Holy Water?
Now you that could drink Tyber dry, and more,
Cannot obtain a Jug upon the score.
Go try, they will hardly trust you for a drop
At the Pope's Head, Mitre, or Ca^dinals-Cap,
Or any place; it is money draws the tap.

Pop. So irreligious are these ages grown,
They think it charity to rob the Clergy.
How comes it that you dare with impudence
Deny the Priests their tithes?

Dull. O, easily sir. A learned Antiquary that has searched
The breech of Saturn for Antiquities;
Proves by a reason an infallible reason,
With bugle-horn writ in the Saxon tongue,
That neither praedial, nor personal tithes
Are due ex jure divino: and you know
The Clergy Bishops, your old quondam Patrons
Are voted down too, and ever since we have learnt
A liberty of Conscience to pay no tithes.
We hear some teach too, they are An^ christian,
Like Steeple Houses; hence we learn to be
Too cunning now for your Apostolic See.

Pop. Now worms devour that Antiquaries nose,
And those that preach against all Steeplehouses;
That power in papers half consumed with Mothes,
To prove some absurd opinions feigned to be
Found in the walls of some old Nunnery,
But o my guts wish for a Benedicite!

Dull. VVilt please your holiness to call a Synod?
You may chance to catch trowt^ in the Council of Trent.

Pop. O I do smell the scent of Pipp^n-pies.


Dull. You do indeed, your Holiness Nose I see,
Has the true spirit of Infallibility,
I find you cannot err. What would you do,
To be of our house now to have free quarter?

Pop. I would resign my right to heaven and hell.


Dull. Ti-he-he, well said good Pope I^nocent.
But that is too much, resign your heaven only,
Retain your right to hell; your title there
Is held (...). Well now,
Stay here a while (...) sing a merry song
As we to Plutus go, and I will free
Thy guts from the Purgatory of fasting.

Enter Anus. An. Is this the Pope? Goddy godden good Father.
I do not come unto thy Holiness
To beg a License to eat flesh on Fridaies;
But I desire thy Apostolical Curse
On a young man that has abused me grossly;
May it please thy Catholicknesse, the perjured Boy
Swore to lie with me while he lived, but he
Grown rich does think to buy out perjury.
Now good your Holiness give him not absolution.

Pop. Would he were here; for three penee I could sell him
A g^neral remission of his sins:
I am almost famisht for want of customers.

Dull. Go woman, fetch the Quire in for sacrifice.
(But bid them bring no Copes nor Organs with them.)
And I will get his Holiness to command him
To ly with thee this night what ^re come on it.
It is enjoined him for his penance is it not?

An. It is an't please your Holiness.


Pop. Any thing shall please my holiness, if you give me
But the least hopes to feed my Holiness:
It Is a lean Holiness, as the wo^ld goes now.

Dull. It Is strange that you, the Shepherd of all Europe,
Should not have one fat Lamb^ in all your flock.
What say, if I give you a leg of Mutton?

Pope Remission of sins, when ere they be.


Dull. But what if I have sworn to give thee nothing?


Pope My Holiness shall give thee absolution.


Dull. But I did but equivocate when I promised?


Pope I Will free thee from all men^all Reservation.


Dull. But what if this same Mutton have gone through
Every Gyppo's hands?

Pope I grant it lawful:
I do allow traditions.

Dull. Well then, I have Remission of all my sins.


Pope With leave and pardon for all sins hereafter.


Dull. What ere they be; though I should ravish Nuns
Under the Altar?

Pop. It Is a Venial sin.


Dull. Or kill a King?


Pop. It Is meritorious.


Dull. Cuckold my Father, Whore my natural Mother,
Grant the supremacy of the secular powers,
Be drunk at Mass, strip all the Feminine Saints
Into their Smocks, laugh at a Friars baldcrown,
Piss in the Pixe, deny your mysteries,
Out-lie your Legend, get Pope Ioane with child,
Eat flesh in Lent, sit off my Confessors Ears,
Or any sin, as great as your own Holiness,
Or any of your Predecessors acted.

Pop. A leg of Mutton wipes all sins away,
So good a deed will justify.

Dull. Swear then.


Pop. I swear and grant it sub Sigillo Piscatoris.


Dull. A pox upon Sigillum Piscatoris,
Send it to Yarmouth, let it fish for Herrings.
Swear, J say, that is, kiss my Imperial shoe,
As Emperors do yours. --

Pop. J am Servus servorum, your servants servant.
Sans complement, like Ham --.
O that this leather of thy shoe, this leather
Could be made flesh by Transubstantiation!
J would not only kiss but eat thy Toe.

Dull. Moreover you shall swear that once a year
J shall have entire power to forgive sins
To my Comrades.

Pop. As much as J my self:
J swear and kiss your Holiness toe.

Dull. And that when J do knock at heaven gates,
The Porter let me in for nothing. Swear again.

Pop. Again J swear, by this sweet kiss he shall.


Dull. Well, it is sufficient, J will pay your Ordinary. Enter Quire.
Here comes the Quire prepare your voice and sing.
The Roundheads will not come, cause the Pope's here.

Pop. O fratres nostri ventr^s siut replcti,
For empty maws are never truly laeti:
To feed on meats, and drink of potionibus,
Is the only Physic for devotionibus.

Om. Benedixit Esculapius.


Pop. Cheese-cakes and Custards, and such good placenta's,
Excel Good-fridaies, Ember-weeks and Lenta's:
When belly's full, we'el go to the Cloisteribus
To kiss the Nuns and all the Mulieribus.

Om. Benedixit, etc.


Pop. I do not think you hold him for sinner,
Whose best devotion tends unto his dinner:
One glass of Sack or cup of nappy Alibus,
More virtue has then all our Decretalibus.

Om. Benedixit, etc.


Pop. J had rather cat a meal then tell a story,
Of limbo patrum or of Purgatory:
No blessings like the pleasure of the Tastibus,
No relics holier then the Venison Pastibus.

Om. Benedixit, etc.


Pop. These are the Prayers, devotions and delighta's
Of Cardinals, Popes, Friars and Iesuita's.
Their break-fasts are their Mattins holy zelibus,
Their Vespertines are eating beef and velibus.

Om. Benedixit, etc.


Pop. Come (...) and sorores per praesentes,
Let us go in to exercise our dentes,
Where we will sit with you and your uxoribus,
To laugh at all these hungry auditoribus.

Om. Benedixit, etc.


Exeunt omnes. Act. 5. Scaen. ult.
Enter Plutus (...) a Letter. I came into England but since this Parliament
sat, (the plunderers J thank them brought me hither) and J think J have had
about 200000. suitors at least: nay, some great men have been ambitious to
proffer me their daughters to marry. They indeed be great ones, but J only look
after Honesty now J have got my eyesight. Never did gudg^ons at a mill-tail
more greedily bite the bait, then some of 'um after me. Had J had the Palsy,
Sciatica, Cough, Ague, Fever, French pox, and a whole cart-load of diseases,
(as J have the Gout already, because J am rich) they would have taken me with
all my faults. England (J see) is a covetous place. This morning J have
received no less then forty letters to the same purpose. Above all, one Mrs.
Maria Corombona Butto Fuocco woes me; as sure as can be a Venetian (...) bred
up in London, an arrant whore. (...) her Letter. A Plauto Gentilhomme
d'Inghilterra de bona gratia, Maria butta suoccae and so forth. A pox take her!
J have forty more of them in my pocket. But there is one Mrs. Honesty Cleon, an
honest Scriveners daughter, ('it is strange they have any thing to do with
Honesty, J warrant she will not live long) she is the mistress of my affections,
for she is honest. See here she comes.

Enter Mrs. Honesty. Fair Lady, fairer then the morning-skies,
Has not young Cupid touched your amorous eyes?
I am all for golden Verses gratulation,
But must not pass by courteous salutation.
They kiss. Hon. Sir, if I may confess, Loves art
No^ only touched my eyes, but heart.

Plut. Nay then the Parson straight shall do his part,
Let Us in: the Gordian knot none can untwiss,
We'll tie it fast, and as we go we'll kiss.
Jn any state never will be foul weather,
When Honesty and Riches meet together.

Exeunt. The Epilogue.
Old Wealth (you see) with Honesty and Piety
Is joined in league for mutual society.
O would it were the blessing of our Nation,
They might have issue too by procreation!
But sure the Bride's past childbearing; that is the reason
So few are honest in this age and season.
If It be a stolen match, P^test must be taxt';
It Is certain true, the Banes were never ax't,
For he that joined their hands (for ought I hear)
He was a very honest Cavalier;
He used the Ring and Book, went not by heart,
But joined them word for word, Till death depart.
Full resolute, without Te^s, to tie the noose:
I^ had lost his Benefice, he had no move to lose.
I know there is many wagg^sh Pates join force
To part this couple by a sad divorce:
We hope't will not be granted by Petition
At the Arches, Doctors Commons, or High Commission:
(...) I do verily think there is (...) intent
To sever them by this our Parliament.
Therefore God give 'um joy! Joy may they find!
This is the wish of every virtuous mind.
But wicked Rascals sing another Catch;
Pox take 'um hoth! It Is an unlucky match.
It is indeed for them, because 'twill serve
To send their Brats to Tyburn, or to sterve.
Welsh Parst y is good physic. Honest guests
We only bid to these our Nuptial feasts.
Offerings to the rich are base: yet we demand
That you pay down a Plaudite at hand.
FINIS.

