THE Arraignment, Trial, and Condemnation OF Peter Cook, Gent. FOR
HIGH TREASON, IN Endeavoring to procure FORCES from France to Invade this
Kingdom, and Conspiring to Levy WAR in this Realm for Assisting and Abetting
the said Invasion, in order to the Deposing of His Sacred Majesty, King
WILLIAM, and Restoring the Late King. Who upon full Evidence was found Guilty
at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, on Wednesday the 13th of May, 1696. And
received Sentence the same Day. With the Learned ARGUMENTS both of the King's
and Prisoner's Council upon the new Act of Parliament for Regulating Trials in
Cases of Treason.

Perused by the Lord Chief Justice TREBY, and the Council present at the Trial.

LONDON: Printed for BENJAMIN TOOK at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet.
MDCXCVI.

Die Sabbati Nono Maii Anno Domini, 1696. Annoque Regni Gulielmi Tertii,
Octavo.
At the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, London.
Dominus Rex Versus Petrum Cook.
THIS day being appointed for the Trial of Mr. Peter Cook, upon an Indictment
of High Treason found against him by the Grant Jury for the City of London,
upon the Commission of Jail-delivery of Newgate, holden for the said City, upon
which Indictment he had been Arraigned, and upon pleading not guilty, Issue had
been joined, and the Court having been adjourned unto this day for the Trial
for public Proclamation in usual manner, the Court was resumed, and the Names
of the Men returned to serve on the Jury, having been called over according to
the Panel, and the Defaulters recorded; the Court proceeded as follows.

Cl. of Arr. Set Peter Cook, the Prisoner, to the Bar: (Which was done.) You
the Prisoner at the Bar, those Men that you shall hear called, and personally
appear, are to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and you, upon Trial of
your Life and Death; if therefore you will Challenge them, or any of them, your
time is to speak to them as they come to the Book to be sworn, and before they
be sworn.


Cook. Sir, I desire you would not Name them too fast, for my Eyes are very bad.


Cl. of Arr. John Ewer.


Cook. Who must I apply my self to, Sir? I desire to know, Whether he is a
Freeholder in London?


Cl. of Arr. I know nothing to the contrary, Sir, he is returned as such by the
Sheriff; you had best ask him himself, he can best tell.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Ewer. Yes, Sir, I am a Freeholder.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Henry Sherbrook.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder in London?


Mr. Sherbrook. Yes, Sir, I am.


Cook. I challenge you. -- No, Sir, I beg your Pardon, I do not challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Then hold Mr. Sherbrook the Book: (Which was done.) Look upon the
Prisoner: You shall well and truly try and true Deliverance make between our
Sovereign Lord the King, and the Prisoner at the Bar, whom you shall have in
Charge, according to your Evidence, So help you God.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Billers.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir, in London?


Mr. Billers. Yes, I am.


Cook. I challenge you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. John Brand.


Cook. Pray, Sir, don't go too fast; Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Brand. I am no Freeholder in London.


L. C. J. Treby. What say you, Mr. Attorney?


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, I would not have any body that is not a Freeholder
serve; so he was set by.


Cl. of Arr. William Hall.


Mr. Hall. My Lord, I am no Freeholder in London.


L. C. J. Treby. Why, what Estate have you?


Mr. Hall. What I have, is in Leases.


L. C. J. Treby. What, Leases for Years, or Leases for Lives?


Mr. Hall. Leases for years, Sir.


L. C. J. Treby. Then he cannot serve upon the Jury.


Cl. of Arr. Edward Leeds.


Cook. Hold, Sir, let me see; are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Leeds. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you then.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Clark.


Cook. Hold, Sir, I pray let me look upon my Paper. I challenge him. A
St^nder^by, He does not appear.


Cl. of Arr. Nathan Green.


Cook. Where is he, Sir? Are you a Freeholder?


Mr. Green. Yes, I am, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Emes.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Emes. Yes, I am.


Cook. Were you one of Sir John Friend's Jury?


Mr. Emes. Yes, I was.


Cook. Then I challenge you for Cause, and I give you my Reason.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. I pray, let us hear your Reason; give your Reason for your
challenge.


Cook. It is for being of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Then you challenge him for Cause:


Cook. Yes, that he was of Sir John Friend's Jury.


L. C. J. Treby. Well, Brother Darnall, how is that a Cause of Challenge? You
are the Prisoner's Council, let us hear what you say to it.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. My Lord, what we have to say to it, is this; Here are some
Persons returned upon this Panel, that were formerly Jurors in a Cause that
was tried for the same Species of Treason that this Gentleman, the Prisoner, is
charged with in this Indictment; and I think the Witnesses at that Trial did
mention in their Evidence my Client, as being present at those very Consults,
about which they gave their Evidence; these Gentlemen gave Credit to those
Witnesses, and found the Verdict against the Person then accused. We humbly
submit it to your Lordship and the Court, whether we may not for this Cause
challenge this Person as not indifferent, it being for the same Cause and
Consult, that the other was tried for.


Mr. At. Genesis Sure Mr. Sergeant is not in earnest in this Objection.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. My Client thinks it a very good Objection, That he is not
indifferent, and I desire he should be satisfied in it.


Mr. At. Genesis If he thinks so, he may except against him, but if he insists
upon it as a cause of Challenge, we desire you would put the Case, and my Lords
the Judges determine it.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. I have told you what the Case is.


L. C. J. Treby. But you hear the King's Counsel insist upon it, to have you
make it out in point of Law.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. My Lord, I have stated the Case as my Client desired, and
we submit it to you.


L. C. J. Treby. Well, there is nothing in it.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Then my Client, if he will not have him serve, must
challenge him peremptorily; Which he did.


Cl. of Arr. Francis Byer.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder?


Mr. Byer. Yes, I am.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. James Denew.


Mr. Denew. I am no Freeholder.


Cl. of Arr. Henry Hunter.


Cook. Hold, hold, my Lord, I challenge him as being one of Sir John Freind's
Jury.


Mr. Baker. Nay, that was not allowed in Mr. Emes's Case; but you challenged
him peremptorily, and so you must now, if you have a mind to it.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. John Hall.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Hall. Yes, I am, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Cullum.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder in London?


Mr. Cullum. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Cox.


Mr. Cox. My Lord, I am no Freeholder in London.


Cl. of Arr. John Hedges.


Cook. Hold, I pray, Sir, let me look upon my Paper; Sir, Are you a Freeholder
in London?


Mr. Hedges. Yes, Sir, I am.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas James.


Mr. James. My Lord, my name is not Thomas.


Mr. Sh. Buckingham. He is returned, it seems, by a wrong name; we did not know
it.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Then you cannot swear him.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Poole.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Poole. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge him, as being of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Mr. At. Genesis That has been overruled already.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Peter Parker.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London?


Mr. Parker. Yes, Sir, I am.


Cook. I challenge you, Sir, as being one of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Mr. Baker. Nay, you cannot offer it again.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. George Grove.


Cook. Where is he? Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Grove. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Nathanael Wyersdell.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London?


Mr. Wyersdell. Yes, Sir, I am.


Cook. I challenge you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. Samuel Blewit.


Cook, Hold, pray, Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Blewit. Yes, I am.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. John Wolf.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Wolf. He did not appear, and was said to be no Freeholder.


Cl. of Arr. William Smith.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Smith. Yes, I am.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Edward Fenwick.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Fenwick. Yes, Sir, I am.


Cook. I do not challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Then swear Mr. Fenwick.


(Which was done.)

Benjamin Hooper.


Cook. Stay, Sir, pray stay a little, where is he?


Cl. of Arr. There he is, Sir.


Cook. Which is the Gentleman? Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Hooper. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Mr. Hooper. I thank you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. Nathanael Long.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Long. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge him, as being of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Cl. of Arr. The Court has adjudged that no cause of Challenge, therefore I
take no notice of it, but as a peremptory Challenge.


Cl. of Arr. Richard Chiswell.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Chiswell. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Child.


Cook. Hold, pray, a moment; I have not crossed these last in my Paper, but I
challenge this man, being of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Mr. Baker. You have had that answered over and over again, as no objection; it
is nothing but a peremptory challenge.


Cl. of Arr. William Walker.


Mr. Walker. I was one of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Cook. I challenge him for the same Reason.


Mr. At. Genesis But that is no Reason at all.


Cook. Then I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. John Wells.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder?


Mr. Wells. Yes, Sir, I am.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Hibbert.


Cook Which is he, Sir?


Cl. of Arr. He stands upon your left hand; the Man in the Black Peruke.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Hibbert. Yes, I am, Sir.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Daniel Wray.


Cook. Stay, Sir, are you Mr. Wray?


Mr. Wray. Yes, Sir, my Name is Wray.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Wray. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Mr. Wray. I thank you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. John Pettit.


Cook. Which is he?


Mr. Pettit. I am the man, Sir.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder in London, Sir?


Mr. Pettit. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Sherbrook.


Cook. I challenge him, as being one of Sir John Friend's Jury.


Mr. Baker. But you have heard that denied to be an Exception over and over.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Stephen Blackwell.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Blackwell. Yes, I am.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. William Hatch.


Cook. Pray give me time to mark them; pray, who is this man you now call?


Cl. of Arr. William Hatch.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder?


Mr. Hatch. Yes, I am.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Henry Beadle.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Beadle. Yes, I am.


Cook. I do not except against him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. John Stredwick.


Mr. Stredwick. My Lord, as I apprehend, I am no Freeholder.


L. C. J. Treby. Why do you apprehend so?


Mr. Stredwick. It is my Wife's Estate, not mine.


Cl. of Arr. Then you Wife has a Freehold, it seems.


Mr. Stredwick. Yes, she has.


L. C. J. Treby. That is Freehold enough; for you have an Estate for your
Wife's Life.


Mr. Baker. And after that too, for it is not given over to any Body else, and
she will not give it from him.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder in London or no?


Mr. Stredwick. I apprehend, Sir, I am not.


Mr. Baker. He says he has an Estate for his Wife's Life.


Cl. of Arr. Then he is a Freeholder, What do you say to him?


Cook. Are you positive you are a Freeholder in London upon your Word?


Mr. Stredwick. I think not.


Mr. Baker. Why, your Wife's Estate is yours for your life.


Cook. My Lord Chief Justice, if your Lordship pleases, here is a man that says
positively he thinks he is not Freeholder, I desire your Lordship's Judgment,
Whether he be a Freeholder or not?


L. C. J. Treby. Why, let him put his Case, if he make a doubt of it.


Mr. Stredwick. I am not possessed of any Estate my self.


L. C. J. Treby. But is not your Wife an Inheritrix?


Mr. Stredwick. Yes, my Lord, she is.


L. C. J. Treby. Then you are seized of a Freehold in her right; and, Mr. Cook,
your own Council will tell you and satisfy you, that that is a Freehold
sufficient for this service.


Mr. Baker. His Wife's Father settled it upon her and her Heirs.


L. C. J. Treby. No question, it is a sufficient Freehold if the Wife be living.


Mr. Baker. Yes, she is.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. William Prince.


Cook. I challenge him, as being of Sir John Friends Jury.


Mr. Prince. I thank you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. John Simmons.


Mr. At. Genesis We challenge him for the King.


Cl. of Arr. Robert White.


Cook. Are you a Freeeholder, Sir.


Mr. White. Yes, I think so.


Cook. Pray tell me whether you are, or not.


Mr. White. Indeed I think so, Sir.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Edward Brewster.


Cook. Where is Mr. Brewster? Are you a Freeholder, Sir, in London?


Mr. Brewster. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge him. Pray Sir, I desire to know how many I have challenged.


Mr. Baker. You have challenged Thirty three.


Cook. How many besides those that are of Sir John Friend's Jury?


Mr. Baker. You have but Two more to challenge, Sir.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. I thought you had heard the Opinion of the Court, Mr. Cook,
that it will not hold as a cause of challenge that he was of Sir John Friena's
Jury, therefore those are all reckoned among the peremptory challenges, and you
can challenge but Two more in all.


L. C. J. Treby. Not without cause, but as many more as you can have good cause
against.


Cl. of Arr. John Reynolds.


Cook. I except not against him.


(He was sworn).

Cl. of Arr. Joseph Brookbank.


Cook. I have nothing to say to him.


(He was sworn).

Cl. of Arr. Adam Bellamy.


Mr. Bellaney. My Lord, I am no Freeholder.


L. C. J. Treby. Why, what Estate have you?


Mr. Baker. He has Estate enough, I know, for value.


Mr. Bellamy. I have only a Lease.


L. C. J. Treby. A Lease for years?


Mr. Bellamy. Yes, my Lord.


Cl. of Arr. David Grill.


Mr. Grill. I am no Freeholder, my Lord.


Cl. of Arr. William Rawlins.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was sworn).

Cl. of Arr. Samuel Roycroft.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir?


Mr. Roycroft. Yes, Sir.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Parker.


Cook. How many have I to challenge, do you say?


Cl. of Arr. But one Sir; What say you to Mr. Parker?


Cook. I do not except against him.


(He was sworn).

Cl. of Arr. James Robinson.


Cook. I have nothing to say to him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Joseph Morewood.


Cook. I challenge him.


Mr. Baker. You have challenged all your number now.


Cl. of Arr. My Lord, we have gone through the Panel, we must now call the
Defaulters again. Thomas Clark.


Mr. Clark. Here.


Sir B. Shower. Was he here when he was called over?


Mr. Arr. Genesis That Is nothing, he is here now.


Sir B. Shower. But if there be a Default of the Jury, and the King's Council
have challenged any one, they ought to show their Cause; therefore we desire
that they may show their Cause why they challenged Mr. Simmons.


L. C. J. Treby. The King has power to Challenge without showing Cause till the
Panel be gone through; but if there be a Default of Jurors when the King
challenges, the King's Council must show cause.


Sir B. Shower. Here is a Default of Jurors, my Lord.


L. C. J. Trebr. No body is Recorded absolutely a Defaulter, if he comes in
time enough to be sworn.


Cl. of Arr. Swear Mr. Clark.


(Which was done).

L. C. J. Treby. When there is an apparent default of Jurors, then they must
show their Cause; but here his appearance, it seems, was Recorded, and so he
was no Defaulter; and you might have challenged him for Cause still.


Cl. of Arr. James Dry.


Mr. Dry. My Name is not James.


Serj. Darnall. Then you cannot swear him: Here are three mistaken in their
Names.


L. C. J. Treby. That is in the Copy in your Brief, Brother, it may be.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. No, my Lord, the Officers admit it.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we desire those Gentlemen, that say they are no
Freeholders, may be sworn to that matter.


(Which was accordingly done.) And several of them that had staid, did deny the
having of any Freehold upon Oath, and some were gone away.

L. C. J. Treby. Pray take care to estreat the Issues, and return greater
Issues the next time.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Truly the Court must put some great penalty upon them for
trifling with the Court in respect of their Duty that they owe to the King and
Country, in regard of their Estates.


Cl. of Arr. Pray, let the Officers be called who summoned this Jury, Mr.
Sheriff.


(Which was done.) And they examined concerning their summoning those who made
Default, and the Issues of those who were recorded as Defaulters were ordered
to be Estreated.

Then the Court not being able to proceed for want of a Jury, they ordered
another Panel to be ready against Wednesday next, to which time at Seven in
the Morning, the Court was by Proclamation adjourned.

Die Mercurii Decimo Tertio Maii, Anno Dom. 1696.
The Court being met according to the Adjournment, the Panel was called over,
and the Defaulters Recorded, and several excused for Absence upon Sickness, and
being out of Town before the Summons. Then Mr. Sergeant Darnall desired before
the Jury was called, to move something against the Panel: And made his Motion
thus;

Mr. Serj. Darnall. IF your Lordship pleases, I have somewhat to offer to you
before you go upon this new Panel; and I confess, I think it is my Duty to the
Court, as well as to the Prisoner, to state the Case as it is, and submit it
upon the reason of Law, and the Authorities that I shall offer, Whether the
Proceedings upon this new Panel will not be erroneous? My Lord, the Question
is, Whether, as this Case is, the Prisoner has had a Copy of the Panel of his
Jury by which he is to be tried, according as the late Law requires, he had a
Copy of the former Panel, and upon that Panel Nine were sworn, and their
Names all entered upon Record, and made Parcel of the Record. Thereof now the
Question is, Whether he can be tried upon a new Panel? We are in a Case that
rarely happens, and in a Case of Life and Death. I know your Lordship will be
careful not to vary from the ancient Practice, or to make a new President,
because of the Consequences. It must be agreed in this Case, That the old
Panel upon which the Prisoner took his Challenges, and of which Nine was
sworn, is Parcel of the Record. Now, my Lord, to add a new Panel, upon which
twelve more shall be sworn, and all this appear upon Record, and the Prisoner
tried upon the last Panel, will not this be Error? I offer this before the
Jury be called and sworn, because we desire to be fairly tried; and we design
to rest upon the Fact in this Case. If it should appear, That he is tried upon
a Panel that is unduly made and returned, that will be of evil Consequence one
way or other. And can this be duly made, if another appear upon Record before
it? And can any body say it is quasht or abated? Or can it be so? My Lord, in
Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, p. 155. it is said, If any of the Panel dye
after the Return, and before their Appearance, so that there are not enough
left to make the Jury, yet the Panel shall not be quasht, nor is it ^bated,
but it is Cause to grant a Tales. And certainly, my Lord, it is a stronger
Case, when by reason of Challenges, which the Law gives the Prisoner liberty to
make, there are not enough left, that there shall not be a new Panel, but that
a Tales shall be granted; for if a new Panel might be made, it cannot appear
who were challenged, or who were admitted. And if your Lordship pleases to
consider the Intention of the Law in giving the Prisoner power to Challenge,
is, that he may have an indifferent Jury; but that would be prevented by such a
practice as this; for when it has been discovered upon the old Panel whom the
Prisoner chose, and whom he challenged upon the new Panel, the Persons
challenged may be set first, and those that were chosen may be omitted, or so
postponed, that none of them whom he thought equal to try him, can serve upon
the Jury. And truly, my Lord, if I am rightly informed, that is the Case upon
this new Panel, some of those that were admitted and sworn are left out, and
most of them, I think, are put last in the Panel whom he thought equal Men to
try him, and all those whom he challenged peremptorily, are the first Men in
the Panel. This, my Lord, is the Case before you, and if this be admitted, the
use and end of Challenges, which are in bebenefit and favor of Life would be
defeated. And for Authorities in this Case, besides the Reason and Ground of
the Law, many cannot be expected, because it is a Fact that rarely happens. I
find none of the ancient Practicers ever knew it, but I find that a Tales ought
to be granted, so it is said in several Books, as in Stamford, 155. 156. when
ever upon the principal Panel, all the Jury does not appear, or so many of
them do not, that there are not enough left to make a Jury, which is our very
Case; then in such Case the Panel shall not be quasht or abated; but a Tales
granted, so is 14 H. 7. 7. there the Question was, Whether there should be a
greater Number returned upon the Tales then were in the principal Panel, and
there the Difference was insisted upon, and agreed, That where it is between
Party and Party, where Life is not concerned, it shall not, but where Life is
concerned, and the Prisoner has Power to Challenge 35 Peremptorily, there the
Judge may award as many upon the Tales as he pleases, that there may be enough
to remain after the Challenges; so that if this old Panel be not abated, and
could not be quasht, and a Tales might be granted to consist of any Number, I
conceive the Prisoner cannot be Tried upon this new Panel, but it will be
Erroneous; and I humbly submit to your Lordships, whether you will proceed upon
it.


Sir B. Shower, If your Lordship pleases to spare me a Word of the same side,
with Submission. We think there ought to have been an Habeas Corpora, with a
Tales, such as had been before Sworn, being to be part of the Jury now, and
that is the proper way to bring the Prisoner to his Trial in this Case; the
Kings Counsel cannot expect we should produce many Presidents, for I believe
this is the second of the kind that ever happened, at least, within Memory,
That a Trial in Treason was put off pro defectu Juratorum, though I have a
President that I think is express in the Case; but we insist in the first
place, That a Tales does lie at Common Law, in the Case of Life; and so the
Book that Mr. Sergeant cited in Stamford, is express; and then we say, that the
Answer which we expect, that we are now before Justices of Goal Delivery, is
not sufficient, because the Justices of Jail-delivery, though they do not
usually award Process by way of Writ, but before their coming, they Command the
Sheriff to have his County ready there, and so in Fact, it is a Parol Precept;
yet when it is returned, then it is entered upon Record, either Preceptum est
Vice Comiti quod venire faceret; or, Ideo veniat Jurata; and the Jury are
entered upon Record: So that take it to be before Justices of Jail-delivery, yet
the Sheriff having returned a Panel, and that being upon the File, as appears
before your Eyes, in Obedience to your Command, and that Copy of the Panel
being delivered to us two Days before Saturday last, we humbly submit it to
your Lordship, Whether by force of the Common Law, and of the late Act of
Parliament, we ought not to be Tried by that Panel; we insist upon it, that
the Act intends, and expressly designed, that not only the Prisoner should have
a Copy of the Panel that the Sheriff returned at any time after, but that he
should be Tried by the Panel that we had a Copy of at first; for it is not
said a Copy, toties quoties the Court shall think fit to award a Precept for a
new Panel, but the Words of the Act are a Copy of the Jury duly returned by
the Sheriff; now this we had, and your Lordship knows it is not a returned
Panel till it be in Court, and then it becomes part of the Record: My Lord, I
do agree the Justices in some Cases have quasht and set aside Pannels and
Juries, and ordered new ones; and I confess there was an extraordinary Case in
the time of King Charles the Second, which was upon the Indictment against
Whitebread, where, after the Jury Charged, and Evidence given, the Jury was
discharged, and a new Panel made the next Sessions, upon which Whitebread was
Tried and Convicted; how just or regular that was, I will not insist upon now,
but I am sure there were great Complaints of that Practice, and few Presidents
can be shown of the like; but besides the Parties themselves waved it there, no
Objection being taken against it, but we insist upon it in this Case, that this
being upon Record, is part of the Record, and so appears to the Court; if the
Record indeed were to be made up upon a Writ of Error, perhaps it would be no
Error* because it may be they would leave it out; but here it appears there was
a Panel of Record before you, and this must either be quasht, or altered, or
continued on by Process, you have power to quash it, it it be unduely returned
by the Sheriff. If there be any evil Practices for procuring the Panel, either
by the Prosecutor, or the Prisoner, if there be no Freeholders returned, or the
same happen in any other respect not to be legally done according to the
Command or Precept of the Court; but because there is a Default of appearance
of Jurors, no Panel was ever quasht upon that Account; then say we, if it be
not quasht, this Panel must continue. For, what shall become of it, why should
it not continue? It is not within the Act of Parliament, that gives the
Justices Power to make a new Panel, as in the Case of a grand Jury, when they
are guilty of Concealments, or refuse to find Bills upon great Evidence, but we
have no such Case before you, nor do I know any such Rule as can reach this; so
that we take it, there is no difference between this Case, as before Justices
of Jail-delivery, and other Justices; that Process does lie against the Jury
that does not appear even in Treason and Felony, there is no Dispute, and it is
very properly so, if it be before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer; first a
Venire facias, and then upon Default, a Habeas Corpora, that is the proper way;
then take it before Justices of Jail-delivery, there it is entered upon Record,
Preceptum est Vice Comiti. etc. And here is a Panel returned by virtue of this
Precept, and some of the Jury do not appear, and so there are not enough to Try
the Prisoner after a great many Sworn and Challenged, and this entered upon
Record. What shall become of that Panel, it cannot be quasht, nor abated? My
Lord, there is a Case that does Warrant that Opinion of a Tales in a Case of
Felony; and if there may be a Tales, then there may be an Habeas Corpora, and
there are Directions how the Jurors shall be Sworn again, upon their appearance
on the Habeas Corpora; and that is Wharton's Case in Telverton, 23.


Mr. J. Powell, Jun. Do not dispute that, it is plain, That a Tales does lie in
Felony, upon a Commission of Oyer and Terminer; but can you show me. Sir
Bartholomew, any where, that upon a Commission of Jail-delivery a Tales does
lie?


Sir B. Shower, Sir. I can only show the Reason of the Law, and I cannot find
that does contradict what we now contend for.


Mr. J. Powell* I tell you Sir Bartholomew, there is no Tales but with a Habeas
Corpora to bring in the first Jurors, and that cannot be upon a Parol Precept
on a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, there goes a Venire facias, which is a
Writ upon which the Habeas Corpora may be grounded, but there is no Venire
facias upon a Commission of Jail-delivery.


Sir B. Shower, Why should there not be a Precept in nature of an Habeas
Corpora for a Jury returned, upon a Precept as well as on a Writ?


Mr. J. Powell, No, it never was done, the Commission of Jail-delivery (...) a
general Commission that does Authorize the Sheriff to impannel, and ^ave a Jury
ready at the day appointed, for the Delivery of the Goal, to Try the Prisoners;
it does import in it self a general Precept for that purpose, before Issue
joined, which the Sheriff cannot do in the Case of a Commission of Cyer and
Terminer, but must have a Writ of Venire facias, after Issue joined.


Mr. Sol. Genesis In all the Cases that they cite, there is a Writ of Venire
facias, upon which the after Process, by Writ, may be grounded; but here is no
Foundation for any future Process by Writ, because it is only by Parol Precept.


Mr. At. Genesis Sure these Gentlemen don't think what they say, the Panel is
not part of the Record, and there is no Record of it, nothing but the Clerks
Entry in a Paper, or Note, for his own Memorandum.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Brother Darnal, have you any Book that says, Justices of
Jail-delivery must award a Tales upon default of the Jurors.


Mr. Serj Darnal, No my Lord, I cannot say so.


L C. J. Treby, Suppose all the Jury had been challenged, or died.


Mr. J. Powell, there could be no quashing of it, but it would fall of it self,
for want of a Jury.


Mr. J. Rokeby, If, according to your Doctrine, we must keep to the first
Panel, the Consequence would be, there would be no Trial at all.


Sir B. Shower, Stamford makes no difference that I can see.


Mr. At. Genesis But these Gentlemen have been told the difference, upon which
this Matter is grounded, a Tales cannot be without a Habeas Corpora, and a
Habeas Corpora cannot be without a Venire facias, but a Commission of Goal
Delivery cannot award a Venire facias, because that is not to be awarded till
Issue joined.


Mr. B. Powis. The return of this Panel before Justices of Jail-delivery, is
an Act of the Sheriff, by virtue of the Commission, and nothing appears of
Record till the Jury are Sworn.


Mr. J. Rokeby, They object that it is upon Record


L. C. J. Treby. By the Record, they mean the Clerk's Note.


Mr. At Genesis If you please to look upon the Indictment, there is no Entry at
all, and that is all the Record before you


Mr. J. Powell, Does it appear upon Record, that Nine were Sworn.


Mr. Baker, No, there is nothing upon the Record.


C. of. Arr. It does not appear till the Record is made up, and nothing is
entered till Twelve are Sworn.


Mr. Serj. Darnal. There will be a great inconvenience, if a Panel may be
changed at any time.


Mr. J Powel, This is a Case that never happened before, and may be never may
again.


Sir B. Shower, The Law will hold the same, in case it does appear upon Record,
as well as where it does not; but we say, a Panel returned in Court is a
Record.


Mr. J. Powell, No, it will not, because, when a Jury does appear, and the
Twelve are sworn, then it becomes parcel of the Record; and therefore
Whitebread's Case was quite another Case, and was indeed held to be an
extraordinary Case, but that comes not up to this, for there a full Jury was
Sworn, and Evidence given.


Mr. Serj. Darnal, It may be the same Jury will not be returned:


Mr. J. Powell* But if you have a Copy of the Jury, you are at no Mischief.


Mr. Serj. Darnal, Some that were in the former Panel are quite left out.


Mr. Sher. Buck. There are none left out, but what were not Freeholders* that I
know of.


Mr. B. Powis, He says the Fact is not true as you have alleged it.


Mr. Sher. Buck. And Mr. Sergeant Darnal has been pleased to reflect upon us,
as if we had packt this Jury, by altering the places of the Names, which, my
Lord, we do utterly deny, and we only left out those that were not Freeholders.


Mr. B. Powis. The Sheriff says he has not postponed any of them, and only
left out those, that were not Freeholders.


Mr. Ser. Darnal. If the Law were as plain with us as the Fact in that Case, we
should have a very good Case of it.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. Mr. Sergeant I have both the Pannels here, they may be
compared.


Mr. Ser. Darnal. I said no harm, Mr. Sheriff, nor meant any Reflection upon
you.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. Mr. Sergeant was pleased to say, the excepted men were
put in the Front, and those that were sworn were put last.


L. C. J. Treby. There is nothing at all in the Objection.


Mr. J. Powel. Really, because it was opened as a Reflection, it will be proper
for the Sheriff to clear it.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. My Lord, the answer I give to it, is, that particularly
one that was sworn last time, is now at the very beginning of the Panel, and
in general they are mixed promiscuously, without any design or study in the
least. He says we have left out those that served before. I solemnly protest,
I know not one Man Returned upon the last Panel that is left out, unless it
appeared that he is no Freeholder, and we had no reason to put in them, that
we knew could not serve.


Mr. Serj. Darnal. That cannot appear to us, that they are not Freeholders.


Mr. J. Rokeby. But it appears to him, and therefore he did well to leave them
out.


Mr. Sher Buckingham. What I say, I am ready to give upon my Oath.


Mr. Serj. Darnal. I say there is one Henry Beadle left out, and he was one
that was sworn.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. I will not say for a particular man, I protest, that I
did not know he was left out. If it be so, it was by mistake; for I know Mr.
Beadle very well, and I take him to be an honest man, and very well affected to
the Government, as any man.


Mr. Serj. Darnal. We desire to be tried by men that are honest and well
affected to the Government.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. There you have of them, Sir.


Mr. Serj. Darnal Those that were sworn are put last of all, and there is not
above one of them that is within possibility of coming on again.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. It will appear by Mr. Cooks Challenges, and the other
Panel, that they stood late before, and Thomas Clark, who was sworn the last
time, stands tenth man upon the Panel.


Mr. Ser. Darnal. He was sworn after we had gone through the Panel, and took
all our Challenges, not appearing at first.


Mr. Sher. Buckingham. I tell you they stand for the most part as they did, for
ought I know.


Mr. Ser. Darnal. There is but one in threescore and ten, that can be sworn
now, of them that were sworn before, and there were nine of them then sworn.


Mr. Attor. Genesis That is a mistake. Indeed there are a great many added to the
Panel, because there was a defect the last time, and therefore now they may
perhaps stand later.


Mr. Ser. Darnal. I do not speak to reflect upon the Sheriffs: I go according
to my Instructions.


Mr. J. Powel. If it had been so it had been well enough for you must be
contented, the Court must take it as the Sheriff returns it, and you have a
Copy of it.


Mr. At. Genesis Here are four of them that were sworn before, that stood above
sixty off in the old Panel.


Mr. Sher. Buck. The first Man that was sworn, Mr. Sherbrook, stands within the
first Twelve now (as well as before.)


Mr. J. Powell, If they had been all new, there had been nothing in that.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Truly, I cannot see but that the Sheriff has done like an
equal, just, fair, and honest Officer.


Mr. At. Genesis They may challenge as they will.


L. C. J. Treby. You are to consider, that this happens, because you run out as
far as your utmost Number, that time you challenged thirty five peremptorily,
and diverse others for Cause; so as not to leave enough for a Jury, and from
that alone arose a necessity of increasing the Number of the Panel.


Mr. Serj. Darnal, It was our Client that challenged them, we do not advise him
whom to challenge.


Mr. J Rokeby, But you must take the consequence of it, which causes this
addition to the Panel.


L C. J. Treby, What do you complain of? they that are returned, are put in the
same order as they were before; they that were sworn, were (for the most part)
late in the Panel then, and so they are now. I do not find any thing done to
the prejudice of the Prisoner.


Mr. Serj Darnal, If the Christian Names had not been mistaken, there had been
perhaps enough to have been sworn.


L. C. J Treby, That Is a good Argument for a new Panel, because the Christian
Names were mistaken before.


Mr. J Powell, It was by defect of Jurors, and therefore there was an absolute
necessity of a new Panel.


L. C. J Treby, I am of the same Opinion.

Wharton's Case is well known. It was much cited, as to another Point in
Bushel's Case. It was a Trial at the King's Bench Bar at Westminster by a Jury
of Kent, upon an Indictment of Murder.

And I think you say the Case of H. 7. was between party and party in Appeal.
And I believe Stamford's Discourse, in the place cited, relates chiefly to
Appeals.

I shall not deny that a Tales may possibly be upon an Indictment before
Justices of Oyer and Terminer. Though it is not usual, nor do you show, or our
experienced Clerks know any such President. I agree, that in the mentioned
Cases, a Tales was proper. For, in both those Cases (viz. of Appeal and
Indictment removed into the King's Bench) the Process for the Jury was, as it
ought to be, by Writs of Venire facias, etc. upon which a full Jury not
appearing, there must be a Tales. But in proceeding to Trial before Justices of
Oyer and Terminer, on such Indictment as is here, though I will not say but
they may proceed by Writ of Venire facias: Yet I do say, that the more known
Course is by Precept, in nature of a Venire facias. And the usage is, that
After (and never Before) the Prisoner has pleaded Not Guilty, there goes a
Precept to the Sheriff under the Seals of the said Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, returnable at such day as they shall Adjourn to, for returning a Jury
to Try it. Rookwood's Trial 4. 13.
(as was done lately, upon Advice, in the Case of Rookwood, etc.) And upon the
return of that, if, after Challenges, there are not enough left to make a Jury,
whether those Justices shall issue a Precept in nature of a Habeas Corpora, or
Distringas with a Tales, or another Precept in the same form as before, and
without taking notice of the former, is a Question not in Judgment before us.
For, we are about proceeding to a Trial on an Indictment in this Court of
Jail-delivery, (which is the Court wherein generally all capital Crimes are
Tried, as well at this Place, as at the Assizes.) And, I think, Here cannot be
a Tales. I am sure it is not necessary. For, First, Here is never any Writ of
Venire facias, etc. Secondly, Nor ever a Precept for returing a Jury to Try a
particular Issue. But this Court takes the Pannels of Jurys returned by the
Sheriff without any particular Precept to him.

The Course of proceeding by virtue of a Commission of Jail-delivery, which is
the Law in this case, is this, viz. There is, Antecedent to the coming of the
Justices, a General Commandment, or Precept made in Writing, to the Sheriff by
the said Justices, to return Juries against their coming, for the Trying of all
and singular Prisoners in their Goal, whether they have pleaded before, or
shall after. And for that purpose it requires the Sheriff to Summon, out of all
parts of his County, whence the Prisoners come, a great Number of Freeholders,
not a Kin to the Prisoners, to be at the time and place appointed for holding
the Court. The Sheriff, by virtue of this general previous Precept, summoneth
many for Jurors, and prepares diverse several Pannels of their Names, either at
first, or afterward, as appears necessary, and returns and delivers in one
or more of these Pannels from time to time, as the Court does need, and call
for any. This, we know, in Fact, is frequently done where the Sessions of
Jail-delivery lasts several days, and there is occasion. Though, in supposition
of Law, all these Pannels are returned, and the Trials thereupon had the first
day of the Sessions; and in Law it is intended to be but that one day only. The
return of this Precept is thus, viz. Executio istius Precepti patet in
quibusdam Pann^llis huic precepto annexis, and the Pannels are annexed, and
there are often Filed here diverse Pannels upon the same general Precept, though
sometimes but One. These Pannels are thus delivered into Court, and a Jury
taken out of them, as there is occasion, only upon a Parol Award, that is,
barely the Court's calling for the same, without Writ or Precept in Writing, or
giving any Day for the doing it. For, this Proceeding is immediate, for the
speedy delivery of Prisoners; and the Entry after setting forth that the
Prisoner being Arraigned, pleads Not Guilty, is Ideo immediate veniat inde
Jurata; or fiat inde Jurata. And this Court's being instituted for the speedy
delivery of Prisoners, and Warnings being given long before, of their coming,
are the Causes why it has been always held without Doubt, that Justices of
Jail-delivery might inquire and Try the same day.

If it fall out that, by Reason of Defaults, Deaths, or Challenges, there
cannot be a full Jury had out of a Panel, (as here there wanted three) which
is an Accident that the Court cannot know, till they have gone through the
Panel; I think in this Case, that Panel goes for nothing, is utterly lost and
void, and to be cast away or cancelled; For, it does not answer the Award of
the Court, which was to have a Jury to Try the Prisoner presently. It is meant
an effectual Panel that should afford a full Jury of Twelve unacceptionable
Men. And every Panel that comes short in this, is to be laid aside as a void
thing. And then the Court takes and makes use of another immediately, which may
not be deficient, whereby the Award is observed, and the present Service
dispatched:

Object. It is objected, that the Old Panel is parcel of the Record in Court,
and, upon that, Nine were sworn, and their Names are all entered upon that
Record; and now to add a new Panel, upon which Twelve shall be sworn and Try
the Prisoner; all this appearing upon Record, it will be Error.

Answ. This Objection stands upon two Mistakes, both arising from not observing
the difference between Precepts and Pannels, in a Court of Jail-delivery, and
Venire facias's, or Precepts and Pannels in other Courts.

1. It supposes that here will be two Pannels, which will appear to relate to
the Trial of this Prisoner Mr. Cook. 2. It supposes that both these will become
Records, or parcel of the Record in Court.

If either of these Suppositions prove to be a mistake, it will destroy the
Objection. I think Both are mistakes.

1. Here is not, nor will be, nay, there ought not to be any Panel purporting
to be returned for the Trying of Mr. Cook, or any particular Prisoner or
Prisoners. For, the Precept in this Case is (not like a Venire facias which
always respects a particular Issue between Parties therein named, but)
General, requiring the Sheriff to return Jurors enough to Try all the
Prisoners, not naming any. And the Return, which is the Answer to it by a
Panel or Pannels, is as General; the Title of every Panel, being Nomina
Jurator ad Triandum pro Domino Rege, and no more; or Nomina Juratorum ad
Triandum inter Dom. Regem and Prisonar* ad Barram, without naming any of the
Prisoners. And it were absurd if it should be otherwise. For, the Precept goes
to the Sheriff Before the Sessions, and his Return is supposed to be made at
the Beginning of the Sessions, when it is not known who of the Prisoners will
be indicted; or, if indicted, who will plead not Guilty, or Guilty, or a
Pardon, or other Plea.

When, for the Trial of a particular Prisoner (or diverse Prisoners that are
thought fit to be put upon Trial by the same Jury) a Jury is about to be taken
out of any Panel, the Clerk, as he goes along, may take a Note in Paper of the
Name of every one that is sworn, or he may (and usually does) write, Jur. on
the said Panel against the Name of every one sworn. But this Note or Mark is
no part of the Record; it is not ex Institutione Legis* it is but a voluntary
Memorandum, for the help of his Memory. If he could safely trust to the
strength of his Memory, he need not write at all on this occasion; I mean, not
till a full Jury is sworn, who Try the Prisoner. But then, indeed, the Clerk
must, (from his Notes, or Memory) write the Names of all the Twelve, entering
them on the Record of the Indictment, in this manner, viz. just after the Ideo
immediate veniat inde Jurata coram prefatis Justic* etc. Adding, Et Juratores
Jurate illius, etc. Scil. A. B. etc. Dicunt, etc. And it is by this only, that
the Names of those that are sworn, come to be of Record; and it is this entry
upon the Body of the Indictment alone, that is the Record, that shows who were
Jurors sworn, to Try this, or that, or other Prisoner, or Prisoners.

So that, if the old Panel were Filed, and were a Record, as the Prisoner's
Council would suppose, yet it would not thereby be made appear, that the said
Panel was returned, or used for, or in order to the Trial of this Prisoner.

2. The old Panel is not filed among the Records of the Court, nor ought to
be. When such a Panel does not produce a Jury, the Clerks may and use to throw
it by, as a useless thing. But, however they use it, we cannot allow it to be a
Record. It was received de been esse; It is abortive and comes to nothing. And
it is not every thing that passes in Court in order to a Record, that comes to
be so. A Frivolous Plea, that is rejected, is not Recorded. A Presentment or
Bill of Indictment, before it is found, is not a Record* And if an Ignoramus be
returned upon a Bill of Indictment, it never can be a Record. And, thereupon,
the Clerks do sometimes throw it away, tho sometimes they keep it and put it on
the File, only taking care to cross it, but if they do forget to cross it, yet
it is not a Record.

By all this it is apparent how great the difference is between a Precept and
Pannels in this Court, and a Venire facias and a Panel returned thereupon,
which is ever issued after Issue joined, and does always mention the
particular Parties and Matter it relates to, and is a Record, and a ground for
an H^beas Corpora which a Tales, to be returnable at a certain future day.

But, in this Case in this Court, it is quite otherwise.


Sir B. Shower. Then, my Lord, since there is a new Panel, we hope we stand in
the same condition upon the Act of Parliament, to take Exceptions to the
Indictment before this Jury sworn, as we did before the other Jury sworn, since
all that is quite set aside.


L. Chapter J. Treby. Yes truly, I think that may be.


Mr. Attorn, Genesis But these Gentlemen would have done well to have given notice
of their Exceptions.


Sir B. Shewer. My Lord, I shall not stand upon an Exception which I think I
might take to the word Turmas in the Indictment, which whether it be Troops of
Men, or Horses, or what it is does not appear; but, I think, we have an
Exception to the chief Overt Act laid in the Indictment, and that we presume,
if my Brief be right, will be sufficient to set aside this Indictment: The
Indictment charges, That Mr. Cook did agree with other Traitors to send Mr.
Chernock into France to the said late King James, and King Jam^s is never
mentioned before in all the Indictment, that is one Exception that we have,
that there is no late K. James mentioned in the Indictment before this, if my
Copy be right, if it be otherwise, I suppose, they will find it: it is laid,
that Mr. Cook did agree to send Cherneck as a Messenger into France, eidem
nuper Regi Jacobo, and no Rex Jacobus mentioned before. Then there is another
Exception, and that is this, They come and say, that whereas there was a War
with France, which is only in the Indictment by way of recital or rehearsal of
an History, Quod cum per magnum Tempus suit and mode fit, etc. Mr. Cook the
Premises knowing, did compass and imag^ne the Kings death, and did adhere to
the said Kings Enemies such a day. Now, my Lord, I do think, that this can
never be maintained, for that Cum quoddam Bellum, etc. being an Historical
Narrative, is not positive enough: For adhereing to the Kings Enemies, being
one of the Treasons laid in the Charge, there ought to be a War at the time of
the adhesion, and of necessity then that ought to be presented by the Jury; for
tho your Lordships can Judicially take notice of War or Peace, yet you cannot
take notice of it at such a particular time, and the reason is from the Notion
that is in my Lord Coke in his 3d, Institutes, Cap. Treason. That adhesions to
Rebels is not adhesion to the Kings Enemies; for a Rebel is not said to be an
Enemy, but it must be adhereing to such an Enemy, as between whom and the King
there was War at that time, and consequently it ought to be more positively
averred in the Indictment, than it here is: but as to the Overt Act of Mr.
Cooks consulting and agreeing to send Chernock over to the said late King James
to give him notice of what was agreed upon between them, when King James is not
named before, that can never be got over with submission


Mr. Baker. It is a mistake of your Copy, Sir Bartholomew Shower.


Mr. At. Genesis I have looked into the Record, and it is Jacobo Secundo nuper
Regi, not Dicto.


Sir B. Shower. Then with submission, my Lord, they cannot try us now, for we
ought to have a true Copy of the Indictment.


Mr. Baker. Upon Demand. But you never demanded it.


Sir Barth. Shower. Yes, it was demanded.


Mr. Baker. Who demanded it? Sir B. Shower. Our Solicitor Burleigh.


Mr. Baker. No, he did not, I gave it him officiously.


Mr. At. Genesis With submission, my Lord, it is no Objection at all, that their
Copy is wrong. That should have been before the Prisoner had pleaded; for the
words of the Act are, that he shall have it so many days before, to enable him
to plead, and he cannot be put to plead unless he have a Copy of the Indictment
so long before: and at Rookwood's Trial it was said by the Court it could not
be alleged after Plea pleaded.


Mr. Burleigh. The Copy was given to me publicly in Court.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Why did not your Solicitor compare it with the Indictment?


Mr. At. Genesis They might have compared it by the Clerk's reading it to them;
but they will not admit the Prisoner's Solicitor to see the Original, because
the Act expressly says they shall not have a Copy of the Witnesses Names.


Sir B. Shower. The Officer is to deliver a true Copy of the Indictment.


Mr. At. Genesis No; the Party is to demand it by himself or his Agent, and then
he is to have it; and if he be denied he ought to apply himself to the Court,
who will order the Delivery of it; but we stand upon it that they cannot take
this Exception now after they have pleaded, for the intent of the Copy is to
enable him to plead.


L. C. J. Treby. The Copy, by the Act of Parliament, is to be delivered to the
Prisoner, his Attorney, Agent or Solicitor, if they require the same, and here
it seems there was no requiring of it, but it was voluntarily given, and now
you have lapsed your time of making the Exception of wanting a Copy by having
pleaded to the Indictment, whereby you have in effect admitted and declared,
either that you had a true Copy of it, or that you did not think fit to require
one; for the use of the Copy is to better enable the Prisoner to plead. But
when you did plead, you took upon your self to be well able to plead without
the help of a Copy, which you might have had upon the asking for.


Sir B. Shower. Then, my Lord, there is another thing in the Indictment* that
in this Overt Act there is a new Time, and a new Place, and a new Verb, and a
new Fact alleged, and no Nominative Case; it is alleged that Peter Cook at
first with others did so and so; and then the first of July to bring the
Treasons aforesaid to effect, there and alibi, etc. (which is very loose, for I
know not whence the Venue must come) did traitorously with Chernock, Friend,
etc. consult to procure Diversas Turmas and Legiones, etc. to join with them in
England, and then it comes and ulterius such a Day, Year and Place, did
traitorously agree so and so, and not say who: now this is neither by express
words nor Rule of Grammar to be referred to the Prisoner at the Bar, it does
not say Ipse Idem Petrus Cook; now, my Lord, that the King's Counsel thought it
necessary in every OvertAct is plain, because those words are put in every
other Clause of the Indictment, in those Clauses that go before and those
Clauses that come after; then if they will take it, that this Clause must refer
to the next Antecedent, that will not do, for the next precedent Nominative
Case is either Friend or Chernock. So that this is without a Nominative Case,
and the Presidents in my Lord Coke's Entries 361, and all the other Books have
the Nominative Case repeated, where there is a new Time, and a new Place, and a
new Fact alleged: now it might be true that the Prisoner at the Bar might be
present, and this same Treason might be discoursed of and agitated, and there
might be a Consult about this Business, and yet it is not necessarily implied
that he must consent and agree to send Chernock into France, upon which the
great stress of the Indictment lies: therefore we say, these words having no
Nominative Case, the Indictment cannot hold.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, as to this Objection it will receive a very plain
Answer. Our Indictment begins and sets forth that Peter Cook, the Prisoner at
the Bar, did imagine and compass the King's Death, and did adhere to the King's
Enemies, and these are the Treasons; and then it sets forth the Overt Act, that
in Execution of the traitorous Compassings, Imaginations and Adhesions
aforesaid. Ipse Idem Petrus Cook together with Sir William Parkins, Mr.
Chernock, Sir John Friend and others, did propose and consult to procure from
the French King Forces to invade this Land and ulterius he and they did agree
to send Chernock to the late King James.


Mr. J. Rookeby. There Is the first naming of James the Second, late King of
England, and there is no eidem Jacobo I promise you.


L. C. J. Treby. Well, that Mistake is over. Pray go on Mr. Attorney General.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, as to this Objection of Sir Barth. Shower, he would
have Ipse Idem Petrus repeated over again, and he says that we lay a distinct
Over-Act with a different Time and Place. Now that is a mistake too, it is not
a different Time and Place, but the same Time and Place; and it mentions that
cum. R. Chernock, J. Friend, etc. and cum aliis Proditoribus conveniebat.
consultabat. etc. Which he says may refer to Sir J. Friend or Charnock: but if
you look into the Frame of the Sentence that can never be.


Mr. J. Rookeby. Petrus Cook is the Nominative Case that governs all the Verbs.


Mr. At. Genesis And there is no other Nom. Case in all the Indictments but
Petrus Cook except it be in a Parenthesis, and that saves the Rule of Grammar
if there were any thing in it, that it must refer to the last antecedent.


Sir B. Shower. When it comes to the Clause that he did procure Horse and Arms,
there the Nominative Case is repeated.


L. C. J. Treby. It would not have made it worse, if they had made it so here,
but the Question is whether it be necessary.


Sir B. Shower. Indictments ought to be precisely certain, but this we say is
not so.


Mr. At. Genesis But here is as much certainty as to the Person, as can be, that
he did consult with such and such about such things, and further the same Day
did agree with the same Traitors to do so and so.


Mr. J. Powell. Indictments it is true ought to be plain and clear, but I do
not see but here is as much certainty as can be that he did such a Day consult,
and further the same Day did agree with the same Persons.


Sir. B. Shower. Who did agree, my Lord?


Mr. J. Powell. He that did consult with them before, and that is Peter Cook.


Mr. At. Genesis You Would have had us to have put it to every Verb, I believe.


Sir. B. Shower. In Indictments no Presumption ought to be used, but the Facts
ought to be directly and positively alleged.


Mr. J. Powell. Its true there should be no Presumption, and there is none
here, for certainly this is a plain Assertion of Fact.


L. C. J. Treby. Here are two things that are set forth; First, That Peter Cook
did meet with Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkyns, and others, and then and
there did consult with them, and consent to procure an Invasion, and join an
Insurrection thereto. And, Secondly, Further with the said Traitors did agree
to send Chernock into France. Now, what is the Nominative Case to this
Agreement? Is it Sir John Friend, and Sir William Parkyns? That Is impossible;
for they could not be said properly to meet and consult with themselves, every
one of them with his own self and the rest: And then the Number, if it had
referred to them, should have been Plural, but here it is Singular [agreavit]
and the sense is no more than this; That then and there Mr. Cook did meet with
such Persons, and did consult with them about such and such Matters, and
further, did agree with them to do thus.


Sir B. Shower. The meaning is not to be forced and strained by Inference or
Presumption, but it ought to be express and plain.


L. C. J. Treby. Nay, you cannot express it better; you may make a Tautology of
it if you will.


Sir B. Shower. The Paragraph is long, my Lord, and therefore requires the more
care to have those Repetitions that are necessary.


L. C. J. Treby. Your Objection to this Paragraph is, that it is too long; but
repeating the same Nominative Case to every Verb, would make it much longer.


Sir B. Shower. It cannot be understood to mean Peter Cook without Presumption,
which ought not to be in an Indictment.


Mr. At. Genesis And as to Sir Bar. Shower's first Objection, his Copy is right
too, and he mistook the place.


Sir B. Shower. You should have given me that for an Answer.


Mr. At. Genesis Nay, you should have taken more care, and not have made the
Objection.


L. C. J. Treby. Truly, I think it is hardly possible to have made this better
if it had been otherwise than it is.


Mr. Serj. Darnel. My Lord, we think we have a good Fact of it, which we rely
upon, and therefore do not so much insist upon these Exceptions, tho, in duty
to our Client, we mention that which we think is necessary, and we submit to
your Lordship.


Cl. of Arr. Set Peter Cook to the Bar. [Which was done] You, the Prisoner at
the Bar, these good Men which you shall hear called, and personally appear, are
to pass between our Sovereign Lord the King and you, upon Trial of your Life
and Death; if therefore you would challenge them, or any of them, your time is
to speak unto them as they come to the Book to be sworn, and before they be
sworn.


Crier. Call Sir John Sweetapple.


Sir John Swetapple. Here.


Cook. My Lord Chief Justice, if your Lordship please, I am advised --


L. C. J. Treby. Pray Sir speak out that we may hear what you say, and let the
Crier make proclamation for silence.


[Which was done.]

Cook. My Lord, before the Jury is called, I am advised, that if any of the
Jury have said already that I am guilty or they will find me guilty, or I shall
suffer, or be hanged, or the like, they are not fit or proper Men to be of the
Jury.


L. C. J. Treby. You say right, Sir, it is a good cause of Challenge.


Mr. J. Rokeby. That will be a sufficient cause, if, when they come to the
Book, you object that, and be ready to prove it.


Cook. Which is Sir John Sweetapple?


[He was shown to him.]

Cl. of Arr. There he is.


Cook. I challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. William Walker.


Cook. Sir, have you said any such thing, that you believe me guilty?


Mr. Walker. No, Sir.


Mr. Baker. My Lord, he is asking of the Jury-Man the Question.


Mr. J. Rokeby. That Is a Fact the Prisoner should prove upon him.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, he must not ask the Jury that Question, Whether they
have declared before, that they will find him guilty; that is to make them
guilty of a Misdemeanor.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Is it any Misdemeanor for me to say, I think or believe
such a Man is guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis If he be summoned to be of a Jury, and declare his Opinion
before hand, it is a Misdemeanor.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. But suppose it be before he was summoned?


Mr. At. Genesis If you make any such Objection, you must prove it, and not out
of the Jurymans own Mouth.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. I think any Man, my Lord, that comes to serve upon the
Jury, may be asked any Question that does not make him guilty of any Offense or
Crime, or liable to any Punishment: Now if any of these Gentlemen that are
returned upon this Panel, before the Summons have declared their Opinion, that
the Prisoner is guilty, or ought to suffer, with Submission, the Prisoner may
ask such a Question, Whether he have said so, yea or no?


Mr. J. Powell. He cannot upon a Voyer Dire be asked any such Question.


Mr. J. Rokeby. It is not denied to be a material Objection, but it must be
made out by Proof.


L. C. J. Treby. You put it too large, Brother Daruall, you may ask upon a
Voyer Dire, whether he have any Interest in the Cause; nor shall we deny you
liberty to ask whether he be fitly qualified, according to Law, by having a
Freehold of sufficient Value; but that you can ask a Juror or a Witness every
Question that will not make him criminous, that is too large: Men have been
asked whether they have been convicted and pardoned for Felony, or whether they
have been whipped for Petty Lacinary; but they have not been obliged to answer;
for, tho their Answer in the affirmative will not make them criminal or subject
them to Punishment, yet they are Matters of Infamy; and if it be an infamous
thing, that is enough to preserve a Man from being bound to answer. A pardoned
Man is not guilty, his Crime is purged; but merely for the Reproach of it, it
shall not be put upon him to answer a Question whereon he will be forced to
forswear or disgrace himself. So Persons have been excused from answering
whether they have been committed to Bridewell as Pilferers or Vagrants, or to
Newgate for Clipping or Coining. etc. Yet to be suspected or committed is only
a Misfortune and Shame, no Crime. The like has been observed in other Cases of
odious and infamous matters which were not Crimes indictable. But to keep to
our Case; It Is true, a Juror may be challenged being an Alien. or being a
Villain; but where the Matter apparently carries Crime or Shame, it should be
proved; the Outlawry should be proved, and so should the being a Villain. Yet
that is no Crime, tho it be an Ignominy.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. But, my Lord, I take this to be no manner of Infamy at all,
there is nothing of Crime, nor nothing of Reproach, but only a declaring of a
Man's Opinion.


L. C. J. Treby. Truly, I think otherwise; I take it to be at least a
scandalous Misbehaviour, and deservedly ill spoken of, for any Man to
pre-judge, especially in such a heinous matter. I think it is a very shameful
discovery of a Man's Weakness and Rashness; if not Malice, to judge before he
hears the Cause, and before the party that is accused could be tried. But, it
seems, by what the Prisoner says that he would ask all the Jurors, whether they
have not said, that he was guilty, or that they would find him guilty, or that
he should be hanged, or the like: Which (presuming him innocent) is to ask
whether they have not defamed and slandered him in the highest degree; and to
force them to discover that they have a mortal Hatred to him, and come with a
malicious resolution to convict him: Which admitting they are not punishable by
our Law, yet are things so detestably wicked and so scandalous as are not fit
to be required to be disclosed by and against themselves,


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Pray, my Lord, what is more common than for a Man to say,
before he is summoned to be upon a Jury, when he hears a Fact reported
concerning such a one, to say I believe he is guilty, or I am of opinion he is,
and I am sure he will be hanged, and yet there is no crime in this.


L. C. J. Treby. Truly, Bro. Darnall, I know not how you may approve of such a
Man, but I Will assure you I do not. I take the Question not to be concerning a
Man's discoursing suppositively; as, if upon hearing News, or a Report of clear
Evidence, a Man should say, Supposing this to be true, such a Man is guilty,
and I should find him so if I were of his Jury. This might not be sufficient to
set aside a Juror: for this has been a general Discourse among the Subjects
upon occasion of this Conspiracy; and it imports that if Evidence should not be
true and clear, he would acquit him. And so he is, as he should be,
indifferent. But if a Man, qualified for a Juror, affirm Positively that such a
Prisoner is guilty, and that he will find him so whatever Evidence or Proof be
given or made to the contrary, I think that may be a Misdemeanour punishable as
an owning and encouraging of Falsehood, Perjury and Injustice, and a contempt
and scandal to the Justice of the Kingdom. Tho I hope and believe that no man
has so demeaned himself.


Mr. J. Powell. In a Civil Case it would be a good Cause of Challenge. If a Man
have given his Opinion about the right one way or other, may you not upon a
Voire dire ask him whether he has given his Opinion one way or other? I
believe it may be ask in a Civil Cause because he may have been a Refferree;
but if you make it criminal it cannot be asked, because a Man is not bound to
accuse himself; now the Difference lies in the nature of the Cause, it is not
Criminal in a Civil Case for a Man to say he was an Arbitrator in such a Case,
and, upon what appeared before him, he was of such an Opinion.


Mr. At. Genesis But, my Lord, it is a different Case to give an opinion about
the Right between Party and Party where a Man has been an Arbitrator and so in
the Nature of a Judge, and where a Man is to go upon a Jury in the Case of Life
and Death, and before the Evidence given he declares his Opinion without
hearing the Cause.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we know several of the Trials have been printed, and
the Names of several Persons mentioned, and upon reading of the Trials or
conversing about them, Men are apt to give their Opinions one way or other.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. It is only an Objection in case he has done it.


Mr. J. Rookeby. But, Brother, how can you ask him the Question?


Mr. Serj. Darnal. If the Court are of opinion that it is such a Crime that it
cannot be asked, as tending to make a Man accuse himself of an infamous Crime,
then we submit it to you, and I confess we must not ask it; but we cannot
apprehend that there is either Crime or Infamy in it, tho we think it is an
Objection and a good Cause of Challenge.


Mr. B. Powys. I think, tho it be not such a Crime as infamous upon which a Man
is not to be credited, for that is Infamy in the Eye of the Law, whereby a Man
is prejudiced in his Credit; yet however it is a shameful thing for a Man to
give his Judgment before he has heard the Evidence and therefore I think you
ought not to ask him it, to make him accuse himself, if it be an opprobrious
matter upon him.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Truly, my Lord, I always took it to be the Rule, if the the
thing asked to the Person returned be not criminal nor infamous, the Party that
is asked ought to answer to it.


L. C. J. Treby. I would fain know, if you should ask any of the Jurymen this
Question, whether he be guilty of all the Crimes that are pardoned by the last
Act of Grace, he be bound to answer it?


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Undoubtedly we cannot ask any such Question; no, not to any
one of the things therein mentioned.


L. C. J. Treby. But yet you will force him to discover a Crime (if it be one)
that is unpardoned.


Mr. J. Powell. Certainly you go too far, Brother, for no Man is obliged to
charge himself with what is Criminal, but whether this be Criminal to say, I
believe such a one will be hanged, is of another Consideration.


Mr. J. Rookeby. But I think it must be proved upon him if any Objection be
made.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, it will be no easy thing to bring Witnesses to prove
this matter, and therefore we would have it from his own Mouth.


Mr. J. Rookeby. And it is a very hard matter for a Man to be put upon proving
every Discourse that he has had about the public Affairs of the time.


Mr. Recorder. The Reason of your Exception is, that he has declared his
opinion before hand, that the Party would be hanged or would suffer, that is a
Reproach and a Reflection upon a Wise man so to do; and if they can prove it
upon him let them do it: but whether you should ask him such a Question,
Whether he be a Fool or a Knave for the giving an opinion one way or other,
that is the Question before us.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. My Lord, we do not offer it to the Court as an Objection
that he is not a Wise man.


Mr. At. Genesis But what a Man does utter imprudently may occasion a Prejudice
against him, and therefore ought to be proved, and not he to prove it himself.


L. C. J. Treby. Especially being a Freeholder of London, and taking notice of
what is done in London; and if he does take notice of the Fact, and does
previously give his Opinion of a matter which he may be called upon a Jury to
try, this is an Indiscretion and a Reproach to him, and I think a Misdemeanour.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. My Lord, I acknowledge it is ill done of him, that is,
indiscreetly and not wisely, and we would have Discreet and Wise men upon our
Jury.


Mr. Cowper. My Lord, Mr. Serj. Darnall will make it so little a thing at last
that it will amount to no cause of Challenge, if it were even proved against
him, which we insist it ought to be, it being their Objection, and the Party
not being bound to prove it against himself; but truly we think there is more
in it than so, because it is an unjust prejudging of a Man before he is tried
and heard, and if so, it is a thing that he ought not to accuse himself of, and
therefore we oppose the asking any such Question.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Our Objection is not because it is an Offense to declare a
Man's opinion upon a Fact reported, but because it shows he has a settled
opinion against the Person of his Guilt, and so he is not so equal a Man to try
him.


L. C. J. Treby. And is that like a Honest man and a Freeholder of London, (who
ought to be indifferent) to come with a settled opinion against a Man, when he
is to be one of his Jury?


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Well, my Lord, we have been heard, and submit it to the
Judgment of the Court.


L. C. J. Treby. Truly I think it reflects both Dishonesty and Dishonor upon
him, and therefore these Questions ought not to be asked. The Question is not
whether a Man (if ever such a Man there were) that has so resolved and
declared shall be sworn? No; he is not fit to serve upon a Jury. But the
Question is, How this shall be discovered, by his own Oath or by other Proof? I
think it ought to be made appear by other Proof, if true. A Man attainted of
Felony, Forgery, False Verdict, or Perjury, ought not to serve on a Jury, yet
he shall not be examined concerning the same on a Voire dire. And if there be
in Court a Copy of such Judgment carefully examined and kept by himself, he
shall not be forced to Answer whether it be a true Copy; tho his Answer could
not subject him to any further Penalty.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. My Lord, I hope no Gentleman of the Jury has done it.


L. C. J. Treby. I hope no Freeholder of London is so indiscreet or so unjust.
But if any Man in this Panel have any particular Displeasure to the Prisoner,
or be unindifferent, or have declared himself so, I do admonish and desire him
to discover so much in general; for, it is not fit, nor for the honor of the
King's Justice, that such a Man should serve on the Jury.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. We hope so too. We hope that all that are returned upon the
Jury are discreet and impartial Men.


Cl. of Arr. Well, Sir, what say you to this Gentleman Mr. Walker?


Cook. I challenge you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. Nathanael Long.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we think he may ask if they have a Freehold or no;
because the Law requires that Qualification, and the Prisoner not being able to
prove the Nagative, it puts the Proof of the Affirmative upon the Person
himself.


Mr. At. Genesis What does Sir Bartholomew mean? would he have the Jurymen bring
their Evidences with them to prove their Freehold?


L. C. J. Treby. No sure, Mr. Attorney; but to ask the Question was allowed him
the last time, and we will not deny him the same just Favor now.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir, in London of the value of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Long. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury when the Bill was found against me?


Mr. Long. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. William Carbonell.


Mr. Carbonell. My Lord, I am no Freeholder.


L. C. J. Treby. What, does he say he has no Freehold?


Cl. of Arr. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Treby. Then he must be set aside.


Cl. of Arr. Joshua Foster.


Mr. Foster. My Lord, I am no freeholder in London neither.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we desire they may be sworn whether they have a
Freehold or not.


Cl. of Arr. Hold Mr. Carbonell and Mr. Foster the Book. (which was done
severally.) You shall true answer make to all such Questions as shall be asked
you by the Court. So help you God.


Mr. At. Genesis Ask him if he has not a Freehold in London?


Mr. Carbonell. No, I have not.


Cl. of Arr. Have you or any body in trust for you a Freehold in London of the
Value of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Carbonell. No, Sir.


Cl. of Ar. Joshua Foster, have you or any in trust for you any Estate of
Freehold in London of the Value of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Foster. No, Sir.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Billers.


Cook. I desire they may be called in the order as they are in the Panel, you
have not called John Ewen, who is next.


Cl. of Arr. I do call them in order: as for Mr. Ewen, one has made Oath that
he is sick, and is not able to come hither. What say you to Mr. Billers? there
he stands.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder of 10 l. a year, within the City of London?


Mr. Billers. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Was you of the Grand Jury, Sir, when the Bill was found against me?


Mr. Billers. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Child.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London?


Mr. Child. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Child. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury, when the Bill was found against me?


Mr. Child. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Edward Leeds.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London, of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Leeds. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Leeds. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


L. C. J. Treby. What Question was that he asked him?


Cl. of Arr. Whether he were one of the Grand Jury that found the Bill.


L. C. J. Treby. A very proper Question: for an Indicter ought not to be a
Tryer.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Clark.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Clark. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me.


Mr. Clark. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Nathan Green.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir, within the City of London, of the value of
10 l. a year.


Mr. Green. Yes, Sir.


Cook Were you of the GrandJury that found the Bill against me.


Mr. Green. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Henry Sherbroke.


Cook I have nothing to say against him.


Cl. of Arr. Then hold Mr. Sherbroke the Book.


(which was done.)

Look upon the Prisoner. You shall well and truly try, and true Deliverance
make between our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner at the Bar (whom you
shall have in charge) according to your Evidence. So help you God.


(Then Mr. Sherbrooke was put into the Place appointed for the Jury.)

Cl. of Arr. Henry Dry.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder in the City of London, of the value of 10 l.
a year.


Mr. Dry. Yes, Sir.


Cook Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Dry. No, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Morewood.


Cook. Sir, have you a Freehold in London, of the value of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Morewood. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Morewood. No, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Ar. Richard Greenway.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder of 10 l. a year in London.


Mr. Greenw. Yes Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Greenway. No, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Sherbrook.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder in the City of London of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Sherbrook. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Sherbrok. No, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Emmes.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir, within the City of London of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Emmes. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Emmes. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Samuel Jackson.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Jackson. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me.


Mr. Jackson. No, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Henry Hunter.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir, in London of the value of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Hunter. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Hunter. No, Sir.


Cook. I Challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Deacle.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London, of the Value of Ten
pounds a year?


Mr. Deacle. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Deacle. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr John Cullum.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Thomas Shaw.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. George Juice.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Juice. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Juice, No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Richard Young.


Cook. I have nothing to say against him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. John Hedges.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London, of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Hedges. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Hedges. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John James.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London of Ten pound a year?


Mr. James, Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. James, No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Poole.


Cook. Sir are you a Freeholder within the City of London of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Poole, Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Poole. No Sir?


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Peter Parker.


Cook. Sir are you a Freeholder in the City of London of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Parker. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Parker. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. William Wilkinson.


Mr. Wilkinson. My Lord, I am no Freeholder in London.


(To which he was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Henry Mitchell.


Cook. Hold, Sir, here Thomas Man in my Panel is next.


Cl. of Arr. There is Oath made that he is sick in Bad. What say you to Mr.
Mitchell?


Cook. Sir, have you a Freehold of 10 l. a year in the City of London?


Mr. Mitchell. No, Sir.


(To which he was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Richard Ryder.


Cook. Sir, Have you a Freehold of Ten pound a year in the City of London?


Mr. Ryder, Yes, I have, Sir; but I live in a Parish that never serve upon any
Juries, nor ever did in the memory of any Man.


Cl. of Arr. But have you a Freehold of 10 l. a year?


Mr. Ryder. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Ryder. No, Sir.


Cook. Sir, I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Richard Temple.


Mr. Temple. My Lord, I am no Freeholder.


(To which he was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Peter Walker.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Walker, Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Walker. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Pistol.


Mr. Pistol. I am no Freeholder.


(To which he was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. John Hunt.


Mr. Hunt. My Lord, my Name is mistaken; my Name is William Hunt.


L. C. J. Treby. Then you must go on to another.


Cl. of Arr. John Hardret.


Mr. Hardret. I am no Freeholder of 10 l. a year.


(To which he was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. John Hammond.


Cook. Are you a Freeholder, Sir, of 10 l. a year, in London?


Mr. Hammond. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Hammond. No Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Cooper.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was Sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Josselin Roberts.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Roberts. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Roberts. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Jonathan Micklethwait.


Cook. I have nothing to say against him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Richard Chiswell.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder within the City of London of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Chiswel. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Chiswell, No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Joseph Thompson.


Cook. Sir, are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Thompson. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Thompson. I was Returned upon the Grand Jury, but did not serve.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Edward Brewster.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Brewster. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Brewster. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. George Gooday.


Mr. Gooday. My Lord, I am no Freeholder.


(To which he was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. Abraham Hickman.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a Year?


Mr. Hickman. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me.


Mr. Hickman. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr George Grove.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a Year?


Mr. Grove. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Grove. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Nathaniel Wyersden.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a Year?


Mr. Wyersden. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Wyersden. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you. My Lord, I desire to know how many I have excepted
against.


Cl. of Arr. One and thirty.


Mr. Burleigh. Write, write.


Cl. of Arr. Samuel Blewitt.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a Year?


Mr. Blewitt. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Blewitt. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl of Arr. John Wolf.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. William Smith.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a Year?


Mr. Smith. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Smith. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Bickly.


Mr. Bickly. My Lord, I don't look upon my self as a Freeholder?


L. C. J. Treby. Why so, Sir.


Mr. Bickly. I have a Lease for One and fifty Years, my Lord, of my House, and
there is a very little piece of Ground adjoining to it that was very convenient
for me to lay to my Lease; there is no way to it but through my House; it is a
thing that never was let for any thing, and it is not worth the Building.


L. C. J. Treby. What Estate have you in it? Do you pay a Ground-Rent for it?


Mr. Bickly. My Lord, I bought that little piece of Ground for the Convenience
of my Lease.


L. C. J. Treby. But did you purchase it for Term of Years, or to you and your
Heirs?


Mr. Bickly. Nay, I bought it for ever, my Lord.


L. C. J. Treby. Then you have a Freehold in it. What Is the Value of it?


Mr. Bickly. Truly very little, my Lord.


L. C. J. Treby. I don't know any Body can judge of the Value of it but your
self. Is it worth Ten Pound a Year?


Mr. Bickly. My Lord, I cannot Value it at Ten Pound a Year, it never cost me
Forty Pound.


L. C. J. Treby. Then for Estate you are well enough, but for Value you are a
little under.


Cl. of Arr. Thomas Collins.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. John Watson.


(He was sworn.)

Cook. I do not Challenge him.


Cl. of Arr. Benjamin Hooper.


Cook. I accept of him.


(He was sworn.)

Cl. of Arr. John Wells.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Wells. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Wells. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. John Hibbart.


Cook. Sir, Are you a Freeholder of the City of London, of Ten pound a year?


Mr. Hibbart. Yes, Sir.


Cook. Were you of the Grand Jury that found the Bill against me?


Mr. Hibbart. No, Sir.


Cook. I challenge you.


Cl. of Arr. Mr. Cook you have challenged your full Number. Call Daniel Wray.

(He was sworn.)


Cl. of Arr. John Pettit.


(He was sworn.)

Crier Countez.


Henry Sherbrook.


Crier. One, etc.


Cl. of Arr. John Pettit.


Crier. Twelve good Men and true, stand together and hear your Evidence.


The Names of the Twelve sworn are as follow:
Henry Sherbrook, John Cullum, Thomas Shaw, Richard Young, John Cooper.
Jonathan Micklethwait, John Wolf, Thomas Collins, John Watson, Benjamin
Hooper, Daniel Wray, and John Pettit.
Cl. of Arr. Crier, Make Proclamation.


Crier. O Yez, If any one can inform my Lord, the King's Justices, the King's
Sergeant, the King's Attorney General, or this Inquest now to be taken of the
High Treason whereof Peter Cook the Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted, let
them come forth and they shall be heard, for the now Prisoner stands at the Bar
upon his Deliverance; and all others that are bound by Recognizance to give
Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar, let them come forth, and give their
Evidence, or they forfeit their Recognizance.


L. C. J. Treby. You must make room for those Twelve Gentlemen that are sworn,
that they may be at ease; and for those that are not sworn, their Attendance
may be spared.


Cl. of Arr. Peter Cook, hold up thy Hand.


(Which he did.)

Gentlemen, you that are sworn, look upon the Prisoner, and hearken to his
Cause. He stands Indicted in London, by the Name of Peter Cook, late of London,
Gentleman; For that whereas an Open and Notoriously Public and most Sharp and
Cruel War, for a great while has been, and yet is by Land and by Sea, Carried
on, and Prosecuted, by Lewis the French King, against the Most Serene, Most
Illustrious and Most Excellent Prince, our Sovereign Lord William the Third, by
the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of
the Faith, etc. All which time, the said Lewis the French King, and his
Subjects, were and yet are Foes and Enemies of our said Lord the King that now
is, William the Third, and his Subjects, He the said Peter Cook, a Subject of
the said Lord the King that now is, of this his Kingdom of England, well
knowing the Premises, not having the Fear of God in his Heart, nor weighing the
Duty of his Allegiance, but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of the
Devil, as a false Traitor against the said Most Serene, Most Mild and Most
Excellent Prince, our Sovereign Lord William the Third, now King of England,
his Supreme, True, Rightful, Lawful, and Undoubted Lord, the Cordial Love, and
True and Due Obedience, Fidelity, and Allegiance, which every Subject of the
said Lord the King that now is, toward him our said Lord the King, should
bear, and of Right is bound to bear, withdrawing, and utterly to Extinguish,
Intending and Contriving, and with all his Strength Purposing and Designing the
Government of this Kingdom of England, under Him our said Lord the King that
now is of Right Duly, Happily, and very Well Established, altogether to
Subvert, Change and Alter, and His Faithful Subjects, and the Freemen of this
Kingdom of England, into Intolerable and Miserable Servitude to the aforesaid
French King to Subdue and Inthral; the First Day of July, in the Seventh Year
of the Reign of our said Lord the King that now is, and diverse Days and Times,
as well before as after, at London, in the Parish of St. Peter Cornhil, in the
Ward of Limestreet, Falsely, Maliciously, Devilishly, and Traitorously did
Compass, Imagine and Contrive, Purpose and Intend, our said Sovereign Lord the
King that now is, then his Supreme, True, Rightful and Lawful Lord, of and from
the Regal State, Title, Honor, Power, Crown, Empire, and Government of this
Kingdom of England, to Depose, Cast down, and Utterly Deprive, and the same our
Lord the King to Death and Final Destruction to bring, and the aforesaid Lewis
the French King, by Armies, Soldiers, Legions and his Subjects, this Kingdom of
England to Invade, Fight with, Conquer and Subdue, to Move, Incite, Procure and
Assist, and a Miserable Slaughter among the Faithful Subjects of our said Lord
King William, throughout this whole Kingdom of England, to Make and Cause. And
further, That the said Peter Cook, during the War aforesaid, to wit, the
aforesaid First Day of July, in the Seventh Year abovesaid, and diverse other
Days and Times before and after, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward
aforesaid, to the said Foes and Enemies of the same our Lord the King, did
Adhere, and was Assisting: And his aforesaid most Wicked and Devilish Treasons,
and Traiterous Compassings, Contrivances, Intentions, and Purposes aforesaid,
to Fulfill, Perfect, and bring to Effect, and in Prosecution, Performance, and
Execution of that Traiterous Adhering, He the said Peter Cook, as such a False
Traitor, during the War aforesaid, to wit, the same First Day of July, in the
Year abovesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and Ward aforesaid, and
diverse other Days and Times, as well before as after, there, and elsewhere in
London aforesaid, Falsely, Maliciously, Advisedly, Secretly, and Traitorously,
and by Force and Arms, with one Robert Chernock, Sir John Friend and Sir
William Parkyns, Knights, (which said Robert Chernock, Sir John Friend, and Sir
William Parkyns, were lately severally Duly Convicted and Attainted of High
Treason, in Contriving and Conspiring the Death of our said Lord the King that
now is) and with diverse other False Traitors to the Jurors unknown, did Meet,
Propose, Treat, Consult, Consent, and Agree to Procure from the aforesaid Lewis
the French King, of his Subjects, Forces and Soldiers, then and yet Foes and
Enemies of our said Sovereign Lord William, now King of England, etc. great
Numbers of Soldiers and Armed Men, this Kingdom of England to Invade and Fight
with, and to Levy, Procure, and Prepare great Numbers of Armed Men, and Troops,
and Legions against our said Lord the King that now is, to Rise up and be
Formed, and with those Foes and Enemies, at and upon such their Invasion and
Entry within this Kingdom of England, to Join and Unite, Rebellion and War
against our said Lord the King that now is, within this Kingdom of England, to
Make, Levy, and Carry on the same: our Lord the King so, as aforesaid, to
Depose, and Him to Kill and Murder: And further with the said False Traitors,
the same First Day of July, in the Year abovesaid, at London aforesaid, in the
Parish and Ward aforesaid, Traitorously did Consult, Consent, and Agree to send
the aforesaid Robert Chernock as a Messenger from him the said Peter Cock, and
the same other Traitors, as far as, and into, the Kingdom of France, in Parts
beyond the Seas, unto James, the Second, late King of England, to Propose to
him, and to Request him to obtain from the aforesaid French King the aforesaid
Soldiers and Armed Men for the Invasion aforesaid to be made, and Intelligence
and Notice of such their Traiterous Intentions and Adherings, to the said late
King James the Second, and the said other Foes and Enemies, and their
Adherents, to give and show, and them to inform of other Things, Particulars,
and Circumstances thereunto Referring, for the Assistance, Animating,
Comforting, and Aid of the said Foes and Enemies of the said Lord the King that
now is, in the War aforesaid: And to Stir up and Procure those Foes and Enemies
the readilier, and more boldly, this Kingdom of England to Invade, the
Treasons, and Traiterous Contrivances, Compassings, Imaginings, and Purposes of
the said Peter Cook aforesaid, to Perfect and Fulfill; also the same First day
of July, in the Seventh Year abovesaid, at London aforesaid, in the Parish and
Ward aforesaid, He, the said Peter Cook, diverse Horses, and very many Arms,
Guns, Muskets, Pistols, Rapiers, and Swords, and other Weapons, Ammunition, and
Warlike Matters, and Military Instruments, Falsely, Maliciously, Secretly, and
Traitorously, did Obtain, Buy, Gather together, and Procure; and to be Bought,
Gathered together, Obtained, and Procured, did Cause, and in his Custody had,
and detained to that Intent, To use the same in the said Invasion, War, and
Rebellion against our said Lord the King that now is, Him, our said Lord the
King, of and from the Regal State, Crown, and Government of this Kingdom of
England, to Depose, Cast down, and Deprive, and Him to Kill and Murder; and
the Designs, Intentions, and all the Purposes of him the said Peter Cook
aforesaid, to Fulfill, Perfect, and fully to bring to Effect, against the Duty
of his Allegiance, and against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lord that now
is, his Crown and Dignity, as also against the Form of the Statute in such Case
made and provided.

Upon this Indictment he has been Arraigned, and thereunto has pleaded Not
Guilty, and for his Trial has put himself upon God and his Country, which
Country you are, your Charge is to inquire whether he be guilty of the
High Treason whereof he stands Indicted, or not guilty; if you find him guilty,
you are to inquire what Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements, he had at the
time of the High Treason committed, or at any time since; if you find him not
guilty, you are to inquire whether he fled for it; if you find that he fled for
it, you are to inquire of his Goods and Chattels as if you had sound him
Guilty; if you find him not Guilty, nor that he did fly for it, you are to say
so, and no more, and hear your Evidence.


Mr. Mompesson. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen that are sworn,
this is an Indictment for High Treason against Peter Cook, the Prisoner at the
Bar, and the Indictment sets forth, That whereas there has been an open and
cruel War for a long time, and still is between his Majesty King William, and
the French King, the Prisoner at the Bar not weighing the Duty of his
Allegiance, the First of July in the Seventh year of the King's Reign, Did
Compass and Intend to Depose and Deprive the King of the Title, Honor, and
Dignity of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, and likewise to put the King to
Death, and did adhere to the King's Enemies; and to fulfill these Treasons, he
did Consult with Chernock, and several other Traitors who were mentioned,
there, and some of whom have been found Guilty of Treason, and executed for it,
to send over to the late King James, to persuade the French King to send over
Soldiers and Arms to invade this Kingdom, and to raise an Insurrection and
Rebellion in it, and to Deprive and put the King to Death, and to complete
these Treasons, it further sets forth, That the Prisoner at the Bar did provide
several Arms and Horses, and this is laid to be against the Duty of his
Allegiance, against the King's Peace, Crown and Dignity, and against the Form
of the Statute in that Case made and provided; to this he had pleaded Not
Guilty, and for Trial put himself upon the Country, and, Gentlemen, if we prove
these Facts laid in the indictment, its your Duty to find him Guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you, Gentlemen of the Jury, the
Prisoner at the Bar stands Indicted for High Treason.


Cook. My Lord Chief Justice, if your Lordship pleases, before the Witnesses
are Examined against me. I entreat you that they may not be both in Court
together, that one may not hear what the other swears, though I suppose it is the
same thing; for they have been together both now and the last day.


L. C. J. Treby. Mr. Cook, I must tell you it is not necessary to be granted
for asking; for we are not to discourage, or cast any Suspicion upon, the
Witnesses, when there is nothing made out against them; but it is a Favor that
the Court may grant, and does grant sometimes, and now does it to you; though it
be not of necessity: they shall be examined apart, but at present this is not
the time of Examination; for the King's Counsel are now to open the Evidence
before they examine the Witnesses; but when the time comes for the Witnesses to
be called and examined, the Court will, in favor to you, take care that your
Request be complied with.


Mr. At. Genesis May it please your Lordship, the Prisoner stands Indicted for
High Treason, in Compassing and Imagining the Death and Destruction of his
Majesty, and likewise in adhering to his Majesty's Enemies, these are the
Treasons specified in the Indictment: the Overt Acts that are laid to prove
these Treasons are, That he with several other Traitors, named in the
Indictment, did Meet and Consult, and agree to send over Chernock into France,
to invite the French King to make an Invasion upon the Kingdom, and did provide
Arms for that purpose.

Gentlemen, the nature of the Evidence that you will have produced to prove the
Prisoner Guilty of these Treasons lies thus: It will appear to you that there
has been for some time a Conspiracy carried on by several Traitors, and Wicked
Persons, to subvert the established Government of this Kingdom, and destroy the
Constitution of England, by a Foreign Invasion of the French. You will hear
that this Conspiracy was laid wide, and consisted of several parts, one part
was that of Assassinating his Majesty's Royal Person, and that was to be done
first, as a Preparation and Encouragement to the French to invade the Kingdom:
the other part was the inviting the French King to invade us, and the Prisoner
at the Bar is accused of being concerned in that part that relates to the
Invasion of this Kingdom, by a French Power; and though it may be the other part,
that of Assassinating the King, be the Blackest part of the Conspiracy, yet if
the Prisoner at the Bar has been engaged in the inviting a Foreign Power to
invade the Kingdom, my Lords, the Judges, will tell you, in Point of Law, that
is as much an Overt Act of the Compassing the Destruction of the King and
People of England, and the Subversion of our ancient good Constitution, as if
he had been concerned immediately in the other part, the Assassination.

But now, Gentlemen, that the Prisoner was engaged in Inviting the French to
Invade us, you will hear proved by several Witnesses, that there having been a
Design last Year, just before his Majesty went to Flanders, to expose his own
Person for our Protection, and the Protection of the Liberties of Europe, there
was a Conspiracy to Murder him before he went to Flanders, which, it seems,
they were not ripe for then; but immediately after he was gone to Flanders, you
will hear there were formal Meetings of several Gentlemen and Persons of
Quality, among whom the Prisoner at the Bar was one: There was a Meeting in
May, last Year, after the King was gone to Flanders; and this was at the Old
King's Head in Leaden-Hall-street; and there were present, my Lord of
Aylesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir William Parkyns, Sir John Friend, Mr.
Chernock, (all which Three last have suffered the Punishment of-the Law for
their Treason already;) and there were also Mr. Cook, the Prisoner at the Bar,
Mr. Porter and Mr. Goodman; these Men did meet together' to consider of the
best Ways and Means of Encouraging and Inviting the French King with an Armed
Force to Invade this Kingdom; They considered that That was a proper
Opportunity, and did treat of several Arguments that might persuade to it:
First, that the King was gone to Flanders, and so was not in Person here to
Defend us; and that the Troops, to make good such Defense, were in a great
measure drawn thither, to assist the Allies against the French Power; They did
think likewise, that at that time there was a great Discontent and
Dissatisfaction in the Nation, though I think in that they were greatly
mistaken; and I believe and hope they will always find themselves so, to think
that the People of England are so little sensible of that which is the means of
their Preservation, as to hearken to any Discontents to Encourage a French
Power to come into England to destroy our Religion and Liberties; that indeed
they did apprehend, though they were mistaken, and I believe they always will,
when they go upon that ground.

Gentlemen, These Persons thinking this a proper Opportunity, did agree to send
a Messenger into France upon this Message, To go to the late King James, and
persuade him to desire and prevail with the French King to assist him with Ten
thousand Men, 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons; and to encourage him,
they promised their Assistance here, as soon as he came over; and undertook,
that between them, they could furnish, and would raise 2000 Horse to meet him
at his Landing, and join upon such an Invasion.

Gentlemen, At this Meeting this was agreed upon by all that were there,
whereof the Prisoner was one; and they did agree to send Mr. Chernock, (who has
since been executed, and a principal Incourager of the Design, and Actor in
it;) he was the Messenger that was appointed to go upon this Errand, and Mr.
Chernock was resolved to go, but desired another Meeting of these Gentlemen, to
know if they continued in their former Resolution, that he might have all the
Assurance that was Reasonable to give the French King Encouragement to make the
Invasion: Accordingly another Meeting was had of most of the same persons that
were at the Meeting before; particularly the Prisoner at the Bar was at that
second Meeting, which was in Covent Garden at one Mrs. Mountjoy's, who keeps a
Tavern next door to Sir John Fenwick's Lodgings; there they met upon the same
Design, and upon Consultation had, and the Question asked, they did agree to
continue in the former Resolution, and upon that immediately Mr. Chernock went
into France to solicit Forces from thence to Invade us; but it happened, as it
seems, that the French King's Forces were otherwise employed, so that he could
not spare so many at that time; and this Return was brought by Chernock to the
Gentlemen that employed him; That he had spoke with the late King, who gave him
that Answer, That the French King could not spare so many Men at that time, but
he thanked them for their Kindness.

Gentlemen, This will be the nature of Our Evidence, to show, that the Prisoner
at the Bar was concerned in that part of the Conspiracy which relates to the
French Invasion; and if he be guilty of that, in point of Law, he is as much
guilty of the Conspiracy, to Depose and Murder the King, as if he had been
concerned in the other part of Assassinating his Royal Person; and I believe no
body can think that those that were to act in the Assassination, would have
attempted to engage in such a desperate Design, if it had not been for the
Encouragement of the French Invasion that was to second them afterward, if
they succeeded; so that no body can extenuate the Crime of the Invasion,
because as to the Horridness of the Attempt, it is less Black than the other;
they are both Crimes of a very high nature, and equally High Treason; and if we
prove the Prisoner Guilty of this part, we hope you will find him Guilty.


Mr. Soll. Genesis My Lord, we will call our Witnesses and prove the Matter, as it
has been opened. Call Captain Porter and Mr. Goodman.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Now, my Lord, we must desire that That may be done which
our Client desired before, and which your Lordship was favorably pleased to
promise, that the Witnesses may be examined apart.


L. C. J. Treby. Let it be so: Who do you begin with?


Mr. Soll. Genesis We begin with Captain Porter, my Lord.


L. C. J Treby. Then let Mr. Goodman withdraw.


Mr. Baker. Let Mr. Goodman go up Stairs, and we will call him presently.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Swear Captain Porter: (which was done.) Captain Porter, Do you
know Mr. Cook, the Prisoner at the Bar?


Capt. Porter. Yes, my Lord.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Do you remember a Meeting of some Gentlemen at the King's-Head
Tavern in Leaden Hall-street?


Capt. Porter. Yes, I do, Sir.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Then pray give an Account of the Company that were there, the
Time when, and what passd.


Capt. Porter. My Lord, the last Year we had two Meetings; the First was in
May, the other was the latter end of May, or the beginning of June; the First
was at the King's Head in Leaden-Hall-street; there were my Lord of Aylesbury,
my Lord Montgomery, Sir John Fenwick, Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkyns, Mr.
Chernock, Mr. Cook and my self; Mr. Goodman came in after Dinner; at this
Meeting it was Consulted which was the best way and the quickest to Restore
King James, and hasten his Return into England; several Discourses and
Proposals there were; at last it was agreed to send Mr. Chernock to the late
King to borrow of the French King Ten thousand Men, 8000 Foot, 1000 Horse, and
1000 Dragoons, to be sent over into England to assist the King's Restoration.
Says Mr. Chernock thereupon, This the King can do without your sending, and I
would not go upon a foolish Errand. What will you do to Assist in this Matter?
the Company desired him to promise King James, That if he would send word when
he Landed, and where, they would be sure to meet him at his Landing with a Body
of 2000 Horse.


Mr. At. Genesis Was the Prisoner at the Bar in the Company, and present at this
Resolution?


Capt. Porter. Yes, he was.


Mr. At. Genesis Did all the Company agree to it?


Capt. Porter. Yes, they did.


Mr. At. Genesis What signs were there of their Agreement? did they stand up
severally and declare their Agreement, or how?


Capt. Porter. My Lord of Aylesbury and Sir John Fenwick did rise up, and
desired Captain Chernock, that he would go upon this Errand: And when the
Question was asked severally of all there present by Mr. Chernock, Whether he
might assure the King of what they had told him? Every one said Yes, you may;
and Mr. Cook kneeled indeed upon a Chair, and said Yes, you may.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he give his Consent to it?


Capt. Porter. Yes, he answered in those very words.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Do you remember any Meeting of any Company at Mrs. Mountjoy's?


Capt. Porter. Yes, that was a second Meeting.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Pray tell my Lord and the Jury, how you came to meet there
then, what Company were there, and what passed.


Capt. Porter. Mr. Chernock desired another Meeting, to see if the Gentlemen
kept to their former Resolution; and we met at Mrs. Mountjoy's eight or ten
Days after, and there were most of the Company that was at the first Meeting,
and there all that were present did assure Mr. Chernock that they kept to their
first Resolution, and would abide to what was agreed upon at the former Meeting.


Mr. At. Genesis Who were present at the second Meeting?


Capt. Porter. The Prisoner at the Bar was there at that second Meeting.


Mr. At. Genesis What was that second Meeting for, do you say?


Capt. Porter. It was to give Mr. Chernock assurance, that we were agreed to
stand by the Resolution taken at the first Meeting.


Mr. At. Genesis What did Mr. Chernock do afterward?


Capt. Porter. I went away from them; there was Sir William Parkyns, Sir John
Friend and Captain Chernock went to the Queens-Head Tavern in Fleetstreet, and
Captain Chernock told me he would go in two or three Days, and I believe did so.


Mr. At. Genesis When did you see him afterward?


Capt. Porter. When I was a Prisoner upon the account of the Riot in Drurylane;
about two or three Days after I came to Newgate he came to see me, and said he
had been in France; and that King James thanked us for our kind Offer, but the
French King could not spare so many Men that Year; and he told me he had been
with my Lord of Aylesbury, and the rest of the Gentlemen that had employed him
to go over, and had delivered them the several Messages that he was ordered to
do from the King.


L. C. J. Treby. Captain Porter, who were present at that second Meeting, do
you say?


Capt. Porter. My Lord of Aylesbury, Sir John Friend, Sir William Parkyns,
Captain Chernock, Mr. Cook and my self; I cannot tell whether my Lord
Montgomery or Mr. Goodman were at that second Meeting or no.


Mr. At. Genesis Captain Porter, I would ask you another Question: You were
concerned in the Assassination with those other Persons that Engaged in it;
Pray what Safety did you propose to your selves after the Assassination was
over?


Capt. Porter. My Lord, I asked Sir George Barclay what we should do after the
Fact was committed: Says he, You need fear nothing, I will go away that night,
I have a Ship ready, and the King will be Landed in five or six Days
afterward; if you will but keep selves close for so many days, all will do well.


Mr. Soll. Genesis If the Prisoner or the Counsel will ask him any Questions, my
Lord, they may do it.


Sir B. Shower. Pray Sir, can you recollect what time a day this was that this
Debate and Resolution were had at the Old King's-Head in Leaden-Hallstreet?


Capt. Porter. Truly Sir Bartholomew, I cannot tell.


Sir B. Shower. Pray, by what means do you recollect that this was in the Month
of May?


Capt. Porter. Because Captain Chernock was absent at the Dog-Tavern Riot,
which was the Tenth of June.


Sir B. Shower. Was it not in April?


Capt. Porter. No, Sir; to the best of my Remembrance it was in May.


Sir B. Shower. What makes you think it was in May rather than April?


Capt. Porter. I have told you Sir, because both Meetings were before the
Dog-Tavern Riot, the Tenth of June, and Mr. Chernock was not there at that
time; but he told me afterward he had been in France, and there were eight or
ten Days difference between the two Meetings.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, if they have done with him, I would ask him one
Question, to settle this Matter in point of Time. Capt. Porter, Was the King
gone to Flanders when you had these Meetings?


Capt. Porter. The King was gone, Sir, before the first Meeting.


Mr. At. Genesis The King did not go till several days in May; was Mr. Goodman
there?


Capt. Porter. He was at the first Meeting, but I cannot tell whether he was at
the second or no.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Pray what time was Mr. Goodman there at the first Meeting?


Capt. Porter. He came up after Dinner at the first Meeting.


Mr. Baker. Then call down Mr. Goodman, who came in, and was sworn.


Mr. Soll. Genesis Mr. Goodman, Pray will you give my Lord and the Jury an Account
what you know of an intended Invasion upon this Kingdom; what were the
Circumstances of it, and who were concerned in it.


Mr. Goodman. My Lord, About the middle of May last, or thereabouts, Captain
Porter sent to me, and told me there was a Meeting of some Gentlemen of our
acquaintance at the King's-Head in Leaden-Hall-street; and he desired me that I
would be there, because it was about business: I told him I did not know
whether I could be there at Dinner; but however, I would not fail of coming
thither after Dinner; and accordingly I came. When I came into the House, I
sent up my Name to Captain Porter, and he came down and brought me up stairs,
and there I saw my Lord, Montgomery, my Lord of Aylesbury, Sir John Fenwick,
Sir William Parkyns, Sir John Friend, Mr. Chernock, and that Gentleman at the
Bar, Mr. Cook: When we were there, the Discourse was, That we did think King
James's coming was Retarded, and we would do any thing to facilitate his
Restoration.


Cook. My Lord Chief Justice.


L. C. J. Treby. What say you, Mr. Cook?


Cook. My Lord, If your Lordship pleases, I desire the Jury may not be talked
to by any body; and I understand there are some talking with the Jury.


L. C. J. Treby. Fie upon it, we will lay any body by the Heels that do so,
they must neither be Disturbed, nor Instructed by any body.


Cook. My Lord, I am informed there was somebody talking to them, and telling
them this was the same Case with Sir John Friend.


L. C. J. Treby. Do you but show us the Man, and we will find another place for
him; we will send him to the Goal, I Will assure you.


Mr. Burleigh. This Gentleman, my Lord, did hear such a Discourse to the Jury
(pointing to a Gentleman there) who stood up.

My Lord, I cannot positively swear to the Man, but I did hear some Discourse
that it was the same Evidence as in the former Trial.


L. C. J. Treby. If you can show us who it was, we will take care to punish
him: I suppose he stands Corrected; and if we knew who he was, he should stand
Committed.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Mr. Goodman, begin again, and tell what passed at that
Meeting, because the Jury were interrupted from hearing by People's buzzing
about them.


Mr. Goodman. My Lord, When Captain Porter brought me up into the Room, I told
you what Gentlemen I found there; after we were set down, there was a
Consultation, that considering the French King's Wars Retarded the Affair of
sending back King James, and the means of Restoring him to the Crown, it was
fit we should find out some way or method to facilitate his Restoration, and it
was thought convenient to have a Messenger to send over to King James with
Proposals for that purpose; to this effect, as near as I remember, That if King
James could prevail with the French King to furnish Ten thousand Men, whereof
8000 to be Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000 Dragoons, we would endeavor to meet him
at the Head of as many Horse as we could raise, to sustain those Forces at
their Landing: This was Debated, in order to come to a Resolution; and much
Difficulty there was how many the Number should be; the Man pitched upon to be
sent, was Mr. Chernock; and after some Debate, how many Thousand Horse could be
raised: Says Mr. Chernock, Don't let me go over upon a foolish Errand, but let
me know what I have to say exactly: Thereupon it was concluded by all, that Two
thousand Horse should be the Number we could promise, and the King might depend
upon them; and if we brought more, so much the better; and Sir John Friend
said, I believe he has so many Friends here, that if he came himself, he might
be welcome; but that we did not think fit to trust to; and no body would advise
any such thing: when the Resolution of the Thing and the Number was thus fixed,
Mr. Chernock asked whether it were with all our Consents? and that he might
assure the King, that this was our Resolution thereupon? we all rose up, and
said to him, Yes, you may, yes, you may, every one particularly; and I remember
one thing particularly concerning the Prisoner Mr. Cook, That he kneeled upon
the Chair when he said Yes, you may; and his Elbows were upon the Table: This
is all that I know of that Meeting. There was to be another Meeting, as Captain
Porter told me; but I had business in the City: but whatsoever he promised on
my behalf, as to the Quota of Men, I would be sure to make it good; and I was
not at the second Meeting.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you see Mr. Chernock afterward?


Mr. Goodman. Yes, I did, when he came back; and he told me the Things was not
accepted, for the French King could not spare Men, and that he had been with
the several Gentlemen to carry them the Complements that he had in charge from
King James, who returned them Thanks for their good Affection; and among the
rest, he did me the Honor to return me Thanks too.


Sir B. Shower. Pray, Mr. Goodman, let me ask you a Question: When was it that
you saw Mr. Chernock after this?


Mr. Goodman. It was in Arundel-street, at his Lodgings.


Sir B. Shower. But I ask you, Sir, when it was? Was it before or after the
Tenth of June?


Mr. Goodman. It was after the Tenth of June, Sir.


Sir B. Shower. How long after, pray.


Mr. Goodman. I believe it was a Month after the Tenth of June.


Sir B. Shower. Did you see him here in England before Mr. Porter was
Discharged from the Riot, and came out of Newgate?


Mr. Goodman. I believe I did see him before Capt. Porter was Discharged, long.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Who were the Persons that were present at that Meeting?


Mr. Goodman. My Lord Montgomery, My Lord of Aylesbury, Sir John Fenwick, Sir
John Friend, Sir Wiliam Parkyns, Mr. Chernock, Capt. Porter, and the Prisoner
at the Bar, Mr. Cook.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Were you at Dinner with them, Sir?


Mr. Goodman. No, I came in after Dinner.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Pray what House was it, do you say, this Meeting was at?


Mr. Goodman. It was at the King's-Head in Leaden-Hall-street.


Sir B. Shower. Can you tell what day of the Week it was?


Mr. Goodman. No, nor the day of the Month.


Sir B. Shower. Was you ever in the Company of these Gentlemen at any other
time?


Mr. Goodman. No, this was the only time that I heard of this Consultation; I
was not at the second Meeting.


Cook. If your Lordship pleases, may I ask Mr. Goodman any Questions?


L. C. J. Treby. Yes, by all means ask him what you will.


Cook. Mr. Goodman, You are upon yor Oath: but did you ever hear me speak ten
words in your life? was you ever in my Company in any House, before or since?


Mr. Goodman. Yes, Sir; I was in your Company at the Cock in Bowstreet, where
you came in accidentally.


Cook. Did you ever hear me talk of the Government, or any thing of that nature?


Mr. Goodman. What the Discourse was of, I cannot particularly say, but I am
certain you was there: And as to the Consultation that I now speak of, I
remember very well you gave your Consent in that manner as I have told the
Court.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, we have done at the present.


L. C. J. Treby. Then, Brother Darnall, what say you for the Prisoner?


Mr. Serj. Darnall. May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury:
I am Counsel, in this Case, for the Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Cook, who stands
Indicted of a very great Offense, no less, Gentlemen, than High Treason; and if
he be Guilty, his Punishment will be as great: But because the Punishment and
the Offense are both very great, the Law requires exact positive Proof, and
that by two credible Witnesses. There have been two indeed that have been
produced to you; and if you believe both of them, after what we shall offer to
you against them; and if what they swear be true, the Prisoner is Guilty: But
if we satisfy you that either of them is not to be credited, so that you do
not believe both of them, he must be acquitted.

There is no doubt, Gentlemen, but that here has been a Villainous Horrid Plot;
there is no question of it; and it was, as it has been opened, basely to
Assassinate one of the bravest Men living; and to make the happiest People in
the World, if they know when they are so, the most miserable People upon Earth,
by bringing them under French Tyranny and Slavery. Many of the Traitors have
been brought to just Punishment for this Treason; nay, they have owned the Fact
at their Death's, so that there is no question of the Truth of it; And
therefore, Gentlemen, every honest Man will endeavor to bring such as are
plainly Guilty, of such an abominable Conspiracy, to just Punishment; but yet
they will be as careful not to let an innocent Man suffer; that, Gentlemen,
every honest Man will take care of, and especially such as are upon their
Oaths: It concerns a Jury highly to be satisfied, that he is not Innocent, whom
they bring in Guilty; for it is better that twenty guilty Men should escape,
than one innocent Man suffer.

But, Gentlemen, if my Brief be true, we shall give you such an Account of one
of these Witnesses; first, as to the Man himself; that he is not a Man to be
credited as a Witness; and then besides that, as to the Evidence he gives in
this Case; (I say, if my Brief be true) it is false, and we shall prove it so;
and when you have heard our Evidence, if you are satisfied that one of these
Witnesses is not to be credited, or that what he swears is not true, you are to
acquit the Prisoner.

Gentlemen, Here has been one Mr. Goodman produced as a Witness, one that never
was produced before at the Trial of any of those that have suffered, so that
the truth of their Guilt does not at all depend upon his Evidence, nor does it
give any credit to it. This is this Gentleman's first Entry upon this Stage;
and yet (if my Brief be true) this is not the first bloody or cruel Part that
he has Acted; for we have a Record of Conviction against him, whereby it will
appear to you, that he was Indicted (for Endeavoring to Poison two Great
Dukes) for giving forty Guinea's to an Italian Emprick, one Amidei, and
promising Two hundred Pounds more when it was effected, to Poison the late Duke
of Graston and the present Duke of Northumberland; and we shall show you, that
he was Convicted of it, and Fined a Thousand Pound for the Offense; which,
considering the meanness of his Circumstances at that time, was as much as
Twenty thousand Pounds; for he could as well have paid Twenty, as One then; and
it appears too, that Mr. Goodman (nay, it will not be denied by him himself)
was in this Horrid Plot; and he that would be concerned to Poison two Dukes in
a Family, to which he had so many Obligations --


Mr. Goodman. My Lord, I desire leave to speak to this Matter that the Sergeant
mentions.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Pray, Sir, let me go on; you may talk anon; I have seen the
Copy of the Record of Conviction, and have it ready to produce.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Goodman, be quiet, and stay till by and by; you will be
defended, no doubt, on it; but in the mean time let them go on, and don't
interrupt them.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. I say, my Lord, he that would be concerned in so vile an
Act, as a Contrivance to take away the Lives of two great Dukes, (who were, in
effect, his young Mastes,) that he should go to Poison them in a Family to
which he had been so much obliged; and then, he that would be concerned in so
Horrid a Plot as this was, to destroy his Country, and take away the Life of
the King; sure it will be no difficult thing to think that this Man will not
stick at the little Prisoner's Life at the Bar, especially when he has so
great a temptation to it, as to save his own Life by it.

But perhaps some of you may doubt whether it is to save his own Life or no:
But I believe there are none of you would give any credit to him, if you
thought so: Therefore, to satisfy you of that Fact, we shall produce you
Evidence of his own Opinion of that matter, besides the General known
Circumstances he lay under; As, That he was long in Prison before he charged
the Prisoner with any thing, and the Prisoner was at Liberty, went every day
abroad for a Week after Mr. Chernock's Trial, and never absconded one Minute,
but lived publicly, openly and visibly to all his Friends, and all Strangers:
But besides, Gentlemen, that Mr. Goodman knew he must dye, and justly and
deservedly for this Horrid Plot and Treason himself; and had no other way left
to save his Life, but to come in thus as an Evidence and an Accuser, which we
think will shake his Credit with you.

I say, besides all this, (if my Brief be true,) we shall prove that he has
said himself, That either he must Hang Peter Cook, or he must be Hanged
himself. Thus, Gentlemen, he swears to save his own Life, by taking away
another's.

This, Gentlemen, is as to the Man himself, that he is not to be credited. But
now further, as to the Evidence that he has given; He tells you that he came
into the Tavern in Leaden-Hall-street, and that there he found such Company; he
owns he came in after Dinner; and that the other Gentleman, Mr. Porter, owns
too; he says there were present at this Meeting, my Lord Montgomery, my Lord of
Aylesbury, Mr. Cook, and several other Gentlemen; but (if my Brief be true) we
shall prove by three Witnesses, that he was not there till they were gone; and
that will make an end of all the pretense of his Evidence.


Mr. At. Genesis Nay, then we shall never have done.


Mr. Serj. Darn. I Will assure you, Sir, I have the Names of Three Witnesses in
my Brief, to prove that my Lord of Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, and Mr. Cook,
were gone before he came in, though if any, or either of them were gone, it
destroys his Testimony; and if we prove this to you, I would be loath to be one
of the Jury that should take away the Prisoner's Life upon this Evidence; no,
it he were the vilest Man alive, and much less the Life of the Prisoner at the
Bar; for we shall prove (if my Brief be true.) he is a Man of Morals, a Man of
Virtue, one that has a great Love for his Country; and this we shall prove by
Evidence undeniable* Persons of Quality in their Country, such as serve their
Country in Parliament, as their Representatives; we shall show it by such
Evidence, that there will be no Room to doubt of it: He is a Man without any
Stain or Blot upon him, til this Accusation; he is the eldest Son of his
Father, and Heir to a great Estate; his Father is a great Officer, and a great
Getter under this Government; and can it be imagined, or believed, that such a
Man would be guilty of the worst of Treasons, to destroy the Religion he
professes, to over-turn the State, to ruin his own Estate, himself and his
Posterity, which must be the Consequence of it? Nay, if two good Witnesses
could be produced to testify it, and if we had not had so much to take off the
Credit of Goodman, I could hardly believe it of any Man that was in his right
Senses; he must have been a Madman if he had done it, one that stood so well
with the present Government, and of a Family never tainted with Disloyalty.

Certainly, Gentlemen, when we make out this to you against Mr. Goodman, the
Prisoner can be in no Danger of his Life, from Mr. Goodman's Evidence, though he
is an unfortunate Man to come under such an Accusation; but I cannot believe
that any Jury, upon such a Man's Evidence, will brand an honest Family with the
foulest, vilest, blackest Treason that ever was hatched; no, Gentlemen, you are
Men of Ability and Understanding, and that is it we rely upon; we doubt not
but that you will consider the Evidence, and consider your Oaths, and not let
the Prisoner's Blood lie at your Doors; therefore we shall go on and call our
Witnesses to make out what I have opened.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we desire to call our Witnesses, and I shall reserve
my self to make some Observations after we have given our Evidence: Mr. Serj.
has opened as much as we can prove, and we will now produce our Evidence; First
we will show the Conviction of Goodman: Mr. Burleigh, where is the Conviction?


Mr. Brul. Here it is, Sir?


Sir. B. Shower. Where had you it, Sir?


Mr. Burleigh, Out of the Treasury at Westminster?


Sir B. Shower. Is it a true Copy, did you examine it there?


Mr. Burleigh. Yes, it is a true Copy, I did examine it with the Record.


Sir B. Shower. Then read it, Mr. Tanner.


Cl. of Arr. Read -- Michaelmas Term: Tricesimo secundo Caroli Secundi.


L. C. J. Treby. Read the Record in English to the Jury.


Cl. of Arr. (Reads). Be it remembered, that Sir Robert Sawyer, Knight,
Attorney General of our Lord the King that now is, who for the same our Lord
the King in this part sueth, came here in the Court of our said Lord the King,
before the King himself at Westminster, on Thursday next after three Weeks of
St. Michael, the same Term; and for the same our Lord the King, brought here
into the Court of our said Lord the King, before the said King, then and there,
a certain Information against Cardell Goodman, late of the Parish of St. Martin
in the Fields, in the Country of Middlesex, Gentleman, which Information
follows in these Words. Scilicet, Middlesex scilicet, Be it remembered that Sir
Robert Sawyer, Knight, Attorney General of our said Lord the King that now is,
who for the same our Lord the King, in this behalf sueth, in his own proper
Person came here into the Court of our said Lord the King, before the King
himself at Westminster, on Thursday next after three Weeks of St. Michael that
same Term, and for the same our Lord the King, gives the Court here to
understand and be informed, That Cardell Goodman, late of the Parish of St.
Martin in the Fields, in the County of Middlesex, Gentleman, being a Person of
a wicked Mind, and of an ungodly and devilish Disposition, and Conversation and
contriving, practicing, and falsely, maliciously and devilishly intending
Death, and Poisoning and final Destruction unto the Right Nobel Henry, Duke of
Grafton, and George, Duke of Northumberland, and that the aforesaid Cardell
Goodman, his most wicked, most impious, and devilish Intentions, Contrivances
and Practices aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect, and bring to effect, the thirtieth
Day of September, in the six and thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Lord
Charles the Second, now King of England, etc. and diverse other Days, and
Times, as well before as after, at the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, in
the Country of Middlesex, with Force and Arms, etc. falsely, unlawfully
unjustly, wickedly, and devilishly, by unlawful Ways and Means, did solicit,
persuade, and endeavor to procure one Alexander Amydei, to prepare and procure
two Flasks of Florence Wine, to be mixed with deadly Poison, for the poisoning
of the aforesaid Right Noble, Henry, Duke of Grafton, and George, Duke of
Northumberland, and his most impious, and devilish Contrivances, Practices and
Intentions aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect and the more to bring to effect, the
aforesaid Cardell Goodman, the Day and Year abovesaid, at the Parish aforesaid,
in the Country aforesaid, falsely, unlawfully, unjustly, maliciously and
devilishly, did promise and agree, to give unto the aforesaid Alexander Amydei,
forty Pieces of Guniea-Gold, of the Value of forty Pound, of lawful Money of
England, if he the said Alexander Amydei would prepare, procure and provide two
Flasks of Florence Wine, to be mixed with deadly Poison, for the poisoning of
the aforesaid Right Noble Henry, Duke of Grafton, and George, Duke of
Northumberland; and if the aforesaid Poison with the Wine aforesaid to be
mixed, should effect the Death of the aforesaid Henry, Duke of Grafton, and
George, Duke of Northumberland; that then he the said Cardell Goodman, would
give unto the said Alexander Amydei, the Sum of one Hundred Pounds, and that
beyond Sea he would maintain the said Alexander all the Days of him the said
Alexander, to the evil and most pernicious Example of all others in the like
Case offending, and against the Peace of our said Lord the King that now is,
his Crown and Dignity, etc. -- Then here is process prayed by the Attorney
General against Mr. Goodman, who comes, and by his Attorney pleads not Guilty,
and here is Issue joined.


Sir B. Shower. Well, see for the Verdict.


Cl. of Arr. There was a Trial at Ni^i Prius, and the Jury find that the said
Cardell Goodman is Guilty of the Premises in the Information specified, as by
the Information is supposed against him.


Sir B. Shower. Now read the Judgment.


Cl. of Arr. Thereupon it is considered, that the said Cardell Goodman do pay
to the King, the Sum of One Thousand Pounds, for his Fine, imposed upon him
for the Occasion a foresaid, and that the aforesaid Cardell Goodman be
committed to the Marshalsea of this Court, in Execution for his fine aforesaid,
that he be safely kept there, till he pay his Fine aforesaid; and before that
the said Cardell Goodman, is delivered out of the Prison aforesaid, he shall
give Security to behave himself well, during his Life, and also shall give
Security for the Peace to be kept toward the said Lord the King, and all his
People, and particularly toward the Right Noble Henry, Duke of Grafton, and
George, Duke of Northumberland.


Mr. Serj. Darn. So, you hear the Record of the Information, Conviction and
Judgment, for a very horrid, abominable Crime.


Mr. At. Genesis But I desire they may now go on, and read the whole of the
Record.


Cl. of Arr. Reads. And afterward, to wit, on Friday next after eight Days of
St. Hilary, in the thirty sixth, and thirty seventh Years of the Reign of our
said Lord the King that now is, before our said Lord the King at Westminster
came the aforesaid Sir Robert Sawyer, Knight, Attorney General of the said Lord
the King that now is, and acknowledged that the said Cardell Goodman, has
satisfied to our said Lord the King that now is, of the Judgment aforesaid
against him, in Form aforesaid given, therefore the said Cardell Goodman is
thereof acquitted, And so forth.


Mr. Serj. Darn. Call Mr. Charles Edwards, William Cock, Christopher Crawford,
Marry Crawford, and Mr. Huntley.


Edwards appeared upon a Habeas Corpus, directed to the Keeper of Newgate,
where he was a Prisoner.

Mr. Baker. Where is the Warrant of his Commitment? what is he committed for?


Tokefeild. He is committed for suspicion of Treason, and treasonable Practices.


Mr. Baker. Is he not committed for High Treason?


Tokefeild. No, Sir, he is not.


Mr. Serj. Darn. What Discourse had you with Mr. Goodman, concerning the
Prisoner at the Bar, what did you here him say?


Mr. Baker. He is not sworn yet, it seems this Gentleman was Dundee's Chaplain
in Scotland.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis If he be not sworn, he can give no Evidence.


Mr. Serj. Darn. My Lord, we desire he may be sworn.


L. C. J. Treby. Swear him, (which was done).


Mr. Serj. Darn. Pray, Sir, will you tell the Court, and the Jury, what you
know of any Discourse of Mr. Goodman's, concerning the Prisoner at the Bar.


Edwards. My Lord, I desire to know, being ignorant of the Law, whether I am
brought here by the common course of Justice or not?


Mr. Serj. Darn. Sir, we have subpena'd you for the Prisoner at the Bar, to
give Evidence of the truth of you Knowledge here upon Oath.


L. C. J. Treby. Would you have us tell you how you came here? We suppose you
came by due Process of Law, as a Witness.


Edwards. Then, my Lord, I desire to speak but one Word, that is a strange
thing to me to consider, how Words should be carried away that were privately
spoken, as if it were to expose me to the Reproaches of all my Friends; it is a
thing that I did never expect to hear of again: however, seeing I am called
here, and obliged upon my Oath to declare what I know, I, by God's Grace, will
to the uttermost of my power, tell what has passed in this Matter.


L. C. J. Treby. Don't make any Apologies for telling the Truth; you are
obliged by your Oath to do it, and the Court expects it from you.


Edwards. Among other Discourses that passed betwixt Mr. Goodman and me, I
asked him when Mr. Cook was to be arraigned, and when he was to be tried; says
he, He is to be arraigned upon Monday, and he is to be tried upon Thursday: I
asked him whether it was for the Assassination-Plot, and he told me, no; for
what then, said I, as being concerned in sending Mr. Chernock into France? Who
are the Evidences against him, said I? said he, Capt. Porter, and my self; said
I, I believe two Witnesses will be found good, or by way of Demonstration in
Law; and I pity the poor Gentleman's Case. Says he, He swore against me; how
comes it then, said I, that he is not come off, and has not a Pardon, and would
divulge no Body else?


L. C. J. Treby. Who had not a Pardon do you mean?


Edwards. Mr. Cook. I asked how he had not a Pardon; says he, he would give an
account of no body else but me, and that was the Reason he had no Pardon; said
I to him, who are the Evidences against him? says he, Capt. Porter, and my
self, and after this, says he, he, or I, must perish, or he, or I, must suffer,
I believe the word was suffer; but, says he, it is a foolish thing to be hanged;
all that is said of a Man that is hanged, is, that he hanged hansomly, or he
died bravely, that is all the Discourse that I can remember.


Mr. Serj. Darn. He said it was a foolish thing to be hanged, and Mr. Goodman,
it seems, had no mind to be hanged; and I believe so too: but he must not hang
my Client, to save his own life.


Edwards. Now, by the same Oath that I have sworn, I knew nothing of being
brought hither, till my words were carried away privately from me, and has been
consulted of, and returned to me back again; and I was far from suborning or
carrying away a Discourse privately to make any advantage of it.


Mr. Serj. Darn. Now we will call Crawford, and Huntley, and Cock.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis I desire that Gentleman that was last examined may not go
away.


[ Crawford, Huntley, and Cock were sworn.]

Sir. B. Shower. Set up Mr. Crawford (which was done) pray, Sir, will you
recollect your self; do you remember when my Lord of Ailesbury and Capt. Porter
dined at the King's Head.


Crawford. Yes; it was about a twelve month ago.


Mr. Serj. Darn. What Company was there?


Crawford. My Lord of Ailesbury, Sir John Friend, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William
Parkyns, Capt. Porter, and two or three more, I did not know their Names.


Sir. B. Shower. How many were there that dined there?


Crawford. I think about Eight in all.


Sir. B. Shower. Was the Room shut while they were there, or did the Servants
and Drawers, go up and down commonly?


Crawford. Yes they did go up and down commonly.


Sir B. Shower. After Dinner did any body come to them while they were there?


Crawford. No, not during my Lord of Ailesbury's stay, and my Lord Montgomery
went away with him?


Sir. B. Shower. About time did my Lord of Ailesbury go away?


Crawford. I think it was about four a Clock.


Sir. B. Shower. How can you tell it?


Crawford. I did attend upon them the most part of the time.


Sir. B. Shower. Did you see him go away?


Crawford. Yes, I did.


Sir B. Sh. Was that Gentleman, Mr. Goodman, there, when they went away?


Crawford. I did not see him there, to my Remembrance; no body came in there
before they went away, saving their own Servants.


Mr. Serj. Darn. Do you know Mr. Cook, the Prisoner at the Bar, was he one of
the Gentlemen that were at your House?


Crawford. Yes, I did not well remember or recollect, till I saw him on
Saturday last.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Was he one that went away?


Crawford. I do not remember truly, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Prav how long was it after Dinner that they went away?


Crawford. I think it was not an Hour.


Mr. At. Genesis Was you there all the time, from the time of the Dinner?


Crawf. No, not all the while I was not in the Room, but going to and fro.


Mr. Serj. Darn. You say Mr. Goodman did not come up till after they were gone?


Crawford. No, I did not see him.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Did you see him at all?


Crawford. No, I did not see him at all.


Mr. Attorn. Genesis Just now it was said he did not come till they were gone, and
now it seems he did not see him at all.


Crawford. I do not know that he was there at all.


L. C. J. Tree. But, Brother Darnall, you opened it, that Mr. Goodman came after
my Lord of Ailesbury was gone, and now you will prove it that he came not at
all.


Sir. B. Shower. My Lord, we do not pretend to falsify his Evidence for any
thing more than is material for the Prisoner; we say Mr. Goodman was not in the
Room where they dined till those Persons went away, if in any particular we
disprove him. it is sufficient for us; if we can show that he was not there
till three of those that he had named were gone away, that answers our end. We
are not concerned if he came at four, five, or six a Clock, and discoursed with
Chernock till twelve a Clock at Night.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray reserve your Remarks, but only observe now what he says,
that Mr. Goodman came not at all thither, and that is more than you pretended
to open.


Mr. Conyers. How many were there that were there at dinner?


Crawf. About eight.


Mr. Conyers. How many do you name that you know?


Crawf. My Lord of Ailesbury, Sir John Friend, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William
Parkyns, and Capt. Porter, there were several others; two or three more, but I
did not know their Names.


Mr. Conyers. Did you see Mr. Goodman come in at any part of the Day afterward?


Crawf. I do not know that Mr. Goodman.


Mr. Cowper. Mr. Crawford, you say, that for an hour after Dinner you were
sometimes in the Room and sometimes out; when you were out of the Room, were
you always in the Passage up to the Room?


Crawf. No, I was not.


Mr. Cowper. Could any Man come in or out without your seeing?


Crawf. I should have known him above stairs when I came in again.


Mr. Cowper. Why, you say, there were two or three above that you did not know.


Crawf. I knew them by Sight, if not their Names.


Mr. Cowper. Were you always in sight then?


Crawf. No, Sir, I tell you I was up and down.


Sir. B. Shower. Was there any body came in before my Lord of Ailesbury went
out, that is, any body besides those that dined there?


Crawf. No.


Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we are not contending now about a Man's comeing up
without his knowledge, but whether any such Man, as Mr. Goodman, came up and
staid there, during the Consultation, and we insist upon it; there was no body
there, till my Lord of Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, and Mr. Cook were gone,
but those that dined there: now I would ask a Question again of him, was there
any body but who dined there, till my Lord of Ailesbury went away?


Crawf. No, there was not.


Mr. At. Genesis Why do you say so? How do you know that?


Crawf. I did not see any body.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you attend upon other Rooms, as well as that, at the same
time?


Crawf. Yes, I did.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Then how is it possible that he can swear that Mr. Goodman was
not there?


Sir B. Shower. Do you remember when my Lord of Alesbury and they went away?


Crawford. It was about Four a Clock.


Sir B. Shower. Were you there in the Room when they went away?


Crawf. I went out with my Lord to the Coach.


Sir B. Shower. Did you see him come down Stairs, or did you go up Stairs then?


Crawf. I went up Stairs when the Coach was called.


Sir B. Shower. Was then any body there but such as dined there?


Crawf. I did not see any body there but those that dined there.


Mr. Cowper. But, my Lord, he does not know all that dined there neither.


L. C. J. Treby. Mr. Crawford, you say my Lord of Ailesbury and others went
away about Four a Clock; pray how long did the rest of the Company stay there?


Crawf. I cannot remember. They stayed there pretty late: it is a pretty while
ago.


L. C. J. Treby. About what hour did they part?


Crawf. I cannot remember what time the rest went away; our House is fuller at
Night than at Noon; and I waited upon other Companies. It was pretty late
before they went away, that I am sure.


L. C. J. Treby. But he cannot remember whether it were Five, or Six, or Twelve
that they went away, only he can remember the Hour of Four, that my Lord of
Ailesbury and they went away.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Was it Light, or was it Dark when they went away?


Crawford. It was Dark.


L. C. J. Treby. Did you attend the Company after my Lord of Aliesbury was gone?


Crawford. I went up and down into that Company as I did into others.


L. C. J. Treby. Was you there several times after my Lord of Ailesbury was
gone?


Crawf. Yes, I was there once or twice after my Lord of Ailesbury was gone, I
am sure.


L. C. J. Treby. And did you never see Mr. Goodman there?


Crawf. No, I never saw Mr. Goodman in my Life, before I saw him on Saturday
last.


Sir B. Shower. Which is Mr. Huntley?


Huntley. Here I am, Sir.


Sir B. Shower. Pray recollect your self, and tell my Lord and the Jury what
you remember of any Company that were with Mr. Porter, at the King's-Head, and
who dined there.


Huntley. My Lord of Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir John Fenwick, Sir
William Parkyns, Sir John Friend, Mr. Porter and Mr. Chernock.


Sir B. Shower. That was the Company, you say, that dined there: Did Mr.
Goodman dine there?


Huntley. No, Mr. Goodman did not dine there.


Sir B. Shower. Pray, Sir, recollect your self, when did any of this Company
part, or go away?


Huntley. My Lord of Ailesbury, and my Lord Montgomery went away about four a
Clock.


Sir B. Shower. Sir, how do you know that?


Huntley. I went down Stairs after them, I was above Stairs when they parted
from the rest of the Company.


Mr. Serj. Darn. Pray mind, Sir, was Mr. Goodman there at that Time before they
went away?


Huntley. No, he was not.


Sir B. Shower. Are you sure of that, upon the Oath you have taken?


Huntley. Yes, I take it upon my Oath, he was not there.


Sir B. Shower. Did you attend them at Dinner?


Huntley. Yes, I did attend them at Dinner.


Sir B. Shower. Did you attend them all the while they were there?


Huntley. I was called frequently, and was in and out of the Room very much
after Dinner.


Sir B. Shower. Do you think if a fresh Man had come in after Dinner, you
should not have known him?


Huntley. Yes, I should have known him.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Friend, let me ask you one Question. Was Mr. Goodman there
at all that Day?


Huntley. That I don't know, I did not see him at all.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Did you attend upon any other Rooms that Day?


Huntley. No, I attended only upon that Company.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Were you in the Room all the time?


Huntley. No, I went up and down.


Mr. Sol. Genesis What time did the last of the Company go away?


Huntley. It was about Darkish, it was pretty Late to the best of my
remembrance.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, did any body come to those Gentlemen after Dinner?


Huntley. No, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis did you ever see Goodman before now?


Huntley. Never in my Life, to my Knowledge.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Did all the Company, but my Lord of Ailesbury, and my Lord
Montgomery, stay till it was Duskish?


Huntley. That I don't know.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Did you know all the Company that was that Day at Dinner?


Huntley. I knew all but one.


Mr. J. Rokeby. And who was that?


Huntley. That was Mr. Chernock.


Mr. J. Rokeby. And yet you cannot tell whether there was any body else that you
did not know, how then can you tell that Goodman was not there?


Sir B. Shower. He did not know him at that time, but he might remember him
afterward.


Mr. Conyers. Did not the same Company use to meet at other Times, at your
House?


Huntl. Not to my Remembrance.


Mr. Con. How then came you, if they never had used to meet there, to know all
these People's Names?


Huntley, I have seen Sir John Friend there, and Sir William Parkyns.


Mr. Con. Was Sir John Friend there, or no?


Huntl. Yes, he was.


Mr. Con. My Lord, he was the only Man that was not named before, you did not
name Sir John Friend before, as I heard, but pray, did you ever see Mr.
Chernock there, but at that time?


Huntley. No, I did not.


Mr. Con. How came you to know it was Mr. Chernock?


Huntl. I knew very few of them before that time, and I asked their Servants
the Names of all those Persons that were there?


Mr. Con. Did you know Mr. Porter, pray?


Huntl. Not before that Time, I did see Mr. Porter, and I knew him again when I
saw him, his Black told me his Name that Day.


Sir B. Shower. You, Huntley, I would ask you one Question more, was the Door
shut, or no?


Huntl. No, it was not.


Sir B. Shower. Did the Servants go up and down as they used to do?


Huntl. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Sir Bartholomew would make it that there was no Consultation at
all.


Sir B. Shower. They were very mad Folks if they would consult at that Rate with
the Door open. Pray call Mr. William Cock, (who was sworn).


Mr. At. Genesis Sir John Friend has owned it, that is dead.


Sir B. Shower. Sir John Friend's Confession is nothing to the Prisoner.


Mr. At. Genesis Mr. Serj. Darnall did open, that the Confession of those that
died, was an undeniable Proof of the Conspiracy; but go on with your Evidence.


Mr. Sarj. Darn. Pray Mr. Cock, will you recollect your self, about the Time
when Cap. Porter, and some other Gentlemen dined at your House.


W. Cock. Yes, very well.


Mr. Serj. Darn. Pray, Sir, can you tell who dined there at that time?


W. Cock. There were my Lord of Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir William
Parkyns, Sir John Fenwick, Sir John Friend, Mr. Chernock, Cap. Porter and Mr.
Cook.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Was that all the Company?


W. Cock. Yes, it was.


Mr. J. Rokeby. One of them said there were Eight.


L. C. J. Treby. and he has named Eight, Brother.


M. Serj. Darn. Can you remember when any of the Company went away, and who
went away first?


Cock. My Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery went away in a Hackney
Coach; and their Servants were frequently in the Room, and waited afterward in
another Room, after that they had waited at Table at Dinner; and though the Door
was shut, as it used to be when any Company is there, yet no body was forbid to
come there at all.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember when Mr. Goodman came there?


Cock. I never saw Mr. Goodman in my life before to day.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Did any body come to this Company before my Lord of
Aylesbury went away that did not Dine there?


Cock. I did not see any body there at all; and my Lord of Aylesbury was about
buying a Hogshead of White Wind, but we could not agree about the Price: And
when my Lord of Aylesbury went away, I went down with my Lord, and waited upon
him to the Coach; and I told my Lord, I hoped he would buy the Wine still. But
he answered, He could not tell whether he should or no.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Who else went with my Lord of Aylesbury?


Cock. My Lord Montgomery. I don't remember any body else.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Did all the rest of the Company go away at once?


Cock. Truly, my Lord, I cannot say they did.


Mr. J. Rokeby. By what time did the rest go away?


Cock. I believe it might be Eight or Nine a Clock.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. You saw my Lord of Aylesbury when he parted: Was Mr.
Goodman there then?


Cock. I did not see him.


Mr. B. Powis. Did Mr. Cook stay till the last?


Cock. That I cannot tell truly.


Mr. B. Powis. I find they all Swear to Four a Clock of my Lord Aylesbury's
going, and go no further.


Mr. At. Genesis Pray, Sir, let me ask you a Question or two: Did you ever see
Mr. Goodman before now?


Cock. No, I do not remember I did.


Mr. At. Genesis When you went into the Room after Dinner, did you look about the
Room to see whether there were any new Company?


Cock. I did look about the Room several times, and so did my Servants, to see
if there were any thing wanting.


Mr. At. Genesis Can you take it upon your Oath, that he was not there whilst my
Lord of Aylesbury staid?


Cock. I do, and can take it upon my Oath, he was not.


Mr. At. Genesis Then if you can, pray distinguish the time when he came in.


Cock. I do not remember that ever I saw him in my Life before to day.


Mr. At. Genesis Why are you not as positive that he was not there at all, as
that he was not there before my Lord of Aylesbury went away?


Cock. He might come in, and I not see him.


Mr. At. Genesis Might he not as well come in before they went away, as after to
come in and you not see him?


Cock. No, I do not think he could.


Mr. At. Genesis Why do you think so?


Cock. Because the Servants were all about, and they did not go to Dinner till
two a Clock; and I believe those Gentlemen that I named came in a quarter of an
Hour's time to Dinner.


Mr. At. Genesis We do not say he came there before Dinner; but could he not come
in after Dinner, before my Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery went away,
without your seeing him?


Cock. Yes, Sir.


Sir B. Shower. Then hark ye, Sir, I would ask you one Question, Did you see
him, upon your Oath, or not?


Cock. No, I did not.


Sir B. Shower. Might not Mr. Goodman come in to them without your seeing him?


Cock. It is possible, but I don't think it was so.


Mr. J. Rokeby. How then can you be positive that he was not there till my Lord
of Aylesbury went?


Mr. Sol. Genesis You say you may be positive he was not there before my Lord of
Aylesbury went: Can you be as positive now, that he was not there before Mr.
Cook went?


Cock. I do not know when Mr. Cook went.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How can you be then positive he was not there before my Lord of
Aylesbury went?


Cock. There were no more than what Dined there when my Lord of Aylesbury went
away.


Mr. Conyers. Pray, Sir, let me ask you a Question: Were you in the Room at any
time after Dinner?


Cock. Yes, I was, Sir.


Mr. Conyers. Pray, Sir, how many times after Dinner were you there?


Cock. I believe half a dozen times.


Mr. Sol. Genesis And yet you do confess that Mr. Goodman might come in after
Dinner before my Lord of Aylesbury went, and you not see him?


Sir B. Shower. Ay, but he could not stay there without his seeing him, if he
was so often in the Room; you don't take Mr. Cock's Evidence right.


Mr. At. Genesis You named Eight Persons that Dined at your House; Did you know
them all personally before that day?


Cock. Yes, my Lord, the most of them at least.


Mr. At. Genesis Did they use to meet at your House?


Cock. Commonly Sir John Friend did once a Week. Mr. Chernock I knew when I was
a Drawer, and so I did Sir William Parkyns: The rest knew by hearing their
Names.


Mr. At. Genesis Did you know them before that Day Sir, I ask you?


Cock. I had seen Captain Porter several times before that Day, but I cannot
say at my own House.


Sir B. Shower. Do you remember the Treaty about the Hogshead of Whitewine?


Cock. Yes, Sir, very well.


Sir B. Shower. Were you by when my Lord of Aylesbury went away, and spoke with
him about it?


Cock. Yes, I was; and told him, I hoped he would buy the Wine still.


Sir B. Shower. Can you be positive that any body was there before my Lord of
Aylesbury went away, that could stay there any time, and did not Dine there?


Cock. I believe not, Sir; for I came in half a dozen times after Dinner, and I
believe if I had heard Mr. Goodman's Name, or seen him there, I should have
remembered it; but I did not see any body but those that Dined there.


Mr. Cowper. Where was you when my Lord of Aylesbury went away? Where did you
meet him going away?


Cock. Upon the Stairs; seeing my Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery
coming down, I met them.


Mr. Cowper. Where did you meet them? At the middle, or the top of the Stairs?


Cock. My Lord of Aylesbury was at the top of the Stairs.


Mr. Cowper. Did you meet him just coming out of the Room?


Cock. Yes, Sir, I saw the Coach that was called for my Lord; and so I went up
Stairs, and met my Lord at the top of the Stairs coming down.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Now how can you be positive who was in the Room when he came out
of the Room?


Cock. I went up into the Room after my Lord of Aylesbury went away.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How long after my Lord of Aylesbury went away?


Cock. It was presently after.


Mr. Sol. Genesis How long before my Lord of Aylesbury went away, had you been in
the Room?


Cock. I had been there just before.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Call Thomas Peachy.


(Who appeared, and was Sworn.)

Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we shall prove that after the Plot broke out, and
after Mr. Porter had made his Discovery, there was no disturbance of Mr. Cook
'till a good while after Chernock's Trial; and Mr. Cook was so far from being
sensible or conscious of any guilt, that he never absconded, but continued for
three weeks in his Father's House, where he was taken by a Messenger, Pray Mr.
Peachy will you tell my Lord, and the Jury, where Mr. Cook was taken, and when,
and by whom?


Peachy. He was taken at his Father's House by a Messenger, about seven a Clock
in the morning.


Sir B. Shower. What day of the Week was it he was taken?


Peachy. Upon a Sunday morning, in his own Room, in his Father's House, at
seven a Clock in the morning.


Sir B. Shower. Did People come to him as they used to do?


Peachy. Yes, and he went frequently abroad as he used to do, and did never
abscond from his Father's House.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Pray Swear Mr. Treganna.


(Which was done.)

Sir B. Shower. Mr. Treganna, pray do you remember how long after the Plot
broke out did you see Mr. Cook?


Treganna. After Mr. Chernock's Trial a Week he was at my Chamber, after the
Plot broke out, he was concerned in a Trial at Winchester Assizes, upon an
Issue out of Chancery, Mr. Nicholls was the Clerk in Court, and went down to
manage it at the Assizes; and Mr. Cook came to me a day or two after Winchester
Assizes was over, and asked me if I had any news from the Assizes? This was
long after the Plot broke out, and I remember particularly that I saw him twice
after the Plot was discovered, at my Chamber.


Sir B. Shower. Swear Mr. Nicholls.


(Which was done.)

Sir, pray will you tell my Lord and the Jury what you know of Mr. Cook's
appearing abroad after the Plot was discovered?


Mr. Nicholls. I was sent down to the Trial, I was present and did attend at
two Trials indeed, and I suppose Mr. Baron Powis may remember that I attended
at two Trials at Winchester Assizes.


Mr. B. Powis. Possibly you might, Sir; I cannot tell all the Attendance at the
Assizes.


Mr. Nicholls. And after my return from Winchester Assizes, Mr. Cook was with
me several days, both at my Office, and Chamber, and at his Father's Office;
and I remember particularly that he threatened me that I was in trouble when I
was at Winchester, and therefore I remember it very well.


Sir. B. Shower. Mr. Nicholls, you know Mr. Cook very well, pray what are his
Morals?


Mr. Nicholls. Upon occasion of the Cause in Chancery that went to Trial, I
have had the knowledge of Mr. Cook five or six years, I always believed him to
be as temperate a man as ever I met with. I think in five years time I was not
above once with him in a Tavern.


Sir B. Shower. Did you ever hear him Swear?


Mr. Nicholls. No, never, nor vent a Curse; I believe he drank as little as any
man, and was as godly a man; I never heard him speak a foul word.


Sir B. Shower. How do you know that, Sir, that he was so godly a man?


Mr. Nicholls. Upon occasion of this Cause I was several times at Sir Miles
Cook's, and at Mr. Cook's Lodgings there, and we were to go about Business, and
after he was dressed, he has made me stay while he went into his Closet and said
his Prayers. And he told me further, that he never went out of his Father's
doors without saying his Prayers; and I was forced to stay at the door while he
performed his Devotions, as he told me, and I believe he did.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Now, my Lord, we will call some other Witnesses to prove
his good affection to his Country, how he continually desired success to the
Fleet, and to the Army.


Sir B. Shower. So that really he had an aversion to it.


Swear Mr. Hamond. (Which was done.)

Mr. Serj. Darnall. Pray, Sir, will you give an account what you know of the
Prisoner, concerning his Judgment, and concerning his Morals?


Hamond. I have been for some time acquainted with Mr. Cook the Prisoner at the
Bar, and to the best of my observation, I always took him to be a Conscientious
Man, and I have heard him declare great detestation of a French Force; and
three or four days before he was taken into Custody, I asked him what he heard
of Intelligence? he said he heard what was in the public Prints, and heard no
more, and knew no more; and he had a great abhorrence of the Conspiracy, and
thought it a very monstrous thing; I never heard him speak a disrespectful word
of the King's Person or Government in my life: And I say again, I have heard
him several times declare in common Conversation, that he had an aversion to a
French Power, and he had a dread of it.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. What have you heard him say about our Fleet, or Army?


Hamond. My Lord, I have heard him very much wish Prosperity and Success to our
Fleet.


Mr. J. Rokeby. What Fleet, pray Sir?


Hamond. To our Fleet, King William's Fleet against the French; things to this
purpose he has frequently said.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Then Swear Mrs. Hunt.


(Which was done) but she was not Examined.

Sir B. Shower. My Lord, we leave it here; but I must beg the favor, that if
they give any new Evidence, and there be occasion, we may have liberty to
answer it. And I have an Observation or two to make when the Evidence is over.


Mr. At. Genesis My Lord, if they have done with their Evidence, I beg leave to
observe that there is something arises upon that Evidence, that will give us
occasion to call a Witness or two more. My Lord, the first Witness which they
call was Edwards, and he is in Custody upon suspicion of High Treason in
Newgate, and he gives an account of some discourse that he had with Mr.
Goodman; and for that it will be necessary for us to call Mr. Porter again, and
Mr. Delarue, to show that this Edwards the Witness, as he is Committed for
suspicion of High Treason, so he was in the Conspiracy for the Assassination;
he was one in the List that was brought back by Cranburne from Mr. Chernock to
Captain Porter, as one of Chernock's Men, and he is in Custody for it. Then as
to the other matter, they have called three Witnesses to prove that Mr. Goodman
was not in this place at this time. The Council indeed opened it that he was
not at the Tavern 'till after my Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery were
gone away, but their Evidence goes further, that he was not there at all; and
the Master of the House says, he was not there to his knowledge at any time. So
that if their Evidence prove any thing, they prove that he was not there at
all, they do not remember that they saw him there; so that the Question will
be, whether Mr. Goodman was there at that time, and it will be necessary to
call Mr. Goodman again, and Mr. Porter, to confront these Witnesses, who will
tell you when he came in; and particularly as to my Lord of Aylesbury, that he
went with him to the Stairs-head, and my Lord would not let him go further, but
he went back again when my Lord of Aylesbury went down stairs. We will begin
with the Witnesses, as to this Edwards.


Swear Mr. Delarue. (Which was done.)

Mr. Conyers. Mr. Delarue, pray do you know Mr. Edwards that was here?


Mr. Delarue. He goes by several Names, I know him by the Name of Douglas; and
last Monday I came into the Press-Yard, and saluted him by the Name of Douglas,
and he said he had taken his own Name again, by which he was known at St.
Germains, and that was Edwards or Richards, as I remember, or some such Name.


Mr. Conyers. When was he at St. Germains?


Mr. Delarue. About three or four years ago.


Mr. Conyers. Pray look upon him, see if you know him.


Mr. Delarue. I know him very well, there he stands, that is the Person in the
black Wig; he was reputed at St. Germains to be my late Lord Dundee's Chaplain.


Mr. At. Genesis What Name did he go by at St. Germains.


Mr. Delarue. I cannot very well tell; but he said he had taken his own Name
again; and I think he said it was Edwards, or Richards.


Mr. Conyers. Did he go formerly by the Name of Douglas?


Mr. Delarue. Yes, here in England; Mr. Porter knew him to go by that Name.


Mr. At. Genesis What else do you know of him?


Mr. Delarue. The List that Mr. Cranburn carried from Mr. Porter to Mr.
Chernock, and which he brought back again from Mr. Chernock to Mr. Porter, had
in it among the other Names the Name of Douglas, which I understood to be that
Gentleman.


Mr. At. Genesis Did he go by that Name at that time?


Mr. Delarue. Yes he did.


L. C. J. Treby. Pray repeat that again, Sir, that we may understand it, and
see whether it be Evidence.


Mr. Delarue. Why, Sir, the List that Mr. Cranburn brought from Mr. Chernock to
Mr. Porter, at the Foot of the List which Mr. Porter had sent to him, there
were other Names written, as I believe, in Mr. Chernock's Hand; and among those
Names there was the Name of Douglas, which I understood to be this Mr. Edwards,
as he calls himself. And moreover, when Mr. Porter went out of Town, going to
Doctor's Commons, I called at Mr. Chernock's and he had a great deal of Company
with him, 4 or 5 Troopers, and among the rest this Edwards or Douglas was there
sitting by him. Here is a Gentleman that I see upon the Bench, I think he is a
Scotch-man, that knew him at St. Germains as well as I. I think his Name is
Mack Donnel.


Mr. J. Rokeby. What Countryman did you take this Edwards to be?


Mr. Delarue. A Scotch-man, and Chaplain to my Lord Dundee that was killed in
Scotland.


Mr. Serj. Darnall. Did you see this Gentleman in France, Sir?


Mackdonnel. I never was in France in my Life.


Mr. At. Genesis You cannot ask him the Question; you know it tends to make him
either accuse or excuse himself of a Crime. Pray call Mr. Porter again. But in
the mean time, till he comes, we'll examine Mr. Goodman, because he is here.
Mr. Goodman, you were by, and heard what these Drawers said concerning your
being at the Old King's-Head in Leadenhall-street that day. Pray give an
Account when you came in, whether you saw my Lord of Aylesbury, and what passed
between you at my Lord of Aylesbury's going away?


Mr. Goodman. Mr. Porter brought me up; and when I came in they were all
sitting; and after Salutation I sat down: And when they had consulted some
time, they came to a Resolution, as I have told you already. The Fellows are so
far in the right of it, that my Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery went
away first; for I took my leave of them at the Head of the Stairs. Says my Lord
of Aylesbury to me, Pray avoid Ceremony, we will go away privately as we came,
in a Hackney Coach. And as to the Master of the House, who says, he does not
know me, I have Dined several times there, four or five times with Sir John
Friend; and one particular Day above all the rest, I remember I was not well,
and I went down Stairs to the Bar, and said, I pray can you get me a little
Brandy. He said, Yes, he would help me to some of the best in England. And he
brought me up some which I like very well: And thinking he had a Quantity of
it, I asked him what I should give him a Gallon for a Parcel. But he said, He
had but a little; and I am sure he has seen me there five or six times.


Mr. At. Genesis Then set up that Master of the House Cock again. (Which was
done) Come, Sir, you hear what Mr. Goodman has sworn, and mind it, you are upon
your Oath. You said just now, that you never saw Mr. Goodman before.


Cock. No upon my Word, Sir, I don't know that ever I saw him before.


Mr. At. Genesis Do you remember nothing of his being with Sir John Friend at
your House?


Cock. No, upon my Word, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Nay, you are upon your Oath. Nor do you know nothing of your
giving of him Brandy?


Cock. No, upon my Oath, I do not remember any such thing.


Mr. At. Genesis That is a very safe way of swearing, I profess.


Mr. Conyers. He remembers the particular time when he was sick, and you
offered to sell him some Brandy.


Mr. At. Genesis No, he asked him what he should give him for it a Gallon. But,
Mr. Cock, did you ever see Goodman in your House since my Lord of Aylesbury and
they were there?


Cock. No, upon my Word, Sir, I did not; and I never had but two Gallons of
Brandy in my Life at a time; and I never had any Cask, or any thing of that
nature, to sell any out of.


Mr. At. Genesis Who used to be with Sir John Friend at your House?


Cock. There used to be Mr. Richardson, and Justice Cash, and Col. Cash.


Mr. Goodman. Mr. Richardson was there that day: I could almost have remembered
the particular day, but I cannot be positive; only we were in the same Room
where the Consultation was, at the further part of the Room.


Mr. J. Rokeby. You, Friend, the Master of the House, you hear what Mr. Goodman
says: He says he was with Sir John Friend at your House, and being not well, he
asked for some Brandy, and you told him, You Would give him some of the best in
England. And he propounded to you then to sell him some of it; but it seems
there was no Bargain made. Do you remember any such thing of one that was with
Sir John Friend, that spoke of buying of Brandy when he was sick?


Cock. No, upon my Word I do not.


Mr. At. Genesis Then set up Mr. Porter (who stood up.) Pray Mr. Porter, look
upon that man in the black Perriwig; what Name did he use to go by?


Mr. Porter. He used to go by the Name of Edwards.


Mr. At. Genesis Had he any other Name?


Mr. Porter. Yes, Douglas.


Mr. At. Genesis He has so many Names, that we don't know which his is true Name.
Mr. Porter, pray what else do you know of him touching his being concerned in
the Conspiracy?


Mr. Porter. I know not any thing of my own Knowledge; but his Name was put
down in the List that Mr. Chernock sent me of his men, and Mr. Delarue read his
Name there.


Mr. Sol. Genesis Mr. Porter, you were a Witness upon the Trials of Sir John
Friend and Sir William Parkyns; did you give Evidence that Mr. Goodman was in
the Room at the same time when the Consultation was?


Mr. Porter. Yes, Sir.


Mr. At. Genesis Well, you hear that these People have sworn, that Mr. Goodman
did not come till my Lord of Aylesbury went away; nay indeed, that he was not
there at all.


Mr. Porter. My Lord, upon my Oath he was there before my Lord Aylesbury went
away, and Mr. Goodman bowed, and took leave of my Lord as he went out of doors.


Mr. At. Genesis What time did my Lord of Aylesbury go away?


Mr. Porter. It was about an hour and a half, or two hours after Dinner, and he
was in the Room when my Lord went away, for he took his leave of him at the
door.


Mr. Cowper. Do you remember the manner of Mr. Goodman's coming in?


Mr. Porter. Mr. Goodman sent up his Name to me, and I told the Company, and
promised for him, that he was a very honest Man, and much in King James's
Interest; and then with their consent I went down and brought him up.


Mr. J. Powell. How long time do you think there was between Mr. Goodman's
coming in, and my Lord of Aylesbury's going away?


Mr. Porter. I cannot tell that, I do not remember exactly how long it was.


Mr. J. Powell. Was it a quarter of an hour, or half an hour?


Mr. Porter. A great deal longer, for we had discoursed of the whole business
after Mr. Goodman came into the Room.


Mr. Conyers. How long were they there after Mr. Goodman came in?


Mr. Porter. It was very near two hours after he came in, before they went
away; they did not go away 'till six a Clock, and he came in at four, as near
as I can remember.


Mr. At. Genesis Then, my Lord, we have done.


Sir B. Shower. Then I beg the favor of a word or two, my Lord. May it please
your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am of Counsel in this Case for
the Prisoner at the Bar, and I must beg your Lordship's patience, and your
favor, Gentlemen, to make a few Observations upon the Evidence that has been
given; for we humbly insist upon it in point of Law, that here is not
sufficient Evidence before you to Convict the Prisoner. You are, Gentlemen, to
have respect and regard to your Consciences and the Oaths which you have now
taken to give a Verdict, and make true Deliverance between the King, and the
Prisoner; you are not to go according to your own private Opinions, nor
according to public Fame, nor according to common Report, nor according to the
Verdicts in other Cases, nor according to the Confessions or Dying Speeches of
Criminals who have been Executed, whether made by themselves, or by others for
them; but you are to go by the Testimony of Credible Witnesses, and if you have
not the Evidence of two Credible Witnesses before you, my Lords the Judges will
inform you how the Law stands. That by the Statute of Edward the Sixth, and the
New Statute for Trials of Treasons, there must be two Witnesses to prove the
Prisoner guilty of the Overt Act of the Treason that is laid in the Indictment;
and whether there have been two Credible Witnesses produced before you, is the
Question that you are to consider upon your Oath and Conscience; that is,
whether you are satisfied here be two such as the Law requires. The Question is
not merely whether Mr. Cook be Guilty, but whether in your Consciences he be
legally proved Guilty; whether there be Evidence to satisfy your Consciences,
according to the Laws of the Land, that he is Guilty; and we insist there is
not; and therefore I beg leave to recapitulate what was been Sworn against him,
that we may see how far it reaches, and wherein it is defective.

Gentlemen, Mr. Porter he Swears that about the beginning or middle of May, he
cannot tell which, there was this Meeting at the Old King's-Head Tavern in
Leaden-Hall-Street; in which, I would observe to you, that he confines himself
to a certain Month; the Reason is very plain, and therefore I asked him whether
it was not in April; for if he had said it had been then, there had been no
danger to the Prisoner, because of the Act of Indemnity, therefore he was
careful to fix it in May; and he would not lay it in June, for the Tenth of
June is a Famous Day; and then, or soon after, Newgate had him; he was Confined
there for a Riot on that Day, and so they have restrained it to a Month, and
the only Month that he is capable of Swearing to, as to any Act done the last
year 'till they came in January to the Assassination Plot, which the Prisoner
is not accused to have had any Concern in; but it should seem he cannot tell
what Day of the Week, or of the Month, but about the beginning or the middle of
May eight Persons Dined at this place, and then after Dinner Mr. Goodman came
in, and they discoursed about this matter.

First, Gentlemen, we insist upon it, that it is very improbable that Engglish
Protestants of pious Conversation and good Morals, should agree, as he says, to
send such a Message to the late King, to Invite over a French Popish Force; we
may easily see the horrid and mischievous Consequences that would have followed
such a practice, such as must affect every Englishman with a Concern, so that
it is improbable a Man of Virtue and Piety could engage in such an Enterprise;
and if it it be improbable, you will never believe it, unless the Conviction or
Proof be irresistible: And if you have any other Reasons to distrust this Man's
Truth, then we hope you will go upon the side of probability; and not let
Popular Prejudice, Common Fame, or any thing else but Legal and Undeniable
Evidence have the Ascendant over you. If you are not satisfied that Mr. Cook
did assent (as from the Character of the Man it is not probable he should) to
send Chernock into France, to persuade King Lewis and King James to send Ten
Thousand Men to Invade our Country, then he is not Guilty.

In the next place, Gentlemen, he is not Guilty we say in the Eye of the Law,
if they have not two Witnesses; and for that we say you have but one, or but
one that is to be believed; and if you have but one that is to be believed,
that in Law is but one, and consequently my Client is not Guilty; so the King's
Council agree, that if there be but one Witness, he cannot be Convicted, the
Law is plain in the Case. Now to make it out that here is but one Witness at
most, we have offered you several Objections, and made them out by Evidence,
against the Testimony of Mr. Goodman; that he is not a Person fit to be
believed; and if he be out of the Case, then does Mr. Porter's stand alone, and
all will amount but to one Witness, suppose it should be granted that his
Testimony were true.

First, We have read a Record of Conviction against him, of a Crime, one of the
greatest next unto Treason, that is known in our or any other Law. That he
hired a Man to Poison two Dukes, Branches of a Noble Family, to which he had
such great Obligations, as all Mankind do know, and he himself cannot but
acknowledge; and if there were not that aggravation in it, of his Obligations
to that Family, yet to lie in wait to Murder and Poison, is such an Offense as
any Age can seldom show the like. And the Objection is not so very easily
answered as they would have it; nor can it be so soon passed over as they
think, by saying He is a Witness of a Confederacy with which the Prisoner is
accused, a Crime greater than the thing objected. It is true, none can bear
Testimony in such a business, but he that is a Party: But, we say, if these
Persons, who come and set up themselves for Witnesses, were not probi Homines,
and did not appear to be persons of indifferent Credit between Man and Man, and
did not stand impartial in the Eye of the World in other respects before, then
they are not to be believed, as to what they charge themselves and others to be
guilty of. Now, if Mr. Goodman stand convicted of such an Offense as this that
is alleged against him, though he is pardoned by the Act of Parliament, or
Satisfaction acknowledged upon the Record, though it be even the very next Term,
yet that does not purge him from the Infamy and Disgrace, or from the
Imputation of being concerned in so Villainous a Design. It is impossible that
he should be a good Witness that would be engaged in such a matter; especially
when we have those Various Witnesses, and such a Concurring Testimony, that
what he has Sworn is absolutely False.

Gentlemen, if there were nothing but his own Testimony in the Case, there
could be no Question at all in it: And as to Captain Porter's Testimony about
his being there, we have produced three Witnesses, who, if they be of Credit,
then Mr. Goodman is not to be believed, but is falsified throughout; for, it is
not the Question, Whether Mr. Cook went away before the Consultation and the
Resolution; for, if my Lord of Ailesbury, or my Lord Montgomery went away, Mr.
Goodman is falsify'd in that, and consequently you ought not to believe him in
the rest; for he actually Swears, that my Lord of Ailesbury, my Lord
Mountgomery, and those other Gentlemen, were all present, and at the Consult,
and did consent and agree to the Resolution, by using these words; Yes, you
may; Yes, you may. Now, we say, there are three Witnesses that swear, That my
Lord of Ailesbury was gone before he came there. I do not care whether he came
there, or not; that is not material: If there were no body there when my Lord
of Ailesbury was there but those that were at Dinner, for then Mr. Goodman was
not there at any such Consultation, as they would insinuate was at that Time,
in that Place, and that Company.

My Lord, we have proved to you Mr. Cook's Abherrence and Declaration, which,
we think, ought to go a great way in satisfaction of his Innocence, at least to
induce you to the favorable Side; for, Gentlemen, you are not brought hither
to Convict a Man only, but to Try and Examine him; and it is your Duty to
Acquit, as well as Convict, according as the Evidence stands: It is your Duty
to go according to your Consciences, and to declare whether he be Guilty, or
Not Guilty, upon the Evidence you have before you: You are to Examine the Truth
of the Fact in all its Circumstances, and upon your own Consciences to declare,
whether he is Guilty or Not Guilty; now we propose it to you, and submit it to
your Consciences, That here are Three Witnesses, that speak upon their Oaths,
against whom there is no Objection, That ever they were Guilty of lying in wait
to Poison any body, nor in any Plot for an Assassination, nor any Conspiracy
for inviting an Invasion from France, nor any other Objection against them, but
they stand upright in the Face of the World, and they Three swear, That he was
not there at that time. The Answer that we expect, is, That he might be there,
and they not see him: And because it was possible he might be there, and they
not see him, therefore it is no Evidence: But, My Lord, because it may be so,
is no Evidence that it is so; that is no Objection, for you will take it as the
nature of the thing will afford, and the Matter itself allow. Now there can be
no better Evidence than this; That they went in and out continually; the
Drawers, and the Master of the House five or six times himself, were in the
Room, and they say, There was no such Person there. Why then it is very
Improbable, if not Impossible, that any such Man should be there. The one
swears, He came down from my Lord of Ailesbury just before he went away; and
another says, He followed him out of the Room; and the Master says, That he met
my Lord of Ailesbury at the Stairs-head. All which falsifies Mr. Goodman in
that Particular, That he was with my Lord of Ailesbury at the Stairs-head, when
he went away. These are incompatible; and if we falsify him in any one thing,
he is not to be believed in any other.

Then, Gentlemen, we offer to your Consideration an Answer to another
Objection: They say, these Witnesses seem to swear, That he was not there at
all. We are not concerned whether he was there afterward, or not: If you are
satisfied, that he was not there, as our Witnesses swear, while my Lord of
Ailesbury was there, that is enough. But then they make an Objection, How comes
the Master of the House to remember my Lord of Ailesbury's going away, more
than any body else? Gentlemen, you know the nature of the thing shows, that not
only that it was more probable the Master of the House should make his
Observations near the time of Dinner, rather than afterward at Night, when
there is more Hurry: But it is more probable he should take notice of it from
the Quality of the Person, from the Discourse he had with him about the
Whitewine, which was a good Medium to refresh a Vintner's Memory, it being a
matter in his own Trade, and that might make him call it to mind.

Therefore, Gentlemen, we think these three Witnesses stand free and clear in
their Credit; and being so, are inconsistent with Mr. Goodman's Testimony; and,
we hope, in favor of Life, the Credit inclines on their side, especially when
the Question is, Whether a Man shall be executed for Treason who never fled for
it, who was never charged with any Treason or Treasonable Practices before;
nay, not so much as with any particular Crime. or Immorality: And, whether
Three Witnesses shall be believed, against whom there is no Objection, rather
than Two, against One of which there are such Objections.

My Lord, we are not now debating or attacking the Evidence of the Plot, or
arraigning the former Judgments against the Conspirators that have suffered;
but, Gentlemen, we are putting you now upon a serious Enquiry, (as GOD and your
own Consciences shall incline you) whether our Clyent be Guilty or Not Guilty
upon this Evidence; that is, whether Mr. Goodman swears true, or not. We hope
that we have given you sufficient Satisfaction, that upon Mr. Goodman's part
the Evidence is insufficient; and we hope you will accordingly find our Clyent
Not Guilty.


Mr. At. Genesis If Mr. Cook have any thing to say himself, I desire he may say
it now, before we begin.


Sir B. Shower. No, pray go on, Sir.


L. C. J. Treby. Mr. Cook, would you say any thing yourself, before the King's
Council sum up?


Cook. The little I have to say, my Lord, I Will speak now, or by and by, which
you please.


L. C. J. Treby. You must do it now, because after they have summed up, there
is nothing more to be said by you.


Cook. My Lord, I thank God, I have lived a Life, I hope, as good as any Man,
and have often received the Blessed Sacrament; I have done it constantly, and
shall do it speedily, by the Grace of God, as soon as I can have a Minister
come to administer it to me. I did offer it to my own Father, when he came to
me, and told me, If would confess this thing I should not come to Trial: I told
my Father, I would not for Ten thousand Worlds take away the Blood of an
Innocent man to save mine. I thank God, I am in a very good way to dye; I have,
for at least this last Year, frequently received the Blessed Sacrament; and how
I have lived, every body in the Court that knows me can tell my Life and
Conversation has been as regular as any man's, and I am as ready to dye to
morrow, if occasion was for it (I thank God) as any one; I will receive the
Blessed Sacrament upon it; and it is not for Life that I would do any thing
that is wrong or unjust: I do love my Nation, and I love the Quiet of the
Nation; I never was for disturbing the Government that now is; and I ever was
against Foreign Forces or an Invasion, for I never thought of one, or heard of
it, but with Abhorrence and Detestation: And I do assure faithfully, I should
be sorry to disparage Mr. Porter's Evidence, because I would have every body
that was concerned in that Horrid and Barbarous Crime to suffer; in God's Name,
let them all suffer. I thank God, I never knew any thing of it, nor of a French
Invasion: And I would say more of it, but that I would not hurt Mr. Porter's
Evidence, whose Discovery of that Bloody Business has done so much Service. As
for Mr. Goodman, as I hope to receive the Blessed Sacrament, and may I perish
when I do it, if I speak an Untruth; I would not for any thing, no, not for the
Good of my Country, have Innocent Blood spilt; I would lay down my Life to
serve my Country, but I would not have my Blood be lightly lost; and how little
a Man soever I am, my Blood will lie as heavy upon the Nation as any the
weightiest man's can do. I do not doubt your Lordship's Justice, nor the
Jury's, but I pray, my Lord, observe; though it is usual not to own things at the
Bar, yet I do not make this Denial as of Course, but out of Truth; and I assure
you, in the presence of the whole Court, if I should suffer for this, I must at
my last moments either confess or deny something: And, I say, I do assure, in
the presence of the whole Court, and I will take the Blessed Sacrament upon it,
that I must, at my Death, deny this whole matter, and that ever I did see Mr.
Goodman at all there; I do not think I saw him; I do not remember I saw Mr.
Goodman at all, except once in Germain-street, when the Coach broke, and that
must be but in passing by neither, and he would have hurt or killed the
Coachman, and we kept him from it; and I walked with him half the length of
Germain-street, before I knew who Mr. Goodman was. If ever a one of those
Gentlemen* that are Men of Credit and Honor, can say I was any ways so
inclined, or that they ever saw me, or knew me, that I ever bought a Pistol or
a Blunderbuss, or the like, may God sink and strike me dead; and the Blessed
Sacrament, which I intend to receive, be my Curse and Damnation, if I knew of
King James's Coming, till after the whole Town rung of it: I had no hand in the
Invasion; and, besides my Abhorrence of Introducing Foreign Force, I desire
your Lordship and the Jury to consider the Circumstances of my Case, that I had
but a very small Allowance from my Father, and therefore it is not probable I
should take upon me to join with my Lord of Ailesbury, and my Lord Montgomery,
and those other Gentlemen, to send Chernock into France, to invite over a
Foreign Force: And I call God to witness I had no hand in it. I beg your
Lordships Pardon for all this Trouble; I would not hurt Mr. Porter's Evidence,
for the Reasons that I have told you; but this is for my Life, and I don't so
much value that as I do Truth and Sincerity; and I shall receive the Blessed
Sacrament, if I dye, that I never did do so. Indeed, I never did take the
Oaths, nor did I ever refuse them, because they were never offered me; but I
would take the Oaths now if they were offered me. My Lord, I beg your Pardon
for this Trouble.


L. C. J. Treby. Have you done, Sir? Have you said all you would say?


Cook. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. J. Treby. Then, you Gentlemen of the King's Council, will you conclude?


Mr. Sol. Genesis May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury, I am
of Council in this Case for the King, and I could have been very glad that this
Gentleman's Defense that he has made had been stronger than in truth it has
been: And I should have been very glad too that his Council had been able to
have made it better for him; but that he and they may be satisfied as much is
done as the Case will bear; they have had all the Liberty in the World to make
his Defense they could desire, nay, more than in strictness could be allowed
them.

Gentlemen, our Evidence is very positive against the Prisoner at the Bar, and
for the Highest Crime that the King's Subjects can be guilty of, by the
Confession of the Gentleman himself, and of his Council. We have, I say, two
positive Witnesses against him; they say, They are not Legal ones: I must own,
if we have not two Witnesses, we have never an one; for whatsoever falsifies
Mr. Goodman's Testimony, falsifies whatsoever Mr. Porter has Sworn. Now, the
Evidence that Mr. Porter has given against him, is this: He says, There was to
be a Meeting at the King's Head Tavern in Leaden-hall-street, and there they
consulted of the Methods to bring back K. James hither; and it was thought the
best way to send to King James to invite the French King to send 1000 Horse,
1000 Dragoous, and 8000 Foot, to land here in this Kingdom, where they would
meet him with 2000 Horse. They pitched upon a very proper Messenger, Mr.
Chernock, a Person that has been attainted, and has suffered for High Treason;
he was to be sent into France upon this Errand; Mr. Cook, the Prisoner at the
Bar, was one of the Persons that were there at that time, and he was consenting
to this Message; and Mr. Porter gives you a particular Token relating to the
Prisoner, for he remembers the Prisoner did kneel upon the Chair, and leaned
his Elbows upon the Table when he consented.

Mr. Porter goes further, and tells you, That Mr. Chernock would have another
Meeting, to know and see whether all the Company were of the same mind they had
been; and That afterward they met at Mrs. Mountjoy's House, and there the
Prisoner at the Bar was present, and consenting to the same thing: Thereupon
Mr. Chernock went into France, and came back again, and said, The French King
could not spare so much Force. Mr. Goodman gives the same Evidence that Mr.
Porter had given: It Is true, he was not at Mrs. Mountjoy's Tavern, but he tells
you withal, He spoke with Mr. Chernock when he came back from France, and
Chernock returned him the same Answer that he did to Mr. Porter, That the
French King could not spare so many Forces. This is the Evidence in short,
Gentlemen, that is given against the Prisoner; and if this Evidence be true,
then is he guilty of the Crime for which he is indicted.

Against these Witnesses they have produced, first, a Record of Conviction
against Mr. Goodman, and that was for hiring one Amadea to poison the Duke of
Grafton, and the Duke of Northumberland: They have produced the Record, whereby
it appears, he was Convicted and Fined 1000 l. and was to find Security for the
good behavior during Life; and he was no lie in Prison till the Fine paid, and
Security given: But it happens, in that very Record it appears there was
Satisfaction acknowledged upon that even the very next Term; and that gives a
great deal of Suspicion to believe, that the Evidence that was given was not
much credited; for, though the Council for the Prisoner has said, that it was the
Payment of the 1000 l. that was the Satisfaction; no, it is not so, it is a
Satisfaction of the whole Judgment, for finding Security as well as the Fine.
They say he was not able to pay the Fine; and there is nothing appears of the
other parts of the Judgment being complied with, but the whole Judgment is set
aside.

But all this does not make a Man no Legal Witness; if they thought this
Conviction tended to set aside his Evidence, they would have produced it at
another part of the Trial, than where they did: That is, when Mr. Goodman was
first called to be Sworn as a Witness, then they should have produced this
Record, and said he had been no Witness: But they knew well enough that that
was no Exception against the Legality of his Evidence, but tends only to his
Credit, and nothing else. Now, though it be a black Crime to endeavor to poison
another, yet that does not totally destroy any Man's Credit; if it did, then
the other Gentleman, Mr. Porter, has confessed himself Guilty of a greater
Crime than that for which Mr. Goodman is Convicted by this Record; for, he owns
himself one that was in that Design of Assassinating the King. And Mr. Goodman
owns himself too Guilty of a greater Crime that what is objected to him, which
is that of High Treason; and, I hope, if he may be believed, when he owns
himself guilty of High Treason, which is a greater Crime than poisoning a
private Subject; or guilty of such a Design as the Assassination of the King,
which Mr. Porter has charged himself with, and notwithstanding which they have
not offered that as an Exception against Mr. Porter's Evidence, (for they very
well know, his Evidence has been Received and Credited:) Mr. Goodman may be
Credited, though Guilty of the Crime objected to him: And the constant Practice
in all Trials of this kind has been, that it does not take away the Witnesses
Evidence, however it affects his Credit, which in this Case is supported by the
Concurrent Testimony of Mr. Porter. And so then, I say, we have two Legal
Witnesses, (notwithstanding all the Exceptions) to prove Mr. Cook guilty of the
Crime for which he is Indicted.

Then they go on further, and produce other Witnesses: First, they produce one
Edwards, a Person that is Committed for High Treason himself, and under
Suspicion of his being to be one of those that was to have a hand in the
Assassination; but his Evidence goes no further, than that Mr. Goodman told him
he was to be a Witness against Mr. Cook, and either he the Witness, or Mr. Cook
must suffer; and, That it was a foolish thing to be Hanged. My Lord, there is
nothing at all in this matter that takes away Mr. Goodman's Evidence: It is
very plain Mr. Goodman had forfeited his Life, and must do something to save
it, and I think he could not do a better Service to entitle himself to the
King's Mercy, than to discover those that were equally guilty with himself.
'Twas his Duty to have done it, if he had not been in Danger; and if he has
done no more than what was his Duty, I hope that is no Objection against his
Testimony.

They have produced likewise a Drawer of the King's Head Tavern, one Crawford,
and he says, he attended in this Room while this Company was there. But then he
goes a little further than the Council or the Prisoner would have had him; for
they called him to prove, that Mr. Goodman was not there when my Lord of
Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, and Mr. Cook were there. But when the Drawer
comes, he knows nothing of Mr. Goodman's being there at all: He says, Mr. Cook
was there, but not Mr. Goodman; and yet he does acknowledge, that Mr. Goodman
might be there, and he not see him come up. He acknowledges he attended upon
other Company as well as this; so that it is plain in the nature of the thing,
and his own Confession, that Goodman might be there. This cannot take off the
positive Evidence of Mr. Goodman and Mr. Porter, who both swear, That Goodman
was there.

But then they produce another Drawer, and that is one Huntley; and he gives
the same Account, only indeed he says, He was there all the while they were at
Dinner: But that is nothing, because it is acknowledged both by Mr. Porter and
Mr. Goodman, That he was not there at Dinnertime, but he might be there after
Dinner, and yet Huntly could not see him at Dinner: He tells you likewise, he
passed up and down in the Room afterward, and did not see Mr. Goodman there;
but yet he might be there, and he not see him.

Then they produce the Master of the House, and he gives much the same Evidence
in effect which his Servants do, That he did not see Mr. Goodman there all the
while; but he says something that is a little incredible; He can be positive
that Mr. Goodman was not there while my Lord of Ailesbury was there, but he
cannot be positive that he was not there afterward. He tells you, he met my
Lord of Ailesbury and my Lord Montgomery upon the middle of the Stairs coming
down, and he is sure Mr. Goodman was not in the Room at that time. Now, is that
possible that he could be sure of that, when he owns, (and cannot but own) That
Mr. Goodman might go into the Room and he not see him? So that he has made a
strain in his Evidence that it is very little to be Credited, which was not
designed so much for the advantage of Mr. Cook as for the advantage of somebody
else: And, in itself, it is almost an impossible thing that it should be true,
by what he offers as the Reason of his Evidence.

But then, Gentlemen, you are to consider, that all these three Witnesses, if
they swear true, do falsify not only Mr. Goodman, who swears, That he was
there; but they likewise falsify the Evidence of Mr. Porter, and for that
Reason I asked Mr. Porter the Question, Whether he did not give the same
Evidence against Sir John Friend? And if what he swears now be not true,
neither was it true when Sir John Friend was Tried, for he was the only Witness
at that time against Sir John Friend, for this meeting; and therefore these
men's Testimony tends to overthrow Both Witnesses as well as One: And I must
tell you, that if Mr. Goodman be not a Legal Witness, because he has sworn a
thing that is not true, then Mr. Porter is not a good Witness, who has sworn
the same thing, viz. That Mr. Goodman was there; and then you ought to acquit
the Prisoner, because there is no Witness against him at Law; for, there is the
same Evidence against Mr. Porter that there is against Mr. Goodman as to this
matter.

Then, Gentlemen, as for the Character of Mr. Cook, they say he is a good
English Protestant, I hope he is so* but it is plain, that Religion does not
vary the Case: It Is within the reach of every man's memory that is here, that
the same things have fallen upon other Gentlemen that have had the same
Character, particularly Sir John Friend and Sir William Parkyns, who both* said
the same things, in the same place, That they were True Protestants of the
Church of England. But that is no manner of Evidence that will be of weight
against Positive Oaths.

Now, Gentlemen, it is fit likewise you should reflect upon another thing: What
is it that should engage Mr. Porter and Mr. Goodman, or invite either of those
two Gentlemen to give a False Evidence against the Prisoner at the Bar? It does
not appear that there was any Injury done by him to them, to provoke them, to
it; so that it could be for nothing but for the sake of Truth.

It has been further said on the behalf of Mr. Cook, That he Abhorred the
French, and any Invasion upon his Country, and the like: It is a matter that is
easily said; and it has been said by others that have been in the same Place
where he now stands; That they hated all Plots, and they might punish them if
ever they caught them. But these are only Sayings, and nothing else. If there
can be any Constructions made of the Evidence given by these two Witnesses,
that does not directly prove the Indictment, then the Prisoner ought to be
Acquitted: But if there can be no other Construction made, but only, That there
was a plain Design to send Chernock into France, to King James, to persuade him
to prevail with the French King, to come and Invade us with a Foreign Force:
And if our Witnesses are Legal Witnesses, (as, I doubt not, my Lords the Judges
will tell you they are; if there be no Exception to the Credit of Goodmen, but
only that he was in such a Design of Poisoning the two Dukes, which is really
no Objection of Discredit to his Testimony;) then, with Submission, I think
there is no room left for you, Gentlemen of the Jury, to doubt, but that the
Prisoner is as Guilty of this Crime laid to his charge, as any others that have
been Tried and Condemned for the same. And so, Gentlemen, I leave it to you.


L. C. J. Treby. Mr. Conyers, and Mr. Cowper, will you say any thing to this
matter.


Mr. Conyers and Mr. Cowper. No, my Lord, we submit it entirely to your
Lordships Direction; we have done on all sides, we think.


L. C. J. Treby. Gentlemen of the Jury, the Prisoner at the Bar, Mr. Cook,
stands indicted here for High Treason; there are laid in the Indictment two
sorts of Treason; the one is, Compassing and Imagining the Death of the King;
the other is, adhering to the King's Enemies. The Evidence to prove these
Treasons seems to be joint; for, as to that of Compassing and Imagining the
King's Death, as well as to the other, the Overt Acts are meeting and
consulting about the Treason, and then agreeing and resolving to invite and
procure an Invasion from France, and to meet that Invasion with an Insurrection
here. And the Evidence is applied entirely to prove these Acts.

Gentlemen, that these are proper Overt Acts of Compassing the King's Death, I
need not inform you, the Law is very well known; and the Prisoner's own Council
do acknowledge, that these are sufficient Overt Acts of Compassing and
Imagining the King's Death: So that all which they Defend him by is, the
Improbability of the Testimony given against him.

Now, Gentlemen, you are to consider and weigh well the Evidence that has been
given. By Law, it is true, as they observe, there must be Two Witnesses. Here
is no defect of Number; that is acknowledged too, here are two Witnesses; but
the Question is, whether here be two Witnesses that deserve Credit, and upon
whose Testimony you can find that the Prisoner is Guilty. The Witnesses,
Gentlemen, are Mr. Porter and Mr. Goodman.

First, For the matter of their Testimony, it is positive from them both; that
you will do well to observe. Mr. Porter tells, you, That (...) May last, (which
is now just a Twelvemonth) there was a meeting of Eight Persons, that is, my
Lord of Ailesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir John Fenwick, Sir William Parkyns,
Sir John Friend, Mr. Chernock, Mr. Cook the Prisoner at the Bar, and the
Witness himself Mr. Porter; and this was at the King's Head Tavern in
Leaden-hall-street, and there these Eight dined, and this was in order to
consult about an Invasion, together with an Insurrection intended to be made
for the Restoring of the late King. After Dinner comes in Mr. Goodman, he says,
and then they pursued this Consultation, and came to a Resolution, to send Mr.
Chernock into France, and the Message was agreed upon which he should carry;
and he was to go to the late King, and solicit him to obtain 10000 Soldiers
from the French King, whereof 8000 should be Foot, 1000 Horse, and 1000
Dragoons. These were to make up the 10000 men to invade this Kingdom. And they
resolved also, when this Force should land, they should meet and assist this
Invasion with a joint Force, that should consist of 2000 Horse. And to Acquaint
and Assure him of this was the Message. But, he says, That Mr. Chernock was
very cautious in it, and would not presently go upon this Errand, but he would
have further Assurance that they were in earnest, and would make good what they
did send him to propose, therefore he would have a second meeting; and a second
meeting was had, and that was at Mrs. Mountjoy's Tavern, and there they did
renew the same Resolution, and there were present my Lord of Ailesbury, Sir
William Parkyns, Sir John Fenwick, Sir John Friend, Mr. Chernock, the Prisoner
at the Bar, and himself; he does not know or remember whether my Lord
Montgomery, or Mr. Goodman was there. He says, Mr. Chernock did accordingly go
into France, and he did return and bring back King James's Thanks to them, but
their Desire could not be complied with; and he had his Share of the
Complements.

Now comes Mr. Goodman, and he says, That about the same time, viz. Mid-May,
Mr. Porter acquainted him, there would be a meeting of some of K. James^s
Friends, at this Tavern in Leaden Hall street. He says, That he did tell Mr.
Porter, he doubted he should not be there at Dinner, but he would come as soon
as he could after Dinner; and according to appointment, he did come after
Dinner, and there was this Consultation and Resolution that Mr. Porter speaks
of, and says, That Mr. Chernock afterward told him, he had been in France with
the late King, and brought back the same Answer that Mr. Porter speaks of; and
he had the Honor of Thanks from the late King too.

Gentlemen, I must observe one thing to you, which does go very much toward
the confirming what these Witnesses say, and that is the Agreement in their
Testimonies, tho they were examined Apart at the Desire of the Prisoner: You
will find they agree in these several Circumstances, in the Time, that it was
this time twelve-months; in the Place, that it was at this Tavern; in the
Number of Persons that were there, which was Eight before Mr. Goodman came in;
in the number of Horse, Foot, and Dragoons that were to be brought from France,
and in those Horse that were to meet them here; and besides, in those words of
Discourse upon the Consultation and the Resolution. And there is one
Circumstance more in which they do agree, and which is very particular; That
when they came to deliver their Consent to this Message that Mr. Chernock was
to carry, the rest sat, and Mr. Cook the Prisoner did kneel upon the Chair,
and leaned upon the Table. And this both of them do agree in. And after all the
many Questions asked in their separate examination, I do not find they disagree
in any Part of their Evidence. So that, Gentlemen, there can remain no Question
now, but Whether these two Witnesses are men of Credit; or, whether there has
been opposed to them any such Evidence as will make you believe, that (if not
both) at least one of them has forsworn himself. They do produce nothing
against Mr. Porter, whatsoever may have been produced at former Trials against
his Credit: Perhaps what has been before, has satisfied the Objectors, there is
nothing appears against his Credit; but he is not only a Competent but a very
clear, good, credible, and undoubted Witness.

But against Mr. Goodman they offer several things which they say amount to a
violent Presumption, that he is not to be looked upon as a credible Witness:
And first, they produce a Record of a Conviction upon an Information against
him, for attempting to poison two Noble Dukes: This he was convicted of, and
fined 1000 l. and ordered to find Sureties for his good Behavior during his
Life. But, to this it is answered, that it appears in the same Record, that
Satisfaction was acknowledged of the 1000 l. and all the rest of the Judgment
the very next Term, and he was forthwith discharged, and that without paying
the Money, which ('it was observed) the Prisoner's Counsel said Mr. Goodman was
not able to pay at that time, no more than he could 20000 l. and thereupon the
King's Counsel say, that the Government was convinced that he was wronged by a
causeless Prosecution, and the Evidence against him was found not to be
credible. And besides, Mr. Goodman stands pardoned by several Acts of Pardons,
as well as other Subjects.

Then they produce one Edwards, who is a Prisoner here, and committed for
Suspicion of High Treason, and for Treasonable Practices: He is, no doubt of
it, a Witness for all that: For that is but an Accusation upon him, and does
not take away his Credit. He tells you of a Discourse that he had with Mr.
Goodman, and that Goodman asked him when the Prisoner was to be tried; and he
told him he would be tried such a Day; and when it was asked what it was for,
it was answered, not for the Assassination, but for sending Mr. Chernock into
France? He asked then who were the Witnesses against him? Mr. Goodman said, Mr.
Porter and himself. And further said, that he understood that Mr. Cook had
sworn against him (though he would give an Account of no body else) and had no
Pardon, and either he must hang, or himself. And then he talked lightly of the
Business of hanging, and said it was a foolish thing to be hanged, for all that
People would say, was, that such an one hanged handsomely, or dyed bravely. This
indeed is a sort of Discourse as if Mr. Goodman did apprehend himself in Danger
from Mr. Cook's Evidence; and yet I cannot see that it does at all falsify the
Evidence of Mr. Goodman: He may be a true Witness, and yet he might say he was
to give Evidence against Mr. Cook, and it was in Mr. Cook's Power to give
Evidence against him, and that truly; and if both were in the Guilt, they were
in Danger of one another. But for a further Answer, the King's Counsel have
produced Mr. De-la-rue, who says, that he knew Mr. Edwards, and that he was a
Scotch Man, and reputed Chaplain to the Viscount of Dundee, that he went
formerly by the Name of Douglas, and by that Name he was set down and described
in the List that Mr. Chernock sent to Captain Porter; and to that Name he
answered in the Press-yard lately. Now it is certain, that Mr. Chernock's
putting of his Name in that List, is no Evidence of his being guilty in Mr.
Chernock's Treason. But his going by two Names does justly lay him under some
Suspicion. But the Evidence that the Prisoner seems to rely upon most, is what
Evidence has been produced against Mr. Goodman in that Point of Fact, by the
Master and the two Drawers; the first of the Drawer's Name was Crawford, and he
does tell you, that about 12 Months ago there was this Company at Dinner there:
My Lord of Aylesbury, my Lord Montgomery, Sir John Friend, Sir John Fenwick,
Sir William Parkyns, Captain Porter, Mr. Chernock, and the Prisoner, though he
did not then know his Name, or the Name of one or two more of them. I observe
by the way, that his Testimony so far does verify theirs, that there were
eight of them there, but he says he did not see Mr. Goodman there, nor any but
those that dined there. And my Lord of Aylesbury went away, as he thinks, about
four a Clock. He cannot say that the Prisoner was there, or was gone at that
time before Mr. Goodman came in; for he did not see Mr. Goodman there at all,
he was not in the Room all the time, but he was to and fro attending till my
Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery went away in a Coach that was called,
and when they were gone, the rest of the Company staid there a good while;
being urged to tell how long, at last he said it was dark, and that agrees with
Mr. Porter, who says, it was about nine a-Clock when they went away. He says he
was there once or twice after my Lord of Aylesbury went away, but he never saw
Mr. Goodman that he remembers at all, till last Saturday, in all his Life. As
to this the King's Counsel say, that it is only a negative Evidence, and in
which a Man cannot be absolutely positive, but can only speak according to his
Observation and Memory, which might not be perfect, and Mr. Goodman might be
there in the mean time of his going in and out: That is possible; and so it
must be left to you to consider of it.

Then there is Huntly the other Drawer, and he says my Lord of Aylesbury went
away about that time, and that he did not see Mr. Goodman there at all, nor
ever in his Life till now; neither does he remember that any body came to them
after Dinner, and if any fresh Man had then come in, he thinks he should (going
often in to them) have known him; and says, that he attended this Company only:
And he had seen Sir John Friend and Sir William Parkyns there before.

Then Mr. Cock, the Master of the House was produced, and he names all the
eight Persons that did dine there, and so far he confirms the King's Evidence:
He thinks that my Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery went away privately
(as it seems they had come) in a Hackney Coach, and that it was about 4
a-Clock; and he says, he did not see Mr. Goodman there, and he does not know
that he ever saw him till now: But when he was cross examined by the King's
Counsel, he does acknowledge that he might possibly come in after Dinner, and
before my Lord of Aylesbury went away, and he not see him, because he was not
there all the time; he says Sir John Friend used to dine at his House, and came
to his House once a Week; and he had seen some of the rest, but they did not
frequent his House as Sir John Friend did: He says, the Company dined about 2
a-Clock, and the last of them staid till about 8 or 9, and that the Door was
shut as is usual when Company is in a Room, but no body was forbid to come
there.

But to establish the Credit of the Evidence on the King's part, they did
produce Mr. Goodman and Mr. Porter again: Mr. Goodman does acknowledge so far
to be true, that my Lord of Aylesbury went away first; but says, that himself
was not wholly a Stranger to this House, for he had dined there four or five
times with Sir John Friend, and particularly one time, he being sick, and
asking for some Brandy, the Master of the House said he would help him to some
of the best in England, and Mr. Goodman would have bought some of him. But the
Master seems not to own that, and says, he does not remember any thing of it.

But then comes Mr. Porter again, and he says positively, that Mr. Goodman was
there, and that he did speak with the Company, and complemented my Lord of
Aylesbury when he went away, and went part of the way toward the Stairs with
him; and he does well remember it by this Token, that when Mr. Porter was told
Mr. Goodman was below, he mentioned him in the Company as a trusty Man, that
was fit for the Conversation; and then Mr. Porter went and fetched him up, and
Mr. Goodman was there near two Hours, and they discoursed all this matter in
that time in the Presence of the Prisoner and the rest; and he says it was
about six a-Clock before my Lord of Aylesbury and my Lord Montgomery went away,
and then there was Opportunity enough for this Discourse, and Consult that they
speak of.

The Prisoner has offered another sort of Evidence: First, the Confidence of
his own Innocence, that he was abroad three Weeks after this Conspiracy was
discovered; and they have produced Mr. Treganna, Mr. Peachy, and Mr. Nichols,
who prove that he never absconded, but was abroad and appeared openly (for
three Weeks after) till such time as he was taken. This the King's Counsel say
is no proof that he is not Guilty, and their Evidence untrue. They say he might
have a Confidence, and the rather because he is not charged with the
Assassination; for, at that time these Witnesses speak of nothing was
discovered and public but the Assassination; for it was before Sir John
Friend's Trial; and then was the great Discovery of the Secret of the Invasion.

Then he shows further as to his Conversation, that he is a Man of a very sober
Life, never was known to Swear, that he Drinks but little, and is a Godly Man,
and often says his Prayers. As to that, the King's Counsel on the other side
tell you, that has been pretended to by other People too; and the Question is
not about Religion, but this Fact that you are now to try. Whether he be so
Religious or no as he pretends, or whether he be Sincere in his Devotion, that
is not so much the matter now, but the Question is, whether he has offended in
this Kind as he stands Accused. They produce a Gentleman, one Mr. Hammond, and
he says that he is a very Conscientious Man, and particularly is a great Lover
of his Country; and he has often heard him declare a Detestation of an Invasion
by a French Force, and wish Success to the Fleet; but that which he remembers
chiefly, was about the time of the Discovery of this Plot. The King's Counsel
answer to this, that a man may use such kind of Expressions, perhaps to Cover
his Guilt; and in the Reply to Sir Barth. Showers Observations it was taken
notice of by Mr. Solicitor, (what we all cannot but remember) that the like
Evidence was given as to Sir John Friend, that he did detest an Invasion, and
was present at the Common Prayer when King William was prayed for, and declared
against Plots; and that if they catched him in the Corn they might put him in
the Pound. These things a man might say, and it is the lightest Evidence that
can be given, being Discourses out of Men's own mouths, who will never proclaim
their own Guilt; and therefore it is the weakest Defense that can be offered.
But Gentlemen, you are to consider the other Evidence that has been produced by
the Prisoner, given by several Witnesses, and who are upon their Oaths now as
well as the King's Witnesses. And his Counsel say their Witnesses, but
particularly the three upon whom they chiefly rely, have no Objection made out
against them; and no man's Testimony ought to be Presumed to be false. And it
must be taken notice of, that they can speak only according to their Belief,
grounded on their Observation and Memory, that they did not so far as they
observed or remember, see Mr. Goodman there, as 'twas most probable they should
if he had been. But it is possible they might overlook or forget; the rather for
that they were not of the Company, but in and out, up and down; and Mr. Goodman
was not there at Dinner when their Attendance was fixed and constant.

It ought to be considered also, that here are several Circumstances, some of
which seem very pregnant. It is agreed on all hands, that the Prisoner Dined
there with those other seven persons, concerning Four of whom we must conclude
nothing; but concerning three of them we in this Court may take notice, they
are Attainted of High Treason, and so it is evident that the Prisoner was for a
long time a Companion of three Traitors, and had a Conversation with them. I do
not find that he had any Occasion to be there; nor any of the rest of the
Company. Concerning my Lord of Aylesbury, indeed it is said he proposed to
treat about a Hogshead of White Wine. But that seems to be casual, and not the
end of his coming and Dining with this Company there. But, be that how it will,
that relates to his Lordship alone. But, for the others, I do not find they do
pretend any Occasion of meeting there; and therefore it leaves it the more
suspicious: And it is the more so, because it was managed so privately and
cautelously. They were not attended according to their Qualities. The Lords
went away together in a Hackney-Coach that was called, as they had come thither
in another. The rest thought fit to stay there till it was dark; and as soon as
it was so, went away. There was some extraordinary Cause for all this. It did
import the Prisoner to show, that it was for some good Cause and Purpose.

And further, it is observable that this House was a place which, as the Master
says, none of this Company did use to resort to, except Sir John Friend; which
makes it probable (this being a House that Sir John Friend frequented and none
of the others) that He bespoke this place, and brought the rest thither: And if
it were so, that makes it more probable that there was such a Treason there to
be hatched, as is evidenced by the King's Witnesses; for you may remember, and
it appears by the Record in this Court, that Sir John Friend was indicted and
attainted (not for the Assassination, but) for the Treason for which the
Prisoner is now a trying, an Invasion that was to be supported with an
Insurrection. Now if Sir John Friend was chiefly acquainted with this House,
and brought this Company together, it is very probable it was about this
business which Sir J. Friend was so concerned in. And that he is Attainted for
it, appears upon the Record before us; which should be read, but that the
Prisoners Counsel admit it, and are so far satisfied in it, that they will not
Arraign the Verdict; nay, they did acknowledge that there was a Plot; and there
was no doubt of it, there was such a Plot.

Now then Gentlemen, here it is certainly proved by these two Witnesses, (and
not gainsaid by the Prisoners own Witnesses,) that there was such a Meeting,
and that the Prisoner was there; and they both have positively Sworn that this
Treason was committed there. You have heard what has been objected to their
Credit; they have delivered their Testimony upon their Oaths; and so,
Gentlemen, are you upon your Oaths: If you are satisfied, and can take it upon
your Consciences that these two Witnesses are, or any one of them is, forsworn
(if such distinction can possibly be made in this case) then you are to acquit
the Prisoner; but if you are satisfied, and think they have sworn true, you are
to find him Guilty.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Nay, if one be forsworn both are; for the Evidence is entirely
in all parts the same; and if Mr. Goodman be perjured, Mr. Porter is so too.


Sir B. Shower. Forsworn and Perjured are hard words; we only say mistaken.


Mr. J. Rokeby. Well, that Objection goes to one as well as the other.


L. C. J. Treby. It must be so, since they speak of the same joint matter, viz.
their being together in Company. If Mr. Porter says true when he swears that
Mr. Goodman was there with him and the rest, Mr. Goodman must say true when he
swears that he was there with Mr. Porter and the rest. There was one thing that
I forgot: Sir B. Shower observed, that it might be an Invention of Captain
Porter, because he fixes it in point of time to the Month of May, that he does
not say it was in April; for that then it would be within the Pardon, which
extends to April 29. last year; nor would he lay it in June, for then he was in
Newgate, and others of them were dispersed by reason of a Riot committed in
Drury Lane; and so there was no Month left but May: And this Sir B. Shower
alleges, was a piece of Skill and Contrivance. But, really, this is a piece of
Ingenuity in himself. For, besides that the King's Witnesses affirm positively
that it was in May, and remember it by a certain token, viz. That it was within
a very few days after the King went beyond Sea, one or two of the Prisoner's
Witnesses (Crawford I am sure) did say that this Meeting was this time
twelvemonth, and you know we are now near mid- May.


Mr. Sergeant Darnall. If you believe our Drawers for part, you must believe
them for all.


Mr. At. Genesis No, not so: My Lord speaks only where they concur with our
Evidence. It were strange to expect we should disbelieve or doubt what the
Witnesses on both sides affirm to be true: But, I do not think it would be to
the Advantage of the Prisoner, if what his Counsel proposes were agreed to,
viz. that the Drawers (and their Master too) should be believed for All they
say, provided equally that the King's Witnesses should, in like manner, be
believed for what they say. For, the main thing controverted is, whether Mr.
Goodman were at this Meeting. These Witnesses for the Prisoner say, they did
not see him there; at least they do not remember it. Mr. Porter and Mr. Goodman
himself say, he was there. Now, these things agreed, and admitted, would make a
very consistent clear Evidence, that Mr. Goodman was there, though the Master
and Drawers did not observe, or do not remember his being there.


Then an Officer was sworn to keep the Jury, who withdrew to consider of their
Verdict, and about three quarters of an Hour after they returned into Court.

Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen, answer to your Names: Henry Sherbrook.


Mr. Sherbrook. Here: And so of the rest, etc.


Cl. of Arr. Are you all agreed of your Verdict?


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Who shall say for you?


Jury. Our Foreman.


Cl. of Arr. Set Peter Cook to the Bar


(which was done)

Peter Cook hold up thy Hand


(which he did)

Look upon the Prisoner, how say you, is he guilty of the High Treason whereof
he stands Indicted, or not guilty?


Foreman. Guilty.


Cl. of Arr. What Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements had he at the time of
the Treason committed, or at any time since?


Foreman. None to our Knowledge.


Cl. of Arr. Then hearken to your Verdict as the Court has recorded it: You say
that Peter Cook is guilty of the High Treason whereof he stands indicted, but
that he had no Goods or Chattels, Lands or Tenements at the time of the High
Treason committed, or at any time since to your Knowledge, and so you say all.


Jury. Yes.


Cl. of Arr. Gentlemen, the Court dismisses you, and thanks you for your
Service.


Then the Court adjourned till 5 a-Clock in the Evening.

Post Meridiem.

About six a-Clock, the Court being, by Proclamation, Resumed, the Prisoner
convicted was brought to the Bar, in order to Judgment.

Cl. of Arr. Peter Cook, hold up thy Hand (which he did) thou stand'st
convicted of High Treason, for compassing and imagining the Death of his
Majesty King William the Third, and for adhering to the King's Enemies; what
can thou say for thy self, why the Court should not give thee Judgment to dye
according to the Law?


Cook. My Lord Mayor, my Eyes are very bad, therefore I desire your Lordship
would be pleased to take this Paper, and that it may be read.


Cl. of Arr. Have you any thing to say in Arrest of Judgment?


Cook. I desire my Paper may be read.


[It was handed up to the Court, and then delivered down to Mr. At. General
and the King's Counsel, but not openly read.]

Mr. Recorder. Mr. Cook, the Court have read your Paper you sent up, and have
communicated it to the King's Counsel; if you have any thing to move in Arrest
of Judgment, this is your time, and we will hear you, but as for any
Representation of your Case to any others, that must be considered of
afterward, you are now called to your Judgment.


Cook. I did not know that I might offer any thing afterward, but if your
Lordships think fit to communicate that to my Lords Justices, I submit it to
you.


Mr. Recorder. Mr. Cook, there is nothing appears upon this Paper that is
matter of Law, and so not serviceable to you now, and therefore what you desire
in it, the Court will consider of afterward.


Cook. I do not understand the Law, my Lord, but I have heard the Court ought
to be of Counsel for the Prisoner, and I desire I may not suffer by my
Ignorance.


Mr. Recorder. I declare it, for my part, I know nothing that you can have any
Advantage of in Arrest of Judgment; if I did, you should not lose the Benefit
of it, and you have had your Counsel assigned, who have pleaded for you without
restraint; and if there had been any matter of Law that would have availed you
in Arrest of Judgment, no doubt, they would have laid hold of that Advantage
for you.


Cook. I cannot tell, my Lord, what is matter of Law.


Mr. At. Genesis Your Lordship observes, they took all the Objections that they
could to the Indictment, but there was none that they could fix.


Cl. of Arr. Then Crier make Proclamation.


(Which was done on both sides of the Court.)

Crier. Oyez, All manner of Persons are commanded to keep silence while
Judgment is in giving, upon pain of Imprisonment.


Cook. My Lord, may I have my Paper again?


Mr. Recorder. If you think it may be of any Service to you to leave it with
the Court, you may do so; or if you desire it, you shall have it again.


Cook. I desire your Lordship to keep it.


Mr. Recorder. I will receive it, and it shall not be buried, I assure you.


Cook. I don't hear what the Court says.


Mr. Recorder. You say you did not hear what was said to you: If you desire to
have your Paper again, you shall have it, but if you desire to have it
communicated above, the Court will consider it, and take care of that too.


Cook. I desire your Lordship would do it.


Then the Recorder proceeded to give Judgment thus.

Mr. Cook, I think it useful to the public, and also at this time to you, to
observe, that the Reign of the late King James, was throughout, one entire
Design and Project formed in Conjunction with the French King, totally to
subvert our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, which grew so apparent to the
Subjects of these Nations, in so many Instances of fatal Consequence, managed
in such a Method, and advanced so far, that the People of these Kingdoms, of
all Qualities, Ranks, and Degrees, did find it absolutely necessary for the
Preservation of themselves and the neighbor Nations now in Alliance with us,
to pray in Aid of the then Prince of Orange, as a Person, not only nearly
allied to this Crown; but also entirely in the Interest of these Kingdoms, and
those neighboring Princes, and Countries that lay exposed to the Violence and
ambitious Insults of France. And the Love which that noble Prince did bear, not
only to us, but to our Neighbors also, disposed him to embrace that
Invitation, upon whose Arrival here, that Predecessor, from Motives that were
invisible, declined the Kingdom and the Government; and left the People to
themselves; whereupon his present Majesty was necessarily and rightfully placed
upon that Throne he so well deserved: And this is now that King, for whose
Preservation all good People have associated, and spare neither Lives nor
Treasure to support and to continue in the Government; and this is that King
whom you have Traitorously conspired, not only to dethrone, but also to
destroy; and this is that People that you would have to swim in Blood, and lose
their Religion, Liberty, and Property. These Matters need a History to relate
at large, I only touch them shortly, to move good Men to rejoice in their
Deliverance, and to move you seriously to reflect upon the Heinousness of your
Crime.

Mr. Cook, you are an English Man, and must needs know, that in this Place we
frequently condemn to Death Clippers, Coiners, Thieves and Robbers, and other
such like Criminals, and that justly and necessarily too, for the Preservation
of the Innocent, and for the common Good. Of what Condemnation must you, and
such as you, be worthy then, who have so horridly endeavored and designed the
fatal Ruin and Destruction of your own native Country, and to render your
fellow Subjects a miserable Prey, and at the best to become Slaves and Vassals
to a foreign Prince?

Let me also mind you, That nothing is more sure, than that after this, you
must receive a Judgment in another World; and if that pass against you too,
that Sentence will be most terrible, and your Sufferings without End: And
therefore I do advise you to employ the few Days you have yet to live, in
Preparation for your future Happiness, which cannot be duly done without a full
Confession of this, as well as other Crimes you have been guilty of; I
therefore charge it to you, as your Duty, and leave it with you at your utmost
Peril, that you honestly and faithfully discover all you know of this inhuman
and traitorous Conspiracy, and all the Persons that you do know to be guilty of
it: This will be the greatest Service you can do in this World, and will be the
best Preparatory Step that you can take toward a better. And,

Sir, there now remains no more for me to say, but to pronounce that Sentence
on you which the Law directs. And that is this,

THat you, Peter Cook, be taken hence to the Place from whence you came; and
thence be drawn upon a Hurdle to the Place of Execution, where you are to be
hanged by the Neck, and cut down before you be dead; that your Bowels be taken
out, and your Privy Members cut from your Body, and both burnt in your Sight*
That your Head be cut off, and your Body divided into four Quarters, which Head
and Quarters are to be at the King's Disposal; and God Allmighty have Mercy
upon your Soul.


Cook. I beg, if your Lordship please, that I may have my Relations and Friends
come to see me, and some Divines, the better to prepare me for another World.


Mr. Recorder. Mr. Cook, if you will give the Names of those that you would have
come to you, to the Officer, Care shall be taken in it; and you will not be
denied any reasonable Helps that may be had for your Preparation for Eternity.


Mr. At. Genesis It is not fit he should be denied any reasonable Help; but in
the mean time there is reason for the Government to be cautious, upon the
account of what has notoriously past in the Case of some others.


Mr. Recorder, If he give in the Names, it will be considered of, and Care
taken that nothing be done, but what is reasonable, and safe.


Then the Prisoner was taken from the Bar, and the Court proceeded to what was
remaining of the Business of the Sessions.

FINIS.

