AN ACCOUNT Of the State of The French Fleet, Their Number of Men of War and
Fireships, And the Fortifications that are making on their Coast, For fear of
an Invasion from England. In a LETTER from a French Merchant at St. Martins, to
his Friend at London, July 9. New Style. 1689.
Licensed, July 12. 1689.

SIR,
OUR Fortifications are almost finished, all the Platforms in the Citadel, as
well as those of the City, are all in a good Posture, with a good Garrison.

Yesterday arrived in this Road a Bark from Breast, where she has left our
Fleet in that Bay or Road, consisting of Forty Two great Ships, besides small
Frigates, and Twenty Five Fireships; and we are fitting still elsewhere; but
how they will be provided with a sufficient number of Seamen to man them, I
cannot tell.

Monsieur De Tourville, the Thirteenth past, Sailed from Thoulon with Twenty
Two Sail of Capital Ships, and Eight Fireships, and is every day expected at
Breast.

The Marshall D'Estrees is at Breast, and is to go on Board the Fleet,
intending to Sail the Fifteenth, to seek out the English and Dutch Fleets, in
order to Fight them: So that we are in expectation to hear of a bloody
Engagement. But others say, that Monsieur De Seignaly goes on Board himself to
Command, and not Marshall D' Estrees.

We have no Ships left at Rochefort (all are fitted out that were there) except
one Fire-ship, which waits for a Wind, and some Fly-boats, who have Four or
Five Hundred Men on Board them, for the use of the Fleet.

I was at Rochel Four or Five Days ago, and viewed all the Fortifications of
that Place, which are very forward, and in a posture of Defense. They have
destroyed many Families there, as well as here, by pulling their Houses down to
the Ground; that are near the Walls.

We build a Fort at Bloody-Point, which is also in a great forwardness; and we
talk of building a great one at the Martreay, and other Fortifications about
the Gates. But I see no likelihood of fear this Summer.

They have caused to march within this Five or Six Days from Rochel, toward
Saumeure, Five or Six Thousand Men, and brought in their room some new
Soldiers, raised by the Parishes, within this Three or Four Months, who are to
be Disciplined, and supply their Places in the Garrison.

The Fortifications of Oleroon are finished, and they have pulled down all the
Houses in the Castle.

They work likewise very hard upon the Fortifications at Brouage, Rochfort, and
the Sheath, which is the entrance of the River of Sherrant.

A Bark is arrived in Brittany since the Twenty Third past, from Ireland, which
brings Advice, That London Derry holds out still, to our great admiration, that
it has not been relieved or taken all this while.

If once our Fleet returns into our Ports, it will be very difficult to put it
to Sea again: For all things are wanting at Rochefort, and the Stores as empty
as a Tennis-Court. And it is said it is the same at Breast.

The Rendevouz of all the French Fleet is designed to be at Belle Isle, not far
from the mouth of the Loire in Brittany.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for H. Jones. MDCLXXXIX.


