A

T'ingrave a Moon, or Morpheus is a Theme With Artists common, as it is to
dream. But to Interpret Dreams (as here) does pass All Works that ever have
been cut in brass.



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS, Digested into five books by that Ancient and
excellent Philosopher, ARTIMEDORVS.

Compiled by him in Greek; and translated afterward into the Latin, the
Italian, the French, and Spanish, Tongues. And now more exactly rendered into
English.

It being a work of great esteem in all Ages, and pleasant and profitable to
peruse, for all conditions of people whatsoever.

In animum and mentem cum qua Dii nocte loquuntur.

Behold their minds with whom in the dead of night,
Angels themselves to have discourse delight.
When good dreams fall, I do with Joy pursue them,
When bad ones fall, I pray I may eschew them.
The fourth Edition, newly corrected, by the French, and Latin Copy.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, 1644.

TO THE TRULY Honorable, Sir William Playters Knight, and Baronet, etc.
SIR,
THe Interpretation of Dreams is of the same Original and Extent, as is the
inspiration or Divine Virtue by which they are infused. That God appeared in
Dreams and in the Visions of the night, the sacred Text does plentifully
testify* And that GOD unto some selected men, by a peculiar spirit, did give
the perfect knowledge of the Interpretation of Dreams; the same Divine Truth
does give remarkable demonstrations. I need not to declare unto you the
admirable gifts of Joseph, almost in the first Age of the world; and of the
Prophet Daniel in the second. Their Interpretations in those days of the
Dreams of the Egyptian and Assyrian Monnrchy, do sufficiently declare the
praescience of their spirits, and how near of kin they were to God, Our
Author being a Philosopher, and working only by second causes, by the light of
Nature; had not that happy interest to be so immediately, so divinely inspired.

SIR; I make bold to present him to you in an English dress: And although by
the Ignorance of Antiquity he had the misfortune to be a Heathen, you shall
find him through the Excellence of his merit, to be clothed in the most
refined Languages of Christendom. I have the rather been induced to devote
this Book unto you, because your Candor to the Arts, and excellent Experience
in the great and choice affairs of Peace and War, is of a wide Latitude, and
not to be confined within the English bounds. Your Experience beyond the Seas,
does sufficiently declare your worth, both when you traveled first by your
self, and when being Major Domo, you afterward took with you (the lively image
of your self) your most noble and hopeful Son; whose understanding in the
knowledges both Polemicall and Political you increased by foraign
observations, and admirably enlightened it by your own example. According to
your nobleness, in this tempest of War receive this Present of the Arts, and
be pleased to protect revived Artimedorus: And also, (though the Subject be of
Dreams) to excuse his zeal, who will ever be awake to express himself to be

(SIR) Your most humble and devoted Servant; BERNARD ALSOP.

The Preface.
SOme are of opinion, that Dreams which arise of Natural and Carnal
affection, are likewise to be interpreted; As an Usurer to dream of gold; or
any other carnal men, when they dream of such things as their natures are
prone and subject unto. But our Author Artimedorus does not agree with them in
their opinion, but says, dreams of any importance, or which come of God, are
far different from their effect and the experience of them. And contrariwise
he affirms, that those Dreams which are shapen to our affections and
thoughts, are to speak ingenuously, as much as nothing, and we must take no
heed of them. And surely, I am confident, that an ordinary Whoremaster, an
avaritious Extortioner, an envious person, or an ambitious man, a flatterer or
dissembler, or a common and notorious drunkard, do not commonly see any good
dream, or any dream that tends to the honor or profit, either of himself,
his friends, or of the Commonwealth. But it oftentimes comes to pass, that
an honest, pure, chaste, and virtuous man, (because he is exempt from humane
fragility) I think may and shall often see and interpret dreams and Visions; To
the safety, honor, and profit of himself, his friends, and the Common wealth:
For as much as his spirit is less bound, tied and soyld with the fellowship of
the body. In the Holy Scripture, we have experience both in the Old and new
Testament, Joseph the Son of Jacob, and Joseph the husband of the Virgin
Mary. Saint Peter in the second of the Acts, repeateth the Prophecy of Ioell:
whereby he shows, that it was no new thing if God sent Visions and Dreams.
There are other places in the Holy Scriptures, which I shall forbear here to
insert, these being sufficient to prove the antiquity of them. Touching humane
Histories, you may see much of the issue and experience of dreams: Virgils
Mother when she was with child of him, dreamed that she saw a branch of
Laurel growing, and she brought forth a Poet, to whom given a Lawreat Crown.
Also Hecuba Queen of Troy, when she was with child of Paris, dreamt that she
should bring forth a fire brande, which should at once consume the whole
Country, and it afterward proved true: for the said Paris of whom she was
delivered, was cause of the ruin, burning and destruction of Troy: which was
interpreted by his sister Cassandra, to whom they gave no credit; whereupon the
mischief ceized not only upon the King and Queen, father and mother of the
said Paris, but also upon all the Kingdom, whose miserable destruction is
reproved to this day. Socrates dreamt that he saw a little Swan in* his lap
whose feathers grew, and presently spreading his wings and flying on high sang
a sweet and harmonious song. And the day following, Plato came to him to be his
Scholar, who by his learning and knowledge soard high, and by his eloquence
sang sweetly. King Astiages dreamt when his daughter was with child, that
there would arise from her nature a Vine, growing so fast, that the boughs
thereof should overshade the Regions of his Dominions, which afterward fell
out accordingly: for she bore Cyrus the great King of Persia: which was the
Master and Lord of all those Countries. I might besides allege Philip of
Macedon, father to Alexander the great, whose dream Alexander the Philosopher
expounded: and according to which Exposition it fell out. Also Cicero,
Haniball, Calphurnia, and many others, which had Dreams and Visions by night,
whose effects came to pass, as great and diverse Histories do verify. But for
brevities sake, I shall forbear to instance any more particulars, lest I
should offend my Reader, with presuming too much upon his patience. Less I
would have said, but was loath to leave the curious unsatisfied. And to
conclude, it seems to me great arrogance in any man to say, that all Visions
and Dreams are vain and of none effect, which has already been proved false,
by many histories both divine and humane: and I think it were to dispute
against God, and wrong to the soul of man, which is (indeed) the mirror of
heavenly things; in making it always in all things unprofitable, a Vagabond,
vain, and idle; seeing that when the body rests, the soul seems most to
reign and rule in his force and virtue, and in her spiritual, apprehensible,
and intellectual Nobility. Wherefore I will agree in opinion with Socrates,
who says, That man whether he live or dye, is in the hands of GOD: who takes
all his affayrs in his hand, and in care disposes there* at his pleasure, and
forewarns (...) by many secret and hidden wa^^ as it pleases him: yet let me
add this one word, that dreams are much more Divine then Physiognomy,
Chiromancy, Podomancy* and Astrology; as being done by the soul only.
Physicians also do make account of Dreams, for by them they often know the
quantity of the humors which are predominant, the spring and cause, long or
short of diseases: I doubt not but some men at the first sight when they read
this book, will think it a vain and frivolous thing; for I my self have often
times said as much, and before I had seen the Book, I ^^ought as much: But
after that by long time and continuance, I had compared these things with
experience; as well in my self as others, I could no but reverence and admire
bo^ the Work and the Author. And I am of opinion, that there is no juditious
Reader, but will yield unto this truth; and therefore I shall forbear to
produce any further proofs; but commit thee to the perusal of that which
follows: And rest,

Thy loving Friend. R. W.

The first Book of Artimedorus His Exposition of Dreams.
Of Dreams either solely Speculative, or Allegorically Significative.
Dreams, are either Speculative and agreeable to their vision; as when a man
dreams, that the ship wherein he is does perish, and rising finds it true, and
saves himself with some few besides. Or Allegorical, by one thing signifying
another. Whereby our soul does naturally advise us, that under them there is
somewhat abstrus'd, secret, or hid. First therefore* I will set down the
definition of a dream in general, against which to object, were to love
contention. A dream therefore is a motion or fiction of the soul in a diverse
form: signifying either good, or evil to come. Of Dreams such as belong not
to others, being only for or against those which see them* and not meant
against or by any other, shall happen to those only which see them; as to
speak, to sing, to dance, to fight, or to swim. But things which are about the
body, or outward things, as beds, chests, movables, and clothing, etc.
Although they be in proper and particular, yet it falls out that often they come
to our neighbors, according to the necessity and propriety of the usage. And
in such sort the head signifies the father, the right hand the mother, the son,
and the brother: the left hand the wife* the friend, the daughter and the
sister. Moreover all those which are done by us, and in us, and toward us
only, we must think that they appertain to us particularly. And on the
contrary, al such are as not done by us nor toward us, nor in us, shall happen
to others, and yet notwithstanding, if they be our friends and the dreams
signify good, the joy shall come to us, and if contrary, then the contrary. But
if they be our enemies, we ought to think, and judge accordingly.

Of the birth.
IF any one dreams that he comes out of a woman's belly, as to be borne into the
world, he must judge in this force. This dream is good for him which is poor,
for he shall have means or friends which will maintain him: if he be not a
tradesman, and of an art which requires the work of the hand, for this dream
forewarns him that he shall be without work, as children which have their hands
bound together. To him which is rich this dream signifies that he shall have
no rule in the house, but others shall overrule him against his will, for
children are governed by others. To him whose wife is not with child, it
signifies that he shall loose his wife, for children are not married, nor come
at women. But to him whose wife is with child, it signifies that he shall have
a son in all things like himself. And he shall be so like him as if
himself were borne twice. To Champions and combatants this dream is ill, For
children can neither go nor run, and cannot assail any man. To him which is
in a far country that he shall return home, as if he should return to his
beginning, then he shall return home as if that he should return to his
veginning. To a sick man, it signifies death, because the dead are wrapped in
linen clothes as children, and laid in the ground.

To be big with child.
IF any one being poor, dream that he is great with child, he shall become
rich, and shall gather a great deal of money. If he be rich he shall be in
pain and care. He which has a wife shall loose her, having no more need that
she shall bear children. He which has no wife shall have a gentle one. To
others it signifies sickness. But to be big with child and then to be
delivered, is all one, for it means that the sick person shall dye quickly.
But to him that is poor and indebted, enduring pain and misery, it is an end
and a discharge of all his present evils, also this dream reveals secrets.
This dream is cross to rich usurers, factors, and all such as are in
authority, for that which they had before, they shall loose. But to Merchants
and Sailers, or to them which have ships this dream is good. To many after this
dream, has happened loss of parent.

To have Children.
TO dream that you see or have children of your own and not other men's, is ill
to man and wife. For it foretells care and heaviness for necessaries, without
the which children cannot be nourished. But the male children bring good
success, daughters bring an end worse then the beginning, for they are married
with a dowry. I know a man which dreamed that he had a daughter borne, and he
borrowed money for interest; and on the contrary side I knew another, which
dreamed that he buried his daughter deceased, and it fell out that he was
constrained to pay a debt for which he was bound. So then his daughter made
agreement with the debt. But to see other men's children is good when they are
fair and well favored, for this signifies that a good and happy time is at
hand.

Of Children wrapped in clothes, and linen, and of Milk.
IF any one dreams to see himself wrapped in clothes in fashion of little
Children, and to suck some woman's dugges which he knows, it argues long
sickness, if he has not his wife with child, for then he shall have a son born
like himself. And if his wife has such a dream, she shall have a daughter.
But if any one being in prison has such a dream, the Devil shall stir up such
accusations against him, that he shall not be delivered, and it is not without
reason to judge the like in sickness. But to seem in a dream to have milk in
her dugs, to a young woman it signifies she shall conceive, and her fruit shall
come to perfection. To an old woman being poor it signifies riches, being
rich, expense, and liberality. To a maid that her marriage is near, for without
company of a man she can have no milk. But if she be a pretty maid, and has
been long unmarried, it signifies her death. For all things coming beyond the
accustomed age, are evil; some few excepted. To a poor man, it is abundance
of money and possessions, if he can nourish others. Moreover, I have known by
experience, that this dream foretold to one that was not married a wife, and to
one that had no children, it foretold children; but to a Champion, and an
artificer, and all such as in their estate travail and move the body, it
signifies sickness. Also I knew one having wife and children who had this
dream, and lost his wife by death; and always after himself nourished his
children, exercising toward them, the duty of a father and mother together.

Of the Head.
TO dream you have a great Head, is good for a rich man which has not a^ yet
any great estate and dignity. Also to a poor man, to a Champion, to an Usu^^^*
to a Horse-cour^er, to him that puts out money to use. For first, this dream
foretells Principality or Dignity, in which he must wear a Crown, Scepter, or
Diadem. Secondly, great riches and possessions (to a Champion victory) to a
Broker and Usurer, great heaps and sums of money. But to those who are already
in dignity, and to an Orator, and Judges of the people, this dream brings
charges, and reproaches by the people. And to him that is sick, it is head-ake.
To a soldier it signifies travel and pains; to a servant long servitude, and
to him which has chosen a calm life, pain, and anger. But to have the Head
l^sser then natural proportion, signifies a thing contrary to the
signification of the Head above spoken of, importing difference in respect of
the different quality of the men.

Of Long Hair.
IF you dream ye have fair long hayr* and seem to take a pride therein,
signifies good, especially to a woman: as also to a Wise man* a Bishop, a
Soothsayer, a King, and a Prince: for to such as use to let their hayr g^ow
this dream is good, because their profession permits them to keep their
tresses. It is also good to others, but not so good, and it signifies to them
only riches; and those painful not pleasant: for one must stay time, and in
that time it may be suffer pain, before long hayr will come.

Of Hair in ill Order.
LOng hayr but out of order, and as it were rather hard and rough hair of ones
Beard; them tresses betokens to all persons anger and heavines. And I once
saw a worthy gentleman placed in authority, and happy also in all his other
affairs, who in a dream, seemed to see those which were under him go before
him, and also that they had hayr all cut rude, and out of order: whereupon I
told him, that it signified heaviness unto him. And presently after* he was
discharged of his Office and Authority, which (you may well think) was grievous
unto him.

Of Hogs Brisles, and Horse hair.
TO dream you have Hogs brisles, is great and violent danger, such as the hog
is commonly subject to. To have horse hayr is a sign of servitude and misery.

To have Wool instead of Hairs.
TO have wool in stead of Hayres, foretells long sickness and fantasies, and the
itch. Also if having this wool on his head he shall think that it is natural
unto him, if the hayrs seem to be changed into any other thing, we must guess
accordingly; that is, according to the thing whereunto we think them changed.
To seem to be without hair about the face, betokens sudden shame, hindrance
of present affairs. But to see the hinder part of the Head in that sort is
poverty, and ill luck in (...) age. If any one has the right side of his Head
shaved and naked he shall lose all his male kindred, and if he have done, he
shall sustain hurt. If contrariwise the left side of his head be without hayr,
it is loss of Co^^ns and allies. For the Head signifies the kindred, the
right side the male, the left the female, and so through all the body. To have
all the hinder part of the Head naked is good for him which goes to law, for
him that is fearful* for him that is shut up and detained by force, for he
shall fly and escape, noting that one cannot catch him by the hayr f^ying.

To see himself powled or shaved.
FOr to see himself powld all the head, is good for Jesters that use to make
men laugh, and to such as are commonly shaved, to all other it is evil. For it
betokens as much as nakedness and barrenuesse, if it bring not greater evils and
more at hand. To Navigators it is evident shipwreck, to sick persons great
peril, and yet not death, for such as escape a shipwreck, and recover after
great sickness shave themselves, but not the dead. To be powled by a Barber is
good (...) to all in general, for surely no man b^ing in any dangerous estate,
will powle themselves, seeing th^se only regard such outward ornaments of the
head which are without sorrow or want. I therefore add by the hands of a
Barber, because if any man shaves himself, it betokens sudden heaviness, or
very ill luck. Moreover to be scratched with nails to him that is in debt, it
betokens that he shall acquit himself: to others it foretells hurt by them which
scratch them.

Of the Forehead.
THe forehead sound and fleshly is good to all, and signifies liberty of
speech, strength and constancy. But to dream that you have a forehead of
brass, iron or stone, to all takers, Vintners, and such as live by shameless
gain, is good, and to these only: for to others it breeds hate.

Of the Ears.
FOr to have many ears, is good to him that would have any one obedient to
him, as wife, children, servants: to the rich it signifies great renown of his
good, if the ^ares be fair and well shapen; but to his ill, if the ears be ill
favored or deformed.

This dream is ill to a servant, as also to him which has a suit in law, be
he the Plaintiff or Defendant: but it is good to an Artificer or one that
works with his hands, for he shall have many that will employ him. To lose the
Ears betokens the contrary to all that is aforesaid: to clens^ ones ears is
good news which shall come to us on some side; contrariwise, the ears beaten
and chafed, foretell ill news.

Of Emmets going into the Ears.
TO Dream of Emmeis getting into the ears, is good only to Sophisters.
Philosophers, and Schoolmasters. For the Emmets represent children which will
give audience to Sophisters.

To others it foretells death: For they are daughters of the earth and go again
to the earth. I know one which dreamt his two ears were filled with ears of
Corn, and how the Corn fell into his hands, and he heard news his brothers heyr
was dea^, his heyr by reason of the ears of the corn, and his brothers heyr,
because the ears represent brothers and sisters. To dream you have Asses ears,
is good only for Philosophers, to others it is servitude and misery. To have
the ears of a Lion or Woolfe or any other cruel beast, is snares and deceit by
euvie. Moreover, fo dream that you have Eyes or Ears, signifies blindness or
deafness.

Of the Brows.
THe Brows hayry and of a good grace* are good to all, especially to women.
But the brows naked and without hair, signifies to all ill success of
business, single combat, and grief.

Of the Eyes.
TO have a sharp sight, is good generally, but a troubled look signifies
want of money, impeachment of affairs; to him that has Children, it foretells
they shall be sick. To be blind of both Eyes, is loss of Children, Brethren,
Father, and Mother. Notwithstanding, this Dream is good for him which is in
Prison, and to him which is very poor: For the first shall no more see his
evils about him, the second shall have wherewith to aid and pleasure himself.
As many are ready to ^end their helping hand to the blind. But this dream
hinders such as are making long voyages: as also forewarns him that is in a
strange Country, that he return not home. For he that has lost his sight, can
neither see in a strange Country, nor find his own house. Also this dream is
bad for a soldier, ^^d also to all of the dealing trades, for their affairs
shall have but bad success. Also it is cross to Navigators, and such as
contemplate the stars, and are Wisards. And if any one that is in search of a
thing that is lost dreams this dream, he shall never find it. To Poets this
dream is good, for they had need of great sleep when they would write verse:
to Sick persons this dream brings daily expectation for death. If any one
dreams he has lost one Eye, all above mentioned and signified, will befall him
but in part or half only* Moreover, thou must consider that the right Eye
signifies the Son, Brother, and Father: the left, the Daughter, Sister, and
Mother. To have 3. or four Eyes to him that determines to take a Wife, and
has no children and desires to have, it is good. It is also good to an Usurer.
For he shall have great sums of money, but to him that owes it is ill. It
admonishes the rich man to keep good guard to himself and his possessions, by
reason of some fraud and secret deceit. But to a Cony-catcher, and a fair
woman, to have more eyes is not good, for he shall have more eyes which will
apprehend him, and she shall have many of her Clients attached about her.
Moreover, if any one dreameth that he has eyes in his Feet or Hands, he shall
so lose his Sight on one side of his body, that the said side shall be
diseased, beaten, or hurt. I knew a man that dreamt that his Eyes fell into his
Feet, and he fell not blind, but married all his daughters* to his Servants.
To have another man's eyes, signifies less of sight. But if one know him whose
Eyes he thinks he has, he shall keep his Child or some other great treasure
of his,

Of the Nose.
FOr to have a fair and great Nose, is good to all, for it signifies subtle^y
of sense, providence in affairs, and acquaintance with great personages. But
to have no Nose signifies the contrary. And to a sick man death, for dead men's
heads have no nose. To have two noses is discord with his domestical kindred.

Of the Cheeks.
TO have the cheeks fat and full, is good to all; especially to women: but
slat and full of wrinckles signifies heaviness.

Of the Jaws and Hippes.
THe Jaws represent Cellars, Shops, and other things accustomed to keep
Merchandises, or Drugges. The Lips represent those which kiss and embrace us
and which are often about us as Wife, Children, Parents, and Allies. So that if
the one or the other, seem to have any harm or mischance, it signifies unto
us that the affairs of our kinsfolks are net in good plight.

Of the Beard.
TO have the Beard long, thick, and unhandsome, is good for him which is
curious to speak well, as an Ambassador, an Orator, a Lawyer, a Philosopher,
and for those who have a desire to learn Arts or Sciences. If a Widow woman
dreams she has a beard, she shall have an husband, which shall be kind and
bountiful, if she be married then she shall lose her husband, or be separated
from him, and govern her house alone, as if she were both husband and wife
together: if she be not with child or at law: for if the first, she shall have
a son; if the second, she shall persever in her opinion, bearing a high mind,
and regarding her honor as if she were a man. To a young child, this dream
signifies death. But to him which is now in his youth beginning to have a
beard* it is a sign he shall rise by himself, and put himself forward, of
what, estate soever he be. The beard falling or cut away, or by force plucked
away by the hands of another, as it signifies loss of Parents, so also it is
hurt and dishonor.

Of the Teeth.
THe upper teeth signify the best kindred of the house, and the lower teeth
signify the inferior. For you must know that the mouth represents the
house, the teeth inhabitants. Those of the right side the men, the other the
women. Or otherwise, the right, signify the elder, the left the younger: the
eye teeth, them of middle age: the great teeth the old folks. Wherefore what
kind of teeth soever a man dreams he loses, he shall lose some such personage
as that tooth signifies. But when the teeth signifies loss of goods: by the
great teeth are meant hidden treasures; by the other, a vessel or some other
thing of little importance. To such as are in debt, what kind of tooth soever
falls out it certifies them, that they shall acquit themselves: the teeth falling
all at one blow, signifies that the house shall be forsaken and abandoned of
all inhabitants. For such as are Sick, to dream that any tooth or teeth fall
out, signifies long sickness, but without death. It were better for him to
dream that he should lose all his teeth, for then he should recover the
sooner. For a servant to have no teeth is a sign of liberty: to Merchants good
gain of their merchandises, charges and traffickes: teeth which seem to grow
in such sort as if the one would exceed the other, signify sedition in the
house, or if they seem to move though they fall not out: those which have black
teeth, or rotten broken teeth and dream they lose them, shall be delivered
from their evils and anger. Also by this dream, some have lost their old
folks: to have teeth of gold is good for such as study to speak well, to
others it is hurt in their house by fire: to other sickness by abundance of
choler: to have their teeth of wax, its sudden death: to have them of lead
or tynn, it is also shame and dishonor: of glass or wood, violent death: of
Silver, you shall get money by eloquence: to the rich, it is great expense in
hospitality and necessary provision: to dream to lose his teeth and recover
others, is change of estate into good or evil, according to the quality of
teeth: to dream his teeth are in his hand or bosom, is loss of Children: to
grate his teeth against his tongue, is to end his pains and miseries by his
Eloquence.

Of vomiting of Blood, and of choleric and melancholy humors.
For to vomit much blood, and of a good color, is good for him which is poor,
for he shall get store of money. It is also very good for him which has no
children, and whose kindred are in a strange Country: the first shall see a
child of his own: the other, his kindred returning home: to carry Blood, is
not good for him that would be hidden: to vomit corrupt blood, is sickness to
all: to cast a little blood in spitting, foretells sedition as I have known by
experience. To vomit fleagme (be the humor chollerick or melancholy) is good
for him which is in misery, anguish, or sickness: for it foretells and end of
all his evils, To vomit meat signifies hurt: also, to vomit his bowels,
foretells the death of children to father and mother, and to them which have no
children, the loss of the dearest thing they have among their goods: to a sick
person it is death.

Of the neck, and of having many heads.
Every suruncle, malady, or imperfection, about the neck, head, or beard,
signifies sickness indifferently to all. To have two or 3. heads, is good for
him that is poor, for he shall heap up sto^e of goods, and also shall have a
wife and children of a good nature: to a rich man it signifies adversity, by
means of his kindred.

Of being Beheaded.
TO dream that he is beheaded, whether justly or otherwise, is ill to him
which has a father, mother and children: for he shall lose them. Some also
having had this dream, have lost their Wives, Friends, and Farm: and others
having houses have lost them. And he which has all these things, shall not
have good luck with them all: but as I have known by experience, he shall lose
that which is most necessary, and which he shall esteem most dearly. This dream
is good for him which is accused of any crime, and is in danger of death: but
to Changers, Usurers, Masters of Galleys, or Merchants, and all such as gathers
money, it signifies loss of a sum of money: this dream is good for debtors.
He which is in a far Country and has this dream, shall return into his*
own: he which is in suit for his inheritance shall obtain his suit: but in a
case of Trespass or money, he shall be overthrown.

To have a wry Neck.
FOr to have the head turned; so that it looks backward: forewarnes, not to
go out of his Country, and to enterprise no affairs, lest the issue be bad.
They which are in a far Country, shall return home.

To have the head of any Beast.
TO have the head of a Lion, a Wolf, a Panther, or an Elephant, in stead of
his own is good: for he which attempteth things beyond his power and has this
dreams, shall attain to great dignity and honor. Many desiring Offices and
places of credit, after this dream have obtained them: to dream you have the
head of a Dog, Horse, or Ass, or such four footed beast, is servitude, pain,
and misery: to have a birds head, argues one shall not stay long in his Country.

To have his head between his hands.
IF one dreams that he has his Head between his Hands, it is good for him
that has neither Wife nor Children, and to him that desires the return of any
one far off. And besides, if one be careful to kembe and trim this Head,
which he seems to hold between his Hands, it is a sign that he shall dispose
well of his business, have an end of his evils and adversities. This dream
signifies thus much, if besides that Head which one holds in his hands, he
seems to have another natural head of his own, else not.

To have Horns.
FOr to dream you have Ox Horns, or any other such like violent Beasts,
foretells violent death, and chiefly beheading: it being incident to horned
Beasts.

Of the Shoulders.
SHoulders thick and fleshly are good to all men* excepting them only that
are imprisoned: to the first, it signifies much strength and prosperity: to the
other, that they shall be long in captivity: if the shoulders be diseased,
lean, or broken, it signifies the contrary to all before said, and often times
foretells the death, or sickness of brethren.

Of the Breast and the Dugs.
TO have the Breast whole is good, as also to have it Hayrie, is a sign of
gain to Men, but to Women it foretells Widdowhood: the Dugges fair and without
any evil is good: and if they seem more gross, yet by good means and grace,
they signify Children and possession to come: but if they be sore, as full of
ulcers, it is Sickness to come. The Dugges falling, is death to her children
which dreams so: and if she have none, it is poverty to her self: to have
many Dugges, thinking she sees them bigger then is usual to a woman, signifies
she shall follow the trade of good fellowship: to be wounded in the stomach by
any familiar, is ill news to old women: and to young men or women, it
betokens glad tidings.

Of the hands.
THe hands fair and strong, shows prosperity to tradesmen: to him which fears
arrests or imprisonment this dream is doubtful: you must remember that before,
we said the right Hand signified the Father and Son: the left, the Wife the
Mother, Sister, and servant: the right* may signify such goods as are to get,
the left, goods already gotten: if therefore one dream that he loses his right
hand, then he shall lose something which it signifies. In general, the hands
signify neither good nor bad: to lose all the fingers of the hand or some
part, signifies hurt or loss of Servants. To Scriveners, Orators, and
Attourneys, it signifies that they shall want employment: to Debtors, that
they shall pay more then they owe: to Usurers, loss by interest. I knew a man
that dreamt he had no fingers, and he was attached by a Creditor that leant him
money without an Obligation. To have more fingers then ordinary, signifye the
contrary; namely, ^o owe, and not to pay. Some (though deceived) have thought
this a good dream, but it is the contrary; for he that has more Fingers then
natural, thinks and finds it ill. And if the overplus fingers are idle, they
make their owner idle. To have hair which cleaves to the joynt^^* i^
captivitis, but if it comes on the palm of the Hand, it is idleness;
especially, to Laborers and Artificers.

To have many hands, is good for an Artificer or handy craftsman; for this
dream^ tells him expressly, thou shall have so muc^^ work, that thou shall have
need of many hands: and to good men also it is good for it tells them they shall
get. Children, Servants, or money* as I have known by experience: but to
wicked men, it is Captivity, and that some shall lay their hands upon them.

Of the Ribs and the Navill.
ALl the Ribs, and the inner side of the belly containing the bowels to the
privities, is force of body, and abundance of goods and riches: if they seem
diseased, they signify diseases of the body, and consumption of the purse. The
Navill is loss of father and mother to such as have them, and to others
banishment.

Of the inward parts.
IF you dream you are dead and see your inward par^s according to their
natural order, it is good to him that has no children, and to him which is
poor: for the one shall have children of his own, the other riches of his
own. But to a rich man and him which would be close, it is shame and
dishonor. It^ is evil to all, when they dream that their intrailes are seen
of others (...) for it betokens troublesome affairs, suites in law, and
discredit. But if one dreams he is opened, and yet sees not his intrails, it
signifies to him, forsaking of his house, loss of children, and death by
sickness. It is also comfort for him that is in misery: for he which ^oseth
those parts which causes pain and gr^efe, surely he shall be delivered out of
distress. Moreover we must think, that the heart signifies a man, and the
husband of the same woman that shall dream thereof and if a man dreams thereof,
it is the Wife of the same man that dreams it: likewise also the Lungs. But the
Liver signifies the Son, Food, and the Fog. The Gall chollerick and
melancholy humor, money, and women, or Wives: the Spleen, pleasures, laughter,
and vessel: the Belly and guts, Children, for they cry o^^ for meat: likewise
they signify Usurers. The Reins signify Brothers and Cos^^s.

Of the Members.
FIrst, the Members signify the Father and the Mother, the Children, the wi^e,
the Friend the Brothers and Cosins: also, the force of the body; Eloquence and
knowledge: for it is very fruitful. Again, it signifies riches and
possessions, because it increases and diminishes. Also counsel and secrets,
poverty also and ser^itude, also it signifies dignity, and increase of honor;
and therefore when one dreams that he sees it in its estate and placeit*
signifies permanence of things represented and signified thereby: also
increasing, diminishing, and redoubling of things present to all (ouely your
Wife and your Friends excepted) for it takes them away, because a man may not
impart their use to any.

Of the Groin and the Thighs.
THe Groin signifyes the same things as the Members precedent: in like manner
the Thighs: except when they foretell small joy to the rich, or rather expense
in many pleasures, with loss and hurt.

Of the knees.
THe knees being strong and sturdie, signifye journeyes, or other motions and
operations of health. But being weak and diseased, the contrary. A Tree or
branch coming out of the Knee, signifyes slownesse and hinderance: to a sick
man, oftentimes death. The Knees signifye the Brethren and familiar Friends,
and sometimes children.

Of the small of the Leg, the Feet, and the Heel.
THe small of the Leg, the Feet, and the Heels, have as it were the same
signification as the Knees. To have many Feet is good for Merchants and Masters
of Ships, for they shall command many men: and it signifies rest to the Master
himself: this dream is good for a poor man, to the rich it is sickness. Many
men by this dream have lost their sight, and Malefactors having it, have been
imprisoned: to put their Feet in the fire is ill too, and signifies loss of
goods, children, and servants: to such as undertake a wager of running it is
good, for they shall run swiftly, as if they had fire on their feet.

Of the back.
THe Back and all the hinder parts signify old age, therefore as one thinks
his back and hinder parts to be, so shall he be in his age.

Of the transmutation of the person.
TO be changed from little to great, and from great again to bigger, so that
you exceed not reason is good, for it is increase of business and goods: but
to be greater then common use, is death. Also it is ill for an old man to be
changed into a young man, or a young man into a child, for they shall change to
a worse estate: but the contrary is good, for they shall come to a better
estate. To dream to be a woman, is good for a poor man, and a servant: for the
first shall find those which will cherish him as a woman, and the second shall
have less pain: but to a rich man, it is ill; especially, if he have
government of any public thing, it takes away his office and authority,
because women must keep the house. To such as exercise bodily labor, it is
sickness: for women are commonly weaker then men. If a woman dream that she is
a man, and she be not married, she shall have a husband, or if she have no
children, she shall have a son, or shall be some way changed into the nature
of a man: but if she be both married, and have a son, she shall be a Widow.
To a Maid servant it signifies she shall have great servitude, and undergo pain
as a man. It is good for a harlot, for she shall leave her wicked courses.
Again, if a poor man or woman dream that they are made all of gold, they shall
be rich: but if they be rich, they shall be circumvented. For gold and silver
have us Spies: to a sick person it is death. To be of brass is good for a
Warrior and a servant: for the one shall have Victory and a Statue erected,
and the other shall have liberty. To dream that you are of Iron, foretells
infinite miseries. To be all of Earth betokens death, except such as live by
earth; as Potters. To be of Stone, is to receive blows and wounds: if one dream
he is changed into the shape of a Beast, he must judge according to the beasts
nature, and of that I will entreat in the Second Books, in my discourse of the
Chase. I have observed, that it is good for all to dream they are fair, and of
good grace, and strong, and yet without exceeding common custom: for to be too
fair, too brave, and too strong, is as much as to be ill favored, faint
hearted, and weak, which things signify death to the Sick, and to Lovers ill
success, and attachment for treason.

Of Arts, Works, and Exercises.
WHosoever in his dream seems to do that which he has learned and exercised,
shall have good success, and is very good to all: foretelling that one shall
come to honor by his business and enterprise: but if in your dream you have
not good issue, it signifyes the contrary. If one in his dream does that which
he has not learned, and it has good issue in his dream, then it is good: but
if he find himself hindered, and cannot bring it to good; it is anger and let
of business until he be mocked. To play the Husbandman or Plowman, to sow, or
plant, is good to him which seeks a wife, or which has no children: for the
Field is his wife, the seed and trees his children, the wheat males, the barley
females, and abortives: to others this dream betokens sickness and anger:
if any one be sick in the house where this dream is, it signifies death: for
the seed and plants are put in the earth as the dead. To reap, to cut, to trim
vines, and to plough, against harvest; signifye that your affairs and work
shall be deferred till the accustomed time of doing them. To govern a ship, if
one have good success and honor without peril, provided that it be without
doubt or pain, it is good, but if one be troubled with tempests, or if the ship
be bruised and broken, it is abundance of evil, which I have often known by
experience: to cut and sow in leather, to married folks is good. It is also
good for him which would marry or get acquaintance and allies, by reason of
close and joined seames. But to dye leathers is ill to all, and reveals
secrets. To see medicines is worst of all: to be a goldsmith signifies harm
to him which dreams it, by reason of the poisons and instruments that they
handle: to be a graver, turner, or carver, of images and figures. is good for
adulterers, pratlers, cooseners, and deceivers, because their arts show other
effects then the true. To others it signifies honor, for such with reverent
works are showed to many.

To work in Iron.
FOr to work in Iron, and strike upon the Anvile, signifies noise and suits in
law: the like we must judge in all other arts of the persons which dream them.
And we must understand that it signifies as much as to see the tradesmen
working: or their shops and tools, as to see himself use the same Art.
Notwithstanding, there is difference between tools, those which cleave and
break, signify discord, and hurt, those which unite and bind signify profit,
marriage, or alliance: but hindrance of voyages: those which scour or smooth,
appease strife: those which address and compass, signify revealing of
secrets, as you may see in Geometricians.

Of the Letters.
TO learn the letters, is good for the ignorant, for some good will betide
them, but with labor and fear. But to him which knows the letters to learn
them again, is not good, for it is the part of a child to learn: now it
signifies to him, hindrance of affairs, and ill issue: only it is good for
him which desired to have a son, for not he but his son shall learn. If a
Grecian dreams that he learneth Latin letters; or on the contrary, any Roman
the Greek letters, they shall travail and go from the one country into the
other. Many Romans by this dream have had Grecians, and as many Grecians,
Romans to their wives: to read well and truly Barbarian or strange Letters,
signify that they shall go into that Country and have goods and honor there:
but to read badly, signifies the contrary. Or that the sick man shall enter
into foolishness and frenzy, by reason of the savage and strange speech which
a raving man speaks. All Letters in any language which one cannot read,
signify anger, and trouble for few days, if the writing be little, but for
longer time if it be much.

Of Plays and Pastimes.
TO play with a top is pain and travail, whereof notwithstanding shall come
good. To play at Tennis, signifies long noise and quarrels, and often foretells
love toward a whore: for the Ball represents the whore, because it has no
stay, and it goes through the hands of many.

Of Plays, Games, and Instruments.
IF one dreams of the trumpet, to them which would fight is good, and to those
which have lost their Servants. But it reveals secrets, by reason of the
great sound, but kills the sick, to servants it promises liberty: but to
wind a horn is ill, and forbids to undertake any Law suit. Every Instrument
which one may blow, signifies trouble: to dream that you play the public
Crier, may be ime^preted as to sound the trumpet: to play upon a Reed, or upon
a Bagpipe is good to all: to sing and play upon the Harp, at Offerings and
sacrifices, is good for weddings and contracting of affinity: but ill for other
affairs: to many it signifies the Gout, because of cords and nerves: to play or
see played Tragedies, signifies travail, fighting, injury, and a thousand
evils. But to play merry plays, is a merry issue of affairs: to hear singing,
signifyes deceit: to ride a horse nimbly is good for all, for thy horse
signifyes a woman, or a friend, the ship, the Master and guide to govern, and
the good friend. So then, as a man finds his horse well, so shall he do all
this. The ^art signifies as much as the horse but that to a sick person it is
death, as also a chariot of 4. wheels. To ride a horse through the town, is
good for him which undertakes to play a prize, and to a sick man: for the one
shall gain the prize, and the other shall be ^^aled: but to ride out of town
is quite contrary: to lead and guide Chariots through woods and deserts, is
death to all at hand.

Of the race.
FOr to run is good to all, except to sick persons, when they dream they come
well to the end of their race, for it signifies that shortly they shall come to
the end of their life.

To be put out of Office.
IF any one dreams he is deposed out of his place, estate and dignity, it is
ill to all: and kills such as are sick.

Of Wrestling.
FOr to wrestle with any parent, signifyes strife with him. And among such as
are at strife already, he which dreams he is superior, shall vanquish, if
they strive not for beritage, for in such a controversy it were better to be
beaten: to wrestle with a stranger, is danger of sickness: if a man fight with a
child and he throw him upon the ground, he shall lose some friend by death, if
he be beaten, he shall have mockery, and sickness. It is good for a little child
to wrestle with a man, for he shall do great matters, more then one would
think. But if he wrestle or combat with a Champion, this dream is not good for
him. To wrestle with death, betokens sickness or debate, and suits in law with
the children or heirs of dead men. But it is good always for the rich man, to
think or dream that he is in Authority.

Of Combatting.
FOr to combat with any one is ill to all men, for besides shame, he shall have
hurt. Notwithstanding it is good for such as live by blood shed. As
Surgeons, Butchers, and Cooks.

To Bathe, and go into the Hot-house.
FOr to wash and bath himself in Baths and hot Houses, signifyes riches and
prosperity, and health to the sick. But to wash and bathe himself contrary to
the common use, as in his Clothes, is evil, and betokens Sickness and great
anger. It Is ill to a poor man, if he be too courageous to wash himself, and if
he have many which rub him, for it foretells long Sickness. In like sort it is
evil to the rich if he be alone, and have no body to aid him. In general it
is bad for all, not to swear or to see the bath in an open place, or to find no
water in it. In brief, it is ever ill when it is otherwise then custom, for it
signifies ill issue of enterprises and affairs: to be washed with water
naturally hot, is a sign of health to the sick, of hinderance of affairs to
the whole. It is good to dream that you wash in Fountains, Ponds, and current
waters, and in fair and clear floods but not to swim, for that were a sign of
Danger or Sickness.

Of drinks.
TO drink cold water is good to all, but hot, signifyes Sickness and hinderance
of affayrs: to drink wine with reason, and not to be drunk, is good; but to
drink much and without reason, signifies much evil: also it makes you be in the
company of drunkards. All compounded wines, and potions mingled otherwise then
naturally, is good for rich men, because of their delicacy. It is evil for
poor folks, which never drink them, but in sickness. To drink Urine,
signifies Sickness, to drink oil signifies poison or Sickness. To thirst and
find no drink neither in wells, fountains, nor rivers, is ill, and a sign
not to finish his business, but the contrary is good. Moreover, to drink in
vessels or tankards of gold, silver, or earth, is good for all by reason of the
solid matter, and use of the Vessels, which signifies tranquillity Also Vessels
of horn are good, for they burst not: vessels of glass are evil, because they
break easily, and reveal secrets, by reason of their transparance: otherwise
these Vessels may signify our friends, which we embrace: when therefore the
Vessels are broken, it signifies the death of some of our Friends or Affinity.
I know by experience, that to dream to see a glass broken, signifies
shipwreck to Mariners. There are certain Vessels with straight mouths,
which if one shall see broken, they signify end and issue of tribulation and
anguish.

Of Herbs, Roots, and Grains, in Pottage.
ALl herbs, and roots which have ^ strong smell in eating, reveal secrets and
signify anger with all her aftendants: that which is scraped before it be
eaten, signifies hurt by reason of the superfluity which is cast away.
Laxative herbs are good for those which are in debt: herbs and roots which
have a head and are good nourishment, signify profit, as a Carrot: strength to
them which are at law for inheritance, for we pluck them out of the ground,
with their heads, branches, strings and vains. Coleworts bring no profit,
either to Tavern or Vine workers, for the Vine is never compassed with
Coleworts. Reddishes or Turnips being curled, signifye vain hopes, for they
make a great show, and have but a little substance: to sick persons and
pilgrims, they signifye danger by iron, as hurts, and cuts. Cucumbers peeled
are good for sick persons. Pompions are good to get friendship and affinity,
for other affairs not so good. To eat garlic and onyons is ill, but to have
them is good: the sick man that dreams that he eats many onyons, shall
recover, if he eat but few, he shall dye. All grains which one eats in
pottage are ill, only pease excepted.

Of Bread.
FOr to eat accustomed bread is good; as to the rich white bread, to the poor
brown. White bread to the poor signifies Sickness. Brown bread to the rich,
is impeachment of their enterprises. Barley bread is good for all. Pap or
Gruell, has the same signification as bread.

Of Flesh, and Fish.
TO eat flesh, which one has dressed himself is good; except Beef and
Mutton, which signify lamentation, loss, and anger. Swines flesh is very good
for all men, specially roasted, for it signifies speedy profit. But to dream
that you eat raw flesh is not good; for it foretells loss of something of
yours. I know by experience, that to dream to ease the flesh of any stranger
is good, but if the party be known or familiar, he shall die. To eat little
birds, and a green goose, is good for all: to eat venison is good, for it
signifies to take much good from his enemies: to eat fresh fish is good so
they be not little ones, because they are nothing but little bones, and
signifye enmity toward their familiar friends. All salt meats whether flesh
or fish, signifye either neglect of business, or anger and Sickness.

Of Cakes, Capers, and Olives.
CAkes without Cheese are good, those which have both, signifye deceit, and
treason by Welshmen: Of Capres and Olives, and all consections to keep, also of
other stamped and compounded things, I will not speak, because they are not
good to dream.

Of Fruits.
TO dream of Summer Apples, which are sweet and ripe is good, for they
signify a good time and joyfulnesse. Sour Apples, or other, signify noise
and sedition: Quinces signify heavines. Almonds, Walnuts, and Filberts, are
trouble and anger. Figs in their season are good, especially the white: out of
season they are calumnies and detractions. Raysins in season* and out of season
are good, and most often they signifye good by women. Pomegranets signify
stripes, by reason of their color. Peaches, Cherries, and other such fruits
being ripe, signifye deceitful pleasures, when one dreams he eats them in
season, but being out of season, they signify travail and labor in vain.
Mulberries signify the same that pomegranats do: to see the mulberry tree,
signifies lineage and generation to him that sees it, but it must not be plucked
up, or rooted out: for then it is loss of children: Pears of the last year
are good, wild Pears are good only to Husbandmen.

Of Household Stuff.
THe pots signify the life, the platters the estate and action of the life, as
also the Harth: wherefore according as such things are of base and small, made
great and precious, or the contrary, so we must judge of the things signified
by them: the changing of them into better is good, into worse is ill; so also
you must judge of all other household stuff: the candlestick represents the
wife, the light or lantern, the Master of the house, or the spirit of him
which dreams it, or also love: the andyrons signifye the life, or as the harth*
the estate and conversation entirely: and the wife, the table in like manner:
the bedstead, and cushions and all their appurtenances, signifye the wife of
him that dreams it, and all the estate of life. Vessels of wine are the
ministers or servants: the tressels which bea^ up the table, are the masters of
the house, the governors, farmers, and enclosers: the garners, butteries,
coffers and cabinets, signify the wife.

Of Ointments and Paintings.
TO dream that you are anointed, and painted, is good for all, except wicked
women. For men it is ill, and signifies shame, except to those which are
accustomed to use them, as surgeons, painters, etc.

To dance and sing.
TO seem to dance himself alone, or only in the presence of the
householders, is good for all: in like sort also to see his Wife, his Children,
or any of his Parents dance, is good: for it is great abundance of mirth and
goods; but to him which is sick, or has any disease about him it is evil.
Also to dream you dance or see dance any of your affinity, in the presence of
strange people, and unknown, is ill to al. To see a child leap and dance, is
a sign that he shall be deaf and mute. If a servant or a sayler do dream
that he danceth it is evil, for the first shall be beaten, and the other in
danger to perish in the water. To him which is in captivity it is good, for he
shall have liberty. To dream that you dance in a high place, signifies to
fall in fear and danger, if he be a malifactor he shall be hanged. To jest, to
move laughter, and to counterfeit others, signifies to deceive somebody. To
dream you sing well, and in measure, is good for Musicians and indifferent to
others. But to sing without harmony, is a sign of impeachment of affayrs and
poverty. To singe by the way is good, especially if you follow a ca^^, For it
signifies you shall live honestly and merrily. But to sing at the ^ath is ill,
and signifies loss of voice. Many by this dream, have been condemned to
captivity, in the prison or gallyes. To sing in the market or public places,
is shame and dishonor to the rich, and imputation of folly to the poor*

Of Crowns of all flowers.
CRowns of flowers in season, are generally good, Crowns of whithered Lilyes
are bad for all. Of violets in season, are good, out of season bad, the white
worse then the blew. Crowns of roses in season are good for all, but the
sick, and those which hide themselves: for the first shall dye, because roses
whither quickly, the other shall be manifested and revealed, because roses
smell. Crowns of French marigolds are good for all, especially for them which
are at law, for they have a color which lasts. Crowns of flower-de-luces,
defer affairs with hope. Crowns of cresses, Fetherfew, the flower called
patience, and Margeram, are ill to all: for most often they signify sickness: A
crown of Parsley or of smalage, is death to the sick: Crowns of palm, or of
the olive tree, signify marriage of a maid of the same house or lineage, the
palm a Son, the olive tree a daughter. The foresaid Crowns signify good
estate and dignity to a champion, and to any of low estate which desires them.
A crown of oak and bay, signify as much as the palm, and one of Mirrhe, as
much as one of the olive tree. Crowns of wax are ill for all, especially for
the sick: Crowns of wool, signify poisons and prisons: of Salt or brmistone,
sign^^^es to suffer hurts or trubles, by men of might and authority. A Crown of
gold is ill for a servant, if he have not the rest, I mean the Robes of a
King, and the Signiory after him: it is also evil for him which is poor, for
it is beyond his estate: to the sick it signifyes death shortly, for gold is
pale and heavy and cold, and in all points like the dead: also it reveals
secrets, for he which carries a crown of gold is well marked. But I have known
by experience, that this crown presented by a dream has brought honor and
profit to the rich and mighty, and to Magistrates and Judges. To be crowned
with Onyons, is profit to him which seems to have such a crown, but hurt to
those which are about him.

To sleep.
TO dream that you sleep or slumber, signifyes impeachment of affairs, and is
ill to all, except those which are in doubt or expectation of some danger, for
this dream delivers them from pain and care: but to dream that you wake
again, imports action and operations. To sleep in the Church to the sick
is health, to the sound man, si^^^esse, or great business. To sleep in the
way, or in the Churchyard, is death to the sick: and hinderance to others.

To say or hear say, Farewell.
HE that dreameth he takes his leave of any one and bids him farewell, it is
good, if he has a Son, Friend, or Kinsman, undertaking a voyage at Sea, or
making a journey into the Country; for it foretells they shall have a speedy
return, and good success in their undertakings. Also, if any one seems to
bid you farewell, it is good for him that dreameth it, if he has a suit in
Law, or if he undertaketh any design that may bring in profit. Likewise, if a
Batcheler dreams this dream when he goes about to obtain his Mistress, it
foretells that he shall assuredly obtain her.

Certain Observations collected by the Translatour.
IF one dreameth that he sees his Beard fair, long, and thick; the fire fair
and clear on the Harth; his ^ose and Shoes new, well knit, and clean; the
Rain fall on him, or about him; to see some little piece of gold or silver, or
his purse in his hand: to walk pleasantly and delightfully on the way without
hinderance: to see or eats some little quantity of Eggs, or Pease, or sodden
Pork, and sweet Apples: they signify good success in affairs, or some profit
for to redound to the dreamer, within four or five days.

When one shall have hinderance of affairs, or ill success in any thing: he
shall see or sound Bells, Trumpets, or sing Sonnets: be shall see, hold, or eat
Cherries, Wallnuts, or Hazle Nuts, or shall remove Gravel: he shall likewise
see Physicians, or Attourneyes, or speak with them.

When one dreameth that he comes down a ladder, or that he sees his Hose or
Shoes broken: it betokens that he shall have loss of Money.

The end of the First Book.
TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND, Mr. William Bailey: R. W. Wishes Prosperity in this
World, and Happiness hereafter.
SIR,
HAving received many courtesies from you, and being much engaged unto you for
your liberal acceptance of part of my former labors; I once more am
imboldened (knowing you to be a well-wisher to the Arts, and a lover of
Learning) to present this Treatise to your view, whose very name, is sufficient
to defend it from the calumnious reproaches of the C^iticall Reader, and
commend it to the approbation of the juditious. It is a great attempt to be
induced to write and conclude of that which (as it often falls out) is a thing
so obscure, secret, unknown, and uncertain, as dreams are esteemed to be: But
because I am assured, and know by the dignity of your spirit, that you are
altogether contrary to these ignorant detractors, and take no pleasure in any
such custom, I thought good to present you with this Translation; in form of
an Epitome, of the second Book of Artimedorus. And I entreat you to receive
this little present, with the same respect and countenance, wherewith you
received me at my being with you, which was, as you should have received one of
your better friends. In reading and renewing whereof with judgment, and
experience, you shall do me a pleasure, and (I hope) it will prove both
pleasant and profitable to your self. I know no greater pleasure and profit
that one would seek, then to foresee, premeditate, and prevent affairs, be
they good or evil; to give him order, and to rejoice and comfort us in God,
and with our friends, of the good which it signifies, and shows unto us in
the glass of our soul, which is only our greatest and richest treasure* or to
pray to him, and so prevent the encounter of evils, wherewith he threatens us
by dreams and Visions: to the end, that we might turn or lessen them by his
grace, and our humility, in all reverence, and fear of his Majesty and power.
As we read in Job: Why strivest thou against God, because he has not
answered all thy words? For God speaks by this means, and that means, to
him which sees not the thing; to wit, by Dreams in a Vision by night, when
sleep arrests men, and they are fast in Bed, then opens he men's eyes to fear
him by instructing apparitions. This is a great cause that we have God, or any
part of his Divinity in us (as the Poets say) which is in this, agreeable to
the truth of our Faith, and the Scriptures. And yet some make so little account
of Gods admonitions, significations, or threats toward us in this case, that
they commonly esteem it as a mockery and derision. And not only the Dreams,
but those also which seek to enlighten, dispute of, and expound them; to the
honor of the Creator, and profit of the creature: mocking, abusing, and as
much as in them lies, overthrowing them: not without injury to God, wrong to
the soul of man, and violence to nature. I cannot better compare such people,
then to the Scribes and Pharisees and to Esops Dog, which hindered the Ox from
eating Hay, which was not good for himself, and whereof he had no use. If one
should never be admonished by a Dream, or if Dreams were not oftentimes an
heavenly Revelation, if Dreams were not a spiritual thing, to wit, an
operation of the Spirit, one might perhaps have some cause to blame them, and
wrong such as are studious therein. Si^, the Translatour professes, he shall
rejoice more in the number (though very small) of such as shall commerce and
profit, by this his little translation, then the great number of those
detractors shall trouble him. And says, that before ever he saw, read, or
possessed this Book of Artimedorus, he heard it well reputed of by many learned
and judicious men, both in Italy and in France; whose approbation incited him
to desire to see it, and often reading thereof, and proving it a long time in
himself and others, he had a second desire to translate it, thereby to bring
this profit to our Nation and Countrymen, as well as the Latins and Italians
have done theirs. And it is also worth your observation, to take notice, that
the things herein contained, which were written about two thousand years ago,
have yet at this day the same^ effects, events, and issues: part of which I
have found by Experience. Whereby it appears, that the labor, diligence, and
knowledge in this Treatise, are deep and mavelous; and not less fruitful in
experiences and effects, then in good and natural reasons.

Sir, I fear I have too much presumed on your patience; but entreating your
goodness to excuse my tediousness: I rest,

Yours to command, R. W.

The Preface of the Author upon the Second Book.
IN my First Book, I handled the understanding of the Art, and the manner how
we may Judge of Dreams; and only glanced at things, whereof I must speak
more at large, in the Second and Third Book, as also of all things common and
usual to man. Having, always regard, that without great need, I borrow
nothing of others. And yet leaving nothing which may fall to my purpose,
unless it be something which has bin well and learnedly handled by the
Ancients. By whose means it were not needful that I should handle it, lest in
desiring to contradict them, I should be constrained to produce untruths; or in
saying as they do, I should seem to have a desire to hinder their Works and
Labors, from coming to knowledge.

The end of the Preface.
The Second Book of Artimedorus His Exposition of Dreams.
To Watch.
TO dream that in the Night one watches in a Chamber, signifies to the rich,
great affairs: to the poor, and to those which would use any subtleties, or
deceits, it is ^ood: for the first shall not be without work and gain, the
others undergoing their attempts with great subtlety, shall ^ome to the height
of their enterprise.

To go out and salute one.
TO dream you are going out of the house in the morning, and are not hin^red
nor stopped, is good: for it signifyes ^our business shall have good issue: but
not to be able to get out, nor find issue out of the house, is hinderance to
those that would travail, and impeachment of affayrs, an^ long sickness to the
sick. To salute his familiar friend, to speak to him and embrace him is good:
for it signifies you shall speak and hear good news: but if they be not our
very familiars, but only simply known^ to us, the dream is not so good: if
they b^ our enemies, if signifies we shall enter into friendship with them. To
kiss the dead, to him which is sick, signifies death: to him which is in
health, it forbids him to speak of his affairs at that present, because h^
has kissed the mouth of the dead: notwithstanding, if the dead party has
been ou^ pleasant and private friend, it hinders not a whit, either to speak
or undertake any thing.

Of the Apparel in general.
THe habits accustomed and agreeable to the season, are good: as in Summe^ a
habit of Linen cloth and fine Wool in Winter a new garment, and of strong
wool. To him only which is at law, and which is a servant desiring liberty,
new a^^ parell is bad, because he must have long time to use them, and refuse
them again. A white garment is good only to Priests: to others it signifies
trouble: to Mechanics, it signifies they shall have no work: and reveals
Malefactors: to the sick it is death but the black garment it is health.
Notwithstanding, I have often seen poor men, servants, and captives, having
dreamt they were attyred in black, died. This black habit is bad except to them
which would do secret things. To have a garment of diverse colors, or scarlet,
for Priests, jesters and Stage Players, it is good, to others it signifies
troubls, dangers, and revealing of secrets: to the sick it is they shall be
tormented with strong and abundant humors. A robe of scarlet to servants, and
rich men is good: signifying liberty and honor, or dignity. It kills the sick,
and brings greater poverty to the poor; to many it has signified captivity,
for the man clad in purple or scarlet, must also have a diadem or a crown, and
many about him to guard his body. Every such robe dyed in Scarlet, is to some
hurts, to others, an ague. A woman's gown is good; only to those which have no
wife, and which come upon stages ^o play. Others after this dream, lose their
wife, or fall into great sickness, by reason of the delicacy and effeminatenesse
of those which wear such garments. And yet notwithstanding in cause of
rejoicing and assemblies, neither gowns of diverse colors* nor women's gowns,
are bad. To have a gown of the fashion of some strange nation is good luck
among strangers, to him which purposes to go, or remain, or lead his life
amongst them, to others it is sickness, and hindrance of affayrs: to have a
delicate and sumptuous gown, is good for rich and poor: for to the first,
their present prosperity shall continue, and to the other, their goods shall
increase. Broken and torn gowns, is hur^ and hindrance of affayrs. A Coat, a
jacket or short cloak, or shirt of woollen cloth, is anger, and loss of a Law
suit: wherefore it (...) better to dream you lose them, then you have them. But
the loss of any other hab^^ is not good; except to the poor, servan^^
captives, and debtors: for these garments being lost, argue loss of evils;
which encompasse them: for others it is not good (...) dream of loss or
nakedness: for it signifies loss of goods, and pleasant things. ^ fair and
brave gown, and of diverse colour^ is good for a rich and joyful woman, for the
one keeps her brave for her pleasure, the other diverse colors argue her
profit. It ^^ always better to dream to have good, fair, rich, and cleanly
garments, then little and durty; except to those wh^^ exercise ^ovenly and
durty trades.

To dream one washes his garments.
TO dream to wash ones clothes, or an other bodies, is to stain, and lose, or
escape some hurt, and danger about the body, or life: for clothes being washed,
lose their uncleanness. This dream also shows, that some body shall learn
and perceive our secrets, for to wash, is to take, and amend, or correct, and
therefore it is an ill dream for them which are in doubt to be reproved or
surprised.

Of Exterior Braveries.
RIngs of iron about one, signify goods, but with labor. Also rings of gold
which have stones are good: for those which have no stones* signify pains
without profit. But always massy and full rings are better then hollow, which
signify deceit and falsehood, and greater hope then profit. Rings of Amber,
Ivory, and such like, are good only for women. Carcanets, chains* pearls,
pre^ious stones, and all adornings of the head and necks of women, are good for
women: ^o widows and maids, they signify marriage; to those which have no
children, that they shall have: and to those which have husbands and children,
they betoken purchases and riches: for as women are provided of these deckings,
so shall they be stored of husbands, children, and goods. But to men, this
dream signifies deceit, craft, and confusion in accounts of money, not because
of the matter, but of the form* and fashion.

Of Gold, and loss of Rings.
FOr a man to dream he has gold is not bad, because of the matter; as every
one will say, but contrariwise it is good, as I have known by experience: but
oftentimes when one has dreamt, that he has too much or an excess, and ill
agreeing to the sex by reason of the fashion and figure: as to men, billiments,
chains, and caxquenets, in like manner: as to poor me* to dream of a crown of
gold, and plate and great piec^s of gold. For when any one shall have such a
dream the gold signifies evil, not in respect of the matter, but the
workmanship and figure. But if the head tyres be lost, broken, or bruised, in
the dream, it is loss to a woman. Loss of Rings to a man, signifies not only
the loss of them that had charge over his goods, as the wife, the tennant,
etc. but also the loss of his goods, lands and possessions, or that he will
not lend or give away any more, to such as he has lent and committed charge to
before times: to many, this dream has foretold loss of eyes, for the eyes
have some agreement with the rings, because of the radiance of the stones: but
when as your dream is either of hosen or shoes, we must judge as of the
apparel.

Of the Kembing ones self, and of curled Hair.
TO dream ^o comb him or her self, is good both to man and woman, for it
signifyes to go out of evil time and affairs. But to plate and curle his
hayres is good only for women, and Courtiers which use it. To others it is
debt and impeachment for money, and sometimes imprisoning and sedition.

Of the Looking-glass.
TO be before a Looking-glass and to see themselves accoring to their true
shape* is good for him and her which would be married: for the Glass
represents to the man his Wife, and to the woman her Husband. It is good also
to sad and afflicted people, for it signifies they shall soon pass out of
heaviness, because heavi^ men look not in a Glass, But this dream to the
sick is death. Others by this dream have gone into a strange Country: to see
himself in the glass not such as he is, signifies he shall be made father of
Bastards or other men's children. But to see himself more ill* favored and
deformed, is heaviness and anger. As also to dream to see himself in the
water, is death to the dreamer, or some familiar friend of his.

Of the Air, and that which is there done.
THe Air clear and pure is good to all, chiefly to those which have lost
goods, and which would make voyages. The air troubled and cloudy, on the
contrary signifies hinderance and anger. Rain without great wind or tempest
is good for all, except to those which go into a strange Country, and those
which have their vocation and work abroad without shelter. Little Rains and
dr^ps of water, is good for Plowmen, to others it is little gain. Great
tempestuous Rains are troubles, hurt and dangers: except to those which are
servants poor and afflicted: for it argues short deliverance from their
present evils, as presently after so sudden a Tempest comes fair Weather.
Snow and yse seen in their time, signifye nothing, but that the spirit when the
body sleeps remembers the cold of the day. But out of time and season, it is
only good for plowmen, to others not: for it argues that their business shall
go forward coldly, and forbids them to travail. Hayles are troubles and
heaviness and reveals secrets. Thunder without Lightnings, to servants
trouble and falsehood: but Lightning without thunder, vain fear and without
cause. To see the Elementary fire, clean pure and clear, not great nor
thick, are threatenings to some Nobles and men of gea^ Estates. But large fire
and th^eke, is approach of Enemies, Poverty, and Famine. In what place soever
the fire is: and from what place it comes, be it from the North South, East, or
West, from that side shall the Enemies come, and about those Regions shall they
run; or else there shall be famine: but yet it is worse to dream that he
carries the fire. To see in your dream torches and burning flames fall from
heaven, signify that Wood stacks, Colonnies, and trees shall be burnt: it is
also great and extreme danger of life to him that dreams it. Lightning without
tempest, falling near without touching the body, signifies change of place:
falling before a man, forbids travailing. To be touched and smitten with
Lightning, such a dream is good for those which would not have their sin and
poverty hidden; for others will reveal them: to the rich and mighty men
adorned with great dignity, as that of a Scepter, or Crown of gold it is good;
for the fire resembles the gold: to others this dreams signifies loss of
goods. Moreover, to those which are unmarried it signifies marriage be they
rich or poor: but it breaks marriages made, and makes friends enemies, for
Lightning looseneth, but uniteth not: those that have children, upon this dream
shall lose them: for the tree touched with Lightning withers, and loses both
fruit, flower, and bud: to dream of Lightning makes Champions honorable, and
graceth Orators, and all such as would show themselves and make appearance.
Also it is good for him which is at Law, in case of honor and renown, though
loss in cases of Possessions and houses, but not loss of Land to them which
possess it: to those which pretend to take Possession, it denies entrance.
Also it signifies to him which is in a strange Country, that he shall return
to his own, and to which is in his own, that he shall die there: you must
understand, it is all one to dream you are only touched on the head, or on the
stomach, or to be burned by the Lightning: but take heed lest you dream you
are all burned and consumed by the Lightning, for it is death to him which
dreams it. Also you must know, that it is not good to be scorcht with
lightning, being with his face on the earth, or lying on ones back, or being
in a ship, but only being upright upon his feet or sitting in a royal and
magestick Seat.

Of Household fire.
TO dream you see fire on the Harth clear, and little, is good; but much is
ill. Little and clear, is abundance of goods: dead fire is Poverty. And if
there be any one sick in the house, it is death. To hold torches and
firebrarnds by night, is good: especially to young folks; to whom most often it
signifies love, with pleasure and effect. But to see another hold a torch, is
ill to those which would be secret. A burning light in the House, clear and
clean, is affluence of goods, to the Poor; to unmarried* persons, marriage: to
the Sick, health. But an obscure and troubled Light, is heaviness and death
by Sickness. A light put out is health to the sick: for soon after one will
light it again. A Lamp of Brass, is either great goods, or great evils,
according to the disposition of the light. A Lamp of Earth signifies least
hurt: the one and the other reveal secrets. A Lamp seen in a Ship, is a
sign of great joy and tranquillity to Navigators.

Of burning houses.
HOuses burning with a clear fire without falling or diminishing, is Riches to
the Poor; and to the Rich* higher Estate and Dignity: But to the Houses which
burn, or fall, or consume, are ill to all and signify death of masters,
children, servants, Parents, or Friends. In like sort, trees burning before or
within the house. The door of the house seeming to be on fire is death to the
good wife, and danger to him which dreams it. To kindle the Fire easily in the
Oven or Harth, is a sign of Generation: but for it to go out straight after
is hurt.

Of Dogs and the Chase.
THe hayes and ginnes, and all such things to ensnare and surprise beasts are
ill, unless to them which seek Servants run away, and a thing lost, for then
it signifies speedy recoverie. It is better to set and hold them your self,
then to see another hold them, in as much as it is better to trouble then to be
troubled. Grayhounds going to the Chase, are good to all, and signify actions
and employments ensuing: to such as are accused, and are in suit of law they
are il, but returning from hunting, they take away fear, and hinder a
workman. A household Dog signifyes farms, servants, and possessions to come: an
other man's dog fawning on us, signifies craft and deceit against us by his
Master: biting and barking at us, signify injuries, adversities, and
oftentimes Agues. Little Ladies dogs, signify delight and pastime.

Of Beasts of all sorts.
A Sheep signifies advancement, and obtaining of goods, wherefore it is good
to dream you have many of them, or see them of others and feed them:
Especially to those which desire to handle Government and charge of people, and
those which have attained thereto already: it is also good for Sophisters,
Pedaunts, and Schoolmasters. The Ram signifies the Master, or the Prince
and King. It is good to dream to be lifted on high surely, and by plain and
easy places, especially for Orators, Atorneys, Proctors, and all those which
have desire to heap up gold and silver, by his labor. Goats signify no good
but are worse to Navigators. Asses bearing charge, strong, and obedient, are
good for friendship and company, and signify the Wife, companion, or friend;
being not proud above their estate, or fierce, but gentle, and very obedient,
and they are also good in all affairs and enterprises. Mules are good for all
works, especially to husbandry, only they cross weddings and procreations. If
the Asses or Mules are hot or mad, and do any hurt, or be savage, it argues
deceit, by some of our own house, or subjects. Mules also signifye sickness,
as I have known by experience. Oxen in labor are good for all, but in a heard
they are trouble divulgation, and peril: the Bull signifies any great
personage, especially if they threaten and pursue you; to Mariners it is
tempest, and if he wound you, it is hurt and shipwreck, by some inconvenience
which shall fall from the top of the Mast, as I have often experienced, and it
daily often falls out. Thus much shall suffice concerning domestical and
familiar Beasts. Now let us speak of Wild and Savage Beasts. To see a
gentle, familiar and fawning Lion, signifyes good, and profit: by the King to a
man of war: by the sentence of the Judges to the Wrestler or Fencer: by the
Magistrate to the Mechanic, and by the Master to the servant. For the Lion
represents these persons for his force and might; but if he be hot, and would
hurt, it signifies fear and sickness, and threatening by such persons, and
danger of fire: to see, or have the forehead of a Lion, is good for all; and
most often the begetting of a manchild: the Lioness signifies as the Lion,
only less goods, and less hurts, and not by men, but by women. I have also
known by this dream of a Lyonnesse scaring or biting, rich personages have
fallen into crimes and accusations: the Leopard signifies (both the man and the
woman) wicked and deceitful, by reason of the diversity of colors: also
people of a strange Country, sickness, exceeding fear, and sore eyes: the
she Bear signifies the Wife, sickness, and return from a strange Country:
the Elephant seen in a dream, is fear and danger. I have often observed and
known, that the Elephant affrighting one, signified sickness: and catching
and killing one, signified death. I knew in Italy a rich and healthful woman,
which dreamt that she was mounted upon an Elephant, and shortly after dyed. You
must understand that every wild beast generally represents our enemies, and
therefore it is always better to overcome them then to be overcome of them: the
Wolf signifies the year, and a cruel Enemy hunting plainly against us. The
Fox signifies the same that the Wolf, and an Enemy hunting secretly, by
surprising and spying; and most often deceit by a woman: the Ape signifyes a
Malefactor and deceiver: the Wild Bore signifies Rain and Tempest to those
which travail, and to such as plead a strong Adversary, to Plowmen
sterilitie, and to him which marries, a rude and angry Wife: to ships it
signifies the governance and course, and in land journeyes, the way easy or
hard to hit, according to the disposition of the heart. In other places it
signi yes, that there are fugitives and deceivers, false and perjured Persons,
fearful, and unassured. One may judge of every other Beast, according to the
former manner, and by those to whom they appertain. And you must remember,
that domestical Beasts whichshew themselves fierce and savage, signifye ill:
and contrariwise cruel and savage Beasts, which in your dream represent
themselves gentle, and domestical, signifye good. Besides they signifye
exceeding profit if they speak our language, especially if they say any good
thing or joyful; and all which they speak, commonly falls out.

Of creeping Beasts.
THe Dragon signifies a King or Lord, and the time for his length; also riches,
gold, and silver: when one dreams that he comes and gives any attempt, or
speaks, it signifies great goods, if the contrary, it signifies evil. A dragon
folded and wreathed, and terrifying, signifies great danger, and captivity,
also death to the sick. The Serpent signifies sickness, and enmity, and to
whom he shall appear, they shall govern him, and the enemy and sickness shall
handle us. The Aspe and Adder signify money and rich wives. I have known by
experience, that these two Beasts coming toward us wreathed and wound
together, have been arguments of good, especially, if they bite us. Any beast
which one dreams that his Wife carries hid in her bosom with pleasure and
pastime, signifies she shall be corrupted by the Enemy of him that dreams it.
But if she be fearful and sad by reason of the aforesaid Beast so carried, she
shall be sick, and if she be with child, her fruit shall be endangered.

Of Fishing.
NEts, and all other Instruments of Flax to catch Fishes, signifye the same
which the Hayes and Ginnes in the Chase, of which we have spoken above: So a
Line of Silk, or Horse hair and wrought, signifye deceit and craft. Wherefore
it is always better to dream you hold them your self, then that any other
holds them: To catch much fish together, and very big, signify to all, gain
and profit: except those which exercise an Art, or trade which requires sitting
by it, and Masters, Teachers, and Schoolmasters: for the first cannot fish
and do their trade, the others shall have foolish Scholars and Auditors,
because the Fishes are mute: to catch little Fishes, is heaviness, and no
profit. Every Fish of diverse colors is poison to the Sick, deceit and treason
to the whole. Red Fish signifye to servants and malefactors, torments: to the
sick gross fevers, and inflammations; revealing, to those that would be secret.
Fish which have seals, and which one may pill* are good for the Sick,
Captives, and Poor, and to every afflicted Person, for it signifies to them
abolition and loss of evils, wherewith they shall be encompassed.

Of Frogs.
FRogs are abusers and Praters. But to see them in a dream is good for those
which live upon the Commons. I knew a man, who dreamt that he beat with his
fyst, and the knuckles or joints of his fingers upon frogs, and it fell out
that his master gave him might and authority over all the affairs of his
house. So then one must think, that the Proud represents the House, the Frogs
the inhabitants, and the striking of his fingers the commandment.

Of great Monsters or Fishes of the Sea.
TO see a great Fish in the Sea, is good for no man, only the Dolphin
excepted, which promises Wind from the place from whence he comes: but out
of the Sea every Fish and great monster is good, for they can hurt no more, nor
save themselves, and therefore besides that, our dream signifyes that our
Enemies cannot hurt us: it says moreover, that the wicked shall be punished.
Notwithstanding, the Dolphin seen out of the Sea, is not good, but signifyes
the death of some of our good friends.

Of Dive-dappers and Cormorants.
TO see in a dream Dive-dappers and Cormorants, and other such like birds of
the Sea, is peril to Mariners, but not death: to others they signifye their
friends and whores, deceivers, and wicked perjured Pirates, which haunt Rivers
and the Sea. And if in dreaming he sees these Byrds, and lose any thing, he
shall never recover it again. Duckes also and Drakes, and other Byrds of the
River, signifye the like.

Of dead Fishes.
TO see or find Fishes dead in the Sea is not good, for it betokens vain
hopes. But it is better to catch them or buy them any way. Also it is good to
eat them dressed, and according to their dressing you must judge as follows. To
see a Fish in his Chamber is ill to a Master, and to the sick. A woman with
child dreaming that she has a Fish in stead of a Child, according to the
opinion of the Ancients, she shall have a dumb child: but as I have known, it
signifyes more often she shall have a dying child, or of little life.

Of Birding, or hunting of Birds.
THe Lime-twigges and glue, is the return of those which are far off, the
recovering of Fugitives or any lost thing: Of the Nets and Hayes to catch Birds
in, we must judge as of those of wild Beasts.

Of all sorts of Birds.
GReat Byrds are better for the rich then the poor, little and tidy are the
contrary. To see an Eagle flying over a Stone or a Tree, or in a high place, is
good for those which would undertake business: but to those which are in fear
i^ is evil. Also it signifies return of him which is in a far Country, and
if his flight be far, and at ease and pleasure it is good; and signifyes,
that the business shall have end, but not so soon. An Eagle flying, and
falling upon the head of him which dreams it, signifies his death. To be
mounted upon an Eagle, signifies to Kings, Princes, and mighty and rich
personages, death: but to the poor it is good, for they shall be welcome, and
received of all rich men, from whom they shall draw great profit; and
oftentimes it signifies changing ones Country, and going into another Nation:
the Eagle threatening, signifies threatening of some great personage, but being
gentle, or giving any thing, or speaking, has been found a good dream by
experience: the woman which dreams that she has conceived an Eagle, shall
bear a child which shall rise (according to his quality) to goods and honor:
to see a dead Eagle, is good for a servant, and him which is in fear, for it
signifies the death of the master and the threatner: to others it is hinderance
of affairs. The Byrd called a Gripe, is good for earthen potters, tanners and
dyers of leather, but to physicians and patients they are evil. Also, they
signify wicked striplings and robbers dwelling without the town, and and
evil in every thing: the Fawlcon and the Kyte, signifye thieves and Robbers:
the Crow may signify the Adulteress and the Thief: the Raven signifies
hinderance of affairs, an old Wife, and winter. Bats signify needy folks, and
trouble in vain, which the Jay also signifies. Wild Pigeons signifye wild
and dissolute women, and tame Pigeons signify honest women and Matrons.
Especially pleasure in business, and in case of frienship, company, and
reconciliation, they are good; because they flock together. Cranes and Storkes
seen in a flock, signify that Thieves and Enemies should be flyed from. In
Winter, bad Weather and tempest: in Summer drought. But being seen alone, and
apart, they are good for a Travailer, and signifye the return of him which is
far off: they be also good in case of Weddings and Procreation, especially
the Storke, by reason of the aid and nourishment which her little ones give
her. The Swan signifies a man Musician, and his Musieke reveals secrets, by
reason of his color. Being seen of the sick it signifies health, but if he
sing, death: for he never sings but near death.

Of Flies.
BEes are good to Plowmen, and to such as thereby get profit* to others they
signifye trouble, by rea^^^ (...) the noise they make: and wounds, by reason of
their sting: and sickness by reason of their honey and wax. Fluttering upon
ones head, they are good to him which should be a Thief or Captain: to others,
they signifye evil; especially death before people or soldiers. To shut in
these flies, and also to kill them, is good to all, only except to Country men
and Plowmen.

To Sail.
TO dream to sail well, is good for all, but to be in a tempest upon the River
or Sea, is ill, and signifies heaviness and danger. To suffer shipwreck, the
ship being overwhelmed or broken, is most dangerous to all, except those which
are detained by force, for to them it signifies releasing and liberty. It is
always best to sail in a great ship which has charge. Also, it is better to
sail by sea, then by land. To have a mind to sail and not to be able, is
hinderance of affairs: to see from the land, ships on the sea sailing at their
ease, is good for all: and signifies to travail, or to return from travail, or
Messengers and news from sea. Ships going from (...) Haven to sea, signifye
goods and slow a^^yres, but arriving to the Haven, the contrary: for the
artificial haven signifies always our friends and benefactors: the Rocks
those whom we love by constraint: the anchors surety, but hinderance of
voyages: the ropes which keep the ship at land, are debts and impediments: the
mast signifies the master of the house, or Galley: to see any part of the ship
on fire and burn, signifyes danger, lest she break on that side, or danger to
him which by that side of the ship is meant.

Of Husbandry.
THe Plough is good for marriages, procreation, and affairs, but it requires
time: the yoke is good, if not to servants, wherefore it is better for them to
see it broken: the sithe is hurt, for it cutteth all, and signifies the time
of half a year: the saw signifies the woman and her profit: the cutter of the
plough, the wood, the fan, and five, is hurt, departure, and loss: the cart is
the life of him that dreams it: to dream to cut vines, or reap out of time,
signifyes that your business shall be slacked to such time as men use to cut
vines and mow: sheaves of corn, or like grain, are also hindrance, for this is
not ready meat. Holes in the earth, ridges, or secret places of the earth
where grains are sowed, or hidden, signify the wife, the life, and the goods
of him which dreamt it. Hedges, pales, ditches, set for limits and confines of
inheritances, are ill: and yet to such as are in fear they signifye surety,
they hinder travailing: but in other affayrs signifye aid, friends, and support
in necessity.

Of Trees.
THe Oaks are people, and also folks, the Olive tree, is the wife, the combat,
principality and liberty, and therefore it is good to see it flourishing well,
bearing fair and ripe fruit in season: to beat down Olives, is good for all
but servants: to gather olives on the ground, or tread upon them, is pain and
anger: the Bay tr^e is a rich and fair wife, it is also ill success of
affayrs, because it is bitter: but as for physicians Poets, and Divines, it is
good for their art. The Cypress tree, is patience, and lingering. Pine trees,
and bodies of fyrre tress, have reference to Patrons and Mariners, because that
thereof men make ships and also Rosen: to others it signifies sloth, and
fear. Orange trees, Pomegranate trees, Apple trees, and Pear trees, must be
accounted of as their fruits, whereof we spoke in our first book, in the speech
of meats. Pine trees, black Poplars, Elmes, Ashes, and other such like, are
good only for Soldiers, Joyners, and Carpenters. To others they are poverty,
because they are trees without fruit. Beech and Myrtle trees, are wanton women,
and are good for those which would undertake any such business, and for the
sick, to others they are pain and labor.

Of the Dung.
COw Dung, Horse-dung, and all others (except man's) is good only to a
Plough-man, to others it is heaviness and hurt. It has been proved by
experience, that it is profit to such as are of mean Estate. To see great
store of man's dung, is great evil; especially, to be fowled therewith is most
evil: to lay his dung in his Chamber is great sickness, or divorce of his
wife* or friend, or change of Lodging, It is very great danger to dream to ease
ones belly in the Church: in the Market or Hot-house, is shame, hurt, and
revealing of secrets: but to ease ones belly well, with ease and much, in a
privy Chamber Pot, is good for all, it is a sign of allegiance, and discharge
of care and business. I have known it good also to ease ones self by the
Shore, in the Fields, paths, Rivers, and ponds: and the like to dream of a
Cupboord.

Of Floods, Ponds, Fountains, and Wells.
RIvers having their waters clear and clean, sliding gently, are good for
servants, and those which have Lawsuits, and such as would travail, for they
signifye the Masters and Judges, which do as they will, and also Travailers,
because they run daily. But if the river be durty, and violent, it is contrary;
the threatening of Masters and Judges, and hindrance of journeyes. 'Lis yet
worse, if the River seems to carry Houses and inheritance of him which dreams
it, or himself either, and abundance of evil, if it carry him even to the
sea. It is also ill to be upon the River whose waves run against the person,
and he cannot get out, for with pain shall one suffer and support the evils
that he has, has he never so great a courage. The great* floods are rigorous
Judges, angry masters, presses of people, assemblies and noise, by reason of
the violence and murmuring whereof: it is good to pass them on foot, or
swimming: to swim in a River or pond, is to fall into great inconvenience, it
is ever better to swim without stay to the shore, then to be asleep in
swimming. A clear River running into the house, is the coming of some rich
man, by whom one shall reap great profit, but a troubled and violent River, and
removing of movables in the house, is the violence of some enemy. A River
tunning out of a rich man's house, signifyes that he shall have authority in the
town, and be very bountiful, and liberal. To the poor man it is dou^t of his
Wife, or others of the house, which he shall hardly rule: to see other then
River water enter into the house troubled and durty, is doubt of fire, but
being fair and clear, it is gain, possessions, and money. In the like sort is
it to set in his ground or house a Well, which was not there before: and it
also signifies wife or children, to those which have none: to see a Well full
of water in the house, is good, if it be open above, and strangers draw not out
of it, for that should be loss of wife, children, or goods: the pond being
great, signifyes the same that the River, but that it signifyes hindrance of
travailing: but being little or mean, is a rich, and pleasant wife loving her
pleasures. It is very good to sail in a Pond or River, but not to swim.
Fountains and Springs, abounding with good water, are good to all, especially
to the Sick and poor, announcing to them health, and Riches: but dry is clean
contrary.

Of Fennes, Mountains, Marshes, Paths, and Woods.
MArshes and Fens are good only to Shepherds, to others they are
impeachments. Mountains Uallyes, Woods, and Plains, are heaviness, fears and
troubles, stripes to servants and malefactors, and hurt to the rich: it is
always better to cross over them, and not to stay there, or number in the way.
Large, plain, and easy paths, are forerunners of health, and s^ on the
contrary.

Of Law, and places of Pleading; and of Physicians.
PLaces of Pleading, Judges, Attorneyes, and Proctors; are trouble, anger,
expense, and revealing of secrets. If the sick man dreams he obtaines his
suit* he shall come to better estate, if otherwise, he shall dye: and if he
which is in suit, dream that he sits in the Judges seat, he shall not be
overthrown, but rather his adverfary. Physicians seen in a dream* to him
which is in law, signify the same that Attorneys and proctors.

Of High Estates and Dignities.
TO dream to be a King or Emperor, to the sick is death, for as the King, so
also death is subject to none: to him which is in health it is loss, or
separation of parents and friends, for the King has no companion: to a
Malefactor it is surprising, and discovering of his fault, for the King is
known, and encompassed with his Guard: the scepter, crown and habit or
ornament royal, signify as much: the poor man which dreams he is a King,
shall do worthy deeds, whereof he shall have honor without profit: the servant
shall be at liberty: it is very good for ^ Philosopher, Poet, or Soothsayer,
for there is nothing more free and royal, then a worthy spirit: to dream to be
a Captain, to those that are accustomed thereto is good, to the poor it is
trouble and defaniation: to the servant, liberty: to be a Towne-Clarke, is to
do another man's work with pain void of profit: to the sick, it is death: to
the servant it is good government of the house, faith, and authority. To be a
Major or Bailey of the Town, or to have charge and government of children and
women, are troubles and angers: to have commission and power over the living is
good for physicians and those which are studious, of the government of life and
health: to others it is trouble and defamation: to give alms and general
distributions, to the sick is death and dissipation of goods: to the whole
trouble and defamation: to good men being poor, it is good, betokening goods
and* advancement coming to them, for without goods one cannot give such Alms.
Also it is good to Players and Moris-dancers, for it signifies to them honor
and praise. When one makes the foresaid Alms and distribution, to dream that
one takes his part, is good; but not to take it or receive it, is good to none,
but evidently signifies death, for the dead receive no more. Any dignity which
requires carrying of gold and purple, is death to the sick, and discredit to
others. To be made a Bishop is good for all, only except those which would be
secret: to be chief of the House, assembly or Congregation, is pain, anger, and
oftentimes hurt: any state belonging to a man, which a woman dreameth she has,
it signifies to her death: and the contrary.

Of War, of the Army, and Election of men at Arms.
WAr, and affairs of war, are troubles and anger to all, excepting Captains
and soldiers, and such as live by it, for to such it is gain. Arms which
cover the body are great surety, as the Buckler, Helmet, Corslet, and such
like: other which one tosses and brandishes, as the Pike, the Lance, the Arrow
and Dart, signifye debate and sedition: the Woodknife or Sword, is courage,
force, and virtue: the Buckler and Helmet, have also reference to the wife, who
shall be either fair and rich, or poor and ill favored, according to the
quality of the harness. To choose men of war or soldiers to the battle, is
death to those which are some way sick, and often to old folks: to others it
is business and angers, change of place, flights and voyages, to the idle and
poor, it is work and profit, which shall befall them, for the soldier is not
idle, nor without praise: to a servant it is honor and estimation.

Of single Combat.
SIngle Combat signifies noise or Law suits, which resemble the pains and
labor of the Combatants: the Arms of him which flies, signify to go to Law:
of him which pursues, signify to call one to law. Sometimes I have known
that this dream has many times forefold Marriages.

Of the Sun.
TO dream the Sun rises shining and clear, is good to all, and also setting
so; it signifies gain, operation, protection, and liberty to servants, but to
such as would be secret is ill, for it discloses and discovers all. In like
sort, if it rise toward the East, it releeveth the sick after he has been
very low, and signifies that sore eyes shall not make blind the patient, and
the return of him which is far off. Also it is good for him which would
travail toward the East, to others in all affayrs it is cross. If the Sun
seems to rise in the South or North, you must judge thus; the Sun being dark
or bloody, or as it were murmuring with anger or heat, is ill to all, and
signifies soreness of eyes, sickness, and children. And yet it has been
found good to them which are in doubt, and which would be secret: the Sun
descending upon the earth or any house, is a sign of danger by fire. Entering
the Chamber and threatening, is great sickness or burning. But if it speaks
or makes any good sign, it is abundance of goods. The Sun vanishing away, or
hiding and absenting it self, is ill to all, except to those that would be
secret; most often it is loss of sight, or death of a child: it is always
better to see the Sunbeams entering the house, then the Sun it self, for the
beams are abundance of goods, the sun abundance of evils, which one cannot
suffer, no more then he can endure the light or great heat of the Sun near
him. The Sun giving or stealing away any thing, is loss and danger.

Of the Moon.
THe Moon is the Wife, Nurse, daughter, or Sister, of him which dreams
thereof, and signifies money, riches* Merchandise and traffic: also
Navigation, the eyes of him which dreams, and the Master, or Mistress. And
therefore, if the Moon turn her self into good, and joy, it is good and
honor, by those whom it represents, and on the contrary. To see himself in
the Moon, is the son of the man, the daughter, of the woman that dreams it:
this dream also is good for exchangers, usurers, and takers of receipt for
Uictuals. Also it is good for those which would show themselves, and appear,
but it discloseth the hidden, and puts sick men and Mariners in danger of
their lives, what good or evil the Sun signifies, the same signification has
the Moon also: but less or more to the woman, then to the man.

Of the Stars.
TO see all the stars clear and fair, is good for a travailer, and for all
business, and for secrets, in which they agree not with the Sun or Moon.
Those stars or Planets, which are causes of cold, signifye anger and dangers,
but those which cause fair and calm weather, are prosperity and Riches. Those
which are the cause of the winter shortest day, are change into evil: or the
worst of the Summers shortest day into good or better. Such stars as vanish and
go out of the sky, are poverty, and forsaking to the rich: for you must
imagine that the sky signifyes the house of him that dreams, the stars, his
goods and possessions: to the poor this dream signifies death. It is only good
for them which have attempted some great evils: whosoever dreams that the
stars vanish out of the sky, his hayres shall fall from his head. Stars
falling upon the earth, or vanishing, is loss of parents, or friends, great or
little, according to the quality of the stars. To rob the stars is not good,
for it has fallen out, that after this dream, the dreamers thereof have
committed sacrilege and for it, have been apprehended and punished. To eat the
stars also is not good, except to Astrologians, and Soothsayers, to whom it
signifies gain, to others death: to see the stars under the eaves of the^
house, is that the house shall be forsaken, consumed, or burnt, or that the
master of the house shall die: the comets, beams and burning rays, and other
like things, seen in a dream, signify as their nature.

Of the Rainbow.
THe Rain-bowe on the right hand is good, on the left ill: and we must judge
the right or the left according to the Sun, and in what quality soever it
appears, it is a good sign to any one that is afflicted, with poverty, or
any other affliction, for it changes the time, and air.

Of Clouds.
WHite clouds, is prosperity, mou^ting from the earth on high, is a voyage, the
return of the absent, and revealing of secrets. Red or inflamed, is ill issue
of affayrs, smoaky, dark, or obscure, is ill time or anger.

Of the Winds.
GEntle winds are good, violent, are wicked, and evil people: troublesome
tempests of wind, are perils and troubles.

Of Earthquakes, and gaping of the Earth.
THe earth trembling, is change of estate and affayrs, but openings, deep pits,
concussions, and turning upside down of the earth, are injuries, death, and
loss of goods. Only this dream has been tried good to those which purposed
to travel, and which were indebted.

Of the Ladder, the Step, a Case, a Millstone, a Pestle, and the Cock.
THe Ladder is a sign of traveling, the steps are advancement. Some say they
are danger. A case, or frying pan is hurt, and a woman which is given to talk.
The Millstone, signifies end of great and angry matters, and a good and loyal
servant: the pestle is the man, the Mortar the woman: the Cock is the father of
the family, or Master of the Lodging.

Of Eggs.
Eggs, to Physicians, Paynters, and th^se which sell and trade with them are
good, to others it is good to have little store of them, and signifies gain,
but plenty of them is care, pain, noise or law suits.

Of Monsters, or things against Nature.
YOu must understand and hold in general, that all Monsters, and
impossibilities, according to the course of Nature are vain hopes of things
which shall not fall out.

Of Books.
BOoks are the life of him which dreams of them: to dream to eat them, is good
to Schoolemasters, and all which make profit by Books, and which are studious
for eloquence, to others it is sudden death.

Of Partridges.
PArtridges signify men and women: but most often women without conscience,
ungrateful, hard.

Of Snares.
SNares, and detaining, impeachment and sickness: to servants they are
loyalty, honor, and authority, for which the unthankefull shall be deposed. To
those which are not married, they are weddings: to those which have no children
they are a sign that they shall hade.

Of Stripes.
IT is good to whip and scourge those only which are under us, except our wife,
for it should be a doubt that she has been naught, others bring profit to them
which beat them. To be scourged of the gods of the dead, or of our subjects is
not good, but the good of them. It is always good to be whipped with rods, or
with the hand, and signifies profit, but with leather, reeds, or cudgels, is
not good.

Of Stripes.
TO dream to be dead, is wedding to him which is to marry, for death and
marriage represent one another. And therefore for the sick to dream they are
married, or they celebrate their Weddings, is a sign of death. For him which
has a wife, to die signifies separation from her, or his companions, friends,
or parents, for the dead keep not company with the living, nor the contrary.
To him which is at home, it signifies he shall go abroad, it is a good dream
for fathers, for poets, Orators, and philosophers, for the first shall have
children which shall live, the others shall compose works worthy of memory:
Moreover, I have made experience that this is a good dream for those which are
in heaviness or fear: for the dead have no more fear and heaviness. Also to
those which are in suit for inheritance, and which would buy lands for the dead
are Lords of the earth. In other Lawsuits, this dream is not good, but for
sick it heales them, for the dead are sick no more: it is all one to dream
that you are dead, or that you are carried and buried for dead: to dream to be
buried quick is not good: for often it signifyes prison and captivity. Be it
good or evil that death signifyes, if one dreams that he is killed by an other
man's hands, that good or evil shall come by his means: if one dreams he kills
himself, the dreamer shall have that good or evil which death signifies by
himself. Death by sentence of Justice, makes our goods or evils greater: to be
hanged or strangled by another, or by himself, is trouble and anguish, it is
also change of place, and house: to be burned quick signifyes as much as to be
scorched with Lightning, whereof we have spoken above, but properly to the
sick, it is a sign of health: to young folks, calamities, concupiscence, and
heats of youth: to be crucified, is good to those which would go to sea, and to
the poor: but to the rich the contrary: to the unmarried it is weddings, to
servants liberty, it is also change of place: to be crucified in the town, is
to have such an estate and office, as the place requires where one dreams he
is: to have combat with beasts, is good to the poor, and signifies goods,
whereby they may nourish themselves, and entertain a train: to the rich it is
anger, and injuries. To many this has been a token of sickness: it is
liberty to servants, if they dream they are killed by the beasts.

Of carrying another, or being carried.
FOr to carry another, is better then to be carried, inasmuch as it is more
honor to give, then to take. For he which carries, represents him which
does good, or a pleasure, and he which is carried, him which receives: to be
carried by a woman, a child, or a poor person, is means of profit, and
supportment. It is good for a servant to be carried by his Master, and for the
mean man to be carried by the rich.

Of the Dead.
ONly to see the dead, without any other accident or speech, is to be in the
same estate and affection, wherein the aforesaid dead persons were toward us.
For if they were our benefactors, the dream signifies good and joy to us, and
so on the contrary it is exceeding bad, when the dead seem to carry away and
take from us apparel, goods, money, or victuals, for it seems death to the
dreamer, or to some of his parents* or friends: if the dead give us victuals,
money, or apparel, it is a good dream, but to such as they give none, it is
another case. I knew a man which dreamt that his wife being dead, made all the
beds in his house, and the next day after, many of his greatest friends fell
sick.

Of Money, and Treasures.
SOme say, that to dream of money, and all kind of coin is ill. But I have
tried that little money of Brass, and Bullion, signifies heaviness, and
angry words. But money of silver, words and talk of great affairs, of gold
far greater: ^t is also better to dream to have little silver, then much,
because that one cannot employ great heaps, without pain and fare: to find
treasure hid in the earth, if the treasure be little, the evil shall be
little: if great, the evils great, with anger, heaviness, or death, for they
open the earth for the dead, as well as for the treasure.

Of Weeping.
TO weep and grieve, whether it be for any friend departed, or for any cause,
it is joy, and mirth, for some good act, and not without reason: for our spirit
has some affinity and resemblance with the exterior air, which invyroneth
us. As therefore air is always subject to change from fair weather to
tempests, and from tempests to fair weather and a calm, so it is likely that
our spirit changes from heaviness to joy, and again from joy to heaviness.
And therefore also to be merry, is a sign of heaviness. But the party must
have some cause of sadness, otherwise to be sad without cause, were a sign
you should be sad for a cause.

Of a Tomb.
FOr to have a sepulcher or tomb, or to build one, is good for a servant: for
he shall have liberty: and to him which has no child, for he shall have one
that shall survive him: also it is often a sign of marriage, and getting of
lands: it is a good dream in general both to rich and poor, but graves
falling, or fell and ruinated, are the contrary.

Of the dead reviving and dying again.
THe dead reviving, are troubles and hurt, for we must think, as if the thing
were indeed, what trouble there would be if the dead should revive, which would
re-enter into the fruition of their goods, and that would be anger and great
loss to those which enjoyed them after their death: the dead dying again,
signifies the death of those which bear their name, being their near kindred
and affinity, if they seem to dye twice. A potion or mortal bit signifies
the same that death. In like sort every beast that one shall find under the
bed: which things signify to die shortly.

Of Weddings.
SEeing that marige and death have some affinity, as the one signifying the
other, I purpose in this place to speak thereof: To mary a Maid, to him which
is sick is death it is good for him which would enterprise any good business*
for he shall have good issue: and he which hops for any good, shall obtain
it: for he which marieth gets some good or dowry by his wife: to others it is
trouble and divulgation: for without this men make no Weddings: but if one
takes an old woman, he shall pursure not new, but old affairs, not without
profit: if any one sees his wife married to another, it is change of affayrs and
actions, or else separation: if the woman dreams she is married to any other
then her husband, she shall be separated from him, or see him dead, as some
say. But I have found this not always true, but only when the wife is not with
child, or has no children, or has no inheritance to fell: for if she be with
child, she shall bear a son whom she shall see married, and by this means,
not her self but her son shall be married to another. And ^he which has any
good to sell, shall sell it and shall make a contract of covenant, as one does
for marriage.

Of the Swallow and Nightingall.
THe Swallow signifies no evil, if she makes no attempt, which denounces
some evil: or if she appear in no other then her natural color: but she
signifies good work, and principally weddings, and music, and promises a
husw^^ely wife, and a house keeper: for the Swallow lives and makes her Nest
with us under the same roof: the Nightingall signifies as the Swallow: only
less good, for he is not so familiar with us.

To fly.
TO dream to fly a little height from the Earth, being upright is good,
forasmuch as one is lifted higher then those that are about him, so much
greater and more happy shall he be. It were better for him not to be in his
Country, for it signifies wandering or not resting, or returning to his
Country: to fly with wings, is good generally for all: to servants, it is
liberty: to the poor, riches: to the rich, office and dignity: to fly very
high from the Earth and without wings, is fear and danger: as also to fly
over the houses and through the streets, and fore-knowne ways, it is trouble
and sedition: to fly into heaven, is for servants to enter into rich houses,
and especially the Court: to those which would be secret it is ill, for all the
world sees the heavens: to fly with the Byrds, is to keep company with
strangers, and pain and punishment to Malefactors. It is always good, after
having flown on high, to desce^d low, and after that to wake: but it is best of
all to fly when one will, and come down when one will: for it is a sign of
facility and good disposition in affairs. But to fly by constraint, as being
pursued by men, spirits, or beasts, is not good, for they are great angers and
dangers: to fly backwards is not ill to those that would sail: for commonly in
a ship which goes her course without tempest, the people take their ease and
lie backwards to others, it is want of work and business, for those which lie
so are idle: to the sick it is death: it is very ill to desire to fly and
cannot: or to fly with the head lowermost, and the feet upward, and what kind
soever the sick fly, it is death: for we defend that the souls departing from
the body, fly into heaven with a great flight, as little Byrds do: to fly is
ill for those which have a trade or handy-craft, which requires no removing
out of his place: it is good for captives. Many by this dream of flying, have
become blind, because they fear to fall: to fly in a chair or bed, or being
set in any underprop, for the better sustaining of himself, is great
sickness: but it is not so ill to him which should travail, for it is a sign
that he should travail with his family, with his tools and movables, in a
Cart or Coach.

Of such as are worty to be believed.
THose which in a dream tell us any thing, and are worthy to be believed, are
in the first place sent from God, for to lie in a thing, that agrees not with
God: next, Sacrifices, for these are pleasing to God. Then Kings and Princes,
for every thing which rules, has power and might of God. After them, fathers,
Mothers, and Masters, for they are as Gods, giving us, first our life, and
after our form of good life. The next Prophets, and amongst them, such as are
not given to lying, nor deceiving, as Soothsayers, Astrologians, and
Interpreters of Dreams. Then the dead. For those which lie, do it either for
fear, or for hope of good. But the dead neither fear us, nor expect any good
at our hands. After children, old folks, and beasts are worthy of belief, in
whatsoever they declare unto us* in our dreams. No others are to be believed,
except those which live well and solitarily.

The Conclusion of the Author, upon the Second Book.
IF peradventure any of those, which shall have had my Books in their hands,
suppose that I have put any thing in either Book which I have not known by
experience, he abuses himself. But having seen and understood the preface of
this Book, he shall know my purpose, and intent. Moreover, if any one have an
opinion contrary to any speech by me recited, because it shall have (as I
think) some, probability, he must know for answer that I know already that he
will find whereof to speak, and that which shall be very likely; which I my
self can do also, but I seek not to complain, as those which seek applause
and favor at Theaters, or which set their words to sail. But always I call to
witness for me, Experience and the rule of Reason, wherefore I have here set
down nothing at all, but what I have gained (with much travail and industry)
by Experience. For I have done no other thing day and night, but meditate and
spend my spirit, in the judgment and interpretation of dreams. But I must
request one little favor of the Reader, that he would neither add nor
diminish any thing of my present work. If any one thinks that he can add, he
may as well make another Book. If he thinks any thing superfluous, let him use
that only which he shall find good, leaving the rest for others.

The End of the Second Book.
THE TRANSLATOVR TO HIS Cousin John Bureaux.
WHat others have thought of my present Translation I know not, but I am
confident you will not mislike, but take it in good part. And because I have
made experience of your humanity and good nature, which takes delight in all
good and virtuous things, especially of this nature. I have thought good to
address this third Book of the Interpretation of Dreams, written by
Artimedorus; with which I hope you will pass the time, with your friends, and
shall find therein (conjoyning it with experience, and comparing your dreams
with the exposition of this Book) recreation not without admiration, as I my
self have done before you. For certainly it is an admirable thing, and more
then may be found again in the world, to come to the end of a thing so confused
and strange as dreams are. For my part (Cousin and friend) I will assure you,
that it has wrought a matter of importance in me concerning evils or good
according to my quality, whereof God has advertised me, either troubling or
comforting me; for which I have thanked him when he comforted me, and prayed to
him when he troubled me. And by this means, I have always found my self well,
and in this manner have I reaped profit by dreams, which also you will do by
exercising your self henceforward, if I mistake you not. I will repeat to you a
chance which fell out some year after I had this Book. It is certain, that
some four or five months before my wife Fleurea bore me my son Gasbart (whom
God bless) which is the first and last fruit of her and I, ^ often and sundry
times dreamt that I saw a Mulbery tree, bearing Mulberies, and this was before
that ever I once thought or knew that this book of Artimedorus said it. But
because that so often my spirit represented to me this Mulbery tree, I was
moved, and as it were constrained to seek for it. I took this Book, and read
therein. He which sees a Mulberry tree, right and bearing fruit, it signifies
lineage and generation unto him. And following his speech, I would often say to
certain of my friends, that I believed I should have by my wife a child, which
should live and not dye at her birth, as my daughter did; I could in this case
allege many other cases and dreams, whose issue have fallen out in all points,
according to the exposition of Artimedorus; but for brevities sake I will omit
them, hoping that you will believe as much, and take this instead of more, the
effect whereof your self knew lately to happen, to the great joy and delight
of me and my friends. But I must advise you that as touching the effects of
dreams, you must not ever seek them or hope for them at the same time that you
dream them, for many times they come to pass four, five, or six months,
after you dreamt them.

I must likewise give you notice, that this third Book of Artemidorus, is as a
Book set apart, and separated from the other two, which appears by the
Authors conclusion in the end of his Second Book; and indeed, this Book was
composed long time after the other. For the Author seeing that in the two
former Books, there wanted some things which the diligent and curious Readers
might desire, laid on an heap, and gathered together the things contained in
this third Book; which he would not add to the two former, for the reason
which he gives in the end of the second Book: nor yet would make it a Book by
it self, but rather gives it the same title. Because it so depends upon the two
former, that in some specches they may seem to be repeated again, unless one
have the better judgment. But without cause he repeats nothing, for it is
either for amplification, or diversity of Exposition.

Farewell.
The End of the Translatours Epistle.
The Third Book of Artimedorus His Exposition of Dreams.
Of Play at Dice or Tables.
TO dream to play at Dice, or Tables, is noise, and debate for money. It is
always good to win: to the sick it is ill, if one gives over in play: the Dice
or Tables simply seen in a dream, is sedition and noise, but loss of them is
end of noise and sedition: to see a child play at Dice or Tables, and
Counters, is not ill: to a perfect man it is ill to play at Dice, except he
hope for some succession, by the death of another, for the Dice are made of the
bones of the dead.

Of theft, Sacrilege, and Lying.
TO dream that one steals is not good, except to him which would deceive an
other. By how much rirher, and safely guarded the thing is, which one dreams he
steals, so much the greater danger it is to the dreamer, for it is likely the
dream subjects the dreamer, to the same pain, that the law does thieves. To
commit a sacrilege in a dream, is most ill to all, except to Sacrificers, and
Prophets, for by custom they receive, and devide che first fruits, of
oblations, and are always nourished by their Gods, and take not all openly. To
tell a lie in a dream, is not good, except to Players, and iesters, which
practice it: it is less evil to lie to strangers, then to his own
countrymen, for it signifies great missfortunes, yea though one dream to lie
to his friends, in things of very small importance.

Of quails and Cooks.
QVailes are messengers bringing ill news from sea, they cross affinities,
friendships and marriages, for they signify noise, and seditions, and death to
the sick, if they cross the sea. They are also cross to voyages, for they
signify ambushes, and treasons, because they are spied, when they stye, and
often fall into the hands of fowlers, and hunters. Cocks which fight are also
noise, and trouble.

Of Ants.
TO see Ants with wings is not good, for it argues hurt or a dangerous voyage,
other Ants which are diligent and industrious, are good for plough-men, for
they signify fertility. For where there is no grain, there you can find no
Ants: they are also good for such as live upon the common good, and reap
profit by many, and to the sick, when they come near the body, for they are
called industrious, and cease not to labor; which is proper to such as live:
but when they range about the bodies of the patients, it is death: because they
are the daughters of the earth, and cold, and black.

Of Lice, and Long Worms.
TO dream to have some little quantity of Lice, and to find them upon his
body, or gown, and kill them, signifies that one shall be delivered from care
and heaviness. But to have a great quantity, is long sickness, captivity, or
great poverty, for in such cases, lice abound. And if one cast them all away,
it argues hope to be relieved of all his evils: to vomit worms by his mouth,
or upon his seat, is to know his enemies, and familiar wrongers, and to
overcome them.

Of Flies, Hornets, and little Worms, which are engendered in the flesh.
LIttle worms, are care, and anger, and oftentimes displeasure, which one
shall have by his wife, or familiars. Hornets are ill people, which will
assault and discredit the dreamer: to Taverns it signifies, that their wine
shall spill, and sour: for such great flies, love and desire vinegar.

Of Beating and Hatred.
FIghting with his friends, or strangers, is not good: the sieke shall be in
danger of raving and loss of sense: to fight with great personages, as Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates, is very bad: to dream to hate, or to be hated,
whether of friends or enemies, is ill, for one may have need of all the world.

Of Slaughter.
TO see people sacrificed or killed, is good; for it is a sign that our
business is accomplished, or near the end.

Of the Crocodile and the Cat.
CRocodiles signify Pirates, or Robbers by Sea, or murderers and wicked
persons in any sort like the Crocodile: the Cat signifies the Adulterer or
Harlot.

Of Crutches.
WAlking upon Crutches, to the Malefactors, is prison, chains, and stocks; to
others it is sickness, or a vagabond like life.

To walk upon the Sea.
FOr to walk upon the Sea, to him which would travel, as also to a servant
and him which would take a Wife: the one shall enjoy his Wife, and the other
shall have his master at his own pleasure, it is also good for him which has a
law suit, for the Sea represents the Judge, which handles some well, and others
ill: and the woman, by reason of the moistnes: and the Lord, by reason of the
might. To a young man, this dream is love of a delightful woman, to a woman it
is dissolute life of her body, for the Sea is like to a harlot, because it has
a fair appearance and show, but in the end she brings many to evil: this dream
is good to all those which live and make profit upon the people, and which
govern any public matter; for they shall have great honor and profit: For the
sea is like a multitude, by reason of the disorder and confusion of the waves.

Of Sickness.
TO be sick, is good only to those which are in captivity or great poverty,
for sickness makes active and lean, and diminishes the booy: to others it is
great idleness and want of work. It is the same case to dream that you visit a
sick man, which you know signifies that the event shall happen to to him, not
to the dreamer: For we hold, that our friends, neighbors, and familiars, are
the fantasies and images which represent things that are to befall us.
Especially, I have observed that all the good or evil things which the soul
would signify to us betimes, and of greater importance, she brings and
represents them in our own person: but those things which she denounces more
slowly, and of less appearance, she represents them by some other.

To make Statues, or Images of men.
FOr to make images of men, whether of earth or any other matter, is good for
Governors of children, for they shall govern and instruct them with honor and
profit. And to those which have no children it is good also, for they shall
have some very like themselves.

To be fastened in a Cart, and carried in it.
FOr to be tied in a Cart to draw as an Horse or Ox is sickness, servitude*
and pain, to every body, how rich or mighty soever he be: to be carried in a
Cart or Coach, or drawn by me (...) to have might and authority over many, and
to have children of good behavior: as for Travelers, it is surety with
slownesse.

To be apparelled ill favouredly.
IF one be ill favouredly attyred, it is ill to all, and signifies abundance
of mocking and flouting, with ill issue of affairs: this dream is only good for
flaughters and Players.

To write with the left Hand.
WRiting with the left hand, is to make some secret circumvention, to
cunny-catch, deceive, or defame any one.

Of a Father in Law, and Mother in Law.
TO dream to see a father in law, or mother in law dead, or alive, is ill,
especially using violence, or threatening: using gentle speech, and good
entertainment, are vain hopes and deceits. Sometimes they signify voyages; for
the natural father, and mother, represent the house: the father or mother in
law, strangers.

Of our Predecessors, and Successors.
PRedecessors, as Grandfathers, and other ancestors, signify care, which shall
turn to good or evil, according to the order and circumstance of our dream.
Our successors being but Children, is anger and pain: being greater, signify
support.

The Rat and Weasell.
THe Rat signifies the servant: it is good to see many playing and sporting.
But the Weasell signifies a bad and wicked Wife, or Law, or Death, or gain:
according to her doings, goings* or commings.

Of Dirt.
IF you dream of Dirt, it signifies Sickness, or dishonor.

Of the Basin.
TO dream of a Basin, signifies a good Maid: to drink or eat therein, is
love of the Servant: to see himself in the Basin, as in a Glass, is to have
children by the Servant.

Of the Image, or resemblance.
A Statue or Image, signifies children, and the will and affection of the
dreamer. An Image of solid matter, and not rotten, is better then the painted,
or one of earth, wax, and such like. That which befalles the Image, shall
befall the children and affairs of the dreamer.

Of the Midwife.
A Midwife seen in a dream, is revealing of secrets, and hurt; it is death to
the sick; for she always pulls out that which is contained, from her which
contains it, and lays it on the ground: to those which are kept by force it
is liberty: often seen of her which is not with child, signifies sickness
to her.

Of Thorns and Stings.
STings and Thorns are griefs, impeachment, care, and heaviness: to many they
have signified love, and also injuries by wicked persons,

Of a Chain.
A Chain is a Wife, defaining, ill success of affairs, and hinderance.

Of Comfort.
IF you dream you have comfort of any one: to the rich and happy, it is mishap
and injury: to the poor and afflicted, aid and comfort.

Of a wound.
FOr to dream to be wounded in the stomach or heart; to young folks signifies
love, to old, griefs and heaviness: in the palm of the right hand, is debt and
war, by reason of the sign which is made thereby, but new skin recovered in
the wound which one calls a skar, is an end an issue of evils.

Of Debt, the Creditor, and the hirer.
THe debt and the creditor represent the life: wherefore to the sick, the
creditor urging and constraining is great danger, and receiving, is death. For
we owe a life to nature, our universal mother, which she makes us restore and
^ay: the creditor dying, is end of heaviness: the Tennant or So journer
signifies as the creditor: sometimes the creditor represents the daughter
which demands her dowry to marry.

To be a Fool, or Drunkard.
FOr to dream to be a fool, is good to him which would undertake any
business, for fools and madmen do that which come into their brain. It is
good also for Marshals and Shrieves, which would have authority over the
people, for they shall have great report and honor. It is also good for those
which would govern and teach children, for children do willingly follow
fools: it is also good for the poor, for they shall have goods, for Fools
catch of all sides, and all hands: to the sick it is health, for folly makes
men go and come, not sleep and rest. But to dream to be drunk, is very bad
to all: for it signifies great folly. It is only good to such as are in fear,
for the drunken fear or doubt nothing.

Of Letters sent.
TO see Letters and that which is written within, signifyes that one shall have
disposition to things therein contained: but to see them only and not the
Contents, is good news: For in every Letter there is health, Good morrow, God
have you in his keeping, Far^^^ll, and such like.

Of Plants and Trees coming out of the Body.
FOr to dream that any plant comes out cut of our body, is death or cutting to
him; which is meant by that part from whence the plant arifeth.

Of the Scab, Leprosy* and Itch.
SCabs, Leprosy, and Itch* are signs of Honor and Riches to the poor, to
the rich and mighty they are Offices and Dignities. It is also revealing of
secrets. But to see another leprous and scabby, is anger and care: For all ugly
and ill favored things, make sad their spirit which look on them*

To cast stones, or to be stoned.
TO cast stones at any one, is to assail him with words and injuries; but to
be stoned and hurt with stones, is to hear and suffer injuries; for stones
represent injurious speeches. Oftentimes it is a journey or flight, for he
which is assailed with stones must fly: when there are many which cast stones,
this dream is good for him which hops for money or profit, and comodity by
many.

Of Grasshoppers.
Grasshoppers, or Crickets, signify Musicians. To such as are in necessity,
they neither signify friends nor support, but only words and talk of their
affairs: to such as are in fear, they are threats without effect: to the
sick, they signify thirst and death.

To suffer as another.
TO be in pain and suffering as another is to be accessory and partaker of his
offense and pain. For sicknesses and imperfections of the body, have reference
to the passions and affections of the soul.

Of Dung.
FOr to see Dung, is good for those which live upon the common People, and
which reap gains by them, and to such as are of base estate. It is also good
for those which have charge of public affayrs. It is good for the Poor to
sleep on a Dunghill, for he shall get and heap up store of money: to the rich
it is Public estate, office, and honor. For the common People always carry
and cast their superfluities on the Dunghill. To be fouled with Dung by any
friend, is enmity with him, and injury by him, but by any stranger it is great
hurt to come.

Of Prayers and Requests.
PRayers and requests, of alms, all beggars, poor, and miserable, are care and
anger to those which dream thereof, for none requesteth of another without
affliction, and none that are afflicted have reason and consideration: by
reason whereof they are importunate, and cause trouble and hindrance: and if
they receive money for alms, it is a sign of great peril and hurt, and death
to the Dreamer, or to some friend of his. Poor folks or Beggars entering into
the house, and carrying away any thing, whether they steal it, or it be given
them, signify very great adversity.

Of the Key.
A Key seen in a dream to him which would marry, signifies a good and
handsome Wife, or a good Maid. It is cross to a Traveller, for it signifies
he shall be put back and hindered, and not received: it is good for such as
would take in hand, or effect other men's businesses.

Of a Cook.
TO see a Cook in the house, is good for those which would marry; for marriages
are not made without a Cook: it is also good for the poor, for they shall have
goods, and ability, to keep a good and long table: to the sick it is
inflammation, heat, and tears: it is also revealing of secrets, for a Cooks
apparel is white, and is seen of many.

Of Chesse play.
TO dream that you play at Chesse, is gain by lying, and deceit, to see another
play, is, that he shall sustain loss by craftiness.

Of Butcher^.
BVtchers which knock down, kill, cut and divide beasts, and after sell them,
signify danger and hurt, and death to the s^ck, for it is their calling to
divide and sell dead beasts: to such as are doubtful, it is greater doubt, to
captives and bondmen it is issue of their evils.

Of an Inne-keeper.
AN Inne-keeper which keeps a public Inn, signifies death to the sick, he
therefore represents death, because like as death, so he entertaineth all
persons: to others it is trouble and heaviness^, danger, and travel. The Inn
signifies the same as the Inne-keeper.

To be kept and detained.
TO be kept and detained by any one, is impeachment of affairs, and
continuance of sickness to the Sick. Notwithstanding, to those that are very
low, and near their end, it is recovery of health, and continuance therein. For
the keeping, represents life which shall be prolonged: but deliverance,
dissolution, and loss, is quite contrary, and death: to enter into prison, and
captivity of bonds, either willingly, or by force, is great sickness, or
anger. Sergeants and Hangmen are captivity, heaviness, and revealing of
secrets, to malefactors.

Of Holy Evens, Joys, and Banquets made by night.
HOly Evens, and Festivals by night, are good for such as would marry, or make
marriages, and such as seek company, and affinity: to the poor they are a sign
of goods: to the sad and fearful, end of heavines, and fear: for none watch
willingly all night in daneing, good cheer, and mirth, but those which are
joyful: to whoremasters and harlots it is revealing of their deeds: to the
rich and wealthy, they are trouble and divulgation.

Of places of Assembly.
PLaces of Plea, the Market, Theaters, Highways, and great places in a Town
and Suburbs, and Churches are troubles and confusions, by reason of the
multitudes of people, which resort to the foresaid places. A market filled with
goods and folks, is good for those which traficke, but an empty Market the
contrary.

Of Statues.
Brazen statues being very big, seen moving in a dream, are riches and
revenews: But exceeding great ones, and moving like Monsters, are great
terrors and perils: because one cannot see them without frighting. Statues
also represent Magistrates and Governors of the Town, and in this case,
whatsoever they shall do or say, shall befall the said personages.

Of the Mole.
THe Mole signifies a man blind by inconvenience and labor in vain, and
signifies also that he which would be secret, shall be disclosed by himself.

Of night Bird^.
THe Madge howlet, the Owl, the Bittern, the Bat, and all other night B^rds,
cross any enterprise or advancement of affairs: but take away fear and
terrors. Only the Bat is good to women with child, for she lays not Eggs as
other Byrds do, but little ones, and bears milk where with she nourishes her
young, if these byrds are seen in a dream to enter a house to dwell there, it
signifies that his house shall be desolate and forsaken of the inhabitants: he
which goes by sea or land, and sees in his dream any of these birds, he shall
fall into a great tempest, or the hands of thieves.

Of the Clock.
A Clock signifies actions, operations, motions, attempts, and surprising in
any necessary things: if the clock fall or break, it is ill and great danger,
especially to the sick: it is ever better to count the hours before noone then
after.

The Authors Conclusion of the Third Book.
B^hold then all which wanted, or which was not fit to be put in the two former
books, sufficiently (as I suppose) are comprised in the Third Book. And for
this cause, I thought it good to make this little Book apart, lest I should
have omitted those things therein contained; and by that means, some other
might take occasion either to write another Book of this subject, or add to
mine. But you must know that there is nothing more tedious or difficult, then
to understand the diversity, composition, and mixtion of dreams, and to
prescribe General Rules for all kinds of dreams. Seeing that sometimes, nay
often, one may see the same dream, and at the same time of the night, or day,
things contrary, and which have no resemblance, or agreement. But it is
impossible, that things signified by the self same dreams* should differ or be
repugnant among themselves, if so be that the dreams foretell matters of
import, which shall happen. For as in all other things there is an order and
dependence, so also is it very likely, that the same falls out in dreams. When
therefore one shall see in his dream things both good, and evil, then he must
think with himself, which were the first, and which were the last. For in
worldly affairs, sometimes even the greatest occasion of hope has had issue:
and on the contrary, the greatest occasions of doubt and fear, have had good
issue: and for great evils which one has expected, one has found but small;
and for little hope of good, one has found non^ at all. So that mixed and
compounded dreams, are very doubtful, and cannot easily be understood or
expounded, which is a great grief to many. But for my part I have writ
methodically, and in the best and easiest order that I could, that every one
might take an easy course in the exposition of dreams. And as Schoolmasters
after they have taught their children the knowledge and property of any one
letter, in particular, afterward teaches them how they must use them all
together. In like-sort, would I prescribe certain little and easy rules, and
foyne them to that which has been said in my three former Books, to the end,
that they may be the better learned and understood. For to such as have had
experience, and long practice, this will be very easy, and shall suffice to
instruct them in all things what they signify: to the purpose then. In our
first Book we said, that the Head signifies the Father of him that dreamt it.
And in the second, that the Lion signifies the King, or Sickness. And in the
Chapter of Death, that it is good for poor folks to dream that they dye: when
therefore any poor man (having his Father rich) dreams that a Lion comes to
devour or tear in pieces his head, and the same poor man seems to remain
dead, and without a head in his dream: it is likely that his Father shall die,
and he shall be his h^yr: and by this means shall forgo the faintness of his
poverty, and become rich, seeing that he has neither father nor poverty that
shall keep him down any longer. For in this dream the head represents the
father: the loss of the head, the death of the father: the Lion, the sickness
whereof his father shall dye. And death to the poor man is change of estate,
showing that by riches, his poverty shall be expelled. In such sort, one must
lead himself to the interpretation of all diverse, and mingled dreams, of
any whole Chapter, or speech: gathering together, and making one only
exposition, like as one Medicine is made of many herbs and roots. To which
intent, I desire all courteous Readers, who are desirous to peruse my Books,
not to accuse or blame them, before they have diligently read and understood
them. For I am confident, and dare affirm with great security, that my Books
will not be rejected by the learned and juditious Readers: nor by those who are
either studious, diligent, or friendly Readers.

The Fourth Book of Artimedorus.
Of the variety and diversity of Dreams.
OF Dreams, some are Speculative, that is to say, which come (if one may so
speak) in the fashion of the spirit, when the body rests: Others are.
Allegorical, that is to say, which show under other things, those things which
they would signify; and are more hard to interpret: chiefly, because one is in
doubt whether the things will fall out as the spirit has presented them, or in
some other manner understood by them: wherefore first of all we must
understand, that the effect of Speculative dreams is brought to pass, if it
shall happen at all: For all dreams have not an effect presently, or soon
after the dream. But the effect of Allegorical dreams, appears sometime
after, either long or short, as a day or two. But it were fondness in any man
to think, that monstrous and impossible things, should happen as the dreamer
has seen them. And we must know, and note, that Artificers represent their
Art, amongst those which are of the same art. As the Attorney which dreamt,
that an other Attorney was sick, was a long time without Clients: the Smith,
which dreamt that he saw a Smith which was his Neighbor, carried to his grave;
afterward left his own shop, and the Town wherein he dwelt. But to speak of
another. Apollonides a Chyrurgion, dreamt, that in Fencing he had wounded many,
and by his Chyrurgery he had healed many, and had great practice: for the
intent of Fencers is to wound, but not to kill: the like does the Chyrurgion.
The Sick man dreaming he saw bread, ready to be set in the Oven, although the
fruits of Ceres are ever good, yet notwithstanding, it signified to him a great
Fever to come; because those Loaves were to be heated, and baked in the Oven.
To him which would marry, or which would get affinity or company, it is better
to dream of the Vine, and wine, then of Corn, or Barley; and for him which
desires to advance himself, it is better to give then to take any good, if he
take it not of the more apparent personages.

Of Stuff.
TO dream you see all sorts of stuff, which you can tie, trusse, or carry,
especially in dossers, panniers; or baskets, whether chains, carcanets, etc.
signifies good to those which would marry, or make any other affinity, but it
is cross to those which would make any voyages, run or fly, or which fear to
be surprised: always excepting those which would surprise another, and use any
deceit or cunning.

To meet folks.
TO dream to meet or see folks, whether men or women, if they be such as love
us, or we love them, or which are willing or have done us any good, and have
had no desire to hurt us, but wish us well, be they either alive or dead: the
dream is good. For those which the spirit sees or meets with the body
sleeping, they are kinds and images of things to come, amongst which, our
friends signify good, and our enemies the contrary, ill.

Of the first estate and fortune.
IF any man being become poor after he has been rich dreams that he has such
lands and possessions as he had before, and the same folks which he had before
is with him in his house, or the deputies tenants or farmers, which he had in
his prosperity upon his lands; this dream is good: for it signifies that his
good fortune will return: and on the contrary, if a man now rich, dreams that
he sees or has those things which he had when he was poor, foretells him, that
he shall return to his poverty, and that he shall have ill luck.

To judge that he whom we think is our Enemy, is our friend, and the contrary.
PEople of recreation, whether loved of those which see them in their sleep, or
which love them and honor them, or bear them good will, although they have
not great familiarity and acquaintance together, signify prosperity and days
of recreation to come: and on the contrary, those which being seen in a
dream, hate them which see them, although they are ignorant of their enmity
and ill will, signify ill. So then when you shall see in a dream, any
personage which you think to be your friend, and the day after you have no
prosperity or good luck, then you may judge that he bears you no good will,
but that he is a dissembler: and on the contrary, if you see any one whom you
suppose to be your enemy, and yet the day after you have good luck, then
think that it is wrong for to judge him your enemy, and you ought not to bear
either an ill eye, or an ill heart toward him.

To see or meet Tradesmen, or any pleasant Maid, or woman.
ANy Tradesman which one dreams that he sees or meets, have the same effect
which their Art has; and the same effect is it to see their Shops. And yet you
must except a Whore: for to dream that you see or meet one, is a sign o^ joy,
and no ill dream. But to see the brothell-house where she keeps her Whoredom,
is to dream of heaviness and ill luck, because it is a public place, full of
trouble.

To see little children or young men, to wit, of mean age, or old folks.
AMong little children, it is better to dream you see boys, then girls: and
yet, both import care, because for little ones we must care. Little children or
other of middle age, seen in a dream, are better then to see old folks. And
yet if the dreamer were in any business to bring witness, or to become
surety, and desires that men should give* credit to his words or writings, it
were better for him to dream to see folks of a ripe age, or old: provided
always that those old folks do nothing in ^otage, or upon an old grudge.

Of Trees and Plants, coming forth soon or late. Also of living Creatures.
AMongst slow Trees or plants the Oak, the Olive, the Cypress Tree, and other
such: in like sort the Elephant, the Raven, the Heart and their like; sig^ifie
good o^^vill to come slowly; according to the disposition and different qua^ity
wherein one sees them. But Trees or plants which grow quickly, as the Vine, and
the Peach tree: and among beasts the Hog and such like, signify on the
contrary side, either good or evil whicsh shall quickly happen.

Of Walls, Foundations, and old Trees.
ALl sound and firm things, as walls, foundations, and old trees, and stuff
of iron, and the Loadstone: are significations of surety, to those that are in
doubt and fear, provided that one be not locked in them.

Of Chariots.
CHariots, which are not in use, as to dream to guide a chariot drawn or
carried by Wolves, Leopards, Dogs, or such like beasts, is good only to those
which fear great Enemies: because such beasts when they are set between the
draught tree, are subject to the guider: but to dream to be carried therein by
men, is good only to those which would command and be obeyed: to others it is
discredit and hurt.

Of Flattery.
IT is good for none but such as use it, to others it is a sign to be abased;
because flatterers are less and baser of courage then those which use it not.
To dream to be pleasant, and easily to endure to be flattered, is not good;
especially if the flatterer be one of our familiars, for it signifies to be
betrayed by him.

To be sold.
FOr to dream to be set to sale (as they were wont in the old time to sell
their servants, and they do at this day amongst heathen Nations) is good to
those which wish to change their present estate and quality: As to those which
are kept in poverty and servitude: but to the rich and the sick, and those
which are placed in honor and authority it is ill, and after this dream it
has fell out, that many have been taken and sold,

To buy.
TO dream to buy all sorts of things which one uses, is good: to buy that
which is only for victual and relief, is good for the poor, but to the rich
and wealthy, it signifies expenses and great charge.

To get.
FOr to dream to get and heap up goods, and especially fair household stuff,
and well ordered, and much, or any more then we had before, is good: but not
most excellent above our estats and quality, for this would be without reason,
and would signify much hurt.

Of Poverty.
TO dream to be in necessity and poverty, signifies some good to one: and yet
this dream brings no good, but signifies cross fortune to those which make
commodity of their tongue, and fair speech.

Of things which one dreams to befall little children beyond their Age.
TO dream of any thing to befall little children, which is not propper to their
age, is not good: as to dream that men children have beards, and gray hayrs,
and that little wenches should be married, and have children; which signifies
to them death at hand. And yet to dream that little children speak well is
good, because it is proper both to man and woman to speak. But as for other
things happening beyond their age in those which are not very little children,
it was declared in the first Book, in the Chapter of alteration, and change:
dreams which are of the generation of children, or of weddings, foretell that
our children being in a far Country, shall return; especially the wife and
children, if by chance any one has took them from us: if one dreams to plough
the earth, and sow seed therein, it signifies the same.

That that which is signified by one thing, is also oftentimes the signifier of
the same thing.
THe Eyes signify and represent Children, whereupon a woman dreaming that her
eyes were sore, found her children sick: and another dreaming that her children
were sick, had after sore eyes.

Of Vomit.
AL vomiting, whether of blood, meat, or phlegm, to poor folks if they dream
it signifies profit, and to the rich hurt, for the first can lose nothing,
until they have it, but the others having goods already, shall come to lose
them.

To see or have often the same dreams.
TO see often the same dreams, and many nights one after another; is a sign
that our spirit does admonish and foretell us affectionately the self same
thing worthy to be thought upon: for when we have great affection to any thing,
we cannot but think and speak thereof. But if the same dreams are seen with
long space of time between them, they do not always signify the same thing,
but diverse according to the change of the time and affairs, neither more nor
less, though many have dreamt the same dream, it will not signify to all
alike, but rather diversely, according to the diverse estate and quality of the
folks and their different affayrs. A certain Perfumer dreamt that he had lost
his nose, and he lost his Merchandise and sold no more: the loss of his nose,
signifying his perfumes. A long time after, being no Perfumer, he dreamt the
same dream, that he had no nose, and he was afterward accused for falsehood,
and fled out of his Country: for it is an unseemly thing to lack a nose, which
is the most perspicuous place of all his face: Whereupon Virgil says, Et
trun^as inhonesto vulnerena^es. The same Perfumer being sick upon a time
after, dreamt again that he had no nose, and he died: for dead men's heads have
no nose. So that the self same dream, in the self same man signified diversely
three several times: first, loss of his Merchandise: secondly, loss of his
honor: and thirdly loss of his life.

Of Vessels and Instruments.
Every Uessell or Instrument, signifies the art or trade wherein it is used,
or that which one uses to put therein. As Tuns signify Wine or Dyle, heaps
of Corn or Barley, or such like thing, somewhat near or equipollent to that
whereto it is applied: the tools and instruments in this sense, signify
friends, children, and Parents: victual and provision signifies the Master of
a house, the Coffers and Cabinets the Wifes and the Stewards. But in all, you
must judge with regard of circumstance. As one having the order of Knighthood,
and requiring a charge or conduct of some men of war, dreamt that being called
of one, he went out of his house wherein he was, and having gone down two
stairs, he thought that he which called him, reached him a Crown of Dlives,
such as the Roman Knights used to wear in their Pomp: after which dream he was
very joyful, and all those that were of his company, were in hope that by this
dream he should have his request: but he had not, and the reason thereof was,
because he received the Crown not in going up the stayres, but in coming
down: for to ascend, signifies honor, to descend the contrary.
Notwithstanding, this dream signified another thing unto him: to wit, that he
should marry and espouse a Maid, for the Crown was of tied branches, Wherefore
he which expounds dreams, must not rest in one thing only, but he must
understand all the disposition and derivation of them: for those which judged
of this dream only by the crown, without having regard to the descent of the
stayrs, were all deceived in their expectation.

Of Parentage.
ALl those which are of one Parentage, especially children being represented by
a Dream, having or doing any thing: signify that something shall be done or
fall out coming near the said things, to whomsoever of the kin it happen. A
man dreamt that his daughter was crook backed, and the sister of the dreamer
dyed: and not without cause, for he dreamt that such a near kinswoman was not
well, shortly after which, his sister departed.

Of things which encompasse.
ALl those things which encompasse us or receive us, have the same
consideration: as one dreamt that he was apparelled in a gown of wood, now he
sailed and his sailing or voyage was hindered: for the gown of wood hindering
him, represented the ship. An other dreamt his gown was cut into small pieces:
and his house fell down. An other dreamt he had lost the roof of his house,
and he lost ^is clothes. A Mariner dreamt he saw a wall break, and the pieces
and sides of his ship were broke: and yet all such things may have reference to
the body, and therefore not without cause, one which dreamt that his gown was
broken and torn, was wounded in his body, and in the same place where he dreamt
his gown was torn: and as the gown showed it self to be the case of the
body, so the body is the case of the soul. In like sort servants (besides other
things which they may signify) represent the bodies of their masters, wherefore
there was one that dreamt he saw his servant sick, and was sick himself of a
fever, and the body is the servitor of the soul, which seeeth the dream. An
other dreamt he had a horse foot, and was afterward knighted: for as his feet
bare him, in like sort the horse should carry him. He which dreams the King
will give him something out of his mouth, must thus interpret it: that there
shall be some sentence given, or word spoken, which shall redound to the profit
of the dreamer.

Of imperfect or halfe-finished Works.
TO dream that works are only half done, signifies evil success of
affayrs, and it were better not to begin them. Cilex making a request to the
King to have the succession of his brother, dreamt that he shore a sheep to the
middle of her body: and taking a great deal of the fleece, awaked, dreaming
that he could not obtain to sheare the rest: after which dream he expected to
obtain the moity of his brothers inheritance, but on the contrary, he neither
obtained it all, nor any part thereof.

Of Towns.
TO dream to see Towns whereto one resorts, is better then to see strange
towns; especially if they be towns of his own Country, and those wherein one
has had good fortune and prosperity: and above all, it is good to see them
well peopled, and filled with inhabitants, goods, and Merchandise: by which
things one may know the honor and riches of the towns. Parents also are
signified by the towns where we make our residence. As for example. A man
dreamt that his Country, and the place where he was born, was fallen down, and
ruinated by an Earthquake, and his father was condemned to death, and executed.

If it be possible at the same time to have both good and bad dreams.
A Man may dream both good and bad dreams, not only in one and the same night.
Nay more, in the self same dream one may see both good and bad things, which
the interpreter must separate in judgment. And it is no marvel, since the
life and affayrs of one particular man, are such, that is to say, mingled
ordinarily with good and evil: and in the same time one may do and suffer both
good and evil: neither must we be always content with one only issue of our
dream, because it has not always the like effect: wherein Antipater an
Interpreter of dreams, often deceives himself: for when any one has dreamt
that he embraces iron, it signifies that he shall be imprisoned, and live
among yrons. The good Antipater to another which has had the like dream, will
interpret; that at a particular combat in a close field, he shall be condemned:
or he shall keep a Fencing School, and live as it were among, and by iron; to
wit, by the Exercise, and Art of Fencing, when one does nothing but handle
daggers, and swords of iron: to whom notwithstanding this falls not out, but
he has a Member cut off. Wherefore we must not always rest at one only
point, or effect that happens, for it were to deal with beasts (or as Fiddlers
that can play debut one tune) but we must be ingenious, to vise every day
diverse things, and they must not in all points be diverse, but some what alike:
for our spirit and nature, are fertile, and recreate and sport themselves in
variety.

That our Brethren, signify our Enemies.
OUr Brethren have the same signification as our Enemies, as touching the
effect and event of dreams: and our Enemies on the other side have like effect
with our Brethren, and not without reason. Because our Brethren bring us
nothing, when they are borne, but diminish our Inheritance and Succession: and
are the cause that those things which should be all our own, are divided into
many parts between them and us: Timocrates dreamt that he buried or caused to
be interred, one of his brothers departed, and a little while after, one of his
adversaries or Enemies dyed. And the death of our Brethren, signifies not only
loss of our enemies, but also deliverance or acquittance from some loss, or
hurt, which attended us, and whereof we stood in fear. As it happened to
Diocles the Grammarian, who sustained no loss of money, whereof he stood in
doubt, and was afraid, because he dreamt before, that he saw his brother dead.

Of Funeral Banquets, reviving, and mounting to Heaven.
Neither to see, nor to eat such meat, as one dreams is prepared for the
feasts of the dead, is not good to dream. Neither in like sort, to dream that
you make such a feast, for your parents, or friends, for it signifies, and
foretells to the sick, his own death, and to him which is in health, the
death of some familiar friend of his. To dream to dye, and afterward to revive
is not ill, but signifies victory. Such things as one bath custom to offer,
and present in oblation for the decased, is not, a good dream either to offer
them, or to take of them, for it signifies death, either to the dreamer, or to
some of his parents. Notwithstanding to take victuals, gold, silver, apparel,
and vessels, from the hand of the dead, whether if be altogether, or at diverse
times, it is a good dream, and a sign of profit. But to dream he mounts to
heaven, for him which is sick is death, in like sort to be in great
tranquillity, rest, and happiness.

Within what time dreams come.
ALl things, which are wont to have a certain determined time, and are seen in
a dream, must be referred to that time: and other things, which have no
certain, nor determinate time, which their effects will show. And we must judge
of the time far or near, according to the circumstance of the dream. For he
were a fool, that would refer to a year, the effect of a man's dream, wh^^ his
constituted either in great pain, great hope, or great fear. And we must know,
that the things which a man dreams to see far off (as it were about heaven)
have their effect more slow, by reason of the long distance. Moreover, we must
not be ignorant, that good or evil dreams signify to the great or little,
greater or less good or evil.

The End of the Fourth Book,
The Fifth Book of Artimedorus His Exposition of Dreams.
Containing certain examples of Dreams, with their effects which followed.
A Man dreamt that he drank Mustard so well stamped and so clear, that it was
potable: it so fell out, that one practiced and coined a certain accusation in
case of a crime of man-saughter, wherewith he was so well charged, and so
attainted to the quick, that he received sentence of death, and was executed by
Justice. An other dreamt that the water of the River of Xanthu^, which is near
Troy the great, was all changed into blood. A dream very fearful and
mavelous. What then fell out? He cast blood at diverse times for ten years
together, and died thereof: by which appears, that great Rivers stay not, but
do continue and hold out their course.

A man dreamt that his cushion or Fetherbed, was full of corn in stead of
feathers. He had a wife which never before had any child, and that year
conce^ved, and bare him a son. Another dreamt he lighted a candle at the
Moon, and he became blind^, for he dreamt a thing impossible: besides, the Moon
has no light of her own. A woman dreamt that she saw within the Moon three
images or resemblances like her self, and she bare three daughters, which
within a month died, for the Moon has a months life. A man dreamt he saw his
image or representation in the Moon, and he made long voyages wandering this
way and that way a long time: for the continual change of the Moon, signified
that he should often change his place and habitation. A man dreamt his privy
Members was of Massy iron, and he had afterward a Son, by whom he was slain,
for iron by its own rust consumes it self. A man dreamt an Olive tree came
out of his head, and he followed the study of Philosophy with great courage,
and got everlasting knowledge and honor: for this is a tree always green and
sound, and by all antiquity dedicated to the Goddess Minerva, reputed the
goddess of Wisdom. A certain man dreamt, that his servant whom he loved above
all the rest, was changed into a torch or flame; and he lost his sight, and was
led and guided by that servant. A servant dreamt he saw a star fall from
heaven, and another come out of the earth and fly up to heaven, his Master
died, and his Masters son rose up into his masters place. A Brother having his
sister rich and sick, dreamt that before her door grew a Fig Tree, from
whence he gathered seven black Figs, and eat them, his sister deceased seven
days after, and made him her heir. A man dreamt he cast his skin, and renewed
it as a serpent, and the day after he died; for the soul which must leave the
body, represents such like visions to it in a dream. Another dreamt that his
father drew his sister being married, from her husband, and gave^ her in
marriage to another, and he died soon after: for his father represented God the
creator and heavenly father of our souls: th^s sister represented the soul of
him that dreamt it, which sister being separated from her spouse and given to
another, seemed to say that she should be separated from her body, and should
live and converse elsewhere: signifying that the souls of those which dye, do
nothing but only change their place. A man dreamt that he was great with
child, and that he was delivered of two black daughters, and he lost both his
eyes or the sight of them, for his two eyelids which covered his eyes, fell
down. A son being far from his country, dreamt that his own mother bare him
again, he returned into his own Country, found his mother sick, and was made
her heyr by her death and will. This dream signified as much to him, to wit,
that by his mothers means he should come from poverty to riches. One dreamt
that he ate his bread steeped in honey, and he thereupon gave his mind to the
study of Philosophy, and thereupon got wisdom, honor, and goods. The honey
therefore by his sweetness, signified the sweetness of wisdom, and the
bread, wealth. Another dreamt, that from his stomach there came ears of Corn,
and that there was one which plucked them out; he had two sons, which soon
after him, dyed.

The end of the fifth Book of Artimedorus.
AN EPITOME OUT OF VALERIUS MAXIMUS, Concerning Dreams.
Of the Emperor Augustus, and Calphurnia.
AS Artorus Physician to the Emperor Augustus say in his bed, the Night before
the Armies of the Romans (namely the Host of Augustus and Mark Anthony on the
one party, and the Bands of Brutus and Cassius on the other) were to figot the
Battle in the Philippick Fields; Pallas presented her self to this said
Physician, commanding him to tell Augustus, that although he was very sick, he
should not fail but be present at the battle. Which Augustus understanding,
that he were very sick, he should not fail but be present at the battle. Which
Augustus understanding, he left his Tent (being carried in a Litter) though he
could not fight for the victory: presently the soldiers of Brutus' army
sarprised his Pavillions, and although Augustus had resolved not to stir out of
his Tent by reason of his sickness, nevertheless by the admonition of his
Physician, by this means he saved his life: for the soldiers of Brutus, aimed
chiefly at his Tent, supposing to have found him there. But because this
Emperor was subtle* wise, and advised in all his actions, the example of his
ad^pted father and predecessor Julius, being yet fresh in his mind, persuaded
him to obey the dream of his Physician. For he well knew that Calphurnia, the
wife of Julius Caesar had seen in her sleep the night before he was slain, that
he lay wounded in her arms and bosom, with many wounds: by reason of which
horrible dream* she entreated him not to be ^een the day following at the
Court: but he not willing to give ear to a woman's dream, thought rather to go
to the Senate, and sat in Parliament, where he was put to death; being
miserably wounded, with more then twenty wounds.

Of Publius Decius, and Manlius Torquatus, Consuls of Rome.
THe Uision which appeared in sleep, all in the same night, to Publius Decius
and Manlius Torquatus, was of great admiration, and manifest issue. For then
when these two Consuls pitched a Field near the Hill Vesuvius, viz. when the
Latins left the side of the Romans. To each of these two Consuls sleeping,
appeared a man, and told them, that of the one Army their Captain should be
slain, and of the other a great company should be discomfited: but the chief of
that Host that would assail the Troops of the Enemies, and vow to suffer death
f^r the rest, they should have the victory. Hearing this news, and waking rom
their sleep, these Consuls made a covenant together, that what wing soever,
should first seem to stoop, under the burden of the battle, the captain of
that band so discomfited, should lay down his life for his country: and
although neither the one nor the other feared this adven^^re yet the chance
fell upon Decius, for his Troops began to be out of heart, which he seeing,
cast himself in the middle of his Enemies with his sword in his hand, and was
slain. So the Romans had the triumphant and desired Uictory against the Latins
b^ the death of one of their chief Captains, following this dream.

Of Cicero.
TUlly being banished Rome by the conspiracy of his Enemies, went to a Uillage,
and in his sleep* seemed walking by desert places, to meet with Marius then
Consul, and his Troops: who demanded of him why he was so sad, and the cause
why he haunted those deserts, and was so transported into an unknown way: and
after he had understood the many injuries which Tully had undergone, he took
him by the hight hand, and gave charge to the principal of his Officers, to
lead him to his Chapel, telling him he should hear there some good news of
the restoring of his estate, which fell out in like manner. For in that
Chapel which Marius had caused to be built, the Senators sat in counsel
concerning the return of Cicero, and it was so concluded, that he should return
safe, and sound, without any charge or dishonor.

Of Caius Gracchus.
AS Caius Gracchus slept, he dreamt he saw his Brother Tyberius, telling him
that he should be killed, as himself had been before. Many heard that he made
account of this dream, especially before he was made Tribune of the people; in
which Office he received his death, agreeable to his brothers.

Of Arthur Rous.
THere being a prize to be played at Syracusis, Arthur Rous a Roman Knight,
dreamt the night before, that a Carrier of Nets, or a Fisher should kill him.
The day after he was at the Combat, and told his dream to the Defendants. It
fell presently after, that near the place where this Arthur was, they came to
bring in the two Combattants, one whe^eof carried for his devise, a fish upon a
hook: when Arthur had seen the face of this Fisher, he said unto him, I
dreamt to night that you should kill me; and therefore would have departed
thence, doubting some wicked attempt, because of his dream. But the Combattants
giving him their words of assurance, he tarried the hazard of his death. For in
the same place the Fisher vanquished the other combattant, and thinking to run
him through with his sword, the blow glanced aside and lighted on poor Arthur,
which miserably in this case tried the effect of his dream.

Of Haniball of Carthage.
HAniball sleeping, had such a Uision, that he seemed to see a fair young
Maid, like an Angel, which was sent to him from heaven, to conduct him to
assail Italy: after which turning himself, he saw a great Serpent, which by
force and violence broke all that he incountred, and after him came Lightning,
and tempestuous rain, which darkened the day. Then Haniball being affrighted,
demanded of this fair Maid, what mavelous Uision this was, and what it
signified, and the young Maid answered him, thou see the ruin of Italy,
wherefore say not a word, and leave the rest to the Destinies. I need not here
declare what evils Haniball did in Italy following this dream.

Of Alexander the Great.
O How well was Alexander King of Macedon admonished in his sleep, that he
should take better guard of his life: if fortune would have suffered him to
have used this counsel to avoid this danger. For certainly he knew by his
dream, before he felt by effect, that the hand of Cassandra should be venomous*
and mortal to him* and he was persuaded in his heart, that he should dye by
her means, before that ever he saw her. Always after that dream, whenever
Cassandra came into his court, and presented her self to him, he remembered
when he looked upon her, that hers was that pernicious face, which he had seen
in his sleep. Notwithstanding, when he knew that she was the daughter of
Antipater, he drove all fear and suspicion away by his courage, ever repeating
a Greek Uerse, which says, That men must not have regard of Dreams: although
notwithstanding all that, the Poison was then prepared to kill him: and men
hold, that he dyed by the hand of the same Cassandra.

Of the Poet Simonides.
THe destinies were more favorable to the Poet Simonides, then to that great
Monarch Alexander, who advertised and counseled him from above, being asleep,
and after his wakening, he betook himself to this consideration. For as soon
as the Ship wherein he was, was come to the Haven* and there he had found the
corpse of a dead man without burial, he took compassion on the Corpse, and
caused them to be buried: The night following, he dreamt that he saw him whom
he had buried* forewarning him that the day after he should not go to Sea;
whereupon, he stayed at home on the land, and his fellows (which would needs put
to Sea) were the same day all cast away, by a great Tempest that arose at Sea,
wherefore he was very glad, for having had so much credit to the dream in a
case of life, then to a poor Ship* Afterward acknowledging this benefit, he
made his benefactor immortal by his Poetry: building him a far better
Sepulcher, and which might make him remain longer in men's memory, then that
which he had built for him, among the sands of the sea, in a desolate and
unknown place.

Of King Croesus.
THat dream which at the first exceedingly affrighted the soul of King
Cresus, and always after made him very fearful and doubtful, was exceeding
mavelous, and of great force and efficacy. For of two sons which he had,
the lustier which was best enriched with perfection of body, and which was to
have the Crown after his Father, dreamt that he was killed with a sword.
Wherefore to hinder and (if it might be) to divert this ill luck, the good
father ^eased not to give order by all means possible. This young Prince
called Atis, being before accustomed to go war, was by his father constrained
to keep the house. He had a chamber furnished with all instruments of war, which
his father made be kept from him. He had his Guard well armed and weapond with
staves, all which his father commanded not to come near him. And
notwithstanding all this, the Destinies made way for sorrow and grief. For
when a great and Wild Bore wasted the goods of that Country upon the Mount
Olympus, and slew many of the Inhabitants thereof; Behold this Country men
assembled themselves together, and made recourse unto the King Cresus:
Whereupon, Atis so long persuaded his Father, that he was sent; and his Father
consented so much the rather, because the Bore had no iron about him, but only
teeth, and his fear was of iron, and not of teeth, but what followed? Behold,
as one ran fierce and hot after the Bore to kill him (see the inevitable luck,
which always awayted the ruin of this young Prince) he turned upon him a
sword, which was directed against the wild Bore: so dyed he miserably, not able
to shun the effect of his fathers dream.

Of King Astiages, and Cyrus, the first of that Name.
AStiages King of the Medes, Grandfather by the Mothers side to Cyrus, had two
dreams; the first whereof was, that the Lady his Daughter covered with her
issue all the Regions of Asia, by reason whereof he would not marry her to any
great personage of that Country, lest the Kingdom should descend or come to
her, or hers, for he stood in doubt thereof. But gave her in marriage to a man
of mean Estate, of the Country of Persia. His second dream was* that he saw
proceed out of the Loins of the said daughter, a Uine, which by continual
growth, other-shaddowed all the parts of his dominions and therefore he
commanded, that Cyrus which was born of her, should be thrown out and exposed
to the wild beasts, so to let him die: but he deceived himself, by his humane
counsel and wisdom, supposing to hinder the felicity of his little son,
whom the heavens preserved, as the dream foretold.

Of Amilcar.
AMilcar, Colonel to the Carthaginians, when he had besieged Syracu^^, ^ Town
of Cicile; in his dream seemed to hear a voice* which said unto him that the
next day he should sup in the same town. He joyful of this good news, thought
that God had promised him victory, put his camp in arms, and thinking to give
an assault and take the town, there fell a mutiny in his Camp, between the
Carthaginians and the Cicilians, so that those of the town making a sudden
salley, took him prisoner, and made him perforce sup in their Town. So then
much deceived of his ho^es which he conceived by his dream, he supped in the
same Town as a Captive, not as a Captain: as he hoped, and his attempt
presupposed.

Of Alcibiades.
ALcibiades dreamt that he was covered with his friends gown, but it was ill
success: for in the same gown with which he dreamt he was covered, after that
he was slain by the people of Farnabasa, according to the appetite of Lysandra.

Of two Arcadians.
ALthough this dream ensuing be longer to repeat then the former, it is worthy
our memory for the evidence and truth thereof. Two friends of Arcadia
traveling together, came to Megara, the one of them repaired to a house of his
acquaintance, the other lodged in a Tavern. The first dreamt that Night, that
the other prayed him to come help him against the treason of his Host, and if
he would make haste be might deliver him of great danger wherein he was. After
which vision, he rose and set forward to go to this Inn: afterward by ill
luck, he began to repent him of his purpose, thinking it was in vain, to go so
by night to such a Tavern: so he returned to his bed, and began to dream
again, that he thought his companion was wounded to death by his Host, and
prayed him that though he did not come to save his life, yet he would revenge
his death, by all means: telling him that his body thus murdered by his Host,
was at that instant carried right to the Gate of the Town, covered with Dung
in a Cart: whereupon the poor man was so much moved with this dream, that he
rose and went to the gate of the Town, and there found the Cart which he had
seen in his sleep, and after he had stayed it, laid his hand upon the choler
of this Inne-keeper, followed the suit, and the crime being confessed, the
Inne-keeper was executed by sentence of death.

FINIS.
A Table of the five Books of Artimedorus.
Of the first Book.
OF Dreams Speculative, and Allegorical. Page, 1. To dream of the Birth.
page 3. To be great with child. page 4. To have children. page 5. Of children
wrapped in clothes, and of milk. ibid. Of the head. page 7. Of long hayres.
page 8. Of hayres ill in order. ibid. Of hogs b^istles, and horse hair. page
9. To have wool instead of hair. ibid, To see himself shaven. page 10. Of
the forehead. ibid. Of the Ears. ibid. Of Ants entering into the Ear. page
12. Of the Eyebrows. page 13. Of the Eyes. ibid. Of the Nose. page 15.
Cheeks. page 16. Jaws and lips. ibid. Of the Beard. ibid Of the Teeth. page
17. Vomtting of Blood, and of choleric and melancholy* humors. page 19. Of
the neck, and of having many heads. page 20. Of being beheaded ibid. To have a
wry Neck. page 21. To have the head of any Beast. page 22. To have his head
between his hands. ibid. To have Horns. page 23. Of the Shoulders. ibid. Of
the Breast and the Dugs. ibid. Of the hands. page 24. Of the Ribs and the
Navill. page 26. Of the inward parts. ibid. Of the Members. page 27. Of the
Groine and the Thighs. page 28. Of the Knees ibid* Of the small of the Leg,
the Feer, and the Heel. page 29. Of the back. ibid. Of the transmutation of the
person. page 30. Of Arts, Works, and Exercises. page 32. To work in Iron. page
33. Of the Letters. page 34. Of Plays and Pastimes. page 35. Of Plays, Games,
and Instruments. ibid. Of the Race. page 37. To be pu^ out of office. ibid.
Wrestling. ibid. Of Combatting. page 38. To ^ath^, and go into the Hor house.
ibid. Of Drinks. page 39. Herbs, Roots, and Grains, in Po^^age. page 40. Of
Bread. page 42. Flesh, and Fish. ibid. Cake^, Capers, and Olives. page 43. Of
Fruits. ibid. Household Stuff. page 44. Of oymtments, and Paintings. page 45.
To dance and sing. ibid. Of Crowns and flowers. page 46. To sleep. page 48. To
say or hear say, Farewell. page 49. Certain observations, collected by the
Translatour. ibid.
Of the second Book.
To Watch. page 59. To go out andsalute one. ibid. Apparel in general. page
60. To dream one washes his garments. page 63. Of Exterior braveries. ibid.
Gold, and loss of Rings. page 64. Of Kembing ones self, and of curled hair.
page 65. Of the Looking-glass. page 66. Of the Air, and that which is there
done. ibid. Household fire. page 70. Of burning-houses page 71. Of Dogs and the
Chase. ibid. Of Beasts of all sorts. page 72. Of creeping Beasts. page 76. Of
Fishing. page 77. Of Froggs. page 78. Great Monsters or fishes of the Sea.
ibid. Of Dive-dappers and Cormorants. page 79. Of dead Fishes. ibid. Of
Birding, or hunting of Birds. page 80. Of all sorts of birds* ibid. Of Flies*
page 83. To Sail. ibid. Of Husbandry. page 84. Of Trees. page 85. Of the Dung.
page 86. Of Floods, Ponds, Fountains, and Wclles. page 87. Of Fennes,
Mountains, Marshes, Paths, and Woods. page 89. Of Law, and places of
Pleading; and of Physicians. page 90. Of High Estates, and Dignities. ibid. Of
War, of the Army and Election of men at Arms. page 92. Of single Combat.
page 93. Of the Sun. page 94. Of the Moon. page 95. Of the Strres. page 96.
Of the Rainbow. page 97. Of Clouds. ibid. The Winds. page 98. Earthquakes,
and gaping of the Earth. ibid. The Ladder, the Step, a Case, a Millstone, a
Pestle, and the Cock. ibid. Eggs page 99. Monsters, or things against Nature.
ibid. Of Books. ibid. Of Partridges. page 100. Snares. ibid. Of Stripes. ibid.
Of Death. page 101 Carrying another, or being carried. page 103. Of the Dead.
ibid. Many and Treasures. page 104. Of Weeping. ibid. A Tomb. page 105. Of the
dead reviving and dying again. ibid. Of Weddings. page 106. Of the Swallow and
Nightingall. page 107. To fly. page 108. Of such as are worthy to be believed.
page 110.
Of the Third Book
Of Play at Dice or Tables. page 117. Of theft, Sacriledg, and Lying. ibid.
Quails and Cocks. page 118. Of Ants. page 119. Lice, and Long Worms. ibid. Of
Flies, Hornets, and little Worms which are engendered in the flesh. page 120.
Of Beating and Hatred. ibid. Of Slaughter. page 121. Of the Crocodile and the
Cat. ibid. Of Crutches. ibid. To walk upon the Sea. ibid. Sickness. page 122.
To make Statues, or Images of men. page 123. Fastened in a Cart, and carried in
it. ibid. To be apparelled ill favouredly. page 124. To write with the left
Hand. ibid. A Father in Law, and Mother in Law. ibid. Predecessors, and
Successors. ibid. The Rat and VVeasell. page 125. Dirt. Of the Basin. ibid. Of
the Image or Resemblance. page 126 Of the Midwife. ibid. Thorns and Stings.
ibid* A Chain. page 127. Comfort. ibid. A wound. ibid. Of Deabt, the Creditor,
and the hirer. ibid. To be a Fool, or Drunkard. page 128. Of Letters sent.
page 129. Plants and Trees coming out of the Body. ibid. Scab, Leprosy, and
Itch. ibid. To Ca^^ stones, or to be stoned, page 130. Grasshoppers. ibid. To
suffer as another, ibid. Dung, page 131. Prayers and Requests, ibid A Key, A
Cook. page 132. Chesse play, Butchers. page 133. An Inne-keeper, ibid To be
kept and detained, ibid Holy Evens, Joys, and Banquets, made by night. page
134* Places of Assembly, ibid Of Statues. Of the Mole. page 135. Night Birds.
ibid The Clock. page 136.
Of the Fourth Book.
Of the variety and diversity of Dreams. page 140 Of Stuff page 142. To meet
folks, ibid, of the first Estate and fortune, page 143 To judge that he whom
we think is our Enemy, is our friend, and the contrary. ibid To see or meet
Tradesmen, or any pleasant Maid, or woman* page 144 To see little children or
young men, to wit, of mea^ age, or old ^o l^^e^, page 145 Trees and Plants,
coming forth soon or late* Also of living Creatures ibid Walls, Foundations,
and old trees. page 146. Of Chariors. ibid. Of flattery. ibid. To be sold. page
147* To buy. (...) To get. ibid. Poverty. page 148. Things which one dreams to
befall little children, beyond their age. ibid. Ho^^ that which is signified by
one thing, is also oftentimes the signifier of the same thing. page 149
Concerning vomiting. ibid. For to see or have often the same dreams. ibid.
Concerning Ves^els and Instruments. page 150 Of Parentage. page 152 Things
which Encompasse. ibid. Imperfect or half finished Works. page 154 Concerning
Towns. ibid. If it be possible at the same time to have both good and bad
dreams. page 155 That our Brethren signify our Enemies. page 166 Funeral
Banquets, reviving, and mounting to Heaven. page 157 Within what time dreams
come. page 158
The Fif^h Book.
Containing certain Examples of Dreams, with their effects which followed.
page 159 Of the Emperor Augustus and Calphurnia. page 163 Of Publius Decius
and Manlius Torquatus, Consuls of Rome. page 165 Of Cicero. page 166 Of Caius
Gracchus. page 167 Of Arthur Rous. ibid. Of Haniball of Carthage. page 168
Alexander the Great. page 169 The Poet Simon des. page 170 King Croesus. page
171 King Astiages, and Cyrus the first. page 172 Of Amilcar. page 173 (...)
Alcibiades, and of the two Arcadians. page 174
FINIS.

