depiction of Cupid leading a man and a woman, with two more following. THE ART
OF MAKING LOVE


Love to this Temple all true lovers leads
And all the Charmeing paths with roses spreads
Where they with Lawrells and with Mirtles Crowned
Line always happy and renewned.
The ART OF MAKING LOVE: OR, RULES FOR THE CONDUCT OF Ladies and Gallants In
their AMORS.

Non solum faciem, mores quoque con^er, and arts
Tautum Judicio, ne tuus ob^it Amor.
Ov. LONDON: Printed by J. Cotterel, for Richard Tonson, at Grays-Inne-Gate in
Grays-Inne-Lane. 1676.

TO MADAM F. K.
Madam,
HOw long will you suffer Love to weep? for having spent all his Darts against
your Heart in vain, he confesses that he owes to the power of your conquering
Eyes a thousand Victories, yet he receives no content from all these Conquests,
since you (too too Obedurate Fair one) refuse to grace his Triumph. Behold him
at your feet attended by a thousand Kings and Heroes in Chains, begging
admittance into your little Family of Love; it is there he desires to establish
the Seat of a new Empire, and in your Heart to erect his Throne. Dispute,
Dispute no longer, most charming Creature, but since Nature has been profuse in
giving you all the Graces of ind and Body, let Love give a finishing hand:
without it your Eyes will loose that all-dissolving Sweetness which melts the
most flinty Hearts, and your Virtue will be a little too severe; it is Love,
Love only, that gives the last perfection.

Take heed that Cruelty and Injustice does not Tarnish the luster of your
excellent Qualities; but as your Eyes are the sweetest in the world, so let
your Heart be tender; and as your Virtue, Wit, and Beauty has gained you the
Title of the Fair Saint, be not inexorable to the Vows of him who sighs
incessantly for you, and languishes under the Rigor of a long and cruel
absence; and by me presents you with these Verses.

1.
Love sits enthroned in fair Aretia's eyes,
Where he in Triumph raigns,
Secure of the Victories
Which he each hour obtains.
2.
His Slaves and Captives happy seem,
And kiss the Chains they wear:
They wish not Freedom to redeem,
Nay, nothing more they fear.
3.
The poor Almedor only lies
Prostrate with bleeding Heart,
Wounded by Darts shot from her Eyes,
Whilst she delays to cure the Smart.
4.
O Love! whose Empire is so vast,
If thou would universal be,
To conquer fair Aretia have,
And wound her too, as deep as me.
5.
Then from her Eyes remove thy Throne
INto her tender Heart,
Permitting ever me alone
To share a little part.
Ah! Charmant fille, vivre sans aimer nest pas vivre, and l'on vit seulment
quand on aim.

MADAM, Your Ladyships most Humble Servant

TO THE READER.
A Virtuous and Reaonable Love is so rarely found, that I cannot wonder that it
is confounded with Lust; nor to find so many sharp Invectives against it,
since we are apt to mistake one for the other. The Author of Conjugium
Conjurgium tells his Friend Philoginus, That Lust is nothing else but what he
calls Love; and that all those Allurements of Beauty, Riches, Greatness,
Apparel, and Deportment, Looks, Gestures, Discourses, Familiarity, Toying,
Fooling, Singing, Music, Dancing, etc. tend only to it, to excite and
satisfy it. I am sorry his Friend should be such a Simpleton as to distinguish
so ill between 'em: but indeed, I doubt he Author has charged a Folly upon him,
of which he was not guilty; for I do not find that the young Gentleman had any
such Conceptions; and for any thing that I can learn, the Lady he was about to
marry was a very Virtuous and a Modest Woman, and a passing good Houswife; and
then he has thrown away his good Advice upon one who stood not in need of it,
and shown himself very extravagant in railing against Marriage in general,
after be has said in his Epistle, That there are few Marriages grounded on the
immovable Rock of true Virtue; which implies, that it is not improbable, though
not common, to find Love and Marriage built upon sich Foundations: But he
confesses himself to be Ictus Piscator, a man who had a Drab to his Wife;
therefore we may pardon his indignation against a Sex which has so much
disobliged him, and yet hope not to be so ill treated.

It Is Ingenuity to confess, that part of this Book is taken from the Gallant
Morale of Monsieur Boulanger, which he dedicates to the young Dauphin: the
Treatise is like a Gallant of his own Country, clad with a great deal of
superfluous and ridiculous Garniture, ends and fragments of Poetry; which the
Writer of this, has stripped him of, and hopes, though he has made it less
gaudy, he has not rendered it less agreeable.

You are here taught the way to vanquish Illustrious Hearts, and to glorious
Victories; and if you observe his Conduct, though you fail of success, yet the
Amarous War will be less expensive than profitable; and if you are forced to
retreat, it will always be with honor: and as it is said of those Chemists who
obstinately pursue their search for the Philosophers Stone, though they never
obain it, yet in their Progress they meet so many pleasant and profitable
Entertainments as recompenses their Travel.

He permits you not to waste your time in the pursuit of a Wanton, or those
foolish Creatures who are captivated by a Song of Monsense a la mode, with a
ga^^y suit of Clothes, or the Charms of some other thing I must not name; the
Sir Foplings may continue unrivaled; their Amors, since their Victories are
not worth a Stratagem.

He gives you an Image of Love, as it ought to be, such as is consistent with
Reason, and may be innocently entertained in the hearts of the most Brave and
Virtuous. He erects all his Altars, and pays all his Adorations to Venus
Urania; and all his Sacrifices are immaculate, to which he permits none to
approach, but with submissions and respects; nor no Vows to be made, but what
are pure and innocent, as that Divine Flame which animates her Adorers. It Is on
this chaste Goddess that Fortune waits, from whose hands a happy Lover receives
a Crown composed of Laurels and of Myrtles: let not therefore the most innocent
and virtuous Lady, or the greatest Hero blush, or disdain to avow a Passion
which conducts them to the Temple of Honor: but that they may more certainly
arrive there, let them study well the Precepts contained in this Book, and they
then may be assured to be fortunate and happy.

LICENSED, April 17. 1676. Roger L'Estrange.

There is lately published an Ingenious Piece, Entitled The Courtiers Calling:
Showing the ways of making a Fortune, and the Art of living at Court, According
to the Maxims of Policy and Morality. By a Person of Honor. In 12o. price
bound 1 s. 6 d. Sold by Richard Tonson, at Grays-Inne-Gate in Grays-Inne-Lane.

There are some Errata's in the Book, but the writer says he is too tazie to
give you a Note of them.

The ART of Making LOVE: OR, RULES For the Conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amors.
CHAP. I. Of the nature and power of Love.
VArious have been the Opinions concerning Love, that Passionate Love I mean,
which is only found between persons of a different Sex; and the mistakes about
it, have opened the mouths of many wise and religious men against it, who speak
of it as pernicious to Youth, born of Idleness and Ease, and nourished by Sloth
and Luxury, as a Weed that grows up in youthful minds which destroys the early
seeds of Virtue, and hinder 'em in the pursuit of glorious Actions; making no
distinction between it and that brutish desire which we call Lust; with this
difference only, that when our desires are determined to this or that person,
it is called Love; and when like a Flame driven with the Wind, to which it is
compared, it rages every where, and knows no bounds, they give it that other
name. From hence it is they abound with Precepts and Cautions to prevent the
minds of Youth from being poisoned, as they term it, with this destructive
Passion, forbid the reading of Romances, from whence they pretend young Ladies
fancies are depraved and debauched, and disposed with ease to dispense with
Duty and Honor, and all other considerations, to follow the fortunes of any
spruce and impertinent fool, or desperate ruffian.

I know not what Instances they can produce of these pernicious consequences,
or how many examples in those excellent Romances, which are the common
entertainment of the most virtuous Ladies: They have been writ as Images of
Virtue, and as Representations of the beauty and glory of a Life without
blemish: Honor, Generosity, Courage, and Fortitude, and all other qualities,
which render a person most amiable, are set off in the greatest luster, to
engage us to pursue the acquisition of them, and to render hateful and
detestable the contrary Vices, which are represented with all the deformity and
destructive consequences: but it fills, say they, the mind with extravagant
Visions, and imbues the Soul with a foolish enderness and pity, which makes 'em
liable to become an easy Prey to any one, who by flattery and feigned
submissions, have the opportunity to insinuate themselves into their company. I
answer, That there will always be a number of vain, fond, and indiscreet
persons in the World; but how can that be ascribed to the reading of those
Books, which the rather help them to discern into the little Arts and Practices
of men and women to enshare each other, acquaint 'em with all the Cajolings and
counterfeit Virtues, and teach them to distinguish between the true and false
crowning the constant Virtue, after it has taught him patience and fortitude in
the Traverses of this life, and leading the other to Infamy, Confusion, and
Disgrace, the consequences of all inglorious actions?

The greatest enemies to Love are such who are possessed with contrary
Passions: for an old rich Cormorant, when he finds his Son or his Daughter
touched by this Passion, he stays not to examine the Merit of the person; it is
nothing to him whether he be Wise, Virtuous, and Valiant: If it cross his
designs of Avarice, he labors all he can to chase it from their breasts, and
to destroy the early Seed: He raves, and storms, and thunders in his trembling
Childrens ears, That Love is a Folly, Weakness, and Madness; and wants not many
Examples of the deplorable effects, and ruinous consequences of it; confounding
a Passion full of Innocence, and grounded upon Virtue, with that of Lust; whose
lawless Rage is the cause of all thee disasters, which he unjustly charges upon
Love: Unjustly I say, for though that inordinate and irregular desire which we
call Lust, often proves calamitous, and the cause of many misfortunes, involving
sometimes whole Families in blood and infamy; yet without doubt Love, when it is
grounded upon Reason, works far different Effects, and is that which makes up
the Felicity of those in whose breasts that Divine Flame finds entertainment.
Of this Love I cannot say any thing too advantageous; it is the Soul of the
Soul of the Soul, the very Source of all our laudable Passions; it makes us
Generous, Brave, Civil, Liberal; it refines the Wit, and inflames to all worthy
Actions. These are the natural Effects, being the means to obtain that Charming
Object which we love: It sweetens the most Rough and Salvage Tempers, softens
the Heart, and renders mild and affable the most Barbarous Dispositions:
Without it we have none of those noble Sallies of the Soul, which excite to
Heroique Actions, which make us surmount the most difficult Obstacles. Nothing
is impossible to Love; it is fruitful in Miracles, and renders all things easy
to a Lover, whom at last vanquishes and triumps over all things; it inflames
his desires, excites his hopes, and gives Fire to all those Passions which may
advance its Empire.

Those persons whom I have mentioned being prepossessed with a false Virtue,
whereof they make an idol, look upon it as contrary to Heroic Actions, and are
so gravely scrupulous, as hat they will not suffer it to touch their ears: They
treat at it as a Chimaera, and mere extravagance; and if any friend of theirs
become inamoured, they always find something to reproach him for; with so much
blindness and precipitation do they censure what deserves true Elogies,
stopping their ears to all justification. But what is the reason of this, but
the want of reflection on the means to render it reasonable? for they regard it
as a blind Fury in its greatest violence, and as a Torrent when it is most
rapid, without considering that the greatest Fury in its birth, is but a light
Passion; and that the Torrent which is most impetuous in its course, is but a
Gut of Water in its Source. The same may be said of Love, which in its birth is
no other than a ligh emotion, which is excited in our Souls by the Charm of a
beautiful and pleasing Object conveyed by the eyes to the heart. If we attack
it in that Infant estate, we may easily vanquish it, and reduce it to terms of
Reason: yet in this Combat we must regard it as a formidable enemy, and spare
neither Force nor Stratagem.

Its power extends over the Universe, and all our other Passions are led
Captive by it. It disarms our Fury, changes our Hate, and assumes an absolute
Empire over our Wills; which Empire is as universal as that of Death: No
Nation, no Age nor Sex, but live under its Laws; and whilst all other Empires
have their bounds, Love knows not any. The greatest professors of severe
Virtue, have not been wholly exempt from his imperious power; he darts his
irresistible Arrows to their Hearts, and renders them, one time or other,
amorous, maugre all their strivings; and on these Love seems to take its
greatest vengeance, because of their resistance.

No Age can plead exemption from its Laws; for if you urge your Youth, Love
will tell you, That he is a Boy, and yet has given his heart to his Dear Psyohe;
and if you demand other Examples, he will let you see a thousand, who in their
Infancy have been taught to give obedience to its power.

If you plead Old age, and would excuse your selves by that, he will show you a
thousand amorous Old men, who will tell you, That Old age is most proper for a
reasonable Love, and who will say to you with a brisk and not ungallant Voice,
In our Amors you discern nothing of the Coldness of Age: It Is in young hearts
that Love creates too great transports; when we love, our Years augment our
Wisdom, and render us more submissive, more discreet, ardent, and more constant.

Thus we may see that Love exercises its Empire upon all men, of what Age and
Condition soever they be; so extensive is its Empire, and so uncontrolable is
its Power.

This may admonish us how difficult it is to subject it to our Reason. If we do
not oppose its growth even in its birth, and use our greatest efforts to
regulate it, nothing is more subtle, crafty, and insinuating, than Love; for
its Address is as great as its Force, and it has the art to vanquish us by our
own arms: for if we oppose our other Passions to it, which are the best Arms we
have, Reason only excepted, it seizes upon them straight by an admirable
Dexterity, and turns them against our selves; and there is not one who in this
Gombate willnot betray us, turn Renegado, and range it self on the part of Love
whenever it pleases. Thus it extends its Empire every where; it raigus in
Heaven, and in all the Regions of the Air, Earth, and Sea; the Plants
themselves are sensible of its power, and, in short, all things that are Mortal
must be subject to Love and Death.

That which begets most Astonishment is, that Love has the power and address to
serve it self with all our Passions, and to convert to the same use even things
that are most contrary to it. It makes not only use of our Desires, but also
even of Aversion, and our flight from the Object loved, which are opposite to
it, for the same design. It is in vain that we believe to vanquish Love, in
flying the sight of the Object which we find amiable in spite of us; and we
had need well consult our selves, before we resolve to deprive our eyes of the
sight of it, to the end to tear out the Picture that Love has graved in our
heart.

That same Heart, which sighs under its Tyranny, and which we desire to
infranchise, will tell you sighing, that it will rather take part with Love
than against it; and that absence will but only increase its sufferings, and
enslave it more. No, no, this flight will not cure the Amorous Wound: the Darts
of Love stick in the Wounds of miserable Lovers; and the more they chase, and
the faster they fly away, the Wounds become more mortal.

For that Passion which we call Hope, it does not only give aid to Love as the
other, but it is even the Throne of Love, where it appears with most Pomp and
Luster, from whence it shoots its most inevitable Darts. It is by this Passion
it finishes the most glorious Enterprises, and by which it preserves its
Conquests; it entirely captivates us to Love, and it is so fearful that we
should break its Chains, that it flatters us incessantly with a thousand
Sweets; and it is so ingenious in the important services it renders to Love,
that it flatters a Lover into the most gross deceipts. This is the great
Consolation of miserable Lovers, and even by its help alone they are encouraged
to such a constant pursuit, as at last overcomes the most rebellious heart.

Despair also ranges it self on the side of Love; for it is so ingenious and so
malicious together, that it lets us see that we love in vain; and yet seduces
us so craftily with the Charms of a false Glory, and Spurs us on to a
ridiculous Generosity, to think our selves happy to die for an insensible
Ingrate, who laughs at us all the time of our Love and Death, yet in making
this Resolution we believe we merit a Crown.

Courage is no less of the party of Love; for Love first imprints this great
Maxim in our Spirits, That the most fair, love always the most brave.

Fear, though it be contrary to Courage, yet it is no less of the party of
Love, and is no less serviceable to Love than it, when that Sovereign of the
Passions ordains it: and most Lovers confess every day, that their fears are
only an excess of Love. Consider these, timorous Lovers, when they approach
those surprising Beauties which charm them, they find themselves speechless,
they sigh, and almost sound away, and dare not lift up their eyes, or open
their mouths, to regard them, or to complain, nor even to sigh; so much they
are afraid to offend these visible Divinities which they adore.

It is true, that Fear is so entirely submitted to Love, that when it pleases,
it begets that Passion in the heart of the greatest Hero; and he who has seen
without the least Consternation the fall of Empires, has yet trembled at the
presence of her he adores.

Yet nevertheless this Fear is not of the kind of those servile Fears, which
make men tremble for themselves: Fears so base, enter not into those great
hearts, they are only for the Object loved, for whose sakes they readily throw
themselves into the greatest Perils.

It is this Passion that Love make use of to establish its Empire: for
persuading these undaunted Spirits, that the Object loved measures always the
grandeur of their Passions by that of the fear they ought to have for the
safety of what they love; it makes them forget their own, and makes them
tremble, maugre all their Courage, to testify the excess of their Love, and to
augment by that, that of the person beloved.

It does not only make them forget their proper safety, but also the care of
their Reputation in many occasions, and makes them prefer the care to save the
person beloved, to all other cares which regard their Honor. It was for this
reason, that the great Pompey refused to combat Caesar, and at the expense of
his Reputation he deferred a Battle, on which depended all his Fortune and all
his Glory, till he had rendered out of danger what he loved above himself. It
was at this time only that Pompey's courage abandoned him, and fear made the
Husband of Cornelia tremble. It Is in the like occasions that Love made us see
the prodigious power that it has over us, by that ingenious Address that it
has to make use of our Passions against our selves: and certainly that Power
and that Address are equally admirable and charming, when they are the cause or
the effect of a Reasonable Love.

Respect, which is a Species of that timorous Passion, and which may be called
a Noble fear, confirms all that I have said. And it is by this that Love does
most extend its Empire.

This Respect augments with Love, and with the fear we have for the person
beloved. In short, we see every day, that he who strives not to please by
Respect, and principally at Court, where Love is most reasonable and most
refined, never succeeds in his Amors.

This Respect is the very Source of all Love's power, and it may be truly
said, that without it that Love is not capable to make those glorious and
difficult Conquests which it Atchieves.

It is that which we observe when Love attacks those hearts whose scrupulous
Virtue being sensible of their weakness, fears the sight of those Lovers which
press them; for then these equally severe and tender Souls find themselves in
a very pitiful estate; sometimes they fear to give ear to their Sighs, because
they find themselves too weak, without running the risque of engaging their
hearts; and other times they are equally afraid to appear inhumane. If they
refuse to hearken to them, it is because they believe that there is too much
rigor in such a Refusal; yet at last they find themselves constrained to be
pitiful, insomuch that their hearts are engaged insensibly by that inquietude.
As soon as they perceive they love that which they fear, their hearts complain
of them, and making at once reflection on what it suffers in this hard Combat,
it cannot forbear sighing. Love, which makes all these Attacks, is astonished
with this resistance, and may be would carry his Attempt no farther, if he did
not serve himself of Respect; which he makes appear to the Attaqu'd heart in
the eyes of her Lover, whose looks are so animated with Love, that in a moment
Respect triumphs over her heart, maugre all resistance, and thus renders Love
victorious.

See the true Picture of this Combat, and of this Victory, made by one of
these fearful and scrupulous Ladies.

I would, and straight I would not! thus I roll
Uncertain thoughts in my unquiet Soul.
To his Complaints and Sighs to stop my ears,
Inhumane and too rigorous appears.
When he his Love and Sufferings does confess,
My Heart does melt with too much tenderness:
Then sighing straight I do my self accuse,
Yet think it unjust my pity to refuse.
At last his Love joined with a deep Respect,
Betrays my Thoughts, and does my Heart subject.
It is so true, that the chief power of Love consists in this Respect, that
when a Lover behaves himself in a manner full of Respect before one of these
fair severe ones, it seems to her-that such a Lover intends with all her
Enemies to betray her, and to vanquish her. So much does she find her self
attacked in all the places of her Heart: In that thought, and in that Assault,
she finds she wants the force to resist him; and she abases her self even to
conjure this respectuous Lover, to affront and to provoke her hate; so much she
finds her self pressed by the violence of his Respect.

Ah! Tircis cease, cease, I desire,
Do not against my Peace conspire.
Banish Respect, me Cruel call,
Reproach, Affront, and still against me rail,
And say I Am proud, fantastical and vain:
This soon will mitigate my pain.
Then I shall yet be Mistress of my Will,
And able to resist thee still.
Spare me the Shame and Blushes which will rise
Into my Face and Eyes,
When thou compelst me to disclose
My Weakness, and my Troubles to expose;
For when thou sighst, alas, I feel a smart,
And Pity steals into my yielding Heart.
Fear does not only beget Love, which makes use of it not only to introduce
it self into a Heart, but also by its means Love establishes it self there, and
secures it self from being despoyl'd of the Fruit of its Victories.

It is by dissembling this Fear, that a Lady who loves, and is unwilling to
loose her Servant, tells him trembling, That she would not for all the world
any should know her tenderness for him. She caresses him only in secret, to
the end he may esteem her favors greater. Thus she awakens by this Fear and
Circumspection, which she feigns, the Fires which else might die without it,
because that then that abused Lover sets so much a greatervalue upon her
Favors and Caresses, as they cost him more dear, and are given more rarely and
in secret. This is most usually practiced by the expert Miss of the Town, who
always paints an Image of Fear upon her Face, to increase the price of her
Favors, which else might be neglected.

It is then certain, that the fear which ought to defend us against Love when
it is not reasonable, forsakes us as the other Passions, and flies over to the
party of Love whenever it pleases.

Choler, which by reason of its transport seems most contrary to Love, fails
not to accord with Love, and to take part against us when it pleases.

And certainly if Love be ingenious in managing all our other Passions against
us, he shows an Art wholly admirable in the use of this. See how he works when
he sees a Lover who believes himself betrayed by his Mistress, and who with a
just despite comes to reproach her Levity and Inconstancy; he is so afraid
that this Captive should break his Chains, that he quickly has a recourse to
Choler; he blows it into the heart of that fickle Mistress, making her do all
the extravagant Actions that Rage and Despair can inspire into a Lady who
looses all that she loves. By this feigned Choler he imprints so tender a pity
in the heart of that abused Lover, that he becomes more amorous than ever: and
if his Friends reproach him with his Weakness, he answers, That he cannot
return her less than Love for the marks of a Love so great; and exaggerates a
thousand furious actions that he has seen this desparing Lady do, by which he
suffers himself to be entirely reenslaved beyond redemption.

Behold how Love serves it self of this Passion, to make us love even more
violently than we ever did! for by these Quarrels which happen betwixt Lovers,
Love re-enforces it self; and there seems a new birth of it in the heart of him
who accuses, when the accused justifies her self: for what disorder soever
Reproaches produce betwixt Lovers, the Criminal finds Pardon a sweet Remedy,
which is always attended by some new Favors. In short, there is nothing so
ravishing and so sweet to a Lover, after a transport of Choler against his
Mistress which he believes unfaithful, than to see her in pain to appease him,
and to give good reasons to excuse an imaginary offense, and to wipe her eyes
with her fair hand, and to pay his unjust Tears by a thousand fresh favors.

It only remains that I speak of Joy and Grief, to let you see that Love is
absolute Master of all our Passions when it pleases, I mean when we do not
subject it to our Reason.

If we consider that Joy is no other thing than the fruition of an agreeable
Good, which renders the Soul content, and which interdicts the use of Desire,
as well as of Sorrow and Fear; it only suffices to make us conceive the true
Idaea of it, and to promise us the enjoyment, to engage us to whatsoever it
pleases. This Love is not wanting in, and it knows so well how to represent
that Idaea in so charming a manner, that it bewitches our eyes, and forgets not
to tell us in making us see that agreeable Image of Pleasure, that it is the
end of all things; it fails not to show us that it arrests the violence of our
Desires, and constrains all our wandering Passions to taste repose, which are
not to be found but in it; that it sweetens our Anger, and takes away the
fierce Humor which accompanies it; and that it is it self the recompense of
all those long Travels which we suffer in its acquest: that it chases away
Fear, and banishes all those vain Terrors which disquiet our Souls: it
banishes also Despair and Sorrow; and if it still retain Tears and Sighs, it is
as spoils which publish its Victory, and which honor its Triumph. In short, it
lets you see that Pleasure is all you wish, and all you want; and it promises
you the enjoyment with so apparent certainty, that it is impossible not to
render your selves, when it attacks you by its utmost power.

But though it does not finish this Conquest only by that Charming Idaea, yet
since it knows how to expose it in so attractive a manner, that it is almost
impossible not to be seduced, as soon as it represents to our eyes and fancies
the sole Image of the places where it makes us taste these Delights.

It is by these Arts that Love conceals the true Torment in which it makes us
languish when we take not the pains to render it reasonable, which we ought to
do before we permit it entrance into our Hearts; for if we do not, but suffer
it to become our Master by its finesses, it makes such a ravage in our Souls, as
nothing in the World is in so deplorable a state, as that to which it will
reduce us. It is a certain truth, and whereof we cannot doubt, if we will
believe those who have fallen into its Nets; for in recounting this pitiful
History, they will tell you in a very miserable Tone:

With Lightning and with Thunder armed,
Love first my Sense alarmed.
He straight a Victory did pursue,
And did my feeble Will subdue.
My Reason then after a weak dispute
Rendered my heart! Thus Love was absolute.
Then I beheld my breast
In every part possessed
With torturing Fears,
Anxieties and Cares;
With lingering hopes and strong desires
Which bur'd with raging Fires,
With day and nights Inquietudes,
And numerous broods
Of vain Displeasures, and of long Regrets
Which hourly gnaw and fret
My breast with Languors and Impatiencies,
With vain Distrusts, Despairs, and short Despites,
Which in my Soul tumultuously arise,
And all my Rest and Peace do sacrifice.
Thus does Tyrannick Love my heart infest,
And plunders it of all Repose and Rest.
If we blame these unfortunate Gallants for being so seduced by this
unregulated Passion, they quickly excuse their Weakness, by the force and
crafts of that agreeable Imposture, and paint to you all the false Pleasures
which it promises.

As to the Passion of Sorrow, it is no less serviceable to Love in the
finishing its Conquest; and what is most admirable, it makes use of this
Passion in a hundred different manners for the same design, that is to say, to
subject us to him in despite of our selves and the assistance of our Reason.

When he sees that a fair and insensible Lady will not admit him into her
Heart, and that he has put in practice unprofitably all his Wiles, he at last
has recourse to this Passion, and from its aid obtains what he desires. He
sweetens the disconsolate and despairing Lovers Sorrows, and persuades him that
Pity will at last vanquish his obdurate Mistress; by which means he makes him
endure all his Sufferings with satisfaction, and pursue it through a million of
Pains and Torments, which at last vanquish the Heart, which was thought
invincible.

Yet though the Empire of Love be as vast as that of the World, and that all
men without exception are his Subjects, and that by his Craft he renders
himself Master of all our Passions; yet this is but a part of the Power of this
agreeable Tyrant; so many Stratagems he has to vanquish us: for there is one
great Art more, by which love seduces us, that is, to diguise it self under the
mask of Friendship, by which it surprises and captivates us before we are aware.

For this Disguise gives a free Access; it shows it self in a thousand places
where Love dares not appear, if it were known: And as there is no person who
receives not joyfully this Friendship into their hearts, so there is no Heart
prepared against the Artifice of this disguised Traitor. Behold the Description
of one of these Disguisements, and of one of the Conquests which Love made
under the name of Friendship.

Friendship and Love with their Parade
Rambl'd one night in Masquerade
At Celin's house, where at the Ball
They did attract the eyes of all.
Young, like a Damosel brisk and trim,
Friend ship appeared, whilst Love came in
Dressed like a humble Maid, all Modesty,
With blushing Cheeks, and down-cast Eye.
Charms, Joys, and Graces followed closely after
With Cares, and Fears, mingled with Sports and Laughter.
The Maskers soon were by their Train betrayed;
But which was Love, there still a doubt was made.
Friendship was rudely used in this Disguise;
Each timorous Nymph from her Acquaintance flies.
Chloris cried, Pish, Celinda, come not near,
And all her dangerous Company did fear.
Love, with Success far different, was crowned;
He was by every one encompassed round.
Under this Mask, their hearts he Captive made,
Who did too late discern they were betrayed.
There is one thing more which Love makes use of with success, and that is
Gold; for he sees few persons refuse their Heart, when that rich Metal demands
it. For this Reason it is said, That Gold is the Vanquisher of Women, and by
consequence all the Powers of the Earth, since the power of that beautiful Sex
has not yet found limits in the whole extent of Nature.

In fine, there is nothing in the World which is not of the party of Love, and
whereof he does not dispose at his pleasure, against those who reist him: and
by consequence, there is no power so dreadful as his; for if we consider his
Empire, it is as large as the Universe; and if we regard his Subjects, we shall
see amongst them as many Kings and Heroes as in all the Earth; and if we make
reflection upon all within and without us, we can spy nothing that is not ready
to assist Love in its Conquensts. From hence we may see, that it is not easy
to reduce Love to a submission to our Reason, to effect which, we stand in need
to engage all our Force and Wit.

CHAP. II. The means to submit Love to Reason.
IF we would subject Love to Reason, we must surprise and arrest it whilst it
is still in our eyes, to the end that we may consult our Reason before it go
too far; and the better to know it, and to stay it in its passage, we must know
how it makes its first entrance, and what it is we feel when it makes its
nearer accesses to the Heart; of which it will quickly become Master, if we be
not as subtle as it, and prevent its progress.

When we observe something rare, which we cannot express in a beautiful person,
we at present regard it with attetion, only to content our curiosity. This is
the first stage that Love makes, thence it glides into our Eyes with the
charming Idaea. At the first view the Object appears only agreeable, and only
gives a simple desire to know what it is: when we have learned this, our
Curiosity augments, and desiring to learn more, we carefully seek the means to
speak to her, that we may see whether her Spirit and Conversation answers to
her Beauty. Having tried her Wit, and gained some knowledge of her humor, we
begin to have a more than ordinary complaisance for her: we feel a secret
pleasure when we see and speak to her; which we do so often, that it becomes so
much a custom, that we cannot quit her company without regret: When we part
with her, we are pensive, and the Soul without perceiving any thing flatters it
self by a thousand amusing and delightful thoughts. When we have dallied a few
days with these thoughts, we begin to be sensible of something without a name,
which begins to trouble our repose: our sleeps, which begin to be unquiet,
represent a thousand agreeable Images, which beget many wishes even in our
Dreams. It Is then we may conclude that our Hearts are no longer our own, but
are become Captives whilst we thought them free.

See how Love glides into the Heart through the Eyes, and in what manner it
acts to render it self master, when it finds a person who makes little
resistance, and who does not dispute its Triumphant Progress, by opposing all
the forces of Reason to it. When we perceive our selves moved by that first
curiosity which fastens our Eyes upon a beautiful Object, let our first
thoughts be to distrust our selves, and to hold for an undoubted principle,
that there is nothing more cunning or insinuating than that fair Sex; and that
there is no kind of Stratagem which they make not use of to make themselves
beloved, because in that they place their greatest glory.

With this diffidence we must examine with care all the draughts of that beauty
which begins to charm us; and how extraordinary soever they are, let us not
give an entire credit to our Eyes, but imagine that our Senses may be
deceivers; and to fortify our selves in these thoughts, hold for a principle
as certain, that there are no Beauties absolutely perfect, or at least the
number is very small.

Let us not therefore presently believe that what we see has not so much
beauty as she appears to have; let us always fancy that she may have some
concealed deformity, which will be too late for us to discover when once our
Hearts are no longer in our own possession; for when the Soul is possessed with
that flagrant Passion, the sick Fancy does so unite the scattered perfections,
that no imperfections can be visible to an entangled Inamarato.

We must not therefore suffer our selves to be dazzled by these surprising
interviews, but preserve our selves free for some time; and not believe a
Beauty all perfect, till we have viewed and examined all things at our leisure.

Yet it is not enough that a Woman be fair only to merit our Love; for there
is nothing so frail and changeable as Beauty, nor nothing so fading as its
Charms: It is also necessary that the Beauty of the Mind and of the Soul
accompany it, if we desire our Loves should be solid, and endure as long as our
Lives.

When we find a Beauty in all things perfect, in which the Sun it self cannot
discover the least blemish; let us reflect that there is nothing so subject to
a miserable change as her Beauty: for nothing is so fading, or has so many
Enemies as its Charms. The Sun is its jealous Enemy, and the Fire destroys it:
All things in Nature seem to conspire the ruin of the fairest things. This may
teach us to make but small account of the Beauty of the Body, if it be not
accompanied by that of the Mind. Nature wills, that Roses should endure but
for a moment, and Thorns for ever. Hence it is that we see every day a thousand
Lovers who mock at those proud Ladies who have only the beauty of the body for
their Portion; for when their Pride and Vanity swell so high, that they believe
all men ought of duty to die for 'em, this unjust Rigor causes those poor
Idolaters to return to Reason; and then perceiving how little incense these
fair Inhumanes deserve, there is not one who in his turn will not say in scorn,

1.
Imperious Beauty, take what care you will,
Be scornful, and disdainful still;
Your Beauty gone, I shall be free
From this inglorious Slaverie.
2.
One scorching Fever will deface
Each beauteous Linament and Grace;
And in that heat which sets you all on fire,
My ardent flames will soon expire.
3.
When once the Roses from your Cheeks depart,
And Luster from your Eyes,
I Will pluck the Thorns out of my Heart,
And your passed Charms despise.
4.
In time, that old Physician Age
My Torments will assuage,
Who every day will play the Thief,
And of your Beauty you bereave,
Snatching you from the number of the Fair,
And me at once from those who wretched are.
See how these proud ones are treated whilst their Beauty flourishes; but they
are more outrageously dealt with when Diseases or Wrinkles claps on a frightful
and unmovable Vizard on their Faces, it is then the Gallants whom they
scornfully used will revenge themselves by a thousand Scoffs, Reproaches, and
Lampoons.

Thus Beauty changes, and with it all its fond Idolaters; we must not therefore
suffer our selves to be captivated, though we find a Beauty in perfection; but
let us examine well whether the beauty of the Soul answer to that of her Body;
for it is that alone which can entertain Love longest, and will render us the
most happy. In short, there is nothing more fading than those Amorous sweets
which make the Paradise of Lovers, if they are not refined and spiritual; for
if they be not, they are more proper for Beasts than reasonable Creatures.

We ought not therefore, though we find a person infinitely fair and charming,
to suffer our selves to be ensnared by her, if she be not as infinitely Witty:
for Wit makes all the sweets of a reasonable life, and without it Love cannot
render us happy, or at least for any long time; for there is nothing can
entertain us long but the Charms of the Mind, which are able to make it endure
eternally.

Yet neither is it enough that we find as much Wit as Beauty in her we begin
to love; we must also learn whether the Soul have as fair qualities as the
Spirit and the Body: for if an excellent and unstained Soul, replenished with
goodness, does not accompany those Charms, they serve only to blind us, and
to lead us to Precipices, where our ruin is inevitable. In short, there is
nothing which is not fatal in a beautiful Woman, if she be vicious; and by
consequence, nothing which we ought more to detest: We must therefore make a
swift retreat upon the first appearances, lest we be caught, and want the power
to disengage our selves from the enchantments of that fatal Beauty. Of this,
that famous Greek presents us an example: And though there are few Ladies which
are so dangerous as she, yet there are few who are not Proud, Cruel,
Ungrateful, Inconstant, Weak, Vain, and Humorous, if they want Virtue, which
only regulates the Passions, and makes Reason always govern in our Souls.

These defects are not so easily discerned in a Woman as we believe: for all
those fair ones have a million of Inventions and Artifices to conceal them; the
principle of which arts is to blind us, by exposing their fairest qualities,
and hiding with care their imperfections. Let us be vigilant in our search,
lest we be deluded: for if we be once persuaded by this subtle Art, Love is o
longer in the Eyes, it lies already in the Heart, where it plays the Tyrant,
and by a force so uncontrollable, that we have no longer power to make any
resistance.

A second craft of these fair Deceivers is, that when they see that we do not
discover the Hook which they conceal under their false Charms, and that we run
after it, they play the cunning Anglers, feign to draw it away, to make us more
greedy of the fatal Bait: for after they have given us the first stroke, they
know how to augment our desires by delays, little Coldnesses, short Divorces,
Amorous Complants, secret Reproaches, and counterfeit Angers.

There are some who exceed these in craft; they have the art to mingle so well
sweetness with severity, that a poor Lover spends all his time in the vain
pursuit of a Bliss, which he only tastes in imagination, without ever being
weary of his fruitless travel. Sometimes they give him ardent desires mixed with
a few sparks of hope; then straight with one haughty look inspire a fear so
respectuous, that they see their Lovers at once in Ice and Fire; and because
they know that Love dies after it is enjoyed, they are so maliciously
ingenious, that by little favors, whereof on such occasions they are not
thrifty, they nourish the languishing distemper, and never ease or satisfy it.

But amongst the number of these beautiful Decoyers of Hearts, none make so
many Conquests as those who dissemble a false Devotion, and a counterfeit
Virtue: This makes every day new Slaves, and oftentimes the most brave and
Illustrious are Captivated by these fair dissemblers; for under that deceitful
Mask, they seduce even the most reasonable persons.

As for those who dissemble by false appearances of Virtue, they have an
universal art, able to seduce all mankind. No Cameleon takes so many different
forms, nor Protheus who assumes so many different shapes, to allure an innocent
heart, and a man of an easy belief as these dissemblers. The very shadow of a
Vice offends her scrupulous modesty; she dissembles an extreme coldnessfor all
her Servants; and feigning to neglect the making Conquests, she flies all
places and entertainments of Love: and to render our desires more vigorous and
curious, she exposes her self as little as she can to view. She counterfeits
always a modest air, and a sober and prudent deportment, and seems to be
ignorant in the use of her Charms: When an intoxicated Lover makes his address
to her, and is about making a declaration of love to her, she imposes silence
on him, and for a while she will by no means give any audience to him: This
increases his respect, and preserves the dignity of the Throne of Love. She
feigns to be as ignorant of his Language, as if he came from a foreign Nation;
and under an innocent face, this crafty Mistress shows her art by her seeming
stupidity: and in short, she assumes the air and fashions of a mere Novice, and
counterfeits ignorance of an art which is all her study.

Behold part of the Artifices of these false and pretending Virtues; they
conceal all their Defects, by which, as I have said, they endanger the wisest
persons: but upon the least appearance, or the least conjecture that you have
of their disguisements, fly them as much as you would do a Bed of Flowers full
of Serpents: And the better to succeed in so wholesome a design, consider of
the danger that lies concealed under so much Artifice; and to fortify you in
this glorious Resolution, be always persuaded that these fair counterfeits will
at least but give you a false pleasure; for to speak with the Proverb, you will
find upon the credit of a long Experience, Que-le-jeu ne vaut pas la Chandel:
Your Game is not worth your Candle.

There is not one Evil which these capricious Creatures make us not endure; and
the ills they make us suffer are such real ones, and so infinite in number,
that there is scarce one of their Servants who is not incessantly upon Racks
and Tortures: for besides all their other precious Qualities, they are so
insolent and humorsome, that they will not believe they are beloved, if the
miserable infatuated Wretches do not always look pale and languishing, and
three or four times a day attempt to Hang or Drown themselves, or at least
perpetually tear their poor Hearts with Hey-Ho's, and if the very shadow of a
suspicion does not give them a thousand Alarms: they will always needs have 'um
distrustful and jealous without cause, sigh without ceasing, and never be
content with them or with themselves. They carry their extravagancy yet
farther; they never believe themselves fair, except they wash themselves in the
Tears of these unhappy men; and think they offend their false Virtue, if they
are not cruel every moment. If you demand these miserable Loves how they pass
their days, there is not one who will not say, in an Accent that will make you
pity him,

1.
Nor Night or Day brings a relief,
Or intermission to my grief.
Equally both are bateful grown;
No ease I find
To my distracted mind,
But careless stalk in solitude alone;
No joys I taste, but Savage am become,
And in a Wilderness of doubts I room,
Tortured by fears which give me no repose,
Nor will permit my weary eyes to close.
2.
Base and inglorious is that Passion sure,
Which makes me tamely thus endure
A thousand base indignities,
Whilst I must think my self obliged
By her disdain,
And humbly thank her for the pain
Which she creates who does my flame despise.
But that which is more funest than all this miserable life, is, that since
Love transforms us as oftentimes into the person beloved; so he who is caught
in the Toyls of a person capricious and unfaithful, will become like her
unfaithful and humoursome; and so both the Lover and his Mistress do nothing
all their lives but torment one another, and all their comfort is in doing
injurys to each other, and in making reciprocal reproaches: This makes them the
sport and contempt of all that know them; for in breaking publicly their
Chains, they complain to all the World of the indignities they have endured,
and curse the fatal day in which with so little Glory they submitted to such
feeble Charms, and to such a dishonorable Vassallage.

It is thus, that those who abandon themselves to Love without consulting
Reason, find themselves constrained to confess their blindness and error with
shame to all the World; and that they are fallen from those hopes which they
had too lightly and vainly conceived; and that they are weary with their
long-suffering: and there is nothing more shameful than for a man to be reduced
to publish himself that he has trifled away his time in the pursuit of a Woman
without merit, and at last to be obliged to to renounce the faith he has once
given with a thousand Oaths never to infringe.

For to what shameful extremity must he be reduced, who to become free, must
become guilty of a base crime? since there is none more great than the breach
of that faith which we have so solemnly given.

It is therefore, as I have said, not only necessary to know whether they have
Wit, but also to be assured that the beauty of the Soul is replenished with
goodness equal to that of the Body; and if you find the least defect in that,
fly their presence as you would a Monster, and mock at that Beauty which is
not attended by Goodness and Virtue: and the more surprising and charming these
Sirens are, stand more upon your guard, and suffer not your selves to be
vanquished by those by whom it is a shame to be conquered.

Behold the dangerous consequences of an imprudent Love, to oblige all those
who have Reason, to make use of it against its allurements: be not therefore
wanting to consult and to follow the Precepts I have given; and let it be done
quickly, before Love has made its progress from the Eyes into the Heart; and
let it not pass so far, without the strictest scrutiny into the nature and
quality of it: for when it is there, how well soever it be disguised, it will
be in vain to call Reason to your succor: and if you should attempt to turn
out that turbulent Stranger, you will find it as much in vain and ridiculous,
as if a Moor should mask his Face to avoid the rays of the Sun, which can do
no injury to his sooty complexion.

Follow then the Precepts which I have given: as soon as you are smitten by an
extraordinary Beauty; examine at leisure whether she has not some concealed
Deformity. If you find her perfect in Body and Mind after you have considered
her a long time, and be well assured that they are not appearances; then you
may believe that Reason permits you to love, and will take the Conduct of it;
then you may submit your self without acting any thing against your Glory, and
may expect nothing but Happiness from it; for that Love which is guided by
Reason, is never followed by Sorrows or Regrets: Secrecy, Constancy, and
Discretion, will attend your happy Flames; and though it be always vehement,
yet it will always act regularly, and without extravagance. Thus conserving
your mutual Flames always in a just heat, you will be always happy, and always
amorous, and you will never have reason to blush at so fair and laudable a
Passion.

And though such a Lover should not be successful in the Conquest of the Heart
he does besiege, yet such a Virtuous Lady is always just and reasonable, and a
Lover cannot be dis-satisfied: for behold what her Conduct is; If she grant
nothing, she permits a Lover to hope all things: all the Ills she causes may be
well endured, since she pities them: her very Refusals displeases him not: she
is neither easy, nor too severe: she nourishes both his Hope and Desire, and
knows the Secret to make her self Mistress of Souls: she kindles the Fire, and
feeds the Flame, but never suffers either the Favors which she bestows, nor
the Ills she makes him endure, to go to excess.

Thus a Reasonable Lover is in perpetual repose; and in lieu of Complaints and,
Reproaches, which other Lovers do constantly load their Mistrisses with, he on
the contrary has nothing to return her but Thanks and Praises.

It is thus that Lovers who govern themselves by Reason, taste a thousand
Sweets in the way to a happy Island, where all their Desires are crowned.

Love is an Island where all Pleasures gnow,
And Streams of Joy perpetually do flow:
Princes and Peasants equally do bend
Their Courses bither, where their Travels end.
Eternal Spring does crown the verdant Fields
With Flowers, and every day new Pleasures yields.
Here no rude Storms the Blossoms-do-destroy,
No Winds but Sighs, no Showers but Tears of Joy.
The Sky in brightest Azure does appear,
And not one Cloud is seen through all the year.
The amorous Birds flutter from tree to tree,
And Love's the Subject of their Harmony.
The Brooks with pleasing murmurs do delude
Our Thoughts, and render sweet our solitude.
Each Grot, each Bower, and every Myrtle Grove
In this fair Isle, is consecrate to Love.
A happy Lover here does feel no pain;
He meets no rigor nor unjust disdain.
Celia is always kind, and always fair,
And all her Sweets does with Amyntas share.
All things to his content do here conspire,
No cross event does frustrate his desire:
But when all Storms are overblown and, past,
A thousand unknown Sweets he drinks at last.
See the beauty of this Charming Island where all reasonable Lovers are
Crowned, where they taste the Pleasures which never finish but with their
lives! And it is in this place that they see themselves at the height of their
Glory and Felicity; and they know so certainly that this Glory and Felicity
will endure eternally, by the knowledge that they mutually have of their
Virtues, that they defy without fear both Heaven and Earth ever to trouble it:
also all their Words serve only to express that common joy, and that common
assurance.

It is not without reason that such Lovers boast of the eternal duration of
their Love: for that Beauty of which they are reciprocally amorous, that is to
say the beauty of the Soul and of the Mind, whose brightness receives a new
splendour from the Body, never changes; no Malady ever renders them displeasing
to each other: They are agreeable till death, and Death it self receives a
luster from their mutual Loves.

In effect, the death of these rare Beauties has nothing hideous; one may take
it rather for a sweet Sleep, than for a true Death; one cannot call it
Paleness: what we see upon the Cheeks of these dying fair ones, it is rather
such a color as we see in a clear Night, when the Sun retires his Rays: Their
eyes become even then dangerous; the Fire burns even when it is about to be
extinguished; and as the Sun eclipsed ceases not to be dangerous and ill to our
sight, the same ma be said of these dying Eyes, the Sparks which fall from them
have both brightness and heat; and I doubt not but they will be able to kindle
a Fire in a Heart into which any of them happens to fall.

By this one may judge of the power of these fair Eyes when they are in their
greatest luster and vigor, especially when Wit and Virtue contribute to their
Victories. It is thus then that these Fair ones attaque us, and which oblige us
at the sight of their victorious Arms to render our Hearts, if we would that
our defeat be glorious, and our Chains worthy of us; and if we would arrive at
that charming Island of which I have spoken, in which Lovers taste
inconceivable Pleasures, and Joys of an eternal duration.

CHAP. III. Of the qualities which a Lover ought to possess, to make him
capable to please, and to render himself beloved by his Mistress.
BEfore I speak of the qualities which may render us amiable to these
reasonable fair ones, which only deserve to be truly beloved, it is necessary
to know precisely what Love is.

Love, to define it well, is a general alienation of the person who loves; it
is a Transport without Contract, and without hope of return; by which we give
our selves entirely, and without any reserve, to the person beloved: It is a
sweet ecstasy, by which the Soul ceases to live in the Body which it animates,
for to live in that which it loves. From hence it follows, that a person who
loves passes into the person beloved, and assumes in his imagination, in his
Mind, and in his Heart, a new and particular being; which two Lovers mutually
do, when Love is reciprocal: and thus, being united by Reason, they live in one
another intellectually. This being so, it follows, that to become the moity of
an Illustrious Heart, that is to say, to be beloved of a person of merit, it is
necessary that our Heart be Illustrious also, and that we possess as much merit
as that admirable person, otherwise these two Hearts can never make that
charming Union which makes all the delights of mutual Love.

The first thing then that we ought to do, is to love her by whom we desire to
be beloved again; for though by a prodigy she may love us without seeing
herself beloved, her Virtue will disavow her Heart, and she will disapprove it
as a crime the greatest that can be committed: for it is a Maxim among all
extraordinary persons of that fair Sex, That Love only is the reward of Love.

But it is not enough that we love, but also that our Love be perfect: when you
do this, you want not the principal means to vanquish her. This will give a
softness to all our Words, a languishing sweetness to our Eyes, which will not
fail to gain credit with the most inexorable Beauty.

This Rule being certain, that there is nothing more necessary to make our
selves beloved, than to have Merit, and to love perfectly; it remains only
that I teach in what true Merit consists.

First, we ought to hold it for an undoubted Principle, that it lies in our own
power to acquire this Merit; for if it be above our forces, those which want it
by reason of the want of power, cannot be disdained without Injustice: and from
hence it is easy to conclude, that Merit consists not in the gifts of Fortune,
because Fortune it self depends on Destiny, or to say better, of Chance; it
follows only its Decrees, and dispences only her Favors according to her own
Capricious humor. It wants eyes to consider the beauty of those who implore
her, and ears to hear the charming words of those who employ them to invite her.

This true Merit therefore consists not in the goods of Fortune, since they are
not in our power. This true Lovers know so well, that instead of searching
after them, they demonstrate a public and perpetual contempt of them; ad not
only so, but as soon as they love, they swear to quit all their Fortune for
their Mistress.

In short, the Favors of that capricious Fortune were so little worthy of the
esteem of a man of Merit, that there are many who have rejected them from the
number of Moral Goods: for Riches have no other value than what Opinion gives
them: besides, Merit has this property, that it gives a Luster to him who
possesses it, whereas Riches are never serviceable to him who has the
possession, but are only enjoyed at the point when he parts with them. By
consequence Riches cannot make a Lover be beloved of these extraordinary
persons; for Merit ought to be something within us, and which we have acquired
our selves.

Birth has no greater advantage than Riches, in its pretensions to true Merit:
for, as I have said, Merit depends on our Will, but on the contrary our Birth
is the effect of Chance: a Coat of Arms, or the Grandeur of a Family, makes not
Merit: and as Eagles are produced in Deserts, Reptiles may be engendered in
Palaces; and whilst the highest Mountains are cursed with an eternal
Barrenness, the fertile Valleys flourish with Palms and Cedars.

It is not then from our extraction that we derive our Merit: Our Illustrious
Ancestors contribute little besides their Examples to make us virtuous; nay, we
may become quite contrary to them in our Inclinations and Lives. This is so
true, that Love it self treats Kings and Shepherds in the same manner. Yet
think not that Love is the cause of any base Condescension; no, it is so far
from that, it raises the least perfect, to equal the other. It is in this noble
Design that he makes the most perfect of these Lovers to speak in this manner
to them they love, to inflame them to the Acquest of those Illustrious
Qualities, that they may entertain and discover their Flame without blemishing
their Glory.

Since Love comands, whose Power's above control,
That both should have one Thught, and both one Soul,
Exalt thy Thoughts equal to mine,
Which cannot without shame descend to thine:
My Virtue then do thou embrace,
It will the meanness of thy Birth efface.
Thus Love by Merit equals two persons of a birth so very much opposite, and
unites them maugre all this opposition.

Behold how Love has no regard to Birth! and as that Love whereof I speak is
caused and nourished only by true Merit, so I have made it appear that Merit
consists no more in high Extraction than in Riches.

There are some who set a value upon nothing but Wit, and stoutly maintain,
that in it alone true Merit does consist; but these abuse themselves as well as
the other, and for the same reason: for we see so many persons without Wit, and
who yet desire and pretend to have it, that it is evident that it depends no
more of us than Birth or Riches, and consequently does not make this true
Merit. Some persons we see, who scarce have a grain of good sense, whom we
would judge have been made of the very dregs of Matter, and you would say there
is not one spark of this Celestial fire in their Constitutions. There are other
who are quite contrary to them, who seem to be formed of the purest extract of
matter, whose Souls are so pure and so refined, that it hardly reflects all the
bright Impressions it receives; all its motions are so just and regular, that
it seems not flattery or extravagance to compare those excellent Spirits to
Stars and Influences: Yet this cannot, as I have said, properly be called
Merit, since it is not of our acquisition.

Yet I deny not that Wit is necessary to make us esteemed; yet I maintain that
it alone is not sufficient, though we possess it in an infinite degree, to
merit the love of those extraordinary persons of whom I speak. Nor is it enough
for a Lady to be perfectly fair, or infinitely witty, to oblige us to love her;
for there is required besides, Virtue, to establish that mutual Love, which is
the sole end to which we must aspire, as the only Object of our Felicity.

It is then in Virtue alone that Merit does properly consist, and it is this
alone which advances us above the rank of ordinary persons, being the only
good which we can call our own, and which lies in our power to acquire. I do
not mean that ordinary Virtue which is found in common Souls; I mean that
eminent Virtue which only meets entertainment in great Minds, and which we
call Heroic. This is that kind of Virtue which I demand in a person, to
render himself worthy to be beloved, and capable to subject the most
Illustrious Hearts.

It is necessary to explain what a Hero is, and what I mean by Heroic Virtue.
Many extravagant Wits have rendered very unjust Images of it, and represented it
as a thing uppracticable, They are not contented with an Hero who does not
things above Humane force, who beats not down Walls of Cities, and routs not
whole Armies by his single Valor. It is necessary to reform the wild
imaginations of these persons, and to reduce them to just measures. It Is not
the stature or the strength of body which makes a Hero; it is the vigor and
firmness of the mind: for there may be Souls very elevated in little Bodies,
and extremely constant, and of extraordinary vigor, in an infirm and delicate
Body. Consequently, all men are capable of this Heroic Virtue, and it is
attainable by persons of both Sexes, being equally capable of it. It is
possessed in different degrees of eminence, according to the dignity of the
Object, and the different powers of mind of those who pursue the acquisition
of it.

The first cause of this Heroic Virtue, is the dignity of its Object, which is
Glory; this being no other thing than the splendour of a good and virtuous life,
and a recompense which Virtue exacts from the Mouths of all virtuous persons,
which maugre Death, makes us live even in the Tomb. This makes Glory the only
Rule, Commencement, and End of all the Enterprises of great men, preferring it
before all other things, and sacrificing all things to it.

The second cause of this Heroic Virtue, is the perfection of the faculties by
which it acts, of which the Understanding and the Will, are as the Heart and
Head.

The third is the nobleness of all the principal Functions which make us act
with undauntedness, and to suffer courageously and with constancy.

The fourth is an extraordinary transport of the Soul, by which it elevates it
self to Objects beyond the common reach of men; and because our forces are too
weak of themselves to reach those high Objects, we are apt to believe something
of Divine in these extraordinary efforts which exalt Nature, which Transports
we are forced to express by the Words Flight and Rapture.

These Transports are diverse, and of different kinds, according to the
faculties which are transported, and according to the difference of their
Objects. If the Transport be only of the Understanding and Imagination, we
conceive elevated Idaeas, and noble and pompous Images and Phantomes: and this
is properly that inspiration which the Ignorant call the Folly of Poets. This
being esteemed something Divine, is the reason that Poetry, in which we find
these exalted Idaeas, has been called the Language of the Gods.

Thus you see the effects of this Transport when it is of the Imagination and
Understanding; but when this Transport is universal, when the Understanding,
and the Will, and all the faculties of the Soul, and functions of the Body,
move with one common effort, they all tend to that eminency which in this life
is the last bound of Virtue consummate. This general Transport, which is a
Transport of action, is the Divine perfectionw hich ever compleats a Hero, and
which the Poets and Philosophers call Heroic Virtue.

The fifth and last cause, which is the principle and Spring of Heroic Virtue,
is Love. And for this reason it is always made the ruling Passion of a Hero,
as that by which all other Virtues are purified, and from whence they receive
their last perfection: from whence it follows, that to be a Hero, it is
necessary to be amorous; for Love, by refining the Soul, and spurring us on to
glorious Actions, renders us amiable, by the practice of all those Virtues
which lead to the Temple of Honor.

Hence you may see that this Virtue is not a Quality of Ease and Sloth, nor a
Habit for Ostentation, but of Travel and of Action; a Habit of Combat and of
Victory: She usually appeared to the Ancients in Armor; her Palace seems built
of the Ruins of Cities, Chains, Wrecks, and Thunder-bolots. It may be said,
that this painful Virtue is proper for Warriors, but not for Amorous persons,
who think they ought only to combat with Respects and Submissions; but they
are deceived, for there are no fewer Battles nor Victories to be performed in
Love than War; and a Lover must be Valiant, as well as Amorous.

In short, that true Merit which renders us worthy to be beloved by an
Illustrious person, consists only in this Heroic Virtue: and indeed how
should it not consist, since a virtuous Love is the source of all the Virtues
themselves, and the spring of all Amiable Qualities? for when Love proposes to
it self an honorable and legitimate end, and whose chaste desires are eloigned
from Crime, the person whose Soul is possessed with it, strives to render it
self amiable, to the end to be beloved; and in order to that Design which this
Noble Love inspires, he endeavors to become Good, Generous, Sweet, Liberal,
Civil, Wise, and Respectuous; he labors to acquire Knowledge, Address,
Discretion, and Politeness: so that all that is perfect in the World, seems the
effect of a Virtuous Love.

I shall take leave to make a short research into the nature and effects of
each particular Quality necessary to a Lover. That which holds the first Rank
in the esteem of Ladies, is Valor: This Quality alone oft-times proves
sufficient to subdue a Heart most difficult to be conquered; and few who will
not avow their Defeat, and boast of the Honor and Glory, to see a Conqueror
crowned with Laurels, become their Captive. What Lady can choose but be pleased
to see a valiant man return from the War crowned with Laurels, and prostrating
himself before her, ascribe all his Victories to her Charms, and the noble Love
she kindled in his breast! and when he is in the Field of Battle, to hear Fame
speak loud of his Achievements, it seems more glorious to 'em to have so
valiant a Captive, than to be Mistress of the World. But this is yet inferior
to those Ravishments which she finds when this Hero returns to render her an
account of his great Actions, and to attribute all the Glory to her. To a Merit
so extraordinary, what scrupulous Heroin will not yield her self with joy? To
be accounted handsome, just, and learned, and well-favoured, all this carries
no danger with it, says Sir Philip Sydney in his Valor Anotomized; but it is
better to be admitted to the Title of Valiant Acts; for all Women, says he,
desire to hold him fast in their arms, who has escaped thither through many
dangers.

As this Heroic Valor powerfully attracts a Lady's Heart, so Love seldom
fails to give Courage to his Slaves, to render them amiable. Love renders a
Lover bold and daring in the pursuit of his Love. In short, how can any make
themselves be loved, without this Military Virtue, of the greatest part of
Women? for if they are Idolaters of Glory, a Gallant cannot pretend to their
Hearts without that Virtue. If by just and legitimate Reasons a Lady be
stimulated to take Revenge, how can he, without being capable to execute that
Vengeance, pretend to a Conquest of her Heart? And there are those Women to
whom Revenge is so sweet, that there is no other means to Charm them. Some
Women go farther; for we have seen even Queens, who not only have given their
Hearts, but even their Crowns, to those who have avenged them; so ingenious is
that Passion in a great Heart, when once it is possessed of it. Yet let us not
think that these fair ones are unjust in these kind of Vengeances: for there
are some Offenses so cruel, as those which wound the Honors of an Illustrious
person, which are not repaired, but by the death of those who have committed
them.

It is in these occasions where that valor which I speak of is most necessary;
for he must be capable to dare all things, and to vanquish likewise; and a true
Lover is never awanting to attempt all things.

But after all, it is necessary to know what this true Valor is, lest we take
the Shadow for the Substance: therefore I shall draw the picture of a Man truly
Valiant.

CHAP. IV. The Character of a Valiant Man.
THe truly Valiant man enterprises all things without temerity, and atchieves
them without fear. He does not seek out Dangers; but when he finds them, he
testifies no less courage in braving of them, than in suffering them: He faces
Death in its most dreadful shape, without waxing pale. If he be constrained to
render himself to this common Enemy of Nature, he receives it and despises it
together in his last breath. He ceases not to frame new designs: He prevents
all ill success before it arrive; and if a misfortune which he has not foreseen
creates in him any confusion and fear, he patiently supports it. His Reason
makes all his Passions his Slaves; it is his Master and directer in all things;
and by that Victory which he meditates, he procures himself the Peace which he
desires. When he has any Quarrel, he considers not so much the strength of his
Arm, as his Cause; nor his Power so much as his Innocence, of which his Sword
is the last of his proofs; he takes it not in hand so much to attaque, as to
defend: And though no other can use it with so much security, or manage it with
so much grace, it is never seen naked till necessity draw it out of the
Scabbard; and he chooses that you should see his Blood rather than his Back: he
buys not his Life by shameful conditions: He exercises not so much his Courage
as his Charity upon him he has vanquished. If he receives an injury of a man
unequal in strength, he shows Compassion and not Choler; he extinguishes it,
and will not take a poor revenge; insomuch that it seems a doubt whether he
more detests Cowardice or Cruelty: He speaks not much, but boasts less, always
acting more with his Hands than with his Tongue: In all his resolutions,
Prudence is his guide; he is not troubled with the apprehensions of danger of
death; and if he be thrifty of his Blood, when Honor counsels him to manage
it, he is prodigal of it: When Religion, his King, or his Country requires him
to spend it, he changes not his Humor: When he changes his Condition, he has
the same constant mind in all things; his Will rules his Power. The best
revenge that he can exercise, is that which he exercises least when it is in his
choice; and as he knows how to command without Pride, so he knows how to obey
without Murmuring; because he regards himself as above all accidents and
hazards. Ignorance and Stupidity are not the principles of his Courage; but
when he has well examined the Danger, he despises it, and testifies as little
emotion when he is Ship-wrackt, as when he embarques: He is indefatigable in
all his Troubles; resolute in his Enterprises; entire in his Resolutions; happy
in all Success: and if he happen to be vanquished, his Heart is always the most
obstinate, and the last which renders it self.

See the Picture of a truely-valiant man: it is a Valor like to this, which I
require in a Lover, to be worthy to be beloved of these perfect Beauties of
which I have spoken, to wit, of those who are enamored only of the Merit of
their Lover. This is so true, that there is not one of these Illustrious Fair
ones who love not to bear to the Tomb the name of so Valiant a Husband, and who
places not more Glory in such a glorious Title, than in any other. And it is
impossible to all these Illustrious Lovers of Valor, to love any after him
they have once loved; and their first Love is always the last.

By this Picture of a Valiant man, which I have drawn, it is easy to see that
Valor is a greatness of Courage, or a haughtiness of Spirit, by which a Soul
elevated above interest, carries it self inviolably to a Duty which is
laborious, and to Actions which appear most difficult. From whence follows,
there are two kinds of Valor: When he does only those bold actions which even
terrify those who hear 'em but related, this Virtue is called simply Valor;
but when we act as a Duty what only regards, our Honor, or that of her whom
we Love, that is to say, when it is to sacrifice all our Pleasures, our
Interests, and even our Lives, to our Glory, and to make that the sole end of
all our Actions; that Virtue is not only Heroic, but Heroic to the highest
degree. This is called Generosity; and as that second Species of Valor is
infinitely above the first, it is by consequence more capable than it, to give
us that extraordinary Merit which is so necessary to make us be loved by those
Illustrious Fair ones, of whom I have spoken.

To make the difference between these two Virtues more easily comprehended, and
to make known perfectly the Character of the one and the other, I will give you
this Example following.

The Valiant Perseus found Andromeda chained to a Rock, and exposed to a
Monster: That Hero fought the Monster, which seemed impossible to be overcome;
he slew him, and delivered the Nymph, whom he rendered to her Parents. See here
a bold Enterprise, which is of that first Species of Valor of which I have
spoke, and that Verture which is simply called Valor.

But after that Heroic Action, Perseus became infinitely amorous of that same
Nymph: The King his Father, and the Gods themselves, declared themselves in his
favor, and willed that he should marry her: Yet that great man, far from
making advantage of his Credit and her Parents Authority, fell at her feet and
protested, that he had rather die than to owe his happiness to any other thing
than only to her Inclination; and left her entirely to her liberty to choose a
Husband, who was destined to him if she had loved him, and that for recompense
of having saved her, and dying for love of her, he desired no other Glory than
to render her happy. See here an Action of that last kind of Valor, which is
infinitely above the first. It was by this high Virtue which is called
Generosity, by which he gained the heart of Andromeda, and that he chased away
Phineus whom she loved, and intended to marry the same day.

The Cowardice of Phineus excused her change, and set off the glory of that
generous Lover by the opposition, from which she conceived as just an Aversion
to him, as she was charmed by the Courage and Generosity of the other.

Thus we may see what power this Generosity has; not only to conquer an
Illustrious heart, but also to chase a Lovers Rival from thence. It is
therefore necessary that a Lover be generous, if he will legitimately pretend
to be loved by these Illustrious Women, who only yield themselves to true
Merit. A Lover must only consider glory in his Love, and sacrifice to it all
his Interests and all his Pleasure; for it is the character of a true Lover, to
be generous and disinteressed: and such a one will not only force the most
insensible to love him, but even a Heart that is most prepossessed with another
Love, and animated with hate and fury against him. Those which are conversant
with the Poets which are correct, will find the advances this Virtue makes in
the affection of the most inflexible; and how by degrees Aversion gives place
to Esteem, and that by degrees throws down all that opposes the entrance of
Love.

We are not to wonder at the effects of this marvelous quality, since it is
accompanied with all others, which make up an extraordinary Merit: for this
Merit is acquired by Patience, by Prudence, by Fidelity, by Constancy, by
Respect, by Discretion, by Perseverance, and by a hundred other like Virtues;
Generosity comprehends all in it: for he that is said to be generous, is
inclusively said to be Patient, Prudent, Faithful, Constant, Respectuous, and
Discreet, and in a word, all that one can figure of most perfect and of most
amiable: and it is so true that all other qualities are the inseparable
Companions of Generosity, that they are recommended to all Lovers as infallible
Maxims amongst them, and by which they are assured to make themselves beloved
if they observe them inviolably.

First, Patience is an inseparable Virtue of all who are generous. Love never
ceases to persuade them, whom he will enrol under his Banner; for when he would
teach them how they must love, and how they must conquer, he tells 'em it is
accomplished by Care and Patience, and that none can arrive to the height of
Felicity without much pain and difficulty. Love is preceded by Labors and
Torments; but those Ills change at last into Delights and Pleasures
inconceivable.

He who is patient in a Love-pursuit,
In time may hope to reap the pleasing fruit.
To suffer Torments, Rigors, and Disdains,
Raises the Merit of his Pains;
And of his Loyalty and Love
Assured Marks will prove:
And how much more of torment he endures,
His Glory he augments, and Love secures.
His past Disquiets will improve
The Sweets and pleasures of his Love.
Constancy and Fidelity are no less the Companions of Generosity than of
Patience; and are no less to be recommended to a Lover, than that rigid Virtue;
and Love makes no less advantage of it in making its most Illustrious
Conquests. If you fear the preference of a powerful Rival, and you despair of
succeeding in your amorous Enterprise, and are ready to abandon your pursuit;
Love will re-animate your Hope, and let you see, that a constant and legitimate
ardour is to be preferred before the splendour of a vain grandeur.

By the aid of these Illustrious Companions of Generosity, Love finishes its
most noble Conquests. But since the inconstant and unfaithful are of a contrary
opinion, it is necessary to make 'um see their error, and to draw 'um out of
it. They say, to maintain their false opinion, that these Virtues of which I
speak, produce more Thorns than Roses, and many more ill Nights than good Days
to a Lover: but they are much deceived, and are ignorant of the Pleasures two
constant Lovers enjoy, even amidst all their pains; for all their amorous cares
and inquietudes are intermixed with such happy moments, that one of them is a
sufficient recompense for an age of trouble.

The professed Inconstants will not yield to these Reasons, how convincing
soever, but maintain that they alone are the most reasonable Lovers: It is
better, say they, to love perfectly in many places at a time. If one say to
them, that this kind of Love gives but little Honor to her he loves, because
there is none so little fair, who does not believe she deserves a Heart entire
to her self: he will presently reply, and so justifies himself, that Heaven
having made as many different desires as there are Beauties, shows by that,
it is its will he should love all: and to persuade you the better, and to bring
you over to his party, he maliciously aggravates the pleasures which this
distribution of his Heart gives, and the disquiett of those who only love one
single person: for he adds boldly, That he who may please many, and will love
but one, is a great Enemy to his own good Fortune: Pleasures are light, says
he, which are limited; but he receives a thousand, who loves a thousand
Beauties. See, says he, the difference between these two kind of Lovers, and
weigh their manners in a just Balance; the Inconstant has a Spirit sweet,
civil, affable, and complaisant; the Constant is pensive, melancholy, and
unquiet.

See the reasons of these Inconstants; but there is nothing in the World more
ridiculous: For first, it is certain that we cannot divide Love without
destroying it; and she who does not possess it entirely, possesses it not at
all. To enumerate all the fatigues that these wandering Lovers endure, would
much exceed the disquiets that a constant Lover suffers in the pursuit of his
Love, and is at last recompensed by imperfect Joys, and a slight satisfaction,
not equal to those which a constant Lover enjoys, from the equal return of a
true and faithful Passion, by a Lady in whom he finds all the perfections in
the World to delight his Senses, and perfections of Mind for the contemplation
of his Soul. Were it true, that the possession of what we love does necessarily
extinguish the amorous Flame, they would have some reason: but this is a common
mistake; for our Affections, produced by these excellent qualities, can never
be extinguished: for neither Deformity nor Age can deprive them of their
Beauty; but even when Time or Age has eclipsed the beauty of the Body, these
qualities shine out with the greater luster, and more strongly engage and
captivate the Soul.

There are a sort of faithless and inconstant Gallants, who will needs maintain
themselves to be the most constant in the World: say they, We always love
Beauty, and when that forsakes a Lady, to love her still would be inconstancy:
but this merry excuse will not pass; for though Beauty fades so fast, that it
is compared to Roses in the Spring; yet if a Lover give his Heart by the
consent of his Reason, as he ought to do, there will remain that Wit and Virtue
which will have sufficient Charms to make her ever beloved, how little Beauty
soever remains.

Who then can apprehend as dangerous, and as destructive to virtuous
inclinations, a Passion so refined, which produces in the Soul of Man such
glorious effects! a Passion which thus ennobles the Mind, refines the Spirit,
and spurs us on to the acquest of all these Illustrious qualities, and never
ceases till it has formed us perfectly amiable. It is easy, from what I have
said, to see the difference betwixt this reasonable Passion, and the Transports
of Lust and wild Desire, whose effects and consequences are so fatal to them
who are hurried on by its fury to the most unlawful and Villainous Actions, of
which nothing can resist the Rage, and than which nothing more defiles the Soul.

CHAP. V. Rules for a Gallant in the Conduct of his Love.
AS Prudence is a necessary and universal Guide in all Enterprises, so it is by
that, that a reasonable Lover is to commence his Amorous Voyage: for it is
impossible to put out from the Coast, and to sail with full Sayls, without
observing the Winds or the Compass, without the hazard of perishing. And if it
be objected, that since we love maugre our selves, our Actions are consequently
out of her government. I answer, That I only speak of that Love which is
always submitted to Reason, and not of that unruly Transport which dethrones
it: in which sense I maintain, that how Amorous soever we are, yet we continue
free to regulate our Passions; and by consequence, a Gallant may profitably
make use of such Rules, if he will, as I shall prescribe. I say, a Gallant,
because those Rules are different from what I shall prescribe the more
Beautiful Sex; for they have Rules apart: Modesty in a Woman is required,
Boldness in a Man. A Lady sometimes acts prudently in counterfeiting Coldness;
but a Gallant ought always to testify an Ardour and Impatience: and though he
be Ice, he ought always to say, he burns; for an Hippolytus in Love, is in this
Age very ridiculous.

The first thing then that a Gallant ought to know, that he may love as he
ought, that is to say, to conduct himself in his Love with Prudence, is, to
hold for an undoubted principle, That Love ought entirely to possess his Heart,
and to chase all other Passions from thence, to rule alone. I acknowledge that
Love does not demand so great an Ardour at the first instant, how miraculous
soever the Beauty is which renders her self Mistress of his Heart; it exacts
only a simple motion of Love at the first view; but when a Lover has made
reflection upon the perfections of her Spirit and Soul, he ought to become an
Idolater, and to love in a manner extraordinary, esteeming it his chief Glory
to pursue what he loves: And which may invite us to love in this manner, is,
that in Love there is nothing which does not justify the excess.

The second thing which he is to learn, who will be instructed by my Precepts,
is, That he ought to be so loosned from his own Sentiments, and so submissive
to those of his Mistress, that he always believes that she has Reason in all
that she does, and in all that she desires: And this Resignation ought to go so
far, as to make him despise the greatest dangers, even Death it self, in the
service of his Mistress. And in that estate he must hold as a Principle
assured, that there is nothing so glorious nor so sweet to a Lover, as that
Resignation: for if it happen that he die in saving the life of her he loves,
he finds this sweet in Death, that she wishes not to survive him after so great
a mark of his Love. One thing which ought to contribute the most to comfort a
Lover who dies in this manner, is, That if his Love be grounded upon great
Reason, even at the beginning of it, he holds it to be the infallible Effect of
it; for he knows, that if his Mistress be inflexible, he must die with desire;
and if she be favorable, then he must die with joy: and so being resolved to
die either by the Malady or by the Remedy, he dies content, when it is to save
the life of his Mistress.

There are some Lovers who go yet farther; they believe that Life is shameful,
when they find no occasion to hazard it for the person they love.

It is not enough that a Soul of a Lover be full of Love, and that it raigns as
Sovereign there, and to have that Resignation to her, which I have mentioned;
he must also believe that he never loves enough, and always wish that he may
still love more; and the reason of this is, there is no Lover who does not
discover from day to day some new perfections in his Mistress, therefore there
ought not to be one moment in which his Passion ought not to augment according
to the increase of his knowledge; to which end a Lover ought always to
exaggerate to himself the Beauty of his Mistress, that it may entertain and
augment his Passion.

With this Love I would also have joined as much Respect; and when a Lover has
as much trembled by one, as burned by the other, let him, in her presence,
extol every Perfection: yet there are strict Measures to be observed in this,
especially with Ladies of excellent Spirits. The Indiscretions of some Gallants
in this Matter, are very much to be pitied; their Praises are so extravagant,
that they loose their effect; and winning no belief from their Mistress, make
their Sincerity and Wit suspected. Praises are most pleasing to all, when they
are bestowed by way of reflection; a Lady then attentively listens to 'em
without Blushes, and wihtout being put to the pain to defend her self. A Lover
ought to seem to have so great an opinion and veneration of the modesty of his
Mistress, that he should seem afraid to displease her, even by just Praises.
This is a silent Commendation, which produces an extraordinary Effect. There
are some indiscreet Gallants who are yet more unlucky, whose Praises turn to
Affronts by misplacing them.

When absence separates a Lover from his Mistress, let him teach every place
the cause of his Grief and Inquietude, and let some prudent Confident betray
him to his Mistress, and let him not be wanting himself to make known the
grandeur of his Love by that of his Sufferings, in these or suchlike words.

1.
Ask my Celinda how Almedor lives;
When absent from your eyes,
No Joy nor Pleasure he receives,
But every minute dies.
2.
Behold the Sun, whose Rays adorn
Heaven with their glorious Light;
When absent, all the Earth does mourn
In Funeral-robes of Night.
3.
Each pretty Flower does hang its head,
And drooping fades away:
The Rose it self looks pale and dead:
At the departure of the day.
4.
Thus, my Celinda, when your eyes
Conceal their amorous Fire,
Doubts and Despairs in mydark Soul arise,
And poor Almedor straight expires.
And as a Lover should esteem nothing so precious as the presence of his
Mistrise, because the presence of the Object beloved is his Sun, which
dissipates the sorrow of his Life, and the fear of Death; therefore I would
have him, when he goes to see her whom he loves, testify to her his joy with
all the variety of expression that his fancy can furnish him withal: and to the
end that tha fair one may see upon his face, and by his words, that Joy which
he boasts in his Letters, and that she may know by that Excess the Power which
she has over his Senses; let him express it so well, that she may be convinced
that he believes nothing can be added to the happiness of him who loves an
extraordinary person when he sees her, and is well received: it is then he must
continue to pour upon her words which express his Transport, and as in an
ecstasy show the infinite Pleasure he takes if he might always be so happy as
to live in her presence.

These Rules without any other doubtless are sufficient to conduct a Lover to
the happy Port where he would arrive, if he make use of them as he ought; and I
dare assure him that they will never fail: for what Lady can refuse her Heart
to a Passion so submissive and respectuous? and who can take it from him after
it is given? this without doubt is impossible, without he meets with that
Monster which he may encounter in his amorous progress, and which a man always
cannot overcome.

This Monster is Jealousy; for it is so cruel, that it quite strangles Love,
even in its full strength; and though it be its Father, it is a Serpent covered
with Flowers, and a Dragon which always wakes: and though it has a hundred
Eyes which never close, yet so it is, that its sight is always deluded, the
Senses are always troubled with false Objects, and it incessantly rends the
Heart: In short, it is an indiscreet Counselor, which has nothing for its end
but to destroy all the reasonable Maxims and the Rules which I give; for in
mocquery it impudently says to those who hearken to it, that Discretion,
Respect, Fear, and Submission, are only the testimonies of a moderate Love;
and that the true marks of a perfect Lover are Suspicions, Choler, and Rage;
and it is so skilful in its Malice, that it strengthens its Councels with
reasons very just in appearance, that it is scarce possible to escape being
seduced.

For it presently tells you, that you never see a great Smoke, but it is a
sign of a great Fire; and there is no Transport which proceeds not from a
great Love; and that Love resembles a Fever, which as it has its Coldnesses,
so it has its Heats. See what this Monster suggests without cease to a poor
Lover; and by the little that he hears, he receives the pestilential vapor,
and Jealousy enters through his Eyes, and occupies his sick fancy: Thence to
the Heart it transmits its venom, disturbs his Reason, alters his Spirit, and
excites his Choler.

And then you cannot imagine that this turbulent Passion is idle and without
action in the Heart of a Lover; for when once it is kindled by that Monster, it
makes him resent all the tortures of Fear and Suspicion, and deprives his
Senses and his Soul of all repose; and throwing Ice into the midst of Fire, it
causes an antipathy, whereof the Combat makes life languish without end;
troubling perpetually the Reason by the vain Phantomes which it continually
forms, and exposes Love to the fury of all its Enemies. It is this jealous
Fear, without doubt, which is the greatest Evil that a Lover can be sensibleof;
it proceeds from the belief that another is beloved by her he loves.

Yet it is not altogether unjust to be a little jealous, and as if he was
assured that he has all the World for Rivals: When a Gallant loves perfectly,
and a Mistress that has much Wit suffers her self to be adored of another, to
augment his submission and his Love, he cannot but be a little jealous: but he
must make an advantage of it; and for that reason, when he perceives himself
the least touched with that distemper, he must not imprison it in his Breast,
for the more he conceals it within, it will at one time or other make the more
violent eruption. But because a declaration of it is very dangerous, and that
it requires peculiar Rules, let a Lover follow these which I shall give him:

First, let him show a little Melancholy in his Eyes and Visage; not too much,
for fear to alarm her too much; but only so much as may oblige her to press
him to give her a knowledge of the cause; and then feigning not to tell it her
without regret, and out of obedience.

Let him declare it in such a manner, that it may appear only the effect of
his Love, without touching the Virtue or Prudence of his Mistress, mixing
therewith the Purity and Constancy of his own Passion; and all this with an air
full of submission, and most capable to move pity, flying all Eagerness and
Reproach.

This is the means to cure his Jealousy: for it is impossible, how fierce
soever a fair one is, but her Heart will become tender by such great marks of
Sorrow and Submission, or refuse to give satisfaction to one so worthy of her
Love and of her Pity: But above all, let him take heed that he pass not the
bounds which I have prescribed; for if his Jealousy be full of Transport and
Fury, nothing will become more insupportable than him; for this is an undoubted
Principle, that there is none Jealous in this manner, who is not looked upon as
a Scourge by the most reasonable.

Let therefore a Lover take great heed of this Jealousy, if he would love as
he ought; and whatsoever he has, let him cover it, discard it, as the greatest
Enemy of his Glory and Repose.

This is the way to avoid the most dangerous Rock in this Sea; for there is no
person who does not agree, that if jealous Suspicions were banished from Love,
the least happy would avow, that there is nothing so sweet as its Empire.
Follow then my Maxims, principally those which concern Jealousy, if you
embarque upon this amorous Sea, and would arrive at last at that happy Port.

But to return: it is accounted in the opinion of the most wise, that all
things are most difficult in their Commencement; therefore there is the
greatest art to be used in the first declaration of Love. This is the chief
work of a refined Spirit; he must spare the Modesty of a Lady, and discover his
Flame in obscure terms. If the thing please her, her curious Spirit will permit
him another day to explain himself better: and if a Lover once discover the
least hint of his Love, Love will repeat it a thousand times.

But that this Curiosity might be better known to you, if you desire to be
permitted with the greater facility to express your Love more clearly, you must
first disguise your Love, and so conceal it a long time under the name of
Respect and Complaisance, and not to speak of it too often; for this shocks and
presses the Modesty of a Lady too much, and obliges her to deprive you of those
opportunities which are so precious in Love.

It is thus that a Lover ought to entertain his Mistress; yet he must as well
know when it is fit to be silent, and above all to hide the secret of his Love.
When he speaks, let him praise the Sex, declare his own Fidelity, and show that
he pretends nothing. In sum, his Conversation must be gallant, sweet, and
witty, which may make her wish every minute such an Excellent person her Slave;
and withal he must always be submissive and discreet, that he may obtain what
he pretends without pride, and see himself beloved without speaking of it;
which is done by rendering her a thousand continual Services, by regulating his
actions according to her humor, till by the sweetness of a long acquaintance
he has insensibly surprised her Heart, which is done before she is aware of
the Stratagem prepared for her.

When a Lover has done all that I have directed, and yet his Mistress does not
declare her self, because of her too great modesty, I permit him to sigh before
her; for a true Passion cannot be better expressed that by a sigh, when it
escapes from the bottom of the Heart; tha^ alone is capable to explain the
grandeur of Love; and it i^ sometimes of more power an^ Eloquence than all the
amorous expressions in the World.

Therefore when he has the opportunity to entertain her alone, let him not be
too profuse of his talk, but let a few Sighs supply the vacancies of discourse.
But let him use much caution, lest he be suspected of artifice: let him seem
fearful to let 'em escape, and sometimes break 'em in their passage, showing
that it is some pain and violence to him to suppress them: This language is
sweet in Love, and the best Interpreter of an amorous desire.

Thus you may see how a Declaration of Love is to be made at the beginning, to
make onesself be loved of a Lady who founds her Passion upon Reason: For when a
Lover acts in this manner, he renders himself so amiable, that the most fierce
will suffer his presence, and hear him with Complaisance: She will always treat
him more favorably than another. She is pleased to see him, and after
believing her self to be beloved, by reason of his inflamed sighs, she finds
her self insensibly charmed; and this you will discern whether she will or no:
for whenever she takes pleasure to hear you sigh, she will find it difficult
to constrain her self, but will sigh too, maugre her resistance: do not matter
then what she says to you. These fierce and haughty fair ones never declare
their Sentiments in these affairs: they always leave their Lovers to divine,
and only in their Eyes betray the secret motions of their Soul. When we have
made this advance, we may declare our selves more freely, and testify openly
the grandeur of our Love; but take heed that you demand not yet to be beloved,
but only the permission to love, and to have leave to tell her so; which you
may do in this or the like manner, after you have expressed the greatness of
your Love:

Will you consent, my dear Celinda, that I promise my desires this charming
privilege, to make Vows to you of an eternal Love? I require not that you
would be sensible of my Flame; nor do I expect that the gift of your Heart
should follow the offer of mine: No, no, charming Celinda, that is a glorious
Rewards, of which nothing can render me worthy; and though my Passion makes me
desire it, yet my own Imperfection forbids me to hope it: Permit me only to
flatter my self with this, That in daring to love, I may also dare to tell you
so, and at your Feet daily pay you my respects and (...) you Vows of an
unchangeable Love, and by its ardour let you know, that it being pure and
sincere, it must always increase: That it is not the effect of a blind
appetite, which is begot by Desire, and nourished by Hope; but that as it is
formed by the most amiable Object in the World, over which no Time will
prevail, so nothing but Death can rend it from my Heart. It is by such tender
Sentiments as these, that you will force at last the most cruel Beauty to love
you, and at last to avow her love to you: She will blush without doubt when she
first gives you this knowledge; but be not alarmed at that, for it is not at
her Love she blushes, but at the confession of it: and in the end, that you may
not doubt it, when she sees that you observe her disturbance, she will say to
you obligingly: My Blushes proceed not from the Cause that you think, yet alas!
I know not whether it be Confusion or Love, I find you too worthy to be loved,
not to suspect my self; but my Spirit is too high, and I can suffer rather the
fire in my Heart than in my Mouth, and Love shows to me more hard to name than
think.

It Is this that finishes the Union of two souls who are born one for another,
and which are linked together by these invisible Bonds, that they have no
longer than one life, because they have no longer but one Heart; and it is that
sweet Union which forms that amorous Circle, in which Lovers are eternally
happy: For when a Lady testifies her love n the manner that I have supposed, a
Lover becomes Ravished and Charmed, and vows himself entirely to her and
submits himself to her without reservation; and every minute is enflamed more
and more by these amorous Transports. It is in these mutual Endearments and
Tendernesses, which two Lovers, which follow the Rules which I have
established, arrive at the Port, and there taste eternal happiness.

CHAP. VI. Rules for the Conduct of a Lady in an affair of Love.
THere is no less care and circumspection required in a Lady than in a Gallant,
at the commencement of an Amor: For those enflamed and languishing looks which
appear often very passionate, yet they are not always true; lest therefore a
Lady be seduced too soon by false appearances, it is necessary that they make
this as a certain Maxim:

That the Faith of Lovers is a very slippery Pledge: That their Oaths are vain,
and their Wit a Deceiver: And that their Passions are generally more in their
Mouths than in their Hearts. This may teach them that they be not too easy of
belief in those things which they see, and hear said; for they may easily
mistake a Flame which is only feigned for a true, whereof these false Lovers
will boast at their expense: yet I would not that they should be too
disdainful, but that they might take those Methods that might make themselves
the more to be valued, that a Lover may better know the price of their Loves
before it be obtained.

They ought not to show at first either Contempt or Rigor; for that rather
chaces away than gains a Lover. Nor ought they to yield their Hearts as soon as
they are solicited; for that is rather the effect of a foolish pity, than of
the merit of their Gallants; and he will not be apt to esteem that much, which
costs him so little, and is acquired with so much ease.

it is thus that these fierce fair ones captivate Hearts by a noble Pride: for
in despising Love at the first, they at last triumph with the greater Power;
but, as I have already said, they must not appear too disdainful, for by that
they totally lose a Lover, who possibly will never be reclaimed. A Lady then
must not be too disdainful, nor hold a Lover too long in her Chains: for
Patience may forsake the Inamarato, especially those of the greatest minds and
courages.

No more must she be too easy to confide too much in the appearances of a
passionate Love, since thereby she becomes liable to be deceived: But let a
Lady act with so much prudence, that she may gain the perfect knowledge of her
Lover's Heart before she trust. But see what measures a Lady takes, who intends
to engage her Lover, and to render the blessing more dear and desirable.

When a Lover has discovered his Passion, to the end to make him more ardently
wish a Pleasure which is only great according to the Grandeur of his desire,
before she suffers her self to be moved to pity, she takes some time to make
proof of his Constancy, and covers her cruelty and injustice with the Vail of
Honor, and of Chastity; and to render the happiness more great after the pain,
and to appear more amiable, she seems inhumane, and oft-times counterfeits an
excessive Pride, the better to charm with her Caresses: But as her most
principal work in this Art is to please, she makes her Eyes look sweet when her
Mouth is severe, and lets her Lover see, in casting upon him a dying look, that
her fierceness combats, whilst her Heart renders up it self.

It is thus that a Lady ought to behave her self to her Lover, after she has
tried his love by all the disguises that she can invent, to be more certain of
the true estate of his Heart: But these artifices and these rigours ought not
to continue after she has gained this knowledge, but she ought to return love
for love, when she is once assured of the love and merit of her Servant; for
it is this alone that finishes and establishes the Conquest of her Lover, who
will be apt to revolt when he finds his subjection too severe.

There are some Ladies who serve themselves very successfully of Choler in the
engaging their Lovers Hearts; but in this it is requisite that their Choler be
feigned, and appear to be light: for there is nothing more dreadful, and full
of Transport, than a Woman in fury.

I condemn not sometimes some little Coldnesses, which these fair ones make use
of; for there are some who have such a grace in this artificial Coldness, that
a Lover sometimes chooses rather to see himself disdained by her, than to be
caressed by others. But to succeed in this, there is required a peculiar
Talent, which is very difficult to obtain: for it is necessary that it be very
natural, not only to please, but not to repulse. I would not have a Lady so
prodigal of her advances, that she show her Eyes sweet to all who make their
addresses, because this is the quality of a perfect Wanton: for the property of
a Wanton is to make a great amaze of Sweetness, obliging Words, Caresses,
Cares, Tendernesses and false Regards, which promises all things to credulous
Lovers, without giving any thing in effect. See how one of these Coquets boasts
her self, and how she makes her own Picture.

As for me, says she, I love every where, and without neglecting the least
Conquest, I strive to engage all; all things contribute to my good Fortune; and
amongst a thousand, I render one or other jealous: and though I have one Heart,
I promise it to all, whilst every one endeavors to please me, and each lives
in hope: The absence of any one afflicts me not; for a thousand others that are
present, take from me the thoughts of them who are absent: I fear neither Death
nor Change; there remains still a Million of my admirers, either to comfort or
revenge me. These kind of Women are so ridiculous and so vain, they make it
their glory not to love in any manner but this, which ought to render them the
contempt of the whole World: See how she persists to boast, as of a wonderful
effect of her Wit!

Let them that will, make account of Fidelity; I trouble not my self with so
vain a thing: for the example of others lets me know, that instead of a Servant
we accept a Master: when we only suffer one, and think on no other, the
entertainment of others gives us disquiet, and we are bound to live after his
Fantasy, endure his ill humors, and fear his jealousy; and lest that Time
might extinguish his Flame, we must heap every day new favors upon him, and
forsooth when he is absent, our Souls are grieved and dejected; his change
kills us, and his death throws us into despair. See the intolerable vanity of
these fantastical Creatures, who teach us to fly and detest them, lest we fall
into their snares, living in a manner so different from those Ladies who ought
to be esteemed, and not too prodigal of their favors if they would preserve
their Lovers: For by being too prodigal in their favors, they expose
themselves very often to the contempt of an insolent Victor; for a Lover who is
flattered and puffed up with his Victory, soon loses the memory of all hihs
submissions.

If then a Mistress would augment the Passion of her Lover, let her sometimes
dissemble a little Disdain, and a little Rigor; for there is nothing so sure,
as that the desire languishes by the facility of obtaining: But as I have said,
it behooves that these Coldnesses and these Rigours be well tempered, and very
short; and a Lady ought to make use of them with a great deal of address and
judgment; for if they endure too long, a Lover may be repulsed in such manner,
that he will escape from them, and in his turn pay her in the same Coin. We
need not to wonder at such a change; for when a fair Lady is too rigorous or
ungrateful, it is commendable to fly from her, and to hold it for a thing
certain, that such a love is a chastisement of Heaven if it endure. A Mistress
therefore ought not to be too rigorous or too ungrateful, but only sometimes
serious, and that more to her Lover than to others; for the civilities which
she may show to a person indifferent to her, should be accounted favors to a
Lover when once he is declared so.

A Lady ought to distrust all things, when she intends to make proof of her
Lover; so that she ought neither to speak not write any thing which may too
much flatter or incense him; and especially she ought not to return any answer
to his Letters; for this would be to put Weapons into the hands of an
unfaithful Lover when he has a mind to boast of her favors, and therefore
prudence does forbid it.

Thus you may see how a Lady who would regulate her love by Reason, ought to
act till she has arrived to the perfect knowledge of her Lover's heart; which
sometimes is very easy to discover, either by his Eyes, which tell her what he
dare not speak; or by a sigh, which escapes from a Heart too much oppressed; and
many other marks of the disturbance of his Soul.

Yet a Lady ought not always to give a confidence to these marks; for sometimes
Sighs and Oaths are not the proofs of Love, but are feigned and criminal; she
ought therefore to put a Lover to all the proofs she can invent; and if she be
not refused one, she may conclude her self beloved, and may safely love again,
since Love cannot be rewarded by any thing but Love.

Yet she ought to take care that her love does not offend against her duty or
her glory; but she ought to resolve to follow her duty maugre her Heart: for
Duty ought always to be inexorable, where Virtue is the Mistress; not but that
when she loves well, that Duty is a cruel and unjust constraint: for it cannot
but be hard to be obedient, where her love is reasonable; she must then
sacrifice her love where Duty ordains it, especially where she is of Royal
Blood: but that she may show she loves well, she ought to do it with regret and
to give all the marks she can to her Lover, that she is forced to abandon him
by that cruel constraint, to justify the injury she does him by an order so
cruel.

1.
In vain my Love and Pity I confess,
Since that Imperious Pride,
Which does on Crowns attend,
Commands that Love should be denied,
And all to Glory bena.
2.
How huge a weight my greatness is;
Which a false splender does disguise!
It robs me of my sweetest bliss.
Since I to it my Love must sacrifice.
Thus whilst to Fortune I too much do owe,
Nothing to Love or Pity I allow.
3.
Hard fate! which does decree
My Crown to be a slavery:
Nay how much happier is a Slave!
Since in my Throne my joys do meet a grave,
What serves it that a Crown I do possess,
And all the power which does on Scepters wait?
My favors give to others happiness,
Whilst naught but pain I to my self create.
4.
I love! yet never must avow the same;
For though Alcidor's merit is above
A King, and more attracts my love;
Yet still alas! alas! he wants the Name.
This want does all my punishments create,
Such are the humorous orders of my fate,
Which by a principle of Virtue too severe,
Makes me unjust and rigorous appear.
Yet think not that a true Lover that is, a Lover who is generous, will be
enraged at such Declaration, how cruel soever it may seem; or that he should
blame his Mistress: for as he loves his glory better than himself, he will
find it easy and sweet to die, to let her see he still conserves his Love. It
is with these generous Sentiments that he submits himself to these cruel
orders, expressing himself to her who with this regret forsakes him to follow
her Duty and her Glory, after this manner.

1.
It is unjust I should complain
Of your more glorious fate.
I will endure the pain,
And be content to be unfortunate,
Fate's just, since it a Crown to you does give,
Though I in Torments live;
Enjoy the sweets of Powes and of Fame;
The price is small,
My death is all,
And that is justly due to my presumptuous flame.
2.
Most justly Fortune does decree
That you should rule, and I should die:
I run, I run to Death, fair Queen,
That you may reign
Happy and glorious, whilst I
Will think it an extreme Felicity
Only to say at last, For you I die.
I know that a Lover well beloved, may justly be dissatisfied if she forsake
him to choose another of equal merit to himself; but when she prefers a man who
is only above him in Quality, Estate, or Birth, that choice which he knows to
be made without Love, or without Disdain of him, he ought to be appeased; and
an Heroic courage ought to pardon her for following that ambitious order of
her duty; to comfort himself for it, and to deceive his grief in believing that
her Heart has not followed her hand when she gave it.

It is then requisite for a Lady who will love according to Reason, not to
return love till she knows her self to be beloved; nor to love against her
Duty, or against her Glory: but yet this is not enough, for she must also avoid
a thousand little weaknesses, which may blemish the glory of her love, and
above all, Jealousy; for there is nothing renders one of so tedious and
disagreeable a humor as Jealousy, nor nothing which hinders her more from
appearing amiable: For when a Soul is possessed, the Fancy is troubled with a
thousand different motions of Love, Rage, Despite, Fear, and a million of other
tumultuous Passions, and in that estate the Soul languishes miserably, without
knowing the grief which wounds it. A Lady must then, as I have said, never be
Jealous, but always appear gay, and with a smiling countenance; for there is
nothing so disagreeable, as those inequal humors, which are sometimes gay and
affable, and sometimes sad and froward; and they are so far from pleasing, that
there is not one Lover who can endure a Lady of this humor, and who will not
in the end quit her with Reproaches. Shun then these inequal capricious
humors, if you would conserve your Conquests; and above all, be constant and
faithful, that your Lovers may follow your example: for if you be light and
unfaithful, your Lovers will become so also, though it be only for
honour-sake, to be quit with you; but above all, have a care when years begin
to diminish your attractions.

Let therefore your love endure as long as you live; and when you die, die
faithful, because, as I have said in another place, That Love is only the
reward of Love; and a true Heart never wants Charms for another that is equally
honest and true.

Behold the principal Maxims that Ladies, who desire to govern themselves
prudently, ought to follow; and these are sufficient, provided the beauty of
their Spirits and of the Soul be as great as that of their Bodies.

In fine, if two persons, such as I have described, love truly, and follow my
precepts, no Age or Deformity can ever make them unhappy by diminishing their
mutual loves.

Thus I have shown that Love may be subjected by Reason, how great soever its
power is; and that the most scrupulous Virtue may not only be permitted to
love, but to avow the same, if she follow the Rules I have given, which teach
how to master the Master of the World; and that there is nothing more sweet, or
more innocent than Love, which adds a sweetness to all other Pleasures, when
it is guided by Reason; for otherwise, to Love, is to give up our selves to
perpetual disquiets, and to join to the most sorrowful Days more tedious and
unquiet Nights, and to banish for ever Repose and Joy.

CHAP. VII. How to discover when a Mistress returns us with Love.
AFter all, the great difficulty which remains, is how to discern whether the
Love which is pretended be real, and whether a true Passion be not repayed
only by artifice. The usual flattery of our selves, does commonly betray us
into an easy belief that we are beloved. There are few Ladies, how ugly soever
they are, yet when they consult their Glasses, do fancy some peculiar grace or
other, capable enough to conquer more than one single heart: and few Gallants,
who do not imagine something extraordinary in their persons and deportment
worthy of esteem. This Self-opinion contributes so much to their being
deceived, that it is not only in vain, but injurious for a man to persuade his
Friend with Arguments drawn from any imperfection in himself, not to be too
credulous in this Affair.

First, we must observe well and attentively all the motions of her eyes; it is
by them that we most usually discover the state of her Heart, how exquisite
soever she be in dissimulation. These ardent and indiscreet Libertines cannot
retain her secrets, and they cannot long dissemble; for the more they strive to
conceal it, the more they make it appear.

It Is not very easy for a Lover to endure the brightness of the eyes of his
Mistress; for they usually imprint so much fear, that the most bold cannot
behold them long without trembling: but maugre this respectuous fear, we must
regard fixedly those fair eyes, and hearken attentively to their Language,
since it is by them chiefly that we can come to the knowledge of her Heart.

Observe then first, if her Looks be sweet and languishing: for nothing so much
manifests the state of a Heart, as the languishing of the Eyes.

Yet though this languishing does not appear, we must not presently conclude
that our Mistress has not Love in her heart; for sometime the eye is grave,
when the heart is sensible: though it is an undoubted Mark that the Heart is
touched, when her Looks are sweet and languishing.

If then we do not observe it, we must not be repulsed by that, for there are a
thousand other Marks which will make known the state of the Heart.

We may conceive great hopes, when we find our Mistress confused at our
presence, and to speak in disorder and unusual constraint in her actions,
proceeding from an endeavor to appear more agreeable in her conversation and
behavior. This amiable Constraint is very different from the ordinary
Affectation of those pert and impertinent Melantha's, which is so tedious and
ridiculous; and it is very distinguishable from that want of breeding and
bashful simplicity of young Country-Ladies: and indeed, that Love is very much
to be suspected, which does not produce these kind of disorders and confusions.

From hence it is, that the very name of her we love, causes such an emotion as
does easily discover the Sentiments which we endeavor industriously to conceal.

Love may work many of these effects, and yet not be absolutely perfect or
refined; therefore let us carefully examine whether Ambition or Avarice make
not up part of its Composition: for if it have these ingredients, a Lover
cannot promise himself to be longer happy than he is fortunate; for that love
is only nourished by Plenty, and is blasted by the frowns of Fortune: But he
who loves truly and as he ought, sacrifices his Ambition and Avarice to his
bove.

For Love, a Lover does all things forgo;
None can adore his Gold and Mistress too.
He who himself does to Love's Altar bring,
Thinks all he has too cheap an Offering;
He does his Gold and such base thrift despise,
Offering with that, his Blood a Sacrifice.
He in whose Heart so noble a flame does rule,
His Mistress to preserve would loss his Soul.
If then we find any remains of these two Passions, we may conclude that Love
has not made an absolute conquest; for where it reigns entirely, it sweetens
all conditions, and the worst traverses of Fortune are not able to lessen it,
but contribute to its growth: the constancy of each begets a mutual pity, which
endears them one to the other, and strengthens that Chain which links their
Hearts and Fortunes together: So true is that part of the Song:

He whose Love's true, and whose Passion is strong,
Shall never die wretched, but always be (...)
Therefore when we see a Lover whose cares are all employed for her he loves,
and in all things to prefer his Mistriss's satisfaction and happiness before
his own, and with a dis-interessed Zeal to offer his heart at Loves Altar; a
Lady may safely accept his Love, and hope with Reason a true and durable
Felicity.

The greatest part of this fair Sex, and above all, those fierce and haughty
fair ones, are very exquisite in disguising of it; and it is not easy to
discover their true Sentiments, how much soever they are touched: but it is
certain, that the less they make it appear, the more is Love in their Hearts,
which at last breaks over all their constraint, and forces them to confess
their. Defeat. Therefore let not a Gallant be discomfited after many Repulses,
and though after many Attacks he finds no hopes of surrender.

1.
What if thy Phillis seem severe,
Do not despair.
In the soft Language of thy eyes,
Tell ber, for her thou dies;
And for her Favors amarously press:
Courage in Love bath always best success.
2.
Fear not; thy constant Flame
Will in her Heart create the same:
In all thy pain, Inquietude, and Care,
Phillis at length will share.
And Whilst of freedom she does boast,
She finds her liberty is lost.
She Will seem thy Passiou to despise,
When Love does languish in her eyes.
3.
Under a tranquil Face, and gentle Eyes,
Loves secret fire may burn,
And in as bright a Flame arise
As under the sad ooks of those
Whose mortal Paleness shows
As if they were revived just from an Vrn.
And though the Flame does not so high ascend,
It may a heat more ardent lend.
If then in Phillis Face thou spies
This Coldness, and this Calmness in her Eyes,
Believe her Face and Looks her Heart belyes.
4.
In vain thou do her Cruel call;
And foolishly accuse,
In saying she is insensible
To all thy Amanous Vows.
A Woman's Heart is well to Love disposed;
And though her modest Lips are closed,
Her Heart is soft, and tender is her Soul;
Yet Fear and Shame
May long conceal,
And secret keep the Amarous Flame
Which at the length her eyes reveal,
When it is no longer subject to control.
Some Ladies are so jealous of the discovery of their Love, that they seldom
speak of the man they love, without railing against him, and censuring this or
that in him; but this they do with so ill an Air, that it may be easily
discerned they take no delight in being compli'd with, or to have the company
of the same opinion.

In many different ways does this Passion make its Eruptions; but after all;
the eyes are the first discoverers of it: and he that is well read in that
Language, will quickly discern what Advances he makes in his Mistriss's Heart.

To enumerate all the Symptoms of it, I should seem to speak of it as Burton in
his Melancholy, as a Sickness or Distemper, a Feavour or a Calenture; not as
that noble Fire which inflames us to all brave and generous Actions, and which
lights us in the Paths of Glory and Virtue.

I shall leave a Lover to consider well of the nature of Love, and of the
ensuing Reflections; and then I presume he will stand in need but of very few
more Instructions.

CHAP. VIII. Important reflections upon Love, and the Conduct of Lovers.
1. ALover must presume upon himself, when he sees a fair Lady, he must believe
that all things are possible to him.

2. The curiosity to see a fair Lady, is one of the great commencements of
Love; and the more strong it is, by so much Love has taken the deeper root.

3. When we have a long time combated with Love, and that it forces us to
yield, we must not say to her we love, that we submitted by Force, but by
Choice.

4. Sometimes we are afraid to become Amarous, and do not perceive that we are
more afraid of a Lady not to see her again; by this we may conclude that we
love, maugre our ridiculous and unprofitable Fear.

5. When we love a Lady too proud or fierce, and that we cannot enfranchise our
selves, we endure a cruel torment: For we cannot live without seeing her; nor
see her without sighing for her; nor sigh without telling her our love; nor
declare it without deserving death.

6. How fierce soever a Lady is, when a Lover that she esteems has once gained
a little credit upon her Heart, she begins to doubt if it be a crime to love.

7. We believe always the last what we most fear; and a Soul accustomed to fly
what wounds it, does not believe it feels the ill when it presses it; and it is
so inclined to flatter it self, that even when it feels it, it endeavors to
doubt it.

8. Love is an Imposture which seduces the Spirit; and the same Heart which
searches after it; fears it: it distributes Blessings only drop by drop; but
it showers down Evils and Tears in great Floods; but in the mean time it makes
it self adored every where.

9. When Jealousy has once taken possession of a Heart, nothing can stay the
Impetuous course of it: Innocence is criminal, the false appears true, and the
true seems false; and by that, Love produces Hate.

10. The right to be beloved, serves ost-times as an Obstacle against it; and
Love is no more Love, when it becomes a Duty.

11. The disorder of a Lover in a Declaration of love, is a great Eloquence;
and when a Lover expresses himself well, it is a sign of little love.

12. Distance of separation makes the pain of absence different; if it be not
great, we are less sen^^^e of regrets, because when a little space only
divides us from the Object loved, the Heart fails not to post thither without
the Eyes.

13. It is necessary that we our selves love, to know the effects of Love in
another; and a Lady cannot know the torment of her Lover, if she become not a
Lover as well as a Mistress.

14. We must never declare our love by the means of a Friend; for to express
our Passion well, the party must be sensible of love himself.

15. It is hard to prove that we love much, when the Heart does not agree with
our Words.

16. Love and Fortune seldom make one and the same man happy; and whosoever is
caressed by one, ought to fear the other.

17. When a Lady is of Royal Blood, she ought not to hearken to a Lover
unworthy of her blood, what ills soever she resents from that hard constraint.

18. Love and Majesty accords but ill; for what one follows, the other flies.
Love cannot suffer noise nor Witnesses; when it is upon a Throne, it is in
constraint; the higher it sees it self, the more it fears; and since it is a
Child, too great splendour does affright it.

19. Jealousy sometimes proves a remedy for Love, by the great Torments which
it creates.

20. When one is so little jealous, that he discerns not that he is so, he
keeps no guard upon himself, but permits it unawares to appear in many of his
actions; but when he is jealous to that height that he perceives it, a wise
Lover does all he can to conceal it, and to lock up his Jealousy within
himself, till he become Master of it: But ofttimes there is mixed so much
fierceness in that feigned indifference wherewith he hides this Passion, that
it is easily discernable that it proceeds from a jealous despite, by which
means he betrays himself.

21. A jealous Lover cannot hear either good or ill of his Mistress, without
equal displeasure; so capricious is Love.

22. All the little devoirs which a Lover pays to his Mistress, speak for him;
mingled sighs, and a glance of the Eye, and a thousand other little amarous
actions expose the Souls of two Lovers, to each other.

23. To be silent in the beginning of an Amor, is in effect to speak much.

24. When Love is strong, and is forbid to speak, it acts, speaks, and shows it
self through the eyes.

25. He who can weep in Love, when he ought to weep, is Master of a Heart.

26. When we are disposed to begin an Amor, we must make our Addresses to one
of the most fair and most witty; and if we please such a one, all others will
esteem us the more. And this is the means to gain an hundred Mistrisses, and to
serve but one.

27. When a Lover is very passionate, far from murmuring at his Sufferings, he
wishes that he had more than one Heart, that he might suffer more: for a true
Lover feels no Torments; or if he do, he seems in love with them.

28. A Heart which knows how to love truly, creates it self a thousand
Pleasures from indifferent things; even its Grief is pleasing to it.

29. There is no Crime that a true Lover does not pardon; and there is not any
who loves truly, who had not rather suffer the punishment the Crime of his
Mistress deserves, than to see her exposed to it.

30. The least Repentance always finds pardon from a Lover.

31. Amongst Lovers there are a thousand little different things, which render
the one Content, and the other Unquiet; Jealousies, Displeasures, short
Despites, sudden Repentances, sweet Remembrances, and pleasing Interviews, in
secret places.

32. When two Lovers make a final Breach, if the Lady has received any
Presents, she ought not to keep them; nor ought her Lover to demand them again.

33. There is much prudence to be used by a Gallant in the Presents he makes to
his Mistress, otherwise he will loose more than profit by them: a profuse Gift
obliges not, but the grace and manner of giving is preferred before the
Present, as to loose something at Play to disguise the Present; but a liberal
Fool seems to give an Alms when he makes rich Presents, and gives so out of
season that it displeases.

34. The words I love, offer too much violence to the modesty of a Lady: a
Lover must find terms more sweet to avow his Love.

35. A fine Raillery has great success in their Conversation: when the
Conversation languishes, a little Raillery pleases the most serious; it
dissipates Melancholy, and brings joy into the Heart and Face. Every one
hearkens with pleasure to Witty things spoke to the purpose, and which are said
without premeditation; but we must fly Buffonrie and Slandering: the Phrase
must have nothing low nor insolent; it must be expressed with a gallant and
agreeable Air, and much Modesty and Civility in all our Actions.

36. When a crafty Mistress sees her Lover about to forsake her, she recals him
by flattering language, and studied Cajolleries: She appeases the greatest
Fury, and rekindles the extinguishing Flame. By an amorous Glance, and by
counterfeit Smiles, all this is easy to her; and Love and her Lover: and as
after War we better taste the sweets of Peace, so a re-conquered Lover loves
better than ever.

37. One cannot be in love, but one time or other there will happen some little
Angers betwixt two Lovers, and that is most commonly for things of a trivial
nature: If any Grief arise from it, it is a Crime to conceal it, nay, even it
is sweet to complain: After an earnest and amarous Contest, the Lovers laugh,
and agree, and with pleasure at last fee that neither of 'em are injured.

38. At the beginning when a Lady is touched by Love, though she will quickly
know it, she dare not name it; and her Heart, which is sensible of the fire,
will suffer it, but not confess it: It feigns to be ignorant of its Malady, for
fear of being obliged to apply a remedy; it makes a secret of the name of its
Conqueror, for fear it should alarm her modesty and shame.

39. That foolish Passion must be shunned; which blemishes our Glory: not that
we ought to have a Heart as hard as a Rock, and impenetrable to Love; but it
ought to be hardened by Virtue when Love is contrary to it.

40. There is nothing so easy, as to know the secret of a Lover; his regards
are always indiscreet; he cannot feel a great Fire in his Heart, without giving
some outward marks of it; and even that constraint and endeavor to conceal his
sighs, is oftentimes that which makes it divined what is in his Heart: We take
no notice of an ordinary sigh; but when one seems afraid to sigh, and strives
to suppress them, it is easily guessed, that this caution conceals Love.

41. When a Lover desires to conceal that he loves, his Tongue must be ignorant
of his desires, lest it betray him: his Heart must not give any confidence to
his Eyes or Sighs; all his Vows must be mute, and all his love locked up in his
Heart.

42. When a Lady is betrayed by her Lover, she weeps when she disputes about
taking revenge; she sees that if her ungrateful Lover perish, she must perish
too: Thus Hate, Love, Rage, and Tenderness, successively triumph in her Soul;
she finds her self both a Lover and an Enemy at the same time; when her
despite increases, her Passion augments: and though her Lover has betrayed
her, yet he appears still amiable; and in this distraction she can neither love
nor hate.

43. The design of being revenged upon a Lover that has betrayed us, serves
as a Virtue, though it be criminal; for Love and Anger will combat each other,
and we may hope they will destroy each other.

44. When we remain in silence in the presence of her we love, Love speaks for
us; but the misfortune is, all Ladies do not understand the language of Love.

45. When a Lover loves without being beloved again, he suffers alone; but when
he is beloved, the Ills and Blessings are divided betwixt them.

46. A Lady is injurious to her Lover, if she believe he has all he desires
when he ceases to complain; for when she hears him sigh, she ought to be
assured he still wants something.

47. When our Mistress commands us to do any thing, nothing should hinder us
from giving a blind obedience. Love is above all; and when it speaks, we must
not hear any other.

48. When a fair Lady accepts the Vows of her Lover, the happiness that he
tastes is so excessive, that he doubts whether she speak sincerely or not; so
much his Reason does oppose his Belief, and surprised with so much felicity, he
doubts whether he be awake or no; and his Ravishment takes from him the liberty
to express his Joy, and to return his thanks to his Mistress.

49. When a Lover apprehends the infidelity of his Mistress, his Constancy
almost forsakes him; and the most great Heart is oppressed with such great
displeasures, that the most resolute Virtue loses all its power; and when he
loves perfectly, Death would trouble him less than such a surprise.

50. The Fair suffer great regrets when they have passed their youth without
loving, and when they love upon their declining: for it is then out of season;
and Love will not fail to revenge himself soon or late, and then laughs at them.

51. An old man cannot love without being scoft at; for certainly a wrinkled
Forehead mingles but a very lamentable Charm with fine sayings.

52. To live without loving, is not to live at all; and we only can say we
live, whilst we love: the Sun sets and rises every day, the Springtime renews
every year; but the destiny of the Fair is very cruel: when their fair Eyes do
once lose their luster, and are closed by death, they will be eternal so.

53. When one loves a fair Lady who has forsaken another, though the disgrace
of the other pleases a new Lover, yet he has reason to be disquieted at it;
and how firmly established so e're he be in the heart of that Mistress, yet he
ought to fear his good fortune, when that Mistress is fickle and vain; and be
afraid that he may lose what he has gained, as well as the other.

54. A Lover who sees himself betrayed by hsi Mistress, cannot better revenge
himself than in making his Love yield to his Reason.

55. A Lover ought not to kill his Rival, to revenge himself of an unfaithful
Mistress; for the pleasure he receives from his Vengeance, affords but false
Sweets, which are accompanied with bitterness: the death of a Rival, the Tears
of an ungrateful Woman, have something in them which at present flatters him;
but when he at the same time sees himself more hated than he was before, he
finds his Soul tortured by an eternal regret of his Crime, and wounded most by
his own vengeance.

56. A fair Lady loves not but with repugnance, because she believes every one
ought to pay her homage

57. When despite proceeds from a great love, we say we hate, but yet we love.

58. A Lady who does not appear angy when she has reason to be so, is more to
be feared than one who makes a great noise.

59. When we quit a Mistress for another, and yet the first continues her love
to us, we become very miserable: for we cannot choose but have a great
compassion for her, and regret for our own ingratitude.

60. To judge well of the Heart of a Lady, we must see her rarely in public:
for if she make her love very much appear, it is known of all the World; if she
conceal it, we believe she has no love at all: and thus we shall never be
satisfied.

FINIS.

