ARTICLES CONCERNING THE SVRRENDER OF OXFORD.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, A. D. 1646.

Articles of Agreement, concluded and agreed by his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one
Party; And the Right Honorable Sir Rich Lane Knight, Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal of England, Fr. Lord Cottington, Lord High Treasurer of England. Will.
Marq. of Hertford, Edw. Earl of Dorset, Lord Chamberlain of His Majesty's
Honorable Household, Tho Earl of Southampton, Francis Earl of Chichester,
Francis Lord Seymour, Sir Edw. Nicholas Knight, one of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State, all of them being of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and Sir Thomas Glemham Knight, etc. Governor of Oxford, on the other
party: for, and concerning the Rendering of the Garrison of Oxford, as
follows.
1. THat the Garrison of Oxford, with the Castle, Forts, Mounts, and places of
Defense whatsoever, with all the Ordnance: Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions of
War, with all Magazins, and Stores thereunto belonging, excepting what is
allowed in the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered to the General Sir Thomas
Fairfax, or whom he shall appoint, without wilful spoil, or embezlement, upon
Wednesday, the 24th day of this instant June, at Ten a Clock in the morning, or
thereabout.

2. That His Highness the Duke of YORK, shall have an Honorable Convoy to
London, where other of His Majesty's Children are, attended by his Officers and
Servants, and fitting Accommodation for the removal of his Household and Goods
thither, and shall have an honorable Provision befitting his Dignity appointed
for him by the Parliament, and to remain there, until His Majesty's Pleasure
be known touching his settling there or elsewhere, and then to be disposed
accordingly to any place within fourscore miles of London, and shall have such
Officers and Servants to continue about him, as the Parliament shall approve.

3. That their Highnesses Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice, shall have Liberty
and Passes for themselves with their Servants, Horses, Arms, and Goods, (the
number of their Horses for them and their Train not exceeding seaventy,) to
repair to any place within fifty miles of London, (so it be not within twenty
miles of London, without leave from the Parliament, nor in any Garrison) and
there to abide for the space of six Months after the Rendering, free from any
molestation by imposition of Oaths, or otherwise; And shall have Passes to go
beyond the Seas at any time within the said six Months, with their said
Servants, Horses, Arms, and Goods, they engaging themselves upon their Honors
not to use the Liberty hereby granted in the mean time to any Hostility
against the Parliament of England, sitting at Westminster, or any way wilfully
to the prejudice of their Affairs; And they are to have the benefit of such the
ensuing Articles, as may concern them.

4. That the Seals called the Great Seal, Privy Seal, the Signet, and the
Seals of the Kings Bench, Exchequer, Court of Wards, Duchy, Admiralty and
Prerogative, as also the Sword of State, shall at such time, and in the
presence of two such Persons, as the General Sir Thomas Fairfax shall appoint,
be locked up in a Chest, and left in the Public Library. And if any of the
aforenamed particulars, shall not be then accordingly produced, the default
thereof shall not be charged upon any other person, then such as has the
Custody thereof, and shall wilfully detain or embezell the same.

5. That Sir Thomas Glemham Knight, etc. Governor of Oxford, with his
servants, and all that to him belongs, and all Officers and Soldiers of Horse
and Foot, and of the Train of Artillery, (as well Reformed Officers and
Soldiers, as others) with their servants, and all that partaines unto them,
shall march out of the City of Oxford with their Horses and complete Arms that
properly belong unto them proportionable to their present or past Commands,
Flying Colors, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both Ends,
Bullet in their mouths, and every Soldier to have twelve Charges of Powder,
March, and Bullet proportionable, and with Bag and Baggage, to any place within
fifteen miles of Oxford, which the Governor shall choose, where such of the
Common Soldiers as desire to go to their own homes, or Friends, shall lay
down their Arms, which shall be delivered up to such as the General Sir
Thomas Fairfax shall appoint to receive them. And all Officers and Soldiers,
as well Reformed, as others, that shall desire to go to their Homes or
Friends, shall have the Generals Pass and Protection for their peaceable
repair to, and abode at the several places they shall so desire to go unto,
and shall have Free Quarter allowed them in all their march from Oxford, to
those several places. The Officers, as well Reformed, as other to pass with
Equipage of Horses and complete Arms answerable to their present or past
Commands, and Common Troopers with their Horses and Swords only, and all to
pass with Bag and Baggage as aforesaid: And that all other Officers and
Soldiers (in case there be any such) that shall desire to take Entertainment
from any Foreign Kingdom or State, shall have Free Quarter allowed them for
28 days from their march out of Oxford, and shall have Passes for their
Officers, not exceeding Ten, with their Horses and two servants a piece to go
to London to Treat with any Foreign Ambassador or Agent for Entertainment;
And all of them shall have Liberty and Passes to march (the Officers with their
complete Arms and Horses proportionable, to their present or past Commands,
and the Common Soldiers with their Arms, and all with Bag and Baggage, to the
Quarters near to Harwich, or Portsmouth, or to any Port between them, to be
transported: Which Arms (except Officers complete Arms and Horses, and Swords
for the Common Soldiers, which they may transport) they shall there lay down
and deliver to such as the General shall appoint, or unto the Governor of the
next Garrison belonging unto the Parliament, who shall take care for their
safety during their abode there, and until shipping can be provided and
weather seasonable, they paying for their Quarter after the said 28 days
expired, and shall assist them for procuring Vessels and shipping for their
transportation at the usual Rates accustomed for freight; The Officers and
Soldiers, and others before transportation engaging themsel^^^ by promise, not
to return into this Kingdom in Hostility against the Parliament in Bodies as
they go, or in Conjunction with other Forces, or in Command of any Forces
invading this Kingdom; And no Oath, or any other Engagement of this, or the
like nature to be during their said stay, or at their transportation imposed
upon them, saving an Engagement by promise not to do any Act of Hostility, or
of wilful prejudice against the Parliament, during their said stay in England.
And it is declared, That those of the three Auxiliary Regiments consisting of
Gentlemen and their servants, Scholars, Citizens, and Inhabitants, who are not
properly of the Garrison in pay: and such Reformed Officers and Soldiers, who
shall not be willing to march forth, shall not be forced to march out upon this
Article, but shall have the benefit of the following Articles to remove or
remain in Oxford, and in all things else which may concern them: And those
also who shall march forth, shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles in
all things, except for remaining in Oxford.

6. That the Governor shall be allowed and assisted in the procuring a
sufficient number of Carts, Teames and Boats, and other necessaries for the
carrying away all goods allowed in these Articles belonging to any Officers, or
persons of quality now residing in the Garrison, they paying the accustomed
rates, and that such persons as cannot presently through want of Carriages or
otherwise, convey them away, shall be assisted with Carriages at any time
within three Months for the disposing thereof.

7. That no Officer or Soldier, nor any person whatsoever comprised in this
Capitulation, shall be reproached, or have any disgraceful speeches or
affronts offered to them, or be stopped, Plundered, or injured in their march,
Rendezvous, or Quarters, journeys or places of abode; And if any such thing
shall fall out, satisfaction shall be given at the judgment of any two or more
of the Commissioners they being equal in number of each party, nor shall the
persons aforesaid be enticed, nor any of them be compelled to take up Arms
against the King, nor be imprisoned, restrained, sued, or molested for any
matter or cause whatsoever, be it of public or private interest, before the
rendering of the Garrison, during six months after the rendering thereof. And if
any Officer, Soldier or person be sick or wounded, that they cannot at present
enjoy the benefit of these Articles, that such persons shall have liberty to
stay until they be recovered, and fit accommodation and subsistence shall be
provided for them during their stay, and then to enjoy the benefit of these
Articles

8. That all Horses, Arms, Money, and other Goods whatsoever, taken as Lawful
prize of War, before or during the Siege and now remaining in the City, be
continued in the possession of the present possessors.

9. That these Articles shall extend to the use and benefit of all strangers of
any foreign Kingdom or State, residing within this Garrison, together with
their Wives, Children, Servants, Horses, Arms, Goods, Money and Debts.

10. That all persons included in these Articles, without exception of any
(other then the Soldiers, which are to march out upon the 5, Article) shall
have liberty during the space of three months after rendering the Garrison)
either to remain in Oxford, or to remove themselves, with their Families
Goods, Horses, and all things that properly belong unto them, or to their
disposal. And all Noble men, Gentlemen, and persons of quality, with their
Arms and other Equipage, to their houses, or friends, without any prejudice to
their friends for receiving them.

11. That all Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Officers, Soldiers, and all other
persons in Oxford, or comprised in this Capitulation, who have Estates real,
or personal, under or liable to Sequestrations according to Ordinance of
Parliament, and shall desire to Compound for them (except persons by name
excepted by Ordinance of Parliament from pardon,) shall at any time within six
months after rendering the Garrison of Oxford, be admitted to compound for their
Estates, which composition shall not exceed two years Revennue for Estates of
Inheritance, and for Estates for Lives, Years, and other real and personal
Estates, shall not exceed the proportion aforesaid for Inheritances according
to the value of them. And that all persons aforesaid whose dwelling Houses are
Sequestered, (except before excepted) may after the rendering of the Garrison
repair to them, and there abide, convenient time being allowed to such as are
placed there under the Sequestrations for their removal. And it is agreed that
all the profits, and Revenues arising out of their Estates after the day of
entering their names as Compounders, shall remain in the hands of the Tenants,
or Occupiers, to be answered to the Compounders when they have perfected their
agreements for their Compositions. And that they shall have liberty, and the
Generals Pass and Protection for their peaceable repair to, and abode at
their several Houses or Friends, and to go to London to attend their
Compositions, or elsewhere upon their necessary Occasions, with freedom of
their persons from Oaths, Engagements and Molestations during the space of six
months: And after so long as they prosecute their Compositions, without
wilful default, or neglect on their part, except an engagement by promise,
not to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act
prejudicial to their Affairs, so long as they remain in their Quarters. And
it is further agreed, that from and after their Compositions made, they shall
be forthwith restored to, and enjoy their Estates, and all other Immunities as
other Subjects together with the Rents and profits, from the time of entering
their names, discharged of Sequestrations, and from Fifth, and Twentieth parts,
and other Payments and Impositions, except such as shall be general and common
to them with others.

12. That no Lords, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Scholars, Officers, Soldiers,
Citizens, nor any other persons included in this Capitulation, (except the
persons mentioned before, to be excepted from pardon) shall be molested or
questioned for any thing said, or done, in or concerning this War, or relating
to the unhappy differences between His Majesty and the Parliament, they
submitting to Composition, as in the precedent Article; and that the Persons
before mentioned to be excepted from Pardon, shall have the benefit of this
Article during the space of six months from the rendering of the Garrison, and
after, if they be admitted to, and agree for their Compositions.

13. That the persons mentioned before to be excepted from Pardon, shall have
Liberty, and the Generals Pass and Protection for themselves, Families,
Horses, Goods, and all things that properly belong unto them now in Oxford, to
go unto and abide at their own Houses, or their Friends, for the space of six
Months after the rendering of the Garrison: and within that time to repair unto
London to endeavor Compositions for their Estates, and Indemnitie of their
persons, and to make their Peace: And if they cannot obtain it, shall have
Passes to go beyond the Seas at any time within the said six Months; and that
no other Engagemen^ shall be put upon them, save by promise, not to bear Arms
against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their
affairs, so long as they remain in their Quarters.

14. That the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of the University of Oxford,
and the Governors and Students of Christ's Church, of King H. 8. his
Foundation: and all other Heads and Governors, Masters, Fellows, and Scholars
of the Colleges, Halls, and Bodies Corporate and Societies of the same
University, and the public Professors and Readers, and the Orator thereof,
and all other Persons belonging to the said University, or to any Colleges or
Halls therein, shall and may according to their Statutes, Charters, and
Customs, enjoy their Ancient Form of Government subordinate to the immediate
Authority and Power of Parliament: And that all the Rights, Privileges,
Franchises, Lands, Tenements, Houses, Possessions, Rents, Revenues,
Hereditaments, Libraries, Debts, Goods, and Chattells belonging to the said
University, or to Christ's Church, or to any Colleges or Halls in the said
University (except such Rents and Revenues as have been already taken and
received by Ordinance of Parliament) shall be enjoyed by them respectively as
aforesaid, free from Sequestrations, Fines, Taxes, and all other molestations
whatsoever for, or under color of any thing whatsoever relating to this
present War, or to the unhappy differences between His Majesty and the
Parliament. And that all Churches, Chappells, Colleges, Halls, Libraries,
Schools, and public Buildings within or belonging to the City, or
University, or to Christ's Church, or the several Colleges or Halls thereof,
shall be preserved from defacing and spoil. And if any removal shall be made
by the Parliament of any Head, or other Members of the University, Christ's
Church, Colleges or Halls, that those so removed shall enjoy their profits
during the space of six Months after the rendering of Oxford, and shall have
convenient time allowed them for the removal of themselves and their Goods
from their Lodgings: Provided that this shall not extend to retard any
Reformation there intended by the Parliament, nor give them any liberty to
intermeddle in the Government.

15. That the Major, Bayliffes, and Commonalty, and all Corporations within the
City, shall enjoy their Ancient Government, and their Charters, Customs
Franchises, Liberties, Lands, Goods, and Debts, and all things else whatsoever
which belong to them as Corporations subordinat, to the immediate authority and
power of Parliament; And shall not be molested or questioned by color of any
thing before the rendering of this Garrison, done or Ordered by them in the
Capacity of Corporations, relating to the differences between His Majesty and
the Parliament.

16. That the Citizens, and Inhabitants of the City, shall not be charged with
free quarter, or billet of Soldiers other then for Lodging, except in urgent
time of necessity, and that to be ordered and disposed by the advice of the
Major, or his Deputy; And that in all public Taxes they shall be charged
proportionably with the County; And that no Scholar, Citizen, or Inhabitant in
the University and City of Oxford, shall be troubled, or questioned for taking
up Arms in the Garrison by express Command, during the time it was a
Garrison, for the defense thereof: And that the Scholars, Citizens, and
Inhabitants shall have the benefit of this Capitulation in all things that may
concern them.

17. That no Officer, Soldier, or other person who by the Articles are to
march out of the City, or Suburbs, or to march in, shall plunder, spoil, or
injure any Scholar, Citizen, or Inhabitants, or other person in Oxford, in
their Persons, Goods, or Estates, or carry away any thing that is properly
belonging to any of them,

18. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other women now in Oxford, whose
Husbands, or Friends are are absent from thence, may have passes and
protections for themselves Servants and Goods, to go to, and remain at the
Houses of their Husbands, or at their Friends, as they shall desire; and to go
or send to London, or elsewhere, to obtain the Allowances out of their Husbands
or Parents Estates allotted them by Ordinance of Parliament.

19. That such of His Majesty's Household Servants, who shall desire to go to
His Majesty, may have free Liberty and Passes to go accordingly at any time
within one Month next after the Rendering of the Garrison. And that His
Majesty's Household Stuff, and other his peculiar Goods which are now in
Oxford, may be carried to His Majesty's House at Hampton Court: And his
Servants under whose charge or custody any of them are, shall be allowed and
assisted in the procuring of Carts, Boats, and Carriages for the removal of
them thither, and there to remain till His Majesty shall otherwise dispose of
them, and then to be sent or disposed accordingly. And that such of His
Majesty's Servants who are not able for the present to go to him, shall have
Liberty, Passes and Protections to go to and remain at His Majesty's said
House at Hampton Court, and have liberty to attend the Committee for His
Majesty's Revenues, to procure a competent Allowance out of His Majesty's
Revenue for their subsistence, until His Majesty shall otherwise provide for,
or dispose of them.

20. That all Clergymen now in Oxford, who shall not upon Composition or
otherwise, be restored to their Church Livings, shall have Liberty to go to
London to obtain some fitting Allowance for the Livelihood of themselves and
their Families.

21. That it is intended, declared, and agreed, That all Persons comprised
within these Articles, shall peaceably and quietly enjoy all their Goods,
Debts, and Movables, allowed by these Articles during the space of six Months,
after Rendering the Garrison: And that they shall be free from all Oaths,
Engagements, and Molestations, except an Engagement by promise not to bear
Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any Act prejudicial to their
Affairs, so long as they remain in their Quarrers: and that they shall have
Liberty within the space of six Months (in case they shall be resolved to go
beyond Seas) to dispose of their Goods, Debts, and Movables, allowed by these
Articles, and depart the Kingdom, if they shall think fit: and to have Passes
for their Transportation; Or otherwise to stay in the Kingdom.

22. That if any of these Articles shall in any point be broken or violated by
any Person or Persons in Oxford, or comprised within this Capitulation, the
fault and punishment shall be upon him or them only who made the breach or
violation, and shall not be imputed to, or charged upon any other not assenting
thereunto, or not an actor in it.

23. That the Duke of Richmond, the Earl of Lindsey, and their Servants that
came forth with them, shall enjoy the benefit of these Articles, in whatsoever
may concern them.

24 That the Garrison of Faringdon, (...) shall be Rendered to his Excellency
Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the Governor, Gentlemen, Soldiers, and all other of
what quality soever within those Garrisons, shall enjoy the benefit of these
Articles in every particular which may concern them, they Rendering the
Garrison accordingly as Oxford.

25. That all Persons comprised in these Articles, shall (upon request) have a
Certificate under the hand of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, or the future
Governor of the City, That such Persons were in the City at the time of the
Surrender thereof, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.

26. That the General Sir Thomas Fairfax, shall give a Pass to one or two
Messengers with their Servants, to go unto the King to give Him an Account of
the Proceedings upon this Treaty and Conclusion thereof, and to return, and
receive the benefit of these Articles.

FINIS.
Dated at Water-Eaton, June 20th, 1646.

