POEMS Written by the Right HONORABLE Henry Lord Arundel of Warder, AND Count
of the Sacred Roman Empire, Now PRISONER in the TOWER.
1. A Valediction to the WORLD.
HEnce all you Visions of the Worlds delight,
You treacherous Dreams of our deluded sense
Passion too long has seized on Reasons Right,
And played the Tyrant in her own defense:
Her fluttring Fancies hurried me about,
To seek content which I could never find out.
If any pleasure did slide over my sense
It left a mark of shame when it went thence.
And when possessed, it relished no more;
And I remained as Thirsty as before:
Those pleasant Charms that did my heart seduce
Seemed great pursued, but less'ned in the use;
And that false flame that kindled my desire
E're I could cast, the pleasure did expire.
But Reason now shall repossess her Throne
And Grace restore what nature had overthrown,
My better Genius prompts me to declare
Against those follie's, and to side with her:
She tells me it is high time to stemm that Tide
Whose Torrent does me from my self divide.
Those brutal Passions do un-man our mind,
And rule, where Virtue had them slaves designed
Such usurpation shall prevail no more,
I will to Reason her just Rights restore:
And make my Rebel heart that duty pay
To her, which on my sense was thrown away.
But this (dear Lord) must be thy act not mine,
Thy Grace must finish what I but design
It is thy power alone that first does move,
Then gives us strength to execute and love.
For Nature has by custom so prevailed,
And such dominion on our sense entailed,
That we can never hope but by thy hand
To free our Captive Souls from her Command*
That fatal liberty which for our good
Thou gav'st us, was ill used, worse understood.
Man made by reason, not like Beasts, to obey
Losing that reason, grows more beasts then they*
And sure we lose it when we do dispense
With our known duty, to delight the sense.
Since then thy bounty does my heart Inspire,
Make me to do, as well as to desire:
Set so my wavering heart from passions free
That it may never love any thing but thee.
By thy sweet force my Stubborn will Incline
To quit my Conduct, and to follow thine:
So shall my Soul thy double purchase prove
Bought by thy Blood, and conquered by thy love.
2 Persecution no loss.
WHat can we lose for him, when all we have
Are but the Favors which his Bounty gave;
And which, when sufferings force us to restore,
God only takes them for to give us more:
And by an happy change does kindly prove
He takes our fortune but to give his love.
How vainly should that beggar chide his fate
That quits his Dunghill for a Chair of State:
So fares it with us, when God does displace
The Gifts of fortune for the gifts of Grace
God did on suffering set so high esteem,
he that way chose the lost World to Redeem:
And when his love and nature were at strife
He vallu'd more his suffering, then his Life.
And shall Opinion have more power to move
Then his Example, Doctrine, and his Love?
Love makes Afflictions easy; to complain
Lessens the merit, and augments the pain.
Let Us humbly then Submit to his design,
And give that freely which we must resign:
So shall our Losses prove the best Increase
Of future Glory, and our present Peace.
3 Quem amat castigat.
IF then the earnest of thy favors be
Affliction, good God let it light on me.
I Will glory more in such a kind distress
Then in all comforts when thy love is less.
And by my Misery I Will make it known
In spite of the World, how much I am thy own
No fruitful shower shall by the thirsty plant
Be kindlier entertained then scorn and want.
Or loss of Honor, Fortune or delight
Shall be by me; That which did once affright,
And filled my troubled Mind with care and grief
Shall be my future Comfort and relief.
I never more will Court a smiling Fate
Since he is so happy, that is desolate.
Afflictions shall be pleasing, for they come
Like friendly showers to drive us sooner home.
And by thy love, such Charms are in them found
As cure the Heart, which they intend to wound;
So strange effects does Grace in us produce
To change as well their Nature, as their Use.
4 Considerations before the Crucifix.
WHen I behold thee on that fatal Tree
(Sweet Jesus) suffering, and that it is for me;
When I consider in that purple Flood
My sins ebb out, but with thy Life and Blood:
When I reflect how dear my soul has cost
I Am moved to wish, it rather had been lost:
For how can that life please that does de^^^oy
The Life of him, by whom we life enjoy*
And yet to wish thou had not suffered so,
Were to reproach thy love and wisdom too;
And if we Joy in what thy Death has brought,
We must allow the pains by which 'twas bought
So that our joy and grief united lie,
And natures Life is to have her maker dye.
It is thy will (dear Lord) must be obeyed,
And in that duty both those debts are paid.
O let my Soul, in a due measure, find
A joy becoming, and a mourning mind;
A joy in thy kind will, even whilst it made
Sunshine in Nature by thy God-head's shade.
A grief to see the Torments sin did merit
And Man deserved, God should himself inherit.
That so divided 'twixt thy pain and will,
I may resign with joy, and yet grieve still.
Adoring so this Trumph of thy Love,
That weeping here I may rejoice above.
5 Upon the Pains of Hell.
O Restless Groans! O sloathful Tears!
O vain Desires O fruitless Fears!
One timely Sigh had eased that Pain,
Which Millions now do seek in vain;
Eternal Penance is thy Fate,
For having wept and sighed too late:
That short remorse which thou did fly,
Is changed into Eternity;
Neglected mercy has no room,
When Justice once has fixed his Doom.
Prevent then timely by thy care,
That endless Penance of Despair;
And weep betimes, your Tears here may
Turn Night into eternal Day;
It Is only they have power to move,
And change Gods Justice into Love;
If by the virtue of his Grace,
Thou shedst them in a proper place*
LONDON, Printed, 1679.


