THE ARTICLES AND CHARGE OF THE ARMY, AGAINST Fourscore of the Parliament men,
who have acted contrary to the trust reposed in them by the People, and would
have his Majesty's late Concessions to be a Ground of Peace.

WITH The Names and Number of those who were seized on by Col. Pride on
Wednesday last at Westminster, and committed to safe custody.

LIKEWISE. The further Demands of his Excellency, and the General Council of
Officers; and their Desires touching Major General Brown, Sheriff of the City
of London.

BY the Appointment of His Excellency the Lord Fairfax Lord General, and His
General Council of Officers,

Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.

Printed for C. VV. near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1648.

THE CHARGE OF THE ARMY, Against Major General Massey, Sir William Waller,
Col. Hollis, Col. Copley, and the rest of the Parliamen men, who was impeached
and taken into custody on Wednesday 6 December. 1648.
I.
THat whereas Denzil Hollis Esquire Lionel Copley Esquire Maj. Genesis Massy, and others
of your members, were in the year 1647. impeached by your selves for treason,
or for high crimes and misdemeanors, in relation to the treasonable Engagement
of the city of London, etc. and upon clear proofs against them, were by your
censure expelled the House; yet by the prevalency of their Faction the same
persons were afterwa^ds readmitted to sit in the House, and vote as formerly,
without any trial or satisfaction in the things whereof they were accused: We
demand that all those members so impeached may be forthwith secured, to be
brought to justice or trial for their said crims, and that such others of their
faction, may be secluded from the House, etc.

II.
That whereas by the confederacy of Major Gen Brown (now Sheriff of London)
with the said impeached members, and others, the Scots were invited and drawn
in to invade this Kingdom the last Summer, insomuch as when upon the actual
In^asion the House proceeded to declare them enemies, and th^se that a^h^^e to
them traitors; yet the said confederates and other treacherous members (to the
number of ninety and odd, as upon the division of the House appeared) did by
their Councels and Votes endeavor to hinder the house from declaring against
their confederate inva^ers; We desire, that the said M.G. Brown may be also
secured and brought to judgment, and that the rest of the ninety and odd
persons dissenting in the said vote, may be excluded the house, and not
trusted further in your Councels.

III.
That whereas in a continued Series of your proceedings for many months
together, we have seen the prevalence of the same treacherous corupt, and
divided councels, through factions and private interests, and in their late
Votes declaring the Kings past concessions to be a ground for the house to
proceed upon for the settlement of the peace of the kingdom, notwithstanding
the visib^e insufficiency and defects of them in things essentially concerning
the public interest and liberties of the Kingdom*

IV.
That such as by faithfulness have retained their trust, being set in a
condition to pursue and perform the same, with out such interruptions,
diversions and depravations of councels, as formerly. We shall desire and hope
you will speedily nnd vigorously proceed, 1 To take order for the execution of
Justice, 2 To set a short period to your own power, 3 To provide for a speedy
succession of equal Representatives, according to our late Remonstrance,
wherein differences in the kingdom may be ended, and we and others may
comfortably acquiese; as (for our parts) we hereby engage, and assure you we
shall.

By the Appointment of his Excellenoy the Lord Falrfax, Lord General, and his
General Council of Officers. Signed, JOHN RUSHWORTH, Secr.


The Articles and Proposals.
1 By what evidences and proofs, or upon what Reasons and grounds the King
stands acquitted of the charge of the Houses against him, in their late
Declaration to the Kingdom.

2 What persons especially what members of either Houses have played the
Traitors, by inviting the Scots to invade this Kingdom, or gave them
countenance, or encouragement in that perfidious attempt.

3 That the promoters of the first and second war be brought to Justice.

4 That the arrears and debts of the Kingdom be secured and satisfied, and that
the public faith be not made a public fraud to the Kingdom,

5 That the Court of Wards be abolished without exacting satisfaction for the
same.

6 That the Consciences of men be not cruelly and unconscionably shipwracked.

7 That the cunning device upon the Army for hateful free quarter, and the
contrivers thereof be discovered, and the Mariners and Army vindicated from the
slander thence raised upon it.

8 That the Orders for reducing any of the Soldiers or Sea men either by Sea
or Land may be suspended, until the Commonwelth be settled, and the enemies
thereof brought to justice. That these and the like things being satisfied and
secured to the Kingdom, your Excellency and your Army may return from this
present employment in honor and good conscience, as faithfully discharging the
Armies engagement to the Kingdom, and not bear the shame and reproach of men
that only acted for hire, and so that base scandal, so much in the mouths of
your and our treacherous enemies, will not be justified in the hearts of our
friends: for the effectual obtaining of these good things, we shall really
adhere to your Excellency to our utmost ability.

By His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.
THese are to require all Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot who shall
quarter in and about the City of London and Suburbs thereof, that they behave
and demean themselves and peaceably toward all sorts of people, not giving any
just cause of offense, or provocation by language, or otherwise, upon pain of
such severe punishment as to a Court Martial shall be thought meet, and not do
any unlawful violence to the person or goods of any, either in their quarters
or elsewhere, upon pain of death: And for the more due execution hereof, all
Commanders and Officers are hereby required not to be absent from their
several and distinct charges, without leave first had from their superiors*
upon pain of such punishment as the party injured shall sustain, and such
further censure as to justice shall be thought fit.

Given under my hand and seal, December. the first, 1648. T. FAIRFAX.


FOrasmuch as diverse ill-affected persons have of late made their Resort to the
City of London, the Subburbs, and places adjoining, with Design (as there is
cause to believe upon Grounds more then probable) to imbroile this Kingdom in
further troubles: and whereas by Ordinance, or Order of Parliament, such resort
has been prohibited, and the departure of such persons enjoined; these are
therefore to require all persons that have engaged for the King in the first or
latter War, or have adhered unto, or assisted him or his party therein, and are
now residing in London, or within ten miles distant there from, that within
twenty four hours, after publication hereof, they depart from the said City
and Subburbs, and all places within ten miles distance thereof, and not to
return for the space of one month, next ensuing the publication hereof, if the
Headquarters shall continue here so long: and who ever shall be found and
taken, contrary hereunto, they shall be dealt withal as Prisoners of War,
except such of them as have perfected their Compositions, and not engaged again
in the latter War.

Given under our Hand and Seal the fourth of December. 1648, T. Fairfax.


By His Excellency the Lord General Fairfax.
WHereas it is informed, that many Soldiers and others of the Army going
without leave of their Officers from the places where they are quartered, do
straggle about the City of London and Subburbs, contrary to Orders in that
behalf given; I do hereby require and command all such Soldiers and others of
the Army, forthwith upon publication hereof, to repair to their several
Quarters upon pain of being strictly proceeded against according to the said
Orders and the General Articles of War. And whereas it is informed, that
diverse loose persons going about the City under the name and in the Garb of
Soldiers, have been very abusive in language, and otherwise, to the injury of
some Inhabitants, and just offense of others; I do hereby desire, that if any
such be hereafter found going about without order, or Off^cers to govern them,
whether they be indeed soldiers or no, and committing any such abuses, they
may be apprehended by the next Constables and sent to White Hall, there to be
delivered as prisoners to the Marshall general, together with what information
and evidence there is against them by a Council of War, to the due punnishment
of those that shall be offended, and to the just satisfaction of the persons
injured, and if any of the Soldiers going about with their off^cers, shall be
so abusive, in case their Officers shall not restrain them, such Officer being
complained of, shall himself be punished, and give satisfaction to the parry
injured.

Given under my hand and seal, December. 8. 1648. T. FAIRFAX.
Col. Pride having received Orders from the General, to secure a certain
number of the Parliament, on Wednesday last marched with his Regiment to
Westminster, and took diverse of them into custody, viz. Sir William Waller,
Major Genesis Massey, Sir Benjamin Rudyard, Col. Hollis, Col^ Fines, and about 20
more, who are committed to safe custody, and whether they shall have their
inlargment upon paroll, or be continued prisoners is uncertain.




FINIS.

