AN ELEGY ON Her GRACE ELIZABETH Duchess of Ormond, Who died July the 21st 1684.

By E. A. M. A. of Trin. Coll. Dubl.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Tho. Newcomb. 1684.

AN ELEGY ON THE Duchess of Ormond, etc.
FOrbear, vain Muse, to vent thy Passion here,
Thou can not offer one ingenuous Tear;
Nor may thou hope thy unregarded Verse
Can have admittance to this Sacred Hearse.
Yet Silence here would be Ingratitude,
It Is then more pardonable to be rude.
If Men of Sense and Fancy more sublime
Condemn the unpolished meanness of thy Rhyme;
This just Excuse for that Disorder show,
Tell them thy Thoughts are Discomposed and Thou.
Less Mourners may Methodically weep,
Thy over swollen Grief within no Bounds will keep.
Then venture to bewail thy rigid Fate,
And with the Saint departed thus expostulate.
Ah! Why so soon did thou resign thy Breath,
And leave the World Impoverished by thy Death?
Did thou, to taste some Heavenly Bliss unknown,
Destroy our pleasure to increase thine own?
Ah no, thou knewst no such inferior Ends,
Thy nobler Aim still was to oblige thy Friends;
For them thou have thy Best Enjoyments given,
And might a while defer thy flight to Heaven.
For no Bliss there to thee could Foreign prove
Thy Conversation was so much Above
And thou enjoyd'st of Heaven so large a store,
That Consummation scarce could give thee more.
Thy Love soard high, above all Human Aim,
Angels scarce boast a more Exalted Flame;
Scarce to their God more Frequent Homage pay,
Nor thou less Serious, less Devout than they;
On his Great Work thou did thy time bestow,
In offering Prayers above, and doing Good below.
Nor was the Case which did this Jewel hold,
Made of Course Earth cast in a Common Mold;
But suited to the Beauty of thy Mind,
Thy Body too was polished and refined.
Thy Face so Heavenly, we believed it still
Not Human, till we found it passible.
Till Envious Time, to lessen our regard,
By stealth the lovely Frontispiece impaired.
Yet Time designed this Injury in vain,
Beauty amidst the Ruins did remain,
And taught us, by its Splendour in Decay,
To judge what its Perfection could display.
But Heaven displeased to see that Work abused
In forming which such Wondrous Skill was used,
As if the Artist chiefly had desired*
To have his Power in this Rare Piece admired,
Dissolved the Fabric, to restore it so,
That it no Ruin, no Decay shall know.
But Lasting and Impregnable shall be
Not only against Time, but vast Eternity.
Ah! then forbear, mistaken Muse, in vain
In thy Hibernian Dialect to complain.
Demand no more why the Bright Soul is fled
And left our Joys, like her loved Body, dead:
But if thy Flight can track her through the Air,
Follow and see her great Reception there.
Angels in Choirs crowd the new Guest to meet,
And straw their Palms beneath her welcome Feet;
The meaner Orders placed on either hand
In double Ranks, to view, and guard her, Stand;
While Seraphims present a Robe of Light
Studded with Stars, and as the Sunbeams bright:
Now comes a noble Troop, in Heaven well known,
A Troop of Works which she on Earth had done;
Of Prayers untold a very numerous Train;
For often she used to pray, and never in vain.
Mortified Lusts, and Passions well subdued
Which never till now durst to her Sight intrude
Repentant Sighs, and Tears in Bottles kept;
For Heaven exhaled each precious drop she wept:
Besides a multitude of Virtues more,
Which loudly knock at the Eternal Door,
Make way, for Ormond's Duchess comes, they cry,
And at the well-known name, the Locks straight open fly.
Here wait those Saints to whom her Womb gave birth,
But coveted by Heaven, soon snatched from Earth.
Ah! that among their number yet we see
The Good, the Great, the Glorious OSSORY!
But he was brought to entertain Her here,
Lest, without Him, the Bliss imperfect should appear.
Yet this great comfort he has left behind,
The exact Resemblance of his Generous Mind;
A Second OSSORY, whose blooming Youth
Gives early hope of a successful growth.
In whom the admiring World does gladly see
ORMOND and OSSORY in Epitome.
May he of ARRAN's Virtue too partake,
Who would not Honor for Applause forsake,
But bravely ventured to declare his Sense
In the behalf of injured Innocence;
Choosing to bear the Aspersions of the Crowd
Rather than stain his Soul with guiltless Blood.
But (...) these Heroes Fame to celebrate,
And think on ORMOND the disconsolate;
That worthy Husband of this Virtuous Wife,
The noble part'ner of her Love and Life.
He, like a Body, when Tormentors Art
Has from the living Fibers torn the Heart,
Finds in himself no Signs of Life remain,
But the worst Symptom, a deep Sense of pain.
Bring Lenitives to his excessive Grief;
And if thou findst they fail to give relief,
Tell him how dear a price it is like to cost,
Tell him --
His Master's Interest will in him be lost.
Tell him, his Life he to his Sovereign owes,
And must not, but by his Command, expose:
These Reasons will affect his Loyal Sense,
For he was ever all Obedience;
To CHARLES's Name he will due Reverence give,
And for his Service condescend to live.

