ARTICLES OF TREASON, Exhibitted in PARLIAMENT, Against EDWARD Earl of
CLARENDON.
Mr. Seymor's Speech to the House of LORDS.
My Lords,
THe Commons Assembled in Parliament, having received Information of diverse
Treasonable Practices and Designs of a great Peer of this House (Edward Earl
of Clarendon) Commanded me to Accuse the said Edward Earl of Clarendon of
Treason, and other Crimes and Misdemeanors; And I do here in their Names, and
in the Names of the Commons of England, accuse Edward Earl of Clarendon of
Treason, and other high Crimes and Misdemeanors. I am further commanded by the
House of Commons, to desire your Lordships, That the Earl of Clarendon may
forthwith be Sequestered from Parliament, and be committed to safe Custody:
They further command me to acquaint your Lordships, That they will in
convenient time Exhibit the Articles of the Charge against him.

November. 14. 1667.
The Vote of the House of Lords.
Resolved, etc.

That the Lords have not Complied with the Desires of the House of Commons,
concerning the Commitment of the Earl of Clarendon, and Sequestring him from
Parliament; Because the House of Commons have only Accused him of Treason in
general, and have not assigned, or specified any particular Treason.

I. THat the Earl of Clarendon has designed a standing Army to be Raised, and
to Govern the Kingdom thereby; Advised the King to Dissolve the present
Parliament, so lay aside all thoughts of Parliament for the future, to Govern
by Military Power, and to maintain the same by Free Quarter, and Contribution.

II. That he has in hearing of many of his Majesty's Subjects, falsely and
seditiously said, The King was in his Heart a Papist, Popishly affected; or
words to that effect.

III. That he has received great sums of Money for passing the Canary Pattent;
and other illegal Pattents, and granted several Injunctions to stop proceedings
at Law against them, and other illegal Pattents formerly granted.

IV. That he has advised and procured diverse of his Majesty's Subjects to be
Imprisoned against Law, in remote Islands, Garrisons, and other Places, thereby
to prevent them from the benefit of the Law; and to introduce presidents for
Imprisoning of other of his Majesty's Subjects, in like manner.

V. That he has corruptly sold several Offices, contrary to Law.

VI. That he has procured his Majesty's Customs to be Farmed at under Rates,
knowing the same; and great pretended Debts to be paid by his Majesty; to the
payment whereof, his Majesty was not in strictness bound: And has received
great sums of Money for procuring the same.

VII. That he has received great sums of Money from the Company of Vintners,
or some of them, or their Agents, for exhausting the Prices of Wine, and for
freeing them from the payment of legal Penalties, which they had incurred.

VIII. That he has in short time gained to himself a far greater Estate then
can be imagined to be lawfully gained in so short a time: And contrary to his
Oath, has procured several Grants under the Great Seal from his Majesty to
himself and Relations, of several of his Majesty's Lands, Hereditaments, and
Leases, to the dis-profit of his Majesty.

IX. That he introduced an Arbitrary Government in his Majesty's Foreign
Plantations, and has caused such as Complained thereof, before his Majesty and
Council, to be long Imprisoned for so doing.

X. That he did reject and frustrate a Proposal and Undertaking, approved by
his Majesty, for the Preservation of Mevis and St. Christophers, and Reducing
the French Plantations to his Majesty's obedience, after the Commissions were
drawn for that purpose, which was the occasion of such great Losses and Damages
in those parts.

XI. That he advised and effected the Sale of Dunkirk to the French King, being
part of his Majesty's Dominions, together with the Ammunition, Artillery, and
all sorts of Stores there, and for no greater value then the said Ammunition,
Artillery, and Stores were worth.

XII. That the said Earl did unduly cause his Majesty's Letters Pattents under
the Great Seal of England (to one Dr. Cronither) to be altered, and the
Inrolement thereof to be unduly razed.

XIII. That he has in an Arbitrary way, examined and drawn into question
diverse of his Majesty's Subjects concerning their Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels, and Properties; determined thereof at the Council Table, and stopped
proceedings at Law; and threatened some that pleaded the Statute of 17 Car. 1.

XIV. That he had caused Quo Warranto's to be issued out against most of the
Corporations of England by Act of Parliament, to the intent he might receive
great sums of Money from them for Renewing their Charters; which when they
complied withal, he caused the said Quo Warranto's to be discharged, and
prosecution thereon to cease.

XV. That he procured the Bills of Settlement for Ireland, and received great
sums of Money for the same, in a most corrupt and unlawful manner.

XVI. That he has Deluded and Betrayed his Majesty, and the Nation, in all
Foreign Treaties and Negotiations, relating to the late War.

XVII. That he was a principal Author of that fatal Counsel of Dividing the
Fleet, about June, 1666.


