ARTICLES OF Impeachment and Accusation, Exhibited in PARLIAMENT, Against
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, Touching his dishonorable surrender of the City and
Castle of BRISTOLL;

BY Clement Walker and William Prynne, ESQUIRES.

Together with a Letter from Mr. Prynne To Colonel FIENNES.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1643.

Die Mercurii, 15 November. 1643.
THe humble Petition of Clement Walker and William Prynne, Esqs concerning Mr.
Nathaniel Fiennes and the surrender of Bristoll, was this day read-in the House
of Commons, and Articles of Accusation of the said Mr. Fiennes, touching the
surrender of the said city of Bristoll and castle, was this day likewise
presented to the said House; A Letter from Master Prynne to Mr. Nathaniel
Fiennes was was likewise read.

Ordered by the House of Commons, That they shall be careful, that there be a
a fair and equal Trial of Mr. Nathaniel Fiennes.

Resolved, etc.

That these Articles, entitled, Articles of Accusation and Impeachment against
Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, late Governor of the castle and city of Bristoll,
touching the dishonorable surrender thereof to the Enemy, contrary to his trust
and duty, by Clement Walker and William Prynne Esqs shall be now read. The said
Articles and Impeachment were accordingly read.

The Petition and Articles were signed, Clement Walker and William Prynne; and
they were both called in at the Bar; being demanded whether the Names
subscribed, were of their hand writing; They did avow the Names to be of their
own handwriting, and did avow the said Petition and Articles.

Ordered that a copy of the Articles attested under the Clerks hand, be
forthwith sent to my Lord General.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
ARTICLES OF Accusation and Impeachment, Against Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes,
Late Governor of the City and Castle of Bristoll, touching his dishonorable
surrender thereof to the enemy, contrary to his Trust and Duty, by Clement
Walker and William Prynne Esquire.
1. INprimis, That he the said Colonel Nathaniel Fiennes, did suddenly
apprehend, imprison, and remove Colonel Thomas Essex, late Governor of the
said City and Castle from his government there, upon pretense that he intended
to deliver up the same (not then fully fortified, or sufficiently provided to
withstand any long siege) into the hands of the common enemies of the Kingdom
and Parliament; contrary to the trust reposed in him* and that hereupon, he
the said Col. Fiennes obtained the government of the said City and Castle for
himself, and undertook to defend and keep the same, to the uttermost
extremity against the said enemy, for the use of the King and Parliament, and
not to surrender the said City and Castle, or either of them to the said
enemies, or to any other person whatsoever, without the previous consent and
order of the Parliament.

2. Item, That the said Colonel, soon after he became Governor of the said
City and Castle, did by Martial law, apprehend, condemn and execute some
chief Citizens thereof; Namely, Master Yeomans, Master Butcher, and others,
only for intending to deliver up the same to Prince Rupert, when he came first
before Bristoll (not then fully fortified and stored) though they did not
actually surrender the same.

3. Item, That he the said Colonel did put the Parliament, Kingdom, Country
and City, to a vast expense in fortifying and furnishing it, and the Castle
thereof with Forts, Sconce, Canons, Ammunition, Arms, Victuals, Provision of
all sorts, and with Garrisons sufficiently able to defend and maintain the same
for Three months space or more, against all the power of the Enemies, that
might or did come against the same; and did likewise promise and undertake to
diverse Gentlemen and Inhabitants thereof, to defend the same for so long space
or more, in case they should be besieged.

4. Item, That he the said Colonel, notwithstanding the said premises, when
the enemy came before the said City and Castle, with no extraordinary Forces or
Ammunition able to force the same, and besieged them not above four days at
the most, did before ever the enemy had taken any of the out Forts, or Sconces
about the same; or had made so much as the least battery or assault upon the
walls of the said City or Cast^e, or any mine or breach into any of the Forts
thereof, contrary to his former trust, promises, duty, and the honor of a
Soldier, most dishonourably, cowardly, and traitorously delivered up the said
City and Castle, with all the prisoners, Canons, Ammunition, Artillery, Arms,
Military Provisions, Magazines, Victuals therein, and the very Colors too,
without, and against the consent of the Parliament, or his Excellency their
General, into the hands and power of Prince Rupert, and other common enemies
of the Kingdom and Parliament, to the extraordinary great danger, dishonor,
loss and prejudice of the whole Kingdom and Parliament, the evil examples of
other Governors and Towns, the loss of most of the Western parts of
England, and great encouraging, enriching, and strengthening of the said
enemies, both by Land and Sea, and that upon very dishonorable Articles, to
which he was no ways necessitated, and had no care to see them punctually
performed by the enemy, when complaint thereof was made to him for relief, to
the great prejudice and impoverishing of the Inhabitants and Garrison sou diers
there.

5. Item, That the said Colonel, without the privity or consent of any
Council of War, did of his own head, send out for a parley with the enemy,
when the Officers and soldiers advised and persuaded the contrary, and would
have repulsed the enemies, and defended the said City and Castle to the utmost,
that the surrendering up of the same was principally occasioned by earnest
persuasion, advice, and cowardice of the said Governor, contrary to his trust
and duty to keep the same: And that the said Governor, when as the Council
of war unanimously voted upon the parley, that it was neither safe, nor
honorable for them to depart the Town, unless they might march thence with
half their Arms at least, and with their Colors; thereupon, after some
private conference with Colonel Ierrard, one of the enemies Commanders, in the
Garden, without the privity, and contrary to the Vote of the said Council, did
make and insert the last Article, that they should leave all their Canon and
Ammunition, with their Arms and colors behind them, and returning to them
out of the Garden, told them plainly, that they must now deliver up all to the
enemy, but what was expressed in the Articles, he then produced, and leave
their Arms and colors behind them, to the said counsels and fouldiers great
discontent. And whereas by those very Articles, the said Town and castle were
not to be delivered up till nine of the clock the next morning, nor the
enemies to enter them, till the soldiers, and other Gentlemen were marched
out, the said Governor was so over hasty to surrender up the same, that he
delivered them up to the enemy above one hour, or more, before the hour
agreed on; and suffered the enemies to enter and possess them before the
soldiers were marched out, whereby many of the soldiers were pillaged in the
castle and town, and diverse of the Inhabitants best affected to the
Parliament, plundered before the hour of surrender came, to their great loss
and undoing.

6. Item, That he the said Colonel, during the four days siege of the said
City and castle, did not give any such encouragement to the soldiers and
Officers (who bravely defended the same, and slew near one thousand of the
enemies best men, by his own printed Relation, with the loss only of eight
persons) which much discouraged them, as his duty and place required, and they
expected; and that when a small number of the enemies, not two hundred (who
gave themselves for lost,) had entered the Line of Commumication at the weakest
place, which was worst guarded; On Wednesday morning the 26. of July last
(being bravely repulsed by the Soldiers with great loss in all places else)
he the said Colonel for two hours space or more (during which time no more
Enemies entered or approached the said Breach) both neglected and refused to
command or encourage the Officers and Soldiers, who offered to beat them out
in due time, as he was advised and pressed to do by Captain Bagnall, Livetenant
Colonel Damson, and diverse others, who would have undertaken that service; and
instead of incountering the said Enemies (against whom the very women offered
to go on with their children to dead the Canon, if the Soldiers were afraid,
rather then the City and Castle should be yielded) called off the Soldiers and
Officers from the Line and Out-workes (that the Enemies might the better enter
them without resistance) upon pain of death, much against their wills, who
should and would have hindered and repulsed the Enemies, and discouraged and
hindered such as were forwards to have cut them off, sounding a parley when the
Enemies were so beaten that they threw down their Arms, and ready for quarter,
insomuch that diverse of the Soldiers and Inhabitants, cried out they were
betrayed, and some of the Soldiers brake their Arms in discontent, swearing
they would serve the Parliament no more.

7. Item, That the said Governor, notwithstanding his promises to defend the
said City and Castle, and dispute it to the last, had yet a real intention to
deliver up the same to the Enemy before ever they were Besieged by them, and no
thought at all to defend it to the uttermost, or till it might be relieved by
his Excellency, as appears by the premised Articles, by the said Governors
refusal to send the Prisoners formerly taken out of the said Castle, before
the Enemy approached, when moved to it, saying to Sir William Waller and
others, that he would detain those prisoners still there, to make his own
Conditions and Composition the better with the Enemy, if they came before it,
by his commanding Master Hassard the Master Gunner there, to lay aside a
Reserve of Thirty Barrells of Powder, with Match and Bullet answerable, to
which when he was reduced, he would then Treat with the Enemy, (which he did
before he was reduced to this large Reserve) by other speeches to the like
effect, And by his moving Sir William Waller to depart from Bristoll, before it
was besieged, who otherwise would have adventured his life in its defense.

8. Item, That he the said Governor, when he surrendered the said Castle to the
Enemy, had at least sixty Barrells of Powder therein (besides what was in the
City and Forts) being ten more then were in Gloucester when it was first
besieged, Five hundred Canon shot, fifty great Grenades, fourteen hundred
weight of Match or more, great store of Musket Bullets, and Tin to make more, A
Match-maker, a Bullet-maker, with materials to make Match and Bullets, and all
manner of provisions and Victuals, sufficient to maintain one Thousand men for
three or four months space at least, Eleven Canons therein Mounted, (besides
44. Canons mounted in the City and Forts) All which were surrendered to the
Enemy before any Battery or assault made against the said Castle (though he had
men more then enough by his own relation to defend it) contrary to his promise
made to diverse Inhabitants of the said City, best affected to the Parliament,
to defend the same to the uttermost, and to dispute every foot thereof with the
Enemy, and to keep it, or to lay his bones therein; who thereupon sent in their
Estates, with provisions for them and their families, for three months or
more, into the said Castle, where the said Colonel promised to secure and
defend the same, most of which their Estates, were there seized on by the Enemy
to their undoing, By reason the said Colonel admitted the Enemies into the
said Castle, and delivered up the keys thereof unto them, before the hour
agreed on in the Articles, such was his extraordinary haste, to quit the same.

9. Item, That the said Colonel, to aggravate this his dishonorable action,
has presumed to justify the same, not only before the Honorable House of
Commons, by word of mouth, but likewise before the whole Kingdom and world in
Printed Relations and Letters, wherein he has laid an extraordinary great
Blemish both upon the Honorable Houses of Parliament, and his Excellency the
Earl of Essex, their Lord General, by publishing in Print, That had he
Manfully held out the said City and Castle to the last, yet he could not have
expected any relief from them in six or eight weeks space at the least, when
as Gloucester since Besieged with a far greater force then Bristoll was, yet
relieved by them in less then half the time (as Bristoll doubtless might and
would have been) and held out a full mone^hs siege or more, as Bristoll might
have done, though he the said colonel to add to his former offense, and
hinder or anticipate the Relief of Gloucester, that it might be lost as Bristoll
was, gave out in speeches to some Members of the house of Commons and others,
and namely to Master Samuel Brown, and Master John Sedgwick, that he would
lose his head, or be hanged, if Gloucester could or would hold out three days
siege, if the Enemy once came before it, or words to the like effect.

10 Item, That the said city and castle were so cowardly and unworthily
delivered up to the enemies, that they have since published in print, and given
out in speeches that the said Colonel Fines did bestow the same upon his
Majesty, that they were delivered up to them beyond their expectation, and that
they could not have taken the same, had it been defended by the Governor, who
eventually at least if not intentionally, did but strongly fortify, and
plentifully store the same, with all manner of provisions to make it Tenable,
at the Kingdoms and the Countries extraordinary expense, to render up the same
to the Enemies with great advantage to them, and far more prejudice and damage
to the Commonwealth, as soon as it was made defensible.

SIR,
ON Friday night late I received a Note from your Footboy, without name or
date, with a datelesse, nameles Paper enclosed, pretended to be a Proclamation
of my Lo^^ Generals, to appear at a Council of War on Thursday next (not
expressing what time of the day) to be held in the army, (without mentioning in
what certain place, the army being dispersed into diverse quarters remote from
Town) to justify what I have written concerning the cowardly and unworthy
surrendering up of Bristoll; which general, the consciousnesse of your own
guilt makes you (it seems) to appropriate wholly to your self, though not named
by me: which I shall be ready to do (since thus unexpectedly challenged into
the Lists) when I shall be legally summoned thereunto, at a certain competent
time and place. To which end (since your Foot-boyes namelesse, dateleffe
Summons, without any Warrant under my Lord Generals Hand and Seal; with the
datelesse, namelesse, placelesse; sealesse Proclamation enclosed; are but
gross artificial flourishes to blind the world, and mere Nullities in
Martial, Common, Civil, Canon law, as all professors of them will instruct you;
and such an individuum vagum, which makes intelligent men conceive, that you
intend only to abuse the world with flourishes, bravadoes, and never to put
your self upon a real public trial. I and Mr. Walker, to set you into a
Legal real way of trial, have both joined in two Petitions to my Lord
General and the House of Commons, to appoint a general Council of War, for
the hearing of this public case in a convenient time (the next Wednesday if
you please) and fitting place within Westminster or London, in presence of the
House of Commons, of which you are a Member, to the end you may vindicate your
Honor, and make good your printed Relation to the House, your Letter to his
Excellency, and delusory rude answer to Mr. Walkers, before them, if able, to
your just Purgation, and our disreputation; or else give him and me leave to
disprove them, and justify what we have severally written (my self by no less
authority then a Committee of the House of Commons) to your just dishonor,
capital censure, and maintenance of our reputations, which you would wound, if
possible, to repair your own. Truth seeks no corners, fears no colors,
Trialls; neither shall I in this common cause, wherein the Kingdom has
suffered more damage by Bristolls surrender, then your life or estate are ever
able to satisfy, though you should lose both for it (as may peradventure
chance to do, if you make no better a defense of your cause, in which you have
now most unwillingly engaged me past all retreats) then of this city and
castle, and that by your own Martial Law (to omit ancient Presidents) who
dispossessed Colonel Essex of his Governorship of that place, hanged up two
Citizens there, and ransomed others, only for attempting to deliver up
Bristoll to the Enemy before it was fortified and furnished; when you did them
a far greater kindness, to fortify and furnish it with all sorts of
Ammunition and Provisions, at the Parliaments and Kingdoms cost, and then most
valiantly surrendered it, with all the Canon, Ammunition, Treasure, Provisions,
Ships, Prisoners, Arms, Colors in it; and if we believe Mercurius Aulicus,
bestowed them on the King, to the irrepairable loss and danger of the whole
Kingdom, before any one Sconce taken, any one shot made against the Cities or
Castles walls, or the least assault of either of them. And yet such has the
carriage of this strange action hitherto been, on your part, that Dat veniam
Coruis, vexat Censura Columbas. You censure, quarrel all other men who dare be
so valiantly honest as to dispraise this your Heroicke State-Service, which
has quite undone them. Sir, if you be as really confident of your own
innocence and valor, as you are quarrellous of our pretended calumnies of
them, (who believe we have written far more truth of you, then your self has
done) I believe you will cordially second our Petitions, for such a fair
public trial as we desire, and the world expects, after so many printed
Bravadoes; otherwise the whole Kingdom will pronounce you guilty, and all men
of Arms, of honor, proclaim you a coward, if you flee a fair public Trial;
wherein I shall punctually follow those Texts you point me to, Exodus 23-1, 2,
7. (which I wish you had made use of in this cause) and aim not so much at
victory, or private ends, as verity and public good in this legal combat, in
which I hope to manifest my self a true friend to my Country, and no enemy to
your self, but a pious one, of your own seeking.

Yours, William Prynne.
Lincolns-Inne, 17. Novem. 1643.

FINIS.

