AN ANSWER TO THE VINDICATION OF Doctor Hamond, AGAINST The Exceptions of
EUTACTUS PHILODEMIUS.

Wherein is endeavored to be cleared What Power MAN has.

1. Over his own Liberty, (which is) his ALL. 2. Over his own Life, for which
he will give that ALL.
The Author E. P.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and are to be sold at the three Daggers in
Fleetstreet, near the Inner Temple gate. 1650.

TO The Right Honorable, the Lord BRADSHAVV, President of the COUNCIL of STATE.
My Lord,
I Have presumed to affix your Lordships name to these few leaves, not that I
desire a Patrocinie for any thing in them, but truth, Quae premetur sed non
opprimetur. Had Dr. Hamonds Vindication been a mirror to reflect mine own
ignorance upon me, and had I had thereby so much light, as to see my self in
the dark, I had quietly acquiessed, and sat down under the Majesty and
Authority of Truth: But (my Lord) I find it far otherwise; not to charge this
Doctors Abilities, I am more then most suspicious (if that could be) of his
candidness, who is not only satisfied in wounding the name of E. P. but takes
thereby opportunity to vent his virulency against the present Powers: Your
Lordship, and your Coassertors of public Freedom, and of the Liberty of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ may lie for a time under the stains of vile men's
Tongues and Pens, yet your Integrity and Resolutions to the hazard of your All,
will (I hope) one day receive the mark of Well-done by him, who makes a
narrower exploration then merely into the Exterior actions of men: My Lord, The
Government of a Kingdom, is Prudentibus grave sed fatuis gratum, the one loves
it, because he is filled with imagination only of its sweet and beauty; and
the other fears it, because he knows its weight and burden; I may not but
conjecture that many hate the present Powers, some because they will, others
because they have not a share in the exercise of it, so that on all hands you
have enemies. The Lord direct you, and those now in Power with you, in the
Execution of the great Trust that lies upon you. That you may not only have
the mark of an Honorable and Pathless act of Justice upon your Names, but that
it may smell sweet in the Nostrils of God, and be precious in the esteem of
them that fear him: This shall be the Prayer of

12. May. 1650. My Lord, Your willing Servant, E. P.

To the READER.
Reader,
LIfe, for which a man will give All that he has, and Liberty, which is the
Genus Generalissimum of that All, into how many parts soever it be branched
out, are the two dearest properties of man, essentially and necessarily annexed
to his Being, and yet even these have been invaded in a high manner, and
received most dangerous assaults of late Times, by the hands of a Rebellious
and Traiterous crew of profane and deceitful men, whom God suffered to proceed
to kill, destroy, and plunder, and to teach to do so, without any other
Authority, then the mere will of a Tyranical Magistrate; Amongst the late
Invadors of our Liberties, there is none (I dare say) more peccant then Dr.
Hamond, in his way, this man having more advantage to deceive then others,
because of his less profaneness, and greater abilities then the generality of
the late Kings adherents, and the more ingenious part thereof, taking up what
he delivered with very little examination, upon the account of his parts. This
is one of the men that would make the late Kings Will the Rule of Goodness,
when he himself intended it no other then the measure of his Greatness; this is
he that would have erected a Pambasilia for the late King, though his
professions were only for a regulated Monarchy: what wounds this man has
given to our Liberties, thou will see in the following Leaves; and though he
had not power to compel the silly vulgar Plebs mavult decipi quam cogi.
to be of his party, yet (I fear) his principles have deceived too many of
them, that took up his advisoes without examining, he being known to be leprous
in his opinion, and to have Laesa Principia, in Polity as well as Religion, and
to have needed to be put into a Lazaret till he were cured of both. I shall not
desire thee to swear compliance and credulity to what thou will find herein,
only try and hold fast the good, and give it thy Countenance; the evil of it
shall be beneath the Authors Connivance when he knows it to be so.

Thy Servant in the Lord, E. P.

The Introduction.
IT is a truth in it self, and very obvious to knowing men, that the use of
language is for the expression of our conceptions; and that these are caused by
exterior objects, which are oftentimes such, as do cause so violent an
agitation of the Spirits, that we may with but little skill in Phisiogmony see
the Tipes and Signatures of men's affections in their Countenances, and assure
our selves of a better account from their faces, when their passions are moved
(which do always faithfully more or less imprint their characters in the
exterior parts of the body) then we may expect from their tongues, which can
cover the deceiptfulnes of a false heart, when yet the visage discovers its
motions and designs; for if a man's speech belie his heart, yet his face shall
belie his speech, and the understanding can never so secretly work, but the
senses will perceive it: I may not but conjecture that Doctor Hamond is better
learned in this kind of science then my self, having vantage ground of me in
years, study and experience, and yet he has gone farther in discovering
himself, and his passions then thus, in his Vindication against E. P. and
(contrary to his professed impassionateness) has so far betrayed himself, as
to transmit the Image and Character of the perturbation and passionate heat of
his spirit, by his Pen, to the view of the world, as his said Vindication will
manifestly testify.

And I wish this parti-colored Doctor (that does thus interlace excellent
professions with so little adequateness of performance (...) words of Moses in
Terminis, Exodus 21. 6. but whether they do not widely range from them, I refer
it to any man that has his understanding about him upon compare, to judge; I
conceived this Doctors affirmation to be but his explication of that place, and
believe the impartial examiner of both places will easily find it so; and I
must tell this Doctor for all this, that he will alone lie under that
Condemnation which, says he, in his fifth Section, E. P. has put him, and the
Scripture under, too good a Companion to be of that man's side, that made and
published the late Misterium Religionis recognitum, which goodly stuff came out
of this Doctors warehouse.

2. The second advantage is not only as imaginary as the other, but palpably
false and scandalous, contrary to the Candidness and ingenuitie of a rational
man: 'This Doctor says that E. P. has two irreconsilable opinions Sect. 7. of
his vindicacion: 1. Opinion, That it should be unlawful for the Jew to give up
his liberty or freedom, and that servitude should be unnatural. Secondly,
That it should be in a man's own power to kill himself; I am astonished that any
man who has his eyes in his head, or any conscience to check him, or any
sencible movement of reason in him, should affirm such an untruth of E. P. Let
this Doctor indigitate the place, and show them in verba, if he can; but that
the reader may know the truth, there is no such opinions in E. P. his
discourse; and it is hoped this Doctor may receive credit according to the
truth of what he affirms here, in whatsoever else he has and shall have to
represent to the world hereafter, who (it seems) will leave no way unassayed,
that may (right or wrong) promote the wicked disigne of his party: I shall
easily believe henceforward he may be so pliable a Courtier, as if his King or
his party shall say it is night at highnoone, he will not stick to maintain
it; or if any should be so ventrous as to deny it, that he is so cunning as to
have this reserve for himself, as to say he has mistaken the Moon for the Sun,
yet I do not see for all his art, but he will have a long voyage before he come
to the end of his expectation, by such shameful and unworthy staining of his
Antagonists.

But for the first of these opinions he mentions, does he not find the
contrary in E. P. page 18. and 19. and does he not cite E. P. his opinion in
page II. and Section 28. of his vindicacion, in these words: That God does not
allow any to take away man's life, but those whom he makes Gods (i. e.)
Magistrates: sufficient to excuse E. P. from this part of the Doctors charge,
who with the same breath and pen he has aspersed that Author, does (as you
see) proclaim his innocence to the world; and for the other opinion charged
upon the Author of E. P. That it was unlawful for the Jew to pass away his
freedom, etc. it is likewise denied by that Author; and this Doctor (who is
his accuser) cites also his opinion in this point in his vindicacion, Page 8.
Section 28. That an unreserved resignation of a man's native liberty into the
hands of any man's whatsoever, without any just Condition, or adequate exchange,
can have on origination from God or reasonable nature: Now whether this Doctor
has dealt ingeniously with E. P. let any man judge.

I shall now come to make good what Eutactus Philodemius did urge in relation
to this Doctors affirmation and Question.

E. P. in his aforementioned discourse of the original and end of civil
powers (under the first head, page the fifth of that discourse) viz. That the
people were (under God) the original and efficient cause of all just powers)
was speaking that the people could not pass away their own native rights out of
themselves into any other hand, to their own evident damage, without any
possible advantage of recall, and no such thing could be rationably gathered
but of their consent, to set up a Magistrate over themselves, and in case the
Magistrate so set up by themselves over them, should encroach upon their
rights, beyond the due limits of his commission, and the mutual pacts, either
express, or necessarily employed between them, then God, nature, and reason did
prompt unto the people, their own safety, together with the use of means to
recover and retain it, when the interchangeable conditions between them were
violated by their Governor.

And I shall add this further to what was then said. That the Governor and the
Governed are relatives, and undergo (when they come to be such) mutual duties,
the wilful breach whereof by either party makes the Propter pactum non
servatum privatur quis jure suo. Bracton p. 2. l 1. c 4. Bartumas de Repub.
Judaeorum. page 1, 2, 3. Triglandius de potestate Civili and Eccl. c. 2 p. 49.
See a late Book called Bonds and Bounds
obligation cease as to the other, and there is then a clear divorce made by
nature and reason between them, and if the End of a peoples Being, be to
glorify God, and to love his Neighbor (as doubtless it is) then Magistracy is
but a subservient end to that of the peoples well being; and a Magistrate is
but a necessary circumstance, to that end that he may be an encouragement to
the good, and a terror to the evil, and that men might live while they are in
this short Pilgrimage in all Godliness, and honesty; and it is irrational to
think that a civil Magistrate, who is but such a circumstance to a peoples
well being (of whom there had been no need, if there had been no fin) should
make the people subserve his own end, and become a footstool to his pomp and
glory; Such an end is abhorred in the thoughts of all rational Spirits, who
have not imbibed a principle of slavery, or are not so supine, as not to
enquire of any other condition, better then an ass like subjection to the
lawless wills of men.

Now to come nearer to the affirmation laid down by the Doctor in his address
to the General and Council of war, page 9. and touched upon by Eutactus
Philodemius occasionally (viz.) That the Jew under Gods own Government might
wholly give up himself and his freedom to his Masters will (power of life only
exempted) What power the Jew had from right nature to dispose of himself and
liberty. Probus usus voluntatis est melioris electio ejusque quod rationi
arridet non quod adulatur passionibus. Eusebius. Nieremb. de voluntatis art.
Justin. l. 1. titulo 3. See also Bracton lib. 1. ca. 6.
and of a freeman become a slave for ever.

First therefore Eutactus Philodemius alleges as before, that it was not from
nature, i. e. rightly choosing, that the Jew had such a power, but that God
permitted it to be so, and sure he is, that the Doctor cannot prove that
slavery was congenial, or natural to Adam, Nemo nascitur Servus, if Adam had
stood in innocence, and had had the like innocent and unstained posterity; it
cannot be made appear that any of them should have been slaves by nature;
slavery is an effect and consequent of sin, and Adams posterity could not have
so unrectified wills as to desire to stoop to a slavish condition, it is a
slavish Disposition that must be a cause of a slavish Condition, and it would
be as difficult a thing to disprove this, as for the Doctor to make good his
tenet, That Adams posterity should in case of innnocent nature, have positive
humane laws imposed on them by man, in order to a civil life, and if it be
allowed that servitude was not Connaturall before the fall, it cannot be after,
and as for the word (unnatural) which was used by E. P. as an Epithete to the
word (Servitude) I say thus much in satisfaction to the Doctor, absolute multa
dicuntur quae tamen intelliguntur comparative, But Justinian tells this Doctor
that Servitus est constitutio Iuris gentium, qua quis Dominio alieno, contra
naturam Subjicitur, which is his definition of slavery, and immediately before
the Doctor may find Liberty or Freedom to receive another definition, Justin.
ibid. and Bracton ibid.
viz. Libertas est naturalis facultas ejus, quod cuique facere libet, nisi si
quid vi, aut jure prohibetur, when this Doctor has either reconciled or
overthrown these two Definitions, I may be of another mind.

And now if I be so bold with this Doctor on the behalf of Eutactus
Philodemius, as to ask him some few Questions, who being himself so great a
Querist in his address to the General and Council of war, will doubtless
grant the like, leave to any other man that will be candid with him; the first
Question shall be.

Quest. Whether if Adam had not fallen, there should have been 1.
any slaves in Innocence?

Quest. Whether, according to those equal and uniform Laws 2.
which Politicians and others call the Primary Laws of Nature, Naturalem rei
cujuslibet inclinationem, there would have been Jura naturalia sunt imutahilia,
libertas quae est de jure naturali per jus Gentium auferri non potest. Bracton
li. 1. cap. 5. Arist. lib. 1. Pol. c. 3.
slavery in the world; indeed there are other secondary Laws of Nature, called
by some demi constrained, and demy-voluntary, which are more stinted Laws, and
much remote from these ingenuous Dictates, to which this Doctor may (if he
please) refer the servitude or slavery that he mentions; as when a Merchant
throws his goods overboard to save himself, or when a Patient is willing to
cut an arm or leg to save his life, or stare promissis nemini laedere; these
secondary Laws are modelled, and made in the Forge of necessity, and are its
Constitutions (as Aristotle says) these are not near so undeterminate, free,
and unconstrained, as those primary Laws of Nature: and those words of the
Apostle mentioned by this Doctor, If thou can be free, choose it rather; as
it is the voice of Gods own Spirit, so we may hear in it a sound or noise of
reviving and returning Nature to its Primitive principle of Rectitude, and true
Freedom.

Quest. Whether between those relatas of Master and Servant, there 3.
were not at least employed conditional respects, and a mutual pacts; as that
the Master should give protection and maintenance to his servant, in
compensation of the servants love and service to his Master.

Quest. Whether, if it should be granted, that the Jew had lawfully such an
absolute dispose of himself by Nature, as this Doctor would 4.
have it, his posterity were obliged successively to be slaves to his Master,
and his posterity, and have their ears boared in token thereof, and should be
as absolutely exempt from release and manumission, as their father is pretended
to be; if the Doctor cannot prove this, then the design of his address to the
General, and Counsel of War for the support of the Royal Cause, stands upon a
very feeble foundation.

Quest. Whether the desire of true Freedom and Liberty was not an inherent
native principle, and a habitude of man's mind in Innocence, ^.
and if that be granted, whether the Doctor can make it appear (by a parity of
reason) that the desire and love of servitude and slavery was as true and
innate a habit of a sinless and untainted soul, which if he denies, I have my
end; but if he affirms, then he must necessarily argue, That because desire of
Liberty was then a congenial principle, therefore a desire of servitude was a
habit equally inbred in Nature, what degree of likeness there is between these
two of Liberty and Servitude (I know not) unless what is very near between two
contraries, there is too great a disparity beween them, that the Doctor should
have so plausible and colorable an Argument here, as he that said Wool and
Snow are both white, and therefore they are equally warm, but let this pass, it
is but a Royal stride of a well affected Levite to his own cause.

The 2. Ans. of Eutactus Philodemius was, That the boaring of the 2. The
boaring of the Jews ear a punishment, as well as a cerimony of admission into
service.
ear was a punishment of the contempt of that liberty which he had, and might
have lawfully kept without sin, that slavery is an effect of sin, is not
doubted by very rational men, had there been no sin, doubtless there had been
no slavery and boaring of the ear was an ordinary mark of slavery, as Diodati,
Cornelius a lapide. Ainsworth, and diverse others explain the forementioned
place of Exodus 21. 6. and from the 25. of Levit. 41. some of the Rabbis do
infer, That a Priest was exempted from this boaring of the ear, because he
should become thereby blemished, and if his ear should be boared, he could not
be reinvested again in his Priestly dignities: Why this boaring of the Priests
ears should be a blemish, and this blemish exclude him from his dignities, I
desire the Doctor to tell me. In 25 Levit. 42. we may see in what love God is
with the slavery and servitude of his people, who used much means to keep them
from it, as you may see there, where speaking of the Jews (God says) They
shall not be sold as bondmen, and the fifth of Nehem. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. we
have the mind of God in these words; We after our ability have redeemed our
brethren, which were sold unto the Heathen, and will you even sell your
brethren? and shall they be sold unto us? they held their peace and had nothing
to answer; and I suppose the reason of that place of Cor. 7. If thou can be
free, choose it rather, is very suitable and consistent herewith. And as it is
not denied, but that the boaring of the ear was a Ceremony of the receiving,
and admission of servants amongst the Jews, yet how the telling us it was a
Ceremony, does disprove it was a Punishment, does not appear to me; this Doctor
tells the world, that the boaring of the ear was no painful thing; sure I am,
if Maymonie, and other Hebrew Rabbis may be believed (whom in this thing I had
rather give credit to, then this Doctor) it was the Jews right ear that was
boared, and it was through the middle it was boared, and whether this was
painful or no, I had rather this Doctor should be Probationer, then I, who it
seems is in so much love with Servitude, that as he knows not how to live
himself in any other Element then this, so he would have no other man so happy
as to be out of that condition; And for the place urged by the Doctor out of
Psalm 40. 6. to enforce his opening about boaring the ear that Prophetical
saying of David touching Christ, Mine ear have thou opened, (i. e.) bored
(says he) The Doctor says it is acknowledged, that the opening of the ear
there, does denote that Christ took upon him the form of a Servant. I do not
know how his opinion crosses mine, for as Christ took upon him the form of a
Servant, were not the punishment of our sins laid uphim, and was not his being
in the form of a servant, part of that punishment of our sins? Let this Doctor
tell me.

But as to the Doctors Explication of the aforementioned place, What the
meaning of the opening the ear in Psalm. 40. 6 is.
let him not be offended if I be of another opinion, though he says it is
acknowledged, etc. As if he would persuade the Reader there could be no appeal
to a higher Reason, or a Liberty of a just inquiry into the Truth of Scripture
beyond his line, and those of his opinion: I conceive it is meant otherwise,
and therefore do lay my opinion at the feet of the ingenuous Reader; The words
are properly in English rendered thus, Ears to me have thou dug, (i. e.)
opened or fitted, and not Mine ears have thou opened (i. e.) boared, there is a
great difference in sense between the word (...) perforavit, Exodus 21. 6. The
word (...) dedit, applicuit, opposuit. Deuteronomy. 15. 16. and the word used by the
Spirit of God in this place (viz.) Psalm. 40. 6. which is (...) effodit,
comparavit, though the Doctor would have them be Synonima's, if the Doctor
please, he may do E. P. a favor to satisfy him a little better herein, and
tell he do it, the opinion of E. P. stands good; for all his pretended self
authoritative assertion, and for the close of this Doctors fifth Section, E. P.
is not so possessed with a Stoicall Apathy, as not to have a sense of his
unsavory Jeare (a Character of the goodness of his cause) and therefore tells
him in his own words in another place, upon another occasion, That he will be
silent, rather then imitate that part of his Spirit, though there be in his
vindication the advantages of many opposite retortions.

The third answer to the Doctors explanation of that place of Exodus 21. 6. That
the Jewish Servant did not give up himself to 3. Slave, an unfit expression to
call the Jewish servant by.
be a slave for ever, but his slavery did terminate in the year of Iubite,
here the Doctor obstreperously vaunts over his opponent, yet he that takes
seriously the weight of this man's arguments, will find (I presume) his
virulency and malice poyzing more in the scale, then his reason: I must
confess, that if a smooth dialect, and an exquisite texture of words could
overcloud a truth, this Doctor can do as much as any toward it: He shall be a
slave, etc. it were well the Guliel. Gibieuf. de libert. Dei and creaturae. l.
1. p. 29. ca. 5. Sect. 5. Non nisi res obvias percipiunt brutorum more, mentes
habent fraenis vinctus. Guliei. Gibieuf. l. 1. c. 32. Sect. 17. p. 244.
Doctor could afford the servant Jew (whom the Chaldee renders a son of Israel)
a better term then slave (this is a word well becoming them that would not
out of necessity, but out of choice, and with all their industry make
themselves so) it may be the Doctor expounds this place by that in Rev. 18. 19.
(...) an apposite word to denominate a slave by, a body without a soul; that
served only to keep it from stinking, Tales rationem potius sentiunt quam
habent: nec ratione uti, nec ratiocinari possunt ut inde eliciant quid agendum,
quid fugiendum, I doubt many of this Levites party in these latter times have
had the motions of their souls chained to the Galley of their bodies, or at the
least they have been parts animatae domini, and have had their souls and
reasons quiessent, while the Royal will possessed and acted their bodies as it
pleased; who can be fitter tools for the hand of tyranny to hew down the tree
of just liberty, then such slaves? but while this Doctor is telling us this Jew
was a slave, the truth drops from him unawares, and he tells us page 9. and 23.
that subjection (which The several significations of the word [for ever] in
Scripture.
was the condition of this Jewish servant) is far removed from slavery, etc.

But I come to that which the Doctor much sticks at; E. P. affirmed that this
Jewish servant did not, or could not pass away his liberty to his Master for
ever, but this word (for ever) did refer to the year of Iubile, or the great
sabbatick year, where his service to his master did terminate: This Doctor
tells the world, these words do not well consist with the words of Moses, Exodus
21. 6. he shall serve him for ever, without the least disproofe of it, but
saying so, yet (though I might rest here, and say over again the same words
till this Doctor be able to overthrow this opinion) I shall tell him that this
word [for ever] has respect to several times in scripture; Sometimes it
signifies till Christ's coming, as Exodus 12. 14. sometimes for a long time, as
Prove. 29. 14. Dan. 3. 9. Levit. 25. 40. Psalm. 89. 1. with which this (for ever)
agrees, and sometimes also it does reach to eternity, as Isaiah 45. 17. But the
Doctor says that this Jew had by a voluntary refusal of his liberty at the
Sabbatick year, made himself a slave for ever, and had no benefit of any after
release, or manumission; he had thereby made himself incapable of his freedom,
and had no possible future remedy though his condition be never so miserable,
and he never so desirous of returning to a condition of liberty again; this
poor Jew is adjudged by this Doctor to be in a hard condition and so should we
all be, if this Doctor could have had his will, and seen the end of his desire;
this is but one Doctors opinion, without any proof, the Jew (says he) did at
the Sabbatick year, out of his love to his Master, voluntarily prefer service
to his Master, before his freedom, therefore he had no refuge or relief from
the year of The Jews surrender of himself to his Masters service, did not put
him in an irreversible estate.
Iubile; first he says it is so, and then he throws a little dirt upon it for
proof.

But I must tell this Doctor, that this voluntary Surrender made by the Jew of
himself, did not put him in an irreversible condition, if it may be called a
voluntary surrender, for (as I take it) this Jew had wife and Children, whom he
is said to love, Exodus 21. 5. as well as his master; and I conceive that there
was duty and necessity that did call upon him to cohabite with his wife, which
was a greater bent upon his will, then his love to his Master, to serve him
till The Jews surrender of himself to his Masters service, not absolutely
voluntary. Lev. 156.
they were also free. It seems to me a strange thing for any man to offer to
conclude this Jew (who as the Doctor says) has voluntarily given up his
liberty to his Master at the sabbatick year) should be exempt from the benefit
of that (...) Sabbath of rest, That the whole land should have, when there was
release of Mortgages and redemption of lands to those that were able, and a
freedom gratis to those that were not, Levit. 25. and sure this Jew could not
be kept off from the benefit of that Iubile which was after seven Sabboths of
years, i. e. fifty years. On the tenth day of the seventh month, in the day
of Atton^ment shall you make the trumpet to sound throughout all the Land, and
you shall hallow the fiftyeth year, and proclaim liberty throughout ALL the
Land, to all the Inhabitants thereof, and it shall be a Iubile to you, viz.
Jews, and you shall return EVERY man to his possession, and you shall return
EVERY man unto his family, Levit. 25. 9, 10. And I find nothing that has not
in this Chapter the benefit of the year of Iubile, but the house in the The
house in the walled City, and the stranger only exempted from manumission at
the Jubilee.
Walled City. and the Stranger, the house in ver. 30. (if it were not redeemed
within a year after it was sold) should be stablished to him that bought it for
ever, throughout all genetations, and not go out at the Iubile; the Stranger in
ver. 45. should be their possession for ever, and the inheritance of their
Children; but God tells the Jews, as to their brethren they should serve them
till the year of Iubile, and then they and their children should depart, and
return into their own possession and family, for says God, they are my
Servants, and they shall not be sold as bond men, ver. 40, 41, 42. and ver. 55.
and this is most evident, that he that was able to pay the price of his
redemption, might go out at the sabbatick year, and he that was not, should
gratis be free at the year of Iubile. Let this Doctor tell me whether God is
not here so great a favourer of the liberty of his people, that he that has
made the most unthrifty bargain for himself, has the advantage of a time of
release: And I shall add for better confirmation of what is here alleged, a
little more, (if the word of God needed any earthly advocate) Let this Doctor
consult Raschi, Aben Esram, and Diodati, and he shall find them unaminously say
this [for ever] in Exodus 21. 6. did refer to the year of Iubile, and terminate
there, and Cornelius a Lapide upon this place has this Critcisme (...) for
ever having a Hholem without a. (...). (as you will find it in this place)
signifies till the year of Iubile, but when it has a (...). for its Hholem, it
intends a long time, or to eternity, as you may find it to have in the
aforementioned place of Isaiah 45. 17. (...) usque ad seculum eternitatis, and
Buxtorsius renders this word in this place spacium 50. annorum, the space or
term of 50. years, the last year whereof was the great Sabbatick year; I hope
I have hereby given satisfaction to all unprejudicate Readers; and if this
Doctor shall not yet think himself satisfied, I cannot at present do him
further service.

But this Doctor says, That though it were granted to E. P. that this Jew were
to be set free at the next Sabbatick year, or the great year of Jubilee, page 7.
of the Doctors Vindication, Sect. 18. yet E. P. could not avoid his concludency
of the lawfulness of passing away his freedom, which (says he) in another
place in his Vindication includes his all but Life. But yet though E. P. did
acknowledge Liberty might be exchanged upon Adequate consideration, as is
acknowledged by this Doctor, Page 8. Sect. 28. This Dr. must know, That when
the The Jews possessions out of his Masters power, proved, notwithstanding Dr.
H. confident assertion.
Jew did pass away his Freedom, etc. to his Masters Will, it does not appear
that his Master had any power of his possessions, which (in the Doctors sense)
is part of his Freedom, and his All by his making himself a slave, for in
Livit. 25. 41. when the servant Jew was set free from his servitude, he was to
RETURN to his own Family, and to return unto the possession of his Fathers;
which word [Return] does clearly manifest that his possessions were out of his
Masters power or liberty of dispose, and as to the Jew himself, his Master had
but the bare usu-fruit of him, not that causalis usus fructus, whereby Minsing.
lib. 2. Titul. 4.
the Civilian intends propriety, for he was not his Lord proprietary; what is
the design of this Doctor by this opinion of the Jews freedom, being wholly in
his Masters power without release, is easily seen, it is but by way of
parallel, to put our Persons and Estates in the absolute dispose of the Royal
Will without possibility of recall.

I now hasten to wash E. P. from the stains that this Doctors Pen E. P. his
opinion touching power of life, cleared from the mal^ce of Doctor Hamond.
has bespattered him with in his second Point, concerning the power of life,
which man has over himself: And here I must profess to the world (as well as
this Doctor) that I should have little thought E. P. should be rendered to the
world, a man that held Self-murder lawful, an opinion point blank contrary to
the sixth Commandment: They that read Eutactus Philodemius his Book will (I am
sure) find the contrary in express terms, in the 18, 19, 20. pages of his
Book; and to this puopose is this Doctor, who is his Adversary therein, become
his Advocate, page 11. of his Vindication, and Sect. 28. before mentioned, viz.
That no man has power of life committed to him, but the Magistrate.

I am not willing to take up every excess of this Doctors excrementitious Pen,
his malice hardly admitting of definitive bounds; or to tell him where he does
but say over again what E. P. said before; Now not to speak here of that duty
and necessity that lies upon men to lay down their lives for Christ, or when
they do Heroically hazard the same for their Countries good, etc. which is
acknowledged by E. P. and infisted upon needlessly by this Doctor, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19. pages of his Vindication. I hasten to tell the Reader first the Opinion
E. P. held, and then the Occasion thereof: You may find E. P. his Opinion to
be this, page 19. which is set down by way of Question, (viz) Whether God and
nature has invested man with such a power over his own life, as freely to
consent that his life should be taken away, or willingly to expose the same, as
a private man, to death, for a greater, a publiker good, (viz.) for the
preservation of societies, and the lives of many others.

The innocence of this Opinion (I hope) needs no Apology, notwithstanding the
slanderous Tongue and Pen of this man, whom I challenge to show a contrary
opinion to this asserted by E. P. Or that there are any such words in Terminis
asserted by him, as this Doctor does charge him withal; Well Doctor, now you
have slandered, to make the world believe you in your slander, must be your
next design. And truly (Sir,) one of your profession, that had not the
conscience to forbear the first, I fear may have too much credit with them that
believe lies in the last. But Doctor take heed, the Fly that biteth the Tortois
breaks her beak, and if you spurn and La moscha che ponge la ^artaruca rompie
il becco.
bite against Truth, it will at length make you repent; your own Pen is a
better friend to Truth then you would have it be, which (after all your malice)
will not be silenced from clearing the innocence of E. P. See Vindic. page 11.
Sect. 28. before mentioned.

The occasion of Eutactus Philodemius speaking of the Point beforementioned,
was this: He had before spoken of the original and end of civil powers, and
urged that the people were the first, and common seat and subject of all Civil
Powers, and now he was speaking how the Magistrate was the proper and formal
subject or receptacle Fortescue de laudibus legum Angliae, page 31. c. 13.
of this power from the people, who are the immediate root (next to God) of this
formal power in the Magistrate; for the better clearing whereof, I add thus
much out of Fortescue, Chief Justice, and afterward Chancellor to Hen. 6. His
words are these. In a body Politic, the intent of the people is the first
living thing, having within it blood, that is politic provision for the
Utility and Commonwealth of the same people, which it imparteth, as well to the
head, as to the members of the same body; And a little before he says, As out
of an Embrion arises a body natural, so out of a multitude of people arises a
Kingdom. And Contzen, in lib. 5. pol. c. 8. Parag. 5. etc. Upon that place of
Scripture, Non est potestas nisi a Deo, i. e. There is no power but of God
(says he) Cum Respublica constituta est, in ejus (i. e. dei) potestate est,
regimen Monarchicum, vel Aristocraticum, vel populi politiam instituere, atque
ita respub. a Deo primo and immediate est: Magistratus ab ea (i e. Rep.)
designati a Deo mediate a populo immediate potestate habent quae ex natura rei,
est TOTA in Communitate primo and immediate. And this Dr. will find further.
that the Ius legum condendarum, i. e. right of making Laws, or a legislative
power (which infallibly includes power of life) that greatest Ingredient of
Supremacy) is in and de ipsa republica (as the same Contzen affirms) seu
hominum multitudine, non uno quopiam, Iamdudum (says he) explosa est ista
Canonistarum quorundarum opinio qui natura hanc potestatem supremo principi and
successoribus tribuerunt, ipsa respublica jus suae Gubernationis, and legum
tantum habet, si naturam s^ectes, ideo CONDERE LEGES and magistratum sibi
preficere potest and CONFER in eum POTESTATEM legum condendarum, and every
man almost knows that Legis virtus est imperare vetare, permittere PVNIRE
(which I suppose this Doctor will confess does include power of life) and
premio afficere; and Contzen tells you that he is not alone of this opinion,
but many other learned Tho. Aquinas. quaest. 9. art. 3. and quaest 97. Molin.
T. 1. inst. Tract. 2. did. 22. Balarm. T. 1. lib. 3. de laicis.
men, and he gives this reason for his own opinion, nullus in alium habet
potestatem, nisi aliena voluntate vel delicto, to which I will add that of
Bracton lib. 1. cap. 4. propter delictum vel pactum non servatum privatur quis
jure suo, and it is true, par in parem non habet potestatem, and says he
further, no man can claim this power of making laws, and of life naturally to
be in himself either by virtue of Seniority, Primogeniture, or paternall right,
as his due; the people first had it in themselves, and they give it their
Governors: I suppose he that will but compare what is here asserted with the
opinion of E. P. in page 19. will find no discord between them, as is most
evident in the case of the ten men in the freedom of nature, 9. whereof did
spontaneously subject themselves to the 10th. to be governed by him, according
to such Laws as should be for mutual good, and against mutual Injuries; one of
the nine kills his fellow subject, the tenth man, whom his own Vote and Consent
(amongst the rest) set up to be a Magistrate, and empowered to make and execute
Laws, put him to death: now in what measure the power of life is derived to the
Magistrate, from the Consent and vote of the people, is easily concluded by Mr.
Hobbs, one of this Doctors party, though a man of dangerous, and unsound
principles in other respects, yet in this agrees with E. P. That power of
Coertion, of the Sword, and consequently of Life, is transferred from the
People to the Magistrate. Hobs de corp. polit. par. 2. c. 1.
rational men; and though this interessed Doctor does undertake to make good
in his said vindication, That Doctor Hamonds Vindication, page 20. Sect. 53.
power of life flows from a higher principle upon the Magistrate, then from
the peoples consent, it proceeding from them only as the Causa sine qua non,
or by way of resultance, and God only communicating power of life to the
Governor, and man's consent that he should be his Governor remotely (and by way
of condition, or qualifying of the subject to a capacity of receiving that
power from God) concurring to the vesting of that power in that person, like
the temper of the air, that contributes to the qualifying of the slime or
putrid matter to receive the same influences, which influences only beget life
in it: This being (as I take it) more then he acknowledges elsewhere in his
Doctor Hamonds Address page 11.
Pamphlet to the General and Council of war (called his Address) I shall show
you how the Ingenuity of this Doctor or his pen has gone a little further, in
his late Doctor Hamonds Reasonableness of Christian Religion, Cap. 4. Sect. 4.
page 99.
Book, viz. wheresoever supremacy of Power is placed by the laws of a Kingdom,
there subjection is required, etc. from both which I shall urge thus much,
Power of life is an ingredient (yea the greatest ingredient of supremacy, as
this Address, Page 10.
Doctor acknowledges) Supremacy is vested in the Magistrate by the laws, and
the Laws are made by the people (that is) collectively or representatively;
how then can this Doctor deny the people to derive any power of life to the
Magistrate: it cannot be denied but Gods approbation must concur to the right
vesting of this power of life in the Magistrate, yet does it not appear but
that God has invested them with this power naturally. The magistrate can make
no law whatsoever that can be good, which is not either express or implied in
the revealed will of the great Lawgiver, his work is only to regulate and
dispose all humane actions to the Common benefit and preservation of that
public society over which he is, and to be an instrument Lex est quidem
rationis ordinatio ad bonum commune. Aquinas.
of Terror to those that will not submit to the Laws held forth by God for the
benefit of mankind: Laws are made for to be the common standard and measure of
men's actions, and for the coertion of their wills, offending right Reason, and
consequently transgressing the Will of God, the fountain thereof; and the Civil
Magistrate is the instrument whereby that is done, and has his immediate
mission from the people for that end, and approbation from God, or his
permission at the least, either of which (in respect of them that are subjects)
is sufficient to make him a Magistrate to command obedience and compliance in
order to these ends. This was the Author of E. P. his opinion in other words,
as the Reader may easily find in the 18, 19, 20. pages of that Book. The place
of Scripture to make his opinion good, Romans 5. 7. is acknowledged by this
Doctor, 21. page of his Vindication, Sect. 55. wherein he is of that Authors
mind: I must come to this close (when I consider this Doctors Vindication) and
am of this opinion, that he was resolved to charge the Author of E. P. with two
contradictory opinions, and with holding an opinion, that Self-murder was
lawful though he proves neither, but what matters that, let E. P. clear himself
as well as he can: Well done Dr. you are not it seems unacquainted with the
Principles of Nicholas the Florentine. I need not tell you the rest of his
name. I have done with you, hoping the Lord will never put me into the hands of
so uncandid an adversary again, though I know the drift and design of your book
was against them that have crossed your Court-expectation, and have not
listened to the charms of your late Address, rather then against E. Philodemius.

And now (Reader) having done with this uncandid Antagonist, I turn my self to
thee, and wish thee, if well-affected (as for others, I leave them their own
way) to a civil Government, and there-under to enjoy thy self, and thy
properties in peace, according to that natural instinct that is in every
sociable rational creature, that thou will not be carried away with the subtle
insinuations of them who are Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and lie in wait to
deceive thee concerning the present Powers, and their Assertors; make use of
thine own Reason, and be not hurled to and fro with the swinge and rapt of that
Billingsgate Rhetoric, which proceeds from such as this Doctor and his party,
who choosing to avoid the naturnal and sober course of Reason, make Railings
their Reasonings against any that stand in the way to their Interests and Ends.
This Doctor by a plausible Tongue and Pen has done much mischief in his way;
his course of writing has been like the Waterman, who looks one way, and rows
another; Let any man almost judge of him that has heard of him, or knows his
Writings, whether though he gives the good man his left hand of profession, the
profane Cavalier has not his right hand of fellowship; with that he is
homogeneous in profession, with this he incorporates; in his heart there is
Royalty effigiated, and his spirit is ductile only to that Interest, though
with the pen of an Artizan he delineates and holds forth the fair face of
Religion, and would be thought to be Indenizened her subject. I seriously think
that Story of the Batt is most apposite to this man; The Batt when he came
among the birds; they would not own him, because he had feet and teeth like a
beast, and when he would be entertained among the beasts, they would not own
him, because he had wings like a bird. It has been the unhappy privilege of
this man's parts, not so much to act, as to teach disobedience to the present
Authoririty and Powers, and therefore I think that each fault in him (and such
as he is) is not so much a Crime, as a Rule of error, and a president to do
evil. I shall now take my leave of thee (Reader,) and with a word touching
present Powers, (not the lawfulness of obeying it, that is already proved*) but
the commendableness of it, though in some things it may use power irregularly.
Thou will say, That though Oppressers are removed, yet Oppression in a great
measure remains still; for heretofore we had good Laws, but bad Magistrates,
and therefore could not expect that security to our persons and properties as
was due to us. But now thou will say, we have good Magistrates, as well as good
Laws, what hinders our Jubilee of Peace, freedom, plenty, and security. I shall
give thee this one answer. That thou must not expect while thou live an even
and a perpetual tenor of happiness in the enjoyment of a thoroughly well-tuned
Government; the finest, and most refined on earth will have some course thread
of irregularity, nay, of Oppression in it, it will have its Remissions and
Intentions, some mixture of bad with good; Art thou not freed from much
Oppression, Tyranny, and lawless Intrenchments, upon soul and body? therefore
bear a little, and forbear: The best of Magistrates, though called Gods, are
but men, and shall die like men. Think that some inconveniences and mischiefs
(like Ivy, twisting it self about an Oak) will stick to the best of
Governments, and that a Rose has its prickles as well as its flowers. I must
confess that that State is in a sad case, which is like that under the late
King, whose Diseases, and distempers are (as the Physician says in another
case of the natural body) Chronick and continuate, or settled, not errant, but
fixed and grown to a habit, which no rational man can say of the present
Government, it being too young for malice to stain it with such an Ignominy. I
have now done with thee, only I desire that thou will dismiss me, with thy
favorable censure of a well-meaning man, and that I did my best to satisfy
thee, and I must tell thee also thus much, that though I did not what I ought,
yet I did what I could.

FINIS.

