THE ARTICLES, Settlement and Offices Of the FREE SOCIETY OF TRADERS IN
PENNSILVANIA.

Agreed upon by diverse MERCHANTS And OTHERS for the better Improvement and
Government OF TRADE IN THAT PROVINCE.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, Printer
to the Society of Pennsilvania, MDCLXXXII.

The PREFACE.
READER,
Honest and Industrious Traffic has been the Usage and the Praise of many
Nations; And in this all Countries seem Agreed, that their Wealth and Strength
are Begun, Continued and Increased by it: A Truth common Experience daily
Confirms: For this has made and is making many Princes and States in the World
endeavor to have their Subjects prosper in Trade. The very Indian Princes are
now convinced of this Truth, which makes the King of Bantam send his
Ambassador here. This is likewise the Reason, why many considerate men have
thought fit to join themselves in a Society of Trade in Pennsilvania; which
after some Difficulty they have Accomplished. But this may be modestly said, It
is a very Unusual Society, for it is an Absolute Free One, and in a Free
Country: A Society without Oppression; wherein all may be concerned that will;
and yet have the same Liberty of private Traffic, as though there were no
Society at all. So that this Society is Calculated both to Promote the Public
Good, and to Encourage the Private. And indeed it seems not possible, that
Province should be Improved in many Years without it, as it is like to be in a
few Years by it. However, it is such a Society, as can do harm to none; but may
do good to all: Which a serious perusal of the Government of it will plainly
Evince to the considerate and Ingenious. We may add, that it is no small
Convenience and Ease to the minds of Planters (happily unacquainted in Trade)
that they may have some part of their Estates improving in an united way and
Care, whilst they thereby may with less Distraction and more Freedom of Spirit,
apply themselves to their particular Plantations. For here a few Hands do the
Work of the whole; and by this honest and free Device, the whole will be
furnished fresh and fresh, from time to time in the nature of a Bank. This
Union of Traffic prevents Emulation; for every One is Interested in every
Ones prosperity; and the Profit must be greater and surer; and Navigation,
Manufacture and Arts better Improved, than by the Force of private and divided
Stocks. To Conclude, it is an Enduring Estate, and a lasting as well as certain
Credit: a Portion and Inheritance that is Clear and Growing; free from the
mischief of Frauds and False Securities; supported by the Concurrent Strength
and Care of a great and prudent Body, a kind of perpetual Trustees; the Friend
of the Widow and the Orphan, for it takes no advantage of Minority or
Simplicity. These and many more great Advantages Accrue to a Society so Freely
Constituted as this appears to be by the ensuing Articles of Agreement, which
are Imposed on none, but recommended to all with this assurance, that nothing
is hereby Intended, but what is consistent with Justice and Prudence; to the
best of their Skills that were concerned in the Framing of it: And it is hoped
that the Improvements which may accrue by it, will prove of no small advantage
to that Country, and Old England from whom it takes its Original.

To which Reader, it may not be improper to add, that this Society is endowed
with diverse Immunities and Privileges, by Grant and Charter from William Penn
the Governor of that Province.

London, 25. 1 st. Mo. called March, 1682. Nicolas More,
James Claypoole,
Philip Ford.

THE ARTICLES, Settlement and Offices Of the FREE SOCIETY OF TRADERS IN
PENNSILVANIA, etc.
IT is Agreed, That the First General Court shall be held at London, upon the
Twenty Ninth of the Third Month called May, 1682. And for ever after, the
General Court shall be held on the First Fifth Day called Thursday in the Ninth
Month (November) every Year after in the Capital City in Pennsilvania, where
Votes shall be Received by Letters to the Society's Secretary from all that do
not appear there personally, for the choosing of Officers: Which Votes shall be
Regulated by these following Conditions:

IMPRIMIS. That none in England shall have above One Vote, whatever Sum they
Subscribe; unless they have a Share of Land in Pennsilvania, at least One
thousand Acres of their own, with some Inhabitants upon it: In such Cases they
shall have their Votes proportionably to their Stocks, as in the following
Article.

ARTICLE II. That all that are Inhabitants in Pennsilvania, shall have for two
Twenty five pounds, one Vote; and each Fifty pound single, one Vote; one
hundred pounds, two Votes; three hundred pounds, three Votes, and none more.

ARTICLE III. That the Book of Subscriptions shall be open here in England,
till the twenty ninth day of the fourth Month called June, One thousand six
hundred eighty two, and no longer. And in Pennsilvania from the Arrival of the
first Ship belonging to the Society for six Months after, paying fifteen per
Cent* Sterling in Consideration of the Risco Run by the Society by such as
Subscribe within thirty days, and for every Month after one per Cent. to be
added to value of the Cargo.

ARTICLE IV. That none shall Subscribe in the Societys Stock less than twenty
five pounds. Yet if five Join together, and make up the twenty five pounds
(provided it be subscribed in one man's name) it shall be accepted of but in
that Name only.

ARTICLE V. That at the first General Court or Assembly held as abovesaid (viz.
the twenty ninth of the third Month alias May, 1682.) all the Subscribers here
in England shall Confirm their Subscriptions, which shall be by the depositing
five per Cent. as a part of that, which shall then be Agreed on to be paid
within a Month after. And at that time shall be Chosen the Officers of the
Society, viz. The President, the Deputy, the Treasurer, the Socretary and
twelve Committee Men, whereof any Five and the President or his Deputy shall
make a Quorum.

ARTICLE VI. That all the Committee Men shall have but one Vote a piece in the
Committee, whatever their Stock be; and the President or the Deputy, if the
Votes be Equal, shall have the Casting Voice.

ARTICLE VII. That at seven years end, from the time of shutting the Book in
Pennsilvania, it shall be opened again for New Subscribers; and so to Continue
for every seven years; a due Valuation of the Stock being first made by the
Committee, that so every one may Subscribe according to the Valuation then
Agreed on.

ARTICLE VIII. That Two hundred Servants be sent away the first Year, of such
Trades and Capacities as may be most for the benefit of the Society; which is
to be Adjudged by the Committee.

ARTICLE IX. That it shall be Lawful for any one that has Subscribed, to add to
their Subscription before the Month is out, what Sum they please.

ARTICLE X. That none shall be President, Deputy or Treasurer, that have not
five thousand Acres of Land in Pennsilvania of their own, and one hundred pound
in the Societies Stock.

ARTICLE XI. That the General Officers shall continue for the First seven
years, and then a new Election shall be made, they being fixed in their Abode
in the Society's-House, there to act for the Society, without change of their
power in Privileges, except they do Commit any act destructive or prejudicial
to the Real Interest of the Society, which first is to be proved sufficiently
in the Court of Assistants* and then the Offender or Offenders are to be
dismissed, and the Court of Assistants to choose another, who is to Continue
till the General Court; which Court of Assistants shall yearly be Chosen and
added to the Committee.

ARTICLE XII. That the President shall Call together the Court of Assistants to
help and advise in any Emergent occasions relating to the Society, as To
receive more Money, To make a Dividend, To choose new Officers in Case of Death,
To settle new Factories, To enter upon Mines, Build Ships, etc.

ARTICLE XIII. The Committee shall choose all Inferior Of^^^ers as
Store-House-Keepers, Clerks, Book-Keepers, Factors, at home and abroad; then
they shall direct, what shall be Planted, Built, etc.

ARTICLE XIV. That all Forfeitures, that shall arise, shall be Employed upon
the Improvement of a parcel of Land alloted for the maintenance of such their
Wives and Children, who have been disabled in the service of the Society.

ARTICLE XV. That the Society's Books, Patents, Records and original Papers be
kept in a Convenient place in the House under three Locks and Keys, one whereof
shall be kept by the President or Deputy, the other by the Treasurer, the third
by the Eldest Committee-man.

ARTICLE XVI. That these Books, Papers and Patent, etc. shall not be Entrusted
in the hand of any single person for longer space than to transcribe any part
of it in the day time, and in the House before some one or more appointed by
the Committee; and that the Book-keeper shall only have Copies of them, which
may be Viewed or Perused once a Month by any Member of the Society, who desires
it: All Originals to be kept as before.

ARTICLE XVII. That Security shall be taken of the Treasurer and of all
Servants relating to the Society, that is, such as have any Trust Committed
unto them, as Agent, Store-keepers, Ship-Masters, Clerks, Overseers and
Servants, etc. and those to be given by Persons of known Honesty and Estate.
And those servants shall be bound to keep the secrets of the House, that is,
not to give Intelligence to any Person, no, not to any Member of the Society
(without leave first obtained publicly in the Committee) upon forfeiture of
their security.

ARTICLE XVIII. That if the Society should receive Blacks for servants, they
shall make them free at fourteen years end, upon Consideration that they shall
give into the Society's Warehouse two thirds of what they are Capable of
producing on such a parcel of Land as shall be allotted them by the Society,
with a stock and necessary Tools, as shall be Adjudged by the Society's
Surveyor. And if they will not accept of these terms, they shall be servants
till they will accept it.

ARTICLE XIX. That no Mineral Undertaking shall be begun by the Committee
without the approbation of the General Assembly.

ARTICLE XX. That the Committee shall at every Yearly Meeting of the General
Court discover the Encouragement or Discouragement they meet with in the Course
of their Trade both at home and abroad.

ARTICLE XXI. That the Society may set up two or more General Factories in
Pennsilvania, one upon Cheasapeak-Bay, and the other upon Delaware River, or
where else the Committee shall see necessary for the more speedy Conveyance of
Goods in the Country and Maryland: but that the Government of the whole be in
the Capital City of Pennsilvania.

ARTICLE XXII. That the Society shall be Assisting to the Indians in their
settling in Towns and other places, both by Advice and Artificers.

ARTICLE XXIII. That there shall be Twenty four Assistants added to the
Committee, whereof twenty and the President or Deputy makes a Quorum.

ARTICLE XXIV. That the First Assembly in the Province of Pennsilvania shall be
desired to Ratify the Patent Granted by the Governor to this Society by an
Act of Assembly.

ARTICLE XXV. That all the Members of the Committee and Court of Assistants
shall have timely and sufficient notice and summons in writing left at their
Dwelling, of every intended Court, to prevent Indirect and unjust Proceedings.

ARTICLE XXVI. That all and every one, who have subscribed any sum in the
Society's-stock, and shall not after the second summons bring in their second
Payment, shall be incapable of disposing of that part in the stock before
disbursed; but the Society shall dispose of the same unto such who will fulfill
the Agreement in all payments; they only being Capable of Receiving their first
Penny or disbursement. Always excepted such, who through any Calamities have
been reduced to Poverty, whereby they are Rendered Incapable to fulfill the
same; that then the thing being proved before a Committee, they shall have
power to sell the same to the best Advantage. And as this is Agreed on for the
second payment, so it is of all others, if there be more.

ARTICLE XXVII. That there shall be in England a Chief Agent, Superior to all
Agents or Factors belonging to the said Society, that are in Europe, unto whom
the Society shall direct their Letters and consign their Goods: He shall have a
Council of six Factors, one of which shall be his Deputy. This Council shall,
with him, Reside in London; and shall on all occasions meet to Advise together,
how to dispose of the Society's Goods, and buy such Goods as the Society shall
direct to be bought, to Execute all other Orders, as shall be required of him
or them. And to give every Factor his Commission, how to proceed in what
pertains unto his place: So that all and every one of them shall Act by the
Advice of the Chief Agent, and he by the Order of the Committee in
Pennsilvania; All these being Chosen by the General Assembly, they giving good
and sufficient security to the Society for their true and faithful service.

ARTICLE XXVIII. That the President, Deputy, Secretary, Treasurer, Surveyor and
all the Servants of the Society shall bring into the Society's Warehouse, what
Peltry they buy of the Indians in their Respective Plantations with their own
private Goods: This shall be Entered in the Books of the several Offices to
prevent Fraud. Those Goods shall be sent over with the Society's Goods, and
shall have what Return they will for the same, allowing to the Society,
Freight, Factorage, etc.

ARTICLE XXIX. That it shall be Lawful for all, who will bring their Goods to
the Society's Warehouse, so to do and to have the same Returns, as they shall
desire. This being granted and Allowed, will bring in most of the Countries
Goods in the Society's hands, which will in time prove the great Advantage of
the Society; and most Eminently to the Planters, who are not able to send into
England, where possibly they may be deceived by their Factors or Attorneys,
they having in the Society the greater security Imaginable for their Effects.

Some of the Officers and Offices for the SOCIETY, Viz. President, Deputy,
Treasurer, Agent, Secretary, Surveyor, Twelve Committee Men, Chyrurgion,
Factors, Clerks, Overfeers, Messengers, Porters, Butchers, Watermen, Carr-men,
etc.
The Four Offices for the Society.
The Secretary Office.
TO this Office shall belong the Book-Keeper, the Factors, Chyrurgeon, Clerk of
all Offices, Messengers, Overseers, Watermen. The Secretary shall be always
ready to receive Orders of the President or Deputy for the Execution of all
Warrants to be Issued out abroad, to write all Letters, etc. for the Society's
Service, and to direct the Plantations in their Duties, as the President and
Courts are Agreed on to be done: As when any Ships are going Out, then to write
to Factors abroad, etc. When any Factors are wanting Supplies of Goods, to give
Warr^nts in the Treasury-Office for the same under the Presidents own Hand and
Seal, or his Deputy; and nothing delivered without this Method. And when Goods
are brought in, then to take Account of the same, and give an Acconnt to the
President of them, and Enter them in that Office also. If any Servant Dies, to
receive Information of it, and make Record. If any Run away, to receive
Information, and take Order of the President about it, etc. If any be Sick, to
Issue Warrants for their help by the Presidents Order, etc. If Cattle Dye, to
Record it; If any be Increased, to Record the Place, Kind, Number. To receive
every Week a particular Account of all Overseers, Factors, etc. of all
Increases and Decreases of Trade, etc.

The Treasury Office.
TO this Office shall belong the TREASURER, Two Clerks, Porters, Butchers,
Watermen, Carr-men, Chyrurgeon, Husbandmen, Handicrafts, etc. every one of
them giving Account to the Treasurer of their Works, and all to be Recorded in
the Treasury-Office, and to be Transmitted into the Secretary's-Office every
Seven days, and all those Officers and Servants to be directed in their
Proceedings by Warrants from the President or his Deputy, and nothing to be
delivered out without the same, to prevent Deceit, etc. And that there shall be
Two Warehouses, one for Exportation, and the other for Importation: Unto each
of them shall belong a Clerk to keep Journals of Goods Come In and Gone Out;
and to keep the Warrants* from the President for their Security. And that if
any Goods are received in, and not Recorded in the Secretary and
Treasury-Office within two dates, it shall be a Forfeiture of such Penalty
thought fit to be Imposed by the Court of Assistants.

The Surveyor's Office.
TO this Office shall belong the Surveyor, an Assistant, a Clerk, a Searcher.

This Surveyor shall View all Ships, and what is thereunto belonging, whether
fit to be made use of for the Society's Service or no; and make Report to the
President. He shall Oversee all Overseers, Servants, their Works, and make
Record of them all, giving Information of all things in the Secretary-Office,
and to the President or his Deputy; and keeping Record in his Office of the
same. He shall see all Goods Shipped Safely and others Landed; He shall view
all Warehouses, their Goods that they be kept well, etc. That all Warrants
from the President, be duly put in Execution, Survey all Entries and Invoyces,
all Buildings, all Cattles, etc. that the Society may not suffer by any;
keeping a Journal of all things which are every seven days to be Compared with
the Secretary-Office, where all things are to be Recorded. And Record being
duly made, all the Books to be signed by the President or his Deputy, and
afterward to stand for good and Just Actings in the Court of Committee and
Assistants: And this being p assed, never more to be recalled.

The Miner's Office.
TO this Office shall belong an Agent, Clerks, Miners, Refiners, Brick-makers,
Tile-makers, Potters, Lime-burners, etc.

The Agent shall daily receive Informations from the Miners, etc. of what is
done, and make Record of it in his Office, and shall be Signed by the Clerk and
himself. Then to send it to the Secretary-Office every seven days there to be
Recorded; the President or Deputy having approved the same. And the Agent shall
Answer for all Defaults and Wrong done to the Society in any of the things,
that are under his Custody, until they are Recorded and Received in the Custody
of the Treasurer.

These are the Heads, upon which the Society is to be Governed, and the Offices
by which all is Administered and secured from Fraud and Deceit. What further is
necessary for the same, must be left to the Wisdom of the President and Court
of Assistants, who in time may give an Exact Account of other things relating
thereunto.

For the Convenience of such who are desirous to Subscribe to The Stock of this
Society, if they please to Apply themselves to Philip Ford in Bow-Lane near
Cheap Side, there their Subscriptions may be Entered.

THE END.

