THE MINISTRATION OF Public Baptism OF INFANTS To be used in the CHURCH. OR, A
DISSWASIVE FROM Baptising Children in Private.

By EDM. ARWAKER, M.A.

Despise ye the Church of God?

1 Cor. 11. 22. LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Edward Poole, at the Ship over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1687.

IMPRIMATUR.

Jo. Battely RRmo P. ac Dno Dno Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a sacris Domesticis.
July 12, 1686. Ex Aedib. Lamb.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Right Reverend Father in GOD HENRY Lord Bishop of
LONDON.
My LORD,
AMong the unhappy Irregularities that crept into our Church in the licentious
days of Usurpation, none has proved so difficult to be reformed as that of
Baptizing Children in Private Houses, when there is no necessity requiring it;
and that too with the Public Form of Administration.

For not only they who are Dissenters from us in the main, but (alas!) too many
who profess themselves of us, and would take it ill not to be reputed very good
Sons of the Church of England, persist obstinately in this Error; and what is
worse, are apt to express a high resentment, if the Clergy deny to comply with
them, while they at the same time refuse to hear the Church.

But it is our happiness, that their Obstinacy, though great, cannot exceed or
tire the pious Industry and unwearied Diligence of the Religious Prelacy, to
reduce us to that primitive Decency and Order for which our Church has been
ever as Venerable as Eminent.

Of this your Lordship is a very signal instance, whose Zeal to free our Church
from this vile Corruption is proportionate to that Authority which you
deservedly bear in it, and has gone a great way so successfully in the Cure of
that part which you more immediately adorn and govern, that we are almost
assured to see it perfected there by Your Lordship's Hand; as we are encouraged
to hope it will be through the Kingdom, by the healing Applications of its
Chief and worthily Most Reverend Metropolitan.

And since what is acted by our Governors in a higher Sphere, commands our
imitation in our inferior Stations; I, who am not in circumstances of
manifesting my obedience in a Reformation, can only testify my good
inclinations toward it, in a weak endeavor of another kind, the following
Treatise that takes sanctuary under the Vmbrage of Your Lordship's name. For
which, while I offer it to Your Lordship, as an humble acknowledgment of former
favors, I must beg the additional one of Your Pardon; and I cannot despair of
that for any thing that wishes well to a design You have still been forward to
promote: And in that have added to many others, one more grand Evidence of our
happiness in Your Presidency over us, which labors to reduce our Practice to
the Purity and Splendour of those Rules that ought to influence and direct it.

But, My Lord, I fear to offend as much by a tedious Apology, as by the
unworthy Present I would excuse; and shall make only this for the Imperfections
of this Piece, That the Author has so much of the Cares, and so little else of
the World, as not to be supplied with leisure and Books for an elaborate
performance, such as might be fit to offer to the Churches Service, and Your
Lordship's Patronage; than which there is nothing more in the Ambition of,

My Honored Lord, Your Lordship's Most dutiful Son, and most devoted Servant,
EDM. ARWAKER.

MINISTRATION OF Public Baptism OF INFANTS To be used in the CHURCH.
AS it is an Affliction that through a strange Deservency of the Primitive
Zeal, in the exterior Worship of our God, so Solemn and Eminent a part
thereof, as the Public Celebration of the Sacrament of Baptism, should be so
much neglected (not to say opposed) as to stand in need of Patronage and
Assertion; so it is an Advantage to engage in the defense of a Practice as
Ancient as Christianity it self, and as generally received (till of late)
without Contradiction or Dispute. Since therefore that devout and excellent
Office labors under such unhappy Circumstances, and that no other Pen has been
purposely employed to redress the Grievance: One of the meanest of its
Admirers, has ventured to expose his Weakness for its Cause, rather than suffer
it by appearing Friendless, to fall into more contempt.

Let him not be thought herein to presume on his own Abilities (which he is
conscious how small they are) since he espouses a Cause so armed with Truth,
Antiquity and Reason, that it cannot be a sufferer, even by the weakest
management: Which makes him imitate the Hebrew Champion, accosting the
Philistin Giant, and despise the Armor of fallacious Sophistry, as
sufficiently guarded and secured by the Nakedness of that Truth which he
maintains. And he cannot doubt, but that the better it is discerned, it will
have the greater Prevalency, and in spite of Opposition, become more than
Conqueror.

For the Conviction then of such who refuse to bring their Children into the
place of Public Worship, the Church, to receive their Initiation into the
Christian Religion, by the Sacrament of Baptism, there in the Face of the
Congregation; but either through Obstinacy, Pride, or Ignorance, contend to
have that Office performed within their Houses: It may perhaps be pertinent to
proceed in this Method, and propose to their consideration.

First, The Rubric of our Church prefixed to the Office of Public Baptism of
Infants.

Secondly, The Consent in this particular, between the Eastern and Western
Churches.

Thirdly, The Ground of this Rubric, upon what strength of Antiquity and
Reason it relys.

Fourthly, The Power of the Church to make this Injunction, and the
indispensable Obligation that lies on them to obey it.

And lastly, To answer the most material Objections, that are usually made
against the performance of this Duty.

But here while the necessity of bringing Children to the Church, to receive
their Baptism, is asserted, it must be understood to mean it with a Supposition
of their being in a condition fit to be carried abroad; for in case of Sickness
and extreme necessity, where there is danger of their dying Unbaptiz'd, the
Church has allowed (...) St. Matt. 3.6
St. John the Baptist performing it in Public, and the Apostles afterward,
when they were at Liberty so to do: for it was done in the Assemblies of the
People, for the most part, which is one main thing requisite to make any
performance Public; and then it was done too in the public places of Worship,
such as were consistent with the State of Christianity at that time, the other
great requisite to complete a public Office.

Thus Justin Martyr, who flourished An. Dom. 150.
early in the Church, speaking of the manner of administering Baptism, says,
Apol. 2. pro Christianis: (...), etc.
They (meaning the Persons to be baptized) are carried by us to the place where
the Water is, and are regenerated the same way that we had been before: And
again he says, The Name of the God and Father of all things is mentioned, and
we invoke that alone; leading the Person to be Baptized to the (...).
Laver or place of Washing; by which Laver if he does not mean the Baptistery
or Font; yet he intimates the public performance of the Office, and is
elsewhere positive, that Baptism was administered in the public Assemblies, as
we shall hereafter find him cited by the Magdeburgenses, which sufficiently
makes for the purpose of this Discourse. For if in his time there were no
public Fonts, it was because the Church was not then in a settled State; and the
Church by performing those Offices of Baptism, and the like, in the places, and
at the times of their more solemn meetings, did sufficiently declare those
times and places to be the properest for such Administrations. And that in the
settlement of the Church, they were determined to them, will be manifest from
Epist ad omnes Orthodoxos.
St. Athanasius who flourished in the Year 340. who making an admiration of the
Villainy of those times, says, Was ever the like Fact committed, even in time of
War and Persecution? And this unparalled Wickedness was the burning the
Churches and Baptisteries: By which it appears, not only that Fonts for public
Baptism were then in use, but that they had been of much antienter standing;
for had there not been such places long before, how ridiculous had it been for
the Father to say, That the like wickedness had never been committed (for the
Interrogation here is much stronger than a Negative) and to wonder at it as a
new and unheard of Thing. Neither was the use of Fonts unknown in the Latin
Church, for Anno Dom. 203.
Tertullian, of earlier date than Athanasius by above a Hundred Years, De
Coron. Mil. cap. 3.
says, That going to the Font, they (the Persons to be Baptized) first made in
the Church, and under the Hands of the chief Ruler or Hierarch, as De Hier.
Eccles.
Dionysius calls him, an open Renunciation of the Devil, etc. And Nec otiose
praemissum a Tertulliano in Ecclesia.
La Cerda in his Notes upon that place, says, It was not impertinently said by
Tertullian in the Church: for this Abrenunciation was not made at the Font, but
in the Church, and then they went to the Font; which, as we shall have occasion
to observe hereafter, was sometimes built without the Church. And that this may
not seem an Objection against bringing Children to be Baptized in the Church,
let it be remembered, that though the Baptism was sometimes administered
without the Church; yet the Examination and Abrenunciation were always made
within it. And St. Greg. Nazianzen in the Fourth Century tells us, That the
person Baptized was led to the Altar, saying, The (...), etc. Orat. 40. in
Sanctum Bap.
Station in which we presently stand after our Baptism, before the (...). ibid.
great and holy Place, represents the Glory of our future Life. And St.
Ambrose, a Latin Father of that Century too, has much to the same purpose,
thus, De Initiandis, cap. 2. post haec reserata tibi sunt. Sancta Sanctorum.
Afterward the Holy of Holies is opened to you. And in another place Lib. 4.
de Sacrament. cap. 1.
that you may understand what is the Second Tabernacle, into which the Priest
introduced you, etc. To conclude this quotation of the Fathers with St.
Chrysostom, much of the same Age, we find him telling the persons to be
Baptized, Homil. 19. Catech. ad Illuminandos: (...)
That though they who at their death are initiated by the Sacred Mystery of
Baptism, might obtain equal Favor and Grace with those who did not defer their
Regeneration; yet they had not an equal will and inclination, neither was their
Preparation (which he much insists on) equal. For, as he goes on, the first
were made partakers of that Sacrament in their Beds, the others received it in
the Arms and Bosom of the Church; where we find he directly opposes the Baptism
in the Church to the clinick Baptism, superstitiously used by some.

Which sort of Baptism was so detested in the primitive times, that he who
received it, was never, to be admitted into Holy Orders; and it was objected to
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 42.
Novatus after his surreptitious Consecration. And this will give us the true
sense of that Council Matisconense, Can. 3.
Council, where after mention of Easter and Pentecost for the Administration of
Baptism, it follows:

Therefore we command all Men, reclaimed from their Errors or Ignorance, by
these present Admonitions, to wait with their Infants at the Church, that they
may enjoy the Festivity of the lawful time (meaning Easter, etc.) and be
Regenerated by the holy Sacrament of Baptism; whereby they may, if they live,
be capable of the honor of executing the Priestly Office. If these are not
sufficient Instances of this kind, Thesaur. Cathol. Artic. 11. Baptisteria.
Cocceius will afford the enquiring Reader more. To proceed then from the
Fathers to the Councils, we shall find in the Third Council of Can. 59. (...),
etc.
Constantinople, in the Year 680. this express prohibition of Baptizing any,
not only in private Houses, but even in the Oratories in them. Thus Baptism
must by no means be Administered, in any private Oratory within a House: But
let those who being purged from their Impurities, are thought worthy of
Illumination, be brought to the Catholic Churches, and there let them enjoy
this benefit: And the Non-observation of this is punished with deposition of
the Clergy, and with Separation in the Laity. Which Canon is agreeable to that
Novel in the Authenticks of Collat. 5. Tit. 13. Nov. 58. Praefat. (...), etc.
Anno 552.
Justinian, wherein he says, That it was established by an ancient Law, That no
one should perform divine Offices [(...)] in a private House: Which Law the
Emperor there confirms with a new Interdiction, making both the Owners of such
Houses liable to a penalty, and the Houses themselves to public Taxes. And he
obliges the Patriarch to see this Law put in Execution under the Forfeiture of
Fifty Pounds in Gold; and he gives the reason of the penalty, because it was a
matter about which the Emperor was studiously careful, as tending to preserve
the unity of the Church, and to prevent clandestine doings. Though afterward the
Emperor Leo in his Constitut. 15. (...), etc.
Constitutions allows Baptism to be administered in private Oratories, (which
Oratories however were consecrated Places) but not elsewhere.

And in another Council. Meldense, Can. 48.
Council in 845. it is decreed, That no Priest should presume to Baptize any
where, but in the Baptismal Churches, and at the times appointed, unless in
case of Sickness or extreme Necessity.

However it may not be impertinent to strengthen what has gone before, by some
Testimonies, which because they come from Persons either indifferent, or
professed Enemies to any thing that had an appearance of superstition, will be
unquestionable. Expos. de Authorit. Consuet. Baptisand. Infant. etc. page 694.
Cassander the Pacifick Catholic, a Man of much Moderation and Indifferency,
who in one part of his Writings, professes, it is his business to avoid
partiality Lib. de Officio pii viri, and c.
and enquire into the truth of Things; tells us, that with general consent it
was received in all Churches, That only at certain times, (that is Easter and
Pentecost) Baptism was solemnly administered, and that only in the Church by
the Bishop and Priests, and c. and neither Children nor the adult were Baptized
in Private, but in imminent danger of Death, and when by reason of Sickness,
they could not without hazard of their Lives be brought abroad. And De Orig.
Templorum, cap. 6.
Hospinian, who has given sufficient proof of his not being superstitiously
affected, acknowledges that Histories bear witness that the Christians, after
the Apostles time did meet together, especially in times of Persecution, in
Coemiteries, that is, places set apart for the interment of the Martyrs, and
that there they celebrated their Religious Assemblies. And he tells us out of
Lib. 2. cap. 14.
Theodoret, That in the Persecution under George of Alexandria, when the
Adversaries of Christianity prevailed, and had got the Churches into their
possession, the Christians were forced to meet in the Coemiteries to perform
their Devotions; and cites Appendice ad Platinam de Coemiteriis.
Onuphrius, who says, That because the primitive Fathers were wont to assemble
at the Tombs of the Martyrs of Sacred Memory, on the Anniversary Day of their
suffering, the large and capacious places of Prayer for their Public
Assemblies, lying near those Burial places, were called Coemiteries also. And
he adds of himself, That the Roman Pontifices or Bishops, were wont to
celebrate Stations, that is, all public Acts of their Episcopacy, among the
Sepulchers of the Martyrs; and therefore, says he, these Coemiteries were to
the Christians as Temples and places of Prayer, in which the Bishops called
their Synods, and administered the Sacraments. And to confirm his assertion, he
tells us of an Edict of Baron Annal. Hist. Eccles.
Galienus, who lived in the Year 256. extant, wherein the Son commands the
Coemiteries which Valerian, the Father, had taken from the Christians, to be
restored to them, that they might meet to perform their Religious Worship
there. So that whoever denies the ancient Custom of public administration of
Baptism, must either make Baptism no Sacrament, or yield that there are more
than Two, or disprove this great Authority, as well as several others. For
Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 4. Iib. 5. cap. 15.
Chamier, as little a Friend to Novelty, or Superstition as Hospinian,
acknowledges this laudable practice of Baptizing all Persons in public, and
cites St. Epist. 33.
Ambrose saying that the Catechumens being dismissed, he gave the Symbolum.
Badge of their profession to some who desired it, or rather who were qualified
for it, (as some have critically distinguished between the Catechumens and the
Competentes) in the Baptistery or Font of the Church. And the same Author cites
Vasquez, saying. We use no other ceremony in giving the Name, only to ask the
Sponsors by what Name the Person brought to the Church to be Baptized, is
called? And again he quotes Cyrill, Hierosol. Cat. Mystagog. 1. (...), etc.
St. Cyrill, mentioning the Baptistery, and telling his Auditors that they
(...) and 7th Century; and they quote Lib. 18. Reium Roman.
Paul the Deacon, alleging that their Baptism in private Houses was very rare,
and that only when necessity compelled them to it. And this was continued down
to the 13th Century, as whoever pleases to peruse those Writers, may be
satisfied.

This might be reasonably hoped to suffice for the Antiquity on which our
Rubric is grounded; as to the matter of fact, That Baptism was from the first
Institution still administered in public, that is in the public Congregation,
and the public place of Worship, the two Sherloch. Rel. Assem. Part 2. Chap.
4. page 289.
essentials requisite to make the Baptism public; and that as soon as the
Church began to be settled, and to obtain places for Religious Worship; there
were still set apart and erected places for the peculiar Administration of
Baptism, according to that of Walafrid. Strab. lib. de reb. Eccles. cap. 6.
Walafridus: The honor of Religion increasing through length of time, and
success of Affairs, the splendour of Ecclesiastical Constitutions grew to a just
hight: And the cebration of the mystical Laver of Baptism became more solemn,
and therefore spacious Fonts were set up in which the Priests did Administer
that Sacrament of Faith, with very splendid Ceremonies: And though it was the
custom at first to build these Fonts without the Church, as Epist. 12. ad Sulp.
Severum.
Paulinus says, Severus did; yet afterward, says Lib. 1. de Rit. Eccles. cap.
19.
Durantus, they began to be brought Prope (...).
into the Churches, near the Porch. And accordingly Hist lib. 1. cap. 21.
Greg. Turonensis shows, That the Font in which Clodoveus was Baptized by
Rhemigius, was placed in the Church. This is the Antiquity that gives occasion
to our Rubric, and the Reasons are as prevalent.

Two we have mentioned in the Rubric it self, and even those are by the wise
and serious consideration of the Church, thought sufficient to procure an
admonition to the people, that it is Rubric before Public Baptism.
most convenient that Baptism should not be Administered but upon Sundays and
other Holy Days, when the most number of people come together: (Which still
argues the place of Administration to be the Church)

The first Reason respects the Parties baptized, that they may have Witnesses
of their Initiation; the latter, the Persons present, that they may be reminded
of their own Profession and Vow made to God. The first has been ever thought so
necessary by the Church, That in such cases of necessity wherein it allows of
private Baptism, yet it still injoyns the Children so Baptized to be brought
afterward into the Church, and there to be received in Public, upon sufficient
testimony of the validity of their Private Baptism in the use of all the
Essentials to it. And it must certainly be a great satisfaction to any so
Baptized in private, upon necessity, and consequently in haste, to be assured
that nothing Essential to his Baptism was then omitted, and that the Church had
such satisfaction thereof, that it added those exterior Rites and Accidentals
that are the Ornaments and Appendages of a due Administration of that Holy
Sacrament: The omission of which Rites the Church never did allow, but upon
some urgent necessity; and not then upon any account but the uncertainty of
their Future State who leave the World without this Badge of their Christianity.

And for this reason it is, that the Primitive Fathers did so press the dispatch
of Baptism, that the persons to be Baptized, whether Adult or Infants, should
be brought to Church, lest sickness should deny them the happy opportunity of
coming thither, and allow them only an Office, as well homely for the
insolemnity, as for the privacy of its performance. Wherefore, says Orat. in
Sanct. Bapt.
St. Greg. Nazianzen, Let us be Baptized to day, lest to morrow it be the
effect of force; let us not defer a Blessing, as if it were an Injury, till
Sickness or some other danger compel us to embrace it: And a great deal more he
has to the same purpose. Wherefore we may conclude this with that of De Rit.
Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Durantus; Parents are therefore to be admonished and exhorted, that as soon as
they can without danger they bring their Children to the Church, and take care
that they be Baptized with the solemn Ceremonies thereof; especially since by
reason of their tender age they are in infinite hazard of being prevented by an
early death. Which argues, That besides the benefit of having the Congregation
present to testify their being received into the number of Christ's Church, it
is an honor and advantage of it self, to have so decent and solemn a reception.

The second advantage mentioned in the Rubric is that of the Congregation's
being put in mind of their Baptismal Vow, by hearing it repeated, and it is not
a small help to the performance of a Promise to have frequent Memorandums of
it. How readily, not to say how willingly, we forget our Vows of Obedience and
new life, is but too obvious in our daily violations of them; and it is an act
of the highest Charity in those who remind us of them. So that whoever
withholds his Child from the Public Baptism, deprives the Congregation of a
charitable office, which might perhaps have an influence on some or other
there, in order to amendment and Salvation.

But besides these Reasons, there are others of no less weight and moment
hinted in the Office of Public Baptism of Infants, though not mentioned in the
Rubric; and those are,

First, The veneration due to the Sacrament it self, as a main part of God's
Holy Worship: And, Secondly, The just regard and deference due to the Churches,
as places set apart and consecrated to his Service.

That Baptism is a great and solemn part of God's Holy Worship, it is to be
hoped, will not need much proof to any one who has had the honor and advantage
to receive it. They who hold more Sacraments than Two, have yet allowed in the
title of the Sacramentorum Janua.
Entrance and Inlet to the rest. It Is that Sacred office wherein we solemnly
dedicate our selves to God: wherein we enlist our selves Soldiers under the
Banner of our Savior, and receive that Tesseram Militarem.
Military Badge that distinguishes us from his Enemies, and take those Signa
juratoria.
Oaths that oblige us to fight his Battles manfully.

It Is the solemn Celebration of God's Worship wherein we express our esteem of
it to be such, that we dare bid defiance to the Devil for its sake: that we
renounce the Pomps and Glories of the World, and neglect the Pleasures and
Allurements of the Flesh, the gratifying our Appetites and Inclinations to
embrace it. It Is that Solemnity wherein we declare our unfeigned belief of, and
assent to all the Articles of the Christian Faith; and wherein we stipulate and
vow to perform a ready and sincere obedience to all the commands of our
Creator. And sure an Act of such general concern and universal benefit, an Act
of so much piety and perfection, should be performed in the solemn and
religious manner: And Solemnity we know is never perfect but in public;
neither does Religion tend so much either to the Glory of God, or the
Edification of our Brethren, when retired and private, as when conspicuous and
eminent. Besides, if we consider the Nature of this Sacrament of Baptism (the
only Rule, according to an Sher Rel. Assemblys. p. 291.
eminent Person in our Church) whereby to determine the manner and
circumstances of any Action, we shall find never to be performed properly but
in public, because it is of a public nature, as it concerns the whole society
of Christians; and therefore is as well to be done in the presende, as by the
Authority of the Church, when the Celebration may be most public and awful.
For where can it be so but in the midst: of the great Congregation? The public
Assemblies for Religious Worship held by the Authority of the Church in places
separated by (...) of all Sacred Offices. Among which, Lib de reb. Eccles. cap.
10.
Walafridus Strabo tells us that it has a more than ordinary claim to that of
Baptism, which, says he, is more properly celebrated there; because we read,
that before the Tabernacle stood the Exodus 30.18.
Laver, and before the Temple the 1 King. 7. 39.
Brazen Sea, and the Ten Lavers, in which both the Priests that were to offer,
and the Flesh of the Sacrifices, were washed; and it is very becoming those who
enter into the profession of Christianity to be regenerated in the Temple of
Christ their Savior. None being fit to enter into the Church, says Isidor.
cap. 7. in Cant. Canticor.
another, who is not first cleaned in the Water of Baptism. Not without great
ground and reason therefore did the Council of Apud Gratian, de consecrat.
Distinct. 4.
Ilerda, in the year 524. decree that every Priest that could not procure a
Font of Stone, should have a convenient Vessel for the administration of
Baptism only, which should not be at all carried out of the Church. Nor with
less discreet consideration, nor without great authority of Fathers and
Councils, is it prohibited in the De Baptis. and ejus effectu. Tit: 15.
Clementins; to any Priests; to dare to administer the Sacrament of Baptism in
any Halls or Chambers, or other private Houses, but only in the Church, in
which there, are Fonts particularly for the purposes. Unless to the Children of
Kings, or upon such an emergent necessity, by reason of which the persons
cannot, without certain danger, be brought to Church to receive it. And then if
we weigh this seriously, Tertul. de Corona Militis
and take Tertullian's Maxim with us, that in those things which the Scripture
neither commands nor prohibits, that is to be observed, which Custom has
confirmed, as proceeding from unquestionable Tradition; we shall not condemn
our Church for enjoining, but our selves for slighting a Duty so primitive and
practicable; a Duty which it is sure was never opposed by any Church, nor by any
Sect that owned the Sacrament it self: but has ever been esteemed decent and
convenient by those who would not allow it to be requisite or of moment. But if
it were neither an ancient, a religious, nor useful practice; if it were
novel, indifferent and insignificant, yet being enjoined by our Mother the
Church, the Holy Catholic Church in general, as well as the Church of England
in particular, it is obligatory to us who are Members of the Whole, and
especially of that part: To some of whom (with shame we must let the Reader
know it) this Paper is designed, since it of late appears too usual with some
of those to dispute the Commands of the Church, in this particular, and
obstinately refuse obedience to them.

Wherefore it will be requisite to proceed to show the Churches Power to make
injunctions of this kind, and the indispensability of our obedience to them.

In the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of England contained in the 39
Articles, it is asserted, Art. 20.
that the Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, not repugnant to
the Word of God. Now that the bringing of Children to be Baptized in the
Church, has no such repugnancy, is undeniable, and will be thought so, till it
appears wherein; and then the Churches authority to enjoin it, will be evident
from the practice of the Apostles (for from the beginning it was so) in
forbidding Men to be 1 Cor. 11. 4, 7, 14.
covered in the Church, and obliging Women to keep silence there; in rejecting
Prayer in an unknown Tongue; and commanding all things to be done decently and
to edification; and several other instances, among which were those things, of
which St. Paul says, the rest will I set in order when I come. And we have an
harmony of Confess. Helv. Art. 13. Cap. 22, 23, 24. Basil. Art. 10. Bohem cap.
15, 17. Gal. Art. 32. Belg. Art. 32. Aug. Art. 4, 57. 15. Sax. Art. 20. Soev.
Cap. 8. 14. Wittemb. Cap. 27. 31.
Confessions among all the Protestant Churches acknowledging the same. And the
learned Cham. Panstrat. Cathol. Tom. 4. lib. 5. cap. 15.
Chamier answering the Objection of Vasquez, that the Protestants did some
things which had no mention or command in the Scripture; as for instance, their
Custom of bringing their Children on Sundays, or other public days, to be
baptized at Church when the Congregations were assembled; defends the practice,
and calls it an honest and decent Circumstance of celebrating that Sacrament:
in things of which kind, says he, Quis negavit Ecclesiae extra Scripturam
licere?

Now this Power being granted, it will necessarily follow, that what our Mother
does so lawfully command, we must readily and submissively obey; for in
refusing, we sin as much against Heaven that has given this Commission to the
Church, as against its Delegate, our grave and reverend Mother; and however we
may arrogate to our selves the specious title of her Sons, are no longer worthy
to be called so. For by our refractory and stubborn carriage, we destroy her
Being as a Church, whence we derived our own as Christians. There is no Body
can subsist without Economy, nor Economy without Subordination: For as there
is variety of Offices to be performed, so there are different Parts and Agents
adapted to the several Employments and Operations; some for the Authoritative,
and others for the Executive Part. For as St. Paul 1. Cor. 12.
says, If the whole Body were an Eye, where were then the hearing? So (...)
('it is sure they should) be the more afraid to alienate the property, and
sacrilegiously rob God of his interest to transfer it to another: And when they
meet with any that were witnesses of their Dedication, they cannot without
shame and confusion let them see how they have contradicted the good intentions
of their Parents, broke all the Promises of their Sureties, and frustrated all
the Prayers of the Congregation made in their behalf. The Third instance is in
the Prayer of Consecration; where it is no small Argument to prevail for God's
assent to the Petitions offered in behalf of the Child to be regenerated, That
he would regard the Supplications of his Congregation, and comply therewith in
sanctifying the Water to the Mystical washing away of Sin, and in granting that
the Child ready to be Baptized therein, may receive the fullness of his Grace,
and ever remain in the number of his Faithful and Elect Children.

Where we see the Church has a great Opinion of the prevalency of the Prayers
of the Congregation; esteeming its united force a kind of holy Violence, that
does as it were wrest Blessings from the Almighty, as an ancient Dionys. Areop.
Lib. de Ecclesiast. Hierarch.
Author intimates the design of the Assembly to intend: Telling us, That the
whole Sacred Assembly is gathered to assist at, and celebrate the safety and
deliverance of the Person Baptized, and to return thanks for it to the Divine
Beneficence.

But still this Congregation whose Prayers are thought thus efficacious, must
be such an Assembly of which the Minister may safely and truly say, Thy
Congregation; for there can be no validity in the Prayers of any but God's
Congregation; and that is none of his, which is not Assembled in the place
which the Church has appointed, and by its Allowance and Authority. Now private
Houses were never allowed of by the Church, much less commanded to be the
places of Public Baptism; and they who so illegally Assemble there, are as
much guilty of disorder in the Church, as they who meet in prohibited numbers
or places, are of a Riot in the State.

The Fourth Instance is the receiving the Child; when the Minister, having
first named and Baptized him, and still holding him in his Arms, uses these
words, as it were of Matriculation, We receive this Child into the Congregation
of Christ's Flock, etc. Which reception does not only mean the whole body of
the universal Church, but as well that representative part thereof then
present, and consenting to it as Proxy for the whole. And the Minister's
Embracing the Child, is for the same end as the Imposition of Hands in Baptism
was of old; which Durant de ritib. Eccles. Cathol. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Durantus tells us signified the Reconciliation, by which he that was without
the Church, a Child of Wrath, according to our Catechism, was in the Church
received into the Church's favor, and made a Child of Grace.

And besides all this, our Church for farther prevention of the performance of
this Public Office in Private, has in cases of necessity, prepared and
enjoined a Private Form of Baptism, to be administered to those, who by reason
of Sickness cannot be brought abroad without peril of their lives. Which we
find by an ancient Council. Vernense. Capit. 7. tent. 756.
Council to be an Indulgence, only on supposition of invincible necessity; and
rather than such who cannot be safely brought to Church, should die Unbaptiz'd,
they may have this Sacrament administered to them at home; but this still with
an injunction, that if they outlive their Sickness, as soon as they are fit to
be carried abroad, they should be brought to Rubr. in the Office of Private
Baptism, and Rituale Romanum, Ordo supplendiomissa super Baptisatum.
Church, that those Prayers and Rites which were before omitted in the Office,
may be there publicly supplied: which is a most convincing Argument of the
Church's sense in this matter, as well as of its determination; and should be
sufficient of it self to oblige every genuine and obedient Son to acquiesce
therein. But since, by sad experience, we find many refractory and undutiful;
the next and last thing will be to enquire into their Objections against this
duty, or Pleas for not performing it.

As for Objections against it, there are truly none; for to urge that St. John
the Baptist, and the Apostles Baptized their Converts every where, in Lakes,
and Ponds, and Rivers, in Houses, Fields and Prisons, does not at all make
against the administration of Baptism now in Churches only. For what they did
then in the Infancy of the Church, was suited to its circumstances, and it was
then impossible to have large Assemblies, and much more Churches for that
purpose, till Christianity gained ground and obtained in the World; and to
argue that Baptism ought not to be administered in Churches, because it was not
so at first, is as ridiculous, and inconsequent, as 'twould be to say, That we
should not live in Houses now, because it is known the Israelites, who were
God's People, dwelt at first in Tents.

For their not having Churches and Fonts for Baptism, was not because they were
unfit, or unnecessary, but because they could not have them; as Lib. 2. Angl.
Histor. cap. 14.
Beda says of the ancient Britains, That in the beginning of Christianity
there, where their Churches could not be so soon erected, the People were
generally Baptized in Rivers; but we find that quickly discontinued, and Fonts
provided for that purpose.

To all which there needs only this be added, That Terful. Carthag.
he who said every day was the Lord's, and every hour and time fit and
convenient for Baptism, yet did not affirm the same hability of place; for he
could not so well say of Place as of Time, If it is conducing to the Solemnity,
it is insignificant as to the Grace conferred; for though it does not tend to the
Esse, yet it does to the Been esse of the Sacrament.

For it has been generally allowed, That God is more immediately present, upon
general occasions, in the places of his Public Worship than elsewhere; his
presence being there in St. Augustin's Opinion, Sacratior and commendatior: Who
likewise affirms it to be a very convenient providence, that God should confer
his Favors in that place where his Name is praised; and that Man should
receive them there where he does praise it.

But not to insist longer on this point, let us proceed to consider the other
Reasons pretended for Baptising Children at home; or rather why their Parents
are unwilling to bring them to the Church.

And indeed, among the richer sort we find it to be nothing but a piece of
state. For if their Children, by reason of indisposition of Body, cannot be
brought abroad, as some pretend, why are they not then contented to have the
Private Office of Baptism administered to them, according to the direction and
practice of the Church? which certainly they would desire, if that were the
true or only reason. And if they think there is no significancy or virtue in
the Ceremony of the Public Office, why do they then so eardestly contend to
have it used in Private? By which they sufficiently discover, That not the
indisposition of their Childrens Bodies, but of their own Minds makes them
neglect the Church, celebrate a Sacrament at home, for which the Public is the
only proper place.

That they ought not to be complied with herein is certain; because God is no
respecter of persons: And though we find it sometimes indulged to the Children of
Kings, it was only on supposal of their having consecrated Chapels in their
Palaces. And for all this, we find both Princes themselves and their Children
Baptized in the Church: Many examples whereof are cited by De gestis
Longobardor.
Paul the Deacon; particularly Advaldus. Son of Agilulfus, King of the
Longobards, Baptized by the Bishop of Modoctia, in the Church of St. John the
Baptist; and the Son of Heraclius, Baptized by Sergius, in the A place where a
Church was built to the Blessed Virgin.
Blacerne at Byzantium; of which Son of Heraclius Tom. 3. page 68.
Zonaras relates, That the whole Senate of Constantinople was invited to his
Christening: But the fond Mother still more tender than her Infant, dares not
trust her darling with the God that gave it her; But thinks its being carried
to the Church to its Baptism, would occasion its speedier exportation thither
to its Funeral. How cowardly she is in this, and how much the weakness of her
Faith resembles that of her Sex, let St. Orat. in Sanct. Baptisma. (...)
Greg. Nazianzen tell her. And it would be happy if all Parents would weigh the
great advantage of having their Children early Consecrated to God, before
wickedness can obtain a prepossession in them, against the seeming
inconveniency, which the tenderness of their Age may suffer.

But that which is state and indulgence in the great, changes shape, and
pretends to be shame in those of meaner rank and fortune; and they usually
allege their backwardness in bringing their Children to be Baptized in the
Church, to proceed from their inability to have things in decorum, as to their
own Apparel, and the Entertainment of the Company, as is usual. Or else that
they would not be thought at so low an ebb as not to have wherewithal to
gratify the Minister for his attendance; which by the discourse of several of
them appears to be the received notion of their circumstances who bring their
Children to Church to be Baptized, as if they did it to save charges, since for
that there are no Fees due. To answer the first there needs little else be
said, than that the prodigality of some ought not to oblige others, nor be
proposed for their imitation; much less be a reflection on them for avoiding
it, than which nothing can more justify their Prudence and Sobriety. That such
Treats and Entertainments were disapproved of by the Church, we have the
testimony of St. Orat. in Sanct. Baptis. (...) etc.
Greg. Nazianzen; who thus informs his Auditory: It Is ill to say, where is the
Gift that I shall offer for my Baptism? where are my new Cloths? where shall I
have Provision for the Entertainment of my Gossips? Do not in a matter of such
moment as that Sacrament, regard things so minute and trivial. Suffer not your
self to be withdrawn from it by an affection so base and abject. This Sacrament
is above those things that lie within the prospect of the Eye: Make your self
your Offering: put on Christ for a Garment, and nourish me with an honest and
praiseworthy conversation. Thus I, thus God desires to be entertained. There
is nothing in esteem with God which is not in the power of a poor Man to bestow
upon Him: That even in this, those of meaner fortune should not be discouraged,
as not having wherewithal to vie with the great and wealthy. Indeed, in other
things there is disparity between Riches and Poverty; but in this, he that is
readiest and chearfullest, is still the richest and the most acceptable.

There might several Councils be produced wherein to avoid Levity, and
Intemperance Council. Colon. 2. cap. 15. Censora pro abus. reformand.
Baptism is forbid to be administered in the Afternoon, but in case of extreme
danger; and where it is likewise forbid to make great Feasts and Banquets after
it; which even in 1549. was censured as a Heathen Custom, and they that used it
were termed parum Christiani; and wherein it is expressly said Council. Mogunt. 4.
cap. 16.
, That a due reverence may be shown to that great Mystery, it is earnestly
advised, that Baptism may not be Administered in the Afternoon, when Men are
charged with Wine and Delicacies; but in the Morning, in the time of Divine
Service, and that with great Sobriety and Devotion: And it is there recommended
to the Civil Magistrate to suppress all Feasts and Banquets afterward, or at
least to reduce them to a moderation becoming Christians. So that not to follow
this ill fashion, is so far from being a disgrace to any one, that it is as well
our Prudence as our Duty to avoid it.

Then for the other excuse, of being unwilling to be thought unable to pay the
Minister, it is idle and impertinent: Because nothing can or ought to be
demanded for the Administration of Baptism, according to the Rules of the
Church. Nor should the Clergy accept of any Fees for Baptizing Children in
Private Houses, since if it is any part of their Office or Duty, as in cases of
necessity, they are both by Religion, and Reason, and express Capit. Herardi
Archiep. Turonen. cap. 31.
Canons forbid to receive any thing: And if it is no part of their Office; (as
where there is no necessity) the performance is incanonical and unjustifiable,
and therefore so far from meriting a reward, that it incurs a reproof.

Though it has been objected to some, who argued for the Baptism of Infants with
the Public Office, to be Administered in the Church, and refused the
Administration of it in Private Houses, but in great necessity, and then in the
Private Form; that several good and eminent Divines were not so strict and
scrupulous, but did often condescend, upon request, to administer Baptism in
the Public Form in Private Houses, and to Children under no indisposition of
body, and consequently no necessity to be Baptized at home.(...)

made out, till there are more sufficient Reasons given on that side than there
can be produced to the contrary: And it will be hardly found, that ever the
Bishop was permitted to tolerate the Administration of Baptism in Private,
unless in case of necessity; and then not in the Public Form, but where there
were Council. Constantinop. 3. Can. 3.
Oratories to do it. And if some eminent Divines transgress this Rule, that
should be no Argument for others to follow them in an Error, any more than the
Defects and Infirmities of Men of Quality should be for their equals or
inferiors to endeavor to resemble them. But their being taken notice of, and
urged so unhappily by the vulgar, should put them in mind of a speedy
reformation. And that the People may not expect this compliance, nor the Clergy
use them to it, let it be seriously considered, That this Expectation has been
still imputed to the pride and contemptuousness of the Laity; and their
Compliance, to the flattery and obsequiousness of the Clergy. Let it be
considered how great an indecorum it is to perform a Public Office, that is of
public nature, in Private; and a Private Office in the Public Form. Let the
late date of this Custom in our Church be looked into, and the occasions of it.
It proceeded either from the scruples and disputes about Ceremonies, when to
avoid them, those who were no lovers of them had their Children Baptized at
home by such conscientious Conformists as could dispense with their Rule, says
Council. Provin. Colon. cap. 7. de administrat. Sacrament. Council. Colon. 2.
Decret. 15.
Dr. Sherlock; or else it ows its original to the fatal time of Usurpation and
Impiety, when there was no King in our Israel; and when all God's solemn
Worship was interdicted as Profaneness: Then the Orthodox, who would not
comply with that prevailing Schism, were forced to retire and perform those
Acts in Private, which they could not be allowed to do in Public. And sure the
very remembrance that this Use was introduced by such means, should make it
odious and abominable to all who have the Honesty, the Loyalty, or the Religion
to abhor the practice of those days. Then let us not contend for a custom begun
on so unhappy an occasion: Let not that be our choice now, which was then the
effect of Tyranny and Compulsion; but let us consider how great an affliction
it was to the Sons of the Church to be denied the privilege of performing that
Office as well as others publicly; and how gladly they would have done it if
permitted. And if even in these our days we were interdicted the Administration
of Public Baptism, and driven from the Church and the Congregation, how would
we grieve and complain, what an injury and injustice should we think were
offered us, and how zeaous would we be to enjoy the benefit which now we
slight? But if neither God's glory, nor our own advantage quicken us in this
Duty, let at least Emulation move us, that we may not be outdone by our
Neighbors of the French and Dutch Congregations; whose zeal in this particular
of bringing their Children to their Churches to be Baptized, though at great
distance from them, will rise in judgment against us for our neglect. No length
of way, nor scarce any indisposition, can prevail with them in Scotland to keep
their Children from the Church, but they carry them several Miles to be
Baptized, that it may be done in Public; and they thought it an inexpressible
favor when a Toleration was granted them for Private Baptism in case of great
necessity. That it was usual heretofore for Mothers when they found their
Children ill, to run with them to the Church that they might be Baptized, we
find by St. Aug. in Psalm. 51. enarratio.
Augustin's Question, where proving the guilt of Original Sin derived from
Parents to their Children, he says, If Infants are wholly innocent, why then do
their Mothers run with them to the Church when they are sick? It Is sure the
learned Grotius takes it for granted, That Baptism always was or ought to be
publicly administered, by that Question and Answer in his Grot. Mystagog.
Catechetical Institutions; where the Catechumen being asked the place of his
Baptism, affirms it to be the place of Religious Assemblies, meaning the
Church: And he calls the Administration of it there, an ancient Ibid. (...);
Custom, a Law established and confirmed by old and long observance, as the
original words import. All which considered, we see how justly the Church
injoyns the Rubr. before the Office of Private Baptism.
Curates of every Parish to warn the People, that without great cause and
necessity, they procure not their Children to be Baptized at home in their
Houses, and there to use a Form distinct from that of Public Baptism. This
then being so lovely, and of so good report, if there be any Virtue, if there
be any Praise, if there be any Zeal for God's Glory, and the Edification of his
Church, let us think thereon.

To recommend which to the serious consideration of the People, that they may
not persist in their unreasonable expectation of compliance from their
Ministers, against such Prohibitions, Obligations, and Engagements to the
conorary, nor conceive a prejudice against them for refusing it; but that both
of them may yield a ready and cheerful Obedience to the Church in performing
its Commands, and celebrating the great and venerable Sacrament of Baptism with
all due grandeur and solemnity, is the whole design of this small Tract: which
if it may conduce in any thing to the end intended, will by that success become
a most ample and agreeable compensation to the Author.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 10. Lin. I. r. Coccius. p. 16. l. 19. r. Walafridus Strabo. p. 20. I. 22.
r. It Is that. p. 21. I. 8. r. the most solemn. p. 35. I. 15. r. and celebrate.
I. 27. r. Modoetia.


