ARTICLES OF IMPEACHMENT Against George Lord Digby, By the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled.

In Maintenance of their Accusation whereby he stands accused with High
Treason in their names, and in the names of all the Commons in ENGLAND.

Whereunto is added a strange and unheard of Oraison put by the Papists, found
in the pocket of Captain James Rauley, a Rebel in Ireland.

Sent from Dublin, in a Letter of Note by Captain Edmund Hippisley, to Sir
John Hippisley Knight, a Member of the House of COMMONS.

London Printed for John Wright, Feb. 28.

1642.

Articles of Impeachment against George Lord Digby, by the Commons in this
present Parliament Assembled, 1641.
1. THAT the said George Lord Digby, in or about the month of January 1641.
maliciously and Trayterousl^ endeavored to persuade the Kings Majesty to levey
forces against his Majesty's Liege Subjects within this Kingdom, and the said
George Lord Digby, did in or about the same month actually levey forces within
this Realm, to the teror of his Majesty's Subjects.

2. That the said George Lord Digby, and about the said month of January, and
at other times falsely, maliciously: and Traitorously, labor to raise a
jealousy and disention between the King and his people, and to possess his
Majesty that he could not live with safety of his Person amongst them, and did
thereupon Traitorously endeavor to persuade his Majesty to betake himself to
some place of strength for his defense.

3. That the said George Lord Digby, in or about the same month of January,
and at other times, did maliciously and Traitorously endeavor to stir up
Jealousies and discensions, between the King and his Parliament, and to that
end and purpose did the same month of Iann, wickedly advise the framing of
certain false and scandalous Articles of high Treason against the Lord
Kimbolton, Dencill Hollis Esquire. Sir Arthur Haselrigg Barronet, John Hampden,
John Pym, and Master Strowd Esqrs. And did persuade his Majesty accompanied
with diverse Soldiers and others in warlike manner to come in person to the
house of Commons sitting in Parliament, to demand the said members of the said
House to the apparent endangering of his Majesty's person, and the high
violation of the privileges and being of Parliaments.

Al which matters were done by the said Georg Lord Digby traitorously and
wickedly to Alianate the hearts of his Majesty's Liege people from his
Majesty, and set division between them, and stir up war within this Kingdom.

For which the Commons do impeach him the said George Lord Digby of high
Treason. And the said Commons by protestation saving o themselves the liberty
of exhibiting at any time hereafter any other o ccation or impeachment against
the said George Lord Digby, and also of replying to the answer which he shall
make to the said Articles or any of them; or of offering proof of the premises
or any of them, or of any other impeachment or accusation that shall be
exhibited by them, as the case shall according to the course of Parliament
require. Do pray that the said George Lord Dighy may be put to answer all, and
every the premises in the presence of the Commons, and that such proceedings
examinations, Trials, Judgments, and executions, may be upon every of them,
had and used as is agreeable to Law, and Justice.

Sir,
THe Lord of Antrim is not in the Rebellion as yet, but is much mistrusted. he
will be by reason he is now gone to the County of Kildare, where at the first
this business was begun: the Rebels would willingly come in: if they could but
once hear of a Proclamation, that they should have the liberty of their
conscience, for some such thing they much expect, if they be not mistaken of
their aim.

Sir, this Prayer I took out of a Rebels pocket that I kiled, one James Rauley,
a Captain of the Rebels, who cried for quarter, when I had sheathed my sword
in his bowels, fearing I should be too troublesome. I rest now what I always
was, Sir, your most obedient and most affectionate servant till death.

From Dublin this tenth of February 1641.
THis Oraison was found on the Tomb of our blessed Lady, and is of such
effect, that whosoever will have the same, or say it daily, or carry it about
him, shall be safe from fire, water, and skirmish of battle, and also from
noisome hanting of spirits. Moreover, whosoever shall say a Pater, Ave, and
Creed, daily to the honor of holy and miraculous Virgin Mary, she will visibly
show her self unto him 3-times before his death.

O Most sweet Lord Jesus Christ, only Son of the omnipotent. Father, God of
Angels, and only Son of the most gracious Virgin Mary, help me a sinner,
and save me from all present dangers wherein I am. Most excellent and blessed
Virgin to be praised, to pray and intercesse for me a miserable sinner to thy
welbeloved Son. O chaste and honorable womm, thou art the Mother of Angels and
Archangels, help me from all present evils, and all to come. O flower of
Patriarcks. O shining brightness of the Apostles. O hope of glory. O beauty fo
Virgins. O high thoughts of Angels and Archangels. O most sweet woman, I most
humbly beseech thee not to for sake me at the trembling time of my death, when
my soul shall be separated from my body, whereby I may see my self in
everlasting glory by him. O flower and sweetest foundation of sweetness. O
star of Christ. O haven of health* O Queen of penitent offenders, Hope of the
faithful Archangels. Thou whose conversation is the only recreation of the
Angels and Archangels. O most honorable Lady of all sweetness and fortitude,
thou art the most wholesom'st medicine for all sores. Thou a^^ the labor of
all virtues, through thee do ever Angels and Archangels rejoice. O Mother of
mercy, look on me with thine own merciful eyes. And I commit me to thy most
blessed arms, to inspire my soul and body, and my thoughts, so thus it
pleases thee and thine own beloved Son Jesus Christ.

Pater, Ave, and Creed.
MOst glorious Virgin, let thy flowing grace defend me from the danger of each
place, grant that thy merits once may make me rise from Tomb, above the
spangled cristall Sky, grant to my Country, I may so well end, that I may
praise thee eternally.

AMEN.
I found this in the pocket of a Captain of the Rebels, Captain James Rauley.
FINIS.

