ARTICLES EXHIBITED In the PARLIAMENT, AGAINST WILLIAM BEALE, Doctor of
Divinity, and Master of St. John's College in the University of Cambridge,
August the 6th. 1641

Printed in the year 1641.

ARTICLES Exhibited in the Parliament against WILLIAM BEALE, Doctor of
DIVINITY, and MASTER of St. JOHN'S COLLEGE in the University of CAMBRIDGE, The
6th. of August. 1641.
1. THat he presumptuously preached a Sermon at St. Paul's in London 1640.
which did not only contain Heretical Doctrine, but did also applaud and
extol the Papists to be the Kings truest Subjects, and most Loyal in the
whole Kingdom.

2. That in another Sermon at the same Church he did positively confirm with an
audatious confidence and insolency, that the Puritans were Traitors to the
Crowns in three respects, (or at least as bad as Traitors.) 1. Of their
obstinacy. 2. Of their Schismatic Religion. 3. Of their Disloyalty.
And therefore in his opinion they either ought by coertion to be compelled to
their Conformity, or to suffer extremity of Law.

3. That by sufficient proof and authority he preached in St. Mary's against
the Subjects freedom and liberty.

4. That in the same Sermon he said it was a sin of damnation not to bow at
the name of Jesus, and his Argument he produced out of the Scripture false
quoted, and that the sin was the same for not bowing with submissive reverence
to the Comumnion Table both at our first entrance and departure out of the
Church.

5. That in his College he did most tyrannically usurp Conformity, and did
exult in a most Majesteriall way, commanding the Deanes of the said College to
execute the inflictions of severe punishments on all those who would not
observe Conformity: as to bow very low at the coming in at the Chapel to the
Communion Table, and likewise at their going out thereof without any exception
both of the Fellows, Scholars and Students of the said College.

6. That because those Papisticall Innovations did oppose the pious Consciences
of some which would not observe them, there were four expelled upon the
nonperformance thereof.

7. That after the expulsion of those he commanded the President-Lecturers and
Deanes to admit none into the College, unless they took an absolute Oath of
the performannce thereof.

8. That he was the sole encourager of Dr. Cozins in his Vice-Chancellourship,
to tyranize in that lesuiticall, Popish, and Canterburian Religion, which does
manifestly appear, first, that by his especial means he was elected
Vice Chancellor, then by his often frequenting, and eucouraging him unto
tyrannycall usurpation, and public promulgation of that Romish Religion.

9 That he commanded the Deanes of the said College to severely punish
according to the expressed infliction who would not likewise convert their face
toward the East, at Glory be to the Father, etc. and many times in Divine
Service, so that he did luxuriously introduce Popish Innovations, and
Ceremonies.

10. That at the Offering at the Communion he compelled the Fellows to give 12.
pence, the Batchellors of Arts 8. pence, and the Pensioners 6. pence, and the
Subsizers 4. pence, which after it was collected was never given to the poor
according to the intent of those which gave it charitably, but was forthwith
put to their private use either for erecting Pictures, or Images, or diverse
others Idolatrous things, or Wax-candles, and a numerous multiplicity of the
like detestations.

11. That he did seduce and allure diverse young Students out of other
Colleges, promising them upon their Conformity great preferment in his
College, which he did frequently: and those who were proper for preferment,
were frustrated and withal greatly contemned without any respect, because they
did not observe his Papisticall Superstition.

FINIS.

