THE Art of getting Money BY Double-Fac'd WAGERS; OR, Cross and Pile whether
MONS be Taken, or no? A DIALOGVE Between a Courtier, a Citizen, and a Sharper
of the Town.
The SCENE Jonathan's COFFE-HOUSE.
Parturiunt MONTES Nascitur ridiculus Mus.
Court. HEre Sirrah -- A Dish of Tea, and desire that Gentleman in the Band to
speak with me -- Oh, Sir, your Servant, (to the Citizen) 'faith I lately came
from the Presence, and it is said, the Queen received an Express just now, that
Mons was taken; Pray what News have you in the City?


Citiz. Mons taken, Sir? Ay, so is Venice, Sir! Lord, you Gentlemen of the
the other end of the Town have the strangest Intelligence! why, nothing but
Pacolet's Flying Horse could bring over the News so suddenly.


Courti. Why do you doubt the Truth of it, Sir?


Cit. I know no Reason I should let any Man's Opinion be the Standard of my
Faith, for --


Courti. Perhaps it is your Interest, Sir, to disbelieve it, you have laid some
Wagers upon that occasion, and I must confess, the Hopes of Winning, and the
fear of Losing, will make any man suspend his belief for some time.


Citiz. The Truth on it is, Sir, I am a little dipped, some five or six Hundred
Pounds to several Persons, and unless the Prince De Bergue, the Governor of
the Town, sends me a Letter from his own hand, shall hardly believe the
Affirmation of any Ostender that comes by the way of Plymouth. Mere Shams, Sir,
mere Shams.


Courti. (Turning aside) Well, now have I a Roguish Inclination to bite this
Opus and Vsus, and though I my self am a little doubtful of the matter, yet the
singring of some City Gold, will be more pleasant to me, than a little Estate
won at the Groom Porters. (Turning to him) Well, Sir, have you a few Dormant
Guineas in your Closet, you are indifferent whether you Win or Lose upon this
Occasion?


Citiz. Truly, Sir, Money was never reckoned by me amongst things indifferent;
but I have Fifty Pound, I will venture to odds with any Person, that Mons will
not be in the French King's Hands by the first of May --


Courti. No more words, Sir, I am your Man, here is ten hard pieces of Old
Barbary Gold, with the Royal Effigies upon them -- which said Sum shall be
yours, if in a little time I do not convince you the Town is in the French
hands; the Counterpart of which Obligation is, you are to give me Fifty
Guineas, when you are undeniably convinced the Town is taken.


Citiz. With all my Heart, Sir; in Token whereof, here is my hand, Sir, and so
good Luck attend me.


Enter a Sharper. Sharp. Boy -- the Gazett -- quickly, here is such a do with a
little Netherlandish Town, not so big as Rumford, a^ if all Europe lay at
stake, and the Peace of Christendom depended upon the Relief of that single
place -- (softly to himself) Well, Money is my aim, and if it is any where, it is
in the City; these Grave out-of-Fashion Sparks command the Gold, and 'faith,
Good Men and True, it shall go hard, but I Will rid you of some on it in a very
civil way. So, so, I see a kind of malicious Pleasure in a Gentleman's Face
yonder, discoursing with Mr. Get-all the Merchant, I Will go a little nearer, and
observe their motions, some Wager going forward, my Life to a Pepper-Corn;
(comes up to 'em) What News, Gentlemen, from Flanders? Is Mons taken yet?


Citizen. Sir, You ask a very hard Question, I am no Privy-Counsellor, Sir.


Sharp. (Aside) No, I dare swear it -- Come here is twenty Guin^^s w^^h any man,
that Mons is not now under the French power.


Court. What odds do you allow, Sir, and what do you mean by the word Now?


Sharp. Do You take one fo^^ J^suit, Sir? By Now, I understand the Numerical Hour
of One in the Afternoon, April the 11th. 1691. And for the Wager, I am upon the
square.


Court. I take you up, Sir -- here is the Money; and by reason we are both
Strangers to one another, we will deposit our Money in this civil Gentleman's
hands, he is a substantial man, and his Word will pass where a Nobleman's Bond
will signify nothing.


Sharp. With all my Heart, Sir -- (Speaking to the Citizen) And now to you, Mr.
Treasurer, I will lay the contrary Wager, that Mons has been in the French
power ever since Tuesday the 31st. of March last.


Citiz. Why, Sir, do you lay cross Wagers?


Sharp. No matter for that, Sir, if you accept me, there is your money; for
yours you are your own Cash-keeper.


Citiz. Come, Sir, it is done --

(strike hands.)
Sharp. Gentlemen, there is a Sea-Captain gone down the Ally, I must needs speak
with him. Your pardon, Gent.

Exit.
Court. This is one of the pleasantest Sparks I ever met with; why this is like
playing at Cards for nothing -- However, tho he gains little he is sure to be
no loser by the bargain.


Citiz. For my part, I wish no better Estate to befall me, than the Wagers
laid, pro and con, about this business: Complaints are made of the want of
money; when you can hardly go into any Tavern or Coffee-House, but the Guinea's
are tumbling about with Mons is taken, and Mons is not taken; when upon the
whole matter I cannot, with my political Spectacles, discern what mighty matter
can be in it -- But Interest swears all men to be true to their Principles.


Court. But if the French King pushes on his Fortune, all Flanders will be his
in a little time, and then Mine here Van Pickleherring look to your self; for if
he goes on at this rate, he may dine in Amsterdam by Michaelmas day, for any
thing I can guess.


Cit. Yes, and at Christmas in Northampton! not too fast, Sir, not too fast;
the Spaniards are a People slow in Action; but we have a Prince of our own,
whom I hope will stop his Progress, and make him slacken his pace a little.


Court. If your Faith be great, I wonder it does not attempt to remove
Mountains; were your Charity but half as large, you would certainly go to
Heaven.


Cit. So I shall, I hope, though I call the Pope the Whore of Babylon.


Courti. A little more Civility though, as he is a Temporal Prince, 'twould not
beamiss. But, Sir, what News have you of the Bilboa Fleet, they say the French
have taken it, and sunk the Man of War, who was its Convoy?


Citiz. You may as well believe, the Peke of Tenariff is sunk; no, no -- Heaven
be Praised, they past by Plymouth a few days since.


Courti. Why, a Master of the Insurance Office, offered Twenty Thousand Pound
to any one, who would bear their Bank harmless; upon the first Rumors of the
Vessels being lost.


Citiz. Had any one had the Gift of Prophecy, and taken his Money, he might
have shook hands with an Alderman.


Courti. But, Sir, does the News hold good, that the Packet Boat wherein the
Bishop of L -- Dr. Scot, Dr. Grove, etc. were supposed to be, is still missing?


Citiz. Mere Lies, Shams, Tricks, Amusements; well, these Inventing Lying Sons
of Caterpillars, were I a Magistrate, should suffer the Law most severely, and
Dance from Algate to Newgate, and from thence to Tyburn, to the Tune of Dr. O
-- tes his Jig.


Courti. The Truth must be confessed, there are a sort of designing People, who
having no business of their own, make it their Employment to invent Lies,
Stories, and Contradictions, to disturb the minds of the unthinking Vulgar --
but I hope, Sir, Men of your refined Thoughts give no Credit to 'em.


Courti. Thanks for the Complement, Sir.


Enter the Sharper in another Dress. Sharp. Gentlemen, set your Hearts at rest,
Mons is as certainly gone as Luxemburgh.


Courti. ( To the Citizen) Do You hear that, Sir, Do You hear that?


Citiz. Why I am not Deaf. But do you think I credit every flying idle Report?


Sharp. Sir, I came from a Gentleman just now, who had it from the Secretary's
Office, who heard my Lord -- affirm it, and I presume you Read the Gazette
yesterday, Sir.


Citiz. Yes, but I don't believe a word on it; and to assure you I do not, give
me Ten Guineas, Sir, and I Will enter into Bond to pay you Twenty Shillings a
week, every week while you live, during the time (the supposed taken) Mons
remains in the French Custody.


Charp. (Aside.) This is what I would have. Come, Sir, there is your Money. Now
I think I have bit him finely, the French don't use to part with their
Conquests so easily; this is as good as an Annuity for Life, come, Sir, if you
please we'll to the Scriveners.


Citiz. Not too hasty, Sir -- well, Sir, let me see you here tomorrow.

( Speaking to the Courtier.)
Courtier. I Will not fail to wait on you, Sir.


Sharp. Nor I neither.

Let Scraping Misers hoard up sordid Gains,
The best Estate is a large stock of Brains.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1691.


