ARTICLES Given by (...) and delivered to the Churchwardens to be considered,
and Answered in his Visitation holden in the year of our Lord God (...)

Whereunto the said Churchwardens and Sidemen are upon their Oaths to answer
truly and particularly.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for George Dawes at the Sign of the White Horse in Chancery
Lane, near Lincolns Inn. 1664.

THe Minister and Churchwardens are to call unto them the Neighbors of the
Parish, and out of them to make choice (according to the custom of the place)
of two of the discreetest Parishioners to be Sidemen; and they altogether are
to read over these Articles diverse times.

Then, after they have duly considered of them, they are to write their answer
or presentment unto every Article particularly and truly, according to their
consciences.

Lastly, they are all of them to bring their presentiments to the Visitation,
and there the Churchwardens and Sidemen upon their Oaths, but the Ministers,
according to the Canon in that behalf, are to deliver them up under their hands.

The Oath ministered to the Churchwardens, and Sworn men.
YOu shall swear, that all affection, favor, hatred, hope of reward and gain,
or fear of displeasure, or malice set aside: You shall upon due consideration
of the Articles given you in charge, present all and every such person, of or
within your Parish, as has committed any offense or fault, or made any default
mentioned in these, or any of these Articles: Or which are vehemently suspected
and defamed of any such offense, or default: wherein you shall deal uprightly,
and according to truth, neither of malice presenting any contrary to truth, nor
of corrupt affection, sparing to present any, and so conceal the truth: Having
in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeal to maintain truth,
and to suppress vice. So help you God, and by the Contents of this Book.

Concerning the Church, the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches Possessions.
IMprimis, Whether have you in your several Churches, and Chapels, the whole
Bible of the largest volume, and newest Translation, and the Book of
Common Prayer, lately set forth by Act of Parliament, both fairly and
substantially bound. A font of stone, set up in the ancient usual place: A
convenient and decent Communion Table, with a Carpet of silk, or some other
decent stuff, continually laid upon the same at time of Divine Service, and a
fair linen cloth thereon, at the time of receiving of the holy Communion. And
whether is the same Table placed in such convenient sort within the Chancel or
Church, as that the Minister may be best heard in his Prayer and
Administration: and that the greatest number may communicate? And whether it is
so used out of time of Divine Service, as is not agreeable to the holy use of
it, as by sitting on it, throwing hats on it, writing on it, or is it abused to
other prophaner uses: and are the ten Commandments set upon the East End of
your Church or Chapel, where the people may best see and read them, and other
sentences of holy Scripture, written on the walls likewise for that purpose?

2. Whether you have in your said Church or Chapel, a convenient seat for your
Minister to read Service in, together with a complete Pulpit set up in a
convenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same, a comely large
Surplice, a fair Communion-cup, with a Flagon of Silver, Tinn or Pewter, to put
the Wine in, whereby it may be set upon the Communion Table, at the time of the
blessing thereof, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the
celebration of Divine Service, and administration of the Sacraments? And
whether have you a strong Chest for Alms for the poor, with three Locks and
Keys, and another Chest for keeping the Books and Ornaments of the Church, and
the Register Book? And whether have you a Register Book in Parchment, for
Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and whether the same be kept in all points
according to the Canons in that behalf provided? And is the Mothers Christian
name therein Registered as well as the Fathers, and a transcript thereof brought
in yearly, within one month after the 25. of March unto the Lord Archbishop,
or Bishop of the Diocese his principal Register? And whether have you in your
Church or Chapel, a Table set, of the degrees wherein by Law men are
prohibited to marry?

3. Whether are your Church and Chapels, with the Chancells thereof, and your
Parsonage or Vicarage-house, your Almes-house and Church-house in good
reparations: and are they employed to godly, and their right holy uses: Is you
Church, Chancel, and Chapel decently and comely kept, as well within as
without, and the seats well maintained, according to the 85. Canon in that
behalf provided? Or have any Patrons or others decayed the Parsonage houses, or
keep a stipendary Priest or Curate, in place where an Incumbent should be
possessed? Whether is your Churchyard well fenced with walls, railes, or
pales, and by whom? and if not, in whose default the same is, and what the
defect or fault is? And whether any persons incroached upon the Ground of the
Churchyard, or whether any person or persons, have used any thing or place
consecrated to holy use, profanely or wickedly?

4. Is your Church or Chapel decently paved, and is your Churchyard well and
orderly kept without abuse? Are the bones of the dead decently interred, or
laid up in some fit place as beseems Christians? And is the whole consecrated
ground kept from Swine, and all other nastiness, as becomes the place so
dedicated?

5. Whether have you the Terrier of all the Gleab-land, Meadows, Gardens,
Orchards, Houses, Stocks, Implements, Tenements and portions of Tithes (whether
within your Parish, or without) belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, taken
by the view of honest men in your said Parish? And whether the said Terrier be
laid up in the Bishops Registry, and in whose hands any of them are now? And if
you have no Terrier already made in Parchment, you the Churchwardens and
Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his absence with your
Minister, are to make diligent inquiry and presentment of the several
particulars following, and make, subscribe and sign the said Terrier as
aforesaid.

1. How many several parcels of Gleab-land do you know, or have you credibly
heard to belong unto your Rectory, Church, Parsonage, Vicarage, etc. and by
what names are they, (or any of them) commonly called and known; And what
yearly Rent have you known, or heard to have been paid unto the Parson, Vicar,
or to his or their assigns, for every, or any of the said parcels?

2. In whose occupation are the said parcells at this present? How much does
each parcel contain by measure of the 16. foot pole? How is each parcel Butted
on every part? And who is to repair the Fences on each side thereof?

Concerning the Clergy.
WHether does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate distinctly and reverently say
Divine Service upon Sundays and Holy Days, and other holy days appointed to
be observed by the Book of Common Prayer, as Wednesdayes and Fridayes, and the
Eves of every Sunday and Holy Day, at fit and usual times? And does he duly
observe the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the said New Book of
Common Prayer; as well in reading public Prayers as the Letany, as also in
administering the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimony, visiting the sick,
burying the dead, Churching of women, and all other the Rites and Offices of
the Church, in such manner and form as in the said Book of Common Prayer he is
enjoined without any omission or addition? And does he read the Book of the
last Canons yearly, and wear a Surpllice according to the said Canons?

2. Does your Minister bid Holy Days and Fasting days, as by the Book of
Common Prayer is appointed? And does he give warning beforehand to the
Parishioners, for the receiving of the holy Communion, as the two and twentieth
Canon requires, and whether he does administer the holy Communion so often,
and at such times, as that every Parishioner may receive the same, at the least
thrice in every year: whereof once at Easter, as by the Book of Common Prayer
is appointed? And does your Minister receive the same himself, on every day
that he administreth it to others? and use the words of institution according
to the Book at every time that the Bread and Wine is renewed, accordingly as by
the proviso of the 21 Canon is directed? And does he deliver the Bread and Wine
to every Communicant severally, and kneeling? Whether he has admitted to the
holy Communion any notorious Offender or Schismatic, contrary to the 26. and
27. constitutions, or put any from the Communion, who are not publicly
infamous for any notorious crime? Does he use the sign of the Cross in Baptism,
or baptize in any basin, or other Vessel, and not in the usual Font? or admit
any Father to be Godfather to his own child, or such who have not received the
holy Communion, or baptize any children that were not born in the parish, or
wilfully refuse to baptize any Infant in his parish, being in danger, having
been informed of the weakness of the said child: and whether the Child dies
through his default without Baptism?

3. Whether has your Minister married any without a Ring, or without Banes
published three several Sundays or Holy Days in time of Divine Service, in
the several Churches or Chapels of their several abode according to the Book
of Common Prayer, or in times prohibited, albeit the Banes were thrice
published, without a License or Dispensation from the Archbishop, the Bishop
of the Diocese, or his Chancellor, first obtained in that behalf? Or not
betwixt the hours of eight and twelve in the forenoon, or have married any in
any private house, or if the parties be under the age of 21. years, before
their Parents or Governors have signified their consent unto them?

4. Does he refuse to bury any, which ought to be interred in Christian burial,
or defer the same longer then he should, or bury any in Christian buririal,
which by the constitutions of the Church of England, or Laws of the Land, ought
not to be so interred?

5. Is your Minister a Preacher allowed by license from the Bishop?

6. Does your Minister (being licensed) preach usually according to the Canons,
either in his own Cure, or in some other Church or Chapel near adjoining,
where no other Preacher is, and how often he has been negligent in that
behalf, and does Preach standing, and with his hat off? Or whether does he or
his Curate upon every Sunday, when there is no Sermon, read an Homily, or some
part thereof, or Catechize the yongar sort, according as he ought to do? or in
case he be not licensed to Preach, does he take upon him to Preach or expound
the Scriptures in his own Cure, or elsewhere? If so, then you are to present
the same, the time and place, when and where he did it.

7. Does your Minister use to pray for the Kings Majesty, King Charles, and for
the Queens Majesty, and all the Royal Progeny, with addition of such Style and
Titles as are due to their Hignesses, and exhort the people to obedience to his
Majesty, and all Magistrates in authority under him: And does he also pray for
all Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical persons?

8. Is your Minister constantly resident unto his Benefice, and how long time
has he been absent, and in case he be licensed to be absent, whether does he
cause his Cure to be sufficiently supplied according to the Canons? Or in case
he has another Benefice, whether does he supply his absence by a Curate,
sufficiently licensed to preach in that Cure where he himself is not resident?
Or otherwise in case the smallness of the living cannot find a preaching
Minister, does he preach at both his Benefices usually?

9. Does your Minister or Curate every Sunday or Holy day, before
Evening-Prayer, for half an hour or more examine and instruct the youth and
ignorant persons of his Parish in the ten Commandments, Articles of the Belief,
and in the Lords Prayer, and the Sacraments, according as it is prescribed in
the Catechism, set forth in the book of Common Prayer only? And if he do not,
where is the fault, either in the Parents and Masters of the children, or in
the Curare neglecting his duty? And is he careful to tender all such youth of
his Parish as have been well instructed in their Catechism to be confirmed by
the Bishop in his Visitation, or any other convenient time, as is appointed by
the book aforesaid?

10. Does your Minister in the Rogation days, go in perambulation of the
circuit of the Parish, saying and using the prayers, suffrages and thanksgiving
to God, appointed by Law, according to his duty, thanking God for his
blessings, if there be plenty on the earth: Or otherwise to pray for his grace
and favor, if there be a fear of scarcity?

11. Has your Minister admitted any Woman gotten with child in adultery or
fornication, to be Churched without license of the Ordinary?

12. Has your Minister or any other Preacher, Baptized children, Churched any
Woman, or Ministered the holy Communion in any private house, otherwise then by
Law is allowed?

13. Does your Minister carefully look to the relief of the poor, and from time
to time call upon his Parishoners to give somewhat as they can spare to godly
and charitable uses, especially when they make their Testaments?

14. Does your Minister use such decency and comeliness in his apparel, as by
the 47 Canon is enjoined? is he of sober behavior, and one that does not use
such bodily labor, as it is not seemly for his function and calling?

15. When any person has been dangerously sick in your Parish, has he
neglected to visit him, and when any have been parting out of this life, has
he omitted to do his last dury in that behalf?

16. Does your Minister, Curate, or Lecturer, in his or their Sermons deliver
such doctrine as tends to obedience, and the edifying of their Auditory in
Faith and Religion, without intermedling with matters of State, not fit to be
handled in the Pulpit, but to be discussed by the wisdom of his Majesty and his
Council? And if you find any fault herein, you shall present them.

Schoolmasters.
1. Does any in your Parish openly or privately take upon him to teach School
without a license of the Ordinary, and is he conformable to the Religion now
established? And does he bring his Scholars to the Church, to hear Divine
Service and Sermons? And does he instruct his Scholars in in the grounds of
the Religion now established in this Church of England, and is he careful and
diligent to benefit his Scholars in learning?

2. Does your Schoolmaster teach and instruct his youth in any other Catechism
than is allowed by public Authority? And what Catechism is it that he so
teaches?

3. Is any Living or means given toward the erection or maintenance of any
School withheld back, or otherwise employed, and by whom?

4. Does any keep School in the Chancel or Church, by which means that holy
place and the Communion Table are many ways profaned, and the windows broken?

Parish Clerks and Sextons.
1. HAve you a fit Parish Clerk, aged twenty years at least, of honest
conversation, able to read and write? Whether are his and the Sextons wages
paid without fraud, according to the custom of your Parish? if not, then by
whom are they so defrauded and denied? by whom are they chosen? and whether the
said Clerk be approved by the Ordinary? And has he taken an Oath, as in such
cases is fit and required? and is he diligent in his Office, and serviceable to
the Minister, and does he take upon him to meddle with any thing above his
Office, as Churching of Women, burying the dead, or such like?

2. Does your Clerk or Sexton keep the Church clean, the doors locked at fit
times? Is any thing lost or spoiled in the Church, through his default? Are the
Communion Table, Font, Books, and other Ornaments of the Church kept fair and
clean? Does he suffer any unseasonable Ringing, or any profane exercise in
your Church? Or does he (when any is passing out of this life) neglect to toll
a bell, having notice thereof?

Concerning the Parishioners.
1. Whether any of your Parishioners, being sixteen years of age or upwards,
or others lodging or commonly resorting to any house within your Parish, do
absent themselves from your Parish Church, upon Sundays or Holidays at
Morning and Evening Prayer? Or who come late to Church, and depart from Church
before Service be done upon the said days? Or who do not reverently behave
themselves during the time of Divine Service, devoutly kneeling, when the
general confession of sins, the Letany, the ten Commandments, and all Prayers
and Coflects are read, and standing up when the Articles of the Belief are
read; or who do cover their heads in the Church during the time of Divine
Service, unless it be in case of necessity, in which case they may wear a
Nightcap or Coife? Or who do give themselves to babbling, talking, or walking,
and are not attentive to hear the Word preached, or read? Whether any of your
Parish, being of sixteen years of age and upwards, do not receive the holy
Communion in your Church thrice every year: whereof once at Easter, and whether
you do not devoutly kneel at the receiving thereof? And whether any having
diverse houses of remove, do shift from place to place of purpose to defeat the
performance of their Christian duties in that behalf?

2. Whether any of your Parishioners being admonished thereof, do not send
their Children, Servants and Apprentices to the Minister, to be Catechized upon
such Sundays and Holydaies as are appointed? Or whether any of them do refuse
to come; or if they come, refuse to learn those instructions set forth in the
Book of Common Prayer?

3. Whether any of your Parish do entertain within their house any sojourner,
common guests, or other persons, who refuse to frequent Divine Service, or
receive the holy Communion, as aforesaid? present their names, their qualities,
or conditions.

4. What Recusant Papists are there in your Parish, or other Sectaries? present
their names, qualities, or conditions. Whether they keep any Schoolmaster in
their house, which comes not to Church to hear Divine-Service, and receive
the Communion? What is his Name, and how long has he taught there, or
elsewhere?

5. Whether any of the said Popish Recusants, or other Schismatics, do labor
to seduce and withdraw other from the Religion now established? Or instruct
their families or children in Popish Religion: or refuse to entertain any,
especially in place of greatest service, or trust, but such as concur with them
in their opinions?

6. How long have the said Popish Recusants abstained from Divine Service, or
from the Communion, as aforesaid?

7. Whether have you any in your Parish, which heretofore being Popish
Recusants or Sectaries, have since reformed themselves, and come to Church to
hear Divine Service, and receive the Sacraments? If yea, then who are they? And
how long since have they so reformed themselves? And whether they still remain
and abide in that conformity?

8. Is there any in your Parish that refuse to have their children Baptized, or
themselves to receive the Communion at the hands of your Minister, taking
exception against him, and what causes or exceptions do they allege? or have
any married Wives refused to come to Church, according to the Book of
Common Prayer, to give God thanks after their childbirth, for their safe
deliverance; And whether do any of, or in your Parish, refuse to have their
children Baptized in your Parish Church, according to the form prescribed in
the Book of Common Prayer?

9. Do any of your Parish usually go to other Parish-Churches to hear Divine
Service or Sermons? Or do they communicate, or Baptize their Children in any
other Parish?

10. Whether there be any in your Parish who will come to hear the Sermon, but
will not come to public prayers appointed by the Book of Common Prayer, making
a Schism or division (as it were) between the use of public prayer and
preaching?

11. Has any person in your Parish quarrelled, or stricken, or used any
violence to your Minister, or have stricken or quarrelled with any other person
within your Church or Churchyard, or demeaned himself disorderly in the
Church, by filthy or profane talk, or any other base or immodest behavior? Or
has disturbed the Minister in the time of Divine Service or Sermon, or has
libelled or spoken slanderous words against your Minister to the scandal of his
vocation, or defamed any of his Neighbors, touching any crime of
Ecclesiastical Cognizance?

12. Whether any person in your Parish, do exercise any Trade or labor, buy or
sell, or keep open Shops or Warehouses upon any Sunday by themselves, their
servants, or Apprentices, or have otherwise profaned the said days, contrary
to the Orders of the Church of England? And whether there be any Innkeepers,
Ale-house-keepers, Victuallers, or other persons, that permit any persons in
their Houses, to eat, drink, or play, during the time of Divine Service or
Sermon, or reading the Homilies in the forenoon or afternoon, upon those days?

13. Whether the fif^h day of November, be kept holy, and thanksgiving made to
God, for his Majesty's and this States happy deliverance, according to the
Ordinance in that behalf? And the 30th. of January be kept as a day of
humiliation for the murdering of King Charles the Martyr?

14. Whether any of your Parish hold or frequent any Conventicles or private
Congregations, or make or maintain any constitutions, agreed upon in any such
Assemblies? Or any that do write, or publicly or privately speak against the
Book of Common Prayer, or any thing therein contained, or against any of the
Articles of Religion agreed upon, in Anno 1562. or against the Kings Supremacy
in causes Ecclesiastical, or against the Oath of Supremacy, or of Allegiance,
pretending the same to be unlawful and not warrantable by the Word of God? Or
against any of the Rites or Ceremonies of the Church of England, now
established? Or against the Government of the Church of England under the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and
other Officers of the same: affirming that the same is repugnant to the Word of
God, and that the said Ecclesiastical Officers, are not lawfully ordained? Or
whether there be any Authors, Maintainers, or Favorers of Heresy or Schism,
or that be suspected to be Anabaptists, Libertines, Brownists, of the Family of
Love, or any other Heresy or Schism? present their names.

15. Whether any in your Parish have married within the degrees by Law
prohibited, and where, and by whom? And whether any couple in your Parish being
lawfully married, live apart one from the other, without due separation by the
Law, or any that have been divorced, which keep company with any other at Bed
or at Board?

16. Whether do any persons administer the goods of the dead without lawful
authority, or suppress the last Will of the dead? Or are there in your Parish
any Wills not yet proved, or goods of the dead (dying intestate) left
unadministred, by authority in that behalf? You shall not fail to present the
Executors and all other faulty therein.

17. Whether any withold the Stock of the Church, or any goods or other
things, given to good and charitable uses?

18. Whether your Hospitals and Almshouses, and other such houses and
Corporations, founded to good and charitable uses, and the Lands, Possessions
and Goods of the same, be ordered and disposed of as they should be? And do the
Masters, Governors, Fellows, and others of the said Houses and Corporations,
behave and demean themselves according to the Ordinances and Statutes, of their
several foundations?

19. Whether have you any in your Parish to your knowledge, or by common fame
or report, which have committed Adultery, Fornication, or Incest, or any which
has impudently bragged or boasted, that he or they have lived incontinently
with any person or persons whatsoever: or any have attempted the chastity of
any Woman, or solicited any Woman to have the carnal knowledge of her body; or
which are commonly reputed to be common Drunkards, Blasphemers of Gods holy
Name, common Swearers, common Slanderers of their Neighbors, and sowers of
Discord, filthy and lascivious Talkers, Usurpers, Symonical Persons, Bawds or
Harborers of Women with child, which be unmarried, or conveying, or suffering
them to go away before they have made satisfaction to the Church; or any that
have heretofore been presented, or suspected of any the aforesaid crimes, have
for that cause departed the Parish, and are not returned again? or any which
have used any Enchantments, Sorceries, Incantations, or Witchcrafts, which are
not made Felony by the Statutes of this Realm, or any which have committed any
perjury in any Ecclesiastical Court in an Ecclesiastical cause, or which have
committed any forgery, punishable by the Ecclesiastical Laws, and the procurors
and abettors of the said offenses? you shall truly present the names of all,
and singular the said offenders, and with whom they have committed the said
offenses, in case they have not been publicly punished to your knowledge for
the said crimes.

Physicians, Chirurgions, and Midwives.
HOw many Physicians, Chirurgions, or Midwives, have you in your Parish? How
long have they used their several Sciences or Offices, and by what authority?
And how have they demeaned themselves therein, and of what skill are they
accounted to be in their profession? And whether have they license from the
Ordinary or Chancellor for to practice?

Touching the Churchwardens and Sidemen.
1. Whether you and the Churchwardens, Quest-men, or Sidemen, from time to
time, do, and have done their diligence, in not suffering any idle person to
abide either in the Churchyard, or Church Porch, in Service, or Sermon-time,
but causing them either to come into the Church to hear Divine Service, or to
depart, and not disturb such as be hearers there? And whether they have, and
you do diligently see the Parishoners duly resort to the Church every Sunday
and Holiday, and there to remain during Divine Service and Sermon? And whether
you or your predecessors, Churchwardens there, suffer any plays, feasts,
drinkings, or any other profane usages, to be kept in your Church, Chapel, or
Churchyards, or have suffered to your and their uttermost power and endeavor,
any person or persons to lie tippling or drinking in any Inn or
Victualling-house in your Parish, during the time of Divine Service or Sermon,
on Sundays and Holydaies?

2. Whether, and how often have you admitted any to preach within your Church
or Chapel, which was not sufficiently licensed? And whether you together with
your Minister, have not taken diligent heed and care, that every Parishioner
being of sixteen years of age or upwards, have received thrice every year as
aforesaid: and also that no stranger have usually come to your Church, from
their own Parish Church?

3. Whether have there been provided against every Communion, a sufficient
quantity of fine white bread, and good and wholesome wine for the Communicants
that shall receive? And whether that wine be brought in a clean and sweet
standing pot of pewter, or of other purer metal?

4. Whether were you chosen by the consent of the Minister and the
Parishioners? And have the late Churchwardens given up a just account for
their time, and delivered to their successors by Bill indented the money, and
other things belonging to the Church which was in their hands? And are the
Alms of the Church faithfully distributed to the use of the poor?

5. Whether do you see the names of all Preachers which are strangers and
preach in your Parish-Churches, to be noted in a book for that purpose, and
whether every Preacher do subscribe his name, and of whom he had his License?

6. Whether any man do trouble or molest you for doing your duties?

7. Whether there be any Legacies withholden, given to the Church or poor
people, or to the mending of Highways, or otherwise by the Testators: In
whose hands it is, by whom it was given, and by whom it is withholden?

8. Do you know any thing that has been complained of, that is not redressed?

FINIS.

