ARTICLES Stipulated and Required FROM OLD NICK, BY The Duke of L -- A Person
of great QUALITY IN FRANCE, When he Resigned and made himself over TO THE DEVIL.

Translated from the FRENCH.

LONDON: Printed in the YEAR 1680.

ARTICLES Stipulated and required from Old NICK, etc.
MEeting in French with this strange and wonderful Contract made with the
Devil, I resolved to Translate it, to show the world the Wickedness of Man,
when he is given up to Pride and Ambition.

The ARTICLES are as follows
I. That thou shall give me down upon the nail, One Hundred Thousand Livres in
ready Money, and one Thousand Livres every first Tuesday of the several Months
in the Year. II. That the gold and Silver thou deliverest to me, shall be
current, and of the standing value; and that it shall turn to the profit of my
self, and of all those (whether Men or Women) to whom I shall give it, either
upon the account of business, or as Gifts and Gratuities. III. That come from
whence it will, it be coined by the hands of men; and that it pass and be
current in what Country soever I shall have occasion to be. IV. That thou
shall give me power to find and carry away Treasures, and to dispose of 'em as
I shall think fit; without being obliged to go upon the place. V. That thou
shall carry me whithersoever I have a mind to go, and that thou shall preserve
me in good and perfect health, during the space of 49 Years: And if in the mean
time I fall sick, thou shall provide Medicines for my Cure. VI. That the Years
be according to the Account of France, that is to say, that they consist of
twelve Months, the Month of thirty and thirty one Days, and the Days of twenty
four Hours; to commence this present (...) day of (...) in the Year 1675. and
so forth to continue until the same day of the same Month, in the Year 1725.
And that then thou shall suffer me to dye without scandal, and according to the
course of Nature. VII. That thou shall cause me to be beloved of the King, the
Nobility and Gentry, and generally of all both great and small, of the one as
well as other Sex. VIII. That if it happen that the King (notwithstanding his
Majesty's gracious Favor toward me) shall deny me any thing that may tend to
my interest or Promotion, by the suggestion of any Favorite or Favorites that
intend to vie with me, or if I shall have any inclination of favor a party
contrary to the will of my King, That then I shall be furnished with all the
Abilities and good dispositions, all the means and opportunities that lie in
thy power, for overturning the Government, and shaking the State into
confusion; and that with the love and applause of the People, and without the
privacy of all, but only of my prime Agents, whom thou shall inspire, and
fitly qualify for bringing about such Revoiutions: That in such a Plot I may
be suspected by none, but by those who (to their sorrow) shall not be able to
prevent me, (which will render my malice of sweeter gusto.) And that when all
things are brought into the confusion thou most delightest in, that then thou
shall assist me to fish in troubled waters, and to bring off the Prize that
others may strive for. X. That thou shall learn me the Art of Poisoning. XI.
That thou shall carry me into what Country I shall desire, and make me
understand the Language and Huomour of the place, so as to speak and act
without an Interpreter. XII. That thou shall preserve me from all sorts of
Accidents that might befall me; and likewise from all forts of Firearms, as
Bombs, Canon, Mortar-pieces, Grenades, Muskets, Firelocks, Pistols, and all
other sorts whatsoever; as also from the Sword, Dagger, Pike, Quarter-staff,
and all kind of Arms in general, rendering me every way invulnerable. XIII. That
I shall triumph over the Enemies of the Public, and my own private concerns.
XIV. That thou shall give me a Ring, which whenever put on any one of my
singers, shall render me Invisible. XV. That whatsoever question I ask, thou
shall always give me a true and faithful Answer; and that as often as I shall
call thee, thou shall appear in a decent and gentle shape. XVI. That when I
play at any Game, I shall always come off a winner. XVII. That thou shall give
me notice of all Plots and Contrivances against me, and afford me means to
prevent the same. XVIII. That if in any place I be set upon, thou shall always
be the first that comes to my assistance. XIX. That thou shall give me Wit to
talk pertinently on all subjects, and confidence to tell lies when I think it
convenient. XX. That thou shall hinder me from being Robbed, either by my
Servants at home, or others abroad, in any place whatsoever. XXI. That thou
shall give me the Universal Medicine, and tell me the Dose that is to be taken
of it. XXII. That thou shall hinder all persons, of what Sex or Quality soever,
from touching this present Covenant, whether it be to read, or carry it away.
XXIII. That thou shall allow me to exercise the Duties of a good Christian,
that I may be free from scandal, and under the wings of the Church procure its
overthrow. XXIV. That I shall engage all sorts of persons, both of the one and
other Sex, without any contradiction or reluctance. XXV. That thou shall enable
me not to disappoint any Female, who shall trust to my performances. XXVI. That
thou shall teach me all Languages and Sciences in twice twenty four hours.
XXVII. That thou shall preserve me from all Courts of Justice, whether Regal,
Papal, or subordinate. XXVIII. That I shall be dextrous at all such bodily
Exercises I shall name to thee. XXIX.That thou shall give me the Herb that
helps Memory, and that it be useful to my self and all Men and Women to whom
I shall give it. XXX. That if thou fail in the performance of any the least
thing contained in this present Covenant, that then it shall be void and of no
effect, as if the same had never been made or agreed upon.
FINIS.

