ARTICLES OF AGREEMENTS, Made, and concluded the 11th. day of January, 1651.

By and between the Commissioners of the Right Honorable, the Lord WILLOUGHBY
of Parrham, on the one Part: And the Commissioners in the behalf of the
COMMONWEALTH of England, on the other Part.

Being in order to the Rendition of the Island OF BARBADOS. etc.

LONDON, Prited for Francis Coals, in the Old-Bayly, 1652.

Articles of Agreement, etc.
THat a Liberty of Conscience in matters of Religion be allowed to all,
excepting to such whose tenants are inconsistent to a Civil Government; and
that the Laws be put in execution against Atheism, Blasphemy, and open
scandalous livers. And that no Minister be deprived, except upon scandalous
livings, seditious Preaching, or unsound Doctrine sufficiently proved against
him.

2. That the Courts of Justice shall still continue, and all Judgments and
Orders therein be valid, until they be reversed by due form of Laws.

3. That no Taxes, Customs, Impost, Loanes, or Excise shall be laid, nor Levies
made on any the Inhabitants of this Island without their free consent in a
general Assembly.

4. That no man shall be imprisoned, or put out of his possession of Lands and
Tenements, which he has by any former Warrant or title derived from it, or
other goods or Chattel whatsoever, without due proceedings according to the
known and Common Laws of England, and Statutes, and Customs of this Island, in
the Courts of Justice here first had, and Judgment from the same obtained,
and execution from thence awarded.

5. That all Suite betwixt party and party, and criminal and Common Pleas be
determined here, and none be compelled to go into England to assert and defend
their titles to any estate which they have here, without the Consent of the
general Assembly.

6. That an Act of Indemnity be with all convenient speed passed in the
Parliament of England, to save and keep harmless, and unquestionable all and
every the Inhabitants of this Island that are comprised in these Articles, for
and concerning any Act or thing whatsoever done by them, or any of them, at any
time, or in any place; or words spoken by them or any of them before the date
of these Articles. And that ye be cleared, acquitted, and discharged thereof for
ever as well in respect of the public power, as of any particular person
concerning damages, or loss which they have received by reason of the present
differences: and until the said Act come hither, an instrument of Indemnity
may be received into the Assembly here, and filed among the Records, and that
it be represented by Sir GEORGE AISCOUGH and the Commissioners to the
Parliament of England, or the Council of State, established by Authority of
Parliament. That an Act made the third day of October, whereby the Inhabitants
of this Island have been declared Traitors, may upon this accord be taken off
the File from among the Records.

7. That all and every the Inhabitants of this Island, comprised within chese
Articles, be restored to all their Lands and Possessions, Goods and Moneys
which they have right to in England, Scotland, and Ireland.

8. That no Oaths, Covenants, and Engagements whatsoever, be imposed upon the
Inhabitants of this Island; who receive the benefit of these Articles against
their Consciences.

9. That all Port Towns and Cities under the Parliaments power shall be open
to the Inhabitants of this Island, in as great freedom of Trade as ever, and
that no Companies be placed over them; and that all Trade be free with all
Nations that do Trade, or are in amity with England; nor the Commodities of the
Island be engrossed into private men's hands.

10. That whereas the Excise upon strong Liquors was laid for the payment of
Public Debts, and other public uses, It is therefore agreed, that the Lord
WILLOUGHBY of Parrham, and all employed by him and all other Persons
whatsoever, shall be acquitted and discharged from the payment of any Public
Debts, and that the same be discharged by the said Excise, and to such other
ways is the general Assembly shall seem fit, provided that Care and respect
be therein had to such as have eminently suffered in their estates.

11. That all persons be free at any time to transport themselves and estates
when they shall think fit, first setting up their names according to the
custom of this Island.

12. That all Prisoners on both sides be discharged and set free, whatsoever,
with the full benefit of enjoying all these Articles; and that all Horses,
Cattle, Servants, Negro's, and other Goods be restored to their right owners,
except such servants as had freedom given them, and came aboard before
Saturday the 3. of January.

13. That such particular persons as are within this Island, together with Sir
SIDENHAM POYNES, who have Estates in Antegoa, may peacably return thither, and
there enjoy the benefit of all these Articles.

14. That for a certain time all Executions be stopped; sufficient caution
being given, that at the expiration of it payment be made, and that the
Commissioners, together with the general Assembly, be Judges of the time and
Caution.

15. That the three small Vessels or Barques, now on ground before the Bridge
Town, do remain to their proper owners, and have liberty to go to any Port
laden.

16. That the Lord WILLOUGHBY of Parrham have all his Lands, Rents, or Estates
whatsoever, real or personal in England, without any Fine or Composition
paid, restored to him or his Assigns, free from all encumbrances laid on the
same by the Parliament of England, or any by them Authorized since the time of
the first seizure or sequestration: And that what settlement the said Lord
WILLOUGHBY of Parrham has made at Sorrenham, and any other he shall make on
any part or the maine of Guinea, shall be by him enjoyed, and kept without any
disturbance of either himself, or those that shall accompany him thither, and
that he have free liberty to bring servants from any Port in England, or
Ireland; and that his Plantation at Antegoa, according to the bounds already
laid out, be reserved to him: and that whatsoever estate of right does belong
to the said Lord WILLOUGHBY of Parrham in this Island of Barbados be to him
entirely preserved.

17. That all such persons of this Island, for all which whose Estates have
been sequestered or detained from them upon this public difference, be
forthwith restored to their Plantations, Goods, or Estates in the Island.

18. That the Islands of Barbados, with all the Forts, Sconces, and
Fortifications thereof, and all the Artillery, all Public Arms and Ammunition
be delivered into the hands of Sir GEORGE AISCU^ for the use of the States of
ENGLAND, before Monday twelve of the Clock at Noone, being the twelfth of this
instant January, and that no Garrisons be kept here, but that all Forces shall
be disbanded within twenty four hours after the sealing of these Articles,
and that for the safety of this Island the Militia shall be disposed of as to
the present Commissioners and future Governors shall seem fit, this Article
not to be construed to take away the private Arms of any particular person
within this Island.

19. That the Government of this Island be by a Governor, Council, and
Assembly, according to the ancient and usual Custom here, that the Governors
be appointed by the State of ENGLAND, and from time to time received and obeyed
here, the Council for the present to be by him chosen, the Assembly to be
chosen by a free and voluntary Election of the Freeholders of this Island in
the several Parishes, and that the usual Custom of the choice of the
Council be Represented by the Commissioners to the Parliament of ENGLAND, or
to the Council of State established by the Authority of Parliament, with the
desires of the Inhabitants for the Reformation thereof for the future.

20. And whereas it has been taken into consideration, that the main and
chief cause of the late Troubles and Miseries have grown by loose, base, and
uncivil Language tending to Sedition and Division, too commonly used among
many people here. It is therefore further agreed, that at the next General
Assembly a strict Law be made against all such persons, with an heavy penalty
to be inflicted upon them that shall be guilty of any reviling Speeches of what
nature soever, by remembering or raveling into former differences, and
reproaching any man with the Cause he formerly defended.

21. It is agreed that these Articles may with all convenient speed be
presented to the Parliament of ENGLAND, to be by them ratified and affirmed to
all Intents, Constructions, and Purposes.

22. It is further agreed that all Laws heretofore made by the General
Assembly that are not repugnant to the Laws of ENGLAND shall be good,
excepting such as concern the present Differences.

23. That the Right Honorable, the Lord WILLOUGHBY of PARHAM have free Liberty
to go into ENGLAND, and there to stay or depart at his pleasure, without having
any Oath or Engagement put upon him; he acting or attempting nothing
prejudicial to the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

Tho. Muddeford. John Colleton. Daniel Searles. Mich. Pack.


FINIS.

