AN ACCOUNT OF THE Solemn Funeral AND INTERRMENT OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE The
COUNTESS of ARRAN, As it was lately sent in a Letter or Narrative from DVBLIN.

Bearing Date, Aug. 12. 1688.

In the SAVOY. Printed by Tho. Newcombe, 1668.

DUBLIN; August 21. 1668.
THough we have not much News stiring here, the Vigilance of Our Governor, so
generally beloved, and Our own Inclinations disposing us to Quietness and
Peace, yet we grow every day more and more sensible of the Loss of the most
excellent and incomparable young Lady the Countess of Arran; a Loss so General,
as that it has not only drowned that Noble Family (which had the Honor of
Her Relation) in Mourning and Tears, but all who had the happiness to know
her, in a very General Lamentation: And, truly, as it has pleased God to take
her to himself, so there has not been wanting any Evidences of Honor to her
Memory: And really her Funeral has been performed with much Grandeur and
Magnificence, suitable to the high Extraction and Relation of the Deceased Lady;
so that I take it to be a piece of Justice to give you as particular an Account
thereof as my own Observation could reach.

The Body, after Embalming, was removed from Chapel Izod, where for some days
it lay in Blacks, to a fair new House in Dammas-Street in Dublin, built by the
late Lord Chancellor Eustace, which was thus fitted for its Reception.

The Passage from the Great Gate, the large Common Hall, and all other Rooms
below Stairs, and the great Stairecase, were adorned with Blacks and
Scutcheons; above Stairs there were five fair Rooms hung with Scutcheons and
Black-cloath from top to bottom, the largest whereof (being the Antechamer to
the State) was spread with a Foot-cloth of Black-Bayes of about six foot wide,
leading directly from the Entrance into the State; on the righthand of the
State a large Passage-Roome hung with fine Black cloth, adorned with
Scutcheons, and Back Stairs hung with Black and Scutcheons for Persons to go
away to prevent Disorder, where so great Resort of Company came.

The Room wherein the State lay, was hung with me Black Cloth, the very Roof
and Floor all of Black.

Over the Head of the Body there was erected a Noble Canopy, Cushions,
Footstool, and Chair of State of Black Velvet, the Canopy adorned with several
Scutcheons, and a Majesty Scutcheon within it over the Chair, with Supporters,
in form of a Lozeng. The ground was raised upon which the Corpse lay, upon the
head whereof on a Velvet Cushion was placed a Coronet, upon the Body a Rich
Pall of Velvet adorned with Scutcheons upon each side the Body; and on the
ascent were placed three Banner-Rolls, and at the Feet the Great Banner and
Pennon, within them ten black Stands with Silver Candlesticks, and Virgin-wax
Tapers. These all had a Rail without covered with Black to keep off the Crowd;
at each Banner-Roll stood constantly a Gentlewoman attendant, and further off
several Ladies of Quality paid their Respects; The whole Room, which was fair
and high was enlightened with a noble fair silver Branch, and several carved
Scenes of the same mettle with wax Tapers, and in all the other Rooms stood a
great number of Gentlemen in deep mourning, who in a decent respectful silence
gave reception to those that came to view that solemnity, which was visited by
all of Quality, besides multitudes of people which daily resorted thither.

After a months thus lying in State, upon the 17th of August instant, the Body
proceeded toward the City of Kilkenny, after this form, to the best of my
observation.

First, two Servants conductors with black Staves on Horseback; then above
sixty Servants all in black, ranckt in order according to their Quality: after
these an Ensign of Honor; then the Gentry and Nobility related, in deep
mourning: after them, followed the great Banner, born by an Earls Son a
Relation; then the Steward and Comptroller with their Staves; then the
Chaplains; then one of the Officers of Arms, with the Cushion and Coronet, on
his left hand the Countesses Gentleman Usher.

After these followed the principal Officer of Arms alone; then the Body
carried in a Hearse of black Velvet, richly adornd with Shields, Scutchions,
Pencils and Plumes, drawn by six Horses covered with black, and adorned with
Scutchions, the Hearse surrounded with the Banners, carried by six persons, the
meanest whereof was a Knight: upon the Hearse there did attend eight Coaches in
mourning; after them near eighty Coaches, whereof the greater part had six
Horses apiece.

These by the diligence of the Officers, without any disorder or confusion, did
decently pass through the City toward Kilkenny, the Gentlemen of the Country
in large Bodies, meeting it upon the Road, most of them being in Mourning. The
want of Accommodation upon the way for so great a Train, and of Houses fit for
the Reception of that noble personages Body, forced them to pitch up several
Tents, in one of the largest whereof hung Scutchions and black; the Hearse was
lodged, attended by Gentlemen in Mourning, wherein there were several
Apartments for the Gentlewomen in Mourning, guarded by some of the Royal
Regiment designed for that service without.

Upon Wednesday the 19th. instant, the day appointed for the solemn interrment,
the Corpse was lodged as before in a fair large field, within two miles of
Kilkenny, where at the hour appointed there was a very noble appearance of
persons of Quality, and of Gentry from many remote parts of this Kingdom. These
being formally drawn into order by the chief Officer of Arms, did afford a
very solemn, though a sad prospect.

The chief Mourner was the Countess of Ossory, who with the rest of the Ladies
in their Coaches to the number of ten mourning Coaches, and about 50 more most
of six Horses apiece followed the Hearse, all the men being on Horseback
before, whereof there were about five hundred in black. There were present one
Archbishop, one Marquess, twelve Earls and Viscounts, four Bishops, six
Barons, besides Noblemens younger sons, Baronets, Knights, Esquires, and
Gentlemen, a great number, all in mourning.

When they came within the precinct of St. Kennies Church, all allighted
without confusion, as before, the chief Mourner being supported by the Marquess
of Antrim and the Lord John Butler, a Gentleman going bare before on the left
hand of the Officer of Arms, and the Pall was supported by those who were
Brothers, or Brothers in Law to my Lord Lieutenant.

When they came to consecrated Ground, they were met by the Bishop of Ossory,
with many of the Clergy of his Diocese, together with the Dean of Christchurch,
and his whole Choyre, which waited upon the Hearse from Dublin, for the more
solemn performance of Divine Service, and from the great West-gate, began their
Anthem. The Church we found hung with Scutchions and black, and at the East end
was erected a sumptuous Hearse of Velvit, richly adorned with Shields,
Scutchions, and other glorious devices which pass my Heraldry to express.

The Office of Interrment was performed by the Bishop, and the Body of that
sweet Lady reposed in a fair Valut wherein the Ancestors of the noble house of
Ormond did rest; and though the malice of the late Rebellion did utterly deface
and pull down as rich a Monument as this Kingdom, or perhaps most others could
parallel, yet we despair not of another in a little time, since there is so
rich a Treasure committed to the custody of that Vault; and since there are
such alive, whom God long preserve, who leave undone nothing which befits the
memory of that noble Lady or themselves.

After the divine Service and Anthems (which were very solemnly and skilfully
performed) and the office of Interrment past, the Officer at Arms, repeated
the Style and Titles of the Ladies descent, which concluded the Ceremony at
Church.

From the Church most of all those persons of Quality did repair to the Castle
of Kilkenny, a seat very oble, Excellently furnished, where Lodgings were
provided for the most considerable; there they found a spacious Hall hung with
large rich Tapestry; and in it, besides many other Elsewhere, four large Tables
covered, and within a little time furnished with 3t large silver Dishes at each
Table thrice over, the last Course whereof was an Exquisite Banquet; of all
which Noble Treat, though I am no competent Judge, yet some present of Quality
and experience protest, that in all their Travels they never saw greater
plenty, variety and order, all this being managed without any noise or
confusion.

FINIS.

