ARTICLES of High Treason, and other high Misdemeanors, against the Lord
Kemolton, Master Densill Hollis, Master Pym, Sir Arthur Hasilrige, Master
Hamden, and Master Stroude.

WITH THE CHARGE OF THE IMPEACHMENT OF THE TWELVE BISHOPS, Accused of High
Treason, for preferring a Petition, and making a Protestation, to the
subverting the Fundamental Laws and Being of Parliaments.

Printed for John Hamond, 1641.

ARTICLES OF High Treason, and other high Misdemeanors, against the Lord
Kemolton, Master Densill Hollis, Master Pym, Sir Arthur Hasilrige, Master
Hamden, and Master Stroude.
I.
THat they have Traitorously endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and
Government of the Kingdom of England, to deprive the King of Regal Power, and
to place in his Subjects an Arbitrarie and Tyrannical Power over the Lives,
Liberties, and Estates of his Majesty's Liege People.

II.
That they have Traitorously endeavored by many foul aspersions upon his
Majesty, and his Government, to alienate the affections of his People, and to
make his Majesty odious to them.

III.
They have endeavored to draw his Majesty's late Army to disobedience of his
Majesty's Commands, and to side with them in their Traiterous Designs.

IIII.
That they have Traitorously invited and encouraged a Foreign Power to invade
his Majesty's Kingdom of England.

V.
That they have endeavored to subvert the Rights and very Being of Parliament.

VI.
That for completing their Traiterous Defignes, they have endeavored, as far
as in them lay, by furce and terror to compel the Parliament to join with
them in their Traiterous Designs; and to that end, have actually raised and
countenanced Tumults against the King and Parliament.

VII.
That they have Traitorously conspired to levy, and have actually levied War
against the King.

The Charge of the Impeachment of the Twelve BISHOPS.
THE House of the Lords was pleased, on the thirtieth of December, to send a
Message to the House of Commons by Sir John Banks, and Judge Reeves, to desire
a present Conference, by a Committee of both Houses, touching matters of
dangerous and high consequence.

And at the Conference, the Lord Keeper, in the name of the House of Peers
delivered, as follows:

That this Petition and Protestation of the twelve Bishops, containing matters
of high and dangerous consequence, and such as my Lords are very sensible of,
and such as require a speedy and sudden Resolution; it extending to the deep
entrenching upon the Fundamental Privileges and Being of Parliament.

Therefore the Lords have thought fit, that this matter, concerning the whole
Parliament, may be communicated to the House of Commons; it being a thing of so
great and so general concernment.

This being thus communicated to the House of Commons, they came to this
Resolution, To accuse these 12 Bishops of high Treason, for endeavoring to
subvert the Fundamental Laws, and Being of Parliaments.

And Master Glinne was ordered to go to the Lords, and at their Bar, in the
name of the House of Commons, and all the Commons of England, to accuse these
twelve Prelates of High Treason, for endeavoring to subvert the Fundamental
Laws of the Realm, and the very Being of Parliaments, manifested by preferring
the Petition and Protestation; And to desire the Lords that they may be
forthwith sequestered from Parliament, and put into safe custody; and that their
Lordships would appoint a speedy day for the Commons to Charge them, and they
to answer, for that the Commons were ready to make good their Charge.

He was further ordered to give the Lords thanks, for communicating this
Petition with so much affection and speed, and for expressing their sense
thereof.

After Master Glin had delivered this at the Bar, the Lords sent the Black
Rod instantly, to find out these Bishop, and apprehend them: an by eight of
the Clock at night they were all taken and brought upon their knees to the Bar,
and ten of them committed to the Tower; and two (in regard of their Age, and
indeed of the worthy parts of one of them, the learned Bishop of Durham) were
committed to the Black Rod.

FINIS.

