ARTICLES Presented against this PARLIAMENT, OR, THE PARLIAMENTS Hypocrisy
discovered in VERSE and PROSE.

By TERRAE-FILIVS, Being an ancient Lover of his Country.

Printed in the Year 1648.

ARTICLES presented against this PARLIAMENT.
By Terra Filius.
IT IS now high time for every honest man to stand up and look about him; We
expected ease and freedom by this Parliament, but behold we find it not:
Taxes and Impositions lie still upon the People, and shall this be suffered and
I live? I have written many pretty things in Verse since the beginning of this
Parliament, which the learned of each House approved: But now Poetique Pen lie
still awhile,
For I Will in Prose the Parliament revile,
And tell the World in spite of Factions,
We are betrayed by their mean actions.


And now I have taken my whip into my hand, I Will spare no body: Stand out
Parliament and hear your charge:

First, You are charged by me in the name of all the People of England, that
you falsely and perfidiously, under the show of giving thanks, did accuse his
sacred Majesty of being guilty of calling this present Parliament of his
especial grace and mere goodness; whereas it was sufficiently and notoriously
known unto you and all men, that his sacred Majesty was from the first day of
his reign till the first of this present Parliament, a constant enemy to all
Parliaments; and had graciously endeavored the settling of Tyranny, as well in
this as the other two Kingdoms, and to inslave the People (as well for the
honor of the Nation, as their own good.) But finding them not less willing
to suffer, then he was to oppress, and doubting (upon good reason) the Peoples
rage (who incessantly in all places, private and public, cried aloud for a
Parliament) not knowing what course to steer; was contented to call this, as a
Sanctuary to which he might fly for preservation, if the Irish Plot (which was
then hammering) should take effect.

Secondly, You are further charged, that when the King had raised an Army,
graciously intouding the destruction of you (and so of the whole People, who
had entrusted you with their Liberties, Lives and Estates) you disobediently,
and contrary to his Majesty's express commands, gave the honor of this
Design to his evil Council, as if his sacred Majesty could need a Broker,
or so little understood his Function, as to want crafrinesse enough to
contrive, or courage to carry on any wickedness; nay, you are so proud of your
folly, that you persist in it to this day, and with so much madness, as that
should his gracious Mejestie please (after the example of his dearest Father of
blessed memory) to bewray his breeches, you had Vored this the act of his evil
Council, and therefore declared them Papists and enemies to the State.

Thirdly, You are further charged, that you having suffered London to become a
Garrison to those Rebels that assisted the King against you, have
notwithstanding laid several Taxes and Impositions upon them by your several
Declarations, commanding them to desert their said Garrison, except they should
within a reasonable time compound with the Clerk of the Committee at
Goldsmiths-Hall for a License to stay in Town and continue the possession of
their said Garrison.

Fourthly, You are further charged, That whereas diverse honest men (who either
have lived constantly in London (it then being your Garrison) calling you
Rebels, and wishing destruction to you and your Armies, or having borne Arms
against you, live under your protection, and have since written and divulged
many Pamphlets to your disgrace, and have thereby contributed much to the
carrying on of this new War) have been at your extraordinary charge, taken
and committed to Prison, and within half a day after discharged, for not
having enough abused you, without any satisfaction made them for their
Imprisonment, or any encouragement given (more then the favors and
countenances of particular Members, their private friends) to proceed in so
good and commendable a work.

Fifthly, You are further charged, That contrary to the lavdable custom of
this Parliament, you have imprisoned and have endeavored to bring to condign
punishment the two stout Champions of Tyranny, Sir John Stowell and Master Tavy
Genkins, notwithstanding that they have given you a brave disgrace at your
Bar, and had always been active instruments against you, and had zealously
endeavored to inthrall the whole Nation in slavery, and do still continue
constant to their first Principles, hating you as over with a perfect hatred:
Whereas it has been the custom of this Parliament to punish their friends
only that had done them best service, and to reward their enemies with all
possible favor.

Sixthly, You are further charged, That having admitted into your House, as
Members thereof, several Gentlemen that have served the King in his late
Wars against the Parliament, you have not endeavored to punish diverse ill
affected persons, who have informed you of these Delinquency, and labored to
purge the House of them, tending to the great weakening of the Royal Party, to
the preventing the wished for success of all his Majesty's gracious Designs,
laid and carried on with so much blood and rapine; and giving so just cause to
all loyal Subjects (the true lovers and honourers of gawdry and slavery) to
despair of ever seeing his Majesty as powerful to do mischief as Nero,
Caligula or Domitian, the sacred and anointed Princes of the Roman Empire.

These are the Articles of your charge, get off them as you can. I assign you
any day twixt this and this day seven nights, for your Answer; which (if it be
satisfactory) must be now at length indifferently to administer justice to all
men, to bring Delinquents to condign punishment (according to your solemn
League and Covenant) to begin with the greatest (for greatness (certainly)
cannot justify any man in doing wickedly, nor secure him from punishment; the
soul that sins shall dye) and so forward, if once you will resolve to walk
in this path (in which only you may find safety) God shall bless you; the
Peoples hearts shall turn to you; you shall destroy all those that rise up
against you; Foraigne and Domesticke Designs shall fall in pieces, and be as
water spilt upon the ^round.

I cannot end thus, I must have a lash at your tails in Verse.

Poeta nascitur non fit.
YOu that have tasted Helicons fair water
And honesty, have wisely followed after;
Harken and read what I do write in Verse.
I saw a Vision, which I will rehearse;
'Twas in a Moonshiny night that I
Lay tumbling in my bed, I knew not why;
When lo, behold, oh! what a sight was there.
A goodly person did to me appear,
All clad in white was be, no snow did ere
More white upon a Mountain top appear;
A loose long garment hung down to his heel;
Oh! God, what comfort did my soul then feel:
For on his shoulders two wings did I spy,
More bright then any Gold of Barbary:
By which I knew that God to me had sent
His Angel, to declare all his intent.
Then I lay still; he thus at length began:
Fear not, but hear thou more then happyman;
He that has sent me, has declared his will
To thee at several times, when he was still
To all the world beside; because he knew
That thou art bold, a faithful man and true,
And wilt not hide his Counsel, but declare
To all the world, how by their wit and care
They might prevent his judgments; now attend,
And carefully thine ear unto me lend.
When as the King not knowing what to do,
Was forced to call this Parliament (as you
And all men know) he did a Plot contrive
It to destroy; hut's own Prerogative
To raise more high then ere it was before,
That him, as god, his subjects should adore:
Many Designs he had, and Plots were laid,
Which by the Plotters were est soon betrayed:
For so 'twas orderd from above, that none
Should take effect but that unhappy one,
Irelands Massacre, which though cruel, 'twas
For good, though unknown reasons, came to pass,
The King then takes up Arms, in order still
To his old Plot, to make his private will
Above the Laws; thinking that if it might
Perchance fall out to have the worst in fight,
He might return unto the Parliament
And be received, although be nere repent;
Thinking and hoping that a time will come,
When for their follies he may pay them home,
The War's begun, his sacred Majesty
That put them by the ears, most graciously
Beholds the fight with pleasure, till on's side
The Foot began to run, the Horse to ride.
The King flies to the Scots, by whose consent
He come a prisoner to the Parliament.
They send him Propositions, but he
Will grant them none, because they how the knee:
But this is not the course that they must take,
His Soul's asleep, and they must it awake.
Let them be strong to Gods work, and stand
Up stoutly in it, or the promised Land
They nere shall see; but by another way
The Lord of hosts shall get himself the day.
Edward and Richard called the second both
Are your examples, mind them, or your sloth
Shall be rewarded, for the blood that is spilt,
If not the Kings, must be the Houses guilt.
Now publish this, and if they do not mend,
And tread this path; then tell them, I intend
To come again; and to thee I will show,
How England shall be lightened of her foe;
And then he vanished. I surveyed round
The Chamber, but he was not to be found,
Now in obedience unto his command,
I do declare this unto all the Land,
From Dan even to Beersheba, though thou be
Of base, or poor, or else of high degree.
FINIS.

