AN Account of the Siege Of the Famous City of DUNKIRK, By the English Forces,
etc. 3. Sept. 1692
Together with the Situation, Natural Strength, and Ancient and Modern
Fortifications of the said Place.
DVnkirk, or Duynskirk, is a very considerable Place now in the possession of
the French, seized on the Sea, and adjudged to be about the bigness of
Cambridge: Beyond the Old Town there has been since it came into the Hands of
the French, great Works drawn, which augment the Town above one half. There is
a new Trench cut for a Mile together through the Splinter Sands, which will,
upon the Head of the Tide, receive 150 Vessels of 70 Guns each; and on the West
side of the Harbor is raised a vast pil'd and plank'd Work, to intercept and
lodge the Sands. It Is a Place of very great Strength, but much added by the
late Fortifications, which are very large, and the Bastion toward the North is
most stately. It is well Built, and very Rich and Populous, and particularly
recommended for the neatness and regularity of the Streets. There is an English
Nunnery, and the Franciscans have a Cloister for Persons of both Sexes. At the
Mouth of the Haven stands a strong Castle, on which are planted 200 pieces of
Cannon. Dunkirk is Situate 54 Miles West of Ghent, 23 Miles from Ipres, 10
from Graveling, 16 from Newport, and 24 from Ostend; its Longitude is 21. 30.
and Latitude 51. 7. In May 57. Six hundoed English Infantry, all Chosen Men,
under the command of Sir John Reynolds as General, and Colonel Morgan as Major
General, arrived in Pricardy from England, where they were joined by the Forces
commanded by the Marshal Turin, the Protector was the more induced to this
Enterprise, because the King of Spain had invited King Charles into his
Dominnion. Before their Embarquement, they Rendezvouzed at Black Heath, where
Mr. Hugh Peter's gave them a Sermon for encouragement, and were Shipped with a
Months Pay in Hand, and all new Red Coats, About the middle of September, the
English Forces and those of Turin, advanced into the Spanish Territories, and
according to agreement, sat down before Mardike, a strong Fortress, and put
themselves between it and Dunkirk. General Mountague, the English Admiral,
Riding before the Splinter with a Fleet of War, it was not long before a
continued Battery made the Besieged quit the Fort, which so incommoded them,
when taken by the English, that they were obliged to yield the Town to Mercy,
Turin not allowing them better Terms, because they and refused his first
Offers. Mardike was presently put into the Hands of the English according to
agreement, soon after this, the two Armies face down before (...) (...)
resolving to take it before they stirred, which shortly Alarmed the Spaniards
in all their Quarters, whereupon Don John of Austria, considering the
importance of this P^^^e, as being the Key of Flanders, and a Frontier of
France, so that if the English Possessed it, they might have an opp^rtunity to
Conquer all Flanders, by the Forces that might be continually Landed from
England, with the sup^lies of Money, which this Town, by their Booties, bro^ght
into the Treasury. Upon these and like Motives, he ^esolved to attempt its
Relief, though with the hazard ^f his whole Army, but whilst he is getting them
together, the English had in a short time run their Trenches to the Spanish,
Counterscarpe, and still approached nigher the Wall, which the Spaniards having
notice off, and fearing their Relief might come too late, he made all possible
haste to its Assistance; The better to effect which, Don John their General
dreins most of their Garrisons, and compleats a Body of 15000 Men, with which
he Marches with all Speed through Fuernes, and Incamps within a Mile and an
half of Tureins Quarters, of which, the Confederates having Advice, immediately
dislodged with a Body of about 16000 Men, leaving still enough to guard the
Trenches, and make good the approaches, if the Townsmen should attempt a
Salley. With this Detachment of Men, and ten pieces of Cannon, Turein faces the
Spainiards: The English Foot were drawn up in Four Battalions, and were Ordered
to give the First Assault upon four other Battalions of Spanish Foot, who had
the Abvantage of the Ground, being placed upon three rising Hillocks, and was
seconded by Don John himself.

The English were commanded by the Lord Lockhart, who having first ordered the
Forelorn Hope of 300 Musketeers to mount the Sand-Hills, together with his own
Regiment of Foot, under the Colonel Fenwicke, they stoutly maintained their
Ground, though the Spaniards plaeyd down continual Volleys of Shot among them:
He then sent another Brigade to their Relief, who immediately fell in with the
But end of their Muskets among the Enemies Foot, and they not being used to
such Club-Law, left the Field and Fled; whreupon Turrein's Horse seeing the
good fortune of the English Foot, fell in with the Spanish Horse, few of whom
stood the Charge.

In this Battle a great part of the Lord Lockheart's Regiment were either Slain
or Wounded, and Lieutenant Col. Fenwick was killed by a Musket Bullet. The
Slaughter was great, the Horse being very severe in the pursuit, so that near
3000 of the Enemy were Slain, and many Noblemen Killed, Wounded, and taken
Prisoners. This total Rout of the Relievers Army, put despair into the
Dunkirkers, who could now expect no relief either by Land or Sea, and Don John
not being able to recruit his Army by Land: Yet the Marquess of Leda their
Governor, to demonstrate some courage, made frequent strong Sallies upon the
French Quarters, which seemed to proceed rather from despair than Valor, for
he who was the Life of the Business received a Wound in one of them, of which
he shortly Died, and with him, the Enemy lost Possession of the Town of
Dunkirk, for after the Confederates had played 14 Days successively with their
Mortar-Pieces upon the Place, the Befieged grew weary of the Sport, and beat a
Parley, and the next Day the Town was delivered up to them.

The English being in the Possession of Dunkirke, the Fortifications were
repaired, and several Additional ones made by Order of the Protector.

FINIS.
London, Printed for J. Johnson, Anno Dom. 1692.


