ARTICLES CONCERNING THE SVRRENDER OF WALLINGFORD.

OXFORD, Printed by Henry Hall., Printer to the University, A. D. 1646.

Articles of Agreement concluded and agreed by h^s Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax Knight, General of the Forces raised by the Parliament, on the one
party; And Colonel Thomas B^agge Governor of Wallingford, on the other party:
so and concerning the rendering of the Garrilon of Wallingford Castle and Town.
July 22. 1646. viz.
THat the Castle and Town of Wallingford, with all the Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunitions, Stores and provisions of war thereunto belonging, shall be
delivered up without wilful spoil or embezlement, unto his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax, or such as he shall appoint to receive the same, upon Wednesday
the 29 of July, 1646. by 9 of the Clock in the morning, in such manner and
with such exceptions as are contained in the ensuing Articles.

2. That on the said 29th day of July the Governor and all Officers and
Soldiers of the Garrison with all other persons therein (that will) shall
march out of Wallingford with their horses and arms properly belonging to
them. (proportionable to their present and past Commands or Employments) with
Flying Colors, Trumpets sounding, Drums beating, Matches lighted at both ends,
Bullet in their mouths, and every Soldier 12 charges of powder, match and
bullet proportionable, with one piece of Ordnance, with equipage, and with
bag and baggage to any place within 10 miles of Wallingford which the
Governor shall choose, where (in regard His Majesty has no Garrison left
open, nor Army near) all their horses and arms, except what are allowed in
the ensuing Articles, shall be delivered up to such as his Excellency Sir
Thomas Fairfax shall appoint, all the Soldiers shall be disbanded, and all
such both Officers, Soldiers, and others as shall engage themselves by promise
never to bear arms against the Parliament, nor to do any thing wilfully to
the prejudice of their affairs, during their abode in the Parliaments
quarters, shall have the benefit of the ensuing Articles; That is to say;

3. That all such as shall desire to go to their homes or private friends (who
shall not be prejudiced for receiving them) shall have the Generals pass and
protection for their peaceable repair to, and abode at the several places
they shall so desire to go unto; The Governor, Officers and Gentlemen to
pass with Equipage of horses and arms answerable to their present and past
Commands, or qualities; and all both Officers, Soldiers, and others, to pass
with bag and baggage, and the Troopers only with their swords, and their
bag and baggage.

4. That all such (if there be any) who shall desire to take entertainment for
Foreign service, shall have passes for their Officers (not exceeding four)
with their horses, and two servants a piece, to go to London to treat with any
Foreign Ambassador or Agent for entertainment, and all of them shall have
liberty and passes to march (the Officers with Equipage of Horses and Arms
properly their own and answerable to their present and past Commands, the
Common Soldiers with their swords, and all with Bag and Baggage) to the
quarters near unto Harwich or Southampton, or to any Port between them to be
transported where they shall be assisted in the procuring of vessels and
shipping for their transportation at the usual rates accustomed for freight by
the Governor of the next Garrison or Port town, who shall also take care for
their safety and accommodation with quarters, until shipping be provided, and
weather seasonable, they paying for the same after twenty eight days from the
render.

5. That all the persons now in Wallingford (not being of the Soldiery of the
Garrison) shall have liberty and protection for their persons and goods to stay
in the Town of Wallingford one Month after the rendering (if they desire it)
and then to have the Generals pass and protection, as others going out at the
rendering upon the like engagement; and that any person whatsoever (who being
sick or wounded, cannot at present remove) shall have liberty to stay till
they be recovered or able to go away, and shall have fit accommodation and
subsistence provided for them, dureing such their stay, and then shall enjoy
the benefit of these Articles.

6. That no person whatsoever comprised in this capitulation shall be
reproached, revised, affronted, plundered, or injured in their march,
rendezvouse, or quarters, Journies, or places of abode, by these Articles
allowed, nor shall be compelled to bear Arms, nor be imprisoned restrained,
sued, molested, or damnified, for any matter whatsoever of public or private
concernement, relateing to the present War, the matter or grounds thereof
ariseing before the rendering of the Garrison, during the space of six months
after the rendering thereof, nor be compelled to take any Oaths or other
Engagements then what is mentioned in the second Article, during the time of
six months, and to have liberty dureing the said time to travel about their
lawful affairs.

7. That all horses and other goods now in Wallingford taken as lawful prize
of War, or properly belonging to the Governor or Officers of the Garrison
before or dureing the siege shall be continued in the possession of the present
possessors, except such as are to be delivered up by the tenor of these
Articles.

8. That such household stuff and goods now in Wallingford, as shall appear to
the General or such as he shall depute for that purpose, to have been
borrowed, by any Officer or Gentleman in the Garrison for their use and
accommodation in the Garrison shall be restored back to the owners.

9. That if any person or persons shall wilfully violate these Articles in any
part, the guilt thereof shall be imputed to such person or persons only, and
shall not prejudice any other not acting or consenting to the same.

10. That the Governor and 3 more such Officers and Gentlemen as he shall
name, shall have passes from the General for themselves, with two servants
apeece, their horses, swords, pistols and necessaries to go to the King to give
him an account of the said Garrison, and to return to their homes, or friends:
and that five weeks shall be allowed for this journey, which shall not be
reckoned any part of the six months mentioned in the sixth Article, but he and
they shall be allowed six months after the end of the said five weeks.

11. That no Officer, Soldier, or other person who by the Articles are to
march out of the Castle or Town of Wallingford, (or shall march in) shall
plunder, spoil, or injure any Inhabitant or other person therein, in their
persons, goods, or estates, or carry away any thing that is properly belonging
to any of them.

12. That all persons comprised within these Articles shall peaceably and
quietly enjoy all their goods, debts, and movables during the space of six
months after the rendering, and shall have liberty within the said space (if
they shall resolve to go beyond the Seas) to dispose of their said goods,
debts and movables, and to depart the Kingdom with the same as they shall
think fit and desire, and shall have passes for their Transportation
accordingly from his Excellency.

13. That all persons comprised within these Articles shall upon request have a
Certificate under the hand of the General, or such as he shall appoint, that
such persons were in the Castle or Town of Wallingford at the time of the
rendering, and are to have the benefit of these Articles.

14. That the Townsmen and Inhabitants of the Town of Wallingford shall not
be troubled or questioned for any thing said or written by any of them, nor the
Corporation thereof prejudiced for any thing done by any of them by express
Command since it was a Garrison, and that they shall have the benefit of these
Articles in all things that may concern them.

15. That Master John Chamberline of Sherbourne shall have the benefit of these
Articles.

T. FAIRFAX.

FINIS.

