AN ACCOUNT OF THE SENTENCE That Passed upon William Ld. Russell, Thomas
Walcot, John Rouse, and William Hone, at the Sessions House in the Old-Bayley,
on the 14th of this Instant July, 1683, for High Treason, in Traitorously
Conspiring the Death of the King, to Leavy War, and Raise a Rebellion, etc.
Entered according to ORDER.

WIlliam Lord Russel, Thomas Walcot, John Rouse, and William Hone, having been
Convicted of High Treason, for Conspiring the Death of the King, etc. were this
14th of July brought into the Court to receive Sentance of Death; and the Lord
Russell being set before the Bar, the Clerk demanded (seeing he was found
Guilty of High Treason, and by the Law ought to dye) what he had to say, why
Judgment should not pass against him, etc. To which he replied, That he did
not conceive a design to Leavy War was a direct intent to Murder the King,
with which in the Indictment he was charged, and therefore desired that his
Indictment might be read, which was by the Court accordingly granted: After
which he declared, that he had been informed, that Leavying of War did not
comprehend the killing of the King; to which the Court replied, that the
Verdict had passed, and that, both the Court and his Lordship were bound by Law
to stand to, as not being in their power to alter; and that seeing it was the
Kings pleasure to demand Judgment by his Attorney General, it was the part of
the Court to give that Judgment as the Law had allotted for Crimes of that
nature, desiring him to think of another state; and Mr. Attorney openly
demanding Judgment, Mr. Recorder in the name of the Court pronounced the
Sentance, That He William Russell Esquire; should be lead to the place from whence
he came, and from thence be drawn upon a Hurdle to the place of Execution, and
there to be Hanged up by the Neck, then to be cut down alive, his Bowels to be
taken out, and his Privy-Members to be cut off and burned before his Face, his
Head to be severred from his Body, and his Body to be divided in four quarters,
and to be disposed of at the pleasure of the King: After which, his Lordship
returned to Newgate.

Then Thomas Wallcot, William Hone, and John Rouse were set to the Bar, and in
like manner demanded what they could say in stay of Execution? Upon which the
two former, viz. Wallcot and Hone desired only that their Friend might come
freely to visit them, which by the Court was granted; after which Hone desired
time to Repent. The latter, viz. Rouse, made a long preamble, but to no
purpose. After which, Mr. Recorder passed the same Sentance upon them as had
passed upon the Lord Russell, earnestly admonishing, that as their Crimes were
great, and of the highest nature, that so their Repentance might be accordingly.

Sentance passed, they returned from whence they came, to expect the just
reward of their Treason.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed by J. Grantham. 1683.


