ARTICLES To be propounded and Treated upon, touching the Rendering of the
Garrison of OXFORD.
1. THat a Safe Conduct be forthwith granted to one or more Messengers to be
sent to His Majesty, to inform Him We are entering into a Treaty, that His
Pleasure may be known before any thing be concluded.

2. That the Duke of York, may be disposed of as His Majesty shall Order, with
all His Servants and Chaplains placed about Him by the King: That out of His
Majesty's Revenue, an Allowance of two hundred Pounds weekly may be assigned
his Highness, for defraying his Diet, Robes, Privy-Purse, etc.

3. That their Highnesses Prince Rupert, and Prince Maurice, His Majesty's
Nephews, and their Servants, with their Horses, Arms, and Goods, free from
any Disturbance, shall have liberty to remain where they shall please in
England, or Wales, and their maintenance be provided for, till they receive His
Majesty's Pleasure how to dispose themselves; Or to give them Passes, (if they
so desire it,) for themselves and Servants to go beyond Seas, carrying with
them their Horses and Goods, without any molestation, and free from taking any
Oath; And to receive the benefit of the other ensuing Articles.

4. That the Great Seal, now in the Custody of Sir Richard Lane, Knight, Lord
Keeper; and the Privy Seal, and Signet, now in the Custody of Sir Edward
Nicholas, Knight, His Majesty's Principal Secretary of State: and all other
Seals of Office, and Courts of Justice, the Mint, the Sword of State, the
White-staves, Keys, and other Ensigns of Honor, and Office, with all His
Majesty's Goods, remain in the several hands His Majesty has already
entrusted the Custody of them, until His particular Pleasure be known, and
then to be removed as He shall direct.

5. That Sir Thomas Glemham Knight, etc. Governor of Oxford, with his
Servants, and all that to him belong: And likewise all Officers and Soldiers
both of Horse and Foot, with their Servants shall march out of the City of
Oxford, on horseback, with their Horses and Arms, flying Colors, Drums
beating, Matcher lighted at both ends, and Bullet in their mouths, with their
Bag and Baggage, and that every Soldier have twelve Charges of Powder; And the
like for all reformed Officers, and Officers belonging to the Train of
Artillery, with six Pieces of Cannon, with Powder, and twelve Rounds, and all
thereto belonging, being such as the Governor shall make choice of: And shall
march to such a place as His Majesty shall direct, And in case they shall be
discharged by His Majesty from further Service, and procure His Majesty's leave
to that purpose, Then to have power to Treat with any Foreign Prince or State
for Entertainment, and thirty days Free Quarter to be allowed them: That to
those that shall make no Condition with any Foreign Prince or State in the
said limitation of time, free leave be given for fix Months to transport
themselves beyond Seas, with their Horses and Arms, or to go to their own
homes: And in all other particulars, to be allowed the same Conditions, at the
rest of the Lords and Gentry that are Conditioned for is this Garrison. That no
Oath or Covenant be ever imposed upon any of them, nor any restraint either for
occasion of Debt, or any other pretense whatsoever past, during the time above
limited of six Months.

6. That such a proportion of Carts and Teemes, as the Governor shall think
fit, shall be allowed to transport the Officers Baggage, and all other Persons
whatsoever now residing in this Garrison.

7. That no Officer or Soldier, or any other Person shall in their March,
Rendezvous, or Quarters, be stopped, or plundered upon any pretense whatsoever;
And if any such thing shall happen, full satisfaction to be given before
release of the Hostages.

8. That two Officers be appointed, The one for Accommodation of Free Quarter
for Officers, Soldiers, and others: And the other Officer to look to the
providing of Carriages and Horses for Officers and their Baggage.

9. That all such Officers, Soldiers, and others as are sick, hurt, and cannot
march out of the Town, shall have free liberty to stay till they be recovered,
and that they may have subsistence given them in the mean^ time; and afterward
may have leave, and a safe Convoy to go to their own homes, or to any of the
Kings Armies or Garrisons, or to go beyond Seas, as they shall desire, and in
the mean time to take no Oath, as abovesaid.

10. That all Officers and Soldiers Wives, Children, and Servants, and all
others now in this City, may have liberty to go along with their Husbands, or
to them if they please, or to return to their own Houses and Estates to enjoy
them.

11. That the Goods of all Officers, Soldiers, and others, which at this time
cannot be carried out or transported, may remains in this City, till they have
opportunity to send for them, and then to have Carriages to transport them,
paying reasonable rates.

12. That no man shall entice any Officer or Soldier of the Kings, with any
promise of preferment or reward, to serve the Parliament, nor no Infamy shall
be offered in word or deed to any Officer or Soldier, nor shall they, when
they are at their own homes be pressed or forced to serve against their wills.

13. That the Chaplains of the Regiments of Horse and Foot Marching with us,
may have free liberty to use the Book of Common-^rayer, in the march and
during the time aforesaid.

14. That all Prisoners belonging to this Garrison may be released, where ever
they are, and are to enjoy the full benefit of these Articles.

15. That any Officer or Soldier, as well Reformed, as other, and all other
persons whatsoever residing in this Garrison, without exception, during the
abovesaid time of six months, shall have leave to go to London, or any where
else within the Parliament Quarters to follow their business, and not be
molested with any Action of Deb^, or Imprisonment, but have a safe Conduct
given them to that purpose.

16. That all the Horses, Arms, Money, and other Goods whatsoever, taken as
lawful prize of War (during these troubles) now in the City, be continued in
the possession of the present possessors.

17. That all persons of quality, Noblemen, Judges, Knights, Ladies, Gentlemen,
Citizens, Inhabitants, and all other persons of both sexes without exception
of any, now resident in Oxford, may remain here as long as they think it
convenient, or at any time when they please have free liberty to remove
themselves, and their Families, with their Arms, Horses, Coaches, and other
goods, and writings, without search, violence, or disturbance, either to live
at their own Houses, or elsewhere; And those who have professions, to be as
liberty to exercife them: and that all the persons, above mentioned, shall
enjoy their Houses, Lands, Rents, Revenues. Goods and Estates real and
personal, Offices, Places, and all other things to them respectively
belonging, or which they have in trust for any other, or wherein any others are
trusted for them, freed without Fine or Composition, of and from all
Sequestrations, Fifth and Twentieth part, Penalties, Seizures, and Melestations;
And that no Oath, or Covenant, promise, or other engagement be imposed upon
them, not enjoined by the Laws of the Land: And that they have free use
wherever they reside, of the Liturgy and Common Prayer of the Church of
England, according to the Laws established by Act of Parliament.

18. That all Clergymen, of what order or degree soever, and other Scholars
resident in Oxford, shall exercise their Functions, use the Liturgy of the
Church, and be restored to, and enjoy their dignities, benefices, fellowships,
in the Universities, or elsewhere, Preferments, and all other their Estates
real, and personal, Ecclefiasticall and Temporal, in their own Rights, and
in Right of their Churches, freed off and from all Sequestrations, Penalties,
and Molestations; And in all other things shall enjoy the benefit of the next
preceding Article, and of all other Articles of this Treaty that may be to
their advantage.

19. That His Majesty's Officers, Chaplains, Household and other Servants, and
all such other persons comprised within these Articles as desire within six
Months to go to, and attend His Majesty, shall have Passes to that purpose for
themselves, servants, Horses and Arms: And that all others, as aforesaid, who
shall within six Months desire to go into any other parts beyond the Seas
shall have effectual Passes to travel, without any Oath put upon them, and
enjoy their Estates in their absence: And that such of those person, or persons
as within two years shall resolve to transplant themselves, shall have liberty
to call in their Debts, sell all their Estate both real and personal, and
carry the Money arising thereupon with his, or their family, or return the
same by Bills of exchange unto such Foreign parts as they shall please, and
have Passes granted them accordingly.

20. That the Lord Duke of Richmond, and the Earl of Lindsey with their
Servants, who lately went out of Oxford, shall have the benefit of the Articles
of this Treaty.

21. That no person, or persons of Clergy, or Layety, or Body-Corperate in
Oxford shall be questioned, or other wise troubled for any thing past, Done,
Acted, or Ordered, Spoken, Written, or Printed, relating to the present
troubles between His Majesty, and the Parliament: Nor any person whatsoever
comprised within these Articles, shall be examined in the future upon any
occasion concerning himself, or others; for discovery of any thing past in
relation to the said unhappy differences.

22. That for the better preservation of the University, (so Famous for
Learning,) all the Fortifications and Works about it shall be forthwith
Slighted and Dismantled, and this City not continued, or any time hereafter
made a Garrison: And that no Soldiers at any time hereafter in their March, or
other wise, be Quartered, or Billetted in, or upon any Colleges, or Halls or
any members thereof: And that no Tax be laid upon them for Quartering,
Billetting, or Paying any Soldiers.

23. That the Chancellor, Masters, and Scholars of this University, and the
Heads and Governors, Masters, Fellows, and Scholars of all Colleges, Halls,
Bodies-Corporate, and Societies of the same, and the public Professors and
Readers thereof, and all persons belonging to the University, or to any
College, or Hall, or Body Corporate therein, shall or may exercise in the
several Churches and Chapels within the University the Protestant Religion,
established by Act of Parliament, and also, according to their Charters,
Customs, and Statutes, and the Laws of the Land, use and enjoy their Ancient
Form of Government, both Ecclesiastical and Civil; And all their Offices,
Dignities, Places, Privileges, Rights, Lands, Houses, Possessions, Rents,
Revenues, Debts, Goods, and Chattells, belonging to them or their Corporations
respectively, free of, and from Sequestration, or other molestation whatsoever,
and of and from all Fines and Compositions for Sequestration, and from Fifth and
Twentieth parts.

24. That all Churches, Chappells, Colleges, Halls, Libraries, Schools, or
Public Buildings, or works within, or belonging to the University, and the
several Colleges and Halls thereof, be preserved, as now they are, without
any defacing or spoil.

25, That the Major, Bayliffes, and Commonalty, and all Corporations within the
City, shall enjoy their Charters, Customs, Franchises, Liberties, Lands, Goods
and Debts, and all things else whatsoever which belong to them as Corporations,
and their Ancient Government as formerly.

26. That no Officers, Soldiers, or other Persons, who by the Articles are to
march out of the City or Suburbs, or who are to come in, shall plunder, spoil,
or injure the Inhabitants in their Persons, Goods, or Estates, or carry away
any thing that is not properly their own.

27. That the Citizens and Inhabitants of the City and Suburbs, shall not be
charged with Free Billet or Quarters Soldiers at any time, other then for
lodging: and in all public Taxes and Charges, shall bear only their
proportionable part with the County at large, as has been formerly used, and
shall have no other particular Charges imposed upon them: And that any of the
said Citizens or Inhabitants, shall have liberty in remove into the Country,
and carry away their goods at any time; And shall in all things enjoy the same
Freedom and Protections with other Subjects.

28. That the Commanders, Officers, and Soldiers of the City-Regiment, ruised
by His Majesty's Command, shall have the full benefit of these Articles in all
things, as Citizens without exception.

29. That if the Garrisons of Faringdon, Radcot, and Bostall, or any of them,
depending upon Oxford, having notice of these Articles, shall within one Month
desire the benefit of these Articles, they shall have granted unto them the
like Conditions.

30. That all Persons comprised within these Articles, shall have upon request,
a Certificate under the hand of the General Sir Thomas Fairfax, or such as he
shall appoint, that such Persons were in the City at the time of the
surrendering thereof, and to have the benefit of these Articles.

31. That there may be forty eight hours space allowed for Additionall
Articles to be put in by the Lords and Governor. if they shall think fit.

32. That these Articles, shall extend to the use and benefit of all Strangers
of all Conditions without exception, residing within this Garrison, or
Prisoners of the same in any place of England, or Wales, together with their
Wives, Children, Servants, Horses, Arms, Goods, Monyes, and Debts.

We pray you to proceed upon these Articles, according to your Commission.

Oxford, 19th May. 1646. Ri: Lane. C.S. Dorset. F. Seymour. Cottington. T.
Southampton. Ed: Nicholas. Hertford. Chichester. Th: Glemham.


ADDITIONALL ARTICLES.
33. That all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and other Women now resident in Oxford,
whose husbands are absent out of the Kingdom, shall have free liberty to
remain in Oxford, or to go to their husbands houses, and there live and enjoy
a fourth part of their husbands Estates, during their husbands absence, for the
maintenance of themselves and their Children, free from all Sequestrations,
Seizures, Penalties, or Fines; without any Composition or Molestation
whatsoever, and without having any Oath imposed on them not required by Law.

34. That all His Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary, And more particularly those
who are tied to daily attendance, who have been hindered by these troubles from
giving their due attendance in course, upon His Majesty, as by Oath they are
obliged, shall have the full benefit of these Articles.

35. That in the fifth Article after these words, [Both of Horse and Foot] it be
added, [Of what Nation or Country soever they be, And notwithstanding they have
at any time heretofore served on the Parliament side, and are since come over
to His Majesty's Service] with their Servants shall march out etc.

36. That all the Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot, of this Garrison,
shall have three Months Pay truly paid them, within the time limited for
free quarter.

37. That the 28th Article may be altered, and run thus; That the Commanders,
Officers, and Soldiers of the University and City Regiments, raised by His
Majesty's Command, shall have the full benefit of these Articles in all things,
as Privileged Persons and Citizens, without exception.

38. That no Officer, Soldier, or other, shall march out of this City within
three weeks from the date of the Conclusion of this Treaty, unless His
Majesty command them out in a less time, and then to march out upon the former
Articles.

Oxford, 22. May, 1646. Ri: Lane C.S. Dorset. F: Seymour. Cottington. T:
Southampton. Edw: Nicholas. Hertford. Chichester. Tho: Glemham.


FINIS.

