THE ARTICLES Of The SVRRENDER Of The City of YORK To the Earl of LEVEN, Lord
Fairefax, and Earl of Manchester, on Tuesday July 16. 1644.

Together with an explanation of some part of the ARTICLES.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed for MATTHEW WALBANCKE, July 23. 1644.

Articles agreed upon between Alexander Earl of Leven, General of the
Scottish Forces, Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, and the Earl of Manchester,
Generals of the English Forces about York on the one part, and Sir Thomas
Glenham Knight, Governor of the City of York, and Colonel General of the
Northern Army, of the other part Anent the surrender, and delivery of the said
City, with the Fort^, Towns, Cannon, Ammunition, and furniture of warke
belonging thereto, in manner after specified to the said Generals, for the use
of King and Parliament, the 15 day of July, 1644.
1. THe said Sir Thomas, as Governor of the said City, shall surrender and
deliver up the same, with the Forts, Tower, Cannon, Ammunition, and furniture
of War, belonging thereunto, between this and the sixteenth of July instant,
at or about the 11 hour thereof in the forenoone, to the said Generals or any
in their names for the use aforesaid, in manner, and upon the condition after
written.

2. That the Governor, and all Officers and Soldiers, both Horse and Foot,
the Governors, Officers, and Soldiers of Cliffords-Tower, the Officers and
Soldiers of the Sconce, the Officers and Soldiers belonging to the train and
outworkes, shall march out of the City on Horseback and with their Arms,
flying Colors, Drums, beating Matches lighted on both ends, Bullets in their
mouths, and withal their bag and baggage, that every soldier shall have 12
charges of Powder.

3. That the Officers and soldiers shall not march above ten miles a day, that
they have accommodation of Quarter and convenience of carriages, that a Troop
of Horse out of every of the three Armies, shall attend upon them for their
convoy in their march, that no injury or affront be offered them to Skipton,
or the next Garrison Town within sixteen miles of the Princes Army.

4. That such Officers and soldiers as are sick and hurt, and cannot march
out of the Town, shall have liberty to stay within until they be recovered,
and then shall have passage given them to go into the Princes Army, where ever
it shall be, or to their own houses and estates, where they may rest quiet, or
whither else they shall please, That it may be recommended to my Lord Fairfax
for their subsistence during their cure or being ill.

5. All Officers and soldiers wives, children and servants, now in Town, may
have liberty to go along with their husbands, or to them, or if they please
to return to their own houses and estates, to enjoy them under such
contributions as the rest of the Country pays, that they may have liberty to
carry with them their goods, and have a convenient time and carriages allowed
to carry them away.

6. That no Officer or soldier shall be stopped or plundered upon his march*

7. That no man shall entice any Officer or soldier as he marches out of the
Town with any promises of preferment or reward, or any other grounds
whatsoever.

8. That the Citizens and Inhabitants may enjoy all their privileges which
formerly they did at the beginning of these troubles, and may have freedom of
trade both by Land and Sea, paying such duties and customs as all other Cities
and Towns under the obedience of King and Parliament.

9. That the Garrison that shall be placed here, shall be two parts of three at
the least of Yorkshire men, and no free quarter shall be put upon any without
his own consent, and that the Armies shall not enter the City.

10. That in all charges, the Citizens resident and inhabitants shall bear such
part with the County at large as was formerly used in all other Assessements.

11. That all Citizens, Gentlemen, and Residents, Sojourners, and every other
person within the City, shall at any time when they please have free liberty to
move themselves, their families* and goods, and to dispose thereof and of their
Estate at their pleasure, according to the Law of the Land, either to live at
their own houses or elsewhere, and to enjoy their Goods and Estates without
molestation, and to have protection and safeguard for that purpose, so that
they may rest quietly at their abode, and to travel freely and safely about
their occasions, and for their better removal they shall be furnished with
carriages, paying for their carriages reasonable rates,

12. That all those Gentlemen and others whatsoever that have Goods within the
City, and are absent themselves* may have free liberty to take, carry away,
and dispose of those Goods, as in the last Article.

13. That no building be defaced, nor any plundering, nor taking of any man's
person, or of any part of his Estate, and that Justice, according to Law,
within the City shall be administered in all cases by the Magistrates, and be
assisted there if need be by the Garrison.

14. That all persons whose dwellings are in the City, though now absent, may
have the benefit of these Articles, as if they were present in the City.

By the Articles of Agreement touching the Rendition of the City of YORK.
THe Generals of the Armies have treated as Generals in reference only to
themselves and their Soldiers, and it was not intended to entrench upon any
Ordinances of Parliament, but all such persons and estates as were subject to
Sequestrations, might still be liable and subject thereto, notwithstanding any
general words in the Articles.

And thus these Generals do declare under their hands, and the Commissioners
of the Treaty do declare, That they did several times during the Treaty
express to the other Commissioners, that they had no order to meddle with any
Ordinance of Parliament, or to go further then the bounds of the Army.
Subscribed by

The Lord Fairfax. The Earl of Manchester. Sir Adam Hepborne. Lord Humby. Sir
William Constable.


Printed according to Order.


