Articles exhibited against Benjamin Spencer, Minister of S. Thomas Parish in
Southwarke, in the right Honorable and high Court of Parliament, for which his
living was sequestered. Together with a charge grounded thereupon, and his
answer thereunto. With his reasons of printing the same.
Gentle Reader,
WHoever thou art, for Gods love let me entreat thee to reserve a good opinion
of this my action. For I protest in the sight of God I present not this sheet
to thee out of any vain glory, to vindicate my self from any aspersions, nor
out of malice to my accusers, to render them odious to the world, much less
out of any heart-burning against the sentence of my judges, who proceed,
Secundum allegata and probata, according to allegation and proof: but to show
how much one man may be misconstrued by another in the deliverance of his
mind, and how free I am from Popish doctrine, or such ill manners whereby to
slight orders of Parliament, or to let fall any loose speeches in the Pulpit
(of which three things the Articles consist) however I may be mistaken by men
who come to hear me with prejudicate minds.

And I hope you will not blame me for this, considering, the malignity of such
a scandal, does not only like a dead fly corrupt the ointment of a good name
(which I thank God till this time he has honored me withal, among all men
who do truly know me) but also is the greatest blot that can be to my
profession, and a just hindrance of my preferment; and therefore I can do no
less then print a few sheets to satisfy my friends (but not to sell) in this
business, because I find my Articles read to many, but not my answers to them,
by which my friends affections may be diverted from me as well as their minds
corrupted.

You are therefore to understand, that after I had answered one Iacksons a
Scotch-mans Articles against me (before my Lord Major) of which I could never
get a copy. I was in good hope to have been at rest, when suddenly my name
appeared in a black bill among 66 scandalous (it may be some will prove
scandalized) ministers. This bill made by whomsoever, I am sure I was never
called to a reckoning about it before any of those Citizens who drew it up and
presented it to the Lord Major. The blow I received by this brown bill almost
stunned me, having no warning to provide an Helmet.

The ground of this bill was the complaints of parishoners to some Citizens who
were authorized by an order of Common Council dated the second day of December
to inquire of all malignant, scandalous, and seditious Ministers, whom I pray
God bring to light, so that the Wolf may be known for all his sheepes-skin.

The next trouble I heard of was by one Quartermaine, who warned me before the
Committee of examination, of which the right worshipful Sir Gilbert Garrat was
the Chaire-man, to answer to 10 Articles alleged against me.

The Articles were as follows.
Inprim. THat Master Spencer wilfully refuses to give the Communion to those
that will not kneel at the Sacrament.

2 The said Mr. Spencer did publicly aver in his Sermon, that water in
Baptism did absolutely cleanse away original sin.

3 He did aver that the Church of Rome is the true Church and lacks nothing
out qualification, and did not err in any fundamental point, but in matter of
circumstance.

4 Certain honest then informing the said Mr. Spencer, that his superstitious
gestures were, burdensome to some good Christian consciences in his
Congrogation, he thus replied. Am I vile (abusing the words of the Prophet
David) I will be more vile yet? And whether the railes be taken away or not, I
will bow to the Table, yea I will dance about the Table; he also abuses all
those that stand near, or lean upon the Communion Table, or lay their hats upon
the Table in the time of prayer or sermon.

5 He has uttered these words in the Pulpit, the times are evil and
dangerous, for we may fear great judgments upon the land, because we do not
know whither to go for justice. And these words were spoken in the time of
Parliament.

6 In S. Mary Overies Church, he most basely abused honest Ministers in his
Sermon: saying these Iack-dawes that formerly durst not show their faces, now
did appear every where. And where did they now shelter themselves but under the
eaves of the Parliament House Consider whether these two Articles do include a
Scandalum Parlamenti, Or not.

7 He not only presumptuously neglects to pray for good Magistates such as my
Lord Major of London, as also not praying for the army that is gone forth for
Religion, King and Parliament, which is too great an evidence of malignity, but
also a presumptuous abuser and scoffer of the Orders of Parliament.

8 Instance; namely, one Sabbath day there came an order from the Parliament to
be read in his Church for the restraining the superstitious bowing at the name
of Jesus, in the reading whereof, the said M. Spencer used these disdainefull
words. For any thing I know, this that I do read might have come from a
Ballad-monger, I know not which Jesus is signified here, whether Ioshuah, or
Jesus the son of Sirach, or lesus Christ.

9 This was M. Spencers divinity in the Pulpit, that women now adays were not
so holy as the Virgin Mary was. For she conceived the holy Ghost before she
conceived Christ, but women now took in men before they took in the holy Ghost
and were coupled together by the tails, as Sampsons Foxes were.

10 That the said M. Spencer, after he had published the Ordinance of
Parliament for the relief of poor maimed soldiers, said, that it may be the
said soldiers went out with a zealous intent, but it was a blind zeal; or it
may be out of malice and envy to be revenged of some of their enemies; or it
may be to rob and steal, and so to enrich themselves; but I hope the misery
they feel, and your charity, will make them desire peace.

His Answers to these 10 Articles before the Committee.
1 TO the first he answered thus. If he had refused any the Communion, as he
remembered none; he did it not because he thinks kneeling more necessary, but
because of the Statute of uniformity, which binds him to observe it, which
statute for direction is bound with the Book of Common prayer.

2 Upon the second Article the witnesses disagreed. His answer was, that being
the plaintiffes did instance no next upon which he so preached, nor time when;
he could not say what he preached: but his opinion was, that the outward sign
without the thing signified was of no validity, and as it is expressed further
in the 27 Article of our protestant doctrine published, and of late protested
by himself and others.

To the third he answered thus: I know not that ever I preached any such thing,
nor do they prove it by either place, time, or Text, but I hold the Papacy to
be Antichristian, and all that wittingly or willingly adhere thereunto.
Neither does the Doctrine of their Church order a man to heaven, and therefore
I detest it as damnable, and hold with our Protestant Doctrine published in
that point in the second part of our Church Homily for Whitsontide. But I
suppose the plaintiffes might be mistaken, when in clearing that point so much
controverted about the Church of Romes being a true Church, it is like enough I
said it was thus to be understood, (namely) that she had the outward being and
existence of a true Church; but not the essence or essential properties of
one. As a thief has the true being of a man in a natural sense, but not the
being of a true man in a moral sense: So W^spes have true Combs, as well as
Bees, but there is no honey in them. So it is likely, that I might say the
Church of Rome agrees with the true Church in many fundamentalls, as in the
Articles of the Creed, but overthrows them by corrupt consequences and
superstructions, as when they allow Christ to be the sole Mediator of
Redemption, but not of intercession, and in sixty odd other several opinions
they differ from the Reformed Churches, and us English Protestants; in which I
hope I shall never agree with them.



Tim. 3.1. and might deplore the decay of justice among men both distributive
and commutative as the Prophets did, Psalm. 12.1. ler. 5.1. and yet not reflect
on the Parliament, who have found much injustice among men themselves, and
punished it.

Tit. 2.15. You are commanded, and be not affrighted at those Iack-Dawes, with
with their noise first disturb the Churches service, and then shelter
themselves under the Leads as many sorts of men do, who hope in vain to shroud
themselves under the eaves of the Parliaments favor, whose worthies though too
much troubled with their trivial complaints; yet I am confident they will
maintain what they have protested against all schismatic persons and
malignant parties, that these were my words many can justify that heard them,
without prejudicate affection.

Panis-Crosse or the like. Neither do I name the Army, but I pray for all
those that fight for the truth, and the faith of the Gospel and true Religion,
which is no evidence of malignancy. Nor do I, nor ever did scoff at any
Orders of Parliament, as shall appear by my answer to the instance following.

Nun, Acts 7.45. and Jesus son of Iosedech, Zach. 3.1. and Jesus the Ionne of
Sarach, Eccles. 1. And for that many ignorant people have used the same gesture
to each name alike, when they have been read; and for that the name is not
distinguished in this order, (viz.) which Jesus is meant as it is in the 18.
Canon, which enjoyneth reverence at the reading of it, I will not be so bold to
interpret the Parliaments mind therein, till it be further expressed by
themselves: And I hope no charitable mind will take this for an abuse or
scoff, but rather want of right apprehension of their mind.

Mary conceived the Holy Ghost in her heart, before she had Christ in her womb;
because she was before both gracious and faithful: And I conceive those that
marry merely for lust, without those other holy ends of marriage, couple like
beasts, and may be likened to Sampsons Foxes: The Prophet Ezekiel speaks much
broader, Ezekiel. ^6.2^.
and yet is not to be blamed; Lewd manners may have loud reproves, so far as
I know.



You may perceive by these Answers, that I am much mistaken in my preaching by
these my accusers, whom I blame not so much for thus accusing me (though a
little discourse with me might have rectified all) if so be they be fully
persuaded that I spoke as they have alleged, but I fear there is some leaven
of ill will in it, which never speaks well; God be judge between us, to who^ I
refer my self

After I had thus answered, I was dismissed. Diverse weeks after one Nicollson
got a warrant for me from the Committee for the safety of the Kingdom. A man
who knew nothing of me except my face, as I did bis. By virtue of the warrant,
I was kept under Custody certain days, but found no charge appear there
against me. But being in prison a warrant was brought to me to appear before
the Lords to answer to a charge drawn up against me with all sequestration of
my living, which charge though it consisted of fewer Articles by three than
before was alleged, namely the 5.2. and 7. yet it is no whit lighter, but
does in some words so much differ from the Articles, that me thinks my
adversaries themselves should consider where they spoke truest, before the
Committee, or before the Lords; they being witnesses, both to the Articles and
charge; and especially one woman whose zeal against me was so smart, that she
blushed not to maintain the ninth Article, farther than was alleged therein;
namely that I should say worse than (that women took^ in men) for she added
these words (Your Lordships know where) O frons, o facies. Mark the charge and
compare it with the Articles, and you will find that whatsoever Clerk drew
it, he has made his building too heavy for the foundation, viz. For the
Articles upon which it is built.

The sequestration and charge, Martij 16. 1642.
WHereas Benjamin Spencer, Stipendary Curate of the Church of Saint Thomas
Hospital in Southwarke in the County of Surrey has endeavored in his
preaching to corrupt his people and Auditors, partly with the leaven of Popish
doctrine pressing upon them, Mary received the Holy Ghost before she conceived
Christ, but now women took in men first and were coupled together like Samsons
Foxes. Sirach or Jesus Christ, and that they that made it, were best able to
express their own meaning. John Hardwicke, Joseph Collier, John Humphry,
Daniell Sowton, Thomas Bennet, John Simes, John Winengton, William Jackson, or
any three of them shall have power and authority, and are hereby required to
sequester all and singular stipends and Allowances, Tithes, Rents, Fees or
profits whatsoever belonging to the Cure of the said Church, or heretofore
paid to the said SPENCER, and to appoint Collectors for the gathering and
receiving of them as they in their discretion shall think fit, and shall have
power to pay the same unto John Biscoe a godly learned and Orthodoxe Divine who
is hereby appointed and required to preach every Lords Day and to officiate as
Curate and to take care for the discharge of the cure of the said place in all
the duties thereof until further order shall be taken by both Houses of
Parliament. And if any shall refuse to pay unto the said sequestrators, or any
three of them, or to the collectors appointed by them any of the Rents, duties,
or lawful sees acoustomed to be paid upon information thereof by the
sequestrators or any three of them unto either House of Parliament. The said
Lords and Commons do hereby declare they will proceed against such refusers
according to their several offenses and contempts.

I answered to the charge that first it differed much from the Articls that
were laid against me; first in the number, for in the charg there were 3.
wanting of the ten alleged, namely the first which charged me for doing what
the statute of uniformity enjoined me. The second which the witnesses being
then examined severally did not agree upon. And the seventh which seemed
ridiculously to accuse me for not praying for my L. Major. Secondly I said the
charge differed in many words from the Articles, as in that it charge me to
endeavor to corrupt people with popish Doctrine, and yet there is in all but
one Article of popish doctrine in the whole charge, which might be as well
mistaken, as not, by my hearers. Secondly, It charge me that I bowed to the
Altar whereas there was never any in the Church, nor did the Table stand
Altar-wise. Indeed it was railed in by Mr. Lynne one of my accusers, without
command from any authority, save himself that I know of. Thirdly, It makes
these words (that now in time of Parliament men knew not whither to go for
Justice) a part of the Article which in the Article it self is made only an
insinuation of the accuser and therefore the witnesses could not as I suppose
under favor maintain rightly both the Articles and the charge. However they
swearing, the Court inclined the rather to their testimony, for an oath must
be the end of controversy: Let the accusers look to it, the Court is free. I
was committed to the fleet for a while, for contempt, where I petitioning for
maintaining of my charge, a Wife and many Children, was by the Lords granted
thirty pounds per annum to be resumed in the hands of the Governors of Saint
Thomas Hospital from the sequestrators, and to be paid to me or my assigns,
as formerly it had, I was afterward upon petition released also from
imprisonment.

But all this suffering could not quiet the spleen of mine adversaries. For
they would feign restrain the Governors so, that they might not pay me my
allowance of thirty pounds aforesaid, by reason whereof I and my family should
be forced to live upon alms while one eats our bread, who can neither well
desire it, and worse deserve it. God forgive mine enemies, open their blind
eyes and soften their hard hearts, that repenting, they may escape the wrath to
come, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

