A SEASONABLE DISCOURSE AGAINST TOLERATION.

WITH A PREFACE, Wherein the Nature of Persecution in general, and the unjust
Complaints of the Dissenting Parties concerning it in particular, are
distinctly considered.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Rumbold, in Butcher-hall Lane, near Christ's
Church, 1685.

THE PREFACE To the READER.
THough Controversies in Religion are (hypothetically) necessary, (for so long
as there is either Ignorance or Malice in the hearts of Men, there will be
Differences in Opinion, and Animosities amongst them) yet a prudent
well-regulated endeavor to moderate and assuage them, is a work truly
Christian and Charitable, however it may be fruitless, and unsuccesfull in the
end.

I do indeed heartily pray for it, yet dare not (as yet) promise my self so
good a return of these my poor Labors, as my Brethrens conviction; Prejudice
and Interest (from which the dearest of Gods Children are not wholly exempted)
being not so easily removed; The utmost that I can now expect, (and which I
hope they will have no cause to deny me) is their favorable Absolution from
that common, yet unworthy Reflection of a Temporizing Formalist; it being my
unfeigned Judgment, (after a strict impartial inquiry into the nature of such
Impositions) that my Subscription to the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
of England is not only warrantable, but necessary.

It Is not my business at present, to give a particular explication or defense
of those Constitutions, which my Dissenting* Brethren (both in Press and
Pulpit) have thought fit to oppose; That task has been with so much Learning
(and withal so much Moderation) performed (to omit others) by those two worthy
Instruments of Gods glory, Bishop Sanderson, and Mr. Hoeker, that I have often
(and I think not without just cause) admired, that any man endowed (even) with
common Abilities (supposing him of a meek and docile spirit) should remain
unsatisfyed, when he shall have but seriously perused the Incomparable writings
of those Pious and Learned Persons.

The truth is (be their pretenses never so plausible) it is to me very plain,
that many of my Brethren both decline, and dread Conviction; of which (amongst
other proofs) this which I now mention is a pregnant Instance.

No sooner had this small Pamphlet appeared in the World, but (as is usual in
such cases, we being all desirous of Novelties) it was generally sought after,
and perused, and (that I may return my Thanks for such encouraging Reception)
not much discommended. However my Dissenting Brethren (from whom I have
deserved other acknowledgements) were not altogether so obliging; some of which
(this is no Conjecture but a certain Truth) though they both knew the Authors
Person, and had other endearments, sufficient to have invited a much greater
Favor, yet (having barely glanced upon the Title) very discourteously (not to
say rudely) refused, even one single perusal of his humble Petition.

I must confess (though even contrary to my natural Inclination) I was some
little moved, to observe such causeless and irrational Perverseness. For though
there be indeed small Reason, that any man (in this Scribbling Age) should so
little consult either his Time or Purse, as to think himself obliged to the
perusal of each impertinent Pamphlet; yet that so small a Tract, so
inoffensively composed, when presented by the hand of a Friend, should not find
a more favorable Acceptance, is such an Vngentle-man like thing, that had I
the leisure or design to play the Satyrist, it were no hard task methinks to
explode so disingenious an instance.

But of this enough, if not (as some may judge) too much: Which yet is
mentioned with this Design, even to assure my Reader; That be his private
Opinion what it will, (if he please to hazard some small portion of Time in the
perusal of the following Pamphlet) he shall find nothing to offend him, but
the Evidence of Truth, and downright Conviction.

I have one thing more to add, and that is an Objection; which being both
plausible and common, I shall first Propose, (and that in the Person of some
Private weak Christian) Secondly R^solve with as much clearness as I am able.

The Objection is this.

There are indeed hot Disputes about these Ceremonies, and other Impositions in
the Service of God: The Tongues and Pens of Learned men have for a long time
been employed about them; the Arguments pro and con, both to desend and
disprove them, are of great weight, and seemingly rational: They are indeed
both so plausible, that a Person of my rank and Quality (who not only wants the
advantage of Education, but is also diverted from such inquiries by a
particular profession which he is obliged to attend) may very well be perplexed
how to behave himself: yet for my own part, I am much inclined to think; That
these Ceremonies are very dangerous and unlawful Things* and that because I
observe so many Learned and Godly Divines, who rather then they will defile
themselves with such Pollutions, have not only, suffered joyfully the spoiling
of their goods, but also Bonds and Imprisonments, Banishments, and a Thousand
other Indignities, to which a persecuted people is usually exposed; which
certainly such prudent Persons would never have done for a few Ceremonies (the
cause of all this mischief) were they such innocent Things, as the Prelates, and
their Agents have endeavored to persuade us.

This is the Objection; To which I Answer as follows.

That which is said in the first Place of their Learning and piety, is not much
to the purpose,

For First, such pretenses (being very advantageous to any Cause whatsoever)
are far more common then true. The Sic est vulgus; ex veritate pauca, ex
opinione multa aestimat. Cic. Orat. 1.
Vulgar sort (who are chiefly concerned in the Objection) are no competent
Judges in these Cases, but much less in the former then the latter. But
Secondly, granting them to be as Learned and pious, as their admiring
Proselytes can fancy, or my Charity could wish them; yet we must remember, that
the most Learned and pious are but Men, and therefore do but know in part, and
are sanctified in part; and (as the learned Pref. before Sermon. Sect. 6.
Bp. Sanderson expresses it) By the power of Godliness in their Hearts are no
more secured from the possibility of falling into Error through Ignorance, then
from the possibility of falling into Sin through Infirmity; Which should
therefore prompt us, (as the safest course) to guide our Actions, not by
Example, which (through different Circumstances) is various, and uncertain, but
by Precept which is sure and fixed; not to have men's Persons in such Admiration,
as to embtace their Opinions and practices against the Light of Scripture, and
Right Reason.

But Thirdly, if Learning and Piety must pass for Arguments (which yet they
will not, it being no good Consequence, such a Learned and Pious Man, or such a
learned and pious Company of Men holds this Opinion, therefore it is true yet) I
say if these must be urged for Logic (though Comparisons are harsh, and for
the most part odious) I think it might easily appear (without disparagement be
it spoken) That there are as Honest, Religious, Zealous good men, that have
willingly and cheerfully submitted to the Church of England, as the best of
them all that have opposed the same.

Our Pious-Fore-fathers (to whom under God, we owe the purity of our Religion,
and some of which embraced a Stake) had more moderate apprehensions, then the
present Generation.

For, when the Tyranny of the Church of Rome had forced them to a Separation
(and that in Obedience to God, who commands us neither to believe Lies, nor to
commit Sin, neither of which they could avoid by continuing in Communion with
her) though they left many of her Ceremonies (the number of them being great
and burdensome) yet they thought fit to retain some others of them, and that
for Order and Decency in the Service of God.

If it be replied (as usually it is) That the Reformation (being carried on by
those that were (...), made of the same Clay, and subject to the like passions
with others) was at best but small and imperfect, it being beyond the wit and
power of Man, either to foresee, or remove all Inconveniences on a sudden, and
therefore, that it was the Duty of After-Ages, to perfect and complete what
they had so happily begun, by removing this Rubbish out of the House of God; To
this I Answer,

That the Topic of Reformation, is too large for a short Preface, and beyond
my design; only this by the by; I wish that Protestants (of whatsoever
Persuasion) would be more sparing in their Reflections upon our first
Reformers; for besides the advantage that is hereby given to the Romish Party,
we ought to consider, That abuses are easier complained of, then redressed; and
possibly, had the men of this Age been in their stead, and under the same
Circumstances, I do much question (if we may take an estimate by their late
transactions) whether they would have brought the work to so good an Issue, as
through Gods Blessing they then did. But no more of this.

It Is sufficient for my present purpose; That since the cause of their
Separation from Rome, was to avoid her Pollutions, it is evident; That these
Ceremonies which they thought fit to retain, were (in their Judgment) no part
of them, or any other way unlawful; the which, if my dissenting Brethren will
but grant, (not to talk now off their inexpedience, of which, neither they nor
I must be Judges) as it is a fair step to end our Differences, so it hence
avoidably follows, That if some pious men have refused the Ceremonies, others
of as great piety have Conformed to them; if some Learned have disputed, others
as Learned have defended, which may for ever Silence that Branch of the
Objection, viz. The Learning and Piety of their Parties.

Nor is there much more weight in that other part of the Objection, (drawn from
their persecutions and sufferings) which comes now to be considered.

A Pretense indeed very plausible and popular; for besides its subtle
Insinuations upon a natural score, (we being all obliged by that common bond of
Humanity, to compassionate those that are in any misery and trouble, witness
those usual resentments even for a Thief upon the Gallows) it has this farther
advantage; That wherever in Scripture the word Persecution is mentioned, and
that either with some Promise annexed for the support of Gods people (who
otherwise might despond under such gloomy dispensations) or of some Judgment
denounced, to restrain the fury of their Persecutors: I say, wheresoever such
passages occur (as they do frequently in holy Writ) they have learned the Art
(by imposing upon a credulous Vulgar) to make the World believe, that they are
those persecuted Saints, for whom those promises are recorded, and that all
such persons as are any way employed (though in Obedience to Authority) to
suppress them, are Persecuting wretches, on whom, sooner or later, all those
Judgments threatened shall certainly be inflicted.

I shall not in the least offend them with any harsh Invectives (such
Reflections (though some ease indeed to a burdened mind) being very little to
the Substance of a Cause) but shall only beg their Patience and Charity, whilst
I endeavor to undeceive them, by assuring them in plain English (what,
without Repentance, they will one day find true) That they are not Persecuted
as Saints, but punished as Malefactors.

And this I shall (through Gods assistance) undenyably prove in this Method.

1. By fixing the Notion, in laying down a clear and distinct definition of
Persecution.

2. By considering, how far those present Sufferings to which our
Nonconformists are obnoxious, do agree with it, or differ from it.

Persecution for Religion (for of such only I now treat) may not unfitly be
thus described.

It Is an eager violent inflicting, of outward temporal Evils, for the exercise
of true Religion.

I call it eager violent inflicting) so the Lat. i. e. continue, seu continuato
motu sequor. inimico affectu insequor. continuo, assidue quaero Mart. Lex.
Philolog.
Persequor, and the Gr. i. e. (...). Hesychius.
(...) do fully denote; they both signify so to follow, as a Hunter does his
Prey, who pursues it till he takes it.

But because these terms eager and violent, do only agree to one sort of
Persecution, viz. That which is furious and rageing, (it being sometimes more
mild and moderate) and since definitions do express the nature, but not the
degree of the thing defined (as when we define Calor, we take no notice of it
in summo) I shall therefore omit these words eager and violent, and then the
definition (I suppose unquestionably) stands thus,

Persecution is an inflicting of outward temporal Evils, for the exercise of
true Religion.

Outward temporal Evils) either upon the Body, as Banishment, Imprisonment,
Tortures, Death; or upon the Estate, as Pecuniary Mulcts, confiscation of
Goods; or upon Reputation and good Name, as Slanderings, Revilings, Reproachful
Speeches.

For the exercise of true Religion) which is the Ratio formalis, the
Constitutive difference, whereby Persecution is distinguished from all other
violences whatsoever. For let the greatest Reproaches and Indignities, usher in
the most exquisite Tortures, and those be concluded by a Death as cruel, as the
utmost Malice on Earth, or Fury in H^ll can contrive; yet unless these Tortures
be eo nomine inflicted, for the sake and cause of Religion, we may call them
merciless, inhumane, unnatural Cruelties, (or any such like name as can most
fitly express them) but not Persecution.

By Religion, (that I may yet more fully explain the Definition) I mean the
Worship of God; by true Religion, the worshipping of him according to his Will;
the which Will (though heretofore variously delivered, and in different
Dispensations, yet those extraordinary ways of Conveyance being now ceased) it
has pleased the Goodness and Wisdom of God to deliver in Writing (by the
Ministry of the Prophets and Apostles) in those Books which (by way of
eminency) we call the Scriptures. So that whatever Worship is not according to
those holy Oracles, is not true and acceptable, but false and vain: In vain do
ye Worship me, etc. It being an undoubted Truth; That God has as much right to
appoint the way of his own Worship, as to be Worshipped.

There are moreover, we know, two parts of Religion; Credenda, Agenda, Truths
to be believed, and Duties to be performed, in order to Salvation; and in both
these, the Scripture is our Rule and Direction.

He therefore that is Punished, either for believing those Truths, or for doing
those Duties, the belief and performance of which holy Scripture requires of
him; or he that is punished, for not believing those things as Truths, which
are but falsities and lies, or for not doing those things as Duties, which are
sinful and unlawful, he, I say, who is punished upon these accounts, is
properly Persecuted.

The Case then about Persecution, as it respects the Nonconformists, is briefly
this:

If those Instances, for which they are punished, be no way required of them in
holy Scripture, either for belief, or practice; and if it shall appear, upon
inquiry, that the Church of England requires nothing of them, that is in side
Erroneous, or in facto Impious; if she neither enjoynes them to believe Lies,
nor to commit any Sin, if nor so, nor so, let the world then judge where the
fault lies; and who they are, that (without Repentance) must one day Answer
(which I fear is now little thought on) for all those Separations and Divisions
in the Church, all those Distractions, Confusions, Wars, Murders, Rapines,
etc. (the natural consequents of the former) in the State, which these poor
miserable divided Kingdoms have so sadly experienced.

'Twill be replied, (and I find it no unusual Plea) That Preaching and Praying
are necessary Duties, But they are punished for Preaching and Praying,
Therefore they are punished for performance of religious Duties, and
consequently (according to the now mentioned definition) are Persecuted.

They tell us, Prop. for Saf. of King and Kingd. p. 10.
There are certain inoffencive persons, and they (meaning their Rulers) have
really no more against them, only that they meet, and preach, and pray
together. Innocent folks, who are dragged to Prison, for doing nothing in
earnest, but endeavoring to save their Souls.

That I may, if possible, convince my Brethren, of the weakness and vanity of
this plausible Argument, I Will give them my Answer (I hope Methodically and
clearly) in these following Conclusions.

Concl: 1.

By Preaching and Praying, (as they are the Subject of our present
Disquisition) is meant the performance of them in public, not in private; this
latter being liberae observation is, since every man (of what persuasion
soever) may not only Pray with his own family, when and how he pleases, but
also Preach, or Instruct them (and that without fear of punishment) in what
manner he thinks fit.

Concl: 2.

In Preaching and Praying there is considerable, Substantia and Circumstantiae,
Res and Modus, the substance of the Duty, or the thing to be performed, and the
circumstances, or manner of its performance.

Preaching and Praying, quoad Substantiam, are necessary, necessitate Praecepti
and Medii, i. e. God has Commanded, and the condition of the Church (whilst
Militant and in via) does require, that these Duties be attended.

Nor is the Substance only, but also the Circumstances of these Duties in
Thesi, and in the general necessary, i. e. when these Duties are considered in
actu exercito, whenever they are put into practice, we must necessarily make
use of Circumstances, some or other.

Concl: 3.

These Circumstances (however in Thesi necessary) in Hypothesi and in
Particular, are not determined in Scripture; (which, I do not mean as to their
Lawfulness, but as to their being duties) if they be, there must then be
produced some clear and distinct Precept (perpetually obligatory to the Church)
requiring our observance of such or such Circumstances; for this, and nothing
else, (though other things are pretended) can constitute a Religious Duty.
Thus, though Prayer be a Duty, yet whether it be a Set Form, or Extemporary?
The Minister, whether habited in a Surplice, or without? His Gesture, whether
kneeling, or standing? The Place, whether in a Deske, or at the Communion
Table, or at both? So for Preaching, whether in a Gown, a long Cloak or a
short? How many Sermons in one day, whether three, or two, or but one; I say,
none of these, or such like, are determined in Scripture to be our Duties;
those who assert they are, must produce the Command making them to be such; for
Duty and Command, have a necessary Respect and Relation to one another.

Concl: 4.

These Circumstances (though still free and indifferent quoad naturam, being
neither commanded nor forbidden yet) must not be left undetermined quoad usum;
i. e. Private persons must not be left at liberty, to do what they think fit in
Circumstantials, as if an agreement in Substantialls only were sufficient; so
as if there be but Preaching and Praying; if these Duties be but performed, one
man may use a Set Form, another may pray Extempore; this Minister may wear the
Surplice, whilst his Neighbor rejects it as Popish and Antichristian. Does not
any man (who has not enslaved his Reason, to support a Faction* very easily
observe, that the bare mention of this Fancy (such I am forced to call it) is
its own Confutation? was it ever so much as thought on, but in the heat of a
Dispute? Did ever any Constituted Church in the world allow such Liberty? Are
not my Brethren themselves convinced of the contrary? If they deny it, I could
very easily refresh their Memories in so obvious a Theme; I could turn them to
their Directory, and their Ordinances to enforce it, etc. but I spare them. In
short,

Mr. Newcomes Sermon. at Paul's, Feb. 8. 1646. page 18.
There is scarce any difference so small, and inconsiderable, but the
divulging, and propagating of it, may prove dangerous and pernicious, and in
the event intolerable: Therefore to allow private persons the Liberty, to
order these Circumstances in the public Worship ( pro modulo Conscientiae) as
their own Conscience (perhaps humor or interest) shall Dictate, is the ready
way to destroy all Order and Government in the world. And this I hope is
sufficiently made plain (to any man that will but read and consider) in the
following Collections.

Well then, to rise yet a little higher.

Since it is necessary that there must be some Circumstances made use of in the
exercise of these Duties, Preaching and Praying, (it being impossible to
perform any Action (and therefore Religious Action) without them) and since
Scripture has determined nothing, either by requiring some as necessary, or
forbidding others as unlawful: and since to leave them undetermined (for
private Persons to do what seems good in their own eyes) is apparently
destructive both to Church and State; what can more naturally follow then this.
That they must be Determined by the Supreme Magistrate; who by the Advice of
his Ecclesiastical Council, his Convocation, (as in Seculars by his Parliament)
may appoint the performance of these, and other Religious Duties in such a
manner, as is most agreeable to that Apostolical Canon: Let all things be done
decently and in order. I proceed therefore to my fifth Conclusion, which is
this,

Concl: 5.

The Supreme Magistrate must determine what Circumstances shall be used in the
Worship and Service of God. The which Conclusion, I shall rather suppose then
prove; not that I think it of less truth or certainty then the rest, but
because our Divines, not only Episcopal, but also the dissenting Parties (with
whom I am now treating) have performed it with so much plainness and
satisfaction to my hand.

And though I might collect whole Volumes from their Sermons, and other
Treatises, to confirm this Truth, yet to relieve my self from the drudgery of
transcribing, (which is no pleasing task) and to give ease to my Reader, I shall
only refer him to some Places in the following Collections; which if he please
to turn to, and read (as they are cited in the Sea the Pages following, viz. p.
18. 19, 20, 21. 28. 29. 35. 36. 37. 38. 39. 50.
Margin) before he goes any farther, he will do me great right, and himself no
displeasure.

From which Places it evidently appears, That the Magistrate is both Custos and
Vindex utriusque Tabulae. That the Examples of the Kings of Israel and Judah,
may sufficiently warrant and encourage all Religious Magistrates, to reform and
settle Religion in one Uniform way, and take care that all under their
Government, should all serve the Lord with one shoulder, this being not a
Tyranny over men, but the Privilege of the Gospel. That they must take a
course, that Christians may live a quiet and Peaceable life in Godliness and
honesty, not in Strife and Contention; which how they shall be able to perform,
if every man (concerning these Circumstances) may hold what be please, and
Publish and Preach what he holds, I am not able to imagine. These and many the
like Passages (some of which I have now given you in their own words) you will
find in the forecited places; from whence I think it is plain, ut supra page 20.
That where the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church does not, or cannot
prevail, the Magistrate must interpose his Coercive Power, for Restraint or
Remedy. Which leads me to the sixth Concl.

Concl. 6.

There must be Eccl: Laws, Canons, or Constitutions made, for the due ordering
of these Circumstances.

Much I grant has been objected by my dissenting B^: against these
Constitutions, both in Thesi (against all Eccl: Laws in general) and in
Hypothesi (against these of our own Church in particular.)

As to the first (for the latter is beyond my design) I think it would puzzle
the most judicious Dissenter, to give a solid satisfactory Account, why the
Supreme Power may make Laws to determine Indifferent Circumstances in
Temporalls, and not in Spiritualls; they being both liable (in my apprehension)
to the same Difficulties and Inconveniences, and if the latter be exploded, the
former (supposing they are faithful to their Principles) will very hardly be
defended.

Concl: 7.

These Eccl: Laws when rightly made and constituted, are obligatory, and must
be obeyed. The Reason is, Because Obedience to Lawful Authority inlicitis and
honestis, is a duty, which God in his holy Word requires of us. Now that is
lawful, and consequently the debita materia of any humane Constitution
(Ecclesiastical or Civil) which is not contrary to any former obligation.
Unless therefore the matter of these Constitutions, or the thing which they
require us to perform, can be evinced (by good Logical Deduction) to be
contrary to Gods will Revealed in Scripture, there remains nothing but
Obedience, not only Passive, cheerfully and quietly (without murmurings and
revilings) submitting to the Punishment; but also Active, by a ready
performance of the thing commanded; though possibly it might be thought very
inconvenient, as being contrary to Education, Custom, Interest and Advantage
in the World, and the like. And therefore,

Concl: 8.

We being not (even the best of us all) over-ready in this great Duty of
Obedience, There are Penalties annexed to these Eccl. Constable. (as well as to
other Laws) to frighten us into our Duty. Such is the corruption and
stubborness of our natures, and so little are we affected with the Obligations
of Conscience, that it is morally impossible for the most wholesome Laws to
obtain their End, without the Addition of Civil Sanctions to enforce them. For,
if the Laws of God, which are holy, just and good, and every way perfect, (they
being the contrivance of infinite Wisdom and Goodness) if these are contemned
and neglected, and (and as sad experience proves, it) daily cast behind our
backs, when the observance of them is inconsistent with some Brutish Pleasure;
no wonder if the Laws of Men, (who not only (many times) want Wisdom to
contrive, but also Goodness to design what is most profitable for their
People) I say, no wonder if these be rather quarreled with and disputed, then
submitted to and obeyed.

As therefore the infinite Majesty of Heaven, has enforced the observance of
his Commands, by a suitable proposal of Rewards and Punishments; so it is the
Duty of Inferior Legislators, to be a Punishment to evil doers, and a Praise to
them that do well. Therefore,

Concl: 9.

The Supreme Magistrate, in inflicting these Penalties, i. e. in punishing the
Offenders against his Constitutions, does execute Justice, and perform his Duty.

The end and design of Government, is Salus Publica, it is to take care, ne
quid detrimenti capiat Communitas, or in the Apostles Phrase, That we may live
a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. This is the End.

And since no End can be attained, but by a due and effectual Application of
proper Means, we cannot but in Reason grant, that the Magistrate may employ
such Medium's as are most conducive to his desired End. Amongst which, this
certainly is not the least considerable, (and without which, all Government is
but precarious) viz. A removal of whatsoever is hurtful and destructive to his
Society.

Now since the Public allowance, of different Opinions, and Practices about
Circumstantials in Religion (particularly about Preaching ad Praying) does
naturally improve into contentious Disputes, and those Disputes (if not
restraind) break out into Civil Wars; for Mr. Newcomens Ser. before Parl. Sep.
12. 1644. page 36.
Men will at last take up Swords and Spears instead of Pens; and defend by
Arms what they cannot do by Arguments. Since things are thus, It Is at least
Prudence (if not Duty) in the Supreme Power, to remove the Occasion of this
Ruin, by enjoining the Public Practice of these Duties in one Uniform way;
That all his Subjects may speak the same thing; and that there be no Divisions
amongst them, perfectly joynd together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment.

If therefore upon inquiry it do appear, That the Magistrate has Power to
make Constitutions, for the better ordering of those Circumstances, about which
Scripture has determind nothing, whether we must use or not use them; and if
Offenders against these Constitutions are justly punishable, it undenyably
follows; that in punishing such Violaters of his Laws, the Magistrate does not
Persecute, but execute Justice, and that those Persons who are thus reflected
upon, are not Persecuted as Saints, but Punishd as Malefactors. The very Case
of our Nonconformists here in England.

The Summary of these Conclusions (that my Reader may the better apprehend them
to be both Consequent and Evident) is this.

Preaching and Praying are necessary Duties, Which cannot be performd without
Circumstances, These are not determind in Scripture, Nor must be left
undetermind, Therefore by the Supreme Magistrate, Who to effect this makes Laws
and Constitutions, These have Penalties annexd to be inflicted on the
Disobedient, The infliction of these Penalties is the execution of Justice, and
the Magistrates Duty, But no Persecution, Therefore those Persons that suffer
these Penalties are not injuriousely Persecuted but justly Punished.

Quod erat Demonstrandum. I cannot at all doubt, but the weakness of my
Brethrens Argument (to any unprejudiced Reader) begins now to appear. However,
I will repeat their Syllogism once more, and then let the World judge who is
in the Right.

Preaching and Praying are necessary Duties,
But N. C. are punished for Preaching and Praying,
Therefore They are Punished for necessary Duties,
and consequently are Persecuted.
I Answer, first, by distinguishing the Major.

Preaching and Praying quoad Substantiam, are necessary Duties, i. e. Its
necessary that these Duties be performed. Quoad Circumstantias, they are not
necessary, i. e. though these Duties be performed, yet it is not necessary to
perform them in such or such a manner. Thus, though Prayer be necessary, yet
that it should be Extemporary, or without a Form, is not necessary, or that the
Minister should be without a Surplice, is not necessary.

So for Preaching, though it be a Duty, yet to preach or hear a Sermon in a
Conventicle of two or three Thousand, or to expose my self to Sufferings, and
perhaps, a long Imprisonment, to the neglect of my Profession, and thence the
ruin of my Family, for which I am bound to provide* I say, to throw my self
upon all these Inconveniences, only to hear a Sermon from A. B. or C. D. when
I may safely hear a much better from an Orthodox Minister, is so far from being
necessary, that it may justly (...) Who has required these things at your
hands. That

Secondly, I Answer, by denying the Minor, which is utterly false and untrue.
They are not punished for Preaching and Praying (they being punishable for
their neglect) but they are punished for not observing those Circumstances
about Preaching and Praying, which Authority requires of them; or, they are
punished for not performing these Duties in such a manner as their Governors
require; or more plainly yet, they are punished for not observing, and
submitting to those Constitutions, which their Governors have Established, for
the better ordering of these Duties. The Obligation of which Constitutions
(because they are much opposed) I Will endeavor to confirm by this one
Consideration. Bonum non oritur nisi ex integra Causa, There must be a
concurrence of all requisite Conditions to make a thing good. Now the
Conditions required to the Validity of a Law, are not unduely expressed by the
four Causes; Efficient, Material, Formal, Final; and, That Law which is not
Defective in any one of these, is Valid and Obligatory, But such are the
Constitutions of the Church of England. Therefore. etc.

1. Respectu Causae Efficientis, there is sufficient Authority and Legislative
Power. 2. Respectu Materiae, the things enjoined are not unlawful, as being
contrary to any Law, any former Obligation. 3. Respectu Formae, there is
sufficient Promulgation. 4. Respectu Finis, Public Peace and Safety, (by
restraining Disorders, Tumults, Contentions, which might arise from Difformity
in Worship) is the very Reason and End of their being exacted.

Object. But is not Conscience violated, and Christianliberty infringed by
these Ecclesiastical Constitutions, since they determine us precisely ad unum
in the use of Indifferent things, which God and Christ have left free ad
utrumlibet?

Answ. I Answer, (referring my Reader for farther Satisfaction to Bishop
Sandersons seventh Sermon ad Pop. page 384.) That there is no Subject of
England (whatever is pretended to the contrary) but has the Liberty of his
Conscience; or, (to speak more intelligibly) may worship God according to his
Conscience, i. e. in such a way and manner as his Conscience (his judging
Faculty) judges most acceptable; provided always, that he keep his opinions to
himself, or to his Family, and make them a Rule only for his own private
Practice: But if such a man will go publish his Opinions, and entangle the
Consciences of others, and seek to draw Disciples after him, and make a Party,
and cause Divisions and Dissentions amongst his Majesty's Subjects, and trouble
the Public, he is to be restrained, he is not to be tolerated.

Object. Mr. Calamys Ser. before the Lords. Dec. 25. 1644. page 38.
Will you allow the Magistrate to Tyranize over men's Consciences?

Answ. By no means; But I believe it is the Duty of Magistrates to keep men
from infecting their Subjects with Soul-destroying Errors. If thou have an
Heretical Opinion, have it to thy self, and the Magistrate will not, nay,
cannot meddle with thy private Conscience. But if thou labourest to infect
others, with thy Gracedestroying Opinions, I doubt not but the Magistrate is
bound to keep thee from spreading thy Infection to the undoing of the Souls of
his Subjects. If he may lawfully shut up a man that has the Plague upon his
body, that he may not Infect others; why not a man that has the Plague of
Heresy upon his Soul, that so he may not destroy the Souls of Thousands? Shall
a Master in a Family have power to put away a Servant that is tainted with a
gross Opinion, and yet not be called a Tyrant over that Servants Conscience?
And shall not the chief Magistrate of a Kingdom have Power to put out of his
Kingdom (at least to shut up from doing hurt) one that is his Subject, and
polluted with Blasphemous, Heretical, Idololatrical Opinions? Is not the
Kingdom the Magistrates House and Family?

These are the means that are to be used to cure the distractions of England.
The Lord give us grace to put them in practice.

But this and the other party will reply, That they are neither Heretical nor
Turbulent; and therefore what is all this discourse to them.

I Answer, No man must be Judge in his own Cause; every man therefore is to be
supposed such, that (when his Place requires it) refuses (by public Oaths,
Subscriptions, and Declarations) to give the Magistrate assurance, that he is
Orthodox and Peaceable.

Mr. Newcomen: Sermon. at Paul's Feb. 8. 1646. p. 40.
Possibly they will all say, They are of the same Opinion with the Reformed
Churches in Fundamentals, as well as we, and their differences are but in
minutioribus. Now supposing this to be true (as it may be in some of them) why
do they then transgress the Apostles Rule? why do they not if it be in matters
of lesser moment wherein they differ from us, why do not they keep their
Opinions private, and have their Faith unto themselves before God? why do they
upon so small Differences (if the Differences be so small) withdraw from
Communion with us, and the rest of the Churches, and gather themselves into
distinct and separate Churches?

Vt supra p. 21.
Had all that Profess the Gospel in England, made Conscience to be of the same
mind, and the same Judgment with their Brethren, and the rest of the Churches
of Christ, as far as possibly; and where they cannot, where there is a
necessity of differing, had they made Conscience to keep their Differences from
appearing in Public; to have their private Opinions and Faith to themselves,
and not entangle the weak with their doubtful Disputations; forbearing to judge
or despise those that are not of their Opinion, loving them still as Brethren,
not censuring them as Profane, Antichristian, Fighters against God, men that
will wilfully shut their eyes against the Light; had these things (I say) been
attended to on all hands, our Breaches had never been so great as now they are,
nor should the lovers of Truth and Peace have had so much cause to lament them.

But, Mr. Baxters Cure of Church divisions, page 254.
O the deceitfulness of the heart of man! Little do many real Separists, who
cry out against the spirit of Persecution, suspect that the same spirit is in
them! whence is Persecution, but from thinking ill of others, and abhorring
them, or not loving them. And do not you do so by those whom you causelessly
separate from? Mr. Newcomen ut supra p. 40.
Who are they that brand their Brethren with the Title Proud, Time-servers,
Prelatical, Tyrannical, Antichristian? And what is this less then Persecution?

Romans 2. 1.
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge: for in
that thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do
the same things. Matthew. 7. 3. 4. 5.
And why beholdest thou the More that is in thy Brothers eye, but considerest
not the Beam that is in thine own eye? Or how will thou say to thy Brother, let
me pull out the Mote out of thine eye; and behold, a Beam is in thine own eye?
Thou Hypocrite, first cast out the Beam out of thine own eye, and then shall
thou see clearly to cast out the Moat out of thy Brothers eye.

I have a fair occasion (could I allow my self the liberty of its improvement)
to return my Brethrens Argument upon their own heads, by assuring them (and I
beseech God to give them grace to consider and bewail it) that the Persecution
(so much complained of) lies at their own Doors, they being not innocent
Sufferers, but injurious Aggressors.

These I know are very harsh and unpleasing words; but the Truth of them will
appear, when we shall have remembered, that there are more sorts of Persecution
then one, of which St. Lib. de Unit. Eccles. contr. Peril: Epist. cap. 17.
Augustine thus informs. Gravius persequitur filius Patrem male vivendo, quam
Pater filium castigando. Et gravius ancilla Saram persecuta est per iniquam
Superbiam, quam eam Sara per debitam Disciplinam. Et gravius Dominum
persequebantur propter quos dictum est, zelus domus tuae comedit me, quam eos
ipse cum eorum mensas evertit, and eos flagello de templo expulit. There is you
see Persecution of the Tongue, and of an irregular Life, as well as of the
Hand; and if my Brethren are not at present guilty of this latter (whether
through restraint, or their own good nature I shall not determine) I am sure
the former is their constant Practice.

For, (to insist only upon that) it is even amazeing to mention, what bitter
Taunts, rude Sarcasmes, unmannerly Jeers, fabulous Stories, scandalous
Reproaches, are their daily exercise, whereby they vex the Righteous Souls,
weaken the Hands, discourage the Endeavors, of their honest Orthodox
Conforming Brethren, Are not all Places, all Companies, all Occasions
sufficient witnesses of this Truth?

Really it is very sad, (and to be lamented with Tear) That the great work of
Religion, the Preaching of the Gospel, and the Salvation of Souls, should be
thus obstructed by these unfortunate practices.

But I hope no faithful Son of the Church will be discouraged at these Things,
or in the least neglect his Duty, though all the World should be offended at
him. The Rule is fixed. We must obey God rather them Man. It Is our Dear Lords
case, in whom there was no Sin, neither was Guile found in his mouth, and yet
he was accused for a Wine bibber, a Glutton, and that he had a Devil. Math.
10. 24. etc.
The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord. It is
enough for the Disciple that he be as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord:
if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they
call them of his Household? Fear them not therefore: Fear not them which kill
the body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him which is able
to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.

I cannot now stay to expostulate with my Brethren, otherwise I should tell
them, there is such a thing as Scandal; and that Christ has little ones, the
meanest of whom, if they offend (hinder from their Duty, and stop them in their
way to Heaven, by speaking Evil of the Ways of God) it were better a Millstone
were hanged about their necks, and they cast into the midst of the Sea.

But I shall only desire them to consider that of Saint James; If any man among
you seem to be Religious, and u James 1. 26.
bridleth not his Tongue, but deceives his own heart, this man's Religion is
vain.

Mr. Baxter ut supra p. 245.
And yet how contrary is the practice of no small number of the Religious? In
all Companies, how forward are they to talk of the sins of Princes and
Parliaments? of Courtiers, of Nobility and Gentry, especially of Ministers? And
not only of the scandalous, that are guilty indeed, but of the Innocent, that
are not of their way, whose faults they rather (...).
make than find.

I have done; and must entreat the Readers Charity, in pardoning those excesses
of my Pen, which (whilst I was intent upon the matter) may possibly have fallen
from me. God he knows it, (and it is my comfort when the world condemns me) I
have no design to exasperate any man but to reform him. If this do not
satisfy (for some men are very hard to please) take this farther Apology in the
words of that Reverend Person now mentiond, whose Piety and Moderation I wish
his Brethren would imitate.

Mr. Baxter ut supra. p. 251. and 253.
Woe to the Land and People that can multiply Sin and cannot Repent; And woe to
them that pretend Repentance, and love to be flattered in their Sin, and cannot
endure to be admonished, but take all the discoverys of their Sin to be
injurious reproach. Among the Profane we take this to be a deadly sign of
Impenitency. And is it so bad in them, and good in us? It is part of my Office
to cry with holy Bradford REPENT O ENGLAND; and to say after Christ (Except ye
Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish,) And can I call men to Repent, when I
must not dare to tell them of what? nor to mention the Sin which is most to be
repented of? I use all this Preface because I know that Guilt and Impenitency
are touchy, and tender, and galled, and querulous, and such will bestow the
time in backbiting their Monitor, which they should bestow in lamenting their
sin. But shall I therefore forbear, and betray their Souls, and betray the Land
through cowardly Silence? Must I show that I hate Professors by not
admonishing them, (Lev. 19. 17.) when I must show that I love the looser sort
by my sharp reproofs? Must I not fear them that can kill the Body? and must I
fear to displease a professed Christian, calling him to repentance in a time of
Judgments?

Read on now with these Memento's in your eye: And if after so plain a
Premonition, you will venture to charge me with that which I disclaim, do it
at your own peril. I stand or fall to the Judgment of God, and look for a
better reward then the Hypocrites, which is, To have the good Opinion of men,
be they Professors of Piety, or Profane. And with me by Gods grace, it shall
hereafter be accounted a small Thing (to the hindering of my Fidelity to Christ
and men's souls) to be judged of men, 1 Cor. 4. 3.

And if there should be any Pastors of the Churches, who instead of concurring
to heal the Flocks of these dividing Principles, shall rather join with
Backbiters, and encourage them in their misreports and slanders, because it
tends to the supposed interest of their Party or themselves, let them prepare
to answer such unfaithfulness to their Consciences which will shortly be
awakned, and to the great Shepherd of the Flock who is at the door, and who
told even the Devils Agents, that a House or Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand, but is brought to naught. Matt. 12. (If alas, alas, experience
has not yet, not yet, not yet, done enough to teach them this.)

TOLERATION Disapproved and Condemned etc.
Humbly presented to the serious Consideration of all Dissenting Parties.
My Brethren,
THE Lord Jesus (who knows all our Hearts, and before whose great Tribunal both
you and and I must one day appear) is my witness; that the chief design of my
present undertaking, is the Peace and welfare of the Church; the continuance of
the Gospel; and the eternal Salvation of precious and immortal Souls. I do
therefore much hope (though we are all naturally impatient of opposition) that
you will favorably receive, and seriously consider these plain (yet well
meaning) lines; which have no other patronage, then the charity of the Author,
and the candor and piety of those persons to whom they are directed.

The solemnity of this Preface as it may raise your expectations, so it may
possibly invite your riosity to inquire; who, or what manner of person I am,
that have taken the confidence of so important an Address.

And though the knowledge of my name would signify little, (I being not so
considerable as that it should add any weight to my performance) yet that I may
in some sort gratify such obliging Readers (as I hope to find you) I shall
farther acquaint you; that (though I am not a person very ambitious to be known
yet) upon occasion, I shall either publicly own, and vindicate, or (if duly
convinced) as publicly recant my present opinion; and (in short) to secure
you, and Apologize for my self, (since concealed names are ever suspicious) I
do solemnly protest: that I am no scoffer at Religion, nor railer at true
Piety; that I love an honest religious good man (that endeavors to save his
soul, and come to heaven) under what profession soever I find him: that I will
pity, and (according to my poor ability) rectify, but never make sport with
his errors, and mistakes: and herein I do readily subscribe to the learned L
Advertisements touching the Church of England, in his Refuse. ^. 165.
Verulam, That to turn Religion into a Comedy or Satyr, to search, and rip up
wounds with a laughing countenance; to intermix Scripture and scurrility
sometimes in one sentence, is a thing very far from the devout reverence of a
christian, and scant beseeming the honest regard of a sober man. Two principal
causes (says this honorable person) have I ever known of Atheism; curious
Controversies, and profane scoffing. And no less do I admire (what I hope you
will grant I have endeavored to transcribe) that incomparable saying of the
judicious The Preface to hi^ Eccl: Pol Sect. 2.
Hooker. There will come a time when three words uttered with Charity and
meekness, shall receive a far more blessed Reward, then three thousand volumns
written with disdainful sharpness of Wit. But, if an irregular heat (which I
will yet endeavor to suppress) should some little display it self; (it* being
very difficult to contend coldly, and without Affection, about things which we
hold dear and precious) and certainly the Peace of the Church is eminently
such) if Passion, and Interest, should obtrude themselves under the notion of
Zeal (which God knows, is no less common then fatal mistake in the management
of our Controversies) I do then humbly beg of you, that you would seriously
consider the following Words of the forecited good man; that, the manner of
men's writings must not alienate our hearts from the Truth, if it appear they
have the Truth.

Having now [as far as it is judged convenient) given you an account of the
Author, it will in all likelihood be next demanded (since this Subject has been
of late so fully, and as some think unanswerably discust) what convincing
Reasons I have to trouble, either my Brethren to read, or my self to write, so
common, and (whilst proposalls are on foot) so unwelcome a discourse.

Really (my Brethren) did I nor fear, that such frequent protestations might
seem too affected; or that Conscience and Reality, might be mistaken for humor
and design; I would once more call the searcher of all Hearts to witness; that
I am so far from a persecuting spirit (the usual brand we bestow upon our
Adversaries) that some Months since I had so favorable an opinion of
Indulgence, Connivence, or Toleration, that I little thought I should now
appear an obstructer of so much desired, and (as I then apprehended) so blessed
a work.

I am confident you are very forward to know the Reason of so sudden, and
unexpected a change; it is therefore (omitting all farther prefacing) in short
thus.

Being desirous to inform my self in the Nature and extent of Toleration,
which I observed (in such variety of methods, by such different Parties) so
zealously promoted; (and that under no less titles then Liberty of conscience;
the great Interest of all Kingdoms, and States, and particularly of England)
in order to a more full satisfaction (not omitting my hearty Prayers to the
Father of Lights, from whom comes every good and perfect gift, and who has
promised to give Wisdom, Counsel, and direction to him that asks) I
procured, and perused, some of the most considerable Tracts and Pamphlets ( pro
and con) that have handled this Subject: and I must ingeniously confess (though
I was not perfectly convinced yet) I did at first very much favor (whom I do
yet no less pity) the dissenting Party: and really it seemed so plausible
(since every man must answer for his own works) that every man should have the
Liberty of his own opinion; and the name of Conscience is so sacred; that I
durst not but make a pause, before I had passed a judgment upon such honest
pretenses. And (to make you my Confessors) I was no little affected with some
resentments of a late ingenious Writer; his words are these.

There are a company of People about us in the c Propos: for the safety of King
and Kingdom. Page 10.
Country of different persuasions, who meet sometimes many hundreds together,
that our Justices have been in perplexity what to do. The most of them (for
ought I perceive] are certainly inoffensive persons, and they have really no
more against them, then Pliny against the Christians of old, when he sent to
Trajan about them, that is, only that they meet, and Preach and Pray together:
and if that excellent Prince was ashamed after this report he gave him, of them
in his Epistle, to have those good men sought out any more unto punishment, I
cannot but favor their inclinations, which are a verse from the like
Inquisition. I profess to God it is such an ungentleman like thing (me thinks)
to trouble ones Neighbors, that I should be glad to rid modest men of that
work. It were better all these Acts suffered at once a due and Christian
regulation, than we should be still put upon, this untoward dragging innocent
Folk's thus to Prison for doing nothing in earnest, but endeavoring to save
their souls. In the name of God take you your Psalter, and let them say their
Prayers as they will.

This, together with some other reflections drawn from the great Love of
Christ to us (which therefore by way of gratitude we are to acknowledge by
suitable Acts of love, pity, and indulgence to our poor Brethren) did very
much move me; The words of my Author are these.

There is a person I hope you would do a kindness P. 72.
for with all your heart, and you have Reason, it is for your dear Lord that
bought you, and there is nothing in the world you can do (I am persuaded) that
he will take so kindly from you at this time, as to be pitiful to his Servants,
who are distressed about your Acts in point of Conscience, and who the more
despised they are, and like unto their Lord, the fitter Subjects they are for
your compassion. And a little after -- If you had no need of mercy from God, it
were tolerable then for you to be extreme toward others.

I hope this candid confession of my weakness (if yet it be a weakness to
acknowledge my errors) shall not so far prejudice my Reader, as to hinder his
acceptance of my following Reasons, if it appear that they are really such (i.
e.) rational and convincing. To give you therefore my Thoughts in order, my
first reflection was this;

That though this Toleration, whilst considered in the notion, and as it were
in the Idea, do carry with it a great deal of outward glory and luster, filling
the hearts of men with expectations of much happiness to ensue, (and no wonder
if it be therefore entertained with general applause especially of the Vulgar
sort) yet when we come ad practicandum; to consider how this notion may best be
made practical and put in execution, we shall then meet with such
impediments, and inconveniences, as shall render the performance (to say no
worse) very far short of promise, and expectation. And for my own part
(submitting still to better judgments) I do find it so unintelligible and
unpracticable, that however it is pretended (and that very highly) by others,
yet in my apprehension (and indeed the process of the World shows no less)
it is only a Thing for weaker Parties to talk on.

For, (to remind you only of what others have more fully discussed) if a
Toleration must be admitted, then either Universal and unlimited, (such as may
comprehend even the Papists themselves) or else Particular, ( i. e.) limited to
some peculiar Persons or Parties.

As to the first, it is so perfectly wild and extravagant, that (in the
judgment of all sober Protestants) it rather deserves an explosive scorn then
a serious confutation.

For the second, viz: a particular and limited; unless (which seems the
likeliest way to bring the work to some Issue) the dissenting Parties (who are
many and of different persuasions) would clearly and distinctly acquaint the
world, (in some public Writing unanimously owned) who they are that shall be
indulged, and upon what conditions, we are yet never the nearer.

They give us indeed (by way of Resolution) some general expressions: but
these then are of so doubtful, (I had almost said impossible) interpretation;
that I appeal to any rational man (all prejudice and interest laid aside)
whether such uncertainty's can be laid as a sufficient Foundation, on which to
raise so considerable a structure as the Peace of the Church, and Prosperity of
the Nation. Disc. of Relig. Title page


For whilst they tell us of Reformed Religion to be settled in its due
Latitude, and yet never acquaint us what we are to understand by this due
Latitude, what is the full extent, and meaning of the Word: whilst they
propose; that the Parties Disc. of Rel. Par. 1. p. 18.
comprehended in their establishment shall be of importance in the Public
Interest, and of Principles congruous to such stated Order in the Church, as
the stability of the Commonwealth requires: and yet never inform us what these
important Interests, and congruous Principles are; what other is it, but to
trifle us with Ambiguities and Amusements? to trouble both themselves and
others, in thus fiercely contending for a Toleration, in no body know's What,
and to be granted to no body know's Whom?

I have given you a reflection, which if duly improved by some happier Pen,
might possibly appear of more difficult resolution, then your present
Sentiments (occasioned by the meanness of its delivery) may invite you to
apprehend.

However, I am sure (as to me) it has been of sufficient moment to revise my
former Thoughts; and to show less kindness to your present Toleration,
toward which I have been (very lately) more warmly affected.

But (to come yet closer to my intendment) that which did more fully (and if I
mistake not unanswerably) convince me, was the perusal of several Sermons
preached by some of our late eminent Divines (before the two Houses of
Parliament) on solemn occasions. For I must not omit to tell you, that having
heard those Discourses much commended (as being delivered by such famous
Preachers, before such as were reputed so wise and judicious Auditors as the
Lords, and Commons, and therefore without doubt did contain somewhat
extraordinary) I procured a good number of them (about an hundred) and as my
other occasions would permit (not without much expectation) set my self to the
reading of them.

And indeed (that I may be faithful to the memory of those Persons) I must
acknowledge both to you and the world, I received no bad return of my labors;
for I found (which is chiefly to my present purpose to observe) this point of
Toleration so excellently, and fully discussed (though obiter only and as it
were by the by) that no tract ex instituto (and there are some very ingenious)
could ever afford me the like satisfaction.

Now that this may not be gratis and precario dictum; I shall very faithfully
lay down their own Reasons in their own words; and then leave it to you and all
men to consider; whether it be not (morally at least) impossible; that so many
excellently learned, and eminent Divines, shoud so frequently, (and that with
such vehemence of zeal) oppose the very Name of Toleration (and which is yet
more observable, that those very Sermons in which these invectives are
contained, should not only receive the Thanks of the two Houses, but by their
especial order, be likewise made Public) were there not some secret Danger in
the Thing, which either the Interest, or Security of the present Age, will not
now suffer us to apprehend?

I speak as unto Wise men, Judge ye what I say. Dr. Cornelius Burgess. Mr.
John Ward. Mr. William Good. Mr. Thomas Thorowgood. Mr. Humphrey Hardwick. Mr.
Arthur Salwey. Mr. William Reyner. Mr. Thomas Case. Mr. John Lightfoot. Mr.
Thomas Watson. Mr. George Hughes. Mr. Edmund Calamy. Mr. Richard Baxter. Mr.
Thomas Horton. Mr. Lazarus Seaman. Mr. Matthew Newcomen. Mr. Richard Vines. Mr.
Simeon Ash. Mr. James Cranford. Mr. Thomas Edwards.

Cujus aures clausae veritati sunt, ut ab amico verum audire nequeat, hujus
salus desperanda est. Cic. Rhet. l. 1.
The Testimonies of the forementioned Divines against Toleration.
GIve me leave, I beseech you, to speak freely to Dr. Corn. Burgess Sermon.
before the house of Commons November. 5. 1641. p. 60. Land. printed for C.
Meredith at the Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1641.
you; I will do it humbly too.

At your first sitting down, you expressed many brave and noble resolutions, of
giving Gods business the precedence of all other your Affairs: and your
beginnings promised much. Howbeit, I know not how it comes to pass, but so it
is, that Gods work lies yet undone. Matters of Religion lie a bleeding; all
Government and Discipline of the Church is laid in her Grave, and all
putredinous vermin of bold Schismatics and frantic Sectaries glory in her
ashes, making her fall, their own rising to mount our Pulpits, to offer strange
fire, to expel the gravest, ablest, and most eminent Ministers in the
Kingdom; (if not out of their Pulpits yet) out of the hearts of their People,
as a company of weak men, formalists, time-servers, no Ministers of Christ, but
Limbs of Antichrist; having no calling except from the Devil; and to forsake
our Assemblies as Babylonish and Antichristian; so as in short time they will
not leave us the face of a Church. And yet No Course is taken to suppress their
fury and to reduce them to Order, which (as things now stand) will never be,
till you put your hands to the Cure. P. 63.
I beseech you therefore, in the Name of that great God, whom you serve, and
who has hitherto blessed you, and for the Peace and prosperity of this Church
and Kingdom, to resume and pursue your first thoughts of setting up God and
his ordinances, as becomes you in a regular way -- P. 64.
That our Church and the Government thereof may be no longer laid waste, and
exposed to Confusion, under the plausible pretense of Not forceing men's
Consciences. To put all men into a course of Order and Uniformity in Gods way,
is not to force the Conscience, but to set up God in his due place, and to
bring all his people into the path of righteousness and life.

Sermon: before the Commons at a public Fast March 30 1642 p. 35.
Be there none of you that foresee the fatal mischiefs of leaving all men to
their liberties in the things of God and yet want hearts to use your Skill and
interest to make have to settle matters of Religion, least you come too late
with a Remedy when the disease is grown incurable, and the Kingdom grown to
that pass (as the grave Historian noted of old Rome) that it can neither bear
the malady, nor endure the Cure. P. 46.
Do you not see or hear daily of the disorders, sects, rents, and Schisms that
every where bud forth already, and threaten all Order, Unity, and Government.
Give the water but a passage without speedy making up the Banks, and you know
how soon whole Seas will break in upon us, and render all irrecoverable and
incurable. If one difficulty occur to day, it will be doubled, yea multiplied
to morrow. There is no Hydra so fertile of heads, as Error and schism grown to
some strength and maturity. It will ask you but a short time of Connivence,
afterward there well be no curbing nor shameing of it. Nothing is so confident
as ignorance, impudent as falsehood, and catching as Error.

Sermon: before the Commons at a public Fast April. 30. 1645. P. 51. and 52.
Take heed of those spirits of Error, who with fair (speciouse, pargetted,
glozeing words) seek to make merchandise of you, beguiling unstable souls.
Beware of those compliances with, and indulgences to all sorts of Sects and
Schisms now pleaded for, both by word and writing, as it were part of Christ's
Legacy, and his Peoples Liberty to be of what Religion they will; to be
tolerated in any opinions never so erroneous and pernicious (until further
light:) that it is the Magistrates, duty to protect them in that liberty; and
that the contrary thereunto is to persecute Christ.

Has God inserted this as one maine branch of his Grand covenant with his
People under the Gospel; I will give them one heart and one way that they may
fear me Jer. 32. 39.
for ever, * that is, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord to serve
him with one consent? Zeph; 3. 9. Did Christ ascend up on high and give gifts
unto men, and gave some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, 'till we all come, (...).
into the unity of the Faith; and, is it Persecution, and Antichristianisme to
engage all to Unity and Uniformity? Does Paul bid the Philippians to beware of
the Concision? Philippians 3. 2. Does he beseech the Romans to mark those
which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the doctrine which they had
learned, and to avoid them; and that upon this ground, that they who are such,
serve not the Lord Jesus but their own bellies, however by good words and fair
speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple? Rom: 16. 17. Does he writing to
the Galatians wish, I would they were even cut off that trouble you, And yet
the Author of Libert. of Consc. (p. 32.) tells us that this Text is little to
the purpose.
Gal: 5. 12. And is it such an heinous offense now, for the faithful Servants
of Christ, to advise you to the same course? O Heavens? be astonished at this;
and blush for the ignorance of some, and impudence of others, that dare so
boldly press for such a Toleration, which none but vain destructive thoughts
of carnal men can look upon, without indignation and horror.

Beware how you hearken to these Empiricks and Sirens, who seek to charm the
world into a deep sleep, by presenting their confidence of a necessity of
complying with all sorts of Sectaries, yea of trusting the Sword in their
hands, and to defer the settling of matters of Religion during the war, for
fear of loosing the Godly Party (as too many proudly style themselves, by way
of difference from all that are not of their opinions and ways) what is this
but to teach God a new form of Politics, to proclaim, that it is not always
safe to hold out the truth of the Gospel^, and to command all men to embrace
it, but much safer to halt between two opinions? Belike Josiah went beyond his
bounds, when after himself had sworn a solemn Covenant to the Lord he made
all Judah and Benjamin to stand to it, and made all that were present in Israel
to serve the Lord their God. 2 Chronicles: 34. 32, 33. and Asa much more, when he
drew all the people into a Covenant, That whosoever would not seek the Lord God
of Israel; should be put to death, whether small or great, man or woman 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. The Author of Lib. of Cons. p. 28. assures us the cont^a^y when
he rells as that What was done by the Kings of Israel and Judah cannot be
reasonably made a rule to Magistrates now under the Gospel.
But the ample and transcendent Commendations which the Lord gives unto these
pious Kings, especially in reference to their sincerity, and zeal in reforming
and settling of Religion in one Uniform way, may sufficiently warrant and
encourage all Religious Magistrates, to take care that all under their
Government, should all serve the Lord with one shoulder; this being not a
Tyranny over men, but the Privilege of the Gospel, Beware yet at last of that
thought, that it is not yet time to build the Lords house. Judah paid dear for
this, as I have heretofore showed you at large, on Psalm: 76. 10. and in my
former Sermon on this Text, and therefore shall spare my self and you, the
pains of enlarging at the present. Settle this in your hearts; Gods Truth, the
true Worship and Discipline of Christ, set up and established in one Uniform
way, never prejudiced any Nation or State (where it had free passage) in the
least degree, but has ever been their safety, happiness, and honor. It is
Error (how much soever cried up) not truth (how much soever cried down and
blasphemed) that makes and foments rents and factions.

Mr. John Ward of Ipswich in his Sermon: before the Commons March 26 1645 p. 49.
Lon printed for C. Meredith. 1645.
Honorable and beloved, yet another word of Exhortation to judge for God, and
as God judges. 1. for God. There are matters of God, as well as matters of the
King or Kingdom; the care whereof must be upon you, as well as upon us; his
Church, his Kingdom, his City, his house, his People, his Spouse, his
Children, his body, ye as nursing Fathers, must tender the good and welfare of
them, that they may find harbor and protection, enjoy their just privileges,
and Liberties, wherewith Christ has made them free: not such licentiousenesse
as is abused for a Cloak of Naughtiness. Ye must see to order and Unity
amongst them, that there be no rents and schisms; surely our Savior that
ascended into heaven and gave gifts to men, some Apostles, etc: that we might
all meet in the Unity of faith; and has diverse times, and after sundry
manners, given that very thing in charge to his ministers, would not have the
Magistrate left at large from providing, and endeavoring, that speaking or
following the truth in love, we may grow up, making increase by edifying our
selves and one another in Love.

Ye must do that, which we are to pray, that ye do viz. Take a Course that
Christians may live in a Peaceable and quiet life in Godliness and honesty,
not in strife and contention.

There is -- His Name, it may not be blasphemed, dishonored. His Day, it must
be sanctified. His Gospel. Ye have Authority, and it is your duty to provide
that it be duly preached. P. 50
That it be truly taught: not blended, adulterated, made another Gospel

His Worship; it must not be corrupted by Idolatry, superstitious Innovations,
lest God be worshipped in vain while they teach for Doctrines the Commandments
of men. His Ministry, it ought to be purged, planted, lights set up in every
bowl of the Candlestick, encouraged, maintained, and abetted in the work of
the Lord.

His Sacraments, it is your honor as your duty to see that they be kept pure
in the celebration and ministration, of them. There is a book-case for it. Number.
9. 7. there were certain men etc: but if this be not full, the Presidents. 2 Chronicles: ch: 15. ch: 30. and ch: 35 will rule the Case for the Civil Magistrate,
and make out this: That where the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church does
not, or cannot prevail, the Magistrate must interpose his Coercive Power for
restraint and remedy -- in a word: God has many things amongst us that must be
protected and maintain^d; and the matters of God have many adversaries which
must be watched, and suppressed; for ye bear not the sword in vain, ye are Gods
Ministers attending continually upon this very thing. Magistrates and Ministers
have (as ye see) one common style of Office; that ye in your place, and we in
our Function and Order, should mind and promove the things of God; ye by the
Sword, and we by the Word; you are keepers of both Tables, the first and great
commandment, as well as the second that is like unto it, both come sometimes as
occasion is under your cognizance: P. 51.
And ye know what a brand sticks to this day upon Gallio (though an Heathen
Magistrate) that he cared not for the matters of the Law and Worship according
to the Law when question was brought; no, though there were insurrections and
tumults upon that occasion: and for Gamaliels counsel, Refrain from these men
and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work, be of men, it will come
to naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happly ye be found
even to fight against God If this be true the Auth: of the Prop. for King and
Kingdom showed more zeal then knowledge, when having mentioned the Counsel
of Gamalielhe thus adds.
though it be found within the Bible, yet it is not of like Authority with one
of Solomon's proverbs or maxims of Policy: it has no otherwise the approbation
of God for good, then the design of Pharaoh, or I wish to the Lord, the great
Ministers of our state wo^ld be content to be no wiser men then Gamaliel P. 36.
the crafty counsel of Achitophel which are also recorded in the scripture: it
will not consist with other rules of the word, and has been condemned as
unsound, and unsafe by many godly and wise men; we have more sure words of
scripture out of which we draw the doctrine of the Magistrates power and duty
in the matters of God and Religion, then the loose speech of such a Neutralist
and time serving Politician as Gamaliel was. Go on therefore, I beseech you as
you began; take us the little foxes as well as the ravening wolves. p. 26.
These be they who separate themselves, sensual not having the spirit. They
Boast indeed (much) of the spirit, but they manifestly do the works of the
flesh. They plead for liberty, but it is licentiousness. Liberty of Conscience
they term it, but it is Liberty of practice, that every man may do what is good
and right in his own eyes. They pretend to nothing but Piety and Godliness,
and seem as if they would be content if they might but have a bare subsistence
in the profession of it. So did the Jesuits to learning, when they first
appeared upon the Stage, but when they had once insinuated themselves into the
good Opinion of Princes and States, how well they answered the expectations,
and required the kindness of those who nursed them up all the Christian world
sees and fe^ls to their cost at this day. They ask But Connivence and
Toleration, but if they once meet in a confluence, and find themselves strong
enough to run in a stream; let but a damme be Pitched down to restrain or
oppose their madness, or men follow not on, to indulge and grati^y their
humor, it would soon appear, whether o^ ^o they would rage and swell and get
over, or bear down before them all that should stand in their way. They did seem
a while to cry up the Order of Parliaments and of the Civil Magistrate, and
have their persons in admiration, but mee^ly for advantage, that so they may
get above all Ecclesiastical Authority; and when they are once up to their
height, what they will do with the Ladder, they hope to climb and ascend by,
is not hard to conjecture. They reckon themselves the Wheat in the field, and
when once they are ripe, they will easily be content to have all that threshed
of, by which they received their growth. Ye have heard of the fable of the
Snake and the Countryman that brought it unto the fire* I shall not need to
apply it. Already they begin to remove the old land marks and Straiten their
bounds they deny their claim up to an high water mark, and make their banks,
and enclose for themselves to the very channel side. But whether it be holden
fit or seasonable that these Libertines be decried, for my part, I cannot yet
discover by any activenesse to suppress them: only seeing the evil and
foreseeing the mischief, I have given the warning; that at least I may deliver
mine own soul. I pray God the remedy be not deferred till it be too late and
ye be driven to play an after-game to an extreme hazard and disadvantage.

Mr. Willam Good Sermon: before the Comm: March 26. 1645. Lo^d printed for C.
Meredith 1645. P. 36.
I doubt not but your Souls abhor that bloody Tenet to the souls of men, That
it is the duty of the Magistrate to Tolerate all Religions. You have carried
out the Dust behind the door, and this Opinion will bring all the mire in the
streets into the house of God again. Cambyses had a lust to marry his sister,
and his Counselors told him, there was no law whereby to do it: But with all
they told him, there was a law that the Kings of Persia might do what they
list, and by this he might marry his Sister. What is it that shall be
unlawful, if this be lawful for every man to make a Law and Religion for him
self?

Put some stop by your Authority to the growth of Errors, that are
destructive, to the power of Godliness, and let not this suspend your
sanction, because some that broach them pretend to Godliness; an enemy the
more like he is to a friend the more dangerous.

a The third use of Confutation; it is of the Remonstrants Sure this Gentleman
is mistaken, I always thought Remonstrants and Arminians had been the same.
Arminians and Socinians, who endeavor from my M. Thomas Thorowgood Sermon:
before the Commons at a solemn fast Dec. 25. 1644 his Text Phil. 4. v. 5. Let
your moderation be known unto all men Land printed for Chr. Meredith 1645. p. 10
Text to get countenance for that Babylonish Error, the allowance of all
opinions, as if because the Apostle says let your moderation be known unto all
men, therefore all men's conceits must be born with in Religion, and every one
suffered in what he supposes to be truth. It is a cunning and cousening
devise, that strikes in with corrupt nature; but because it offers violence to
my Text, I cannot be true to it, or you, if somewhat be not added by way of
vindication; and it shall be in these six particulars. First is it probable
that our Apostle: who elsewhere almost every where is so zealous for Unity
against Schisms, should in any sort Tolerate them, and so voluntarily open a
wide door for division? in this very Epistle he writes for Peace even
passionately but with with mighty power Phil. 2. 1. 2. If there be any
consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any fellowship of the spirit,
if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like-minded, having
the same Love, being of one accord, and of one mind. And in the next Chap. 3.
16. -- Let us walk by the same Rule, let us mind the same thing: expressions
different from all licentious Tolerations. The same Apostle abounds in serious
Dehortations from Schisms and dissentions, Romans 13. 12. 16. 17. and as
carnal. 1 Cor. 3. 3. and in other places. And he does very often exhort with
earnest words and arguments, not only that we be like-minded, Rom: 15. 6. Phil.
2. 2. and of one mind, 2 Cor. 13. 12. but of the same mind. 1 Cor. 10, 10.
joined, yea joynted together in the same mind, and in the same judgment: And
is here the least approbation of that multiplying Doctrine? Neither will that
excuse, so long as they all breath Christ, tend to the advancement of Christ,
it matters not: but let S. Paul answer this Objection also; is Christ divided?
1 Cor: 1. 13. Consider it well, and season your Consideration with that of our
Master Christ himself, Mar. 9. 50. Have salt in your selves, and have Peace
one with another: If we were preserved by humility from the corruptions of
selfopinion, it would be no hard matter to embrace unity.

Secondly, such allowance would prove destructive to holiness both Personal
and Domestical; Omnis Religio and nulla Religio, would soon be the same:
Suppose the Husband of one Opinion, the Wife of another, the Children, (it may
be) of one or two other, and the Servants of as many more; what shall the
Master of the house do here? how perform the Family duties? diversity of
Opinions, like so many hatches interrupting their prayers, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
chopping all devotion and piety in pieces: As the Duke of Wittenberge was wont
to say, New Garments introduce new manners, new manners bring in new men, and
new men thrust out the old; so new Opinions suffered will devour the old; and
the Toleration of every Religion will destroy all Religion, and in conclusion
leave no Religion at all.

Thirdly, this Liberty is inconsistent with civil tranquillity; the bleeding
condition of our own nation at present is a living, almost a dying witness of
this; and if that one Religion of Popery, so tolerated as it was, has brought
in upon us so many destructions; what will that multiplication do, but hasten
desolation without recovery? for every part would endeavor to support it
self, to the prejudice of the rest, et dum de Religione certatum est Regio,
dum de caelo terra amissa; as it was said long since.

Fourthly the late Bishops of Ireland may put this Liberty to silence and
shame; for when not long since a Toleration of Popery in that Kingdom was
proposed they said, To give the Papists a Toleration is a grievous sin, and
will make us accessory to all their Abominations and the perdition of all
seduced souls.

Fifthly this may be current Doctrine amongst the Turks and Defense of Prop. p.
20 highly commends this judgment of the wise Emperor Soly. man, and is sorry
that his Adversary is of another humor.
the grand Seignior told his Mufti, that is, his chief Priest, As a garden is
beautified with variety of of flowers so his Empire would be adorned with
diversities of Religion. Let such Toleration find allowance in the Turk's
Paradise, it shall never, I trust, be planted in the Paradise of God.

Sixthly We have undertaken all in the National Covenant, the establishment of
Uniformity, and how can that stand with this Omniformity indeed Nulliformity, I
understand not: it was a prodigiouse thing in the days of Jeremiah the
Prophet, Jer. 2. 28. according to the Number of thy Cities are thy Gods, O
Judah: here would soon appear another kind of multiplying and increase; but
though this fancy be never so plausible, Divine providence has shut it out of
our camp by our Covenant.

M. Humph. Hardwick Ser. before the Comm: June 26. 1644. Land printed for Chr.
Meredith 1645. P. 43.
A thing pleasing to God and profitable to the Kingdoms, by which there is and
through Gods blessing may be the most famous blow given to the whore of
Babylon, and her Bastard Impes that ever yet was: now to have this stick among
us or laid aside, whilst Malignants and Sectaries live in our Bosom, blessing,
and in secret applauding themselves, that they have neither taken this nor any
of your former protestations. This is our case, and I appeal to wiser
Judgments, whether this may not be the way to lessen the honor and Authority
of the high court of Parliament. M. Arth: Salwey before the Com: October. 25.
1643 p. 19. Land. printed for Chr. Meredith. 1644.
Consider I beseech you ( Worthy Christians) that the vows of God are upon
you, you have abjured Neutralitie in your late Solemn Covenant, far be it from
any of you to glory in luke warm indifferency, as if it were a piece of
singular Policy. You have with your Tongues renounced this Neutrality as
detestable. Follow the Lord in promoting a National Reformation. You have an
admirable Pattern; the zealous Prophet Elijah; I wish from my soul that a
double portion of his spirit may be given unto you, that you may act in his
power and spirit. Elijah opposed Idolatry and Oppression; so do ye: down with
Baals Altars, down with Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters. etc.
Baals Priests; do not (I beseech you) consent unto a Toleration of Baals
Worship in this Kingdom upon any Politic consideration whatsoever -- Give me
leave to be your humble Remembrancer. The mouths of your Adversaries are opened
against you; the hearts of your true friends are grieved, that so many Honest
Royalists.
Delinquents are in Prison, and yet but very few of them brought to their
trial. M. William Reyner before the Com. Aug. 28. 1644 Land. Printed for Sam.
En. derby 1644. p. 12.
Ye cannot preach, nor pray Errors and Hersy.
them down directly, and immediately -- well, that which the Word cannot do,
the Sword shall; that which the water cannot wash out the fire will burn out;
unto this particular the Apostle applies this very Haggai 2. 6. 7.
Text in part, namely concerning the shakeing of the heavens etc: an Earthquake
(as we have heard) was appointed to shake down the Ceremonial ordinances; now
if this were necessary for the abolition of that divine Worship which had
sometimes been by Gods own holy Institution, how much more shall that which
has been of human Invention (yea the very fumes and fogs of the bottomless
Pit) to Gods infinite displeasure and dishonor, be tumbled down with violence,
and vengeance to hell, from whence it came.

M. Thomas Case Sermon: before the Comm: May 26. 1647. p. 33. Land printed for
Luke Fawn at the Par. rot in Paul's Church yard. 1647.
There is a word of Exhortation behind, and I beseech you suffer it.

First, to you Honorable and noble Patriots, who are called to be Reformers
and healers of a poor broken Kingdom. Does not indeed the punishing and
suppressing of spiritual whoredoms against God, Idolatry, Heresy,
Blasphemy, and the rest: does it not belong unto you, as well as the punishing
bodily whoredoms, theft, murder etc:? does it indeed belong to you only to
look to the civil peace, and to let Religion, and truth, and the worship of
God stand or fall to their own master? fight God, fight Devil, fight Christ,
fight Antichrist, catch that catch can; you have nothing to do but to stand by
and look on, say so then; speak out, publish it in your Declarations to the
world, and let the People of England know that it is the right and liberty, to
which the Subjects of England, are borne, that Every man hold what he please,
and publish, and preach what he holds; that it is the birthright (as some
would have it) of the free born people of England every man to Worship God
according to his own Conscience, and to be of what Religion his own Conscience
shall dictate. Do so and see (Fathers and Brethren) how long your Civil peace
will secure you when Religion is destroyed; how long it will be ete your civil
peace be turned into civil war, for no doubt if this once be granted them, but
they may in good time come to know also (there be them, that are instructing
them eve^ in these principles too) that it is their birthright to be freed from
the power of Parliaments, and from the power of Kings; and to take up arms
against both when they shall not vote and act according to their humors.
Liberty of Conscience (falsely so called) may in good time, improve it self
into liberty of Estates, and liberty of Houses, and liberty of wives, and in a
word liberty of perdition of souls and bodies.

Right Honorable and worthy Gentlemen, I cannot stand to dispute, this only
would I know of you; are Idolaters, and Heretics, and Blasphemers, and
Seducers are they evil doers? if so, then look to your Charge Romans 13, 4.
Rulers must be a Terror to evil Doers unless ye mean to bear the sword in
vain. And if you will God will not; and if God take the Sword into his own
hand once, (as he seems to be a doing of it) he will smite to purpose; he will
execute vengeance thoroughly: both upon the evil doers, and upon you that have
not been a Terror to them. Oh therefore up and be doing, that ye may deliver
the Kingdom out of the hand of the Lord; for it is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. O let not your Patience (I hope it is no more
all this while) be interpreted a Connivence, and your Connivence be taken for a
Toleration, it may be the Kingdoms ruin, but it will be your sin.

Ser before the Com: Feb. 19. 1645. p. 25.
Fathers and brethren how will ye call this keeping of Covenant with God? Had
we a Parliament of Apostate Julians, of whom it is reported, that at what time
he opened the temples of the Heathenish Gods, he set open the Christian
Churches, called home all the Christians whom he had banished, both Orthodox and
Heretic, and gave them (as we call it) Liberty of Conscience, but as Austin
more truly phraseth it, Aug. Ep. 166. vid. Ammian Marcel. lib. 22. p. 208. 209
Edit. Hen: Valesii. Defense of the Prop. calls this of Julian a brave and
Politic thing. p 98.
Libertatem perditionis, Liberty to destroy themselves; for that was his Policy
and end, namely by liberty of all Religions, Eo modo putans Christianum nomen
posse perire de terris etc.
to destroy the True, and the Professors thereof too. Or had we a Parliament of
careless Gallio's we should not wonder: but for a Parliament of Christians,
Protestants, Professors, the Choicest, the most active that could be culled out
of a Christian State, the like not under heaven; that these things should be
done, and you hold your Peace, and be able to keep your places, and not to put
on Righteousness as a Breast Plate, and the Garments of Vengeance for your
Clothing, as it is said of God; this makes the Churches abroad to wonder what
Englands Parliament is a doing, and all at home that love the Lord Jesus Christ
more then their own Interests and Notions, to be filled with unspeakable
trembling and astonishment, to wit, what God means to do with this poor
bleeding Church and State.

Ser. before the Comm. Aug. 22. 1645. p. 29.
If you mean that England shall be turned into a wilderness, and be overrun
with Atheism, and Heresy, and Profaneness, and Blasphemy, you may hold your
hands, and you need not do it long.

Ser. before the Comm: Feb. 19. 1645. p. 25.
The Errors and Innovations under which we so much groaned of later years were
but tolerabiles ineptiae, tolerable trifles, childrens play, compared with
these damnable doctrines, Doctrines of Devils, as the Apostle calls them:
Polygamy, Arbitrary Divorce, Mortality of the Soul, No Ministry, No Churches,
No Ordinances; No Scripture, yea, the very Divinity of Christ and the Holy
Ghost questioned by some, denied by others, And the very foundation of all
these laid in such a Schism of Boundless Liberty of Conscience, viz: Believe
what you will, and Preach what you Believe, and such Lawless separation of
Churches: and all these not only whispered in Corners, but Preached on the house
top, yea, published in Print before your faces with so much virulency and
impudence, that I verily believe no Age since the Apostles time could ever
parallel.

Sermon before the Commons May 26. 1647. p. 25.
There be a Generation of men in the Land that stand up for all kind of false
Worship; that every man may Worship God after his own Conscience, or if they
will not own it in words at length they will have it in figures: And if they
may not, are ready, not only to cry, but to act Persecution, and that to
purpose: for while they cry Persecution gladio oris they are ready to act
persecution ore gladii. I pray God it may never be englished.

M. John Lightfoot Ser: before the Comm. Aug. 26. 1645. p. 30. Lond-printed for
And. Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's Chur: yard. 1645.
There is great talk of, and pleading for Liberty of Conscience, for men to do
in matters of Religion, as Israel did in the book of Judges, whatsoever
seems good in their own eyes; and how that proved there, there are sad
stories that relate. I shall not go about to determine the question, whether
the Conscience may be bound or not, though for mine own satisfaction I am
resolved it may, and do hold it a truer point in Divinity that errans
conscientia liganda, then ligat, but certainly the Devil in the Conscience may
be, nay he must be bound, or else you act not according to that vigor that
Christ has put into your hands, nor according to that exactness that Christ
requires at your hands. It is true indeed which is so much talked of, that
Christ alone must reign in the Conscience, but it is as true also, that he does
so by the Power that he has put into the hands of the Magistrate, as well as
by his word and spirit.

M. Thom: Watson before the Com: December 27. 1649. p. 17. Land. Printed for Ra:
Smith at the Bible in Cornhil 1649.
If Conscience be a sufficient plea, the Papist will come in for a Child's part.
Conscience must have a Rule, it binds only virtute praecepti, by virtue of a
precept. If Conscience goes against the Word, Deponenda est talis Conscientia.
Get conscience better informed.

M. Hughes Sermon. before the Com: May 26. 1647. p. 34. Land. Printed for John
Roth well at the Sun and fountain in Paul's Chyard.
I must say that the Toleration of all things must be a destructive Principle
to the State or Church where ever it be allowed. Experience has showed us no
less in Kingdoms and Churches Called by Gods name. These are only suggested
which need a larger Treatise to state fully. Ye Servants of Christ, take heed
of yielding to the pretenses of Conscience, the Devil and not Christ has his*
Throne there; And no stronger hold for him than Conscience if he once take it.
Christ will not suffer him to shelter there, therefore ye may not, so much as
in you lies.

Do not other States, as some of the united Provinces Dub.
tolerate all these Heresies, and protect them, and yet they prosper? who more?

I desire not to deal with other States, unless I might do Sol.
them good, I am now only called to our own, yet others being made exemplary, a
word in soberness and truth may not offend. I suggest only these thoughts.

1. Can any man say, that prosperity is a sign peculiar unto Truth? then let
Rome come in and speak more than any for outward prosperity.

2. Are not spiritual wickednesses as odious to God as carnal? and are not
these Heresies such, which God condemns as works of the flesh, inconsistent
with the Kingdom of Christ?

3. Has God made an end yet of visiting Nations for the sins of them? when
God has done judging were a better time to urge this Example then now. I pray
God the evil day may not overtake those States; the good Lord cause the Cup of
trembling to pass by them and purge their iniquities peaceably. But I am
pressed in Spirit to say, God has not spared such State Polities, which have
sought their own rise by the ruin of God and his Truth. Witness Jeroboam the
Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. And he bids sin that does not hinder Qui
non vetat peccare cum potest jubet. Sen.
it when he can -- Gods Truth, my beloved, and not man's example must be the
Rule -- if Heresies yet must be, let us mourn for what we cannot help; it is a
miserable necessity when not allowed; it will be rejoicing in iniquity, either
for State or Church wilfully to tolerate.

M. Ed. Calamy Ser. before the Ld Mayor Jan. 14. 1645. p. 3.
Though God has given us glorious victories over our Enemies, yet the Churches
of Christ ly desolate, Church-Reformation is obstructed, Church Discipline
unsettled, Church-Divisions increased. The famous City of London is become an
Amsterdam, Separation from our Churches is countenanced, Toleration is cried
up, Authority lies asleep. -- Ser. before the Lords Dec. 25. 1644. p. 13.
It would seem a wonder if I should reckon how many separated Congregations, or
rather Segregations, there are in the City: what Churches against Churches
etc. -- the Lord Knows that I mention these things with a sad heart. ut supra
p. 4.
Divisions whether they be Ecclesiastical or Political, in Kingdoms,
Cities, or Families, are infallible causes of Ruin to Kingdoms, Cities, and
Families.

p. 14.
Hereby the hearts of People are mightily distracted, many are hindered from
Conversion, and even the Godly themselves have lost much of the power of
Godliness in their lives. I say the hearts of People mightily disturbed, while
one Minister preaches one thing as a truth of the Gospel, and another Minister
Preaches the quite Contrary with as much Confidence as the former.

P. 17.
If Divisions be so destructive to Kingdoms, Cities, and Families? this
reproves those that are the Authors and Fomentors of these Divisions that are
now amongst us. These are the Incendiaries of England. If he that sets one
house on fire deserves hanging, much more they that set a whole Kingdom on
fire. If he that murders one man must be put to death, much more he that
Murders three Kingdoms: Mark them (says the Apostle Romans 16. 17.) that cause
divisions and Offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have Learned and avoid
them. Avoid them as the greatest enemies of England. These are like the
Salamander that cannot live but in the fire of contention. These are of a
Jesuiticall spirit. And no doubt the heads and hands of the Jesuits are in all
our Divisions.

P. 33.
Take heed of the Land-destroying opinion of those that plead for an illimited
toleration of all Religions, even of Turkisme, Judaisme, etc. The Lord keep us
from being poisoned with such an Error! * This Text Mat. 12. 25. Every Kingdom
divided against it self is brought to Desolation.
rises up against it, for it will divide a Kingdom against it self. It will
rend it in a thousand pieces. It is a Doctrine directly contrary to your late
Oath and Covenant. A Doctrine that overthrows all Church Government, brings
in Confusion, and opens a wide door unto all irreligion and Atheism: For at
the same door that all false Religions comes in, the true Religion will quickly
get out, and if it be as good for a man to live where nothing is lawful, as
where all things are lawful; surely it is every way as uncomfortable to live
where there are all Religions, as where there is no Religion at all.

P. 37.
It is your Duty (Right Honorable) whom God has betrusted with great Power,
to suppress these Divisions and Differences in Religion, by your Civil
Authority, as far as you are able, least you are accessory unto them. For God
has made you Custodes utriusque Tabulae, Keepers not of the second Table only
(as some fondly imagine) but of the First Table also, and not only Keepers, but
vindices utriusque Tabulae, Punishers also of those that transgress against
either of them. For you are the Ministers of God for good, and Revengers, to
execute wrath upon him that does evil, Romans 13. 4. and God has deputed you
for the Punishment of evil doers, and for the Praise of them that do well. 1.
Pet. 2. 19. There be some that would blot out half your Commission, and
restrain this good and evil, to Civil good, and to evils only against men. But
this is against that general Rule, Non est distinguendum, ubi Lex non
distinguit. Where the Law does not distinguish, there must not we distinguish.
Tell me I beseech you, Shall it be lawful for Magistrates to punish those that
destroy men's Bodies, but not those that destroy men's Souls? Shall they be
blamed for suffering men to draw people away from obedience to the Laws of the
Land, and to themselves, and not also for suffering men to draw away people
from the Truth of the Gospel, and from the ways of God, such as Hymenaeus and
Philetus, who overthrow the Faith of some, and their words eat as a Canker?
shall Christian Magistrates take up the Maxim of Tiberius, Deorum injurias
Diis curae esse? Let God himself take care to vindicate himself from injuries
committed against God? as for me, I will (just like Gallio) take care of none
of these things. Can Christian ears endure such Language? Does not God
Prophesy, Isaiah 49. 23. That in the New Testament Kings shall be our Nursing
Fathers, and Queens our nursing Mothers? And how can a Christian Magistrate
discharge that duty aright if he has not power from God, to punish those that
would poison the souls of his weak Children with Heresies and soul destroying
opinions?

Will you allow the Magistrate to Tyrannize over

By no means. But I believe it is the duty of Magistrates Master in a Family
have power to put away a Servant that is tainted with a gross opinion, and yet
not be called a Tyrant over that Servants Conscience? and shall not the chief
Magistrate of a Kingdom have power to put out of his Kingdom (at least to
shut up from doing hurt) one that is his Subject and polluted with blasphemous,
Heretical, Idolatricall Opinions? Is not the Kingdom the Magistrates house and
Family?

Ser. before the Comm. October. 22. 1644. p. 26.
This is a certain Rule, That all the Sins of the Kingdom which are committed
by your connivence or allowance, are the Parliament Sins, and they call for a
Parliament Repentance. And therefore I beseech you search and try your hearts,
and consider how far you are accessory to the sins of the Kingdom, that so you
may be wrought up not only to a personal but a Parliament humiliation. And if
it does appear, that you have taken more care in settling your own Liberties,
then in settling of Religion* If you have taken more care to build your own
houses then Gods house, this is a crying Sin; and this makes you accessory to a
Thousand Sins that are committed in the Kingdom. Again, if you do not labor
according to your duty, and according to your power, to suppress the Errors and
Heresies that are spread in the Kingdom; all these Errors are your Errors, and
these Heresies are your Heresies, and they are your Sins, and God calls for a
Parliamentary Repentance from you for them this day; You are the Anabaptists,
and you are the Antinominians, and it is you that hold That all Religions are
to be tolerated etc. And these are your Errors if they sptead by your
Connivence. For the Sins of the Sons of old Ely are imputed to old Ely
himself. And when the People of Israel had profaned the Sabbath, Nehemiah
contended with the Nobles of Judah for suffering them, and tells them, that it
was they that did profane it, because they suffered the People to profane it,
Neh. 13. 17.

It was none of the Old cause that the People should M. Ric. Baxter Holy
Commonwealth. Addition to Pref. Prop. 6. Land printed for Tho: Underhill at the
Anchor and Bible in Paul's Ch: yard 1659.
have Liberty and the Magistrate should have no Power in all matters of Gods
Worship, faith and Conscience.

And as it is not the Old Cause, so it is not a Good Cause.

For first it contradicts the express Revelation of the will of God in the
holy Scriptures. Moses had to do in matters of Religion as a Magistrate; and so
the ruling Elders of Israel that assisted him; And so had the Kings of Israel
and Judah, as is well known, insomuch that in Asa's days they covenanted to put
him to Death that would not seek the Lord God of Israel. 2. It tends to the
ruin of the Commonwealth, and therefore it is no good cause. How God was
provoked By Aarons Calfe, and by his Sons, that offered strange fire which the
Lord commanded not Lev. 10. and what was the effect, and what benefit the
Calves at Dan and Bethel brought to Israel and Jeroboams house, and the high
places, and other Errors about worship, brought to the Princes and People of
Judah we need not particularly recite.

Law and providence are quite changed, if Toleration of false Worship and other
abuses of Religion, tend not to the ruin of the Commonwealth.

If Magistrates must give Liberty for all to propagate a false Religion, then
so must Parents and Masters also (for their Coercive power is rather less then
the Magistrates then more, and they are no more Lords of faith or Conscience)
But if all Parents and Masters should give such a Liberty, it would be a crime
so horrid in the nature and effects, as I am loath to name with its proper
Titles.

A pari, it tends to the destruction of an Army to give liberty to all men to
do their worst to draw them to Mutinies and Rebellion. It tends to the ruin of
Families that all have liberty to do their worst to tempt the Sons to Theft and
drunkenness, and the wife and Daughter to whoredom. It tends to the
Destruction of the Commonwealth if there be liberty for all to persuade the the
People to Sedition and Rebellion: And therefore it must tend to the destruction
of the Church and men's souls, and consequently of the Commonwealth in the chief
respects, if all have leave to do their worst to preach up infidelity,
Mahometanisme, Popery or any false Doctrine or Worship, against the great and
necessary Truths.

I leave it therefore to the judgment of all men that are not fast a sleep in
their security, and utterly unacquainted with the advantages of the Papists,
whether this design of engageing the Magistrate by a fundamental
constitution, not to meddle with matters of faith and Worship, but leave them
all to Christ alone, be not the present setting up of Popery in England, and
the delivering all the fruit of our labors, Prayers and victories into the
Papists hands.

Obj. But Liberty for Popery and Prelacy is still excepted.

Answ: by whom? -- But if there had been an exception against Popery put in, it
would have been to little purpose, as long as a general Rule is laid down that
condemns that exception. For if it be the standing Rule, That matters of
Religion and faith, and all matters of Worship are out of the Magistrates
power; to say then that Popery shall be excepted from Liberty, is to say the
Magistrate shall intrude into the proper Office of Christ to restrain the
Papists.

Well, seeing these things are so; that sin will find Mr. Tho* Horton Ser:
before the House of Peers. Dec. 30. 1646. Land printed by F. Neile for Sam:
Gellibrand at the Brazen serpent in Paul's Ch: yard. 1646. p. 35.
out us; let this be the use we make of it, to be careful to find out it; and
to begin with that first.

This is that which lies upon us all: But especially (to speak a word in
Season) upon those which have the Government of Kingdoms and Commonwealths
committed unto them. These had need to find out sin more especially, for the
safety and welfare of that State, which they have the ordering and managing of.

P. 36.
First their own Personal Sins.

p. 37. and 38.
Secondly they are to find out also the sins of the Kingdom. I have already
Administered some help in this performance, by the hint of those Sins before
mentioned; all which I humbly desire may be taken into serious Consideration,
and especially (which grows so much upon us and which threatens so much evil to
us) the Sin of Libertinisme and Toleration, which is the ringleader of all the
rest and involves all others with it. O that this should ever be once mentioned
amongst us here in England who have enjoyed so much of the Gospel of Truth as
we have done; derived to us from our Godly forefathers, sealed to us by the
blood of the Martyrs, prosecuted with so many Blessings, and victories, and
Gracious successes both of former and latter times, to the admiration both of
Enemies and Friends; is this the fruit and issue of all that God has done for
us? and do all overtures of Reformation come to this? Surely God cannot but
take it very ill from us, that we should but incline and lean hereunto; As he
said to David of his building of the Temple; Thou did well that it was in
thine heart and accordingly was well pleased with him. So will he say to us, of
our Contrary carriage; That it is ill that it is in our heart; if so be, it be
come so far, as I hope it is not. What? when we have so much appeared against
Popery and Superstition, shall we now begin to think of Indifferency and
Toleration? Certainly it is but a sorry exchange of a Bad Religion for none.
Although indeed it will be no exchange, but rather a further Confirmation:
Toleration of all other Errors does but strengthen Popery amongst the rest;
which will at least think so well of it self, as to come in for a Child's Part.

M. Lazar* Seaman Ser. before the Comm. Sept. 25. 1644. Land printed by E. G.
for J. Rothwell at the Sun in Paul's Ch: yard. 1644* p. 41.
There is a Generation who look for much at your hands, and yet ask nothing, I
mean by way of humble Petition. When they find you, or themselves in such a
posture, as that they cannot be denied, it may be you may hear of them. Besides
the many loose, profane, and scandalous Ministers, there are a new sort risen
amongst us, who have thrust themselves into the Lords Vineyard. It Is no less
then Persecution (so they commonly give out) to desire that their suspicious
Opinions may be examined according to the word of God, and they commanded to
forbear the publishing and spreading of them for the present. There be many
dangerous Books abroad, dangerous at least, 'Ile say no more.

Liberty of Conscience. The Bloody Tenent. The compassionate Samaritan. John
Baptist.
p. 44.
Consider also, Solomon's.
His failings and beware of them. 1. He had many Wives, 1 Kings 11. 3.
even seven hundred Wives, Princesses, and three hundred Concubines. Let not
us have as many Religions. There Is some Analogy between the one and the other.
2. There was in his days first a Connivance at Idolatry, then open Toleration,
and withal Apostasy. These Wives turned away his heart after other Gods; v. 4.
He built an high place for Chemosh the Abomination of Moab, and for Molech the
Abomination of the Children of Ammon, and likewise did he for all his strange
Wives, v. 7, 8. Observe the Gradation, first Connivance, then open Toleration,
herewithall Apostasy.

M. Matthew. New comen Ser: before the Parliament. Sept. 12. 1644. Land. printed
for Ch: Meredith 1644. p. 31.
No Reformation of Religion now: now nothing will satisfy some, but a
Toleration of all Religions. and all Opinions: Church Government, Discipline is
to some a fiction, to others Tyranny, and Persecution, Ah Brethren, this is a
Provocation and will be a Provocation, for this God may turn us into the
Wilderness again.

P. 36.
We are grown beyond Arminianisme, Brownisme, Anabaptisme; we are come (I mean
many among us) to downright Libertinisme. There are two Opinions, which if
encouraged (and they are encouraged if connived at) will open a door to
Turcisme, Judaisme Atheism, Polytheisme, any monster of Opinion. The one is.
That every man is to be left to the Liberty of his own Religion, an Opinion
contended for by the Bloody Tenets, John Baptist, Liberty of Conscience, and
the like Pamphlets. An opinion most pernicious and destructive, as to the Souls
of men, so to the Commonweal of the Kingdom.

Libertas illa quidlibet credendi (says Gerard) nihil aliud quam Libertas
errandi etc. That Liberty of believing what men will (or of holding what Faith
they please) is no other then a liberty of erring, and of erring in a matter
that concerns the eternal Salvation of the Soul, wherein to err cannot but
be most dangerous and destructive -- Diversity of Religion dis-joynts and
distracts the minds of men, and is the Seminary of perpetual hatreds,
jealousies, Seditions, Wars, if any thing in the World be; and in a little
time, either a Schism in the State begets a Schism in the Church, or a
Schism in the Church, begets a Schism in the State. That is, either Religion
and the Church is prejudiced by Civil Contentions, or Church controversies and
disputes about Opinions break out into Civil Wars. Men will at last take up
Swords and Spears, instead of Pens, and defend by Arms, what they cannot do by
arguments. Once for all, it is the Preservation and Reformation of Religion
which you have Covenanted to endeavor, and not a Liberty of Opinion, that will
consist with neither. It is the Extirpation of Heresy and Schism that you have
Covenanted; which if to be connived at, why does the Apostle reprove the
Corinthians for their Schism, so much? and why does our Lord Jesus commend the
Angel of the Church of Ephesus, for trying those which said they were
Apostles, and were not? And why is the Angel of the Church of Thyatira
reproved for suffering that woman Jezabel who called her self a Prophetess, to
teach and seduce, If once we come to this, that any man be suffered to teach
what he pleases to sedu^e whom he list, to be of what Faith or Religion seems
good in his own eyes, farewell Covenant, farewell Reformed Religion, farewell
the Peace and Glory of England, if that day once come. But you (Right
Honorable) I hope better things of you though I thus speak. I hope while you
live and sit in Parliament, this shall never be. It is not usual, nay, it is
not possible that they which love God sincerely, should desire to cherish
differing Religions: for it is most certain he that admits contrary Religions,
believes neither of them.

Sermon: at Paul's Feb. 8. 1646. Land. printed for Ch: Meredith 1646. p. 14.
But then the question will be, Seeing there will be difference of judgment and
Opinion, while we are upon earth, then how, or how far is this difference of
judgment P. 14.
to be permitted? how or wherein may Christians differ from one another in
judgment, and yet ought to be Tolerated and born with?

This is my Brethren a very grave and difficult Question; Tolerated, then to
tell you wherein they may.

First therefore, I say, that as an absolute unity in judgment, that we should
all be of the same mind in all things, is scarce to be attained in this life,
though it be to be endeavored; so an Universal and absolute Liberty of
judgment, for every man to differ when he pleases, and in what he pleases,
to be of what Opinion and Faith he will, is not to be endeavored, if it might
be attained, nor is it to be Tolerated or permitted. I know no warrant, no
pretense of warrant for it, in all the Book of God: Scripture no where says,
Let every man be of what Opinion, and of what Faith he pleases, let every man
be left to his own judgment.

Particularly, Liberty of Opinion or Judgment is not to be granted, or
indulged, in such things as are injurious to God, and Destructive to the Souls
of men; nor wherein the Difference of judgment and Opinion will necessarily
and unavoidably, ex natura rei, produce a Rent and Schism in the Church of
Christ. 1 Cor. 1. 10. Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no Divisions among
you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment. Romans 10. 17. I beseech you Brethren mark them that cause Divisions
and Offenses among you, contrary to the Doctrine that you have received, and --
what? Tolerate them? no, avoid them. Gal. 5. 12. I would they were even cut
off that trouble you. Nothing can be clearer then these Scriptures are, against
the Toleration of all Doctrines, and particularly of those that Trouble, Rend,
Divide the Church.

P. 18.
But (to speak a little to the Positive) if there be a Latitude, and a Liberty
of judgment left, it is first in such things as are not clearly and Positively
laid down in Scripture, and therefore are not of the Fundamentalls, and and
essentialls of Faith and Worship; for there is for these, clear and undoubted
Light of Scripture.

Secondly, it is in things that are of private and single practice, and not of
open converse, or Church Fellowship and Communion. And yet even in these
things, this Liberty is not to be assumed, at least, not to be practiced
without much tenderness and circumspection.

First, care must be had of keeping those Opinions wherein we differ from
others, private to our selves, not troubling or perplexing the Consciences of
others with them. This is the injunction. Romans 14. 22. Have thou Faith? have it
to thy self before God. The Faith there spoken of, is a particular persuasion,
touching the free use of all Creatures, and the Liberty of all days. And this
Faith, this Persuasion was according to the Truth (as is clear by the Apostles
Argumentation in that Chapter) yet says the Apostle, Have thou Faith? have it
to thy self before God: do not say, I am fully persuaded of my Liberty, and
therefore I ought to profess it, and hold it out in my practice, whatever
become of others; it is the truth of God, and I must hold it forth: No says
the Apostle, have it to thy self. And if a man who has a private opinion in re
media, must keep it to himself, though it be a truth, much more must they whose
opinions are false and erroneous. Certainly there is scarce any difference of
judgment so small, and in it self inconsiderable, but the divulging and
Propagating of it may prove very dangerous and Pernicious, and in the event
intolerable.

Suppose a man should be of this Opinion, that it is unlawful to eat things
strangled, or blood: if such a man keep his opinion to himself, and make it a
rule only to his own practice: let him enjoy it 'till he can be otherwise
informed, and persuaded in his Conscience. But if he will now go publish this
Opinion, and entangle the Consciences of others, and seek to draw disciples
after him, and make a party, and cause Division and Dissension amongst the
People of God, this is not to be tolerated.

Private Persons of a differing judgment, if they live quietly, frequent the
public Assemblies of Worship, and are not discerned to disturb the Peace
either of State or Church, by any secret underminings, are to be tolerated, in
hope of their Conversion, and for public Peace sake. But if these men shall
begin to spread their Errors in public, to inveagle and draw others to them,
to beguile the simple, and so to trouble the public Peace, they are to be
restrained.

P. 21.
Had all that profess the Gospel in England, made Conscience to be of the same
mind, and the same judgment with their Brethren and the rest of the Churches
of Christ, as far as possibly; and where they cannot, where there is a
necessity of differing, had they made Conscience to keep their diffences from
appearing in Public, to have their private opinions and faith to themselves
and not entangle the weak with their doubtful Disputations; forbeareing to
judge or despise those that are not of their opinion, loving them still as
Brethren, not censuring them as Profane, Antichristian, fighters against God,
men that will wilfully shut their eyes against the Light; had these things (I
say) been attended to on all hands, our breaches had never been so great as
now they are, nor should the lovers of truth and Peace have had so much cause
to lament them.

P. 40
But where is the fault you will say? True it is there are divisions, sad
divisions, danger threatening divisions among us, but where is the fault? I
know there are many that lay all the fault upon those whom they call
Presbyterians, and say it is their rigor, and their pride and ambition, their
Spirit of Domination that is the cause of all these divisions; Thus say the
Antinomians, and thus the Separatists, and thus the Anabaptists, and thus the
others say. Now the Lord judge between us and them, and let his people that
hear judge this day.

Who are they that divide in judgment from all the Reformed Churches of Christ
in the world, that have Opinions and judgments differing from the Opinions and
judgments of all the Reformed Churches? we or the Anabaptists? we or the
Separatists, we or the --? Possibly they will all say, they are of the same
Opinion with the Reformed Churches in fundamentalls, as well as we, and their
differences, are but in minutioribus. Now supposing this to be true (as it may
be in some of them) why then do they transgress the Apostles rule? why do they
not if that it be in matters of lesser moment wherein they differ from us, why
do not they keep their opinions private, and have their says unto themselves
before God? why do they upon so small differences (if the differences be so
small) withdraw from Communion with us and the rest of the Churches, and gather
themselves into distinct and separate Churches? -- their holding one head and
one faith, does not excuse them from being guilty of breach of Unity and
downright Schism, so long as they hold not one body, one baptism. (...) sive
(...) Beza annot. in 1 Cor. 1. 10.
est cum alii aliis etc. Schism or division (says he) is this; When men are
so addicted to some men, or to some outward rites, that though they do agree in
the chief points of Religion, yet they are estranged in their minds, and engage
themselves into parties and factions. Now who are they that though they
profess to agree with us in Doctrine have yet made a secession, withdrawn
themselves gathered Churches, engaged Parties? Consider and give sentence.

Who are they that have most broken the band of Love? There is great fear what
the Presbyterians will do if once they get power into their hands; but in the
mean time what do others? who are they that brand their Brethren with the
Title, Proud, Time-servers, Prelatical, Tyrannical, Antichristian? And what is
this less then Persecution.

Who are they that have been farthest from condescending to their Brethren for
peace and union sake? were it fit, I could say something of this, yea much: I
could tell you much has been yielded and much more would be yielded, yea
almost any thing, but that one thing that would lay a foundation of perpetual
Division and disunion in Families, Church, Kingdom? Who are they that profess
an utter impossibility of reconciliation or union, and plead for nothing but
Toleration, Toleration, and some for Toleration in the utmost Latitude, to
Papists, Jews, Turks, the very artifice whereby the Arminians in Holland sought
to gain a party, and strength unto themselves? Resolve these Questions, and
they will resolve you who are most guilty of these Divisions.

M. Rich: Vines Ser. before the Com: Mar: 10. 1646. Land. print. for Abel
Roper. 1647 p. 1.
By a Declaration set forth above Thirty years ago, King James (of Famous
memory) was pleased to let the World know, not only how ill he resented, and
how much he detested the Vorstian, and Arminian Doctrines, then newly born and
in their swadling-cloaths; but also how sollicitously he interposed with the
States General of the United Provinces, against their admittance of Vorstius
into the place of Divinity Professor of Leiden, or into their Country. And that
he might decline the envy of being in aliena Republica curiosus, he bears
himself upon that common rule, Paries cum Proximus ardet, when a Neighbors
house is on fire, it concerns all in the Neighborhood to look about them.
This Vigilance condemns our (I know not what to call it, I wish no worse might
be said then) insensibleness and security. For what were those sparks at that
time smoking in a remote corner, in comparison of that fire which now flames
forth at every corner of our house, blown up by that (...), or liberty of all
Religions, which may be justly called, the Golden Calfe of these times,
whereunto many are not unwilling to contribute their strength and Policy, and
whose Birthday, they would not fear to call festum Jehovae, an acceptable day
unto the Lord. Are not the errors which are rife amongst us, either by
infecting Persons of Place and Quality, grown into that boldness? or by carrying
away Barnabas also, crept into that credit? or by spreading far and wide, risen
to that strength? that they do face, if not seem able to put into danger of
rowting, our common Faith, Public Worship, authorized Ministry, long and much
expected, and promised Reformation. This to the common Enemy, is the Cape of
good hope; the sound part are afraid, least the Truth should come to beg for
poor quarter, and be led Captive, following the Chariot of triumphant Liberty.
Some think that Episcopacy in his Pontificalibus, may by this means be
retrived, and recalled from exile, to which it was sentenced by the Covenant.
Many that are as distant in their Opinions as the two Poles, yet moving upon
one axeltree, or tied together by the tails of common Interest, doubt not but
by laying their stocks together they shall be able to bid fair for a
Toleration.

And that we might not be left alone to wonder at our selves, our sympathizing
Brethren abroad do wonder also, That we should be made the common Sewre to
receive the Garbage of other Churches, and that their stinking snuffes should
be allowed Candlesticks here in England.

In this sad Posture of things, all men's eyes have been upon the Parliament,
and every one says, Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there?
Why then is not the health of the Daughter of my People recovered?

M. Simeon Ash Sermon. before the Lords Feb. 26. 1644. Land. printed for Edw.
Brewster 1645. p. 32.
Endeavor vigorously to compound our Differences in Ecclesiastical
concernments. Alas, alas, my heart aches, because of our breaches. Let mine eyes
run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease, for the Virgin
Daughter of my People is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow,
Jer. 14. 17. What Factions and Fractions, what Schisms and Sepatations, what
Rents and Divisions are in this poor, distracted, Distressed Church of England?
how should either Kingdom or Church divided stand? God forbid, but tender
respect should be had to tender Consciences. But (Right Honorable) I beseech
you take heed, least under that pretext, you think of Tolerating all Religions
amongst us. Such Liberty (I am afraid) would usher in Libertinisme, and hasten
our desolation.

Mr. James Cranford Sermon. before the L. Mayor Feb. 1. 1645 Land. printed for
Char: Green 1646. p. 11. and 12.
It is commonly replied in Pulpits, in Presses, That a Toleration of all
consciences, even Antichristian, would be a Sovereign remedy to cure all
dissentions, and an effectual means to compose the Wars of Christendom: all
the blood that has for so many years been shed, is charged upon the restraint
of this licentiousness, ignorantly or maliciously termed Persecution.

I answer, it is besides my purpose to discuss this question of Toleration,
only for the present I enquire, First; Would these men that so hotly defend it,
grant that Toleration (if they had power in their hands) to others which they
desire for themselves? I doubt it. The Arrians did sometimes seem as earnest
enemies to Persecution as these men; yet when they had Authority on their side,
they raised Persecution against the Orthodox, more terrible then the heathen
Emperors against the Christians, which the Churches of the East most
grievously Binii Tom. 1 conc. p. 686.
complained of.

Athanasius at large describes, and having spoken much of their inhumane, and
more then belluine cruelty against all Sexes, all Ages, both living and dead,
concludes, Epist. ad Solitar.
that he had said less then their inhumanity was, because it exceeded all
expression.

The Donatists did ordinarily plead for Toleration, and seemed the most
inveterate enemies to all disturbance for Conscience sake; yet when under the
Apostate Julian they had gotten power, who can declare (says Con. lit. Petil:
l. 2. c. 82.
Austin) what havoc they made of the Orthodox? Opt. cont. Parm. l. 2. 3.
All Africa was filled with blood and desolation; Men were rent, Matrons
dragged, Infants slaughtred, Women with child miscarried, none were secure in
their houses, the ways were not safe for Travelers; the Letters of them that
boasted to be the Captains of the Saints were terrible to all. Are our men led
by another Spirit? Sure I am, that one of them, that with most earnestness, or
impudence pleads for Toleration, was lately of another mind in the case of
Familists and Antinomians in New England.

P. 13.
Secondly would such Toleration, conduce to the establishing of Peace in the
Commonwealth? has it ever done it? Possible it is, that the equality of
Powers may persuade each Party for a Season to suppress their inward rancour;
can Toleration take it away, so that it shall not break out upon sensible
advantages by the increase of strength? let the experience of former Ages, and
present times teach this.

Error may Tolerate error, saevis inter se convenit urfis, but can darkness
agree with light? or Wolves with Sheep? De praescrip. cont. Haeret. c. 41.
Tertullian observes concerning Heretics of old, they agreed well enough one
with another; for though they differed in private opinions, yet they joined in
one, in the opposing of Truth. You Persecute (says Austin of the P. 14.
Donatists) where you are able; where you Persecute not, you are not able to
do it, restrained by the fear of Laws, or envy, or the multitude making
resistance.

I have been long upon this point; but I will conclude it, with that solemn
Embassy, which the Orthodox Fathers, Assembled in Council at Sirmium, sent to
the Emperor Constantius. I have insisted the longer, Athan. de Syn. Arim. and
Sele^^.
that it might appear to all, that the Toleration of Error, is not a way to
Peace, as some men pretend, but to disorder and confusion: And yet I am not an
enemy to Peace, but a friend to Truth, and Holiness, without which no Man shall
see God.

A seriou^ and passionate Admonition to the Clergy; in the words of M. Tho.
Edwards in his Gangra^: part. 1. p. 84 Land. print. for Ralph Smith at the
bible in Cornh^ll 1646.
Ministers ought now to be intent to the errors of the times, both in Doctrine
and Practice, and observe what is the proper work of the day, and Preach
accordingly, taking heed of being guilty of sinful silence, whilst Christ and
his truth suffers. We have too many wounds with which we have been wounded, in
the house of our friends: many Ministers have and do undo us; some by their
total silence; others by speaking too favorably of the Sects, and too much
daubing; it is high time now to speak out, when the truth of God, the Faith once
delivered to the Saints, more precious then our lives, is almost lost, three
Kingdoms almost ruined, and all the reformed Churches in their Truth and Peace
hazarded. They that can now be silent, well contented, and let the Wolves come
freely and not bark, they deserve to be accounted dumb dogs. Let therefore,
all Go^ly Orthodox Ministers, who would not have all run to ruin, stir up
themselves, and lift up their voices like Trumpets, stand no longer looking on,
as idle spectators, or halting between two; for he that is not now with God in
his cause is against him, and he that gathers not scatters -- And that
Ministers in our times may be a means to prevent and suppress the Errors,
Heresies and Schisms, they must not only often preach against them, but they
should set themselves against all the ways by which Errors are come in, and
are farther comeing upon us, and oppose them by Preaching and writing; as
Laymens Preaching, the Gathering of Churches, and above all a Toleration, for
that would be an open door, at which all kind of Heresies would come in, and
no man could keep them out: and therefore if Ministers will witness for Truth
and against Errors, they must set themselves in a special manner against a
Toleration, as the principal inlet to all Heresy and Error; And if a
Toleration be granted all preaching will not keep them out: For as it has been
answered the Patrons of Images, (who plead let them stand, but Preach against
the Worshipping of them) that if they stand, preaching will not take away all
the danger; it is not sufficient to keep the People from all Idolatry; so say I
in this case. If a Toleration be granted, the Devil will be too hard for us,
though we preach never so much against them. A Toleration will undo all. First
bring in Sceptisme in Doctrine, and loosenes of Life, and afterward all
Atheism.

The Patrons of Error, because they cannot at first plead for such and such
Doctrines in terminis, and yet hold them, and would have them propagated,
therefore they plead for a Toleration, which once being granted they will come
in then of course. O let the Ministers therefore oppose Toleration, (as being
that by which the Devil would at once lay a foundation for his Kingdom to all
Generations) witness against it in all places, possess the Magistrate of the
Evil of it, yea, and the People too, showing them how if a Toleration were
granted, they should never have peace in their Familes more, or ever after have
command of Wives, Children, Servants, but they and their Posterities after
them are like to live in discontent, and unquietness of mind all their days.
-- p. 87.
I might show how the Pastors of the Reformed Churches (namely those who were
stars of the First Magnitude) were against the Toleration of Anabaptists,
Libertines, and other Sectaries in their time, and what they did and writ
against it; as Calvin, Zuinglius, Peter Martyr, Philip Melancthon, Zanchius,
Beza, Knox, Bullinger, Musculus, -- p. 88.
As also how in England in Queen Elizabeth's days, learned Bishops and Godly
Ministers were against the suffering of many Religions in this Kingdom: as
Bishop Jewel, Bishop Babington, Bishop Bilson, Mr. Cartwright, and Mr. Perkins,
who in his learned works on Revel: 2. 20. speaks thus; Every man is not to be
left to his own Conscience; to teach and hold what Doctrine he will* But all
such men or women as teach erroneous Doctrine, by the Government of the Church
are to be restrained. -- p. 91.
Did I say the Archbishops, Bishops, Deanes, Doctors, Court-Chaplains, and
Bishops-Chaplains, (for there were some of all these sorts opposed) hazard the
favor of King, Nobles, great Courtiers, the loss of all their Preferments,
Arch-Bishopricks, Bishoprics, Deaneries, great liveings to withstand a
Toleration; And shall the Ministers of our times suffer a Toleration of all
Sects to come in upon us, in a time when the greatest Reformation is pretended
that ever was in this Kingdom, and a Parliament fitting, and be either wholly
silent or oppose saintly; be afraid of displeasing some great man, or hazarding
a little estate and liberty? was the Lukewarm Angel whom God has cast out of
his Church, for not being zealous enough, yet so zealous as to hazard all
against a Toleration of Popery? And shall the Presbyterians Orthodox Godly
Ministers be so cold as to let Anabaptism, Brownisme, Antinomianisme,
Libertinisme, Independency, come in upon us, and keep in a whole Skin?
Certainly the Bishops and their Chaplains shall rise up in judgment against the
Ministry of this Generation, who appeared against the mind of the King,
Council, and so powerful a faction as was for Popery, and the Toleration of it
in those days, if they be silent or meally mouthed, besides the shame and
dishonor of it here, before the Churches abroad, and good men at home, who
will lay all the blame upon the Ministers, and say, We may thank them for
this, for dealing no more freely, nor faithfully with the Kingdom, crying out,
an unworthy Assembly, an unworthy Ministry in City and Country, to sit still
and suffer all these Errors and poisonous Principles, in Books, Sermons to come
in upon us, and to pass unquestioned.

O for some Gabriel Powells, D^wnams, Abbots etc: O for a Burgess, a Calamy, a
Case, a Baxter, an Edwards etc. to write Preach, etc.
to write, preach, remonstrate, protest against the Errors and ways of these
times. It Is want of courage and speaking out has undone us; and it is only
boldness and freedom in speakeing, to declare particularly such books come
forth, such Sermons preached, such practices played, such persons preferred and
suffered, such partiality used etc: in reference to the Sectaries, that must
recover us; there is no way to put a stop to things, and save all from ruin, but
present courage and Heroic resolution, and lets speak out, and suffer no
longer a company of giddy cunning self-seeking Sectaries, to betray the Truth
of God, and to abuse and undo two Kingdoms -- Lets therefore fill all Presses,
cause all Pulpits to ring, and so possess Parliament, City, and whole Kingdom
against the Sects, and of the evil of Schism, and a Toleration, that we may
no more hear of a Toleration, nor of Separated Churches, being hateful names
in the Church of God. AMEN AMEN.

An Additionall Testimony of M. Nath: Newcomen Sermon. at Paul's Feb. 8. 1645. p.
12.
For if it be lawful for every man to entertain and hold what opinion he
pleases, how differing soever from the opinion and judgment of the rest of the
Church and People of God, yet this is his opinion, and his judgment is
persuaded of it, and he must follow his own judgment, and this liberty of
judgment be (as some say) Liberty of Conscience, part of the Liberty purchased
by Jesus, and to restrain it, or set bounds to it, is in their language
Persecution, Tyranny, etc. If this were true, sure Paul did very ill, to charge
the Corinthians with so much authority, to be of the same mind, and of the same
judgment. Might not some among the Corinthians have said to Paul, This is hard
usage, this is to rack a low man to the same length with a taller, and to cut a
tall man to the stature of one that is low? What, the same judgment? and the
same mind? will not Paul allow difference of lights and sights? Might not some
one among the Corinthians have said, What if I am of opinion that there is no
resurrection, what has Paul or any man to do with that? it is my conscience,
and it is my liberty, and what has any man to do with my conscience more then
I with his? might nor Hymaeneus have said; What if it be my Opinion, that the
Resurrection is past already, what has Paul to do with that? Yes, says Paul,
if ye persist obstinate I will Excommunicate you, I will deliver you up to
Satan, that you may learn not to Blaspheme: Certainly this shelter, this Asylum
of error, falsely called Liberty of Conscience, was not thought of in former
times.

THus far these Famous Divines, whose very words I have transcribed, and that
faithfully, never adding so much as one syllable of my own, unless in the
Margin, where I have sometimes taken a little Liberty.

I do much hope (upon a serious perusal) you will confess these Testimonies
both pertinent and convincing, and therefore I might here take occasion to
consult my own ease, and your patience. But because (as I have found by sad
experience) Prejudices are strong, and evil Habits (which have been long in
contracting) are not suddenly removed, (as an effectual means (through Gods
blessing) of your farther Conviction) I shall entreat your perusal of these
following Authorities.

A LETTER OF THE Presbyterian Ministers in the City OF LONDON, Presented the
First of Jan. 1645. to the Reverend Assembly of DIVINES, Sitting at Westminster
by Authority of Parliament AGAINST Toleration.
To Our Reverend, Learned, and Religious Brethren, the Prolocutor, and the rest
of the Divines Assembled, and now sitting at Westminster, by Authority of
Parliament: These present.
Reverend and beloved Brethren,
WE are exceedingly apprehensive of the desirableness of our Churches Peace,
and of the pleasantness of Brethrens Unity, knowing that when Peace is set upon
its proper Basis, viz: Righteousness and truth, it is one of the best
Possessions, both delectable and profitable: like Aaron, ointment, and the dew
of Hermon. It is true, by reason of different lights, and different sights
among Brethren there may be dissenting in Opinion; yet, What is the keeping
conventicles or private meetings but separating from our Church communion.
why should there be any separating from Church Communion? The Churches Coat
may be of diverse colors, yet, why should there be any rent in it? Have we not
a Touchstone of Truth, the good word of God; and when all things are examined
by that word, then that which is best may be held fast; but first they must be
known, and then examined afterward. If our dissenting Brethren after so many
importunate entreaties would have been persuaded (either in zeal to the truth,
or in sincere love to the Churches peace, and unity among Brethren, or in
respect to their own reputation by fair and ingenious dealing, or Yet the
Ministers of this persuasion made as little conscience of their Subscriptions,
Promises, yea* Oaths of Canonical Obedience to their respective Diocesans.
in Conscience to their promise made with the Ministers of London now five
years since, or any such like reasonable consideration) at last to have given
us a full narrative of their Opinions, and Grounds of their Separation, we are
persuaded they would not have stood at such a distance from us as now they do:
But they chose rather to walk by their own private lights than to unbosome
themselves to us their most affectionate Brethren; and to set themselves in an
untroden way of their own, rather then to wait what our Covenanted Reformation,
according to the word of God, and Show us the example of one reformed Church
which allows her Ministers liberty not to use her establishd Rites and
Ceremonies.
examples of the best reformed Churches would bring forth. But the offense does
not end here, it is much that our Brethren should separate from the Church, but
that they should endeavor This is plainly our Brethrens design and endeavor
at this time.
to get a warrant to Authorize their Separation from it, and to have Liberty
(by drawing members out of it) to weaken and diminish it, till (so far as lies
in them) they have brought it to nothing; this we think to be plainly
unlawful, yet this we understand is their present design and endeavor.
Wherefore (Reverend Brethren) having had such large experience of your zeal of
Gods glory, your care of his afflicted Church, your earnest endeavors to
promote the complete Reformation of it, and of your ready concurrence with us
in the improvement of any means that might be found conducible to this end; we
are bold to hint unto you these our ensuing Reasons against the Toleration of
Independency in this Church.

1. The desires and endeavors of Independents for a Toleration, are at this
time extremely unseasonable and preproperous: for,

1. The Reformation of Religion is not yet perfected and settled amongst us,
according to our Covenant. And why may not the Reformation be raised up at
last, to such purity, and perfection, that truly tender Consciences may receive
abundant satisfaction, for ought that yet appears?

2. It is not yet known, what the Government of the Independents is, neither
would they ever yet vouchsafe to let the World know, what they hold in that
point, though some of their Party have been too forward to challenge the London
Petitioners, as led with blind Obedience, and pinning their souls upon the
Priests sleeve, for desiring an establishment of the Government of Christ,
before there was any Model of it extant.

3. We can hardly be persuaded, that the Independents themselves (after all the
stirs they have made amongst us) The Presbyterians (although often pressed
thereunto) will not declare wherewith they would be all concluded, how far they
mean to go, and where to stay in their desires of Toleration, and
condescension.
are as yet fully resolved about their own way, wherewith they would be
concluded, seeing they publish not their model (though they are nimble enough
in publishing other things) and they profess Reserves, and new Lights, for
which they will (no doubt) expect the like Toleration, and so in infinitum. It
were more seasonable to move for Toleration, when once they are positively
determined how far they mean to go, and where they mean to stay.

II. Their desires and endeavors, are unreasonable, and unequal in diverse
regards.

1. Partly because no such Toleration, has hitherto been established (so far
as we know) in any Christian State by the Civil Magistrate.

2. It Is notorious Presbytery would not in the late times tolerate Episcopacy.
Partly, because some of them have solemnly professed, that they cannot suffer
Presbytery; and answerable hereunto is their practice in those places where
Independency prevails.

3 And partly because To grant indulgence unto a few, would offend many more of
all Parties. Why may not Independents, and all other Sectaries, desire the same
favor, in case they provide Readers or Churches.
to grant to them, and not to other Sectaries, who are free borne as well as
they, and have done as good service as they to the Public (as they use to
plead) will be counted injustice and great Partiality; but to grant it unto
all, will scarce be cleared from great impiety.

III. Independency is a Schism

1. Ye already do, and (in case your Toleration be granted) will draw our
members from our Congregations, which ye acknowledge true Churches.
Independents do depart from our Churches and so acknowledged by themselves.

2. They draw and seduce our members from our Congregations.

3. Ye do in effect set up Separate Churches.*
They erect separate Congregations, under a separate and undiscovered
Government.

Ye receive not the Sacraments (except some few) in our Churches but (...)
private meetings,
They refuse Communion with our Churches in the Sacraments.

5. Their Ministers refuse to preach among us as Officers.

6. Their members, if at any time they join with us in hearing the Word and
Prayer, yet they do it not as with the Ministerial Word and Prayer, nor as the
Acts of Church Communion

No Schism is to be Tolerated* as ye grant. But Presbytery is a Schism Now,
as much as Independency w^^ by you declared to be Then. Therefore, (according
to your own grounds) it (...) not to be Tolerated.
Now we judge that no Schism is to be Tolerated in the Church Schisms.
(...) 1 Cor: 1. 10. 1 Cor: 12. 25. Divisions.
(...) Rom: 6. 17. with 1 Cor. 3 3. Gal: 5 20.

IV. The same would follow if Presbytery were Tolerated.
Many mischiefs will inevitably follow upon this Toleration, and that both to
Church and Commonwealth.

First to the Church, as,

1. Causeless and unjust revolts from our Ministry, and Congregations.

2. Our Peoples minds will be troubled, and in danger to be subverted, as Acts
15. 24.

3. Bitter heart-burnings among Brethren, will be fomented and perpetuated to
Posterity.

4. The Godly, painful, Orthodox Ministry, will be discouraged and despised.

5, The life and power of Godliness will be eaten out by frivolous disputes,
and vain janglings.

6. The whole course of Religion in private Families, will be interrupted and
undermined.

7. Reciprocal Duties between persons of nearest and dearest Relations will be
extremely violated.

8. The whole work of Reformation, especially in Discipline and Government will
be retarded, disturbed, and in danger of being utterly frustrate and void,
whilst every person shall have liberty, upon every trivial discontent at
Presbyteriall Government and Churches, to revolt from us, and list themselves in
separated Congregations.

9. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will be encouraged to
endeavor the like Toleration.

10. All other Sects and Heresies in the Kingdom will safeguard and shelter
themselves under the wings of Independency, and some of the Independents in
their Books, have openly avowed, that they plead for Liberty of Conscience as
well for others as for themselves.

11. And the whole Church of England, in short time will be swallowed up with
destruction and confusion. And God is not the Author of confusion but of peace.
1. Cor: 14. 33.

Secondly to the Commonwealth. for,

1. All these mischiefs in the Church will have their proportionable influence
upon the Commonwealth.

2. The Kingdom will be woefully weakened by scandalls and Divisions; so that
the enemies of it, both domestical and foreign, will be encouraged to plot
and practice against it.

3. It is much to be doubted, lest the power of the Magistrate, should not
only be weakened, but even utterly overthrown, considering the Principles and
practices of Independents, together with their compliance with other Sectaries,
sufficiently And are not Presbytarian principles known to be so too.
known to be Anti-Magistraticall.

And as inconsistent with other Oaths imposed by Lawful Authority, which that
was not.
V. Such a Toleration is utterly repugnant and inconsistent with that solemn
League and Covenant, for Reformation and defense of Religion, which not only
both houses of Parliament, but also persons of all sorts in both Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, have subscribed, and with hands lifted up to the most
high God have sworn: Which Oaths have been taken by most of the chief sticklers
for Toleration, and with a True intention (it was hoped) to perform the same.
which Covenant likewise, both you, and we, and those that most earnestly
pursue the establishment of Toleration, have made (or should have made) in the
presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to
perform the same, as we shall answer at the Great day, when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed. For,

1. This is opposite to the Reformation of Religion, according to the word of
God, and the example of the best reformed Churches, Article 1.

2. The Toleration of Presbytery is no less destructive to the conjunction and
uniformity of all the three Kingdoms then Independency.
It is destructive to the three Kingdoms nearest conjunction and uniformity in
Religion and Government, which might lead us and our posterity after us as
Brethren to live in faith and Love Art. 1.

3. Seeing Presbytery is as much a Schism from Episcopacy, as Episcopacy or
independency was from Presbytery, why do they now, in stead of extirpation,
desire the Toleration of it, contrary to your Covenant.
It is plainly contrary to that extirpation of Schism and whatsoever shall be
found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of Godliness, which we have
sworn sincerely, really, and constantly to endeavor without respect of
persons.

4. Toleration of Schism renders Magistrates and Ministers accessory to the
Errors, Sins, and Destruction of seduced and deluded People.
Hereby we shall be involved in the guilt of other men's sins, and thereby be
endangered to receive of their Plagues Art. 2.

5. It seems utterly impossible (if such Toleration should be granted) that the
Lord should be one, and his name one in the three Kingdoms. Art, 2.

6. This will palpably hinder the Reformation of Religion, inevitably divide
one Kingdom from another, and unhappily make factions and parties among the
People contrary to this League and Covenant; of which evil offices, whosoever
shall be found guilty, are reputed in the Words of the Covenant The Toleration
of deformity, even in little Matters, sometimes causes factions and parties
amongst the People. Let Us have a care we be not Incendiaries, or evil
Instruments for Sacrilegious spirits to work by ill affected as well to
Presbytery as Episcopacy
Incendiaries, Malignants Malignants and evil Instruments, to be discovered,
that they may be brought to public trial, and receive condign punishment.
Art. 4. and 5.

These are some of the many Considerations, which make deep impressions upon
our spirits, against that great Diana of Independents, and all the Sectaries so
much cried up by them in these distracted times, viz. A Toleration, a
Toleration. And however, none should have more rejoiced then our selves in the
establishment of a Brotherly, Peaceable, and Christian accommodation; yet this
being utterly rejected by them, we cannot dissemble how upon the forementioned
grounds, we detest and abhor the much endeavored Toleration. Our Bowels, our
Bowels are stirred within us, and we could even Drown our selves in Tears,
when we call to mind, how long, and sharp a travel this Kingdom has been in
for many years together, to bring forth that blessed fruit of a pure and
perfect Reformation; and now at last after all our pangs, and dolours, and
expectations, this Real and through Reformation, is in danger of being
strangled in the Birth, by a lawless Toleration, that strives to be brought
forth before it.

Wherefore (Reverend and Beloved Brethren) we could not satisfy our selves,
till we had made some discovery of our Thoughts unto you about this matter; not
that we can harbor the least jealousy of your zeal, fidelity, or industry in
the opposing, and extirpating of such a root of gall and bitterness, as
Toleration is and will be, both in present and future Ages; but that we may
what lies in us, endeavor mutually to strengthen one another resolutions,
against the present growing evils, and that our Consciences, may not smite us
another day for sinful silence, or sluggish deficiency in any point of Duty,
tending to the glory of Christ, Honor of the Truth, Peace of the Church,
Perfection of Reformation, Performance of our Covenant, and Benefit of present
and succeeding Generations.

From Sion-Colledge Land. December. 18. 1645. Subscribed by Us your Affectionate
Brethren, and Fellow Laborers in the work of the Ministry, to whom Truth and
Peace is very precious.
The Judgment of King JAMES and His Privy Council against Toleration.
Transcribed verbatim out of Judge Crooks Reports. Term. Mich: Anno 2. Jacobi
Parag. 13. Part. 2. p. 37.
MEmorandum, that by command from the King, all the Justices of England, with
diverse of the Nobility viz. The Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellor, the Earl of
Dorset Lord Treasurer, Vicount Cranbourne Principal Secretary, the Earl of
Nottingham Lord Admiral, the Earls of Northumberland, Worcester, Devon, and
Northampton, the Lords Zouch, Burghley, and Knowles, the Chancellor of the
Duchy, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, Popham chief
Justice, Bruce Master of the Rolls, Anderson, Gaudy, Walmesly, Fenner,
Kingsmill, Warberton, Savill, Daniell, Yelverton, and Snigg, were assembled in
the Star Chamber; where the Lord Chancellor, after a long Speech made by him,
concerning Justices of Peace, and his Exhortation to the Justices of Assize;
and in discourse concerning Papists and Puritans, Declaring how they both were
disturbers of the State, and that the King intended to suppress them, and to
have the Laws put in execution against them, Demanded of the Justices their
Resolution in three things.

First, Whether the Deprivation of Puritan Ministers by the High Commissioners,
for refusing to Conform themselves to the Ceremonies appointed by the last
Canons, was Lawful? Whereto all the Justices answered.

That they had conferred thereof before, and held it to be lawful, Because the
King has the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power, which he has Delegated to the
Commissioners, whereby they had the Power of Deprivation, by the Canon Law of
the Realm, and the Statute of 1. Eliz. which appoints Commissioners to be made
by the Queen, does not confer any new Power, but explain and declare the
ancient Power. And therefore they held it clear, That the King without
Parliament might make Orders and Constitutions for the Government of the
Clergy, and might deprive them, if they obeyed not; And so the Commissioners
might deprive them. But they could not make any Constitutions without the King,
and the divulging of such Ordinances by Proclamation is a most gracious
Admonition; And for as much as they have refused to obey, they are lawfully
deprived by the Commissioners ex Officio without Libell Et ore tenus convocati.

Secondly, Whether a Prohibition be grantable against the Commissioners upon
the Statute of 2. H. 5. if they do not deliver the Copy of the Libell to the
Party; whereto they all Answered, That that Statute is intended where the
Ecclesiastical Judge proceeds, Ex officio and ore tenus.

Thirdly, Whether it were an offense punishable, and what punishment they
deserved, who framed Petitions, and collected a multitude of hands thereto, to
prefer the King in a public cause as the Puritans had done, with an Intimation
to the King, That if he denied their Suite, many Thousands of the Subjects
would be discontented? Whereto all the Justices answered, that it was an
offense finable at discretion, and very near to Treason and Felony in the
punishment, for they tended to the raising of Sedition, Rebellion and
discontent among the People: To which Resolution all the Lords agreed and then
many of the Lords declared.

That some of the Puritans had raised a false Rumor of the King, how he
intended to grant a Toleration to Papists: which offense the Justices conceived
to be heinously finable by the Rules of the Common Law, either in the Kings
Bench, or by the King and his Council: or now since the Statute of 3. H. 7. in
the Star Chamber. And the Lords severally declared how the King was
discontented, with the said false Rumor, and had made but the day before a
Protestation unto them, That he never intended it, and that he would spend the
last drop of blood in his body before he would do it; and prayed that before
any of his Issue should maintain any other Religion then what he truly
professed and maintained, that God would take them out of the World.

VOTES etc. OF THE Honorable House of COMMONS Feb. 5. etc. 1662. Upon Reading
His Majesty's Gracious Declaration and Speech etc.
Die Mercurii 25. Feb. 15. Car. R.
Resolved etc. Nemine contradicente, That the humble Thanks of this House, be
returned to His Majesty, for his Resolution to Maintain the Act of Uniformity.

Resolved etc.

That it be presented to the Kings Majesty, as the Humble Advice of the House,
That no Indulgence be granted to the dissenters from the Act of Uniformity.

Most Gracious Sovereign,
THe Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons house of Parliament, did
with great joy receive your Majesty's most Gracious Speech, at the opening this
Session of Parliament: And being thereby invited to consider of their
Declaration of the Twenty sixth of December last; they have with all Sobriety,
Duty, and Affection, examined the grounds thereof, and do by me present unto
your Majesty their most hearty Thanks for the same, and humble Advice
thereupon; both which, I do beseech your Majesty, that you will vouchsafe me to
deliver in their own words.

May it please your most excellent Majesty,

We your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses of the House of Commons in Parliament Assembled, having with all
fidelity and obedience considered of the several matters comprised in your
Majesty's late Gracious Declaration of the 26 of December. last, and your most
gracious Speech at the beginning of this present Session,

Do in the first place for our selves, and in the names of all the Commons of
England, render to your Sacred Majesty, the Tribute of our most hearty Thanks
for that infinite Grace and Goodness, wherewith your Majesty has been pleased
to publish your Royal intentions, of adhering to your Act of Indemnity and
Oblivion, by a constant and Religious observance of it. And our hearts are
further enlarged in these returns of Thansgivings when we consider your
Majesty's most Princely, and Heroic Professions of relying upon the Affections
of your people, and abhorring all sort of military and arbitrary Rule. But
above all we can never enough remember, to the honor of your Majesty's Piety,
and our unspeakable Comfort, those solemn and endearing Invitations of us your
Majesty's Subjects to prepare Laws to be presented to your Majesty, against
the growth and increase of Popery; and withal to provide more Laws against
Licentiousness and impiety, at the same time declaring your own Resolutions for
maintaining the Act of Uniformity.

And it becomes us always to acknowledge and admire your Majesty's Wisdom in
this your Declaration, whereby your Majesty is pleased to resolve, not only by
sumptuary Laws, but by your own Royal example of frugality, to restrain that
excess in men's expenses, which is grown so general, and so exorbitant; and to
direct our endeavors, to find out fit, and proper Laws for advancement of
Trade and Commerce.

After all this we most humbly beseech your Majesty to believe, That it is with
extreme unwillingness and reluctance of heart, that we are brought to differ
from any thing which your Majesty has thought fit to propose; And though we do
no way doubt, but that the unreasonable distempers of men's spirits, and the
many Mutinies and Conspiracies which were carried on, during the late
intervalls of Parliament, did reasonably incline your Majesty to endeavor by
your declaration, to give some allay to those ill humors, till the Parliament
Assembled and the hopes of indulgence, if the Parliament should consent to it,
especially seeing the pretenders to this indulgence, did seem to make some
titles to it, by virtue of your Majesty's Declaration from Breda. Nevertheless,
we your Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, who are now returned to
serve in Parliament from those several parts and places of your Kingdom, for
which we are chosen, Do humbly offer to your Majesty's great VVisdome, That it
is in no sort advisable, that there be any indulgence to such persons, who
presume to dissent from the Act of Uniformity, and the Religion established.

For these Reasons, We have considered the Nature of your Majesty's Declaration
from Breda, and are humbly of Opinion, That your Majesty ought not to be
pressed with it any farther,

Because it is not a promise in it self, but only a Gracious Declaration of
your Majesty's Intentions, to do what in you lay, and what a Parliament should
advise your Majesty to do; and no such Advice was ever given, or thought fit
to be offered; nor could it be otherwise understood, because there were Laws of
Uniformity then in being, which could not be dispensed with, but by Act of
Parliament.

They who do pretend a right to that supposed promise, put the Right into the
hands of their Representatives, whom they chose to serve for them in this
Parliament, who have passed, and your Majesty consented to the Act of
Uniformity. If any shall presume to say, that a right to the benefit of this
Declaration does still remain after this Act passed,

It tends to dissolve the very Bonds of Government, and to suppose a disability
in your Majesty and the Houses of Parliament to make a Law contrary to any part
of your Majesty's Declaration, though both Houses should advise your Majesty to
it.

We have also considered the nature of the Indulgence proposed, with reference
to those consequences, which must necessarily attend it.

It will establish Schism by a Law, and make the whole Government of the Church
precarious, and the Censures of it of no moment or Consideration at all.

It will no way become the Gravity or Wisdom of a Parliament, to pass a Law
at one Session for Uniformity, and at the next Session (the Reasons of
Uniformity continuing still the same) to pass another Law to frustrate or
weaken the execution of it.

It will expose your Majesty to the restless importunity of every Sect or
Opinion, and of every single Person also, who shall presume to dissent from the
Church of England.

It will be a cause of increasing Sects and Sectaries, whose numbers will
weaken the true Protestant Profession so far, that it will at least be
difficult for it, to defend it self against them: And which is yet farther
Considerable, those Numbers which by being troublesome to the Government, find
they can arrive to an Indulgence, will as their Numbers increase, be yet more
troublesome, that so at length they may arrive to a general Toleration, which
your Majesty has declared against, and in time some prevalent Sect, will at
last contend for an establishment, which for ought can be foreseen, may end in
Popery.

It is a thing altogether without precedent, and will take away all means of
Convicting Recusants, and be inconsistent with the Method and proceedings of
the Laws of England.

Lastly it is humbly conceived, that the Indulgence proposed will be so far
from tending to the peace of the Kingdom, that it is rather likely to occasion
great disturbance. And on the contrary; That the asserting of the Laws, and
the Religion established, according to the Act of Uniformity, is the most
probable means to produce a settled Peace and Obedience throughout your
Kingdom: Because the variety of Professions in Religion, when openly divulged,
does directly distinguish men into parties, and withal gives them opportunity
to count their numbers; which considering the animosities that out of a
Religious Pride will be kept on foot by the several factions, does tend
directly and inevitably to open disturbance.

Nor can your Majesty have any Security, that the Doctrine or Worship of the
several Factions, which are all governed by a several Rule, shall be
consistent with the Peace of your Kingdom.

And if any persons shall presume to disturb the peace of the Kingdom, We do
in all humility declare, That we will for ever, and in all Occasions, be ready
with our utmost endeavor and Assistance, to adhere to and serve Your Majesty
according to our bounden Duty and Allegiance.

My Brethren,
I Have now given you my Authorities, viz.

1. The private Testimonies of twenty eminent Divines.

2. The public Testimony of the Presbyterian Ministers in the City of London
(Synodically) met at Sion College.

3. The Authority of that Wise, and Learned King James and his Privy Council.

4. The Votes and Reasons of the Honorable Commons Assembled in this present
Parliament.

All which I have designedly ranked in this method, that observing the order of
nature, and beginning ab imperfectiori, I might gradually ascend to that which
is more perfect; for such I think the Reasons of the House will be found; (to
him that dares attempt them) i. e. Impregnable and unanswerable.

I Know not how it fares with other men, (I am no judge of their honesty or
Knowledge) but I am sure, as to me the premises have appeared so considerable I
should think the world might suspect either my Intellectualls, or Moralls, were
I not thus apprehensive of so convincing a Light.

My Brethren, (that I may deal freely with you) I am perfectly amazed, and (I
had almost said) scandalized; that men so eminent for Learning, so noted for
Piety, and (if we may believe themselves it being one of their grand Topickes
for Indulgence) so considerable for Policy, I say, that these men should so
warmely concern themselves for this Thing called Toleration, which (as I hope
the premises have evinced) is not only destructive both to Church and State,
but also (which prudent men would a little consider) so directly contrary to
their former Principles and Practices.

I am very unwilling to make any unpleasing Reflections, but it is the Language
of the world (and I am not yet instructed to confute it) that it is not a
Toleration, (however pretended, as the most advantageous method, that can at
present be employed) but a Reformation, (that is, (as sad experience has
explained it) a total Extirpation of what ever is contrary to their humors
and designs) that each different Party endeavors to establish.

Now that this may not be rejected as a slandering design, only to make you
odious to Authority, (as is commonly objected) there are several Reasons (at
least strong conjectures) that seem highly to enforce the formentioned Charge.

I am willing to conclude; and shall therefore give you my notions in gross,
leaving the Analysis to your acuter Judgments.

There are you know such things in the world, as a Jus Divinum of some one
Form of Government, and a Solemn League and Covenant; both which as being
directly contrary to your pretended Toleration, (had I but the leisure or
ability to improve them) might easily be resolved into Volume of Arguments.

But leaving this performance (if occasion shall require) to the management of
some abler Pen, permit me very calmely to beg your Resolution to this following
Proposal.

Were you in the same Condition, ( i. e,) did you enjoy the same encourageing
Circumstances, that your Adversaries, the true Sons of the Church of England
(through Gods great mercy and the Indulgence of a gracious Prince) are at
present favored with; then lay your hands upon your breasts, and tell me, as
in the Presence of the great God that shall judge the world; Whether would you
then indulge either Person or Parties, that should dissent from your
established Discipline, be it Presbyterian, or Independent, or any other
whatsoever: ( e. g.) Whether would you then permit that Minister to preach
publicly, that should read the Service of our Church, wear a Surplisse, use
the Cross in Baptism, Kneel at the Sacrament, etc: and not only so, but the
utmost of whose endeavors should be employed in persuading others to the like
practices, telling them that the contrary (by you observed) was irreverent and
undecent, and therefore of all good Christians to be loathed and abhorred, I
say tell me plainly; Is it fit to grant a Toleration and Indulgence to such a
Person or no? if not, then (even your selves being judges) neither is it fit to
Tolerate you, since your Principles and Practices are as distant from his (I
mean the true Son's of the Church of England) as his from yours, as destructive
to his, as his to yours: and it is unreasonable (says the defender of the
London Ministers Letter to the Assembly) that Independents should desire that
Ant. Tolerat. p. 16.
Toleration from Presbyters, which they would not give to Presbyters; so say I,
it is unreasonable that Independents, Presbyters, or any other Sect should
desire that Toleration from Episcopacy, which they would not grant to
Episcopacy. For with what face can I desire a courtesy from him, to whom I do
openly profess, I would deny the same Courtesy.

But now if you take the other member of the Contradiction, and say, you would
tolerate the forementioned Person, supposeing him otherwise of a quiet, and
peacable temper; let me then desire you further to resolve me. Are you
persuaded, That the Church of England requires any thing Sinful as the
condition of her Communion or not? if you say, she does not (I am no little
troubled to mention it, but there is no evasion) I must plainly tell you, you are
no better then downright Schismatics; for Schism in the proper notion of it
is nothing else, but a causeles Separation from that part of the visible Church
of which we were members: now there is no sufficient cause for such Separation
but Unless there be something which is sinful required as the Condition of our
Communion, it appears to me to be Schism to withdraw our selves. Def: of
Propos. p. 91.
Sin; it being the judgment of our best writers upon that Controversy, that
nothing else could warrant our Separation from Rome but this; that she required
as Conditions of her Communion somewhat in fide erroneous, or in facto impious.

But if you are persuaded (and some of you have declared it) that she does
require something which is sinful, as the Condition of her Communion, then the
Case is clear; the Make falls of; and I have finished my Task; for, since all
Sin is confessedly the object, not only of our hatred and aversation, but also
of total extirpation (it being every ones duty not only to avoid Sin himself,
but (by all lawful ways and methods) to hinder its Commission in others) I
shall humbly leave it to his most sacred Majesty and the Wisdom of the
Parliament to Consider;

Whether it be either Religion, or Policy to tolerate those Persons, or
Parties, which are persuaded in their Consciences, that it is a necessary
incumbent Duty, not only to hate and detest, but also (by all those ways and
methods which they themselves shall think lawful) to weaken, alter, and
extirpate the settled Government of the Church? the which Alteration, what
influence it may have upon the State, and how Destructive it may prove to his
Majesty's Crown and Kingdoms, (I hope it is no breach of the Act of Oblivion
to tell you) the experience of late years has suggested a very fatal
conjecture.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS
The Preface.
The Author no scoffer at Religion. p. 2. The Occasion of this work. 5. The
Author dissatisfied about Toleration. 7. Toleration is unpracticable. 8. The
petitioners for Tol: scarce intelligible in their Proposals. 9. The Testimonies
of twenty eminent Divines against Toleration. 11.
Particularly.
Mr. Ash. 50. Dr. Corn: Burgess. 15. Mr. Baxter. 37. Mr. Calamy. 33. Mr. Case.
28. Mr. Cranford 51. Mr. Edwards. 53. Mr. Good. 23. Mr. Hardwick. 26. Mr.
Horton. 39. Mr. Hughes. 32. Mr. Lightfoot. 31. Mr. Newcomen 42. Mr. Reyner. 28.
Mr. Salwey. 27. Mr. Seaman. 41. Mr. Thorowgood. 24. Mr. Vines. 49. Mr. Ward,
19. Mr. Watson, 31. A Letter of the Presbyterian Ministers in the City of
London to the Assembly, against Toleration. 61. The Judgment of King James and
his Privy Council against Toleration. 71. The Votes and Reasons of this
present Parliament against Toleration. 75.
Conclusion.
A serious reflection upon the Premises. 81. It Is not Tol: but Reformation that
N. C. intend. 82. The Reasons which caused the Author so to think. 83. A
Proposal which N. C. are desired to resolve. ib. N. C. are Schismatics. 85. A
very humble Address to his Majesty and the Parliament. 86

