REASONS AGAINST AGREEMENT with a late Printed Paper, entitled, Foundations of
Freedom: OR, The Agreement of the PEOPLE. Whereby it does appear, that the
Particulars proposed in the said Paper are not Foundations of Freedom, but of
Tyranny and Slaverie to the People being destructive to Religion, Laws,
Liberty, and Government; against our Covenant and Protestations, and very
dangerous and unsafe for the Kingdom.

By WILLIAM ASHHURST Esquire.

LONDON: Printed for Tho: Underhill. 1648.

To the READER.
I Have no more to say to the Reader, but That when I had considered the
Printed Paper, entitled, Foundations of Freedom, Or an Agreement of the
People; I was very much unsatisfied with it, and so were others I met with: And
finding that the differences upon it would fall out amongst those who are
obliged to friendship and agreement both for the good of the Kingdom and their
own good, I thought it unchristian and unsafe, to let so great
dis-satisfactions lie privately heating together, until they might kindle into
an hotter flame of discontent, especially it having ever been (as it is still)
my opinion (which I have not hid) that differences in this case should be ended
by Reason, not by Opposition: And seeing the Publisher of the Paper calls upon
every man for his Reasons against it, I have here brought him mine under my
hand, wherein although I am sensible that I may discover my own weakness and
folly, yet I ever hating all private Contrivances, or to do any thing of
public Concernment in a Corner, have judged it more honest (and that shall
ever go for wisdom with me) to use plain dealing, which if it be (according to
the Proverb) a jewel, I am sure was never more precious then at this time.

W. A.

REASONS AGAINST Agreement with a late Printed Paper, Entitled, An Agreement
of the People.
THe Publisher of this Paper called, An Agreement of the People, tells us, that
it was tendered to the Consideration of the General, and Counsel of the Army;
but before it was approved by them (which I hope it never will) he held it just
to be published, that men might offer their Reasons against it: wherein he is
so ingenious, that however both the Epistle and Paper might give occasion to
some personal Reflections, yet I will only give him fairly my Reasons why I
cannot agree to this Paper; having for the more clear proceeding first laid
down the most principal parts of this Agreement, which (as I take it) is
briefly, That the People who shall subscribe this Paper shall agree, To take
away this Parliament, And to choose an equal Representative consisting of 300.
men, who shall have full power without the Consent or Concurrence of any other
person or persons, (either King or House of Peers) to make, Repeal, Alter, and
Declare Laws: and that none do resist their Laws or Orders upon pain of death,
except such Representatives expressly violate this Agreement, and they shall
have power to choose a Council of State for the managing of public affairs:
But that they shall not have power to continue in force, or make any Laws,
Oaths and Covenants, whereby to compel by penalties or otherwise any person to
any thing in or about matters of Faiths, Religion, or Gods worship, or to
restrain any person from the professing his Faiths, or exercise of Religion,
according to his Conscience in any house or place, except such as are or shall
be set apart for the public worship, nevertheless the Instruction or
directing of the Nation in a public way for the matters of faith, worship, or
discipline, so it be not compulsive, or express Popery, is referred to their
discretion: with like restriction in other matters of less consequence.

I am very much unsatisfied with this Paper, both for the manner and matter of
it, for these Reasons.

this Agreement may call themselves the People, might those who shall refuse to
subscribe it, and those who are not admitted to subscribe it, both call
themselves the People, And at any time hereafter pretend like right to do the
same, or like things; which must lay a foundation of certain Confusions.
Neither can there be assurance of any settlement whatsoever in this way for
what those who call themselves the People agree upon now, they may alter within
a month, or sooner if they please.

must bring, and that without offering any Reason for it.

Neither is there only these general Reasons against the whole Paper, but if
the subject matter of it, and the proceedings intended thereupon were lawful,
yet there are many Reasons against the particulars in it, which I shall proceed
with.



England, which we are bound to preserve and maintain, not only as Englishmen
but as Christians; most part of the Kingdom having solemnly sworn it to the
most high God, And one to another in the Vow and Protestation of the 5th. of
May, 1641. wherein we further vow and protest, to oppose. And by all good ways
and means endeavor to bring unto condign punishment all such as shall either
by force, practice, or Counsels, plots, Conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing
to the contrary. And likewise in the Solemn League and Covenant of 27th of
September. 1643. not only we in this Kingdom, but the most part of the Kingdom
of Scotland have sworn to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliaments in both Kingdoms. Now the Paper does not only propose, to take
away the Rights and Privileges, but the Parliaments of England themselves, as
they were constituted when these Oaths were taken, to which the words according
to the literal sense of them (which is the rule of Oaths) must relate, for we
could not swear to that which was not, or to something that was only like a
Parliament: therefore no man (as I conceive) who has taken either the Vow and
Protestation, or the Solemn League and Covenant, can agree to this agreement,
unless he dare make himself guilty of most palpable and notorious perjury.



England proposed in the Election of this Representative; it being a known
Maxim in Law, that no power could lawfully impose upon the liberties or
properties of the people of this Kingdom, but either by their particular
consent, or general assent in Parliament where every man is represented. But
by this Paper, as well all those who have been most faithful to the Parliament
and Kingdom, and hazarded their lives and estates in this cause (if in
Conscience they cannot subscribe this Agreement) as the Delinquents and Papists
that are most of all obnoxious to the Law, shall be debarred from electing or
being elected, yet they shall have Laws and taxes imposed upon them, and by
them who for number are the least party in the Kingdom, and by those to whom
they give no consent nor trust; which is as perfect slavery, as any Tyrant
could impose upon them.

that shall happen upon either subscribing or not subscribing, is only to
those who have been united in this cause, the Common Enemy being thereby
strengthened, united, and kept from the rest of this Subscription.

Except such Representative shall expressly violate this Agreement; which leaves
every man to be a Judge of it, there being by this Paper no other power
Intended to be Above this Representative to judge it; Nor does it Appoint
either how, or by whom, this Judgment shall be made: Therefore every man that
will but say they have broken this Agreement, and has power to make it good,
shall not offend, but justify his disobedience, or opposing of their Laws or
Orders by force; And where there is this principle that Judgment is out of the
legal Judges, there can be no Magistracy, Authority, or Government. It is
true that (there being no perfection in any thing here below) all Judges and
Supreme Authorities may err, and do evil; but if upon that ground any
multitudes should be their Judges, is not the Reason as good, and much more
strong, that those multitudes (who cannot be judged) may err, and do evil, by
how much they are Acted by fancy, and as they are possessed by others, And
according to their sudden and present Apprehensions, rather then by principles,
Reason, or Judgment; neither are they bound by those Considerable Interests to
seek the good and tranquillity of the Kingdom, that usually those have who are
called to be Judges; and especially they are not so obliged in duty to God,
because the Magistrates are called by God to be Judges, therefore they must
judge righteously, as they will answer it to him upon highest penalty, The
loss of their souls. I might further show, that by the Moral Law, the Law of
nature, and the positive Laws of God, Judgment does wholly rest in the
Magistrate. But this point being only for the more abundant clearing, yet not
of absolute necessity to this Reason, I will insist no further upon it, there
being enough to demonstrate, That if no man ought to be punished for opposing
any Law or Order of this Representative, if they break this Agreement, and that
every man may be his own Judge whether they have broken this Agreement or no;
then although there may be a color, yet there is really no Authority in this
Representative: And if not in this, which is to be made the Supreme, then much
less have any inferior Judicatories that shall act under them; and so that
great Ordinance of God, Magistracy, whereby he preserves humane society, shall
be taken out of this Kingdom.

me, that the whole was made and contrived by some Jesuit, with the advice of
some of the Kings old Counselors, although it is possible that some honest men
may be coosened into the acting of it for them. But to return to the point,
Here we have a Magistrate that has neither compulsive nor restrictive power in
matters of Religion, but both he and the people are freely left to be of any
Religion that they please, or of no Religion if they please; yet the Magistrate
(if it stand with his discretion) shall have a Toleration to instruct and
direct in a public way (all that will be instructed and directed by him (for
all are left to their liberty) in matters of Faith, Worship, or Discipline,
whereby he is at liberty to instruct according to truth, or in an error, so
that for the present it be not Popery, yet in truth the best contrivance to
build up Popery at last upon the ruins of Religion by Atheism and
profaneness; which the more it is considered, the more it will be abhorred by
all honest and godly men in the Kingdom. If I had more patience I might say
much more upon this Reason, but I think this is enough.

Ireland to the Rebls: and the Protestant party and Forces there, to misery and
ruin: not only by our distractions, but because the managing of the War of
Ireland is in this Parliament, wherein the new Representative will have no
Authority.

Scotland: the particulars held forth in this Agreement being directly contrary
to the declared principles both of that State and Church, and destructive to
all the faithful in that Kingdom both Ministers and people, that have adhered
to us in this Cause.

with others to take away this Parliament by a forcible Agreement, is to do the
enemies work, and give them the Cause. And is against the great Trust which
has been, and is given by the Parliament to all the Soldiers that have had,
or have Commissions from them, wherein they are specially entrusted to fight
for The preservation of this Parliament. And when all Soldiers do well
consider, that without the Authority of this Parliament their taking up Arms
were Treason, and their killing of men were murder; and that it is the
Authority by which they have endemnity and present pay, and security for their
Arrears, and that as the change of Authority would make many questions in other
things, so would it do in these. It being also evident, that as the Parliament
cannot well be without their Forces, so they cannot be without the Parliaments
Authority. Upon all these considerations, the Soldiers have reason to be
against this Paper, which proposes by Agreement to take away the Cause they
have fought for.

piety, nor give security for the enjoyment of Liberty or Property, nor hopes
of Union, which might bring a settlement and peace. And what sorts of people
are left whose interest it would be to preserve this Agreement, I leave any one
to consider, whether they will not be only such who because they cannot bring
themselves within the protection of the Laws established and present Government,
will possibly sign this Agreement, that so they may bring the Law and
Government to their wills and corrupt interests; for so indeed they do that
subscribe this Agreement. No obedience being to be given to this
Representative, but in their keeping this Agreement; and there being no other
Judges thereof but the Subscribers, who in the result of all have the Law in
their own wills: Upon all which grounds, there is no hope that this Agreement if
it were made (as is desired) would either preserve it self, or that any who
were most considerable, could be obliged to keep it, so as nothing could be
expected from it but to be a foundation for new confusion.

I will close these Reasons with this profession, That I am far from arguing
that this Parliament should not (in this manner) be taken away out of any base
or low end, that I might still continue a Member of it, for I dare and do
appeal to God, who is the searcher of all hearts, that I know no outward thing
to befall me, that I should account my self more happy in, then to be legally
discharged from that Service. But in this way to tear up the very foundations
of all Government, and to rear up so miserable a thing in the room, It behooves
every true hearted Englishman that sees it to be sensible, not for his own, but
for the Kingdoms sake: and that really set me on work at this time.

I shall now only add some short general observations upon several
particulars I find at the end of this Paper prepared already for this new
Representative; wherein are desires to this purpose.

That no man's life be taken away but for Murder. That no man be Imprisoned for
Debt: That no Tithes be paid: That there be no restriction ( which is no
Regulation) of Trade. That there be no Lawyers, nor Law, but new Rules in
English, to be made by the new Representative; And twelve men in every Hundred,
to be Judges of all causes; who are likewise intended to supply the Offices of
all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Deputies, etc. These are the desires
of them who labor for a new Representative instead of Parliaments. And it
seems they hope to choose such a Representative as will grant them all. Indeed
if these must be had, I agree there is a necessity (by some means or other) to
take away this Parliament; for I believe that they would never grant such
things, as the making of Laws in the favor of Treasons, Burglaries, Felonies,
Sodemy, Buggery, Rapes, and such like abominations, from which the punishments
of death is (by these men) desired to be taken off, especially considering that
the many good Laws which have been made under highest penalties (as now they
stand) do not hinder nor deter men from those foul offenses which are daily
and frequently committed in all parts of the Kingdom; and therefore there
rather appears need of stricter provision against them.

But when the new Representative shall take these things into consideration,
they may find that there will be no need to take away any penalties from
Malefactor, by a Law to keep them from Justice, if they do but grant the
Hundred Courts as is desired (who can but sit seldom) and thereupon all
Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices or Peace, etc. who are Officers ever ready, and by
whose Authority the Malefactors are apprehended, examined, committed, and
brought to Justice; being taken away, the Offenders are like to go free without
any such Law. Especially when these Hundred Courts act the parts not only of
all the Lawyers, but of all the Judges in the Kingdom; And all this Justice to
be done, and lie in the breasts of twelve men in every Hundred, who may be
chosen of men that can neither write read, nor have any Estates responsable,
if they should be found guilty of Briberie, or any other high misdemeanors: by
this means we are like to have Justice at all adventure, be it right or wrong.
If I should go over the rest of the aforementioned particulars, I should not
keep my word, for there is so much to be said against every of them, that I
could not be short, nor is it very necessary to be done: for in the bare
reading of them it does too much appear, that they are working to a universal
Licentiousness, as well in the Civil State, as in matters of Religion; by
which liberty, all truth, and every man's property, with the Government which is
the band of humane society, will be destroyed. I had thought to have closed
here, but I cannot conclude without a word upon that particular proposed, that
no Tithes be paid; because I believe that taking away the Ministers of the
Gospel with their maintenance, lies at the bottom of it: I say so upon this
ground: Because I did yet never speak with any man who was for the taking away
Tithes from Ministers, without as good maintenance first provided in a-setled
and certain way (which I could never yet hear propounded) but he was for the
taking away the Ministers themselves; and therefore they will not allow that
the Ministry is an office ordained by God (although nothing be more clear in
his Word) but call them State Ministers, or (as this Paper) public Ministers,
as though they were only by some politic or civil constitution, and might
be taken away at pleasure: then which, nothing can be more contrary to the
truth; neither is it only clear, that there are those in the Church of Christ,
whose office it is to be Ministers of the Gospel, but likewise that by an
Ordinance of Christ, They that preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel: And
however it be of a Divine right, that Ministers should have a maintenance, yet
the proportion, distribution, use, and enjoiment of it is from, and by a civil
right, whereupon they hold and possess their Tithes by the Laws of the
Kingdom; and have as legal a Freehold in their Tithes, as any man has to his
Land. And the Law does provide full as good a remedy to the Minister for
recovering his right of the Tithes, as to an Impropriator, or other man in the
Kingdom, for any thing he injoies. But the Paper says, it is a grievance and
oppression. I believe it is a grievance to those men that Ministers live, or
have any thing; But how comes it to be an oppression? Is it oppression to pay
to others what is legally due to them? These men may consider, that if Tithes
be taken from the Ministers, or Impropriators, yet there is neither right nor
Justice, that they by whom they are payable should have them to their own use,
for they have nothing that might make or derive a right or title to them. They
never paid any consideration for them, they did not purchase, nor were they
conveyed to them: when their Land was bought, it was under this charge, that
Tithes should be paid out of it. In a word, there may as much be said in
justice, reason or equity, why they should not pay any quit Rents, Rent
Charges, Annuities, or other charges that lies upon their land, as why they
should not pay Tithes: And do but give them Tithes upon their crying out that
it is a grievance and oppression, and they will in a short time (I am
confident) upon the same grounds, cry out upon all other payments and charges
out of their Land; and it is like the Rent to the Landlord will not be paid
long after, for they will be all alike a grievance and oppression.

I do observe that there are two notable pieces of justice in the consequence
of this particular of theirs.

First, That the Impropriator shall be satisfied (yet I know not how, where, or
by whom) before his Tithes be taken away. Yet the poor Minister that holds his
by as good a Law and right, shall have his first taken from him, and play an
after-game for his maintenance which might gain their point; when by that means
they might be driven from their Churches to go abroad to beg, because they
cannot work.

And the other is, That they would have this new Representative to take Tithes
from the Ministers, to whom they belong in justice and right, and to give them
unto other people who have no right at all to them. And when they have got the
Ministers Tithes, then they propose that they may have maintenance. Provided
always, that (it being against their Consciences) they may pay them nothing:
Nor others pay any thing, all payments being oppressive, and they are to have
nothing but in an unoppressive way. By all which it appears, that they intend
to take away the Ministers, and get their means to themselves for their pains.
I do not in this plead my own case, for I do and shall willingly pay Tithes,
but I receive none.

I have thus looked into these Foundations of Freedom, and told you in part
what I have seen, wherein I must leave every Reader to his own judgment: I
shall only upon the whole matter give you mine. That under the color of laying
new foundations, all the old Foundations of Religion, Parliaments, Laws,
Liberties, and Property: are strongly endeavored to be undermined, plucked up,
and destroyed. And all the materials I find brought to this new new building
are such (in my judgment) as only tend to Licentiousness; therefore it shall
be against my will it I live in it, or near it, because it has no ground work.
For here is a Government without Authority, A Magistrate without power; If a
Minister, yet without maintenance. A People left to be of any Religion, or of
all Religions, or of no Religion as they please. It is therefore (in my
judgment) altogether unsuitable to any who desire to live soberly righteously,
and godly in this present world. Yet not withstanding I would not be so angry
with those that should offer it, as to resolve presently to fall out with them.
I would remember that it has still been our enemies work to divide us, England
from Scotland, and one from another: Let it still be our work to unite, and not
be so wicked and unwise, as to ruin a righteous cause, and our selves with it.
But let us lay aside this Paper, and all dividing and party Projects, and make
it our study how to satisfy and secure one another, that we may live in love
and peace; Which as it has ever been my hearty desire, so it shall ever be my
faithful endeavor, and most earnest prayer to that God, who out of all these
shakings is only able to bring a good settlement to this poor distracted
Kingdom.

FINIS.

