A SVPPORT FOR the sinking Heart in times of distress. OR A SERMON PREACHED in
LONDON, to uphold hope and allay fear, January 4th. Which was a day of great
trouble and deep danger in the City.

By SIMEON ASH.

PROVE. 25.11. A Word fitly spoken, is like apples of gold, in pictures of
silver.

LONDON Printed by G.M. and are to be sold by Thomas Underhill, at the sign of
the Bible in Woodstreet near the Counter, MDCXLII.

To the Christian Reader.
THE seasonablenesse of this Sermon occasioning warm workings in the hearts of
many who heard it preached, the Author of it was persuaded to print it: but he
judging it unworthy such public view, returned a denial unto those desires of
his friends. Afterward understanding that a Copy taken by short hand from his
mouth, would be made common, he rather chose to peruse and correct it, then to
expose himself and the reader unto greater wrong. Hereupon sundry phrases are
filed, and some Scriptures lay^d more open, other additions or amplifications
are not very many, but thou now have the body of the Sermon, both for matter
and method, as it was first delivered. When thou meetest with wants and
weaknesses, remember that not the confidence of the preacher, but the
importunity of some of his heareres, has made this discourse thus public. If
by means hereof, thy soul shall receive any spiritual edification, and grow
more able with hope and comfort, to thrust through straights in Heaven way;
give God the glory of all his gracious workings upon thy spirit by Jesus Christ.

Martis. 17. 1641.
IT is this day ordered by the Committee of the House of Commons in Parliament
concerning Printing; that this Book, entitled A support for the sinking heart
in times of distress, be printed.

JOHN WHITE.

GENESIS XXII. XIV. In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.


INterpreters call this Text a Proverb, the interpretation whereof is to be
fetched from the occasion of it.

God by way of trial did put his servant Abraham upon a sad task, Verse. 1.
a dead service, commanding him to make a burnt offering of his son, his
son Isaac, the son of his age, and the son of Gods promise.

Take now thy son, thy only son Isaac whom thou love, Verse. 2.
and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering.

How heavy this work was likely to be upon Abraham's heart, I leave it to the
judgment of any affectionate father, when he has seriously perused the law of
the Lord concerning burnt offerings.

The offering being slain it was to be cut in pieces, Lev. 1.6.8, 9.
the wood being laid upon the Altar fire was to be put under, the parts, the
head, the fat were to be laid in order upon the wood, the inwards and the legs
being washed in water, all were to be burnt on the Altar.

When the good old man had chewed this bitter pill for the space of three
days, toward the end of the third day, Genesis 22.4.
he lifting up his eyes saw the place afar off where his dearest son must
be sacrificed.

Being come to his journeyes end he builds the Altar, binds his son, and
lays him thereon. What patheticall conference pafled between them two, the
Holy Ghost reveals not. But what it was each affectionate heart will make
conjecture. When the father (no doubt with a heavy heart) had taken the knife,
and lifted up his hand, and was ready to give the deaths blow to his beloved
Isaac, now imagine you what were Abraham's straights.

Is it not probable he might have such reasonings as these? If I kill not my
son God will be incensed because he is disobeyed; If I do, how will the
world clamor and censure, being ignorant of my warrant, and therefore apt to
judge my act both impious and unnatural.

Now in the Mount is the Lord seen, divine providence sweetly and gloriously
appears two ways.

1. In that Abraham's son is spared.

Verse. 11, 12.
2. In that a sitting sacrifice is prepared, and both unexpected. Abraham,
Abraham hold thy hand.

How welcome were these words to the working warm heart of Abraham, being
ready to let forth the life of his welbeloved son? The execution is checked,
Isaac is not killed, Heb. 11.17.
and yet the intention of his obedience herein is graciously accepted: yea and
as an addition of mercy, he is assured by Christ the Angel of the covenant,
Verse. 12.
that God accounted him one that truly feared his name. Now J know thou fear
me.

This unexpected providence might work in the good man's heart willingness to
tender unto the Lord an offering in way of thankfulness, that his Majesty
might have some homage in the same place where he had showed so much favor.
And though speedy provision of that kind was as far from Abraham's thoughts,
as the preservation of his son, yet when he lifted up his eyes and looked,
behold behind him aramme caught in a thicket by the horns. Verse. 13.
And Abraham went and took the ram and offered him up for a burnt offering
in the stead of his son, and Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah
Jireh. In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.

I will not trouble you in reporting the various readings of these words from
the original. In short, the english of my Text is this, Man's extremity is Gods
opportunity. Or if you would have my Doctrine in other words, take it thus:

In the Mount, in the midst of straights it has been the manner of the
Almighty, Doct.
mercifully to manifest himself for his servants comfort.

There are two things that I shall desire to speak too in the prosecution of
this point, purposeley pitched upon because of this days perplexity.

1. Confirmation, that it may be strongly believed. 2. Application, that it may
be seasonably improved.
The Confirmation of the Doctrine I will give in.

1. By Scripture. 2. By Reason.
The Scripture proof you shall have under two heads.

1. The Promises of God. 2. The experiences of the godly.
I will mention only two precious Promises, because they are sufficient, being
both pregnant and pertinent, speaking both fully and punctually to the point in
hand.

The former is in Psalm. 72.12. where the sweet dispensations of Christ's regal
authority being tipically foretold by King Solomon's government, Psalm. 72.12.
we have this recorded. He shall deliver the needy when he cries, the poor
also and him that has no helper. You may do well to mark the fitness and
fulness of the Promise.

1. When Christ finds his people in themselves poor and needy, destitute of
abilities to shelter themselves from wrong and violence. 2. When in regard of
others it is thus with them, viz. not only that they have weak helps, or few
helpers, but when they have no helpers, none at all. 3. When in this distress
they cry out as persons in an undone condition, then, though not till then will
he deliver.
The other Promise is registered in Deuteronomy. 32.36. For the Lord shall judge his
people, Deuteronomy. 32.36.
and repent himself for his servants when he sees that their power is gone,
and there is none shut, up, or left.

The language is large, and has much in it, but because the proof in it is
apparent to every eye, I will leave it.

The experiences of the godly which I shall produce you may please thus to
consider:

1. Of single Persons plunged into deep dangers. 2. Of companies, whether few
or many, compassed about with devouring perils on every side.
For single Persons, I will instance in four Examples.

Dan. 6.16.17, etc.
The first is of Daniell, wherein fource circumstances are remarkable.

1. He was cast to Lions, not only one but many, the number we know not. 2. He
was put into the Lions den, and the door was shut, a stone was brought and
laid upon the mouth of the den that he might not get forth from those beasts
of prey. 3. The King seals it with his own signet, and with the signet of
his Lords, that the purpose might not be changed concerning Daniell. 4. In this
dark den of deadly danger he continued a whole night, and in this great
straight the Lord by his Angel, shut the Lions mouths that they did his
servant no hurt at all.
The second Example is that of David, 1 Samuel 23. from the 25. to the 28. Saul
pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon, and Saul went on this side the
Mountain and David and his men on that side of the Mountain, and David made
haste to get away for fear of Saul, for Saul and his men compassed David and
his men round about to take them. But there came a messenger unto Saul saying,
have thee and come, for the Philistines have invaded the Land, wherefore Saul
returned from pursuing after David.

In this Example these things are considerable.

1. It was no less then David's life that now was endangered. Verse. 15.
2. The Ziphites who were acquainted with David's holds, combined themselves
also against him. Verse. 19.
3. All this strength did not only in a warre-like way take up arms to meet
him, for then by flying back he might have made an escape, but they compassed
him round about. 4. His strength was not sufficient safely to break through
these blood-thirsting forces: Now in this straight, an unexpected providence
procures his preservation: In this Mount was God seen gloriously.
The third Example is that of Paul, which you have in the 21. Acts 30.31, 32.
All the City was moved, and the people ran together, they bound Paul, drew
him out of the Temple, and forthwith the doors were shut, and as they went
about to kill him, tidings came to the chief Captain of the band, that all
Jerusalem was in an uproare, who immediately took soldiers, and Centurions,
and ran down unto them, and when they saw the chief Captain and the
soldiers, they left beating Paul.

Herein you may note:

1. The general Insurrection, All the City. 2. Their violent Opposition, They
drew him out. 3. Their bloody Intention, It was to kill Paul. 4. Their entrance
upon execution, They were beating him to beat out his life: Now in this
straight comes tidings, leave him there is something else to do: Thus was
God in the Mount seen, and Paul's life preserved.
The fourth Example is of Peter, Acts 12.4, 6, 7. wherein note:

1. That Herod intending to kill him (having done execution upon James, ver.
3.) had apprehended him, and imprisoned him. 2. In prison he was committed to
the custody of four quaternions of soldiers, that for every watch both day
and night there might be 4. looking to him to prevent escape. 3. The night
before he was to be brought forth, he was bound with two chains, and two
soldiers had him between them. And now, that night, and in that straight, he
was delivered by the Angel of God.
The experiences of Gods people in combined companies, come in the next place
to be considered, and for brevities sake I will only suggest three.

The first is of Shadrack, Mesheck and Abednego, wherein their Persons are not
so many as the particulars notable in their deliverance, Dan. 3.19, 20, 21, 22,
23. etc. Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was
changed against Shadrack, Mesech and Abednego, therefore he spoke and commanded
that they should heat the furnace seven times more then it was wont to be
heated, etc.

From these words their extreme peril with which they were besieged, appears
in five circumstances.

1. Their death is determined by the King, who had authority to command both
their tortures and executioners. 2. The most mighty soldiers were appointed to
bind them, and do execution upon them. 3. The furnace being heated seven times
more hot then ordinarily, did burn to death them who undertook their burning.
4. These 3. men, were cast not only into the mouth, but into the midst of the
furnace. 5. They fell down bound in the midst of the burning fiery furnace. Now
in this condition, conceive how little hope could be expected of life to be
continued, and yet it is affirmed by the Holy Ghost, Verse. 27.
that they had no hurt, upon their bodies the fire had no power, nor was the
hair of their head singed.
The next is of Israel when they came out of Egypt, recorded, Exodus 14.
wherein these things set forth Isreal's extremity.

1. The forces prepared against them, The heart of Pharaoh and of his servants
was turned against the people, and he made ready his Chariot and tooked his
people with him, and he took six hundred chosen Chariots, Verse. 5, 6, 7.
and all the Chariots of Egypt, and Captains over every one of them. 2. The
pursuit made after them, They pursued after the children of Israel, and the
Egyptians pursued after them, Verse. 8, 9.
all the horses and Chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen and his army. 3. The
dreadful apprehensions raised in the hearts of the Israelites, (viz.) that no
less then their death was intended. Why have thou taken us away to dye? Verse.
11, 12.
Had it not been better for us to serve the Egyptians then that we should dye.
4. The particulars whereby they were further straightned. Verse. 9.
1. The Egyptians overtooke them encamping by the Sea. 2. The Seas of they went
forward threatened to devour them. In this distress God discovers himself,
and delivers them. For observe the words, Moses said unto the people, fear ye
not, stand still, Verse. 13.
and see the salvation of the Lord, which h^ will show to you to day.
To day, even just now and not before, help comes from Heaven Herein this
farther circumstances has it is weight, that Israel at this instant was
provoking God, by murmuring and distrustful fears.

The last is of Israel in the reign of Jeroboam son of Joash. 2 King. 14.26,
27.
The Lord saw the affliction of Israel that it was very bitter, for there was
not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel, and the Lord said not
that he would blot out the name of Israel under Heaven, but he saved them by
the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.

All these passages propounded from sacred records, may abundantly satisfy us
in the truth of the doctrine now under hand: (viz.) That in the Mount of the
Lord it shall appear, Man's extremity is Gods opportunity.

In case you inquire the Reasons of this divine dispensation, I return answer.

That God thus works in reference to Himself. His people. Their enemies


1. In reference to himself. The praise and glory of his own blessed Name
designed in all his works, is the supreme end aimed at in this Providence.
This God brings in as the cause why his hand carried Israel to the very side
of the Sea, into the mouth of death before deliverance should appear. I will
be honored upon Pharaoh and upon all his host; that the Egyptians may know
that I am the Lord. Exodus 14.4.


Upon such occasions the Attributes of the Lord break forth in glory, His
Wisdom is most manifested when it works beyond means, above means, that
humane reason cannot find out divine footsteps. His Power truimphs when all
opposition shrinketh before his wondrous workings. The like might be showed
concerning his other excellencies. The event of Gods dealings with Daniel, and
the three young governors in the times of their straights, discover that this
was Gods intent in those providence. For mark how Nebuchadnezzar and the King
Darius did trumpet forth the praises of the God of Shadrach, Mesech, Abednego
and Daniel, when they were eye witnesses of those two glorious deliverances
which were wrought on by omnipotency. Dan. 3.28, 29.
Then Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach
and Abednego, who has sent his Angel, and delivered his servants that trusted
in him, and have changed the Kings word, and yielded their bodies that they
might not serve, nor worship any god, except their own God. Therefore I make a
decree, that every people, nation and language, which speak any thing amiss
against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and
their houses shall be made a dunghill, Then King Darius wrote unto all people,
Dan. 6.26, 27.
nations and languages, that dwell in all the earth. I make a decree, that in
every dominion of my Kingdom, men tremble and fear before the God of Daniell,
for he is the living God, and steadfast for ever, and his Kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even unto the end. He
delivers and resoueth, and he works signs and wonders in Heaven and in
earth who has delivered Daniell from the power of the Lions. By both these
instances it is evident, that the Lord does appear in the Mount for his own
sake, to get and raise himself a name in the world.

2. God does thus work in respect to his own people. And here I will note only
four particulars.

1. Sometimes that he might discover to his servants for their encouragement,
both the truth and strength of his own graces in them. This was the reason why
God thus tried Abraham, that he might manifest that holy fear which was
planted in his breast. Hereupon God puts him to it, and carries him into
the Mount, leads him into distress by degrees, acting him on to build the
Altar, to lay the wood in order, to bind his Isaac, to lay him upon the Altar,
upon the wood, yea to take the knife, and to stretch forth his hand to slay his
son, before he did appear for his comfort, in giving order for the
lengthening of Isaacks life. And now when there seemed to be but one minute of
time unto the effusion of Isaacks blood, hear the good news from Heaven,
Abraham I know thou fear me.

2. Sometimes to manifest the feebleness of some grace in their hearts for
their humbling, Peter thought himself full enough of courage to come to Christ
upon the sinking seas it he might have a call. Well! mark the issue, Christ
calls him, come out Peter, but when he saw the winds boisterous, and when
his sooting failed, he began to sink, then he was afraid and cried out, Mat.
14.28, 29, 30, 31.
hereupon observe Christ's answer, O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt.

3. That he may set the graces of his Spirit in exercise, both for their
increase, and for the enfeebling of contrary lusts. We know that habits are
strengthened by exercise, and grace is augmented in its measure, by being put
forth vigorously in it is operations. And by how much any grace gathers
strength, by so much the opposing corruption becomes feeble in a Christian
breast. And that the Lord has this end in this kind of working, it might be
evidenced by manifold instances, but for brevities sake, I will only point at
one, in one single experiment.

As holy affiance in God is confirmed, so by such like dispensations creature
confidence is abated in holy hearts, 2 Cor. 1.9, 10. But we had the sentence of
death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which
raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. Men in straights see the strength of
creature helps shunke up, and withered, whereupon they dare lean to them no
longer; but Gods irresistible power profound wisdom, abundant goodness, and
other glorious attributes in such difficult cases being clearly discovered,
the soul is encouraged confidently to cast it self into his arms for future
times.

4. That their deliverance might be more sweet to their spirits, and
consequently that their joys might the more readily run out before his
Majesty in holy thankfulness. When we expect that now our houses shall be
fired, the City sack it our estates wasted, our wives abused, our children
cruelly murdered, our Sabbath and week day meetings interrupted, our
Parliament dissolved, and our Kingdom desolated. Now to see these clouds to
blow over, and our Sun to break forth again, oh how sweet will this
glorious change be to our now-dropping hearts! David's experince speaks to this
purpose, Psalm 34.1, 2, 3. A Psalm of David when he changed his behavior before
Abimelech, who drove him away, and he departed. I will bless the Lord at all
times, his praise shall continually be in my mouth: My soul shall make her
boust in the Lord, the hamble shall hear thereof and be glad, oh magnify the
Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. Psalm. 86.12, 1, 3. I will
praise thee O Lord my God with all my heart, and I will glorify thy name for
evermore. For great is thy mercy toward me, and thou have delivered my soul
from the lowest hell. But more fully and fitly may our Kingdom concernments be
expressed by: Psalm. 1* 24. if our God be pleased now to appear in the Mount
for London, for England, in this day of our deep danger, and exceeding,
exceeding great fear, And our desired deliverance from present perplexities,
may with joy of soul be expressed by the words of that Psalm. If it had not
been the Lord who was on our side, now may England say, if it had not been
the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up against us, then they had
swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us, then the waters
had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul, then the proud waters
had gone over our soul. But blessed be the Lord who has not given us as a
prey to their teeth, etc.

3. God thus works in regard of his peoples enemies, both the Devil and
divelish men. 1. In regard of the Devil, that he might stop his black and
slanderous mouth, which is upon all occasions wide open in ways of calumny,
casting slanderous accusations upon Gods good servants. When all Jobs estate
was removed in a day, all his children knocked dead at one blow, God commending
Job says thus to Satan, Job 2 3.
Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth,
a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth evil? and
still be holds fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him to
destroy him without cause. And Satan answered and said, skin for skin, ver. 4,
5,
yea all that a man has will he give for his life, put forth thy hand now and
touch his bone, and his flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. Hereupon God
brings Job into further straights, for this very purpose to silence Satan.
Rev. 12.10.
And whereas those malignant spirits continue to be the accusers of the
Brethren, and are still apt to provoke his Majesty against them, suggesting,
that if his providence put them to pinches, they will then sly out, and
manifest their carnal fleshlinesse in the profession and practice of Religion:
Hereupon God puts them (as it were) into the stocks, and sets them upon the
rack, and causes them to be besieged with difficulties to prove Satan a
notoriour liar.

2. In regard of divellish men. Partly to fill their hearts with the more
vexation: Partly to chain down their violent spirits, that they may not break
forth with further fury against his cause and people, and through the power of
strong conviction, to work some change in their lives and courses.

1. To fill their hearts with the more vexation. The Lord does indeed rejoice
in the misery of the wicked. I will laugh at your calamity, Prove. 1.26.
and mock when your fear comes: yea it is a comfort to his highness to
power forth fury upon them: Ezekiel. 5.13.
I will cause my fury to rest upon them, and I will be comforted. And the
Psalmist seems to give in this, as a reason why God causes it to be midnight
with his servants before light peep forth, why they are in deep danger before
daylight appear, Psalm. 112.9, 10. Unto the upright there arises light in the
darkness, his heart is established, he shall not be afraid: until be see his
desire upon his enemies, his horn shall be exalted with honor, the wicked
shall see it and be grieved, he shall gnash with his teeth and melt away. It
cutteth a wicked man to the heart, when he thinks he shall have the day in
the downfall of the righteous, and yet the godly they rise and get ground, and
gather strength. We have a pregnant proof of this in the example of Haman;
Esth. 5.14.
who expecting that Mordecai should be hanged, when Mordecai was advanced to
great honor, Esth 6.10, 11.
then Haman mourned and hanged down the head: And thus it will be with the
popish and profane, ver 12.
who this day rejoice in our doleful straights, when God shall appear in the
Mount for our deliverance.

2. That chains of restraint might be laid upon their hearts and hands, by
Gods strange and amazing providence. When they see that God from Heaven does
give testimonialls of approbation to his poor persecuted servants and service,
being plunged over head and ears in the floods of deepest calamity.

This is made good upon Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 3.29.
Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation and language which speak
any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, shall be
cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no
other God that can deliver after this sort. Then the King promoted Shadrach,
ver. 30.
Meshach and Abednego in the province of Babylon.

In like manner the defeat of Haman, and the deliverance of the poor Jews
devoted to destruction, Esth. 8.16, 17.
produced the same effect upon many of their enemies. And truly notwithstanding
this days fears and straights, we will hope to see some such effects upon the
hearts and lives of some who deride and oppose our desired reformation. Thus
much for Confirmation of the doctrine. Application follows. There are four
uses to be made which are both natural and seasonable.

Hence it follows, Use 1. Information.
that people have no ground at all to suspect their own gracious standing in
reference to God because of their straights. Deep and devouring dangers may be
ready to swallow up the righteous, God may bring an Abraham into the Mount,
unto great difficulties, Gods people may travel through the red sea in the way
to Canaan, seas of trouble, bloody times may overtake them who are most dear
to God. This I rather note because Gods people are apt to dash upon this rock,
and to do themselves much wrong by thus reasoning. If God did love me, 1 Pet.
4.12.
or had been graciously respective to my humiliations and prayers, I should not
have seen so black, so dark a day. My self and mine, our peace and Parliament,
our persons and possessions had never been in such danger, if the Lord had bin
favorable to me in seeking better times. Herein David failed: Psalm. 73.13, 14.
Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, for
all the day long have I bin plagued, and chastened every morning. Now to keep
us from adding guilt to our grief, that we may not provoke God to be angry,
while our enemies are filled brim full of bloud-thirsting fury. I will briefly
suggest four considerations, to preserve us from this mistake.

1. By this error acted, we deny the perfection of the word of God, because
therein there is no such rule to judge by. Yea the Scriptures openly and
evidently speak the contrary, Eccles. 9.1, 2. No man knows either love or
hatred by all that is before them. All things come alike to all, there is one
event to the righteous and to the wicked. And certainly if we shall dare to
add our devises to Gods word, Prove. 30.6.
he will be angry. Add thou not unto his words lest he reprove thee, and thou
be found a liar.

2. Thus people bear false witness against themselves, by passing
unjustifiable sentences against their own souls. Exodus 20.16.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. To detract from our
neighbors credit and comfort, is a breach of Gods law. And truly it admits
many aggravations, when we deal thus injuriously with our selves.

3. We express much ingratitude to God, the God of all our mercies, calling
his love into question, and overlooking or undervaluing all former favors,
because of present pressures and approaching dangers. Let Isreal's miscarriage
in this kind be your looking-glass to show the foul face of this fault, that
you may take heed of this deformity. When Pharaoh pursued them, and the roaring
seas threatened to devour them, their deliverance out of Egypt (though wrought
on by many miraculous providence) was accounted a misery rather then a mercy,
for observe their language, Exodus 14.11. wherefore have thou dealt thus with us?

4. By this mistake we reach a wrong to others, Psalm. 73.15. If I say I will
speak thus, behold I should offend against the generation of thy children. Our
carriage in this particular may cast sad discouragements upon the hearts of
many dear to God, causing them to question their spiritual state, because of
outward straights. Hereby also we seem to suspect their wisdom who uphold
their hopes, and maintain their comforts, notwithstanding their manifold heavy
afflictions.

Censure not others to be rejected or abhorred by the Lord, because you meet
with them in the Mount, Use 2. Admonition.
you see them in straights, in extremities. Beloved, the words of the Psalmist
are considerable. Psalm. 41.1, 3.
Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble, the Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will
make all his bed in his sickness. As you desire favorable dealing from God in
the time of your personal calamity, learn to judge wisely and charitably of
them who are in extremity. The Barbarians did censure Paul to be a man under
some black note of infamy, fastened upon him by the Lord, because of his
sudden and unexpected danger. Acts 28.4. And when the Barbarians saw the
venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, no doubt this man
is a murderer. Mark their confidence as well as their uncharitableness, no
doubt he is a murderer: And why no doubt? because though he has escaped the
sea, yet vengeance suffers him not to live, for a venomous viper, a death
threatening creature now did hang upon his hand. Beloved when we look upon men
arrested by credit-killing accusations, and pursued with death-threatning
charges, and constrained to hide themselves from the bloody hands of violence,
let us take heed of adding to their sorrow by our censures. That practice which
was well beseeming Barbarians, will be very uncomely for us Christians. Two
things consider to keep you from this fault, which I will propound without much
enlargement.

1. The sinfullnesse of this censoriousnesse. 2. The dangerousnesse of this
censoriousnesse.
The sinfullnesse of it:

1. Being forbidden by Christ, judge not, Mat. 7.1.
that you be not judged; judge not, that is, not rashly, groundlesly,
uncharitably.

2. Arguing want of love, for truth and strength of love makes fair and
canded constructions of all occurrances which concern them whom we love.
Charity does not behave it self unseemly, 1 Cor. 13.5. ver. 7.
is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all things, believes all
things, hops all things.

3. Weakening love, for affection is enfeebled by our looking upon our brethren
through the glass which presents them as unlovely, while we think them persons
disregarded by God, our respect to them is diminished.

4. Hindering prayer, the Apostle knew this, and therefore I pray you consider
by what an argument he presses the Hebrews to pray for him, Heb. 13.18.
pray for us, for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing to
live honestly. If you be well persuaded of the afflicted in regard of their
pious frame, you will be the more willing to let out your hearts for them in a
way of prayer. But when men thus think, the Heavens frown, and God is angry
with such an one, and therefore it is a vain thing to bestow time and breath in
prayer for him, this office of Christian love is interrupted. By these
particulars you may perceive that this censoriousnesse is very sinful; sinful
in the root, and sinful in the fruits, sinful in the heart, and sinful in
the life, checking grace, and hindering duty.

2. Consider the dangerousnesse of it.

1. God is much incensed, You remember how Eliphas and the other of Jobs
friends, loaded him with their heavy censures, concluding his hypocrisy from
his extremity. Now when God had done with Job, having schooled him out of the
whirlwind, and had wrought him to his own bent, observe what follows, The
Lord said to Eliphas the Tewanite, my wrath is kindled against thee, Job 42.7.
and against thy two friends, for ye have not spoken of me the thing that is
right as my servant Job has. Therefore my beloved if you would not suffer
under Gods frowns, nor smart under the expressions of his displeasure, if you
would not have the sparks of Gods wrath to kindle upon you, take heed of
censuring any of Gods worthies that have bin isntrumental for good either in
Church or commonwealth, because for the present under a black cloud, because
exposed unto any disgrace or danger, by reason of some sad providence.

2. Our censoriousnesse may in our suffering times add much weight to our own
heavy pressures. If I censure others, and thereby add affliction to their
bonds, I may expect that God will add gall to my wormwood, when the bitter cup
comes to my hand, and I must per force take down a displeasing and
distasteful draught. Judge not, that you be not judged, for with what judgment
ye judge, ye shall be judged, and with what measure ye mete, Mat. 7.1. ver. 2.
it shall be measured to you again. These meditations made use of, may, I hope
through Gods mercy, prevent our sinning against God, others and our selves, by
uncharitable censures cast upon our distressed brethren.

It concerns all of us to prepare for a journey into the Mount, to make ready
for trials by extremities. Use 3. Exhortation.
Beloved, this day the Heavens are black over our heads, and our fears are not
few, for ought we know God will have us into the Mount, my meaning is, it may
be the Lord will thrust us into such extremities, as we never yet met with in
all our lives.

There are two things that I will plainly speak to in the enlarging of this
use.

1. What may quicken us to prepare for straights. 2. What course must be taken
that we may be prepared for such a condition.
To persuade our preparation, consider two motive.

1. That we are all exposed unto perplexities. 2. That we are all subject to
manifold miscarriages in such a state.
1. We are all subject to a distressed condition, let him that denies it bring
forth his supersedias, and say here, I have that from Heaven signed and fealed,
which does secure me I shall never come into adversity. Beloved, believe it,
whatsoever afflictions have seized upon any of Gods worthies formerly, may
overtake you and me before we dye, and we cannot tell how speedily. You have
heard what befell Israel, and why may not the same betide England, you have
heard what befell Abraham, David, Daniell, Paul, and why may not we look for
the like.

Secondly, Subject we are to many miscarriages when God in his providence
brings us to extremities: I will only hint this in a word or two.

1. Extremities do expose us unto unbelief, A grievous sin it is to suffer
our souls at any time to be taken from an holy adherence, and firm dependence
upon our God, and yet thus we are in danger to dishonor his highness, and
wrong our own souls in times of distress. David's example does evidence this
fully. What more fair promise can any man embrace, then that which God made to
him particularly, that he should be the King of Israel, and yet when David was
in a straight, you hear of his distrust from his own confession, I was gratly
afflicted, Ps. 116.10, 21.
I said in my have all men are liars, Nathan a liar, and all others who told
him of succeeding Saul in the Kingdom of Israel, they were all liars. And why?
because he saw not a fair and easy passage to the crown. The like also is
recorded concerning him, when wearied out with the bloody pursuit of envious
Saul. And David said in his heart, I shall perish now one day by the hand of
Saul. 1 Samuel 27.1.


2. In distress we are disposed to strange impatiency and discontent of
spirit, which distemper does woefully disguise our hearts, and disgrace our
profession. It is a wonderful thing that ever a heart furnished with grace,
Jonah 44.
should fly out as Jonah did. First, he thought he had lost his reputation,
because Niniveh by him threatened was by the Lord spared. Well, he goes out,
and then the Sun annoyed him in regard of his body, ver. 6.
but God provided a shelter, and the man was calm, afterward the gourd being
worme-eaten and withered, (...) 7.
Jonah he chafes and frets. The Lord checks him by this interrogation, do
thou well to be angry? ver. 8.
Mark and be warned by his answer, I do well to be angry even unto death.
ver. 9. Job 3.
The history of patient Job also proves this plentifully.

3. I might add, that we are subject to sinful fears, which dismay and
torment the heart, check duty, weaken joy, and interrupt our sweet communion
with God. Take notice of this distemper in Gods own people, for which his
majesty chideth them, Isa. 51.12. ver. 13.
And who art thou that fear a man that shall dye, and the son of man that
is but as grass, and for gettest the Lord thy maker, that has stretched forth
the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and have feared
continually every day, etc.

4. Apt we are to use sinful shists betaking our selves to unworthy practices
to safeguard our selves in times of extremity. Observe this in Peter's
practice, Mat. 26, 70. ver. 72.
his Master is apprehended, violently carried away, likely to suffer death as a
grievous malefactor. Now he sees himself surrounded with them that oppose
Christ, ver. 74.
and this distress drove him upon a dangerous rock, a threefold denial of
his dearest Master: Let this move you and me, to prepare that we may not in
like manner miss it, if God shall be pleased thus to prove us.

These things I believe do affect your hearts, whereupon in probability you
will desire direction. Attend therefore and I will give you some counsel
briefly: There are six things which I shall commend to your consideration and
practice.

First, You must labor to make sure your propriety in God: When David upon
service had bin abroad, 1 Samuel 30.2.
Ziglack the place where he left his wife and children was burnt, ver. 3.
when he comes home, there was no house to entertain him, no wife to welcome
him, no children to be a comfort unto him, they all were carried captive,
hereupon he with the rest, ver. 4. ver. 5. ver. 6.
wept till they could weep no longer, etc. But David encouraged himself in
the Lord his God. Heed here the ground of his support and consolation, not the
Lord God, but the Lord his God, deity and propriety hold up his heavy heart,
for the good man enjoying God, might thus refresh his drooping spirit. What
though I have not an house to dwell in? thou art my dwelling place, my
habitation, a place of sweetest rest and safest refuge. What though I have not
a Wife? I have more in God then a yoak-fellow could have afforded. What though
I have not a Child? there is more then the comfort of a numerous posterity in
the blessed Deity. The soldiers cannot batter down this castle, the pilfering
people pillaging, cannot possibly steal away this treasure, the troops of
robbers, the desperate Cavilliers cannot deprive of this possession: This might
be much enlarged both seasonably and profitably, but I must not insist upon any
thing. But this is my request, that you would without delay endeavor to clear
up your interest in the almighty, that your dejected hearts may not abide
disconsolate in the days of your distress.

Secondly, Acquaint your selves with God, and labor to be familiar with his
Majesty by constant and frequent communion through Jesus Christ. Men desire to
know the utmost worth of what they have in possession, and what improvement may
be made thereof if need should so require. We read in the Parable, that he
that had bought a piece of ground, Luk 14.13.
must needs go to see it, and therefore he must be excused if other things be
neglected. If we were thus wise for our souls, we would seek to know, and to
improve our God who is our inheritance, yea our all, unto our various
advantages in the times of our greatest need. Seriously therefore ask thy
self this question, What have I in having a God? What have I? I have infinite
wisdom to advise me in all difficulties, infinite power to carry me through
all straights, abundant goodness to supply all my wants, the tenderest bowels
to commiserate me in my most doleful condition, yea I have alsufficiency to
fill me brim full, and running over unto satisfaction. I added converse with
thy God. He that would have comfort from Physicians in time of sickness,
gains and maintains acquaintance with them in time of health. If you and I
shall dare to keep at a distance from God in a way of estrangement from his
Majesty in summer days, and in sunshine seasons, when the Heavens are clear,
and the City is peaceable, and the Parliament promising, and our hopes
flourishing, we shall want comfort through communion with God, when the sun
sets, winter approaches, Parliament breaks, and misery threatens on
every side. Being in have I shall here lay heads confusedly on heaps, whereas
I should distinctly have discovered three things.

1. How God is revealed in holy writ for our comfort in the worst of times. 2.
By what courses Christians should gain, and maintain communion with their
God. 3. What fruitful improvements may be made of God by such employments. But
I shall leave these things to your private care, having suggested this course
by way of friendly counsel to make way for your comfort in the day of
distress.
Thirdly, Walk exactly. Take heed of making breaches upon your consciences, by
willing and wilful sinning against the God of your comforts. Beloved, beloved
you know that those who have had bruises and broken bones, they will feel
aches in hard weather, and certainly if you will in time of prosperity dare to
sin against conscience, it will add sorrow to your Sops, and gall to your
wormwood, when God comes upon you in a way of bitter calamity. Sinful
sensual surfets upon sweet morsells, will breed wringing pains, and painful
vomits. Gen 42.21.
The sons of Jacob were in a great straight when they were taken for spies as
the story reports. What did now wring them? The remembrance of sin, though
many years since committed, ah our brothers blood, our brothers blood; we would
not pity him when he made his moan, and now God will be avenged of us. Alas,
alas, we were hard-hearted toward a brother, and therefore no wonder that we
meet with harshnesse amongst strangers. Whereas the maintaining of a clear
conscience, o what a comfort will it be when all shall be blackness, and blood
about us. See it in Paul and his companions. When they made no other account
but to dye, 2 Cor. 1.12.
what says Paul, This was our rejoicing, (that was strange, rejoice when the
next day they might expect to go to the stake?) well says Paul our rejoicing
is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world. Beloved, believe it that
you cannot lay in a better cordial, to comfort and to stay your hearts in
fearful, fainting, distressing, dying times, then by exact walking with God
before the storm fall. The Apostles experience puts a probatum est unto this
prescription. For ought we know, the day is at hand wherein we shall hear the
warre-Horses neighing, the murdering Cannons roaring, the little Children
skreaking, and the fearful Women skritching: You know not, beloved, how soon
you may see your City flaming, your own houses burning, your goods wasting. It
will be a sad sight to behold your Wives barbarously abused, your Husbands
bloudily butchered, and your Children cruelly tormented. I beseech you, I
beseech you, consider now what will yield you comfort then. When Hezekiah did
daily expect to dye, take notice, unto what he betook himself for solace and
support: Remember now o Lord I beseech thee, Isa. 38.3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight. In like manner may we raise up our
sinking hearts in such heavy times, if we can truly thus speak unto the
soule-searching Majesty. Lord while times were peaceable and prosperous, when I
was surrounded with comforts on every side, thou know I had a heart to walk
with thee humbly, to observe thy Sabbath holily, to use thy worships purely,
and to aim at the honor of thy name sincerely. This, this will cheer you
both living and dying. You know that neither the loud winds, nor the black
clouds, nor the great showers, nor the flashings of lightning, nor the hideous
claps of thunder, do so much affright us, as an earthquake. But when some
vapors are got into the hollow places, the bowels of the earth, and the
foundation of the world shakes, this is terrible, this is terrible indeed,
though the Sun shine, and no cloud appear in the sky. In like manner it is
not so much an outward affliction as guilt within, guilt within which causes
the heart of man to rock and quake through fear within him. Therefore take
heed, stop all the passages into your souls, keep the heart with all
diligence, that no known guilt be admitted into it, as you desire a stable,
firm frame of spirit, prepared for the strongest storms, the greatest
straights wherewith divine providence may possibly prove you.

Fourthly, If you have made wounds and bruises in your consciences, seek an
healing plaster by sound repentance suddenly. A bone broken being well set
(they say) becomes the stronger. David had gashed his conscience grievously,
both by uncleanness and murder, in the matter of Bathsheba and Vriah.
Notwithstanding by means of Nathans plain dealing being wrought to deep
sorrow, the wound was healed, and the same mouth which cured him by a
corrasive, gave him this comfort, God has forgiven thy sin, thou shall not
dye. 2 Samuel 12.13.
Now after this, according to the threatening of Nathan, ver. 11.
God raised up evil against him out of his own house, and he was in a
wonderful straight, Absalom was up in arms against him. This distress
occasioned the third Psalm, as the title tells, wherein he expresses his
perplexed condition. Many are they that rise up against me, Psalm. 3.1.2.
many there be that say of my soul there is no help for him in God. Now here
is a straight indeed, many imagining, that Heaven could not help him: yet if
you will by his phrase of speech, judge the frame of his heart, you shall find
as much confidence in him now, as ever in all his life: Take notice of it. ver.
3.
But thou o Lord art a shield for me, ver. 6.
my glory, and the lifter up of my head. I will not be afraid of ten thousands
of people, that have set themselves against me round about. ver. 5.
Yea this is added, I laid me down and slept. Consider in his supposition, 1.
The number of enemies, viz. ten thousand. 2. The manner of their opposition,
though they should rise up in a warlike manner against me. 3. Their advantage
against him, and his danger to be apprehended by them. It is not though they
come to meet me, or though they make after me, for then by flight he might
hope for safety, But though they should beset me round about, etc. David having
made his peace with God, though now in a very great distress, yea although
(remembering Gods threathing) he might read his scandalous sins, in this
heavy affliction, yet his confidence, courage and comfort is very remarkable.
If any of your consciences now wring you upon the remembrance of such a sin,
or such a sin, (I name none, but leave it between God and your own hearts to
consider of it) go home repeat, repent and make your peace with God to day,
without any further delay, that you may be sit for a straight if it should come
to morrow.

Fifthly, Mind and trade your experience. God has done already as much for
England as is yet to be done, to set all things right and in order again
amongst us. Not many Months since, our days were as dark, our fears as
great, and our enemies as many as now. Let us therefore remember our selves,
the Lord lives, the Almighty is in Heaven, he still is mindful of his
covenant, and changes not. The holy Scriptures yield us plentiful proof of
improving former experiences, to arm against future fears. 1 Samuel 17.36.
That of David is notable, Thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear, and
this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them. ver. 37.
David said moreover, The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion,
and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this
Philistine. Psalm. 61.2, 3.
When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to the rock that is higher then I, for
thou have bin a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy. In like
manner the Apostle improves his deliverance from Nero, that persecutor. No man
stood by me, but all forsook me, 2 Timothy 4.16. ver. 17.
notwithstanding the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, and I was
delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. Consider the words, Paul was not only
in the Lions den, not only within the reach of the Lions chain, nor only
under the Lions paw, but in the Lions mouth. Now his inference is observeable,
ver. 18.
And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me
unto his heavenly Kingdom. Again note, 2 Cor. 1.9.
We had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in our
selves, ver. 10.
but in God which raises the dead. Who delivered us from so great a death, and
does deliver, in whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. Here for your
help, I will hint one experience still fresh in our minds, God settled peace
between us and Scotland, when after great preparations for war, the arymes
were set in battle array, the onset given, the skirmish begun, blood drawn,
many slain, the two Kingdoms ready to be broken in pieces, the one against
the other. Consider what great things God has done, and trade your experiences
for your future profit.

Sixty, Clear up your evidences for Heaven, and keep them so fair, that in
the darkest day they may be legible, easy to be read without hacking and
hesitancy. The usefullnesse hereof in evil times appears in the Apostles
experience, For which cause we faint not, 2 Cor 4.16.
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day.
For our light affliction that is but for a moment, ver. 17.
works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weigh of glory. Mind the
ground, For we know that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were
dissolved, Chap. 5. ver. 1.
we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. The heir apparent of Heaven, may hold up head and heart, and in this
manner express himself: come the worst that can come, though my state shall
decay, my soul and body part, my self and dearest natural friends be plucked
asunder, Heb. 10.34.
yet I have in Heaven, a better and more enduring substance: more and better
friends, sweeter and more satisfying communion. If they take away my trash, the
true treasure, that is out of their reach. What if they take down my tottering
tabernacle of clay? I shall have a glorified, a beautified body to all
eternity, in spite of hell and earth combining against me. What if they drive
me out of house, and City, and Kingdom, the best is, they cannot expel me
from my God, nor deprive me of a mansion, an abiding place in the City of God,
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Use 4. Comfort.
It is a ground of sweet joy, and strong encouragement unto us, notwithstanding
our present state which is dark and dreadful. Here we may seasonably with
comfort call to mind that strange apparition unto Moses: A bush burning with
fire, Exodus 3.2.
and yet the bush was not consumed. Beloved, what slames of fury are now
kindled in the bosoms of many, threatening to burn down all our hopes? Yet
let us pluck up courage, for though our sins have made us combustible matter,
yet may we hope that our God will not consume us. Let us cheer our selves
against the jeares and insolences of the Malignant party with the words of the
Church, Rejoyee not against me o my enemy, Mich. 7.8.
when I fall I shall rise again, when I sit in darkness the Lord shall be a
light unto me. Some interpreters conceive, Abraham had this deliverance hinted
before hand, and therefore first told his servants, Genesis 22.5.
I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you: and
afterward going to the place where Isaac was to be sacrificed; when the child
said, father, father here is the wood, but where is the burnt offering, he
answered, my son God will prepare one, and this held up the good man's heart,
encouraging him thus to resolve, I will go on, I will see what God will do, I
will put him to it. We are in straights at this day, I need not tell you, and
who knows but that to day in the Mount God will appear for our comfort. Much
I cannot speak through want of time to this use, yet dare I not altogether be
silent, considering the season. Under two heads I will briefly assist your
sinking spirits by way of advice.

1. Learn aright to make way for desired comforts in times of distress, that
you may have this Texts, and this Sermons encouragement at hand, not only now,
but hereafter when you may stand in need.

2. Improve the particulars comprised in this title Jehovah, held forth for our
use in the Text now handling, I may not now speak under these heads, both unto
our National and Personal concernments distinctly. For the former, way is
made for our refreshing in the worst of times that can possibly overtake us.

1. By studying the qualifications to which favor is promised.

2. By using the means of our good which by the Lord are prescribed.

First, Every one may not challenge propriety in the privilege of the Text.
Every loose-liver may not come out and say, well I in the Mount God will be
seen, and therefore I will fear no colors. No, no, for there is a peculiar
gracious disposition to be found upon the hearts of them who may expect that
God will appear in the Mount for them, for their consolation.

1. Your souls must be so seasoned with Gods fear, that having his command,
you will not draw back from any service put upon your hands, how hard, how
heavy soever. Mark it in Abraham, Abraham now I know thou fear me, and how
does his fear discover it self, Upon divine commission he sets upon a
service, the doing whereof, was against heart and hair, repugnant to reason,
without all president, against the stream of natural affections, crossing the
conceit and opinion of the world. Can you imagine if Isaac had bin slain, and
the fact known, what a hubbub would have bin in the Country? how many mouths
would have bin opened, in reporting Abraham's strange and unheard of cruelty?
Isaak is killed, and his own father, father Abraham, that religious man, he
himself has killed him, how would this have rung in every corner? Do but
think what Mother Sarah would have said upon her Husbands return home,
Husband where is Isaak? and conjecture with what a sad heart he might have made
this answer, Wife I have killed him, and I have burnt him before God as a
sacrifice. Beloved, neither these things, nor any other which might be cast in
as discouragements, did take him off from duty. The fear of God carried him
above all discouragements, both from his natural affections, his wives
frowns, and the worlds clamours. And to this man, thus fearing God, God
appears in the Mount: Mind this I pray you, and labor herein to be like this
gracious man, thus devoted to Gods fear.

2. You must, not dare to adventure upon any known sin, though it be to
safeguard your persons, your estates, your places of favor and honor, your
any thing, your all things under the Sun. A man of this make, is one who may
expect to meet with the Almighty in the Mount. The proof of this is fair in
the experience of Daniell. The decree was signed, he must not for thirty days
pray unto his God, Dan. 6.7.
if he did, he must be thrown into the Lions den, well says Daniell, let the
Lions make a meal upon my body, I am resolved I will not forbear this worship
due to my God, I will not thus interrupt my communion with my heavenly Father.
The like you have in the three young Governors, the King he would have them
fall down and worship the image he had set up. Dan. 3.
If you will not, you must into the furnace. ver 17. ver 18.
Mark their answer, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver, but if not, be
is known unto thee, we will not serve thy gods. And the proof of the point
reported how God appeared in the days of their distress for their
deliverance, unto these experiments I might add Promises. If thou take away
from the midst of thee the yoke, Isa 58 9. ver. 10.
the putting forth of the singer, and speaking vanity, and if thou draw out thy
soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul. The meaning is, if you
will betake your selves to courses of piety and mercy, contrary to your former
ways of wickedness and violence, then shall your light break forth in
obscurity, and your darkness be as the noonday. ver. 11.
And the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of water, whose waters fail not. If iniquity be in thy hand put it
far away, Job 11.14, 15.
and let not wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle, for then shall thou lift up
thy face without spot, yea thou shall be steadfast, and thou shall not fear.
What encouragements should these be to persuade us to reform our selves, and
to endeavor the amendment of one another. Therefore go home now, and thus say
to God, and to your selves seriously and sincerely, I am resolved I will leave
my cheating, and cozening, my oaths, lying, my hypocrisy and pride, and all
my other known sins. Away with these and all other discovered abominations,
promise God for future times to betake your selves unto a better course of
living, as you desire the sweet and seasonable discoveries of God, in the time
of your greatest need.

Secondly, The means of your good must be used, and they are, 1. Civil. 2.
Sacred.


For Civil means, You must not say we care not whether we have any more watch
in the City, night or day, we will trouble and charge our selves no further in
this kind. But you must hold on in being serviceable to divine providence,
otherwise you will tempt God. There is a notable example of Joab in this case
both commendable and imitable. 2 Samuel 10.9.
When Joab saw the front of the battle was against him, before and behind, he
chose all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians,
ver 10.
and the rest of the people he delivered into the hand of his brother. ver. 11.
And he said, if the Assyrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me,
but if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee then I will come and help
thee. Now be of good courage, ver. 12.
and let us play the men and fight for God and our country, and the Lord do
that which seems him good. Remember we have by solemn protestation bound our
selves before God to do our utmost in ways lawful for the honor of our
King, the liberty of the Protestant Religion, for the peace and welfare of the
three Kingdoms, and for the privileges of our Parliament, and keeping within
the limits of our callings, to oppose Popery, and popish innovations. Therefore
every man according to the laws of God and of the land, must unweariedly be
industrious, night and day, for the Kingdoms good, in the use of means, both
defensive and offensive, as necessity may require.

2. There are means sacred, Tears and Prayers are the Christians best
weapons, this munition let us make use of. Jeh shaphat surrounded with danger,
when Moab, Ammon, 2 Chro. 20.3.
and the children of Mount Seir came out against him, what course does he
betake himself to? he feared, and set himself to seek the Lord, and
proclaimed a fast. And David being in danger to loose both his Kingdom and his
life, by the insurrection of Absalom, betook himself to prayer, 2 Samuel 15.31.
Psalm. 3.
to break the neck of Achitophels crafty counsel, and also to secure himself
from the hand of violence, now stretched forth against him. Beloved, as Gods
command, and the practice of his people, do guide us unto this employment, so
Gods precious promises, and our own glorious experiences, touching the
prevalency of this ordinance, should persuade our perseverance herein in these
times of fear and danger.

Secondly, What is the improvement of the original word here used, In the
Mount Jehovah shall be seen. This title has much in it, a great deal more
then I may mention. Thus much I have observed from holy Scripture, that it both,

1. Advances God.

2. And advantageth a Christian in times of straights.

Psalm. 68.3.
Let the righteous be glad, let them rejoice before God, yea let the^
exceedingly rejoice. Sing unto God, sing praises to his name, extol him that
rides on the Heavens by his Name Jah, ver. 4.
and rejoice before him. Four things there be hinted in this title Jehovha,
and they are all useful for our present purpose.

This title holds forth the Lords, 1. Sovereignty. 2. Independancy. 3.
Immutability. 4. Fidelity.


1. It suggesteth the Lords unlimited Sovereignty, his absolute and undoubted
authority over all things. Jehovah he is the most high, not only high, or
higher then many, or more high then the most, but the most high over all the
earth. Psalm. 83.18.
It is Jehovah that rules Kings, and orders Crowns, joy in him, he can rule
both the Kings heart and counsel, he governs in the Country and in the City,
at Westminster, and here within the walls: Therefore still rejoice in him, for
he is Jehovah, the all-governing Majesty.

2. It notes his independancy. All creatures for their continuance, have a
kind of dependence upon one another. As the grass and plants upon the earth,
the bruites upon the fruits of the earth, and our nutriment is from inferior
creatures. But our Jehovah depends upon none, he is of, and from himself, he
needs no servant, no service. In him we all live, move and have our being,
Acts 17.28.
but his Majesty is beholding to none, either men or Angels, either for being
or wel-being. Thus much God intended to teach by his speech to Moses, and God
said unto Moses, I am that I am. Exodus 3.14.
We think verily that we shall be utterly undone if the Parliament break up,
or if our King divide himself from this his body representative. Beloved, my
soul makes out to God for the prevention of this sad fraction. Yet I beseech
you remember this, whatsoever falls out, that whereas all men, and all
ordinances, Kings and Parliaments depend on God, yet our God Jehovah is an
independent Majesty.

3. It intimates Gods Immutability, All other things change, As a snow ball
melts by our handling it, and the flower withers by our smelling it, so
these sublunary contentments wast and ware away by our using them. But in the
Lord Johovah there is everlasting strength, Isa. 26.4.
or as the original languange expresses it, The Lord Jehovah is a rock of
ages, he abides the self same, strong, unalterable, unmovable God throughout
all generations.

Mind this (my beloved) that though England Ireland-like should be wasted,
although there should be sad changes in Church and Commonwealth, in City and
Country, in Towns and Families: Yet still our Jehovah continues in himself,
and unto his people the self-same All-sufficient, All-satisfying God. Surely we
who pitch our hearts and hopes upon this unchangeable foundation, the Lord
Jehovah, may abide steady in our spirits and comforts in the midst of the worst
alterations that can overtakes us.

Exodus 6.3.
4. It expresses Gods fidelity. And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and
unto Jacob, by the Name of God almighty, but by my Name Jehovah was I not known
unto them. The true meaning is, Genesis 15.13, 16 compared with Exodus 12.41.
that whereas God had manifested abundantly his power by many glorious
providence in former times, now he intended to prove himself mindful and
careful of his promises made unto his people. Now let us make improvement
hereof for our comfort. Search divine records, consider the various precious
promises annexed by the Almighty unto the covenant of free grace and mercy.
Choose out of those Gospel treasures, such pearls as you put the highest
prizes upon, Collect those particular promises, which you conceive most
pertinent for your condition, and most full your satisfaction. And from this
sweet title Jehovah, you may comfortably and confidently infer this
conclusions.

Whatsoever Promise is registered in the book of God, either in the old or new
Testament, that this Jehovah will set all his attributes on work, for the full
and seasonable accomplishment thereof unto his own people by special covenant.
Therefore having evidenced your propriety in Gospel Promises through Jesus
Christ, from this bottom build your comforts, in the darkest and most doleful
times. Is is Jehovah the all-governing, the independing, the immutable and
faithful God that will be seen in the Mount for his servants deliverance.

FINIS.

