An ACCOUNT of the Taking of the FORT of BALLYMORE, within ten miles of
Athlone, on Monday the eight of June, 1691.
Published by Authority.

LIeutenant General Ginckell, Commander in Chief of Their Majesty's Forces,
with fisteen Battalions of Foot, and nineteen Squadrons of Horse and Dragoons,
being that part of Their Majesty's Army that Rendezvoused at Mullingar, marched
from thence on Saturday the sixth instant toward Ballimore, and arrived there
on the seventh, and immediately beat the Enemy out of the Hedges they had
possessed themselves of without, into the Fort, a Sergeant and fifteen Men, who
were in a small Tower, half a quarter of a Mile from the Garrison, only
excepted, who had the impudence, after all Communication was cut off from him,
to force his Men to Fire, and killed two of ours; for which, as soon as it was
taken, he was hanged.

On Monday Morning the eight, the Batteries being finished, began to Fire at
the Fort about Sunrising; about eight a Clock, the General sent a Summons to
the Governor, That if he did not deliver up the Place within two hours, he
should have the same Treatment his Sergeant met with; but mistaking the
Message, (as the Governor said afterward) he did not return an Answer to the
General's Satisfaction. Upon which he Commanded the Batteries to continue
firing, and they did it with such good Success, that two Breaches were made,
one in the outermost Fort next the Town, and the other on the Works within the
Island, so that it was resolved to Storm it the next morning when the
Tinn-Boats came up, four other Boats being put into the Water, put the Enemy
into a mighty Consternation, all the Island to the Lough-side being altogether
Unfortified. About twelve a Clock they continually held out White Flags, but
were not hearkened unto till about seven in the Evening, when they left off
Firing, and then we did the like. And after some Parley, Colonel Vlick Bourke,
the Governor and several Officers came out to the General, and desired to
submit upon Discretion; About nine a Clock the General went into the Fort,
where were found alive four Field Officers, sixteen Captains, fourteen
Lieutenants, twelve Ensigns and Cornets, five Quartermasters, Chaplains,
Store-keepers, etc. seven hundred and eighty private Soldiers, two hundred and
fifty nine Rapparies, who were all well Armed, six hundred and forty five
Women, and Children innumerable; and are to be brought Prisoners to Dublin. We
lost in this Action but eight Men, and killed of the Enemy about one hundred
and fifty.

EDINBVRGH, Reprinted by the Heir of Andrew Anderson Printer to Their most
Excellent Majesty's, anno DOM. 1691.


