Sol in Ascendente: OR, The glorious Appearance OF CHARLES the Second, UPON The
Horizon of London, in her Horoscopicall Sign, Gemini.

DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT
royal blazon or coat of arms

Iam vaga coelo sidera fulgens,
Aurora fugat; surgit Titan
Radiante coma, mundoque diem
Reddit clarum.
London, Printed for N. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1660.

Sol in Ascendente. OR, The glorious Appearance of CHARLES the Second, Upon the
Horizon of London: in her Horoscopical Sign, Gemini.
ANd now the Nights dire Tragedies are done,
Woes are dissolved to Bliss, we have outrun
The Ills, that did pursue us in fierce chase;
And softer Revels do possess their place.
What Peace old Rome saw in Augustus days,
Will England feel, while CHARLES shall wear the Bays,
For Heaven has held her peace, rowse up, then rise!
Let not dull sleep seize on your sluggish eyes;
Awake! and greet this Calm; these gentle Gales,
(Swelled with rich Air) invites to spread our sails.
What though the cripl'd Heaven has seemed to trace,
No other Motion, then lame Saturn's pace;
Yet now behold! the lingering Hours at last,
Shake off those Weights, that on their Feet were placed:
And the Morn is fully rose, from yon dark Rocks,
Pleased with the coolness of her moistened Locks;
But erst imbathed in the dewy tears,
Which long Nights sorrows, pressed through our tears.
Mark! how the Clouds disband, how they retire,
To see our Heaven arched over, with this bright fire;
How you declining Moon, (conscious of Ill)
Sets with a wasting paleness; and how still
The charmed Winds are in their several flights;
How all those numberless tumultuous Lights,
Which twinkling look, as struck with trembling fear,
Shrink in their sockets; dye, now the Sun draws near.
Observe! instead of Clouds, how the fresher Air
Inwraps us round, with its preserving care;
And the forgotten glory of our Sun,
Which here comes riding on our Horizon,
Does like a lucky Planet, fix his Beam
On the Ascendant, of the Kingdoms Scheam.
See! see! our Phoebus, who in the Sea was pent,
His Steeds unharnest, and to grazing sent;
His Chariot set aside, and what he chose
For rest, became disturbance, not repose,
Awakes! his Generous Horses curle their Mains,
And Champ their Bits; he is mounted, handling's Reins,
Throwing his usual glories round his Face,
And making ready for a second Race.
Behold! his Chariot cuts the Eastern line,
And his Serener Brows with Glory shine,
Decked in refulgent luster round about:
Thus the Sun, at first cleft Heaven, and so brake out.
See! Glories arch His Crown, Majestic Grace,
With Myrtle wreathes, his Temples do embrace;
All sacred Luster from about him sheds,
Fame rides before, and circularly spreds*
From her select collections, what is most due
To his so great Deserts, and Patience too.
Whilst Heaven it self breaks through his lovely Smile;
Thus looks the auspicious Fortune of this Isle.
They are his Native Rays, that render bright
This Morn, and dress it with Celestial Light;
Whose all-attracting power sucks up the Dew,
That new bogotten Gladness sends unto
Our eyes; which (Hallowed) is let fall again,
To shelter us from Devils, and worser men.
Lo! Heaven has now subscribed to our request,
Here with a glorious Sun we all are blessed;
Whilst the Nights guilty shadows sneak away
Back to their Cave, at this approach of day.
Let Us then no more our withered Joys lament,
Let sadness be condemned to Banishment;
And Misery cease to grind: let us pay our Vows,
And strew our streets with peaceful Olive Boughs:
Of whose fair Trunks new Gates let us prepare
For Ianus Temple, to shut out fierce War,
And keep in Peace; whilst due obedience shall
Our Bosoms fill, never to know Ebb at all.
But first, all cordial greetings we must pay,
From our devotest souls to this blessed Day;
Next to our Sun, such just observance give
As his great worth deserves: then pray to live
To see Meridian Beams dance on his Crown,
And full blown Glories, shine about his Throne.
And since that Heaven thus smiles, let each full soul,
Unlade such thanks, may rise above control;
Unfold free welcomes, to embrace this Morn;
And to these forward joys, which are newborn
In Loyal hearts, force passage to each Tongue,
Venting the Acclamations thither throng.
Let Us kiss the Hand, that steered Affairs to this,
Let Us bless those Eyes, to see this hour did wish:
Esteem it dear as heaven which sent it, such
As our Devotions cannot praise too much.
Repeat these Blessings while there is a day,
Which this Month brought, with Ills it took away;
And date our Records hence, make them retain
Force and effect from CHARLES the Secord's Reign:
Let Us in all gladsome looks our faces dress,
All grateful welcomes let our hearts express;
Darting such spirits from each greedy eye,
By whose reflection he our loves may spy:
Nor can he by a better Medium find,
How strongly we to duty are inclined;
Unless we were all eyes, that so each part
Being filled with eyes, might all become one heart.
Yet see! and let us wear out our eyes in view
Of these fair looks, Fate does to us renew;
(...)to heaven) yea, let us Anticipate,
(...)ward gratitude can yet create:
And like to Tides, bring all our wealth on shore,
(...) Cabinets lay out our store,
(...) upon our brows, and make them grow
(...) Sands whose number none can know.
(...) this Hero with a full spread sail,
(...) who can in strife of joy prevail:
Kiss Heaven with thanks, and make our hearty cries,
Roll round in Echoes, pierced the arched skies.
Look with what conquering Aspect he returns,
Foarding the hearts of all he sees; and mourns
At naught so much, as those wan looks which we
(And our black night) tanned with disloyalty.
That gracious Face we view through humble Tears,
Brings healing to the wounds of these late years:
Nor need we doubt, our great Apollo will
Secure this Island with his ablest skill
Like Delas, (to requite his nursing years)
From all assaults of future storms and Fears.
For see! he comes offering Oblivion,
Forgetful of what is past, or lost, or done;
Clothed with the general Good, (that weighty Care)
Attended with those thoughts that pitious are,
Bringing along all Charms, to still our Fears;
Filled with ripe knowledge, of experienced years;
Able to poise all Interests, quit each score,
To stanch that waste of Blood long running over,
And cure our rankled wounds; if we will but sip,
That healing Balsom, droppeth from his Lip:
In fine, here comes the close of all debate,
Worthy to manage a far greater State.
It Is true, he has been plundered over and over,
And little left, but what might style him poor,
Yet is his stock of favors not impaired,
There Is plenty left for those deserve reward;
His wiser judgment can most clearly see,
The fitting due's, belong to each degree:
And happy we, that once again behold,
His just Authority himself infold;
Which never shall alter him, unless his Power
Rise up to's will, to do us good each hour.
What thoughts dare then deny this Sun his Rays,
Who is the Spring and Fountain of our days;
The brightest Eye, of this our little world;
Whose spreading Rady in rich glories curled,
Grow from his own essential light; their power
Raises the luster, of this growing hour.
From these all-glorious Beams, on us shall shine
The light of Peace, and Happiness Divine;
Even all those Halcion days we once beheld,
When our replenish't Cornucopia's swelled.
Since then his Fate, has gained the Eastern light,
May it recover the Meridian height;
Whilst all good Fortunes lead him to that Hill,
And further him from good, to better still:
May Heaven, which did through Clouds, his sufferings mark,
And with Compassion viewed his sinking Bark,
Never leave him till Astrea right his wrongs,
Fully restoring what to him belongs:
Then place him like Olympus lofty Rocks,
That kiss the Heavens, and mount above those shocks
Of under storms, would toss him to and fro,
With their false byast Guests; for we must know
Justice can never be evenly rendered, till
He like the Sun in his Meridian dwell.
FINIS.

