THE ASSEMBLY OF Moderate Divines.
PRay pardon me, John Bays, for I beg your excuse
If I make no stranger of your beloved Muse,
It being your Talent Divines to Abuse.
Divines that can Scruple and Cant with the Times,
As Settle and Shadwell for Crust belch their Rhymes:
But St. Peter and Judas we know had their Crimes.
If among Twelve Apostles, we can produce two,
Did exceed any Cruel and Hard-hearted Jew,
Why then should we wonder, if we have a few.
There Is the B -- p of B -- n, for he L -- ne never saw,
And there is Naked Truth, with his scrupulous Paw,
And there is -- Pray beware of the Common Law.
There Is the D -- of St. P -- admired by some
For his Works against England, Geneva and Rome,
Idolatry, Separation, Irenicum.
And there is Trimming Tray too, who talks much of Love,
As if a Phanatick was as meek as a Dove:
But for him and R -- Cudworth, a God let them prove.
But Gilbert where art thou? thou man of the Lord,
For Mary-Hill's lost, you may take the Planks word,
Between you and I, 'twas a Prophetic Board.
With you Anth -- H -- ke the Pulpit disgraces
By your Whining, your Canting, and your Outlandish Faces,
But the Rolls and the Savoy are Priviledg'd places.
St. Lawrence for Wh -- te did stiffly dispute,
Perhaps he might Cant well, had he not been Mute,
But he Preached as Marr-all does play on the Lute.
There Is old Father G -- rd of Dunstans in the East,
Who among the rude Vulgar is a Prophet at least;
But who e're Preached well, when the People were pleased.
There Is a Fat Trimming Doctor of Cornhill St. Miles,
Whom the Clergy's contemner, Parson slip Stockins styles
An Eloquent Preacher, none hears him, but smiles,
And there is Boannerges his Brother that thunders,
He Cants in Old-Fish-street, and who I pray wonders,
For he has a most excellent Voice to sell Flounders.
There Is a Moderate Doctor at Criplegate dwells,
Who Sm -- s his Curate in Trimming excels:
But Bunyan the Tinker has tickled his Gills.
There 's P -- ne of Whitechappel a Simoniac they say,
A man that is cut out to be Vicar of Bray,
If the Times do but turn: as he wishes they may.
There Is Charterhouse P -- cke, a Captain they call him,
For Borlesqueing the Psalms, some highly extol him,
But O how L'Strange, and Sam's Coffee house gall him.
But Kidder thy Trimmings above humane Race,
For Faction turned out of the Rolls with Disgrace,
And Orthodox B -- t succeeds in thy place.
There Is Scotch bawling Alderson, proof against Ien,
Has a Voice that drowns a Cathedral Amen:
But it is thought he Catches more Women than Men.
There Is D -- m of Breadstreet has Trimmed fifty years.
So Old, so Grave, and so Foolish appears,
At once he deserves both Laughter and Tears,
But Trimming's the subject of Brave Roger's Pen,
Who Scourges those Monsters called Moderate Min,
For Trimming the Source of Rebellion has been,
Go on Loyal Sir, and gain more Renown,
Write all the Factious Whiggs and Trimmers down,
Draw out your Conquering Pen and Guard the Crown.
FINIS.

