A SERMON Preached before the Honorable SOCIETY Of the NATIVES of the County
of KENT, November the 21th, 1700.

At St. Mary-le-Bow, LONDON.

By WILLIAM ASSHETON, D. D. Rector of Beckenham in Kent; and Chaplain to His
Grace the Duke of Ormond.

LONDON, Printed for J. Back, (Bookseller to the said Honorable Society,) at
the Black Boy on London Bridge, 1700

Dr. ASSHETON's SERMON, Preached before the Honorable SOCIETY OF THE County of
KENT, November 21th, 1700.

Veneris xxij. die November. 1700.
IT is Ordered at a General Meeting of the Stewards for the Society of the
County of Kent, That their hearty Thanks be given to Dr. Assheton, for his
Sermon Preached on the 21th Instant, at St. Mary le Bow; and that He be desired
to Print the same.

Edmund Riggs, Treasurer.

To ^^e much Honored, Mr. Edmund Riggs, Capt Tho. Robinson, Mr. John Bulfinch,
Mr. David Dennis, Mr. John Back, Mr. Daniel Lane, Mr. John Bridgar, Mr.
Christopher Den, Mr. Edward Rooke, Mr. Henry Fuller, Mr. Ri. Whittingham, Mr.
Richard Jones.

STEWARDS of the KENTISH-FEAST.
Gentlemen,
THough I am not a Native of your County, yet I heartily bless God, that I am
an Inhabitant. For I do with the greatest Thankfulness acknowledge, that my Lot
is fallen in a pleasant Place amongst you: Where for many Years I have enjoyed
the Satisfaction of a most comfortable Retirement. And being thus far yours, by
Affection and Interest, I could not think it decent to Dispute your Commands,
either for the Preaching or Publishing this short Sermon.

That it may, through God's Blessing, be Instrumental to promote those Great
and Noble Ends of your Yearly Meetings; viz. Friendship and Charity, is the
Prayer of

Worthy Gentlemen, Your most Humble, and Faithful Servant, William Assheton.

A SERMON Preached at the Kentish-Feast.
1 Cor.X. 31. Whether therefore ye Eat or Drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the Glory of God.
THough the Particle Therefore does plainly refer to the preceding Verses, and
would thence oblige me to examine the Context; yet that I may the better
contract my Discourse, (wherein I design to be very brief) I shall consider the
words Absolutely, without any dependence upon the preceding or following Verses.

And I shall treat of them in this Method.

I. I shall examine the meaning of this Expression, Do all to the Glory of God.

II. How can Eating and Drinking, with other common Passages of your Lives,
whatsoever ye do, be done to God's Glory?

III. I shall make particular Application with respect to the Occasion of this
solemn Meeting.

I. What is it, to do all to the Glory of God* By the Glory of God we are to
understand God himself; or the eminent Excellency of the Divine Nature,
discovered and made known to us in those Perfections, which we commonly call
the Attributes of God: Such as his Goodness, his Wisdom, his Holiness, and his
Power.

And we are said to do all to the Glory of God. Not by making him more
Glorious; or by adding to his Glory in any of these Instances (which being
Infinite can have nothing added to them): But to do all to the Glory of God, it
denotes no more than to publish and show forth his Glory. Sing Psalm. 66. 1.
Praises to the honor of his Name, make his Praise to be glorious: i.e. Not
make his Essence to be more glorious, than it is in it self. But, make his
Praise to be more and more glorious in the Eye and Esteem of Men: That so his
Power, his Glory, and Psalm. 145. 12
Mightiness of his Kingdom, might be known unto Men. And that Men might ascribe
unto the Lord the Glory due unto his Name. Psalm. 96. 8.


In short, When the Wisdom, the Power, the Justice, the Mercy of God, with
other his Divine Attributes, are confessed and acknowledged, are reverenced and
adored by any of our Actions, then in Scripture Language, God is glorified: Or,
such a thing is done to the Glory of God.

II. How can Eating and Drinking, which are but natural Actions, be said to be
done to God's Glory?

To this I Answer,

That the best Expedient we can propose, to honor God in any Instance, is
Obedience to his Commands.

When therefore we Eat and Drink in such a manner, and with such Circumstances,
and for such Ends and Reasons as God has directed and appointed, then these
and such like natural Actions, are done to his Glory.

Now the known Ends of Eating and Drinking are these;

The nourishing of our Bodies; the refreshing of our Spirits, and preserving
our Health. I say, The refreshing of our Spirits; for doubtless Meats and
Drinks are not only allowed us for Necessity; for the mere Support of Nature;
but also for Satisfaction and Delight. God has not only given Man Bread to
strengthen him, but Oil to make him a cheerful Countenance, and Wine to make
glad his Heart.

But when Meats or Drinks are taken in such Excess, that by oppressing Nature,
they hinder Digestion; drown and suffocate the Spirits; disorder the Faculties;
hinder the free use of Reason; and thereby make Men unfit for Business; and
indispose them either for Civil or Religious Duties; then, and in such Cases,
the use of them is irregular and unlawful; dishonorable to God, and
destructive to themselves.

These Excesses are severely reflected upon in the Holy Scriptures.

Woe unto them that rise up early in the Isa. 5. 11, 12.
Morning, that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until Night, till
Wine inflame them And the Harp, and the Viol, the Tabret and Pip^, and Wine are
in their Feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the
operation of his Hands. Wine and Music, and Feasting, are doubtless very
lawful: But if Men will so far indulge themselves in these Enjoyments, as not
to regard the work of the Lord; i. e. If they Eat and Drink to that Excess, so
as to drown their Reason, so as not rightly to apprehend why these Refreshments
were given them: If they are so far Dozed, that they are incapable to bless God
for them, and to acknowledge his Bounty in the use of these, and all other
their Mercies.

In short, If they Eat and Drink only to gratify their Appetites, not
considering that their Health, their Strength, and their Time are to be
improved to God's Glory, then there is a repeated Woe denounced against them,
v. 22. Woe unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to
mingle strong Drink. Woe unto them that thus Glory in their Shame; or, that
make their Shame their Glory.

It Is therefore a very seasonable Admonition of our Blessed Savior, Take heed
to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be Luke 21. 34.
overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so
that Day come upon you unawares.

Let us walk honestly as in the Day; not in Romans 13. 13
Rioting and Drunkenness. The which Caution of St. Paul, is elsewhere enforced
with this awakening Sentence, Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. 1
Cor. 6. 10.


But I shall not enlarge any further on so harsh and unpleasing a Subject.

There are indeed great Irregularities committed in the World, and which ought
sharply to be reproved, but not fit to be mentioned in this Place.

It Is not decent to insist on those scandalous Excesses, before such a great
and generous Audience.

Leaving therefore these Blemishes, I shall crave leave to remind you,

III. What are the Reasons of this Days Solemnity: Or, in the Language of my
Text, of your Eating and Drinking together on this Day.

Now the Design of this Day's Solemnity is plainly Twofold.

I. First, To maintain Friendship. II. Secondly, To promote Charity.
I. First, The first Design of your present Meeting is, to maintain and improve
your Friendship.

A most Noble and truly Generous Design: Since a true and well-regulated
Friendship, is not only the greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction to your own
Breasts; but also is of equal Benefit and Advantage to others.

Now the sociable Life of Friends, or the mutual Conversation of Wise and
Virtuous Persons, is of great Advantage in several Respects.

1. By improving our Understandings, and rectifying our Judgments. 2. By
regulating and composing of our Passions. 3. By assisting of us in our useful
Designs, and the relieving of us in our Wants.
1. Friendship does improve our Understandings, and rectify our Judgments.

Iron sharpeneth Iron, so a Man sharpeneth Prove. 27. 17.
the Countenance of his Friend.i. e. As Iron is sharpened and brightened by
Iron; so one Man's Parts are raised and improved by another.

Hence it is observed, That a Friendly Conversation, where Men communicate their
Notions with freedom, is of much greater Advantage to true and useful
Knowledge, than either Reading or Meditation.

I grant indeed that both Reading and Meditation are necessary; and it is as
vain to pretend to Learning without them, as it is to build without a
Foundation. But that which I design shall be expressed in the words of the
Great Lord Verulam: Reading may make a full and copious Man, and Meditation a
profound Man; but it is Discourse that makes a clear, distinct and useful Man.

In Confirmation of this it is observed, That several Persons have been highly
accomplished in most parts of Conversation, and have been very useful to the
Public, without any great share of Bookish Learning.

Which I do not mention with the least Design to discourage true Learning; but
to rectify and improve it. For Reading without Discourse, is like Eating
without Digestion; which only loads the Body, obstructs the Passages, and
impairs the state of Health instead of advancing it.

Now that which Digestion is to the Body, Discourse is to the Mind. By which
word, I do not only mean private Discourse with a Man's own Thoughts; which we
call Meditation or Thinking (a most pleasing as well as profitable kind of
Discourse): But by Discourse, I denote external Discourse; expressed by outward
Conversation with others.

By this Conversation we open our Breasts, unfold our Notions, bring them out
into the Light, to be considered and examined by others: Which is a most
prudent and modest Practice.

For we are all of us too apt to think well of our selves, and have a strange
fondness for the Issue of our own Brain.

But when our Projects are brought to light, and communicated to others, then
the Sagacity and Faithfulness of a Friend, discovers and rectifies our Errors
and Mistakes.

2. Another Advantage of Friendship is the regulating and composing of our
Passions. The tumults and disorders of which Passions are the cause of all our
Misery; as being the chief Ingredients of our Sorrows, both in this World and
in the next.

The Frenzy of Anger, the Fever of Love, the Consumption of Envy, the Aguish
Vici^situdes of Hopes and Fears, are the noted Diseases and Distempers of our
Mind.

Now by opening our Breasts with freedom to our Friend, and by giving vent to
our Passions, we assist his charitable Inclinations to rectify these
Disorders. For when he knows our State and our Circumstances, he will then by
his friendly Advice compose our Anger, direct our Love, correct our Envy,
regulate our Hopes, and divert our Fears.

3. Friendship does assist us in our useful Designs, and relieves our Defects.

I doubt not but you are all fully convinced, that you were not sent into this
World only to please your selves, and to gratify your own sensual
Inclinations; but that it is your Duty, in all your Actions, to glorify God,
and do Good to others.

Especially you that are Gentlemen, whom God has entrusted with the Talents of
Authority and Estates beyond and above other Men, you I say, are more
especially obliged to be faithful to this your Trust, by laying out your
Estates, and using your Power in such a manner, as may make you even a Blessing
to the Age you live in.

But when you come ad practicandum, and project any particular Advantage,
either to the Neighborhood or the World; then, from the Envy or Designs of
others, you shall quickly encounter such Opposition, as will convince you of
your Weakness, and how necessary it is to call in the Help of others to supply
your own Defects.

From hence the necessity of Friendship is undeniably established. For on such
an Occasion, a Stranger is not proper to be consulted, who may not know the
whole State of your Business, nor the Series and Circumstances of your Affairs.
Much less is an Enemy to be trusted; who will only betray you, and undermine
your Designs.

But the assistance of a faithful prudent Friend, will effectually support you,
in all your Difficulties, and in all your Wants.

I might add much more of the Nature and Excellency of Friendship, by
representing, that it is the chief Ingredient of our Happiness in Heaven, where
the Blessed Angels, and Spirits of Just Men made perfect, by their mutual
Conversation, enjoy the Perfection of Friendship to all Eternity.

But this is too noble a Theme for any Humane Expression. This Heavenly
Friendship is best explained by being practiced. And God grant that your
Generous Inclinations may make the Experiment.

Do you begin and continue a true Christian Friendship in this World; and
through the Mercy of God, and the Merits of Jesus Christ, it shall be
completed in the next.

I am now addressing my self to Gentlemen, who have this Obligation to
Friendship amongst others, that they are Countrymen. Either born in, or
Inhabitants of the same County.

A County, which is not only one of the Largest, but also one of the Richest
and most Flourishing Counties of the whole Kingdom. And that whether you
consider the Fruitfulness of the Soil, the Number and Disposition of the
Inhabitants, and the Privileges you enjoy.

The Fruitfulness of the Soil does appear in the Riches of the Inhabitants;
since one of your Yeomans does rival the Gentry of other Counties.

The Disposition of the Inhabitants is thus described by Malmsburiensis, an
ancient Writer: The Country People, and the Town-Dwellers of Kent, retain the
Spirit of that ancient Nobility, above the rest of the English; being more
ready to afford a Respect and kind Entertainment to others, and less inclinable
to revenge Injuries.

Their not revenging of Injuries is an evident Proof of their Courage. Which is
thus confirmed by John of Salisbury in his Polycraticon.

As a Reward (says he) of that signal Courage which our Kent with great
eagerness and steadiness showed against the Danes, they do to this Day lay
claim to the Honor of the first Ranks, and the first Onset in all Engagements.

But omitting other Instances, I shall only remind you of the Courage and
Bravery of your Ancestors, when William Duke of Normandy invaded England.

The Duke (for I will not call him your Conqueror) after the famous Battle near
Hastings, (where King Harold was slain) immediately began his March toward
London: And entering into the Weald, or Woody Part of Kent, and advancing with
his Vanguard before the rest of his Army, he found himself almost environed
with mighty Numbers of the Kentish Men, who had concealed themselves in the
Wood, by carrying every Man a great Bough of a Tree, like a Shield in his Hand.

But when they saw the Norman Troops, and the Duke at the Head of them, within
their Danger, they began on a sudden to march like a moving Wood; till
approaching their Enemies, they threw down their Boughs, and discovered on all
sides a Multitude of brave armed Men, ready to charge the Normans, that stood
surprised and amazed at the strangeness of the Sight; which appeared as if a
Wood had been, by some Enchantment, transformed into an Army.

But the Kentish-Men approaching, to show that they had Conduct as well as
Valor, made a Halt; and sent the Abbot of St. Austins to tell the Duke, that
all the Men of that Province were there assembled to defend their Country and
their Liberties; or, to sell their Lives as dear as they could. But if he would
swear to preserve them in those ancient Laws and Customs, under which they and
their Ancestors had so long lived, they were then all ready to lay down their
Arms, and become his Subjects. If not; he must prepare to fight with Men that
had resolved to lose their Lives, rather than their Liberties and Laws.

The Duke finding he was too far advanced to join the Body of his Army before
he engaged, and unwilling to venture all his Hopes and Fortunes, against such
numerous Bands of desperate Men, of such Courage and Resolution as these
appeared to be; He granted to all the Inhabitants of the Province of Kent, the
Preservation and free Enjoyment of all their ancient Laws and Customs under the
Saxon Reigns. He swore the Observance of his Grant, received their Homage, and
so pursued his March.

Thus I have presumed to be your Historian as well as your Preacher, in giving
this short Account of those Green Boughs, which this Day are carried before
you: as Laurels and Trophies of your Ancestors Victory, and your Liberties.

And may these Boughs be ever Green. May these your Laurels still flourish. And
may you, Worthy Gentlemen, still continue what you are: Firm to your Religion,
the Religion of the Church of England, Loyal to your King, and an Ornament to
your Country.

And having done this Right to your Worth and County; Give me leave now to be
your humble Remembrancer of another Design of this Day's Solemnity: viz.

II. Secondly, To promote Charity.

Which I shall at present commend to your Practice only from these Two Topics.

1. Charity is the best and surest Expedient to preserve your Estates in this
Life.

2. You have a comfortable assurance, that your Charity shall be rewarded in
the Life to come.

1. Charity is the best Expedient to preserve your Estates.

When you purchase an Estate, your first Concern is to find out a good Title;
and then you are no less sollicitous to convey that Title firmly, to you and
your Heirs for ever.

But let me with freedom tell you, That Charity is your best Tenure; and will
continue a Name, and perpetuate a Family more firmly, than all your Fines, and
Vouchers, and Entails (those clenching Nails of the Law) can pretend to. For
alas! How slight a Title is a Legal Right? How slender Security is the firmest
Conveyance against destructive Casualties?

Will you charm a Thief with Paper and Parchment? Or, will it stop the
devouring Flames to tell them, that you have an unquestionable Deed of Sale;
and that this House which they are now ready to consume, is settled upon you
and your Heirs for ever?

Will an astonishing Earthquake, when God gives it a Commission to swallow up,
be fixed and firm at the Pleadings of your Learned Council?

Will the Winds grow calm, and the Sea hush and be still; or a Roving Pirate
cease his Pursuit, because the Ship and its Cargoe are the Property of its
Owners?

Do not these and such like Instances, effectually convince you, That God's
Providence is your best Insurance? Can any Power less than his preserve you,
from that Violence and Treachery, those Calamities and Dangers, with which your
Wealth is surrounded?

Think seriously upon it, and you will then confess, It is your Interest as
well as Duty, by Acts of Charity to secure the Divine Protection, which alone
is able to preserve your Estates. Blessed is he that Psalm. 41. 1, 2.
considers the Poor; the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble. The Lord
will preserve him; and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the Earth;
and thou will not deliver him unto the Will of his Enemies.

2. The highest and most pressing Motive to Charity, is the comfortable
Assurance, that it shall be rewarded in the Life to come.

As preparatory to your Conviction I must remind you, That you are frail and
mortal as well as others.

Which I shall express in the words of the Learned and Pious Dr. Isaac Barrow.
And I do designedly repeat his words at this time, because by the Mothers side,
this Eminent Man was of your County. His Words are these: After a very V.
Barrow 's Bounty to the Poor, p. 160.
short time your Thread will be spun out; and then you shall be rifled and
quite stripped of all; you shall be laid out stark naked, as when you came into
the World. You shall not carry with you one grain of your glistering Metals,
nor one rag of your gaudy Stuff. Your stately Houses, your fine Gardens, and
your spacious Walks, must all be exchanged for a close Hole under Ground. You
must for ever bid farewell to your Pomps and Magnificences; to your Feasts and
Jollities; to your Sports and Pastimes. Not one of all your numerous and
splendid Retinue; no Companion of your Pleasures, no Admirer of your Fortune,
no Flatterer of your Vices can wait upon you: But desolate and unattended, you
must go down into the Chambers of Darkness. Thus that Learned Person.

Being thus convinced that you must certainly Dye; the next Thought is to
consider, (and it is a weighty Thought) Whither are you going when you leave
this World? Into what unknown Regions is your next remove?

And then, since Persons of your Figure do love to be well treated, it is
methodical to inquire; What kind of Entertainment are you then to expect? What
Preparations have you made for your Reception there?

Persons of Honor and Quality, in their Progress or their Journey, do give
Notice of their approach to such or such a Place, and send their Harbingers
before to make Provision for them; that so they may be received with Decency,
and according to their Quality.

Let us now examine, Whether you are as wise for the Life to come, as you are
for this.

We are all Strangers in this World, and have here no continuing City; but as
Pilgrims and Sojourners are Traveling to a better Country. Now those who
Travel into Foreign Parts, do either send some Effects before them, or else do
carry along with them Bills of Credit, which they take up in the Coin or
Commodities of those Countries, as they have occasion.

Indeed in this World, Money answers all things. But there is something else
which answers all things in the next: viz. Alms and Charitable Distributions.

These are your Exchange for the other World, and the Bills and Effects you are
to send before you. These (in the Traders Language) are such Bills, as will
certainly be accepted. Or (in Scripture Phrase) shall be recompensed at the
Resurrection of the Just.

By thus giving Alms, you provide your Luke 12. 33.
selves Bags which wax not old; a Treasure in the Heavens that fails not,
where no Thief approaches, neither Moth corrupts. By this faithful usage of
the Mammon of Unrighteousness, you make your selves Friends, that when ye fail
(when ye Dye, when you leave your Houses, and your Lands behind you) will
receive you (will cause you to be received) into Everlasting Habitations Which
God grant to us All.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, Three Persons, but
One Glorious God, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor, Power, and Praise,
henceforth and for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

