A DEFENSE OF THE Plain-Man's REPLY TO THE Catholic Missionaries.

Being a further Examination of the Pretended Infallibility of the Church of
Rome.

Imprimatur.

Guil. Needham R. R. in Christo Patri ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sac.
Domest.
March 29. 1688.


By the Author of the Plain-Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for R. Wild at the Bible and Crown on Ludgate Hill.
1688.

Advertisement.
SOme Papers having lately passed, betwixt a Romish-Missioner and a
Country-Parson, it may not be improper so far to gratify the Reader's
Curiosity, as to acquaint him with the occasion of them. Which shall thus
briefly be represented under the Title of

The Argument.
A Romish Priest being wearied with the noise and hurry of the Town, for his
Diversion and Health, retires into the Country. Where observing a Farmer, in a
pleasant field holding his Plough, in hopes of a Convert he enters into a close
Discourse with him. The Plough-man at first is much started with his Address;
and fenceth as well as his Mother-wit will allow him: and gives very good Reason
(according to some Directions received from his Parson) why he ought not to
engage in Discourses of that nature. Till a^ last, conquered by the civility or
importunity of the Priest, he admits the Debate. And to bring the matter to a
short Issue, the Farmer puts him to prove the Infallibility of his Church. And
withal desires him particularly to inform him; Who is this Living Infallible
Judge, that so upon occasion he may consult him? Who is this unerring Guide, that
so he may submit himself to his Conduct? Wherein the Priest not being able to
give him any tolerable Satisfaction; the Plough-man is so far from embracing
the Communion of the Church of Rome, that he is more firm and affectionate to
the Church of England than he was before. And in Charity to the rest of his
Brethren, of the same Capacity with himself (by the Advice and with the
Direction of his Parson) he publishes the substance of the Conference under
the Title of, The Plain-mans Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. Which together
with the forementioned Directions of his Parson, called; The Country-Parsons
Admonition to his Parishioners, was so displeasing to the Romish Party; that
they have Published a pretended Confutation of them both. Titled, The
Plain-mans Answer to his Country-Parsons Admonition. Together with the
Missioners Answer, to the Plain-mans Reply. To the former of these an Answer
has been lately Published, with this Title, viz. A Defense of the
Country-Parsons Admonition against the Exceptions of the Plain-mans Answer. And
a Reply to the latter, being a full Vindication of the Plain-man against the
Missioner, is attempted in this following Discourse.

THE Country-Parson's REFLECTIONS Upon the Missioners Answer.
A Parishioner of mine, an honest Plain-man, was prevailed upon by the
Importunity of others, to hearken to the Whispers of a Romish Priest. Who
suggested to him, that as without Faith there is no Salvation, so without
Infallibility there is no Faith; and that this Infallibility is only to be
found in the Church of Rome.

The Plain-man, with whom Saying and Doing are two things, very bluntly
demands; How it appears that the Church of Rome is Infallible? And desires the
Priest to give him in Writing one or two of his best Arguments, Country Parsons
Admonition page 15.
and then promises to consider them at his leisure.

The Missioner assures him, he can prove by undeniable Arguments; That the
Church of Rome is infallible. Which he will undertake in this method. By
showing*

1. What is meant by the Church of Rome. 2. What is meant by Infallible. 3.
From whence the Church of Rome had this Infallibility. 4. How they prove it. 5.
Where we may find this Church. 6. And lastly, How we may know when she speaks
to us, and what she teaches.
[Missioners Answer. p. 9.] This Paper being sent to the Plain-man he gives it
to his Parson, and desires his judgment of it: Intimating further, that the
Missioner thinks these Arguments very convincing and therefore expects an
Answer to them. [ p. 21.]

Now in order to the Plain-mans satisfaction (and the Missioners also if he
please to accept it) I do thus examine that Paper in its own Method.

And First I am not satisfied with his Description of the Church of Rome, viz.

By the Church of Rome we do not mean the particular Diocese of Rome, or any
particular Church or Assembly, but the Catholic Church spread over the face of
the whole World, in Communion with the Bishop of Rome, the Supreme Pastor of
the Church of Christ.

[Missioners Answer. page 9.] In this Description here are three Things
supposed.

1. That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church.

2. That the Bishop of Rome is the Supreme Pastor of the Church of Christ.

3. That the Catholic Church, spread over the face of the whole World, is in
Communion with the Bishop of Rome.

The Two former are denied, therefore I expect their Proof. And the Third must
not be granted without its due explication.

1. As to the first, the Plain-man has told him; That though it is the noted
mistake of some writers, to call the Church of Rome the Church Catholic (and
then to apply all the Promises of Protection and Preservation to her as such)
yet this is only their own confident Supposal, without the least manner of
Proof. [ Plain-mans Reply p. 10.]

Being thus admonished, why did not the Priest confirm this Proposition wherein
his Cause is so much concerned? Nay! Why did he thus prevaricate in omitting to
do it, when so fair an occasion was offered?

For; Several Texts of Scripture (of which more anon) being cited by the
Missioner, To prove the Infallibility of the Church of Rome, The Plain-man thus
Reply's.

I must confess these are great Privileges, but I have been told these belong
to the Universal Church, composed of all Christians. So that if you can show me

5. That these promises were made to the Roman Church, or That she is the only
true Church of Christ, I shall most willingly hear you.

[Missioners Answer. p. 14.] This Demand was rational and to the purpose. To
which the Missioner makes this Answer.

This may be easily made clear to you, if you do but remember what I told you
we mean by the Roman Catholic Church. [ p. 15.]

And what was it that he had told him? Even this (but then you must take it
upon his word) The Church of Rome is the Catholic Church. And further this
Deponent says not.

Now in kindness to this Missioner (that I may direct him in his Proof, which
I Will assure him is expected from him) I shall a little more distinctly examine
this matter.

Whoever shall pretend to prove that the Church of Rome is the Catholic
Church, He must consider.

1. The nature of the Christian Church.

2. He must examine, Why, and upon what account the Christian Church is styled
Catholic. And from thence he will be prepared to determine; Whether the Church
of Rome is the Catholic Church.

As to the nature of the Christian Church, the Trent-Catechism, out of St.
Augustine, does thus instruct us.

Ecclesia est Populus fidelis per universum orbem dispersus. Cat. Romans P. 1. c.
10. Sect. 2.

The Christian Church is, The Company of Believers [A Society of men professing
the Faith of Christ] dispersed and scattered over all the world.

And this Church is styled Catholic in these Two respects.

1. With respect to the Persons who make this Profession. Who are not now
confined to one Nation, or limited to one People, as the Jewish Church was. But
in every Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted
with him. Hence St. Augustine. [Ep. 170.] tells us. The Church is called
CATHOLIC, because it is spread throughout the whole World.

2. With respect to the Faith which is professed. And so Catholic is the same
with sound and Orthod^x. In which sense Particular Churches, and the Bishops of
those Churches, in ancient Writings, are often styled Catholic; in opposition
to Heretics and Schismatics.

Now in whether of these Two respects will this Missioner pretend, that the
Church of Rome is the Catholic Church?

1. Will he affirm that she is Catholic with respect to the Persons who make
this Profession? Then, she is the whole Church. Then, there is no other Church
but the Roman (taking in those other Churches which submit to her Authority,)
In short; Then the Roman-Catholics alone do make Profession of Christianity,
and there are no other Christians in the World but Papists.

If this be his meaning, for his conviction, let me then desire him to resolve
me.

When any Member of the Church of England is reconciled, as they phrase it, to
the Church of Rome; Was that Person, before his Reconciliation, a Member of the
Church of Christ, or was he not? Was he a Christian, or was he not? If not Why
then do they not admit him into the Church by Baptism?

But if this Missioner is forced to grant; That such a Convert was a Christian,
and a Member of the Church of Christ even before he was a Roman-Catholic; Then,
there are other Christians besides Papists; and there are other Churches
besides the Roman. Then the Church of Rome is not the Whole Church; and
consequently, in this first sense of the wo^d, is not the Catholic Church. But

2. Will this Missioner pretend, That the Church of Rome is the Catholic
Church, in the other notion of the word, i. e. Sound and Orthodox?

If this be his Project it is then expected, that he prepare us an Answer to
that larg Bill of Indictment, which the Reformed Writers have preferred against
her. And when he shall have given us Satisfaction, as to all those Errors and
Corruptions with which she is charged; As for instance The Sacrifice of the
Mass; Transubstantiation, Half-Communion, Prayers in an unknown Tongue, Worship
of Images, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead, etc. Then,
and not till then, we may grant; That the Church of Rome is Catholic in this
Second sense of the word: And that she is a Sound and Orthodox Church.

And so I leave him to his Defense (which he may prepare at his leisure) and
proceed to consider his Second Supposition, viz:

2. That the Bishop of Rome is the Supreme Pastor of the Church of Christ.

This is the Fundamental Article of the Romish Faith. And yet there is not one
word of it in the Apostles Creed, which is the Sum of the Christian Faith. No
nor yet in the Holy Scriptures, out of which that Creed was taken.

That de facto this Supremacy was not granted to the Bishops of Rome, in the
first and purest Ages of the Church, but that their Encroachments were still
opposed; is most evidently showed by the Learnd Dr. Cave, in A Dissertation
concerning the Government of the Ancient Church.

That the Britannick Churches were ever exempted from all foreign Jurisdiction
for the first Six Hundred Years, and so ought to continue (if this Missioner
will be so modest as to hearken to Instruction) the renowned Archbishop
Bramhal has undeniably proved.

And therefore, if prosperous Usurpation may be called in Question, I would ask
Quo jure? This Supremacy of the Pope whence was it? from Heaven or of Men? Who
gave him this Authority, to Rule and Govern the whole Church of Christ? ch

Their usual pretense for such exorbitant Power, is known to be this, viz.

That our Blessed Savior, before his Ascension, did constitute St. Peter his
Vicar, Deputy and Vicegerent: and as such gave him a Monarchical Supremacy and
Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles, and the whole Church. The which
Supremacy was not Personal and Temporary, to cease with his Person (as the
Apostleship did) but was to be transferred to his Successor. The which Successor
( say they) is the Bishop of Rome.

This is their Plea. In confirmation of which these following Propositions must
be established.

1. That St. Peter had a Primacy over the Apostles.

2. That this Primacy did include a Supremacy of Power, and Dominion or
Jurisdiction over the Apostles.

3. That St. Peter's Primacy with its Rights and Prerogatives was not Personal,
but derivable, to his Successors.

4. That St. Peter was Bishop of Rome, and continued till his Death in
possession of that Office.

5. That the Bishops of Rome, as Successors of St. Peter (according to Gods
institution and by original Right derived thence) should have an Universal
Supremacy and Jurisdiction over the Christian Church.

6. That in fact the Roman Bishops continually from St. Peter's time have
enjoyed and excercised this Sovereign Power.

7. That this Power is indefectible and unalterable.

These are the Pillars of the Romish Cause. And therefore if this Missioner
will be showing his skill, let him practice upon these Points. But when he
attempts it he shall find to his cost, that the Learned Dr. Barrow has
examined them before him: In his excellent Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy. To
which I refer him.

So much for that. I am next to examined his Third Supposition viz.

3. That the Catholic Church, spread over the face of the whole world, is in
Communion with the Bishop of Rome.

To determine this matter, we must consider the nature of Church Communion. Of
which briefly thus.

Church Communion, to speak properly, does chiefly respect the Universal
Church. For to be in Communion with the Church, it is to be a member of the
Church Catholic; in plain terms it is to be a Christian; as we were made by
Baptism, the Seal of the New Covenant. Into which Covenant being thus admitted,
we are united to the whole Church. And by virtue of this union, as
Church Members, have a common Right to all Church Priviledges and Blessings,
and a common obligation to all Church-Offices and Duties.

The which Communion (or Communication) in Religious Duties, though it be
limited and restrained, in the use and exercise of it, to particular Churches
and Congregations (for all Christians in the world cannot meet together) yet
all such Acts of Worship (as Prayers, Sacraments, Hearing the word, etc.) are
performed by us, as Members of the Catholic Church. And therefore we are
obliged to Communicate in these Duties, not only with our own National Church
but also, if our occasions do call us abroad, with any other Church in the
world: Provided that we may do it upon Catholic Terms and Conditions.

These things premised, we are now prepared to Determine, How far the Catholic
Church, spread over the face of the whole world, is in Communion with the
Bishop of Rome.

Which will easily be decided by observing. That there is a Twofold Communion.

1. Of Co-ordination or Friendship.

2. Subordination or Subjection.

As to the former we may safely affirm; All the Churches in the world are thus
far in Communion with the Bishop of Rome; That they may own him for a Christian
Bishop; as acknowledging the Church of Rome to be a true Church, though indeed
a very corrupt Church. And if they do not Communicate further with him, it is
his own fault.

But this it it seems will not satisfy this Missioner: Who most vainly fancy's
that there is no Communion without Subjection. And that no Church can be in
Communion with the Church of Rome, without submitting to her Authority.

When therefore it is affirmed; That the Catholic Church is thus Subject to the
Bishop of Rome: If this Missioner pleads; That de facto all other Churches are
actually thus Subject; we then deny it; for the greater part of Christendom
does protest against the Errors, and oppose the Usurpations of the Bishop of
Rome. But if he contends that de jure they ought so to be, and that this
Subjection is their Duty, then let him prove it.

What I have now said, is sufficient to convince this Missioner, of his
mistaken Notion of the Church of Rome. Which if he thinks fit to Defend, he
must then prove.

1. That the Church of Rome is the Catholic Church. i.e. He must convince us,
Either (1.) That she is the whole Church, and that there is no other Church
besides her; or else (2.) That she is the only true and Orthodox Church.

2. That the Bishop of Rome is the Supreme Pastor of the Church of Christ.
Which when he has proved, I shall then grant him.

3. That the Catholic Church spread over the face of the whole world, is in
Communion with i. e. is Subject to the Bishop of Rome.

And here should I now hold my Pen, and proceed no further in my Reflections, I
have given this Missioner work enough.

But if he will be so modest as to confess his mistake, I Will help him to a
better Definition of the Church of Rome, and less liable to exception.

By the Roman Church, we do not understand the particular Diocese of Rome; but
we understand, that vastly extended Community of Christians which hold
Communion with the Church of Rome, submitting themselves to the Bishop of Rome
as to their Head; so that whatsoever he Decrees with a General Council they
embrace as the Definition of the true Church, which they hold Infallible. [
Question of Questions, Sect. 17. p. 373.]

Had this Missioner been so prudent as to have consulted this Author (whom he
was pleased to recommend for the Plain-mans Satisfaction) we might then make
short work on it: and without further diversion, might have proceeded to the
Second Inquiry, viz.

2. What is meant by Infallible? Which he thus explains.

By the word Infallibility we do not mean only Indefectibility and Duration,
but an unerring Direction in necessary points of Faith. So that when we say the
Church ( of Rome) is infallible, we mean; that Almighty God has given an
Authoritative Power to the Church (of Rome) to declare, in case of Differences,
which is the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. So that in
case of Differences about the sense of Scripture, or any divinely revealed
Truths, the Church (of Rome) is to decide the Difference, and end the
Controversy. And to perform this, we say, she is assisted by the Spirit of
Almighty God, who, as he has ordained her for our Direction, so he secures her
from erring whilst she Directs. Which assistance we call Infallibility. [
Missioners Answer. p. 10.]

This he endeavors to confirm, by inquiring Thirdly,

3. From whence had she [ the Church of Rome] this Authority of unerring
Guidance? (p. 11.)

To which he gives us this Answer.

You must not think that the Church [of Rome] has this power from her self; for
we know that all men may fail; All Communities and Assemblies are subject to
error and mistakes ( where then is the Infallibility of Oral Tradition?) But
she has it from God himself, who is faitful and true to his Promises. (Ibid.)
But

4. How does it appear that the Church of Rome is thus Infallible, and that God
has made her these Promises of unerring Guidance? ( Ibid.)

This he tells us, is evident from the plain Testimonies of Holy Scripture,
both Old and New Testament ( Ibid.)

Thus far I do readily Subscribe; That if the Church of Rome is Infallible, She
must have this Privilege from God himself. And if there is such a Promise of
unerring Guidance it must be found in the Holy Scriptures.

Let it therefore appear from those Sacred Writings, that God has promised
such an unerring Guidance to the Church of Rome, and I shall then Dispute no
further, but submit to her Direction.

Now to prove this Infallibility, this Missioner has cited Twenty Places of
Scripture, which the Question of Questions tells him are in the Bible. But how
little they are to his purpose, I do thus endeavor to convince him, by
examining them in their order.

His First Text is that noted Place, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc. From whence the Argument
is this. The Jewish Church was Infallible, Therefore The Church of Rome is
Infallible.

To which I thus Answer.

Both Propositions, Antecedent and Consequent, are false.

And, First, it does not appear from this Place of Scripture (nor indeed from
any other) That the Jewish Church was Infallible.

From what Circumstance in this Text will the Missioner infer such a Conclusion?

Was it 1. Because in that Church there was a Supreme Court of Judicature, from
whence there was no Appeal? Or 2. Because the Priests, the Levites, and the
Judge were to give Sentence? Or 3. Was it because the contemner of this Sentence
was to be put to Death?

Now if these Passages do prove Infallibility, there was (...) Infallibility in
the State as well as in the Church: in the Judge, the Civil Magistrate no less
then the Priest: and ^n every Inferior Priest as well as the High Priest.

But I need not insist on these Suggestions* since there is no arguing against
matter of Fact. If therefore it does appear* in any instance, That the Jewish
Church [or the Roman] has actually erred; it is too late to pretend that she is
Infallible.

To convince him that she has erred I Demand of this Missioner;

The Sentence of the Sanhedrim, whereby our Blessed Savior was condemned as a
Blasphemer, was it a just and Legal Sentence, or was it not? If not. Then the
Jewish Church, which pronounced it, was not Infallible. And consequently this
Argument, so triumphantly repeated, is utterly lost.

But if this Missioner dares pretend;

That the Sentence of the Sanhedrim was a Legal Sentence; and that the Holy
Jesus was justly condemned as a Blasphemer; let him take heed; least contending
for Infallibility; he forfeits his Christianity.

However, for Arguments sake, suppose it were granted; That the Jewish Church
was Infallible; Must it thence be inferred; That the Christian Church has the
same Privilege? Yes doubtless, think's this Missioner. For to her has been
given a Covenant with better Promises. True! But was Infallibility any of those
Promises? This ought not be supposed but proved.

But now let it be further granted; That the Christian Church is Infallible?
What Is this to the Church of Rome? Is there no other Church besides the Roman?
Or, Is she only the true Church of Christ? Let the Missioner prove this; And I
shall most willingly hear him. [Missioners Answer. p. 15.]

Secondly, He fills up his Pages with several other Places out of the Old
Testament. Which I shall only transcribe, and then it will sufficiently appear
they are nothing to his purpose.

He tells us, The Church shall be like a Mountain upon the top of Mountains,
Isa. 22. Like a Tabernacle seated in the Sun, Ps. 18. 4. That all Nations shall
flow unto her. That Kings shall be her Nursing Fathers, and Queens her Nursing
Mothers, Isa. 49. 23. That all the ends of the Earth shall remember, and turn
unto the Lord, and all the Kindred of the Nations shall worship before him,
Psalm. 22. 27.

Besides these plain Prophecies which [speak not one word of the Infallibility
of the Church of Rome but] only show the Visibility, Universality and Durance
of the Christian Church, which are not now the Dispute, and therefore shall be
considered when occasion is offered;

I say, besides these, we are told that in this House of the God of Jacob, he
himself will teach us his ways; and will judge amongst the Nations, Isa. 2. 3,
4. And then certainly we shall neither be taught an Error, nor have a wrong
Sentence. [ Missioners Answer p. 12, 13.]

That's granted. God will certainly teach us Truth. And we shall never err.
Provided, that we follow his Instructions.

Now all extraordinary ways being ceased, the Divine wisdom ordinarily does
instruct us only by the Scriptures. Which, as St. Peter has admonished us, are
a more sure word of Prophecy then a voice from Heaven. Whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place. 2 Pet. 1. 19.

These Holy Scriptures are the good old way. By walking in which the wayfaring
men, though fools, shall not err, Isa. 35. 8. [Missioners Answer. p. 12, 21,
22.] For the Testimony of the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple,
Psalm. 19 7.

But now if the Church of Rome, for instance, shall leave this good old way of
Truth, to wander in Bypath of her own; If she shall neglect, vilify and
forsake the Holy Scriptures, to follow her own blind Traditions; It Is not her
confidence that she is in the Right, that can keep her out of the Ditch, or
secure her from falling.

He tells us moreover, That God will not be wroth with his Church, neither
shall his kindness depart from her, nor the Covenant of his peace be removed.
That all her Children shall be taught of the Lord, That she shall be
established in righteousness. That whosoever shall gather together against her,
shall fall for her sake. And that every Tongue that shall rise against her in
judgment shall be condemned by her. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the
Lord and their righteousness is of me says the Lord Isa. 54.

Furthermore he tells us, that God has made a Covenant with his Church. That
his Spirit shall be upon her, and his words which he has put into her mouth,
shall not depart out of her mouth, nor out of the mouth of her seed, nor out of
the mouth of her seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Isa.
59. 20, 21. You see here a promise to the Church in all Ages, that she shall
speak the very words which God shall put into her mouth, and therefore no
Errors. [pag. 13.]

To all this flourish I briefly Reply in the words of Mr. Chillingworth.

If the Church of Rome be Zion and they that turn from iniquity in Jacob, they
may have Title to this Covenant. If not; They must forbear, and leave it to the
Jews after their Conversion. To whom it is appropriated by a more Infallible
Interpreter than the Pope; I mean St. Paul Romans 11. 26. And it seems the Church
of Rome also believes as much. For otherwise why does she in the Margent of her
Bible, send us to that place of St. Paul for an Exposition? [Addit. Discourses.
p. 36.]

Out of the New Testament he has cited several Texts, which I shall set down
in their order, with short remarks upon them.

Math. 16. 18. Upon this Rock I will build my Church: and the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it. page 13.

This Text has been so often and so fully Answered, that I admire the
confidence of this Missioner, who at this time can pretend to urge it.

In short. This Text is a Promise of the Perpetuity of the Catholic Church:
But not of the Infallibility [no nor the Perpetuity] of the Roman Church.

Matthew: 28. 20. And I am with you always even unto the end of the World. Amen.

What You? only You of the Church of Rome? Are there no other Pastors and
Teachers besides You in the Church of Christ?

But does Presenc^ signify Infallibility? Has he not promised; Where two or
three are gathered together in my name there am I in the midst of them, Matthew:
18. 20. And are all such Assemblies Infallible?

John 14. 16. I will pray the Father* and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever.

V. 17. even the Spirit of Truth, whom the World cannot receive.

V. 26. He shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.

Chapter 16. V. 13. When he the Spirit of truth is come, he will guide you into all
truth: for he shall not speak of himself; but whatsoever he shall hear, that
shall be speak; and he will show you things to come.

What has the Church of Rome to do with these Scriptures? Did the Church of
Rome ever hear the Sermons and Discourses of our Blessed Savior? If not. How
can they be brought to her Remembrance? Is it not therefore evident, from
several Passages in both those Chapters, that these Promises do belong only to
the Apostles, who personally conversed with our Savior. As being made to
those, To whom he had many more things to say, which they were not yet able to
bear. To those who had been with Christ from the Beginning. To those from whom
Christ was now going away. And whom he had before told of his Departure.
Lastly, to whom the Holy Ghost was to show Things to come. A Promise, which the
present Church of Rome dares not pretend to.

If here it shall be urged that the Clause for ever must needs extend this
Promise beyond their own Persons, and so to their Successors. To this I Answer.

1. This for ever signifies no more then to the end of their Lives. According
to those known Forms of Speech. This is mine for ever. Or This shall be yours
for ever.

2. Suppose these Promises had been made to them and their Successors? Had they
no Successors but them of the Roman Church? This has been confidently
pretended, but was never yet proved.

Math: 18. 17. And if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church:
but if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man
and a Publican. page 14.

What Church is this that must be heard? The Church of Rome only? nothing less.
It Is evident by the Church in this Text, can be meant no other than that
particular Church, of which the offending Brother was a Member.

But suppose that by the Church were meant the Church of Rome, and that this
Church of Rome were to be heard and obeyed. What then? Is she therefore
Infallible? Are all those that are to be heard and obeyed Infallible? Are not
Kings and Parents and Masters and Prelates and Abbots; are not all these to be
heard and obeyed? And are all these Infallible?

Matthew: 28. 19. compared with Mark. 16. 15, 16. Go ye therefore and Teach all
Nations -- and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that believes and is
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, p. 14.

What then? Therefore The Church of Rome is Infallible. This is such a
Demonstration as Euclid never dreamed on.

1 Timothy: 3. 15. -- That thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in
the house of God, which is the Church of the living God the pillar and ground
of the truth. p. 14. The Church Catholic, without controversy, is the Pillar
and Ground of the Truth. Nay! even Particular Churches, as sound parts and
members of the Catholic* and the Bishops of those Churches, may be adorned
with that Title.

But what^s this to the Church of Rome? Which is neither the Catholic Church,
nor a sound Member of it.

Indeed had Timothy been Bishop of Rom^, I should then have been obliged to
examine, how and in what sense a Particular Church may be called, the Pillar
and ground of the truth, without being Infallible. But since he was Bishop of
Ephesus and not of Rome; and since the Infallibility of Rome and not of Ephesus
is to be proved, there is no occasion for that Inquiry.

Ephesians: 4. 11, 12, 14. And he gave some, Apostles: and some Prophets: and some,
Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints
-- that we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness,
whereby they lie in wait to deceive: but speaking the truth in love, may grow
up in him in all things, who is the head, even Christ. p. 14.

Amongst all these Orders here is no mention of an Infallible Judge of
Controversies, much less that this Judge is only to be found in the Church of
Rome.

And thus I have briefly showed, how impertinently these Scriptures have been
urged by this Missioner. When I say Impertinently, I do not thereby blame the
conduct of this Writer (who has taken the true method to defend his Church)
but by that word do only express the weakness of his Cause. Which has been so
often and so effectually exposed, that it may well puzzle, even the skill of a
Missioner, to make a decent Defense. And indeed it is no little surprising to
observe, how perplexing and confused an Answer is here given, to the most plain
and easy Question.

The Plain-man having often been admonished, to return (as they Phrase it) into
the Bosom of the Church of Rome: and as a further inducement to hasten his
Change, having been assured; That the Church of Rome is Infallible; and that
Protestant Churches, for want of this Infallibility, are neither able to
interpret Scripture, nor compose Differences in matters of Faith: I say being
thus admonished, he makes this short Reply viz. That if the Church of Rome is
infallible as they pretend, it would be a seasonable Charity to instruct him in
this matter.

This is the Substance of that little Treatise. Which indeed is no other then a
Paraphrase upon this Question.

Who is this Infallible Judge; that so upon occasion I may consult him? Tell me
distinctly* Who is this unerring Guide? Where may I find him? And I do
faithfully promise to resign my self to his Conduct. [Plain-mans Reply. p. 18,
19, 22.]

Observe now what Answer the Missioner has given to this important Question.
Pray mark it. It Is worth your notice.

Mistake me not I pray, I tell you distinctly, that the Church is my infallible
Guide. And this Church is to be found spread over the face of the whole World,
I may therefore securely rely upon what she teaches, without troubling my self
to search whether this or that particular Person in her be Infallible or no.
[Missioners Answer. p. 16]

A most learned Determination. And very much, no doubt, to the satisfaction of
the Plain-man. For whose further Instruction, I do thus expostulate with this
Missioner.

The Country Parson to the Missioner.
YOu say, Sir, the Church is my Infallible Guide. Pray, what do you mean by
this Church? Is it, in your Language, the Teaching Church, or the Learning part
of the Church? p. 14. Or, in more proper Terms, Is it the Church
Representative, or the Church Diffusive? sure not the Church Diffusive. For
that comprehends every private Christian, even the most ordinary Mechanic. And
in case of Differences about the sense of Scripture, or any Divinely revealed
Truths, I hope these are no fit Persons to decide the Difference, and end the
Controversy.

[Missioners Answer. p. 10.] It remains therefore, That the Church
Representative is this Infallible Guide. And then our next thought is to
inquire; who this infallible Representative is. And though you assured the
Plain-man, That he may securely rely upon what the Church teaches, without
troubling himself to search whether this or that particular Person in her be
infallible or no; [ page 16.] yet in contradiction to your self you are forced
to Declare;

That a General Council, the Supreme Court of Judicature, is the Legal
Infallible Representative of the Church. p. 18. So that whether the
Controversy be about the sense of Scripture, or about the Canon of a Council,
there must be a Living Judge to determine it; and this I say, is the Church in
her General Councils, in which she is secured from Error. p. 19.

And now why was not this acknowledgment made at the first? When the Plain-man
desired you to tell him distinctly; who is this Infallible Guide, why did you
not then roundly and boldly Answer; I tell you distinctly A General Council is
my Infallible Guide? Why such shuffling and shifting in so plain a matter?

Does not this evidently confirm the Plain-mans suspicion; That since your
Discourses about this Infallibility are so various and uncertain, expressed
with such diffidence and caution, he can scarce think you believe it your
selves?

[Plain-mans Reply. p. 8.]

However at last you have taken the courage to Declare; That a General Council
is this Living Infallible Judge, this unerring Guide.

The truth of which pretense I do thus briefly examine.

In St. Mathew's Gospel the Plain-man finds these words. And he took the Cup,
and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye ALL of it, Math. 26, 27.

This Text, he observes, is controverted betwixt the two Churches, and the
sense of it Disputed.

The Church of England (in obedience to that last precept of her Lord, Teaching
them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, (Math. 28. 20.)
has thus Determined.

The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied to the Lay People: For both the parts
of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance and commandment, ought to be
ministered to all Christian men alike. ART. 30.

But the Church of Rome (in direct opposition to our Lords Command) has thus
Decreed, in her Councils of Constance and Trent.

Although our Redeemer has instituted the Sacrament in his last Supper, and
has delivered unto the Apostles in both kinds. Yet, The Synod has decreed,
That it should be received for a Law, that the Sacrament be adminstred in one
kind. And whosoever shall say, That by the command of God, all the Faithful
ought to receive in both kinds; Let him be accursed. Council. Constable. Sess. 13.
Council. Trident. Sess. 21. Cap. 2. 3. Can. 1.

Now my Plain-man desires to be instructed, whether Church is in the right? The
Church of England which gives the Cup to Lay People; or the Church of Rome
which denies it. If his Reason might be Judge, he is then convinced; that the
Church of England is Orthodox, and holds the truth in this matter. For he
thinks it very reasonable, in the Administration of a Sacrament, to observe the
Institution of our Blessed Savior.

But you Missioners do tell him, he must not judge by Reason, but must submit to
the Authority of an infallible Judge. Well! it is now hoped at last we shall
bring the matter to a short issue.

You have declared; That whether the Controversy be about the sense of
Scripture, or about the Canon of a Council, there must be a living Judge to
determine it; and this you say is a General Council. [ Missioners Answer. p.
19.]

I demand therefore, and answer me distinctly. Is there any General Council
actually now sitting, which (by its infallible Authority) may explain this Text
and determine these Controverted Canons, of the Councils of Constance and
Trent? If there is such a Council, pray where is it to be found? in what part
of the world are the Fathers assembled? But if there is no such Council. Then
there is no Living infallible Judge, to Determine this Controversy about
Half-Communion.

I am not able to conjecture, what you can possibly say to this, unless you
will be so dull as to repeat your own words, viz. That as there is not any
General Council actually now sitting, to end our Controversies, so neither
needs there any, the Church having so fully expressed her self in the Canons
and Definitions of her preceding Councils, and in particular in that of Trent.
p. 19.

I say, to urge this would be dull and impertinent. For you your self have
confessed; That these Canons of preceding Councils are but mere Writings, and
a mere Writing can be no Judge though indeed it may be a Rule. So that these
Decrees of former Councils being mere Writings they cannot, in case of a
Controversy arising about their sense, determine themselves and explain their
own meaning. So that in such a case as this, Where there is a Controversy
about the Canon of a Council, there must be a Living Judge, which you say, is a
General Council.

Now, Sir, to make Application. Here is a Canon of the Council of Trent [ Sess.
21. Can. 1.] That is controverted, and the sense of it Disputed. I do again beg
of you to resolve me; Where is this Living Judge, this General Council, to
determine this Canon? If there is none; Then the evidence of Truth does
constrain me to pronounce; That there is no Living Infallible Judge in the
present Church of Rome.

These Things are plain and convincing, and admit of no Reply. But some men, I
observe, are not to be silenced. These Missioners are so trained up, even from
their Childhood, in the habit of wrangling (which they call Disputing) that
they will hold the Conclusion in spite of all Premises. And you, Sir, for
your part will be still saying something, though nothing to the purpose. For
thus you go on.

You have granted; That when there is a Controversy about the Canon of a
Council, there must then be a living Judge to determine it: another Council must
be called. But, say you, pray take notice, that we have no such Controversy at
present. All persons are agreed as to what this Church has defined, and the
sense of her Canons is not Controverted. We see it in her Practice, we read it
in her Catechisms, we hear it from her Pastors, etc. p. 20 -- Hold Sir, What a
hurry of words is here to no purpose? How? The sense of her Canons not
co^^roverted? Were I not come to the very end of my Paper, I would refresh your
(...) on both sides.

I could convince you of your mistake, from the great Lateran Council; Can. 3.
de Hareticis. Which has been the subject of infinite Debate and Controversy.
I forbear to repeat it at large, for a Reason that you know; and shall only
demand; Whether the Deposing Power, is the established Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, or no? The Papist Represented P. 1. page 47, shall resolve you in
these words. For the few Authors that are Abettors of this Doctrine, there are
of his Communion three times the number, that publicly disown all such
Authority.

I am not, at present, concerned to examine, How many these few Authors may be.
Bellarm. adv. Barcl. de Potest. Pap. produces the Testimony of near Fourscore
for the Popes Temporal Power; and almost all of them do plainly own his Power
of Deposing Kings. But be they more or less, it is sufficient for my purpose;
That some do affirm what others deny, and consequently; That this 3d Canon of
the Council of Lateran is controverted, and the sense of it Disputed.

I could descend to the Council of Trent. And there remind you of Soto, Vega,
and Catharinus; Who had large Disputes about the sense of that Council.

From whence the Historian makes this remark. This seemed to put all men out of
hope to understand the meaning of the (...) the principal men that were (...)
in it, did not agree, page 230.

(...) I must confine my self to this in^^^^^ now before us. Where indeed the
Question is not de facto, whether you deny the Cup to Lay People? For we see it
in your Practice, we read it in your Catechisms, we hear it from your Pastors.
But the Question is de jure. Whether the Church of Rome has Authority, to null
and contradict the Institution of our Blessed Savior? And whether in so doing
the Church of Rome is not mistaken, has not actually erred, and so lost her
Infallibility? For, if in this or any other instance, we can prove that she
has actually erred, it is too late to pretend that she is Infallible. This is
the point wherein my Plain-man desires to be resolved.

And now, where is this living Judge, this General Council actually now sitting
to determine this Controversy? I say, actually now sitting; for when the
Council is dissolved, and the Prelates and Fathers are in another world, it
does then cease to be a Living Judge.

To conclude.

If, as you say, a General Council is this Infallible Judge, this unerring
Guide; Then, since there is no General Council actually now sitting, it
undeniably follows; That there is no living Infallible Judge in the present
Church of Rome.

The Plain-man to the Missioner.

Sir, This Discourse of our Parson, against the Infallibility of the Church of
Rome, seems to me very convincing; and therefore I desire your Answer to it.

FINIS.

