The Envious Man's Character.

A SERMON Preached at S. MARY's CHURCH IN CAMBRIDGE.

By WILLIAM ASPIN, D. D. Rector of Emberton in Bucks.

LONDON, Printed by B. W. for Ralph Smith, at the Sign of the Bible in the
Piazza under the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. MDCLXXXIV.

TO THE READER,
HAVING seriously considered what might be the reason of those heats and
immoralities which do but too visibly disturb the quiet of this Church and
State, I presently found how great a share Envy had in causing them. And
therefore being to preach a Sermon, Ad Populum, in S. Mary's Church in
Cambridge, I thought I could not do better service to Religion, than by
endeavoring to detect and display that monstrous Vice. For it is apparent to
him that sees any thing, how great a cause it has been of former commotions as
also of our present Discontents and Disturbances. I do not wonder, when I hear
the greatest worth defamed, Men of the profoundest Wisdom, and most exemplary
Piety and Virtue, either in Church or State, evil spoken of. For alas! the eyes
of some will ever be disturbed at so great a luster. The Israelites envied
Psalm. 106.
Moses in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. Tertullian observes, the
Gospel must needs be a precious thing, because Nero hated it. And it plainly
argues, that there is something excellent belonging to that man who is envied.
And therefore Erasmus says, Ut umbra nusquam est, nisi cum adest In Vit.
Sanct. Hieronymi.
lumen: ita celebritas sanctissimi viri non caret invidia: As the shadow is
never seen to appear, but with a luminous Body: so the fame of the most
virtuous Person, is sure to be attended with Envy. Hence some of the bravest
men that ever the World had, have met with the unkindest usage in it. The
reason is, because the higher their worth has raised them, the fairer mark they
have appeared for Envy.

Themistocles in Plutarch says, He was not envied in his Minority, because
then he had done nothing that was famous and extraordinary. And no sooner were
the Athenian Captains by their excellent Conduct, Valor, and Successes, raised
the highest in the esteem of those over whom they were Victors, but they were
presently envied and proscribed by their own Country men. And amongst the
Romans, the renowned Caesar's Fall was owing to the Envy, as well as malice of
Brutus, and Cassius; which Caesar himself saw he was in danger of; when as
Plutarch tells us in the Life of Brutus, he said, He was not afraid of fat Men,
but of lean whitely faced-fellows, meaning thereby Brutus, and Cassius, who
were such; The thinness of their Bodies, and paleness of their Faces
discovering the Envy and Malice that was in their hearts. And therefore it is a
great piece of folly to think the worse of any one for being envied and evil
spoken of, because it is sure, the Wisest and best men in a Nation, though
others may, shall not escape Censure. It Is certainly every Christian man's
wisdom to hold on in a steady course of duty, to endeavor to approve himself
to God in all cases, not to value much what men think or say of him, and to
look for his reward in another World, and not in this.

When I preached it, I had no thought of making this Sermon public. But since
that time, which is now about a year and half, something having happened which
I foresaw might occasion its coming abroad, at some time or other, without my
knowledge, I concluded it to be the prudentest way to put it out my self, since
by that means I might avoid some inconveniences which might have happened by
another doing it. It may be some will not like it; because it is but too true a
Character of themselves: But that I cannot help. If it shall contribute any
thing to the quiet, and welfare of the Community, for which it is designed, or
to the advantage of any individual in it: I shall not repent me of what I have
now done, being contented to be censured by some, if I may but profit any.

ECCLES. IV. iv. I considered -- every right work, that for this a man is
envied of his Neighbor.
TWould be matter of just wonder and astonishment to a considering mind, that
Men who are bound to one another by so many obligations of Nature, Religion,
and Interest, should yet be at such enmity amongst themselves, if we were not
by infallible Revelation acquainted with the degeneracy of our Natures, as the
cause of it. For since there is a concord and agreement between even the Beasts
themselves of the same kind; it cannot be imagined that human Nature should be
at such odds and discords with it self, but that its propensions are by sin
changed, and but that it self is sunk below tha^ ^f the Beasts that perish.
Though indeed, reason ^^self, if it had wanted the assistance of Divine
Rev^^ation, might have gone a great way toward thi^ discovery, since a change
in the Effects, must of necessity argue one in the Cause, from whence they
proceeded. And therefore the wisest Heathen, though they were never able to
assign the true Cause of the degeneracy of our Natures, that being beyond their
search, and past their finding out; yet they easily discerned that Man's nature
was corrupted, and changed from what it should be. Hence in Horace, The Soldier
is displeased with his own Profession, and wishes himself a Merchant; The
Merchant dislikes his own Calling, and envies that of the Soldiers. The Lawyer
envies the Husbandman's happiness: And the Husbandman is displeased with his
own Calling, and thinks they are only happy that dwell in Cities. What Is the
reason men should find their own conditions so uneasy, and should envy that of
other men's? It Is not because other men's (all things considered) are better for
them than their own; For he that makes a change, finds himself to be as uneasy
as he was before. And indeed, the same Suit is not fit for every ones back: But
it is because men have not a right apprehension of things, and because they
would engross all the goods of the World to themselves. And therefore are
troubled when they see any body else possessed of them. It Is because their
natures are degenerated and corrupted. But whatever be the more general and
remote, or the more particular, and immediate Causes of it, the (...), or thing
it self, is too obvious to escape any ones notice, That there is a great deal
of Envy in the World, which Solomon has observed in these words, saying, I
considered -- every right work, that for this a man is envied of his Neighbor.

Now Envy seems to be the same which the Orator Cicero has defined it, namely,
A grief conceived in Aegritudo animi ex alterius rebus secundis suscepta, quae
praesertim nullam jacturam afferunt invidenti. 4. Tuse.
the mind, at the good which another enjoyes, and that good especially, by
which the envious man receives no injury. We'll consider briefly the parts of
this Description, that we may the better understand the nature of it.

1. I say, Envy is a grief; and besides that, every (...). Plut. Mor.
one who has experienced it, has felt it to be so: this appears by its effects,
it making men sad and full of complaints that are infested with it; It changes
the natural pleasantness of the countenance, wastes the Zenoph. Memor. Lib. 3.
Body, and disquiets the mind. And therefore David tells us, When he was
envious at the foolish, Psalm. 73. 3, 21.
seeing the prosperity of the wicked, his heart was grieved.

2. It Is a grief, conceived in the mind, by which (...), etc. Plut. de Invidia
and Odio. (...), ibid. Psalm. 38. 20.
terms it is distinguished from that grief which Beasts may have, because of
some present bodily pain, that they are afflicted with, who though they are
capable of grieving, being of a sensible nature; Yet they cannot envy one
another, because they can have no imagination of the prosperity that others
enjoy above themselves. It Is a grief conceived in the mind (at another good)
and hereby it is distinguished from hatred, which has for its object evil. It Is
true, a man may be hated for doing good, as 'twas David's lot, but then it is
looked upon under the notion of Evil. But Envy has good for its object, not our
own, which would excite our joy, but another which causes our Envy. And
Solomon tells us, It Is not for any evil, but for good. For every right work, a
man is envied of his Neighbor. That is,

1. For every right work of Art. Thus when a Mechanic has finished a piece of
work, according to the rules of his Art, he is envied for it by some or other,
that are of the same Trade with himself. And therefore such can seldom speak
well of one another, but will be secretly undermining, and take all occasions
to disparage and detract from one another skill, and love to be finding fault
with that which they did not do themselves. Which was an observation long since
made by the Greek Poet; (...), etc.
and is grown into a Proverb amongst our selves. Hence we are told by the
Moralist, That all excellency is attended with Envy. A man cannot hope to excel
in any thing, but he shall be envied by some body for it. And it is a common
Proverb amongst the Rabbis, That every Artificer hates the Children of his own
Craft.

2. A man shall be envied of his Neighbor for every right work of Nature. Such
I account are all natural perfections either of mind or Body: As are Wit,
Beauty, Strength, or the like. They who have either any or all of these, are in
danger of being envied by some that want them.

3. For every right work of Grace. For if a man live uprightly, and do justly,
in all probability he is like to be a considerable gainer by it in this World;
though fools are apt to think otherwise, it is the likeliest means to advance
both his Reputation and Estate, which men that have the greatest Dealings in
the World, seem to be convinced of, in that they pretend to it, and would be
thought to be most righteous, even then when they have designed to steer a
quite contrary course. But it matters not much what such men's thoughts are,
since we are sure, that Grace or Godliness has the promise of the things of
this life, and that he who by the constant tenor of an upright life, best
acquits himself of his duty to God and Man, shall ordinarily be best accepted
of by both. I say, ordinarily, because most assuredly God will value him the
more for it; And so, unless it be very rarely, will men too. And he that has
the advantage of God's favor and man's, is most likely to advance in his
worldly Estate, and to become the object of his Neighbor's Envy. Thus
likewise, if a man by his honest Industry; thrive and increase in Wealth, or if
by the merit of his virtues, he be raised to honor, he shall be envied by some
body or other. It may be, to speak strictly, no man is envied for his grace or
goodness, but for the rewards of it. For a man may be as holy, and as virtuous
as he will, and yet no body will envy him for that; unless from thence he be
more esteemed, and be better thought of, or unless by such a course he thrives
in his worldly estate, then he shall be envied. But because it is hard to
separate between virtue and its reward, therefore I may not improperly say,
That for every right work of grace, a man is envied of his Neighbor. And thus
you see another good is the object of Envy; or the good which another injoyes,
is that which causes his Neighbor to look upon him with an evil eye. Which is
the third Particular to be considered in the definition which I have given you
of it.

4. It Is for that good especially that a man is envied, by which the envious
person receives no injury. For if one possesses a good by which another is
injured, it makes him hated rather than envied, because he came by it by evil
and indirect means; that is, by injuring of another. But what injury can it be
to an Artificer, to have another to perfect a more curious piece of Work than
he? It may accidentally be a loss to him, because most will make use of him
that is best skilled in his Art; but injury it can be none. And what wrong is it
to me, if another Sim ipse foelix, sint alii foeliciores, non equidem invideo,
mihi nihil detrahetur. Cumberland de Legibus Naturae. p. 128. A saying like
that excellent Author.
be wittier, handsomer, and stronger than I? I have never the less of either,
because he has more. That degree which he has above me, was not taken from me:
And so, if he excel me in any virtue; or, as a reward of that virtue, if he be
better thought of, find greater favor, and be preferred before me, it is but as
it should be. He has what he deserves, and I am not injured by it. For, though
he have more than I, yet I may not have less, but more than I deserve. Thus you
see the object of Envy, is another good. A man is envied for any good of Art,
of Nature, and of Grace too. For the highest virtue, goodness and innocence, is
no fence against it, as is plain, because our blessed Savior himself, for
Envy, was delivered over to be proceeded against by the Civil Magistrate. Nay,
as Synesius has de Providentia.
observed, Envy is not so much suppressed by virtue, as inflamed, or not so
much appeased, as enraged. Neither can that good, which is possessed without
the wrong of any one, secure a man from it; that good of another being
especially the object of it, by which the envious person receives no injury.
Thus having showed you the monstrous nature of Envy, our next enquiry shall be
into the Causes of it. And as we commonly guess from the sordidness of a man's
temper, at that of his Birth and Breeding; so doubtless, this more than Brutish
vice of Envy must needs be of very base extraction and original, whither if we
trace it, we shall find it descended from one, or all of these Causes. And,

1. From Ignorance. For if the envious man did not think some things to be
valuable beyond what really they are, such as Riches, and Honor, Beauty, Wit,
and the like, he would not grieve to see another possessed of them. Alas! a man
may enjoy all these to his hurt, and it is but too evident, that a great many
do, all indeed that mis-imploy them, and use them to other ends, than those for
which God designed them. And then, if we understood things aright, they would be
the objects of our pity, rather than of our envy, as being more miserable than
others that want them. Our Savior opposes the Goods of Fortune to the Goods of
Grace, calling the Goods of Grace true riches; Luke 16. 11.
thereby implying, That the Goods of Fortune are false riches. And indeed, in
the event, they are as often evils as goods. And surely, none would envy the
goods of Grace which any one possesses, if he understood that they were
imparted to him for the advantage of others, as well as his that possesses
them, and consequently, that others may be benefited by them if they will.
Methinks it should rejoice us to see that man rich, that is obliged to maintain
us out of what he has. This I say upon supposition, that the goods of Grace may
be said properly to be envied. But that envy is owing to ignorance, we need no
other proof than what David will furnish us with, who when he has told us,
That he envied the prosperity of the wicked, and Psalm. 73.
was grieved at the Goods which they enjoyed, he afterward lets us know the
cause of that envy in him, saying, So foolish was I and ignorant. And Verse. 22.
therefore, when once he understood things aright, he is so far from envying
them any longer, that he describes them as objects of the greatest Verse. 18,
19, 20.
pity.

2. Unbelief, is another cause of Envy. For he that believes God is
All-sufficient, and has enough of all Goods to bestow upon every man, and that
every gift of his is the issue of his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, will never
grieve to see another man possessed of it. As that Child who believes his
Father has enough left for him, and that he has done well in the disposal of
part of his Estate upon his Brethren, will never be troubled at it. The elder
Brother in the Parable would not have been disturbed at the provision which his
Father made for his younger Brother's welcome home, but that he thought what
was spent that way, properly belonged to him, and that his Father did ill in
bestowing it upon another. And therefore we read, That they who were moved with
envy, were the Jews which believed not. He that firmly believes Act. 17. 5.
that God in infinite Wisdom and Goodness, allots to every man his portion
here, and what is best for him as he most certainly does, all things considered;
as he will see no reason he has to grieve that he has less than another: so he will
see no cause he has to envy another man that has more.

3. Pride is another cause of Envy. For whatever good another possesses, the
proud man, having a great opinion of his own merit, thinks it properly belongs
to him. And hence he is grieved to see another enjoy that which he accounts his
own due. Envy ever accompanies Pride. And therefore the proudest persons are
the most envious, as was evident in the Pharisees, and is but too apparent in
those whose Principles and Practices argue them to be descended from them. They
that fancy themselves to be more holy than all others, can hardly be contented
that any others should enjoy what they account good but themselves And
therefore they would have all Temporal Power and Jurisdiction, and would
exclude all others, as carnal and formal, from having any thing to do with the
regiment of the World. They would dispose of Crowns and Scepters, imagining
that a right to Rule and Government is founded in Grace, and that Grace is no
where to be found but amongst themselves. Neither is this opinion to be found
only amongst a few, from whose weak and crazy heads, one can scarce expect much
better reasoning; But it is become the avowed Doctrine of a whole Church, whose
reason would soon detect the Error, if Pride and Interest, did not obstruct the
discovery of it. Hence they tell us, That the Pope has power to deprive that
Prince of his Kingdom, and to depose him from his Government, that deserts the
Romish Faith, and refuses obedience to the Apostolic See, Binii Council. de
Haereticis.
as is declared in the Lateran Council held under Innocent the Third.

But since God gives these outward things in common to bad as well as good men,
and furnishes them with natural endowments and abilities to accomplish those
ends that he looks at in bestowing them; And since bad men are often possessed
of them by just and lawful means, there being nothing either in Divine or
Humane Laws, to infringe their titles, but enough in both to warrant them; And
since it is impossible without Divine Revelation to know assuredly who has
grace, and who has not; And since bad men have just right, and lawful authority
to alienate what they have, and to vest others in it: sure he has need of a
strong Faith, that can believe Heresy, Idolatry, or any other sin, does null
any man's title to his worldly estate. But Pride makes men think they have a
right to all things; and therefore they are troubled to see any body else
possessed of them. Hence the Apostle tells us, Envy comes 1 Timothy 6. 4.
of pride.

4. Another cause of Envy, is Covetousness. For if I did not desire my
Neighbors Estate; I should not envy him the enjoyment of it. We do not grieve
at the absence of that, the presence of which we never wished for. Where love
and desire go not before, grief never follows after. The degree of Envy is
often answerable to the degree of Covetousness. And therefore as none were more
covetous, so none were more envious than the Pharisees. The Apostle tells us,
That the love of money is the 1 Timothy 6. 10.
root of all evil, and therefore of this of Envy: Which he seems not very
obscurely to insinuate, by saying, That while some coveted after i^, they
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Grief and Sorrow being ever the
concomitants of Envy.

5. Uncharitableness is another cause of Envy. For he that loves his Brother
will not grudge, but rather rejoice at any good that happens unto him. This the
Apostle asserts, telling us, That Charity envieth 1 Cor. 13. 4.
not. Where there is least of charity, there is most of Envy. And the Devil who
is most uncharitable, is the most envious; always grieving at any good that
happens to man, and endeavoring by all arts and devices imaginable, to deprive
him of it, and by all means to bring upon him all the evil he can. Doubtless if
God did not hold him back, and limit his power, he would soon destroy this lower
World, as envying those wicked men's any longer reprieve from the extremest
misery that inhabit it: And for fear that, by all the means and methods of Gods
Providence that he uses to that end, they should at last be brought to
repentance. And therefore that request mentioned in the Gospel, where the rich
Glutton in Hell is represented as petitioning Luke 16. 27. 28.
Abraham, that he would send Lazarus to his Father's house, unto his five
Brethren, that he might tell them what was befallen him, and what was necessary
for them to do in order to their being happy, lest when they died, they should
come to the same place of torment, where he was, did not proceed from charity
to his Brethren, there being nothing so lovely amongst the damned; But from
fear, lest they to whom he had given evil example, and with whom he was a
Companion in all Vice and Wickedness, should enhance his misery, and add to his
torment, when they were once come where he was.

6. Idleness is another cause of Envy. For when men are grown poor by sloth,
they begin to envy those who are grown rich by their industry. Solomon tells
us, That the soul of the sluggard desires, and Prove. 13. 4.
has nothing.

When he has by sloth and negligence wasted and spent his own, he then desires,
and envies his Neighbor's estate. An idle person is commonly envious, and
would be glad if some great misfortune might happen to his Neighbor's estate,
though he himself was never the better for it. So near approaches does the
envious person make toward Hell even in this life.

Thus if we look upon Envy either in its Nature, or in its Causes, we must
needs see enough to make us abhor it as a most detestable vice. Neither will
it appear otherwise, if we view it in its effects, since the Apostle tells us,
Where envying is, there is James 3. 16.
every evil work. Now those effects I shall rank into three Heads, because some
respect God, some other men, and some the envious person himself.

I. Some respect God, who is struck at by all sin, but has contempt offered him
by this sin of Envy.

1. For he that envies his Brother any good that he possesses, does in effect
find fault with God, as if he had not done well in so disposing of it. The
elder Brother in the Parable, who was troubled to see the provision made for
his younger Brother's entertainment, thereby blamed his Father who caused it.
Such an interpretation our Savior makes of their grutching at those on whom
the Master bestowed a days wages when they wrought but an hour, saying, Is
Matt. 20. 15.
it not lawful for me to do what I will with my own? implying that whoever he
be, that is troubled at any good which another injoys, does thereby find fault
with him that bestowed it upon him. And what are we that we should instruct
God, or blame him for his disposals? As if without us he knew not how rightly
to bestow his benefits. Which carries blasphemy with it, it being a charging
God with want of wisdom, and the fetting our selves above him.

2. He that envies his Brother any good that he possesses, does in effect
quarrel with the goodness of God, with that Attribute whereby he is propense and
inclinable to do good to all his Creatures. If the envious man might have his
mind, he would limit and bound his Goodness, and confine all the offices of it
wholly to himself, not liking, nor by any means approving that others should be
benefited by it. And so would have God cease to be what he is, to please him.
As if he were not infinitely Perfect, Lovely, and Desirable, not only in
respect to the transcendent excellency of his Nature; but also in respect to
his Munificence, Bounty, and Goodness toward his Creatures. So that you see,
the envious man would not only detract good* from his Neighbor, but also
Goodness from God, which is the cause of all that good which his Neighbor is
partaker of.

3. He that is troubled at any good that another possesses, goes about to
eclipse the glory of God. For every excellency, and every good that we see the
creature endued with, issues from God. As all the light the Moon has, it
borrows it of the Sun; so every good which the creature enjoys, is derived from
God, and points at its original from whence it came. He therefore that envies
any good that his Neighbor has, since it is a representation of God, and an
effect that manifests the cause from whence it sprang, would darken and obscure
the glory of God. How can he be said to desire the glory of God, that is grieved
to see it shine forth in its excellent luster, so as men might admire and adore
it? As he cannot be said to be a friend to a Prince's Honor who is troubled at
every thing he does, whereby to obtain to himself, an esteem from his people.
Besides, the envious person does as good as tell the World, that all the good
which God does to others, is not worth his thanks: and so he does what in him
lies, to hinder God from receiving that tribute of Praise that belongs unto
him, and not only would withdraw from men the things that are theirs; but would
withhold from God the things that are Gods.

4. He offers the greatest affront, and discovers the greatest enmity to God
imaginable. For when a man is slighted the more for being regarded by us, and
when the more kind we are to him, others stand at the greater distance from
him, we account it argues their great slight and contempt of us. Now, the more
kind God is to any one, the more does the envious man hate him. If God has done
well for him, the envious man presently wishes him ill. The more he has of the
expressions of God's, the less he shall be sure to have of his love: And the
more regard he seems to have from God, the less he shall have from him. For the
more good he receives from the bountiful hand of Heaven, the thicker are the
Arrows of envy shot at him. As Xenophon has observed in his Page 157.
Cyrus.

Thus we see how great an evil Envy is, if we consider the effects of it, as
they respect God. For it quarrels with his Wisdom, grieves at his goodness,
would detract from his glory, and deprive him of that Honor and Praise which
belongs unto him, and is to be paid him by all his creatures, and offers the
greatest affront, and discovers the greatest enmity to him.

II. Those effects of Envy which respect others, are also very evil.

1. As it makes a man curious to inquire into their concerns, and to pry into
their secrets, that he may find out something or other that he thinks
diminishes them. Plutarch has observed this to be the property (...). p. 518.
of Envy, That it is curious in searching into the misfortunes and mishaps of
others, and it is diligent to pick up all stories that seem to lessen them. For
since the envious man is troubled at any good which others enjoy, he is very
solicitous to acquaint himself with some of their evils to ease his own mind,
finding he cannot be at quiet in himself, so long as all things are well with
them whom he envies. And therefore he takes all occasions to inform himself of
any evil accident that happens either to their Estates or Persons, and that
which is their interest to keep secret and hid, he will use all the means he can
to get to the knowledge of, that so he may have the better advantage to
diminish and lessen them in the esteem of others.

2. Envy causes a man to wish the hurt of those whom he envies. For since he is
troubled at another's good, he must needs wish his hurt, because that would
remove the ground of his trouble. Neither will any past obligations make him of
a better mind; For he will overlook all kindnesses received. Nay, such
engagements as are founded in nature it self, are not strong enough to allay
the distemper, as is apparent, in that the nearest Allies are often stung with
it, and discover it against one another, as did Joseph's Brethren against him.

3. Another effect of Envy is, The rejoicing at any evil that befalls the
envied party, contrary to charity or love, which rejoiceth not in iniquity, 1
Cor. 13. 6.
but rather causes a man to grieve when any evil befalls his Brother, of what
kind soever it be. The envious man quite inverts the order of that command,
Romans 12. 15. For he weeps with them that rejoice, and rejoices with them that
weep. A temper so far from being Christian, that there is nothing of humanity in
it, but very much of the Devil. For if there be any thing that may be called
joy in Hell, doubtless, it is at the sin and misery of others whom they would draw
into the same condemnation with themselves. And yet there are but too many that
would be not only accounted Christians, but would be also thought to be in the
highest form amongst those that are called such, who imitate in this, those
infernal Spirits, who delight in nothing more, than in publishing the sins and
failings of their Brethren, especially of their Superiors. Hence they are
almost always, and in all companies, declaiming against Magistrates and
Ministers, and diverting themselves with telling stories of their supposed
miscarriages; whereas, if they did not envy their Authority, and Revenues, they
would be contented to let them pass without their Censure.

4. Another effect of Envy is, the endeavoring to do the envied party an ill
turn: And to be sure, since an envious man desires another's ill, he will
endeavor it what he can. And this is done,

1. By meditating his hurt, or projecting in his mind how to bring it to pass.
Thus when Readiness Envy was once stirred up against David, he thought of nothing
but his ruin, and was always plotting means to bring his purpose about. He
had an evil eye upon him ever after that he heard the Women 1 Samuel 18. 9.
in their Song ascribed unto David, more than unto himself. Sometimes he
designs to kill him with a Javelin; another time he thinks the best means he
can use to effect his purpose, is the giving him his Daughter Michal to Wife,
that she may be a snare unto him: Sometime he thinks to entrap him by secret
fraud; at other times, to assault him by open violence. And as David's fame
increased by his worthy Deeds, so did Readiness envy toward him. 1 Samuel 18. 29,
30. and Chapter 19. 1.
And therefore he was ever casting about how to destroy him.

But we need not have had recourse to ancient times, for proof that envy causes
men to meditate the hurt of those whom they envy, since our own will furnish us
with too many instances of such, whose heads are always working how the most
effectually to mischief those whom they are troubled to see in such prosperity,
who are restless not only to ruin single persons, but whole orders of men
amongst us, to the apparent wrong, or rather the subversion of both Church and
State; who are so stark mad with Envy and malice, that so they might but pull
down the house where those whom their fancies have created their enemies, do
inhabit, could be content themselves to perish in the ruins of it with them.

2. Another means whereby the envious person endeavors to do others an ill
turn, is by detraction. And therefore the Apostle has very fitly joined these
two together, Envies and all evil Speakings; 1 Pet. 2. 1.
because one is the Cause, the other is the Effect. Envy lessens others what it
can: It will not allow them to have so much of any thing as really they have,
that makes them appear considerable in the world. And they shall be sure to
have large additions, and greater degrees of that attributed to them, which
seems any way to diminish them, than justly belongs to them. Hence amongst
those who take their measures of a man's worth, by his riches; that is, amongst
the sillier sort of people, who know no better; the envious man will take great
pains, and use many arguments to persuade that those whom he envies, are
thought much wealthier than they are. Amongst those that are taken with Beauty,
he will say, they are not at all handsome. If he meets with them that value a man
for his Learning, he will assure them that he never had any thing that might
justly entitle him to it. If he be accounted wise, He Will tell them, the quite
contrary is true of him. If he be esteemed for his piety, that is so eminent
and perspicuous, that it cannot be hid, he will bring in some But, or other, that
shall shade and eclipse it. Hence also every little imperfection of Body shall
be termed a deformity; and every misfortune that happens to him, shall be
reckoned up, as so many instances of his own folly, as well as of Divine
Vengeance against him. His common failings shall be heightened into vices, and
because he is not more than a man, envy will represent him to be worse than a
beast. Hence spring those filthy Libels that are thrown about against
Magistrates, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, whereby their faults are
exaggerated, and foul reproaches cast upon them, on purpose to make them
despicable in the eyes of the people. If envy may be believed, Moses and Aaron,
God's Magistrate, and God's Minister, were proud, and took too much upon them,
and every one of the Congregation were as good as Numb. 16. 3.
they. But here indeed, Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, were more charitable and
ingenuous than some who succeed them, in that they would allow Moses and Aaron to
be holy as well as themselves, and did not wholly appropriate it to their own
Party.

3. By l^ying violent hands, or offering open force against the envied party.
This sin of Envy was the cause of the first Murder in the World, I mean, that
of Abel's. And it has been a fruitful Mother of many more since. 'Twas that
which caused our Savior's death; For the Priests delivered him for envy. Matt.
27. 18. 18.
And some whose greatest crimes were their Estates and Honors, have drunk of
the same Cup in the memory of many of us, and therefore we may guess that Envy
served it up. So sitly does the Apostle Gal. 5. 21.
place murders after envyings. And indeed, Envy ever banishes love out of the
heart, and is accompanied with some degree of hatred. And he that hates his
Brother is a murderer, and is like to be proceeded against as such at the great
day, though he do not actually take away his life. For as the malicious intent
or the designing and compassing the death of the Prince is Treason by our Law,
and all overt Acts are looked upon only as evidences that manifest it; so the
hating of our Brother in our hearts is murder, and the laying violent hands on
him, and actually killing him, only argues the murderous intent to men, who
otherwise are not able to know certainly our hearts. But God wants none of
these evidences, since he knows what is in man, and needs not the help of the
Effects, to lead him to the knowledge of the Cause. Thus we see the effects of
Envy as they respect others, or God and our Brethren, and from thence may
understand the evil of it.

3. But the truth is, The effects of Envy are most pernicious and deadly to the
envious man himself. For God is not hurt by it. He that shoots an Arrow Job 35.
6.
up to Heaven, is likely enough to have it fall upon his own pate; And since
Envy is levelled against the good of our Brother, which God is the Author of,
it is most likely he will either secure him in the possession of his own gift, or
else make up the loss of it to him some other way. Thus though the envy of
Joseph's Brethren prevailed so far, as to make him leave his own Country; yet
God took care to advance Act. 7. 9.
him in Pharaoh's Court. Certainly the envious person himself has the worst of
it, or is hurt most by it.

1. For it has a most pernicious effect both upon his body and mind, causing
leanness and paleness to his Body. As the Poet has observed, He Is sick because
Hor. Ep. Lib. 1. Ep. 2.
his Brother's well, and the better it is with another, the worse it is with him.
As his Brother increases in his Fortunes, in the same degree he decreases in
his Comforts. For it creates great disturbance, trouble, and grief to his mind.
Solomon calls it, the rottenness Prove. 14. 30. Invidia Siculi non invenere
Tyranni Majus tormentum. ibid.
of the bones. And the Satyrist says, It Is a most fretting tormenting Disease,
such as will let the mind enjoy no quiet, that is infested with it.

2. By this means we are most likely to lose the favor of men. For he that
envies his Brother, will be apt at some time or other to detract from him, and
speak against him, and that will lose him in the esteem of those that hear him.
For they that are at present unconcerned in the envious man's detractions, will
think with themselves they know not how soon they may be so, since he may have
the same Motives to speak against them hereafter, as he has now to speak
against others. And hence they presently conceive a very mean opinion of him,
and that most deservedly, because they see him set against all that is good in
others. And therefore Plutarch compares Envy to the Cantharides, who destroy
(...), etc. Plut. de Invid.
the ripest Fruits, and fullest blown Roses; it is levelled against the highest
worth and greatest good.

3. By this means we certainly exclude our selves the favor of God; who cannot
choose but be offended with us for being troubled and grieved at his disposals,
and for loving them the less to whom he is most kind and bountiful. Besides,
envy is the Parent of many other evils, as you have heard, and so involves us
in the greater guilt, and consequently must needs render us the more hateful in
the sight of God. Since his love is proportioned to the degree of goodness
which he beholds in men, so will his hate to the degree of evil.

4. This sin of Envy will exclude a man Heaven, as well as any other. For proof
of which, you need read only what is written (Gal. 5. 21.) Where the Apostle
reckons envyings amongst the works of the flesh, and then adds; Of the which I
tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Mere self-love therefore, one
would think, should, if there wanted other Motives, prevail effectually with
men to lay down this filthy passion, and to be as fearful of admitting it into
their bosoms, as they would be of a Thief into their houses, who comes to rob
them of all that is valuable in them; And to be as careful of suppressing it, as
they would be of fire, that (if it be let alone) would wast and devour all
before it.

But besides what has been said already. I might add,

1. That it is a base Vice, as appears by every one's being ashamed to own it.
There being some that will own other sins; but every one endeavors to hide
this.

2. It Is a Vice highly unjust, since it is so far from giving others their due,
that it pursues them with the greatest hatred, scorn, and reproach, who deserve
the best. Hence the Moralist tells us, That we cannot envy any one justly.
There may some seeming (...).
justice appear in our hatred, because the party may have done us an injury:
But there can be none in our Envy, because it is levelled against him that has
done us none. And it is for his good, not for his evil, that he is envied. It Is
true, in one sense, it may be (...). Orat. 27.
said to be just (as Gregory Nazianzen has observed) because it is a means to
destroy him who fosters and cherishes so foul a Vice.

3. It Is of a vast extent, and is not to be confined, bearing ill to all the
fortunate and happy. Hen^e that ingenious Moralist, before named, says, It Is a
kind of infinite Thing, like an inflammation (...).
in the Eye, that causes it to be disturbed at every light it sees.

4. It Is most dangerous to them that are the objects of it. An envious man
being a worse enemy than he that is openly and professedly so, because an open
enemy strikes at us when our faces are toward him; but an envious man takes
his advantages of doing us a mischief when we are least aware of him, skulking
in secret, so that we cannot ward for our selves, which is most ingenerous in
it self, and most deadly in its effects. For he wounds the sorest, who is
(...). Greg. Naz. Orat. 32.
not thought to have any design of hurting us. And consequently, it hurting the
more, and being the more deadly, must needs be the more sinful.

5. It Is a foolish Vice. For, besides that the envious person receives real
damage by it in his body and mind, loses the esteem of men, and favor of God,
which is ten thousand times more valuable, and excludes himself Heaven: if he
did rejoice at all the good that happens to another, he might certainly be some
gainer by it himself, since that very joy would be more advantageous to him,
than the grief which the envious man has. And all those goods that another is
possessed of, might some way or other be to his profit; from his wisdom he
might have good counsel, from his piety, good example, from his Estate relief,
if ever he should come to want it. And many other ways one may be advantaged
by the good which another is possessed of. Hence it is, that S. Augustine
says, Take away envy, and what I have is Toll invidiam, and tuum est quod
babe^; Toll invidi^m, and meum est quod babes, in Psalm. 139.
thine, and what thou have is mine. But the envious man loses the benefit of
all.

And therefore having thus opened the nature of the disease, having taken an
impartial view of it, both in its Causes, and in its Effects; charity requires,
that I should in the next place propose what is proper and sovereign, in order
to the remedy and cure of it. For I account when the Physician has faithfully
and plainly demonstrated the nature of the Malady, with the fatal and deadly
consequences of it, unless it be timely removed, He has done sufficient to
persuade the Patient to make use of those remedies which he shall rationally
offer as proper to expel it.

Now having already found out the Causes, it is but removing them, and the Cure
will be effected.

1. Therefore, endeavor after a conviction of the vanity and emptiness of all
worldly goods. And indeed, if we did not think them better than they are, we
should envy no man the possession of them. If a man had as much of them as he
desired, he might still be miserable. When a man's going into another World,
it is but little ease to his mind to think how well he is provided for in this.
They are often the ruin of wicked men, and they are snares and temptations to
them that are good. For one man that is profited, I am persuaded that ten are
hurt by them. Since therefore they are so hazardous in the enjoyment, there is
no reason we should envy them that have them. David saw them that had most of
them, to stand in slippery places. Besides, we know not how much care,
solicitousness, pains, attendance, flattery, etc. they cost some of them, so as
that we'd be loath to purchase them.

2. Let us cherish Humility, and endeavor after a mean opinion of our selves;
and then we shall never think much at any good that happens to another, and
shall account our selves to have beyond our desert already. He that thinks
meanly of himself, will conclude, that God deals graciously with him, in that
he gives him any thing. If he thinks himself to be less than the least of all
God's mercies, the least of his mercies will please him.

3. Have a love for, and bear good will to all men, and think charitably of
them, unless there be evident cause to the contrary. For he that loves his
Neighbor will not grieve, but be glad of any good that happens unto him. And
if we bear him good will, and desire his good, 'twill rejoice us to see it. And
if we think charitably of him, we shall think he deserves it.

4. Study contentment. Consider in how much better circumstances you are, than
many others who have deserved as well, and that your condition whatever it be,
is such as God accounts the best for you. This is necessary, For he that looks
with murmuring and re^^^ng on his own condition, is apt to look with envy on
other men's. And he that is pleased with his own condition, will never be
troubled to see his Neighbor's better.

5. Endeavor after a firm assent to all that God has reyealed of himself to
the World. He has told us, That he is most Wise, Powerful, and Gracious,
inclinable to do good to his Creatures: If we did believe him to be so, instead
of envying what others enjoy, we should approve of his disposals to them, and
sue to him for what we want our selves, resting our selves satisfied in what it
is his pleasure to do to us or with us.

6. Be always well employed. This is the way of making us become the envy of
others, and of raising us to such a condition that we shall not have so great
temptation to envy them. But Solomon tells us, Idleness will cloth a man with
rags; and then he is most likely to envy those that go better clad. Idleness
brings a man to want, and then he is ready to envy his Neighbor's plenty.

7. To all these let us add, our hearty and humble supplications to Almighty
God, who is the giver of all good things, that he would endue us with such a
love to our Brethren, as will extirpate and root all envy out of our hearts;
that he would so thoroughly convince us of the fading vanity of all worldly
goods, that we may neither eagerly desire them for our selves, nor be grieved
when we see others enjoy them, having far better things in our eye, than this
World can afford us. Let us beg of him a humble heart, that we may ever think
our selves to have beyond our desert, may submit our selves wholly to his
disposals, and may esteem others better, and more deserving than our selves,
and in whatever state we are, we may be therewith content; Being persuaded that
as he is All-sufficient, so whatever his wisdom sees best for us, his Goodness
will communicate to us, if we use our own sincere endeavors, and are not
wanting to our selves in the use of those means which are necessary in order to
those supplies which we expect from his hands.

FINIS.

