Charles R.

CHarles the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, Defender of the Faith etc. To all Our loving Subjects, of what
degree, condition, or quality soever, within Our Kingdoms and Dominions,
Greeting: Whereas it has been manifested unto Us, that Our trusty and
well-beloved Elias Ashmole Esquire Windesor Herald at Arms, has for fifteen years
past applied himself to the search and study of things, relating to the Honor
of Our most Noble Order of the Garter, and has at his great charge, and
expense of time, now completed a Book, Entitled, The Institution, Laws, and
Ceremonies of the said most Noble Order; collected and digested into one Body,
and adorned with variety of Sculpture; whose pains therein, as it is greatly to
Our satisfaction, so can We no less, for his past industry and future
encouragement, in his further progress of these Studies, but express Our good
liking and approbation thereof: Know ye therefore, That it is Our Royal
Pleasure, and We do by these presents, upon the humble request of the said
Elias Ashmole, not only give him leave and license to Print the said Book, but
strictly charge, prohibit, and forbid all our Subjects, to reprint within this
Our Kingdom, the said Book in any Volume, or any part thereof, or any
Abridgment of the Laws or Ceremonies therein contained, or to copy or
counterfeit any the Sculptures or Ingravements belonging thereunto, or to
import, buy, vend, utter, or distribute any Copies or Exemplaries of the same,
reprinted beyond the Seas, within the term of fifteen years, next ensuing the
publishing thereof, without the consent and approbation of the said Elias
Ashmole, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns, as they and every of them so
offending, will answer the contrary at their utmost perils: Whereof, as well the
Wardens and Company of Stationers of our City of London, the Farmers,
Commissioners, and Officers of Our Customs, as all other Our Officers and
Ministers whom it may concern, are to take particular notice, that due
obedience be given to this Our Royal Command, herein declared.

Given under Our Signet and Sign Manual, at Our Court at Whitehall, the 31. day
of March, in the 22. Year of Our Reign, 1670. By his Majesty's Command
Arlington.

The most High most Excellent and most Mighty Monarch Charles the Second by the
Grace of God King of Great Britain France and Ireland Defender of the Faith
and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

(...) Sherwin sculpsit

THE INSTITUTION. Laws and Ceremonies Of the most NOBLE ORDER OF THE GARTER.

Collected and digested into one Body BY ELIAS ASHMOLE of the Middle Temple Esquire
WINDESOR Herald at Arms.

A Work furnished with variety of matter, relating to HONOR and NOBLESSE.

LONDON, Printed by I. Macock, for Nathanael Brook at the Angel in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange, MDCLXXII.

AUGUSTISSIMO POTENTISSIMOQUE MONARCHAE CAROLO II D. G. MAGNAE BRITANNIAE
FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE REGI FIDEI DEFENSORI ET SUPREMO NOBILISSIMI MILITARIS
ORDINIS GARTERII

HOS ORDINIS COMMENTARIOS HUMILLIME D. D. ELIAS ASHMOLE FECIALIS WINDESOR.

PREFACE.
IT is not to be attributed only to Custom, but sometimes it is necessary, in
order to the Readers greater convenience, that Books are commonly recommended
to their perusal, by somewhat prefatory, as Epistles, etc. the use of them
being chiefly, to render an account of what they contain, and by a short
Antipast, to represent to them, what they are likely to find in the
Entertainment of the whole Work. This consideration has obliged me to a
compliance with others, and to acquaint my Reader, what occasioned my engaging
upon this Subject, and what I have done therein.

As I ever had a great veneration for the most Noble Order of the Garter, so
must it needs be imagined, that I was accordingly much concerned, in the late
unhappy times, to see the honor of it trampled on, and it self sunk into a very
low esteem among us. That re^lection put me upon thoughts, not only of doing
something, that might inform the world of the Nobleness of its Institution, and
the Glory which in process of time it acquired, both at home and abroad; but
also of drawing up, in the nature of a Formulary, both the Legal and Ceremonial
part thereof, for the better conduct of such as might be therein afterward
concerned, in case the Eclipse, it then waded under in our Horizon, should
prove of so long continuance, as that many occurrences, worthy of knowledge,
might come to be in a manner forgotten.

Upon the first communication of my design, to the late Reverend Doctor
Christopher Wren, Register of the said Order, it received not only his full
approbation, but also his ready assistance in the use of the Annals thereof,
then in his custody: From those, and other authentic Manuscripts and
Autographs, particularly relating to the Order, and a painful and chargeable
search of our public Records, I had collected the greatest part of my
Materials, before the happy Restoration of his now Majesty the present
Sovereign of this most Noble Order; who, being afterward acquainted with what
I had done, was most graciously pleased to countenance it, and encourage me in
the prosecution thereof.

The Work in general contains an Historical account of the Laws and Ceremonies
of the said most Noble Order; but more particularly, its Institution, the
manner and order observed in Elections, Investitures, and Installations of
Knights, the Holding of Chapters, Celebration of Festivals, the Formality of
Proceedings, the Magnificence of Embassies sent with the Habit, to Stranger
Kings and Princes; in sum, all other things relative to the Order. In the
illustration whereof, I have inserted (where they properly occurred) the most
eminent and considerable Cases, which have required and received discu^sion in
Chapters, the determinations thereupon becoming Rules and Laws; Whence it may
be observed, that the Foundation and Superstructures of the Order, were laid
and raised upon the exactest Rules of Honor. And to supply the failer and
defects of the Annals, I have been forced to make use of Memorials and
Relations, yet such as were taken notice of, and committed to writing, either
by some of the Officers of the Order, or those of Arms, during the times of
their attendance on the Service of the Order, and consequently of sufficient
authority for me to rely on.

To usher in those, I have given a Prospect of Knighthood in General, of the
several Orders of Knighthood, as also of the Antiquity of the Castle and
College of Windesor; and closed all, with the Honors, Martial Employments, and
famous Actions, the Matches and Issues of the Founder, and first
Knights-Companions, as also a perfect Catalogue of their Successors to this
very present. All which are adorned with variety of Sculptures, properly
relating to the several parts of the Work: But the following Synopsis of its
whole Contexture, and the Heads of the Chapters* will excuse a further
enlargement here.

I shall with submi^sion add, That this noble Subject, having not been (at some
times) heedfully looked into, some irregularities have happened, on which I
have made the less adnimadversion, in regard it was my desire, by proceeding
upon what is purely derived from the Root, to show wherein the right Rule,
either Legal or Ceremonial, has been observed (that it may still be pursued,
till thought ^it to be altered) and as little as may be, where broken: to the
end also, that a careful distinction may be made between matter of Law, and
matter of Fact; lest otherwise, an Error may hereafter come to be vouched for a
Precedent.

And whereas some passages may seem of little importance, it is to be
considered, That the ensuing Discourse, is limited to an account only of
certain peculiar Laws and Ceremonies of Honor, wherein sundry minute things
(occasionally falling in) are not only pardoned, but also allowable, yea very
necessary to be mentioned; in regard they promote their satisfaction, who are
more particularly concerned therein. And this will be yet the rather excusable,
if another thing, which has occasioned no small inconvenience, be reflected
on: to wit, The omission or negligence of many Writers in setting down
Occurrences, merely upon the score of their being then fresh in most men's
memories; by which means, Posterity has not only been deprived of many
passages, whereof it would gladly have been informed, but the elaborate
disquisitions of both Critics and Antiquaries have proved fruitless, and of
little advantage, and the things themselves lie yet buried in obscurity.

Lastly, to explicate some few Abbreviations in the Margent, it is to be
observed, that where I cite the Annals of the Order, they are thus noted. Lib.
N. to be read Liber Niger, Lib. C. Liber Caeruleus, R. Rubeus, and Carol.
Carolinus. So also the Collections or Manuscripts of some that have been, or
now are Officers of Arms (whose frequent quotations would otherwise have too
much swelled the Margent) being thus abbreviated. E. W. G. signify Edwardus
Walker Garter, R. C. Cl. Robertus Cook Clarenceux, W. le N. Cl. Willielmus le
Neve Clarenceux, W. D. N. Willielmus Dugdale Norroy, A. V. W. Augustinus
Vincent Windesor, and G. O. Y. Georgius Owen York. The rest may be easily
understood.

E. A.

THE CONTENTS Of the CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. Of Knighthood in general.
Sect. I. Of Virtue and Honor. Page 1. II. The Antiquity of Knighthood. 5. III.
Of the Foundation of the Equestrian Order among the Romans. 6. IV. Of the
Modern D^grees of Knighthood. 12. V. The Etymology of Eques, Miles, Chevalier,
Ritter, and Sir. 17. VI. The Ensigns of the Equestrian Order among the Romans.
21. VII. The Ensigns and Ornaments of Knighthood among other Nations. 27. VIII.
Qualifications for Knighthood. 31. IX. The various Ceremonies used at the
conferring of Knighthood. 36. X. Of the Dignity, Honor, and Renown of
Knighthood. 43.
CHAP. II. Of the Religious Orders of Knighthood in Christ^ndom.
Sect. I. Of ancient Societies, analogous to the Orders of Knighthood. Page 47.
II. The Christian Institution of Knightly Orders. 48. III. The Division of
Knightly Orders into Religious and Military. 49. IV. Of Ecclesiastical
Foundations dependan^ upon Military Orders. 50. V. A brief account of the
Religious Orders of Knighthood. 51.
CHAP. III. An Account of the Orders absolutely Military.
Sect. I. The Order of Knights of the Round Table. etc. Page 94. II. Of Knights
in the West Indies. 124. III. The Feminine Cavaliers of the Torch in Tortosa.
125.
CHAP. IV. Of the Castle, Chapel, and College of Windesor.
Sect. I. Of the Castle of Windesor. Page 127. II. Of the Chapel of St.
George. 135. III. The Foundation of the College within the Chapel. 152. IV.
Of the Dean, Canons, Petty-Canons, Clerks and Choristers. 153. V. Of the
Alms-Knights. 158. VI. Of other Officers of the College. 166. VII. Of the
Endowment of the College. 167. VIII. Of the Privileges of the Chapel and
College. 174.
CHAP. V. The Institution of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
Sect. I. The several Opinions touching the Occasion of its Institution. Page
178. II. The true Cause asserted. 181. III. The Time when the Order was
Instituted. 185. IV. Of the Patrons of the Order. 187. V. The Honor and
Reputation thereof. 189.
CHAP. VI. The Statutes and Annals of the Order.
Sect. I. Of the Statutes of Institution. Page 190. II. Of th^se other Bodies
of Statutes since established. 191. III. Several Endeavors for Reforming the
Statutes, since the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. 194. IV. Of the Annals of
the Order. 198.
CHAP. VII. The Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
Sect. I. Of the Garter. Page 202. II. Of the Mantle. 208. III. Of the Surcoat.
211. IV. Of the Hood and Cap. 214. V. The Robes anciently assigned to the Queen
and great Ladies. 217. VI. Of Collars in general. 218. VII. The Collar of the
Order. 220. VIII. Collars of SS. 224. IX. The lesser George. 226. X. When the
Habit, or part of it, ought to be worn. 231.
CHAP. VIII. The Officers appointed for the Service of the Order.
Sect. I. The Prelate's Institution, his Oath, Robe, and Privileges. Page 234.
II. The Institution of the Chancellor's Office, his Oath, Robe, Badge, and
Pension. 237. III. The Register's Institution, Oath, Mantle, Badge,
Privileges, and Pension. 248. IV. Garter's Institution, Oath, Mantle, Ensign,
Badge, Privileges, and Pension. 252. V. Institution of the Black Rod's Office,
his Oath, Habit, Ensign, Badge, Privileges, and Pension. 256. VI. The Payment
of the Officers Pensions upon the new Establishment. 258. VII. The Execution of
these Offices by Deputies. 260.
CHAP. IX. The Election of a Knight into the Order.
Sect. I. Of Summons to the Election. Page 262. II. The Place of Assembly. 264.
III. The Number of Knights that constitute a Chapter. 265. IV. Dispensation for
want of a full Number. 266. V. Of Opening the Chapter. 268. VI. That Knights
only present in Chapter ought to nominate. 269. VII. Of the Number,
Qualifications, and Degrees of the Persons to be nominated. 271. VIII. Of the
Scruteny, and by whom it ought to be taken. 276. IX. The Time when. 278. X. The
Manner and Order of it. 279. XI. The Presentation of it to the Sovereign. 283.
XII. His Considerations thereupon referring to the Qualification of each Person
to be Elected. 284. XIII. Of other Inducements for Election. 290. XIV. That the
Sovereign only does Elect. 291. XV. The Scruteny ought to be entered among the
Annals. 292. XVI. The Scruteny ought not to be viewed until it be entered. 293.
XVII. Of Scrutenies taken, yet no Election made. 294. XVIII. The Penalties
inflicted on Knights-Companions, who appear not at an Election. 295.
CHAP. X. The Investiture of a Knight-Subject with the Garter and George.
Sect. I. The Notice given to a Knight Subject of his Election. 296. II. His
Reception into the Chapter House. 298. III. The Ceremonies of Investiture with
the Garter and George. 299. IV. Of sending the Garter and George to an Elect
Knight-Subject. 302. V. The Manner of a Knights Investiture. 308. VI.
Allowances and Rewards given to Garter for his Service in this Employment. 311.
CHAP. XI. Of Preparations for the Personal Installation of a Knight.
Sect. I. That Installation gives the Title of Founder. Page 312. II. Of the
Time and Place appointed for Installation. 313. III. Of Commissions for
Installation. 314. IV. Letters of Summons. 315. V. Warrants for the Livery of
the Order. 316. VI. The Removal of Achievements and Plates. ibid. VII.
Preparations made by the Knight Elect. 334.
CHAP. XII. The Personal Installation of a Knight-Subject.
I. Of the Cavalcade to Windesor. Page 338. II. The Offering in the Chapel, on
the Eve of the Installation. 342. III. The Supper on the Eve. 344. IV. The
Order in Proceeding to the Chapter House. ibid. V. The Ceremonies performed in
the Chapter House. 350. VI. The Proceeding into the Choire. 352. VII. The
Ceremonies of Installation. 354. VIII. The Order observed when two or more
Knights are Installed in one day. 360. IX. The Offering of Gold and Silver.
364. X. Of the Grand Dinner at the Installation. ib. XI. Of setting up the
Knights Achievements. 367.
CHAP. XIII. The Installation of a Knight Subject by Proxy.
Sect. I. The Original Cause of making Proxies. 372. II. Letters of
Procuration. Page 373. III. Qualifications of a Proxy. 375. IV. Preparations
for Installation. ibid. V. Proceeding to the Chapter House. 377. VI.
Transactions in it. ibid. VII. Proceeding to the Choire. 378. VIII. Ceremonies
performed there. ibid. IX. The Grand Dinner. 380.
CHAP. XIV. The Signification of Election to Strangers.
Sect. I. Within what time, and in what manner Certificate is made of their
Election. 381. II. Of Notice given of an Election, before sending the Habit.
384. III. Notice of Election sent with the Habit. ibid. IV. Certificate of
Acceptance. 386. V. Of an Election not accepted of. 387.
CHAP. XV. The Investiture of Strangers with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
Sect. I. The Time for sending the Habit and Ensigns unlimited. Page 389. II.
Preparations made for the Legation. 390. III. The Ceremonies of Investiture.
399. IV. Certificates of having received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
432.
CHAP. XVI. The Installation of a Stranger by Proxy.
Sect. I. Touching the Choice and Nomination of a Proxy. Page 434. II. The
Proctor's Qualifications. 437. III. His Letters of Procuration. 439. IV. Of the
Proctor's Reception. ibid. V. The Preparations for Installation. 440. VI. The
Proctor's Cavalcade to Windesor. 441. VII. Supper after his Arrival there. 442.
VIII. Of the Proceeding to the Chapter House. 443. IX. The Ceremonies performed
therein. 444. X. Of the Proceeding to the Choire. 447. XI. The Ceremonies of
Installation. 448. XII. The Proctor's Offering. 452. XIII. The Dinner. 454.
CHAP. XVII. The Duties and Fees Payable by the Knights-Companrons at their
Installations.
Sect. I. Touching the Fees due to the College of Windesor. Page 455. II. Fees
due to the Register, Garter, Black-Rod and Officers of Arms. 458. III. Fees
belonging to other of the Sovereign's Servants. 462. IV. Fees payable for
Strangers. 463.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the Grand Feast of the Order.
Sect. I. The Grand Feast appointed to be annually celebrated on St. George's
day. Page 467. II. The Anniversary of St. George fixed by the Church unto the
23. of April. 468. III. St. George's day made Festum duplex. 469. IV. The Place
for celebrating the Grand Feast, assigned to Windesor-Castle. 471. V. St.
George's day kept apart from the Grand Feast, and how then observed. Ibid. VI.
The Grand Feast neglected by King Edward the Sixth. 473. VII. Removed from
Windesor by Queen Elizabeth. 474. VIII. Of Prorogation of the Grand Feast. 475.
IX. Of Commissions for Prorogation. 480. X. That the Grand Feast ought to be
celebrated once every year. 482.
CHAP. XIX. Of Preparations for the Grand Feast of the Order.
Sect. I. Of Letters giving notice of the Time and Place. Page 484. II. Of
Dispensations for not attending at the Grand Feast. 485. III. Of Commissions of
Lieutenancy and Assistance. 487. IV. Warrants for the Removal of Achievements.
Ibid. V. Scutcheons of Arms and Styles. Ibid. VI. Of adorning the Chapel. 490.
VII. The furnishing of St. George's Hall. 500. VIII. Officers and Servants
appointed to attend at the Grand Feast. 502.
CHAP. XX. The Order of the Ceremonies on the Eve of the Grand Feast.
Sect. I. Of the beginning of the Grand Feast. Page 504. II. Of setting the
Proceeding in order. 509. III. Of Proceeding to the Chapter House. 516. IV. Of
the Opening of the Chapter. 519. V. Transactions in the Chapter held before the
first Vespers. 520. VI. The Ceremonies relating to the first Vespers. 538. VII.
The Supper on the Eve. 544.
CHAP. XXI. The Order of the Ceremonies on the Feast Day.
Sect. I. The Proceeding to the Chapel in the Morning. Page 547. II. The
Proceeding to the second Service. 550. III. Of the Grand Procession. 551. IV.
The Order of the second Service. 576. V. The Offering of Gold and Silver. 580.
VI. The Return to the Presence. 587. VII. Of the Dinner on the Feast Day. 588.
VIII. The Ceremonies belonging to the second Vespers. 597. IX. Of the Supper on
the Evening of the Feast Day. 598.
CHAP. XXII. The Ceremonies observed on the last Day of the Feast.
Sect. I. Of Proceeding to the Chapter House in the Morning. Page 599. II. Of
the Elect Knights Proceeding into the Choire. 600. III. Of the Ceremonies
performed at Divine Service. 601. IV. The Diets at some of the Grand Feasts.
602.
CHAP. XXIII. The Observation of the Grand Feast by Absent Knights.
Sect. I. Absent Knights enjoined to observe the Grand Feast. Page 613. II.
More particular Directions for their Observation of it. 614. III. How to be
observed in case of Sickness. 616. IV. In what manner the Feast has been
observed by Absent Knights. ibid. V. Dispensation for Absence granted during
life. 619.
CHAP. XXIV. The Degradation of a Knight-Companion.
Sect. I. Of the Degradation of a Knight-Batchellor. Page 620. II. The manner
of Degrading a Knight-Companion of the Garter 621. III. Of Restoration into
the Order after Degradation. 622.
CHAP. XXV. Honors paid to Deceased Knights-Companions.
Sect. I. Of the Celebration heretofore of Masses, for defunct
Knights-Companions. Page 623. II. Of fixing on the Stalls, Plates of their
Arms, and Styles. 627. III. The Offering of Achievements. 629. IV. Of
depositing the deceased Knights Mantles in the Chapter House. 636.
CHAP. XXVI. Of the Founder, the first Knights-Companions and their Successors.
Sect. I. Of what Number they consisted. Page 642. II. A short view of the
Founder's Wars. 643. III. Some account of the first 25 Knights-Companions. 670.
IV. A Catalogue of their Successors. 708.
HONI^ SOIT QVI^ MAL^ Y^ PENSE^
blazon or coat of arms
CHAP. I. OF Knighthood in general.
SECT. I. Of Virtue and Honor.
IT has been the Practice of all well-governed Kingdoms and States, Virtue is
encouraged by Reward.
to encourage Merit by Reward. Merit consists in the performance of some
virtuous Action, directed to the Public good. As Virtue is either Military or
Civil; so Reward is differently distributed, either by Honor or Profit: to the
end, each sort of Virtue may have its proper and suitable Reward.

And though in a moral and strict sense, Virtue is to be accounted its own
Reward; yet in regard there are very many, who not so much from a virtuous
Principle, as to obtain Wealth or Honor, are drawn ofttimes to act
meritoriously; therefore it was provided, by the wisest Founders of Empires,
and Commonwealths, to take special care, no less for the encouragement of
well-doing (by setting up Reward as a Prize, for brave endeavors to aim at,
prosecute and carry; and consequently to exalt men according to their merit)
then for the punishment of vicious and ignoble actions: insomuch that Socrates
justly concluded that City to be best governed, wherein, Br^s. in Plat^^em, l.
^* c. ^.
the good are cherisht, and the bad chastis'd.

Nor does it a little concern the interest of a Nation, that noble incitements
to Virtue be proposed to valiant minds, wherewith being inflamed, they may
always shine forth, in some action, worthy themselves: since Rewards are
powerful (even to wonder) to excite and stir up the force and vigor of gallant
Spirits, to very high degrees of performance; and from the example of our
Ancestors, every one is apt to persuade himself, that there is nothing which
may not be attempted, and effected by endeavor and manly courage.

As touching civil Virtues or Faculties (to wit, Justice, Gravity, knowledge in
the Laws, and the like) they being Qualifications in order to Magistracy, and
Offices of Trust and Credit, and rewardable by the advantages, estimation, and
authority accruing thereby; come not directly within the limits of our present
discourse.

Honor the reward of milltary Virtue.
Virtue (in the opinion of Epist. 120.
Phaleris,) is alone excellent, and all other things but merely Fortune. Its
reward and end (says Ethic. l. 1.
Aristotle) is something excellently good, divine and blessed, according to
that of De situ Orbis.
Dionys^us Aser, Virtue immortal honor ever gains. But the proper Reward of
military Virtue (which comprehends both Fortitude and Conduct, and of which we
only treat) is Honor: Arist. Ethica. l. 4.
Honor is the greatest of exterior goods, and being the object of a nobler
ambition, than Wealth or Profit, is therefore the aim of that Virtue, to wit
Valor, which springs from a more generous Spirit. For all men of Courage (nay
even the Pusillanimous themselves) are in some sort, touched with a sense and
desire of Glory and Fame.

So that (as is already intimated) of all virtuous Acts, military Prowess, and
valiant Achievements, have rendered men capable of the highest Honors and
Advancements: they being principally invited, by the allurements of such
Rewards, to make the greater discoveries of their Virtue and Fortitude, in the
performance of noble Exploits.

But that Fame might not lose it self, in a general and unbounded Notion,
therefore at length it was thought fit, to reduce Honor into Form and Order, by
investing the Person meriting with some particular term, title, or appellation
of Excellence; and this is the very source and original of all Nobility, and of
all those Dignities and honorable Titles, which being transmitted from the
first Atchievers to their Successors, through several Ages, remain at this day
in their posterity, as lasting Monuments of the glory of their Ancestors. Among
which, Knighthood, as it has been esteemed the Reward most suitable to worthy
and great Virtue, so has it been accounted the chief and primary Honor among
many Nations.

Virtue and Honor deified by the Romans, who built them Temples.
The Romans had so great an esteem of Honor and Virtue, that they deified them,
and dedicated Temples to their Worship; the chief and principal was that which
Live. l. 27. c. 27. edit. Prancof. ad Moen. 1628. Vide etiam Plutarch. in vita
ipsius Marcelli.
Marcellus vowed to erect, when he was at Clastidium, in the Gaulick War: (and
afterward built, with the Idem Plutarch. in vita praef. Marcei.
spoils he got in the Wars of Sicilie) but the Dedication thereof was hindered
by the Priests, who affirmed that one Temple could not be rightly dedicated
unto two Deities; and thereupon there was another Chapel built for Virtue, and
joined to the fore-end thereof: and albeit Marcellus hastened the erection, yet
he lived not to dedicate the same, nevertheless that was afterward done by his
Guido Panciroll. de 14 Reg. Vrbis Romae.
Son.

This Temple stood near to the Gate Topograph. Romae, ex Maliano. c. 73. and
133. Vide p^rr^ Ioh. Rosin. Antiq. Romans cap. 18.
Capena, upon the Appian way, and was rather according to Vides Virtutis
Templum, vides Honoris, a Marco Marcello renovatum, quod multi^ ante annis erat
bello Lig^stico a Quinto Maximo dedicatum. De Not. Deor. l. 2. p. 192. edit.
Basil. 1534.
Cicero, but renewed or re-edified by Marcellus (as his was by the Emperor
Pinu^ and Actius Priscus, qui Honoris and Virtutis aedes Imperatori Vespasiano
Augusto restituenti pinxerunt. Plin. l. 35. c. 10. sub fine.
Vespasian) for that many years before, it had been dedicated by Q. Maximus.

In this structure, the Temple of Virtue was contiguous to that of Honor, and
so situate, that there was no other passage thereunto, but through the Temple
of Virtue; thereby mystically showing and admonishing, That Honor was not to be
attained by any other ways then by Virtue; That Virtue was as the Guardian of
Honor; and those that undertook any notable Action, Neminem honorius Tem^lum
ingredi (...), nisi pri^^ Virtutis esset ^ngressus. A^gust. de civit. Dei.
unless they carried themselves valiantly, and squared their actions by the
Rule of Virtue, could make no entrance into future Honor.

And because the Structure of this Temple, and the order of the Buildings may
be beheld, we shall here exhibit a Prospect thereof, as it is set forth by
Antiq. Vibi^ Splendour.
Iacobus Laurus.



There was another Temple built to Honor, without the Gate Cic. l. ^. de Legib.
p. 288.
Collina (which according to T^p. Romans Marlian cap. 130. and Alex. Donat. de
Vrb^ Roma, lib. 3. p. 67.
some was called also Salaria) and the reason of its Dedication there, was (as
Cicero tells us) the finding of a Plate of Metal in that place, bearing this
Inscription, DOMINA HONORIS.

About an hundred years after the death of Marcellus, C. Marius consecrated a
little Chapel to Honor and Virtue, as appears by this following Inscription,
Videsis Inscript. 3 apud Ian. Grut. p. 436.
C. MARIUS C. F. COS. VII.

The Symmetry and Proportion of the Columes, and what they supported, were
perfected by C. Mucius, as Lib. 7.
Vitruvius informs us, and that according to the exact Rules of Architecture;
Moreover it was adorned within and without with Images, most artificial for
Sculpture, and beautiful for Painting; Alex. Donat. de Vrbe Roma, l. 3. p. 256.
but the place where this Chapel was erected, is not now certainly known.

How Honor and Virtue were represented by the Romans, Their Images variously
represented.
and after what manner their Images (set up in their Temples) were designed and
fashioned, may be seen in some of their Coyns, the Ectyps of a few we have
placed here, from that large and choice Collection, now in the Cabinet of His
Majesty, the present Sovereign of the most noble Order of the Garter: the first
represents the heads of Honor and Virtue: where Honor is set forth with a
youthful face, crowned with Laurel, having long and curled hair: Virtue,
wearing an Helmet, but without any attire, or other ornament.



The Face of Honor so shadoweth that of Virtue, that but a little of it
appears; and this is observed to have been, not without good reason so
designed, inasmuch as Ant. August. Antiq. Roman. Dialog. 11. p. 36. Edit.
Antuerp. anno 1653.
Honor is the more illustrious of the two, and where we behold any person
outwardly adorned with Honor, we are to judge him inwardly endued with Virtue:
forasmuch as Honor is his due, and justly bestowed upon him.

Such another representation of the heads of these Deities, may be found in
Tom. 1. p. 221. number. 3.
Hubertus Goltzius; and not unlike, but it was upon this account, that
Postumus, [II] one of the Tyrants in Gallienus his Reign, placed her head
behind his own.

In the Reverse of the first of these, we see the figures of Italy and Rome
drawn at full length; that which represents Italy, seems to deliver a
Co^^^^opiae (the Emblem of her Wealth) into the hands of Rome, in
acknowledgment of the Peace she thence enjoyed; and Rome, setting her right
foot on the Globe of the World, which she had, or hoped to overcome.

In a Coin, relating to the Emperor Galba, [III] Honor is exhibited with an
Hasta pura (which was a Test Servio ad ^ Aeneid.
Spear-staff not armed with Iron) in one hand, and in the other a Cornucopiae;
and is in the same manner set forth by the Emperor Tab. 45. Nummi Ducis
Croyia^i and Arschot, number. 14. edit. Antuerp. anno 1654.
Aurelius Antoninus.

But because the Romans placed their chiefest glory in military Virtue; Virtue
is designed in the Reverse like an Amazon, wearing an Virtus fortitudinem
roborque designet.
Helmet, and her Vest Solet virtu^is simulacrum depingi succinctum Lucat. ad 10
The baid.
girded about her; having an Hasta pura in her left hand, a Parazone, or short
Sword in her right, and booted according to the military manner; in which
posture and habit, she is likewise represented in some Coyns of Cro^iac. Numis.
Tab. 37. number. 22.
Hadrianus, Antoninus Pius, and Severus.

In a Coin referring to Idem Tab 28. number. 5.
Titus, Honor is set forth after the manner in that of Galba; yet not with a
youthful, but a bearded face. How at other times represented, appears among the
Coyns of Antoninus Pius [IV] being there vested, both in a Toga and Tunica, and
holding a Laurel-branch: but in those of Croyiaca Numis. Tab. 45. number. 13. and
14.
Aurelius Antoninus, exhibited sometimes with an Hasta pura, at other times
with a Laurel.

Galba, we see, joined Honor and Virtue together in one Reverse; to show that
by Comment super Tab. Number. Duc.-Croyiaci. p. 38.
Virtue he gained his Honors and Imperial Command; the like did Ae^^. Vic. in
(...) Vitell. 11.
Vitellius. So Croyiaca Numis. Tab. 64. number. 20.
Galerius Maximianus seems to express the attaining of his greatness, by a
compact and agreement (as it were) with Virtue, which he signified by joining
his hands with hers.

Some other difference has been now and then put in the representation of
Virtue, as may be observed in the Ectyps above; for in one of Galba's Coyns [V]
she is found standing, holding a Parazone, and a little Victory. The same is
done in a Coin of Videsi^ Histor. August. i^l^str. per Fr. Angelon. p. 243.
Severus, where she is only differenced by a sitting posture.

But Commodus [VI] thought fit to arm her completely, bearing a little Victory
in her right hand, and holding a Spear and Shield in her left; the like did
Severus, Caracalla, and Valerianus. Yet sometimes the Shield was omitted [VII]
and the little Victory changed for a Laurel-branch: for so she appears in the
Coyns of Gordianus tertius [IX] Philippus Arabs, Trajanus Decius, Tetricus, and
Claudius Gothicus.

In the last place, Virtue is now and then seen armed, as before, holding only
a Spear and a Shield; as in the Coyns of Alexander Severus, [VIII] and many
others. And all of them by these Symbolical devices, pointing at the military
Virtue, not only of that most accomplished and famous Roman Nation, but of the
Emperors themselves.

SECT. II. Of the Antiquity of Knighthood.
IN tracing out the beginning and original of Knighthood, Knighthood among the
Greeks.
though we are not so vain, as to offer at the deriving this degree or order
from before the Creation, and say, that Saint Michael the Archangel is primier
Chevalier, being so styled in the Preamble to the Statutes of the Order of
Monsieur Saint Michael; or Primier Chevalier de l'ordre de Paradis, as he is
called in the Penes Camerar. Scacca^^.
Instrument of Election of our King Henry the Eighth, into the said Order of
Saint Michael, by the French King Francis the first: Yet may we very well
affirm, Knighthood to be near as ancient as Valor and Heroic Virtue; albeit
the Ceremonies and Circumstances thereof, have been much varied and transformed
in several Ages, and among the several Nations, where this Dignity has at any
time flourished. And therefore with much probability, and some justice, may we
derive the Original of military Honor, whence most of our Europeans account it
their greatest honor to derive their Original, namely, from Troy.

For of how great renown its Knights were of old, namely, Hector, Troilus,
Aeneas, Antenor, with many others, for their Knightly deeds; and how great
glory they acquired by their military Virtue, may be sufficiently learnt from
those things, which are recorded in the Histories of them.

So among the Greeks, Agamemnon, Menelaus, Peleus, Hercules, Diomedes, Telamon,
Ulysses, Patroclus, and several others, were such, as left behind them, an
everlasting Memorial of their Knightly actions; to inflame the young Nobility
that was growing up, by the examples of Achilles, and themselves, to the
imitation and pursuit of their virtues and valiant enterprises.

But lest this may be thought too much to be granted, we shall endeavor to
strengthen our conjecture, with some observations out of Homer, by whom we
often find the word (...), used in the same sense, as Fques was afterward
among the Latins, as will appear in these following Verses of his, Iliad. B.
Catal. 336.
(...).
Among whom thus Nestor spoke, that honored Knight.


And in many other places of the Iliads (almost all, where he speaks of Nestor)
he mentions him by the same Title; which is as much as if he had said,
Chevalier Nestor, as in the 108. Verse of the Catalogue of the second Book of
the Iliads, and Iliad e ver. 170.181. th 112.151. ^ 52.163. g 128.157. etc.

And that this Title of Knight seems to be of more ancient date among the
Grecians, then the Trojan War, may be collected from the same Homer, who
bestows it on other brave Heroes, that lived some time before these Wars began:
For in the 135. Verse of the aforesaid Catalogue, Phyleus, among the rest of
the Greek Commanders (whom he there reckons up) is thus mentioned, (...).
Phylides Son of Phyleus, Heav'n-lov'd Knight.


Likewise to the famous Tydeus, King of AEtolia, Father of Diomedes, he
attributes the same Title.

(...)
(...).
Thy Father Tydeus, that stout Knight, his fire
Into thy manly heart I will inspire.
In aftertimes the Grecians had among them this Degree and Title, considerable
both for reputation and dignity.

In Genesis Dier. l. 2. c. 29.
The Knightly Honor (says Alexander ab Alexandro) always excelled among the
Achaians, as being the chiefest charge. Those of Ibid.
Crete also had it in great esteem, as the most principal among them, for its
antiquity and dignity. Herod. in Terpsichore.
Herodotus tells us, that among the Chalcedonians (as after among the Romans)
Wealth was so much regarded, that those who were rich, bore the title of (...),
i.e. Equites. And as a testimony, that the ambition of the Equestrian Name was
very ancient, De Milit. Equestri, lib. 5. c. 1. in principio.
Hermannus Hugo says, the Lacedaemonians constituted a second Order of Knights,
and that the same Lacedaemonians had an Ex Strabone, lib. 10.
Order of Knights, who had no Horses. Not much unlike some of the Equestrian
Order, in succeeding times, among the Romans, who were only honored with gold
Rings, but not with a public Horse, until they actually entered into military
Service.

SECT. III. Of the Foundation of the Equestrian Order among the Romans.
Institution of the Celeres, whence sprung the Equestrian Order.
BUt to raise the Structure of Knighthood upon a more substantial Foundation, we
shall with greater certainty descend to the Romans; among whom we find, there
was from the very infancy of their military glory, an instituted Body and
Society of Knights, consisting of a select number; and this is recorded by Lib.
1. edit. Franc. ad Maenum. 1628.
Livy, who (speaking of the time immediately after the Romans and Sabins were
united under one Commonwealth) says, that then there were enrolled Centuriae
tres Equitum, three Centuries of Knights.

This inrollment was ordained by Romulus, and did follow soon after his
division of the City into three Tribes; and the Institution consisted of three
hundred in number; for each Tribe was divided into Claud Salmas. de re milit
Romans c. 20. p. 230. Videsis Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 10. c. ^.
ten parts, which were called Curiae, and every Decuria set forth ten Knights;
so that in every Tribe there were ten Decuriae, or one hundred Knights.
Moreover, each of these Centuries were particularly distinguished by several
Titles; one being called Livy loco cicato.
Ramnenses, another Tatienses, and the third Luceres.

A little after, Livy (speaking of Romulus) tells us, Idem, lib. 1. c. 15.
that he appointed these three hundred to attend him as a Lifeguard, both in
Peace and War, and called them Celeres; and so called (as some write) Pl^tarch.
in vita Romuli. Videsis Dion. Halicarnass. l. 2. p. 86. Edit. Frances. ann^
1586.
a celeritate, from their active and dextrous dispatch in martial affairs. But
Claudius Salmasius derives Celeres from the Greek word (...), which (says he)
among the Aeolians signifies a Horse; and from a Horse, did the ancient Romans
derive the Title of Eques; of which more anon. Hereupon not only those of
Romulus his institution are by Livy called Equites (as is before noted) but
when he speaks of the addition which Tarquinius Pris^ns made to those three
Centuries, he again calls them Livy l. 1. c. 36
Centuriae Equitum; and to the twelve Centuries, listed afterward by Servins
Tullus, does he afford the Ibid. c. 44.
same Title, making frequent use of it, in diverse other places, as their common
appellation.

And because the Celeres or Equites were at first appointed Halicarnass. eod.
lib. and loco cit.
to attend Romulus through the City (in the quality aforesaid) armed with
Javelins and Spears, are therefore (in the esteem of The. Godwin, Romanae
Historiae Anthologia, p. 28.
some) placed within the degree of service, and consequently thought inferior
to the Equestrian Order; we shall here (to remove this mistake) note, That in
their Election, not only Courage and personal Valor was required, but
Nobleness of Extraction no less regarded; they being also such as were
descended from the best Families in Rome: and this is fully testified by
Dionysius Halicarnasseus. Lib. 2 p. 86.
Romulus (says he) chose three hundred stout and personable men out of the
chiefest Families, or (in the words of Lib. 1. c. 43.
Livy) ex primoribus Civitatis.

Within a short time after the Institution of the Celere^, Servius Tullus
ordained, that those who did succeed in that Body, should be elected ex Censu;
to wit, from a considerable and certain valuation of their Estates, entered in
the Censors Book, called the Equestrian Cense.

This is confirmed by Dionysius (ex Pisone in primo Annalium) Lib. 4. p. 222.
Servius (says he) chose the number of Knights out of the Citizens who had the
greatest Cense, and were of the most noble Families.

Wherefore it cannot be denied, that Eques was at this time (which was even in
the infancy of the City) a Title, not only of Dignity, but also that the
Equites were then chosen from among those Romans, eminent both for Nobleness of
Extraction and Estate; Neither were more considerable Qualifications required
of any, who were admitted into the Equestrian Order, in the following times.

The Roman State was at first constituted (as at this day is the Venetian) of
Rosin. Antiq. Roin. l. 1. c. 17.
two degrees only, namely, Patritians and Plebians: For neither the three
Centuries, instituted by Romulus, nor their increased number, appointed by
Tarquinius ^riscus, nor those chosen by Servius Tullus from the Cense, and
added to the former, were molded into a peculiar degree, while Rome was
governed by Kings; but soon after the Equestrian Order began to be formed, and
constituted one of the three Orders in the Commonwealth: the Celeres then in
being, were the very persons of whom was composed and made up the Body of that
Society, which then, and thenceforward, was called Ordo Equester or Equestris,
(for both words are found to be indifferently used among the Ancients) from
whence it appears, that the Original and Foundation of the Equestrian Order, is
plainly deducible from (if not the same with) the Celeres, since all the
alteration lay, not in dissolving and taking away, but in making them known by
a new Title. Nay so little, or no difference, is put by Salmasius between those
of Romulus his Institution, and the Equestrian Order, that speaking of the
Celeres, he faith, De Re Mil. Romans c. 20. p. 236.
The whole Equestrian Order did then consist in them: and Rosinus having shown,
that the Ordo Equestris was ranked in the second of the three degrees,
positively affirms, Antiq. Romans l. 1. c. 17.
That in this division those three hundred are to be understood, who had been
elected by Romulus, and whom he called Celeres.

And now, to the end the Reader may take a short prospect into the Glory of
this Equestrian Order, (indeed the flower of the Roman Chivalry) together with
some other Dignities annexed unto that Degree, we shall first observe,

That the Roman Citizens, The Equestrian Order was the middle Degree.
being thus distributed into three degrees, are ranked by Lib. 26. c. 36.
Livy in this Order, Senatus, Equester Ordo, and Plebs: Alexander ab Alexandro
(from Lib* 2. Bell. Civil.
Appianus) places also the Equites in the Genesis Dier. l. 2. c. 2^.
middle, between the Senators and Plebeians: and this is further confirmed by
that most noted Elogie, R^sinus, l. 1. c. 17.
Consensu Senatus, and Equestris Ordinis, Populique Romani, which among the
Roman literal Notes by De Interpret. R^m. Literis.
Valerius Probus, is set down after this manner, CON. SEN. E. ORD. P. Q. R.
Agreeable hereunto is that of Cicero, Pr^ Cluent.
The Knights are next in dignity to the Senatorian Order: The same is affirmed
by Lib. 33. c. 1. in sine.
Pliny, and diverse Tiraquel de Nobilit. c. 37. number. 16^. Salmuth. noth Guide.
Pancirol. l 1. p. 271.
others.

And forasmuch as this degree was placed between the Patritians or Senators,
and the Plebeians or Common People, therein it is resembled by the Knightly
degree at this day with us, which is ranked between the Nobility and Commonalty.

But though the Equestrian Order (ranked as before) was somewhat inferior to
that of the Senate, Alex ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 2. c. 29.
yet had it the esteem of great authority and power, forasmuch as it was
invested with most ample Honors, and almost equal to the Senatorian degree. And
Salm^s. de Re mil. Romans c. 20 p. 227.
from this Order to the height of Nobility (which resided in the Senators) was
the way prepared: Hence, being the usual removal, to the Ordo Senatorius, (
Livy l. 2. c. 1.
Iunius Brutus being the first who supplied the Senate from the Equestrian
Order) and upon this ground, the Emperor Alexander Severus (as In vita ipsius
Severi, c. 20
Lampridius reports) did call this Degree, The Seminary or Nursery of Senators,
so did Equites enim illis Principes Iuventutis, Equiter Seminarium Senatum,
inde lecto^ in Patrum numerum Consule^, inde Imperatores creant, Live. l. 42. c.
61.
Perseus King of Macedon long before; and for the very same reason, may we
further parallel it with that of Knighthood among us in England, which is the
next in dignity to the Baronage, and generally persons of their rank and
quality are made choice of to ascend unto that Honor.

It was a Constitution as ancient as the Reign of Tiberius the Emperor, that
no man should be admitted into the Equestrian Order, nor have given unto him
the right of a Gold Ring, Alex. ab Alexandro loc. cit. Plin. lib. 33. c. 2. in
princ.
unless he was freeborn, or a Gentleman, and his Father and Grandfather had
been so: and indeed for a long time none were elected Knights, but the best
sort of Gentlemen, and Persons of noble, nay sometimes Kingly Extraction, as
was the illustrious Mecaenas at avis regibus ortus Eques, Matt. lib. 12. Epgr.
4.
Mecaenas, concerning whom Lib. 2. c. 88.
Vell. Paterculus gives this Character; That he aspired no higher than the
Equestrian Order, not out of an incapacity of attaining greater matters, but
that he desired them not.

Yet at length, through the corruption of times, Plebeians and Freed-men were
too frequently received into this Degree; the Equestrian Cense alone, Mecaenas
Equ^ Hetrusco de sanguine Regum, Propert. lib. 3. Eleg. 8.
to wit, their attaining to such a degree of Wealth, as reached the valuation
of a Knight, was that which gained them this Honor, which Salma^ius thus
affirms (in his Exposition of a piece of Polybius) De Re Mil. Rom c. 21. p. 240.
Whomsoever the Censor did elect into the Equestrian Order, he considered
nothing in him but the Equestrian Cense; which for the general, will likewise
find but too near a parallel among the Knights of this Age.

The Knights were Judges at Rome, and Presidents abroad.
To add to the luster of the Equestrian Order, let us next consider, that the
civil affairs of the Roman Commonwealth were sometimes put under their
management, and the chiefest of the Knights made Judges: which Cicero thus
confirms: Secund^ de Oratore.
Before the Knights, Judges at Rome, the Causes were pleaded and debated. And
what esteem was generally set upon their uprightness and justice, Turnebus sets
forth, who explicating some Pieces of Cicero (wherein several of their
excellent Judgments are reported) says, Turneb. in Comment. in O^ati^nem
Cicer. pro Caio Rabirio, p. 11.
There was then a great opinion of the Virtue of the Roman Knights, from the
integrity of their Judgments. Nor was there any other cause (as Budaeus notes)
wherefore they were called Judges, Ad L. ult. F. de Se^^toribus.
Then that the Decuriae of the Judges were chosen from amongst those of the
Equestrian Order.

And though (by assuming this additional dignity) they bore the Title of
Judges, and not of Knights; (for in those times, Plin. lib. 33. ^. 1. sub finem.
The Title of Knights continued appropriate to the Troops of those who served
with Public Horses) yet nevertheless, without all doubt (says Alexander ab
Alexandro) Genesis Dier. l. 2. c. 29.
The Judges continued still of the Equestrian Order, and were reckoned among
the Knights: for that they used the Gold Ring as Knights, and had the same
Ensigns of Honor, and executed the said Offices: Though it was otherwise, where
a Knight was elected into the Senate, Ambr. Calepin. verbo Eques.
for then (having assumed the Name of the more noble Order) the Title of his
former degree was extinguished, albeit he still retained the Ensigns thereof.

Fl^r. Epitom.
Gracchus, (Brother to Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus) being Tribune of the
Commons, and studying how to curry favor with the People, concluded it would
best be brought about, by abating or clipping the authority of the S^nate: He
thereupon preferred (amongst others) a Law* that (...)
(...) should be chosen out of the Equestrian Order, into the Senate (which
then (...) but o^ three hundred) (...)
out of design to make the ^otes of the Knights double to thos^ of the
Senators; by which means, he (...)
took away from the Senate their authority of ^itting in judgment, and
appropriated it to the Equestrian Order. But In Cap. (...).
(...) notes withal, that this proved a means to corrupt the Knights; between
who^ and the Senate, there was at that time a good correspondence.

For it seems, those who were hereupon chosen into the Senate, did so misbehave
themselves in the execution of their powers, at least, so kept under the
Senators authority, that they gave very great distaste unto them; insomuch* as
not long after by the Flor. (...) l. 70.
assistance of M. Lucius Drusus, then Tribune of the P^opl^ their former
prerogative was again translated, from the ^questrian Order, to themselves; for
he made Legem Iudiciariam, whereby not only an God^in. Anthol p. 237. ex
C^ce^o. de O^at. 71.
equal number of Judges should be elected, out of both Orders, but that Flor.
Epit. lib. 71.
all Judgments, should pass, indifferently and equally, by the Senate and
Equestrian Order. Hereupon the power of the Knights grew less and less, until
it shrunk to nothing; so that at length, the Judges places which they before
had executed, became conferrable upon the Publicans.

But half a Century of years passed not, e're Plin. l 33. c. 2.
M. Cicero when Consul (which was Anno ab Vrbe Condit^ (...). Romans l (...).
690) re-established the Equestrian Order, and reconciled the Senate to it. And
(...)
from hence Idem Plin.
the Knights were (a second time) est^blished the third degree in Rome, and all
Acts p^ssed in the n^me of the Senate, (...) People of Rome, and the Equestrian
Order; the same Pliny giving the reason why the Knights were then so placed
after the People, in all public instruments, (...).
because they were last of all incorporated into the body of the Commonwealth.

As to the Dignities and Honors the Ordo ^quesiris enjoyed abroad, we find,
that many Provinces were governed Alex. ab Alex Genesis Die^ l 2. c. 29.
by some of the Equestrian Order ^lone, inst^ad of Presidents; for in
Cappadocia, Egypt, and other Countries, those of the Equestrians Order did for
a long time rule; among whom Egypt had this peculiar, and proper to it self,
that none of the Senators were admitted to be her Presidents, Ibid.
but only those of the Equestrian Order. Whose Decrees Augustus commanded to be
had in like esteem, Ib.
as if the Magistrates of Rome, or Kings, or Consuls, or Praetors, had
pronounced them.

As a note of Eminence, They were called (...) and (...).
to their Names and Honors, they had the Titles of Splendidi and Illustres,
bestowed upon them; both which are equivalent to that of Nobiles. For De Bell^^
Civil
Oppius calls them Splendidi, and Illustres. Tacitus describing the affairs of
Claudius, styles them also Illustres. Pliny gives them the Title of Lib.
Epis^ol^. ^. Epist. 1. and 1. Epist. 6. Epist. 25.
Splendidi, and so does L. 2. D^ Finibus.
Cicero. There is an inscription near Praeneste which puts it in the
superlative, for so Scalig^r reads it, in his Index to Ianus Gruterus
Ins^riptions. Vid (...) 440. number. 1.
A. MUNIO. A. F.

And in the Oration of Caius Claudius the Consul, touching a Sedition raised by
Caeso Quintius, they are called (...) Dion. Halica^. nas. l 10 p. 63^ And had
sea^^ in the Theatr^
most sacred Knights.

But besides other privileges belonging to the Equestrian Or^er, whereby it
was advanced above the ^lebeian, there is yet this one to be here remembered, to
wit, that of their Se^ts in the Theater.

Of this privilege, the chiefest Author is thought to be Julius Caesar, or
Au^ustus; that Law being called Iulia. But it is more probably affirmed by
others, that long before them, Flo^. Epit. l. 99.
L. Roseius, being Tribune of the People, brought in a law, that the fourteen
next seats (i. e. next to those of the Senators) should be assigned to the
Roman Knights; which is further confirmed by Philipp. 2.
Cicero who calls it Roscian Law. And yet far more ancient is it (even in the
reign of Tarquinius Pr^seus) that L. 1 c. 35.
Livy assigns them Seats with the Senators, in the Circus M^ximus, and for the
very same use and end; namely, to sit and view the Plays and Shows there
exhibited.

They had a College.
As an Honor to their Society, the Roman Knights had a College belonging to
them, called Collegium Equitum; as it appears by an Altar of Stone at Coloigne
in Germany, which one of their Order, who bore the title of Moderator of that
College (as Scaliger reads it) had dedicated to Hercules, and thus inscribed.
Ian. Gruter. Inscr. Romans p. 44. number. 1.
HERCULI

And Temples dedicated to the Equestrian Fortune.
We find that in several places there were Temples dedicated to the Goddess
Fortune, under the Title of this Order, viz. Equestri Fortunae.

That anciently at Rome, was erected Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. l. 1. c. 13.
near the Marble Theater: but it seems to have been decayed, or at least not
visited, in Tiberius his days: for Tacitus taking notice of a Present, which
the Roman Knights had vowed to the Equestrian Fortune, for the health of the
Empress, says, Annal. l. 3. sub finem.
Although there were many Temples dedicated to that Goddess in Rome,
nevertheless there was none which bore that Name; but there was one found at
Antium so called, where she was worshipped under that Title.

Lib. 42. c. 3. Anno V. c. 578.
Livy also makes mention of another Temple, consecrated to the Equestrian
Fortune by Fulvius Flaccus, Proconsul in Spain: because through the
extraordinary Valor of some of the Equestrian Order, under his command, he had
obtained a memorable Victory over the Celtiberians.

Their Title preserved by Inscriptions and Coins.
In the last place let us observe, that as it was the great ambition of the
Romans to make use of all means they could invent, to eternize the glory of
their Renown: so in particular did the Equites among them, account the Honor of
their Order worthy remembrance in their public Marbles; as is most apparent
from sundry Inscriptions thereupon, to the end that the Honor of their Dignity
might not only spread, but happily be transmitted and revived to future Ages,
when themselves should be forgotten, or all other Writings perish.

One of which Marbles (though defective in the name of the Person to whom it
related, yet complete enough in the memorial of his Dignities) remains in a
private House at Picenum, or in modern language Sinigaglia, in la Marca
dell'Ancona, bearing this Inscription. Videsis Number: 9. apud Gruter. Inscrip. p.
493.
P.F. -- A. PRIMOPILO.

By this Inscription it further appears, that this Noble Person was not only of
the Equestrian Order, but also an Officer of principal credit, namely the
Primopilus, or Vide Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 10. c. 7.
first Centurion or Captain of the ten Ensigns among the Triarii (who were the
chiefest of the four divisions that composed a Legion) and indeed, the very
last reserve, and refuge of the whole Army; and consequently, that this Person
was the chief Captain of the whole Legion.

To this Officers charge was committed the principal Ensign called the Eagle:
and that we may understand the greatness of his trust, he was of the Generals
Council, and, as may be collected from a passage out of P. Salonius alternis
prope annis and Tribunu^ militum, and primus Centurio erat, quem nunc Primopili
appellant. l. 7. c. 41.
Livy, equal, if not of higher Dignity, than the Tribune, though otherwise the
Centurion or Captain was subordinate to him.

Another Inscription, we conceive, may not improperly be inserted here, which
is to be seen at Rome, in the Flaminian way, and is as follows. I^scri^^.
Gr^^. p. 47^.
M. VALERIO. M. F. PAL.

What is herein observable to our purpose, is only out of the words Natus Eques
Romanus, which tells us, that this young M. Valerius, for whom the Inscription
was made, was born a Roman Knight.

And to give light to this phrase, give us leave to borrow the assistance of
Verbo Eq^^^.
Calepine (being next at hand) who notes, that the Romans did call those, who
were advanced to the Equestrian Dignity, or were descended from some of the
Equestrian Order, Knights. And lest this be not clear enough spoken by him, or
that the words need further explication, he (in the same place) tells us, that
the Latin Writers, in relation to the Knightly Dignity, used three kinds of
speech, viz. (1.) Eques [for a Knight.] (2.) Equestris Ordo [for one of the
Equestrian Order.] (3.) Equestri loco natus [for one born or descended from an
Equestrian Family.] which, whether they do signify the same, or whether they
differ, and how far, we (says he) must consider.

For the first, whosoever is called a Knight, the same is, and is called one of
the Equestrian Order; and contrariwise, whosoever is, and is said to be of the
Equestrian Order, Idem habet Manutius inter Comment. Salustii, his verbis
Differunt Eques, Equestris Ordinis, and Equestri loco nature. Eques and Equest^^
Ordinis, idem sunt, quod si Equ^^ pa^^e na^^ est qui nunquam Senator suit,
Equ^st^ loco natus est; sin natus est Senatore; Equestri loco non recte natus
dicitur.
is, and is said to be a Knight. But if a Knight is born from a Father, being a
Knight, and who never was a Senator, such a one is said to be of Equestrian
extraction: but if the same Knight be born of a Father that is a Senator, he is
a Knight indeed, but not extracted from an Equestrian Family.

And hence it is evident, that M. Valerius the Father (who caused this ^pitaph
to be inscribed) was then no Senator, but a Knight, and of the Equestrian
Order, though not noted with that Title in the Inscription; and consequently,
that his Son Valerius might therefore justly be said to be Natus Eques Romanus.
For when once a man was admitted into the Equestrian Dignity, the appell^tion
of Eques belonged, and was accustomably given to all his male issue, who kept
that Title, until they were advanced into the Senate, or degraded for some
misdemeanour.

And as in Marbles, so in Coyns, are there memorials left us, of this ancient
Order.

De Viti^ ^mperat. page* 25*
Octavius Strada exhibits one of Drusus, the Son of the Emperor Tiberius, by
Agrippina; on the one side is the Effigies of this Drusus, thus circumscribed,
NERONI CLAVDIO DR VSO GERM. COS. DESIGNAT. And on the reverse is this
Inscription (which takes up all the middle of the Coin) EQVESTER ORDO PRINCIPI
JVVENTVTIS. From whence we learn, that the body of the Equestrian Order did at
this time offer their service to Drusus; he having then obtained the
appellation of Princeps Iuventutis.

Imper. Romans Numism. p. 11^
Adolphus Occo sets forth two Coyns, the one of Gold, the other of Silver, both
which are in all particulars the same with this already discoursed of, and
inserts them among those belonging to the Emperor Nero; and so does Hubertus
Goltzius in his Sub nomi^^ Ner^^i^.
Thesaurus.

We doubt that Strada has misplaced that Coin abovementioned, in regard we
meet with no Inscriptions upon Coyns, or other public Monuments, either in
Occo, Goltzius, Angelonus, or elsewhere, that gives to Drusus the Son of
Tiberius, any other Name or Title, than Drusus Caesar Tiberii Augusti Filius;
but to Nero (before he was made Emperor) the names of Nero Claudius Drusus
Germanicus, are frequently attributed.

It Is true, the very same names of Nero Claudius Germanicus are all stamped
upon the Coyns of Drusus, Brother of Tiberius the Emperor; but there the Head
is crowned with Vid. Numism. Imp. Romans Caroli Ducis Croyiaci and A^schot. Tab.
17. Number. 17. vide etiam Numis. ejusdem ducis Croyiaci per Hemelar. edit.
Antuerp. 1627. Tab. 4. Number. 8.
Laurel, which Drusus the Son of Tiberius wanted, and the Face made older in
all places, than that set forth by Oct. Strada, (which indeed is a perfect
juvenile Effigies) nor has this Drusus the Brother of Tiberius, the Title of
Princeps juventutis, any where given to him, but that of Imperator only, added
at the end of his Names.

Imp. Romans Numis. p. 311.
Besides these, we are beholding to Occo, for the description, and to La
Historia A^g. p. 217.
Fr. Angelonus, for the Ectyp of another Coin, appertaining to Commodus, the
Son of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus* on whose Reverse is to be seen the
aforementioned Inscription, viz. EQVESTER ORDO PRINCIPI IVVENTVT. it being
stamped when Commodus had the like address made to him from the Equestrian
Order, he having then also attained that attribute of Princeps juventutis.

And thus have we let in a glimps of the Equestrian Order, established among
the Romans, with its Dignity and Honors, which for many Ages flourished in
great glory and reputation; it being the continual care of that famous Nation,
to preserve, partly, the Fame of valiant men to posterity, by the memory of
their noble Acts; and partly, to stir up the spirits of the younger sort, to
the imitation of their Virtue; upon whom the glory of their Ancestors might
have such an influence, as to make them eagerly contend for the attainment of a
like degree of Honor, by proportionate degrees of Virtue and Noble deeds. All
which we have thought requisite to bring in by way of Introduction, to those
Knightly Honors, that afterward succeeded in the world.

What we have further to say in this Chapter, shall be to touch upon those
degrees of Knighthood, which have been personal, and obtained by Creation only,
(after such time as the French Empire took beginning) and are, or may be
comprehended, under the modern Title of Equites Aurati, or Milites simpliees,
(being indeed all of one nature, albeit they received several denominations,
from those various Ensigns of Honor, and Ceremonies of Creation, wherewith the
Dignity has been in several Ages since particularly bestowed) and as this
Equestrian Dignity is distinguished from the several Orders of Chevalry
instituted in Christendom, whether they be of greater or less note, who have
received their Titles as Knights, used together with that of their peculiar
Orders, which differenceth them from those we call Milites simplices. In the
circumstances of whose Creation, we confess that nothing in the Ordo Equestris
among the ancient Romans has place, though that might well be the ground and
original of the Dignity, and one common end in both; namely, the pursuit of
military exploits and service in the Wars.

SECT. IV. Of the modern Degrees of Knighthood.
Knights girt with the military Belt.
AND first, concerning those whom some call Monozoni, that is, Knights begirt
with the Military Girdle; a custom devolved to the Germans, and Gauls, from
ancient time, and from them to later Ages.

Our learned Countryman Sir Henry Spelman notes, Glossar. Ar^haiolog. verbo
Miles:
That the later Emperors conferred the Dignity of Knighthood with the military
Girdle, instead of all other Arms; because that part, more eminent amongst
them, girdeth, supporteth, and adorneth the rest. Whence our learned Seldom
calls this girding, Titles of Honor. p. 451.
the most essential part of the Ceremony. Nor do we find, that among the
various Ceremonies belonging to Knighthood, there have been any (to the later
ages) that has continued so constant and frequent in practice, as the endowing
with Girdle and Sword: Ornaments indeed most proper to the Knightly Dignity,
and marks of Honor and Virtue, with which the Statues and Portraitures of
Knights have been adorned after death; is may be seen on diverse of their
Monuments and Grave-Stones.

For as at this day, Knights are in some places styled Equites Aurati, from the
golden Spurs, heretofore put on at their Creation; so were they more anciently
Cingulo militari donati* or (according to the old word used by Bracton) Ringae
enim dic^ntur ex ^o quod R^ne^ gyran^ and circ^mdant, and inde dicitur
^ccingere Gladio t^o. Bracton de Legibus and Consu^tud. regni Angliae. lib. 1.
cap. 8. number. 2.
Ringae Gladiis; in regard that when any one was Knighted, he was not (as in
this Age) only smitten with the Sword, but invested with Sword and Belt. Nor is
this Ceremony wholly lost, since it is retained among those, appointed to be
used at the creating our Knights of the Bath; who are to be girt with a Sword
and Belt, when they receive the aforesaid Honor, as the old Formulary thus has
it. Dugdale's Antiq. of Warw. p. ^39.
Then shall the King, of his great favor, take the Sword, and gird the Esquire
therewith.

In the second place (taking leave to rank those following degrees of
Knighthood here mentioned, Knights Batchelor^.
according to their antiquity, not the precedence they have since gained) the
Baccalaurei or Knights Batchelors, are to be considered; who are also
indifferently styled Chevaliers, Milites, Equites Aurati, and Knights.

This degree is truly accounted with us, Primus [Eques Baccalaurcus] apud
Britanno^ dignitatis omnis Mi^itaris gradus est, Hono^um omnium in Republica
basis. l. R. p. 143.
the first of all military dignity, and the basis and foundation of all Honors
in our Nation; and is certainly derived from if not the same, with that
immediately preceding. For as the Ceremony of a gentle touch on the shoulder,
with the flat side of the Sword, has been since used, instead of endowing with
the Sword and Belt (especially in times of War, or in haste) as an initiation
into the Military Order; so on the contrary, it is not unusual, now adays, for
the Prince, at least Gladio, if not Cingulo donare; for he oftentimes bestows
the Sword upon the person whom he Knighteth.

The Equites had the Epithete of Ab ornamentis aureis. Miraeus, Origines Ord.
Equestrium, p. ^. jux^a impressionem 16^8.
Aurati given them, from the privilege of wearing Gold upon their Swords and
Spurs; and the 265 Knights, created upon Hadrians Bridge at Rome, by Frederick
the Third, Emperor of Germany, the 18. of March, Anno Dom. 1451. as he
proceeded to the Cathedral Church of St. John de Lateran to be crowned, are by
Vitae and Gesta sum. P^ntif. l 2. p. 925.
Ciaconius called Equites Aurati; and were indeed no other than Knights
Batchelors; such were also the Platina de vi^^s Ponti^. p. 262.
Italian and German Knights, created in the same place, by Sigismond the
Emperor, on Whitsunday 1432. as he went to the Lateran from the Vatican, where
he had received his Crown from Pope Eugenius the Fourth.

And here we have an occasion offered, to insert the distinction which Andrew
Tiraquel puts between those Knights, who are, and who are not noble before they
receive that dignity; allowing the later the Title of Equites Aurati, and to
the former that of Milites. De Nobil. c. ^. sect. 13.
For (says he) it is to be observed, that those whom we in the French Tongue
call Chevaliers, were made noble as soon as they attained that dignity, even
though they were not such before, yet they were not called Milites, contrary to
the position of all Interpreters of the Law: but such as speak properly, have
called them Equites Auratos. Which appellation Lib. Epist. 24. Epist. ^. ad
Alb* Parisium.
Franciscus Philelphius did first of all find out, and Bebellius in his
Commentary De abusione linguae, brings many things against the Interpreters,
who call those (that are not noble before their Creation) Milites.

Somewhat to like purpose would our learned Spelman deduce from the addition of
Gloss. Archaiolog. verbo Eques.
Aurati, conceiving it introduced ad distinguendum Equitem ritu honorario
institutum, ab inhonorato istiusmodi; and by him made applicable to the
Neapolitan Gentlemen, (usually called Cavalieri) who are all styled Equites,
though they never have attained the Knightly dignity.

Thirdly, Knights B^nerets.
concerning the Knights Banerets, a Title bestowed on such who had so well
deserved in the Wars, that they were afterward permitted to use the Vexillum
quadratum, or a square Banner; whence they were truly called Equites
Vexillarii, or Chevaliers a Baniere, from the Dutch word Ibid. verb^ Baneret.
Banerherr, Lord, or Master of the Banner.

Our learned In Brit. p. 124: Edit. Land. 1608.
Cambden derives the original of this Knightly dignity among us, not higher
than the reign of King Edward the Third, and believes him to be the first
Institutor thereof, and this honorable Title to be then first devised, in
recompense of martial prowess; a recital of which dignity received, is
mentioned in a Pat. 20. E. 3. par. 2. membrana 22.
Patent, whereby that King grants to John Coupland, for the maintenance
thereof, five hundred pounds per annum out of his Exchequer, to be received by
him and his Heirs; and this was for his good service performed, in taking
Speeds Chron. p. 592.
David the Second, King of Scots, Prisoner, at the Battle of Nevils Cross, near
Durham. But some few years before the Creation of Sir John Coupland, there is
mention also in the Patent Rolls of 10. E. 3. part 2. m. 7.
Sir Reignald Cobham, and 13. E. 3. m. 13.
Sir William de la Poole, both Banerets: And doubtless the Title and Dignity
was much more ancient with us (as well as in Vide Seld. Tit. of Honor, p. 543.
France) for in our perusal of the Accounts of the great Wardrobe, we find such
like Robes allowed to several persons made Knights, as were appointed usually
for the Creation of Banerets; and this before the reign of King Edward the
Third, which implies, that there was then a Degree of Knighthood, so called,
amongst us. For instance, Ex Rotul. Compo^i Tho. Vseflet de an. 20. E. ^.
Gerardo de la Bret, ad apparatum suum pro Militia, tanquam pro Baneretto, a
Rege suscipienda, etc. viz. ad unam Tunicam, etc. after which is set down the
particular Robes, and other Ornaments, appointed for his Creation; and then it
follows, Consimilem apparatum habuerant subscripti, viz.

Hug. de Courtney. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Rad. de Wylington.
Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Rad. Daubeney. Viz. Singuli eorum
tanquam pro Baneretto. Ioh. de Willouby. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro
Baneretto. Edw. Stradling. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Rad. Baro
de Stafford. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Ioh. de Meules. Viz.
Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Will. de Percy. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam
pro Baneretto. Gerard de Insula. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Pet.
Breton. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Rog. le Strange. Viz.
Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Ernone de Potes. Viz. Singuli eorum
tanquam pro Baneretto. Ioh. de Neville. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro
Baneretto. Gerard de Trassyns. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto.
Willect de Ciply. Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Mulect de Blekey.
Viz. Singuli eorum tanquam pro Baneretto. Disram de Keney. Viz. Singuli eorum
tanquam pro Baneretto.
In like manner in the preceding year have we met with an account of Robes,
given to Ex Comp. praed. Tho. de Vseflet.
James Botiller of Ireland, ad apparatum suum, pro se novo Milite faciendo,
tanquam Baneretto; as also to William Mountacute, Ebulo le Strange, and others.
So also An. 18. E. 2. to Hugo de Points, and Hugo de Plesey; and Ex Comp.
praed. Tho. de Vseflet.
Ann. 16. E. 2. to Raymund Durant. And our learned Spelman (in Pellae exitus
An. 8. E. 2.) does find Gloss. Archai. verbo Baneret^. vide etiam 4. part.
Instit. p. 6.
John de Crumbwell, written with the addition and Title of Baneret.

But that this Dignity was yet more ancient in England, is sufficiently
apparent from a Writ of King Edward the First, under the Privy Seal, directed
to the Clerk of the Wardrobe, to furnish Thomas Bardolf with Robes, such as
were usually allowed to a Baneret; he being to receive the honor of Knighthood,
at that eminent solemnity, when Edward of Caernarvon, the Kings eldest Son, was
made Knight; which Writ runs thus.

Ex Brevi R. Ed. 1. penes Rem. Regis in Scacc.
Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae Dominus Hiberniae and Dux Aquitaniae, Dilecto
nobis Radulpho de Stoke, Clerico magnae Garderobae nostrae salutem, Mandaemus
vobis, quod dilecto nobis Thomae Bardolf tanquam Baneretto, decentem apparatum,
pro se novo Milite faciendo ad festum Pentecostes proxime futurum, in Comitiva
Edwardi filii nostri karissimi habere, de dono nostro faciatis. Et nos vobis
inde in compoto vestro debitam allocationem habere faciemus. Datum sub privato
Sigillo nostro apud Wolveseye tertio die Maii, Anno Regni nostri Tricesimo
quarto.

This Degree of Honor is Mills Ca^a^. of Honor p. 80.
esteemed the last among the greatest, viz. Nobilium majorum, or the first with
those of the second rank, and Gloss. Archaiol. verbo Baneret.
is placed in the middle between the Barons and the other Knights; in which
respect, the Baneret may be called Gloss. Archaiol. verbo Baneret.
Vexillarius minor, as if he were the lesser Banner-Bearer, to the end he might
be so differenced from the greater, namely, the Baron, to whom properly the
right of bearing a square Banner does appertain.

But there are some remarkable differences ^^tween these Knights, and Knights
Batchelors; to wit, as to the occasion and circumstances of their Creation; the
Baneret being not created, unless at a time when the Kings Standard is erected
and displayed; besides, Gloss. Archaiol. verbo Baneret.
he bears his own Banner in the field, while the Knight Bachelor follows that
which is another, which evidently shows the Dignity to be of a higher nature;
nevertheless, Sir Henry Spelman notes, this not to be dishonorable, since the
Emperor Gloss. Archaiol. verbo Baneret.
Maximilian was pleased to serve in the Wars, under the Banner of our King
Henry the Eighth, in the Lord Herbert^ Hist. of Hen. 8. M S. fo. 47.
quality of his Soldier, in the Camp before Terwin in France, wearing the Cross
of St. George, and receiving the pay of one hundred Crowns a day.

This further difference is observed between them, by Andrew Favin, to wit, In
le Theater d'Honeur l. 1. c. 6. Vexillarius, qui Vassa^^o^ suo^ habeba^ el^to
Vexillo; and Baccalaureus* qui sub alieno vexillo procedebat. Jo. Tilius
Commentar. d^ reb. Gall. l. 2. p. 180.
that the Knight Baneret was he who had so many Gentlemen, his servants, at
command, as that he could raise a Banner, and make up a Company of Soldiers to
be maintained at his Table, and their wages paid out of his own Purse: But the
Knight Bachelor he, who had not servants sufficient to lead to the War, at his
own charge, but marched under the Banner of some other. Idem Favin. loco cit.
These two degrees of Honor (says he) were also distinguished by their Wages,
in regard that a Knight Baneret had twenty Sols per diem to dispend, the Knight
Bachelor ten, and the Esquire but five; proportionable hereunto is that which
Mr. Seldom notes out of the Wardrobe accounts, an. 4. E. 2. Titles of H^nor, p.
991.
That the Banerets wages by the day was four shillings, the Knights two
shillings, and the Esquires one shilling.

Next unto the Knights Banerets, we shall speak of Knights of the Bath; Knights
of the Bath.
which is a degree that has the Investiture and Title of a Knight, with an
additional denomination, derived from part of the Ceremony of his Creation.

It is the most received opinion, that our King Henry the Fourth, first
instituted these Knights; and true it is, according to Chronic. l. 2. p. 24^.
Sir John Froisard, He at his Coronation (to add to the luster and
magnificence of it) created Chronic. l. 2. p. 24^.
six and forty of them; making an especial choice of such as he favored,
either out of an inward affection, or consideration of their service or deserts.

And as he designed them to attend him in the Ceremonies of his Coronation,
then at hand, so did he retain them nearer unto his person; thereby seeming to
honor them with a more familiar consociation, than he vouchsafed to the Knights
Batchelors.

But if the Ceremonies and circumstances of their Creation be well considered,
it will appear that this King did not institute, but rather restore, the
ancient manner of making Knights; and consequently, that the Knights of the
Bath are in truth no other than Knights Batchelors, that is to say, such as are
created with those Ceremonies wherewith Knights Batchelors were formerly
created by Ecclesiastics; but some of them having been for a long time laid
aside with us, were then brought again into use, and made peculiar to the
Degree of Knights of the Bath, and since continued to them, upon some solemn
and great occasion.

At the first view, this Degree looks like a peculiar and distinct Order of
Knighthood, and may perhaps (by some) be thought more fit to be spoken of in
the third Chapter rather than here: But it cannot properly and justly be so
accounted, if we consider, that they have not either Statutes or Laws assigned
them, nor are they in case of vacancy supplied; (which are the essentials of
distinct Orders) nor do they wear their Robes beyond the time of that occasion
upon which they were created; as chiefly the Coronation of Kings and Queens of
England, or otherwise the Creation of a Prince of Wales, Duke of York, and the
like, whereto also is to be considered, that their Number has been uncertain,
and always at the pleasure of the King.

Andrew Favin will have these Knights to be otherwise called En le Theater
d'Honeur l. 5: c. 2.
Knights of the Crown, because (says he) to distinguish them from Esquires,
they wear upon their left shoulders an Escutcheon of Black Silk, with three
Crowns of Gold embroidered thereon. But this is a great mistake, for it is not
found that such, or indeed any other Badge, was at any time (after that manner)
used by them, save only a Silk Lace; but the Jewel worn, to be known by, is
made of Gold, containing three Crowns, with this Motto, Tria juncta in una, and
hanging down under the left arm at a Carnation Ribbon worn cross the body.

This leads us to the consideration of another Degree among us here in England,
namely, Baronet^.
Baronets, who seem to be allied to Knighthood, by having granted to them the
addition of Sir to be set before their Names; but this Title gives not the
Dignity of Knighthood, nor can any of them be properly styled Knights, until
they be actually knighted.

It is a Degree but of a late erection, to wit, in the ninth year of King
James, and the grant thereof made only by Letters Patents under the Great Seal
of England, a Copy of one of which is transcribed into the Page 8 21.
Titles of Honor. This Honor is made hereditary to them, and the Heirs males of
their bodies lawfully begotten, for ever; and by a subsequent Decree of the
said King, precedence is granted to them before all Banerets, Rot. Pat. an. 10.
Iac. pars 10, m. 8.
except such as should be made by the King, his Heirs, and Successors, under
his or their Standard displaid in an Army royal, in open War, and the King
personally present; and next unto and immediately after the younger Sons of
Viscounts and Barons.

The ground for erecting this Degree (as appears by the Instructions given to
the Commissioners appointed to treat about this affair) was partly Martial; for
though themselves were not enjoined personal service in the Wars, yet the
motive of this Honor was a certain contribution from each Baronet, Seld Tit. of
Hon. p. 827.
to maintain thirty Foot Soldiers, for three years in Ireland (after the rate
of eight pence a day) for the defense of that Kingdom; and chiefly to secure
the Plantation in the Province of Vlster.

Their Qualifications were, that at least they should be descended from a
Grandfather, on the Fathers side, that bore Arms, and had a Revenue of one
thousand pounds per annum, of Lands of inheritance in possession, or Lands of
old Rents, as good as one thousand pounds a year of improved Lands; or at least
two parts of three, to the said value in possession, and the other third part
in reversion expectant, upon one life only held in Jointure.

The year after the first Patent past, King James was pleased to add some new
Privileges and Ornaments to this Degree, namely, Rot. Pat. 10. Iac. pars 10.
m. 8.
to Knight those Baronets already made, that were no Knights, as also such as
should be afterward created, and the Heirs males of their bodies, when they
attained the age of one and twenty years; that the Baronets and their
Descendants might bear either in Canton, or in an Inescutcheon the Arms of
Vlster, and further, to have place in the Armies of the King, and his Heirs and
Successors, in the gross, near about the Royal Standard, for defense of the
same.

Since the Institution of Baronets in England, there have been made diverse in
^itles of Ho^nor p. 842.
Ireland, after the like form. And the Knights of Heylins Cos^ogr. printed
1652. l. 1. p. 306.
Nova Scotia in the West Indies, were ordained, in imitation of Baronets in
England, by the said King James, anno Dom. 1622. and upon a like design; to
wit, the planting of that Country by Scotch Colonies, and the Degree made
likewise hereditary.

These later have the privilege to wear an Orange-tawny Ribbon, as a Badge of
Honor, to distinguish them from other Knights: and it appears by a Ex MS. in
Offic. Armor. [ L. 2.] fol. 23.
Letter from Henry Earl of Holland, dated the 29. of June 1627. and directed to
the Officers of Arms, that there was some intention to move his then Majesty to
declare his pleasure, that all Baronets and Knights Batchelors might wear in
Ribbons of several colors, some Badge or Jewel, to distinguish the one from
the other, and both from persons of inferior quality, in such sort as did the
Knights of the Baeth; to which end, he desired their opinion, touching the
fitness and convenience thereof.

Which Officers, from precedents of the differences and marks set upon Robes
belonging to several Degrees of Nobility and Honor, and from the Ensigns and
Ornaments of Knighthood, used for distinctions sake, both at home and abroad,
being esteemed as peculiar marks of Sovereignty in the Giver, and eminent
tokens of Honor in the Receiver; grounded their opinion, that such Ornaments
for distinction of those two Degrees, namely of Baronets and Knights
Batchelors, were no way unfit or inconvenient, either to his said Majesty, or
to his Subjects: But it seems, there was nothing further done in this matter.

We shall conclude this Section with a general observation, which relates to
the conferring of Knightly Honor; That Kings and Princes have in no Age limited
themselves, or confined their bestowing of this Dignity to Martialists alone,
who profess Arms, and give themselves to the exercise of Military Virtue, as it
was in its original Institution, viz. a Military Employment; inasmuch as men of
the long Robe, and such as have dedicated themselves to the managery of Civil
Affairs, through their great worth and desert in that kind, have so well
merited of their Prince and Country, as to be thought worthy to share with
those of the short Robe, in having this Honor conferred on them.

SECT. V. The Etymology of Eques, Miles, Chevalier, Ritter, and Sir.
WE have observed before, 1. Equi^^.
that the Grecian Captains had a Title of Honor in their Language, equivalent
to the signification of Eques in the Latin, to which a Horse gave the
denomination; we shall here further add (it being testified by Lib. 33. c. 1.
sub finem.
Pliny) that the Title of Eques, given and appropriate to the Ordo Equestris
among the ancient Romans, as a name of Title and Dignity, was at first likewise
derived from Equus a Horse; and indeed it is a proper and significant term
since among them, they were esteemed Equites, Demster in Rosin. p. 94.
who having a public Horse, did receive the stipend of a Horseman to serve in
the Wars: because one part of the Ceremony, whereby this Honor became
conferred, was the giving of a Horse, bestowed on them at the Public Charge;
of which more anon. In the ancient times (says Turneb. animadv. in Rullum:
Petri Rami Comment. p. 76.
Turnebus) they who received pay, upon the account of a public Horse, were
called Equites. And the Legionary Soldiers, which L. 33. c. 2.
Pliny says were sometimes called Fluxumines, De re mil. Romans p. 231.
Salmasius calls Fluxutes, and derives the word a flectendis Equisin Gyrum.

It is also to be noted, that the word used to denote the Degree of Knighthood,
in the several Dialects of other Nations, has the same derivation, to wit,
from a Horse; for in the French, a Knight is called Chevalier; in the German,
Ridder; in the Italian, Cavagliero; nay even in the ancient British, Morchog;
concerning some of which, hear also one of Geoffry Chaucer's Scholars.

Io. Lydgate MS. of the Horse, Sheep, and Go^^.
Eques, ab Equo, is said of bery right,
And Chevalier, is said of Chebalrie,
In which a Rider called is a Knight,
Arogoners done also specify,
Caballiero through all that party,
Is name of worship, and so took his 'ginning,
Of Spurs of Gold, and chiefly Riding.
And albeit the Latin word Miles, and the English word Knight, had not their
derivation from a Horse, as have those before enumerated; nevertheless they are
now restrained to a Title of Honor (though heretofore they had other
significations) and ordinarily used to express a dubbed Knight.

According to the opinion of our learned Spelman, ^. Miles.
Miles (in a general sense) is he Gloss. Archa^^ verbo Mile^.
who is legally enrolled for the War: which Inrollment he also says was
twofold, Honoraria, and Vulgaris. This pertaining to the Foot, or common
Soldiers; that to persons more renowned and famous. To the admittance of a Foot
Soldier, the bare entrance of his Name upon the Military Tables sufficed; but
at the creating of the other, some solemnity was used, for he was adorned with
Arms; not of his own choice, but given and granted, upon the account of Honor,
from the Prince, and that after a certain kind of ceremonious Pomp. Thus he.

But though the word Miles anciently among the Romans, and hitherto in a strict
sense, is allowed by all to signify a Foot Soldier, whence Miles, a Militia;
yet how this word became usurped, continued in use, and in tract of time
naturalized, to signify the same which Eques did, we could no where receive so
clear satisfaction, as from the learned Pen of Claudius Salmasius, who in his
Treatise De Re Militari Romanorum gives this following account.

Page 2.
It is manifest (says he) that there was one kind of Military Discipline among
the Romans, when their public Affairs were first settled by Kings; another,
when in the flower of their Government Liberty was established; another, when
the Caesar's and Augustus's were Masters of the Empire; and lastly, another,
under the Successors of Constantine, when upon the translation of part of the
Empire to Constantinople, the Militia was changed from Foot to Horse. For the
new Romans of that time being continually engaged against Nations powerful and
abounding in Horse, and reposing no further confidence in the Legionary
Militia, the rigor of the ancient Discipline being wholly lost, began to
exercise and train up only the Horse Militia, deserting that of the Foot,
whereof there was hardly any advantage to be made against the innumerable
Forces of the Alani, Goths, Vandals, Persians, Saracens, and Sarmatians, which
consisted in Horse.

In those times the Greeks, who writ ought concerning that part of Military
Discipline, which relates to Tacticks, taking all things from the Ancients,
expressed the Affairs of their own Age (by reason of the alteration of the
Militia) in words proper to the ancient Militia. What the former had said of
the Foot Soldiery, these later applied the same things in their writings to the
Cavalry. And what is more to be admired, the names whereby the ancient Greeks
and Latins called the Foot, these transferred to the Horse of their time. Hence
(...), which before was said of the Foot Soldier, was by these later Greeks and
Constantinopolitans, properly attributed to the Horseman. So also among the
Romans of the same Age, the word Miles was no longer said of him that served
afoot in the Wars, but began to be properly spoken of the Horseman.

Whence it came into vogue (as the same Author concludes) that among the Titles
of Nobility, he who had that of Miles bestowed on him (whether in public
Monuments and Archives of Courts, or in the private Instruments and Tombs of
illustrious Families) was understood to be a Horseman, or Eques, that is of the
Equestrian Dignity, or descended from it.

Our learned Tit. of Honor p. 436.
Seldom also notes the word Miles to be equivocal, and that in the old Feodal
Laws of the Empire it signifies a Gentleman, as the word Gentleman is signified
in Nobilis: and with us the word has been frequently and indifferently used,
to denote both a Gentleman and a Knight: as for instance, Milites signifies
Tit. of Honor p. 436.
Gentlemen, or great Freeholders of a County, and not dubbed Knights, viz. such
who hold by Knights-service from a Lord of a Manor, they being also called
Vide Tit. Hon. cad. page
Milites or Knights in our Laws, that concern either choice of Coroners, or who
are chosen from the several Counties of this Kingdom, to serve in the High
Court of Parliament; although they be not advanced into the Degree of
Knighthood.

That Miles with us has denoted the dignity of Knighthood (which is indeed the
chiefest of Military professions) even in the Saxons times, Ibid. p. 770.
Mr. Seldom not only believes, but fortifies his opinion from the authority of
several Charters of that Age, wherein this Title is given to sundry persons, as
may be Idem, page 771.
there seen to satisfaction; observing withal, that the Et page 934.
ancientest use of it, in the German Empire, as a Title of Honor, that he finds
it had, was about the Year of our Lord 1064. but Aubertus Miraeus (in Apud
Iurisprud. Heroic. p. 69.
Cod. donat. pier.) exhibits an ancient diploma, in which the Title Miles is
mentioned, in charta Gerardi Cameracensium Episcopi, de anno 1046. since which
it is become more frequently used, in all public Instruments written in Latin,
and most generally appropriate in our Law, to persons who have received the
Order of Knighthood, and to signify the same with Eques and Chevalier, though
indeed it may seem less properly to signify a Knight, than that of Eques; in
regard Knighthood is by Ferns Glory of Generosity, p. 108.
some called the dignity of Horsemanship, and the tenure of Lands by Knights
Fees here in England, is in truth a Horse-service, and the Tenants such as
served the King on Horseback in Wars, and Gentlemen at least, if not persons of
noble extraction: besides, to note the dignity of this Tenure, it is anciently
called Cokes preface ad lib. 3. fo. 3. a.
Regale Servicium, because due to and for the King and the Realm.

As the Greeks and Romans derived a Title of Honor from Horses of service, 3.
Chevalier.
and conferred the same upon their men of Arms, so did the French; among whom,
the word Chevalier has the like signification and relation: For at first, it
properly signified a Horseman, or (...) that rides a Horse; but at length it
came to be used among them, more (...) to express one, upon whom the Honor of
Knighthood had been bestowed.

And this clearly appears from Claude Fauchet, a French Writer of good account;
who speaking of the original of Knighthood, and the Etymology of the word
Chevalier, says, Origines de Chevaliers Armoir. and Heraux. f. 1.
it is evident that the Chevaliers derive their name from Cheval [a Horse]
which (to say truth) is the properest Animal that can be found for War; and
which by reason of the swiftness thereof, is by the Vide Com. Servii ad
Virgilii primum Georgicon.
Poet ascribed to Neptune, at the contention he had with Pallas for the
invention of profitable things.

The skilful management of a Horse, has been heretofore accounted one of the
principal marks and properties of a Knight; and so greatly delighted were the
active and warlike youths, among the old Gauls (to wit, the ancient Inhabitants
of France) with gallant Horses, that no Present could be more acceptable to
them.

It is evident, that with the nobler sort among us, the Title of Eques or
Chevalier has been esteemed more honorable than Miles (though Miles had before
much prevailed in England, even to a general Title and Appellation) which may
be proved out of those Records, instanced in the fourth part of the Page ^^
Institutes, by which it appears that the Barons in Parliament, who had been
Knighted, liked to be called Chevaliers, rather than Milites. And in Writs of
Summons they were more usually styled Chevaliers, than by the Titles of their
Baronies; or if these were used, nevertheless, that of Chevalier followed at
the end of the style. Anno 7. E. 4. all the Barons in Parliament have the
addition of Chevaliers, and therefore they subscribed thus -- Equites aurati
omnes. And about Seldens Tit. of Honor. p. 746
King Henry the Eighths Reign, the Custom began, to style all the temporal
Barons in their Writs of Summons, Chevaliers; whether they were Knighted or
not, which is hitherto continued in practice; all which are considerable proofs
of the estimation they had of the Title of Chevalier, above that of Miles.

Among the modern Germans, 4. Ridder.
the Title of Knight is understood by the word Corn. Kilian. Dict.
Teutonico-Lat. lit. R. Versteg. Antiq. p. 314.
Ridder, which in English is the same with Rider or Horseman, and equivalent
both to the ancient Title Eques, and the modern Chevalier; and the Order of
Knighthood or Equestrian Dignity, is in high Dutch called Frisius Dict.
Latino-Germ. lit. R.
Ritterschafft, in low Dutch, Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 389. a.
Riderschap.

As the German Ridder or Ritter, is observed by our learned Tit. Hon. p. 436.
Seldom, to be the same with Miles (viz. a Gentleman) so the Ghe-slagen Ridder,
is interpreted by Kilianus in lit. R.
Eques Auratus, viz. Miles factus, or the dubbed Knight, he being created by
the Ceremony of a gentle stroke, or light touch with a naked Sword, upon the
shoulder ( Ghe-slaeghen, signifying but as percussus) for albeit The Estate of
the Empire, Dialog. 8. in prin^.
Lewis du May tells us, that in Germany the Gentlemen to this day, writing in
Latin, style themselves Equites; yet no man among them is accounted a Tit. of
Honor* loco cit.
Ritter or Ridder, in the same sense as Eques Auratus, or Cingulo Militae
donatus, denotes it, unless he be actually Knighted.

And besides, the said Eod. Dialog.
Lewis du May notes down these manifest differences, between them and the
dubbed Knight: as first, that the Knight has been always more privileged than
the Gentleman. 2. That the chance of Birth makes the Gentleman, without his
contributing any thing to it; but Worth and Valor raises the Knight to that
degree of Honor. 3. Princes and Lords do not seek for the Title of a Gentleman,
as they do very earnestly for that of a Knight: And 4. The Gentleman is born
so, the Knight comes to be so; that is, a Gentleman begets a Gentleman, but a
Knight begets not a Knight.

The Saxon word 5. Knight.
Cniht (from whence our Knight) is by our learned Countrymen, men, Gloss.
Archa^. verbo Knight.
Spelman, Titles of Honor. p. 769.
Seldom, and Dict. Saxon. verbo ^niht.
Somner, rendered a Boy, a Servant, or an Attendant, and also a Soldier. We
shall not meddle with the word, as it ba^ely signifies Puer, Puerilis, Iuvenis,
or Puber, as making naught to our purpose; but as it has signified Servus or
Famulus, a Servant or Attendant (being not otherwise used at this day among the
Dutch) and also, as it imports the dignity of Knighthood (to which purpose we
now commonly use it) it will deserve observation; and this chiefly in the words
of Mr. Somner, that painful Inquisitor into the so much neglected, and almost
forgotten Saxon Tongue Saxon. dict. loco cit.
(...) (says he) that use of it remaining in our Knights of the Shire; which
(...) Knights by dignity or place as indeed but few of them are, or need to be,
yet are so called, but why? under favor, in regard of that service which is
required and performed of them in Parliament, for their several Countries,
whose servants for the time they are.

But that we may know it was used with us, as an honorary Title and
Appellation, shortly after the Conquest, there is an ^^ter Cod. MS. a Guil.
Archiep. Cant. Bibl Oxon. donatos [ E. 80. fo. 64. b.]
old Manuscript yet extant in Bibliotheca Bodliana, in which the Annals are
continued down to King Stephens Reign, wherein the Annalist having told us,
that King William the Conqueror accustomably wore his Crown at the Feasts of
Easter, Whitsontide, and Christmas, he further notes ^^ter Cod. MS. a Guil.
Archiep. Cant. Bibl Oxon. donatos [ E. 80. fo. 64. b.]
(...) Then were with him all the wealthy (or potent) men throughout England,
viz. Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, Barons, and Knights.

Antiq. p. 314. Impr. London. 1629.
Verstegan is of opinion, that this word began to be made use of among our
Ancestors, as a Title of Honor, from such as were admitted for their merit to
be Knights to the King; viz. his own Servants and Reteyners, and such as were
appointed to ride with or attend on him; to whom our industrious Minshew
agrees, the Verbo Knight.
Equites (says he) which heretofore followed and accompanied the Emperor, are
in the German Tongue called Knechtes, that is, Servitors or Ministers. But our
learned Cambden is of opinion, that the word Knercht, Brit. p. 125.
was in far more ancient times used and accepted as an honorary Title, and
among the old Germans, signified a person armed with Spear and Lance (the
Ensigns of their Knighthood) as in after times such were among other Nations,
adorned with a Girdle and Belt, who are since called Equites Aurati, and
sometimes simply Milites.

6. Sir.
In the last place, we think it not amiss to say something here, touching the
usual and accustomed English word, with us added to the names of Knights, viz.
Sir: We note then, that since Titles and honorary Appellations have been in
use, (for anciently no other Appellations were used, but only the persons
names) the word Sire in old French was taken to signify Seignieur or Lord; and
though in Latin the word Dominus has been indifferently attributed to all
Degrees of Nobility, yet in the Registries of the most noble Order of the
Garter, it is used with a distinction. For wherever the Names of any of the
Knights Companions are recorded, if he be a Baron of the Kingdom, it is expressed
by Dominus, and his Surname only, added thereunto; as for instance, the Lord
Cameux is termed Lib. N p. 58.
Dominus de Cameux, and so others; whereas a Knight Baneret or Bachelor has
his Christian Name adjoined, as Sir John Chandos (who was one of the first
Founders of this most noble Order) is styled Idem p. 30.
Dominus Johannes Chandos, Sir Walter Pa^ely, another of those Founders, is
written, Dominus Gualter^s Pa^ely, and so of others.

Now this addition Sir, is properly attributed to the Names of all Knights
Banerets, Knights of the Bath, and Bachelor Knights; the words sometimes
pronounced at the time when they are dubbed being with this compellation to
their Christian Names, Arise Sir John, or Sir Thomas, or whatsoever else is his
Christian Name, and therefore is accounted parcel of their style, as among the
French Messire is used in the same nature. But to Knights Baronets the addition
of Sir is Pat. 9. Iac. pars 45.
granted by a peculiar clause in their Patents of Creation, to be prefixed to
their Christian Names, albeit they be not dubbed Knights.

How it came to be first given we cannot find, but Custom from former times
has continued it to ours, upon the Degrees before mentioned, and diverse of our
old English Writers have bestowed it upon the major Nobility, after they had
been received into the Order of Knighthood. Nevertheless, though it be wholly
uncertain when it first began to be used with us, yet our learned Seldom has
observed it in an Additions and Amendments t^ the Titles of Honor. p. 939.
Hebrew Star, of King Edward the First's time. And in the life of Saint Thomas
Becket, written also about that Age, we meet with the Title prefixed to the
Names of the four Knights (there called Luther Knigths) who slew the said Saint
Thomas. MS. penes Sylam Tailor genesis so. 253.
His Knyghts tho hi i husde this, hi stood some stille,
Hi bethoghte stillelich, to pay the King at will,
Hour that mest ^rewen were, bithoghte of one gile,
Sir Renaud le uz Ours, and Sir Hew de Morbile,
And Sir William Trati, and Sir Richard le Brut.


SECT. VI. The Ensigns of the Equestrian Order among the Romans.
THE Equestrian Order among the ancient Romans was conferred by particular
Ceremonies, 1. A Public ^orse.
to wit, the donation of a Horse, or giving of a Ring; and these were accounted
the two chief and principal Ensigns and Ornaments of that Order, as appears out
of Lib. 33. c. ^. sub finem. Rosin. de Antiq. Romans l. 1. c. 17.
Pliny and other Writers; and both bestowed upon the public account.

The giving of the public or military Horse was a far more ancient Ceremony,
than that of bestowing the Ring: there being a time when only those who
received the public Horse, we^^ of the Equestrian Order, and none other; and
this was long before the Gold Ring was used, as a mark of this Honor.

For it appears out of Livy, that upon Servius his Institution of the Cense,
and his inrolling the Knights by it, he forthwith took care to pay them out of
the public Treasure, Livy. l. 1. c. 43.
Ten thousand pieces of Brass Money to buy them Horses: and certain Widows were
assigned to pay two thousand pieces of like money annually, Livy. l. 1. c. 43.
toward the keeping of them. De re mil. Romans p. 239. circa medium.
Therefore (says the learned Salmasius) no other were then enrolled in the
Equestrian Order, but such as had the Equestrian Cense, and to whom a public
Horse was assigned. And this is further evident from this passage in Pliny;
Quod ante^ militares Equi nomen dederant, hoc nunc Pecun^ae Iudices tribuunt.
l. 33. c. 1.
That the Name (to wit Equites) which was heretofore (says he) derived from
the ^ilitary Horses, now the Judges upon the account of money (viz. the
Censors) bestow.

But here instead of the word Iudices, the learned Critic Iustus Lipsius is
rather willing to read De militia Romana. p. 3^* Dialog. 5.
Indices (and we find the Letters n and u are frequently mistaken by
Transcribers, the one for the other) which indeed seems as well suitable to the
meaning, which the whole sentence aims at; for the former part thereof
declares, that the Rings were the Notes or Ensigns of the middle ( viz.
Equestrian) Degree; and then according to Lipsius his correction of the word,
the latter part runs thus; that the Name which formerly the military Horses
gave, the Notes and Indices of wealth did afterward (to wit in Pliny's time)
bestow.

And as the donation of a Horse was the ancienter badge of Knighthood, so were
those to whom it was given, Lips. loc^ citato.
says Iustus Lipsius, most anciently, properly, and alone in times past called
Equites. The same Lipsius (reflecting on the twofold Ensigns of Knighthood
among the Romans) makes a dichotomy of the Equestrian Order, into Lips. loc^
citato.
those who had a public Horse, and others who had none; but only the honor of
wearing of a Gold Ring.

In succeeding times, when the Custom was received of electing Knights, as well
by bestowing of a Gold Ring, as formerly had been used by the single Ceremony
of giving a public Horse (yet still to those who had the Equestrian Cense)
then was the number of these Knights very much increased; whereupon no public
Horses were afterward assigned, but unto such as were ready to enter into the
military service, and to fight in the Legions; and then also to such persons
only, who were chosen Salmas. de ^e mil. Romans p. 239.
out of the Body, Number, and Order of the Knights, to wit, Ib. p. 240.
such as to whom there had not yet any public Horse been assigned, but were
only known to be of that Order, by wearing of a Gold Ring. Those therefore to
whom the public Horse was then assigned, were thenceforth called Legionary
Knights, from being Et. p. 231.
annexed and joined to the Legions by such donation; and likewise to
distinguish them from the rest of the Equestrian Order, who had only received
the honor of a Gold Ring; though they had not as yet taken upon them any
martial employment.

Hence we may observe, that all those who were of the Equestrian Order, were
not employed in military service, or rather very few, in respect of the whole
Body; but only such of them to whom a public Horse was assigned, and had the
peculiar Title given them of Legionary Knights, as aforesaid; being chosen from
the entire body of the Ordo Equestris, to the end they might forthwith serve in
the Legions.

Nor was every Citizen, whose wealth could entitle him to the Equestrian Cense,
received into the Equestrian Order, for doubtless many concealed the just value
of their Estates from the Censor, and so escaped the admission and inrollment;
but whosoever were found possessed of such a proportion of Riches and
Substance, as would reach the Equestrian Cense, were constrained (if debauchery
and vitiousness hindered not) to enroll themselves within that Order, and
thereby become capable of receiving a public Horse; as is evident from Lib.
39. cap. 19.
Livy, in that which he relates concerning P. Aebutius, the Son of a Roman
Knight, where in favor to him, and recompense of his service, by whose
(together with Lib. 39. cap. 19.
Hispalo Fessenia's) means, the abominable Ceremonies, used in the nocturnal
Feasts of Bacchus, were first discovered, the Senate decreed, Lib. 39. cap. 19.
that the Consul should mind the Tribunes of the Commons, to prefer a Bill to
the people for his exemption from all military service, and notwithstanding to
a^ow him his Pension, as if the time of service which the Law required, had
been accomplished; and moreover Lib. 39. cap. 19.
to prohibit the Censor from assigning to him a public Horse, or compelling
him to serve in the Wars, against his will. By which it is manifest, that the
Censor might force any man (in that time) who had the Equestrian Cense, to
accept of a Horse, and constrain him to serve out (in the Legions) the time
appointed by the Law; otherwise what needed so great endeavor to obtain such a
prohibition? Howbeit Salmasius adds, De re mil. Romans p. 238.
that in the more ancient method of Election, constrain^ was not used.

This Horse (which first gave name to the Knights, as has been before noted
out of Pliny) was in relation to his service called Godw. Anthol. Romans Hist. p.
29
Equus Milita^s, and from the annual allowance to keep him, Equus publicus. And
after such time as the Office of Censor was instituted (which was in the
Fastorum Romans l. 1. vide Live. l. 4. c. 7. and Rosin. Antiq. Romans l. 7. c. 10.
310. year after the foundation of the City) this Horse Idem Rosin. l. 1. c. 10.
was bestowed by the Censor (which also is apparent from the case of P.
Aebutius, cited by Livy, and mentioned a little before) and not as yet by the
Emperors, who (it is true) in succeeding times gave the same, (which ought
nevertheless to be distinguished from the Horse that the said Emperors gave
among the Praemia militaria, and by and by touched upon) And it was so assigned
by the Censors, as they were Judges of manners (as is well observed by De mil.
Romans p. 33. dial. 5.
Lipsius,) for it was part of the Censors duty, Rosin. l. 7. c. 10. vide etiam
Dion. Halicar. l. 4.
to observe the lives and manners of every man, even of those who were of the
Senatorian and Equestrian Order; and to brand (if they saw cause) any Citizen
whatsoever with infamy. And therefore were neither all persons, or those
unadvisedly, enrolled for a public Horse, but such only as could endure the
test and examination of their reputation and good behavior, and whose fair
conversation and carriage, had given proof of their good and commendable life.

Wherefore, as the aforesaid Salmasius observes, Polybius uses in this kind of
Election, the word (...) which comes from (...), signifying to be in good
repute and esteem, and (...), which signifies to prove, to examine, to enquire,
etc. De re mil. R. (...). p. 238.
because they chose from the Equestrian Order, and from all the number of
Knights, those of known virtue and of approved life, who might take Horsemans
pay, and serve with public Horses, and be enrolled in the Legions.

And as this power in judging of men's manners and behavior in general, For
what cause withdrawn.
was placed in the Censors, so also did they of censuring, in particular, the
Knights debaucheries and miscarriages, if they were chargeable with any such,
after their Election into the Ord^ Equestris; for if they observed any thing in
their lives, Rosin. l. 7. c. 10.
contrary to ho^esty and good report, they took away from them both Horse and
Ring, than which a greater disgrace and dishonor could not befall them.

The Knights were not only to be circumspect, as to their own demeanor, but
also obliged to be careful of their Horses; for if upon the Censors review of
the public Horses, any were found poor and lean, or that the Knight kept him
not well dressed, and in good order, he who owned him A. Gell. Noc^es Attica. l.
4. c. 12.
was noted for negligence and carelessness; Lips. de re mil. Rom p. 33. Dial. 5.
and if the Censors saw any blemish or impediment in them, they forthwith took
them away.

But such might be their Crime, that withdrawing the Horse was not thought an
agreeable punishment, for we read in Livy, that the Censors did not only take
away the public Horses from the Knights who came off safe, after the defeat at
Cannae, but Lib 4. c. 18.
they removed them all from their own Tribes, and wholly dis-franchised them.
The like did the Emperors, when, in succeeding times, they took upon them to
bestow the public Horses, in such manner as the Censors had formerly used;
among whom we find, that Augustus (after he had obtained his ten Coadjutors)
exercised at one time, several of the powers belonging to the Censors, for
Sueton. in ^l^a Aug. c. 39.
be compelled every Knight to give an account of his life, and of those whose
manners be approved not, be punished some, and noted others with reproach and
infamy, and many with admonition, but after various kinds. So also Caius
Caligula, who not only reviewed with some severity, the Musters of the
Equestrian Order, but Idem in vita Caii Call. c. ^6.
openly took from them their Horses, in whom was found any foul reproach or
infamy. And those who were less guilty, and culpable but of smaller faults,
lost also their dignity, together with their Horses, albeit they avoided that
public note of disgrace, which the former underwent, from whom (as it is
shown) he openly, and in the face of all took away their Horses; for concerning
these, the said Suetonius adds, Ibid.
He only passed over their Names in reading the Roll. Now Rosinus, in laying
down the manner and order used in ejecting such Knights, says it was thus: A
Lib. ^. cap. 1^.
recital being made by the Censor of all the Knights, that were enrolled in the
Ordo Equestris, those whose names he omitted, Lib. ^. cap. 1^.
were thereby understood to be deprived of that dignity.

In the last place, where any of this Order had consumed their Patrimony, and
had not an Estate left answerable to the Equestrian Cense, they were reduced to
the same condition with those, who (for some great mis-behaviour) were deprived
of the public Horse, and Gold Ring, Rosin. l. ^. c. 17.
and cast into the lowest rank and Order, being thenceforth reckoned among the
Plebeians.

When the Legionary Knights had accomplished the full time of service in the
Wars, appointed by the Law, and that the public Horse had not for any crime or
mis-demeanour of the Owner (all that while) been taken away from him, then was
he delivered back to the Censor; the manner whereof is thus taken notice of by
In vita Pompeit.
Plutarch. It was the custom (says he) with the Knights of Rome, when they had
served in the Wars the time appointed by the Law, to bring their Horses into
the Forum, before the Duumvirs (who were called Censors) and giving an account
under whom, and what Generals, or Captains, they had served, thereupon to be
dismissed from further service in the Wars: an example whereof, the same
Plutarch relates to have been given by Pompey himself, which was briefly thus.

In vita Pompeit.
When the two Censors Gellius and Lentulus had placed themselves in the Forum,
to view the Knights that were to appear before them, Pompey came from the
farther end thereof, leading his Horse in his hand by the Bridle (all the
Ensigns of a Consul being carried before him) and pass^d by the Bars where the
Censors sat, who seeing him so obedient in the observation of the Law, gave him
great respect, after which the senior Censor thus examined him. Pompey the
Great, I desire you to tell me, whether you have served so long in the Wars as
the Law does enjoin? To which he answered, that he had, and under no other
Captain tha^ himself; whereupon the Censors rose up from their Seats, and
accompanied him home to his House.

Iustus Lipsius De mil. Romans p. 35. Dial. 5.
exhibits the Reverse of a Coin, which he refers to the Emperor Claudius, as
made upon his reviewing of the Legionary Knights, whereon is drawn the Censor
sitting in the Forum, and a Knight leading his Horse up to him, and underneath
is this word CENSOR inscribed; which since I have not met with in any other
Author, who writes concerning the Roman Coyns, I though necessary to mention in
this place; together with another Roman Coin given us by Romans and G^aec.
Monumenta p. 165.
Hubertus Goltzius. This latter might possibly be stamped by M. Tullius Decula,
who was Consul with Cneus Cornelius Dolabella, in the Fastorum Romans l. 1. sub
finem.
672. year after the foundation of the City.

And although on the Reverse the Censor is not to be seen sitting in the Forum,
as in the former, yet there is a Figure representing a Knight leading his
Horse, and in the very same posture as before, which doubtless was designed by
Tullius Decula, to represent the manner of bringing a public Horse to a review
before the Censors; and to strengthen this conjecture, there is insculped on
the other side, the Effigies of Servius Tullus, the Sixth King of Rome. For in
regard the Tullian Family is said to be descended from Servius Tullus, in
remembrance thereof, his head was stamped thereupon. Yet certainly this was not
all, but that as well the Reverse was designed, to perpetuate the memory of the
same King's instituting the Cense, and ordaining a public Horse to be given to
the Roman Knights, whereon to serve in the Wars. Albeit I am not ignorant that
the learned Commentator upon the Duke of Croy's Coyns (among which is set forth
the very same piece) likes rather to have it represent a Consular Horse, led by
a Groom; but he gives neither remarque nor observation of the use, custom, or
occasion for a Consular Horse to be soled.

We shall close our discourse concerning the public Horse, as it was the
principal Ensign of the Equestrian Degree, with this observation; That amongst
the Roman Inscriptions, collected by the great industry of Inscript. Antiq.
orbis Romans
Ianus Gruterus, there are several written thus, Equo publico honoratus, Equo
publico donatus, ornatus, exornatus, which at first sight may seem to infer,
that this public Horse was bestowed as an Ensign of Knighthood, and the person
thereby admitted into the Equestrian Dignity.

But these expressions ought more rightly to be referred to the praemia
militaria, with which the Emperors used to recompense some particular service
done, by the honor of such a gift; and therefore we conceive it necessary here
to insert that cautionary note, which Salmasius gives in this very case. De re
mil. Romans p. 240.
Wheresoever we read of any that have been honored or adorned with a Public
Horse, it must be understood not of him who served with a public Horse, and
really took Horsemans pay, but of him on whom this honor had been bestowed by
the Emperor.

From this learned Author we shall add a further observation; that Equus
publicus (which does often occur in old Monuments and Inscriptions) is by a
wondrous, but nevertheless an accustomed speech among the Romans, taken for the
person himself, Ibid.
qui Equo publico meret, that is, for one of the Equestrian Order, or that
served with a public Horse; but qui Equo publico donatus, for one, to whom a
public Horse had been given by the Emperor, as an honorary reward.

Another Ensign of the Equestrian Order was a Ring: a Ring in Latin is called
Annulus, a Circuitu, from the roundness of its figure, whereby the Finger, as
with a Crown is incircled; It is also taken diminutively from Annus the year,
from its circulating within it self: but the Graecians have derived its name
from the Finger, viz. that part of the body whereon it is worn, and called it
(...).

That it has been very anciently used, is undeniable, seeing the Author of the
Book of C. 41. v. 42.
Genesis has noted Pharaoh to have taken off his Ring (then esteemed one of
his Kingly Ensigns) and put it upon Joseph's hand.

We shall not need here to exhibit the (even almost innumerable) forms and
fashions of Rings, or other their various uses, as little relating to our
present purpose: But for as much as the Gold Ring has been used and taken as an
Ensign of the Equestrian Order, and consequently reputed as a Symbol of Honor,
among the Romans; as such, it falls within what we design, and therefore we
shall here note a few things in relation thereunto.

When the custom of wearing Rings began first to be taken up at Rome, ^liny
affirms, that the ancient Romans wore only the Iron Ring, Lib 33. c. 1. in
princ.
it being accounted by them the Ensign of Military Virtue. Nor were then Rings
worn by any other, but by those Lib 33. c. 1. in princ.
who had received them upon a public account. This use of Iron Rings continued
a great while amongst them, as is manifest from the same Author, who also
says, Lib 33. c. 1. in princ.
that it was a long time e're the Roman Senators did wear any of Gold. And
therefore all the while the Senate wore only Iron Rings, it cannot be supposed,
that any of the Equestrian Order should wear those of Gold; and consequently in
those elder Ages, the Gold Ring was not received, or reputed as an Ensign of
their Knightly Degree.

Howbeit in process of time, we find Gold Rings were also drawn into use among
the Romans; yet when they were so, we observe it was not lawful for men of any
Degree to wear them, but only those to whom their use was restrained; as
appears from Dion the Historian, who alleges, Vide C^l. Rhod Lect. Antiq. 16.
c. 12^ prope finem, ex Dione.
That none of the ancient Romans, except the Senators and Knights, were
permitted to wear Gold Rings. And now was it that the Gold Ring became enobled
among them, when assumed by these two Orders, which included all the Roman
Nobility.

These Rings (says Isidore) were given at the public charge, In Originibus. l
19. c. 32.
but not without manifest distinction; In Originibus. l 19. c. 32.
for to the Senators Rings were given, set with precious stones to others (to
wit the Knights) those made of massy Gold: which were so called (says
Licetus) De Annul. Antiq. c. 137.
because they were not made hollow to receive Gems into them.

But more particularly, the Gold Ring was another Ensign of the Equestrian
Order; Plin. l. 33. c. 1. in finem.
Annuli plane medium ordinem Plebi and Patribus inseruere. Here Pli^y notes it
for the Symbol of the middle Degree, inserted between the Senators and
Plebeians, which was that of the Appian l. 2. de (...) Civilibus.
Equites, as has been before showed.

The Learned Salmasius interpreting a place in Pl^ny, immediately following
that before cited, to wit, L 33. c. 1. sub finem.
Quod antea militares Equi nomen dederunt, hoc nunc pecuniae Iudices tribuunt,
says, that his meaning can be only this, Salm. de re milit. Romans p. 239.
That all persons who had an Equestrian Cense, that is, an Estate of Equestrian
value, did comport themselves as Knights, and (when afterward they) were
elected into that Order (it was) from and by virtue of the Cense alone, Idem,
in fine; and in proxima page qui designabuntur Annuli aurei gestamine.
whose Ensign was a Gold Ring. Hereupon the Ordo Equestris became conferred by
the public Donation and acceptance of a Gold Ring, as formerly was wont to be
done by the giving of a Horse.

And we also observe, that Tacitus does use the phrase promiscuously, Equestri
dignitate donare, and Annulo honorare, to give the Dignity of Knighthood, and
to bestow honor with the gift of a Gold Ring: as where he tells us, Hist. l. 2.
c. 20.
that when the Army entreated Vitellius to make Astaticus, his Freedman, a
Knight, he represt their unbeseeming flattery; but soon after (such was the
fickleness of his mind) at a private Banquet (which In vit^ Vitel. c. 12.
Suetonius says was in Supper-time, on the first day of his Empire) he gave
him what before he had denied, and honored him with Gold Rings.

Thus we see that at length Slaves were created Knights, and the Ius Annulorum,
to wit, the right of wearing a Gold Ring, was given to Freedmen, no less than
to Freeborn men.

But if it be inquired, why Tacitus here uses the word Annuli^ in the plural,
Turnebus will give the reason, viz. Advers. l. 20. c. 2.
That some of the Ancients who were more sumptuous and gallant, had two kinds
of Rings; to wit, one for Summer, and another for Winter; and I (says he)
should judge those for Winter to have been of greater weight, the other for
Summer more light; and he groundeth his opinion upon the first and seventh
Satyrs of Iuvenal, who in the one calls such Rings Aestivos, or Summer Rings,
and in the other Semestres, or six Months Rings.

Statius showing that mean extraction hindered no man from attaining to Honor,
and that Freedmen and Servants (known by wearing of an Iron Ring) had assumed
at their manumission the Gold Ring and Equestrian Dignity (whereby they became
equal to others of high birth) and left off the use of the Iron Ring, has
these elegant Verses.

-- Lib. 3. Sylvar. de Lachr. Hetrusci.
Tenuesque nihil minuere parents,
Atque idem in Cuneos populusque cum dixit Equestres,
Mutavitque genus, laevaeque ignobile ferrum
Exuit, and celso natorum aequavit honor.
Whereupon, one of his learned Domitius.
Commentators gives an instance in Claudius Etruscus, (whom Vespasian had
advanced from the condition of a Freedman, to the Equestrian Order) and notes,
that the said Emperor caused him to put off the Iron Ring, which Servants and
Freedmen used to wear, and to put on a Gold Ring, the note or mark of Knightly
Dignity.

Salmasiu^ upon the words of Aurelius Victor, cited by Julius Capitolinus in
the life of Macrinus, viz. donatum Annulis aureis, says thus, Hist. Aug.
S^riptores. p. 4^3.
Freedmen (and such a one was Macrinus) upon whom Gold Rings were bestowed,
were thereby made Knights: besides he there cites the abovementioned Verses of
Statius, and thence infers, that Claudius Etruscus, the person of whom the Poet
spoke, was a Freedman, whose condition the Emperor had so changed, that of a
Freedman he became a Knight, and for Ibid.
Iron Rings, such as Freedmen did wear, he gave those of Gold, which were the
proper Ensigns of Knights. At length he positively concludes; Ibid.
That whereas Knights were highborn, nevertheless he, who having laid aside
his Iron Rings, and put on those of Gold bestowed on him by the Emperor, was
equal to them in honor. Agreeable hereunto is that of Freinshemius, Notis in L.
Flor. l. 1. c. 5.
the Gold Ring was the proper Ornament of Knights, to the end they that were
honored therewith from the Emperor, should be understood to be taken and
received into the Equestrian Order.

For the donation of the Gold Ring did bestow upon slaves such Privileges and
Immunities, as if they had been freeborn; who being now freed from service,
Salmuth. in Pancirol. Tit. 58. p. 313.
ingenuitatis jura consequebantur, did thereby not only obtain the rights of
Freeborn men, but increase of Honors; Alex. ab Alex. in Genial. Dier. l. 2. c.
19. in fine.
living in such sort, that they were to bear Magistracy and Honors, and to
sustain all Offices of freeborn Citizens, like other Freemen. And more
particularly, Salmuth. Loco cit.
were also esteemed to have attained unto the Equestrian Order, or enjoyed the
Privileges equal thereunto. And all this merely from the donation and
permission of the use of the Gold Ring, upon receiving of which they Salmuth.
Loco cit.
left off wearing the Iron Ring, that being then (though not anciently) Isidor.
in Orig l. 19. c. 32.
a badge of servitude and slavery; and Alex. ab Alex loco cit.
rejecting their old name also, they assumed that of Knight.

It distinguished the Knights from the Senators and Plebeians.
But as this noble Symbol, the Gold Ring, was an Ensign of the Equestrian Order,
so was it also one of the notes or signs of distinction, to difference them
from the two other Degrees, namely, Senatorian and Plebeian.

And first, though anciently while the Senators wore plain Gold Rings, we
confess the Knights Rings being plain also, carried not a sufficient
distinction; nevertheless after such time as the Senators began to adorn their
Rings with Gems and precious Stones, (as is before noted) was the difference
evident enough.

Secondly, they were also worn to distinguish the Equestrian Order from the
Plebeian; and that the Knights used them to that end, is evident from Plin. l.
33. c. 1. sub fine, Rosin. de Antique Romans c. 17. Salmuth. in Pancirol. Tit.
58. Salmas. de re mil. Romans p. 240. Cl. Fauchet. Crigines des Cheval. Armairies
and Hepaux. p. 2.
many Authors, in regard the Plebeians had permission to wear no other than
Rings of Iron. The difference among the Rings of these three Orders is thus
observed by Licetus, De Annulis Antiq. p. 136.
Gold Rings set with precious stones were given to the Senators only, plain
Rings without stones to the Knights, and Iron Rings to the Plebeians, which the
said Author here calls Ferrei Militares, because the aforesaid Degrees at first
used the Iron Ring, Ibid.
to show themselves good Soldiers and expert in Arms. But after such time as
the Gold Ring was appropriate to the Equestrian Order, the people continued the
custom of wearing the Iron Ring only; for albeit they enjoyed the privilege of
free birth, yet because they wanted Nobility they might not wear Gold Rings,
but rest contented with those of Iron.

But at length grew into common use.
We are informed by Appian, that one of the Ornaments of a Tribune, was likewise
a Gold Ring; the Tribunes (says he) wore Gold Rings, among the Soldiers, when
other inferiors wore those of Iron; and lest it should be doubted that the word
(...) might refer to those of the Equestrian Order; Iustus Lip^^us clears this
place, saying, De mil. Romans l. 2. p. 87.
that the words of Appian were meant only of the Infantry, in regard the
Knights were of equal rank and dignity with the Tribunes.

At length, in the middle times of the Empire, it appears that the Foot
Soldiers were also allowed the honor of wearing Gold Rings, no less than
Knights; for L. 3 c 25*
Herodian affirms, that Severus (among other Privileges granted by him to his
Soldiers) was the first, of all the Roman Emperors, who permitted them the use
of Gold Rings. And afterward, in times of greater liberty, the use of them
grew far more frequent and promiscuous; insomuch (as In Genial. Dier. l. 2. c.
19.
Alexander ab Alexandro notes) that not only the Roman Soldiers without
distinction, but at length the Freedmen, as also Women, and the meanest Slaves,
were allowed to wear Gold Rings, which formerly was not lawful.

Among the Interpreters of Lucius Florus, we find that Zevecotius upon these
words Lib. 2. c. ^*
Modii duo Annulorum Carthaginem missi, dignitasque Equestris taxata mensura,
whereby Florus observes, that from these two measures of Rings, the
Carthaginians did judge how many Roman Knights were slain at the Battle of
Cannae; we say the said Zevecotius has this observation; for the dishonor
received at this overthrow, unto the time of Severus the Emperor, the use of
Gold Rings was not granted in warlike Expeditions, but only to the Tribunes;
and to others those of Iron, which exclusion of the Roman Knights, he conceives
included in the word caeteris; but what ground he has for this opinion we know
not, since we find no such remark in any ancient Author.

For had the Equestrian Order, after the said Battle, been prohibited the use
of Gold Rings abroad, until the time of Severus, doubtless Herodian had then
mentioned them to have received, not a donation, but restoration of this
privilege from Severus; besides, those he speaks of were (...) only the Foot
Soldiers, not Knights; moreover it was the donation of a thing (...) which they
never before enjoyed. And therefore most certain it is, he could not intend the
Knights here; since they from ancient time had enjoyed, and (for ought we can
find to the contrary) did to this time, and beyond, continue the wearing of
Gold Rings abroad, no less than at home.

To conclude, that which seems very much to persuade, that the use of Gold
Rings was grown promiscuous, long e're these times, to wit, before the Battle
of Cannae, is this following passage of Pliny; Lib. 33* cap. 1.
That there was a promiscuous use of Gold Rings in the second Punick War; and
his reason is this, Lib. 33* cap. 1.
If they had not been at that time worn by others, as well as Knights, Hannibal
could not have sent those three Measures of Rings to Carthage.

But L. Florus, an ancienter Author than Pliny, is clear (in the place above
cited) that it was only they of the Equestrian Order, who (by those Measures of
Rings) were known to be slain near Cannae, and not any other; and that there
were but two Measures of them, not three, as Pliny reports; so that Pliny
grounding his opinion for the confused or indifferent use of Gold Rings, upon
the number of those Measures they are said to fill, which number by an Author
more ancient is affirmed to be less; we conceive, this deduction of his has
not weight enough to be relied on.

SECT. VII. The Ensigns and Ornaments of Knighthood among other Nations.
FRom the Romans we shall pass to other Nations, 1. Shield and Lance.
and first to the Germans; among whom, as Tacitus affirms, the Shield and
Lance were accounted the grand Badges of Military Honor, or Knighthood, and
accordingly given their young Gentlemen that were to be admitted to so
honorable a Dignity: Tacit. de morib. Germ. c. 2.
for it was not the custom (says he) for any one among them to take Arms,
before the State had approved him able to manage them; but then in their
public Ass^mblies, some Prince, or the Father, or else a Kinsman of the young
man, adorned him with a Shield and Lance (and whom they termed in their
Language Camb. Brit. p. 125.
Knecht) to which Tacitus also adds, Loco cit.
That this Investiture was the Gown among them; and the first honor bestowed
upon their youth.

This also says Loco ^uper relat.
Cambden, was the first and most simple manner of creating a Knight. This the
Lombards, this the Franks, and this our Countrymen, all descending out of
Germany, in old time used: and was to us (in the opinion of the learned
G^ossar. verbo Miles.
Sir Henry Spelman) the Foundation of the Knightly Order.

Much like that of the ancient Germans, was the custom of making Knights among
the old Irish: for either the Froissard. Hist l. 3. c 63.
King, or Father of the young man created him a Knight; and if his Father were
dead, then the next of Kin did it; and the manner of creation was thus:
Froissard. Hist l. 3. c 63.
A Shield was hung upon a Pole or Stake, fixed in the ground, and a small Lance
or Spear (such as the Youth designed to this honor could weild) was given to
him, and therewith he ran a Tilt at the Shield, and the more he broke of these
Lances, the greater reputation he gained.

In le Theater d' Hon. l. 1. c. 2.
Andrew Favin notes, that the Shield and Lance were the proper Arms
appertaining heretofore to a French Knight, and therefore in their
Capitularies, called Arma Patria; these, Esquires carried always after their
Masters, wheresoever they went, and what occasion soever they were engaged in.

And it is an Observation of Cl. Salmasius, in relation to the Nobility and
Gentry of France, De re milit. Rom p. 227. in pri^c.
that at this day all the Ensigns and Marks of Honor, appertaining to persons
of highest extraction, are ^questrian, and take denomination from the
Equestrian Militia: and that the Shields and Scutes (as they are vulgarly
called) in which the Arms of the Nobility are expressed, are Ibid.
Equestrian Targets, not Shields or Bucklers of Foot Soldiers.

The form of the Equestrian Targets among the Romans, were inclining to an
Oval, as may be seen by those cut upon Trajans Column at Rome; after which
Figure, diverse of our Nobility and Gentry have of late times also fashioned the
Escotcheons, whereon their Arms are born: but the figure of our more ancient
Escotcheons, came nearer that description which Lib 9. circa finem.
Livy gives us of the Samnites shields, whose upper parts were broader, and the
head of an even height, for defense of the breast and shoulders, but growing
narrower and narrower, toward the bottom, finished in a point.

2. Belt.
Another Ensign and Ornament of Knightly Honor is the Cingulum militare, or
Military Belt, called also Balteus, or Baltheus, which Varro says is a L. 18.
Rer. hum.
Tus^an word, and signifies a Military Girdle. That which the Roman Soldiers
wore, was made of Varro l. 4. de Lingua Lat.
Leather, and adorned with Studs or Bosses (from whom it devolved to the
Germans and Franks) and is in like manner described by Theat d' Hon. l. 1. c. 6.
Favin, to be made of a large Thong of white Leather, having the ends pure
Gold, covered and fastened with Studs of the same metal, to which the Sword
was made fast on the left side.

With him does another French Writer concur, saying, that the Claude Fauchet,
en les Origines des Chevaliers, etc. fo 2.
Incincture was made of a large Thong of Leather, and was termed Balteus, and
by the French a Baudrier, which Favin affirms to be so called of the old French
also.

Apud Io. Iac. Chisterium in Anast. Childerici Regi^. p. 197.
Rudolphus Abbot of St. Trudon in Germany, speaking concerning the finding of
the Body of St. Gereon Knight and Martyr, at Colen, in the Monastery of St.
Pantaleon, says that his Military Girdle was found to that time whole and
entire, and that it was of black Leather, almost an Ell long: But his Sword was
consumed, and only the pomel (of the form of an Egg) almost eaten up with rust,
was likewise found at his left side nigh to his Belt.

This Ensign of Honor came in time to be richly adorned both with Gold and
precious Stones, as Favin also notes L. 3. c. 1.
in another place of his Theater of Honor, out of St. Gregory Victor Archbishop
of Tours: as also that it was not the common wearing Girdle, inasmuch as the
French in general used golden Girdles; but that the Knights wore such as were
garnished with great Buckles, Studs, and Rings of pure Gold, being of great
price and value; to show their dignity and power in Military Commands: and with
such a Belt Mal^sb. de gest Reg. l. 2. c. 6.
set with Pearls and precious Stones, was young Athelstan (afterward one of
our Saxon Kings) girded, when he received Knighthood from his Grandfather
Alfred.

It is to be f^rther noted, that by this Badge of Knighthood, were our Knights
anciently known, no less than by their gilt Swords, Spurs, and golden Collars
of S^. howbeit it has not for a long time been used with us, at the creation
of a Knight, save only of the Bath; but instead thereof, the dubbing with a
naked Sword suffices.

To this Belt was also added a Sword, 3. Sword.
and such a one, as in the esteem of some, was different from the ordinary use,
and therefore is by Favin termed Theat. d'Honneur. l. 1. ^. 6.
the Sword of a Knight. In time of Christianity this Sword came to be hallowed
with great Ceremony, either by some great Prelate, or other Ecclesiastical
Person: the form of the Benediction is to be found in the Page 781.
Titles of Honor, and in Favins Loco ci^.
Theater of Honor.

This among the Ensigns of Knightly Honor has obtained the principal place and
regard; for it is chiefly the Sword with which Knights are now created; and
has become so far ennobled, that the Red Cross assumed by the Francise, de
Rades y Andrada en Chronic. Sanctiago. c. 1. p. 1. b. etc. 4. p. 6. b. videsis
Historia de los Ordimes Militares per Fr. Car^ de Torres. l. 1. p. 9. b.
Knights of St. James in Spain for their Badge of Honor, is drawn in the
fashion of a Sword. And the Collar of the Order of the Sword and Belt in Sweden
is composed of Swords bloody at the point, and encompassed about with Leathern
Belts; the manner and order whereof may be seen in the Plate prefixed to the
third Chapter ensuing.

Another eminent Badge of Knighthood (which succeeded in the place of the Gold
Ring) is the Golden Spurs, 4. Spurs.
wherewith at the time of their Creation Knights were wont to be adorned; and
Fr. Menen. Delic. Equest. Edit. Colon. Agrip. p. 13.
these (a little after the Conquest) were added to the other Ensigns, for more
and greater Ornament, and are usually carried by a Nobleman at the Coronation
of our Kings, to signify their Knighthood.

Those Spurs appointed to be made against Christmas, Anno Domini 1252. and sent
to York, to be used there, at the Knighthood of Alexander the Third, King of
Scots, were of Silver, Claus. an. 36. H. 3. m. 30.
gilt over, and the Straps curiously wrought of Silk, instead of Leather.

They were usually put on after the person had been conducted and presented to
the King or Prince, who gave the Honor, beginning with the right Heel; and
given to signify, Theat. d'Honneur. l. 1. c. 6.
that the new made Knight should not only declare his valor by his Sword, but
also by the management of his Horse; which he should encourage and excite with
his Spurs to the carrying on of his valiant designs.

Of so great an esteem has the Knightly Spurs been, that from thence, Seld.
Tit. of Honor. p. 437.
Knights Batchellors are generally called in Latin Equites Aur^ti, among the
Germans Ritterdess Gulden Sporns, and with us heretofore Rot. Parl. 3. E. 4.
Knights of the Spur. Nay one of the Military Orders was instituted under this
Title: and the Delic. Equest. p. 150
Collar of the Order of the Elephant in Denmark, is (according to Delic.
Equest. p. 150
Franciscus Mennenius) composed of Elephants and Spurs. It was conceived so
proper and suitable a Badge of Knighthood, that it has been thought fit to be
given for Coat Armor, to some Families here in England, who bear the Sur-name
of Knight: as namely to Registrum Armor. partiam borealium Angliae, tempore
Regis Hen 8. penes Thom. nuper Com. Arundell. and Sur.
Knight of Shrewsbury [I.] Inter Collect. Concess.
Knight of Charwelton in the County of Northampton [II.] and Ibid.
Knight of St. Dennis in Hampshire [III].



We further have it certified by the Kings and Heralds of Arms, Anno 10. Iac.
Regis, among other rights belonging to the Degree of a Knight Baneret, that he
MS. in Offic. Armor.
upon the account of his Knighthood, might wear gilt Spurs, as well as a gilt
sword: and that they have been accounted an Essential Badge of Knighthood, may
be collected from the Ceremony of the degradation of a Knight, where his gilt
Spurs are See the degradation of Sir Andr. Harclay in Seldens Titles of Honor,
p. 788.
first cut off with a Hatchet.

5. Collar.
In the last place, although the use of wearing Collars of Gold has been most
ancient, and one of the usual causes for which they were bestowed, was to honor
Military Virtue; and though among the Romans, the Collar gave a Sur-name to one
of their chiefest Families, and consequently became of much esteem among them:
yet do we no where find it reckoned among the Ensigns of their Equestrian
Order: But among some other Nations it was accounted a Badge and Mark of
Knighthood.

De Antiqu^rum Torquibu^ p. 37.
John Schefser, from a passage out of ^. varior. c. 10.
Pancirollus, which tells us that Golden Collars were reckoned among the
Ornaments, worn by the Roman Presidents of Provinces, would likewise have it an
Ensign of Scheffer de Antiq. Torq. p. 38.
Knightly Dignity among the Germans, affirming withal, Scheffer de Antiq.
Torq. p. 38.
that the more ancient Statues and Images of their Knights, were adorned with
Collars.

He also notes, as a thing observable, Ibid. p. 42.
that this custom of bestowing Collars upon Martialists, was very much
practiced by the Germans, especially as to their Knights; and that in ancient
times, such as were in repute for their gallantry and valor, were adorned
therewith.

It may be safely presumed, that Collars were Badges of Knighthood among the
ancient Gauls, since they were bestowed upon valiant men, and such as had
rendered themselves conspicuous by acts of Prowess and Chivalry, as a worthy
recompense of their Virtue: and from Pliny it appears, that the ancient Gauls
were wont to wear them in Fight, for as the said Schefser notes upon Gallos cum
auro pugnare solitos, Torquatus indicio est. Plin. l. 33. c. 1.
his words, no other thing can be understood by the word Auro than Torques.

The like may be said of the ancient Scheff. Syntag. p. 56, 57, and 5^.
Britans, Danes, and Goths, among whom it was customary to wear them, as
denoting such as were remarkable for their valor.

But in later times, it was the peculiar Fashion of Knights among us, to wear
Golden Collars, composed of SS, or other various works; so that those Monuments
are known to belong to Knights, on whose Portraictures such Ornaments are now
found.

To conclude, we must acknowledge that this noble Ensign has been likewise
honored with a particular and high estimation among the Founders of Military
Orders, since it is manifest from Catalogue des Chevaliers de l'Ordre du
Collier de Savoy dict. de l'anonciade.
Francis Capre, that the Order of Savoy was at first called, The Order of the
Collar, and not by the Title of the Catalogue des Chevaliers de l'Ordre du
Collier de Savoy dict. de l'anonciade.
Anunciade, until the year 1518. as will more amply appear by and by.

So that if we sum up the principal Ensigns of Knighthood, ancient, and modern,
we shall find them to have been, or are, a Horse, Gold Ring, Shield, and
Lance, a Belt and Sword, gilt spurs, and a Gold Chain or Collar.

But from these have later Ages, more especially, selected the Belt, or golden
Girdle, Sword, Collar, Spurs, and Rings; (...) which we find innumerated, and
particularly called the Ornaments and Ensigns appertaining to Knighthood, in
some Imperial Diplomas, and wherewith the Emperor is therein said to have
adorned and invested his new created Knight, according to Custom; as for
instance, that of Rodolph the Second, granted to Sir Robert Sherley, and dated
at Prague, the second of June 1610. of which a fuller account may be taken in
Part. 2. l. 10. p. 1806.
Purchase his Pilgrimage, where the Imperial Instrument (containing also the
creating of him an Earl Palatine of the Empire, and bestowing sundry
Privileges and Prerogatives therewith, worthy of knowing) is translated
verbatim.

The Author of the Iurisprudentia Heroica has afforded an Example in this kind,
in another Diploma of the same Emperors, made to Page 403.
Sir Charles Rillehe, dated at Vienna the eleventh of February, anno 1594. And
there is a privilege usually granted in these Diplomas, that the Knights shall
in all Exercises, Actions, and Enterprises, use and wear Chains, Swords, Spurs,
Robes, Trappings, and whatsoever Furniture else belonging to Horses, either all
Gold or gilt.

The Trappings here mentioned put us in mind of a passage in Lib. 33. c. 1.
circa medium.
Pliny, whence it may be conjectured, that Horse-Trappings were sometime
heretofore accounted part of the Ensigns of a Roman Knight; for, having told us
that one Flavius a man of mean birth, had ingratiated himself with the Commons,
by publishing the Mystery of the whole course of days, pleadable and not
pleadable, which his Master Appius Claudius Caecus had discovered to him; he
adds, that a Bill passed by general consent, to create him Aedilis Curulis,
together with Q. Anicius, without any regard had to those other, who, being
nobly born, had l^kewise stood for that Dignity: And that at the same time he
was also made Tribunus Plebis, at which the whole Senate took such offense,
that they laid aside their Rings, and some thought (but were mistaken) that the
Knights did the like, nay believed further, that they left off their
Horse-Trappings, as if from them the name of Knight had been bestowed; and
consequently the Phalerae, no less than the Annuli, or Equi, were accounted
Badges of the Equestrian Order, after they were drawn into fashion and use.

However we may suppose, that the public Horse, if at first, was not
afterward given naked; but with such accoutrements and furniture, as were both
for use and ornament in War: the fashion whereof may be observed among those
Sculptures upon Trajans Column at Rome, a Draught whereof was first made by
Iulio Romano, then set forth by Franciscus Villamena; and last of all, after a
long and retchless neglect (these Plates being thrown by, and welnigh spoiled
with rust and carelessness) were happily brought to light and repaired, by the
care and expense of my noble Friend, accomplished with great variety of useful
and ingenious knowledge, John Evelyn Esquire, during his residence at Rome.

SECT. VIII. Qualifications for Knighthood.
AS touching the Qualifications which formerly made persons capable of this
Honor of Knighthood, the principal and most remarkable were these three, Merit,
Birth, and Estate.

In the right distribution of this Honor and Dignity, 1. Merit*
Merit has been by all allowed to challenge a principal share; and the
deserving judged fittest to be preferred, before those who wanted that
Qualification.

Among the Romans, no Soldier was denied or envyed his part in the Prizes of
Honor or Recompense, to wit, that sort of Crown, or such other of the Military
Rewards which their valor had deserved; and not only their Emperors, but all
other Princes found the advantage of conferring benefits on the meritorious, in
being thereby best served: For those who have showed themselves inclined to
noble and valiant Actions, having once tasted the sweet of Reward, are
generally so encouraged, as no danger has seemed too great to attempt, no
enterprise so difficult but might be made feasible. But of this subject there
is so much spoke, and to be met with almost every where, that we need not add
more.

As to the second Qualification, 2. Birth.
namely, Birth; there was so great c^re taken, that (says In le Theater d'
Hon. l. 1. c. 1.
Andrew Favin) to prevent the admittance of any, not of eminent and generous
Extraction, into this Dignity; of the Ordinances made concerning the Order of
Knighthood, the first Article is, That the parties who enter thereinto, ought
first to make it appear they be Gentlemen of three paternal descents; and that
the Arms they bear have been born by their Fathers, Grandfathers, and
great-Grandfathers.

It was also the Law of the Empire, That no man should be capable of this
Dignity, but he that was descended from one, who was Miles ( which Mr. Seldom
interprets not by Knight, but Gentleman, or Nobilis) as appears by the
Constitution of Frederick the Second, elected Emperor anno 1212. and mentioned
in the Page 436.
Titles of Honor; and perhaps there was an Eye had to this Law, in the
Sentences upon the following Cases.

Nor has it been (by some) accounted sufficient, that the person Knighted
should be a Gentleman by the Fathers side, unless he were so also by the
Mothers, at least she was to be a Freewoman, and not a Servant: Io. Tilius
Comment. de Rebus Gallicis l. 2. p. 181. vide Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 23.
for if she were a Servant or Bondwoman, though the Father were a Gentleman,
the Children were still ranked within the Degree of Servitude, and In Servum
autem non cadit Equestris Diguitas. Ib.
counted incapable of the Knightly Dignity.

Heretofore the conferring of Knighthood was not restrained to the Sovereign
power, as now it is; but that the greater Subjects did sometime make Knights:
But where the honor has been given by such, to those who were Vassals to
another, the bestowing thereof was accounted illegal, and they that took upon
them to give it, were liable to censure; because by this action they took
another Villain or Bondsman from him, which was a manifest wrong, and ought not
to be done. As in the case of the two Sons of Io. Tilius Comment. p. 182.
Philip de Bourbon, one whereof was Knighted by the Earl of Flanders, the other
by the Earl of Nevers: Whereupon by an Order dated on All Saints day, Anno
Domini 1279. and another at Whitsontide following, both the said Earls were
fined, and the two Brethren condemned to pay one thousand pounds apiece; though
by the Kings grace and favor they kept their Knighthoods.

And to show that this Law was elsewhere observed more strictly, and the breach
thereof liable to more severe sentences, those among the Mennen. Delic.
Equestr. p. 25.
Aragonians that descended from Knights in a direct line by the Fathers side
(which were called Infancones, and accounted Gentlemen, whether legitimate or
illegitimate) were capable of being Knights, and no other: Mennen. Delic.
Equestr. p. 25.
So that if one, not an Infancon, were promoted to Knighthood, by a Rico Hombre
(which seems to be a higher Degree of Nobility) both the Rico Hombre was to
lose the Honor he had, and the person whom he pretended to promote, remained
still a Villain or Plebeian.

But it was otherwise where a Nobleman Knighted his own Vassal, as in the case
reported by Io. Tilius Comment. de Reb. Gallicis. l. 2. p. 181.
Philip de Beau-manoir in his Customary of the Year 1283. where the Son of a
Gentleman and a Woman-Servant, was Knighted by him, whose Servant the Woman
was: and his condition being afterward discovered, the Nobleman would have
challenged him for his Slave, but in regard his Knightly Dignity had vindicated
him from servitude and vassallage (though his Lord was deceived in conferring
the Honor) he was adjudged to remain free and a Knight; which he could not have
done, if any other but his Lord had Knighted him: for which this reason is
there given, Io. Tilius Comment. de Reb. Gallicis. l. 2. p. 181.
because no other person had sufficient power to infranchise him.

3. Estate.
The third and last of those Qualifications, which we have thought fit to take
notice of here, is that of Estate or Wealth, which serves to support the
Dignity of Knighthood: for we find that in all Times and Countries, when men
were grown wealthy, they thereby (as by Merit or Birth) became capable of
Honors.

Thus Wealth was so much regarded among the Chalcedonians, as Lib. 5.
Herodotus tells us, that those who were rich, bore the name of Knights. It was
Arnobius, adversus Gentes. lib. 4.
Estate that entitled a man to this Honor among the Romans: for the Censor (as
has been before observed out of L. 9. c. 19.
Livy) might compel any Citizen, who had an Estate equal to the Equestrian
Cense, to enter into the Equestrian Order, and this old Roman Cense consisted
of Plin. l. 33. c. 1. vide porro Bernegger in Sueton. in Caesar. c. 33.
400000 Sesterces, which according to our learned Seldens computation amounts
to Titles of Honor. p. 438.
3025. l. of our Money.

And as anciently in old Rome, so not long after the Conquest here in England
(as Brit. p. 126.
Cambden observes) were Knights dignified for their wealth, and state of
living. For they who had a Knights Fee, to wit (says he) six hundred and
fourscore Acres of Land, might claim as their right the Ornaments and Badges of
Knighthood.

But by the way it appears from Tit. of Honor. p. 691.
Mr. Seldom, that not any certain number, or extent of Acres made a Knights
Fee: and by several Writs directed to the Sh^riffs of all Counties in England,
to make Proclamation for receiving the Honor of Knighthood, in the Reigns of
Hen. 3. and Ed. 1. as also by the Act de Militibus, anno 1. Ed. 2. it appears
that the Census Militis, or valuation of the Estate of a Knight, was measured
by Twenty Pounds Land by the year (and sometimes more) and this was counted the
most reasonable way of Estimation, because one Acre might be more or less in
value th^n another.

And the Parallel yet held as to the matter of enforcement and compulsion, to
take this Honor; for by an ancient Prerogative, several of our Kings, have at
their pleasures compelled such persons who held a whole Knights Fee, or so much
Land, whose annual value, as aforesaid, answered thereto, to take this Dignity
upon them; and to that purpose sent forth their Mandates in Writs, directed to
the Sheriffs of each County, to make Proclamation, Claus. de anno 9. H. 3.
membr. 24. dors^, and Claus. 1. E. 2. membr. 25. dorso.
That all those, within their several Bailiwicks, who were of full age, and had
one whole Knights Fee, and were not Knighted, should appear before the King (on
a certain day, in the Writ set down) ready fitted and prepared to receive the
Honor of Knighthood.

Sometimes these Writs included, both such as were possessed of Lands worth Qui
habeant 20 l. librata^ terra, vel Feodum unius militis integrum valens 20 l.
per annum. Claus. 37. H. 3. in. 25. dorso.
Twenty pounds per annum, and such as held a whole Knights Fee, valued at that
annual sum: but the yearly value set by the King was not always certain, for
sometimes we find it to be Stows Abr. p. 290. an. 40. H. 3. Camb. Brit. p. 126.
fifteen pounds, then Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 12. dorso.
twenty pounds, at other times Claus. 5. E. 3. pars 1. m. 12.
thirty pounds, then Rot. Parl. 20. E. 1. Claus. 17. E. 2. m. 8. and 19 E 2. m.
16. dorso. Claus. 7. E. 3 pars 1. m. 22. dorso. Brevia R^gis an. 2. R. 2. pars
1. and par. 2. Pat. 15. E. 3. pars 1. m. 15. dorso. and Claus. 12. H. 4. m. 10.
dorso.
forty pounds, and sometimes Claus. 9. E. 2. m. 13 dorso. de decreto Parl.
fifty pounds.

Anno 40. Hen. 3. Speeds Chron. p. 533.
The Sheriffs in England were amerced, because they had not distrained all
those who had such Estates in Land, as the Law limited to take the Order of
Knighthood, or otherwise to pay their Fines; and we observe the Command in the
Kings Writ to be now and then accompanied with much severity, in case the
Sheriff should be negligent in the discharge of his duty, or connive with any
for lucre of a Bribe; as appears in that directed to the Sheriff of
Northamptonshire, the words whereof are.

Claus. 28. H. 3. m. 12. dorso.
Rex Vicecom. Northt. salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod sicut teipsum and omnia
tua diligis, omnes illos in Rallivatua, qui habeant viginti libratas terrae
distringas, quod se Milites faciendos, citra Nativitatem Sancti Iohannis
Baptistae proxime futur. Sciturus pro certo, quod si pro munere, vel aliqua
occasion, aliquam relaxationem eis feceris, vel aliquem respectum dederis, Nos
ita graviter ad te capiemus, quod omnibus diebus vitae tuae te senties esse
gravatum. T. R. apud Wyndesor decimo quarto die Aprilis.

Where, upon appearance, after such Proclamation, a reasonable or lawful excuse
has been alleged, as Pat. an. 20. E. 3. pars 2. m. 29.
old age, Pat. 15. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16.
irrecoverable weakness, Pat. 7. E. 3. pars 2. m. 30.
loss of Limbs, being Claus. 25. H. 3. pars 1. m. 7. dorso.
in holy Orders, or the like, whereby the Body was wholly disabled to perform
personal service; there, the allegations have been admitted by the King, the
persons acquitted, and by Letters Patents exempted from taking this Military
Order during life.

But there were many other causes and reasons which usually obtained a
suspension for some certain time, (besides those set down in the Act of
Parliament Anno 1. E. 2.) as where a man was at present greatly Claus. an. 36.
H. 3. m 23.
indebted, or bound to attend some necessary employment, as a Communia de Term.
Mich. 9. H. 6. Ro^. 14. dorso.
Sergeant at Law in the Common Pleas Court, for which nevertheless, the party
suing for such favor, paid a Fine, and therefore in some Writs we have seen a
clause added, to give intimation, that (where any reasonable cause could be
made appear, at the time of Knighthood, to impede the receiving of the Order)
the person might be admitted to make Quod sin^ ad Nos, etc. parati, ad
capiendum Arma militaria, vel ad sinem nobiscum faciendum pro respectu habendo
de milicia sua.
Fine for the respite thereof.

Yet was not this Fine constant or certain, but estimated and set according to
the nature of the excuse, or length of time given: for instance, Robert de
Menevil of Northumberland, having obtained respite for two years, was set at
Orig. 51. H 3. m. 6.
five Marks, and Peter Founden at Ib. m. ^.
forty eight Shillings and eight Pence, for three years respite; but John de
Drokensford paid Orig. 7. E. 3*
ten Pounds for a suspension of his Knighthood, only for the same time. And in
these cases the Kings Writ usually issued to the Sheriff, with command to Claus
35. H. 3. m 2. dorso, and Claus. 36. H. 3. m 23.
permit the person to have that respite, and to forbear taking any distress,
till the time compounded for should be expired, and if, nevertheless, the
person happened to be impleaded for not having received Knighthood, the Kings
Letters Patents (granting him the time of respite being produced) have been
Placita corona in Com. Derb. coram I. de Vallibus, etc. anno 9. E. 1.
allowed.

If any person had been distrained by the Sheriff, and a retorn thereof made to
the King, and did not appear at the time and place, in the Writ nominated, to
receive the Honor of Knighthood; in such case we sometimes find that a Writ
has issued, giving command to the Sheriff, forthwith to Orig. de anno 51. H 3.
m. 4.
seize all his Lands and Tenements into the Kings hands, and answer the profits
thereof into the Exchequer.

The Fines and Amerciaments set upon such contempt, seem to have been
arbitrary, and the Court swayed, according as the nature of the default
appeared: William the Son of Gilbert de Alton, paid Communia Fines, etc. Term.
Mich. 9. E. 3.20.2. Ebor.
twenty shillings for not appearing and receiving Knighthood, according to the
command of the Kings Proclamation; Thomas Pauncefoot paid Com. de Term. Hill.
14. H. 4. Somerset.
four Nobles, John de Lodbroke Communia de Term. Mich. 56. H. 3. incipiente 57.
War.
forty shillings, the Commun. de Term. Mich 33. E. 3.23.3 dorso.
like Fine was set upon Simon de Bradeney and Thomas Trivet, both of
Somersetshire, and John de Neirvote in the County of Bucks; and lastly, William
Lassels paid Communia de Term. Pasch. 31. E. 3. fines, and Rot. 2. Ebor.
four pounds, for that he had not received Knighthood before Michaelmas, Anno
30. E. 3. and for obtaining respite for three years from thence.

But albeit in the promiscuous course of bestowing of Knighthood, where the men
of Wealth and Estate (whether otherwise worthy or not) became dignified, yet
was not the gate of Honor then shut against those, who wanting Riches sought
her out, by the paths of Virtue and Merit: For where men of low Fortunes
deserved well of their Country, and that for their good services the King had
judged them worthy of Honor; He was accordingly pleased to bestow such annual
Pension, or Lands upon them, as He esteemed sufficient to maintain that degree
of Dignity (whatsoever it was) so conferred. And this is agreeable to the
judgment of the Author of the Division du Monde, who says, That the Honor of
Knighthood is not to be given to any person who has not a considerable Estate;
unless sufficient means to support the Honor of that Order be also given with
it.

Hence it is, that the Kings of England have allowed Pensions (and frequent
mention of them is made in the Rolls) sometimes during pleasure, and then again
during the lives of those on whom they have thought fit to confer the Honor,
for their better support: as for instance, King Edward the Third granted by
Letters Patents Pat. 33. E. 3. pars prima. m. 22.
forty Pounds per annum, out of his Exchequer, to John at Lee, Queen Isabel's
Steward; in auxilium status sui manutenendi, first during pleasure, and
afterward for his life.

But the case is more remarkable of Sir Nele Loring (who afterward attained
the Honor to be one of the first Founders of the most noble Order of the
Garter) for whose valiant performances, in the Naval Fight against the French
at Sluice, the King conferred the Dignity of Knighthood upon him, and
immediately after granted to him and his Heirs Males Communia de Term. Tri^.
15. E. 3.
twenty Pounds per annum, that he might better maintain that Honor, until he
could settle on him and them, so much in value of Lands, or yearly Rents in Fee.

And here the following Grant made by King Richard the Second to Sir John
Walssh, of forty Marks per annum for life, to support that Dignity of
Knighthood he had given him, may very well be inserted.

Pat. 8. R. 2. pars prima m. 8.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod cum nos pro eo quod dilectus
and fidelis noster Johannes Walssh, nuper in praesentia nostra pro defensione
su^ multum strenue fecit, prout satis est notorium, ipsum Ordinem Militarem
suscipere facerimus, and Ordinem illum ei de manibus nostris dederimus, and eum
penes nos ipsos retinuerimus: Et quia ipse sufficienter non habet unde Onus cum
honor valeat supportare, Dedimus and Concessimus ei Quadraginta Marcas per
annum, ad terminum vitae suae, percipiend. per manus Vicecomitis nostri
Lincolniensis qui pro tempore fuerit, de exitibus balivae suae, ad terminos
Paschae and Sancti Michaelis, per aequales portiones. In cujus, etc. Test R.
apud Westminst. quinto die Decembris.

The Kings of England, upon the same account, did usually bestow like annual
rewards on such whose merit raised them to the Degree of Baneret; and in the
Letters Patents, whereby such Pensions are granted, we observe it usually
expressed, ad manutenendum statum Baneretti, or words to the like effect.

Hereupon King Edward the Third gave to Sir Reginald Cobb^m Pat. 10. E 3. part.
2. m. 9.
four hundred Marks per annum, during his life, to be paid him out of the
Exchequer; afterward the Pat. 11. E 3. pars 1.
Manor of Tippenham, in Buckinghamshire, for life; and a Pat. 14. E. 3. p. 1.
m. 23.
Mill under Oxford Castle, with a Meadow there, called Kings Meade.

We find moreover, that Thomas de Rokeley, who in the service of this King had
received the Degree of Baneret, had Claus. 20. ^. 3. pars 2.
two hundred Marks per annum granted unto him, pro sustentatione sua, during
life. To Sir John Lysle (one other of the Founders of the said most noble
Order) Pat. 29. E. 3. pars prima m. 29.
ut ipse statum Baneretti (which the King had before conferred on him) melius
manutenere possit, he gave two hundred pounds a year during life; and upon
Roger de Swynerton Baneret, He bestowed for life pro statu suo manutenendo, all
the Pat. 8. E. 3. pars prima. m. ^
Manors, Lands, etc. which, lying in the Counties of Stafford and Chester,
came to the Kings hands, by the forfeiture of Hugh le Despenser, as likewise
the Manor of Barew in the County Palatine of Chester, to him and his Heirs.

And it is worthy of note, that some times such like Grants have been made by
the consent of Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament; for so were the
Claus. 30. H. 6. m 21.
two hundred Marks per annum given to Geoffry le Scroop Baneret, in the Reign of
King Henry the Sixth.

Thus far we have spoken of the Qualifications, which capacitate him, who
receives the Degree of Knighthood; it will not now be amiss to touch upon one
particular relating to the Person, who confers this Honor, before we leave this
Section.

It has been thought by diverse, that no man can make a Knight unless himself
be first Knighted, and because that some have not given this Honor before they
received it, they thence would imply, that no man ought: for so Math.
Westminst. anno 1306.
Prince Edward of Carnarvan, having been first Knighted by his Father, King
Edward the First, forthwith Knighted a great number more in Westminster Abbey.
So Anno 20. E. 3. the King being landed at Hoggs in Normandy, Knighted Stows
Chron. fo. 377.
Edward his eldest Son, and immediately the said Prince made Mortimer,
Monteacute, Ros, and others, Knights. And Ibid. fo. 1000.
King Edward the Sixth, being Knighted by the ^arl of Hertford, in the Tower of
London, as soon as the Ceremony was over, Knighted Henry Hoblethorn Lord Mayor
of London, with the same Sword, wherewith himself received this Military Honor.

But it is apparent enough, that they who never were, and others who never
could be Knights, have conferred this Dignity; and we are to understand that
necessity and custom has in this case the force of a Law; for anciently
Bishops and Priests made Knights, so also do the Popes, and some
Commonwealths, nay Women, in whom the supreme Power is vested, may, and have
done the like, witness our Queens, Mary and Elizabeth, and we find it to be the
ancient Law in Spain, L. 11. tit. 2^. partida 2.
That the King or his Son and Heir, though they be no Knights, may nevertheless
make Knights, by reason that they possess the Kingdom, and are therefore the
Head and Chief of Chivalry, and consequently all the power thereof, is closed
up and contained in the Kings command.

To conclude, in all the instances and examples, where the creation of a Knight
has been performed, either with Ceremony, or by Diploma (of which we shall
speak in the next Section) it may be observed, that the Dignity was always
given by, and received from the hands of another Person, except only the Kings
of Spain, who Io Iac. Chifflet. in suis luminibus novi^ praerogativis, ad
vindicias Hispanias, Lumine 13. p. 395.
time out of mind have made themselves Knights, and this by virtue of an old Lex
Suprarbriensis.
Law written in the Aragonian Tongue, as Ambrosius Morales reports, which says
thus: In Chron Hispan. l. 13. c. 2.
The whole night preceding the Ceremony (viz. of Knighting) the King shall
watch in the Church, in the morning he shall hear Mass, and offer both Purple,
and some of his Money, and after he shall receive the Sacrament: And when they
are going to raise him, he shall ascend upon his Shield, the Noblemen holding
and supporting him: Then shall all cry with a loud voice three times, Real,
Real, Real: This done, he shall command to scatter more of his Money, to the
quantity of one hundred shillings among the People; and to show that no man
upon earth has any power over him, he shall gird himself with the Sword, made
after the form of a Cross, and that day can no other man be Knighted.

One Example of this ancient Rite is remembered by the said In suis Lumin. p.
397.
Chiffletius, at the Coronation of King Ferdinando the Third, who took from the
high Altar the regal Sword, and with his own hand girt himself therewith; to
the end being so girded, he might show himself openly to the People, and
declare, that he received the power of Governing and making War from none but
God alone, and that he owed not his Kingdoms to the gift of any mortal man.

And it seems this manner of Knighting was a thing of such remarque, that it
was sometime taken notice of and entered for a memorable note of time; as for
instance in the Test of a Anno 1220 facta Charta apud Segoviam quinto Kal.
Febr. Era 1258. anno regni mei tertio, quo ego memoratus Rex Ferdinandus, in
Monasterio Sanctae Mariae Regalis de Burgos, manu propria me accinxi cingulo
militari.
Charter, which this Don Ferdinando made to the Monastery of De solos alvos, in
the third year of his Reign, and is reported by the said Chiffletius, out of
Colmenars History of Segovia, c. 20. as also by another Charter, wherein the
Seldens Tit. of Honor. p. 577.
Knighting Prince Edward eldest Son to our King Henry the Third, by Alphonso
King of Castile, at Bruges anno Domini 1255. is remembered after the same manner.

SECT. IX. The various Ceremonies used at the conferring of Knighthood.
BEsides the donation of the beforementioned honorary Ensigns, there were
several Ceremonies and Formalities, begun to be used in the middle Ages, at the
investiture of Knights; some of which we shall here set down by way of Instance.

1. Girding with the Sword and Belt.
The most ancient of these, is the investing of the Knight with a Belt and
Sword; and this was performed, either by putting the Belt loose over the
shoulder, or girding it close about the waste: the Bend in Armory represents
the one, and the Fess the other. Of this kind of Honor we have spoken Sect. 4.
before.

The first Christian Kings and Princes (says Theater d' Honneur l. 1. c. 6.
Favin) at the giving of the Cingulum militare, kissed the new Knight on the
left cheek, and used these words, In the honor of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, I make you a Knight. And this was called Osculum pacis, the
kiss of Favor or Brotherhood.

Some think this to be the same with the Accollade, or Ceremony of embracing,
which was performed by Charles the Great, Aym^nius de ges^is Francor. l. 5. c.
17.
who (before his expedition against the Hungarians) Knighted his Son Lewis the
debonair, at the City of Ratisbone; for upon the girding him with the Military
Belt and Sword, he gave him the Accollade, that is, he embraced him, (though it
be rendered for kissing by the L. 1. c. 6. p. 51.
Translator of Favin) and this was the first time we observe the Ceremony of
the Accollade to have been used.

It was in the time of the same Emperor that the way of Knighting by the
Colaphum, or giving a blow on the Ear was used, in sign of sustaining future
hardships and indurances; which is thought to have been derived from the manner
of manumission of a Slave among the Romans, where Rosin. Antiq. l 1. c. 20.
first the Praetor gently struck him on the head with the Vindicta, a Rod so
called, after which the Lictor did the like, and moreover struck him on the
Face and Back with his hand, in token of full liberty and freedom.

This Custom was retained long after both in Theat. d'Honneur, l. 1. c. 6.
Germany and France (much like the Seld. Tit. of Honor. p. 577.
Pescosada, or blow on the neck, given in Spain at the Creation of the
Cavalleros de Espuela d' orada, or Knights of the Golden Spur) as appears from
a clause, in the Instrument of the Frizons Infranchisment to this effect.
Mennerius de Deliciis Equestribus. p. 7.
That the ^otestate or Governor of the Country should gird the Sword about him,
who was to be Knighted, and then give him a Box on the Ear with his hand, with
which Ceremony he was made a Knight, he also gave him special charge and
command, that thenceforth he should go armed after the manner of Knights of the
sacred Empire, or of the Kingdom of France.

It is also said this Emperor ordained, Ios. Micheli, Marquez en le Tesoro
militar. fo. 16. ^.
that no King should succeed to the Empire, if he were not Knighted, as
aforesaid, before his Coronation. And there is an eminent example of this
formality in Delic. Equest. p. 8.
William Earl of Holland, who when he came to be chosen King of the Romans,
Anno Domini 1247. preparation was first made to create him Knight, Delic.
Equest. p. 8.
according to the custom of other Christian Emperors (before they were admitted
to take upon them the Imperial Diadem) to which purpose he was presented by
John King of Bohemia before Petrus Capucius Cardinal of St. George, the Popes
Legate, whom the King besought on the behalf of this elected Esquire (for so
Earl William was yet called) that he might have the Oath of his profession
administered unto him, and be inscribed into the Military College: which he
having taken, the King of Bohemia gave him the blow on the Ea^, and then
pronounced the words of signification, Tesoro Militar. fo. 17.
after which (...) girt with the Sword.

The Ceremony at large is to be found in Seldens Titles of Honor. page 442*
443. and 444. as also in Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 400.401.

In the time of the Saxons here in England, 2. Watching and Bathing.
Knights received their Institution at the hands of great Prelates or Abbots; it
being the opinion of our Ancestors, that nothing so happily succeeded, as that
which was performed by religious persons; in the accomplishing of which
solemnity they were very punctual, by adding diverse religious Ceremonies, as
Watching, Fasting, Bathing, Cons^crating of the Sword, and the like: and how
solemnly these things were observed, will appear in that famous Constitution,
mentioned by Ingulp^. Hist. inter Rerum Anglic. Scripto^es. London. excus. anno
1^96 fo. 512. ^.
Ingulphus (speaking of Heward Lord of Brune, in Lincolnshire, who coming into
England from ^landers (where he had lived in exile) with a considerable
assistance, and force of his Friends and Followers to recover his Fathers
possessions; received the Honor of Knighthood from Brand, Abbot of Saint
Edmunds-bury) which being thence transcribed by our learned Ti^les of Hon. p.
780.
Seldom, Brit. 125.
Cambden, and Antiq. of War^. p. 531.
Mr. Dugdale, upon a like occasion, we here omit it.

Shortly after the Conquest, the Custom of receiving Knighthood from religious
persons began to be restrained here in England, insomuch that at a Synod held
at Westminster in the year of our Lord 1102. viz. anno tertio Hen. primi it was
among other things ordained, Council. Brit. Tom. 2. p. 22.
Ne Abbates ^aciunt Milites; by which word Abbates, we suppose is understood
all sorts of spiritual persons.

However, the religious Ceremonies for the most part continued, especially the
Vigils and Bathings; an eminent example whereof, we have not long after in the
time of King Edward the First, who to adorn the splendour of his Court, and
augment the glory of his intended Expedition into Scotland, di^^ at Whitsontide
in the four and thirtieth year of his Reign, begirt Edward of Carnarvan his
eldest Son, with the Military Belt, and this young Prince, immediately, at the
high Altar in Westminster Abbey, conferred the same Honor upon near three
hundred Gentlemen, the Sons of Earls, Barons, and Knights. The Habit, Equipage,
Attendants, and Ceremonies of which grand solemnity, being already transcribed
at large, out of Matthew of Westminster, both by Tit. of Honor. p. 776.
Mr. Seldom and Mr. Brit. p. 127.
Cambden, we shall thereunto refer our Reader.

But in regard their Author tells us, that the number of these Knights were
about Page 458. ed. Land. anno 1570.
three hundred, and the old Annals of Ireland, cited by Loco cit.
Mr. Seldom, add one hundred ^ore, which was further wide of the mark; we will
here out of a respect to truth, and the memory of those Noble persons, with
such as are descended from them, take occasion to give a perfect Catalogue of
their Names, which amount to no more than 267.

Only first, we shall take notice, because that part of the Ceremony, namely,
Bathing, is not remembered by Matthew of Westminster, that it is not only
implied in the solemnity of the Vigils then held, but we find in the Accounts
of the great Wardrobe, for the aforesaid year, among the Robes and other
Ornaments appointed to be prepared for the young Prince, that there were six
Ell^ of Cloth delivered out for the covering of his Bath.

The religious Ceremonies of Bathing, Watching, and offering up the Sword at
the high Altar, are retained amongst us at this day, but restrained only to
that peculiar Degree of Knighthood, which from hence has the denomination of
Knights of the Bath.

The Names of all the Knights made at Whitsontide, anno 34. E. 1.
Ex Rot. Compot. Io. de Drokensford Custodis mag. Gardrobae Regis, penes
Rememorat. R. in Sca^cario remanentibus.
DOminus Edwardus Princeps Walliae. Johannes de Warenna. Edmundus de Arundel.
Thomas de Greilly. Johannes de la Ware. Thomas de Ferers. Bartholomeus de
Enfeud. Johannes de Moubray. Alanus Plokenet. Aungerus filius Henrici.
Gilbertus de Clare filius Domini Thomae de Clare. Edmundus de Cornubia.
Johannes de Frivill. Willielmus de Freigne. Amaricus de Fossad. Fulcius filius
Warini. Walterus de Hugeford. Stephanus de Burghash. Iacobus de Nortwoode.
Humpfridus de Waldene. Rogerus de Chaundos. Johannes de Deen. Willielmus de la
Zouche. Ricardus Lovel. Rogerus de Mortuomari. Walterus Hakelut. Rogerus de
Ransou. Galfridus de Seye. Richardus Porteseie. Egidius de Breheus. Walterus de
Mollesworth. Rethericus de Ispania. Petrus de Gavaston. Thomas de Verdon.
Humfridus de Bassingbourn. Nicholaus Kryell. Robertus filius Roberti filii
Pagani. Johannes de Harecourt. Johannes filius Domini Iohannis de Sulleye.
Willielmus Tracy. Hugo filius Domini Hugonis le Despenser. Willielmus de
Huntingfeud. Thomas Bardolp. Nicholaus Malemeyns. Robertus de Scales.
Willielmus Trussel. Johannes de Hants. Willielmus de Monteacute. Thomas de
Multon. Walterus de Montgomeri. Rogerus filius Domini Rogeri de Mortuomari.
Eustachius de Whyteneye. Johannes Mautravers. Thomas de Veer filius Comitis
Oxoniensis. Thomas de Lodelawe. Willielmus de Bernyngham. Griffinus filius
Griffini de la Pole. Willielmus de Lodelawe. Philippus de Courtenay. Vrianus de
Sancto Petro. Warinus de Bassingburn. Johannes le Blount Major London. Johannes
Denre. Johannes de Insula. Thomas de Lucy. Radulphus de Botetourte. Hugo de
Mailly. Radulphus de Kamoys. Petrus filius Domini Petri de Malolacu. Edmundus
de Willington. Robertus de Kendale. Henricus de Den. Johannes de Nevill.
Rogerus de Ingelfeld. Hugo Braboef. Johannes de Weston. Johannes filius Warini.
Thomas de Ponynges. Johannes de Foxley. Johannes de Walkingham. Willielmus de
Harden. Radulphus de Weden. Johannes de Meryeth. Radulphus de Rolleston.
Johannes de Manduit. Thomas de Boiville. Willielmus Corbet. Willielmus
Brabason. Georgius de Thornetone. Johannes de la Pen. Johannes de Bykebyry.
Willielmus de Cosyngton. Radulphus Bagot. Willielmus de Bassinges. Andreas de
Sakeville. Nicholaus Pershots. Morganus ap Mereduk. Vmfridus de Boune. Walterus
de Skydemore. Johannes Chaundos. Walterus de Derlyngham. Walterus de
Stirkelonde. Johannes de Clyndon. Ingelramus Belet. Laurentius de Hollebeche.
Johannes de Stauntone. Johannes de Wachesham. Johannes de la Mare. Hugo Howel.
Willielmus de Menymrate Socius Amenrey de Fossad. Willielmus Pyrot socius
Stephani de Burways. Johannes Sauvage. Philippus de Vyreley. Robertus Lovel.
Adam Walran. Johannes de Penbrug. Rogerus Pychard. Henricus le Moigne. Robertus
de L^cy. Johannes de Boillaunde. Johannes de Guyse. Willielmus Motoun. Rogerus
Waleys. Philippus le Lou. Johannes de Hinton. Johannes de Twyford. Richardus de
Breheus. Stephanus de Cobbeham. Johannes de Haulo. Thomas de Sanwico. Johannes
de Mounteney. Robertus le Conestable. Johannes Marteyn. Johannes de Bello
Campo. Robertus de Ros. Radulphus Basset. Petrus de Grisle. Thomas Malorie.
Richardus de Sculton. Willielmus de Haundesacre. Johannes de Thouthorp.
Walterus de Romeseye. Johannes de Ruda. Petrus de Bosoun. Nicholaus de
Geneville. Johannes de Knoville. Johannes de Lacy. Willielmus Bernak. Richardus
Daniel. Robertus de Wygkham. Robertus Achard. Willielmus de Herppeden. Iacobus
de Lambourne. Johannes Mauncel. Robertus de Wyvill. Philippus le Rous. Johannes
Common. Johannes de Somery. Johannes de Lungevill. Johannes de Harpefeld.
Egidius de Astele. Johannes de Boivill. Henricus filius Conani. Rogerus de
Burton. Johannes de Multon. Godefridus de Meaux. Johannes de Plescic. Edmundus
de Plescis. Willielmus de Hollande. Henricus de Rypsford. Thomas de Zedefen.
Johannes de Lyngeyne. Rogerus de Bavent. Galfridus de Colevill. Johannes filius
Iohannis Mautravers. Johannes Conquest. Willielmus de Stopham. Radulphus de
Dryby. Thomas de Gray. Robertus de la Mare. Thomas Corbet. Johannes de Heryk.
Robertus de Hoo. Johannes de Lacy. Willielmus de Manneby. Johannes de Mortone.
Gerardus de Aillesford. Gilbertus de Aton. Ricardus de Berley. Johannes de
Neubourgh. Johannes de la Poille. Robertus filius Guidonis. Hugo Hose.
Willielmus de Goldington. Walterus filius Domini I. de Insula. Thomas de
Brompton. Willielmus de Wrotesle. Richardus Huwys. Robertus de Hildyard.
Johannes de Kyrkeby. Thomas de Leukenore. Petrus de Evercy. Warinus de Scartil.
Gerardus de Vfflet. Petrus de Burgate. Robertus de Fandon. Willielmus de
Saustone. Johannes Mauleverer. Willielmus de Lucy. Rogerus de Chedle. Hugo de
Dulton. Johannes de Haveryngton. Rogerus de Somerville. Adam de Walton.
Nicholaus de Sheldon. Willielmus de Weilonde. Walterus de Fau^umberg. Nicholaus
de Rye. Rogerus de Grymeston. Henricus de Erdyngton. Willielmus Dautrie.
Johannes de Launey. Johannes de Ryson. Henricus Beausun. Rogerus filius Domini
Thomae Corbet. Hugo de Pykeworth. Baldewinus de Colne. Robertus de Skale.
Henricus de Biry. Richardus de Bermyngham. Walterus le Pour. Thomas de Bechum.
Walterus filius Humfridi. Edmundus Pecche. Johannes de Treiagu. Richardus
Foliot. Richardus de Echebaston. Robertus de Godemauston. Adam de Everingham.
Johannes de Wassingbourn. Adam de Wanerville. Willielmus de Somercotes. Thomas
filius Domini T. de Chaworth. Radulphus de Kele. Petrus de Lekeburne. Hugo
filius Henrici. Johannes de Salsbiri. Richardus de ^yvers. Johannes filius
Iohan^is de Wegetone. Johannes le Rous. Georgius du Chastel. Willielmus de la
Motefacto. Willielmus de Bayons. Willielmus Marmyon. Willielmus Rosel. Johannes
de Langeton. Willielmus Littebon. Johannes de Pabenham. Thomas Mordac. Iacobus
de Norton. Johannes de Belhous. Brankaleo de Boloigne. Johannes Pykard.
Walterus de Kyngeshevede. Robertus de Watervill. Rogerus de Kerdeston. Johannes
de Daventre.
These Religious Ceremonies were not alone observed here in England, by the
Saxons and Normans; but also by the Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 6. c. 14.
French, Spaniards, and other Nations abroad.

Concerning the first of these Iean du Tillet, a French Writer in his Memoirs
says, Lib. 2. f. 277. a vide Io. Tili^^ Comment. de reb. Gall. l. ^. p. 180.
That the old French, being observers of Forms and Ceremonies, in most of their
actions, brought in many Customs to be observed at the making of Knights,
enjoining them before the Solemnities, to Watch, Bath, and do other things, to
teach them, that upon their taking of this Order, it did behove them to be pure
of heart and mind, and of virtuous inclinations, valiantly to suffer for
virtues sake, all manner of pains and necessities, to be circumspect in word
and deed, and above all to observe Faith and Truth.

And much to the same effect, but more particularly to the Ceremonies used, In
le Theater d' Hon. l. 1. c. 6.
Favin tells us, That the proof of Nobility being made (after the manner which
a little before he sets down) the Esquire prepared himself to receive the Order
of Knighthood, watching the night before in the Church or Chapel, with devout
Prayers and Meditation: When morning came, he entered into his Bath, to wash and
make clean his whole Body, whereby he was given to know and understand, that in
all his following life time, he ought to be neat and clean, as well of Body as
Soul, honest in his Manners, and behavior of life, wholly disposed to embrace
Virtue, and to use in all his actions, Modesty, Providence, and Wisdom.

And that the like religious Ceremonies were heretofore (about the time of
Alphonsus the Tenth) observed in Spain at the Creation of Knights, whether they
were Cavelleros de Espuela d' Orada, or Armados (which are no other than our
Equites Aurati, or Knights Batchellors) may be seen in the Page 576.
Titles of Honor, our learned Seldom having collected and transcribed thither
the manner of such Creation, from the Spanish Partidas; and is briefly thus.

The Person that was to be Knighted was Bathed on the Evening, and presently
laid in Bed, then clothed in rich Robes, and led to the Church, to perform his
Vigils; that being over, and Mass heard, his Spurs were put on, and his Sword
girt unto him, then drawn out, and put into his right hand; whereupon the Oath
was forthwith administered to him, which taken, he that bestowed the Dignity,
gave him una Pescocade, a blow or stroke on the neck, saying, God assist you in
the performance of that which you have promised.

3. Taking an Oath.
To the aforesaid Ceremonies of creating a Knight, an Oath was for the most part
adjoined, which drew its original from the Military Oath, imposed anciently
upon the Roman Soldiers, several particulars of which are collected by Honor
Military and Civil. l. 1. c. 5.
Sir William Segar, sometime Garter, principal King of Arms.

This Oath or vow of Profession Theat. d'Hon. neur. l. 1. c. 6.
Favin observes to have been at all times, and in all places, continually
uniform and alike; and to the same purpose cites a passage out of Saint Hierom,
relating to Nepotianus, who had the Military Belt bestowed upon him, to the
end, That he should relieve and protect Widows, Fatherless, the oppressed and
miserable, and these particulars, together with the defense of the Church of
God, made up afterward the substance of the general Vow, which for a Knight to
observe and keep, and to perform all that belongs to the Order of Knighthood,
was (as Ti^les of Honor. p. 851.
Mr. Seldom observes) esteemed as meritorious, as to do all that a Monk, Friar,
or Canon regular should.

In the aforesaid Example of William Earl of Holland, it is particularly
mentioned, that at the request of the King of Bohemia, he might have the Vow of
his profession administered; whereupon the Cardinal Petrus Capucius, gave him
admonition, what a Knight ought to be, in an Acrostick, according to the
Etymology of his name Miles, thus,

Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 9.
Magnanimus in adversitate,
Ingenuus in consanguinitate,
Largifluus in honestate,
Egregius in curalitate, and
Strenuus in virili probitate.
Among the religious Ceremonies of making a Knight (called sometimes consecrare
Militem) set down by Mr. Seldom, Favin, and Petrus Blessensis, there is
particular mention made of consecrating the Sword, offering it at the Altar,
and receiving it again from thence; which manner of reception from the Altar,
was an implicit kind of taking an Oath, as may be deduced from the said Petrus
Blessensis, who says, Epist. 94.
That Candidates in his time received their Swords from the Altar, that they
might profess themselves the Sons of the Church, and that they received the
Sword, to the honor of the Priesthood, defense of the poor, punishment of
Malefactors, and deliverance of their Country.

Lastly, at the institution of those Christian Orders of Knighthood, erected
for the defense of the Holy Land (which we shall in the next Chapter discourse
of) the Knights entered into a solemn Vow and Oath, chiefly to propagate, and
sight in defense of the Christian Faith, and to repel the violence and
cruelties of Pagans and Saracens.

In fine, among the various Ceremonies performed at the admission of Knights,
in all the several Orders and Societies of Knighthood, whether Religious or
Secular, which have been erected; there are none esteemed greater, or ought
more solemnly to be observed, than the taking of an Oath.

It was in the times of Peace and great leisure, 4. Dubbing with a Sword.
that the beforementioned solemn and tedious Ceremonies, used at the making of
Knights, were observed; whether by great Princes in their own Courts, or by
Ecclesiastics in the Church: but much otherwise in times of War, or on a day
of Battle, where the hurry and throng of Affairs, gave not time for so long and
troublesome Ceremonies: And therefore, as well Instances in both are to be found
in Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 391.392.393 and 394
before the joining of Battle, as after Victory obtained (the Io. Tilius
Commentar. de Rebus Gall. l. 2. p. 181.
one to encourage and stir up the Valor and Virtue of gallant men to overcome,
or if they dyed in fight, to give their bodies the Honor of Knightly Enterment:
the other to reward the eminent prowess, and valiant performances of those that
happened to survive) it was usual for the Prince or General, in the Field and
sight of the whole Army, to give those whom he thought fit to advance to the
Honor of Knighthood (they humbly kneeling before him) a Flecti genu ante
Principem Candidatu^, ab ^oque leniter nudo Ense in humero percutitur; addit. ^
verbis solenni more concep^is. Aub. Miraeus, Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 1. Vide
Sander. in Fland. illustrat. Tom. 1. p. 12.
stroke with a naked Sword, flat-wise upon their shoulders, or else to touch
their heads or shoulders lightly as aforesaid, without any other Ceremony,
except pronouncing the Si^ Eques in nomine Dei, and postea addit, Surge Eques,
or as in French Su^ vel soi^ Chevalier a^ nom de Dieu.
words of Creation, which latter kind of Ceremony is used in Europe at this
day, it supplying all the rest: and this we commonly call Dubbing, the old
English word used for creating of a Knight.

As touching those Ceremonies, used at the making of a Knight in Scotland,
which are chiefly dubbing with a Sword, and putting on ^^urs, together with the
particulars which the Knights Oath contains, see our learned Seldens P. 850.851*
Titles of Honor, they being for substance, much the same, with what the
Knights of former Ages either swore or professed.

The Benediction of a new Knight, at the time of his Creation by the Pope, or
those, whose power in this particular is derivative from him, as it is set down
in the Pontificale Romanum, may be found there; or in the said P. 445.
Titles of Honor, whither it is transcribed.

But there is another manner of creating of Knights abroad, 5. Bestowing of
Royal Codicils.
namely, by Royal Codicils, or Letters Patents (these the Spaniards call
Privilegios de Cavelleria) and thereupon such Knights are entitled, Quo^ a suo
diplomate (quod suae dignita^^ fidem facit) Codicillares appellare ^otes* Vinc.
Lupan^^ de Magistrate* Francorum. l. 1.
Equites Codicillares; and this without any actual Ceremony or Solemnity; for
the Codicils were chiefly designed, to supply the ordinary way of Dubbing, to
those who dwelt in remote Countries, yet under the Dominion of the Prince that
bestowed the Honor.

In these Instruments, the Emperor or King is said thereby, to make and create
them Knights, willing and intending that thence-forward they should be held and
reputed for such; and moreover grants, that they shall, in all their acts and
affairs, enjoy all the Rights, Liberties, and Franchises, accustomably due to
all other Knights, throughout all his Dominions, as well also in the same form
and manner, as if the person had been actually Knighted by his own hand.

Of this manner of Creation, two Presidents are exhibited by the Author of the
Page 395.
Iurisprudentia Heroica, the one granted by Philip the Fourth King of Spain, to
Sir Philip Ryckewaert, Councellor of his Council of Brabant, dated at Madrid
the twenty seventh of October 1663. and the other by the present King, namely,
Charles the First, and Mary Anne Queen Regent, to Page 394*
Leon Iean de Pape, Councellor also, and Advocate of the Exchequer, of his said
Council of Brabant, dated likewise at Madrid the sixteenth day of December Anno
Domini 1665.

These Royal Codicils have sometimes (though very rarely) extended so far, as
to make this Knightly Degree hereditary, which being unknown among us, in the
Dignity of Knighthood (though that of Baronet comes something near it) a few
Examples may be worth mentioning.

We have met with two of these Diplomas in the time of Charles the Fifth,
Emperor of Germany, whereby this Dignity or the Degree of Knight of the Roman
Empire (as therein it is called) is granted by him (20. Nov. 1553.) to Iurispr.
Heroica. p. 64.
Sir Stephen Prats of Barcelon, and made to reach to his posterity, which then,
or afterward, should be born. As also another of the same Emperors, made to
Page 410.
Lucas de Broyart, the twenty fourth day of September 1540. that extends much
farther, to wit, not only to himself and Children, born or to be born, their
Successors and Heirs, and the Successors and Heirs of their Children, born in
lawful Matrimony, and carrying the Surname of Broyart; but also to all those
who should marry any of the Daughters of the said Luke, or the Daughters of his
Sons, their Successors or Heirs.

There are besides Examples of Grants in this nature, which take in the
Collateral Lines, as in that ancient Diploma, which Sir Edward Bysshe Knight,
Clarenceux King of Arms, has transferred to his Page 24.
Notes upon Vpton, where it appears, that Raymond Viscount of Turine, anno
1219. granted to Rodolph de Bessa, that he and his Nephews (Sons to his Brother
Ademar) and their Successors should be Knights, and enjoy all the Privileges
and Honors of Knights: This is the ancientest that I have met with of this
sort; to which there is another in that place adjoined, whereby Maximilian the
Emperor granted the Dignity of Knighthood to Page 25.
Thomas Salernitana, President of the Council of Naples, and to his seven
Brothers therein named, and their Sons born or to be born, and their Male
descendants in infinitum.

But there is one Example of greater rarity, in relation to the creating of
Knights, than any yet remembered, viz. by the bare signification of a Kingly
Letter, without using either any of the aforementioned Ceremonies, or granting
Letters Patents under Seal to that purpose. Of which kind the Author of the
Iurisprudentia Heroica, gives an instance worthy taking notice of: where Page
28.
Philip the Fourth King of Spain, the fifteenth of January 1633. conferred upon
all the Captains that had behaved themselves valiantly in the defense of
Mastricht (then lately besieged by the Hollanders) and remained faithful to the
Spanish interest, to wit, Page 28.
to those of them that were Gentlemen, the title of Knights; and to others that
of Gentlemen.

Having thus briefly showed the various forms of Creation of Knights
Batchelors, if any be further desirous to know, what were the ancient Rites and
Ceremonies, used at the making of Knights Banerets among us, the Example of Sir
John Chandos, in the Reign of King Edward the Third, will give sufficient
information, which being at large recorded by Chron. l 1. c. 137.
Sir John Froisard, and from him by Brit. p. 124.
Cambden, and Tit. of Honor. p. 790. and 791.
Seldom, it will be needless to transcribe them hither. With what Ceremony also
the Duke of Burgundy made the Seigneur de Sans Baneret in Flanders, is reported
by En le Theater d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12.
Andrew Favin.

But in later times it appears, that he that was advanced to this Honor in the
Field, Videsi^ Camb. Bri^. loc. cit. Seld. Tit. of Honor. p 790. Gloss. Spelm.
in verbo Baneret. vide e^iam Cokes 4. part of Institu^es. p. 6. and lib. E. in
Offic. Armor. fo. 89.
went between two senior Knights, with Trumpets before them, the Heralds
carrying a long Banner called a Penon, with his Arms painted thereon; and so
was brought unto the King or his Lieutenant, who bidding him good success,
commanded the end or tip of the Banner to be cut off, that of an oblong it
might become a square, like the Banner of a Baron: this done, he returned back
to his Tent, conducted as before.

In the last place, there are many and various Ceremonies performed at the
Creation of a Knight of the Bath, as appears by the Formulary thereof in old
French, inserted by Sir Edward Bysshe, among his Page 21.
Notes upon Vpton, and in English by William Dugdale Esquire, Norroy King of
Arms, into his Page 531.
Antiquities of Warwickshire; to which we refer our Reader for a full view, as
we do in all other like Cases, where things at large may be readily had,
purposely to avoid the swelling of this discourse, beyond what is necessary. We
shall therefore close with this observation, that the Knights of the Bath, made
by the present Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, to attend him
at his Coronation, were created with the principal of all those Ceremonies
noted in this Section, and appointed to Knights Batchellors, both in former and
later times, which to complete their Honor, were jointly united and placed upon
them: for they Watched and Bathed, they took an Oath, they were girded with a
Sword and Belt, and lastly Dubbed by the King, with the Sword of State.

SECT. X. Of the Dignity, Honor, and Renown of Knighthood.
BEfore we conclude this Chapter, it will be necessary to subjoin something
concerning the Dignity, Honor, and Renown appropriate to the Knightly Order;
whereunto, though enough might be said to fill a Volume, yet to avoid
tediousness, we shall touch only upon the principal and most material.

Of all Virtues those that have gained the highest honor and repute, are the
Military, hereupon says De Privileg^ mil. p. 6.
G. Acacius Evenkelius, a Noble modern Writer; It is not without great reason,
that in all renowned and famous Commonwealths, which ever were, great honors
and profits have been proposed to military persons, and in consequence we hear
of several Prerogatives, Privileges, and proper Rights granted to them, above
other men; yea it will appear, not only living, but also after death, having
died for the Commonwealth, they are still honored, in a high degree, and ever
to be honored. And to the great honor of Baldwinus Pulchrobarbus, Earl of
Flanders, it is remembered, Sander. in Flandr. illust. Tom. 1. p. 12.
that he conferred many Prerogatives upon the Knightly Dignity.

But of all the Titles of Honor, Knighthood (being a Degree above common Honor)
must be acknowledged the first and most principal, derived from the field and
military services; whose very Name and Title (as Delic. Equest. p. 1.
Mennenius affirms) seemed to include somewhat of magnificence, beyond what he
was able to express, and something more excellent than Nobility it self; and
which, as it were, mounting the Royal Throne, becomes the assertor of civil
Nobility, and sits as Judge at the Tribunal thereof.

Our learned Brit. page 126.
Cambden notes from some of our Law Books, that Knight is a Name of Dignity,
but Baron is not so: and he there adds the reason, Brit. page 126.
For if heretofore a Baron had not received the Order of Knighthood, he was
written simply, and plainly, by his Christian Name, and the Name of his Family,
without any addition, but that of Dominus; which term is as much attributed to
a Knight: But the Title of Knight seems to be an adjunct of Honor, since Kings,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons have coveted the Dignity, together with
the Name. And to this the aforesaid Mennenius (for the greater Honor) observes,
that in ancient Charters, the Dell^. Equest. p. 17.
Titles and Names of Knights may be seen to be set before Barons.

Sander. in Fland. illustrat. loco cit.
The Degree of Knighthood is of so great splendour and fame, that it bestows
Gentility, not only upon a man meanly born, but also upon his descendants, and
very much increases the honor of those who are well descended. It Is a Maxim
laid down by a learned Civilian, Andr. Tiraquel. de Nobilitate. c. 8. f. 43.
That Knighthood enobles, inasmuch, that whosoever is a Knight, it necessarily
follows, that he is also a Gentleman. For where a King gives the Dignity to an
ignoble person, whose merit he would thereby recompense; Florentin. de
Therriat. de la Noblesse civil p. 188.
He is understood to have conferred whatsoever is requisite, for the
completing of that which he bestows. And therefore in some instances Sect. 8.
before, where though this Honor had been conferred on Vassals, no way capable
thereof, and for which both the Givers and Receivers were put to Fine, the
Knights were esteemed so enobled by the action, as to be adjudged fit to keep,
and retain the Dignity, and to remain free from Vassalage and Servitude. Hereto
also agrees the Common Law of England, which says, Glanvil. l. 5. c. ^. Bra^^.
l. 4. f. 198. ^.
If a Villain be made a Knight, he is thereby immediately infranchised, and
consequently accounted a Gentleman: And this is the same with the Roman La^,
where the donation of a Gold Ring (the Symbol of Knighthood) to a slave,
enobled him with all the Privileges, belonging to one Freeborn, as has been
Sect. 6.
before observed.

It is manifest of what reputation and esteem the Equestrian Dignity among the
Romans, was with Maecenas, who though his descent was Maecenas atavis edite
Regibus. Hor. Carm. l. 1. Ode 1.
great and high, and though the Tunc Vrb^s Custodiis Praepositus. C. Maecenas,
Equestri, ac splendido genere natus vir. Vellcius Patere. l. 2. c. 88. (...)
Dion. l. 55.
Custody of the City, was for a long time committed to him by Augustus, whose
Salmuth. Notis ad Panciroll. de Novis repertis. p. 315.
Chancellor he also was, and that he lived his chief Favorite; yet would he not
rise beyond that Dignity, but (...).
dyed a Companion of that noble Order: Augustus bellis civilibus Cilnium
Maecenatem, Equestris Ordinis cunctis a^ud Romam, and Italiam Praeposuit.
Tacit. l. 6. in princ.
and is by Horace called Maecenas Equitum decus. l. 3. Ode 16. Maecenas
Caesarianus Eques. Matt. lib. 10. Epigr. 73.
the honor and glory of the Roman Knights.

In later Ages it has been accounted so full, and so complete an Honor, that
men were not so often advanced from Knighthood, as from a meaner degree, to
higher Titles and Dignities; and that those of the chiefest quality and rank,
even Kings and Princes, have been so far from taking it to be a diminution to
their Honor, that such of them, as were invested with this Order, took it as an
accession thereunto, their other Titles showing more their Dominion and Power,
this their Valor and Courage, as may be properly instanced in Otho.
Frisingensis. l. 1. c. 32.
Geysa King of Hungary, who waging War with the Austrians, was by the Bishops
(when he came into the field) Armis accinctus, girded with Arms, that is
Knighted; and in like manner, Leopold Marquess of Austria, Ottacher Duke of
Stiria, and Frederick Duke of Austria and Stiria, so also Godfrey Duke of
Brabant (with Henry his Son) solemnly received the Order of Knighthood, before
his Expedition to Jerusalem. So Hier. Blancus in Hist. rerum Hispanic.
Peter King of Aragon, was girt with the Military Girdle, from Pope Innocent
the Third anno Domini 1204. the Emperor Lamb. Sch^fnaburg. in Chronico.
Henry the Third, was made Knight by the Bishop of Breme, and our Malm^b. de
gest. Regum. l. 4. p. 67. b. Edi^. Land. 1596.
William Rufus by Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury.

But to proceed yet a little farther in Examples of this nature, Kings
themselves have been Knighted, not only by inferior Princes, but sometimes by
their own Subjects, as Lewis the Eleventh of France, at his Coronation, by
Renat. Chopin de domanio Fran. l. 3. ti^. 26. Sect. 13. ^ Marthe de la Mason de
France l. 1. p. 6^0.
Philip le bon, Duke of Burgundy. Francis the First, immediately after the
memorable Fight at Marignan, near Millan, by Perrus Terrai^^ius Baiardi
Dominus. Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 386. vide Mezeray Hist. de Franc. p 390.
and Io. Tilius Commentarior, de reb. Gall. l. 2. p. 181.
Peter Baiarde: Of our own Nation, King Edward the Third, by Sir Rich. Bakers
Chronic. p. 127. Edit. 1665.
Henry Earl of Lancaster, King Henry the Sixth, by his Uncle Lib. N. p. 79.
John Duke of Bedford; King Henry the Seventh, by the Earl of Bake^s Chronic.
p. 321.
Arundel, and lastly, King Edward the Sixth by St^ws Annals p. 1000.
Edward Seymour, Earl of Hertford, afterward created Duke of Somerset.

And though it is commonly said, Append. Monstraleti apud Chapp. de domanio
Franc. l. 4. tit. 26. Art. 13. p. 574.
That all the Sons of the French King are Knights, as soon as they receive their
Baptism; nevertheless Glossar. verbo Miles.
Sir Henry Spelman (from Goropus) seems to contradict this opinion, by
informing us; that they were not judged worthy of the Kingdom, unless they had
been first solemnly admitted into the Knightly Order. And we elsewhere find,
that the Hier. Blancus.
Royal Heirs of Aragon were suspended from the Crown of that Kingdom, until
they had received the Honor of Knighthood.

To this purpose, the usage and fashion of the time shortly after the Norman
Conquest is considerable, when our young Princes were sent over to neighboring
Kings, that from them they might receive this Honor; Thus was our Rog. Hoved.
Annals. p. 280. b. Edit. Land. 1596. vide I. Lesleus de Reb. gest. Scot. l. 6.
p. 223. Edit. Romans 1578. 4o.
Henry the Second, sent to David King of Scots, and Knighted by him in
Carlisle, and Math. Paris. Hist. Anglicana. p. 890. Edit. Land. 1640. Walsingh.
in Ipodigma Neustriae. anno 1254.
Edward the First, at the Age of fifteen years, to Alphonsus the Eleventh King
of Castile, for the same Dignity.

In like manner did Foreign Princes repair hither to receive the Honor from our
Kings; as Anno 6. Hen. 7. vide Rog. Hoved. p. 281.
Malcolne King of Scotland, and Math. Paris. p. 231.
Alexander Son of William King of Scotland, Knighted by our King John, anno
Domini 1212. So was Ib. p. 829.
Alexander the Third, by our King Henry the Third, on Christmas day at York
anno 1252. and Stows Abrev. p. 290.
Magnus King of the Isle of Man, by the same King. All which sufficiently
demonstrate the great Renown of Knighthood, and the honor and esteem which was
ever had for that Order.

The estimation of Knighthood may be yet further manifest from diverse
expressions, in that part of an Edict (transcribed by Tit. of Honor p. 445.
Mr. Seldom, out of Goldastus) which Conrade King of the Romans sent to those
of Palermo, to give them notice he had received the Order of Knighthood; which
he did after this manner, Tit. of Honor p. 445.
That although he ought not to want the Ensigns and Tokens of Military Honor,
considering the nobleness of his Birth, and greatness of his Dignity (he at
that time swaying two Scepters) yet because he had not as then received the
Military Girdle ( established by venerable Antiquity) he did choose to adorn
himself therewith in that Month of August (wherein the said Edict passed) to
the end, that from thence the ^lower of his victorious years might put on the
Ensigns of greater valor, and the excellency of this new Militia renew the
luster of original Nobility. What peculiar respects Knights have had paid them
in our own Nation, Mr. Seldom has collected from our legal proceedings, and
set down in his Titles of Honor, page 783, 784, 785, and 786.

In the close of this Chapter, Declarations of Knighthood
we think fit to insert a few memorials of that additional favor (in
augmentation of the Knightly Honor) which some of our Kings have pleased to
afford those Strangers, on whom they have conferred the Dignity of Knighthood;
and to make it more known and public, given Declarations thereof under the
Great Seal of England (where the person so honored made suit for the same)
whereby they have declared and attested, that willingly, and of their own
accord, they have given and conferred on them the Degree, Honor, and Title of a
Knight, as due to their Virtues and Merits; to the end, that those persons
should be esteemed and ranked in the place and number of Knights, as well among
their own Subjects, as in their own Countries, and also by all persons
elsewhere; no less than themselves should esteem any other honorable and worthy
men, adorned with the like Honor from other Kings and Princes.

The first that we have met with in this kind, was given by King Henry the
Eighth, to Sir Gregory de Caalis, born of a Noble Family in Rome, on whom in
consideration of his Virtues and Merits, the King had bestowed the Honor of
Knighthood; as may be collected from a Billa signata an. 11. H. 8.
Warrant directed to the Cardinal Archbishop of York his Chancellor, to make
out Letters Patents under the Great Seal, as well of the said Order of
Knighthood, as of the Grant of an annual Pension, of two hundred Crowns of Gold
per Annum, during his life; for the better and more honorable maintenance of
that Dignity.

His late Majesty of ever blessed memory, King Charles the First, having
Knighted Sir James Cats, Doctor of Law, Syndick of Dort, and Ambassador
extraordinary to his said Majesty from the States General of the United
Provinces; was also pleased (26o Ian. 1627.) to give him a Ex R^^. pe^es W.
Hutchinson genesis An^ 1641.
Declaration thereof, under the Great Seal of England, to notify his being
such, not only with us here, but in his own Country, and elsewhere.

And sometimes there has past in these Letters Testimonial, a kind of
Ennoblement to their Posterity (where that has been before wanting to the
Family) which the King in regard of the Knights great Virtue and Merits, has
thereby raised into that Degree, Title, and Dignity of Gentleman; as may be
seen by those Ex R^^. pe^es W. Hutchinson genesis An^ 1641.
Letters Patents, granted to Sir Lewis Van Alteren, eldest Son to Simon Van
Alteren, Lord of Iaer^velt, and Councellor in the Court of Admiralty of
Amsterdam, dated the twenty ninth of January anno, 4. Car. 1.

The like Ex R^^. pe^es W. Hutchinson genesis An^ 1641.
Letters Patents of Declaration of Knighthood and Ennoblement of Posterity,
were shortly after ( viz. 26. Feb. following) given to Sir Peter Pau, Son of
Sir Adrian Pau, Lord of Hemsted, and then extraordinary Ambassador from the
aforesaid States General.

But in some others, this declarative Clause, of having bestowed the Dignity of
Knighthood, has been much more contracted, then in the Precedent before
remembered, and the testimony of donation only, and that briefly expressed: as
in those Letters Patents made forth to Sir Ex R^^. pe^es W. Hutchinson genesis An^
1641.
Aloysus Contareni, Leiger A^bassador for the State of Venice, to King Charles
the First, 20. July 1629. as also to Sir Ex R^^. pe^es W. Hutchinson genesis An^
1641.
Peter Paul Rubens, Secretary to the King of Spain, and one of the Privy
Council in Flanders, 15. December 1630. to both of whom he thereby also gave
augmentation of Arms.

With these before mentioned, may be here also inserted a few Examples,
testifying the Creation of a Knight from abroad; such like Royal Declarations
being oftentimes granted by the Emperors of Germany, and other Foreign Princes,
to the Knights they have Created, both for the same reason, and upon the like
ground, as is before noted.

Such was that Imperial Diploma of Rodulph the Second, Emperor of Germany,
given at his Court at Prague, the second of June 1610. whereby he declared to
have See the Diploma at large in Purchase Pilgrimage part. 2. l. 10. p. 1806.
created and ordained Sir Robert Sherley (our Countryman) a true and lawful
Knight, to have received him into the State, Degree, and Honor of Knighthood,
to have girt him with the Sword of Valor, and adorned and invested him with the
Robes, Ensigns, and all other Arms and Ornaments, appertaining to the Order of
Knighthood, according to the Imperial Custom: Decreeing moreover, by his said
Imperial Authority, that for the future he should be esteemed, reputed, named,
and honored for a true and lawful Knight, without let or contradiction, and
might use, possess, and enjoy all whatsoever Honors, Prerogatives, Ensigns,
Privileges, Freedoms, Favors, and Liberties, which the rest of his Knights,
the Knights of the Roman Empire, as also the Knights of S. John of Jerusalem
used, possessed, and enjoyed, in what manner soever; either of right or custom,
none whatsoever forbidding the contrary.

There is transcribed into the Page 403.
Iurisprudentia Heroica, a like Diploma at large, and almost in the same words,
granted to Sir Charles Bellehe by the same Emperor; in which it is also
testified, that Page 405*
he had by the stroke of his Sword, and Imperial word, made, created,
nominated, and constituted him a Knight, and invested him with the Ensigns of
the Equestrian Order, and other Ornaments appertaining thereto; and by virtue
and force thereof, did decree unto him the Honors, Ensigns, and Privileges,
which other Knights did use, possess, and enjoy, without any impediment or
contradiction.

Lastly, the Diploma of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, made to Sir Henry St.
George Knight, late Richmond Herald at Arms, when he was employed to carry the
Ensigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter to that King (and transcribed by
See the Titles of Honor. p. 459.
Mr. Seldom) is worthy of mention here: Wherein his Creation into the Dignity
of Knighthood, is testified to have been solemnly performed in the view of the
whole Army, and thereby is given and conferred upon him all Honors,
Privileges, Immunities, Liberties, Rights, Preheminences, and Ensigns
whatsoever, which at any time, according to the Custom of any Place, had been
granted to this Order of Knighthood; so that he might publicly use, possess
and enjoy the same, in the presence of all men, and among all Emperors, Kings,
etc. without any prohibition, either in word or deed. And moreover, this King,
as a greater testimony of his favor, did thereby grant unto the said Sir
Henry, an augmentation of the Royal Arms of Sweden, to be born and used by him
and his descendants.

Certificates of Knighthood.
Something like the Royal Declarations before remembered, are those Attestations
and Certificates of Knighthood, made, as occasion requires, instead of
Codicils, by some of the Kings, and Heralds of Arms in Flanders, for
manifestation and truth, no less than perpetual memory of the Creation, and the
Honor thereby accruing to them, and their descendants, who have actually
received the Dignity of Knighthood, to the end they might be acknowledged and
reputed for Knights, and enjoy and use the Honors, Privileges, and
Prerogatives, due to that Degree, with other Knights.

Two such Declarations are set down in the Page 397. and ^98.
Iurisprudentia Heroica, the one made on the behalf of Sir Hierom Sandelin
(Knighted at the solemn entrance and inauguration of Philip then Prince of
Spain into Antwerp) the twelfth day of September in the year 1549. and
subsigned by Iean de Arroyo, Claude Marion, and Gerard de Marbais, Heralds of
Arms to the said Prince; the other by Sir Anthony Beaulincourt Knight, Toison
d'or, Principal King of Arms, Henry de la Tour, Brabant, Estienne de Morez,
Haynau, Claude-Marion, Bourgoigne, Iean de Demedrano, and Piere de Vernois,
also Kings of Arms to Philip the Second, King of Castile and England, for Sir
Roland Longin, who was Knighted by the said King at Antwerp, the twenty third
day of January, Anno Domini 1555. where a Chapter was then held, for the
Election of Knights into the Order of the Golden Fleece.

CHAP. II. OF THE Religious Orders OF KNIGHTHOOD in CHRISTENDOM.
SECT. I. Of ancient Societies analogous to the Orders of Knighthood.
ALthough the Orders remembered in this and the next Chapter, may seem to have
had their original from the Equestrian Order among the Romans; nevertheless, we
may observe from Stories yet more ancient, some things bearing proportion or
resemblance to these modern Societies of Knighthood. And this, though we do not
take any great notice of certain old Rabinical Comments, concerning the Anakim,
or Sons of Anak, who (according to De Ecclesia ^nte Legem. l. 2. c. 8. p. 207.
Edit. Paris. 1630. 4o.
Bouldouchius) were a Society of valiant men, imagined to have been so called,
not from Anak, as being the name of any person, but as they were Torquati,
Knights, endowed with a Chain or Collar, Anak signifying as much as Torquis;
and the Order thereof to have been instituted at the building of the City of
Hebron, which City was before called Joshua. c. 14* v. 15.
Kiriath Arba, i. c. the City of Arba; who is said to have been the c. 15. v.
13.
Father of Anak, namely the Father or first Institutor of Anak, or the Order of
the Collar.

What will such, as are apt to give way to ingenious Fictions and Conceits,
fancy of the Argonauts, who went in quest of the Golden Fleece (a Catalogue of
whom you have in Apollonius Rhodius, Orpheus, and Valerius Flaccus) but that
they were a Company of Grecian Knights (the principal whereof were Castor and
Pollux, Telamon, Orpheus, Hercules, and Hylas) who entering into a most
honorable Fraternity, or Association, made an Expedition to Colchi, under Jason
their supreme? What of the Argolic Youths, that hunted the Caledonian Boar; but
a Society of Knights combined under Meleager their head or chief? Much like to
which, of later times, were those Martial Followers of Charles the Great (first
Emperor of the Western Franks) in his Expedition against the Saracens that
invaded Aquitain, who (especially the chief of them, Orlando) are so renowned
by that excellent Poem of Lodovico Ariasto; as also those that accompanied
Godfrey of Bulloign, to the Conquest of Jerusalem, celebrated by that Heroic
Poet Torquato Tasso, in his Jerusalem Liberata: both which Stories are true in
the main, however flourisht over and interlac'd with Fancy and Fiction.

SECT. II. The Christian Institution of Knightly Orders.
BUT waving further instances of this nature, we shall touch upon the occasion
of founding Societies and Orders of Knighthood, in the times of Christianity.
The grounds of their Erection were several and different (though all terminated
in one common end) among which the principal were these that follow.

First, a perfect and sincere love to Honor, and a regard had to the prudent
management and continual advancement of Military Affairs; and therein chiefly
to excite and promote Virtue, and to confer on it a suitable Reward.

Such was the Design of King Arthur of Britain; who Praefatio ad Lib. Nigrum.
being wonderfully delighted with the valiant emulation and military experience
of gallant and worthy men (in whose policy, strength, and industry he might
confidently and safely rely, if need required, in all urgent and hazardous
enterprises) enjoined such as had especially signalized themselves by their
Martial Actions, a freedom and familiarity, not only with one another, but even
with himself: And further, to honor and reward their valor and desert; he
formed himself and them into a Body and Fellowship, which he styled Knights of
the Round Table.

Upon which account also the Military Orders of the Oak in Navarr, the Gennet
in France, the Crown Royal among the Frizons, the Dove in Castile, and the Bear
in Switzerland, took their beginning: and hitherto may be referred the
foundation of the most Noble Order of the Garter, as shall appear anon.

Secondly, it is not altogether from our purpose, that the generality of
Romances, and several modern and heroic Poems (some of which are before
remembered) make such frequent mention of Knights Errant, riding up and down to
encounter Pagans; for another famous cause of erecting Knightly Orders, sprung
from this occasion, namely, the Incursions and Robberies of the Saracens and
Barbarians: to repel the violence and cruelty whereof, to vindicate the
oppressed, redeem the injured and enslaved, to give entertainment and relief to
Pilgrims and Strangers, were part of the Duties to which the Knights
Hospitallers, Templers, and those of Saint James in Gallicia, stood engaged by
their first foundation.

A third reason was to fight in defense of the Christian Faith, against Pagans
and Infidels, to propagate the Christian Territories, and to promote the
service of the Catholic Church; which was the chief cause why the Orders last
mentioned were instituted, as also those other of the Holy Sepulcher,
Calatrava, Alcantara, St. Savior of Mount Royal, our Lady of Montesa, of
Christ in Portugal, and the Sword-Bearers in Livonia.

And indeed, these were the main inducements that engaged them, and many other
Orders of Knighthood (instituted in the Christian world) to do famous things in
the cause of Religion: So that their holy zeal may be said to have very far
contributed to the propagation and advancement of the Christian Profession;
since generally the Knights of these Orders have employed themselves in the
service of God, and spent their blood in the defense of his Faith, against
Saracens, Turks, and Unbelievers.

Lastly, when Sovereign Princes found themselves imbroiled in Wars or dangerous
Factions, a fourth reason of erecting such Orders, was, that they might by such
a Tie (as the Combination of many valiant Knights into a Fraternity) restore
Peace, quiet all Jealousies, unite Affections, and secure unto themselves the
alliance of lasting friendship and powerful assistance, both for their own, and
their Countries safety and defense. Hereupon do the Orders of the Dragon in
Hungary, of the Ermin, as also the Knot in Naples, and of St. Michael in
France, seem to have been erected.

And to what end were the Badges of such several Orders devised, but to be
distributed as Pledges of remembrance, that thereby the sincerity of their love
who had united themselves into a Brotherhood (if at any time it should grow
cold) might be quickened and renewed, and their Friendship increased and
established? So that though humane occurences might occasion a distance between
them, as to their persons, yet were these Ornaments as so many Remembrances of
the Faith and Oath whereby they were contracted into one Body; and consequently
of the harmony of minds and affections that ought to be among them.

SECT. III. The division of Knightly Orders into Religious and Military.
HAving thus briefly touched upon some general grounds and causes, for
instituting Orders of Knighthood in Christendom; before we proceed to a
particular account of the Orders themselves, it will be further necessary to
acquaint our Reader, that the Knights of these Orders have been more especially
divided into two kinds, namely, Religious or Ecclesiastical, and Military or
Secular; which division we shall likewise follow in this place, beginning with
the Religious, for the same reasons, that in all Degrees of Honor, which are
esteemed of an equal rank, the Ecclesiastic has been allowed to precede the
Temporal.

But we find, that there has risen much dispute among the Canonists, touching
several of those which we are to marshal under the title of Religious (or as
generally they are called a Crucis insigni.
Cruciseri) to wit, whether they be truly and properly Religious or not. The
Arguments on both sides are numerous, and therefore we shall refer such as are
desirous of a particular satisfaction in the case, to a late Treatise, written
by De Ordin. Militar. Disquis. 2. Quest. 2. sect. 2. and 3. Edit. Lugduni. 1668.
Andreas Mendo, a Jesuit, who has judiciously contracted the Arguments, and
cited the several Authors both of the Affirmative and Negative part; thinking
it enough here, to give this following short account thereof.

Those Knights who have taken upon them the three solemn and substantial Vows
of Religion, namely Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, (that is, (1.) Obedientia
prast and a Magistro, nibil proprii tenendum, a^que Castitas quantum s^eri
potest tenenda. Pantal. de Ord. Joannit. reb. gest. l. 1. p. 19.
Not to hold or possess any thing properly or peculiarly their own, nor to
dispose thereof, but with the license or allowance of the Master, Vide etiam la
Regla y ^^tablecimientos de la Cavaller^a de Santiago de Espada fo. 65. a.
or Chief of the Order. (2.) To keep themselves single, chaste, and undefiled
with Women. And (3.) to submit to the commands of their Master, and to the
Rules and Statutes of their Order) they are (we say) without contradiction
Mich. Anton. Frances de Eccles. Cathedralib. l. 5. n. 248.
truly and properly accounted Religious, and have been numbered among Religious
and Ecclesiastical persons, and consequently in spiritual concerns, exempt from
all spiritual, or other Jurisdictions (except the Masters or Prelates of their
own Order) as are the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem.

But such of these as have permission to contract marriage, and are either
married or may marry, and do prosess Conjugal Chastity, viz. La Castidid
conjugal ^a de ser, que con sola su m^ger, and convengan. La Regla de Santiago.
f. 65. a.
to enjoy only their own Wives; are not by some, simply and absolutely, called
or esteemed Religious, but S. Thomas. 2.2. Q. 184. Art. 4. respons. ad tertium.
secundum quid, and improperly; of which sort are those of the Orders of St.
James, Vide M. A. Frances de Eccles. Cathedralib. loco citato.
Calatrava, Alcantara, and Montesa, in Spain, and many others. Nevertheless,
Flav. Cherubinus Compend. Bullar. Tom. 3. p. 50. Constit. 41. Schol. 2. and
Tom. 1. p. 7. Constable. 5. Schol. 2.
others conceive these as well truly Religious, seeing they vow Conjugal (though
not strict and absolute) Chastity; and this is the opinion of most.

And in truth, the Vow of severe Chastity is not in this case wholly
discharged, but only dispensed with; and that of Conjugal imposed instead
thereof. For the Popes never changed or abolished the religious state of
Knights, but only dispensed with them as to Marriage; whilst in other things
they made no alteration, but lest them whole and entire.

And therefore, since we observe those Knights, who vow absolute Chastity, and
those who profess Conjugal, have alike received their approbation from the
Papal See, and that some Knights have not been accounted Ibid. Tom. 1. p. 21.
Co^st. 1. Schol. 2.
Religious, before such time, and until their rule of living has been
confirmed to them from thence (as is noted by those of St. Lazarus) after which
Confirmation, all that enter into any Order, are subject to the particular
Rule, so approved of, unless for good cause, they be Si in votis aliquis est
laxatus, id ex Ponti^icis dispensatione dimanat, qui potuit Religionis verae
naturam conservare adhuc post praestitam dispensationem. Andr. Mendo de Ord.
milit. Disq. 2. Quest. 2. sect. 2. n. 44.
dispensed with: For these reasons we shall place both under the Title of
Religious or Ecclesiastical Knights, in the following Discourse.

SECT. IV. Of Ecclesiastical Foundations dependant upon Military Orders.
BUT the Institutions of those Orders, purely Military, were after a while
thought too weak to continue long, if not sustained by Religion and Piety, and
too defective, without adjoining Ecclesiastical persons thereunto. Therefore
the Founders, considering, that in all Councils and Affairs, there should be a
concurrence of Divine assistance and Military industry, began to dedicate them
principally to the Honor and Worship of God, or to our Savior, or to the
blessed Virgin, or some other of the Saints; thereby to gain no less the
protection and favor of the Divine goodness, on the behalf of the Founders,
and Knights Companions of such Orders in general, than its especial assistance
in their Councils, Affairs, or particular Enterprises: And this they supposed
more easily obtainable by the interposition of men eminent for their sincerity,
piety, humility, and devotion, set apart and appointed to say Prayers, sing
Psalms, and perform other Ecclesiastical Duties (the efficacy of Religion,
consisting in the Offices of the Priests) for the glory, fidelity, peace, and
safety of their Kingdoms and Subjects, and the good success of their Military
Undertakings.

Hereupon some of them, at their first Institutions, joined sacred Orders to
their Militia, and made provision for Ecclesiastical persons, whose assigned
Duty was to undertake the spiritual warfare, and spend their time in Divine
Offices and Devotions at home, in their several Foundations, for the prosperity
of those undertakings, wherein the Knights Companions themselves were engaged
abroad, either as to the defense of Christian Religion, their Prince, or
Country.

Hence was it, that our Ord. Stat. Garteri Art. 4.
King Edward the Third, at the first Institution of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, appointed, within the Chapel of Saint George at Wyndesor, Ord. Stat.
Garteri Art. 4.
thirteen secular Canons, and thirteen Vicars, there to attend the celebration
of Divine Offices. In like manner did Catalog. des Chevaliers de l'Ordre du
Collar de Savoy, dict. de l' Annunciade. a Turin. 1654.
Amadis the Sixth, Earl of Savoy, who, when he had instituted the Order of the
Collar (since called of the Annunciade) founded also the Chartreuse of Pierre
Chastle in Bugey, wherein were entertained Catalog. des Chevaliers de l'Ordre
du Collar de Savoy, dict. de l' Annunciade. a Turin. 1654.
fifteen Priests, and they obliged to celebrate, every day, fifteen Masses. THE
Several ENSIGNS of the RELIGIOUS ORDERS of KNIGHTHOOD mentioned in the second
Chapter*
Upon the same account were erected certain Statut. T^.^s^n d' ^. A^^. 20.
foundations of Divine Service, in the Ducal Chapel of Dion, in the Duchy of
Burgundy, by Philip Duke of Burgundy, Founder of the Order of the Golden
Fleece; and likewise in the Church of le Mont. S. Michel in Normandy, did Stat
de l'Ordre Monsieur S. Michel Archang. Art. 19.
Lewis the Eleventh of France, ordain to be celebrated the Divine Service, and
other Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, relating to the foundation of the Order of
Saint Michael, by him instituted.

SECT. V. A brief account of the Religious Orders of Knighthood.
NOw come we to deliver a short account of the Religious or Sacred Orders of
Knighthood, to which shall succeed those that are purely and completely
Military; in both which we shall principally take notice (1.) Of the Time of
their Institution, (2.) By whom founded, and (3.) The Habit, and Ensigns,
bestowed upon each of them; proceeding according to the antiquity of each
Order's Foundation, as we can best discover it, and allowing their Precedence
here, for that cause rather than any other.

But forasmuch as the Institutions of some of these Orders of Knighthood, are
endeavored to be made more ancient than there is good ground to believe; we
have therefore thought it needless (having for the most part confined our
Discourse to the three particulars now mentioned) to engage our Pen too far,
where it is almost impossible to set the Chronological part right, and may very
possibly give an occasion of Offense.

We have taken in all the Orders that we could meet with, though some were
obscure, and but short-lived, and others, for other reasons, may be thought
inconsiderable; judging them worthy of a place here, with the most famous and
known, seeing once they had such in the Register of Honor.

Lastly, where the occasion is inserted, whence (as is affirmed) some of them
took their Original, and this looked upon as fabulous and romantic: We must
inform our Reader, that we take not upon us to justify all that is spoken to
this point; but suppose we have dealt fairly and heartily with him, in placing
our Authorities in the Margent, and there lest them to be considered of, where
we hope they will be of strength, at least sufficient to support the Text, and
justify our integrity.

The Order of the Knights of the Holy S^pulchre in Jerusalem. (1.)
This Order of Knighthood, though not so ancient as some would make it (who
refer the Original to Barth^l. de Saligniaco in ^^inerari^ su^ terrae sanctae.
St. James Bishop of Jerusalem, to Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro Militar^ de
Cavalliera. fol. 14. b. and fol. 15. a.
Constantine the Great, and to Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 197.
Charles the Great) nor so late as Andr. Mend^, de Ord. Milit. Dis. 1^ Quest.
2. Sect. 3. n. 22.
others would have it, who say this Order was founded in the year of our Lord
1110. yet is it accounted the most ancient of all those Orders which took
beginning in the Holy Land; and as a judicious Divine of our Nation reports,
was instituted in the year Heylins C^smogr. l. 3 p. 109.
1099. at such time as the Temple of Jerusalem was regained from the Saracens:
which account perhaps he grounded upon the date given to the ancient Statutes
of this Order, established at Jerusalem on Delicia^ Equ^strium. p. 213.
New-years-day in the year aforesaid, and published by Mennenius.

As to the person by whom this Order was founded, he refers it to Cosmogr. loc.
cit.
Philip King of France, but En le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 4.
Andrew Favin will have it to be Baldwin the First, King of Jerusalem: For
there having been (while the Saracens possessed that City) certain Canons regular
of the Order of St. Augustine, to whom they permitted the Custody of the Holy
Sepulcher of our Lord, and whose Convent adjoined thereunto; These Theat.
d'Hon. loco cit.
Canons (says he) did King Baldwin make men of Arms, and Knights of the Holy
Sepulcher, and ordained that they should nevertheless retain their Theat.
d'Hon. loco cit.
White Habit, and on the breast thereof bear his own Arms, which were, Carol
Seg^ing in Tresor. Heraldique page 115 Seb. Pet. Sanctus in Tess. Gentilit.
page 260. vide St. Marthe's.
Argent, a Cross Potent Or, between four Crossetts of the same, commonly called
the Jerusalem Cross. Their Great Master was the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who had
power granted from the Founder, to confer the Order, and to receive the three
Vows, of Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience.

The chief Duty whereunto these Knights were obliged by their profession, was
to guard Ios. Micheli Tesoro Militar. de Cavalleria. f^l. 15. a
the Holy Sepulcher, the custody whereof was peculiarly committed to them,
Mennen in Delic. Equest. p. 42.
to ^ight against the Saracens and Infidels with all their power; to relieve
and protect Pilgrims; to redeem Christian Captives; to hear Mass every day; to
recite the hours of the Cross, and to bear the five Mennen in Delic. Equest. p.
42.
red Crosses, in memory of the five wounds of our Savior. They had their Rule
confirmed to them by I Lud Gothofrid. in Archontol. Cosm. l. 3. p. 1. Andr.
Asendo, loc. supra cit.
Pope Innocent the Third.

When the Christians were driven out of the Holy Land, these Knights retired
into Europe, and seated themselves at Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. reb. gest. p.
95.
Perugia in Italy, after which, by consent and permission of the Sultan, the
Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. reb. gest. p. 95.
custody of the Holy Sepulcher was committed to the Franciscan Friars. The
Knights then in being, retained yet their white Habit, but changed their
ancient Arms to a Sansovin. Origin de Cavalier. f. 22. a. Aubert. Miraeus,
Orig. Ord. E^uest. p. 46. jux^a impres. 1638
double red Cross.

By the Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9 c. 4. Mennen Delic. Equest. I^s. Mich.
Tesoro Milit. locis cit. Sylvest. Maurolico in Mare Oceano, de ^utte le
Religioni del Mundo. p. 232.
Bull of Pope Innocent the Eighth, dated the 28. of March 1484. they, and all
their Goods were annexed and incorporated, to the Knights Hospitalars of St.
John of Jerusalem, then remaining in the Isle of Rhodes, (since more commonly
known by the Title of Knights of Malta) as being under the same Vow and Rule.

But it was not long e're his Successor Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9 c. 4. Mennen
Delic. Equest. I^s. Mich. Tesoro Milit. locis cit. Sylvest. Maurolico in Mare
Oceano, de ^utte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 232.
Pope Alexander the Sixth, anno 1496. transferred to the Papal See, all power
of conferring this Order of Knighthood, publishing himself and his Successors
to be the Great Masters thereof. He further Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9 c. 4.
Mennen Delic. Equest. I^s. Mich. Tesoro Milit. locis cit. Sylvest. Maurolico in
Mare Oceano, de ^utte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 232.
empowred the Guardian of the Holy Sepulcher (his Vicar General) to bestow the
same upon Pilgrims and Travelers to the Holy Land; the Formulary for receiving
of which, is set down at large by Delic. Equest. p. 43.
Mennenius, and Thea^. d' Honneur. loc. citato.
Favin.

Afterward, Philip the Second, King of Spain, used his endeavors to restore
this Order in some of his Dominions, to which end, several of these Knights
assembled in the Church of St. Catharine at Hochstraten in Brabant (in
Cameracensi Diocesi) and by their Diploma, dated the 26. of March 1558.
(exhibited by Delic. Equest. p. 214.
Mennenius) elected the said King, Grand Master of the Order; but this design
took no effect.

Of latter times, there was another attempt to the like purpose, made by Favin.
Theat. d'Hon. l. 9. c. 4.
Charles Gonz^go of Cleve, Duke of Nevers, in the year 1615. and this also,
upon the application of the Great Master of Malta, to Lewis the Thirteenth of
France, came to nothing.

The Order of Hospitalars of St. John Baptist in Jerusalem. (2.)
Before the Latin Christians had taken the City of Jerusalem from the Saracens,
certain Monast. Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist. Antiochenal. 18. c. 3. and
4. Pantaleon, de Ioannitarum rebus gestis l. 1. p. 3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare
Oceano Religionum. p. 121.
Christian Merchants of the Kingdom of Naples, who traded into Syria, and the
Holy Land, with Commodities most acceptable, because most rare and strange, to
the Inhabitants of those Countries, obtained leave from the Caliph of Egypt,
who then had the Dominion thereof, to Monast. Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex
Hist. Antiochenal. 18. c. 3. and 4. Pantaleon, de Ioannitarum rebus gestis l.
1. p. 3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121.
erect a small and convenient House, for the entertainment of themselves and
their Countrymen, which they built before the Patriarchal Church of the Holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem; together with as small an Oratory, dedicated to the
Blessed Virgin Mary.

Alf. Cincon. de vita and gestis Paschal. 2. l. 1. p. 357. Roma 1601.
To them repaired certain Monast. Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist.
Antiochenal. 18. c. 3. and 4. Pantaleon, de Ioannitarum rebus gestis l. 1. p.
3. Sylv. Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121.
Canons of the Order of St. Augustine, conducted by an Abbot from Naples, who
in a short time built another Oratory, in honor of St. Mary Magdalen: that of
the Virgin Mary being appointed for the entertainment of Men, and that other of
St. Mary Magdalen, for the reception of Women. And not long after, to wit, in
the year of our Lord Monast. Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 497. ex Hist. Antiochenal.
18. c. 3. and 4. Pantaleon, de Ioannitarum rebus gestis l. 1. p. 3. Sylv.
Mourolico in Mare Oceano Religionum. p. 121.
1048. they restored the Church of the Holy Sepulcher.

But the confluence of Pilgrims and Travelers, growing very great, and these
places already built, too narrow for their reception, they Cassan. Catalog.
gloria mundi, pars 9. Consid. 4.
erected a large Hospital in that very place Caenavi^ Dominus cum Apostolis,
and nunc ibi domus illa, a qua incepi^ Ordo, qui di^itur Hospitalariorum.
Abulensis in Comment, Epist. D. Hieronymi ad Paulam. c. 7.
where our Savior celebrated the last Supper with his Disciples, for the
better entertainment of Strangers, that traveled thither upon the account of
Devotion; (who for want of a place to lodge in, did usually, in the night time,
fall into the hands of the Saracens, that Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. etc. l. 1.
p. 4.
robbed and murdered them) as also to relieve and cure the diseased among them.
So that at length, in regard of their great Charity, and friendly Hospitality,
as also for that these religious persons took St. John Baptist for their Patron
(to the honor of whose Name, a Chapel or Oratory was built there also) they
obtained the Title of Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9 c. 5.
Brethren Hospitalars, of St. John Baptist of Jerusalem. But some are of
opinion, that this Hospital was dedicated to the memory of Pantaleon loco
citato.
St. John of Cyprus, who in the Reign of Phocas the Emperor, was Bishop of
Alexandria, and so charitable and liberal in bestowing Alms, A. Mir^us Orig.
Ord. Equest. p. 3.
that he obtained the name of Johannes Eleemosynarius.

Calvisius in his Chronology sets down the Institution of this Order, to be in
the year 1092. Others refer it to the year Sansovin. Orig. de Cavalieri. fo.
13. a. Gio. Pietro de Crescenzi Presid. Roman^: part 3. l. 1. p. 496.
1099. when one Gerard, a Native of the Province of A. Mendo de Ord. Milit.
Disq. 1. Quest. 3. n. 108*
Toulouse, and a man of holy life and piety, came to Jerusalem, in the time of
Godfrey of Bouillon, and out of zeal upon sight of the places trodden by the
feet of our Savior, and sprinkled with his blood, built this Hospital (which
became the first and chief Seat of this ancient Order) and devoutly ministered
to the necessities of the poor. After a while he Vitriac. apud Miraeum.
adjoined to himself some honest and religious men, and received the regular
Habit of Black, wearing on the outside thereof a White Cross.

King Favin. en. le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 5.
Baldwin the First, conferred on them large Privileges and Franchises,
permitting them to manage Arms, as did the Canons Regulars, Guardians of the
Holy Sepulcher, and anno Favin. en. le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 5.
1104. instituted them to be Knights. So that they, who before were pious and
liberal toward Pilgrims and diseased persons, became at length the examples of
true and Christian generosity: Their Cassan. Catalog. glor. mundi, pars 9.
Consid. 4. f. 1^2 and pars 5. Consid. 64.
duty now engaging them personally to fight against the Sara^ens and Insidels,
in defense of the Christian Faith.

These Knights then acknowledged obedience to the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who
Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 19.
first approved their Order, but afterward Monast. Anglic. Tom. 2. p. 499.
when their Revenues increased, it begat a neglect of their former religious
and humble carriage; and forthwith they labored with the Pope to be absolved
from their obedience to the Patriarch, which Hospitalarii praevenientes, per
dona maxima totam Curiam (Romanam) corruperunt, sic qu^d Patriarcha, ipso
insecto negotio, ad patriam suam rediit. Ib.
they obtained, though he, and several other Bishops of Palestine, traveled to
Rome to oppose them, and manifest the injuries they sustained from the Knights.

This Order had its Mennen. Delicae Equest. p. 69.
second approbation and rule of living confirmed from Pope Gelasius the Second,
but De Ordin. milit. loco nuper cit.
Andr. Mendo says, from Calixtus the Second, anno 1120. and was by Adrian the
Fourth Flav. Cherubin. Compend. B^llar. Tom. 1. p. 6. Constable. 2.
received under the protection of the Papal See; being likewise endowed with
ample Privileges, and exemption from payment of Tithes, by succeeding Popes,
chiefly by Tom. 2. p. 3. Constable. 9.
Pius the Fourth.

The Knights of this Order then took the Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 18.
black Habit of Hermits of St. Augustine, and lived under his rule by the grant
of Honorius the Second, anno A. Mendo de Ord. Milit. loc. cit.
1125. vowing Pantaleon. l. 1. p. 18. Aub. Miraeus. p. 7. Ciacon de vita
Paschal. 2. l. 1. p. 357. Cassan. Catalog. glor. mundi, pars 9. Consid. 4.
Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity; and on the Item omnes Fratres, Crucem in
honorem. Dei, and ejusdem Sanctae Crucis, in Cappis and Mantellis secum
different ante pectus. Regula Ord. Joan Jerusal. Art. 29. Vide Monast.
Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 497.
Breast of this Habit wore, at first, a plain Cross of white Cloth, since
changed to one with Cruz. blanca de ocha puntas, abit^ negro. El. Conde de
Lanserote en Noblez^ del Andalusia. l. 1. c. ^2.
eight points: but in the Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. loc. cit.
time of War they used a Red Cassock, bearing the White Cross upon it.

After the death of Gerard, the Founder of this Hospital, having increased in
Men and Revenues, elected out of their own Body another Governor or Head,
namely, Raimund de Podio, or Sansovin, Orig. de Cavalieri. f. 13. a.
Poggio a Florentine, who digested and enlarged their Laws and Institutions,
and divided the Body of the Order into Phil. Briet. Annal. Mundi, pars 3. Tom.
2. p. 2^.
three Classes, viz. Knights, Servants, and Ecclesiastics (which has since
received, from the succeeeding Great Masters, many additions.) This Body of
Laws was confirmed by Pope Monast. Anglican. Tom. 2. p. 493.
Boniface the Ninth, 7. Idus Apr. in the sixth year of his Popedom, the
Composers style in it runs thus, Ibid.
Ego Ramundus Dei gratia, servus pauperum Jesus Christi, and Custos Hospitalis
Ierusolymitani. But afterward he had the Title of Mennen. Deliciae Equest. p.
69.
Great Master of the Order given him, which continued to his Successors,
Cassan. Catalog. glor. Mundi, pars 9. Consid. 4.
the Adjective [ Great] being added to denote his power and authority; the
Government and Administration of the whole Militia, being lodged in him for the
time being.

This great Master is a free Lord, he has at this day the Title of
Gottofridus. Archont. Cosmic. l. 3. p. 70. Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 12. p.
381.
Prince of Maltae and Goza, and had that of Illustrious first given him by
Ferdinand the Second, Emperor of Germany: Among sundry great privileges
wherewith he is invested, he has power to Seal in Lead, as does the Pope and
Duke of Venice. He acknowledges the Pope for his Head, and the King of Spain
for his Patron.

Under this Great Master, there are many of the Knights in several Kingdoms and
Provinces, called Priors, some of whom have also the addition of Great; With us
in England he was styled Prior Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis Jerusalem in Anglia,
and by that Claus. 49. H. 3 m. 11. Dorso in Schedulia.
Title was he summoned to the Parliament as a Baron of this Kingdom: At length
he became ranked the first Baron, and had place and precedence accordingly
above all the Barons of Parliament. There is a Memorandum of making his Oath of
Fealty to the King, which I find thus recorded.

Claus. 6. R. 2. pars 1. m. ^9. Dorso.
Memorandum quod Frater Johannes de Radyngton Prior Hospitalis Sancti Iohannis
Jerusalem in Anglia vicesimo tertio die Septembris anno praesenti apud Mansum
Fratrum Praedicatorum London. fecit fidelitatem suam Domino Regi debitam coram
Consilio dicti Domini Regis ibidem tunc existente, sub hac forma; Jeo sera
foial and foie and loialtie portera a nostre Seigneur le Roi Richard and a ses
heirs Rois D'engleterre de vie de membre and de terrien honor a vivre and
morir contre toutz gentz and diligiament seray entendant as busoignes nostre
Seigneur le Roy solonc mon sen and poair and le conseil nostre Seigneur le Roy
celera and a lui and a ses maundementz en quantque a moy attient sera obeisant
si Dieu moi eide and ses Seintz. Protestando quod hoc non cederet in
praejudicium Hospitalis praedicti temporibus futuris.

This Order grew in time to such greatness in Possessions and Lands, that in
the Reign of King Henry the Third, they had in Christendom, no fewer than Math.
Paris. Hist. Anglic. p. 615. sub anno 1244. Edit. London, 1640.
nineteen thousand Manors.

When Saladine had taken Jerusalem (after it had been possessed eighty nine years
by the Christians) these Knights retreated to the City of Favin. l. 9. c. 5
Acres, called Ptolomais; and that being also taken, they seized upon the Pant.
de Ord. Ioannit. l. 4. p. 97.
Island of Rhodes, and gained the chief City there, Lib. 7. p. 200. Sansovin.
f. 13. and 14. Miraeus, p. 7.
18. Calend. Sept. in the year of our Lord 1308. which Pope n Clement the Fifth
confirmed to them, and thereupon they began to be called Cassan. Catalog. glor.
Mun^i. pars 9. Consid. 4.
Knights of Rhodes.

At Rhodes they remained 214. years, even until anno Turkish Hist. p. 600.
1522. when Solomon the Great took the Island by force, and made his public
entry thereinto on Turkish Hist. p. 600.
Christmas Day, after which they betook themselves to the Pantaleon, loc. cit.
Island of Malta, which with Tripoli and Goza were granted to them in Flav.
Cherubin Compend. Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 4. Constable. 9. schol. 1. vide etiam Pantal.
de Ord. Ioannit. l. 7. p. 212.213.
Fee, by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, the Flav. Cherubin Compend. Bullar.
Tom. 2. p. 4. Constable. 9. schol. 1. vide etiam Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 7. p.
212.213.
23. of March anno 1530. under the tender of one Falcon to the Viceroy of
Sicily, upon the 25. day of April yearly, and on condition to acknowledge the
King of Spain and Sicily for their Protectors. This Donation was confirmed by
Flav. Cherubin Compend. Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 4. Constable. 9. schol. 1. vide etiam
Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 7. p. 212.213.
Pope Clement the Seventh, on the 9. of May in the same year. In which Isle
they yet continue the Bulwark and Fortress of Europe, chiefly to shelter
Sicily, and guard the Coasts of Italy: and from this settlement of theirs in
this place, they have been ever since called Knights of Malta.

The Order of Knights Templars. (3.)
About the years Cassan. Catalog. gloria mundi. pars 9. Consid. 5.
1117. Ex Chron. Rogeri de Wendover. Math. Paris. Hist. Angl. p. 67. Histor.
Anglic. Script. Edit. Land. 1653. Col. 1^^8.
1118. Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 7.
1119. or Monast. Anglic. Tom. 2. p. 517. Ex Histor. Antiochena. l. 12. c. 7.
1120. this Order took beginning ( Baldwin the Second then reigning in
Jerusalem, and Platina in vita Gelas. 2. p. 166. Al^. Ciacon, in vita praed.
Gelasii, l. 1. p. 385.
Gelasius the Second possessing the Roman Chair) when Cassan. in Catal. glor.
mun. loc. cit. Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 23. S. Maurolico in Mare
Oceano Religionum. p. 216.
nine Gentlemen, Aub. Mir^us Orig. Ord. Eq. p. 11.
urged by zealous devotion, passed the Seas to the Holy Land, the chief of
which (though the rest are forgotten) were Sansovin. Origin de Cavalierie. fo.
17. b. Me^n. Delic. Equest. p. 75 Francis. de Radez de Andrada (by mistake)
calls him Don Hugo de Campanes. Chron. de Calatrava. f. 3. b.
Hugo de Paganes, and Godfrey de Saint Omer, two Knights of Noble Extraction.
The King, because these Knights at first had no habitation, assigned to them
part of his Pantal. de Ord Ioannit. loc. citato.
own Palace, near the South-gate, adjoining to the Temple of Solomon in
Jerusalem; and gave them leave to build a small House of residence, within the
enclosure thereof; and hereupon they became called Fratres militiae Templi.
Cassan. loc. cit.
Brothers of the Militia of the Temple, or more ordinarily, in one word,
Knights Templars.

And as they began to increase in number (which they did not till after Mennen.
ut supra. Mir^^s. p. 13.
nine years, from their Institution) so their first undertaking and profession
(to which they were enjoined by the Patriarch of Jerusalem) was chiefly to Fl.
Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 3^. Constable. 1. Schol. 2. S. Maurolico, loc. cit.
guard the most dangerous Highways about Jerusalem; whereupon they became safe
conductors to Pilgrims and Travelers (who came to visit the holy places in
that City) both in coming thither, and returning thence, against the violence
and robberies of the Saracens; which charitable service made them acceptable to
all, and for which they obtained of the Gottosred. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 4.
S^ows abbrev. p. 281.
Patriarch and Bishops, remission of their sins.

But they were yet so poor, that for the first nine years, they lived upon the
Monast. Ang. Tom 2. p. 518.
Alms of others, and wore such Clothes, as good men, for Charities sake
bestowed on them: They also rode two on one Horse; in memory of which primitive
poverty, there was engraved on the Seal of their Order, the Figure of two of
their Knights riding upon one Horse; which is exactly represented in Ad Calcem
Adversarium. vide Antiq. War. p. ^04.
Math. Paris.

At the Math. Paris. Hist. Angl. p. 6^. Phil. B^ietii Anal. mundi. pars 3. Tom.
2. p. 30.
Council held at Troyes in Champaigne, anno 1127. they had certain Rules
assigned to them, drawn up by Andr. Favin. en le Theat. d' Honn. l. 9. c. 8.
Monn. p. 230.
St. Bernard, Abbot of Clairuaux (a Ib. l. 6. ^. 14. and l. 9. c. 7.
French Gentleman, Lord of Fontaines, a Village and Castle distant about half a
mile from Dion) by the appointment of Pope Honorius the Second, and Stephen
Patriarch of Jerusalem; in the Ib. l. 6. ^. 14. and l. 9. c. 7.
presence of which Patriarch, they made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and
Chastity, and to live under the rule of Ex Chronic. Rog. de Wendover.
Canons Regular of St. Augustine. They were also enjoined to wear a White
Habit, to which (but not till the time of Eugenius the Third) they assumed the
Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 76. F. Cherub. Compend. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 37. Consid.
1. Schol. 2. Math. Paris loco supra citato.
Red Cross, and of the Dugdales Antiq. of Warwick sh. p. 705. and 707.
same form that the Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem wore, (though
Lib. 9. c. 7.
Favin says it was a Patriarchal Cross) and sewed it ^n the left shoulder of
their Mantles, to distinguish them from the Knights of other Orders in the Holy
Land. And thus as by their ^hite Habit their innocence was notified, so by the
Red Cross, their resolution to spend their blood in defense of the Christian
Faith.

These Knights, with those other of the Holy Sepul^hre, Hospitallers, and
Teu^onicks, were the principal Columns which supported the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, for a long time; and therefore their valiant encounters with the
Infidels, and forwardness to sacrifice their lives, for the honor of God, and
defense of the Holy Land, ought to be had in everlasting remembrance. But Ad
tantam rerum opulentiam devenerunt, ut silia ditata, matrem suffocare, and
supergredi videretur. Hist. Anglic. Script. antiq. Col. 1008.
when Riches increast, and their Revenues were augmented, they grew proud, and
withdrew themselves from the obedience of the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to join
with the Pope.

So that at last, upon Fav. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 7.
Friday after the Feast Day of St. Denis, in the year of our Lord 1307. all the
Knights of this Order in France, were (in one and the same hour) seized on and
imprisoned, by the command of Philip le Bell, King of France, with the consent
of Pope Clement the Fifth, being Alf. Ciacon lib. 1. p. 674. de vita Clem. 5.
Fl Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 37. Constable. 3. Schol. 3. Pantaleon. de Ord.
Ioannit. l. 3. p. 94.
charged with most infamous and damnable Crimes; the Articles confessed are set
down by ^oco cit. p. 404.
Andr. Favin. But in England their apprehension was on Hist. Anglic. Script.
antiq. fol. 2494. and 2531.
Wednesday next after the Feast of Epiphany, 4. Idus Ianuarii. Ibid. Col. 1730.
litera dominicali G. Luna currente per 17 die Mercurii proxime post festum
Epiphan. Ib. Col. 2494.
in the first year of the Reign of our King Edward the Second. Shortly after, a
Ibid. Quamvis in multis essent accusa^i, nihil tamen inventum est, quod de jure
videretur s^atum illorum anullare. Ibid.
solemn examination of their Crimes (upon the Articles exhibited against them)
was by the special Commission of the said Pope, committed to William de
Grenesfeild Archbishop of York, and Ralph Baldock Bishop of London, in the
presence of the accused Templars, who sufficiently answered all the objections.
Howbeit they were afterward convicted in a Council held at London, and all
their Lands and Goods seized into the Kings hands. Upon this, the aforesaid
Archbishop very greatly commiserating the sad state and condition of the
Templars, within his Diocese, thus left destitute of maintenance, most
charitably disposed of them in several Monasteries under his Jurisdiction,
where they were provided for during their lives.

An. Favin. loco cit. 3. Apr. vide Histor. Anglic Script. praef. Col. 1730
Two years after, many of these Knights were burnt in France, nay some of the
Bones of John de la Tur (who had been long buried) were taken up, and in like
manner burnt.

Upon An. Favin. loco cit. 3. Apr. vide Histor. Anglic Script. praef. Col. 1730
Monday Sennight after Easter, anno 1312. in the second Session of the Council,
called at Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 37. Constable. 3. Tho. Walsingham. p.
72. n. 40. vide etiam Chron. Io. Brompton inter Script. praef. Col. 1008. and
Hen. Knighton. Col. 2382.
Vienna in Daulphine the year before, this Order was by Papal Authority
condemned, and perpetually dissolved; and in March of the following year, the
last Great Master, Jacques de la Maule, a Bourgundian, Favin. loc. cit.
burnt at Paris.

Their Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 3. p. 95. Cassan in Catalog. glor. mundi.
pars 9. Consid. 5. Platina in vita Clem 5.
Lands, Possessions, and Goods, by a Decree of the said Pope, dated at Claus.
7. E. 2. Dors. m. 11.
Vienna 6. Non. Maii, in the seventh year of his Papacy, were annexed to the
Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem (except those within the Kingdoms
of Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 37. Constable. 3.
Castile, Arragon, Portugal, and Majorca, which were reserved to the
disposition of the Roman See) Ibid.
because they had constantly hazarded their lives in the defense of the
Christian Faith, and continually suffered great dangers, and undergone vast
expenses in transmarine parts, as also for Alf. Ciacon. in vita Clem. 5. Tom.
2. p. 674.
five years before, with exceeding great charge, and signal valor, had
maintained the Isle of Rhodes against the Turkish power. Thus fell this Noble
Order, no less famous for Martial Achievements in the East, than Possessiones,
tam citra, quam ultra mare, adeo immensas habere dicuntur, ut jam non sit in
orb Christian^ provincia, quae eis bonorum suorum portionem non contulerit,
and Regiis hodie divitiis praestantiores existunt. Math. Paris. Hist. Anglic.
p. 67.
their wealthy Possessions in the West. For, according to Doctor Heylins
account, they enjoyed no less than Cosmogr. l. 3. p. 110.
16000 Lordships in Europe; and a Spanish Author tells us, their Revenue was
Andr. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quest. 2. sect. 6. n. 27.
two Millions annually, and had in possession 40000 Commanderies. Which gave
occasion to many sober men to judge, that their Wealth was their greatest
crime. And there are several Authors remembered by In loc. citato. vide etiam
Sylvest. Maurolico in Oceano Religionum. p. 218.
Alfonsus Ciaconius, who are of opinion, they were falsely accused, and by
suborned Witnesses, merely upon the ambition and covetous design of Philip King
of France, who gaped after their Lands, but nevertheless the morsel fell beside
his mouth.

The Statutes of this Order are recorded by En le Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 8.
Favin.

Knights of the Order of St. Lazarus. (4.)
We are here to note, that this Order was at the first Institution only a
Fraternity of Religious Monks, not Ecclesiastic Knights, whose Weapons in the
Christian warfare were Prayers and Tears, not the Military Sword. And albeit
the time is uncertain, when they first began to be an Order of Knighthood, yet
it cannot be presumed to be before the Knights of the Holy Sepulcher, took upon
them that Military profession, since to them is generally attributed the
beginning of that Custom, for Ecclesiastics to make use of Arms in defense and
propagation of the Christian Religion; nor was there indeed occasion
administered for it, until the Christian Princes set on foot the Holy War in
Palestine.

This Order then is accounted the most ancient of all others in Christendom,
(which occasioned Pope Pius the Fifth, in two Bulls given in the year 1572. to
style it Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 9. ^. 9.
Antiquissimum Charitatis and Militiae Christi Ordinem) but that (as has been
said) must be understood as an Order of Monks, and before they were made
Ecclesiastic Knights: The Original of such their foundation, being by Sermon.
25. in laudem S. Basilii. ^lav. Cherubin. Comp. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 42. Constable. 28.
Schol. 1. vide etiam Histor Gene^^^g de la Maison de Savoy, par Sam. Gui^henon
l. 1. p. 114. Edit. Lion. 1660.
St. Gregory Nazianzen, attributed to St. Basil, about the years Ios. Mich. en
Tesoro Milit. de Caval f 48. b
360. or 370. or between both, viz. anno S. Maurolico in Oceano Religionum. p.
207
366. about the time of Julian surnamed the Apostate.

The first Institution of this Order was upon a most charitable account;
namely, to take care of persons infected with incurable Leprosy (a Disease
frequent in the Eastern Countries) by which Malady they became separated, even
from the conversation and society of men.

And albeit, through the Incursion of Barbarians and Saracens, and the injury
of time, this Order lay, as it were, extinguished, for a great while; yet was
it revived when the Latin Princes joined together in a holy League, to expel
the Saracens out of the Holy Land; and a famous Mennen. Deliciae Equest. p. 50.
Hospital was then erected in Jerusalem, under the Title of St. Lazarus, for
the reception and entertainment of Lepers. For in that time the Monks of this
Order added Martial Discipline to their knowledge in Physic, and became very
skilful both at their Weapons, and in feats of Arms; insomuch as their services
against the Infidels, begat a great esteem and value with Mennen. Deliciae
Equest. p. 50.
Baldwin the Second, King of Jerusalem, and some of his Successors, and other
Princes enumerated by In Orig. Ord. E^u^st. p. 48.
Aubertus Miraeus; in which Age this Order flourished with great luster, under
the Government of a Great Master.

In the year of our Lord Tesoro Militar. de Caval. l^c. cit.
1120. Pope Fl. Cherub. Comp. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 28. Constable. 95. videsis Sam.
G^ichenon, in Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy. p. 113. and 114.
Innocent the Third, and after him Honorius the Third, granted very great
privileges to this Order, and received it under the protection of the Papal
See. The Knights wore a Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 52.
Green Cross anciently plain, afterward of eight points, and Pope Gregory the
Ninth prescribed the form of creating their Great Master.

About the year Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c. 9.
1150 they made their Vows of Obedience, Poverty, and Chastity, before William
Patriarch of Jerusalem, and submitted themselves to the Rule of St. Benedict;
receiving his black habit: But Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. ^uaest. 2. Sect.
15.
seven years after, Pope Alexander the Fourth, commanded them to observe the
Rule of St. Aug. and approved the donation of the Emperor Frederick, who had
given great Revenues in Calabria, Apulia, and Sicily, to this Order. Compend.
Bull. loc. citato.
Nicholas the Third exempted them from payment of Tithes, and several of the
succeeding Popes indulged them with diverse privileges.

These Knights were so admired and favored by Fav. ^heat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 9.
vide Mennen. p. 51. and Miraeus p. 48
St. Lewis of France, that he brought twelve of them with him out of Palestine,
and placed them at Fav. ^heat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 9. vide Mennen. p. 51. and
Miraeus p. 48
Boigny, in the Diocese of Orleans, where he established a College, anno
Domini 1154. which (as Favin affirms) was acknowledged for the Fav. ^heat. d'
Hon. l. 9. c. 9. vide Mennen. p. 51. and Miraeus p. 48
chief Seat of this Order in Europe.

In process of time the dignity of this Order sunk, being Compend. Bullar. Tom.
2. p. 29. Constable. 95. Schol. 1.
suppressed by Pope Innocent the Eighth, who Favin. loc. cit. Men. ^p. 52.
united it to the Order of Hospitalars at Rhodes, by virtue of his Bull, dated
anno 1490. and all the goods which they possessed in France, were carried away
thither; so that shortly after the memory of this Order, as well in Italy as
France was wholly obscured.

Nevertheless Pope Compend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 28. Constitut. 95.
Pius the Fourth, did again restore and re-establish the same, by his Bull
dated at Rome anno 1565. confirming all former Privileges, and granting many
new; he also ordained Rules and Statutes, both for the Election of their Great
Master, and reformation and better Government of the Order. Moreover he made
Samuel Guichenon in Hist. Genealog. de la Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p. 114. ex
Thu^^^.
Don Ianot de Chastillon, a Gentleman of Millan (his Kinsman) Great Master
thereof.

The Privileges of this Order were afterward enlarged by Compend. Bull. Tom.
2. p. 42. Constitut. 28.
Pius the Fifth, in the year 1567. who permitted them to take one Wife only, to
wit, a Virgin, not a Widow.

Lastly, Pope Histor. de Mons. de Thou. Tom. 2. l. 38. p. 876.
Gregory the Thirteenth, anno 1572. bestowed the Great Mastership of this
Order, upon Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy and his Successors, Dukes of his
Line; and prescribed to them the Cistertian Rule. Furthermore, he ordained,
Favin. l. 8. c. 6. vide l. 3. c. 10.
that all Commanderies of this Order, under all Christian Princes, should be
left freely to the said Duke and his Successors; and accordingly he had the
Investiture and Collation of the Commanderies in Spain, and Italy: But Henry
the Fourth of France hindered the effecting thereof in his Kingdom, conceiving
the right of Great Mastership appertained to him, in regard the chief Seat of
this Order in Europe, was (according to Favin) within his Kingdom.

Knights of the Teutonick Order, or of Prusia. (5.)
In the time of the Holy War, a Cassan. in Catalog. glor. mundi pars 9. Consid.
6. Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. l. 1. p. 13. Sansovin. Origin de Cavalieri. f
20. b.
wealthy Gentleman of Germany, who dwelt at Jerusalem, commiserating the
condition of his Countrymen coming thither upon Devotion, and not understanding
the Language, or knowing where to inhabit; made his House a receptacle for
these Pilgrims, where they received lodging and entertainment. Afterward,
gaining Authority and License from the Patriarch, he erected a Chapel near
unto this Hospital, and Segars Honor Milit. and Civil l. 2. p. 105.
dedicated it to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, whence they had also the
Title of Equites Mariani Mennen. p. 78.
Marian Knights.

To him And. Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12.
associated other German Gentlemen, who contributing to maintain this
charitable work thus begun, and in short time, increasing in Number, Piety,
Wealth, and Esteem (though yet they had no rule of living assigned) gave
themselves to the Catalog. glor. mundi. Ord. Ioannit. locis cit. Aub. Miraeus
Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 10.
professions, both of the Knights Hospitalars, and Templars; imitating the
later in their military Employments, and emulating the former in their acts of
Piety and Charity: albeit the year, wherein they first assumed Arms, and entered
into a Society, we do not find remembered.

But afterward, to wit, in the year of our Lord Favin. loc. cit.
1190 (or Pontanus in rerum Danicarum Historia. page 284.
1191.) they elected their first Master, namely Henry Walpott, and on the 22.
of February in the following year, (upon the request of Frederick the Emperor)
received confirmation of their Order, from the Bull of Pope Aub. Miraeus Orig.
Ord. Equest. p. 8.
Celestine the Third, being the first year of his Papacy, under the Title of
Nomen Pontifex Militum beatae Mariae Virginis domus The autonicorum dedit,
Barhamque alere jussit. Pantaleon. de Ord. Joannit. l. 2. p. 58.
Knights Teutonicks, or Dutch Knights of the Hospital of St. Mary the Virgin;
vowing Poverty, Obedience, and Chastity,: He also prescribed to them the Rule
of St. Augustine.

Their Statutes were composed by the Model of the Knights Hospitalars, and of
the Knights Templars; among which one Article was, that none but Cassanaeus,
loc. citato.
Germans should be admitted into this Order. But to difference them from those
Orders, their Habit was ordained to be a Pantal. l. 1. p. 23. and l. 2. p. 58.
White Mantle, on the breast whereof a plain black Cross (but some Segar. loc.
cit. Crux nigra, cum limbo argenteo in vest candida, and Magistro Ordinis,
Crux nigra, cum alia Cruce aurea eam intersecante. Mendo de Ord. Mil. Disq. 1.
Quaest. 2. Sect. 9. n. 32.
others make it a black Cross, voided with a Cross Potence) for their Ensign.

In the year when this Order received Confirmation from the Papal See, there
Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12.
joined to them some rich Citizens of Breme and Lubeck; by whose united
Contributions another Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 12.
Hospital was erected in the City of Acon.

But after that City was Pantal. de Ord. Ioannit. l. 3. p. 74. Cassan. loc. cit.
taken by Saladine, one Hermannus then Master, and the remaining Knights
removed into Germany: on whom the Emperor Frederick the Second, anno 1229. and
Pope Honorius the Third, bestowed the Province of Prussia (or as some say
Chronic. Chronicorum. p. 7. Miraeus ex lib. Ordinis Prussiae
Conrade Duke of Massovia anno 1226.) where having conquered that Nation, and
reduced it from Paganism to Christianity, they built the City of Mary-burgh;
and there Heyl Cosm^gr. l...p. 180.
anno 1340. fixed the chief Seat and Resid^ (...) of their Great Master.

This Country they enjoyed, till the year Fav. Theat. d' (...) l. 7 c. 12 vid^
Menn. D^^^c. ^ques^. 8^. 82. and ^3.
1525. that Albertus Brandenburg, the last Great Master, made solemn
renunciation of the Order, and became Feudatory to Sigismund the First, King of
Poland, who raised Prussia into a Dukedom and created this Albert first Duke
thereof. The Conditions upon his Surrender, and the Ceremony of his Investiture
into this new Dukedom, are set down in the Fav. Theat. d' (...) l. 7 c. 12 vide
Menn. D^^^c. ^ques^. 8^. 82. and ^3.
Theater of Honor.

Some of the Knights disrelishing this Action, did afterward elect another Fav.
Theat. d' (...) l. 7 c. 12 vide Menn. D^^^c. ^ques^. 8^. 82. and ^3.
Great Master, namely Albert Wolfang, and leaving Prussia, seated themselves in
Germany, where they now reside, though of no great account; only the Fav.
Theat. d' (...) l. 7 c. 12 vide Menn. D^^^c. ^ques^. 8^. 82. and ^3.
younger Sons of the German Princes, being for the most part received into this
Order, give the greatest reputation thereunto.

There were some other Military Orders of lesser note instituted in the Holy
Land, under the first Latin Kings of Jerusalem, in imitation or rather
emulation of those more famous Orders before remembered, of which there now
remains only an obscure memorial: and seeing their Histories are all defective,
as to the year of Institution, we think best to muster them up here in the
following order.

The Order of the Knights of Mount-Joy. (6.)
THese Knights were so called from a Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 9. c.
11.
Castle in the Holy Land, where this Order was Instituted, built on the point
of a Mountain, Fr de Rades y Andrada en Chron. de Calatra^a f 38 a.
not far from Jerusalem, whence the Pilgrims first viewed the Holy City, and
where these Knights lay in Garrison.

They were employed in Military Services, for defense of that Casile and the
Holy Land, against the Saracens and Pagans; and received for their Habit,
Favin, loc. cit.
Red short Mantles, and a White Star, with five rays issuing out of it, fixed
upon their breasts. I^s. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Cavalleria. f. 36. b.
Others say, the Habit of this Order was White, and the Badge thereof an
Octogonal Cross Red (but this might happily be after they left the Holy Land, and
settled in Spain.) They vowed And Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qu^st. 2. Sect.
^.
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience, and observed the Rule of St. Tesoro Milit.
de Cavall. loc. cit.
Basil.

Pope Mennen. de Delic. Equest. p 86.
Alexander the Third, by his Bull approved this Order, and changed their Rule
to that of St. Augustine, in the year of our Lord 1180. In this Bull (remaining
in the Archives of the Order of Calatrava) is mention made of several Vide Fr.
Rades y Andrada loc. citato.
Towns and Castles, which these Knights held in the Holy Land, as also what
they possessed in Spain.

After the loss of the Holy Land, these Knights retired into Spain, and fought
against the Moors, and according to the several names of the places, where they
resided, were they denominated, though the general Title was of Equites de
Monte Gaudio.
Mount-Ioy. In Catalonia and Valentia, they were called Mennen. loc. cit.
Equites de Mongoia (which is the same with Mount-Ioy) but in Castile Mennen.
loc. cit.
Knights of Monfrac, from a Castle so called in that Kingdom, it being their
chief place of residence; and after Fr. de Rades. loc. cit.
when this Order was fallen into great decay, it was given unto Fr. de Rades.
loc. cit.
Don Goncalionez, Master of the Order of Calatrava, by King Ferdinand the
Saint, in the year of our Lord 1221. by And. Mendo. loc. praecitato.
whose consent they were afterward incorporated into the Order of Calatrava.
Moreover in the Instrument, by which Alphonso the Ninth, King of Castile, gave
the Lands to this Order, which the Knights took from the Moors, the Donation
says thus, Maestre de Monfrac de la Orden de Monte Gaudio. Fr de Rades loc.
cit.
To you Don Rodrigo Goncalez Master of Monfrac, of the Order of Mount-Ioy. They
were also called (says En le Thea^ d' Honneur. loc. cit.
Favin) Equites de Truxillo, or de Trugillo, from a City of that name, where
they sometime resided; but this will appear by and by, to be a distinct Order,
united afterward to the Knights of Alcantara.

Knights of St. John of Acon, or Acres. (7.)
Under the Patronage of this Saint was this Order erected, but the Original, as
to time, uncertain. The Knights thereof Ios. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de
Cavalleria. f. 61. a. Gothofrid. Archont. Cosmica. l. 3 p. 5.
exercised all Duties of Charity toward those who went on Pilgrimage, to visit
the Holy Land; and assumed the exercise of Arms, in imitation of the Knights
Hospitalars, whence they became ranked amongst the Religious or Sacred Orders:
They followed the Rule of St. Augustine, and according to In le Theater d'
Honneur. l. 9. c 11.
Favin had a black Habit assigned them, upon which they wore a White Cross
Pattee.

After the City of Acon was taken, they removed into Spain, and flourished in
that Kingdom, in the Reign of Tesoro mil. de Cavall. f. 61. ex Hieron. Romano.
Alfonsus the Astrologer, King of Castile, about which time, Pope Mennen.
Deliciae Equest. p. 84. A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Q. 2. Sect. 23.
Alexander the Fourth approved the Order, under the conjoined Title of St.
Thomas and St. John of Acon. This King gave unto them by his Will, all the
Furniture of his House, and very much Money, but afterward they by little and
little decayed, until at length they were A. Mendo, loc. cit.
united with the Knights Hospitalars.

The Ensign of their Order (says La Insignia era una Cruz colorada lisa, y en
medio san Iuan, y santo Tomas. Tesoro militar. de Cavall. loc. cit.
Ios. Micheli Marquez) was a Red Cross ( And. Mendo, loco nuper cit.
like to that of the Order of Montesa) in the middle whereof stood the Figures
of St. John, and St. Thomas, which differs from what Favin has before
assigned; but perhaps the color of the Cross was changed to Red, after their
coming into Spain.

Knights of St. Thomas. (8.)
There was another Order which (as may be collected from Delic. Equest. p. 84.
Mennenius, and Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. fol. 61. b.
Ios. Micheli) was distinct from the former, bearing the Title of St. Thomas;
but De Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Q. 2. sect. 24.
A. Mendo supposes, they were rather some of those which joined themselves to
the Knights Hospitalars; and the rather, because they wore the same Habit with
the Knights of St. John of Acon; they also made the same Professions, followed
the same Rule, observed the same Constitutions, and were approved and confirmed
by Pope Alexander the Fourth and Fifth, and John the 22. Their Badge was a
Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 263.
Saltire gules, yet Micheli makes it the same with that of St. John of Acon,
wanting the Figures in the middle. But Theat. d' Honneur, l. 9. c. 11.
Andr. Favin reports (though we meet with nothing in our English Histories to
back him) that this Order was Instituted by our King Richard the First, after
the surprisal of Acon, and that these Knights were of the English Nation; who
wore a White Habit, and a Red Cross, charged in the middle with a White
Escallop: and lastly, that they had for their Patron, St. Thomas Becket.

This gives us occasion to remember here, that we have some more Honor of this
kind done our Nation by Strangers (if it can be called an Honor, to report
those things of us, which want ground and authority from our own Histories and
Chronicles to support them) viz. Ios. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f.
35. b.
That Henry of England (which by the note of time afterward mentioned, must be
understood of our King Henry the Second) visiting the Holy places in Jerusalem
(but we find not that he was ever there) being moved with a pious zeal, by the
example of the Knights of the Sepulcher, Instituted the Order of Jesus Christ
of the holy Sepulcher in England, in the year of our Lord 1174. giving to the
Knights thereof the same Rules, as had those of the Holy Sepulcher in
Jerusalem; which Order (says the same Author) was confirmed by Pope Alexander
the Third, under the Rule of St. Basil. Howbeit after the Christians were
driven out of the Holy Land, the Knights of this Order were joined to the
Knights Hospitalars.

But we give the less credit to this formal account, because we find no mention
made thereof in any of our English Writers or Records: Perhaps the Relator
mistook them for the Canons regular (but not Knights) of the Holy Sepulcher,
who about that time lived amongst us, and of whom the Page 362.
Antiquities of Warwickshire give some account.

Knights of St. Blase. (9.)
These were called also Knights Mennen. Deliciae Equest. p. 84
de Sancta Maria, and founded under the Ios. Mich. Tesoro milit. de Cavalleria.
fo. 77. b.
Rule of St. Basil. They were Fav. Theat. d'Hon. l. 9. c. 11
Officers and Servants to the Kings of Armenia, and had assigned them for their
Habit Skie-colour, with a Cross gold, worn before their breasts. Others say a
Tesoro milit. de Caval. loc. cit.
Red Cross, and in the middle thereof the Picture of St. Blase their Patron.

This Order was at the Fav. loc. cit.
height, when the Armenian Kings, of the House of Luzignam, kept their Court in
the City of Acon.

Cavalleros de los Ma^tires en Palestina y Jerusalem. Tesoro milit. de Cavall
f. 53. a. Ordo Poentten^iae SS. Martyrum. Mennen. p. 84.
Knights of the Martyrs in Palestine. (10.)
By the pious affection of some Ibid. vide etiam And. Mendo de Ord. Milit.
Disq. 1. Qu^st. 2. Sect. 17.
Noblemen, there was erected in the Holy Land an Hospital dedicated to the holy
Martyrs St. Cosmas, and St. Damianus; where all acts of charity were exercised
toward sick strangers. Their profession also obliged them to other works of
mercy toward the poor, to redeem Captives taken by the Saracens, and to bury
the dead.

These Knights followed the Ibid. vide etiam And. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1.
Qu^st. 2. Sect. 17.
Rule of St. Basil, which was confirmed to them by Pope John the 22. They wore
for the Badge of their Order, a Mendo ut supra.
Red Cross; and in the middle thereof, within a Circle, the Figures of the
Saints Cosmas and Damianus were described.

Delic. Equest. p. 84.85.
Mennenius informs us, that Hieron. Romanus had seen some of these Knights
wearing for their chief Ensign a Red Cross; and professing the Rule of St.
Augustine; which perhaps was so changed when they retired into Europe.

Knights of St. Katharine at Mount Sinai. (11.)
This Order received its Institution, says In Tesoro milit. de Cavalleria. f.
18. b.
Ios. Micheli, in the Year of our Lord 1063. under the Title and Patronage of
St. Katharine, whose body is reported to be deposited in Favin. Theat. d'Hon.
l. 9. c. 10
Mount Sinai, and the high Altar in the Church of the Monastery, there
(dedicated to her name) erected near to the place where she was interred.

The end for which these Knights were at first Instituted, and the sum of their
profession, was to A. Mend^ de Ord. Milit. Dis^. 1. Qu^st. 2. Sect. 5.
guard and keep safe the Sepulcher of St. Katharine, to secure the ways for
Travelers, to defend and protect the Grecian Pilgrims, who came thither for
devotions sake, and to relieve and entertain them with convenient Hospitality.

Their Habit was A Miraeus in Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 56.
White, and they lived under the Rule of St. Basil the Great; making their Vows
of conjugal chastity and obedience to the Abbot of this Monastery, who was
their Superior or Master.

But Mendo* ^oc. cit.
when those Countries fell into the hands of the Turks, the Knights of this
Order were ill entreated and driven away, and the Order it self almost
abolished. Nevertheless, some shadow thereof does still continue; for such as
travel to visit the Holy Sepulcher at Jerusalem, do now and then likewise pass
to this Monastery at Mount Sinai; where (in imitation of the Padre Guardian of
Jerusalem) the Favin, loc. sup^^ c^tato.
principal of the Monks of this Convent, makes them Knights of the Order of St.
Katharine; the Ceremony being performed upon her Sepulcher or Tomb; and the
same Questions and Formulary are here used, as are accustomed at the Holy
Sepulcher in Jerusalem.

These Knights do now wear Favin. loc. supra citato.
upon the left side of their White Habit, the Cross of Jerusalem, and
Instrument of St. Katharines Martyrdom, which I have caused to be engraven,
after the form of that Badge bestowed upon Favin. loc. supra citato.
Andr. Favin, by Mesiere Claude Daubray, a Knight both of the Holy Sepulcher,
and of St. Katharine: but according to others, the Et in mediam rubei coloris
Rotam Gladio transfixo pro insignibus praeferre. Mennen. p. 49. Ac in pectore
almidium Rotae rubrae, quam Ensis intersecabat. Mendo loco praecitato.
middle of the Wheel is pierced with a Sword.

The Order of Knights of St. Anthony in Aethiopia. (12.)
MS. penes Ioh. Knight Ar. Principal. Chirurg. Reg. Car. Secund. vide etiam
Ios. Micheli in Tes. milit. de Caval. f. 9. b. and Mendo Disq. 1. Quaest. 2.
Sect. a. n. 20.
Shortly after the death of St. Anthony the Hermit, (which fell out about the
years of our Lord 357. or 358.) many of his Disciples remaining in Thebais (a
Country bordering upon Aethiopia) followed the Example, Rule, and manner of
life which he had left them: and both they and their Successors lived for some
time in great austerity and solitariness in the Desert, and therefore called
Anchorites, until they were at length reduced to a more convenient and rational
life, by submitting to the monastical Rule of St. Basil, and cohabiting in
Monasteries, but still under the Title and Habit of St. Anthony.

It is said, that about the year of our Lord MS. penes Ioh. Knight Ar.
Principal. Chirurg. Reg. Car. Secund. vide etiam Ios. Micheli in Tes. milit. de
Caval. f. 9. b. and Mendo Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. a. n. 20.
370. John Emperor of Aethiopia (commonly called Prester John) erected these
Monks into a Religious Order of Knighthood, under the Title and Mennen. Delic.
Equest. p. 177.
Protection of St. Anthony, Patron of his Empire; and bestowed upon them great
Revenues and many Privileges. And being thus instituted Knights, they received
the aforesaid Ios. Micheli Tes. Milit. de Caval. fol. 10.20.
Rule of St. Basil, and submitted to his Constitutions. The Habit of the Order
is Ios. Micheli Tes. Milit. de Caval. fol. 10. a.
Black, and the Cross, Blue; much like the form of the Latin Letter T, but not
like either the Samaritan or Hebrew Letter Tau, (which St. Origin. St. Hierom.
some say is like a Cross) for the fashion and shape of either has no likeness
or similitude to a Cross at all, as has been observed by the Learned Animadv.
in Chron. Eusebius. p. 109.
Joseph Scaliger.

The chief Seat of this Order is in the Isle of Ex MS. penes eund. Io. Knight,
and Tesoro milit. de Cavall.
Meroe, where the Abbots both spiritual and temporal have their residence; but
in other parts of Aethiopia they have a very great number of Convents and
Monasteries, and not less than two Millions of annual Revenue.

The Ex MS. penes eund. Io. Knight, and Tesoro milit. de Cavall.
eldest Sons of Noblemen and Gentlemen cannot be admitted into this Order, but
the second Sons may; and if a man have three Sons, he is bound to assign one of
them to be of the Order; from which Law none are exempt but Physicians.

The effect of the Vow and Profession which these Knights make, is to observe
Ex MS. penes eund. Io. Knight, and Tesoro milit. de Cavall.
conjugal chastity, to dye in defense of the Christian Faith, to guard the
Confines of the Empire, to yield obedience to their natural Laws, and their
Superiors, and to go to War, whenever and wheresoever they are commanded.
Moreover they take an Oath before the spiritual Abbot, Tesoro milit. de Cavall.
fol. 11. a.
not to fight in Wars between Christians, nor to receive any holy Orders, or to
marry without express License first obtained.

There are in this Order, two sorts of Knights; the Ibid. fol. 10. a.
one employed in the Wars, the other being old, are exempted from Military
services, and retire themselves under the Title and Profession of Monks, to the
Abbeys where first they took their Habit. Of these there can be no more but
five and twenty in one Abbey (albeit while they remain Military Knights they
have no certain number) out of whom the most ancient in the Habit is chosen
Abbot, by the voices of his Fellows, and called the Spiritual Abbot.

The Ibid. fol. 10. a.
Novices are taken in about sixteen or seventeen years of age, and employed
nine years in the Wars; to wit, three years in the Garrisons about the Red Sea,
against the Arabian Pirates; other three years in the Isle of Meroe, against the
incursions of the Turks; and the last three years upon the Borders of Borno, a
neighbor Kingdom of the Moors.

These Ibid. fol. 10. a.
nine years being completed, they obtain Letters from their last Captain,
testifying the fulfilling those years in the Wars, with honor and worthiness;
wherewith the great Abbot being made acquainted, he directs his Letters to the
Abbot, where they are to receive their Habit, to give them admittance
accordingly. But in case the Certificate of life and services be not sufficient
(which seldom happens) their admission is prolonged to a further time.

When they come to be admitted into their Abbey, they are introduced in their
military Habit, of which being disrobed, and the religious Habit put on, to
wit, a Ibid. fo. 11. a.
Black Gown reaching down to the ground, lined with Blue (described to be a
Garment made with many Plaits in the neck, and large sleeves, such as the
Basilians wear) having a Blue Cross fixed to the Breast, and over that a Black
Cowle, they then are led to the Church, and before the Altar make their
Profession.

Fol. 10. b.
Philip the Seventh of that Name, Son to the Founder, very much increased their
Lands and Privileges; and gave command that the Badge of the Blue Cross should
be bordered with Gold, which is observed at this day.

Such as are inquisitive after a further Account of this Order in Aethiopia,
may receive it from the afore-cited Author Ios. Micheli Marquez, who is very
large and particular upon this Subject.

In Fol. 14. b.
Italy, France, and Spain, there are a sort of Monks that from Et quamvis
gladio minim^ accingantur, Equitum tamen numero censentur. Mennen. p. 176.
some have the Title of Knights of St. Anthony; these were commanded to observe
the Rule of Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1 p. 35 Constable. 5.
St. Augustine by Pope Boniface the Eighth, and appointed to wear a plain Blue
Cross like that in Aethiopia; the Principals of these (according to Inle Theat.
d' Honn. l. 8. c. 1.
Favin) wear a double St. Anthonies Cross of Blue Satin, the one above the
other, but the rest of them, only a single Cross.

Their chief Seat is at Inle Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 1.
Vienna in Daulphine, of which place the General of the Order bears the Title
of Abbot, the Monastery there having been erected into an Comp. Bullar. loco
cit.
Abbey, by the said Pope Boniface, anno 1297. in honor of St. Anthony, whose
Baron. Annal. Eccl. Tom. 11. Col. mihi 642: sub anno 1084.
body is reported to have been translated thither from Constantinople: and all
other places, built in honor of his name, were made subject to this Abbot by
Pope Compend. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 107. Cons. 2.
Clement the Seventh, anno 1523. In Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 45.
Aub. Miraeus takes notice of this Order, calling it the Order of Hospitalars
of St. Anthony, and to have taken beginning in France, in the year 1121. from
one Gaston, a Nobleman of Vienna. But Annal. Eccles. Tom. 11. col. 694. sub
anno 1095.
Baronius says it was in the year 1095. that this Gaston with his Son Gerin,
taking eight other persons to them, instituted this Order; who before they took
upon them the Habit of Religion, assumed to themselves, the Letter Thau, for
the Badge or Ensign of their Order. Yet In vita Vrbin. 2. l. 1. p. 355
Alfonsus Ciaconius, makes this Order more ancient, affirming that Gaston and
Guind (whom Baronius calls Gerin) instituted it before the year of our Lord
1092.

The Order of the Constantinian Angelick Knights of St. George, in Greece, but
now in Italy. (13.)
We shall be somewhat large in the account of this Order, because we have met
with little of it besides what is delivered by Joseph Micheli Marquez a Spanish
Writer, in his Tesoro Militar de Cavalleria (from whom And. Mendo has
collected all he says of it) as also for that it appears he was
Vice Chancellor thereof, which makes us presume, he might be enabled to give a
fuller and more particular account of it to the world than others; and to say
truth, the History of it, set down by him, is large enough.

Nor do we call in question the authority of his attestations, from the time of
Angelus Flavius Comnenus, and the Confirmation given this Order by Pope Leo the
First, under the Rule of St. Basil, which perhaps should be understood, as they
were Monks, rather than Knights.

But our Author not content with an original of that Age, which if granted to
him, will make this Institution elder than either the Knights of the Sepulcher,
Hospitalars, or Templars, and consequently high enough, to be one of the first
military Orders in Christendom; must needs derive a formal Institution, Rules,
and Laws from Constantine the Great, and vouch for it an Inscription (not
mentioned by any other) in the Capitol at Rome. From which account of his,
though it appears little better than a fabulous story, grounded, at best, upon
some uncertain Tradition, and in several things smelling of novelty, we shall
nevertheless extract what is most material to our purpose.

This ancient, and (as our Author calls it) the In Tesoro Milit. de Caval. fol.
1. b. Vide etiam Crescenzi del suo Presidio Romano. part. 3. l. 1.
first Military Order in Christendom, took beginning from the Emperor
Constantine the Great, and from him was entitled, the Military Order of
Constantine the Emperor.

It was called also Fol. 2. b.
Angelical, because the Cross with this Inscription, In hoc signo vinces, was
showed from Heaven to that Emperor by an Angel; and thence, they of the Family
descended from him (among whom were the Great Masters of the Order) took the
name de Angelis.

As to the description of this Cross and the form thereof, Lib. 1. c. 22.
Eusebius may be consulted, who in the Life of Constantine, not only affirms,
that this Emperor himself vouched the truth of this Miracle to him with an
Oath, but Cap. 25.
describes the Figure thereof, which the Emperor gave Cap. 24.
directions to be made of Gold and precious Stones, according to the Pattern he
had seen in the Sky, and thence-forward caused the Lib. 4. c. 21.
Figure of this Cross to be carried before his Army, instead of the golden
Standard, formerly used, and to be engraven upon the Armor of the Legionary
Soldiers.

He also reports, that upon Lib. 1 c. 33.
Constantines triumphal entrance into Rome, after his Victory over Maxentius,
he erected many Crosses with Inscriptions, to indear the Sign thereof, into all
men's affections; and amongst the rest, commanded his own Statue to be placed in
the chiefest part of the City, holding a Banner of the Cross with the following
Inscription, engraven below it.

HOC SALVTARI SIGNO, VERO FOR TITVDINIS INDICIO, CIVITATEM VESTRAM TYRANNIDIS
JVGO LIBERAVI. ET S.P.Q.R. IN LIBERTATEM VINDICANS, PRISTIN AE AMPLITVDINI, ET
SPLENDORI RESTITVI.

This Order had also the Epithet Ios. Micheli Marquez en Tesoro mil. de Caval
fol. 3.
Golden adjoin'd, because, that instead of the Collar of Gold, which the
ancient Emperors his Predecessors used to give in reward of Virtue, and
military Service, this Emperor gave a Collar of Gold, composed of these three
Characters A x O, at which was fastened a Cross, like that which appeared to
him, and thereunto the Image of St. George; to confirm which (says our Author)
there is to be seen (but we much doubt) in the Capitol at Rome, a Marble,
whereon are armed Knights engraven, and an Inscription speaking thus,
Constantine the Great, Emperor, after he was cleansed of his Leprosy, by the
means of sacred Baptism; thus created Golden Knights, with the Cross for
defense of the Christian name.



He further informs us, that Fol. 79. b.
Constantine elected fifty illustrious Grandees of his Empire, to be Knights of
this Order, to whom he gave the Standard of the Labarum and likewise a Collar
of Gold, to which the Figure of the Labarum, and a Cross were dependant,
together with several Constitutions and Laws; and that he instituted this
Order, with the Fol. 2. b.
consent and approbation of Pope Sylvester.

As also, that it was confirmed by Pope Fol. 4.
Leo the First, whose Bull for assigning to the Knights thereof, the Rule of
St. Basil, dated the 20. of July anno Domini 456. (Prince Alexius Angelus being
then Great Master) he transcribes at large.

That it received further confirmation and approbation, from the Popes Fol. 3.
a.
Julius the Third, Calixtus the Third, Pius the Second, Sixtus the Fourth,
Innocent the Eighth, Paul the Third, Sixtus the Fifth, Clement the Eighth, Pius
the Fifth, Gregory the Fifteenth, and Urban the Eighth. And whilst it
flourished in Greece, was confirmed and augmented with large Privileges by
diverse succeeding Grecian Emperors, namely Leo the First, Isaac Angelus anno
Dom. 1191. whose Fol. 80. a.
Diploma this Author also gives us, dated the 13. of Sept. in the year
aforesaid, and of his Empire the Seventh, by Michael Paleologus anno 1294. by
Fol. 3. b.
Isaac Angelus anno 1295. and lastly, by Ferdinand the Second, Emperor of
Germany, at Ratisbone, anno 1630. who recommended to his Catholic Majesty,
the restoration of this Order, because those who had been Great Masters
thereof, were allied to him, and of the Family of Angelus Flavius Comnenus;
which recommendation was sent to that King, by the then Great Master Don John
Andrea Angelo Flavio Comneno.

The Great Masters of this Order, have their chief Seat and Convent now at Fol.
3. b.
Brianno, a Town nigh to Venice, the Dignity yet continuing in the Line of
Angelo Flavio Comneno; howbeit among the Privileges granted by the Emperor
Isaac Angelus, one is, Fol. 80. b.
That if the Family of Angelus Flavius Comnenus should be extinguished, the
Collared Knights may elect from among themselves a Great Master.

Among the many Prerogatives granted to this Order, by the Imperial Privileges
and Papal Bulls, we shall mention a few, by which may be understood, something
of the grandeur thereof; to wit, that the Great Masters are Fol. 3. b.
Commensales Pontificum, and have the privilege of sitting at the Table with
the Pope, by whom they are defended and supported, as Benefactors to the
Church, and Founders of the Lateran Cathedral in Rome. They are persons of
great note and authority, in that they are subject to no Prince, and therefore
have the power of coining Money. They give titles of Counts, Princes, and such
others, and of Reverend to their own Fraternity. They have also the faculty of
restoring to Honors, of legitimating Bastards, of giving Degrees with the Title
of Doctors, creating Poet Laureats, and making public Notaries.

This Order is under the protection of the Fol. 6. a.
Blessed Virgin, and patronage of St. George, the titulary Saint and Guardian
of military men in general, and of these Knights in particular, who profess
obedience, and conjugal Chastity.

The Formulary prescribed for entrance into the Order, the manner of receiving
the Habit, taking the Oath, the benediction of the Mantle, Cross, and Sword,
the admittance of the Knights, Priests, and Novices, are at large laid down by
this a fol. 3. usque ad 10.
Author.

The Habit of this Angelick Order is Fol. 3 b. and Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq.
1. Quaest. 2. sect. 1. n. 17.
White, on the left side whereof is sewed a Fol. 3 b. and Mendo de Ord. milit.
Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 1. n. 17.
Red or Crimson Velvet Cross Flory, in the middle is the Labarum imbroidered
after the form of the Letter X, with the Letters A upon the one arm of the
Cross, and O on the other: the sides are wrought with Gold and Silk, but the
Labarum all with Gold.

Amongst these Knights there are three Degrees, the Tesor. milit. de Cavall.
fol. 3. b.
first are called Collared, or Grand Crosses; these wear a Collar, formed of
Labarums, whereat depends the Figure of the Cross, and St. George: The second
are the Knights, and these wear the Cross as is above described: The third are
Servants, and they bear the Cross, only wanting the upper arm of it, and the
Labarum.

The Priests wear the like Cross with the Knights.

The Ibid. f. 80.
Grand Priorates and Promotions, or Commanderies, belonging to this Order, show
how great it has been, and how far its jurisdiction extended; since to them
were joined very great Revenues and Rents which the Knights of this Order held,
and they were these (says mine Author) though I suppose diverse of them are
miswritten. The grand Fol. 82.
Priorates of Mistra, and of Bosnia, of Cappadocia, Calcide, Napoles,
Antiochia, Constantinople, Jerusalem, Natolia, Iulia Caesaria, and the Priories
of Barlada, Scione, Anfiboli, Damascus, Mileto, Pergamo, Sinope, Ephesus, Argo,
Odeseo, Egena, Nicepoli, Corinthus, Nicomedia, Apollonia, Erapoli, Engada,
together with several Baliato's or Baliwicks.

The Fol. 82.
Bulls and Privileges are to be seen in the Constitutions of the Order,
published by the eloquent and learned Knight Majolini Bisachioni, grand Prior
of Bosnia, Earl of Galicia, great Chancellor and Administrator of the Order; as
also in Malvezzi, and other Authors, Knights of this Order.

To conclude, this Author gives a Fol. 80.
Catalogue of the Names of 34 Great Masters (whom he affirms were all true
descendants of the Family of Angelus Flavius Comnenus) beginning with
Constantine the Great, but between him and Alexius Angelus Flavius (whom he
reckons to be the third Great Master, and who was he that drew all the Knights
into a Fraternity) is doubtless a very great Chasme: As to others, either the
chain of succession is broken in several places, or the Order has suffered
some discontinuance.

Knights of the Order of St. James in Galicia. (14.)
There were several Orders of Knighthood, to which the Spanish piety gave a
being, protection, and support, and amongst them that of St. James the Apostle,
(commonly called Sanctiago) was the first and principal.

There are some Lucas Tuden^is. Io. Vasaeus. Diegus Valera: Ant. Morales. vide
Flav. Cherub. in Schol. ad Constitut. 30. Gregor. 13. Schol. 2.
Spanish Writers (reckoned up by Franciscus Mennenius) that say this Order took
beginning in the time of Don Ramiro King of Leon, who began his Reign in the
year of our Lord Francisc. de Rades y Andrada en Chronic. Sanctiago. fo. 4. b.
and fo. 5.
821. and at the Battle of Clavijo, or Clavigio, anno Heyl. Cosmog. l. 1. p.
220.
826. (or as some say anno S. Maurolico in Oceano Religion. p. 209.
837.) against the Moors, did by the assistance of St. James the Apostle (said
to have then appeared upon a Sobre une Cavallo blanco, y con una Cruz colorada
por senna. Rades in Chronic. hujus Ordin. fol. 5. a.
white Horse, bearing a Banner with a Red Cross upon it) gain a mighty Victory
over an innumerable multitude of them; whereupon in all Battles thenceforth his
Sanctiago Sanctiago. Ibid.
patronage was implored.

That this was the occasion of the Orders Foundation, is not believed or
approved of by all, as may be collected from Johannes Mariana, Franc. Alphon.
Venerius, and others of that Country, some of them placing the Institution
thereof about the year 1160, and some others upon a clear mistake, confounding
the time of Institution, with that Confirmation, by Pope Alexander the Third,
anno 1175. in which the first rule of living is prescribed to the Knights of
this Order.

But though there be no certainty, that this Order was instituted, in memory of
the appearance of St. James, after the manner before related, and in the Reign
of Don Ramiro; yet, that there was a Fraternity or Military Order in Spain
under that Title, at least La Regla y establecimientos de la Cavalleria de
Sanctiago del Espada.
145 years before Pope Alexander gave his Confirmation, (though how much elder
is hitherto not known) is a thing out of all dispute. For it evidently appears,
from the original Privilege granted to the Ibid. fol. 3. b. vide Fr. de Rades
en Chron. Sanctiago, fol. 3. b.
Nuns of the Monastery of St. Esprit in Salamanca, dated the 15. of Nov. anno
Dom. 1030. under the royal hand of Don Fernando the First, who began his Reign
anno Dom. 1017. and is therein styled King of Castile, Leon, Galicia, Portugal,
and Lord of Biscay (for in his time were the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon first
united) that there was then in being a Fraternity and Order of Knights or
Comendadores, as also a Superior, bearing the Title of El Maestre y Governador
de la Orden. Ibid.
Master and Governor thereof, and that these Knights had then also Castles,
Lands, Rents, and Possessions to support them; for of all these is there
express mention made in that Grant.

Moreover in an ancient Quae adhuc asservatur in archivo de Veles.
Original of a very old Letter, written long before they received any Rule or
Form of Religion, and penned in corrupt and barbarous Latin, which contains
certain Rules and Orders to be observed by them, as also mulcts and
forfeitures, for neglects and offenses therein set down; they are called
Confrades de la Confradia de Sancte Iacobo. Rades en Chron. Sanctiago. f. 5. a.
videsis Fr. Caro de Torres en Histor. de las Ord. milit. fo. 1. b.
Brothers of the Fraternity of St. James.

And albeit the Knights of this Order did at Franc. de Rades y Andrada, en
Chron. de Sanctiago. fo. 4. b.
first dispose themselves to virtuous courses, and valiantly encountered the
Moors, Enemies to the Cross of Christ, that being the chief end of their
Foundation; yet in tract of time, they fell from the honor of their first
Institution, and grew so strangely debauched, and gave so great occasion of
scandal, that the Order was thereby so much perverted, as it could scarce be
accounted an Order.

But afterward the Knights (being by the divine goodness reclaimed) grew
desirous to be reduced to a better life, and to submit themselves to regularity
and order, and upon La Regla y establecimientos de la Cavalleria de Sanctiago.
fo. 5. b.
Cardinal Iacintha's arrival in Spain, and their application to him, he (as
much as in him lay) first confirmed their Order, in the year of our Lord Alfon.
Ciacon. in vita Alex. 3. l. 1. p. 469.
1170, under the Rule of St. Augustine, and upon his return to Rome, La Regla,
etc. loc. cit.
Fernando de Fuente Encalada, and others, Knights and Canons of this Order,
attended him thither, whom he presented to Pope Alexander the Third, and from
him obtained approbation and confirmation. He also received this Order under
the protection of the Papal See, La Regla de Sanctiago f. 9.
prescribed to these Knights, the Rule and manner of living, the form of
holding Chapters, of electing their Master, of the Trezes, and thirteen
Comendadores of Houses, and of the Visitors; In brief, this Bull gives them
very large Privileges, is fitted with ^xceeding good Precepts and Laws, both
for Government and Conservation of the Order, and bears date the 13. of July
anno Dom. 1175. which happened in the beginning of the Reigns of Don Alonso the
Ninth, King of Castile, of Don Fernando the Second, King of Leon, and Don
Alonso the Second, King of Aragon. And hereupon (says En Chron. Sanctiago,
loco ^rad.
Francisc. de Rades y Andrada) do some of the Chronicles of Spain, call this an
Institution (which was indeed but a Restoration) because the Knights of that
time were the first that entered into the Vow of Obedience, poverty of Spirit,
and Conjugal Chastity; wherein consisted the substance of this Religious Order.

It being observed out of the Confirmation, that Pope La Regla y Establec. de
Sanctiago. fo. 1. b. and f. ^. b.
Alexander the Third, had (among other things) granted to these Knights, the
Monastery of Saint Lodium.
Loyo, situate in Galicia near Sanctiago, and that the Prior and Canons
thereof, (being Fr. de Rades en Chronic. Sanctiago fol. 6. b. vide Cassan. in
Catalog, gloriae mundi part 9. Consid. 7. Marian. de reb. Hispan. l. 11. c. 13.
Canons Regulars of St. Augustine) were thereby incorporated to the Knights of
this Order; it is thence concluded, that this Order was rather founded in the
Kingdom of Galicia than Leon.

And though it appears by King Don Fernando's Privileges to the Monastery of
St. Esprit, that there was in ancient time, a Master of this Order, yet is no
notice taken either of him, or any of his Successors, till after Pope
Alexanders Confirmation, and then Don Pedro Fernandez de Fuente Encalada
(Encalada being a place in the Diocese of Idem de Rades fo. 6. a. and 11. b.
Item Fr. Caro de Torres in Histor. de las Ordin. militares. f. 10. b.
Astorga) is reckoned the La Regla de Sanctiago. fol. 16. b.
first, in the Catalogue of Masters.

At the beginning, the Knights of this Order were employed Aub. Miraeus de
Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 23. Favin. in le Theat. d'Honneur. l. 6. c. 5.
to assist the Canons Regular of Saint Loyo, who had built Hospitals (the first
of which was that of St. Mark in the Suburbs of Leon) for the relief of
Pilgrims who daily resorted from all parts to visit the shrine of St. James of
Compostella; and to guard the high ways, frequented by the concourse of them,
against the insolences of the Moors, and Robbers of Spain.

The Ensign of this Order, is a Chronic. de Sanctiago p. 1. b. and p. 6. b. Su
Senal es la Espada Roxa, que el ^ulgo Llama Lagar^^. Lancerote en Nobleza del
Andaluzia. l. 1. c. 32.
Cross, (which the Knights wore upon their Chronic. de Sanctiago p. 1. b. and
p. 6. b. Su Senal es la Espada Roxa, que el ^ulgo Llama Lagar^^. Lancerote en
Nobleza del Andaluzia. l. 1. c. 32.
Breasts) finishing like the blade of a Sword, the Hilt crosleted, and
fashioned after the ancient manner; whereupon it was called Historia de las
Ordines Militares. per Fr. Caro de Torres. l. 1. p. 9. b.
La Orden de Sanctiago de la Espada, as also Compend. Bull. Tom. 1. p. 7.
Constable. 5. Schol. 1. videsis Ciacon. de vit. Pontif. l. 1. p. 469.
Ordo militaris Sancti Iacobi Ensigeri, a qualitate insignium. And the reason
why this Ensign is always painted Red, rather than any other color; is thus
given by En su Chronica. l. 17.
Don Rodrigo Ximenes, Archbishop of Toledo. Rubet ensis sanguine Arabum.

But these Knights assumed not only the Sword in form of a Cross, but also the
Symbol of St. James, which though it cannot be directly determined (says En
Chronic. de Sanctiago. fo. 6. b.
Rades y Andrada) what it is, yet it seems to be the Escallop shell: For that
the Venerea, quae in Hispania pro Tessera D. Iacobi semper est habita. Mennen.
Delic. Equest. p. 97.
Escallop is generally among the Spaniards taken for the Badge of St. James,
and worn by Pilgrims, in their Voyages to his Sepulcher at Compostella (the Io.
Mariana de reb. Hispan. l. 7. c. 10. page 328.
place where his body was found about the year of Christ 800.) the day of whose
Translation is the La Regla de Sanctiago. fo. 72. b.
30. of December. And in all the ancient Seals of the Order, as well of the
Masters, as of the Convent, there is to be seen an Fr. de Rades en Chron. de
Sanctiago. fol. 7. a.
Escallop shell, placed under the handle of the Sword, at the closing thereof
to the Hilt.

But it seems the honor of the Escallop is such, Las Veneros son insignial del
Apostol. Lancerote. loc. cit.
that the use thereof is not permitted to all; for by a Bull of Pope Alexander
the Fourth, among other things, it is ordained, that Fr. de Rades en Chron. de
Sanctiago. fol. 7. a.
none of this Order shall wear the Escallop shell for Ensign, but such Knights,
Priests, and Nuns as are nobly descended.

In the year of our Lord 1560. King Philip the Second La Regla de Sanctiago.
fo. 74. b.
declared, that the Knights of this Order might wear an Escallop shell (hanging
in a Chain of Gold, not a Ribbon or Cordon) made of Gold or Silver, as big as a
piece of Eight, but not of Crystal, or any Stone of what kind soever; and
wearing this, they were permitted the use of a Coat, without the Badge of the
Order, nevertheless their upper Robe or Mantle, was not to be worn without it.

The Habit of these Knights is a Ibid. f. 72. b. vide ettam Fr. de Rades, in
Chronic. hujus Ordinis. f. 6. b.
White Mantle of Cloth or Serge, close before, on the breast whereof is set a
Cross of Cloth or Satin, in the form before described. The Figure of which
Habit, adorning a Knight of this Order, is to be seen in Page 521.
Iurisprudentia Heroica. This C^^^s made of Regla de Sanctiago. loc. cit. and
f. 74. a.
Silk or Cloth, they are obliged to wear upon their Garments, Coats, or Cloaks,
though they use Crosses of Gold likewise.

When the Moors were driven out of Spain, the principal end for which this
Order with those of Calatrava and Alcantara, were instituted, ceased; and
thereupon it came to be considered, how the Administration of these Orders
might be placed in the Crown of Castile.

Upon the Fr. de Rades y Andrada en su Chronic. Sanctiago. fo. 69. a.
death therefore of Don Rodrigo Manrique (elected Master at Vcles in Castile,
Competitor to Don Alonso de Cardenas, elected Master at Leon) Queen Isabella
came to the Covent of Vcles (whither Don Alonso had drawn a considerable power,
to force his Election there also) and commanded to assemble all the Knights of
this Order, that then were thereabouts) upon whose appearance she told them,
Fol. 69. b.
That in regard the Knights of this Order, had many Fortresses upon the
Frontires, for which reason her Predecessors had in former times taken the
Administration of this Order upon themselves, and given it to their Sons; upon
great deliberation therefore was it thought fit, that the King Don Fernando her
Husband should now be Administrator; and intimating, that a desire was sent to
the Pope for a Grant thereof, she commanded them to surcease in their Election,
to which all the Trezes submitted.

Fol. 70. a.
Afterward, the King had the Mastership of this Order, under the Title of
Administrator granted him by the Pope, nevertheless finding that Don Alonso de
Cardenas had been very faithful to him, and greatly deserving, he waved the
Papal Grant, and gave leave for a new Election; whereupon Don Alonso was
elected a second time, in the year 1477.

But Fol. 73. a.
anno Dom. 1499. the Mastership of this Order becoming again vacant, by the
death of this Don Alonso, King Ferdinando and Isabella obtained another Bull
from Pope Alexander the Sixth, to hold the Administration thereof during their
lives: After their death, Charles the Fifth succeeding, obtained a Quae Bulla
incipit, Dum intra nostrae mentis arcana, etc. Et est prima inter
Constitutiones Adriani 6. expeditaque suit anno 1522. and affertur in
Iurisprudentia Heroica. p. 514.
Grant from Pope Adrian the Sixth, whereby the perpetuity of the Mastership
(together with those others of Calatrava and Alcantara) became annexed to the
Crowns of Castile and Leon, and thereunto in most ample manner were transferred
all Rights, etc. which the Masters of those Orders did formerly enjoy or
exercise. Since which time the Kings of Spain have enjoyed the Administration
of this Order, and carried that title and style in the Inscription upon the
Great Seal thereof, which holds the Fr. de Rades en Chronic. de Sanctiago. fo.
10. b.
Royal Arms of Spain, upon a Cross that fills all the Shield, with a Sword at
each of the four Corners.

Philip the Third, King of Spain, called a Chapter of this Order in Madrid, the
16. of April, anno 1600. which ended the 30. of November following. In which it
was ordained, that the Book Entitled La Regla y Establecimientos de la
Cavalleriae de Santiago del Espadae, etc. should be printed. This Book contains
the Institutions, whereby the Knights of the Order are to be governed, together
with all the Statutes, Laws, Rules, and Ceremonies, appertaining thereunto, and
now in use; and at this Chapter, many of the former Laws were abolished, others
amended, and some new added.

The Order of Knights of St. Savior in Aragon. (15.)
About the year of our Lord Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 85
1118. was this Order erected by Don Alphonso (called Emperor of Spain, King of
Navarr, Aragon, Leon, Castile, and Toledo) who chose out of those Spanish and
French Nobility, that assisted him in his Wars against the Moors, a certain
number whereof he formed this Society; and to the end he might be the better
enabled to drive the Moors out of Saragosa, and the whole Territory of Aragon,
he engaged them by this Honor, to pursue the War against them to the utmost of
their power.

Theat. d'Honneur. l. 6. c. 14.
Favin seems to place the Institution of this Order to the year 1120. but Ios.
Mich. Marquez en su Tesoro Mi^it. de Cavall. f. 24. b.
that was the year of King Alphonso's great Expedition against the Moors, whom
he vanquished and destroyed, and for which Victory he had the Title of
Conqueror given to him: besides, these Knights were Instituted upon design to
engage with this King in that War; of whose assistance he had not so great
need, as to give Institution to them, if he had before overcome the Moors.

Some may possibly take this Order to be rather Military than Religious: but if
it be considered, that these Knights Favin. loco nuper cit.
succeeded the Templars in Montreall, being by King Alphonso established in
that place, and had a Rule of living somewhat conformable to the Knights
Templars (save only the privilege to marry) which Rule De (...) cit.
Io. Mariana (a Spanish Author of very great credit) says expressly was the
Cistertian, and for that (...) cit.
Ios. Mich. Marquez (another Spanish Writer) informs (...) that they professed
conjugal Chastity and Obedience, and were obliged to support the holy Church
and Christian Faith against the Moors, we need not scruple to place them in the
ranks of Religious Knights.

Their Habit was a (...)
White Mantle, on the breast whereof they wore a Red Cross Ancree, but (...)
A. Mendo says, it was the Figure of our Savior.

At length the like Fate attended this Order, as did the Knights of St. James,
Alcantara, and Calatrava; for the Moors being driven out of Spain, and the
chief end for which they were instituted ceasing, their rich Commanderies were
at length united to the Crown.

The Order of Knights d'Avis in Portugal. (16.)
Fran. de Rades y Andrada en su Chronic. de Calatrava. f. 32. b El Conde de
Lancero^e en Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32. vide etiam Rodrig. Lusitan.
Tom. 1. Quest. Regul. Quest. 6. Art. 6. in principio.
Don Alphonso Henriquez first King of Portugal, took from the Moors (in the
year of our Lord Fran. de Rades y Andrada en su Chronic. de Calatrava. f. 32. b
El Conde de Lancerose en Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32. vide etiam Rodrig.
Lusitan. Tom. 1. Quest. Regul. Quest. 6. Art. 6. in principio.
1147.) the City of Evora, and to strengthen this Garrison, he sent thither
several gallant Commanders, who assumed the Title of Cavalleros de Evora. Rades
ut supra.
Knights of St. Mary of Evora, as well from putting themselves under the
protection of our blessed Lady, as from the place where they were first seated.
Their first Great Master was Don Fernando de Monteiro.

Not long after, they came to be called Ibidem etiam a fol. 32. b.
Knights d' Avis, from a Castle of that name, situate on the Frontires of
Portugal, which being conquered from the Moors, by the said King Don Alphonso,
he gave it to Favin. Theat. d'Honn. l. 6. c. 18.
Fernando de Yannes, Master of Evora, in the year 1161. (but Loc. cit.
Fr. de Rades says it was 1181.) to which Castle, he and his Brethren
forthwith transplanted themselves from Evora.

This Order was confirmed by Pope Flav. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar.
Innocent the Third, anno 1204. in the Reign of Sancho the First, Son to King
Don Alphonso, under the Tom. 2. p. 90. Constitut. 32. Innoc. 3. Schol. 2.
Rule of St. Benedict, and therefore in some Papal Bulls, the Order is called
of Ibid. Tom. 3. p. 45. Constable. 24.
St. Benedict d' Avis, but Ant. Brandon Lusitan. Monarch. part 3. l. 11. c. 1.
others say, this Order had confirmation anno Dom. 1162. by a power which the
Bishop of Hostia, Legate in Spain, for Pope Alexander the Third, gave to Io.
Zerita Abbot of St. Io. Tarroca. The Knights profess Ios. M. Marquez en Tesoro
milit. de Cavall. f. 25.
Conjugal Chastity and Obedience.

In the year of Christ 1213. Fr. de Rades in Chronic. de Calatrava. f. 32. b.
and Ios. Micheli. f. 25. b. vide Favin. in Theat. d'Hon. l. 6. c. 18.
Don Rodrigo Garcez de Assa, then seventh Master of Calatrava, gave to the
Great Master and Brethren Knights d' Avis, their two Fortresses in Evora, and
some other lands possessed by them in the Kingdom of Portugal, upon which
Donation they submitted themselves to the Rule, Statutes, Visitation, and
Correction of the Order of Calatrava, and their Successors; but in the time of
Fr. de Rades in Chronic. de Calatrava. f. 32. b. and Ios. Micheli. f. 25. b.
vide Favin. in Theat. d'Hon. l. 6. c. 18.
Don John of Portugal (natural Son of Pedro the Eighth, King of Portugal)
seventh Great Master d' Avis (after he had gained the Victory of Aljubarrato,
against Don John the First of Castile) he commanded this Order, to cast off
their acknowledgments to that of Calatrava, which they thereupon did; and
afterward Fr. de Rades in Chronic. de Calatrava. f. 32. b. and Ios. Micheli.
f. 25. b. vide Favin. in Theat. d' Hon. l. 6. c. 18.
refused to receive Don Gonsalo Nunez de Guzman Master of Calatrava, who went
to visit them. Hereupon the Order of Calatrava complained to the Council of
Basil, who decreed that this Order d' Avis should continue subject to that of
Calatrava, and receive their Visits and Reformation, to which purpose a Bull
issued, which yet remains preserved in the Archives of Calatrava, but the
Portugueses never submitted to it, albeit those of Calatrava, to preserve their
pre-eminence, have still nominated Visitors. Nay afterward, Fr. Cares de Tores
en la Histor. de las Ordines mil^t. f. 83. b.
when that Crown fell into the hands of Philip the Second King of Spain, this
Order d' Avis did nevertheless remain governed according to the Statutes of
Portugal, nor did the Council of the other three Orders of Castile, take upon
them to proceed in any Cause where this Order was concerned.

The Badge of this Order is a Green Cross Flory, Lancerote en Nobleza del
Andaluzia. l. 1. c. 32.
such as the Knights of Alcantara wear, and said to be given them by Tesoro
Milit. de Cavall. fo. 25. b.
Don Pedro, but before they used the Rades en Chron. de Calatrava loco supra
cit.
like Cross with those of the Order of Calatrava, two Birds being added at the
foot thereof, in allusion to the later name given to this Order; as appears
from the ancient Seal.

The Royal Council of Portugal make examination of the Extraction of such as
are to be admitted into this Order, that is of the Fathers and Grandfathers
Gentility, both of the Fathers and Mothers side. The manner of giving the
Habit, and making profession, is agreeable to that of the Knights of Calatrava.

The Order of Knights of the Wing of St. Michael in Portugal. (17.)
Ios. Mich. Marquez en Tesoro Militar. f. 35. a vide Ant. Brandon en la 3. part
de la Monarch Lusitan. l. 11. c. 22.
Don Alphonso Henriquez King of Portugal, (in whose Reign the Order d' Avi^ was
instituted) being very much oppressed by Albara the Moor, King of Sevil, raised
an Army to free his Country; and being ready to give Battle, he commanded all
his Soldiers in a devout manner to address themselves to their particular
Saints, for the obtaining of good success: himself imploring St. Michael the
Archangel, to whom he was greatly devoted.

When the Battles were joined, Ios. Mich. Marquez en Tesoro Militar. f. 35. a
vide Ant. Brandon en la 3. part de la Monarch Lusitan. l. 11. c. 22.
St. Michael the Archangel, appeared on the Kings right side, and fought
against the Moors; whence followed a very great and notable Victory over them.

As Soon therefore as the King was returned home, he Ios. Mich. Marquez en
Tesoro Militar. f. 35. a vide Ant. Brandon en la 3. part de la Monarch Lusitan.
l. 11. c. 22.
Instituted this Order of Knighthood, in the year of our Lord 1171. (but De
Ordin. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 4. n. 97.
Mendo places the Institution earlier, to wit, in the year 1165. and Orig.
Ord. Equest. p. 38.
Miraeus the year after) which he called the Del Ala de san Miguel. Tes. Milit.
de Cavalleria.
Order of St. Michaels Wing: These Knights had for the Badge of their Order a
Del Ala de san Miguel. Tes. Milit. de Cavalleria.
Red Sword crossed with Flowers de lis, and this Motto, Quis ut Deus? but more
agreeable to the Name of the Order is that Badge assigned by Mendo, to wit,
Insigne erat Ala (qua S. Michael ornatus depingitur) purpurea, intermicantibus
radiis cureis. Mend. loc. cit.
a Purple Wing, irradiated with beams of Gold.

They were of the Mendo ut supra.
Cistertian Order, and followed the Rule of St. Benedict. The manner of their
Tes. Milit. de Cavall. p. 35. a.
Investiture was the same as is used in the Order d' Avis. Their Obligation was
chiefly to Tes. Milit. de Cavall. p. 35. a.
defend the Christian Religion, to secure the Borders of the Country against
the inrodes of the Moors, and to relieve the Widows and the Fatherless.

This Order is now grown out of use, but the Mastership thereof has since
remained with the Kings of Portugal.

Knights of St. Gereon. (18.)
This Order was instituted by Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 11
Frederick Barbarossa the Emperor (others say by Frederick the Second) and
consisted only of Gentlemen of the German Nation, who followed the Rule of St.
Augustine, and wore a White Habit, whereon was sewed a Menn. Delic. Equest. p.
263.
Black Patriarchal Cross set on a little green Hill.

The Order of St. Julian de Pereyro, or of Alcantara. (19.)
This Order of Knighthood has assumed two appellations, upon what occasion we
shall here show.

The first and ancient Title was of Fr. de Radis y Andrada in su Chronic. de
Alcantara, fo. 1. a. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 102. Favin. in le Theat. d'
Honn. l. 6. c. 5.
St. Julian de Pereyro, because at a Town so called in the Kingdom of Leon, in
the Fr. Caro de Torres en Histor. de las Ord. milit. f. 51. b.
Diocese of Cividad Rodrigo, upon a small branch of the River Coa, a Monastery
was built for these Knights by the favor of Don Fernando the Second, King of
Leon and Galicia, who in his Diploma of Privileges granted thereunto, dated in
December the Era of Caesar 1214. (which agrees with the year of our Lord
1176.) styled himself Protector of this Fraternity and Society of Knights.

An approbation thereof was obtained from Pope Rades en Chronic. de Alcantara.
fo. 2. a.
Alexander the Third, the following year being the 18. of his Popedom, at the
supplication of Don Gomez Fernandez, therein called Prior; but Pope Lucius the
Third (confirming this Order anno Dom. 1183.) styled him Master of Pereyro.

This Bull of Pope Alexander the Third makes not any mention of the Habit,
these Knights of St. Julian should wear, nor is it known what it was, more than
that they used a Ibid. f. 2. b. and f. 6. b.
secular Habit, modest and grave, and the Ecclesiastics a clerical Habit: Only
to make a difference of these Knights from other Seculars, and the Clergy from
other Ecclesiastics, they wore a Chias de pano. Ibid.
shred of Cloth, and a Scapulary.

Nor does the said Bull take notice of the Rule they were obliged to observe,
but by several other Bulls it appears, that from the beginning of this Orders
Foundation, it was of the A. Miraeus, Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 31. Fr. Caro de
Torres, loc. cit. and inf. 52. b.
Cistertian Order, and the Knights thereof observed the Rule of St. Benedict,
moderated and limited as it was convenient for the exercise of Arms against the
Moors, for which end it was instituted.

The ancient Badge of this Order was a VnPeral verde, Lancerote l. 1. c. 23.
Pear Tree vert, assumed in allusion to the Name of the Order.

The occasion of altering the first appellation, was upon changing their place
of habitation: For when Fr. de Rade^ en Chronic de Alcantara, fol. 5. a.
Don Alphonso the Ninth, King of Leon, had taken from the Moors, Alcantara, a
Town in Castile, anno Dom. 1213. he afterward gave it to Don Martin Fernandez
de Quintana, the twelfth Great Master of the Order of Calatrava, which Town
Idem de Rades en Chronic. de Calatrava. f. 33. b.
anno 1218. (with the consent of the said King) was given to Don Nunno
Fernandez, the third Master of St. Julian de Pereyro, and his Fellows, as well
Knights as Ecclesiastics; and to the end there might follow an union of these
Societies, (in like manner as was between Calatrava and the Order d' Avis in
Portugal, some few years before) they consented to become subject to the Order
of Calatrava, under the agreement and conditions following.

Ibid. f 33. b. and f. 34. a.
First, that the Master and Convent of Pereyro should receive with all
obedience the Visitation which the Master of Calatrava should make according to
the Cistertian Order.

That they should not be obliged to receive a Monk for their Prior, against
their consent and will, but rather when they were to choose one, it should be of
their own House, or of that of Calatrava, or of any other Houses, Daughters to
Calatrava, provided he were not a Monk.

That the Master and Convent of Calatrava should give to the Master of Pereyro
the Town of Alcantara, and all its Possessions, with all their Charters and
Privileges, and all the moveable Goods which they held in the Kingdom of Leon,
as well by royal gift, as any other way.

That when it should happen, that the Master of Calatrava should dye, or be
removed, the Master of Pereyro should be called to the Election of the future
Master.

Lastly, that the Master of Calatrava should not have power to give away any
thing belonging to Pereyro, without consent of the Master and Convent thereof;
and in case he did, then the King of Leon should have power to vacate such
Donation.

These Conditions and Capitulations were made, en Cividad de Rodrigo, the 16.
of July anno Dom. 1218. and confirmed by King Don Alphonso, and the Masters of
both Orders.

Hereupon the Convent of St. Julian, transferred their Seat from Pereyro to
Alcantara, and Don Diego Sanchio the fourth Master of Pereyro, assumed the
Title of Master of Pereyro and Alcantara, Rades Chronic. Alcantara. f. 8. a.
which Title his Successors held until the Church of St. Julian de Pereyro was
made an Encomienda; and thenceforward, the Masters used only the Title of
Alcantara, and the Fraternity in like manner relinquishing their ancient Name,
were afterward called Flav. Cherubin. in Compend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 105.
Constit. 44. Schol. 1. vide Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 22.
Knights of Alcantara, from this their new place of abode. And whereas the
Masters of Pereyro did formerly bear for the Ensign of the Order a Pear Tree
only, they after this Union Fr. de Rades en Chronic. de Alcantara. f. 6. b.
added two Travas to the Pear Tree.

But albeit this Order of Alcantara, was by this agreement, put under the
subjection of that of Calatrava, and accordingly visited and corrected by them;
yet nevertheless, they have since pretended to be Ibid. in Chronic. f. 7. a.
freed therefrom, for that the Masters of Calatrava broke the agreement made
between them, by not admitting the Master of Pereyro to the Election of their
Master, as was contained in their Articles.

Whereupon this Order of Alcantara obtained a Bull from Pope Ibid. in Chronic.
f. 7. a.
Julius the Second, by which they pretend to be freed from that ancient
subjection: Though this Bull was given without knowledge of any cause, or
making any necessary mention of the subjection. And therefore Ibid. in Chronic.
f. 7. a.
notwithstanding this Bull, the Order of Calatrava does still in all general
Chapters, nominate Visitors of their own Order to visit that of Alcantara, as
well as that of Montesia, according to their ancient Capitulations; but they of
Alcantara make always their protestation against it, and so this matter rests
still undecided.

After this pretension of being exempted from obedience to the Order of
Calatrava, Io. Mariana de reb. Hisp. l. 12. c. 3. p. 569. Portano la Croce
verde. Sansovin. fol. 21. b.
Benedict the Thirteenth (one of the Anti-Popes) changed their Badge into a
Cross Flory vert, in the year of our Lord 1411. and this they wore upon the
left shoulder of their Scapulary, for the Badge of their Order.

The Examination of the Candidates, and in what manner they receive the Habit;
is related at full by Tesoro milit. de Cavall. fol. 22. a.
Joseph Micheli Marquez.

The Catholic Kings Don Fernando and Donna Isabella, having about three years
before obtained the Administration of the Order of Calatrava for their lives,
had an eye also upon this of Alcantara; and therefore Fr. Rades en Chron. de
Alcantara fo. 54. b. vide Fr. de Torres in Hist. de las Ord. milit. f. 83.
endeavored, that at the first time the Mastership thereof should fall vacant,
to gain it likewise, with the like Title of Administrator; to avoid several
inconveniences that had happened to the Crown of Castile, when the Master of
Alcantara did confederate with the King of Portugal.

Hereupon Fr. Rades en Chron. de Alcantara fo. 14. b. vide Fr. de Torres in
Hist. de las Ord. milit. f. 83.
in the year of our Lord 1492. they made their address to Pope Innocent the
Eighth, that he would reserve to himself the provision of the supreme Dignity
of this Order, whenever it became vacant, either by the death or renunciation
of the then Master, Don John de Cuniga; or after any other manner.

Upon this address the Pope did Fr. Rades en Chron. de Alcantara fo. 54. b.
vide Fr. de Torres in Hist. de las Ord. milit. f. 83.
accordingly reserve the disposing thereof as was desired, and then gave it in
Administration to the said Kings; that they two should govern this Order under
that Title, until such time as his Holiness should provide a Master.

A little after Pope Innocent dyed, and Alexander the Sixth succeeded, who at
the like supplication of these Kings, Io. Fo. 55. a.
confirmed and of new granted, what his Predecessor had granted them before.
Upon which ( anno 1494.) they treated with Don John de Cuniga, for the
renunciation of his Mastership, yet with condition to reserve to himself all
the Rents of the Masters Table, that he held in that part of Serena, to which
he consented. Whereupon he resigned and surrendered his Dignity of Master of
this Order into the hands of the Pope, which the Bishop of Valencia received by
Commission back from him, and gave the Possession thereof in administration to
the said Catholic Kings. After Fol. 55. b.
this manner it was that these Kings succeeded in the Administration of the
Mastership of Alcantara, in the year of our Lord 1494. which they held during
their lives.

But it was not long e're Pope Adrian the Sixth, annexed this Mastership,
together with those other of St. James and Calatrava, to the Royal Crown of
Castile, for ever, as has been before observed.

Knights of Trugillo or Truxillo in Spain. (20.)
En Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 73. a.
Joseph Micheli Marquez professes, that it had been his great endeavor, to
satisfy himself about the Foundation of this Order; notwithstanding which,
neither by information from the Natives of the City of Trugillo (a Town situate
in Estremadura in Spain) nor otherwise from History, could he understand when,
or by whom it was erected.

Evident it is, these Knights were in being in the year of our Lord 1227.
though it be unknown how long before they had their beginning: But because it
is found in some slight memorials of the Order of Alcantara, That Fr. Rades y
Andrada en Chron. de Alcantara. f. 9. a.
Don Arias Perez Gallego, elected Master of that Order, in the year before
mentioned, took Trugillo from the Moors, and there placed a Fraternity or
Brotherhood of Knights and Priests, who lived after the manner of a Convent;
therefore it is presumed, that they were no other than of the Order of
Alcantara.

Now it is certain, that there was a Convent and Order of the Fraternity of
Trugillo; but it is not so certain, that these were of Alcantara. It rather
seems to be the opinion of Ibid. Vide Hieron. Romanum in Republica sua.
Fr. Rades y Andrada that these had been some other, and a distinct Order of
Knighthood by it self; which he collects from a Donation of Lands, that King
Don Alonso the Ninth gave them some years after ( viz. in the Era of Caesar
1233.) of the Towns of Trugillo, Sancta Cruz, Zuferola, Canaba, and Albala: in
which it appears, that several years before the time of Don Arias there were
Freyles Trugillensis.
Brothers or Knights of Trugillo.

It is not unlikely therefore, that this Order might be incorporated into that
of St. Julian de Pereyro, and by this means the Order of Alcantara pretend
these Towns to be theirs, which in the Reign of King Don Alonso the Ninth, of
Castile, and King Don Fernando of Leon, were taken by force of Arms from the
Moors, and given to the Fraternity of Knights who kept their Convent in
Trugillo.

Apud Marquez.
Hieronymus Romanus says, that these Knights were of noble descent, and that
no man was admitted into this Order, unless he first made proof of his
Gentility. But there is not any Writer that gives an account what was the
Ensign or Badge of their Order. It is guessed by Loc. cit.
Marquez, that their Institution obliged them to be near the person of the
King, and upon every martial Expedition, that he undertook, to attend him armed
and well provided; maintaining always two Horses and Servants to be in
readiness such for services.

The Order of Knights of Calatrava in Castile. (21.)
This ancient Order of Knighthood, was instituted in Castile, and took En Conde
de Lancerote in Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32.
beginning under the Reign of Don Sanchio the Third, and En Conde de Lancerote
in Nobleza del Andaluzia l. 1. c. 32.
appellation from the Castle Calatrava, being a Frontire both of Castile and
Toledo; which Castle the Fr. de Rades y Andrada en Chronic: de Calatrava. fol.
2. a.
Moors took upon their Victory over Don Rodrigo King of Spain, anno Dom. 714.

The word is compounded of Cala, signifying in Arabic Lancerote en Nobleza del
Andaluzia loc. cit.
a Castle, and of the Spanish word Travas, which signifies Manacles, Gives, or
Irons, to fasten about the feet and wrists of Captives; Favin, in le Theat. d'
Honneur. l. 6. c. 10
for with such as these the Moors locked up and fettered the Christians, whom
they held Prisoners in that Castle.

After its recovery from the Moors (who had held it above 400 years) it was
given by Rades y Andrada, fo. 3. b. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 99.
Don Alphonso, surnamed the Emperor of Spain, to the Knights Templars (of whose
virtue that Age had a great opinion) to be made a Bulwark against the Inrodes
of the Moors, being the very Ibid. in Chronic fo. 5. a.
Key into the Kingdom of Toledo; but they no way able to hold it, withdrew
their Garrison; and what with the Knights Templars deserting it, and the
approach of the Moors, all others were disheartened from accepting the place,
although the foresaid King Ibid. f. 4. b.
Sanchio (Son of Don Alphonso the Emperor) had caused it to be proclaimed at
his Court, that whosoever would take upon them the defense thereof, to them he
would freely give it, and to their Heirs for ever.

At length one Don Raymond (native Ibid. f. 8. b. Io. Mariana de reb. Hispania.
l. 11. c. 6.
of Barcelona) formerly a Knight of great renown, then Abbot of the Monastery
of St. Mary de Fitero (of the Cistertian Order) in the Kingdom of Navarr (by
the advice of Diego Velasquez, of the same Order, being then at Court) accepted
of the Kings proffer, and took upon him the fortifying and maintaining this
Castle; and hereupon the De Rades en Chron. f. 5. Io. Mariana loc. cit.
King made his Charter of Donation, dated at Almason in January, in the Era of
Caesar 1196. (to wit of Christ 1158.) whereby he gave to God, to the blessed
Virgin Mary, to the Congregation of Cistertians, and to Don Raymond, and all
his Brethren, as well present as future, the Village called Calatrava, with all
its Bounds and Territories, (particularly described in the Grant) to possess
and enjoy by right of inheritance for ever.

This Don Raymond (after he had received possession according to the tenor of
the Charter) together with his Associates, and other Idem de Rades, f. 6. b.
Io. Mariana, ut supra.
assistance from Castile and Toledo, fell to fortifying of the Castle; and
hence arose the Order of Knights of Calatrava, Instituyola el dicho Rey Don
Sancho. Rades f. 6. b. vide Lancerote, l. 1. c. 32.
instituted by King Don Sanchio in the year of our Lord 1158. in the Town of
Calatrava, and therefore called at first De Rades. loc. cit.
Militia de Calatrava: the foresaid Don Raymond and Don Velasquez, being the
first movers of this excellent work; of whom the former is in another place
called also a Ibid. f. 8. b.
joint Founder with King Sanchio.

After this Fol. 6. b. vide Mennen. p. 100. and Favin. l. 6. c. 10.
Don Raymond considering the richness and fertility of the Soil, returned to
his Monastery, and from its neighboring Countries drew 20000 men, with their
Families and Goods, to plant in and about Calatrava; which so greatly
strengthened the Country, that the Moors durst never after attempt besieging of
the Castle.

This Order was approved by Pope Idem de Rades, fo. 13. b.
Alexander the Third, the 25. of September, anno Dom. 1164. under the
Discipline of the Cistertian Order. It was confirmed afterward by Pope Favin.
Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 10.
Innocent the Third, in the year 1199. and at length grew on, till it gained
exceeding great reputation in Spain.

At the first Institution, the Knights wore their Robes and Scapulars, of a
Aub. Miraeus, Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 30. Favin. Theat. d' Houn. l. 6. c. 10.
White Color ( Vanno vestiti de Nero, and partano la Croce rosa nel petto. f.
21. d.
Sansovin, and Chron. p. 614.
Genebrand says Black) as did the Cistertian Monks; and on the breast thereof
a plain Red Cross, but Pope Benedict the Thirteenth, anno 1396. dispensed with
that Monastic Habit, and assigned them a Aub. Miraeus Orig. loc. cit.
Cross Flory: So anciently they were prohibited Marriage, yet Paul the Third
permitted them Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 101.
one Wife, but not a second.

Fr. de Rades en Chron. de Calatr. f. 82. b.
After the death of the last Master Don Lopez de Padilla, anno 1487. Don Diego
Garcia de Castillo (being the Commendador Major) caused a general Chapter to be
summoned in the Convent of Calatrava, for the Election of another Master; in
which there fell out great contest among the Electors, and the chief that
stood, was the said Commendador Major, and Don Alonso Pacheco, Commendador de
Villa Franca.

Upon notice of this, the Catholic Kings, Don Ferdinando and Donna Isabella,
sent to the Convent a Knight of their Court, with a Bull from Pope Innocent the
Eighth, wherein he declared that he had reserved to himself the providing of a
Master; and therewith Ibid. f. 83. a.
required them not to proceed in the Election, until his further Commands were
made known: in obedience to which the Election ceased.

Afterward ( Mennen. and Favin. locis supracitatis.
anno Dom. 1489.) the Rades, fol. ^3. b.
Pope gave the Mastership of this Order in Administration to King Don
Ferdinando during life; but he did not give it with the Title of Master, Ibid.
because the King had never received the Habit of this Order, neither was he
capable of it, being a married man; but Ibid.
chiefly because the King then endeavored to obtain the other two Masterships
of St. James and Alcantara, and he could not hold them all three with the Title
of Master.

Ibid.
King Don Ferdinando and Isabella his Wife governed this Order with the Title
of Administrators very worthily, and reformed the stare thereof; visiting it by
the Abbot of Claravalle of the Cistertian Order, then called Don Pedro, who
came on that employment with a Commission from Pope Innocent (at the desire of
the said Kings) and of the general Chapter, in the year of our Lord 1491.

Upon the death of King Don Ferdinando (anno 1516.) the Ibid. f. 84. l.
Chapter of this Order met at Guadalupe, with intention to elect a new Master,
of which Cardinal Adrian having notice (who then governed the Kingdoms) first
sent, then went to the Electors, to desire they would not proceed, because the
Pope had given the Administration of the Order to Prince Charles (afterward
Emperor by the name of Charles the Fifth) but they seemed unwilling to depart,
before they had made an Election, and thereupon (...)
elected that Prince, Master, or Administrator of their Order, which was
afterward confirmed by Pope Leo the Tenth.

But it seemed much for the interest of the Crowns of Castile and Leon to have
the Mastership or Administration of this Order, and those other of St. James,
and Alcantara for life, made perpetual, and annexed to them for ever; hereupon,
great suit was made to the Pope by the Emperor for obtaining thereof: and among
the inducements some of them were these.

(...)
That great alteration often happened in those Kingdoms upon the Election of
these Masters, to the damage of persons of all sorts relating to those Orders.

That in regard the Masters were so powerful in those Kingdoms, they several
times, gave aid and assistance to particular Factions that arose; so that Civil
War often followed.

That the Peace and Quiet since the Administration was in the hands of the
King, much exceeded that which was in the times of the Masters. These and other
things being considered of, Pope (...)
Adrian the Sixth granted the Emperors desire, and annexed the Mastership of
these three Orders perpetually to the Crowns of Castile and Leon.

The form of admittance into this Order, and manner of their profession, is set
down at large by Tesoro Milit. de Cavall fo. 28. etc.
Marquez.

The Order of the Holy Ghost in Saxia, at Rome. (22.)
They are called by En Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. f. 61. b.
Marquez, the Brothers of the Hospital of the Holy Ghost; who though not
invested with Sword and Spurs, as other Knights be, are nevertheless reckoned
among the Military Orders, because bound to bring Certificate of their
Gentility, before they can be accepted or admitted.

Their chief Seat is the sumptuous Hospital of the Holy Ghost, founded near the
Church of St. Mary in Saxia by the River Tyber in Rome (a place so called from
the F. Lud. Gothosrid. Archont. Cosmica. l. 3. p. 51.
Saxons, a People of Germany, who anciently inhabited there) by Pope Platina in
ejusd. Papa vita.
Innocent the Third, in the year of our Lord 1198. or S. Maurolico in Oceano
Religionum. p. 233.
1201. But it appears by A. Miraeus Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 43.
another of this Popes Bulls, dated anno 1204. for uniting of the Hospital of
the Holy Ghost at Montpelier in France, unto this at Rome, that the ancient
Foundation was at Montpelier, though in process of time this other became the
principal.

They of this Fraternity profess Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. loc. supra cit.
Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience, as also the service of the Poor; living
under the Rule of St. Augustine, and have a Praeceptor or Master.

The Ensign of this Order, is a La Insignia es une Cruz blanca Patriarcal, y
los bracos Otogonodos. Ibid.
White Patriarchal Cross, with twelve points, sewed to their Breast, and on the
left side of their Black Mantle.

The manner of giving the Habit, and making their Profession, is recorded by
Ibid. fol. 62.
Ios. Mich. Marquez.

In this Hospital care is taken for the S. Maurolico, p. 234.
nursing and bringing up exposed Children, the curing of all manner of
Infirmities, entertainment of Strangers for three days with meat and lodging,
relieving the Poor, and other works of the like kind.

The Ibid.
Revenue belonging thereto, is about 24000 Ducats every day; it having great
Commanderies in Italy, Sicily, Spain, France, Burgundy, Germany, and elsewhere.

The Order of St. George d' Alfama. (23.)
We are informed from In Mare Oceano di tutte le Religioni del Mundo. p. 229.
Sylvester Maurolico, that there was an Order of Knights called the Order of
St. George d' Alfama, instituted in the year of our Lord 1201. in a Town of
that name situate in the Diocese of Tortosa, which afterward in the year 1363.
received approbation from the Papal See, but we find no other mention thereof,
save that it was united to the Order of our Lady of Montesa, anno Dom. 1399.

The Order of Knights of Christ in Livonia, or of the Portglave and Sword.
Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 168.
Sword-Bearers. (24.)
In the year of our Lord Munster. Chron. Universe. l. 3 p. 423. de Germania.
1186. one Meinardus a holy and devout man, began to preach the Gospel in
Livonia, and erected the Bishopric of Riga. But this good man and his
Successors met with great difficulties and opposition, in the propagation of
Christianity, until the year 1200. about which time many of that Country
embraced the Christian Faith; and one Ibid. l. 3. p. 785. and 786. de Ge^m.
Mennen. Deliciae Equest. p. 89. Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. p. 272.
Albert, being then Bishop of Livonia, instituted this Order, in imitation of
the Knights Teutonicks, with design to extirpate Idolatry, and propagate the
Christian Religion in those Territories, as the other had undertaken to do in
Prussia.

He prescribed to the Knights the Cistertian Rule and Habit, namely, a long
White Mantle and Black Hood, on the breast was sewed the Figure of a Functius
in Chronolog. sua.
Red Sword, or rather Aut verius binos Gladios formae Crucis decussatim positae
rubescentes. Mennen. p. 89. videsis Mendo Disq. 1. Quest. 2. sect 14
two Red Swords, crossing one another in form of a Saltire, whence they had the
Title Munster. l. 3. p. 423. and 785. de German.
Ensiferi, vel Ibid. l. 3. p. 778.
Gladiferi Fratres, or Brethren Sword-Bearers.

This Order had their Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. f. 52. b.
Statutes something like those of the Knights Templars, and the Knights thereof
took on them the Favin. and Mennen. in locis praed.
Vow both of Obedience and Chastity.

Pope I. Lud. Gothofrid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 5.
Innocent the Third gave approbation and confirmation to this Order, which
became fully Instituted in the year of our Lord 1203.

And Munst. Chron. l. 3. p. 423. and 778.
because they could not of themselves accomplish the end for which they were
instituted, they in the year Functius Chron. ut supra.
1237. or 1239. united to the Teutonick Order, and submitted to their Rule and
Habit, by whose help and assistance, they afterward overcame the Idolatrous
Livonians, and brought them to submit to the Christian Faith: thenceforward the
Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 168.
Great Master of Livonia acknowledged him of Prussia for his Superior; and so
continued until Mennen. de Delic. Equest. p. 91.
Walter de Pletemberg their Great Master, contemporary with Albert of
Brandenburg, Great Master of Prussia, separated this Order from its obedience
to the Teutonick.

Finally, in the year 1561. Gothard de Ketler, the last Great Master of this
Order, following the example of Albert Great Master of Prussia, became a
Subject to the Crown of Poland; for on the Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 169.
5. of March in the year aforesaid, he (in the Castle of Riga) surrendered to
the use of King Sigismund the Second (surnamed Augustus) all the Lands
belonging to this Order, together with his Cross, the Seal of the Order, the
Charters and Grants of several Popes and Emperors, which concerned the same;
the Keys of the City and Castle of Riga, the Office of Great Master, the rights
of Coynage, and all the Powers and Privileges appertaining to it; receiving
back again from Radzevill the Kings Commissioner, the Dukedom of Curland to him
and his Heirs for ever.

In this manner this Order became extinguished, after it had flourished 357
years.

The Knights of Jesus Christ, in Italy and France, or Brothers of the Militia
of St. Dominick. (25.)
St. Dominick (descended of the Nich. Ianssenius in vita ipsius S. Dominici
Edit. Antuerp. 1622. p. 1.
Family of the Guzmans in Spain) was Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 8.
Founder of this Order, which he instituted in the year Briet. An^al. Mundi
pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 93.
1206. principally to fight against the Albigenses then called Heretics, and
the Knights thereof were styled Fratres de Militia B. Dominici.

He prescribed to them a Habitus erat albus, and insigne Crux partim nigra,
partim alba liliata; qua nune Ministri Tribunalium Sancta Fidei utuntur. Mendo
de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quzst. 2. Sect. 13.
White Habit, and for the Badge of their Order a Cross Flory quarterly Sable
and Argent, to be worn upon their Breasts.

Pope Ios. Mich. Marquez in Tes. Milit. f. 47. b.
Innocent the Third approved of this Order Briet. Annal. Mundi pars 3. Tom. 2.
p. 101.
anno Dom. 1215. under the Rule of the said St. Dominick, and gave privilege,
that the Knights from among themselves should elect a Master. They professed
Obedience and conjugal Chastity.

The work being done for which these Knights were instituted, they laid aside
their Arms, and devoted themselves wholly to the A. Miraeus, p. 46.
spiritual warfare.

Afterward there were Widows and Virgins joined to this Order, and thereupon
they became called Fratres seu Sorores de Paenitentia B. Dominici; whose Rule
was approved by Pope Mennen. p. 106.
Innocent the Sixth, about the year of our Lord 1360.

The Order of Knights of St. Mary de Merced in Aragon. (26.)
Alonso Remon. Historia General de la Orden de la Merced; l. 1. c. 4 f. 10.
vide etiam Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 58. a. and Mennen. Delic.
Equest. p. 107.
James the First of Aragon surnamed the Invincible (who conquered from the
Moors the Kingdom of Murcia, Valentia, and the Baliares) was sometime Prisoner
to Simon Earl of Montfort in France, where he suffered much hardship and many
troubles; and being thoroughly moved with the insufferable miseries the
Christians endured, under the slavery of the Moors; made a Vow to the blessed
Virgin, that when he should be delivered from his Captivity, he would endeavor
the redemption of such Christians as the Moors had made Captives. Thus far his
Vow: but it extended not to the Alon. Remon. in Histor. praed. l. 1. f. 11. a.
erecting of an Order, which should oblige the Companions thereof, to engage in
that affair, as some would have it.

This King being freed from his Imprisonment, laid up great sums of money to be
employed in performance of his Vow; and afterward by the advice and counsel of
Raymond de Penafort his Confessor (a Dominican Friar) and of Pedro Nolasco, a
noble Cavalier, ( Ibidem l. 2. c. 1. f. 37.
descended from the ancient Family of Nolasco in France, resident at a Town
called les Saintas Pucelles, in the Diocese of St. Paul, under the Archbishop
of Arles) he Ibid. l. 1. c. 6. p. 17. Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar Tom. 1. p.
15 Constitut. 9. Schol. 2.
founded an Order of Knights, in the City of Barcelona, called La Nueva Merced,
so named (says our Author) by the blessed Virgin, who in a Vision Ibid. l. 1.
c. 6. p. 17. Fl. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar Tom. 1. p. 15 Constitut. 9. Schol.
2.
appeared to this King, and to Raymond and Nolasco one night, in one and the
same hour, directing the whole Institution, and giving it that Name, because of
the mercy and liberty which the Christian Captives should receive by this means.

But it appears by the Bulls of Popes Alon. Remon. l. 1. c. 8. f. 21. b.
Gregory the Ninth, and Lib 2. c. 18. f. 84. b.
Alexander the Fourth, as also by a Charter made by Don Pedro King of Aragon,
dated the eleventh of January, anno 1358. to have been likewise called Ordo
beatae Eulaliae from Ibid. l. 9. c. 5. f. 426.
St. Eulalia the Virgin and Martyr, buried at Barcelona, in the Church there
dedicated to her name.

There are various opinions concerning the year wherein this Order was founded;
but it is with certainty determined to have been anno Dom. Lib. 1. c. 8. p.
vide Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. ^8. a.
1218. on the Feast Day of St. Laurence the Martyr in August (on which day
annually the commemoration of the Foundation of this Order is commanded to be
celebrated by the Compend. Ballar. Tem. 3. p. 21. Constable. 68.
Bull of Pope Clement the Eighth) in the fifth year of the Reign of this King
James; as is manifest from several authentic testimonies, collected and
alleged by Alphonsus Remon, in his Alon Remon. l. 1. c. 8.
History of this Order.

The end of its Institution, and the Profession and Obligation of the Knights,
was in effect the same with that vowed by King James in his Captivity, to wit,
to gather Alms, and to go in person to redeem Christian Slaves, who either by
Piracy, the chance of War, or other sad accident, had fallen into the hands of
the Moors. This work prospered so well, that Lib. 2. c. 8. f. 54. b.
Pedro Nolasco (being first sent into the Kingdom of Valentia, to make
redemption of Captives) redeemed four hundred within the space of six years
after the Foundation of the Order.

This Pedro Nolasco was by the Founder constituted the first General or Head of
the Order; but as concerning the person that gave the Habit to him, there are
these three opinions.

First, That it was by the hands of King James the Founder. Secondly, That
Rerengario Pallovasino, Bishop of Barcelona gave it. Thirdly, That he received
it from Raymond de Penafort; all which our Lib. 1. c. 10. fo. 29. b.
Author sets down, but there determines nothing; only seems inclinable to the
first opinion, as most rational, because the King was Founder, and was so
called by the blessed Virgin in the Vision, and for that the Order it self was
at first composed merely of Lib. 5. c. 6. f. 238. b.
Laymen, and wholly military, and so declared by the Popes Lib. 7. c. 8. f.
328. b.
Boniface the Eighth, and Clement the Fifth: Besides their Laws are in favor
of those that are of this opinion, and exclude out of this Act, judicially
Kingly, all Ecclesiastical ones, and by the same reason the Bishop: for says
the Canon of their Law, Otto si el Clerigo un home de religion, non tuvieron
que podrian sazer Cavalleros. l. 11. tit. 21. partida 2.
A Priest ought not to make Knights. But afterward Alon. Remon. l. 5. c. 6. f.
237. b. and f. 238.
in another place, he absolutely concludes, that the King himself gave the
Habit to Nolasco, from the evidence he exhibits out of a Letter which King Don
Pedro the Fourth sent to Pope Innocent the Sixth.

Such a like Habit as was given to Nolasco, was also prescribed to the first
Knights, viz. a Coat and Scapular of a Ib. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b.
common sort of coarse White Cloth. Their Coat was garnished with Cordons and
Ribbons, wherewith they fastened it about their necks, and from the upper end
thereof issued a Cap that covered half their head. The Monks wore their Ib. f.
236. Sansov. f. 21. b.
Coats and Scapulars reaching down to their feet (but those of the Knights were
much Ib. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b.
shorter) and the form of their Coat (or rather Mantle) and Cap, was the same
as they now wear.

When the Government of the Order became both spiritual and temporal, as well
the Ib. f. 236. Sansov. f. 21. b.
Knights as Monks, were commanded by order of Chapter to keep the manner and
form of their Habit apart, according to the intention of the first appointment.

In the time, and upon request of Gulielmo de Bas, the second General of this
Order, See the Diploma in Alon. Remon. l. 1. c. 12. fol. 177. b. Scut^m cum
Cr^ce alba in Campo rube^, in part superiori, cum insigniis Regni Aragonis in
inferiori. F. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 34. Constit. 6. Schol. 2.
King James the Founder, by his Diploma, dated at Saragosa the 15. of July anno
1251. granted unto him, and all the Fraternity of the Order, That they should
wear upon their Scapulars an See the Diploma in Alon. Remon. l. 1. c. 12. fol.
177. b. Scut^m cum Cr^ce alba in Campo rube^, in part superiori, cum insigniis
Regni Aragonis in inferiori. F. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 34.
Constit. 6. Schol. 2.
Escotcheon of See the Diploma in Alon. Remon. l. 1. c. 12. fol. 177. b. Scut^m
cum Cr^ce alba in Campo rube^, in part superiori, cum insigniis Regni Aragonis
in inferiori. F. Cherub. in Compend. Bullar. Tom. 1. p. 34. Constit. 6. Schol.
2.
Aragon, viz. Or, four Pales Gules, and above that, the Remon. histor. General
hujus Ord. l. 1. c. 9. f. 29.
White Cross of the Church of Barcelona, in a Red Field; which two Coats being
joined together, per Fess, in one shield, were so born for sometime, but
afterward came to be encompassed with a Border. The Lib. 5 c. 6 f. 236.
Knights wore their Escotcheon of Arms, sixth on their Scapulars, but the Monks
on their Mantles, and both before upon their Breasts.

The Founder by his Lib. 4. c. 12. f. 179.
Diploma dated at Valentia the 14. of March, anno Dom. 1254. granted particular
Privileges to the Order, which he Lib. 4. c. 12. f. 179.
confirmed by another royal Instrument, dated at Lirida the third of March,
anno 1275.

Besides these Royal Grants, this Order received approbation from the Papal
See, namely, from Pope Lib. 1. c. 8. f. 22. b. vide Ciacon. in vita hujus
Pon^if. l. 1. p. 558.
Gregory the Ninth, in the eighth year of his Papacy (on the day of St. Anthony
the Abbot) who prescribed to the Master and Fraternity the Rule of St.
Augustine. It was afterward confirmed by Alon. Remon. l. 2. c. 18. fol. 84. b.
Alexander the Fourth, as appears by a Bull of his, wherein he granted them
several Indulgences, and dated at Naples the 10. of April in the first year of
his Papacy. These Knights professed Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 58.
a.
conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to their Superiors.

In time this Order also, which was at first solely under the Government of
Knights, came to be as well Spiritual as Temporal, and at length fell into the
power of the Monks and Priests.

For, the Knights and Priests falling at variance about the election of a
General of their Order, (upon the death of Alon. Remon. l. 6. c. 20. f. 312.
Arnoldo Rosiniol, their seventh General, who died anno 1317.) the Knights
having chosen Berengario Hostales, and the Priests Raimundo Alberto, they
appealed to the Pope ( John the 22. then holding the Chair) who it seems the
17. of November, in the year aforesaid, declared, Lib. 7. c. 7. f. 328. b.
That (the Order seeming inclinable to be governed after the manner of Monks)
he thought it convenient for them to have a Master General, which should be a
Priest, and that for the future no Layman should be elected General; and so
determined the controversy on the behalf of the Priests.

This Judgment gave the Knights so great discontent, that Lib. 6. c. 20. f. 313.
one of them, being Kinsman to the Governor of the new erected Order of
Montesa, offered to bring over to that Society, all the Knights of Merced,
being then threescore in number, which being accepted of, he did so, and from
henceforth they became incorporated with the Knights of Montesa: So that ever
since, the whole Fraternity have been only Priests, and no Lay or Military
person among them, and therefore De Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Qu^st. 4 n 99.
Andr. Mendo reckons this Order among those that are extinct. The Master
General is also a Priest, and has his residence at Barcelona, by the Decrees
of Popes Clement the Fifth, and John the 22.

Remon en Hist. de la Merced. l. 1. c. 5. f. 15. b. etc. 8. f. 25.
Raymond de Penasort, the Founder's Confessor (called also Raymond of
Barcelona, because it was the place of his Birth) who had a powerful hand in
the Institution of this Order, and Fr. Cherub. Comp. Bullar. Tom. 3. p. 24. and
25. Constit. 77.
devised the Statutes, lived near to the age of an hundred years; he was Fr.
Cherub. Comp. Bullar. Tom. 3. p. 24. and 25. Constit. 77.
canonized for a Saint, and the Fr. Cherub. Comp. Bullar. Tom. 3. p. 24. and
25. Constit. 77.
7. of January appointed for his Anniversary, by the Expedita suit 3. Kal.
Mail, anno 1601.
Bull of Pope Clement the Eighth.

On the 12. of July, anno 1664. the approbation of the College passed, for
making the 29. of January, the Anniversary of Petro Nolasco Confessor, the
other great assister, and first General of the Order. The Office appointed for
that day, may be seen in the Missale Romamum, printed lately at Paris, in the
large Volume.

This way of Canonizing holy men by the Popes, is said to have been first used
by Compend. Bull. Tom. 3. p. 25. Constable. 77. Scbol. 1. Bellarmine de Sanct.
Beatis. l. 1. c. 8.
Leo the Third, anno Dom. 803. who then solemnly Canonized Suibert Bishop of
Werden.

To conclude, the charitable and pious work, for which this Order was erected,
has been carried on from the time of its Institution, and managed by the
Fraternity thereof, with all religious care and faithfulness; very great sums
of Money being yearly collected and put into their hands, for that use and
purpose, in manner following. They send their Agents yearly abroad, chiefly to
Algiers and Fess, to return them an account of the age, quality, and number of
those who are in Captivity; and upon consideration had thereof, order them to
contract for their redemption: the general course being to ransom the religious
persons first, next the Laiety; and among them the young, and such as appear
most likely to do service before others.

Few dye in Spain, who bequeath not some Legacy to this Order, which greatly
encreafeth its Revenue: and here, though she was no Benefactress to this Order,
nor left her Legacy to be disposed of by that Fraternity, most deservedly may
be recorded, of our Nation, the illustrious Lady Alice Duchess Dudley, created
into that Dignity by his late Majesty, of ever blessed memory, King Charles the
First, by See a Copy of the Patent entered in the Earl Marshal's Book in the
Office of Arms. fol. 80.
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Oxford the
23. of May, in the twentieth year of his Reign; who dyed the 22. day of January
in the year of our Lord 1668/9. being the 90. year of her age, and bequeathed
by her last Will and Testament, one hundred pounds per annum for ever, to be
employed for redemption of Captives of the English Nation.

Knights of the Rosary in Toledo. (27.)
Ios. Mich. Marquez Tes. Milit. de Cavall. f. 58. b.
Roderick Archbishop of Toledo in Spain, seeing the Country sore oppressed by
the Moors, called the Nobless of the City together, and propounded the great
necessity of their appearance and assistance in its defense, and extirpation of
the Moors; whereto they being unanimously inclined, he gave beginning to this
Order of the Rosary, into which entered many of the Nobless.

This Order had Statutes, which chiefly obliged them to the defense of the
Catholic Religion, to fight against the Moors, and to say continually a Rosary
of our blessed Lady: Our Author finds not that it had been approved by any of
the Popes, but conceives the Archbishop, being Metropolitan of Spain, was of
sufficient power to give it approbation; besides, he framed the Statutes for
the Knights, and prescribed to them the Rule of living, to wit, that of St.
Dominick.

The Tessera fuit effigie^ B. Mariae del Rosario, and infra ipsam Cruz alba,
and nigra; instar ejus, quam gestant Ministri Tribunalium Sanctae Fidei. Mendo
Disq. 1. Quaest. 4. Sect. 100.
Ensign of this Order was the Figure of our Lady of the Rosary, upon a Cross
Flory, quarterly Argent and Sable.

Knights of St. Mary the Glorious in Italy. (28.)
The Author of this Institution, was Carol. Sigonius de regno Italiae. l. 17.
p. 45.
Bartolemeo de Vincenza, of the Order of Friars Preachers or Dominicans,
afterward made Bishop of that City, a man that did much both in word and
example: and the end he chiefly designed, was to procure peace to the Cities of
Italy, Sylv. Maurolico in Oceano Religionum. p. 232.
then much disquieted by Civil Wars, among the Princes thereof.

This Order received Institution anno Dom. Ios. M. Marquez en Tesoro milit. de
Cavall. f. 37. b.
1233. a year famous and renowned in that Age, for very great piety, and
therefore called Brietii Annals Mandi, pars 3. Tom. 2. p. 118
generalis devotionis Annus. It was approved and confirmed by Sigon. in regno
Italiae. l. 19. p. 97.
Pope Urban the Fourth, anno 1262. and the Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 1.
Rule of St. Dominick prescribed to the Knights, who are obliged Sigonius and
Marquez, locis cit.
to take into their care and protection Widows and Orphans, and use their
endeavor to beget concord among such as are at variance.

The Habit is a Gothofrid. in Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 7.
White Tunick or Cassock, and a Mantle of Russet Color; but there is some
difference among those that mention the Badge, Orig. de Cavaleri. f. 22.
Sansovin and In Mare Oceano Relig. p. 232.
Maurolico say, they wore before their breasts a purple Cross patee, bordered
with Gold; Loco cit.
Gothofridus says, it is a purple Cross patee, with two Stars in chief; but
Loco supra cit.
Marquez gives it an Octogonal Cross, like that of Malta, and four Stars, to
wit, one at every side thereof.

The Marquez in Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. fol. 38. b.
manner of giving the Habit, and making Profession, is with the Ceremony used
by the Knights of Malta. The Knights profess Ibid. f. 37. b.
Obedience to their Great Master, and conjugal Chastity, but are S. Maurolico,
loco cit.
forbid to wear Spurs or Bridles of Gold. They are commonly called Cavaleri de
Madona, and reside at Bolonia, Modena, and other Cities of Italy: and because
they have no Monasteries, but dwell in their own Houses, together with their
Wives and Children, at ease and in plenty, they were called Menenn. Delic.
Equest. p. 111.
Fratres Gaudentes, or Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 7.
Hilares.

The Order of Knights of St. James in Portugal. (29.)
We have not met with any who make mention of this Order as distinct from that
of St. James in Galicia, save only I. Mich. Marquez, but such as rather take it
to have been sometime a member thereof; and that the Knights of St. James in
Galicia, who had anciently Commanderies in Portugal, were only exempted from
obedience and subjection to their Great Master, and not received upon the
account of a new Institution, for so much does Andrew Favin affirm; but Ios.
Micheli, from Portugal, Writers, reports the contrary, and gives this further
account of the Order, to wit En su Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 48. a.
That the troubles the Moors gave daily to Portugal, and the great zeal of
their Kings, seeing their Subjects so exceedingly oppressed by them, was such,
that they endeavored by all means to cut off those mischiefs, and to secure
and quiet the Consines of their Kingdom.

Among whom King Don Denis the Sixth, moved with a like tender regard toward
his People, did in the year of our Lord En su Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 48. a.
1310. institute this Order of St. James, under whose protection he became
victorious in diverse Battles against the Moors, and at length quieted his
Kingdom, by the assistance of these Knights. And it was not long after the
Institution, e're this Order flourished, through the favor of those
Privileges bestowed on it by the Founder.

It received approbation first, from Pope En su Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 48.
a.
Nicholas the Fourth, after from Pope Celestine the Fifth, and again from other
of his Successors.

The Knights profess conjugal Chastity, Hospitality and Obedience, and none are
admitted before they make proof of their Gentility by blood.

The Ensign of this Order is a Ibid.
Red Sword, formed like that of St. James in Galicia, the Habit White: only the
difference between them lies in a little Twist of Gold, which these of Portugal
draw about their Sword.

At the Town of Ibid.
Alcasar de Sul, was the principal Convent of this Order first seated,
afterward removed to Palmela, where it yet continues: and whiles Portugal
remained under the Crown of Spain, and the Administration of this Order under
that King, it was no less illustrious, than whilst their own Kings governed.

The Statutes Ibid.
are much the same with those of St. James in Galicia, so also is the manner of
giving the Habit, Benediction, and Profession.

The Order of our Lady, and of St. George of Montesa in Valentia. (30.)
This Order did Menen. Delic. Equest. p. 112.
succeed into the Lands and Possessions of the Knights Templars in Valentia, as
the Knights Hospitalars did into those of the Templars in France, Italy, and
other places. For Tes. milit. de Caval. f. ^2. a.
after the Templars were dissolved, James the Second, King of Aragon and
Valentia, refused to grant their Revenues (lying in his Kingdom) to the Order
of St. John of Jerusalem, as other Princes had done; nevertheless within few
years sent an Embassy to Pope John the 22. to give him his reasons why he did
not.

These the Pope considering of, as also that the Moors were very near to
Aragon, gave way that these Revenues of the exauterated Templars should be
applied to the Convent of Montesa, where had been placed both Knights and
Friars of the Order of Calatrava.

Hereupon this King, in the year of our Lord Io. Mariana de reb. Hisp. l. 15.
c. 16. vide Fr. de Rades y Andrada en Chron. de Calarava. f. 49. b.
1317. Instituted this Order, in the City of Valentia ( Idem de Rades.
nevertheless subject to that of Calatrava, as a member thereof) and made
choice of the Town of Montesa, to give the Knights both name and habitation:
whom he obliged to defend his Kingdoms, against the incursions of the Moors.

Their Ibidem.
College (dedicated to the honor of St. George) was built in the following
year by the Pope at Montesa, at the instance of King James, Menenn. p. 113.
Culielmus de Eril, a valiant Soldier being constituted the first Master in the
Convent of St Mary and St. George.

The Favin. en le T^eat. d'Honneur. l. 6 c. 15.
Statutes of the Order (almost the same with those of Calatrava) were confirmed
by the said Pope John, who gave to these Knights the Sansov. Orig. de
Cavalieri. f 21 b.
Cistertian Rule. They vowed conjugal Chastity, and the manner of their
Investiture is as in the Order of Calatrava.

Their Habit is So^^^vin ut supra. and Goth^frid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 7.
White, and the Badge of the Order a Una Crux Llana Roxa, Lancerote l. 1. c. 32.
plain Red Cross, that is, the Cross of St. George, Favin l. 6. c. 16.
Patron of the Kingdoms of Navarr and Aragon. This Cross was worn upon the
breast, by a privilege granted to the Knights from Pope Benedict the
Thirteenth.

To this Order of Montesa was incorporated that of Silv. Mauroli^o in Mare
Oceano Relig. p. 2^9.
St. George d' Alfama, anno Dom. 1399. which union received confirmation from
the Council of Constance.

A Catalogue of the Masters are recorded by En Tesoro milit. de Caval. loc. cit.
Io. Micheli; which great Office continues to this time in the King of Spain;
so does the Revenue of thirteen Commanderies belonging thereunto, amounting to
23000 Ducats per annum.

The Order of Knights of Christ in Portugal. (31.)
As the Knights of Montesa sprung from the ruin of the Knights Templars in
Valentia, so did this Order of Christ (or of the Alex. Ross his continuation of
Sir W. Rawleighs Hist. sub sinem.
Warfare of Christ) succeed them in the Kingdom of Portugal. For the Knights
Templars having been very serviceable to the Kings of Portugal, in their Wars
against the Moors, the Kings gave unto them diverse Lands and Revenues, which
when their Order came to be dissolved, and their Estates confiscate, King Ios.
Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 63. b. Pantaleon de Ord. Ioannit. reb.
gest. l. 1. p. 95. Mennen. p. 114.
Don Denis, surnamed Perioca, sent to Pope John the 22. (then at Avignion) to
desire that the Knights Templars Lands might not be disposed of, out of his
Kingdom; which though he did not readily grant, yet he gave way for the King,
to render him ^he reasons of his request.

Hereupon King Denis sent his Ambassadors to the Pope, in the year 1316. not
only to back his desire, but withal to declare to his Holiness the great
vexations and evils, the neighboring Moors in Algarves did to his Kingdom. And
forasmuch as the Town of Castro Marin was a Frontler of the Enemy, and the site
thereof very commodious for the building of a Fort to resist them, he farther
moved the Pope for License, that an Order of Knights might be Instituted in
that Town, and withal offered to him the Rents and Jurisdiction thereof, and
all Dominion over it.

This request being thought just, and the remedy so necessary, the Pope did
afterward (namely in the year of our Lord 1319.) give Foundation to this new
Order, dedicating it to the honor of God, and the exaltation of the Catholic
Faith, under the Title of the Military Order of our Lord Jesus Christ, because
of the miraculous apparition, which this King had seen of Christ crucified,
when he went out to fight against the Moors.

He further commanded, that the Knights of this Order should observe the same
Rule, with those of the Order of Calatrava, which was Cistertian, and enjoy the
same. P^iviledges and Indulgences, formerly granted to their Great Master and
Knights. Aegidius Martinius.
In which respect he nominated Don Gil. Martinez, for their first Master,
because he was a Knight professed, and Master of the Order of St. Benedict d'
Avis; and appointed for their Visitor, the Abbot of Alcobaza, of the Cistertian
Order.

This Ibid. f. 64.^.
Abbot or his Lieutenant in succession was empowered to receive of the Master of
this Order, in the name of the Pope and Church of Rome, the Oath of fidelity;
it being directed to be taken in the presence of the Kings of Portugal, before
he should enter upon the administration of his Mastership, and the King was
obliged to receive this Oath within ten days, after the Master should tender it
to him, and in case the King did not in that time receive it from the Master,
then he might take on him the administration of his Office without it: and
further that each Knight before his admittance should take the same Oath of
Fidelity, before the Master of this Order.

All the Platina in vitae Job. 25. p. 220.
Goods and Possessions formerly belonging to the Knights Templars, within the
Kingdom of Portugal, were hereupon granted unto this Order, and the Knights
thereof particularly obliged to make War against the Gothofrid. Archont.
Cosmica. l. 3. p. 7. Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 244.
Moors in Baetica, next neighbor to Portugal. They had appointed to them for
their chief Seat, Io Mariana. l. 15. c. 16. Tesoro milit. de Cav. f. 63. b. In
Sylvensi Diaecesi.
Castro Marin, where their first Convent was erected, but afterward it was
removed into the City of Tomar.

They went clothed in Favin. l. 6. c. 8. ^ide Iurisprud. Heroi^. p. 563. and A.
Mendo. Dis^. 1. Quaest. 11. n. 196.
Black, wearing upon their breasts a Cross Pat^e of Red Silk, and upon that
another of White.

This Order (as that d'Avis) became at length annexed to the Crown of Portugal;
whose Kings have ever since taken upon them the title of perpetual
Administrators of both.

The Order of Knights of the Passion of Jesus Christ. (32.)
Some years after the Institution of the precedent Order, and toward the
latter end of the thirteenth Century, there was erected a religious Order of
Knighthood, by Charles King of France, and our King Richard the Second, which
bore the Title of the Order of the Passion of Jesus Christ. And though we do
not find any further progress thereof, after it had received its Foundation,
yet considering the grounds whereon it was instituted, and the nobleness and
largeness of the design (exceeding all other Religious Orders of Knighthood,
except those of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, and Knights Templars) as
also because one of our English Kings was a Co-founder thereof; we conceived it
worthy our pains to make an extract, particularly relating to the causes why it
was erected, the frame of its Constitution, its principal Structures, and the
Habit and Ensigns thereof, out of an old French Manuscript, written by Philip
de Maisiere Chancellor of Cyprus, wherein it is thus prefaced.

Ex vet. MS. in Bibliotheca Arundeliana. f. 1.2.3.
Forasmuch as by reason of the three deadly sins, which began to reign among
the Christians, namely, Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury, God permitted the
Saracens, Enemies of the Faith, to overcome Jerusalem and the Holy Land, to the
shame and disgrace of Christendom; therefore to renew the memory of the Passion
of Christ, thereby to extirpate those deadly sins, and to make way for the
re-conquest of Jerusalem, and the Holy places, the overthrow and confusion of
the Enemies of the Faith, this Order was erected.

There are Ibidem. sol. 3. a.
twenty causes reckoned up by this Author, for the necessity of Instituting this
Order of the Passion.

1. To stir up the Soldiery to amendment of life, by the example of so new and
solemn a devotion. 2. To renew the memory of the Passion of Christ among
Christians, by the example of this holy Order. 3. For the speedy sending of
relief and succor to the Christians of the East, that stood in great need of
it. 4. For the regaining of the Holy Land, out of the hands of the Enemies of
the Faith. 5. For the propagation of the holy Catholic Faith, among the people
of the East. 6. For resisting of those that were disturbers of the Catholic
Faith; as Heretics, Tyrants, and Schismatics. 7. That the rents and divisions
of the Church through Italy, might by the passage of this holy Order be healed
and reunited, under one universal Shepherd of Souls. 8. Fol. 4.
That when the Kings of France and England should arrive in the Continent, this
Order might go before them, as a valiant precursor, to make way for, and attend
them in all things. 9. To serve as a Lifeguard, for the defense of the two
Kings persons, and a forlorn hope, to give example and encouragement to the
whole Army. 10. That those Volunteers that served in the Army, being without
head, and not under Rule (if they should venture extravagantly and rashly into
the Battle without Guide) might be regulated by the Cavaliers of this holy
Order. 11. That if the Victory should at any time incline to the adverse party,
these Cavaliers, by reason of their expertness in the feats of Arms, might
serve for a reserve to recover the declining Fortune of the day, and to rescue
the dead and wounded out of the hands of the Enemy. 12. That if at any time
either of the two Kings should be left destitute of a Guard to their persons,
they might be attended by some of the most valiant of this Order. 13. That if
any Towns or Fortresses taken by either of the two Kings, should be found
dangerous and difficult to be kept; that such should be committed to the
Cavaliers of this Order, who were to be ready to undergo all kind of dangers
and difficulties. 14. That by the vigilance and industry of these Cavaliers (if
they should be set as Spies upon the Enemies actions) the two Kings might be
informed of the secrets of the Enemies Camp. 15. Fol. 5.
That if a Treaty should happen to be between the two Kings and the Enemy, the
Prince of the Chevalry in person, or some of his chosen Cavaliers in his stead,
should labor indefatigably in this affair, especially either of the Kings so
commanding. 16. That if either of the Kings should be at any Siege, within the
Enemies Territories, certain of the Chevalry ought humbly to visit the Host, to
be watchful over it, and to guard it by night from the attempts and Spies of
the Enemy, or of false brethren. 17. That if any false rumors or tales should
be spread in the Army of the Catholic Kings, with design to raise dissentions
or debates; the Prince of the Chevalry in person, or any of his grand Officers
for him (according to the dignity of the persons at odds) should labor to the
utmost of their power to take up the Controversy, and bring the persons to a
reconciliation. 18. That if any of the Christians of the West, should have any
obligation to take upon them a passage into the Holy Land, a certain number of
the Chevalry might be ready to accompany them to the performance of their Vows
or Obligations. 19. That if any of the younger Sons or Brothers of Noblemen,
having little or no portions of their own, should be willing to serve in the
Chevalry; they might so long as they behaved themselves well, be nobly and
handsomely provided for. 20. That if either of the Kings should be hindered from
passing into the Holy Land, about the performance of any Vow or Obligation from
their Forefathers, the Chevalry might be ready at a speedy warning to perform
whatsoever was committed to their charge, in behalf of the Kings.
Fol. 16. b.
And although this Order was principally dedicated to the honor of our blessed
Savior, yet says our Author, the blessed Virgin Mary was looked upon as a
principal Mediatress and Advocate of this holy Chevalry; representing the
passion of her Son, and also guarding and defending the Cavaliers, against the
Enemies of the Faith, as a Mother does a Child.

Pol. 19. b.
As to the Government of this Order, it is to be noted, that in the principal
Convent of the holy Chevalry, all things of public concernment were to be
debated by five authentic Councils in the presence of the Prince.

The first was to be called the Quotidian Council, consisting of four and
twenty Counselors. The second was the Particular, or Singular Council,
consisting of about forty persons, to wit, four and twenty grand Counselors,
eight Executors of Justice, four Commissaries of Trespasses, and three or four
Doctors of Divinity and Law. The third the Grand Council, consisting of
fourscore persons, viz. forty such as were mentioned in the second Council, and
other authentic Officers, and a certain number of Brothers, valiant and sage
persons, amounting in all to the abovesaid number. The fourth Council was to be
called the General Chapter, and held every year; consisting of all the
abovenamed Officers, with the Presidents and Deputies of Provinces. The fifth
Council was the Universal Chapter, to be held from four to six years;
consisting of a thousand Knights of the Chevalry, by which Universal Chapter,
any of the Chevalry, or grand Officers were to be reformed, or, if occasion
required, punished according to the Statutes of the Chevalry.

The principal Officer of the Chevalry, was the Grand Iusticiary, to whom
belonged the Judgment of all the criminal Affairs, and the disposal of all
chief Offices and Places.

The next chief Officer was called the Grand Bailiff; that is to say, only in
the principal Convent, to administer Justice both Civil and Criminal in that
Convent to all sorts of persons.

Fol. 20. ^.
In the principal City, as also in every City and Castle belonging to the
Chevalry, one of the Order was to be chosen to administer all sorts of Justice
in that place; who was to go under the name of Potestate.

Also in the General Chapter, there was to be chosen every year one of the
Order, who should be called the Senator of the General Chapter, and four and
twenty discreet persons of the Chevalry with him, who should hold a general
Chapter, or principal Convent, upon any Expedition of War.

In the Universal Chapter, there was to be chosen one of the Order, who should
be called Dictator of the Universal Chapter; and with him twelve Fathers
Conscript, with twelve Coadjutors, who should hold an universal Chapter, from
four years to six.

Also in the principal Convent, there were to be chosen ten of the Chevalry,
courageous and of holy life, who should be called the Ten Fol. 20. b.
Executors of Justice, which should be decreed by the Grand Justiciary upon the
persons of the chief Officers being delinquent; they were also to be called the
Conservators of the holy Rule of the Chevalry, and also to be assistant to the
grand Advocate, and the grand Protectors and Promoters of Divine Charity.

Also in the principal Convent there were to be chosen four of the Chevalry,
devout and good men, who should be called the Charitable Commissaries of the --
whose Office it was to provide for the Widows and Orphans, committed to their
care.

And whereas this Order was made up of eight several Languages, there was to be
always appointed in the principal Convent, eight Notaries using the Habit of
the Brothers, and also for every language a several Notary, and so the like in
the Convents of other Regions and Cities.

Also, to the end the Knights of this Order might live according to the Rules
of the Order, in the perfection of their Estates and Degree, they were to bind
themselves by Oath to three things, viz. Obedience to their Sovereigns, poverty
of Spirit, and conjugal Chastity.

Fol. 21. b.
Also the Chevalry were to have for their sustentation, the possession of
Cities, Castles, Fortresses, Gold, Silver, and all kind of movables, as God
should bestow upon them; nevertheless all to be in common among them, that they
might the better intend the exercise of their Arms and other Duties.

Also to the end that any of the Chevalry, having possessions in the West,
might not return thither, to the personal enjoyment of them, thereby leaving
the duties that belonged to their Order in the East; such possesions were
appointed to be managed by certain Merchants and honest Citizens, deputed to
that purpose.

Also the holy Chevalry, were to observe Justice, both Civil and Criminal,
rendering to every one according to his deserts, whether reward or punishment.

Fol. 22. ^.
Also the Prince of the Chevalry was to summon the principal Convent, at the
Castle of the principal City; where he should assemble the President of the
City and of the Convent, and three or four other Presidents, each having under
them four and twenty Knights, and four and twenty Brothers of the Chevalry,
with fifty Sergeants, so as to make up in the whole, with Officers and others,
to the number of about 500 or 600 Combatants to be ready upon all occasions.

Moreover there was to belong to the principal Convent, a Church of so
marvelous a structure, that the like has not been seen or known: it was
designed to be 50 Cubits in breadth, without any Pillars, 100 Cubits long, and
in height 25.

Also in the Castle and principal Convent, there was to be an Hospital, in
which the Widows of the holy Chevalry, should attend upon the sick and infirm,
Fol. 2^. b.
still employing themselves in the holy work of Charity, which also was to be
the business of the Prince, the Grand Officers and all the Knights.

Also there should belong to the Convent a Baptistery or Font, round, large,
and curiously made for the baptizing of the Sons and Daughters of the Knights.

Also there was appointed to belong to the principal Convent, a large and
stately Palace, with a great Hall, and large Consistories, to contain the
Prince and Council with their Retinue, and for a habitation for the Prince,
with his Princess and Family.

Also in the Convent there was to be a Cloister, for the Canons and Clerks,
large and delightful, and a great Hall with Galleries; which habitation should
be near the Church, and enclosed with high Walls.

Also there was to belong to the said Castle a very fair Palace, to entertain
the Princes of the West, when at any time they came that way, either to Wa^, or
upon Pilgrimage.

Also in the said Castle there were to be distinct lodgings and habitations for
the grand Officers of the Chevalry, as well Natives as Foreigners, for the
Knights Companions, and Sergeants of the Chevalry, and for their Wives.

Also there were to be in the said Castle, Wine-Cellars, Granges, Granaries,
Stables for Horses and Cattle, Easements, Mills, Cisterns, Baths, and all other
necessaries for the Chevalry.

Fol. 23. a.
Also in the principal Convent there were to be three chief Halls; first the
great Hall of the Prince, where he and all the Knights and Brothers of the
Chevalry were to dine on Festival days: The second, where the Canons should
daily sit at meat with the Foreign Prelates and Clerks, and also all the
Knights and Brothers of the Chevalry that were unmarried: The third, for the
grand Commandor of the Horse to eat in, and with him all the lesser Officers of
the principal Convent, all the Valets of the Horse, and the Servitors belonging
to the said Commandor.

The Habit of the holy Chevalry of the Passion of Jesus Christ, was to be
established according to the intention of the holy Rule; that is to say,
representing in its Vestments the Passion of Jesus.

The Knights were appointed to wear a handsome cloth Coat, of a civil color,
reaching down half way the leg, which should be called the principal Coat of
the Chevalry; this was to be girt with a large Girdle of Silk or Leather, two
fingers broad, the Buckle round, of black Horn, as also the Tongue and the
garnishing of the holes were to be of Tin. They should also wear Red Chaperons
or Caps, representing the blood of Jesus Christ, and over the principal Coat
Fol. 23. b.
a Mantle of white Cloth or Serge, which Mantle from the shoulders downward,
was to be open on both sides along the arms; and in that part between the two
openings before the breast, there was to be a Cross of Cloth or Serge, two
fingers broad; this Cross was to proceed in traverse as far as the openings of
the Mantle, only the Cross upon the Prince his Mantle was to be edged round
about with a Gold Fringe, half an Inch broad, or thereabout: Some small
difference also there was to be between the Habits of the Knights, the Brothers
and the Sergeants; that of the Knights was to be a little more solemn, and more
clearly representing the Passion of the holy Jesus, than either that of the
Brothers or Sergeants; but the Habit of them all was to be White, only in the
Cross, and in the shape there was to be some difference.

Ibid.
The Arms of the holy Chevalry were these, the field of the Banner (following
the description in the Constitution) was to be White, in the midst of it a Red
Cross four fingers broad, or thereabouts, extending along the field: in the
middle of the Cross there was to be a compass with four rounds and four little
angles between the rounds, this compass was to be filled with a black color,
representing the agony and passion of our Lord, which compass in the middle of
the Cross was to be four inches about, and within it an Agnus Dei, well shapt,
and of a resplendent golden color, representing the glory of Jesus after his
resurrection: the Cross and Compass was to be edged about with a bordure of
Gold, one finger broad, or a little less, and about the sides there was to be a
little red bordure of the breadth of half a finger.

There was also to belong to this holy Chevalry, another singular and solemn
Banner, yet not to be born, but at great Battles, and in times of extraordinary
danger and difficulty. The Cross and Agnus Dei, was to be born by the Prince
armed, the armed Chevaliers and the Brothers, upon their great White Gippos or
loose Coats, both before and behind; excepting that in lieu of the Habits and
Ensigns belonging to the Order of the Passion of Ihesus Christ.
Gold bordure about the Cross, the Brothers were to have a bordure of black
Silk.

Fol. 24. a.
Every Knight was to have his Esquire armed at all points, and a little Valet
to carry his Lance and Helmet, beside another bigger Valet habited in a loose
Coat, to carry his Mail, and a third on foot, to lead his Sumpter. For any
warlike Expedition, he was to have his five Horses and four Servants, and in
all times of peace, two or three Horses, according as the means of the Chevalry
should be able to allow.

Also each Brother of the Chevalry was to have toward warlike Expeditions three
Horses or four, according as his merits and abilities were, and three Servants,
whereof one or two were to be fighting men; and in times of peace, one or two
according to the Chevalry's ability of allowance.

The number of Knights of the Holy Chevalry, was a thousand; or a thousand, one
hundred, or thereabouts.

The Order of the Cavalleros Bricianos en Suecia. Io. Micheli Marquez en Tesoro
milit. de Cavall. p. 57. b.
Brician Knights in Sweden. (33.)
Ibid.
Ios. Micheli Marquez from Marcus Ant. Vianus, in his Description of Sweden,
informs us, that a holy and famous Queen of that Kingdom, (whom De Ord. Milit.
Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 20.
Andr. Mendo says, was St. Should not the Knights then be rather called of St.
Bridget.
Bridget) being very zealous for the honor of our Savior Jesus Christ,
Instituted this Order in the year of our Lord 1396. which we rather think is
mistaken for 1366. because he says it was approved by Pope Urban the Fifth,
who then possessed the Roman Chair, and gave to the Knights the Rule of St.
Augustine, beside St. Bridget dyed the Io. Bapt. Ricciolus Chronolog. reformat.
Tom. 4. Index 2. p. 208.
23. of July 1373.

The sum of their Profession was to defend Christian Religion against
Heretics, to secure the Confines of that Kingdom, to bury the dead, to succor
the Widows and Fatherless, and to keep up Hospitality; to which end the Queen
endowed this Order with large Possessions; so that during her Reign, it
exceedingly flourished.

The chief Ensign of this Order, was Cruz Octogona, abaxo una lingua de suego
colorada. Tes. milit. loco cit. Tessara Cruz Caerulea ad instar Militensis, sub
qua lingua ignea jacet. Mend. loc. cit.
a Blue Octogonal Cross, and under it a Tongue of Fire, this being accounted
the Symbol of Love and Charity; in regard they were to be zealous in defense of
the holy Faith, and in maintaining the Statutes of the Order.

The manner observed at the Investiture of the Knights, as also the
Benedictions and Professions, were the same with those of Malta.

But one thing is observable in this Order above others, that after admission
thereinto all were advanced according to their seniority: so that there was a
possibility for the junior Knight to arrive at the dignity of Master of the
Order.

The Order of Knights of St. Maurice in Savoy. (34.)
The Sam. Guichenon in le Histor. Genealog. de la royal Mason. de Savoy. l. 1.
p. 113. Crescenzi Presid. Romans par. 3. l. 1.
Order of Knights Hermits of St. Maurice, had their beginning upon the retreat
of Amadis the Eighth, Duke of Savoy, into the desert of Ripaille, near the Lake
of Geneva, and was bestowed by him, in the year of our Lord Sam. Guichenon in
le Histor. Genealog. de la royal Mason. de Savoy. l. 1. p. 113. Crescenzi
Presid. Romans par. 3. l. 1.
1434. on those ten Knights of his Court, who had retired with him thither; as
well to preserve the memory of St. Maurice, honored as titular Patron of Savoy,
for many Ages past, as of his Lance (some say Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 54.
Sword) and Ring, the essential Symbols of Knighthood, passing from hand to
hand, from the Kings of Burgoigne to the Princes of Savoy; by whom they have
been preserved, with great honor and veneration: and are as a pledge of
Dominion, delivered to them with great solemnity, at their Inauguration.

Nine years after the Institution of this Order, the Founder was prevailed
with, to accept of the Popedom, after the deposition of Pope Eugenius the
Fourth: and the Council of Basil sitting, he was elected Pope, the Alfon.
Clacon. l. 2. p. 910.
5. of November, anno 1439. by the name of Felix the Fifth: Nine years after he
freely resigned the Chair, the Instrument of Renunciation, bearing date at
Lausanna, the Guichenon en mesme Hist. Genealog. de la Maison de Savoy. l. 6.
p. 322.
sixth day of April, anno 1449. to whom succeeded Nicholas the Fourth, and
immediately he Ibid. p. 333.
retired again to his solitude in Ripaille, where he dyed the Ibid. p. 333.
seventh of January anno 1451. and lies buried in the Ciacon. l. 2. p. 916.
Cathedral Church of Lausanna.

This Order of St. Maurice was made subject to the Rule of St. Augustine: and
the Knights had assigned them for their Habit, a Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l.
8. c. 6.
Gray or Ash Color Gown and Chaperon, a Vest of the same, girded with a golden
Girdle, the Chaperon and Sleeves faced with Red Chamlet, and on the breast of
the Mantle Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 6.
a White Cross Pommette of Taffaty or Cloth; but the Cross which the Master or
Chief of the Order wore, was made of Gold, or rich Embrodery.

This Guichenon. Hist. Genealog. l. 1. p. 114.
Order continued not long after the death of the Founder. But Duke Emanuel
Philibert to renew the devotion, which his Predecessors always bore to St.
Maurice, restored the same, and obtained a Bull from Pope Gregory the
Thirteenth, dated the 17. of October 1572. for erecting and instituting
thereof, under the Cistertian Rule, and the perpetual protection of the Duke of
Savoy, its Grand Master; which Bull is set forth by In Origin. Ordinum
Equestrium p. 51.52 53. vide porro Guichenon. l. 6. p. 524. and Cherub. in
Compend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 80. Constitut. 6.
Albertus Miraeus, who thence collects that this Order was then first
Instituted, and not by Count Amadis the Eighth, as is before noted.

Knights of the Holy Ghost at Rome. (35.)
This Order was Instituted by Pope Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1.
Paul the Second, anno Dom. 1468. under the Title of Brethren of the Hospital
of the Holy Ghost: The Knights wore upon their Habits a Favin. Theat. d'
Honneur. l. 8. c. 1.
White Cross Form.

The Order of Knights of St. George in Austria and Carinthia. (36.)
Lib. 3. de rebus Viennens.
Wolfangus Lazius informs us, that Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany (
Gotofrid. Archont. Cosmica. l. 3. p. 13.
others that Rudolphus of Hapsburgh, first raiser of the House of Austria)
instituted this Order of Knights of St. George, in the year of our Lord 1470.
chiefly to Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3.
guard the Frontiers of Germany, Hungary, Austria, Stiria, Carinthia, and to
suppress the insolency of the Turks, by whose Incursions the Marches of these
Countries were (about that time) miserably wasted: since which, these Knights
have so gallantly behaved themselves, that they have often born away great
Trophies and Ensigns of Victory from their Enemies.

The Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3.
Great Master of this Order was advanced to the Title and Honor of a Prince,
and for a Seat and Residence to him and his Successors, the Castle of Favin.
Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3.
Mildstad in the Dukedom of Carinthia was appointed, where also was founded a
Cathedral Church of Canons, under the Rule of St. Augustine.

The Knights bear for the Ensign of their Order the Arms of St. George, viz.
Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 3.
a plain Red Cross. Their A. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 27.
Habit is White, they profess A. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect.
27.
conjugal Chastity, and Obedience to their Master, and have the A. Mendo de
Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quest. 2. Sect. 27.
Emperors for their Protectors.

But there is mention made by In Delic. Equest. p. 173.
Fr. Mennenius (from Bernardus Luceburgius, in his Book De Ordinibus
Militaribus) as also by Origin. Ord. Equest. p 47.
Alb. Miraeus, of an Order of Knights of St. George (which Tesoro Milit. de
Cavall. f. 59. b.
Ios. Micheli calls Cavalleros de San Iorge en Alemania) erected by Maximilian
the Emperor, upon the like design with the former, he being greatly devoted to
that Patron of all military Professors.

This Order was confirmed by Ibid. f. 60. a.
Pope Alexander the Sixth, under the same Rule and Profession as the other,
having the Emperors also their Protectors, though it be not much extended. The
Knights elect their Master from among themselves, and the Ensigns of the Order
is a Menn. Delic. Equest. p. 173. A. Miraeus, loco cit.
Red Cross, with a Crown of Gold on the top of it.

We observe elsewhere, that this Order runs under the Title of Iurisprudent.
Heroica. p. 373
Crowned Knights, and is said to have been instituted among the Iurisprudent.
Heroica. p. 373
Austrians, by the said Emperor Maximilian, anno 1494. in which respect the
Iurisprudent. Heroica. p. 373
Knights, after they have served their Prince for a year, do enjoy a peculiar
right (which is transmitted to their Heirs) of adorning their Shields and Helms
with a Crown.

Ios. Micheli writes, that this Emperor M^ximilian joining in Battle with
these Knights against the Turks, obtained a notable Victory; and that the Y
confessauan los Turcos, que un Cavallero solo a Cavallero, Idem Micheli p. 60.
Turks confessed, that a man on Horseback (supposed to be St. George, Patron of
this Order) put them into so great fear, that they longed for the hour to fly
and leave the Field.

The Order of Knights of St. George at Rome. (37.)
Mennen. apud Iuceburgium, in lib. de Armorum militar. Mysterius. Vide Favin.
in le (...) d' (...) and (...)
Alexander the Sixth, anno Dom. 1498. Instituted the Knights of St. George, who
wore a Mennen. apud Iuceburgium, in lib. de Armorum militar. Mysterius. Vide
Favin. in le (...) d' (...)
Cross of Gold, entowred with a circle of the same, made in the form of a Crown.

But E^losoro milit. de Cavall. f. 62.
Micheli says, that the Order of St. George, which had the foresaid Cross for
Ensign assigned to it, was instituted by Pope Paul the Third, at whose death it
became extinct, and that the Knights of this Order dwelt at Ravenna, and were
obliged to secure the Confines of the Adriatic Sea from Pirates. But that the
Order, which Pope Alexander the Sixth erected, had for Ensign the Figure of St.
George hanging at a Collar.

Knights of St. Peter at Rome. (38.)
Favin, loco naper cit.
Pope Leo the Tenth, anno 1520. Instituted this Order to fight against the
Turks, and to guard and defend the Seacoasts. The number of these Knights at
first was Alph. Ciacon. in vit. Pont. l. 2. p. 1070.
400.

They wore the Image of St. Peter within an Oval of Gold, hanging at a Gold
Chain: This Order was A. Mendo de Ord. Mil. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 26. n. 53.
confirmed by Paul the Third.

Knights of St. Paul at Rome. (39.)
They were Instituted by Pope A. Miraeus Orig. Equest. p. 84.
Paul the Third, anno 1540. and while he sat in the Papal Chair (which was
about ten years after) he made Palliot en la science des Armoiries. p. 5041
200 of these Knights.

The Ensign of this Order is the Image of St. Paul, hanging at a Chain of Gold.

The Order of Knights called Pios at Rome. (40.)
In the year of our Lord Menn. de Delic. Equest. p. 779.
1560. Pope Pius the Fourth, erected this Order, and gave to the Knights
thereof the Title of Pios. He created of them at first 375. but they increased
to the number of 535. Ciacon. de vit. Pontif. l. ^. p. 1179.
Ciaconius styles them Imperiales, but they were more usually called
Commensales.

Tesoro mil. de Caval. p. 74. b.
Ios. Micheli Marquez calls them Knights of the Golden Spur in Italy, and not
getting any certain knowledge of the original of this Order, under that Title,
he is content to believe a Relation of some of the Roman Courtiers, who told
him that it took beginning in the time of Constantine the Great, and that the
Knights had their Title from the nature of their Office, which was to take off
the Emperors Spurs; they were also employed near his Person, in the quality of
a Lifeguard.

This Pope endowed them very considerably, and gave them Favin, lib. 8. c. 1.
precedence before the Knights of the Empire, and of Malta, because they were
his Courtiers, and had the care and charge of carrying the Popes Chair on their
shoulders, at such times as he went abroad in public.

De Orig. Equest. p. 84.
Miraeus says, the Ensign of this Order is the Figure of St. Ambrose, hanging
at a Chain of Gold about their necks; ^ut Tesoro mil. de Caval. loco cit.
Marquez will have it a Cross of Cloth of Gold, of eight points, like that of
Malta, and a little Spur linkt to the foot of it.

The Order of Knights of St. Stephen at Florence. (41.)
This Order was founded in the year of our Lord 1561. by Scipio Ammirato in
Istorie Florent. pars 2. p. 531. Sansovin Orig. de Cavaller. f. 92. b. Favin.
Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 7.
Cosmo de Medicis, second Duke of Florence (created afterward first Great Duke
of Tuscany) in Scipio Ammirato in Istorie Florent. pars 2. p. 531. Sansovin
Orig. de Cavaller. f. 92. b. Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 7.
honor of St. Stephen, Pope and Martyr (of that name the Ninth) Patron and
Protector of the City of Florence, to Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 184. Histoire
de Mons. de Thou. Tom. 2. l. 26. p. 203.
revive and continue the memory of that fortunate Battle at Marciano, at which,
overthrowing the assertors of Liberty, he laid the foundation of his grandeur.
This Battle was fought on the sixth of August, being the Feast Day of the said
St. Stephen.

Pope Pius the Fourth Statut dell' Ord. de Cavalier. S. Steffan. p. 6. edit. in
Firenza 1620.
approved and confirmed this Order, under the Rule of Ibid. p. 8.
St. Benedict (his Bull to that effect, being dated at Rome the first of
February next following the Institution) which was afterward enlarged with
many Privileges, by another Bull of the said Page 14.
Pope Pius, as also by the Bulls of Page 39.44. and 52.
Sixtus the Fifth, and Page 62.
Paul the Fifth.

The Institution of these Knights much resembles those of the Knights of Malta,
and was erected in Histoire de Monsieur de Thou. loco cit.
imitation of that Order; they having the same Privileges granted unto them.
They vow Scip. Ammirato, loco nuper relato.
Chastity, but conjugal (for they have liberty to marry) Charity in relieving
their neighbor and afflicted, and Obedience to the Commands of their Grand
Master: which Dignity was vested in the Founder, and descends to his
Successors, Great Dukes of Tuscany.

The principal Seat of this Order was settled at Pisa, where the Founder Mennen.
Delic. Equest. p. 185.
built a Church and a Convent, designing it for a Nursery, to breed up persons
skilful in Maritime Affairs; that City having a commodious Haven for the
Galleys, wherein the Knights of this Order are to serve, either in checking the
Inrodes of the Turkish Pirates, or seting forth a Navy on any other Expedition,
if occasion require it. But since, it has been transferred to Heylins Cosmogr.
l 1. p. 113
Cosmopoli, in the Isle of Ilva; a place where the Founder, it seems, designed
and intended it to have been first settled; for which A. Miraeus cites Onuphrius
Panvinius.

The Habit of this Order, is a long Mantle of White Chamlet, beautified with
Red Trimming, and on the left part of the breast a Crux rubra cum Limbo aureo.
And. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quest. 2. Sect. 19. n. 44.
Cross (like that of Malta) of Red or Crimson Satin, bordered with Gold. This
Favin. in le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 7.
Cross is daily worn by the Knights on their Cloaks, as also on their military
Garments, and about their necks in a Ribbon on Festival days.

Moreover this Order (like that of Malta) consists of Knights, Priests, and
Servants; the Favin. in le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 7.
Priests wear the Cross of Red Taffaty without a border; and the Servants the
Cross of St. Anthony only.

The Statutes and Constitutions were reformed by Ferdinand Great Duke of
Tuscany, Son to the Founder, and approved in a Chapter of the Order, anno 1590.
and since printed at Florence, anno 1628.

The Order of Knights of St. Maurice, and St. Lazarus in Savoy. (42.)
Pope Gregory the Thirteenth, having at the solicitation of Emanuel Philibert
Duke of Savoy, restored and instituted anew the Order of St. Lazarus, as also
the Order of St. Maurice, anno 1572. and constituted this Duke Grand Master of
both; shortly after, by his Bull dated the Guichenon in Hist. Geneal. de la
Maison de Savoy. l. 6. p. 526. and Compend. Bull. Tom. 2. p. 81. Gonst. 7.
13. of November in the same year, he united the Order of St. Lazarus to that
of St. Maurice, for their greater honor: and thereby ordained, that this new
Institution should be thenceforth called the Order of St. Maurice and St.
Lazarus. He also constituted the said Duke and his Successors Dukes of Savoy,
Grand Masters thereof; and obliged them to furnish out two Galleys, for the
service of the Papal See, to be employed against Pirates.

Upon this Union (permission being given by the last mentioned Bull, to assume
a new Habit) the Knights of this Order had assigned them a Ex relatione Com de
Monroux hujus Ordinis Cancellar.
Gown of Crimson Tabby, with wide sleeves, a long train, and edged about with
White Taffaty, as also a Cordon, having a Tassel of White and Green, fixed to
the Collar thereof.

The Badge of this Order is agreeable to the form engraved in the Plate set
before this Chapter, to wit, the Ex relatione Com de Monroux hujus Ordinis
Cancellar.
Green Cross of St. Lazarus, charged in the heart with the White Cross of St.
Maurice, which the Knights wear either in a Gold Chain or Silk Ribbon, the
Color being at their own choice. This double Cross was granted to be the
Ensign of this new Order, by another Idem Guichenon. l. 6. p. 529.
Bull of the said Pope Gregory, given at Rome the 15. of January 1573.

In which year, to wit, in the Month of Favin. l. 8. c. 6
April, Duke Emanuel, in pursuance of this Union and new Foundation, assembled
all the Knights, in the City of Nice; where meeting, he was by them received
and acknowledged for their Grand Master, and took the Oath, recorded by Lib. 6.
p. 529.
Sam. Guichenon.

Afterward this Duke did erect Guichenon. l. 1. p. 114.
two fair Houses or Convents, for the Knights of this new Order to inhabit in,
the one at Nice, and the other at Turin; and with the Popes approbation,
bestowed all the Lands and Revenues formerly belonging to the Order of St.
Lazarus (lying within his Territories) upon them.

So that at this day, both the Orders of St. Lazarus and St. Maurice, being
united, rest under the Patronage of one Grand Master, and chief of the Order,
namely the Duke of Savoy; whose title used in all Affairs, relating to this new
instituted Order, is as follows.

Ibid.
Totius Religionis and Militiae Sanctorum Mauritii and Lazari, Betleem,
Nazareth, Hierosolymitan, Ordinis Sancti Augustini, Conventuum, Hospitalium,
Domorum, Praeceptoriarum atque piorum locorum omnium, citra and ultra Mare, cis
and trans Alps, per universum Orbem, Humilis and Generalis Magnus Magister.

Knights of Loretto. (43.)
Ciacon. de vit. Pontif. l. 2. p. 1243.
Sixtus Quintus instituted this Order, anno Dom. Theat. de Hon. l. 8. c. 1.
1587. but Tes. milit. de Caval. f. 62. a.
Ios. Micheli places it in the year before; for which he erected the Church of
our Lady at Loretto into a Cathedral and a Bishops See: and gave the Knights
for Ensign the Image of our Lady of Loretto, hung in a golden Chain.

The Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 26. n. 56.
splendour of this Order continued but a while, yet is it not quite extinguished.

The Order of Knights of the blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel. (44.)
Though the Grand Mastership of St. Lazarus, and the Commanderies thereunto
belonging, lying within the Dominions of all Christian Princes, were conferred
upon Emanuel Philebert Duke of Savoy, by Pope Gregory the Thirteenth (as has
been Page 58.
before remembered) yet the Duke did not gain the investiture of the
Commanderies lying in France, being opposed by King Henry the Third; whereupon
Favin Theat. d' Honn. l. 9. c. 9. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 55.
some Knights of that Order, refusing to join with their Fellows, under the
obedience of the Duke, maintained themselves in that Kingdom, until the Reign
of King Henry the Fourth; who being desirous to have a Fl. Cherub. in Compend.
Bull. Tom. 3. p. 50. Constable. 41.
new Order of Knighthood instituted, under the Rule and denomination of the
blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, applied himself to Pope Paul the Fifth for
that purpose.

Hereupon the Pope (the Ibid.
7. of February 1608.) confirmed the same, and prescribed several things
necessary to the Institution, according to the mind of the King, ordaining also
Pensions to the Great Master and Knights of this Order, out of certain
Ecclesiastical Benefices, in several places, within the Kingdom of France.

After this the Favin. l. 3. c. 10. vide ^tem Briet. Annal mundi, pars 4. Tom.
2. p. 263 and p. 403.
Commanderies and Hospitals of St. Lazarus, lying in France, were disposed of
likewise for the support of the Knights of this new Order; and the Knights of
St. Lazarus that remained in that Kingdom, were joined to these of the new
Institution; thus they became acknowledged to be one Body, under two Titles,
which we find inscribed round the Seal of their Order, viz. Idem Favin. Ibid.
Sigillum Ordinis and Militiae beatae Mariae Virginis de Monte Carmeli, and
Sancti Lazari in Jerusalem.

So that at this time, we find the Order of St. Lazarus to be divided between
two other Societies; namely the Order of St. Maurice in Savoy, and of St. Mary
of Mount Carmel in France.

This Order consists of Idem Favin. Ibid.
one hundred choice Gentlemen of France, and all appointed to attend on the
Kings person, upon every warlike Expedition. They vow Compend. Bull. loc. praed.
Obedience and Chastity, and profess to fight against the Enemies of the Roman
Church. The Feast of their Patroness is annually celebrated on the Idem Favin.
16. of July. Their first Master was Philibert Nerestang, sometimes one of the
Mendo. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 21. n. 46.
Knights of St. Lazarus, a valiant Gentleman, and famous in all military
Discipline; for which cause he was thought worthy to be preferred to this
Dignity, and accordingly nominated by Henry the Fourth, in April 1608. The 30.
of October following he took the Oath as Great Master, and of Fidelity to the
French King.

The Badge of this Order is a Cross of eight points, of Favin. ut supra.
Tawney Velvet or Satin (but some say of a Mennen p. 56. Miraeus p. 34. Insigne
est Crux violacea simul cum effigy Virginis Mariae deMonte Carmelo intra illam
inclusa. Mendo loco praed.
Violet color) with a white Bordure, sewed on the left side of their Cloaks,
and the Image of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel, placed in the middle within a
Rundle encompassed with beams or rays of Gold, all wrought in curious
Imbrodery: besides this, the Knights wear about their necks, in a Tawny Silk
Ribbon, the like Favin. loco cit.
Cross of Gold, but the Image of the said Virgin is enameled on both sides.

The Statutes of this Order are exhibited by Favin. loco cit.
A. Favin, and the Miraeus, p. 55.
solemn Rites used at the investiture of these Knights, are much after the
manner of those of Malta.

Knights of the Order of the most glorious Virgin Mary of Rome. (45.)
It was but of late years, viz. Andr. Favin en le Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 2.
1618. that three Brethren of Spella in Italy, namely Pedro, John Baptista, and
Bernardo, surnamed Petrignanoes, invented this Order of Knighthood, to which
was given the Rule of St. Francis d' Assise, and whereof the Pope and his
Successors are Great Masters.

Andr. Favin en le Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 2.
Paul the Fifth approved this Order, and gave these Knights the Palace of St.
John de Laterane, for their Convent, the City and Port of Civita Vechia, to
make their Arsenal of Galleys; as also an Island adjacent to that Port,
together with the Government of his Galleys.

The cause of its Institution, was for the Ibid.
exaltation of the Roman Church, and to repress the insolence of the Turks,
roving on the Mediterranean Sea.

In this Institution there are Ibid.
three kinds of Knights, who are differenced by their Habits: The first are
Knights Gentlemen Laics, who wear a Mantle of White double Taffaty, having
great sleeves and a long train, the Cordons of White Silk, with Knots and
Tassels of White and Blue Silk; the second are Knights Gentlemen Priests, and
beneficed, who wear the like Mantle, but something shorter; and both these wear
about their necks in a Blue Ribbon, a Cross of Gold, enameled Blue: The third
are Knights Chaplains, or Servants of Arms, and their Mantle is of White Serge,
with strait long sleeves, reaching down to the ground, and Cordons of Blue Silk.

All these Degrees wear on the Ibid.
left side of their Mantles, the Cross of the Order, as is here described; to
wit, of Blue Satin embrodered with Silver, and bordered with Gold; in the
middle is a round Circle, wherein is this Motto, In hoc Signo vincam, and
within that is composed a Cipher of the Letters M and S, (the initial Letters
of Sancta Maria) crowned with a Chaplet of Flowers, and Stars of Gold set over
the Chaplet; from the round Circle issue twelve rays, or beams of Silver,
representing the twelve Apostles: the finishings of the Cross are fashioned
like Flowers de Lis, and at the end of each Flower is a Star, set to signify
the four Evangelists.

The Statutes and Rules of this Order are recorded by Andrew Favin in his Ibid.
Theater of Honor.

The Order of the Annunciade and St. Michael the Archangel, or of the
Christian Militia in Moravia. (46.)
In the year of our Lord Ios. Micheli Marquez en l^ Tesoro milit de Cavalliera.
f. 71. a. Miraeus Orig. Ord. Equest. p. 85.
1618. Charles Gonzaga Duke of Maniua and Nevers, together with Adolph Count of
Altham, his Brother, and John Baptist Petrignan Sfortia, did contrive the
Institution of th^s Order; and to extend and amplify the same, divided the
World amongst them. For Duke Charles took the North and West parts, his Brother
the Eastern part, and to the other was given the South; where, in their own
persons they were bound to found Convents, and invest Knights: And in
prosecution of this design, we find, that Duke Charles began his Institution of
this Order under the Miraeus. loc^ cit.
Rule of St. Francis, in the Monastery of the Capuchins in Olmuntz, the
Metropolis of Moravia, on A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1.^.2. Sect. 30. n. 63.
Saturday the 17. of November, in the foresaid year; and dedicated the same to
the honor of the blessed Virgin, and St. Michael: But what the other two did in
the Eastern or Southern parts of the world, we have not heard.

Ioh. Ludov. Gothofridus gives this Title to the Order, to wit, Archon^. Cousin.
l. 3. p. 16.
Ordo Equilum Militiae Christianae. Philip Brietius calls it Annal. mundi pars
4. Tonr. 2. p. 440.
Conceptionis Ordo. Andr. Mendo, Loco nuper cit.
Militia Virginis Annuntiatae, and the Knights thereof are called by Ios.
Micheli Marquez, Tesoro mil. de Cavall. f. 71. a.
Cavalleros de la Anunciada, y San Miguel Archangel en Mantua.

This Order was afterward ( viz. the Mellis. Hist. par. 4. p. 1189.
8. of March 1619.) received at Vienna, by many Princes of diverse Countries,
whose names, together with the Statutes of the Order, are set down by the said
Gothofridus, in the Lib. 3. p. 15.16.17.
work above cited. I^ was approved by Pope Tes. mil. loc. cit.
Paul the Fifth, and the Briet. Annal. mundi loc. cit.
6. of February 1624. it received confirmation from Pope Urban the Eighth.

From the preamble of the Statutes of this Order, it appears, that it had for
its Basis, the Art. 1.
two chief Precepts of the Divine Law, to wit, to love God with our whole
hearts, and with all our souls, and our Neighbor as our selves; and the end of
its Institution, was to establish Peace and Concord between Christian Princes
and their Subjects, to release Captives, and to deliver the oppressed out of
the hands of the Infidels.

The Art. 15.
Habit assigned to the Knights was White; upon which they wore a long White
Mantle, and over that a shorter of Blue Silk, their Buskins were of Blue, and
their Caps of Black Silk.

They bore Art. 12.
two Crosses for the Ensign of this Order, the one of Gold of eight points
enameled Blue, on the one side thereof was the Figure of the blessed Virgin,
bearing our Savior in her arms, and on the other the Portraicture of St.
Michael, treading the Dragon under his Feet: This they wore about their necks
in a Blue Ribbon.

The other Ibid.
Cross was made of Blue Silk and Gold, in the middle whereof was the Image of
the blessed Virgin, surrounded with rays of the Sun, holding Christ in her left
arm, and a Scepter in her right hand, crowned with 12 Stars, a Crescent placed
under her feet; all which were encompassed with the Cord of St. Francis, and
the four angles of the Cross, cast forth four golden flames. This Cross was
embrodered on the left side of their white Mantles.

Touching the Art. 13.
great Collar of this Order, it was composed of fifteen Cords of St. Francis,
joined together with as many Stars; at the lower part whereof hung, at three
Chainets, the golden Cross above described.

But it seems, that in the height and glory of this Order, there grew some
Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 71. b.
difference between the Founders, insomuch that in a short time it became
ruined thereby; as if that notable Comet, which appeared within four days after
it was instituted, showed its sudden splendour and decay: which occasioned
Brietius to say of it, Loco supradicto.
That the Mahumetans, for whose destruction it was instituted, heard only the
name and report of it.

CHAP. III.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE Orders absolutely Military.
SECT. I.
The Order of Knights of the Round Table. (1.)
HAving thus given some account of the Religious Orders of Knighthood, that is,
of such whose Knights live under an Ecclesiastic Rule, and according to some
Religious Profession or solemn Vows; we shall next proceed to those that are
accounted purely and completely Military, among which that of the Knights of
the Round Table may (for its Antiquity) challenge the first place.

And though we are not ignorant that the story of this Orders Institution (as
also its Founders famous Exploits beyond Sea) is looked upon as the issue of
uncertain The Several ENSIGNS of the ORDERS absolutely MILITARY, mentioned in
the third Chapter
Tradition; yet considering, that not only the Gesf. Monmout^.
British Histories, but some of our Leland. Assertio Arturi, and White of
Basing stoke.
English defend it, and many as well Harding. Robert of Glo^^. John Lidgate.
Poets, as Lilly Cambden. Heylin.
Historians make mention thereof, we judge it may deserve room among the
Military Orders.

The Founder of this most ancient Order, was Arthurus, militaris disciplinae
and Orbicularis Mensae fundator. Geo. Lilius in Chron. Angl. Regum. p. 44. vide
Priseum Histor. Brit. Defensi^, edit. Land. 1573. p. 139. Segar, Honor Milit.
and Civil. l. 2. c. 5.
Arthur King of Britain, Crowned in the year of our Lord 516. at the age of
Math. Westminst. p. 185. Edit. Land. 1570.
15 years, concerning whom, though some with unbounded fancies have strained
too far, in setting down his famous actions, insomuch, as that what really is
true of him can hardly be known; yet all allow him to have been a stout and
successful Martialist, of incredible courage and gallantry, the most famous and
renowned of all the British Kings, and as De gestis reg. Anglor. l. 1. p. 4.
William of Malmsbury judges, right worthy to have been celebrated by true
story, not false Tales; seeing it was he that long upheld his declining
Country, and even inspired martial courage into his Countrymen, having
overcome the Saxons in Hen. Huntingd. l. 2. f. 180. Edit. Land. 1596. I.
Anglicus, pars 2. l. 17. f. 89. MS. Polycronicon. l. 5. c. 6.
twelve several pitched Battles.

I have by me an old Chronicle in Manuscript, Entitled Brute, or the
Chronicles of England, beginning at Brute, and ending the sixth year of King
Henry the Fifth, wherein it is noted, That after King Cap. 76.
Arthur had conquered diverse Countries, he lived in so great renown, that many
worthy Knights came from all parts to his Court, as to a Seminary of military
Discipline, to give evidence of their valor, in the exercise of Arms.

This gave him occasion to select out of these, and his own Subjects, a certain
number (some say Ios. Micheli Marquez en Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 52. b.
Iean Boisseau in le Promptuaire Armorial.
24.) of the most valiant Knights, whom (himself being chief) he united into a
Fellowship or Order; and to avoid controversy about priority of place, when
they met together at meat, he caused a Round Table to be made, whereat none
could be thought to sit higher or lower than another; and thence they were
called, Knights of the Round Table.

At the upper end of the great Hall in Winchester Castle, I remember to have
seen a large Round Table hang against the wall, called King Arthurs Round
Table, and affirmed by the Inhabitants (who had taken up the report upon vulgar
Tradition) to have been as ancient as that Kings time; but it carried no very
great show of antiquity to a judicious eye; however it seemed to have been set
up, either in the room of one more ancient, or else by some who were persuaded,
there was once such an Order of Knights, which had been denominated thence.
This old Monument was broken to pieces (being before half ruined through age)
by the Parliaments Soldiers, in the beginning of the late unhappy War, because
looked upon as a relic of Superstition (as were those little gilded Coffers
with Inscriptions, that did preserve the bones of some of the Cambd. Brit. in
Hants. p. 19^.
Saxon Kings and Bishops, deposited by Bishop Fox in the top of the Walls on
both sides the upper part of the Quire of the Cathedral Church of that City)
though guilty of nothing but the crime of reverend Antiquity.

Into this noble Society of Knights, were admitted not only Enderbies Cambria
Triumphans. part 2. p. 199.
Britains, but also Strangers of other Nations, who out of a desire of glory,
came over hither, to make proof of their sufficiency in the exercise of Arms
with the British Knights; and the general qualifications for Election were,
that they should be persons of Nobility and Dignity, renowned for Virtue and
Valor, and admirably well skilled in the knowledge and use of Arms.

The place where the Founder first Instituted this Order, says Sir John
Froisard, was at Chron. l. 1. c. 100.
Windsor, and those other of note where he and his Knights usually assembled,
were Leland. Assertio Arturi. f. 10. Selden^ notes upon Polialb. Song. 4.
Carleon in Monmouthshire, Winchester and Camelot in Somersetshire; and the
time of the year for their meeting was Whitsontide.

The Articles of their profession are set down by Honor Milit. and Civil. l. 2.
c. 5.
Sir William Segar, which are in number twelve; and if any be desirous to read
the Names of the first twenty four Knights, he shall not only have them from
Monsieur Boisseau in his In l' Institution de L'ordre de la Iarti^re.
Promptuaire Armorial, but of 129 more of this Order, elected in seven
following Chapters; nay more then that, the formal blazon of all their Arms:
but these particulars may be justly ranked with what is fabulous in King
Arthurs story.

We read not of any Badge peculiarly assigned to these Knights, though En Tes.
milit. de Cava^^. f., ^2. b.
Ios. Micheli, in allusion to their Title, takes upon him to give the Figure of
a Round Table, furnished with Cloth, Bread, Salt, Knives, Bottle and Bowl, but
we have not authority enough to follow him: However it gives us occasion here
to acquaint our Reader, that King Arthur himself is reported to bear a Shield
called Hen. Huntingdo^. l. 2. p. 180. Mat^. Westminst. p. 186. Fabians Chron.
p. 93.
Pridwen, whereon was painted the Image of the blessed Virgin; his Sword and
Lance also, were not without their names, for the one it seems was called
Caliburn, the other Irone or Rone.

It is not remembered by any, that this Order survived its Founder, but rather
that it extinguished at his death; for it is related that Chronic. of Engl.
cap. 88. M S.
most of those Knights, whom he had drawn from several Countries, and advanced
to a Companionship with himself, bore him company in death, and perished in
that fatal Battle of Kamblan, or Cambula (now Cambd. Brit. in Cornwall.
Camelsford) in Cornwall; where though he killed Mordred his Enemy upon the
place, yet, being sorely wounded, he survived him but a short time, and dyed in
the year of our Lord Malmesb. antiq. Glaston. videsi^ Math. Westminst. p. 192.
and Speeds Chron. l. 7 c. 12. f. 334. Anno 542. Inclytus Arthurus obiit and
sepultus in Insula Avalonia in Domino requiescit. Malmesb. antiq. Glaston.
542.

It may add some reputation to King Arthurs Round Table, if we here note, that
the like Round Table, grew into great estimation and request, shortly after the
Norman Conquest, and continued long with us; being ordinarily set up at the
grand martial Exercises, called Hastiludium quod vulgariter Torneamentum
dicitur, sed potius Ludus militaris, qui Mensa rotunda dicitur. Math. Paris. p.
846.
Hastiludes, Tilts, or Turneaments, permitted by King Stephen, and much
encouraged by King Ex lib. Rubro in Scaccar. fol. 122. b. and ex Registro
Priorat. de Dunstaple, f. 8. a. vide Lamb. Peramb. p. 448.
Richard the First (for the delight of men inclined to military actions, and
increase of their skill in the management of Arms) and for the same end and
purpose, as King Arthur made use of it; no less than in memorial and
remembrance, that he had erected an Order of Knighthood, denominated therefrom:
those times being thoroughly persuaded of the truth of that story.

Besides, it is recorded, that Tho. Walsingh. sub an. 1280.
Roger Mortimer Earl of March, held the celebration of the Round Table
(consisting of an hundred Knights, and as many Ladies) with Tilting and
Turneaments, at Kenelworth Castle in Warwickshire, anno 7. E. 1. and that King
Edward the Third having designed to Ut Arturi memoriam refricaret. Vincen.
Lupani de Magistratib. Francor. l. 1.
restore the Honor of the Round Table, held a Just at Windsor, in the Tho.
Walsing. sub an. 1344.
18. year of his Reign (but there is an old Manuscript Chronicle that has
these words, King Edward in his Cap. 226.
nineteenth year first began his Round Table, and ordained the day annually to
be kept there at Whitsontide) and this meeting in truth occasioned the
Foundation of the most noble Order of the Garter, as shall be noted by and by.

But it was thought fit sometimes, and upon diverse accounts, to forbid these
kind of Assemblies, upon very great penalties; as in particular Rot. Pat. de
eodem an. m. 3.
anno 16. H. 3. at Shrewsbury, when the King went to meet Llewalyn Prince of
Wales (called in the Record Prince of Aberfraw and Snowden) and afterward at
Walden, in the Claus. de e^d. anno m. s. Dors.
36. year of the said Kings Reign, and at many other times.

The Order of the Oak in Navarre. (2.)
The Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 16. a. and Hier.
Blancus, in Regum Aragon. Serie.
Kingdom of Navarre being oppressed by the Moors, the Inhabitants were forced to
seek deliverance by Arms, to which end, though they had raised a great Army,
yet were they destitute of an experienced Commander; at length, Don Garcia
Ximenes, of the blood of the Goths, who had formerly retired from the world,
to a solitary and religious life, was persuaded to relinquish the same, and
take upon him the Command of the Army.

As he was marching out of the City to encounter the Moors (in the year of our
Lord Ios. Micheli Marquez in Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 16. a. and Hier.
Blancus, in Regum Aragon. Serie.
722.) there appeared to him from the top of an Oak, the sign of the Holy
Cross, adored by an infinite number of Angels. Proceeding on, he gave battle to
the Moors, and having gained a remarkable Victory, the people elected him their
King; and upon this occasion he became the first King of that Country.

Some few days after, in thankfulness to God for this great Victory, he Ios.
Micheli Marquez in Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 16. a. and Hier. Blancus, in
Regum Aragon. Serie.
instituted this Order, investing therewith even all the Nobles of his Kingdom;
whom he obliged to defend the Christian Faith, and acknowledge Obedience to his
Successors Kings of Navarre.

He ordained the Habit of the Order to be White, and the Ensign thereof a
Tessera suit haec ipsa Arbor, and supra ^am Crux rubra, instar Crucis de
Montesa. Mend^ Dis^. 1. Quaest. 4. n. 94.
plain Red Cross, set on the top of a green Oak (which gave the Title) after
the same manner as it appeared to him: but time has darkened this Order, not
only in its heroic actions, but laudable Foundation, since we find no further
memorial of it.

The Order of the Gennet in France. (3.)
To Favin. Theat. ^ Henn. l. 3. c. 1.
preserve the memory of that famous Battle fought near Tours, anno Christi 726.
(or as Mennenius margins it, about the year 738.) where 385000 Sar^cens and
Moors, together with their General Abdiramo, fell by the conquering Sword of
Charles Martel; and to reward those who had behaved themselves valiantly in
that action; the said Charles instituted an Order of Knighthood, under the
Title of the Gennet. The great Favin. Theat. ^ Henn. l. 3. c. 1.
number of rich Gennet Furs (anciently esteemed among them the most excellent,
though since the Ermine has gained a better value) as also of the Creatures
themselves alive, taken among the Spoils of that Victory; giving him occasion
to bestow that name upon his new erected Order.

But Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 56.
others, not improperly, impute the reason of this appellation to a kind of
neat shaped Horses; of which not unlikely, a great part of the Founders Cavalry
might consist.

The Knights, says Favin, were Loco cit.
sixteen, whose Collars were made of three Chains of Gold, interwoven or linked
with Red Roses, at the end of which Collar hung a Gennet of Gold, Black and
Red; sitting on a flowery bank, all enameled with variety of Color and Art.

And in further honor of this Institution, the Founder not only Sic Mennen. p.
63.
renewed the ^se of Gold Rings (so peculiar of old, to the Equestrian Order
among the Romans) but caused them, and all other Ornaments of this Order, to be
engraven and wrought with the Effigies of a Gennet.

This is accounted by Loco supra cit.
Favin, the first Order of Knighthood among the French; which is to be
understood of a distinct Order, acknowledged by a particular and peculiar
Title; and continued in glory, until the institution of the Order of the Star,
( Gotofrid. Archont. Cosm^^^. l. 3. p. 3. Heyl. Cosmogy. l. 1. p. 204.
some say but till the Reign of St. Lewis) after which time it was laid aside.

But though Favin be thus particular, as to the Institution of this Order, and
the occasion thereof, the exact number of Knights, and especially in assigning
a Collar, with the Ensign hanging at it, suitable to the mode of later times;
yet some other of his Scevol. and Lovis de sain^^ Marthe en le Histor.
Geneal^g. de la Ma^s^n de France. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 58.
Countrymen, wanting the assurance and authority of ancient Writers to back
them, are not confident enough to persuade the world, that there was ever any
such.

The Order of the Crown Royal among the Frizons. (4.)
The erection of this Order is referred to Charles the Great, Son of King
Pepin, in the year of Christ Mart. Ha^con. de rebu^ Fris^ae.
802. (which more fully appears in his pragmatical Sanction, then dated at the
Lateran Palace in Rome) and instituted out of a design to Favin en Theat. d'
Honneur, l. 3. c. 1. And. Mendo de Ordin. Militar. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 4.
honor and reward those among the Frizons, who had behaved themselves valiantly
in his Armies, against the Sesnes or ancient Saxons; or as Tesoro milit. de
Cavalle^. f. 16. t.
others say, against the Lombards, in subduing that Kingdom, and to stir up and
encourage others to emulate their virtue.

This Order was so called, Favin. loc. cit.
from the Ensign appointed to the same, namely an Imperial Crown, embroidered
with Gold, which the Knights used to wear upon the breasts of their Habit: and
to perpetuate this Militia, he ordained, that the Governor of that Country
(whom they then called Potestat) should confer the same upon such as had
followed the Armies of France, as well in Italy as Germany, for five years
together at their own expense; by which means the Emperor was served at a less
charge.

The Knights were invested with the Military Belt, and a box on the Ear; of
which we have spoken in the Sect. IX.
first Chapter.

The Order of the Dog and Cock in France. (5.)
The Institution of this Order of the Dog and Cock, is generally attributed to
the Family of Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 57 Seld. Titles of Honor. p. 554.
Montmorency in France, and it is more particularly affirmed by Robertus
Caenalis, to have been erected by the first Christian of that Family, called
Protochristianus and Archibaro, which causes us to bring in this Order here,
near to the Age he lived in; but to say truth, as to the Institution it self,
or to the time thereof, there is not any more certain, or more satisfactory
account, than that anciently this Family carried a Idem Menn. p. 58.
Dog (the Emblem of fidelity and sincerity) upon their Helmet for a Crest; and
that Ibid. p. 59.
Peter Montmorency was a Knight of the Order of the Cock, which Bird was called
by the Ancients the Bird of Mars.

But some make two distinct Orders of this, and after that of the Dog, they
say, another Order, viz. of the Ita Ios. Micheli en Tesoro milit. de Caval. f.
89. b. and A. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Q. 2. Sect. 31. n. 88.
Cock, was also Instituted, whose Collar had the Comb of a Cock pendent
thereat, the Motto being Vigiles; howbeit afterward, both these Orders came to
be united, and hereupon the Ensign was then, the Effigies both of a Dog and
Cock joined together.

Apud Mennen. p. 58.
Moraeus relates, that Burchard Montmorency, appeared at the Court of Philip
the First, King of France, attended with many Knights, and all of them (like
himself) adorned with Collars of Gold, composed of Stag-heads, whereat hung the
Figure of a Dog: whence we may presume, that it had some relation to the more
ancient Order, of which this was the Badge or Ensign.

The Order of the Thistle in Scotland. (6.)
John Lesley Bishop of Ross, reports that a bright Crux in quam divus Andreas
sublatus mortem oppetivit, in Coelo vivis quasi coloribus effecta, quam primum
omnibus apparuit. De rebus Gestis Scotor. l. 5 p. 177. Edit. Romae, anno 1578.
4o.
Cross appeared from Heaven, in fashion of that whereon St. Andrew suffered
Martyrdom, to Hungus King of the Picts (but Theat. d' Honneur, l. 5. c. 3.
Favin says to the Scots, whom Achaius King of Scotland sent to his
assistance) the night preceding the Battle with Athelstan King of England, (or
rather of G. Buchanan. Rerum Scot. l. 5. c. 56.
Denmark, to whom King Alured had given the Kingdom of Northumberland) over
whom Hungus prevailing, Atque ut tantae victoriae memoria nulla unquam
vetustate deleatur, effigiem Crucis (cui D. 'Andreas affixus est) in armis and
insignibus efformatam, cum Hostibus congressurus, semper postea gestabat, id
quod Scoti omnes in memoriam victoriae a Pictis divi Andreae auxilio
reportatae, etiamnum religiosissime observant. Lesleus in loco supra cit.
bore the Figure of that Cross at all times after in his Ensigns and Banners:
and from this time and occasion has the like bearing thereof been religiously
observed by all succeeding Kings of Scotland.

Hence also it is believed (says In Delic. Equest. p. 146. Heyl. Cosmogr. l.
1. p. 306.
Mennenius) that the Equestrian Order of St. Andrew, vulgarly called of the
Thistle, took beginning. To this agrees the relation which I received from Sir
Charles Areskin, now Lion, King of Arms in Scotland, through the favor of the
Right Honorable the Earl of Lauderdail, who adds, that after this Victory
obtained, which was as he says, anno 819. (but according to Vbi supr^.
George Buchanan, Achains dyed 9 years before) King Hungius and Achaius
(Confederates against Athelstan) went in solemn Procession barefooted, to the
Kirk of St. Andrew, to thank God and his Apostle for their Victory, promising
that they and their Posterity in time coming, would ever use in their Ensigns
the Cross of St. Andrew, whenever they undertook any warlike Expedition;
which custom not only remained among the Picts, but is still among the Scots to
this day: And both these Kings, after their solemn Procession, presently
instituted an Order, naming it the Order of St. Andrew.

But Theat. d'Honne^^ l. 5. c. 3.
Andr. Favin reports the occasion to be otherwise, to wit, that Achaius King
of Scotland, having made that famous League offensive and defensive, with
Charlemain King of France, toward all and against all other Princes (to
preserve the memory of which alliance to posterity, the Scotch Lion Theat.
d'Honne^^ l. 5. c. 3.
assumed before by King Fergus, became then enclosed with a Theat. d'Honne^^ l.
5. c. 3.
Tresure of Flowers de Lis) he found himself thereby so strong and mighty, that
he took for device the Theat. d'Honne^^ l. 5. c. 3.
Thistle and the Rue, which he composed into a Theat. d'Honne^^ l. 5. c. 3.
Collar of his Order, and for his Motto Pour ma defense: giving intimation
thereby, that he feared not the powers of Foreign Princes, seeing he leaned on
the succor and alliance of the French.

And though hence may be inferred, that these two Plants, were the united
Symbols, but of one Order of Knighthood, yet does In Delic. Equest. p. 146.
Mennenius divide them into two, making one, whose chief Badge was the Thistle,
(whence the Knights were so styled) and the Motto, Nemo me impune lacessit: and
another vulgarly called Ibid. p. 147.
Sertum Rutae, or the Garland of Rue, whose Collar was composed of two Branches
or Sprigs thereof, or else many of its leaves: Nevertheless, that at both these
Collars hung one and the same Jewel, to wit, the Figure of In cujus patrocinio
gens Scotiae acquiescit. Lesleus, l. 5. p. 177.
St. Andrew Patron of that Kingdom, bearing before him the Cross of his
Martyrdom.

But there are some (says the same Mennen. ubi nuper.
Author) who refer the Institution of the Order of the Thistle, to later times,
(albeit the Thistle Mennen. ubi nuper.
from the Reign of A^haius, had been acknowledged for the Badge and Symbol of
the Kingdom of Scotland, in like manner as the Rose was of England, the Lilly
of France, the Pomegranate of Spain, etc.) to wit, in the Reign of Mennen. ubi
nuper.
Charles the Seventh of France; when as the League of amity was renewed between
those two Kingdoms, and especially for the succor and aid which France then
received from Scotland, it being in a time of so extraordinary distress: and,
last of all, others place the Foundation yet later, viz. in the year of our
Lord A. Miraeu^ d^ Orig. Equest. p. 78.
1500.

I have done with what can be said as to the Foundation of this Order, and the
time thereof; and shall now pass on to some other particulars, relating to the
Order it self.

The chief and principal Ensign of this Order is a Gold Collar, composed of
Thistles, interlink'd with anulets of Gold, and pendant thereunto the Image of
St. Andrew with his Cross, and this Epigraph, Nemo me impune lacessit: the
Figure whereof may be seen in a Picture of James the Fifth King of Scotland,
now hanging in his Majesty's Gallery at Whitehall, on several great Seals of
that Kingdom, on some Coyns and Medals, and lastly among the representations of
the Military Ensigns, placed at the beginning of this Chapter.

The Ex relatione praef. C^ Areskin mil.
time of this Societies meeting, was heretofore very religiously observed and
celebrated, upon the Feast day of St. Andrew the Apostle annually, in the
Church of the Town dedicated to his name, and in testimony of the high esteem
and reverence they bore unto him as their titular Saint and Patron: During the
Ex relatione praef. C^ Areskin mil.
solemnity of the Feast, the Knights of this Order were habited in rich and
costly Apparel, and wore their Parliament Robes, having fixed on their left
shoulders, an Ex relatione praef. C^ Areskin mil.
azure Rundle, on which was embroidered St. Andrews Cross, environed in Center
with a Crown composed of Flowers de Lis, Or.

For the Ex relatione praef. C^ Areskin mil.
ordinary and common Ensign, the Knights used a Green Ribbon, whereat hung a
Thistle of Gold, crowned with an Imperial Crown, within a Circle of Gold,
containing also the foresaid Epigraph; but for more satisfaction, we have
caused the Figures of these two to be here exactly represented, from the
draughts of them sent me from the beforementioned Sir Charles Areskin.



As to the number of the Knights, there is nothing remembered by any Author we
have seen, but herein I was supplied by the Right Honorable the Earl of
Lauderdale, who assured me he had met with (among his readings) from good
authority, a memorial, that this Order consisted of 13 Knights, in allusion to
the number of our blessed Savior, and his twelve Apostles.

The Order of Knights of our Lady of the Star in France. (7.)
The Institution of this Order is by Andrew Favin derived from Theat. d'
Honneur. l. 3. c. 2.
Robert King of France, surnamed the Devout, who, to manifest his particular
devotion to the blessed Virgin Mary, and in her honor, gave Being thereunto, in
the Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2.
Month of August, Anno Domini 1022.

The Knights were in number Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2.
thirty, comprehending the King of France, the Chief or Sovereign; they had
appointed for their Habit, Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 2.
Mantles of White Damask; their Mantlets and Lining, were of light Carnation
Damask, their Surcoats of the same, and on their Mantles, as also on their
Surcoats, to wit, upon the left side of the breast, was embroidered a Star,
wrought in pure Gold, with five rays or pointed beams.

The great Collar ( Loco dicto.
says he) was formed of three round Chains of Gold, much like that of the
Order of the Gennet, and united at little distances, with enamelled Roses,
interchangeably White and Red, at the end whereof hung the Figure of a Star.
The Loco dicto.
Ceremonies of the Order began on the day of the Nativity of the blessed Virgin
Mary, Patroness thereof, in the year beforementioned.

In the Loco dicto.
Reign of Philip de Valois, this Order began to be intermitted by reason of the
Wars, nevertheless it was restored by King John his Son, the eighth of
September, anno 1356.

But albeit Favin has thus formally set down the Institution of this Order,
and assigned it to King Robert, adding moreover Habit, Collar, and other
specious circumstances thereunto, yet the Histor. Genealog. de la Maison de
France. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 58. and 59.
Sancte Marthe's (his Countrymen) are not persuaded of the truth thereof, but
ingeniously acknowledge, that there is not any thing of it mentioned by their
ancient Writers, and coming to speak of the Order in particular, Histor.
Genealog. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. c. 13. p. 58. and 59.
they refer its first Institution (not renovation) so do Delic. Equest. p. 129.
and 130.
Mennenius, Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 71. b.
Ios. Micheli, and others) to King John Son of Philip de Valois, in the Month
of October, anno 1352. in commemoration of that Star which directed the
Wisemen, who came from far, to adore the Savior of the World at his Nativity;
the S. Marthe de la Maison de France and Mennen. locis cit.
Figure whereof crowned, King John caused to be embroidered on the Mantle or
upper Garment of the Order, as also this Motto, Monstrant Regibus Astra viam.

The Seat of this Order (thus instituted by King John) and where the first
Ceremonies were kept, was in the noble and ancient House of Io. Tilly
Commentar. de rebus Gall. l. 2. p. 181. Cujus nunc tantum ruinosa murorum
ve^^gi^ apparent. Vinc. Lupan. l. 1. d^ Magistrate. Fra^c^r.
St. Owen, called de Clichy, near St. Denis in France; and by an ancient Tresor
d^s Chart. d^ France tit. C^ttez. Beaumont. 52.
deed of Exchange of Lands, situate in the Earldom of Alancon, in lieu of the
House of St. Owen (made by King John to the Countess of Alancon, and dated at
St. Cler de Gomets the 6. day of June 1356.) is the King called Instituteur de
la Congregation miletaire de l'Estoile.
Institutor of the military Fraternity of the Star; which sufficiently
contradicts the fair-spun relation of Favin, who bestows the honor of
Foundation upon King Robert, as before has been said. To which we may add,
that the day assigned by Favin for holding the Chapter of Election of the first
Knights, to wit, the eighth of September 1356* and at Clichy aforesaid, was (in
all probability) too near the day of the Battle of Foicters, (that being but
eleven days after) and King John not only then at a great distance from Clichy,
but on a Frois. Chron. l. 1. c. 15^.
hasty March to engage the Black Prince, and consequently too little at leisure
to enter upon the Formalities of such an Institution.

This Order was of no long continuance, for being much S. Marthe en m^s^e
Histor. Genealog. loco citato. videsis Seld. T^. of Honor. p. 552.
violated and dishonored (during the confusion of the Civil and Foreign War)
by the admission into it of mean and undeserving persons; it gave a fair
occasion to King Charles the Seventh to take off the pretense of honor supposed
in it, and to extinguish it.

Whereupon, in the year S. Marthe en m^s^e Histor. Genealog. loco citato.
videsis Seld. T^. of Honor. p. 552.
1455. he contrived the holding of a Chapter, for giving away that Ensign
thereof, which himself wore, to the Chevalier du Guet, Captain of the
Night-watch in Paris, after whose example the Princes and Lords left the Order,
thus disgraced, to the said Captain, and never after wore it.

This Story as to the time, though not the manner, does Theat. d' Hon. l. 3. c.
2.
Favin contradict, and renders his reasons for it: howbeit, upon what occasion
soever, the Order became relinquished or dismissed, certain it is, that Ibid. c.
3. etc. 5. vide Mennen. ubi supra. p. 130.
upon (if not some time before) the Foundation of the Order of St. Michael, it
grew out of request; as did that of the Gennet upon the erection of the Star.

The Order of the Lilly in Navarre. (8.)
Andr. Favin. in Theat. de d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 3.
Garcius King of Navarre, the Sixth of that name, lying under the extremity of
a languishing sickness, sent to diverse places of Devotion, to the end, that
Prayers might be offered up for the recovery of his health. In which season
there happened to be found in the City of Nagera, where he kept his Court, an
Andr. Favin. in Theat. de d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 3.
Image of the blessed Virgin Mary, issuing forth of a Lilly, and holding her
Son between her arms, upon finding of which (if we may credit the story) he
immediately recovered, and (to perpetuate his devotion to the said Virgin)
Andr. Favin. in Theat. de d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 3.
instituted an Order of Knighthood, in the year of our Lord 1048. which
consisted of 38 Knights, drawn out of the ancientest Families in Navarre,
Biscay, and old Castile, and Entitled it, the Order of Knights of St. Mary of
the Lilly.

But Ios. Mich. Marquez gives foundation to this Order ^esor^ milit. de C^vall.
f. 1^. b.
25 years before Favin, and draws the Institution from another ground. For
^esor^ milit. de C^vall. f. 1^. b.
whereas Don Garcias had succeeded his Father, King Zanchy the Fourth, in the
Kingdom of Navarre, the Moors made War against him, and he prevailing, made a
Feast in honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, at which he instituted this Order,
and adorned many Knights with the Ensign thereof, beginning with his Brothers
and Sons.

Of this Order ( Mennen. p. 6^
esteemed the most illustrious of all Spain) King Garcias Favin. loco ^itato.
ordained himself, and after him his Successors Kings of Navarre, the Chiefs
and Sovereigns. The Knights promised at their entrance into this Order, to
Favin. loco ^itato.
expose their lives and fortunes in defense of the Christian Faith, conservation
of the Crown of Navarre, and expulsion of the Moors.

The Badge or Symbol which the Knights wore daily on their breast, was a Favin.
loco ^itato.
Lilly embroidered in Silver; but on solemn days, a double Chain of Gold,
interlaced with the letter M. made after the fashion of a Saxon Capital; at the
end whereof did hang a Flower de Lis of Gold, enamelled White, bearing the
foresaid Letter M. crowned upon the head of its Flower. The Habit was White,
wrought all over in Needle Work, with White Lillies.

But Ios. Micheli differs in this also from Favin, for he Tes. milit. de
Cavall. loc. cit. Tessera suit supra Togam albam effigies Annuntiationis
Deiparae^ intra duo Lilia. A. Mendo Disq 1. Quaest. 4. n. 95.
assigns for the Badge, two Branches of Skie-coloured Lillies, one crossing
another, and in the middle of them the Figure of the Annunciation of the
blessed Virgin, but agrees that the Habit was White.

The Order of the Sword in Cyprus. (9.)
Andr. Favin. Theat. d' Hon. l. 9. c. 2.
Guy of Lusignan, (and according to this Author, King of Jerusalem and Cyprus
in right of his Wife Sibilla, Sister to Baldwin the Leper) shortly after his
setlement in the Isle of Cyprus (which he had bought of Richard the First, King
of England, for one hundred thousand Crowns of Gold) Instituted this Order in
the year of our Lord 1195. in remembrance of so fortunate a Plantation of 15000
persons, whom he had brought thither.

But De Deli^. Equest. p. 153. Gotofrid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 11.
Mennenius, and some others, are so far from being of this opinion, as to
affirm, that neither the name of the Founder, nor the time of this Order's
Foundation are certainly known; though it be conceived he was one of the Family
of Lusignan, who gave beginning unto it.

The Theat. d' Hon. loc. cit.
Collar of the Order (called a Collar of Esses by Vide eum loco praed.
Mennenius) was composed (as Favin reports) of round Cordons of White Silk,
woven into Loveknots, interlaced with the Letters S and R. Beneath this Collar
hung an Oval of Gold, wherein was figured a Sword, the Blade enamelled Silver,
and the Hilt Gold; and about the Oval was engraven this Motto, Securitas Regni,
Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 87. b.
Micheli says it was, Pro fide servanda; and Loco cit.
Gothofridus, Pro integritate tuenda.

The Theat. d' Honneur, ut supra.
day appointed for holding of the solemn Ceremonies of this Order, was
Ascension-day, whereon the Founder gave it (in the Church of St. Sophia the
Cathedral of Nicosia in Cyprus) to his Brother Amaury, Constable of Jerusalem
and Cyprus, and to 300 Barons, which he had established in that his new Kingdom.

There were Tesoro milit. loco relato.
eight Kings of Cyprus, of this House of Lusignan, Great Masters or Chiefs of
this Order; and Tesoro milit. loco relato.
when the Isle fell into the hands of the Turks, this noble Institution ceased.

The Order of the Bear in Switzerland. (10.)
The Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. vide Miraeum in Orig. Equest. p. 79.
Emperor Frederick the Second (in favor of the Abbot of St. Gall in Swaben,
and several Noblemen of that Country, who had been active in his assistance for
gaining to him the Empire) instituted this Order, in the year of our Lord
Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. vide Miraeum in Orig. Equest. p. 79.
1213. and bestowed upon the elect Knights Collars of Gold, at the end whereof
hung the Figure of a Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 14. vide Miraeum in Orig.
Equest. p. 79.
Bear, Gold, mounted on an Hillock enamelled with Black.

He ordained, Idem Favin. loco nuper cit.
that this Honor should be conferred by the Abbot of St. Gall, for the time
being, and that on the Anniversary of their Patron St. Gall (a Gentleman of
Scotland, and the Apostle of Swaben) being the 16. day of October, the Knights
of this Order should assemble at the Abbey; on which day, such Candidates as
were Miraeus. p. 79.
designed to receive the Honor, were girded with the military Belt (the Sword
being first consecrated at the Altar) and adorned with the Collar of the Order;
having kept their Vigils the preceding night, according to the ancient and
accustomed manner.

But it carried the Title of the Favin, ut supra.
Order of the Bear, in memory of St. Vrsus, of the Theban Legion, who was
martyred before the Temple of the Sun, at Soleurre in Switzerland; as also of
St. Gall, from the name of the Patron of the place, where it received
Institution.

This Order continued among the Switzers, till they became a Commonwealth, and
then the Castles and strong holds of the Noblemen and Gentry of the Country
being dismantled, the use thereof was wholly laid aside.

The Order of the Broom Flower in France. (11.)
E^ T^eat. d' Honneur, l. 3. c. 3.
Saint Lewis King of France (says Favin) instituted this Order, to honor the
Coronation of Margaret his Queen, eldest Daughter of Bereng^rius Count of
Provence, anno Dom. 1234.

The E^ T^eat. d' Honneur, l. 3. c. 3.
Habit appointed for the Knights, were Cassocks of White Damask, and Violet
Chaperons; the Collar was composed of Broom Flowers, of the native colors,
interlaced with Flowers de Lis, hanging thereat a Cross Florence Gold, to which
was added this Inscription, Exaltat humiles, the Founder accounting it the
Symbol of humility.

As to the E^ T^eat. d' Honneur, l. 3. c. 3.
number of the Knights, it was not made certain by the Founder, but wholly
depended on the will of the Sovereign. This Order E^ T^eat. d' Honneur, l. 3.
c. 3.
continued to the death of King Charles the Fifth.

Notwithstanding all that Favin thus relates, the En le Hist. Geneal. de la
Maison de France, Tom. 1. p. 58.
Saint Marthe's are of opinion (for the reason before noted) that neither
this St. Lewis, nor the before mentioned King Robert, nor King Charlemain, did
ever institute any Military Order of Chevalry: And Delic. Equest. p. 64.
Mennenius reports, that Charles the Sixth is said to have been the Founder of
the Knights of the Broom Flower: if this be true, the Order will want many
years of that antiquity which Favin bestows upon it.

Apud Menn. loco cit.
Peter Bellay rather thinks this later Institution not to have been any Order
of Knighthood, but a Company of young Esquires, the Sons of Noblemen, who
attended King Charle's person as a Lifeguard, or as Esquires of the Body, and
were oftentimes employed to interpret the messages of Ambassadors from foreign
parts.

The Order of the Ship, and double Crescent in France. (12.)
In Delic. Equest. p. 166.
Mennenius acknowledges, that of old, there was such an Order in France,
erected in honor of the great achievements that Nation did by Sea; but by whom
it was founded, or at what time, does not appear from him. Yet Theat: d' Honn.
l. 3. c. 4.
Favin is full in both, for he affirms, that the before mentioned St. Lewis,
after the Institution of the Broom Flower, erected this likewise: for animating
the Nobility of France, by this new prize of honor, to accompany him in his
Voyage into Africa, 1269.

The Theat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4.
Collar was interlaced with double Escallops of Gold, and double Crescents of
Silver, interwoven and fastened together with double Gold Chains, at which the
Figure of a Ship was pendent in an Oval of Gold.

This Theat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4.
Order continued in France (after the death of St. Lewis) no longer than those
Knights lived, who were admitted thereinto by him: but it was retained by
Theat: d' Honn. l. 3. c. 4.
Charles, Brother of the said St. Lewis, and by him settled in Sicily, where it
remained in request with his Successors, until the Kings of Aragon gained that
Kingdom.

Knights of St. James in Holland. (13.)
Orig Ord. Equest. p 81. See Grimstons general History of the Netherlands. p.
66.
Albertus Miraeus, from an old Dutch Register, called Register der Ridderscap,
or the Register of the Order of Knighthood, informs us, That Florentius Earl of
Holland and Zeland, and Lord of Friseland, in the year 1290. bestowed the
Ensigns of his Order of St. James, in the Hall of his Palace at the Hague, upon
twelve of his principal Nobility, whose names he sets down: among whom, the
second in rank, is Lancelot Lord Hamilton, then Ambassador from the King of
Scots.

The Knights of this Order were invested with a Ibid. p. 82.
Collar of Gold, or military Belt of Silver and gilt; adorned with six
Escallops, whereat was appended the Picture of St. James the Apostle.

All the Ibid. p. 82.
Knights Shields (whereon were painted their proper Arms) were delivered to
John Paypaert, Herald of Holland, and by him hung up in the great Hall of the
Palace, at the Hague, in perpetual memory and testimony of this Institution.

Order of the Swan in Cleveland. (14.)
If ever there was an Order there, under that Title, it has been very ancient,
and long since laid aside; yet Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 11.
Favin says, the Princes of Cleve have born the Swan for their Order, Devise,
Crest, and Supporters, to preserve the memory of the Knight of the Swan, the
Romance of whose Adventures he also sets down; and further reports, that Idem.
l. 9. c. 5.
Charles Gonzaga of Cleve, Duke of Nivers and Retelois, had it in design to
re-establish this Order, peculiar to the House of Cleve.

The Knights of Jesus at Rome. (15.)
The Popes of Rome, as they are Lords Paramount of St. Peter's Patrimony, are
Temporal Princes; upon which account to Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1.
honor the Nobles, principally of that Territory and others, they have erected
and established certain Orders of Knighthood, as well Religious as Military,
but all of them Stipendaries to the Papal See: Of the former sort we have
spoken before in the last Chapter, but this being esteemed a Military Order, we
therefore place it here.

It was instituted by Pope Favin. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 8. c. 1.
John the 22. at Avignon in France, anno 1320. and much augmented by Paul the
Fifth. The Knights wear for the Badge of this Order, a plain Cross gules,
enclosed within a Cross Patee Or, hanging at a Gold Chain.

In the Month of January 1668/9. Pope Clement the Ninth, created three of the
Ambassadors from the Catholic Cantons in Switzerland, with the accustomed
Ceremony; himself putting on their Gold Chains, with the Ensigns appendant, and
the Captain of his Guards, girding their Swords about them.

Order of the White Eagle in Poland. (16.)
The information we have of this Order, is from Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 6.
Favin also, who says, that Ladislaus the Fifth, King of Poland, instituted
the same, to honor the marriage of his Son Casimire the Great, with Anne
Daughter of Gedimir, Duke of Lithuania, in the Month of February, in the year
of our Lord 1325.

The Ensign hereof was a Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 6.
White Eagle, crowned.

The Order of Knights de la Banda in Castile. (17.)
This Order of Knights called Banda, vulgar Hispanorum lingua l^nia es^ Io
Mariana de reb. Hisp. l. 16. c. 2.
de la Banda, was erected by Alphonsus the Eleventh, King of Leon and Castile,
in the Ibid.
City of Victoria, anno 1332. (but In le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 11.
Favin from Antonio de Guevara, says it was in the City of Palencia, anno
1330. and Orig. de Caval. p. 37. b.
Sansovin in Burgos, anno 1368.) For this King considering, that he had to do
with many Enemies, could find no better way to secure himself, than by erecting
this Order, and constituting himself Master thereof, which he did a little
before his Coronation.

Shortly after (says Mennenius) to wit, anno 1332. the Solemnity of this Order
was celebrated in the Mennen. p. 116.
City of Burgos, where, on the Eve thereof, in the Monastery of St. Mary Royal,
each of the Candidates was conducted by the King to the Altar, and having there
laid down his Arms, spent the whole night in watching and Prayer.

The next day after Mass, he was invested with a Io. Mariana, loco supra cit.
Red military Belt, or a Ribband of four fingers broad, which came across the
body, over the right shoulder, and so under the left arm; And was the Ensign
from whence the Knights took their denomination.

This Order was instituted chiefly to honor the Nobility, and therefore at
first, none were admitted, but the Mennen loc^ citato.
younger Sons of Noblemen (excluding elder Brothers) or persons descended of
the most noble Families in Spain; or else Esquires, who had served in the Court
or Camp, ten years at the least: and to the end that greater honor might the
more inflame them to valiant Exploits, Kings themselves, sometimes, vouchsafed
to take the Ensign of this Order upon them.

Mariana, loco cit.
It was anciently of very great esteem, but (such is the vicissitude of humane
Affairs) at length it grew out of use.

The Laws and Constitutions are recorded by Epist. ad Pe^rum Pimentelium, Com.
Beneventanum.
Anth. de Guevera (who also gives a Catalogue of the first Knights) Tesoro
milit. de Caval. f. 50.
Ios. Micheli, Orig. de Cavaliere, p. 38.
Sansovin, Theat. d' Honneur, loco supra cit.
Favin, and Honor Milit. and Civil. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Segar; to whom we refer those that are desirous to be informed of them.

The Order de la Calza in Venice. (18)
From the Mennen Delic. Equest. p. 118. videsi^ Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1.
Qu^st. 2. Sect. 2^.
example of the Knights de la Banda in Castile, and about the year 1400. was
instituted a Society at Venice, bearing the Title de la Calza, in honor of the
Inauguration of Duke Michele Steno.

Meeting with but a slender account hereof, among those Authors who have
handled Military Orders, and some confounding it with that of St. Mark; I was
at length, by the friendship of the deservedly honored Sir Charles Cotterel
Knight, Master of the Ceremonies to his Majesty, furnished with better
satisfaction, which he obtained for me from Signore Pietro Moccinigo, the late
Venetian Ambassador, at his Residence here in England; and from Signore Aberti
the present Resident for that State.

This Order consisted of a Society of particular Noblemen and Gentlemen, who at
their voluntary choice met together, and entered into a Fellowship (among whom,
some person of Eminence was elected their Chief) Nevertheless, upon the
recommendation of their intention and design to the Council of Ten, who
confirmed their Institution, and granted them Privileges.

It has appeared with so much the more reputation to the world, by having had
the honor to receive into it several Princes of Italy, especially the Family of
Este Dukes of Ferara, of Gonzaga then Marquesses, now Dukes of Mantua, of the
Rovere, Vrbino, Mirandula, and others of the most conspicuous Families of that
Country, namely, Colonna, Vrsini, Sanseverini, Visconti, and others.

They were distinguished by wearing a Stocking quartered into different
colors, embroidered with gold, and enriched with Jewels, which they at
pleasure altered from the right to the left Leg; and in particular it is
remembered, that an. 1529. the right Stocking then worn, was half the inside of
Scarlet, and half the outside of Purple, and the other half gray, but the left
Stocking was all green: and as were the Husbands Stockings, such were the Wives
Sleeves in all particulars.

On their solemn days, they first went to Church, and at Mass, took an Oath to
observe the Articles of their Order. Among other things which this Society (for
the honor of the City) was obliged to, splendid and noble Entertainments were
part; at which were exhibited Music, Dancings, and Theatral Representations:
And with such magnificent and sumptuous Divertisements, have they given
reception to diverse foreign Princes, in particular to Henry the Third of
France, when he past by Venice in his way from Poland to France.

They wore for their Habit a Crimson Senators Vest, appearing therein very
splendid, and reserved for solemn days; at which times the Foreign Princes,
that had been admitted into this Order, appeared clad after the same manner.

These Knights had for their Ensign a Sun on a Shield painted in their Banners,
which they used also for a Seal; perhaps as a happy Omen and Presage, that the
Order (being laid aside about the year 1590. for the excess it was growing
into) should like the Sun from under a Cloud, rise again in after times (when
better opportunity offered it self) in greater splendour than ever.

The Order of St. Mark in Venice. (19.)
In this Seigniory there is another Degree or Dignity of Knighthood, commonly
called the Order of St. Mark; and because it is generally reckoned among the
Orders of Knighthood, and differs from the Milites Simplices by wearing a
peculiar Title, and being invested with a particular Ensign of Honor at their
Creation, we have thought good rather to discourse of it here, though the
Ceremony of Creation is performed after the manner of Knights Batchellors, viz.
by Dubbing with a Sword, and their Title a bare mark of Honor only; being by
our Learned Seldom affirmed to be, Additions to the Titles of Honor, p 935.
the known Degree of Knighthood given by Supreme Princes, or such as have a
like power with them.

Besides, we have been informed thence, that those Knights are not governed by
any Laws or Statutes, and are without any Revenue or Indowment of Lands: That
they are not under any particular obligation or tie, except what is common to
them with other Subjects, namely that of Fidelity to the Prince, being in all
things else left to their own liberty. To this we add, that the Honor is also
bestowed on absent persons, by Letters Patent or Codicils (as is the Knightly
Dignity sometimes) among some of which, that to the learned Sir Daniel
Heinsius, is given us by Ibid.
Mr. Seldom.

It had its Title from St. Mark the Evangelist, whose Plaina in vita Greg. 4.
page 114.
Body was translated to Venice, from Alexandria in Egypt, in the year of our
Lord Alphons. Ciaconius de Vita and Gestis Pontif. l. 1. p. 234.
828. in the time of Iustinianus Patritius Duke of Venice, ever since which
time this Saint has been assumed and taken for the Plat. loco nuper cit.
titular Angel and Guardian of this noble City, and his Picture very anciently
painted upon their Banners and Ensigns; but as to the Institution, it is not
certainly determined, when, or by whom, it was first brought in use.

The Badge of Honor, wherewith these Knights are adorned, is a Gold Chain, put
over their shoulders, at the instant of their Creation, whereat depends a
Medal; on the one side is represented the Symbol of St. Mark, to wit, the Andr.
Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Qu^st. 2. Sect. 28.
Figure of a Lion, having wings, holding in his right Paw a drawn Sword, and in
his left a Book, spread open, in which, this Motto, Pax tibi Marce Evangelista
men's; on the other, the name of the Duke then living, beautified with a
particular Impress; but in the other, he is represented on his Knee, receiving
a Standard from the hands of St. Mark: and sometimes this Medal is worn on a
Cross enameled blue.

I was further informed from the hand of the noble Signore Pietro Moccinigo,
that the Duke of Venice bestows this Honor, either privately in his Chamber, or
publicly in a full College: Some also are made Knights by the Senate, and
those of the Venetian Nobility, at least persons of very eminent Quality and
Character, who have merited well of this Commonwealth, by some extraordinary
piece of service, either at home or abroad, or upon whatever occasion the
Senate sees fitting: and for as much as the Senate is a representation of the
whole Commonwealth, and that the Creations of these Knights are confirmed by
public Decrees; it is taken, that the Knights of their creating are of greater
Dignity, than those made by the Duke. When the Creation is in a full College,
whether it be by the Senate or the Duke only, the Collar and Medal is bestowed
at the public Charge; but when by the Duke privately, then upon his particular
expense.

These Knights wear the Honor among other Titles of Dignity, as I have seen it
inscribed about the Effigies of Sir Daniel Heinsius, thus, DANIEL HEINSIVS D.
MARCI EQVES ILLVSTR. HOLLANDIAE ORDINVM HISTORICVS, POLITICVS, ET HISTORIARVM
PROFESSOR BIBLIOTHECARIVS ACADEMIAE ET SECRETARIVS. And among those other
Titles given to that famous Mathematician and Astrologer Sir Andrew Argoll,
that of his Knighthood by this Title, is also thus inserted, ANDREAS ARGOLVS D.
MARCI EQVES, ET IN CELEBERRIMO LYCEO PATAVINO PROFESSOR MATHEMATICVS.

The Order of Seraphins in Sweden. (20.)
In the year of our Lord Favin. in le Theat. d' Honneur. l. 7. c. 10.
1334. Magnus the Fourth, King of Sweden, in imitation of other Christian
Princes, who had established Military Orders, instituted this of the Seraphins,
or Seraphick Knights, otherwise surnamed of Jesus; in memory of the Siege laid
to the Metropolitan City of Vpsala.

The Collar of this Order was composed of Mennen. p. 158.
Seraphins and Patriarchal Crosses, the former of Gold, enamelled Red, the
later also of Gold, but without any enamel: At the end thereof hung the
Gothofrid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 12.
Image of Christ in an Oval. Loco cit.
Favin says it was this Cipher IHS composed of three Letters, and signifying
the name of Jesus, and in point four Nails. But Tessera Gentilitia, p. 637.
elsewhere it is said to be the Figure of the blessed Virgin Mary, and to make
the thing yet more uncertain, Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 92. b.
another tells us, it was a Patriarchal Cross that hung thereat.

The Order of the Sword and Military Belt in Sweden. (21.)
We find mention made of another Order of Knights in Sweden, called of the
Mennen. p: 159. Archont. Cosm. loco cit. Mendo de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qu^st.
2. Sect. 30. n. 71.
Sword and Military Belt, whose Collar consisted of Swords and Belts conjoined
(the Symbols of Justice and Love) the Swords somewhat bending toward the
point, and so joined point to point, round into a Circle: But by whom or when
this Order was instituted, we are not yet informed.

The Order of the Knot in Naples. (22.)
When Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 38. b. videsis Pand. Collenucius Hist. Neop.
l. 5. Angel Constantin. Hist. Neop. l. 6. An. Pacca de Ord. and Societ. militar.
Lewis King of Hungary designed a War against Ioane Queen of Naples, he
undertook an Expedition into Italy, not so much to deprive her of her Kingdom,
as to revenge the death of his Brother Andrew; whom (as it is reported) Queen
Ioane, his Wife, had commanded to be strangled.

After many troubles and three years of War, they came to an accord, the first
of April, anno 1351. and the 26. of May following (with the consent of Pope
Clement the Sixth) the Queen, and Lewis Prince of Tarentum, were crowned King
and Queen of that Realm; and that same day, in memory of such a happy Peace,
and to take away all suspicions and enmities; the Prince instituted this Order
of Knights, into which entered threescore and ten of the illustrious Lords in
blood of Naples, and some other Strangers.

The Habit he appointed was White, and for the Orders chief Ensign, he gave a
Knot (the Emblem of Love and Friendship) intermixed with Gold: and as the like
Institutions in that Kingdom, commonly ended with the death of their Founders;
so this Order expired in a short time.

The Order of Knights of the Annunciade in Savoy. (23.)
Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Chevaliers de l' Order du Collier de Savoye,
dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide etiam Samuel Guichenon Histoir.
Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p. 111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p.
133. and Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33.
Ame the Sixth of that name, Earl of Savoy, surnamed Conte le Verde, instituted
this Order under the Title of the Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Chevaliers de
l' Order du Collier de Savoye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide
etiam Samuel Guichenon Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p.
111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133. and Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33.
Collar, in the year of our Lord Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Chevaliers de
l' Order du Collier de Savoye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide
etiam Samuel Guichenon Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p.
111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133. and Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33.
1362. in honor of the 15 Fran. Capre en le Catalogue des Chevaliers de l'
Order du Collier de Savoye, dict. de l'Annonciade, Edit. Turin. 1654. vide
etiam Samuel Guichenon Histoir. Genealog. de la royal Maison de Savoy. l. 1. p.
111. Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 133. and Sansovin. Orig. de Caval. f. 33.
Divine Mysteries of the Rosary.

Theat. d' Honneur, l. 8. c. 5.
Andrew Favin, on a mistaken ground, calls it the Order of the Snares of Love,
in regard (as he alleges) the Founder had received of his Lady, the favor of
a Bracelet, made of the Tresses of her hair, knit or plaited in Love-knots, and
that the four Letters, afterward interlaced by the Founder, within such like
Love-knots should signify, Frappes, Entres, Rompes, Tout.

But Francis Capre (Councellor and Secretary of State to the present Duke of
Savoy) who has given an account of the In Advis au Lecteur.
Institution, together with the several restaurations of this Order, from the
Records thereof (preserved in the Charter House in Pierre Chastle, appointed at
the time of the Foundation, for the Seat of the Order) In Advis au Lecteur.
confutes this error of Favin, and with him several others, who have unwarily
swallowed down the same mistake.

Page 131.
Mennenius and Page 39.
Miraeus take not the least notice of its denomination from the Collar, but
call it the Order of the Annunciation in Savoy: But it is clear enough from the
Founders Guichenon. Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy. l. 6. p. 217.
last Will and Testament, bearing date the 27. of February, anno 1383. and from
what Locis supra relatis.
Capre and Guichenon allege, as also from the Sansovin. f. 33.
Statutes of Ame the Eighth, that at the time of the Foundation, it was called
the Order of the Collar: under which name it continued, till the time of
Charles the Third, surnamed le Bon, Duke of Savoy, when (and not before) it had
bestowed on it the Title of the Annunciation, from the Picture of the History
of the blessed Virgin Mary, by him first made appendant to the Collar, in the
year 1518.

The Capre. Guichen. Sansovin. locis praed.
Founder appointed the number of his Knights (reckoning himself the Chief and
Sovereign for one) to be fifteen, (among whom we find Guichenon. l. 2. p. 414.
and Capre en le Catalog. des Cheval. etc. Portoit d'or, a trois Pals d'azur.
Sir Richard Musard, an English Gentleman, recorded) agreeable to the number of
the before mentioned Divine Mysteries; but in the additional Statutes made by
Ame the Eighth (first Duke of Savoy) anno 1434. and by Duke Emanuel Philibert,
1568. there is a permission given to augment their number, by adding five to
the former fifteen, but the Sovereigns have not always been confined to this
number.

Besides the Institution of this Order, the Founder erected and founded the
Capre in advis. au Lecteur. Guichenon. l. 6. p. 217.
Chartreuse of Pierre Chastle in Bugey, wherein were entertained 15 Priests,
and they obliged to celebrate every day 15 Masses, to the honor of the 15 Joys
of the blessed Virgin, to the Souls health of him, his Predecessors, and all
who had been, were, or should hereafter be Knights of this Order. So that the
resemblance of this Institution, with the foundation of this religious house,
is some argument, that the Order, as well as the House, were founded upon a
religious and pious, not amorous or wanton account.

At Pierre Chastle were the Ceremonies observed, and the Chapters held by the
Sovereign and Knights, Guichenon. l. 1. p. 113. and l. 2. p. 791.
until the time that Charles Emanuel First of that name, Duke of Savoy,
exchanged it, and some other places, for the Marquisate of Saluces, upon the
Treaty of Peace concluded at Idem Guich. 16 p. 548.
Lions, 17. Ian. 1607. and then the Anniversary of the Feast, and celebrations
of the Order (being fixed to the Feast Day of the Annunciation of our Lady) were
translated from hence, first to the Church of St. Dominick at Montmeillar, and
afterward by his declaration, dated at Turin Fr. Capre, ut supra.
3. Dec. following, to the Hermitage of Camaldule, situate upon the Mountain of
Turin, vulgarly called l' Eremo Assis, where they were performed, as formerly,
at Pierre Chastle.

The Fr. Capre, ut supra.
ancient Collar (from which also the Order received its denomination) was made
of Gold, about three fingers breadth, as may best be collected from the
Founders own Collar, which he Guiche^^n. l. 1. p. 112.
gave to the religious at Haut^omb, in whose Vestry it is yet preserved. Upon
this Collar are engraved these Letters F.E.R.T, represented in ancient
barbarous Characters after this manner (...) and one Knot (commonly called the
Knot of Savoy) at the end of each Fert, which with three other like Knots
entwined one within another, made up the circumference depending at the Collar:
nevertheless, without any Figure or Image within the Circle.

These old Characters (as has been generally taken and supposed) were the
initial Letters of this Epigraph, Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenet, alluding to the
glorious actions of Conte Ame le Grand, who gallantly defended the Isle of
Rhodes, against the Turks, anno 1310.

But the world has now received more light in this particular, from the
industrious pains of Monsieur Guichenon; In Hist. Genealog praed. l. 1. p. 147.
who has very fortunately cleared this so common a mistake from all obscurity.

For the Devise of the House of Savoy, consisting in the before noted word, or
four Letters, appears to be more ancient, than the time of Conte Ame le Grand,
in regard that Lewis de Savoy, Baron de Vaud, who dyed anno Dom. 1301. did
always wear this Devise, as appears from some of his Coyns, which this Author
Idem ibidem.
inserts; and further, the Monument of Thomas de Savoy, the First of that name,
Son of Humbert the Third, Conte de Savoy, de Piemont, and de Maurienne, who
died the 20. of January, anno 1233. and lies interred in the Cathedral Church
of Aouste, has (on the Draught of the Idem. l. 2. p. 251.
Monument which Guichenon exhibits) a Dog lying at the feet of his
Portraicture, which (on a Collar about his neck) bears this word Fert, without
pointing also, or distinguishing of Letters; and is besides a strong proof,
that this was but one word.

But yet to add more strength to this assertion, he exhibits another convincing
Testimony, from a Lib. 1. p. 141.
Brass Coin of the same Earl Thomas, whereon is a bowing Escotcheon, charged
with a Cross, and for the Crest, a Lions head winged, and surmounted with a
Peacocks Feather; on the one side of the Crest are these two Letters TS, being
the initial and final Letters of his Christian name Thomas, and on the other
side HI, the first and last Letters of the Surname Humberti, which signifies,
Thomas filius Humberti: On the Reverse of this Coin, is to be seen two Knots,
of the fashion before noted, and the word F^rt in the midst.

He moreover gives us the Ectype of a Ib. p. 145.
Silver Coin, of Peter de Savoy (who for some time abode in England, in the
Reign of King Henry the Third, and built that stately Structure in the Strand,
called the Savoy) in which is represented the Devise Fert, in Gothic
Characters.

From all which it is fully evident, that this word, as also the Knot and Cross
were used for the Devise, Badge, and Arms of the House of Savoy, long before
Count Ame le Grand relieved Rhodes, against the power of the Turks, or the time
of the Institution of the Order; though for how long before is not certainly
known; nor is the true interpretation of the word left rendered to Posterity.

We may here not unfitly add, that though Historians generally report for a
truth, that Conte Ame le Grand, relinquished the Eagle, the ancient Arms of
Savoy, and assumed the Cross of Rhodes, to wit, Gules, a Cross Argent, in
memory of the relief he gave to that City; yet does this particular suffer much
contradiction. For it is made clear enough by Ib. l. 1. p. 126.
Guichenon, that some of this Conte's Ancestors, Earls of Savoy, and other
Princes of that House, did bear the said Cross for their Arms, long before that
famous action at Rhodes: Nevertheless he determines not when it was first so
assumed by the House of Savoy, but modestly interposeth his conjecture; Page
127.
conceiving, that upon the return of Ame the Third, Earl of Savoy, out of the
Holy Land, anno Dom. 1147. he might assume the Cross for his Arms (for in the
like kind we have several instances in the Arms of Families herein England,
when their Ancestors returned home from that Country) as well for the honor he
bore to this Pledge of our redemption, as for a memorable Badge of that his
Military Expedition. And seeing that in those times Arms were not become
hereditary, the Earls of Savoy, did one while bear an Eagle, another while the
Cross, until Conte Ame le Grand established the later of these in his Family.

The ancient Collar had no Idem Guichenon, l. 1. p. 112.
Rose on the Circle of its pendant, or Image either of our blessed Lady, or St.
Maurice, as Fav. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 5. videsis Hierom de Bara, in la
blaison des Armoiries p. 44 Marc. Gilb. de Varennes en le Roy d'Armes. p. 595.
some relate: but was composed only of the aforesaid word, linked together by a
single Knot, and three little Knots in the pendant; until the time of Duke
Charles the Third, as may be proved by the ancient Collars of the Sovereigns of
this Order, preserved in the Monastery at Hautcombe in Savoy ( Guichenon in le
Hist. Geneal. de la Maison de Savoy l. 6. p. 31.
founded by Conte Ame the Third, anno 1125.) where most of the Sovereigns are
interred, with the Figure of which Collar, Fr. Capre has encompassed the Arms
of all the Knights, from the first foundation, unto the time of Duke Charles
the Third; as may be seen in his Catalogue of the Knights of this Order.

This ancient Collar is still in use, and daily worn, but now called the Capre
loco supra relato. Guichenon. l. 1. p. 113.
little Collar of the Order, being made of Gold, or Silver and gilt, about an
inch broad, and of different weight. The Knights wear it about their neck,
close to the Collar of their Doublet, in which manner Ame the Tenth, Duke of
Savoy, is represented, in his Picture at full length, now hanging in the
Gallery at Whitehall, to which Collar (within a round formed of three Knots)
hangs the Figure of the Annunciation.

As Duke Charles the Third restored much of its decayed splendour to this Order,
so anno Ibid.
1518. did he introduce another larger Collar, and called it the great Collar,
so that now the Knights use two Collars, the later being only worn upon days of
Ceremony, and Festivals of the Order. This later and larger Collar weighs about
200 Crowns in Gold, and is composed of the word Fert interwoven with Knots,
severed with Roses, viz. 15 Roses of Gold, whereof seven are enameled with
White, and seven with Red, and bordered with two Thorns; as also the Figure of
the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin, enamelled in various colors, pendant
at three Chainets to another Rose, colored both White and Red.

We read not of any peculiar Habit assigned to the Knights of this Order,
before the time of Duke Charles the Third, who brought into use the Ibid.
great Mantle of Crimson Velvet, his own being fur'd with Ermins, but the rest
of the Knights with Miniver, fringed and bordered with Knots, (to wit, of the
fashion of those that adorn the Collar) in fine Gold: Under this Mantle is worn
a Surcoat, of white Damask.

Capre. Guichenon.
Duke Emanuel Philibert his Son, changed afterward the color of the Mantle to
Azure, and lined it with White Taffaty, of which Silk he also made the Surcoats.

But Capre. Guichenon.
Charles Emanuel altered the Mantle unto an Amaranthus or Purple Color, seeded
with Roses, and Flames, in embroidery of Gold and Silver, bordered throughout
with the Symbols of the Order, fringed with Gold, and lined with Cloth of
Silver, tissued Blue, which continues hitherto in use: Under which instead of
the White Taffaty Surcoat, is now worn a White Satin suit, embroidered with
Silk, the Hose gathered upwards, in the fashion of Trouses.

Concerning the Statutes of this Order, the most ancient are those of Capre.
Guichenon. l. 1. p. 113.
Ame the Eighth (for there are none of the Founders extant) made at Chastilion
the 30. of May, in the year of our Lord 1410. the original whereof is lodged in
the Archives at Turin, which he augmented in the year 1434. and both are
printed by In Origin de Cavall. f. 33. b. and 36. b.
Sansovin. Duke Charles the Third, made new Statutes at Chambery the 11. of
Sept. anno 1518. these were enlarged by Duke Emanuel Philibert, anno 1568. and
published in the year 1577.

The Order of the Thistle of Bourbon in France. (24.)
At the solemnity of the Fav. Theat. d' Honneur. l. 3. c. 12.
marriage of Lewis the Second Duke of Bourbon, with Anne Daughter to the Count
Daulphine of Auvergne, celebrated in the Town of Arde, on New Years day 1370.
this Duke instituted the Order of Knights of our Lady, otherwise called the
Thistle, and the Ibid.
first solemnities thereof were performed at Nostre Dame de Maulins in
Bourbonnois, where he founded a College of twelve Canons in honor of the
blessed Virgin.

The ground of the Institution was Menn. De^^^. Equest. p. 142.
to strengthen this Dukes power and interest, for the aid of Charles Duke of
Orleans, and of his two Brothers Philip and John, against the Faction of the
House of Burgundy: And by joining of Flowers de Lis and Thistles (the Symbols
of hope and courage) emblematically to express the nobleness of his Spirit,
against all power of Fortune.

He ordained a set number of Knights of this Society, to wit, Favin. Theat. d'
H^n. loc ^i^.
26, therein comprehending himself and Successors Dukes of Bourbon, as Chiefs;
and obliged these to wear daily a Favin. Theat. d' H^n. loc ^i^.
Belt or Girdle made of watchet color Velvet, lined with Crimson Satin,
embroidered with Gold, in the midst of which embroidery was curiously wrought
the word ESPERANCE. This Girdle was fastened with a Buckle and a Tongue of Gold,
bearded and checquered with green enamel, in form like to the head of a Thistle.

On the Anniversary of the Festival (namely the day of the Conception of our
Lady in December) the Knights wore Cassocks or Surc^ats of Carnation Damask,
with wide sleeves, girded with the Girdle before described.

The Favin. Theat. d' H^n. loc ^i^.
Mantle of this Order was of Skie-coloured Damask, having broad welt^ of Gold
embroidered on the Collar, and lined with red Satin; but the Mantlet of green
Velvet.

The Bonnet was also of green Velvet, at the point of the band hung a sai^
Tassel of Crimson Silk and threads of Gold, the lining of Crimson Tassaty, and
turned up after the antique manner, whereon they had embroidered the Golden
Shield with the word Allen.

Whosoever considers in this Constitution, the number of Knights, the principal
colors of the Mantle, Surcoat and Girdle (with the injunction for wearing
thereof) shall plainly see that this Founder took an exact pattern from the
Order of the Garter, which he had observed in England, and acquainted himself
with its Constitutions, while he was Prisoner in Windsor Castle: for here is
little change or alteration, and only a Belt or Girdle made the chief Ensign of
this, as the Garter was of that Order.

The great Idem Favi^, l^co praed.
Collar was of Gold, of the weight of ten Marks, enamelled with Green, opened
like Network, which was filled with Flowers de Lis of Gold, and each of
them(together with the Letters of the Impress)placed in a Lozenge of red
enamel. At the bottom of the Collar, in an Oval of Gold(the Circle whereof was
enamelled with Green and Red) appeared the Figure of the Patroness, the blessed
Virgin Mary, surrounded with rays of the Sun, crowned with twelve Silver Stars,
a Crescent of the same under her feet, enamelled with Purple and Sky color,
lastly at the end of the Oval depended the head of a Thistle enamelled Green,
but bearded White.

Some little difference is put by Menn^n. (...) Deli^. ^quest. p 14^.
others in the fashion and composition of this Collar; namely, that it was made
either of Gold or Silver, and framed of Flowers de Lis, and four leaves or
Flowers of a Thistle, set in the form of a Cross.

The Order of the Dove in Castile, (25.)
Was instituted by Ios. Micheli Marquez en la Tesoro Militar. de Cavalliera. f.
81. b. And. Mend^ de Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qu^st. 4. Sect. ^* n. 103.
John the First of that name, King of Castile, in the City of Segovia Anno Dom.
1390. (so says Delic. Equest. p. 154.
Mennenius and Orig. Equest. p. 73.
Miraeus, but Theat. d' Honneur. l. 6. c. 12.
Favin places it 1379.) and proposed to his Nobles, as a Mennenius, loc. cit.
reward to encourage them to prosecute the noble acts of his Grandfather King
Henry the Second.

The Favin. and Menn. locis nuper cit.
Collar of this Order was linked or enchained with the resplendent beams of the
Sun, Tessera suit Columba rad^is circumd^^^ e Torque dependens, Mendo loc. cit.
both waved and pointed, at which hung a golden Dove enamelled White, and
Micheli en Tesoro Milit. de Caval. f. 82. b.
encompassed with rays, the Eyes and Beak Red.

Herewith the Founder, says Favin, adorned himself on Whitsonday (yet
Mennenius and Miraeus will have it the Feast Day of St. James) and at the Altar
of the great Church in Segovia, distributed other the like Collars to his
intimate Favorites, together with a Book containing the Statutes of the Order.
But he dying the very same year, before the Order had taken sufficient root, it
became of small continuance.

The Order of the Argonautes of St. Nicholas in Naples. (26.)
Tesoro Militar. de Caval, f. 60, vide etiam Pandol. Colenduc. Hist. Neop. l.
5. Aug. Constan. l. 8. Anellum Paca de Ord. and Societ. Militar.
Charles the Third, King of Naples, instituted this Order, in the year of our
Lord 1382. and with the Ensign thereof invested several of the Nobility of that
Kingdom; with which as by a Bond, he designed to tie them one to another in a
brotherly obligation.

The end of its Institution, was to preserve amity among the Nobles, to compose
enmities, and suppress seditions; Insomuch, as if any of the Knights of this
Order, were at variance one with another, and refused to be reconciled, the
Ensigns were then to be taken from him: but Briet. Annal. mundi. par. 3. Tom.
2. p. 300.
some say the ground and cause, was to advance Navigation, which the
Neopolitans stood in need of. To which the principal Ensign of this Order seems
rather to allude, it being a (...) de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 31.
n. 77.
Ship floating upon the waters, in the midst of a storm, having this Motto, Non
credo tempori.

Tesoro Milit. de Caval. loc. cit.
In the Convent of that sumptuous Church, which St. Nicholas Bishop of Smyrna
caused to be built, was the grand Feast held, on the Anniversary of that Saint.

This King appointed a Tesoro Milit. de Caval. loc. cit.
White Habit for the Knights, and prescribed laudable Constitutions to the
Order; but because he settled no Revenue thereupon, the splendour thereof ceased
at his death; nevertheless Tesoro Milit. de Caval. loc. cit.
he obtained the end for which it was instituted.

Knights of St. Anthony in Hainolt. (27.)
Alb. Miraeus Orig. Equest. p. 80. videsis Iurisprud. Heroic. p. 390.
Albert of Bavaria, Earl of Hainolt, Holland, and Zeland, designing an
Expedition against the Turks and Moors, instituted this Order, in the year of
our Lord 1382.

The Ensign thereof was a golden Collar, wrought after the fashion of an
Hermits Girdle: at which hung a walking Staff, and a little golden Bell.

The Order of the Porcupine in France. (28.)
Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 3. c. 11.
Monsieur Lewis of France, Duke of Orleans, instituted this Order, in the year
1393. to honor the Baptism of his eldest Son Charles, by Valentina his Wife,
Daughter to John Galeas Duke of Millan; and made choice of the Porcupine for
his Devise, with this Epigraph Cominus and Eminus; not only out of the high
hopes he conceived of this Child, Ibid.
but also to intimate something of revenge against John Duke of Burgundy, his
mortal Enemy, no less than self-defence, against all his designs and assaults,
of which this Animal is a proper Emblem.

Apud Favin.
Paradine, In Delic. Equest. p. 139.
Mennenius, and Tes. Milit. de Caval. f. 95. b.
Micheli, make Charles, the Son of this Monsieur Lewis, the Founder anno Dom.
1430. in imitation or emulation of Philip Duke of Burgundy, Founder of the
Order of the Golden Fleece; but Loc. supra cit.
Favin strengthens his foresaid relation, from the authority of one Hennotin de
Cleriaux an Herald, who attended the forementioned Christning in his Heralds
Coat, and set down an account of the Institution by Monsieur Lewis, together
with the names of the Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, on whom he then bestowed
his new erected Order, their number being 25, including the Founder.

The Ibid.
Habit assigned to the Knights were Surcoats of Violet Velvet, and over them
Mantles of Watchet Velvet, lined with Carnation Satin.

The Ibid.
Collar was formed of Gold Chains, at the end whereof hung a Porcupine of Gold,
upon a little enamelled hillock of Grass and Flowers; which Gotos^id. Archont.
Cosm. l. 3. p. 10.
Creature was also embroidered on the Knights Belts.

The Order of the Lilly in Aragon. (29.)
According to In reb. Aragon. l. 12. c. 3c. vide Miraeum in Orig. Equest. p. 77.
Hieronymus Zurita, this Order was instituted by Ferdinand King of Aragon,
called the Infant of Antiquera, in the year of our Lord 1403. and dedicated to
the honor of the blessed Virgin.

The Collar was composed of P. Palliot in la vraye and parfaite Science des
Armoiries. p. 498.
Bough-Pots, filled with White Lillies, interlaced with Gryphons; and as Apud
Menn. p. 67.
Hieronymus Romanus reports, was vulgarly called La Orden de la Terraca o de
las Azucenas, o Iarra de S. Maria, which is as much as to say, The Order of
Lillies, or the Vessel of St. Mary.

Theat d'Hon. l. 6. c. 16.
Favin gives it under the Title of the Looking-glass of the blessed Virgin Mary
in Castile, instituted (as he says) in honor and memory of a Victory, which
this King Ferdinand had obtained in that Kingdom against the Moors, anno 1410.
to wit, seven years after the time assigned by Zurita for the foundation. The
Founder transplanted this Order with him into Aragon 1413. when he received the
Crown of that Kingdom, and where it continued under the Sons of this King, but
no longer.

The Order of the Dragon overthrown in Hungary. (30.)
The Emperor Sigismond, surnamed the Ios. Micheli en Tesore Militar. de Cavall.
f. 90. b.
Glorious (for the many Battles he gained over the barbarous Nations, in
defense of the Christian Religion) Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 7. c. 1. Menn. p.
155.
having greatly labored the peace of the Churches of Hungary and Bohemia, and,
by his Travels into England, France, and Spain (to invite those Princes to join
with him in that his Enterprise) brought the same to pass by the Council of
Constance; out of extreme joy at the accomplishment thereof, instituted this
Order, in the year of our Lord 1418. for defense of the Christian Religion, and
to Tesoro milit. de Cavall. loc. cit.
crush all Heretics and Schismatics that should arise: which Order in short
time became of high esteem, not only throughout Hungary, but Germany also.

The Knights wore daily for their Ensign of Honor, a Favin. loc. cit.
Green Cross story, on solemn days a Scarlet Cloak, and on the Mantlet of Green
Silk a double Chain of Gold ( Micheli says a Green Ribbon) at the end of which
hung a Dragon dead, with broken Wings, in the posture of being overcome (the
Symbol of Heresy vanquished) and the whole enamelled with variety of Colors
proper. But this Order Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 2. p. 190.
continued not long, for it almost expired with the Founder.

Peter Beloy, President of Toulouse, affirms he had seen a Menn. p. 156.
Diploma, dated anno 1413. purporting that Basilius Colalba Marquess of Ancona
was admitted into this Order, in these very words, Te quem manu propria
militiae cingulo and societatis nostrae Draconicae ac Stolae seu amprisiae
charissimi fratris nostri Regis Aragoniae insignivimus, etc.

Equites Tufini in Bohemia. (13.)
We find but a bare mention thereof made by In Delic. Equest. p. 156.
Mennenius, and that it was erected in the Kingdom of Bohemia (or else both in
Micheli. f. 60. b.
Bohemia and Austria) but he does not in the least inform us either of the
cause of its Institution, the Badge of the Order, or to what the Title refers.

The two first of these particulars Ios. Micheli supplies, but as to the third,
we cannot give so perfect an account as we would; yet we remember to have read
somewhere, that this Order had its name from Toca, a Cap or Coif.

The Micheli Loco praedicto.
Archdukes of Austria (says he) were Founders of this Order, which they
instituted to engage their Subjects in the defense of the Christian Religion,
and expulsion of the Turks, and those they called Heretics, out of their
Dominions: for having about 200 years maintained a War with vast and excessive
charge, by erecting this Order, and bestowing upon the Knights thereof all that
they gained in War toward their supportation, they very much ea^^d themselves
in their Military Expenses; and indeed this proved so great an encouragement to
them, that in a few years (performing service wheresoever their Chiefs
commanded them to engage) they cleared their Provinces almost of both Turks and
Schismatics.

The Micheli Loco praedicto.
Ensign of this Order was a plain Green Cross, and the Habit of the Knights Red.

This and the following Order (says the same Micheli Loco praedicto.
Author) were under the Rule of St. Basil, and professed conjugal Chastity and
Obedience; but we see not from what ground he alleges this; for if so, then
ought we to have placed it among the Religious rather than Military Orders,
these being absolute notes and marks thereof. But inasmuch as we Menn. Delic.
Equest. p. 156.
elsewhere find, that Albert the Emperor adorned Moses Didacus de Valera in
Spain (a Knight of known and approved courage) with the Ensigns of his three
Orders, viz. of the Dragon, as he was King of Hungary; of the Tusin, as King of
Bohemia; and with the Collar de la Disciplinas, as Duke of Austria, it is hence
manifest, they were all complete Military Orders, of which this Emperor was
Sovereign or Chief: for no man can be admitted into more than one Order at a
time (if it be of a religious Constitution) and whenever he obtains leave to
change that Order, he cannot be received into another, without relinquishing
the former.

Ordo Disciplinarum in Austria. (32.)
Bohemia (says En Tesoro milit. de Caval. f. 59. b.
Micheli) finding it self very much endangered by Turks and Heretics, the
Kings thereof instituted this Order, to suppress, or at least to keep them
under, and to secure the Confines of that Kingdom. But I suppose, this Author
means Austria, in regard it appears immediately before to have been conferred
by the Dukes of that Country.

The Collar of the Order had a Tessera erat Aquila alba in fidei Symbolum.
Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. Sect. 31. n. 75.
White Eagle hanging thereat.

This, and the former Order, together with that of the Dragon in Hungary, are
said to have flourished in Germany, in the Reigns of the Menn. loco pr^d.
Emperors, Sigismund and Albert.

Ordo de la Scama in Castile. (33.)
This Order received Institution from Idem Menn. p. 117.
John the Second, King of Castile, about the year of our Lord Ios. Micheli, f.
38. a.
1420. to persuade and stir up his Nobility to fight against the Moors. For he
being overcharged with War, designed this Order chiefly to awaken their
courage, for the defense of his and their own Estates: which afterward upon
all occasions they performed so well, and gave so great demonstrations of their
Valor, that in a short time the Moors were vanquished.

What their symbol or Ensign was, or the reason of the Title de la Scama,
happened to be so far worn out, that Apud Mennen.
Hieronymus Romanus (who wrote the life of this King John) professes he knew
not what was meant or intended by it, though he had been very diligent in the
search thereof.

Yet En su Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 38. Insigne suiz super togam candidam
Crux ex squamis consecta. Mendo de Ord. milit: Disq. 1. Qu^st. 4. n. 98.
Ios. Micheli informs us, that their Ensign was a Cross, composed of Scales of
Fishes, which does plainly enough demonstrate it to be derived from the Latin
word Squama, from whence comes the Spanish word Scama, that signifies the Scale
of a Fish.

Some that speak of this Order, say Micheli, loc. cit.
nothing as to its beginning, being ignorant of the Founder; but it is
generally believed to be Instituted by the foresaid King John, in whose time it
flourished; insomuch as there were few of his Nobility, but were also Knights
thereof.

The Micheli, loc. cit.
duty to which they were obliged, was to defend the Kingdom of Castile against
the Moors, and to dye in defense of the Christian Faith; besides which, upon
every occasion, when the King went out to War, they marched before him.

Their Micheli, loc. cit.
Privileges were given them by King John, as also Statutes and Rules to be
governed by. Upon whose Micheli, loc. cit.
death the splendour of this Order was eclipsed; as many times it has fared
with other Foundations in the like case: the Successors, wanting the zeal and
love for their continuance, equal to that of the Founders for their Institution.

The Order of Knights of the Golden Fleece in Flanders. (34.)
Favin, in le Thea^. d' H^n^. l. 4. c. 5.
Philip the Second, Duke of Burgundy, of the second and last Line, issuing out
of the House of France, surnamed the Good, instituted this Order, under the
Title of the Golden Fleece, in memory of the great Revenues he raised by the
traffic of Woolls with the Low Countries. Some will have it erected in
commemoration of valiant Iurisp Heroica^ p 429. a^ud Ioh. Germanum primum
Ord^n. Carcellar.
Gideon, who with 300 men vanquished a numerous Army of Midianites. Or else
(according to others) the Founder followed the example of Ibid. a^ud Olivar.
^arranum. vide Men. Delic. Equest. p. 135. and 137.
Jason, and his Argonautes; whose Expedition to Colchus against Acts, he
perhaps might intend to imitate, by a Voyage into Syria against the Turk.

Whatsoever the occasion was, it is certain (from the preamble of the Statutes
of Institution) that this Duke out of the perfect love he bore to the noble
estate of Knighthood, founded this Order, to the glory of the Almighty Creator
and Redeemer, in reverence of the Virgin Mary, and honor of St. Andrew, the
Apostle and Martyr (whom he made Patron thereunto) to the advancement of the
holy Faith, the service of the Catholic Church, and promoting of Virtue. For
the maintaining and upholding of which, and for the increase of honor and fair
renown, no less than the correction of Vice, Ordin. hujus statuta Aurei
Velleris. Art. 31, 32, 33, 34; and 35.
several good orders, set down in the Institution, are appointed to be
observed, at the Chapter held on the last day of every Annual Feast of the
Order.

The day of Institution, was the Praefatio ad eund. Statut.
10. of January, anno Dom. 1429. on which very day the Founder solemnized his
Marriage, with Elizabeth, Daughter to John King of Portugal, in the City of
Bruges in Flanders.

The number of Knights first chosen, were Art. 18. Mennen. Delic Equest. p.
126, 137 Iurisprud. heroica p. 483.
24. beside the Duke, Chief and Supreme, who reserved to himself the nomination
of six more at the next Chapter. But Charles the Fifth, anno 1516. increased
them to fifty.

And though the Founder at first resolved upon the Feast of Art. ^2.
St. Andrew annually, for holding the solemnities of the Order; nevertheless in
consideration of the shortness of the days, at that time of the year, and how
troublesome it would prove, especially to aged Knights, who lived at great
distance, to take a Journey in so cold a season; it was afterward ordained,
that the Grand Feast and General Assembly, should be kept Ibid.
from three years to three years, on the first of May, in such place as the
Sovereign of the Order should beforehand give competent notice of.

As to the Habit, it was at first ordained, that at the Grand Solemnity, the
Knights should wear three different Mantles, to wit, the first day of the
Feast, of Art. 25. and 26.
Scarlet Cloth, richly embroidered about the lower end, with Flints struck into
sparks of Fire, and Fleeces, with Chaperons of the same; and the same day after
Dinner, to proceed to Vespers in Art. 27.
Mantles of Black, and black Chaperons: The day following, the Knights were to
hear the grand Mass of our Lady, Art. 28.
clad as should seem good to themselves. But Duke Charles, Son to the Founder,
appointed them Mantles of White Damask, for that days Ceremony, and changed
their Cloth Mantles into Velvet.

The great Collar is composed of Joan. Iac. Chefflet. Insign. Gent. Equit. Ord.
Veler. Aur.
double Fusils, interwoven of equal bigness, in form of the Letter B. with
Flint-stones, seeming to strike fire, and sparkles of fire between them, at the
end whereof does hang the resemblance of a Fleece of Gold, enamelled in its
proper Colors. These Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 4. c. 5.
Fusils are placed back to back, two and two together, thereby representing the
Letter B both ways, intending to signify Bourgoigne, they are also
intermingled with Flint-stones, in reference to the Arms of the ancient Kings
of Bourgoigne; but it was the devise of the Founder to ingirt them with
sparkles and flames of fire. To the Flint, Paradine (in his Heroical Devises)
ascribes this Motto, Ante Ferit, quam Flamma micet, and to the Fleece this,
Pretium non vile laboris.

The Jewel is ordinarily worn in a double Chainet or Males of Gold, linked
together at convenient distances; between which runs a small Red Ribbon: and so
is Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, represente^, wearing his Jewel in a
Picture at full length, hanging in his Majesty's Gallery at Whitehall; or
otherwise it is worn in a Red Ribbon alone.

The Founder ordained Ord. Statuta. Art. 19.
four Officers to attend and serve the Order, after the manner declared in the
Ordinances for their Instructions, annexed to the Statutes, namely, a
Chancellor, a Treasurer, a Greffier or Register, and a King of Arms, called
Toison d' Or.

Saint Marth. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. p. 891.
Lewis the Eleventh of France refused to accept of this Order, because his
Predecessors were not accustomed to receive the Orders of their Subjects; for
such were the Dukes of Burgundy accounted, who held that Duchy and other
Seigniories in homage liege to the Crown of France.

Albeit the Emperors of Germany are descended from Philip Archduke of Austria,
Duke of Burgundy, and Count of Flanders; nevertheless the power of conferring
the Order is lodged in the Kings of Spain only, the Title of Head and Sovereign
being solemnly resigned by the Emperor Charles the Fifth to his Son King
Philip, the Iurisprud. heroica. p. 433.
25. day of October anno Dom. 1556. in the Royal Chapel at his Palace in
Bruxelles, and the Collar taken from his neck, and with his own hands put over
his said Sons shoulders, in the presence of diverse of the Knights, at which
Ceremony he used this form of words, Iurisprud. heroica. p. 433.
Accipe Fili mi, quem e Collo meo detraho, Tibi praecipuum Aurei Velleris
Torquem, quem Philippus Dux Burgundiae cognomine Bonus Atavus noster,
Monimentum fidei sacrae Romanae Ecclesiae esse voluit, and hujusce
Institutionis ac Legum ejus fac semper memineris.

Afterward, though Philip the Second, King of Spain, invested the Infanta his
Daughter Isabella, in the Dominion of the Low Countries, upon the Contract of
her marriage with the Archduke Albert of Austria, yet he Ibid.
retained to himself, and Successors, Kings of Spain, and Dukes of Burgundy,
the honor of being Chief of this Order, in which Crown it remains to this day.

The Statutes (ratified under the Founders Seal the 27. of Nov. 1431.) are
printed in the Page 445.
Iurisprudentia Heroica, together with those other Page 462.
additions and alterations which were since made by his Successors. So also are
the Page 470.
Privileges granted to the Knights by the Founder, his Son Charles, and
Maximilian, which received confirmation from King Philip the Second, anno Dom.
1556.

The Names of the first Page 483.
24 Knights, and their Successors, to the number of 450. are there also
registered, together with a Catalogue of the Page 501.
Chancellors, Treasurers, Registers, and Kings of Arms, and lastly a Page 499.
Figure of a ^^^ght, vested in the Habit, may be there likewise seen.

The Original and Foundation of this Order is written at large in French by
William Bishop of Tournay, Abbot of St. Bertin, and second Chancellor to the
Order, in a Treatise of his called The Golden Fleece, dedicated to Charles Duke
of Burgundy, Son to the Founder, and printed at Troyes, in the year of our Lord
1530. In this Work the Author treats of two manner of Golden Fleeces, viz.
first of Iason's Fleece (of which he uses the testimony of Eustathius, to
assert it for a true History) and by it represents the noble Virtue of
Magnanimity, demonstrating several Virtues appertaining to the state of
Nobility. Secondly, of Jacobs Fleece (viz. the party-colored and streaked
Fleece) by which he sets forth the Virtue of Justice, which Virtue principally
appertaining to Kings, Knights, and noble persons, moved the heart of Duke
Philip to institute this Order, under it comprehending the Virtues of both the
other Fleeces.

The Order of St. George at Genoa. (35.)
The Menn. Delic. Equest. p. 118.
Republic of Genoa have an Order of Knighthood among them, dedicated to the
honor of St. George, their titular Saint and Patron; it was instituted by
Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany, and the Knights thereof are called,
Equites Divi Georgii apud Genuenses. ib.
Knights of St. George at Genoa.

The Ensign is a plain Cross Gules, and worn by the Knights at a Chain of Gold
about their neck. Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 8. c. 3.


The Dukes of Genoa are Chiefs thereof, and in regard their Dignity lasts but
two years, the Order is much impaired through the inconstancy and alteration of
times.

The Order of the Croissant in France. (36.)
Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 3. c. 14.
Rene, or Renatus, descended of the second Line of the House of Anjou, King of
Jerusalem and Sicily, etc. Duke of Anjou, Count of Provence, etc. erected this
Order, under the denomination of the Croissant, or half Moon, in the City of
Anjou, anno Dom. 1464. But the Geneal. Hist. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. p.
824.
Saint Marthe's make it 16 years older, by placing the Institution in the
year 1448.

Tesoro Milit. de Cavall. f. 54. a.
Ios. Micheli reports, that Charles King of Sicily* and Jerusalem was the first
Institutor, anno 1268. in the great Church at Messina in Sicily, on the day of
St. Lewis King of France; but he by mistake confounds this Order with that of
the double Croissant instituted by St. Lewis in France; and after his death
retained and settled in Sicily by the said King Charles his Brother.

The end wherefore King Rene founded this Order, is noted to be in Favin, loc,
cit.
honor of God, support of the Church, and exaltation of Knighthood. Over which
he declared himself and his Successors Dukes of Anjou, and Kings of Sicily
Chiefs.

He also chose Saint. Marth. loco cit.
St. Maurice, Knight and Martyr, for Patron, and held the first Ceremonies in
the Menn. p. 163.
Church of Angiers, dedicated to his name.

The Favin. ut supra.
Symbol which the Knights wore on the right side of their Mantle, was a golden
Crescent, whereon, in red enamel, was this word L'oz, signifying (in the
opinion of Peter Mathieu) L'oz en Croissant, Heylin's Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 170.
whereby they were encouraged to search after the increase of valor and
reputation.

At this Favin. loc. dict.
Crescent was fastened as many small pieces of Gold, fashioned like Columes and
enamelled with red, as the Knights had been present in Battles, Sieges of
Towns, Cities, or Castles, which gave due intimation to all men, of their
valor showed in martial services; for Ibid.
none could be adopted into this Order, unless he had well m^^ited in some of
these kinds.

The Knigh^^ who were 36 in number (but the Saint Marthe's say 50) did wear
for the Habit, Ibid.
Mantles of red or Crimson Velvet, and a Mantlet of White, with the lining and
Surcoat of the same.

The Order of the Ermine in Britagne. (37.)
In the year of Christ Favin. Theat. d' Honn l. 3. c. 17. Menn. p. 160.
1450. Francis the First of that name, Duke of Bretagne, in memory of his S.
Marthe Hist. Genealog. de la Maison de Fr. Tom. 2. p. 583.
Grandfather John, surnamed the Conqueror, or else in imitation of other
Princes of the blood in France, founded this Order, consisting Favin. loco
praed.
of 25 Knights, and thereupon also, new-built his Castle of the Ermine.

He ordained the Favin. loco praed.
Habit to be Mantles of White Damask, lined with Carnation, and the Mantlet of
the same.

The great Ibid.
Collar to be of Gold, composed of Ears of Corn in Saltir, bound above and
beneath with two Circles of Gold (in imitation of the Crown of Ceres) hereby
noting the care of Husbandry, which the ancient Counts and Dukes of Bretagne
had, as also the fertility of that Province; and hence is this Order otherwise
called of the Ears of Corn.

Ibid.
At the end of this Collar hung the Generosum incontaminati and sincerissimi
animi Exemplar. Menn. p. 161.
Mus Ponticus, or Ermine, passing over a Turf of Grass, diapred with Flowers,
at the edge whereof was imbossed this Epigraph in French, A Ma Vie, the devise
of his S. Marthe, loco praed.
Grandfather John, by which he made known the greatness of his courage, and
rather than fail of his word, that he would undergo any misfortune.

This Order took ending, when the Dukedom of Bretagne became Gotofrid. Archont.
Cosmica. l. 3. p. 12.
annexed to the Crown of France, by the marriage of Anne Duchess of Bretagne
with Charles the Eighth, and he being dead, with Lewis the Twelfth, both French
Kings.

The Order of the Ermyne in Naples. (38.)
Ios. Micheli, Marquez Tesoro milit. de Cavall. f. 93. b vide porro Io. Pontan.
de bello Neopol. l. 1. Io. Bitta Carafa. l. 10. Angel. Constant. l. 20. Anelus
Paca de Ordinib. and Societ. milit.
Ferdinand the First, King of Naples, after the end of the War which he had
with John of Lorain, Duke of Calabria, erected this Order, in the year of our
Lord 1463. being moved thereunto upon the Treason intended against him, by
Marinus Marcianus Duke of Sessa, and Prince of Rosiona, his Brother-in-law; who
raising a confederacy against him, intended to kill him, when they should be
together, that so he might transfer the Kingdom to the Duke of Calabria.

But this Plot being discovered, and the Duke apprehended by the King (his
Subjects expecting that he should have executed Justice upon him) he not only
forbore it, but having instituted this Order of Chevalry, the first of many
that were invested with the Collar thereof, was this his Brother-in-law, (whom
he not only pardoned, but also honored) and besides whom, admitted all the
Noblemen of Title in the Kingdom thereinto.

The Collar was of Gold intermixed with Mud or Dirt, to which depended an
Ermyne, and this Motto, Malo mori, quam faedari.

The Order of St. Michael in Naples. (39.)
In Orig. Equest. p. 76.
Albertus Miraeus makes this King Ferdinand Founder of another Order of
Knighthood in Naples, in memory of St. Michael the Archangel, Patron of
Apulia. The Page 77.
Habit of the Knights was a long White Mantle, embroidered with Ermyns, and the
Collar of Gold composed of the Letters O, to which was added for Symbol, this
Epigraph, Decorum.

This Order is likewise taken notice of by the Author of the Page 390.
Iurisprudentia Heroica; but perhaps it may be the same with that of the Ermyn;
since we observe the Habit hereof is embroidered with Ermyns, and might be
otherwise called of St. Michael, if so be it were dedicated to his honor.

The Order of Knights of St. Michael in France. (40.)
S. Marth. de la Maison de France, tom. 1. l. 1. p. 59. and ^. 1. l. 14. p.
656. Item Mennen. p. 168. and Miraeus. p. 641.
Lewis the Eleventh of France, considering how much the Factions of the
Nobility of his Realm had disordered his Affairs, to the end he might reunite
their affections to himself, and confirm the same, by new obligations of Honor,
instituted this Order in the year of our Lord 1469. to which he gave the Title
of St. Michael, this Archangel being esteemed the Princeps Imperii Francorum.
Gardien and Procteur du Royaume de France. S. Marthe loco supra cit.
titular Angel and Protector of the Realm of France; in Arthur de Monstier, in
Neustria pi^. page* 382.
reverence of whom the ancient Kings of France were wont to observe the
Feast Day of this Saint with great solemnity, and keep an open Court.

This King Lewis by the foundational Statutes of the Order (which passed his
Royal Assent at Amboise the Vincent, Lupan. de Magistrate. Francor: lib. 1.
first of August in the year aforesaid) ordained, In Statutis Ord. Art. 1.
That the number of Knights should be 36. whereof himself and his Successors
were to be Chief: but afterward the number far exceeded, even to Heyl.
Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 204.
300.

The Collar of this Order is composed of Stat. Ord. Art. 3.
Scallop-shells of Gold, joined one with another and double banded, fastened on
small Chains or Males of Gold; to the midst thereof is annexed an Oval of Gold,
on which a rising hillock, whereon stands the Picture of St. Michael
combating with, and trampling upon the Dragon, all curiously enamelled, to
which says In Delic. Equest. p. 169.
Mennenius was adjoined this Epigraph, Immensi tremor. Oceani.

The Habit appointed by the Founder, was a Art. 32.
Mantle of White Damask hanging down to the ground, furred with Ermyn, having
its Cape embroidered with Gold, and the border of the Robe interwoven with
Scallops of Gold, the Chaperon or Hood, with its long Tippet, was made of
Crimson Velvet.

But afterward King Henry the Second ordered, Theat. d'Hon. l. 3. c. 7.
That this Mantle should be made of Cloth of Silver, embroidered with three
Crescents of Silver, interwoven with Trophies, Quivers, and Turkish Bows, seemed
and cantoned with Tongues and Flames of fire: and moreover that the Chaperons
of Crimson Velvet, should be covered with the same embroidery.

The Stat. Ord. Art. 31.
grand Assembly was by the Sovereign and Knights directed according to the
Statutes, to be held as a solemn Festival on Michaelmas day, and the Art. 19.
place appointed for celebration of these pompous Ceremonies, at the Church of
Mons in procella Maris, vel in periculo Maris, aut Mons in Tumba. Ar. Monstier
in Neustria pia. p. 371.
Mount St. Michael in Normandy, built by St. Autbert, upon St. Michael's
appearing to him in a Vision, and liberally endowed by Idem, p. 375.
^ollo Duke of Normandy and his Heyl. Cosmogr. l. 1. p. 205.
Successors, but afterward removed to Bois de Vincennes not far from Paris.

There is an Herald of Arms appointed to this Order called Monsieur St. Michel,
whose duty is to attend the Solemnities thereof, and Heylin, loco cit.
who in most things is precedented by our Garter, King of Arms.

Such care and moderation was used by King Henry the Third of France, when he
instituted the Order of the Holy Ghost, not only to preserve the honor of this
Order in its full splendour (notwithstanding the example of former times, where
the rising of a new Order has commonly proved the setting of the old) but to
reform some miscarriages which had crept into it, by bestowing it upon some
me^^ and undeserving persons; that he not only continued the annual Solemnities
thereof, and Election of Knights thereinto; but also declared, that neither
Stat, de l' Order du Saint Esprit. Act. 37.
Strangers, nor the Natives of France, who before are Knights of any other
Order, should enter into that of the Holy Ghost, except those only of St.
Michael.

The Collar of which Order is thereby made lawful to be worn, with that of the
Holy Ghost, and usually represented within it, that being esteemed the more
worthy place: And we are told it is now Present State of France, Edit. Land.
1671. p. 314.
customary for those that are designed to be Knights of the Holy Ghost, to be
admitted into the Order of St. Michael the Evening before they receive that
Order.

Knights of St. Hubert in Gullick. (41.)
Miraeus Orig. Equest p. 82. Item Iurisprud. Heroic. p. 390.
Gerard Duke of Gullick and Berg (or as the French call them Iuliers and Mont)
Instituted a Military Order in the year of our Lord 1473. in veneration of St.
Hubert Bishop of Liege, who died anno 727.

The Statutes thereof were written in the Dutch Tongue, whereunto was added a
Catalogue of the Knights and their Arms, to the year of our Lord 1487. But
further mention of this Order, or what was the Badge thereof, we do not find.

The Order of the Elephant in Denmark. (42.)
Observing some difference among Mennenius, Favin. Micheli, Gothofridus,
Heylin, and others.
Writers touching the Institution, Collar, and Ensign of this Order, I was in
doubt what to say, till at length I happily met with better satisfaction from a
Letter wrote anno 1537. by Avo Bilde Bishop of Arhusen, sometime Chancellor to
John King of Denmark and Norway, unto John Fris Chancellor to King Christian
the Third, a Copy whereof was most freely communicated to me by Monsieur
Cristofle Lindenow Envoye from Christian the Fifth, now King of Denmark, to his
sacred Majesty, the present Sovereign of the most noble Order of the Garter.

This Letter informs him of the Institution, and some other particulars
relating to the Order, to wit, That King Christian the first being at Rome
(whither he had traveled upon a religious account) Pope Sixtus the Fourth,
among other Honors* invested him with this Order, in memory of the Passion of
our Lord and Savior; and withal ordained, that the dignity of Chief and
Supreme, should be continued as a successive right to the succeeding Kings of
Denmark.

This King founded the magnificent Chapel of the three Kings in the Cathedral
Church at Roschilt (four Leagues from Copenhagen) where the Knights were
obliged to assemble, upon the death of any of their Fraternity. He also
admitted thereinto diverse Kings, Princes, and Noblemen.

The chief Ensign of this Order was the Figure of an Elephant, on whose side
(within a Rundle) was represented a Crown of Thorns with three Nails, all
bloody; in honor and memory of the Passion of our blessed Savior.

The Knights were obliged to the performance of acts of Piety, Alms Deeds, and
certain Ceremonies; especially upon those days, on which they wore the Ensigns
of the Order: But King John set so high a value upon it, that he wore them on
every solemn Festival.

He also advanced the honor of this Order to so great esteem, that it became
accepted by both our King Henry the Eighth, and James the Fifth King of
Scotland, his Sisters Son; with whom the Ensigns thereof, remained as a Pledge
and assurance of constant and perpetual friendship; with these he likewise
invested diverse Ambassadors, Senators, and noble Danes.

There is one Ivarus Nicholai Hertholm, a learned Dane (as I am informed) who
has written a particular Treatise of this Elephantine Order, but not yet
printed; The scope whereof is to show, that the beforementioned Epistle of the
Bishop of Arhusen does not sufficiently make it appear, that it received its
first Institution, when Christian the First had those many Honors conferred on
him, by Pope Sixtus the Fourth. And that the Badge was an Ensign merely
Military, anciently given as a memorial and incitement to the Danish Princes,
who took upon them the defense of Christianity against the Moors and Africans.
It Is greatly presumed that this Book (which we hope may shortly be published)
will furnish the world with many choice things relating to the antiquity and
honor of the Institution, Ensigns and Ceremonies of this royal Order.

Heretofore the Knights wore a Collar of Gold, composed of Elephants and
Crosses, fashioned something like Crosses Ancrees ( Mennenius calls them De
Delic. Equest. p. 150.
Spurs) at which hung the Picture of the Virgin Mary to the middle, holding
Christ in her arms, and surrounded with a Glory of Sunbeams: but they have
long since laid this Collar aside, and now wear only a Blue Ribbon, at which
hangs an Elephant enamelled White, adorned with five large Diamonds set in the
middle. Those Elephants worn by the Knights in the Reign of Christian the
Fourth, had in the same place within a Circle the Letter C, and in the heart
thereof the Figure of 4, made to signify Christianus quartus.

This Honor has been most commonly conferred by the Kings of Denmark, on the
day of their Coronation, both upon the Nobles and Senators of the Kingdom.

It seems Frederick the Third brought into use (in imitation of the most noble
Order of the Garter) an embroidered Glory of Silver Purle, wrought upon the
left side of their Cloak or Vest, on which was embroidered two Crowns within a
Rundle, bearing his Motto, Deus providebit; for such a one did Count Gulden^
low (Ambassador hither from that King) wear at his residing here in England,
anno 1669. But we are to note, that the Motto has changed with the King, for
that of the present King is Pietate and Iustitia; and this the Knights of his
Election now wear, in the middle of the Circle. Nevertheless all the Knights
created by his Father, are obliged still to continue the former Motto.

The Order of the Burgundian Cross at Tunis. (43.)
Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 180. I. Lud. Gotofrid. Archont. Cosm. l. 3. p. 13.
Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany and King of Spain, after he had restored
Mulleasses, King of Tunis, to his Kingdom (who had been expulsed thence by that
famous Pyrate Barbarossa) on the day of his victorious entrade into Tunis, with
solemn and magnificent Pomp, was apparelled in a Coat which he used to wear in
Battle, whereon was embroidered the Burgundian Cross: and being desirous to
gain the good respect of all, who had served in that War, was chiefly willing
to adorn the Commanders, that had behaved themselves valiantly in the Victory,
with some Badge or token of Honor, as a reward: and for this reason did he
institute this Order in the year 1535. on July 22*
St. Mary Magdalen's day.

To this Burgundian Cross he added a Steel striking sparks of fire out of
Flint, with this Inscription BARBARIA, to be the Badge or Ensign thereof: And
for an additional Ornament, gave a Ios. Michels. f. 94. b. vide A. Mendo de
Ord. milit. Disq. 1. Qu^st. 4. n. 105.
Collar of Gold, whereat hung the said Badge.

Men. Delic. Equest. loco cit.
Some say this Order was instituted at ten of the Clock that day, it being also
the hour of Mercury, in which respect the Character of that Planet is usually
enamelled on the one side of the Jewel, as the Burgundian Cross is on the
other. But it was of short continuance, for it expired long since.

The Order of Knights of the Holy Ghost in France. (44.)
This Order received Favin. Theat. d' Honn. l. 3. c. 9. vide perro Delic.
Equest. p. 187.
Institution from the French King, Henry the Third, the first Chapter being
held on the last day of the year 1578. The design thereof was chiefly to S.
Marth. Hist. Geneal. de la Maison. d^ France, Tom. 1. l. 1. p. 60. and l. 16.
p. 789.
unite and tie his Nobility and Prelates more firmly to their natural
obedience, as also to In Statut. hujus Ordin. Art. 12.
stir up and encourage them to persevere in the Romish Religion, to illustrate
and adorn the state of the Nobility, and to restore its ancient splendour and
dignity.

It had its denomination from the Holy Ghost (to Mennen. p. 288.
whose power and assistance the Founder usually ascribed all his Actions and
Councils, advanced with most glorious and fortunate successes) in Favin. Theat.
d' Honn. l. 3. c. 7.
remembrance that he was born on Whitsonday in the year of our Lord 1550.
elected to the Crown of Poland on Whitsonday 1573. and lastly came to the Crown
of France on Whitsonday 1574.

The number of Knights whereof this Order was to consist, is by the Statutes
ordained to be one Art. 40.
hundred, besides the Sovereign or Great Master, which Office and Dignity is
Art. 2.
inseparable from the Crown of France.

A long Art. 72.
Mantle of Black Velvet turned up on the left side, and opened on the right,
was also appointed for the Habit of this Order, being at first embroidered
round with Gold and Silver, consisting of Flowers de Lis and Knots of Gold,
between three sundry Ciphers of Silver; and above the Flowers de Lis and Knots
were thickly seeded or powdered Flames of Fire.

This great Mantle was garnished with a Art. 72.
Mantlet of Cloth of Silver, covered with embroidery, made after the same
fashion as was the great Mantle, excepting only, that instead of Ciphers there
were wrought fair Doves of Silver; and both these robes double-lined with Satin
of Orange-tawney color.

The great Favin. loco nuper cit.
Collar of the Order (worn over the Mantlet) was at first composed of Flowers
de Lis, cantoned or cornered with Flames of Fire, interwoven with three
Ciphers, and diverse Monogramms of Silver, one was the Letter H, and a Greek
Lambda, both double; the first of these belonging to the Kings own name, the
other to the Queen his Wife, Madam Lovisa de Loraine; the other two were
reserved in the Kings own mind, but not without Briet. Annal. Mundi, pars 4.
Tom. 2. p. 310.
suspicion of referring to some wanton Amors.

But these Fav. Theat. d' Hon. l. 3. c. 9.
Ciphers were taken off from the Collar, and the embroidery of the Robes by
Henry the Fourth his Successor, and for a mark of his Battles and Victories,
Trophies of Arms were interlaced instead thereof, with the Letter H crowned
(because it was also the initial Letter to his Christian name) whereout arose
flames and sparks of Fire; and for the like reason has this Letter H been
since changed into the Letter S. Marthe de la Maison de France, Tom. 1. p. 54.
L, both by Lewis the Thirteenth, and Lewis the Fourteenth.

At this Collar hung a Bottel. Histor. Relat. p. 40.
Cross, artificially wrought and adorned with a rich enamel, in the midst
whereof was represented the form of a Dove, in a flying posture, as descending
down from Heaven, with full spread Wings: and to the end an Epigraph might not
be wanting, some have attributed to it this, S. Marth. Tom. 1. l. 1. p. 61.
Duce and Auspice, thereby to signify, that those who wear it, ought to hope
for good success in their designs and enterprises, being guided and assisted by
the happy conduct of the Holy Ghost.

Besides these Ornaments, the Knights wear a Boitel. loco cit.
Black Velvet Cap adorned with a white Plume; their Boitel. loco cit.
Breeches and Doublets are of Cloth of Silver, and their Shoes White, tied with
Roses or Knots of Black Velvet.

The Badges ordained to be ordinarily worn, are a Stat. Ord. Art. 82.
Cross of Yellow or Orange color Velvet, wrought in the fashion of a Malta
Cross, fixed on the lest side of the Sovereigns breast (but this at pleasure)
and the like Cross sewed on the left side of the upper Garments of the
Prelates, Commanders, and Officers; except in actions of Arms, and then they
are permitted to wear them of Cloth of Silver, or White Velvet; having in the
midst thereof a Dove embroidered in Silver, and at the angles or corners, Rays
and Flowers de Lis of Silver.

Moreover Art. 83.
a Cross of the Order made of Gold, like to the Cross of Malta also, with a
Flower de Lis in each angle thereof, was appointed to be worn about their necks
in a Blue Ribbon, and to be enamelled White about the sides, but not in the
middle; such as are Knights, both of the Order of St. Michael and the Holy
Ghost, are to bear the Figure of St. Michael on the one side, and of a Dove on
the other.

The Anniversary of the grand Feast is ordained to be held on the Art. 71.
first day of the new Year, but the first part of the Ceremony begins always on
the Art. 28.
last day of the old; the place for celebrating thereof is the Church of Art.
79.
Augustine Friars in Paris. An account of the first Solemnity, as also of some
other which have succeeded in the Reign of King Lewis the Thirteenth, are set
forth by Monsieur Boitel, in his historical relations of the Pomps and
Ceremonies used at the receiving of several Knights into this Order by this
King, and Printed at Paris 1620.

The Order of the Precious Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ of Mantua. (45.)
Mennen. in Delic. Equest. p. 192 videsis Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c.
8. Miraeum, p. 74. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29.
Vincentio de Gonzago the Fourth Duke of Mantua, and Second of Montferat,
instituted this Order, anno Dom. 1608. for defense and propagation of the
Christian Religion, and in honor of three drops of blood of our Savior and
Redeemer; as also the more nobly to set forth the Nuptials of his eldest Son
Francisco (who succeeded him in his Dukedoms) with Margaret of Savoy, Daughter
to Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, and Catharine of Austria.

It was allowed and approved by Pope Mennen. in Delic. Equest. p. 192 videsis
Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Miraeum, p. 74. Mendo de Ord. Milit.
Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29.
Paul the Fifth, and consisted of 20 Knights; the Founder declared himself
Great Master, and after him his Successors Dukes of Mantua and Montferat.

The Collar is filled with variety of fancy and design, being Mennen. in Delic.
Equest. p. 192 videsis Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8. c. 8. Miraeum, p. 74.
Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29.
composed of Ovals of Gold, some extended in length, others in breadth, and
interlinkt with small Annulets. On those Ovals in length, is raised in white
enamel, these words, Domine Probasti; on the other in breadth, upon flames of
Fire on a Trevet enamelled Black, a Crucible Gray, filled with small rods of
Gold; he being desirous to intimate by this devise, that they who entered into
this Society, should hold inviolable faith, and perpetual concord, in the
greatest trials and extremities.

At the end of this Collar is pendent a larger Oval of Gold, in which are
expressed Mennen. in Delic. Equest. p. 192 videsis Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l.
8. c. 8. Miraeum, p. 74. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29.
two Angels standing upright, enamelled according to life, holding between them
a Chalice crowned, in the Table whereof are figured three drops of blood,
enamelled Red, and round the Oval, Nihil isto triste recepto.

On Mennen. in Delic. Equest. p. 192 videsis Favin. in le Theat. d' Hon. l. 8.
c. 8. Miraeum, p. 74. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Quaest. 2. sect. 29.
Whitsonday, in the year 1608. were the first Ceremonies of this Order
performed, in the Dukes Chapel of the Palace at Mantua.

The Order of Amaranta in Sweden. (46.)
This Order of the Knights of Amaranta, was instituted by Christina Queen of
Sweden about the year 1645. in honor of a Lady of that name of great beauty,
courage, modesty, and charity: The chief Ensign is a Jewel of Gold, composed of
two great AA, adorned with Diamonds on both fides, and joined together by
reversing one of them, being set within a Circle of Laurel Leaves wreathed
about with White, and on the four sides this Motto, Dolce nella memoria; which
Jewel the Knights wear, either in a Gold Chain, or a Crimson or Blue Ribbon, as
they best like of.

The Ceremony used at the Investiture of these Knights with this Ensign, is
briefly this. The Queen being seated under her state, the designed Knight is
brought up, with usual Reverences, and approaching near the Queen, he kneels
before her, then she in a short speech acquaints him with the inducements that
invited her to bestow this honor, enumerating his services and merits; to which
he makes a return of humble thanks.

This done, he takes his Oath, still kneeling and holding his hands between the
Queens hands; the effect whereof is to defend the Queens person from harm, and
the persons of the Brothers of the Order, to promote to his power, Justice,
Virtue, and Piety, and to discountenance Vice, Injury, and Wickedness.

Having obliged himself to the performance of this Oath, the Queen puts about
him (in the manner of a Baudrick) a Crimson Silk Scarf, with the Jewel fastened
thereto, after which the Knight arises and retireth, with all suitable
reverence.

To an absent Prince or great Personage, whom the Queen intends to honor with
this Order; ^he sends the Jewel, accompanied with her Letter, which serves
instead of a personal Investiture.

Among many others admitted thereinto, were Vladislaus Sigismundus late King of
Poland, Carolus Gustavus late King of Sweden, and Adolphus Johannes his
Brother, also John George Duke of Saxony, the Lantgrave of Hesse, several
German Princes, the Count Montecuculi General of the Horse to the Emperor, Don
Antonio Piementelli de Parada Envoye Extraordinary from the King of Spain, as
also diverse great Lords of the Court of Sweden; and of our Nation, Sir
Bulstrode Whiteloke, to whose friendly civility we are obliged for the
foregoing Account.

SECT. II. Of Knights in the West Indies.
IF after all these we take some prospect of those Martial Honors, bestowed in
the West Indies, which the Europeans commonly call by the Title of Knighthood;
as having some resemblance to it from the nature of the Ceremonies, used at the
entrance and admittance into that Dignity, and the end for which they were
bestowed; we shall find they properly enough deserve mention here.

The Purchase Pilgrimage, part 3. p. 1063.
Mexicans gave the first place of Honor to the profession of Arms; and
therefore on such as had performed valiant services in Wars, they bestowed
great recompense, and gave them sundry Privileges, which none else might enjoy.

Valor and Courage were with them the steps by which a man of mean extraction,
ascended to high dignity and honor; and therefore the chief of their Nobility
commonly sprung from the Camp.

Among whom Ibid. Eagle Knights.
Motecuma set Knighthood in highest splendour, Mexican Knights.
ordaining certain Military Orders, with several Badges and Ensigns. The most
honorable among the Knights, were those that carried the crown of their Hair
tied with a little Red Ribbon, having a rich Plume of Feathers, from which did
hang branches and rolls of Feathers upon their shoulders. They carried so many
of these rolls, as they had done worthy deeds in War.

The King himself was of this Order, as may be seen in Capultepec, where
Motecuma, and his Sons are represented, attired with those kind of Feathers cut
in the Rock.

There was another Order of Knighthood, Lion and Tiger Knights.
which they called of the Ibid.
Lions and Tigers; these Knights being commonly the most valiant, and most
noted in the Wars, and always bore with them their Badges and Armories.

Other Knights there were, Gray Knights.
as the Ibid.
Gray Knights, not so much respected as the rest, they had their Hair cut round
about the ear. They went to the Wars, with Ensigns like the other Knights, yet
not armed, but to the Girdle, while the most honorable were armed all over.

All Knights might carry Gold and Silver, wear rich Cotton, use painted and
gilt Vessels, wear Shoes after their manner; but the common people only earthen
Vessels, neither might they carry Shoes, nor attire themselves but in a gross
Stuff called Nequen.

Ib. p. 1064.
Every Order of these Knights had their Lodging in the Palace, noted with their
Ensigns; the first was called the Lodging of the Prince, the second of Eagles,
the third of Lions and Tigers, and the fourth of Gray Knights.

They of the Province of Cinaola (an Inland part near new Mexico) created their
Knights by giving a Bow, Knights of Cinaola.
then setting them to encounter a Lion, or some other wild Beast; the death of
which was accounted the life of their Gentility.

The Purcha^ Pilgrim. part 3. p. 1045.
Inguas Lords of Peru, in their solemn Feasts at Cusco, dedicated their
Children to Honor, by adorning them with Guarras or Ensigns. They pierced their
Ears, whipped them with Slings, anointed their Faces with Blood, and all in sign
that they should be true Knights to the Ingua.

Those of the Ib. part 4. p. 1474.
blood royal in Peru, Knights of Peru.
before they received the Degree of Knighthood, passed through sundry
probations, but chiefly they performed some Military Exercises, and managed the
Lance, Dart, and other Arms. The manner and order of trial of their skill and
courage, was both rigorous and severe; Ibid.
as abstaining from all things for seven days, except a little raw Corn and
Water, then being heartned again, their running of Races, afterward, one day
holding out, another besieging a Fort, then Wrestling, Leaping, Shooting,
Slinging, throwing the Dart and Lance, exercising in all Weapons of War, and
enduring to be beaten on the hands and legs with wands; all these things
tending to discover whether they could bear the hard adventures of War, or not;
which trials if they could not manfully suffer, they were rejected and denied
Knighthood.

Next followed the Circumstances and Ceremonies of their Creation, as Ibid.
boaring a hole in the Ears, putting on gallant Shoes, as also Breeches, which
before they might not wear, adorning their heads with Flowers, and an Herb that
none else might use; and lastly giving an Axe into their hands. All which Mr.
Purchase having set down at large, we thought it less needful to be more
particular.

These Knights are by In Delic. Equest. p. 196.
Mennenius called Oreiones, from the Spanish word Orejas, which signifies flap
or loll-eared, and in Latin Auriculares, either from the Leaf which they
carried hanging in their Ears, or as Ios. Micheli says, Tesoro Milit, de
Cavall. f. 96. a.
for that they were only to negotiate, and treat of great Affairs with the
Emperor, and had his ear at all times.

To these we shall add the account we have of an Order of Knights in Iapan,
Knights of Japan.
entitled Ibid. f. 7^.
Mengoras, part of them are called Bonzoes, living in Fraternities, as do our
religious Brotherhoods in Europe. Some of these relate to their Temples, and
have the charge of their Idols, and the service appertaining to them; others
are Knights and follow the Wars, accepting pay from any Lord that imploys them.

Of this Order there are found to be about 30000. who in many things bear
parallel with the Religious Knights in Europe: They prosess Chastity with such
severity, that into their Cities no Woman may enter. They have the Rule given
them over those Kingdoms which they conquer, and are very rich; some of them
having not less than 60000 Ducats per annum Revenue.

Every day they make and present five Arrows to the public Armory, which is a
very prudent provision, in regard no man is sensible of the charge; and thereby
they find themselves well provided upon all occasions.

SECT. III. The Feminine Cavaliers of the Torch in Tortosa.
AND now, in close of our Discourse of the Orders of Knighthood, give us leave
to bring up the rere, with a memorial relating to Feminine Valor, and of the
later Age (for we shall not need to instance in the Amazons of old, whose fame
in Arms is so generally known) since some of that Sex, having acquired honor
and renown, by their personal courage and valiant exploits; have had bestowed
on them the privilege of living after the manner, and in the esteem of Knights.

The Example is of the noble Women of Tortosa in Aragon, and recorded by Joseph
Micheli Marquez, who plainly calls them Cavalleros del Passatiempo del Hacha.
Tesoro Mil. de Cavall. f. 96. b.
Cavalleros, or Knights; or may I not rather say Cavalleras, seeing I observe
the words Iurisp. Heroit. p. 413.
Equitissae and Militissae (formed from the Latin Equites and Milites)
heretofore applied to Women, and sometimes used to express Madams, or Ladies;
though now these Titles are not known.

Tes. Milit. loco. cit.
Don Raymond, last Earl of Barcellona (who by an intermarriage with Hiet.
Blancus in Serie Regum Aragon.
Petronilla, only Daughter and Heir of King Ramiro the Monk, united that
Principality to the Kingdom of Aragon) having, in the year 1149. gained the
City of Tortosa from the Moors, they on the 31. of December following, laid a
new Siege to that place, for the recovery of it out of the Earls hands. The
Inhabitants being at length reduced to great streights, desired relief of the
Earl; but he being not in a condition to give them any, they entertained some
thoughts of making a surrender. Which the Women hearing of, to prevent the
disaster threatening their City, themselves, and Children; put on men's Clothes,
and by a resolute sally, forced the Moors to raise the Siege.

The Earl, finding himself obliged, by the gallantry of the action, thought ^it
to make his acknowledgments thereof, by granting them several Privileges and
Immunities; and, to perpetuate the memory of so signal an attempt, Don Ramon
Berenguel ultimus Comes Barchinonae ^arum Foe^ninarum Congregationem, seu quasi
militiam formavit, elictam de la Hacha, quia in capite gestabant purpuream
Fa^is formam. Mendo de Ord. Milit. Disq. 1. Q. 4. number. 106.
Instituted an Order, somewhat like a Military Order, into which were admitted
only those brave Women, deriving the honor to their Descendants, and assigned
them for a Badge, a thing like a Friars Capouche, sharp at the top, after the
form of a Torch, and of a crimson color, to be worn upon their Head-clothes.
He also ordained, that at all public meetings, the Women should have
precedence of the Men; That they should be exempted from all Taxes; and that
all the Apparel and Jewels, though of never so great value, left by their dead
Husbands, should be their own.

These Women (says our Author) having thus acquired this Honor by their
personal Valor, carried themselves after the manner of Military Knights of
those days.

We may also, not unfitly, bring in here a word or two, of a more general
Ornament of Honor, not long since made peculiar to this fair Sex, to wit, that
of the Cordon; which some will have to be an L'Ordre de la Cordeliere, ou du
Cordon. Nouveau Theater du Monde. Tom. 2. p. 1413. Ordo Funigerae vel Funis.
Gotosr. Archont. Cesm. l. 3. p. 13.
Order, or somewhat equivalent thereto, under that Title. The Ibid.
Institution of it, is attributed to Anne of Britane, Wife to Charles the
Eighth of France, who instead of the Military Belt, or Collar, bestowed a
Cordon or Lace on several Ladies, admonishing them to live chastely and
devoutly, always mindful of the Cords and Bonds of our Savior Jesus Christ;
and to engage them to a greater esteem thereof, she surrounded her Escocheon of
Arms with the like Cordon. From which Example, it is since drawn into use, that
the Arms of unmarried Ladies and Gentlewomen (usually represented on Escocheons
made after the form of a Lozenge) are adorned with such a Cordon.

But if we look back into ancient times, we may see when Women among the Romans
were first thought worthy of enjoying respect and peculiar favors; and in
particular, out of a great honor to the Mother of Marcus Coriolanus, the
liberty of wearing the Segmenta aurea, or bordures of Gold and Purple on their
Garments (the latter of which the Romans raised to an high esteem) was
Caldernius ad Martialem annotat.
first permitted to the Roman Matrons, since she had so extraordinarily
deserved of that Commonwealth, by Live. lib. 2. c. 40. An. Vrbe Cond. 264. vide
Plutarch. in vita Coriolani.
diverting the fury of her Son, and drawing off his Army from before the City,
whose ruin he had threatened, upon a just resentment of the Citizens
ingratitude toward him; in memorial of which Live. lib. 2. c. 40. An. Vrbe
Cond. 264. vide Plutarch. in vita Coriolani.
preservation, was there also a Temple erected and dedicated to the Female
Fortune. On this occasion also, other accessions of honor and respect were
decreed to this Sex; namely Cujacius l. 12. Observat. c. 24.
to have place in passing on the way, and the permission of wearing golden
Earrings. To all which the Romans willingly condescended for her sake, whose
powerful persuasions, and rhetorical tears, had gained them so great a
deliverance.

CHAP. IV. OF THE Castle, Chapel, AND College OF Windesor.
SECT. I. Of the Castle of Windesor.
ALthough we intend hereafter (God assisting) to make public a complete
History of the Antiquities of the Castle, Chapel, College, and Town of
Windesor by it self (toward which we have already made some progress)
nevertheless we are obliged to give a brief Account of such of them here, as
bear a particular relation to our chief design unfolded in the succeeding
Chapters: and more especially, for that the Chapel of St. George is situate in
this stately Castle, made highly illustrious by those many pompous Solemnities
of the most noble Order of the Garter, exhibited within its Walls.

To begin then with the Place; it is ancient name [Wyn^le^ho^a] seems to claim
no greater antiquity than of the Saxon times, and as our Learned In Attrebat.
Cambden conjectures, received this denomination from the winding of the shore
thereabouts; as did Wandsworth in Surrey, anciently written Rot. Cart. Antiq
tit. CC, number. 2.
Windlesworth, and probably for the same reason.

The first authentic notice we have of it (for we rely not upon the reports of
Geofry of Monmouth, or his Followers) is from that Instrument of Donation,
which King Edward the Confessor made thereof, among other Lands, to the
Monastery of St. Peter's at Westminster, wherein it is declared, that this King,
Monast. Anglican. Tom. ^. p. 61.
for the hope of eternal reward, the remission of all his sins, the sins of his
Father, Mother, and all his Ancestors, to the praise of Almighty God, granted
as an endowment and perpetual inheritance, to the use of the Monks there, that
served God, Wyndleshore, (situate within, yet at the East point of the County
of Berks) with all its appurtenances.

But it continued not long in their possession, for King William the Conqueror,
the first year of his Reign, being greatly enamoured of the pleasant situation
of the place, and Ex praf. Rot. Cartar. antiq. loco citato.
for that it seemed exceeding profitable and commodions, because situate so
near the Thames, the Wood fit for Game, and many other particulars lying there
meet and necessary for Kings, yea a place very convenient for his reception;
invited Eadwin the then Abbot and Monks, to accept in exchange for it Ibid.
Wokendune in Ceaford Hundred in the County of Essex, a Mansion called Ferings,
with all its Members and Hamlets in Lexedene Hundred in the same County,
together with fourteen Sokemen and their Lands, and one Freeholder in
Thurestaple Hundred, who held one yard Land, belonging to the said Mansion,
with three Houses in Coleceastra; and hereupon was it again returned to the
Crown, where it has ever since remained.

The King being thus possessed of Windesor, forthwith built a Castle upon the
Hill, which we find by Bercsta. Terra Radulfi filii Seifridi. Radulfus filius
Seifridi tenet de Rege Clivore, pro quinque Hidis, modo pro quatuor Hidis and
dimid. Castellum de Wyndesores est in dimidia Hida.
Domesday Book, contained half a Hide of Land, and that half Hide is there
noted to be parcel of the Manner of Clure.

This Castle King Henry the First Hen. Hunt. fo. 217. b. Londini 1596.
re-edified, and beautified with many goodly buildings; and to entertain
himself with the pleasure thereof, did in the Hen. Hunt. fo. 217. b. Londini
1596.
tenth year of his reign, summon all his Nobility thither, where he held his
Whitsontide with great state and magnificence.

Shortly after, we find this Castle called Spelman. Gloss. Archaiolog. verbo
Mota.
Mota de Windesor, the Fortress of Windesor, as the Tower of London is called
Turris de London; both which are so termed in a Charter of Peace between King
Stephen and Duke Henry (afterward King of England, by the Title of Henry the
Second) and this word Mota, is here used for what the French call Mote, or A
little Hill, or high place, a Seat for a Fort, or strong House.
Motte, being the same with Collis, or Colliculus, and Meta in Latin, viz. a
little Hill.

Within this Castle was King Edward the Third Claus. de anno 6. E. 2. membrana
22. Dors.
born (whence commonly called Edward of Windesor) and received his Baptism in
the old Chapel. The native affection he bore to this place was exceeding
great, insomuch as he constituted it the Head and Seat of that most noble Order
of the Garter, whereof himself became the most renowned Founder; in honor to
which he there also founded the College of the Chapel of St. George, and much
enlarged and beautified the Castle: To this work he appointed several
Surveyors, whom he assigned to press Hewers of Stone, Carpenters, and such
other Artificers, as were thought useful and necessary, so also to provide
Stone, Timber, and other materials and Carriages for them; among these
Surveyors, we find remembered Pat. de anno 23. E. 3. pars. 1. m. 10.
John Peyntour, Pat. 24. E. 3. pars 1. m. 23.
Richard de Rochell, Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 2. m. 21. Dorso.
William de Hurl, William de Herland, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11.
Robert de Bernham, and some others.

And to the end this great undertaking might be honestly and substantially
performed, the King assigned Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 12.
John Brocas, Oliver de Burdeux, and Thomas de Foxle, jointly and severally,
with all care and diligence (at least together once a Month) to survey the
Workmen and their works, and to encourage such as did their duty competently
well, but to compel others that were idle and slothful.

He afterward commissionated Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2. Dorso. Pat. 28. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 20.
John de Alkeshull, and Walter Palmer to provide Stone, Timber, Lead, Iron, and
all other necessaries for the work; and to impressed Carriages for their
conveyance to Windesor.

William de Wyckham (who attained to the Dignity of Bishop of Winchester, and
was the second Prelate of the Garter) had a Pat. 30. E. 3. p. 3. m. 21
Supervisor's or Surveyor's place granted to him by Letters Patents bearing
Test at Westminster the thirtieth of October anno 30. E. 3. He had like powers
given him with those Surveyors first abovenamed, and a grant of the same Fee
as had been formerly allowed to Pat. 30. E. 3. p. 3. m. 21
Robert de Bernham, viz. Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11.
One shilling a day, while he stayed at Windesor in his employment, two
shillings a day when he went elsewhere about that affair, and three shillings a
week for his Clerk: which like allowances had been first of all made to Pat.
24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 23.
Richard de Rochell.

Afterward he had bestowed upon him the Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 20.
chief custody and surveyorship of this Castle, of the Manors of Old and New
Windesor, and of several other Castles, Manors, and Houses enumerated in his
Letters Patents, with power to appoint and dispose of all Workmen, buy
necessaries for Reparation, provide Carpenters, Masons, and other Artificers,
Stone, Timber, etc. Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 20.
and in those Manors to hold Leets and other Courts, Pleas of Trespass and
Misdemeanors, to enquire of the Kings liberties, rights, and all things
appertaining thereunto.

It may be presumed, that about the thirty fourth year of this Kings Reign, the
most considerable enlargement of the Castle was made, seeing there were then
great store of the best Diggers and Hewers of Stone, impressed in London, and out
of diverse Counties in England, by virtue of Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 34.
Writs, directed to several Sheriffs (dated the 14. of April in that year) with
command to send them to Windesor, by the Sunday next after the Feast of St.
George at the furthest, there to be employed at the Kings Wages, so long as was
necessary, viz. London. 40 Essex and Hertford. 40 Wilts. 40 Leycest. and
Worcest. 40 Cambridge and Huntingd. 40 Kent. 40 Gloucester. 40 Somerset and
Devon. 40 Northampton. 40
Herewith the Sheriffs were commanded to take sufficient security of these
Workmen, not to depart from Windesor without the License of William de Wyckham
(who was appointed to return the same Securities into the Court of Chancery)
and all this, under the penalty of one hundred pounds to each respective
Sheriff.

And because diverse of these Workmen, for gain and advantage, had afterward
clandestinely lest Windesor, and were entertained by other persons, upon
greater Wages, to the Kings great damage, and manifest retarding of his Work,
Claus. 36. E. 3. m. 36. Dorso.
Writs were therefore directed to the Sheriffs of London, with command to make
Proclamation, to inhibit any person, whether Clerk or Layman, under forfeiture
of all they had forfeitable, for employing or retaining any of them, as also to
arrest such as had so run away, and commit them to Newgate, and from time to
time to return their names into the Chancery.

But a great number of them dying of the great Pestilence, other Ibid. m. 33.
Writs issued (30. of March, anno 36. E. 3.) to the Sheriffs of several
Counties (not of the former number) That under the penalty of two hundred
pounds apiece, they should send to Windesor, able and skilful Masons and
Diggers of Stone, to be there on Sunday the Utas of Easter at furthest, to be
employed in the Works, namely to the Sheriffs of.

York. 60 Derby. 24 Salop. 60 Hereford. 50 Nottingham. 24 Lancaster. 24 Devon.
60
It was the thirty seventh year of this King, or e're the Buildings were ready
for Glasing, and then Pat. 37. E. 3. pars prima, m. 28.
Henry de Stamerne and John Brampton, were employed to buy Glass in all places
of the Kingdom, where it was to be sold: to press four and twenty Glasiers, and
convey them to London, to work there at the Kings Wages; and Ibid. m. 30.
twelve Glasiers for Windesor, to be employed in like manner within the Castle.

In this year also, the work went effectually on, as may be guessed from the
great store of Pat. 37. E. 3. p. 1. m. 12. and 29.
Workmen pressed for this service, as also Carriages for Stone and Timber, much
of the Stone being dug out of the Quarries of Ib. m. 26.
Wellesford, Helwell, and Careby, and the next year, not only in these, but in
the Quarries of Pat. 38. E. 3. p. 1. m. 29.
Heseleberg, and Demelby, and the following year out of the Quarry of Pat. 39.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 37.
Melton.

From hence to the forty third year of this Kings Reign, we find Artificers
were yearly pressed, and the buildings of the Castle seriously pursued; but after
we meet with nothing in that kind mentioned to be done, until the eight and
fortieth year, and thence not any thing during his Reign. So that its to be
presumed, this famous piece for magnificence and strength, was for the greatest
part finished in his said forty third year, that is to say, the Kings Palace,
the great Hall of St. George, the Lodgings on the East and South side of the
upper Baily or Ward, the Keep or Tower in the middle Ward, the Chapel of St.
George, the Houses for the Custos and Canons in the lower Ward, together with
the whole circumference of the Walls, and their several Towers and Gates, as
now they stand.

In succeeding times, some other additions were made to the buildings within
the Castle; in particular, King Henry the Seventh added that stately Fabric,
adjoining to the Kings Lodgings, in the upper Ward. King Leland ad Cygneam
Cantionem verb. Windlesora.
Henry the Eighth new built the great Gate, at the entrance into the lower
Ward. King Edward the Sixth began, and Queen Ex Lib. Compet. penes -- Harris
nuper de Windesor genesis an. 1660.
Mary perfected the bringing of Water from Blackmore Park in Wingfield Parish,
into a Fountain of curious workmanship, erected in the middle of the upper
Ward, which served all the Castle. Queen Elizabeth made a Cambden in Atrebat.
Terrace Walk on the North-side of the Castle, from whence there is a pleasant
prospect down upon Eaton College, the Thames, and neighboring Country. And
King Charles the First, an. 1636. built the Gate at the East end of the said
Terrace, leading into the Park. Lastly, his now Majesty out of a particular
regard to this princely place, has issued great sums of money in its repair,
and furnishing it with a curious and gallant Magazine of Arms; so well ordered
and kept, that it is worthy the sight of every Traveller.

And here our learned Cambden's elegant Description of this Castle's situation,
must not be omitted; Cambden, loco cit.
For from an high Hill (says he) that rises with a gentle ascent, it enjoys
a most delightful prospect round about; Foreright in the Front, it over-looketh
a Vale, lying out far and wide, garnished with Cornfieldsd, flourishing with
Meadows, d^ckt with Groves on either side, and watered with the most mild and
calm River Thames: behind it arise Hills every where, neither rough nor over
high, attired as it were with Woods, and even dedicated, as one would say, by
Nature to hunting Game.

With this let us offer what Sir John Denham's ingenious Muse has rarely
limn'd out of its situation also and majestic fabric.

Coopers Hill.
Windesor the next (where Mars with Venus dwells,
Beauty with strength) above the Valley swells
Into my eye, and does it self present
With such an easy and unforc't ascent,
That no stupendous precipice denies
Access, no horror turns away our Eyes:
But such a Rise, as does at once invite
A pleasure, and a reverence from our sight.
Thy mighty Masters Emblem, in whose face
Sat Meekness heightened with Majestic Grace;
Such seems thy gentle height, made only proud
To be the basis of that pompous load,
Than which, a nobler weight no Mountain bears,
But Atlas only that supports the Spheres.
And now to afford our Reader's Eye, yet more pleasure and satisfaction, than
these verbal Descriptions can do his fancy; we shall here insert the exact
Draughts of several Views and Prospects of this princely and magnificent
Structure.

This Castle is under the government of a Constable, whose Office is of great
antiquity, honor, and power, but of little profit.

The use and signification of the word Constabularius (with others of a near
spelling, and like sense, found in Historians) is showed by the learned Gloss.
Archaiolog. verbo Constabularius.
Spelman, and particularly applied to the Governor of a Castle, the French
call him Chastelan, whom we call Constable of a Castle, but in the Rolls of
King John's time (which is as high as we have any) the Governor of this Castle
is called Constable, and under that title has the Office ever since passed.

Ex relatione Bulstrode Whiteloke, Ordinit Amarant. Milit.
His Office is mixed, partly Military, and partly Civil; as a Military Officer,
pertains to him the sole Command of the place, and of any Garrison placed
there, as also of the Magazine of Arms, Stores, and Houses. He is obliged to
defend it against all Enemies, whether domestic or foreign, has the charge of
Prisoners brought thither; and is answerable for them, and for all that is in
the Castle to the King, under whom he is Captain or Governor there.

As a Civil Officer, the Constable is Judge of a Court of Record, held there by
Prescription, for the determination of Pleas between party and party, arising
Prospect of the Castle from the S. E.
Prospect of WINDSOR CASTLE. from the North.
within the Precincts of the Forest of Windesor, and Liberties thereof, which
compriseth many Towns, over the Inhabitants whereof this Court has
jurisdiction, to any Sum or Contract, by way of Action at the Common Law, and
all legal Process, Judgments, and Executions, issue out in his name.

He has a Deputy learned in the Law, who is called Steward of the Court of
Record, and is Keeper of the Constables Seal of Office, belonging to this
Court, with which all things issuing out of it are sealed. This Officer
supplies the Constables places as Judge of that Court of Pleas, from whose
Judgment the appeal is by Writ of Error returnable in the King's Bench, or
Common Pleas at Westminster.

The Constable of this Castle is likewise chief Forester and Warden of the
Forest of Windesor, which is one hundred and twenty miles in compass: He has
under him one or more Lieutenants at his pleasure, with several other Officers,
and has power to imprison any Trespasser in Vert or Venison, being convicted
according to the Law of the Forest, having a Prison in the Castle for that
purpose, called the Colehole.

This Command of his, is not only great, but full of pleasure (specially to
such a one as takes delight in Hunting) for he has the freedom of using the
sports of the Forest when he pleases, which none else can do, unless the Kings
license, or Constables leave be first obtained. He signs all Warrants to kill
Deer (except what the King signs) to fell Timber and Wood.

He that was Chastelain of this Castle in William the Conquerors Reign, was
Cambd. in Atrebat.
Walter fitz Other, from whom the Honorable Family of Barons Windesor are
descended; and the present Constable is his Highness Prince Rupert.

SECT. II. Of the Chapel of St. George.
PRoceed we next to the Chapel of St. George, situate in the lower Ward or
Court of this princely Castle, concerning which, we think fit to give our
present discourse commencement at the foundation of the College within this
Chapel, by King Edward the Third, because it had a peculiar respect to the
most noble Order of the Garter; and wave speaking of the first erection thereof
by King Ex lib. N. p. 13. in Pro^emio. See Stow in Ed. 3.
Henry the First, who Pat. ^2. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
dedicated it to King Edward the Confessor.

First therefore, we shall observe, That King Edward the Third, shortly after
he had founded the College (of which we shall treat in the next Section)
thought it convenient to pull down the old Chapel, and to erect another more
large and stately: Hereupon he granted to Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2^
John de Sponlee the Office of Master of the Stone-hewers, and gave him power
to Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2^
take and press, as well within Liberties as without, so many Masons and other
Artificers as were necessary, and to convey them to Windesor, to work at the
Kings pay, but to arrest and imprison such as should disobey or refuse, until
the King took other order; with a command to all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs,
etc. to be assisting to him on the Kings behalf.

The following year this King assigned Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 10.
James de Dorchester, Sub-Constable of the Castle, to keep a Control upon all
the Provisions whatsoever, bought for the works of the Chapel, as also on the
payments made for the same, and all other things relating thereunto.

Together with this Fabric he erected several Houses near adjoining for the
Custos and Canons to inhabit in, and afterward King Henry the Fourth gave to
them a Pat. 10. H. 4. p. 2. m. 13.
void place in the Castle called the Wodehawe, nigh to the great Hall, for
building of Houses and Chambers for the Vicars, Clerks, Choristers, and the
other Ministers, assigned to the service of the Chapel.

But King Edward the Fourth (whose inclination to, and kindness for this place
was extraordinary) finding upon survey, that the former foundation and walls of
the Chapel of St. George were in his time very much decayed and consumed, and
esteeming the Fabric not large or stately enough, designed to build one more
noble and excellent in its room. To this purpose he constituted Richard
Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, Master and Surveyor of the work. And taking
notice, that diverse of the Pat. 15. E. 4. p. 2. m. 17.
Officiary Houses, and other irregular Buildings and old Walls stood in his
way, and hindered the design he had to enlarge the Structure, gave the Bishop
power wholly to remove all such impediments, and to demolish and dig up their
Foundations; particularly those ancient Buildings on the East Side of the
Chapel, which reached unto the Walls on the North-side of the Castle, where
the Towers, commonly called Clure is Tower, and Le Amener is Tower, and Barner
is Tower were situated; as also on the South Side of the Chapel, unto the
Belfrey there, exclusively, and to employ the Stone, Timber, and other
materials thereof, upon such Edifices in the Castle, as he should think most
convenient.

With what diligence and sedulity, and how well the Bishop performed this
Office and Employment, appears from the testimony given him by the King in the
preamble of that Patent, by which he shortly after constituted him Chancellor
of the Garter, to wit, Pat. 15. E. 4. p. 3. m. 18.
That out of mere love toward the Order, he had given himself the leisure,
daily to attend the advancement and progress of this goodly Fabric.

From the new Foundation thus laid by King Edward the Fourth, arose (like a
Phoenix out of its ashes) the elegant and beauteous Structure now standing,
enlarged in length at least Bulla de concessione Episcopo Sar: ad condendum
novas Ordinationes.
one hundred fathom (whose order and figure, as well on the outside as the
several Views from within, are here represented) though it attained not its
beauty and perfection, until the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; together with
the Dean and Canons Houses, situate on the North-side of the Chapel, and those
for the Petty Canons, raised at the West end thereof, in form of a Fetter-lock,
(one of King Edward the Fourths Royal Badges) and so vulgarly called.

In Henry the Seventh's Reign, Sir Reginald Bray, (one of the
Knights-Companions of the Order) became a liberal Benefactor toward finishing
the Body of this Chapel, and building the middle Chapel on the South side
thereof, still called by his name (where his body lies interred) as is manifest
not only from his last Ex Lib. vocat. Blaymer in Officio Praerogat. Cant. n. 26.
Will, but also from his Arms, Crest, and the initial Letters of his Christian
and Surname, cut in Stone, and placed in diverse parts of the Roof.

By Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. Collegii Windesor.
Indenture dated the fifth of June, in the one and twentieth year of this Kings
Reign, John Hylmer, and William Virtue Free Masons, undertook the vaulting of
the Roof of the Choire (that curious and excellent piece of Architecture) for
seven hundred pounds, and to finish it by Christmas, anno Dom. 1508.

In his Son and Successors reign the Lib. N. p. 204.
Rood-loft and Lanthorn were erected, with the contributions raised among the
Knights-Companions, anno 8. H. 8.

Adjoining to the East end of this Chapel was a little Building of Freestone
raised by Cardinal Wolsey, called the Tombe-house, in the middle whereof he
designed to erect a goodly Monument for King Henry the Eighth, and had
well-nigh finished it before he dyed. But this was demolished in April 1646. by
command of the long Parliament, and the Statues and Figures provided to adorn
it, being all of Copper gilt, and exceedingly enricht by Art, were taken thence.

This place Ex relatione Dan. Stokes, nuper unius Canon. Coll. de Windesor.
King Charles the First, of ever blessed and glorious memory, intended to
enlarge, and make fit and capable, not only for the interment of his own royal
Body, but also for the Bodies of his Successors Kings of England, had not bad
times drawn on, and such, as with much ado, afforded him but an obscure Grave,
near the first haut-pace in the Choire of this Chapel, his Head lying over
against the eleventh Stall on the Sovereigns side, and in the same Vault, where
the Bodies of King Henry the Eighth, and his last Queen yet remain.

In this Chapel also rest the Bodies of two other Sovereigns of the most noble
Order of the Garter (besides sundry of the Knights-Companions) namely of King
Henry the Sixth, removed thither from Spelmans Councils, Vol. 2. p. 712.
Chertsey Abbey in Surrey, and deposited under the uppermost Arch at the South
side of the high Altar, but without either Monument or Inscription, only his
Royal Badges may be yet seen painted in several places on the inside of this
Arch; and likewise the Body of King Edward the The Prospect of St. George's
Chapel, from the South, The Tomb House.
The Groundplot of St. George's Chapel.
PROSPECT OF THE INSIDE OF THE CHAPEL
1. The middle Isle,

2 The South Isle,

3 The North Isle,

4 The Pulpit,

5 The Choire Door,

6 Roof of the N^u^,

7 Roof of the Choire,

8 East Window of the Choire.



Fourth, under a large Stone of Tuch, raised within the opposite Arch, at the
North side of the Altar, but without Inscription also; having on the outside of
his Grave a range of Steel gilt, set to enclose it from the North Isle, cut
excellently well in Church-work.

Over this Arch hung this Kings Coat of Male, gilt, covered over with crimsoit
Velvet, and thereon the Arms of France and England quarterly, richly
embroidered with Pearl and Gold, interwoven with diverse Rubies. This Trophy of
honor had ever since his Funeral hung safely over his Grave, but was plundered
thence by Captain Fogg the twenty third day of October 1642. (on which day he
also robbed the Treasury of the Chapel of all the rich Plate, dedicated to the
use of the Altar) yet having met with an exact measure and size of each part
thereof, as also of his Banner, both heretofore taken by Sir William le Neve,
sometime Clarenceux King of Arms, an exact observator of any thing curious,
referring to Arms or Ceremony, we think fit to transmit it thus to posterity.

Ex Collecta^. praes. Will. le Neve.
The Coat of Arms was two foot seven inches deep, and below two foot in breadth.

Above (the Maunches being extended) in breadth three foot and six inches:
whereof the length of each Maunch, was one foot.

The breadth of the upper part of the Coat besides the Maunches one foot and a
half.

The breadth of each Maunch one foot and eight inches.

The Arms were embroidered upon Velvet, lined with Satin, and better wrought
then they use to work in these days.

The Banner which also hung over his Grave, was of Taffaty, and thereon painted
quarterly France and England; it had in breadth three foot four inches, besides
a Fringe of about an inch broad, and in depth five foot and four inches,
besides the Fringe.

There were within this Chapel of St. George several Chantries, endowed with
Lands, and other Revenues, appointed for the maintenance of Chaplains and
Priests, to sing Masses there, for the Souls of their Founders, and their
Kindred: As first,

Ex ipso Autogr. in Aer^r. Colleg. Windesor.
William of Wickham Bishop of Winchester, gave two hundred Marks for buying of
twenty Marks Rent per annum, to sustain a Chaplain to celebrate Mass in this
Chapel, for the health of his Soul, the Soul of King Edward the Third, of the
said Bishops Father, Mother, and all his Benefactors: The Covenants between him
and the Dean and Chapter for performance thereof, bear date at Windesor the 29.
of May, anno 3. H. 8.

The Ex ipso Autogr. in Aera^. praed.
26. of November, anno 18. E. 4. the Feossees of Richard Duke of Gloucester,
confirmed and delivered to the Dean and Chapter, the Manors of Bentfieldbury
in the County of Essex, Knapton in the County of Norfolk, and Chellesworth in
the County of Suffolk; who thereupon granted (among other things) that they and
their Successors should cause yearly for ever, a Mass to be daily celebrated in
this Chapel, for the good estate of the said Duke, and of Anne his Duchess
while they lived, and their souls when dead; as also for the souls of their
Parents and Benefactors.

Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. praef.
Sir Thomas St. Ledger Knight (sometime Husband to Anne Duchess of Exeter,
Sister to King Edward the Fourth) founded a Chantry of two Priests, who (in the
middle Chapel, situate on the North side of the Church) were ordained to pray
for the healthful estate of King Edward the Fourth, and his Queen, and Cicely
Duchess of York the Kings Mother, while they lived, and for their souls when
dead: as also for the Soul of Richard Duke of York, the good estate of the said
Sir Thomas, and Richard Bishop of Salisbury, then living, and after their
decease for their souls, and the soul of Anne Duchess of Exeter. The
Foundation of this Chantry and the Covenants between Sir Thomas St. Ledger, and
the Dean and College, are dated the 20. of April, anno 22. E. 4.

By the Lib. voca^* Denton in Aerar prae^. f. 260.
last Will of King Edward the Fourth, a Chantry was ordained to be founded of
two Priests, to serve at his Tomb, to whom was appointed an exhibition of
twenty Marks yearly apiece. They were called King Edward's Chantry Priests.

The Ibid. f. 241.
Chantry of Thomas Passche (one of the Canons of this Chapel) was founded for
a Priest to pray daily for his Soul, and the Soul of William Hermer (another of
the Canons there) as also for the good estate of Master John Arundel, and
Master John Seymer, Canons, and of Master Thomas Brotherton, and their Souls
after they should depart this life.

Ibid.
There was another Chantry Priest assigned to pray for the Souls of the said
Passche and Hermer, and of John Plumer Verger of the Chapel, and Agatha his
Wife; which devotion was appointed to be performed at the Altar on the North
side of the new Church, and the setlement thereof bears date the 18. of March,
anno 9. Hen. 7.

The Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. Colleg. Windesor.
first of March anno 12. H. 7. Margaret Countess of Richmond, obtained license
from the King, that she or her Executors might found a Chantry of four
Chaplains, to pray for her Soul, the Souls of her Parents and Ancestors, and
all faithful Souls departed: This Celebration was to be performed in a place
near the East part of the new work of the Chapel. And the Ex ipso Autogr. in
Aerar. Colleg. Windesor.
18. of July, anno 13. H. 7. the Dean and Canons granted, that the Countess or
her Executors, should erect such a Chantry in the Chapel, as is before
mentioned.

The Ex libro vocat. Denton. f. 244.
Chantry of William Lord Hastings, founded of one Priest to pray for his Soul,
the Souls of the Lady Katherine his Widow, and of Edward Lord Hastings his Son,
and Mary his Wife after their death: The Chapel wherein this Service was
celebrated, is that on the North side of the Choire, about the middle thereof,
where the Body of this Lord lies interred. The Ordination is dated the 21. of
February anno 18. H. 7. Ibid. f. 247.
On the North side of St. Georges Chapel stands a little house, built for the
habitation of this Chantry Priest, having over the Door (cut in stone) the Lord
Hastings's Arms, surrounded with a Garter.

Ib. f. 233. b.
Charles Somerset Lord Herbert (created afterward Earl of Worcester) was
buried in the South Chapel (dedicated to the Virgin Mary) at the West end of
the Church, where he ordained a secular Priest to say Mass every day, and to
pray for the Souls of him and his first Wife, Elizabeth the Daughter and Heir
of William Herbert Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Herbert of Gower, who also lies
there interred. Ib. f. 237.
Adjoining to the House built for the Lord Hastings's Chantry Priest, is
another like Building, erected for this Chantry Priest, and over the Door
thereof, now to be seen, is the Founders Arms within a Garter, cut also upon
stone. The Foundation of this Chantry is dated the 30. of July anno 21. H. 7.

To these we shall add the pious Foundation of the House called the Ibid. f.
261. and 262.
New Commons, erected over against the North Door of the Body of St. George's
Chapel, by James Denton one of the Canons of the College (sometimes Dean of
Lichfield) anno 11. H. 8. for the lodging and dieting such of the Chantry
Priests, Choristers, and stipendary Priests, who had no certain place within
the College, where to hold Commons in, but were constrained daily to eat their
Meals in sundry houses of the Town: this House he furnished with proper
Utensils for such a use, the whole charge amounting to 489 l. 7 s. 1 d. and for
all which the Choristers were desired by him (in the Statutes he ordained for
their Rule and Government) to say certain Prayers, when they entered into the
Chapel, and after his death, to pray for his, and the Souls of all the
faithful departed.

In this Chapel of St. George, there were heretofore several Anniversaries or
Obits held and celebrated, some of them as they are entered down in an In Aerar.
Coll. Windesor.
Account of Owen Oglethorp Treasurer of the College for the year, commencing
the first of October, anno 38. H. 8. and ending the last of September, anno 1.
E. 6. inclusive, we will here remember.

October. November. 2. Sir Thomas Sentleger Knight. 3. William Bewster Canon.
6. John Wygrym Canon. 5. John Plomer Verger. 8. William Edyngton Bishop of
Winchest. 10. John Brydbroke Canon. 9. King Edward the Fourth. 13. Thomas Pashe
Canon. 16. Rich. Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury. 20. Robert Vere Earl of Oxford.
22. William Cock Canon. 27. Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. 29. John Chapman
Vicar.

Prospect of the Cancellor Screen from the West.


PROSPECT OF THE CANCEL from the East.


PROSPECT OF THE CHOIRE from the West


PROSPECT OF THE CHOIRE from the East.


December. January. 3. Ralph Wyndesor. 3. Katherine Queen of England. 14. John
Howden Canon. 8. King Edward the Fourth. 30. Richard Duke of York. 10. Anne
Devereux. 31. Tho. Beauford Duke of Exeter. 11. John Chamber Canon. 12. Anne
Duchess of Exeter. 14. Geoffry Aston. February. March. 4. Richard Raunds
Canon. 1. Richard Smith. 21. William Mugge Custos. 4. Knights of the Garter.
28. Roger Lupton Canon. 5. Walter Devereux. 10. Richard Wells Canon. 19. King
Henry the Fourth. 24. Henry Duke of Lancaster. April. May. 3. William Butler
Canon. 11. King Henry the Seventh. 5. Geoffry Wren Canon. 21. King Henry the
Sixth. 6. King Edward the Fourth. 19. Robert Ravendale Canon. 20. Anne Duchess
of Exeter. 21. John Bean and his Wife. June. July. 2. John Stokes Canon. 9.
King Edward the Fourth. 7. Anne Queen of England. 12. Anne Duchess of Exeter.
8. Edward the Black Prince. 13. William Harmer Canon. 11. William Ferrys. 16.
William Palet Canon. 12. John Vaughan Canon. 17. Henry Deane. 13. William Lord
Hastings. 27. John Oxenbrydge Canon. 14. Brothers and Sisters of St. Anthony.
21. King Edward the Third, Founder. 27. Will, Askew Bishop of Salisbury.
August. September. 4. Sir Reginald Bray Knight. 5. John Seymor Canon. 8. John
Blount. 13. Henry Hanslappe Canon. 10. William Mychell Canon. 14. John Duke of
Bedford. 11. Robert Barham Canon. 16. William Bohun Earl of Northampton. 17.
Philippa Queen of England, Foundress. 27. William Wykham Bishop of Winchest.
18. Richard Surland Canon. 31. King Henry the Fifth.

It was an usual thing in former Ages, especially for those of the Military
profession, after they had spent their youth and manhood in the service of
their King and Country, to bestow the remainder of their liv^^ in Prayers for
both, and the salvation of their own Souls. And therefore to cherish the piety
of well disposed Knights-Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, who
for devotions sak^ were induced to retire to Windesor, permission was given
then by the Statutes of Institution, Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 31.
to make their continual abode there. Nevertheless to maintain themselves out
of their own Estates, not at the College charge.

This Article is confirmed by the Art. 32. H. 8. Stat. Art. 35.
Statutes of King Henry the Fifth, to which those of King Henry the Eighth add,
That the Sovereign should assign them convenient Habitations within the Castle.
The H. 5. Stat. Art. 33. H. 8. Stat. Art. 36.
like favor upon like occasion, was afforded to other devout Knights, though
not of the Order; but the Lodgings to be such as the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions should decree.

We no where find, that any of the Knights-Companions made use of the benefit
of this Article hitherto: but in another nature and for their better
accommodation at the grand Feast of the Order, and other Solemnities held at
Windesor; they moved the Sovereign in Chapter there ( Sir James Palmer's large
Iournal. p. 16.
22. of May anno 14. Car. 1.) That they might have Rooms for Lodgings assigned
them, in the great (or upper) Court (which they offered to repair at their own
charge) since all the officers of the Order had Lodgings in the Castle, but the
Knights-Companions none. This motion was not disliked by the Sovereign,
Exrelatione D. Chr. Wren, nuper Re^ist. hujus Ordinis.
so it might be without exclusion of the Great Officers of State, concerning
whom He declared, That he would not have them removed from him at any time; and
thereupon it was left to further consideration.

SECT. III. The Foundation of the College within the Chapel.
KIng Henry the First, as he had erected a Chapel within the Castle, so did he
therein found a College for eight Canons, neither endowed nor incorporate, but
maintained by an annual Pension out of the Kings Exchequer. King Edward the
Second founded here a Chantry for Claus. 6. E. 2. m. 2. Dorso.
four Chaplains and two Clerks, to pray for his Soul, and the Souls of all his
Progenitors; as likewise a Chapel in the Park of Windesor, under the same
Ordination, for four more Chaplains, whom his Son King Pat. 4. E. 3. p. 1. m.
19.
Edward the Third (by the advice of his Council) removed and joined to those
other before settled in the Chapel of the Castle, and built Claus. 11. E. 3. m.
18.
habitations for their better accommodation on the South side thereof: all
which we shall pass over with this short mention, as not directly relative to
our present purpose.

But the Foundation that we shall treat of here, King Edward the Third laid by
His Appendix Number. 1.
Letters Patent bearing Test at Westminster on the sixth day of August, anno
regni sui 22. that being about three quarters of a year before He instituted
the most Noble Order of the Garter: for (being inflamed with the zeal of a
pious devotion, and desiring by a good kind of Commerce to exchange earthly for
heavenly, and transitory for eternal things) at his own Royal Charge, He new
founded the ancient Chapel in honor and to the praise of the omnipotent God,
the glorious Virgin Mary, of St. George the Martyr, and St. Edward the
Confessor: And by his Kingly authority and as much as in him lay Ordained, that
to King Henry's eight Canons there should be added one Custos, fifteen more
Canons, and twenty four Alms-Knights, together with other Ministers, all under
the Government nevertheless of the Custos: and these to be maintained out of
the Revenues wherewith this Chapel was and should be endowed.

But, according to the opinion of those times, his Kingly Authority extended
not to the instituting therein men of Religion, and other Officers to perform
and attend the Service of God; for that lay in the power and disposition of the
Pope: And therefore this King, setting forth what he had profer'd to do, in
reference to the endowment of this Chapel, requested Pope Clement the Sixth to
grant to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Bishop of Winchester the authority
and power of ordaining and instituting the College, and other things thereunto
appertaining.

Hereupon this Pope by his Appendix Number. II.
Bull dated at Avignion pridie Calendas Decembris, in the ninth year of his
Papacy (which answers to the thirtieth day o^ November, Anno Domini 1351.)
commending the pious purpose of the King in this affair, granted to the
Archbishop and Bishop, and to either of them, full power to Ordain, Institut^,
and Appoint in this Chapel, as should seem good to them, a certain number of
Canons, Priests, Clerks, Knights, and Officers, continually to attend upon the
Service of God, of which Canons and Priests, one should have the Title of
Custos, and preside over the rest.

On that day twelvemonth the Statutes and Ordinances of the College bear date,
being made by In praefatione ad Colleg. Statut.
virtue of the Popes authority, the Kings Command, the Consent of the Bishop of
Salisbury (in whose Diocese the Chapel is situate) and of the Dean and Chapter
of Salisbury. By which Statutes the Bishop of Winchester, one of the Popes
Delegates (for we find not the Archbishop's name used in them) did Ordain and
Institute a College, within the Chapel of St. George, consisting of one
Custos, twelve secular Canons, thirteen Pri^sts or Vicars, four Clerks, fix
Choristers, and twenty six Alms-Knights, beside other Officers. And to this
Custos and College, by the name of Custos and College of the Free-Chappel of
St. George, within the Castle of Windesor, for the most part, but sometimes of
Custos and College of Chaplains, or otherwise of Custos and Chaplains of the
same Chapel, were the Donations of Advowsons, and other temporal Endowments,
commonly made and granted.

SECT. IV. Of the Dean, Canons, Petty-Canons, Clerks, and Choristers.
SHortly after the Foundation of the College by the Kings Letters Patent, The
Dean.
to wit, the Pat. 22. E. 3. p. 3. m. 19.
14. of November, anno 22. E. 3. the King constituted John de la Ch^mbre Custos
of the Chapel of St. George, but he enjoyed this dignity not above half a
year, for the Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 2. m. 29.
18. of June ensuing, the Letters Patent, for constituting William Mugg Custos,
bears Test: so that in truth John de la Chambr^ was the first Custos, though
in the Rot. Parl. 8. H. 6. n. 31.
Preamble to the Letters Patent past under the Great Seal of England, with
consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, anno 8. H. 6. William Mugg is
there said to be the first, and so has been Tho. Frith. in suo Custodum sive
Decanor. Catalogo.
since accounted.

But it seems the Catalogue of Custos's and Deans, took commencement at the
Institution of the College by Papal (not Kingly) authority, and though William
Mugg (in like manner as John de la Chamber) had been constituted Custos above
three years before, yet being then again nominated by the King to receive
Institution from the Bishop of Winchester upon his ordaining the College, he
came to be accounted the first Custos, as being so under that Institution; and
consequently John de la Chamber not taken notice of.

By this Title of Custos were those that succeeded De la Chamber and Mugg,
presented by the King, till the last year of King Henry the Fourth, when Thomas
Kingston was the Ibid.
first of them presented by the name of Dean; and his Successor John Arundell
observing that diverse of the Lands and Endowments of the College, were
sometimes granted thereunto by the name of Custos, at other times of Dean and
Custos, or lastly of Dean only; and doubting that this variation and diversity
of names might beget some damage to the College, especially being both beside
and against the form of the Foundation (wherein the Title of Custos was only
used) he applied himself by Rot. Parl. ^ni, 8. H. 6. n. 31.
Petition to the Parliament before mentioned; whereupon the King being pleased
to provide for the security of the College in this particular, did, with
consent of the Lords and Commons, by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of
England, grant and declare, That the said John should be Custos sive Decanus
for his life, and enjoy all rights thereunto belonging, and for the future, he
and every other Custos of the Chapel for the time being should be called Ibid.
Custodes sive Decani, viz. Wardens or Deans of the free Chapel of St. George
within the Castle of Windesor; and that the Custos, or Dean and Canons thereof,
and their Successors, by the Name of Custos, or Dean and Canons of the said
free Chapel, should have and hold to them and their Successors for ever, all
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions, etc. ^s also all manner of Liberties,
Franchises, Immunities, etc. granted to the College at any time before.

So that here was instituted a kind of new Incorporation of this Chapel, by
the Title of Custos, or Dean and Canons only, and the whole State of the
College, together with its possessions, strengthened and constituted in a
manner De novo: at least this was a great step to the complete incorporating
them by King Edward the Fourth, when, through the interest of Richard Beauchamp
Bishop of Salisbury, then also Dean of Windesor, ^^d Chancellor of the most
noble Order of the Garter, there was obtained from King Edward the Fourth,
Letters Patent bearing Test at Windesor the 6. of December in the 19. year of
his Reign, for Pat. 19. E. 4. m. 5.
incorporating the Custos, or Dean and Canons and their Successors, by the name
of Dean and Canons of the free Chapel of St. George within the Castle of
Windesor, and that thenceforward they should be one Body Corporate in, thing
and name, and have a perpetual Succession.

Furthermore, that they and their Successors, should by the same Name, be
persons capable in Law, to purchase, receive, and take Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions, Services, Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges, or other
Possessions whatsoever, to be held and possessed in Fee and Perpetuity: As also
to have a Common Seal, for the Affairs and Causes of them and their Successors.
And that they and their Successors, by the name of Dean and Canons, etc. might
plead and be impleaded, pursue all manner of Causes and Actions, real and mixed,
challenge all Franchises and Liberties, and answer and be answered, before any
Judges spiritual or temporal.

But for the avoiding all further doubts, which might be taken for any occasion
or cause, touching the Dean and Canons of this Chapel in their Corporation,
Capacity, or Possessions, and for the more surety of them in all their tempora^
Endowments; the Letters Patent of Incorporation, were within three years after,
past into an Vide Rot. Parl. 22. E. 4. n. 11.
Act of Parliament, which yet remains in force.

Thus much for his Title of Custos and Decanus; we shall next touch upon his
Authority and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: for as he is constituted (both by
the Dat. Avinioniae pridie Call. Dec. Pontif. sui anno 9.
Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, and the Praef. ad Coll. Stat.
Institution of the College thereupon) President over the rest of the
College, to govern, direct, and order them, their Goods and Estates; so is he
to Praef. ad Coll. Stat.
exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over them, with a
reservation of power of Appeal to the Chancellor of England, Visitor of that
College.

Moreover, Colleg. Stat. cap. 39.
where any of them live inordinately or unpeaceably, he, with the advice of the
Chapter (in cases where no particular penalty is appointed to be inflicted)
has power to reprehend or correct at discretion. Ibid.
And in case where discord arises among any of them, shall within eight days
reconcile the parties, or do justice. Lastly, he has power (after the third
time of admonition) to Cap. 20. vide eriam Injunct. Io. Archiep. Ehor. Angl.
Cancellar. c. 1. and 2.
expel from the College, all sowers of Discord, Back-biters, and Whisperers,
that are below the Degree of a Canon.

And to the end there may be no defect in Government at any time, during his
non-residence, it is provided by the Statutes of the College, Cap. 49.
That when he has occasion to be absent from thence, above eight days or more,
he shall before his departure constitute one of the Canon-Residents (whom he
please) for his Deputy, who during his absence (having the Title of Lieutenant)
shall in all things exercise and execute his Office: for we are to note, that
the said Statutes allow him Cap. 7.
sixty days for non-residence, the Royal Visitation held anno 1552. enlarged
that time to Ex Collect. G. Evans modo unius Canoni^. hujus Colleg. lib. B. f.
74. a.
one hundred and ten days, and the Lord Chancellor Hyde gave him liberty of Ex
Collect. G. Evans modo unius Canoni^. hujus Colleg. lib. B. f. 74. a.
six weeks absence, to attend the affairs of his Deanery of Wolverhampton.

But in the Colleg. Statut. cap. 50.
vacancy of the Custos, whatever power or authority belongs unto him, the same
is then devolved upon the Chapter of the College; which Chapter ought within
two days after the vacancy known, to elect one of the Resident-Canons, under
the Title of President, to govern the College and direct all affairs relating
thereunto, until there be provided another Custos.

Canons.
Leaving the Custos thus settled under the Title of Decanus (which later he is
only known by at this day) we are now to speak of the Canons, whose number by
the Letters Patent of Foundation, were appointed to be four and twenty,
including the Custos; but upon Institution of the College, by the Bishop of
Winchester, there was then ordained (as has been noted) one Custos, twelve
Secular-Canons, and thirteen Priests or Vicars, in all twenty six; being the
very number before ordained by the Statutes of Institution of the Order of the
Garter, and answerable to the just number of the Knights-Companions of that
most noble Ord^r. And for a further distinction between these Canons-Secular,
and the Priests, the first twelve are in a Dat. 11. Call. Oct. an. 1484.
Bull of Pope Innocent the Eighth, called Majores Canonici, the other Lib. N.
p. 221.
elsewhere Canonici Minores, or Petty Canons.

To these twelve Seculars were assigned so many Colleg. Stat. ^. 2.
Prebendships in the Chapel of St. George (as also Ibid. c. 55.
Stalls in the Choire, and Places in the Chapter) together with that, held by
the Custos, whence of later times they are frequently called Prebends as well
as Canons, and their Dignities Canonships and Prebendships. Every Prebend has
a Ib. c. 10. vide E. 3. Stat. Art. 4.
Sacerdotal power given him by the Statutes of the College, and in regard of
this, those Statutes further ordained, That each Canon of the Chapel being a
Prebend, if not at that time a Priest, should within a year after he has
enjoyed his Prebendship, be so ordained; otherwise (without further admonition)
to be deprived thereof.

By the forementioned Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, there is reserved to the
Founder, his Heirs and Successors, the right of presenting the Canons, Priests,
Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Ministers belonging to the College; and thereupon we
find it noted, that Praefat. ad Colleg. Stat.
he nominated and presented William Mugg, and four other Presbyters to the
Bishop of Winchester, to institute them Canons and Prebends, in the Canonships
and Prebendships of the Chapel, which the Bishop did accordingly, and then
gave the said William Mugg institution to the place of Custos, upon the
Founders nomination and presentation also.

Notwithstanding which, it appears by the Art. 4.
Institution of the Garter, that the first Canons were presented to the Custos
by the first Founders of the Order, viz. the five and twenty first
Knights-Companions, every one of them being permitted by the Sovereign's
favor, to present a Canon; yet was it therewithal provided, Art. 4.
That neither the Knights-Companions, who thus first presented, nor any one of
their Successors from that time, should present to the vacant Canonships, but
the Sovereign only. To which end, in another place, the Custos was obliged when
any of the Ibid. Art. 33. vide e^iam H. 5. Stat. Art. 3^.
Canons died (the Sovereign being out of the Kingdom) to signify the same to
him by Letter, that so he might appoint whom he thought sit to succeed him.

But upon whomsoever these Dignities are conferred, they ought to be Colleg.
Stat: cap. 9.
Admitted, Instituted, and Installed, by the Custos (or Dean) or his
Lieutenant, to whom (at the time of their Installation) they are to be obliged
by Oath, to Cap. 3 and 48.
yield Canonical Obedience, and observe the Statutes of the College, so far as
it concerns them. The form of their Admittance is annexed to those Statutes.

The principal duty of these Praefat. ad Stat. Colleg.
Canons (so also of the Vicars, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Ministers of the
College) is continually and personally to attend upon the Service of God, in
the Chapel of St. George; and upon each days omission of a Canon-Resident, it
was Ordained, that he should forfeit his Colleg. Stat. cap. 11.
quotidian distribution, viz. Ibid. c. 2.
twelve pence. Nor do we find any license of non-residence, or discontinuance
given to any of the Canons by the College Statutes, but only to the Cap. 7.
Custos, and that but for sixty days in the whole year (as is before remembered)
howbeit there is mention of Canons-Resident, and non-Resident in the said
Statutes; to the non-Residents there are great Cap. 20.
defalcations appointed to be made, and good reason for it, because the
Resident-Canons bear not only the burden of that duty belonging to the Chapel
and College, but the expense of Hospitality and other works of Charity,
occasioned from their residing at Windesor.

Nevertheless the effect of a favorable indulgence toward the Canons was
introduced by degrees, and when Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, had
obtained power by a Dat. Romae anno 11. call. Aug. 1475.
Bull from Sixtus the Fourth, to make new Statutes in the College, he in this
particular dispensed with the old ones, and the fifth of March 1478. gave to
the Dean and every Canon and their Successors, fourteen days of non-Residence
in every Term, to wit, six and fifty days in the year. By the visitation held
anno 1552. these days are enlarged to Ex Colle^^. praefat, G. Evans lib. B. f.
74.
fourscore, and the Lord Chancellor Hatton yet further indulged them with Ibid.
two hundred and two days, which liberty the late Lord Chancellor Hyde Ibid.
confirmed; and consequently there remains one hundred sixty and three days in
the year, in which the Canons ought to be resident at Windesor. For each Canons
great Residence is Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. f. 143.
21 days, the looser Residence in conjunction with the greater is 163 days;
that is 21 of these 163 are to be kept without interruption, and with
hospitality according to the Statute.

The Canons are particularly obliged, Colleg. Stat. c. 34.
humbly to pray for the prosperity of the Sovereign of the most noble Order of
the Garter from time to time being, as also for the Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art.
4.
happy estate of the Order. E. 3. Stat. Art. 32.
And if any Knight-Companion, or other person, should out of Devotion bestow
ten pounds per annum revenue or more in Lands or otherwise, that so he might be
made partaker of the Prayers, appointed for the Benefactors of the College,
his name was ordained to be inscribed among them, and himself also prayed for;
which Article, though King Henry the Fifth confirmed, yet he provided H. 5.
Stat. Art. 34. H. 8. Stat. Art. 37.
that neither the Custos or Canons, should thenceforth admit of any such charge
upon the College, without the consent of the Sovereign, his Deputy, or the
Knights-Companions of the Order.

To this let us adjoin the care taken by the Injunctions of the 8. of February
an. 4. E. 6. for commemorating the bounty of the Benefactors of this College
to Posterity, for there it is enjoined, Art. 16.
That from thenceforth upon the Tuesday, next after the third Sunday in Lent,
and on the first Tuesdays in June, September, and December, some one of the
College should in a brief Sermon commend the munificence, not only of the
Founder, and of King Henry the Eighth, but of all other Noblemen, whose
bountifulness had appeared in their pious acts, and set forth how greatly God
is to be glorified, who by them had bestowed so many benefits on the College:
As also exhort his Auditors to use their gifts to the glory of God, increase of
Virtue and Learning, and the pious intent of Benefactors; and lastly, pray the
Almighty so to stir up the hearts of the living, to bestow some part of their
substance likewise, to the increase of Religion, and setting forth of his glory.

Thus far of the Canons Ecclesiastical Duty; but those things which relate to
their Civil Obligations are to attend the Sovereign (or his Deputy) and the
Knights* Companions, at the Grand Feast of St. George, whenever celebrated at
Windesor, as also at the Feasts of Installation; or when the Sovereign upon any
other solemn occasion shall come to the Chapel of St. George to offer; or
lastly, when any of the Knights-Companions (being on a Journey near the Castle)
come thither to offer likewise.

As touching their part in the Ceremonies observed upon any of these occasions,
we shall hereafter note them down in their proper places; and only mention here
the Robe appointed for them to wear at these times over their Ecclesiastical
Habit. This by the Statutes of Institution is appointed to be a Art. 5. vide
Hen. 5. Stat. Art. 5.
Mantle, and though these mention not the matter whereof it was made (which at
this day is Taffaty, of the fashion of the three inferior Officers of the
Order) yet they set down the Color to be Art. 5. vide Hen. 5. Stat. Art. 5.
Murrey, as also that the Arms of St. George should be placed within a Rundle
on the Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 5.
right shoulder thereof.

Petty Canons.
Those, who are now called Petty Canons, have no nominal nor other distinction
in the Pat. 22. E. 3. pars 2. m. 6.
Founders Patent of Foundation, from those other afterward called Canonici
majores, but both go under the Title of Canons only. In the Praefat. ad Colleg.
Stat.
Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth (which recites the substance of the Founders
Patent) in reference to the transferring his authority to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Bishop of Winchester, for instituting the College, they are
called Presbyteri; and by the said Bishop, in the very words of his Ibid.
Institution, Presbyteri sen Vicarii, but in the Art. 4. vide H. 5. Stat. Art.
4.
Foundational Statutes of the Order of the Garter, are styled Vicarii only.

Their Number at the first Institution was Praef. ad Colleg. Stat.
thirteen, and the same number appears to be continued, being taken notice of
in all the Exemplars of the Statutes of the Order. Only Art. 13.
King Henry the Eighths English Statutes mention eight Petty Canons, beside
thirteen Vicars (but the Latin takes notice only of Lib. N. p. 221.
thirteen Priests, part of them are there called Canonici minores, and other
part Vicarii) afterward the Injunctions of the Kings Commissioners dated the
23. of November anno 1. E. 6. appointed Art. 5.
twelve Priests, and they to be called Petty Canons: that is, four to be added
to the former eight, mentioned in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, which the
said Article directed to be done after this manner, to wit, that at the first
avoidance of the next Vicar, his stipend should be equally divided among three
of the eldest Vicars, who thereupon were to be called Petty Canons; and when
the room of another Vicar became void, then five marks of his stipend should be
appointed to the next senior Vicar (who was likewise to be styled Petty Canon)
and this direction being observed, the number of twelve Petty Canons became
completed. Yet in Queen Penes Carnevario^ Scacc^rii.
Elizabeth's Ordinances for the continual charge, the number of Petty Canons
thereby provided for, are noted to be thirteen, agreeable to the ancient number
of Vicars; but at this day they are but seven, and one of them Sub-chanter.

The Vicars at their admission (according to the appointment both of the
Statutes of the College, and those of the Order) are bound to be Colleg. Sta^.
cap. 3. E. 3. Stat. Art. 4. H. 5. Stat. Art. 4.
Priests, or at least Deacons, from whence they are next to be ordained
Priests, to wit, Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. Colleg. Stat. cap. 11.
the next time appointed for Ordination. Those Statutes bound them also to Ord.
Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. Colleg. Stat. cap. 11.
continual personal residence, and if absent without a lawful cause, from
Mattens, they were amerced Ord. Stat. in lib. N. Art. 4. Colleg. Stat. cap. 11.
two pence apiece for each omission, and two pence a time more, if not at every
grand Mass, and one penny for their absence from every Canonical hour, the Mass
of the Virgin Mary, or for the Defunct. All which forfeitures were to be
deducted o^t of their Sallary, and divided among those Vicars who gave their
attendance in the foresaid Duties. But the Art. 7.
Injunctions anno 1. E. 6. appoint the forfeit of absence from Mattens, to be
one penny half penny, and from either Procession, Communion, or Even-Song the
like Sum, to be paid to the poor Men's Box.

And not only they, but all other Ministers of the Chapel, if absent from the
College above Colleg. Stat. c. 18.
twenty days, without just cause approved of by the Resident Canons, or do
behave themselves scandalously in life or conversation, are by the Statutes of
the College to be expelled, after the fact proved before the Custos or his
Lieutenant; but if any of them absent themselves for less than twenty days,
without the like approbation, then to be punished at discretion.

Each of these Vicars had at first but the annual Pension of Ibid. c. 3.
eight pounds Sterling, paid after this manner, to wit, every Calendar Month
eight shillings for their Diet, and that which then remained at the Quarters
end, went toward furnishing them with other necessaries. Afterward King
Edward the Fourth increased their Pensions to Ex lib. vocat. Dento^. f. 177.
twenty marks apiece. To which Queen Elizabeth in augmentation of their livings
(they being then called Petty Canons) added thirteen shillings four pence per
annum to each of them, out of the Lands settled on the College by King Edward
the Sixth, as appears by the Penes Came^ar. Scaccarii.
Book of Establishment made by her, among the certain disbursments. And now
their yearly Pensions are lately increased by the College to Collect. praef.
G. Evans lib. B. f. 85. b.
thirty pounds. One of these Petty Canons is chosen from among the rest, to be
Sub-Chanter (and usually the same person is the Deans Vicar) to whose duty
belongs the cure of Souls, Marrying, Burying, etc.

To these Petty Canons it is requisite that we subjoin those, Four Clerks.
who after the Foundation of the College by King Edward the Third, were took
into the Choire for the service thereof. As first the Quatuor Clerici,
remembered in the Preface to the Statutes of the College, whereof Colleg. Stat.
c. 17.
one was to be instituted a Deacon, and another a Subdeacon, before their
admission: and these two were next in designation, and accordingly promoted to
the Vicars places; but for the other two, it was sufficient if they had
institution into lesser Orders, in which they were to continue. Each of the two
first of these had Ibid. c. 3.
eight Marks yearly Pension, and the two last but six.

King Edward the Fourth increased their number to thirteen, and allowed them
Lib. Denton. f. 177.
ten pounds per annum apiece. The same number do we find mentioned in Art. 1^.
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes of the Order, and by the Art. 9.
Injunctions 23. Nov. anno 1. E. 6. made by the Kings Commissioners, they were
increased to fifteen, but here appointed to be Laymen, wearing Surplices in the
Choire, each having an allowance of ten pounds annually for his service.

In the 23. Article of the Injunctions, of 28. Feb. an. 4. E. 6. a course is
prescribed to bring these fifteen Clerks to twenty, but in Penes Came^ar. Sc^cc.
Queen Elizabeth's Establishment, they were again reduced to thirteen, which
number is yet continued, (one of them being Organist, has a double Clerks
place, and consequently reckoned for two of the thirteen) and an augmentation
to each of two pounds thirteen shillings four pence half penny farthing yearly;
which being at first opposed by the Dean and Prebends, they at length ( anno 5.
Eliz.) consented to allow them forty shillings per annum apiece, not out of the
New-lands, but out of other payments, which the Dean and Canons should
otherwise yearly receive, and Ex Collect. praef. G. Evans. lib. B. f. 86. d.
anno 1662. increased their annual Pensions to three and twenty pounds apiece.

They are tied to be Injunct. dat. 8. Feb. an. 4. E. 6.
present in the Choire at all times of Service, as are the Petty Canons, and
under the same forfeitures, Injunct. dat. 8. Feb. an. 4. E. 6.
nor may they, or the Petty Canons go out of Town, without the Dean's or his
Lieutenant's license, nor then neither, above Injunct. dat. 8. Feb. an. 4. E. 6.
three at once, except for very weighty cause, left the Choire should be
unfurnished of a convenient number, to perform the daily Service.

Choristers.
Secondly, There were appointed for the further service of the Choire Praefat.
ad Coll. Statut.
six Choristers, and they to be likewise Clerks, or at the time of their
admission to have been Colleg. Stat. c. 3.
instituted of the Clerical Order, to each of which was allowed five Marks
Sterling, annually, or to the value thereof in common Money. And in like manner
as the Deacon and Subdeacon were placed in the College, only in addition to
the Vicars, and designed to succeed them as vacancies happened, so also were
there Cap. 17.
six secular Children, endued with clear and tuneable voices, admitted and
designed to succeed the Choristers, when their voices altered.

King Edward the Fourth enlarged the number of Choristers to Lib. Denton. f.
177.
thirteen, and allowed them annually six Marks apiece, and though this number
was confirmed by Art. 13.
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, yet the Art. 27.
Injunctions dated the 8. of Feb. anno 4. E. 6. reduced them to ten,
nevertheless by Penes Camer. Scacc.
Queen Elizabeth's Establishment, the former number of thirteen was restored,
and thereby given in augmentation among them all, Penes Camer. Scacc.
three pounds eleven shillings eight pence: Howbeit they were since brought to
eight, and their present exhibition is twelve shillings a Month to each.

SECT. V. Of the Alms-Knights.
PUrsuing the Order of our Discourse, the Alms-Knights come next to be spoken
of, wherein to avoid confusion, we shall consider them, first, under the
Foundation of King Edward the Third; Secondly, when separated from that, by Act
of Parliament; and lastly, as they were established anew by Queen Elizabeth.

First then, King Edward the Third, out of the great respect he bore to
Military honor (of which himself had gained a large share) and due regard had
of valiant men, chiefly such as had behaved themselves bravely in his Wars, yet
afterward happened to fall in decay; took care for their relief and comfortable
subsistence in old age, by making room for them within this his Foundation, and
uniting them under one Corporation and join Body, with the Custos and Canons;
these he called Milites Pauperes, and we vulgarly Poor or Alms-Knights, the
ordained number being at first but Pat. 22. E. 3. pars 2. m. 6.
four and twenty, as were the Custos and Canons at the first foundation of the
College. But shortly after upon his Instituting the Princely Society of
Knights of the most noble Order of the Garter, consisting of six and twenty,
there were added two more to the former number (as there was to the first
Canons) to make them of like number with the Knights-Companions of that Order;
which number of twenty six we after find settled at the Ordination of the
College by the Praef. ad Colleg. Stat.
Bishop of Winchester the Popes Delegate.

The charitable intention of the Royal Founder, was to provide for such only,
as were truly objects of Charity, and therefore he describes (even in the
Instrument of Foundation) what kind of men they should be, to wit, Poor
Knights, weak in body, indigent and decayed; and to like effect is their
qualification inserted in the Statutes of Institution of the most noble Order
of the Garter, viz. Art. 6 videsis Hist. Tho. de la Mare. f. 156. b.
such, as through adverse fortune were brought to that extremity, that they had
not of their own wherewith to sustain them, or Ca^^. an. 25. E. 3. n. 14. m. 6.
live so gentilely as became a military condition; but this being thought not
enough, the same is repeated (probably for greater caution) in King Art. 6.
Henry the Fifth, and King Art. 16.
Henry the Eighth's Statutes to prevent diverting the Founders pious intention,
and against admittance of such as are otherwise able to live of themselves;
which conjecture is not improbable, because we find the Cap. 6.
ancient Statutes of the College Ordained (as also the Orders of Art. 20.
Queen Elizabeth) That in case there should happen to fall to any of the
Alms-Knights either Lands or Rents, by succession or any other way, to the
yearly value of twenty pounds or more; then such Knight should immediately be
removed from the College, and made incapable of receiving any profits or
emoluments thence, and another Alms-Knight preferred into his place.

Their presentation when first admitted, was by the same hands that presented
the first Canons, viz. E. 3. Stat. Art. 6.
Each Knight-Companion of the Order presented his Alms-Knight, nevertheless it
was then also Ordered, That from thenceforward, every Election should remain at
the disposal of the Sovereign of this most noble Order.

To each of these Alms-Knights was appointed for their Habit, a Ibid. Art. 7.
H. 5. Stat. Art. 7.
Red Mantle, with a Scutcheon of St. George, but without any Garter, to
surround the same.

Their Exhibition from the College at first, was Stat. Colleg. Cap. 5.
twelve pence apiece for every day they were at Service in the Chapel, or
abode in the College, and forty shillings per annum for other necessaries; it
being the like allowance as was appointed to each of the Canon-Residents, which
shows the quality and esteem then had of these Alms-Knights.

It seems (about the beginning of King Henry the Sixth's Reign) these quotidian
distributions, and the forty shillings per annum so assigned them, had been
unpaid by reason of some dissentions and quarrels that had risen between the
Dean and Canons, and Alms-Knights; but upon complaint to John Archbishop of
York, Lord Chancellor of England, Visitor of the College, by the Art. 36.
Injunctions issued upon his Visitation anno 10. H. 6. the Arrears of both were
appointed to be forthwith paid without charge, and in case the Treasurer of the
College became negligent in future payments, he was to incur the loss of his
own Quotidiaus, from the time of his voluntary delay; the same to be divided
among the Alms-Knights.

Their duty was to attend the Service of God, and pray for the prosperity of
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions of the Order, to be Colleg. Stat* c. 6.
every day present at high Mass, the Masses of the Virgin Mary, as also at
Vespers and Compline, from the beginning to the end, except any lawful occasion
did impede. But it was Ordained that for Cap. 5.
every days absence from the Chapel, they should be debarred of receiving the
twelve pence per diem, and whatsoever was raised from such forfeitures, should
be converted to the use of the rest of the Alms-Knights then being in the
Castle of Windesor.

Notwithstanding which Decree, it appears that the Dean did afterward take
upon him the disposure of these Mulcts at his pleasure, which occasioned the
Alms-Knights to complain to Adam Lord Bishop of St. David's, Chancellor of
England and Visitor of the College, who among other of his Injunctions Pat. 2.
R. 2, pars prima m. 15.
dated the 8. of October anno 2. R. 2. commanded that the Mulcts should be
equally distributed among those Alms-Knights, who did attend at Divine Service
in the Chapel, as the Statute had enjoined. And besides, the like complaint
being made for the Dean's disposing of Donations and other Liberalities of the
Knights-Companions, so that the Alms-Knights had no part thereof toward their
sustentation, this Chancellor also appointed Ibid.
an equal distribution of them among the Alms-Knights and Canons, until the
King and his Council should otherwise determine.

These and other differences between the Dean and Canons, and Alms-Knights,
grew at length so wide, that they could not be reconciled; insomuch as in the
Act of Parliament, anno 22. E. 4. for the Incorporation of the Custos and
Canons, by the name of Dean and Canons, the Alms-Knights were not only omitted,
but this Clause inserted, Rot. Parl. anno 22. E. 4. m. 11.
That the Dean and Canons, and their Successors, should for evermore be utterly
quit and discharged from all manner of Exhibition or Charge of or for any of
the said Knights. And this was obtained upon pretense, Rot. Parl. anno 22. E.
4. m. 11.
That the King had greatly increased the number of the Ministers of the
Chapel, so that the Revenue was not sufficient to maintain both them and the
Alms-Knights, as also Rot. Parl. anno 22. E. 4. m. 11.
that the King had otherwise provided for the Alms-Knights. But we elsewhere
find some other cause, and this afterward alleged by the Dean and Canons in
their Answer to the Knights Petition for Repeal of the said Act, to wit,
Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. ad Calcem.
That William Omerey and John Kendall, Alms-Knights, labored much before this
Act passed, to be incorporate by themselves, to get Lands settled on them, to be
exempt from the obedience and rule of the Dean and Canons, and governed by
Ordinances made among themselves.

In the second place, this Act being thus obtained, and the Alms-Knights
divided from the Body of the College, as also struck off from the benefit of
the Quotidians, Portions, and Fees, assigned by the Foundation of King Edward
the Third; how they next subsisted does not fully enough appear: but so soon as
King Henry the Seventh came to the Crown, Ex veteri MS. f. 12.
they petitioned the King and Parliament, for repeal of the Act anno 22. E. 4.
affirming it was gained without their knowledge, or being called thereunto; to
which Petition the Dean and Canons answered, and the Alms-Knights replied, but
it seems all they could allege did not induce the Parliament to repeal the
Act: but on the contrary the Dean and Canons some years after obtained an
Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. f. 76.
Exemplification thereof under the Great Seal, dated 4. Feb. anno 18. H. 7.

And it is clear from King Henry the Eigth's Ex lib. Denton. f. 72. b.
Letter to the College, which takes notice of their discharge from any
exhibition to the Alms-Knights, by virtue of the said Act, That what the
College did in that kind, after this Act past, was merely upon courtesy, and
not obliged thereunto; for He thanks them for granting a Pension of twenty
Marks to Peter Narbone, whom He had recommended to an Alms-Knights place, and
promises they should be no further burdened with Alms-Knights, but that he
would setle Lands upon them for their maintenance, and free the College from
the said Pension.

Besides, when Mr. Narbone had the Pension granted him, it was by an Ibid. f.
73.
Indenture made between Nicholas West then Dean of Windesor and the Canons on
the one part, and the said Peter on the other, dated 18. July anno 3. H. 8.
wherein he covenanted, that when the King should setle any Lands on the
College, for sustentation of such Knights, then the grant of the Pension
should be void, and of none effect.

In the interval between the disunion of the College and Alms-Knights by the
foresaid Act, to their establishment by Queen Elizabeth, their Habit and Badge
continued the same, and was so confirmed by King Henry the Eighth's Art. 16.
Statutes: But it may be collected from his last Will, that there was then an
intention to draw the Garter about the Scutcheon of St. George's Arms, but it
took no effect: We observe also, that in this interval several persons who had
been of considerable quality and worth, became Alms-Knights, some of them were
nevertheless great objects of Charity; among whom was Sir Robert Champlayne
Knight, a valiant Soldier, and one whose martial services abroad, rendered him
an honor to our Nation.

It seems he had taken part in the Civil Wars here, with King Henry the Sixth,
against King Edward the Fourth, shortly after whose coming to the Crown he left
England, and traveled into Ex vet. MS.
Hungary (having with him an Equipage of three Servants and four Horses) where,
in the assistance of Matthias Corvinus King of Hungary against the Turk, he
behaved himself bravely, and like a valiant Knight: But prosperous Fortune not
attending him at all times, he received many wounds, and at length was taken
Prisoner, lost all, and forced to pay 1500 Ducates for his Ransom. For the
justification of all which, he obtained Ex vet. MS.
several authentic Testimonies under the Great Seals of Matthias King of
Hungary, Ieronimus Archbishop of Crete, Legate de Latere in Hungary, Frederick
the Third Emperor of Germany, Renat King of Sicily (Father to Queen Margaret
Wife of our King Henry the Sixth) Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne,
Charles Duke of Burgundy, and lastly a Declaration thereof from our King Edward
the Fourth, under his Privy Seal, dated the third of April in the nineteenth
year of his Reign. And being reduced to a low condition, by his great losses
and the charge of his Ransom, he was through the favor of King Henry the
Seventh Ann. 1. H. ^.
admitted an Alms-Knight here.

But some others made their retreat hither, and obtained admittance into this
Fraternity, probably out of devotion, rather than cause of poverty; and among
these were Pat. 22. E. 4. pars 1. m. 26.
Thomas Hulme sometime Clarenceux King of Arms, An. 7. H. 7.
Lodowick Carly the Kings Physician, Pat. 18. H. 7. p. 1.
John Mewtes Secretary of the French Tongue, and An. 6. H. 8.
Bartholomew Westby made second Baron of the Exchequer Pat. 1. H. 8. p. 2. m.
31.
2. June anno 1. H. 8.

It is manifest by the Will of King Henry the Eighth (as also by an Ex lib.
vocat. Frith in Aerar. Coll. Windesor. p. 55.
Indenture Tripartite between King Edward the Sixth of the first part, the
Executors of his Father of the second part, and the Dean and Canons of Windesor
of the third part, dated the fourth of August anno 1. E. 6.) that he intended a
re-establishment of half the ancient number of Alms-Knights, viz. Thirteen, to
which end he appointed, that as soon as might be, after his death (if not done
in his life time) there should be a Revenue of 600 l. per annum in Manors,
Lands, and Spiritual Promotions (above all charges) settled upon the Dean and
Canons and their Successors for ever, upon the Conditions following, that is to
say, That the Dean and Canons should for ever find two Priests to say Mass at
the Altar near his Tomb, to keep yearly four solemn Obits for him, and at every
Obit to distribute ten pounds in Alms, as also to pay twelve pence a day to
each of those thirteen Alms-Knights, and they to have once in a year a long
Gown of White Cloth, and a Mantle of Red Cloth, besides five Marks annually, to
such one among them as should be appointed for their Governor: And lastly, to
cause a Sermon to be made at Windesor every Sunday throughout the year.

King Edward the Sixth (in performance of this Will) the 7. of October, in the
first year of his Reign, did setle several Lands upon the College, which we
shall mention by and by; immediately after which, the Ibid. p. 37.
Dean and Canons were put in possession thereof, and received the Rents: but
600 l. per annum of these Rents, were by them paid back at the appointment of
the then Lord Treasurer, to be employed in building of Houses for the
Alms-Knights, intended to be settled as King Henry the Eighth designed.

But it seems this work was not begun till the last of February anno 3. and 4.
Ph. and Mar. and finished the 25. of Sept. anno 5. and 6. of the same King and
Queen, the charge whereof came to Lib. Compos. praef. penes -- Haris nuper de
Windesor.
2747 l. 7 s. 6 d. These Houses are situate in the South side of the lower Ward
of the Castle, and contain thirteen Rooms, besides a Hall, a Kitchen and
Pastry. The Lib. Compos. praef. penes -- Haris nuper de Windesor.
Stone for building was brought from Redding, the Timber from several places in
the Forest, and the Lead and Apparels for Chimnies, from Suffolk-place in
Southwark.

At a Chapter of the Order of the Garter held the Lib. C. p. 24.
first of June anno 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. (these Houses being then near
finished) debate was had about placing some Alms-Knights therein, if possible
by Michaelmas following, whereupon it was Ordered, That the Lib. C. p. 24.
Marquess of Winchester Lord Treasurer, should assign Lands for their
maintenance, that not any thing might be wanting to finish so pious a work. And
toward the completing of all, the Queen had nominated nine of the thirteen
designed Alms-Knights, namely Lib. vocat. Frith. p. 64.
James Crane, Michael Whiting, Silvester Clessop, Hugh Iohans, Robert Case,
John Brigby, George Fothergill, George Thackwell, and William Berd: but she
fell sick of a Fever in August following, and so a stop was put to this
business.

But now (in the third place) to come to the Establishment, which these
Alms-Knights obtained, and under which to this present they continue, Queen
Elizabeth, immediately after her coming to the Crown, confirmed her Sisters
Grants to the said nine Alms-Knights, and associated unto them Ibidem.
Thomas Kemp, William Barret, William Cowper, and John Acton, to make up the
full number of thirteen, ordained by King Henry the Eighth.

Afterward, viz. Ex lib. pergam penes Camerar. Scacc.
30. Aug. anno primo Eliz. the Queen, minding the continuance of the Foundation
erected by King Edward the Third, and as near as might be the performance of
the intent of her Progenitors, and advancement of the most noble Order of the
Garter, and especially of the knowledge given her of the last mind and Will of
her Father King Henry the Eighth, to make a special Foundation and continuance
of thirteen poor men, decayed in Wars, and such like service of the Realm, to
be called Thirteen Knights of Windesor, and kept there in succession: And
having also set forth and expressed certain Orders and Rules for their better
Government, and declared how and in what manner the profits of certain Lands,
of the yearly value of 600 l. given and assigned by her Father to the Dean and
Canons and their Successors, should be employed for the maintenance of these
Poor-Knights, and otherwise according to his mind and will, she lastly declared
her pleasure, That the Dean and Canons and their Successors should for ever
cause the said Orders and Rules to be observed and kept, which are these that
follow.

1. Ibidem.
First, We do establish 13 Poor-Knights, whereof one to be Governor of all the
residue by such Order as follows; The same 13 to be taken of Gentlemen,
brought to necessity, such as have spent their times in the service of the
Wars, Garrisons, or other service of the Prince, having but little or nothing
whereupon to live, to be continually chosen by Us, and our Heirs, and
Successors. 2. Item, We Ordain, that the Governor and Knights shall be chosen
of men unmarried, and shall continue, except in special case, where it shall
please Us the Sovereign, and the Heirs, and Successors of Us the Sovereign
Kings of this Realm, to dispense with any person to the contrary. Provided
nevertheless, if any of them will marry, he may so do, losing his place at the
day of his Marriage. 3. Item, We Ordain, that no man desamed, and convicted of
Heresy, Treason, Felony, or any notable Crime, shall be admitted to any Room
of the said 13 Knights, and if any so admitted be afterward convicted of any
such Crime, he shall be expelled out of that company, and lose his Room. 4.
Item, The same 13 Knights to have yearly for their Liveries, each of them one
Gown of 4 yards of the color of Red, and a Mantle of Blue, or Purple Cloth, of
five yards, at six shillings eight pence the yard. 5. Item, The Cross of St.
George in a Scutcheon, embroidered without the Garter, to be set upon the left
shoulder of their Mantles. 6. Item, The charges of the Cloth, and of the
Lyning, making, and embroidering, to be paid by the Dean and Chapter, out of
the Revenue of that foundation, and endowment given for that and other causes.
7. Item, The said 13 Knights to come together before Noon, and afternoon daily,
at all the Divine Service, said within the College, in their ordinary Apparel,
and to continue to the end of the same service, without a reasonable let, to
be allowed by the Governor. 8. Item, The said 13 Knights shall keep their
Lodgings appointed unto them, and their Table together in their common Hall
appointed, and to have their provisions made by their common Purse, except for
any reasonable cause, any of them be licensed to the contrary, by the Dean or
his Deputy, and that License to endure not above 20 days in no year, except it
be for sickness only. 9. Item, The said 13 Knights shall not haunt the Town,
the Alehouses, the Taverns, nor call any Woman into their Lodgings, without it
be upon a reasonable cause, and that with the License of the Dean or his
Deputy. 10. And further, We will that 12 of the said Knights shall be obedient
to the thirteenth, appointed for the Governor, and all 13 shall be obedient to
the Dean and Chapter, in the observation of these Statutes, for the good Order
of themselves. 11. Item, The said 13 Knights shall be placed within the Church
where the Dean and Canons shall think best, to hear the Divine Service
together, where they shall least trouble the Ministers of the Church. 12. Item,
They shall be present at the Service, to be done quarterly for the memory of
the Patrons and Founders of the said College, and specially of our said deaer
Father and Us, and have for every of them at each time 20 d. and the Governor 2
s. The said Service shall be used at the four quarters of the Year, every
Sunday next before the Quarter-day; That is to say, the Sunday next before the
Feast of the Annunciation of our blessed Lady, the Sunday before the Nativity
of St. John Baptist, the Sunday before the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel,
and the Sunday before the Nativity of our Lord God. 13. Item, If any of the 12
Knights do not obey the Governor in the observation of these Statutes, he shall
sustain for every time of such disobedience, such forfeiture as the Dean and
Chapter shall put on him. The Governor shall make report of all such
disobedience and other Offenses committed by any of the said Knights to the
Dean and Chapter; and if the offense be such, as shall seem to them to require
such punishment, they shall besides a pain Arbitrary, give a warning to the
Offender, causing the same to be registered, and he that shall so twice be
warned by them, shall immediately upon the third offense, be expelled for ever
out of that company. And if the Governor disobey the Dean and Chapter in the
Observation of the said Statutes, upon such warning by them, he shall receive
like punishment as the other twelve. 14. Item, The Penalties of such as are
punished by the Dean and Chapter for not observing of these Statutes, shall be
employed, by the discretion of the Dean and Chapter, upon any of the Ministers
or Choristers of the Church where they think best. 15. Item, When it shall
please God, that We, or our Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall repair to
the Castle of Windesor, the said 13 Knights shall stand before their doors in
their Apparel, to do their obedience unto Us, then, at the coming and going
away. 16. Item, Yearly at the keeping of the Feast of St. George, they shall
stand likewise in their Apparel, before their doors, at the coming and going
out of the Lieutenant, and of the other Knights of the Order, chosen for the
keeping of that Feast. 17. Item, When any Feast of St. George is kept within
that Castle of Windesor, the Governor and Knights at the Dinner, shall sit
together in their Apparel, as aforesaid, at one Table, and have allowance of
meat and drink, at the charges of Us, our Heirs, and Successors. 18. Item, The
said 13 Knights shall daily in their Prayers, pray for Us the Sovereign, our
Heirs and Successors, and for the Companions of our said Order of the Garter.
19. Item, The said 13 Knights shall all lie within their Lodgings provided for
them, and if any of them shall lie without their said Lodgings, and the
College, without the license of the Dean, or his Deputy, he shall lose for
every time twelve pence. 20. Item, If any of the Poor-Knights, after his
admission into that room, shall have Lands or Revenues fall unto him to the
yearly value of 20 l. or upwards, he shall immediately upon the coming of such
Lands or Revenues unto him, be removed, and put from his said room of a
Poor-Knight, and another, such as aforesaid, taken into his place. 21. Item,
The said Poor-Knights (excepting cause of sickness) shall be every day present
in the College, at Church at Divine Service as is aforesaid, and receive there
for a daily distribution of twelve pence by the day, to be paid them Monthly,
if it may be, or at least in such sort as the other Ministers of the Chapel be
paid; and he that shall be absent from the Church one day without leave of the
Dean or his Deputy, shall lose his distribution of 12 d. aforesaid. 22. Item,
The Governor shall keep a Book, and therein note as well the absence of every
Knight from the Church, as other faults committed by them, punishable by these
Statutes, whereof he shall deliver one to the Dean or his Deputy, and another
to the Steward, or him that pays the Poor-Knights, who by order of the Dean
or his Deputy, shall defaulk at the time of their pay such sums as are set upon
any of the said Knights for Penalties as aforesaid. 23. Item, The Dean or his
Deputy shall once in the year at least, appoint a day and hour, at the which
the Poor-Knights shall be warned to be present, unto whom the said Dean or his
Deputy, or one of the Commons to be appointed by the Dean, or in his absence by
his Deputy, shall read these Statutes, and if any of the Knights, being warned,
shall be absent from that reading, without license of the said Dean or his
Deputy, he shall lose for every time of such absence, six shillings eight
pence. 24. Item, The Poor-Knights so chosen, as is aforesaid, and every of
them, before he take any commodity of his Room, shall give a corporal Oath
before the Dean or his Deputy, to be faithful, and true to Us, and to our
Heirs, and Successors, Kings of this Realm, and that he or they for the time of
their tarrying there, shall truly observe these Statutes and Ordinances, so far
as the same concerns them, or such other as shall be hereafter made by Us, or
our Heirs, and Successors, touching the good order of that Company* upon the
pains contained in the said Statutes. 25. Item, Notwithstanding the Article
before expressed, prescribing the aforesaid number to be chosen of Gentlemen,
which we do most allow, yet considering that before the perfection of these
Orders, we be advertised, that the more part of them now chosen, and admitted,
be not certainly known Gentlemen, were received into the same Order, as men
well reported for honesty, and thought meet to be relieved for their poverty,
we are pleased to dispense with all such, as are presently placed, being not
Gentlemen born, and hereafter mean in that point, not to have any admitted,
contrary to the said Order.
The annual allowance to each of these Alms-Knights upon this new Establishment
is 18 l. 5 s. 0 d. to be paid by the Dean of Windesor (but their Governor has
3 l. 6 s. 8 d. more) besides a Gown or Surcoat of Red Cloth, and a Mantle of
Blue or Purple Cloth, on the left sleeve whereof is embroidered the Arms of St.
George in a plain Scutcheon. King James was pleased to double this Pension,
viz. to each of them Howes Chron. p. 1037.
18 l. 5 s. 0 d. more, and made it payable out of the Exchequer by quarterly
payments.

To these thirteen Alms-Knights there was added, in the Reign of the late
Sovereign King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, five more; to wit, two
of the Foundation of Sir Peter la Maire Knight, and three of Sir Francis Crane
Knight, sometime Chancellor of this most noble Order.

For Sir Peter la Maire, by his Ex lib. v^cat. A^dely in Officio Praerogat.
Cant. f. 7.
last Will and Testament, bearing date the eighth of January anno 1631.
bequeathed the sum of 1500 l. to be bestowed and settled to and for such
charitable and pious uses, and in such manner and form as Sir Francis Crane
(who had married his Sister) should think fit and appoint, within four years
after his death.

Afterward Lib. R. p. 113.
Sir Francis determining (very greatly to his own Fame and the honor of the
Order) to erect certain Houses in Windesor Castle, for the dwelling of five
(...) Knights, did thereupon design the said 1500 l. toward that use, and
added (...) money of his own to make up the rest; charging his Executor [Sir
Richard Crane his Brother, afterward created Baronet] by his Lib. vocat. Pyle
in Officio praed. f. 105.
Will, dated the 27. of August, anno 1635. to see the buildings, which himself
had begun, finished. He also bequeathed for ever two hundred pounds per annum,
to be settled in Lands by his Executor, according to the advice and direction of
Thomas then Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and Henry Lord Ma^revers his eldest
Son, to serve for the perpetual maintenance of five Alms-Knights, after the
rate of forty pounds per annum to every one of them.

But his Executor growing slack in the performance of this, the work being
rather exposed to ruin than any way forwarded by him, by whom the same was
only expected to be finished; and complaints thereof several times made to the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions in Chapter, Lib R. p. 140.
Orders were issued thereupon to quicken him, and a Sir James Palmer's Iournal
pro anno 1639 p. 64.
peremptory Letter sent him, dated the 7. of March 1639. to go on with the work
forthwith; which commands he evading, and bad times growing on, the building
was wholly neglected.

Sir Richard Crane afterward dying, by his Vide lib. vocat. Aylet in Officio
praed. f. 186.
Will dated, the 20. of Sept. 1645. appointed that his Manor of Carbrooke in
Norfolk, should for ever stand bound for the payment of the said 200 l. per
annum, whereupon by an Inquisition taken at Windesor, 4. Mar. 1652. by virtue
of a Commission upon the Statute, anno 43. Eliz. for charitable uses, the
Manors of Woodrising and Wesfield, with other Lands in the County of Norfolk
were found liable to satisfy for building and finishing the said five Houses,
and payment of the 200 l. yearly; and further, that the Arrears thereof from
Sir Francis Crane's death, came at that time to 3200 l.

Some contest then ensued in the Court of Chancery, between Ralph Mabb, with
other Prosecutors on the Alms-Knights behalf, and William Crane Esquire (to
whom the Estate of Sir Richard Crane fell) nevertheless the 200 l. per annum
was (19. July 1655.) Decreed to be paid out of all the Lands which were Sir
Richard Cranes, and the building of the Houses out of his personal Estate. And
upon this (about two years after) that fair pile of Building, erected between
the Chancellor's and Garter's Towers, against the West wall in the lower Ward
of the Castle, was taken again in hand, and finished in the following year; the
charge whereof amounted to 1700 l.

But for a final end of the Suit it was Decreed, the 27. of January 1659. That
the before mentioned Manor of Carbrook should for ever stand charged with 200
l. per annum, to be paid half yearly at Michaelmas and our Lady Day, or within
thirty days after, for the perpetual maintenance of five Alms-Knights, together
with 30 l. yearly for repairs, payable at the foresaid times, and an assurance
thereof to be made accordingly: toward the recovery and settling of which, the
care and assistance of Sir Bulstrode Whiteloke (then Constable of the Castle of
Windesor) was not wanting.

The setlement being perfected, the present Sovereign, in a Chapter held at
Whitehall the 14. of January anno 12. Car. 2. Decreed, That the Chancellor of
the Order for the time being, should receive the said annual sum of 230 l. and
dispose thereof thus; 200 l. per annum among the five new-instituted
Alms-Knights quarterly, by even and equal portions, at the four usual Feasts of
the year, and to employ the residue (being 30 l. per annum) upon repair of the
new buildings, erected for their Lodgings, which powers were inserted into the
Paten^^or his Office, bearing date the 20. of the same Month.

And it was further decreed at the same Chapter, That these five Alms-Knights
should be subject to the same Rules and Government, under which the other
thirteen were established by Queen Elizabeth's Foundation, and made equal
partakers of the same Privileges, and have the like Habit assigned to them.

The number of Alms-Knights being by the donation of Sir Francis Crane,
increased to eighteen. King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, taking
notice thereof (though they were not yet settled) intended to make them up six
and twenty, as they were at the Institution of the Order; to which end, in a
Chapter held at Whitehall the 18. of April 1637. it was Ordered, Lib. ^. p. 121.
That the Knights-Companions (Commissioners for other affairs of the Order)
should consider of the best way how the same might be effected, and report
their opinions to the then Sovereign: But nothing being done thereupon, this
Affair yet waits a more propitious season for the completing thereof.

SECT. VI. Of other Ministers of the College.
IN the last place, the Ministri or Officers of the College and Chapel of St.
George, bring up the rear in the Patent of Foundation, under which Title are
comprehended, first, the Superior Officers, namely the Chantor, Steward, and
Treasurer.

Chantor.
The Colleg. Stat. c. 37.
Chantor is ordained to be chosen from among the Canons, the chief part of
whose Office is to govern those that sing in the Choire, and such as are
employed about Divine Service: Before the Reformation in Religion, he appointed
who of them should begin the Antiphones, celebrate the Masses, and read the
Lessons, Epistles, and Gospels; with these, to his care was committed the
Colleg. Stat. c. 37.
custody of the Books, Crosses, Chalices, Vestments, and all the sacred
Ornaments of the Chapel. He receives the Offerings there made, and accounts
for them, for all which service an annual Pension of 5 l. is allowed him.

The Steward and Treasurer are Ibid. cap. 38. Steward.
annually chosen on the morrow after Michael-mas-day, from out of the
Canon-Residents. To the Stewards Office belongs the Government of all the
Revenue of the College; the Rents and Profits arising thence, he is to pay to
the Treasurer: To his keeping is delivered all the Ornaments, Jewels, and other
Treasure of the Chapel, not committed to the Chantor, under the obligation of
rendering an account, and his yearly Pension is 5 l.

Treasurer.
The Ibid.
Treasurer is appointed to distribute to the Custos, Canons, Vicars and every
other Minister of the Chapel, the Pensions and Allowances assigned to them, of
which if he fail eight days after the expiration of their set times of payment,
he is debarred of his own Quotidians, as Canon-Resident, until such Arrears be
discharged, so also the Steward if he be faulty herein. The Pension allowed him
is also 5 l. per annum.

As there is one Treasurer who receives the Rents of the Old Lands, so was
there appointed another distinct from the former, and chosen from among the
Canons to receive the Rent of the New (within few years after they were settled
on the College) to whom the like annual Pension of 5 l. has been also
allowed. The Title of the former being Senescallus veteris Dotationis, and of
the latter Senescallus novae Dotationis.

There is also the Steward of the Courts, Steward of the Courts.
and Clerk of the Lands, which is an Officer under both the before mentioned
Stewards: He Lib. Collect. praef. G. Evans, lib. A. f. 74. b.
keeps the Courts by himself or Deputy, he is a Barraster at Law, and the
standing Council for the College; his yearly Pension is Ibid. f. 75. a.
twenty Nobles; but the Council in Spiritualibus, is usually a Graduate in the
Civil Law.

Chapter-Clark.
The Ibid.
Chapter-Clerks Office, or Registership, is to enter or register all Acts
agreed upon in the Chapter House, he also draws, ingrosseth, and registreth all
Indentures, Patents, Grants, Leases, and other Writings, which pass under the
common Seal of the Dean and Canons. His Pension is Ibid.
3 l. 6 s. 8 d. per annum. The Under Stewardship and Chapter-Clarkeship went
sometimes heretofore together, but of late they are divided, and now this
Officer is also a Barraster at Law.

Verger.
Of the Vergers Institution the Colleg. Stat. Cap. 54.
Statutes of the College take notice, and appoint that in the Chapel at
Processions and other Solemnities, he shall go before the Dean and Canons
bearing his Rod: for which service there was then allowed him annually one
Robe, Sextons. Bell ringers. Clock-keeper. Porter.
and six pence per diem. And besides these Officers, there are two Sextons, two
Bell-ringers, a Clock-keeper, and a Porter, who attends the shutting and
opening of the Gates.

SECT. VII. Of the Endowment of the College.
OUR brief account relating to the Dean, Canons, and other Members of the
College, being now dispatched, it follows that we treat of the Endowment
thereof, and show what Lands were given toward the maintenance and support of
this Foundation. But because we intend no other account here, than in that of
the Castle, Chapel, and College, which was but short; we will only set down
what Lands, etc. the Founder endowed the College with, and then touch upon
those other considerable additions made by some of his Successors, Sovereigns
of the most noble Order of the Garter, and of the Knights-Companions, referring
the rest (after a bare mention of some other that were taken into the first
Foundation) to the larger discourse which we intend hereafter to make public.

The Endowments wherewith King Edward the Third invested this College by his
Letters Patent of Foundation before mentioned, were first the Pat. de an. 22.
E. 3. pars. 2. m. 6.
Advowsons of the Churches of Wyrardesbury (vulgarly called Rasbury) in the
Diocese of Lincoln, of Southtanton in the Diocese of Exeter, and of Uttoxater
in the Diocese of Coventry and Lichfield. These he gave to the Custos, Canons,
Alms-Knights and Ministers of the College, to hold in free, pure and perpetual
Alms, thoroughly and perpetually, free from all secular exactions, with license
to appropriate the same to the College, notwithstanding the Statute of
Mortmain. Pat. de an. 22. E. 3. pars. 2. m. 6.
He thereby also appointed so much of his Treasure as should be for their
decent support, until he had settled an immovable estate of 1000 l. per annum
upon them in Lands, Benefices, or Rents.

But as for two of these Advowsons, namely Vttoxater and Southtanton, it is to
be doubted there was afterward discovered some defect in the Kings Title to
them, and that the right of Patronage lay rather in Henry Earl of Lancaster,
and Thomas Earl of Warwick: for the 18. of June anno 23. E. 3. the King granted
special License to Henry Earl of Lancaster that he should give and assign to
the Custos and Chaplains of the Chapel of St. George in Windesor, and their
Successors for ever, the Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 2. m. ^.
Advowson of the Church of Vttokeshatre, it being there said to be of the Earls
proper Patronage. And the like license to Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, for
assigning to them the Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 2. m. ^.
Advowson of the Church of Southtanton, that being of his Patronage also: The
King gave special license likewise to receive these Advowsons from these Earls,
and to appropriate them to the use of the College.

Another like license passed ( Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3^
26. Ian. anno 24. E. 3.) to William de Bohun Earl of Northampton, that enabled
him to assign to the said Custos and Chapl^ins and their Successors, the Pat.
24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3^
Advowson of the Church of Dadyngton in the County of Oxford, which he held of
the King in Caepite, with license for them to receive and appropriate the same.

The 28. of January following, this royal Founder gave unto the Custos and
College, by the name of Custos and Chaplains of his Free Chapel of Windesor,
Pat. 24. E. ^. p. 1. m. 36.
one Message, seventeen Acres of Land, one Acre of Pasture, and three
shillings Rent, with the appurtenances, lying in Wyrardesbury in the County of
Buckingham, which had been conveyed to him by Rich. de Gloucester Heir to
Isabell de Ditton. And on the 22. of May ensuing, he also granted unto them,
the Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14.
Advowson of the Church of Dachet near Windesor, with license to appropriate it
to them and their Successors.

In the following year ( primo Martii) the King gave them the Pat. 25. E. 3. p.
1. m. 24.
Advowsons of the Churches of Eure in Buckinghamshire, of Riston in the County
of Norfolk, and of Whaddon and Caxton in the County of Cambridge, to
appropriate these also to them and their Successors. And the 9. of May after he
likewise granted and assigned to them, the Pat. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 14.
Advowson of the Churches of Symondesbourn (which the College in the Reign of
King Edward the Fourth surrendered to Richard Duke of Gloucester) and of St.
Stephens of Saltash, with like license of Appropriation. But the first of these
was the gift of Queen Philippa, she having purchased it of Ibidem.
Sir John Darcy Knight; and the other of Edward the black Prince; and both
granted by them, first to the King, that by his Grant afterward to the
College, its Title might be better strengthened.

The 26. of October in the same year, the King granted to the said Custos and
College and their Successors, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 3. m. 15.
one hundred Marks per annum, to be received out of the Farm of the Town of
Northampton; and paid them by the hands of the Bailiff of that Town for the
time being, at Easter and Michaelmas by equal portions, toward their
sustentation and maintenance, and the supportation of the burden of the
Chapel.

It was at the instance of the Founder (and therefore we mention it here) That
the Bailiffs and Communality of Yarmouth granted to the College (the first of
April anno 26. E. 3.) under their Common-Seal, a Ex ipso Autograph. in Aerar.
hujus Colleg.
Last of Red Herrings yearly, well dried and cleansed; to the end they might
take this Corporation into their Prayers. But some say it was enjoined them as
a Penance, for murdering a Magistrate among them.

Moreover the Founder granted to them and their Successors (18. July anno 26.
E. 3.) the Pat. 26. E. 3. part 1. m. 1.
Manor of Eure near Weybrigg, with its appurtenances in Buckinghamshire, the
Manor of Craswell, with its appurtenances in the Parish of Bray, in the County
of Berks, and a certain Wear, called Braybrok, placed in the River of Thames,
with all the Lands and Tenements in the said Parish conveyed unto him by Sir
John Philibert, together with the Knights Fees, and Advowsons of Churches,
Chapels, Chanteries, and other things whatsoever, to the said Manors, Lands
and Tenements belonging or appertaining. And the 23. of February following, a
Claus. 27. E. 3. m. 25.
Writ issued to Henry de Greystock Clerk, Steward of the Lands set apart for
the use of the Kings Chamber, and to Robert de Haddon Escaetor of the same
Lands, to give full seisin to the Custos and College of these Manors of Eure
and Bray St. Philebert, as also of a Wood called Temple-Wood in Stoke-pugeys,
conveyed to the King by John de Molyns.

Afterward, the King considering, that all the Lands he had assigned for
support of this College, were yet too little for that end; and being desirous
to have it better provided for, he further granted to the Custos and College
and their Successors by like Letters Patent, a Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 2. m. 22.
Pension of one hundred pounds yearly out of his Exchequer. These Letters
Patent were afterward vacated, for that by other like Letters dated the 12. of
May anno 34. E. 3. he gave them Lands to the yearly value of Pat. 34. E. 3. p.
1. m. 13
101 l. 11 s. 11 d. of the possessions of Religious Aliens, which fell into his
hands, by occasion of the French Wars. One hundred pounds per annum part of
this, was in recompense of the said 100 l. yearly Pension issuing out of the
Exchequer, and the 1 l. 11 s. 11 d. in part of satisfaction of the Lands, which
the King intended to provide for the further maintenance of the College;
nevertheless he thereby also granted, Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13
that in case these Possessions should by Treaty of Peace or otherwise be
restored, they should then receive the said yearly sum of 101 l. 11 s. 11 d.
out of his Exchequer as before, until there was provided for them Lands of the
like annual value.

And whereas in the Patent of Foundation it is said, that the King designed to
setle upon the College Lands of the value of 1000 l. per annum; now in another
Letters Patent bearing Test the said 12. of May, there is notice taken only of
Lands of the annual value of Ibid.
655 l. 15 s. 0 d. (as if his intended Donation had extended to Lands of no
greater value) and that the King in pursuance of such his purpose, had already
provided Lands and other Possessions, rated at 604 l. 5 s. 3 d. per annum, the
residue to make up the intended sum here expressed, being but 51 l. 9 s. 9 d. He
thereupon Ibid.
appointed the College to receive that sum yearly out of 126 l. 0 s. 0 d.
which the Prior of Takkele paid to him for the Farm of that Priory, it being
then in the Kings hands by reason of the War with France: Howbeit in case Peace
was so concluded, that the same should be restored to the Prior, the King then
further granted, Ibid.
that the Custos and College should thenceforward receive the said sum of 51
l. 9 s. 9 d. out of his Exchequer, at Michaelmas and Easter, by even Portions.

But it seems the Lands fell short of the value rated at in this Account, and
reached not to the total of the Kings intended Endowment by 90 l. per annum:
For the first of Pat. 35. E. 3. p. 2. m. 21.
June in the following year, by other Letters Patent, he granted to the Custos
and College, so much money to be annually paid them out of his Exchequer (to
make up what yet fell short) until he should cause to be provided Lands or
Rents of that value, to be settled on them and their Successors.

Lastly, the 2. of April anno 39. E. 3. the Founder bestowed on them a Pat. 39.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 22.
piece of ground in New-Windesor (upon which had stood a House sometime of John
de London) in lieu of the great Garden lying on the South part of the Castle,
Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 37.
formerly given them by him, for the use of the Custos and Canons. And also a
Garden opposite thereunto, on the other side of the way, with its
appurtenances, for the use of the Alms-Knights, Vicars, Clerks, Choristers, and
other the Officers of the College; and herewith he closed his Endowments.

But besides all these Donations made by the Founder, to the Custos, College,
and their Successors, there were other Lands, Parsonages, Pensions, and
Portions given to them by pious and devout persons, in free, pure, and
perpetual Alms for ever, toward their sustentation, which are said MS.
to be taken into the first Foundation, and made up that Revenue, which
Praesat. ad Colleg. Stat.
William Bishop of Winchester, accounted and declared sufficient for the
maintenance of the Custos and those other of the College, according to the
number by him limited in the College Statutes, as also for the due defraying
of all charges imposed upon them, and these we shall let pass with the bare
mention only.

The MS.
Manor of Dodyngton Castle, two Pastures called Frith and Ashcroft, the
Chapel of Langeley, the Parsonages of Es^riton, Langeley-Maries, Wantynge,
Shaldeborne, Wedonbeek, Glynde, and Ryslepe, the Pensions of the Vicarages of
Wantynge, Clyffe, Tyltehey, and Gottesford, and the Portions of Bassyngborne,
Pre^^ewyke, in Haseley magna, Chalgrave, Adewelle, Aston, Rowband, Sebyngdon,
Kyngeston, and Henton, in Stoke-Basset, and Clopecote, in Gatehampton,
Whytechyrche, Maplederham, Retherfeld, Esthenrith, Stretham, of Thernecroft in
Letherhed, of Totynbeek in Wodesdon, Ebyngton, Woodmershtborne, of Fordham,
Ethorpe, ^ewenham, and in Tollesworth.

In following times, there were many other considerable Donations bestowed on
the College, by the succeeding Sovereigns and Knights-Companions of the Order
(for as to what was given by others, we shall not need to take further notice
of now) either out of devotion, or desire to be more especially taken into
their Prayers, or in honor to the Military Order; some of which, as they fall
into our way, we will here set down.

King Richard the Second, Grandchild and Successor to the Founder (13. Feb.
anno Regni sui 13.) gave to the Custos and Canons Pat. 13. R. 2. part 2. m. 11.
one Croft in the Town of Northmolton, together with the Advowson of that
Church, it being in the Diocese of Exeter, and license to appropriate the same.

John Duke of Bedford, third Son to King Henry the Fourth, bestowed on this
College, by his Deed dated the 3. of December anno 9. H. 5. the Ex ipso
Autogr. in Aerar. hujus Colleg.
Priory of Okeborne in the County of Wilts (a Cell to the Abbey of Be in
Normandy) together with all and singular the Possessions thereunto belonging or
appertaining. This Grant King Henry the Fifth Ex Lib. vocat. Arundel in Aerar.
praed. f. 91.
confirmed, and that it might be more valid, was likewise confirmed by King
Cart. de an. 1. E. 4. m. 20.
Edward the Fourth.

King Edward the Fourth had a singular respect and favor for this College, to
which, the 18. of July in the seventh year of his Reign, toward augmentation
of its maintenance, and ease of the great burdens of the Dean and Canons, he
gave the Pat. ^. E. 4.
Manors of Atherston in the County of Warwick (a member of the Priory of
Okeborne) the Manors and Advowsons of the Churches of Chesingbury in
Wiltshire, and of Quarle in Hantshire, the Church and Priorate of Uphaven, and
the Deanery or Chapel of St. Burien in Cornwall, with all rights and
appurtenances thereunto appertaining, as also an annual Pension which the Abbot
of Sautre paid for the Church of Fulburne to the Abbey de bona Requie, and
another annual Pension of 20 l. paid by the Abbot of Rousford for the mediety
of the Church of Rotheram.

The 29. of January anno regni sui 13. he gave the Pat. 13. E. 4. p. 2. m. 6.
Manor or Priorate of Munclane in the County of Hereford (parcel of the
possessions belonging to the Priories Alien) with all and singular its
appurtenances.

The following year ( viz. 27. of February) he granted to them, by the name of
Custos or Dean and Chapter of this College, the Pat. 14. E. 4. p. 2. m. 5.
Custody, Patronage, and free disposition of the Hospital or Free-Chappel of
St. Anthonies London (a Preceptory of the Monastery of St. Anthony at Vienna)
with all the Liberties, Privileges, Lands, Rents, Services, and Emoluments
whatsoever thereunto belonging, upon the first vacancy, whether it should
happen by death, resignation, or otherwise.

He also gave them (the 17. of May ensuing) the Pat. 14. E. 4. p. 1. m. 1.
Priorate of Brimsfield in the County of Gloucester, the Manor of Blakenham in
the County of Suffolk (parcel of the Priory of Okeburne) the Priorate of St.
Elene in the Isle of Wight in Hampshire, the Priorate of Manor of Charleton in
Wiltshire, and all the Lands, Tenements, Rents, and Services in Northumudon,
Compton, and Welegh in the Counties of Sussex and Southampton (which sometime
belonged to the Abbey of Lucerne in Normandy) the Manor of Ponyngton and Wedon
in the County of Dorset (parcel of the possessions of Okeburne Priory) one
annual Pension of twelve Marks, payable by the Prior of the Priory of
Monte-Acuto, together with all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Advowsons, Liberties, etc. annexed to the said Priorates and Manors, or in any
manner appertaining, with license to appropriate the same to them and their
Successors.

About two Months after, this King gave also to the College, the Ibidem.
Manor of Membury in Devonshire, and Lordships of Preston and Monkesilver in
the County of Somerset, the Advowsons of the Churches of Puryton, and
Wollavington in the said County (being parcel of the Priory of Golalys in
Wales, and one of the Priors Aliens) together with the Knights Fees, Advowsons,
Profits, Rights, etc. thereunto belonging.

In the 18. year of his Reign, the Queen, Thomas Archbishop of York, and
several Bishops, Noblemen and others, being seized to the use of the King his
Heirs and Successors of the Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. Colleg. Windesor.
Manor of Wykecombe called Bassetsbury, the Fee Farm of the Town of great
Wykecombe, the Manor of Crendon in the County of Buckingham, and of the
Manors of Haseley and Pyrton in the County of Oxford, parcel of the Lands of
the Duchy of Lancaster, they (at the special command of the King) demised and
granted the premises with all their appurtenances to the Custos or Dean and
Canons and their Successors, until such time as the King, his Heirs or
Successors should grant to them other Lands of the like yearly value.

The 17. of February following, this King gave them the Pat. 18. E. 4. p. 2. m.
4.
Advowson of the Church of Cheshunt, being of his own Patronage, with license
to appropriate the same, provided the Vicarage were sufficiently endowed, and a
competent sum of money annually distributed among the poor Parishioners,
according to the Diocesan's Ordinance, and form of the Statute in such case
provided.

This King the 21. of February following united the Custody or Deanery of the
Free Chapel of Wolverhampton in the County of Stafford, to the Custos or Dean
of this College, and his Successors for ever. This Church cum membris is
exempt not only from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry,
but (by a Papal Bull) from all his Legates, and Delegates; nor is it subject to
any terrene power but the Majesty of England, and under it, to the perpetual
visitation of the Keepers of the Great Seal pro tempore.

He likewise gave them the Pat. 20. E. 4. p. 2. m. 23.
Advowson or Patronage of the Prebend of Ewern in the County of Dorset, the 27.
of Sept. in the 20. year of his Reign, with all its rights and appurtenances,
and also a license of appropriation.

And lastly, the 21. of November in the ensuing year, he granted to them two
parts of the Pat. 21. E. 4. p. ^. m. 3.
Manors of Old-Swynford and Gannow in the County of Worcester, and the
Reversion of the third part of them after the death of M^rgaret Wife of Fulk
Stafford Esquire; with the Advowson of the Church of Old-Swynford.

These were the effects of this most noble and munificent Princes piety and
liberality toward this College: Nor was he alone bountiful, but excited
others* to be so likewise, and to that purpose, in the first year of his Reign,
Cart. an. 1. l. 4. m 20.
h^^nsed all his Subjects in general to give what Lands, Rents, or Advow^ons
they plea^ed, to the Dean and Canons, within the value of 300 Marks per annum.
as well such as they held of the King in Capite, or in Burgage, or otherwise*
as any other Land; the same to be united and appropriated to the College and
its uses p^rp^tually, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmai^e; and afterward
increased this license to Lands of the value of Pat. 19 E. 4. m. 5.
500 l. a year (but King Henry the Eighth extended the like license to the
value of Ex lib. Denton. f. 115.
1000 l. per annum.)

Hereupon shortly after, to wit, June 29. anno Regni sui 20. he granted license
to John Duke of Suffolk and Elizabeth his Wife the Kings Sister, to give and
assign unto them the Pat. 20. E. ^ p. 2. m. 26.
Manor or Lordship of Grovebury otherwise called Leighton-Busard with its
appurtenances in the County of Bedford, the Church of Tintagell in Cornwall,
with all its emoluments; as also 19 Messuages, 7 Tofts, 140 Acres of Land, 14
Acres of Meadow, 140 Acres of Pasture, 1^^ Acres of Wood, and 4 l. Rent, with
their appurtenances in Newford and Blanford in the County of Dorset. And 70
Messuages, 12 Tofts, 500 Acres of Land, 100 Acres of Meadow, 300 Acres of
Pasture, 100 Acres of Wood, and 100 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in
Stokeley, Northall, Edelesburgh, and Rodenach in Buckinghamshire. And 20
Messuages, 8 Tosts, 300 Acres of Land, 60 Acres of Meadow, 200 Acres of Pasture,
40 Acres of Wood, and 20 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Compton-St.
John in the County of Sussex. And 10 Messuages, 9 Tofts, 200 Acres of Land, 20
Acres of Meadow, 100 Acres of Pasture, 10 Acres of Wood, and 20 shillings Rent,
with the appurtenances in Portsmouth and Burgbegge in Hampshire. And one
Message, 3 Tofts, 60 Acres of Land, 6 Acres of Meadow, 40 Acres of Pasture, and
20 shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in Stodeham in the County of
Hertford, held of the King in Capite; notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmaine,
or any other restriction or proviso whatsoever.

We shall here note, that the 24. of July anno 18. E. 4. this Lib. (...). f.
148.
Duke of Suffolk infeoffed Richard Duke of York, Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, and
others, of the Manor of Leighton-Busard, who the 25. of June anno 19. E. 4. at
his special instance Demised and Granted the said Manor to the Dean and Canons
forever. And in the Octaves of St. John Baptist, anno 20. E. 4. the Ibid. f.
149.
Duke of Suffolk and his Duchess levied a Fine to the Dean and Canons, who
thereupon agreed that for this their so large Donation they should be had in
their perpetual Orisons.

The 10. of January next after, Ex ips^ Autogr. in Aerar. Colleg. Windesor.
Sir Walter Devoreux de Ferrers Knight, following this pious Example, together
with Sir John Devoreux, and others his Feoffees, of the Manor of
Sutton-Courtney in the County of Berks, and of the Church of Sutton-Courtney
(having withal obtained the Pat. 20. E. 4. p. 2. m. 3. vide Lib. Dento^. f. 41.
and 42.
Kings license to that end) did give and grant unto the Dean, Canons, and their
Successors for ever, the Advowson or Patronage thereof, with all rights
appertaining thereunto.

All the before mentioned Endowments are called the Lands of the Old Dotation,
to distinguish them from those settled on the College by King Edward the Sixth,
which bear the title of Lands of the New Dotation, concerning which we shall
speak in the next place. But several of them so given by King Edward the
Fourth, the College never enjoyed, namely, the Manor of Atherston, the Manor
and Advowson of Quarle, Vphaven, St. Burien, Fulburne Pension, Brimfeld, St.
Elen, Charleton, Blakenham, Ponyngton, Wedon, Old Swinford, and Gannow: And of
some others they were seized but a short time, to wit, Chesingbury Manor and
Advowson, the Lands in Newford, Blanford, and Portsmouth. Besides these, the
College was dispossessed of Gottesford in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, of
Cheshunt Advowson in Henry the Seventh's Reign, and in the time of King Henry
the Eighth (or some time before) of Wodemershthorne, Tyltehey, Retherfeld,
Levyngdon, Stoke-Basset, Stretham, Totingbeek, Fordham, Ethorp, Newenham, and
Tollesworth; afterward they surrendered into the hands of King Henry the
Eighth, the Manors and Advowsons of Eure, Clyff, Ashton, Rowhand, Kingston,
Est-Henrith, Northumunden, Compton, Weleg, Compton-St. John's, and Shobingdon
Portion.

And lastly, the College lost at least 1000 Marks per annum, upon the
Reformation of Religion, in the profit made by St. Anthonies Piggs, which the
appropriation of the Hospital of St. Anthonies London had brought to it, and no
less than 500 l. per annum, the Offerings of Sir John Shornes Shrine, at
Northmarston in Buckinghamshire; a very devout man, of great veneration with
the people, and sometime Rector there. The Advowson of this Church was
appropriate to the Dean and Canons, by the Prior and Convent of Dunstaple, the
license of King Edward the Fourth being obtained for that purpose the Pat. 19.
E. 4. m 3.
15. of November, anno regni sui 19. in exchange for the Advowson of the Church
of Wedenbeck in Bedfordshire.

The Dean and Canons having by their Deed under their Chapter Seal, conveyed
unto King Henry the Eighth the Regist. vocat. Frith. p. 53.
Manor and Rectory of Ivor in Buckinghamshire, the Manor of Dammery Court in
Dorsetshire, and diverse other Lands, Rents, Portions, and Pensions in the
Counties of Somerset, Hants, Middlesex, Oxford, and Sussex, for which they had
no recompense in his life, nevertheless by his last Ex lib. vocal. Al^n in
Regist. Cur. Prerog. Cant. n. 32.
Will and Testament, he appointed them satisfaction; and thereby charged and
required his Son, and all his Executors, and likewise all his Heirs and
Successors Kings of England, as they would answer the neglect before Almighty
God at the dreadful day of Judgment, that they should see assurance made to the
Dean and Canons for settling Lands on them and their Successors, in performance
of his Will, and the uses therein appointed.

And it being manifest to the Lord Protector and his Co-Executors (after this
Kings death) Regist. vocat. Frith. p. 56.
that the Dean and Canons upon the commutation and agreement of an exchange,
performed on their part by assigning to the said King the Manors and Lands
above specified, being of the yearly value of 160 l. 2. s. 4 d. for which they
were as then unrecompenced; King Edward the Sixth, minding the accomplishing
and performance of his Fathers last Will, as well for the assurance of Lands to
the yearly value of 600 l. to the Dean, Canons, and their Successors for ever,
to the uses in the Will, and for maintenance and performance of such other
Ordinances and things, as he and the said Executors should limit and prescribe
to them; as also for the assurance of other Lands of the annual value of 160 l.
2 s. 4 d. to be made to the Dean and Canons in recompense of the Lands, they
had released and assigned to King Henry the Eighth; was pleased by his Letters
Patent bearing Test at Hampton Court, the 7. day of October in the first year
of his Reign, to give and grant to the said Dean and Canons the Rectories,
Impropriations, Parsonages, Chapels, Portions, and Tithes here named, viz.

The Rectories and Churches of Pat. 1. E. 6. part 5.
Bradnynche, Northam, Iplepen, Ilsington, and Southmolton in Devonshire, and
the Tithe of Corn of Dtery in that County, part of the Duke of Somersets
Possessions, as also Blosoms-Inn in St. Lawrence-Lane, London, sometime parcel
of the Possessions of the late College of Otery. The Tithes of Grain, etc. of
the Rectory of Ambrosbury in Wiltshire, and all the Tithes of Bedwyn, Stoke,
Wilton, Harden, Harden-Tunrige, Knoll, Pathall, Chisbury, East-Grafton,
West-Grafton, Grafton-Darten, and Wexcombe, parcel of the Prebend of Bedwyn in
that County; as also the Prebend of Alcannyngs and Urchefounte, the Rectories
of Urchefounte, Stapleford, Tytcombe, and Froxfield in the said County, and all
the annual Pension of 8 l. issuing out of the Manor of Icombe in the County of
Gloucester. The Rectory and Vicarage of Ikelington in Cambridgeshire. The
Rectory of East-Bethworth in the County of Surrey. The Reversion of the Portion
of Tithes of Trequite in Cornwall, and the Rent of 13 s. 4 d. reserved upon the
same. All the Portion of Tithes of Trequite aforesaid, belonging to the Priory
of St. Germans in Cornwall. The Rectory and Church of Plymton, the Chapels of
Plymstoke, Wembury, Shagh, Sanford-Spone, Plymton, St. Maurise, and Bryxton in
Devonshire, belonging to the late Priory of Plymton, the Rectory of Istleworth
and Twickenham in the County of Middlesex, parcel of the possessions of the
College of St. Mary's of Winchester, and the Rectory of Shiplake in
Oxfordshire, lately belonging to the Monastery of Missenden in Buckinghamshire.
As also all the Reversion of the Rectory of Aberguille, and of the Chapels of
Llanlawett (alias dict. Llanbadock) and Llanpenysaunt, (part of the Monastery
of Karmarden in South Wales) with the Rent of 30 l. per ann. reserved thereon;
the Reversion of the Rectory of Talgarth (part of the Priory of Brecknock in
South Wales) with the reserved Rent of 11 l. 6 s. 8 d. The Reversion of the
Rectory of Mara in the County of Brecknock (belonging to the Priory of
Brecknock) and 6 l. Rent. The Reversion of the Rectory of St. Germans in
Cornwall (appertaining to the Monastery or Priory of St. Germans) with 61 l. 13
s. 4 d. Rent. To have and to hold all the premises, unto the Dean and Canons
and their Successors for ever; except the Tithes in Woolpall and Fitz-Waren in
Wiltshire (belonging to the Priory of Bedwyn) The Vicarage-house of Ikelington,
the Moneys called Marriage-Money, Dirge-Money, and Mass-Money, and the whole
profit of the Bedrolls of Ikelington. Nevertheless to pay the King and his
Successors in the Court of Augmentation, for the Rectories of Aberguille,
Talgarthe, and Mara, the Chapels of Llanbadock and Llanpenysaunt 4 l. 2 s. 8
d. in the name of Tenths, and for all Rents, Services, etc. of the other
Rectories, etc. 48 l. 7 s. 4 d. annually at Michaelmas.

Furthermore, within all these premises the King (by the said Letters Patent)
granted to the Dean and Canons, Court Leets, or Views of Frankepledge, and to
have Fines and Amerciaments, Free-Warrens, Waifs, and Felons Goods, and all
other Profits, Commodities, Liberties, Emoluments, and Hereditaments
whatsoever. All which Rectories, Tithes, Pensions, Rents, etc. before
mentioned, and all other Gifts and Grants in the possession of the Dean and
Canons anno Iac. Reg. 2. were confirmed and made good and effectual in Law to
them and their Successors, by Act of Parliament that year.

The Regist. Frith, p. 57.
2. of August preceding the Grant made by King Edward the Sixth, a Rental
passed under the hand of Sir Edward North Chancellor of the Court of
Augmentation, containing the particular charges issuing out of the aforesaid
Rectories, etc. whereunto certain Articles were annexed, and according to which
the said Deed of Conveyance from the King was drawn.

The ancient rate of these New Lands in the Kings Books was Ibid. p. 54.
661 l. 6 s. 8 d. per annum, but according to the improved Rents, to wit, as
they were then turned over to the College, was 812 l. 12 s. 9 d. out of which
improved value (as appears by the Articles now mentioned) Ibid. p. 57.
160 l. 2 s. 4 d. was yearly allowed them in satisfaction of the Lands past
over to King Henry the Eighth, and 600 l. per annum for accomplishment of his
Will, but the remaining sum, viz. 52 l. 10 s. 5 d. was reserved in lieu of
Tenths, to be yearly paid into the Court of Augmentation; howbeit this last
reserved sum was not agreed unto by the Dean and Canons to be so paid, because
the Charges issuing out of the Lands were greater than were expressed in the
Rental.

And we find, that shortly after the Ibid. p. 54.
Rents of the Parsonage of St. Germans, the Rectories of Northam, Ilsington,
Icklington, Ambrosbury, Stapleford, and Vrchefount, the Prebends of Alcanings
and Vrchefount, being part of the New Lands, were received and accounted for,
according to the old rate in the Kings Books, to wit, 162 l. 13 s. 4 d. per
annum, by the Steward of the Old Lands, in recompense for the Lands conveyed to
King Henry the Eighth, and out of which they paid a yearly surplusage of 2 l. 2
s. 1 d. this sum together with the Rents of the rest of the New Lands, being
upon the said improvement accounted to be 597 l. 17 s. 11 d. made in all 600 l.
per annum; and this was paid by the Dean and Canons for some time toward
building the Alms-Knights Houses, as is before remembered.

Thus stood the Lands accounted for, till the setlement made by Queen
Elizabeth, for the disposition of the whole Revenue, which then was accounted
to the College, but at the value entered in the Kings Books; upon which
setlement the Queen appointed the Dean and Canons to convert the Rents of these
New Lands, from time to time to such uses and intents, and in such manner and
form as she had set down in a Penes Camerar. Scaccarii.
Book signed with her Sign Manual, and annexed to an Indenture bearing date the
30. of August, in the first year of her Reign, made between Her on the one
part, and the Dean and Canons on the other part. By which Indenture the Dean
and Canons Covenant for themselves and Successors Penes Camerar. Scaccarii.
to distribute and employ at all times for ever the Rents and Profits of these
Lands, in such manner as in the Book is declared and appointed, and to observe
and keep all the Ordinances, Rules, and things whatsoever contained therein,
which on their part and behalf is limited and appointed to be performed and
executed, according to the true meaning of the same.

And if the Dean and Canons or their Successors should omit any thing to them
appointed to be performed by the said Ordinances, Rules, and Statutes, then for
every such default they are to abide such Order as shall be made by the Queen,
her Heirs, or Successors, or by any of the Knights-Companions of the Order, as
by her or her Successors should be thereunto appointed.

l. s. d. In this Book, the Total of the Revenue, reckoned at the ancient value
amounts to -- 661 06 08 The Annual charge and disbursements to the College,
therein set down, is -- 430 19 06 And so Remains -- 230 07 02

Which Remainder has been and is Ibid.
assigned and employed for payment of Tenths to the Crown, Vicars and Curates
annual stipends, Officers-Fees, Reparation of the premises, and for the relief
of the Dean and Canons and their Successors, in maintenance and defense of the
said Lands.

And to the end the Queen might know how the Revenue of these New Lands was
disposed of, she also Ordered, Ex eod. lib.
That her Lieutenant and the Knights-Companions, should annually (at the Feast
of St. George held at Windesor) see the just account thereof, how the Income
was expended, and the payments made; and that one of the Officers of the Order,
should from time to time yearly put her Lieutenant in mind thereof.

Which Order was renewed in a Chapter of the Garter held April Lib. R. p. 10.
and 15.
24. ann. Iac. Reg. 21. and the Chancellor of the Order appointed to be the
Remembrancer: and in obedience thereunto, the Account of these New Lands (which
begins annually at Lady Day, as that of the Old Lands does at Michaelmas) was
afterward exhibited in Chapter, and in particular that Ibid. p. 88.
Account, presented by the Dean of Windesor, and submitted to the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions consideration, (the 6. of November anno 9. Car. 1.) was
referred to the perusal and inspection of the Ibid. p. 88.
Knights-Commissioners, appointed at the same Chapter to consult the Affairs of
the Order.

SECT. VIII. Of the Privileges of the Chapel and College.
IN the last place, the Privileges of both are to be considered, which we
shall divide into Ecclesiastical and Temporal.

Touching the first, it appears by a In Aerar. Coll. Windesor.
Bull of Pope Clement the Sixth, dated at Avignion the 12. of February in the
9. year of his Papacy, That at the desire of the Founder, this Pope exempted
the Chapel, College, Canons, Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Officers of
the College, from all ordinary Jurisdiction, Dominion, and Superiority of
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, and all other Judges and Officials, and
received them within the protection of the Papal See. And further granted, That
the Custos for the time being, should have Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the
Canons, Priests, Clerks, Alms-Knights, and Officers, and their Successors, as
also the Cure of their Souls; notwithstanding any Papal Constitution, Statutes,
Customs, whether Provincial or Synodical, or other whatsoever to the contrary.
Willing nevertheless, that the Custos should receive the Cure of their Souls
from the Diocesan of the place. And in considerat^^^ of this Exemption and
Privilege, the Custos was obliged to pay annually on St. Georges day, one Mark
in Silver to the Popes Chamber.

About two years before the date of this Bull, we find that this Chapel had
the title of Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 1. m. 36.
the Kings free Chapel, given unto it (so also whilst under the Rot. Finium
anno 1. E. 3. m. 21.
former Foundation) and still enjoys the same: which title of Free Chapel is
not only intimated but confirmed by its exemption from the Jurisdictions now
mentioned.

It is subject to no power (since the Supremacy in Ecclesiastics became vested
in the King, by the Law of this Realm) but only to the King of England; as
heretofore it stood divided to the King and See of Rome.

The Privilege of Exemption by Pope Clement the Sixth, is included in the
Cart. de an. 47. E. 3.
Confirmation of Liberties made by the Founder in his Charter, dated the 28. of
February anno regni sui 47. and all Privileges and Liberties granted by him,
are Rot. Parl. an. 8. H. 6. n 31.
confirmed to the College by Act of Parliament, anno 8. H. 6.

As this College does depend immediately on the King, so is it visitable only
by his Chancellor, whose Praesa^. ad Colleg. Stat.
Visitations, and accustomed Jurisdictions exercised by him in the Chapel,
College, and Persons thereunto belonging, are reserved to him by the Statutes
of the College; and himself called in the Kings Commission for Visitation of
the College anno 2. R. 2. Pat. 2. R. 2. p. 1. m. 15.
Governor of the said Chapel, as well in Spirituals as Temporals, and under
the King immediate Custos.

And so jealous were the Dean and Canons left the power of the foresaid
Exemption should be infringed, that when Sixtus the Fourth had granted a Lib.
Denton. f. 10.
Bull to the Bishop of Salisbury and Dean and Canons, with authority to make
new Ordinances, and to interpret the ancient Statutes, they within few years
obtained a Ibid. f. 1.
Revocation of that Authority; left the said Bishop (in whose Diocese the
College is situate) being so empowered, might prejudice their Liberties, new
form their Statutes, and by degrees bring them under his Jurisdiction, in
prejudice to the said Exemption.

And further, to prevent any such design, the same Pope commissionated the Fol.
1^.
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of Winchester and Worcester to see this
Bull of Revocation take effect, and enjoined them not to suffer the Bishop of
Salisbury to intermeddle further in the College Affairs or Statutes; but that
the Fol. 18.
Bishops of London, Lincoln, and Rochester, and the Chancellor of England, or
any two or more of them, with the Dean and Canons should review, alter, or new
make such Statutes or Ordinances, as might be for the utility and advantage of
the College: This later Bull is dated at Rome, 7. Call. Aug. an. Dom. 1485.

It is an argument of no small privilege, that if the Ex Collect. praef. G.
Evans lib. A. ad Calcem.
Archbishop of Canterbury be present in the Chapel of Windesor, yet he sits
below the Dean; nor can he consecrate there without his License. And the
instance is no less remarkable, that at the Solemnity of ratifying the Peace
between King Charles the First of ever blessed memory, and Lewis the Thirteenth
of France, the 6. of September 1629. in the Chapel of St. George at Windesor,
Lib. R, p. 53.
Doctor Matthew Wren then Dean, gave the Oath (as Dean of this College) to the
Marquess of Chasteneaus the French Kings Ambassador, and not the Archbishop of
Canterbury, though he was then present.

By the Statutes of the College, the Cap. ^1.
Dean and Chapter, are at their yearly Chapters, diligently to consider and
debate all things that shall fall out, or seem fit to be dispatched, in
reference both to the Spiritual and Temporal Affairs of the College, and
whatsoever Ordinances or Determination shall be made at these Chapters (not
repugnant to the College Statutes) all persons belonging thereunto, are firmly
obliged to observe, so far as they are concerned in them, until they happen to
be altered by later Resolves of succeeding Chapters.

Other Notes and Marks of Exemption appears in the Deans taking no Institution
from any other Bishop; but that his Stat. (...). Cap. 9.
Institution, Investiture, and Installation into the Custoship, Canonship, and
Prebendship, is received from such of the Canons-Resident, to whom the King
(who Collates) does recommend him by his Letters. As also in the constant Ad
Calcem; Collect. pras.
proving of Wills before him, or in his absence before his Lieutenant: In using
the power of Excommunication within their Ju^^^diction (which is the Precincts
of the College) and dispensing with themselves, for eating of Flesh in Lent.

Add to these, that the Ibid.
Ordinations for the Chantry Priests were confirmed by the Dean and Chapter,
not the Bishop of the Diocese, so also were the Statutes of the New Commons.
Nor does the Ibid.
Dean who has the cure of Souls (as is before noted) pay any Synodals or
Procurations, nor can any of the Lib. R. p. 53.
Kings Chaplains preach in the Chapel of St. George, unless he be a Canon
there, without the Kings special mandate, or leave of the Dean and Canons.

The Dean and Canons send no Ex praef. Collect.
Delegates to the Synod, and when this point fell into debate, anno 1640. it
was carried in the Negative, as being a perfect Novelty, and against their
Liberties, and might entitle them to the payment of Subsidies, and consequently
bring a new charge upon the College. Nor have they share in the Government of
the Church, as other Deans and Chapters have. So that notwithstanding any
alteration or dissolution of the Government of the Church here in England by
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters, this College cannot be concerned,
more than the Colleges in the Universities, where there are many nominal Deans.

Lastly, after the Act for Uniformity past, Ibid.
an. 14. Car. 2. whereby every Clergyman was bound to subscribe before the
Archbishop or his Ordinary, the Ibid.
Canons subscribed before the Dean of Windesor, he being the Ordinary of the
place: And though some of them in majorem cautionem, subscribed also before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, yet was it with this Salvo, saving the rights and
privileges of this Free Chapel.

Thus much in relation to the Ecclesiastic Privileges of the College: As to
the Temporal and Civil, what the Founder granted to it, being very large and
beneficial (in regard he was born here, and touched with a prerogative of
affection to this place) and has been since confirmed by several of his
Successors, we shall here insert.

First then the Founder King Edward the Third, by his Cart. de anno 17. E. 3.
m. 6. n. 14.
Charter dated the 6. of March in the 27. year of his Reign, granted them
several Profits, Privileges, and Immunities to the effect following.

That the Custos and Canons, and their Successors, should for ever be free from
payment of any Aid, for making the eldest Son of any King of England a Knight,
and for marrying their eldest Daughter: as also of all Aids to the King,
Contributions and Tallages.

That whenever the Clergy of this Realm, or of the Province of Canterbury or
Tork, should give a Tenth or other Imposition, out of their Spiritualities; or
the Commons of England should give a Tenth or Fifteenth, or any other Tax, out
of their Temporalities or moveable Goods, or that the King and his Heirs should
cause his own Demain to be taxed; or that the Pope should impose any Tax or
Imposition upon the Clergy of this Realm, and give the same to the King and his
Heirs; this College with all its Lands and Possessions should be wholly freed
thereof.

That they should be free from any charge of Arraying Soldiers, for the service
of the King and his Heirs; and from sending them for the Custody of the
Seacoasts, and from every Fine or Composition for the same.

That their Houses, as well those within the Castle of Windesor, as elsewhere,
should be free from any Livery of the Kings Stewards, Marshalls, Purveyors,
Officers, and Servants, and from the like Officers of the Queens, or any of
their Children, or of the Peers or Nobles. And that the said Officers should
not intermeddle there, without the leave of the Custos and Canons, and their
Successors.

That no Duke, Earl, Baron, or Nobleman, nor any Stewards, Marshals,
Escheators, Sheriffs, Coroners, Bailiffs, or Officers, nor any other person of
what condition soever, should upon any color lodge or stay in the Houses of
the Custos or Canons, without their consent.

That they the said Custos and Canons, and their Tenants, should for ever be
free from payment of Toll, Paviage, Picage, Barbicanage, Terrage, Pontage,
Murage, Passage, Paiage, Lestage, Stallage, Tallage, Carriage, Pesage, and from
Scot and Geld, Hidage, Scutage, working about Castles, Parks, Bridges, Walls
for the Kings Houses. And from suits to the County or Hundred Court, and
Wapentakes, Court Leets, Murder, and Common Amerciaments, whether they should
happen before the King, or any of the Justices of the Bench, or Justices
Itinerant, or other Justices whatsoever, and from every other like Custom.

That they should have within their Lands and Fees, the Chattels of all Felons
and Fugitives, and seize them to their own use.

That they should have all Fines for Trespasses, and all other Contempts and
Misdemeanors, Fines, pro licentia concordandi, and for all other causes.

That they should have all Amerciaments, Redemptions, Issues, and Forfeitures
whatsoever, Annum, Diem, Vastum, and Streppum, and all things which might
belong to the King and his Heirs thereupon.

That they should have Wrecks, Waiss, and Strays, within all their Lands and
Fees.

That no Purveyance of Corn, Hay, Horses, Carts, Carriages, Victuals, or any
Goods, Chattels, or any thing whatsoever, should be taken by any of the Kings
Officers or Ministers, in, or upon any of their Lands, or the Lands of any of
their Tenants.

That they should be free from the payment of any Pension, Corrody, or other
Sustentation to be granted by the King, his Heirs or Successors.

That they should have Free Warren in all their Demain Lands wheresoever. And
that, although they lay within the bounds of the Kings Forest.

That they should have a weekly Market, to be held on Wednesdays, at their
Manor of Eure in Buckinghamshire, and two Fairs to endure for eight days, viz.
on the Eve and Feast Day of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and for two days next
following: and upon the Eve and Feast Day of St. Peter ad vincula and two days
following, with all Liberties and Customs to the said Market and Fairs
belonging.

That they should enjoy all their Lands, with the Liberties of Soc and Sac,
Insangthes, Vtsangthes, and View of Frankepledge; with Thewe, Pillory, and
Tumbrel, for punishment of Malefactors; and power to erect Gallows upon their
own soil, for Execution of such Malefactors as should fortune to be apprehended
within their Jurisdiction.

That they should be freed and discharged from all Suits and Pleas of the
Forest, and of all Charges or Fees, which the Justices or other Officers of the
Forest might demand. And from Expeditation of their Dogs, and Suits of Court
there.

That they should be free from Gelds, Dane-gelds, Knights-Fees, Payments for
Murder and Robbery, Building or Repairing of Bridges, Castles, Parks, Pools,
Walls, Sea-banks, Causeways, and Enclosures, and of all Assizes, Summons,
Sheriff-aids, their Bailiffs, or Officers, carrying of Treasure, and all other
Aids, as also from the common Assessments and Amerciaments of the County and
Hundred and all Actions relating to them.

That they should be freed from the payment of Ward-penny, Aver-penny,
Tithing-penny, and Hundred-penny, and discharged from Grithbrech, Forstall,
Homesoken, Blod-wite, Ward-wite, Heng-wite, Fight-wite, Leyr-wite, Lastage,
Pannage, Assart, and Waste of the Forest, so that such Waste and Offenses be
not committed in the Forests, Woods, or Parks of the King his Heirs and
Successors; and if it should happen so to be, that then reasonable
satisfaction, without imprisonment or grievous recompense, should be accepted.

That they should have return of all Writs and Attachments, as well relating to
the Pleas of the Crown, as other, throughout all their Lands or Fees, and that
no sheriff, Bailiff, or other Officer should make any Execution of such Writs
there, unless in default of the Custos and Canons and their Successors.

That they should have and hold Leets and Law-days, for all within their Lands
and Fees.

That they should have cognizance of all Pleas betwixt their Tenants, as well
of Trespasses and Contracts, as others, in their own Courts.

And lastly, that they should have and hold Wards, Reliefs, Escheats,
Forfeitures, and other Profits, Issues, and Emoluments whatsoever, within their
own Fees, from all their Tenants, which might belong to the King or his Heirs,
and which the King might receive by reason of those Fees, in case they were in
his own hands, as if the Tenants did hold of him or others in Capite of the
Crown.

CHAP. V. THE Institution OF THE MOST NOBLE Order Of the Garter.
SECT. I. The several Opinions touching the occasion of its Institution.
EDward King of England and of France, of that name (after the Norman Conquest)
the Third, was the first Founder of this most renowned Order of the Garter: And
this is not only unanimously attested by our own, and other Historians, but
also by good Authorities and Records of the Order it self.

The Historians generally agree in the person of the Founder, but as to the
original occasion, that gave beginning to the Order, and the time when it was
erected, there is not small difference among them; by reason whereof, the truth
of both is left so perplexed, that if we had not clearer light from some other
means, the world might yet live in ignorance of the verity of either: But that
we may set down these two particulars more exactly than hitherto has been
done, and give a more perfect account of a Military Order, whose same has
spread all over the World, and been conferred on the greatest Princes thereof,
is our design in this present Work.

First then, as to the occasion of its Institution, the opinions of Writers (as
we said) are various: The vulgar and more general is, That the Garter of Ioane
Countess of Salisbury falling casually off, as she danced in a solemn Ball,
King Edward hastily stooping, took it up from the ground; whereupon some of his
Nobles and Courtiers smiling, as at an amorous action, and he observing their
sportive humor, turned it off with this reply in French, Honi soit Qui mal y
Pense; but withal added in disdain of their laughter, That in a short time,
they should see that Garter advanced to so high honor and estimation, as to
account themselves happy to wear it.

But taking leave to examine this Tradition, we shall only make two or three
Remarques, and then refer it to the judgment of others, what credit ought to be
given thereto.

First, Sir John Froissart (who only among the Writers of that Age speaks of
this Institution) assigns it no such original, as that of the falling of a
Ladies Garter: Nor is there found any thing to that purpose in our other
Historians, for the space of two hundred years, till Polydor Virgil took
occasion to say something of it; whose grounds we shall examine immediately.
Besides it might be expected, that some Historian among the French (who were so
forward to jeer at our King Henry the Fifth's design of invading them, with a
return of Tennis Balls) would not have forborne to register some where or other,
a scoff at the Ladies Garter; especially in a time when the fury of War had
dissolved all obligations of friendship and civility, and opened the mouth of
slander. Whereto we must add, that there is not the least appearance in the
original Statutes of this most noble Order, to countenance the conceit of such
a Feminine Institution; no not so much as obliging the Knights-Companions to
defend the quarrels of Ladies (as the Rules of some Orders then in being
enjoined) nor does the Author of that piece entitled, Institutio clarissimi
Ordinis Militaris a prenobili Subligaculo nuncupati, written by way of Preface
to the Black Book of the Garter, let fall the least touch to that purpose.

As to what Polydor says, it is even thence to be noted, that he himself is not
so confident, as to ascertain the person whose Garter it was, but warily
declining that, says, it was Angl. Histor. l. 19. p. 379.
either the Queens, or the Kings Mistress; and if it were the later, yet does
he with the same caution omit her name and title of dignity, both which has
since been supplied (but on what authority we find not) by some of our modern
Historians, who call her Cambd. Brit. in Aurebat. p. 208. Speed^punc; Chron. p.
588. Bakers Chron. p. 139. Edit. Land. 1665. Fullers Holy State. p. 349.
Ioane Countess of Salisbury; and there is as little reason, why she should be
supposed to be Ioane, called also the Fair Maid of Kent (whom Edward the black
Prince afterward married) inasmuch as no Historian takes the least notice,
that King Edward the Third ever courted her as a Mistress.

We suppose our learned Seldom points at her, when he calls the Lady from whom
the Garter slipped, Titles of Honor, p. 793.
Countess of Kent and Salisbury; but about the time of the Foundation of the
Order of the Garter, she in truth was neither: for albeit she was Daughter to
Edmund of Woodstock Earl of Kent, and had been sometime the reputed Wife of
William Mountagu, second Earl of Salisbury of that Family; yet then she could
not properly be accounted Countess of Salisbury, because she was actually Wife
to Sir Thomas Holland (one of the first Founders of that Order) and so Ex lib.
in Ossic. principal. Cantuar. vocat. Islip, f. 178. a. See Heylins Hist. of St.
George, part 3. c. 2. sect. 7. Edit. 1633. where the Case is Reported.
adjudged to be, by Pope Clement the Sixth, in a controversy depending before
him, between Sir Thomas and the Earl: and for this reason not taken notice of
either by Brook or Vincent (in the title of Salisbury) to have been his Wife.

Nor was she yet (though afterward) Countess of Kent, because her Brother John
Earl of Kent at the Institution of this Order, was alive, and died not till
anno Escaet. de an. 26 E. 3 n 54.
26. E. 3.

But that there was a Countess of Salisbury, of whom King Edward the Third
became greatly enamoured, is reported by Chronic. l. 1. c. 78.
Sir John Froissart, after this manner; That this King having relieved a Castle
belonging to the Earl of Salisbury, in the North of England, wherein his
Countess had been besieged by the Scots (the Earl himself being at that time
Prisoner in France) upon sight of her extraordinary beauty fell in love with
her: but she so virtuously demeaned her self toward the King, during his short
stay there, that he declined further solicitation. Howbeit some time after,
the King out of desire to see her (says the same Ibid. c. 90.
Author) proclaimed a solemn Justs in London, whither this Countess, and many
other Ladies, being invited, came.

Froissart names not the Castle, wherein this Countess lay, when the Scots
besieged it, but only gives this note upon it, Ibid. c. 76.
That the King gave the same Castle to her Husband for his good service past,
when he first married her, being then but a Knight.

The name of the place being left thus by him in the dark, those who hitherto
sought after it, have but roved at it with uncertain guesses. But upon more
diligent search we have hit the mark, and find it was the Castle of Pat. ^. E.
3. p. 2. m. 24.
Wark upon Tweed in the County of Northumberland, upon the Borders of England
toward Scotland, which King Edward had so bestowed upon Sir William Mountague
(afterward created Earl of Salisbury) for his life, together with the Manor,
Lands, and Tenements within the Liberty of the said Manor.

This Castle being grown very ruinous, and the said Sir William undertaking the
charge of the repair, (which happened to be very great) the King thereupon Ibid.
granted the same anew to him for life, by the service of one Knights Fee, the
remainder after his death to his Son John, and the Heirs of his body lawfully
begotten, to hold by the foresaid service; and if he dyed without such issue,
then to the right Heirs of Sir William for ever.

Though then it should be admitted, that this Countess of Salisbury was the
Kings Mistress, yet must it be noted, that she was Wife to William Mountague,
created Earl of Salisbury, Rotul. Cart. 11. E. 3. memb. 26. number. 54.
anno 11. E. 3. Mother to William the before mentioned second Earl, that her
Christian name was Escaet. bundel. anno 9. E. 3. n. 4.
Katherine, not Alice, as Froissart, nor Ioane, as others call her, and
Daughter to William Lord Granston, a Nobleman of Burgundy; and that she died
Escaet. anno 28. E. 3. n. 39.
anno 28. Ed. 3. and lies buried at Ex Gollect. Iac. Strangeman.
Bysham Abbey in Berkeshire.

But that the whole story may appear, no otherwise than indeed it is, a Fable;
we shall here insert the opinion of a late learned Writer, who has taken no
small pains to satisfy himself and the world in this particular.

Cosmography, l. 1. p. 287. Edit. 1652.
This (says Doctor Heylin) I take to be a vain and idle Romance, derogatory
both to the Founder and the Order; first published by Polydor Virgil, a
Stranger to the Affairs of England, and by him taken upon no better ground,
than Et Fama vulgi talis. Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 379.
Fama vulgi, the tradition of the common people, too trifling a foundation to
so great a building, common bruit being so infamous an Historian, that wise men
neither report after it, nor give credit to any thing they receive from it. And
yet has it so fallen out, that many learned men, for want of reflection, have
incautelously swallowed and run away with this vulgar error; whereupon it has
come by degrees to the vogue it is now in.

Of the same spinning with the former, is another Tradition, and no less
uncertain; Andr. du Chesne Histoire generale d'Angleterre, d' Escosse, and d'
Irlande. p. 670.
That the Queen being departed from King Edward's presence to her own Lodgings,
he following her soon after, happened to espy a Blue Garter lying on the ground
(thought to have slipped from her Leg as she went along) whilst some of his
Attendants passed by it, as disdaining to stoop at such a trifle; but he
knowing the Owner, commanded it to be taken up and given to him, at the receipt
whereof, he said, Andr. du Chesne Histoire generale d'Angleterre, d'Escosse,
and d'Irlande. p. 670.
You make but small account of this Garter, but within few Months, I will cause
the best of you all to reverence the like.

And some think that the Motto of the Garter was the Ibidem.
Queens answer; when the King asked her, what men would conjecture of her, upon
losing her Garter in such a manner.

But both these Relations are remote from truth, and of little credit;
nevertheless, they give us opportunity to note here, That it has thus fared
with other Orders of Sovereign Foundation; and an Amorous instead of Honorable
Account of their Institution, has by some been untruly rendered.

For instance, that of the Annunciade, Instituted some few years after this of
the ennobled Garter; concerning which, though Andrew Favin has given it an
amorous original, yet have we (in the Sect. 1. pa^. 10^. and 109.
third Chapter) from better authorities, cleared his mistaken account thereof.

Nor has it happened otherwise with the Order of the Golden Fleece, even that
also has met with the same fate; and the Institution reported to have risen
from an effeminate ground: for it is said, that its Favin, in le Theater d'
Honneur, l. 4. c. 5.
Founder entering one morning into the Chamber of a most beautiful Lady of
Bruges (generally esteemed his Mistress) found upon her Toilet, or Toilette,
called also Tavayoile, is a large Napkin, or cloth, usually laid over Women's
dresses, and other Clothes after they are spread on a Table.
Toilet, a Fleece of low Country Wool; whence some of his Followers taking
occasion of sport, as at a thing unusually seen in a Ladies Chamber, he (as is
reported of King Edward the Third, upon such another occasion) vowed that such
as made it the subject of their derision, should never be honored with a Collar
of the Order thereof, which he intended to establish, to express the love he
bore that Lady.

There is a third opinion, grounded on a Relation having an aspect to time
before King Edward the Third's Institution, which is reported of King Lib. N.
p. 13. in prooemio.
Richard the First, and is this; that while his Forces were employed against
Cyprus and Acon, and extremely tired out with the tediousness of the Siege, He,
by the assistance and mediation of St. George (as imagined) was inspired with
fresh courage, and bethought himself of a new device, which was, to tie about
the legs of a chosen number of Knights, a Leathern Thong or Garter ( for such
had he then at hand) whereby being put in mind of the future glory that should
accrue to them, with assurance of worthy rewards if they overcame, they might
be ronzed up to the behaving themselves gallantly and stoutly in the Wars, much
after the manner of the ancient Romans, among whom were various Crowns, with
which for several causes, Soldiers were adorned; to the end that by those
encouragements, all sluggishness being shaken off, the virtue and fortitude of
their minds might spring up and appear more resolute and vigorous.

It further continues in the same Preface, That after a long interval of time,
and diverse Victories obtained by him, the said King returning into his Country,
determined with himself, to institute and setle this most noble Order of St.
George, on whose patronage the English so much relied.

But admit this (though we are to note, it is only a Relation put down in the
Preface of the Black Book, but not any part of the Annals of the Order, nor can
it plead higher antiquity than the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, because
written a little after the time he reformed and explained the Statutes of the
Garter) all this we say admitted, and that King Richard the First did make use
of this devise in the Holy Land, as a signal or distinction of a party going
out upon some warlike exploit: yet that he thence took occasion to frame a
distinct Order of Knighthood afterward, there is not the least mention, nor
any ground to imagine. So that all the advantage can be made of it is, that (as
Hist. of St. George, part 3. c. 1. sect. 6.
Doctor Heylin affirms) we may warrantably be persuaded, this occasion much
heightened the reputation of that Saint among the English, by which means in
process of time, the most heroic Order of the Garter came to be dedicated to
him; and not that it any way contributed to the Institution of it.

SECT. II. The true Cause asserted.
THus far of the conjectures of others, concerning the Institution of this most
noble Order; now come we to unfold the true occasion thereof.

We affirm then, that King Edward the Third had no reflection, either upon a
Ladies Garter, or King Richard's Leathern Thong, when he first designed the
Institution, but that it did proceed from a much more noble cause; to wit, that
this King being a person of a most absolute and accomplished virtue, gave
himself up to a prudent management of Military Affairs; and being engaged in
War for the recovery of his right to the Kingdom of France, in the prosecution
of which enterprise, he had great use of the stoutest and most famous
Martialists of that Age, did thereupon first design (as being invited thereto
by its ancient same) the restoration of King Arthur's Round Table, which he
exhibited with magnificent Hastiludes and general Justs, to invite hither the
gallant and active spirits from abroad: and upon discovery of their courage and
ability in the exercise of Arms, to draw them to his party, and oblige them to
himself.

And conceiving no place more fit than Tho. Walsingh. sub. anno 1344. apud
Land. 1579.
Windesor, upon Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
Newyears-day, anno 1344. he issued out his Royal Letters of Protection for the
safe coming and return of Foreign Knights, their Servants and what belonged to
them, that were desirous to try their valor at the solemn Justs, by him
appointed to be held there, on Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
Monday after the Feast of St. Hillary next following (which that year happened
on the 19. of January) and these Letters of safe conduct continued in force
until the Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
Octaves of the Purification of our blessed Lady ensuing, being in the 18. year
of his Reign.

At the time appointed, he provided a great Ex vet. MS. Chronic. penes Ranul.
Pigott Ar.
Supper to begin the Solemnity, and then Ordained, that this Festival should be
annually held there at Ex vet. MS. Chronic. penes Ranul. Pigott Ar.
Whitsontide; and immediately after these first Martial Exercises were over (to
the end better accommodation might be provided for the Knights that should
afterward come thither) he caused to be impress Pat. 18. E. 3. p. 1. m. 39.
Dorso and p. 2. m. 39.
Carpenters, Masons, and Carriages, for erecting a particular building in the
Castle, and therein placed a Table of Walsingh. ut supra.
two hundred foot diameter, where the Knights should have their entertainment
of diet at his expense of Walsingh. ut supra.
100 l. a week, to which building he gave the name of the Round Table. By this
means he associated to himself, from most parts beyond Seas, the prime spirits
for martial valor, and gained the opportunity of engaging them on his side in
the ensuing War.

And, as at these solemn conventions, and great assemblies, the days were spent
in exercising all kind of noble feats of Arms, Justs, and Tournaments; so were a
great part of the nights consumed in public Balls, and dancing with the
Ladies, which attended the Queen thither; and perhaps it was hence conjectured,
that at some of these Balls, the Queen's Garter, or the Garter of Katherine
Countess of Salisbury might slip off, and that King Edward's stooping to take
it up, might beget smiles in the bystanders; and afterward, when the King had
modelled his intended Order, a Garter appearing for its chief Ensign, might add
something to the conjecture: But that any such accident became the principal
cause of erecting the Order, and that the Founder's particular design therein
was to advance the honor of that Garter so accidentally taken up, is only a
groundless imagination, and has been already disproved.

And though King Edward so far advanced the honor of a Garter, as that the
Order did derive its Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378.
title and denomination from it; yet is it most evident, that he founded this
most famous Order, not to give reputation to or perpetuate an esseminate
occasion, but Ut militarem virtutem honoribus, praemiis atque splendore
decoraret. Cambden in Attrebat. p. 207.
to adorn Martial Virtue, with Honors, Rewards, and Splendour: to Heyl. Cosmogr.
l. 1. p. 287.
increase Virtue and Valor in the hearts of his Nobility: or as Andrew du
Chesne says, Ed. 3. desireux d' honorer la Virtue military de quelque faveur
and recompense glorieux, etc. Hist. general. D angleterre, etc. p. 670.
to honor military Virtue with some glorious favors and rewards; that so true
Nobility (as is noted in the Preface to the Black Book of the Order) after long
and hazardous adventures, should not enviously be deprived of that honor which
it has really deserved; and that active and hardy Youth might not want a spur,
in the profession of Virtue, which is to be esteemed glorious and eternal.

Upon these grounds no doubt does our learned Seldom affirm, that Tit. Hon. p.
794.
this Order was raised chiefly out of the Round Table of that time (the Knights
thereof being the flower of that Age) as out of a Seminary.

It is further observable, from the current of the Histories of those times,
that the Tho. Walsingh. loco citato. Sam. Daniell. History f. 233. Speed's
Chron. p. 587.
French King, Philip de Valoys, in emulation of these martial associations at
Windesor, practiced the like at his Court in France, for he set up a Round
Table, and invited the Knights and valiant men of Arms out of Italy and Almaine
thither, lest they should repair to our King Edward the Third. Which meeting
with success, proved a Countermine to King Edward's main design, who thereby
finding, that his entertainment of Stranger Knights, upon the account of
reviving King Arthur's Round Table, was too general, nor did sufficiently
oblige them to him, but being free and at liberty, did after their departure
take what side they pleased in the following Wars; he at length resolved upon a
design, more particular and select, and such as might oblige and tie those whom
he thought fit to make his Associates, in a firm Bond of Friendship and Honor.

And having given forth his Cambd. in Attreb. p. 207.
own Garter for the signal of a Battle that sped fortunately, (which with Hist.
Generale d' Angleterre, etc. p. 670.
du Chesne we conceive to be that of Crescy, fought almost three years after
his seting up the Round Table at Windesor; rather than with the Author of the
Tom. 2. p. 1407. Edit. Paris. 1661.
Nouveau Theater de Monde, that of Poicters, which happened above seven years
after the Foundation of the Order, and whereat King Edward was not present) the
Victory (we say) being happily gained, he thence took occasion to Institute
this Order, and gave the Garter (assumed by him for the Symbol of Unity and
Society) pre-eminence among the Ensigns of it, whence that select number, whom
he incorporated into a Fraternity, are frequently styled Equites Aureae
Periscelidis, and vulgarly, Knights of the Garter.

By this Symbol he designed to Heylin's Cosmogr. loco supra cit.
bind the Knights or Fellows of it, severally unto one another, and all of them
jointly to Himself, as Sovereign of the Order. And accordingly (says an
industrious Historian) this did not only serve as a Speed. Chron. p. 588.
vehement incentive to Honor and martial Virtue, but also a golden Bond of
unity and internal society: it being most just, that those whom equal virtue
and fortitude of mind, had joined together, no Fortune should separate or
estrange, by occasion of any accident or difference.

Whereunto may be added this further consideration; how nearly the Princely
Garter (which ennobleth the Order) as it is framed with a Buckle to fasten it
close to the Leg, does resemble the Cambd. in Attrebat. p. 208.
Bond of most inward Society; and can be called nothing more aptly, than a
Cambd. in Attrebat. p. 208.
Badge of Unity and Concord.

By this Garter Lib. N. in proaemio.
the Knights-Companions are admonished, religiously, sincerely, friendly,
faithfully, and dexterously, to go through whatsoever they undertake, but not to
undertake or attempt any thing, contrary to the Oath, and Statutes of the
Order, neither to frustrate the rights of peace and friendship, vilisie the Law
of Arms, or to proceed in any thing further than Faith or Compact, or the Bond
of Friendship will admit.

And much to this purpose, they who will take the pains to read the Edit.
Colon. Agripp. anno 1631.
Catechismus Ordinis Equitum Pericelidis Anglicanae, will find the Author [F.
Mondonus] Symbolically to descant upon the chief Ensigns of the Order.

Moreover Notis Guide. Panciroll. de Rebus deperdit. p. 170.
Salmuthus, out of Stephanus Frocatulus notes, that in the binding of the Leg
with this enobled Ensign, there was given this honorable Caveat and
Exhortation; That the Knights should not cowardly (by running away from Battle)
betray the valor and renown which is ingrafted in Constancy and Magnanimity.

Nay, so exactly did the Founder suit the whole Habit unto the signification of
this Princely Ensign, that he Ordained His, and the Knight-Companions Robes and
Ornaments to be all alike, both for materials and fashion; thereby intimating,
Lib. N. p. 16. in proaemio.
That they ought to conserve brotherly love among themselves. And lest at any
time there should fall out the least breach of Amity, the great Collar of the
Order (ordained to be of equal weight, and composed of a like number of small
Links and Knots) was so made, in Lib. N. p. 16. in proaemio.
witness of the like Bond of Faith, Peace, and Amity, strictly to be observed
among them. In fine, all things relating to the Order, were so designed and
appointed, Ibid. p. 1^. Froissart's Chron. l. 1. c. 101.
That every one might plainly perceive, how much these things tended to the
maintaining of Amity and Concord.

In further reference to the Institution and perpetual establishment of this
Order, the foresaid King, Ibid. p. 1^. Froissart's Chron. l. 1. c. 101.
calling together the Earls, Barons, and principal Knights of his Kingdom,
freely and obligingly declared his mind to them, concerning this Affair: To
which Ibid.
all of them being well inclined, entertained the motion with equal joy and
applause; considering it would prove a very great advancement to Piety,
Nobility, and Virtue, and likewise an excellent expedient for the uniting, not
only his Natives one with another, but all Foreigners with them in the Bonds
of Amity and Peace.

And it is very improbable, that this prudent Founder should summon his Nobles,
solemnly to consult about so high and noble an advancement of an Order, had it
taken its first rise from so slight an occasion, as the accidental dropping of
a Garter from a Ladies Leg. On the contrary it is manifest from Froissart, that
the declaration which the King made to them of his intention and design (when
they were assembled) appeared Loco cit.
a matter very honorable, and (as has been alleged) such as contributed to
the improvement of Love and Amity among themselves; which we see this Historian
assigns to be the only cause, why they joyfully consented to his proposal.

Now to make the Bond and Tie of Love and Friendship yet more close and
obliging, the King caused those who were (or should be) of the Order, to be
called Lib. N. p. 15.
Fellows, Associates, Colleagues, Brethren, and Knights-Companions, and the
Order it self Lib. N. p. 15.
a Society, Fellowship, College of Knights, and Knight-Companionship; and
their Lib. N. p. 15.
Habit and Ornaments to be all alike, as to Fashion and Materials: and to no
other end, but to represent how they ought to be Lib. N. p. 15.
united in all chances of Fortune, Copartners both in Peace and War, assistant
to one another in all serious and dangerous transactions, and through the whole
course of their lives, faithful and friendly one toward another.

But besides these Authorities, we have met with some other testimonies, much
to the same effect; namely, that this most noble Order of the Garter was first
instituted, to Caii Antiq. l. 2. c. 217.
fortify the confidence of the King, the Kingdom, and Martial Virtue: that is
to say, to strengthen the faith of the subjects toward them, and for their
greater security.

The French Orator, who made the Harangue at the investiture of Henry Prince of
Orange, seems to account the denomination of this Order, by the style of the
Garter, to be very significant, and only for this reason; MS. in Officio Armor.
[L. 18.] circa medium.
because it carries with it a Bond or Tie of Fellowship, and a Symbol of Amity
and Friendship between Princes, being Companions of the same Order.

In the last place, if we look back upon the Statutes of Institution, as also
those that have succeeded, we shall find the Injunctions wholly Military, and
so are the words of Admonition, appointed to be pronounced, at the putting on
the Ensigns of the Order: and the ground of the Institution (in the Preamble to
King Henry the Eighth's Exemplar) is said to be, Article 1.
For the honor of God, and exaltation of the Catholic Faith, joined both with
Piety and Charity; in establishing a Art. 13.
College of religious men, to pray for the prosperity of the Sovereign of the
Order, and the Knights-Companions, and to perform other holy duties; as also
Art. 16.
Ordaining sustentation for a company of Alms-Knights, who have not otherwise
wherewith to live. But not one word relating to any obligation or engagement,
on behalf of the Feminine Sex.

And whereas King Edward the Third had set on foot a Title to the Kingdom of
France, and in right thereof assumed its Arms; he from the Ex Collect. praef.
Will. le Neve.
Color of them, caused the Garter of the Order to be made Blue, and the
circumscription Gold. And it may, without any straining, be inferred from the
Motto [ honi soit qui mal y pense] Ex Collect. praef. Will. le Neve.
that he retorted shame and defiance upon him, that should dare to think ill of
so just an enterprise, as he had undertaken for the recovery of his lawful
right to that Crown; and that the magnanimity of those Knights, whom he had
chosen into this Order was such, as would enable them to maintain that Quarrel,
against all who durst think ill of it. Consonant to this is the conjecture of
Hist Anglic. Escles. p. 507.
Harpsfield, that this Apothegme was designed to put the Knights-Companions in
mind, not to admit any thing in the actions of their lives, or among their
thoughts, unbeseeming themselves and their honor.

And here we have a sitting opportunity to inform our Reader, that the Age we
speak of did exceedingly abound with Impreses Motto's, and Devises, of which
the Rolls of the great Wardrobe will afford variety; and particularly that King
Edward the Third (upon almost every occasion) was much inclined thereto, so
far, as that his Apparel, Plate, Beds, Houshold-furniture, shields, even the
very Harness of his Horses, and the like, were not without them; many of which,
for any man now to descant upon, would be an endless and fruitless attempt,
seeing the occasion of their invention, and the circumstances thereupon
depending, are irrecoverably lost.

Add to which, that others by reason of their brevity, seem insignificant, in
regard it is to be imagined, that something was purposely omitted, and left to
be understood, which cannot now be rightly supplied, so as to arrive at the
mind of the Inventor. Of this number may well be this Motto, Rotul. Libe* rat.
Draper. Offic. mag. Gardrob. ann. 21. and 12. E. 3. membr. 11. penes Rememorat.
Regis.
It is as it is, being embroidered upon a Dublet, made for the King of white
Linen Cloth, having about the sleeves and skirt a border of green Cloth,
wrought over with golden Clouds and Vines.

But there are others, which seem more easy to be understood, as is that
daring and inviting Motto of this King, wrought upon his Surcoat and Shield,
provided to be used at a Turnament Ibidem.
Hay bay the with Swan,
By Gods Soul I am thy man.


We further observe, that although David Brus King of Scotland was a Prisoner
in the Tower of London, yet such was the nobleness of this King, that he
sometimes permitted him the use and exercise of Arms; for against a Ibid.
Hastilude kept at Windesor, he had a Ibid.
Harness made of Blue Velvet (at King Edward's charge) whereon was embroidered
a Pale of Red Velvet, and beneath a White Rose. And that it was the custom then
to have the Arms of a Knight, set upon his Horse-Harness, to distinguish him
from others, appears by those eight Harnesses, which the King gave (and were
among the preparations made for the Hastilude appointed at Canterbury, anno 22.
Ed. 3.) of Indian Silk, beaten with the Arms of Sir Stephen Cosyngton Knight,
of the Prince, of the Earls of Lancaster, and Suffolk, of Sir John Gray, Sir
John de Beauchamp, Sir Robert Maule, Sir John Chandos, and Sir Roger de
Beauchamp: four of these Martialists being shortly after chosen among the first
Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order of the Garter.

SECT. III. The Time when the Order was Instituted.
IN what year of the Reign of King Edward the Third, the Order of the Garter
received Institution, cannot certainly be deduced from our Historians, for the
difference among them in this point is very wide.

Our most learned Seldom would have it, to be in the Tules of Hon, p. 793.
18. year of the Founder's Reign, and relies chiefly upon the authority of L.
1. c. 100.
Sir John Froissart, who lived near that time (for he wrote his History in the
Reign of King Richard the Second) But since Mr. Seldom does acknowledge him
guilty of a mistake in the number of the first Knights-Companions (and a gross
one indeed it is) by making them no fewer than forty; why might he not likewise
err in this point, namely the Time? and as unwarily confound the year of its
Erection, with that wherein the Founder renewed the Order of the Round Table?
Windesor being the place for holding the grand celebration of both.

For should we admit, that during some part of the great Solemnity held in this
Kings 18. year, the accident of the Ladies Garter slipping off happened; and
that the King taking it up declared, he would make it highly renowned: what
other inference can be made, but that he had then only an intention or
resolution at most, to do somewhat afterward, not that there was an Erection
or Order actually Instituted at that time.

Besides, if the King had been desirous to fall upon the establishment of the
Order, immediately upon the said accident, yet may it well be supposed, that
the jollity of the season, and remaining part of the Feast, was too busy a
time to admit of much consultation tending thereunto; at least serious enough
to mould a design, so complete and substantial, as it appears to have been,
even at first; whether we consider the substance of the Statutes of
Institution, or variety of the matter, and so fully, judiciously, and warily
contrived, as little of that subject could be found worth the adding in many
years after.

To these, if we join the authority of Fabian, he is plain, Chronic. f. 219.
that though the King designed the Institution at the end of the Festival
(which he places between Candlemas and Lent in the 19. not 18. year of this
King) yet was it not then (says he) but afterward established by him.

As to the testimony given by the Apud Seldom, p. 794.
Author of Les grandes Chroniques de Britaigne, etc. who likewise alleges,
that the Institution of the Order, was in the 18. year of the King: We suppose
his best authority was also taken from Froissart, supposing him (as Mr. Seldom
does) the more to be relied upon, because he wrote so near that time.

But it is a fault too frequent among Historians, to run away with what they
find spoken by those from whom they collect (especially if such have gained any
good opinion or credit in the world) though perhaps erroneous; without making a
sufficient enquiry, either into the probability or truth of the thing. And for
an instance of some unwariness in collecting, we may trace the now mentioned
Author in another passage, relating to this matter, where he tells us it was
the day of Ibid.
St. Gregory (instead of St. George) whereon the Grand Feast of the Order was
ordained to be solemnized.

We now see that Froissart, and with him Mr. Seldom, place the beginning of
this Order to the 18. year of King Edward's Reign; with whom agrees Thomas
Cooper in his Third part fol. 240. b. Edit. Land. 1560.
Epitomy of Chronicles. And yet the same Mr. Seldom, in Notes upon Polialb.
Song 15.
another place, notes, that it took beginning in the 24. year of the said King,
and our industrious Stow (with whom Angl. Reg. Chron. p. 44.
Lilly, Chron. p. 588.
Speed, and Hon. Mil. and Civil. p. 69.
Segar agree) tells us, that the first Feast of the Order was celebrated in the
year of our Lord 1350. which answers to the said four and twentieth year of
King Edward the Third.

But Angl. Histor. l. 19. p. 378.
Polydore Virgile in the series of his History, places it after Henry Earl of
Derby was created Duke of Lancaster, and Ralph Lord Stafford, Earl of Stafford,
which happened in Pat. 25. E. 3. par. 1. m. 18. Cart. de ann. 25. E. 3. n. 31.
March, anno 25. E. 3.

Thus it appears, that our Historians took little heed to transmit the true
time of so famous an Institution to posterity (and their neglect perhaps was
the cause why our judicious Cambden became silent herein) yet how this
Chronological note slipped all their Pens, is much to be wondered at: We must
therefore have recourse to some other proofs, whence our Reader may receive
better satisfaction.

Admitting then, that the erecting this Order entered into King Edward's
thoughts, at some of those grand Assemblies of the Round Table, held after the
French King had set up the like, yet was it not brought to any maturity, till
after his glorious Triumphs over the French and Scots, in the Battles of Crescy
and Nevils Cross (in which both the French and Scotch Armies were utterly
vanquished, and David King of Scots taken Prisoner) and until King Edward had
Calais surrendered to him, as will now be manifest.

Among the Rolls of the great Wardrobe, we have met with one which contains the
Accounts of all the Kings Liveries, from Michaelmas, anno 21. E. 3. to the 31.
of January in the 23. year of the same King: In this Roll are diverse things
mentioned to be adorned with Garters, which were provided against the first
grand Feast of St. George, and among the rest are the Robes for the Sovereign
of the Order; namely his Ex Rot. Compot. Io. Coke Cler. mag. Gardrob. penes
Rememor. Regis. m. 8.
Mantle, Surcoat, and Hood, as also a Ex Rot. Compot. Io. Coke Cler. mag.
Gardrob. penes Rememor. Regis. m. 8.
Bed of Blue Taffaty adorned with embroidered Garters, containing the Motto,
Honi soit qui mal y pense. There were then likewise made for the Sovereign m.
10.
three Harnesses, whereof two were of White Velvet, wrought over with Garters
de blu and diaspriz, per totum compedinem cum Woodhouses, and the third de
Velvetto Ynde, cont. Lappekin quisseux, and caligas, wrought over likewise with
Garters.

Had this Roll been divided into years, or had there been other notes
thereupon, to have distinguished whether these particulars were made and
provided at the beginning of his 22. year against the Feast Day of St. George
ensuing, or else toward the later end of that year, against the same Feast Day
anno 23. E. 3. we might have been thereby guided with more certainty, as to the
right and true year of the Institution.

However, we may thence safely conclude, that this Order was not founded in the
18. year of King Edward the Third, according to Froissart, and his Followers;
because we here find, that the Sovereign's Robes were not made until the 22.
year of his Reign at the soonest, perhaps not till the beginning of the 23.

But to put all out of further doubt, the Edwardus tertius Rex Angliae, anno
reg. ni sui post Conquestum 23. Ordinavit etc.
Founder's Statutes fix the time of Institution to his 23. year; so do the
Edoard apres la conquest D' angleterre l' an de son reign vingt and trois
Ordonne and Estably, etc.
Statutes of King Henry the Fifth, and the Edwardus tertius, anno regni sui 23.
cum de Gallis atque Scotis plus semel illustrissime triumphasset, etc. p. 14.
in prooemio.
Preface to the Black Book; the same also is attested by Ad Cygn. Cant. verbo
Windelesora.
Leland, and affirmed by Catalog. of Honor, f. 88.
Mills, and History of St. George^ part 3. c. 2. Sect. 5.
Doctor Heylin.

To conclude, when this famous King had resolved upon the day and place for
keeping the first grand Feast of this most noble Order, which he designed to
exhibit with as much glory as could be imagined, Lib. N. p: 20. vide etiam
Froissart. Chron. l. 1. c. 100. and 102.
He sent his Heralds into Germany, France, Scotland, Burgundy, Hainault,
Flanders, and Brabant, to invite all Knights and Esquires who were willing to
meet at that grand Solemnity (with assurance to every one of safe conduct and
Liberty for fifteen days, both before and after the same) to show their
Military Prowess and Valor, in all kind of Martial Feats, and other Public
Exercises, there to be held, proper to the place and occasion.

According to which Invitation, there came over at the appointed time, sundry
Knights and other brave Martialisis, out of desire to signalize their valor;
and what made the Solemnity more glorious, King Edward's Queen, attended with
Ibid.
three hundred of the fairest Ladies, adorned with all imaginable gallantry
were there likewise present.

SECT. IV. Of the Patrons of the Order.
KIng Edward the Third, upon his Instituting this Princely College, of a
select number of Knights, did (according to the custom and opinion of that Age)
make choice of several Patrons to this his most noble Order; under whose
protection Himself and all the Knights-Companions, together with the Affairs of
the Order, might be defended, conserved, and governed.

The first and chiefest Patron that he elected for this end, was the Lib. N. p.
24. in proaemio.
holy Trinity, which, though indeed it be the Creator and Governor of all
things, yet nevertheless was in a more especial manner invocated to the aid and
assistance of this Order.

Nor was it in those times accounted any derogation to God, or his divine
worship, but rather on the contrary a great addition thereunto, that what he is
alone the giver of, should be desired and implored, by their means, through
whom he is well pleased to be sought unto: Upon which consideration this
religious and pious King, being singularly affected to the Ibid.
blessed Virgin Mary, though she was accounted the general Mediatrix and
Protectress to all men and upon all occasions, yet did he more peculiarly
entitle her to the Patronage of this most noble Order.

And no less was King Edward the Fourth in a special manner devoted toward the
same blessed Virgin; insomuch as he thought it necessary, that some additional
Ceremonies within the Order, should be observed by Himself and the
Knights-Companions to her peculiar honor: and thereupon Ordained, Ibid. p. 37.
That on her five Solemnities, the Knights-Companions should annually (as was
wont and accustomed, at the yearly Feast of St. George) wear the peculiar Habit
of the Order, as long as Divine Service was celebrating (unless they had
sufficient cause of excuse) bearing on the right shoulder of their Robes, a
golden figure of the Virgin Mary, and further, that they should go in the same
manner and Habit upon all the Sundays throughout the year: and lastly, that on
the same days for ever, they should say five Pater Nosters, with as many Ave
Maria's.

Thirdly, Ibid. p. 25.
Saint George of Cappadocia, a most choice Champion of Christ, and famous
Martyr, was also chosen one of the Patrons to this Order; and that Ibid. p. 25.
not so much because in his life, he was a Candidate of the Christian Faith, a
real Professor, and a sincere Defendor thereof, or for that he was an armed
Soldier or Knight of Christ; but much more because in those Wars, which were
waged by Christians, against the Infidels, he by several appearances showed his
presence, as a most certain encourager and assistant to the Christians; the
relations of some of which Visions may be seen at large Heylins Hist. of St.
George, part 2. c. 7. sect. 4. and 5. and part 3. c. 1. sect. 6.
elsewhere.

There is no need we should in this Work engage at all, in asserting the
History of Saint George, against those who will neither allow him either a
place in Heaven, or a being in the Church; since that is both learnedly and
judiciously maintained to our hand, out of the venerable Records of Antiquity
and Church History, by the elaborate endeavors of the late reverend Divine,
Dr. Peter Heylin, in a particular Hist. of St. George asserted etc. Printed
1633.
Tract.

The like pains we are eased of, in avouching and assuring him to be the
special Patron, Protector, Defendor, and Advocate of this Realm of England, and
manifesting in what veneration he has been held abroad, especially among the
Eastern Churches; by the Pen of our most learned Titles of Honor, p. 811.
Seldom. To whose testimonies we shall only add, that this Title of Beatus
Georgius invictissimus Christi Athleta, cujus nomen and patrocinia Gens
Anglicana veluti Patroni sui singularis, in expeditione presertim Militari
invocat and implorat, instinctu divino ut credimus excitati. Pat. de anno 25.
E. 3. p. 2. m. 12.
Patron to our Nation is given to St. George by the Founder of this most noble
Order, in a Patent granted to the Deans and Canons of the Chapels of St.
Stephen at Westminster, and St. George at Windesor, which discharges them from
payment of Tenths (for the Churches appropriate to those Chapels) that were or
should be given by the Clergy to Him and his Successors: As also by The
blessed Martyr St. George, Patron of the right noble Realm of England.
King Henry the Eighth, in the Preamble of his Statutes: Nay further, that he
was likewise called our Nations Patron, in relation to the Sanctus Georgius
Martyr, qui totius Militiae Anglicanae Spiritualis est Patronus. Regist. MS.
Arundel. Arch. Cant. par. 1. fol. 53. art. 37.
Spiritual Militia of this Kingdom.

And though in general he is styled, the Heylins Hist. of St. George, part 2.
c. 7. Sect. 1.
Principal Patron of the Affairs of Christendom, and a Tutelar Guardian of
military men; yet among all Christians the English did the best, and in England
the Founder of this most noble Order, in making particular choice of such a
Ordo est divo Georgio ut Bellatorum praesidi dicatus. Pol. Virg. Angl. Hist. l.
19. p. 378.
Captain and Patron, under whose conduct to fight, to wit, a Captain so
approved and tried by such high testimonies as he had given. In particular
relation to whom, the Knights-Companions had bestowed on them, the title of
Equites Georgiani, St. George's Knights; and the Order it self came to be
styled, Ordo divi Sancti Georgii, the Order of St. George.

It is worthy of observation that du Chesne (a French Writer) acknowledges,
Hist^ire generale d' Anglete^re, etc. p. 670.
it was by the special Invocation of St. George, that King Edward the Third
gained the battle of Crescy, which afterward calling to mind, he founded (says
he) to his honor, a Chapel within the Castle of Windesor. But if we may go
higher, and credit our Cap. 72.
Harding, it seems King Arthur paid St. George particular honors, for he
advanced his Picture in one of his Banners: and this was about 200 years after
his Martyrdom, and very early for a Country so remote from Capadocia, to have
him in so great estimation.

Lastly, The Founder added to these a fourth Patron, whose Name himself bore,
namely, Lib. N. p. 26.
Saint Edward the Confessor, sometime King of England, and his Predecessor, by
which choice the Patronage of the Order belongs also to him. And we find he was
wont to be invocated by this noble Founder (as well as Saint George) at such
time as he found himself in any great straight; of which a memorable instance
is recorded by Hist. Angl. p. 159.
Thomas Walsingham, who reports that at a Skirmish near Calice, anno Dom. 1349.
King Edward in great heat of anger and grief, drew out his Sword, and most
passionately cried out, Ha Saint Edward, Ha Saint George, which his Soldiers
hearing, ran presently unto him, and rushing violently upon the Enemy, put many
of them to the Sword.

But in further declaration of electing all these for Patrons to the Order, we
find them ranked together, in the In honorem omnipotentis Dei, and suae
Genetricis Mariae virginis Gloriosae, Sanctorumque Georgii Martyris and Edwardi
Confessoris nostris Regiis samptibus focimus, etc Pat. 22. E. 3. par. 2. m. 6.
Preamble of the Charter of Foundation of Windesor College, granted by King
Edward the Third; though in the Preamble to his Statutes of the Order, and to
King Henry the Fifth's Statutes, Saint Edward the Confessor is omitted;
nevertheless, in the Preamble to Henry the Eighth's Statutes, he is there
remembered with the rest.

SECT. V. The Honor and Reputation thereof.
BEfore we leave this Chapter, we shall note some few things touching the Honor
and Reputation of this most noble Order; and that, either as comparing it with
other Orders of Sovereign Foundation, or else in relation to it self.

First then, let what our learned Seldom affirms be observed, viz. That this
Order of the Garter has Notes upon Polyalb. Song. 15.
precedence of antiquity, before the eldest rank of honor of that kind any
where established.

Secondly, The Statutes of Foundation were so judiciously devised and
contrived; and framed upon such solid grounds of Honor and Nobleness, that they
afterward became a Precedent to other Orders, particularly those two of the
Golden Fleece, and of Monsieur Saint Michael; as may be readily seen, by any
that will take the pains to compare them.

Thirdly, It has begot no small honor to the Order, that the number of the
first Knights-Companions, were never yet increased, but as there were five and
twenty of them elected at the Institution, they, with the Sovereign of the
Order, made up that E. 3. H. 5. St^. Art. 3. Praef. to H. 8. Stat. Pol. Virg.
Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378.
Number, which at no time hitherto has been exceeded, ut pretium faciat
raritas, says Hist. St. George, part 3. c. 2. sect. 5.
Heylin, lest being else communicated to many, it might at last become
despicable. For it is manifest enough, that an invasion in this particular,
has like an undiscerned Rock, split several other Military Orders into
contempt and ruin: nothing so much abasing the worth of Glory and Honor (which
are to be desired by all, yet granted to few) than when made common, and given
indifferently without choice and merit, to persons of mean condition: as may be
sufficiently instanced in the Order of the Andr. Favin en le Theater d'
Honneur. l. 1. c. 5.
Star in France, under the Reign of Charles the Seventh, and the now declining
Order of Andr. Favin en le Theater d' Honneur. l. 1. c. 5.
St. Michael.

Fourthly, It has been honored with the Companionship of diverse Rex instituit
Garterium Ordinem, cui tantus deinde accessit honor, ut maximos quosque Reges,
non paeniterit in id venire Collegium. Polyd. Virg. Angl. Hist. loco supra cit.
Emperors, Kings, and Sovereign Princes of Christendom, who reputed it among
their greatest honors, to be chosen and admitted thereinto; insomuch as some of
them have with impatience courted the honor of Election. For we find remaining
upon this Registry of Honor, eight Emperors of Germany, three Kings of Spain,
five French Kings, two Kings of Scotland, five Kings of Denmark, five Kings of
Portugal, two Kings of Sweden, one King of Poland, one King of Aragon, two
Kings of Naples, besides sundry Dukes and other Free Princes, as one Duke of
Gelderland, one Duke of Holland, two Dukes of Burgundy, two Dukes of Brunswick,
one Duke of Milan, two Dukes of Vrbin, one Duke of Ferrara, one Duke of Savoy,
two Dukes of Holstien, one Duke of Saxony, and one Duke of Wertemberg, seven
Counts Palatines of the Rhyne, four Princes of Orange, and one Marquess of
Brandenburgh.

Fifthly, It entitles those Knights and Noblemen, whose virtue has raised them
to this degree of honor, to be Companions and Fellows with Emperors and Kings;
a Prerogative of an high nature, and a reward for greatest merits.

In the last place, we shall close up all with the Elogie given to this most
noble Order, by our learned Seldom; Notes upon Polyalb. Song 15.
That it exceeds in Majesty, Honor, and Fame, all Chivalrous Orders in the
world.

CHAP. VI.
THE Statutes and Annals OF THE Order.
SECT. I. Of the Statutes of Institution.
AMong Societies in general, it has been found expedient, to plant Rules for
them to walk by: Order and Regularity being not only the beauty and Symmetry of
Government, but the parent of that Being, which greatly contributes to their
perpetuity: Besides, Statutes and Rules, are as well the Bounds to determine,
as Bonds to unite Fellowships and Societies together; and if either through
negligence fall into disuse, or be unadvisedly broken, they readily open a way
to dissolution and ruin.

Upon such like considerations therefore, that most famous, happy, and
victorious Prince, King Edward the Third (after he had advisedly determined the
Erection of this most noble and renowned Order of the Garter) did most
prudently Lib. N. p. 214.
devise and institute several laudable Statutes and Ordinances, to be duly
observed and kept within the said Order; which being collected into one Body,
are called the Statutes of Institution.

The original of these was Ordained to be safely kept within the Ed. 3. Stat.
Art. 27.
Treasury of the College of Windesor, but has long since wholly perished, yet
there is a Transcript of them recorded in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, at
the beginning of the old Book, called Registrum Ordinis Chartaceum; a Copy
whereof we have placed first in rank of the Infections and Autographs in the
Appendix: nevertheless, bearing the marks of the Transcribers negligence or
inadvertency, as will appear in several places, by the words we have supplied
in the margent, warranted by two ancient Exemplars of this Body of Statutes.

The first of which, written in an ancient hand, I had communicated to me by
the favor of the late Lord Hatton, that noble Patron of all good learning and
learned men. But it is evident these were not the Original Statutes, from a part
of the 10. Article, where speaking of the penalty for a Knight's not coming to
Chapter on the Eve of the Grand Feast, at the assigned hour, it is there added,
Concerning which there is a Decree extant. So also in the 12. Article relating
to the penalty, where a Knight-Companion is found without his Garter; the
payment whereof is there appointed to be made after the same manner, as those
who sailing in like sort have been used to pay. And lastly, the 33. Article
here is wholly added out of King Henry the Fifth's Body of Statutes. This
Exemplar next follows the Transcript of the Original Statutes in the Appendix,
and where we have occasion, is cited thus, Ordinis Statuta in Bibliotheca
Hattoniana.

Another Exemplar of the Founder's Statutes is registered at the beginning of
the Black Book of the Order, it being the same in substance, put only into
purer Latin, and the Articles rendered in a more eligant style; yet there is one
thing must not slip our observation, that whereas in the 17. Article of the
Statutes entered in the Registrum Chartaceum, the Title of Marquess and
Viscount, with the proportions they were decreed to pay Regist. Chart* f. 24. a.
an. 24. H. 8. upon the death of each Knight-Companion, are both interlined by
another hand, and with fresher Ink, this Exemplar has put them into the Text:
But the same Titles being not interlined in the 22. Article, in the said
Register (where there is a like occasion to speak of the Degrees of Nobility in
the Order) are also omitted in that very Article of this Exemplar: which is a
sufficient Argument, to manifest that it was compiled from the Statutes in the
Registrum Chartaceum; and as to the time, after the 24. year of King Henry the
Sixth, at soonest. These also are printed next the former Exemplar, and cited
under this Title, Ordinis Statuta in Libro Nigro.

SECT. II. Of those other Bodies of Statutes since established.
BEsides these Statutes made at the Institution of the Order, there are two
other Bodies or Exemplars established since; the one by King Henry the Fifth,
and the other by King Henry the Eight.

King Henry the Fifth, that happy restorer of the honor of the Order, having
(at his entrance to the Royal Throne) found its glory upon abatement, not only
raised it to its former luster, but very much increast the honor thereof. For
He renewed the Grand Festival and other Solemnities, He commanded a strict
observation of all the Founders Statutes, and Lib. N. p. 6^
brought many more to a like perfection, which He subjoined to such of them
where they properly might be inserted, and are these that follow.

Article
3. That the Knights should make their obeisance in the Choire, first to the
Altar, and next to the Sovereign. 8. That the Deputy should elect, if the
Sovereign ( when abroad) had not six Knights with him. 9. That the Feast of St.
George should not be kept on St. Marks day, May Day, etc. 12. That when a
Knight should ride, he might wear a Blue Ribband instead of his Garter. 14.
That the order and manner of offering up the Achievements of deceased Knights,
should be such as is there prescribed. 20. That Knights absent in the
Sovereigns service, might be Installed by Deputy. 31. That the Sovereign should
take a Signet of the Order abroad with him. 34. That no Charge should be
admitted upon the College, by the Custos or Canons, without the Sovereigns
consent.
The Statutes of Institution, with these Additions, this King caused to be
translated into French, and transcribed into a Roll, the Transcript whereof was
lent me by the right honorable Basil Earl of Denbigh, a person who through an
industrious search into his own ancient Evidences, is become fortunately happy,
by adding thence great light to his From the Earls of Hapsburg in Germany,
Dugd* Antiq. of War. p. 57.
high and noble Descent; and a no less encourager of, than really affected with
the Studies of venerable Antiquity.

This Roll (as before the Statutes of Institution) was Ordained to issue out
thenceforth to the Knights-Companions under the Art. 27.
Common Seal of the Order. In after times it was transcribed into Books; and by
a Decree passed an. 3. H. 7. an Lib. N. p. 168.
Original Book of these Statutes and Institutions fair written, was to be laid
up in the College of St. George; and the Scribe or Register to have
Transcripts of it in readiness to present the Elected Knights withal.

The last and largest Body was undertaken and completed, by that munificent
increaser of the splendour of this most Noble Order, King Henry the Eighth;
chiefly in regard some of the former Statutes were obscure, doubtful, and
needed further explication; others wanted reducing and contraction, where the
necessity of the case required.

And to set this worthy work on foot, this Sovereign gave Order (in a Chapter
held at Lib. N. p. 205.
Greenwich on St. George's day, anno regni sui 9.) Lib. N. p. 205.
That all the Knights-Companions should be carefully summoned, to assemble
together in the year then next following (whilst the solemnity of the Feast
lasted) to consult and conclude upon the abrogation of such things as tended to
the dishonor of the Order (if any such were) and for the advancement of other
things that might augment and promote the honor thereof, but it seems there was
not any thing done thereupon.

Afterward, to give greater reputation to this his Royal design, this
Sovereign on the MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] p. 26. b.
28. of May in the 11. year of his Reign, entered upon this great and noble
work, with all magnificent Ceremony, being accompanied with MS. in Offic. Arm.
[M. 17.] p. 26. b.
19 Knights-Companions of the Order, all MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] p. 26. b.
proceeding on Horseback to the Chapter House at Windesor; where being entered,
and consideration had of the old Statutes; the Ibid. p. 27.
Knights-Companions, with all due reverence, entreated the Sovereign to reform
and explain them, as he should think convenient; who thereupon determining so
to do, the whole Company gave their advice and consent. That done, all present
besought the Sovereign, kneeling, that where any of them had Ibid. p. 27.
offended, in breaking any Ordinance concerning the Order, he would please to
remit it, and give them a general pardon, which most benignly he granted, and
the next day, in Chapter, ratified it to them.

But it seems this undertaking held yet Lib. N. p. 196.
three years, before it came to perfection; nevertheless then, viz. the 23. of
April, anno 14. H. 8. the Sovereign out of Ibid. p. 215.
right singular, love, good zeal, and entire affection to this most Noble
Order, to the estate of Chivalry, and the continuance and increase thereof; as
also at the humble request and instant desire of the then Knights-Companions,
and by their advice, counsel, and consent did make Interpretation, and
Declaration of the obscurities, doubts, and ambiguities of the former Statutes
and Ordinances.

And having Ibid.
reformed diverse things in them, he thereunto made several Lib. N. p. 21^.
additions, no less necessary than expedient. The Ibid. 229.
Original whereof being signed and sealed, was commanded to be carefully laid
up, in the Treasury of the College at Windesor, there to remain to succeeding
times, notwithstanding which, it has not been seen there these many years past.

The Articles and Clauses added to the former Statutes in this last Body are
these.

Article
1. That the interpretation of the Statutes, etc. belongs to the Sovereign.
2. The three points of Reproach, declared; and what is meant by a Gentleman of
Blood. 4. Of the Prorogation of the Feast. 5. How the Feast is to be observed
by absent Knights. 6. Attendance on the Sovereign, if he be not at the Feast.
7. That the Sovereign's Deputy may correct things in Chapter. 12. The Offering
up of Achievements, and a Taper armed with a Scutcheon. 13. Canons to sit in
the lower Stalls, when any Knights are present. 14. That six Knights make a
Chapter. 20. The manner of Installation set down. 21. Clause for a foreign
Knight' s Deputy to be conducted from the Chapter House to his Stall; and for
making an Election void, if the Knight send not his Proxy within seven months.
23. For Advancing and Translating of Stalls. 25. Plates not to be larger than
the first Founders, except Strangers. 38. Concerning the Collar of the Order.
This Body of Statutes was compiled in Latin, and is recorded in the Page 214.
Black Book of the Order; it was translated into Ib. p. 196.
French and English by Sir Thomas Wriothesley. Knight, then Garter King of
Arms: The English Version is that which has been since delivered (instead of
the former Statutes) to all succeeding Knights-Companions, according to the
Injunction, but of late times appointed to be sent to Foreign Princes, and
other Elect Knights abroad, Lib. R. p. 120.
sealed with the Great Seal of the Order, affixed to a Label of Blue Silk and
Gold.

Where this Book has been delivered to a Knight-Companion at the Sovereign's
charge, the Knight's E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 28
Executors are obliged to send it back to the College of Windesor, and there
to deliver it to the Custos or Register of the Order. And because this Law was
defective in point of time, therefore King Art. 31.
Henry the Eighth's Statutes appoint the same to be sent to either of them (or
to one of the principal Officers of the Order, for the time being) within three
Months next after the decease of such Knight-Companion.

And yet besides these three Bodies, most eminently known by the title of
Statutes, there was another drawn up and published, anno 7. E. 6. the
Reformation of Religion here in England giving the occasion; but it being
within few Months repealed by Lib. C. p. 6.
Queen Mary, his Sister and Successor, before it received the life of
Execution, and not since revived, we suppose it not proper to rank it in the
Appendix or make any use thereof in the following Discourse.

In the Month of December 1666. the Right Reverend Father in God Matthew Wren,
late Lord Bishop of Ely, showed me a Manuscript, compiled by himself, about the
year 1631. being at that time Register of this most Noble Order: wherein by way
of Comment upon King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, he briefly shows (out of the
Statutes and Annals of the Order) what alteration there has been in the Law of
the Garter, both before and since. It is a work composed with a great deal of
judgment, and exceeding useful; and had it been my good hap to have met
therewith before I had so near finished this Work, the ready directions therein
would have eased me of much toil, whilst I was about the composing it.

SECT. III. Several endeavors for Reforming the Statutes, since the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.
AS the Kings of this Realm, immediately at their attaining the Crown, do
become Sovereigns of this most Noble Order of the Garter, and consequently the
Lib. R. p. 119. and 122.
Supreme Law, and Interpreters thereof; so is the regulation of the whole their
undoubted Prerogative; and this has been evidenced in nothing more fully than
from their constant course in exercising the power, not only of making and
establishing, but changing and altering the Laws and Statutes thereof; which
upon interest of Religion, pleasure of the Sovereign, change of times, or any
other fit or necessary Occasion, has from time to time been done by them. Upon
this ground was it, that King Edward the Sixth went about to alter and reform
such things in preceding Statutes as seemed not consistent with the Religion he
had established in England. To which purpose, at a Chapter holden at Greenwich,
the 23. of April in the 3. year of his Reign, it was agreed, Lib. N. p. 302.
That the Lord St. John, the Earl of Arundel, and Sir William Paget should
peruse over the Statutes of the Garter; and that the same should be reformed,
and made agreeable to the Kings Majesty's other proceedings, by the advice of
the Duke of Somerset Lord Protector, and other Companions of this Noble Order.

This was seconded by another Order, made also in Chapter at Greenwich, on St.
Georges day in the following year; where it was agreed, Ib. p. 304.
That the Book of Statutes should be reformed, and thereupon the Sovereign
delivered to the whole Company, a Book, wherein was contained certain Statutes,
by the same to be corrected and reformed as they thought best, until the next
Chapter.

But it seems, nothing was as yet done, in pursuance of either of these Orders,
for at the next Feast, on the 24. of April, anno 5. E. 6. another Order past,
Ib. p. 306.
impowering the Duke of Somerset, the Marquess of Northampton, the Earls of
Warwick, Arundel, Bedford, and Wiltshire, to peruse over the Statutes and other
Books of the Order, and the same to be reformed; as aforesaid.

This third Order it seems took more effect than the former; for thereupon a
new Body of Laws was collected together (wherein some things were reformed,
others newly added; but in effect the Laws of the Order very much altered) and
published March 17. anno 7. E. 6. But this King dying within four Months after,
the very first thing Queen Mary (his Sister) took care for, in reference to the
Affairs of this Order, was to see these new statutes abrogated and made void.

To which purpose in a Chapter held at St. James's House, the 27. of September
next following her coming to the Crown, it was among other things Decreed and
Ordained, Lib. C. p. 6.
That the said Laws and Ordinances, which were in no sort Ibid.
convenient to be used, and so impertinent and tending to novelty, should be
abrogated and disanulled; and no account to be made of them for the future.

And for the speedy execution of this Decree, command was then also given to
Sir William Petre (who that Ib. p. 7.
day was admitted Chancellor of the Order) to see, Ibid.
that they should be speedily expunged out of the Book of Statutes, and
forthwith defaced; left any memory of them should remain to posterity: and only
those Decrees and Ordinances, which her Father, and his royal Predecessors had
established, should be retained and observed.

It may be also noted, that in this particular of Reformation, King Philip her
Husband appeared no less zealous: for on the 5. of August, an. 1. and 2. Ph.
and Mar. (which was the third day after he had been invested, with the Habit
and Ensigns of the Order) himself being present at a Chapter in Windesor
Castle, it was then Ordained; Ibid. p. 12.
That all Acts and Decrees being recorded in diverse places of the Great Book
(to wit, the Black Book of the Order) which were repugnant and disagreeable
either with the ancient and received Statutes of the Order, or else with the
Laws of the Realm; should clearly be abolished and taken away; by the Marquess
of Winchester, the Earls of Arundel, and Pembroke, and the Lord Paget.

And we no sooner see Queen Elizabeth ascending the Throne, but shortly after,
on St. George's day in the 2. year of her Reign, a view of the Statutes is
committed (by Commission) to four of the Knights-Companions, namely the Lib. C.
p. 5^.
Marquess of Northampton, the Earls of Arundel, and Pembroke, and the Lord
Howard of Effingham: Lib. C. p. 5^.
Who were thereby empowered to read over and consider those Statutes, and being
so read over and viewed, to consider with a watchful care and diligence, if any
of them were disagreeable to the Religion, Laws, and Statutes of this Realm;
and if any such were found, the same to be faithfully represented to the
Sovereign, to the end that She, with the Knights-Companions, might establish
such Decree concerning them, as she should think fit.

Whether any thing was done pursuant hereunto, or not, does not appear in the
Annals of the Order, or any where else that we have seen; nor do we conceive
there was, or that this Sovereign saw much cause, to alter the frame of those
Statutes, which King Henry the Eighth had established, and Queen Mary
confirmed; since the Books of Statutes delivered to the Knights-Companions at
their Installations, throughout her Reign, were no other than Transcripts of
her Father's Body of Statutes, and besides, the practice of her time was
generally pursuant to the direction therein; except in some few things, now and
then added or altered, at future Chapters, when there arose new cause for so
doing; of which we shall give an account as the matter occurs.

After her Reign, King James, her Successor, observing the obscurity and
disagreement of some passages among the Statutes, attempted something toward
their reformation, and in reference thereto, the Ibid. p. 173.
14. of May, in the 9. year of his Reign, Decreed, That Commissionary Letters
should be made forth to the Earls of Nottingham, Worcester, Pembroke, and
Northampton, whereby power should be given them, Ibid. p. 173.
to examine the Registers, and other Monuments, which pertained to the Order;
and where any thing should be found obscure, to make it clear, where
contrariety appeared, fitly to reconcile it, yet with no endeavor of
innovating any thing, but an intention of renewing all things, as near as might
be to the first and most ancient Institution of the Order: Saving always power
to himself, as Sovereign of the Order, to add or change any thing (according to
the occasion) as it should seem agreeable to his prudence, for the honor of
this most Noble Order. What was done hereupon appears not, but some few years
after, this Affair was revived, and the following Commission issued forth.

James R.

JAmes by the grace of God King of Great Britain, Ex Collect. Guil. le Neve
mil. ^uper Cla^* R. Armor.
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble
Order of the Garter,
To our Right trusty, and Right well beloved Cousi^s and Counselors, Charles
Earl of Nottingham, and Edward Earl of Worcester, and to our right trusty, and
right well beloved Cousin Henry Earl of Southampton, and to our right trusty,
and right well beloved Cousin and Councellor Thomas Earl of Arundel, and to our
right trusty, and right well beloved Cousins, Philip Earl of Montgomery, and
Robert Viscount Lisle, Knights and Companions of our said Order, Greeting;
Whereas, ever since our coming to the Crown of this our Realm of England, We
have had a special care to maintain and uphold the dignity and honor of our
most Noble Order of the Garter, whereof we are Sovereign, as to the world has
well appeared, both by our careful observation at all due times of all the
Ceremonies and Solemnities belonging to the same, and also by the choice we
have made of Noble and Worthy persons, whether Princes of Foreign Nations, or
Subjects of our own Kingdoms, to supply the places which have been void of that
Society. Now forasmuch as We are not ignorant that in all humane Constitutions,
there may be not only Ambiguity, suffering doubtful Interpretation, but also
defect, for which addition is requisite, the same best appearing in time, which
is the producer and tryer of truth, We have therefore thought fit, out of the
knowledge and experience we have of your understanding and wisdom, and the
confidence we repose in your faithfulness and sincerity, being men of honor,
and Knights and Companions of our said Order, to nominate you six, and to
appoint you, or any four of you, to take an exact view of all the ancient
Statutes and Articles of our said Order. And do give unto you, or any four of
you, full power and authority to call before you all such persons, whether
Officers of our said Order, or others, as can give you light or information
concerning the same; and after a serious consideration thereof had by you all,
or four of you, We will and require, that you set down in writing, what in the
said ancient Statutes and Articles, you shall conceive meet to be explained,
and what to be added, whereby our said Noble Order may be made more famous and
illustrious, that the same being presented to us the Sovereign and the Society,
at a Chapter holden, may be resolved on, in part or in all, to be put in
execution, if to us it shall seem so good. Given under the Seal of our said
Order, at our Palace of Westminster, the 26. day of April, in the sixteenth
year of our Reign, etc.


Notwithstanding the powers and directions given by this Commission, the
progress in this business was very slow paced, but toward the later end of his
Reign, the Earls of Worcester, Montgomery, Arundel, Surry, and Leicester, four
of the six Commissioners abovenamed, having had diverse meetings, and debated
several things represented to them; did at a Chapter holden at Whitehall, the
19. of May, anno Iac. Regis 20. present to the Sovereign certain Articles,
subscribed with their hands, which for the Honor of the Order they thought
necessary to be observed.

By the first of which they endeavored to provide for a further progress and
advance of the same, in proposing, Lib. C. p. 11. and 12.
that every year a Commission from the Sovereign should be given or continued
to such Knights of the Order, as in Chapter should be thought fit; to consider
of all things to the Order belonging; and that the year following an account by
the Knights in Chapter should be given of their proceedings, by virtue of the
said Commission.

This with 8 other Articles, were Ib. p. 12. and 13.
confirmed by the Sovereign, and twelve of the Knights-Companions, the Ib. p.
12. and 13.
22. of May following, in a Chapter held at Whitehall.

And so happily and effectually went this work forward, that on the Feast Day
of St. George held at Windesor in the ensuing year, the said Earl of Worcester
(being then the Sovereign's Deputy for that Feast) with ten Knights-Companions
more, did agree to eight other Articles (most of them concerning the
Alms-Knights) which the next morning were Ib. p. 14.
approved of by the Sovereign; and that day, before the celebration of Divine
Service, by the Sovereign's Deputy, and Companions assembled in the
Chapter House, Ib. p. 14.
the observation thereof was also Decreed.

And now to come nearer, even to the Reign of his late sacred Majesty, King
Charles the First, of ever blessed and glorious memory, who while it lay in his
power, was (and much more would have been, had not the angry Fate of our late
times opposed) the greatest Increaser of the Honor and Renown of this most
Illustrious Order: He, I say, taking into his princely thoughts all things
whatsoever, which carried any show or probability of adding luster thereunto,
designed and endeavored, the most complete and absolute Reformation of any of
his Predecessors.

And first, at the Solemnity of St. George held at Windesor the Lib. R. p. 6^.
6. day of October in the 6. year of his Reign, He commissionated nine of the
Knights-Companions, namely, the Earls of Molgrave, Pembroke, and Montgomery,
Arundel and Surry, Salisbury, Carlisle, Dorset, Holland, Berkshire, and
Suffolk, with command to assemble four times in a year, to consult and handle
the Affairs of the Order.

All these, but the Earls of Molgrave and Dorset, met at Whitehall, the 2. of
January following, where some Ibid. p. 67.
few things were considered of.

This Commission was seconded by one more ample, about three Months after, and
directed to the before-named Knights-Companions, or to any 8, 7, 6, 5, or 4 of
them, thereby impowring them, Ib. p. 68.
to meet, consult, and take an exact view, and to peruse all the Statutes and
Ordinances of the Order; as well such as were established in the beginning, as
such as had been since made by Explanation or Addition, and to consider
advisedly, whether any thing had been Ordered, that had brought Doubt or
Ambiguity, or did stand in need of Alteration or Amendment. To the end, that if
upon mature deliberation by them, there should appear any contrariety or other
defect, by want of plain expression or other omission, which were fit by the
Sovereign to be supplied for the augmentation of the Honor of the Order, that
then in such case, He [the Soveraign] might (upon return of their Proceedings)
resolve of some general Declaration in Chapter, to reform and reduce into one
body all the Statutes and Ordinances thereof, that the same being compiled and
settled in a perfe^t form, might be so delivered over to posterity, cleared and
freed from all future questions and doubts.

We see here the largeness of this noble design: Nevertheless not any thing was
done upon this Commission, though it stood in force even from the 6. to the 13.
year of this Sovereign's Reign: but where the neglect lay appears not, though
it may not untruly be conjectured by that which follows.

At the Feast of St. George, celebrated by Prorogation at Whitehall, for the
year Sir Thomas Rows Iournal p. 8.
1636. upon the 17, 18, and 19. days of April, anno 1637. diverse humble
Petitions for Ibid. p. 9.
Reformation and Renovation, were presented to the Sovereign, the said 18. day
of April, by the Chancellor, and them also read; some of which more especially
tending to the honor of the Order were accepted and decreed by the Sovereign,
and the rest referred and transmitted to the Knights-Commissioners before
mentioned.

The first of those Decrees which at this time past, was Lib. R. p. 118.
to revive and renew the powers given in the former Commission, and thereupon a
new Commission, dated the 7. of May then following, issued under the Great Seal
of the Order, having the same Preamble with the former Commission, and was
directed to the Earls of Molgrave, Derby, Pembroke, and Montgomery, Arundel,
and Surrey, Kelley, Salisbury, Dorset, Holland, Berkshire, Suffolk, Lindsey,
Exceter, Marquess Hamilton, Duke of Lenox, the Earls of Danby, Moreton, and
Northumberland, or to three or more of them, to Rows Iournal, p. 18.
meet and consult of any matter, concerning the Statutes, or Honor of the
Order. These Knights-Commissioners, were likewise armed with Rows Iournal, p.
18.
all the powers given in the foresaid Commission, dated anno 6. Car. 1. Unto
which was added, for the better effecting the Sovereign's royal care; Ibid. p.
19.
That three or more of them should meet at the Sovereign's Court, and begin to
execute the said Commission, in Whitson-week next ensuing, attended and
assisted by the Chancellor of the Order, and all or any other Officers, or such
of them as they should call and find serviceable. And being met and assembled,
to have power to hear, propound, and debate whatsoever should be presented, or
that they should conceive conducible, to the honor and perfect establishment of
the Order. And to prepare all matters of such their consultation to be
presented unto the Sovereign, at the next Feast of St. George, and so
successively at every Chapter to be held by the Sovereign: therein to receive
his full determination, approbation, and royal assent: with further power to
adjourn from time to time, after the first opening and reading of the said
Commission, their meetings to such places and days, as to them should seem most
convenient.

Now who would think, that, after so noble a designation of the Sovereign,
after his care to send forth a second Commission with augmentative powers,
after his earnest Ibid.
recommending this Affair to their diligence, his pressing their dispatch for
the speedy accomplishment of his Royal Intentions, and lastly, his expecting
from them an account of their Transactions, at or before the celebration of the
next Feast, these honorable persons who were Companions of so noble and
honorable an Order, and at their admission sworn to advance the honor of the
same, no less than to defend and maintain it, should need a Spur to so worthy a
design? But it was so! --

For although the foresaid Commission was opened and read at the Court at
Whitehall, the 30. of May following, in the presence and session of the Earls
of Pembroke, and Montgomery, Salisbury, Holland, Marquess Hamilton, and Duke of
Lenox, Commissioners and Companions of this most Noble Order; yet I find the
then Chancellor Sir Thomas Row, in an account of that day's proceedings by
Letter, dated the fourth of June 1637. and directed to Dr. Christopher Wren,
then Regiter of the Order (whose attendance was on that day excused) sadly
profess; That it was as much as he could do, to procure and draw together five
of the Knights-Companions, to open and read the Commission, and this also in
haste, quasi in transitu; and all that was done, was to appoint another meeting
at the Court in Midsommer-week, then next ensuing; and to lay a charge upon the
Chancellor to prepare matter (to wit, Ibid. p. 21.
Propositions and Observations upon the Statutes) fit for their Consultation,
against that time, according to the tenor of the Commission. And elsewhere he
makes this ingenuous acknowledgment, That he found such difficulty to procure
meetings, and a certain non-chalance in every one, as if it were but a
ceremonious Affair, and so few hearty in it, that he feared, he and the
Officers should wait to little purpose.

And so indeed it fell out, for albeit he attended the said
Knights-Commissioners in Midsomer-week, according to the appointment at their
last sitting; yet there was nothing done, save only the adjourning of their
meeting to Ibid.
London.

Some little (and but little) progress was afterward made in this Affair, at
another meeting at White Hall, the Ibid. p. 31.
8. of February following; where three of the said Knights-Commissioners were
present, namely, the Earls of Berkshire, Lindsey, and Northumberland; who
Ordered, Ibid. p. 31.
That the Chancellor, Register, and Garter, should prepare an abreviation of
the Statutes, and reduce every thing of one-head, into an act, to avoid
confusion: And this being the half of what they then did, caused this
Expression to fall from the Pen of this worthy Chancellor, in another Letter to
the Register, of the 24. of Nov. 1637. There is little hopes of the Knights;
they never meet, or to no purpose; though I am tired with solicitations.

Finally, the Ibid. p. 36.
first of February after, another assembly of seven of the
Knights-Commissioners was held also at Whitehall, in whose presence a few
things were debated, but little concluded: and further than this sitting, can I
not trace the prosecution of this noble design and intendment of the late Royal
Sovereign, all the following years of his Reign; but that here it slept in
silence and neglect.

SECT. IV. Of the Annals of the Order.
AND because the several Orders and Decrees occasionally made in Chapters
(being of good authority and binding to the Knights-Companion^ and Officers)
with many other Historical and Ceremonial matters, relating to the Order, lie
dispersed throughout the Annals thereof; it will be requisite here, to give some
account of those Books wherein they are so recorded, because we shall make
frequent use of them in the progress of our Discourse.

Registrum Ordinis Chartaceum.
The first of these in order of time, is an old Paper Book, written in French
(hitherto fortunately preserved in the Paper-Office at Whitehall) which in all
probability was begun by John Coringham: for we find him 1414. (which was a
little before the Annals therein entered do commence) made Tho. Frithin suo
Canonicor. Catal.
Canon of Windesor, and constituted Tho. Frithin suo Canonicor. Catal.
Register of the Order. And in regard that one and the same kind of
handwriting is continued from the beginning of this Book, until anno 16. H. 6.
inclusive, where follows an Hiatus till anno 23. H. 6. that the Annals begin to
be entered with another hand, and that he shortly after died, viz. Tho. Frithin
suo Canonicor. Catal.
anno Dom. 1445. it is very probable, the Book so far was writ by himself.

Hence forward these Annals are entered with several hands, and those generally
in use about the times, wherein the Transactions passed, whence may well enough
be presumed, that these were the proper hand-writings of each Register of the
Order, and that this Book was transmitted from one Register to another,
wherein, after their death or other removal, the Annals and Acts were continued
by the hand of the next Successor; and from this conjecture may some light be
also given of the time how long each Register or Scribe enjoyed his Office.

After Richard Sidnor was made Register, to wit, Lib. N. p. 245.
anno 16. H. 8. (who subscribed his name to the foot almost of each leaf) the
Annals were written in one hand, until anno 26. H. 8. that Ex Catalog. praed.
Robert Aldrydge Doctor of Divinity, and one of the Canons of Windesor Lib. N.
p. 265.
succeeded him in that Office, and then it is evident the handwriting also was
changed, to an old set Roman, which ran on to the end of 29. H. 8. in which
year he was advanced to the Bishopric of Godwins Catal. of Bishops, p. 543.
Carlisle, and this Book ends in the 31. of his Reign.

Besides this, there is another Book wherein the Annals of the Order are
recorded in Latin, concerning which there past a Decree, anno 3. H. 7. Lib. N.
p. 168.
That it should be fairly transcribed, and Anno 22. ^ 7. vide Lib. N. p. 181.
afterward, That the Sovereign should be put in mind of it, as being then
needful to be renewed; but neither of these Decrees took effect, nor was this
done till toward the end of the Reign of King Henry the Eight.

This Book agrees very nearly with the Registrum Chartaceum, for therein is
nothing entered relating to the Order (except Lib. N. p. 27.
one of the Exemplars of the Founder's Statutes, and a Ibid. p. 38.
Catalogue of the first 25 Knights-Companions) before the fourth year of King
Henry the Fifth; the Annals of the Order until then being wholly lost. It has
the same Hiatus or Intervals, viz. from the 16. to the 23. year of King Henry
the Sixth, from the 7. to the 10. of Edward the Fourth, from the 4. to the 7.
of Henry the Seventh, and from the 10. to the 14. of the same King; it also
runs parallel therewith for the most part, yet where there is any thing more
recorded in the Registrum Chartaceum than in the Black Book, we shall note it,
as we have a fitting occasion offered.

And that it was compiled by Dr. Aldrydge, while he was Register, may be
collected from a short Account given in the Page 22. and 23.
Preface, of all the Sovereigns of the Order, ending with King Henry the
Eighth; with a memorial relating to Cardinal Wolsey, who, as it there appears,
was then dead.

The Transcription of this Book was finished anno 31. H. 8. for so far it is
written (as ^^so the Appendix) with one and the same hand (being a middle sized
Text Letter) but anno 32. H. 8. it is most apparent, another hand is introduced,
which with some variation is afterward carried on to the end of anno 5. E. 6.
where this Book ends.

The Register of the Order, by the Constitutions of his Office, was obliged to
provide Lib. N. p. 235.
two Books, and therein to enter the Ordinances and Statutes, with other Acts
of the Order, whereof one was appointed to be kept in the Chapter House at
Windesor, and called Index Windesoriens^s; and the other (being a duplicate of
the former) to remain in the Register's keeping, ready at hand to show the
Sovereign whenever he should require it; and this latter was called Aulae
Regisirum.

As to the general directions given for compiling these Books, and of what
particulars they are principally to consist, we have some information from the
Statutes of the Order, and the foresaid Constitutions; for besides the entry
this Officer is enjoined to make of all the Scrutenys taken in Chapter, and
Elections thereupon made (which we shall at large discourse of in its Chap. 9.
Sect. 15.
due place) his duty is to record the E. 3. Stat. Art. 34.
Penalties inflicted on Knights-Companions, and the reason thereof, the Ord.
Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 36.
reconciliatin of those that have suffered penalties as Delinquent, with other
Acts and their causes, appertaining to the Order: All which are Decreed to be
E. 3. Stat Art. 34. H. 5. Stat. Art. 36.
recited before the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, at the beginning of the
Chapter, yearly on the Eve of St. George; to the end they may be corrected, and
reduced into Method, if need require.

Moreover, he is, by the foresaid Constitutions, to make entry of all the Lib.
N. p. 235.
Policies in War, Exploits, Transactions, and memorable Achievements, both of
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, according as he can best attain the
knowledge of them, either by his own search, or the assistance of Mr. Garter,
which having first set down and committed to writting, as passages and
accidents happen from year to year, whatsoever is thus noted by him, is to be
red and perused at the next Chapter, by the Knights-Companions there assembled,
that if any thing be found to stand in need of Correction, it may there be
forthwith amended, and again in like manner at another Chapter afterward;
which done, he is to take care, that they be fairly engrossed in the foresaid
Book, for a perpetual memorial.

And because the time assigned for rehearsal of these particulars in Chapter,
had in succeeding years been taken up with other Affairs; in one of those
Articles, which the Knights-Companions (to whom King James recommended the
framing of some Articles, necessary for the honor of the Order) presented to
the Sovereign the 19. of May, anno Iac. Regis 20. and confirmed the 22. of May
following, it was Decreed, Lib. R. p. 13.
That nothing of this nature, or any other Act in Chapter should be Registered,
before it had been perused and considered by the then Knights-Commissioners, or
at least sour of them, who when they should set times apart, to consult of the
Affairs of the Order, for which they were chiefly constituted, might then also
make use of such opportunities, as should give this business dispatch with more
convenience.

Upon due consideration had of these Injunctions, the present Register (at a
Chapter held the 19. of November, anno 22. Car. 2.) Lib. Carol. p. 76.
exhibited the continuation of the Annals of this Noble Order, which he had
prepared to register in the Liber Carolinus, and humbly submitted it to the
perusal and approbation of the Knights-Companions whom the Sovereign had
deputed to take into their consideration the Affairs of the Order; which tender
when they declined, he proposed that it might be examined by the Prelate, but
that not being liked by them (on consideration that the Register was obliged
under an Oath, to deal faithfully in his Report) it was Decreed, Lib. Carol. p.
76.
That the said Annals should be recorded in the said Book without any further
examination.

Besides the abovementioned particulars, there were materials of another
nature, ordered to be collected, both from the Chancellor of the Order, and
Garter Principal King of Arms, to be digested by the Register, and entered also
upon Record; for, whereas one part of the Chancellor's duty was to Lib. N. p.
234.
set forth and declare every year in Chapter, at the Feast of St. George, the
renowned and praiseworthy Acts of the Knights of this Order, as many as had so
merited, and as for those who had deserved the contrary, to make relation also
of their scandalous and disgraceful actions; the Register was to take these in
writing, and record them for a memorial of their honor or shame, never to end.

And it is part of the duty of Mr. Garter, Ibid. p. 237.
diligently and industriously to make enquiry after the valiant, fortunate, and
renowned Acts, both of the Sovereign, and the rest of the Knights-Companions,
which having learnt, he is to make a true and faithful relation of them to the
Register, to be by him entered upon Record for a perpetual memorial.

But we find very little of this hitherto done, and how sparingly inserted, the
Annals themselves are but too evident Witnesses. Nevertheless, the present
Garter, Sir. Ed. Walker, has drawn up a faithful account of the noble Actions
and Characters of the Knights-Companions, beginning with Thomas Earl of
Strafford, and continuing it down to his Son; which he delivered to Dr. Ryves,
the now Register, for the use before directed.

Among the Articles established at the Feast of St. George, anno Iac. Regis 21.
the last is, Lib. R. p. 16.
That the then Register of the Order should compose a Book, wherein should be
orderly transcribed the form and manner of all the Solemnities, Ceremonies, and
Processions, which were accustomably used at the Feast of St. George, and
celebration of the Order, as also of taking down and offering the defunct
Knights Achievements, to the end the Knights-Companions, upon recourse to it,
might have full information thereof. But (after much enquiry) we have not heard
that such a Book was drawn up by him, or any of his Successors.

And that some course should be taken for the safe custody and preservation of
the Annals of the Order, such was the worthy care of the foresaid
Knights-Commissioner, that the said 22. of May, anno Iac. Regis 20. it was
Ordained, Ibid. p. 13.
That a secure and certain place within the Castle of Windesor, should be
provided and appointed, in which all Acts concerning the Order, should be kept,
and to which every Knight-Companion at all times might have access. And
further, Ibid. p. 13.
That upon the remove, or after the death of the Register of the Order, the
Book containing an account of all such acts as had been Registered and there
reserved, should be delivered to one of the Knights of the Order.

The second of these Books (is called the Blue Book, Liber Coeruleus.
and so called from the color of the Cover, being fairly bound in Blue Velvet.
It begins with the first year of Queen Mary, and ends at the 18. year of King
James.

The third, Liber Rubeus.
being bound up in Red Velvet, goes therefore under the name of the Red Book;
it takes commencement where the Blue Book ends, and contains like Acts and
Entries with the former, it ends in the 14. year of King Charles the First of
ever blessed memory, having first given a full account of the Ceremonies
performed at the Installation of the present Sovereign.

And as to a great part of this Book may I justly and without flattery say,
(and to the honor of that right Reverend Prelate, Doctor Wren the late Lord
Bishop of Ely, let it be remembered) that from the Institution of this most
Noble Order, until he was chosen into the Office of Register, the Annals of the
Order, were at no time recorded by a Pen near so judicious or eligant; whose
excellent Pattern his worthy Brother, and Successor into that Office, Doctor
Christopher Wren, (who most freely and readily communicated to me, what
materials he had, to encourage my first design and entrance upon this Work)
has exactly copied in its following leaves.

The fourth and last Book commenceth, Liber Carolinus.
anno 1640. wherein the Annals are continued down to the beginning of the year
1670. according to the English Account, by the learned pains of Dr. Brune Ryves
the present Register of the Order. And in a Chapter held at Windesor the 16. of
April, anno 13. Car. 2. it was Decreed, Lib. Carol. p. 30.
That there should be two of these Books made, the one penned in Latin to
remain with the Register at Windesor, and the other in English to be kept at
Whitehall, and called Registrum Aulicum.

THE Account drawn up of the Founder and first Knights-Companions of this Noble
Order, we designed for the next Chapter, but for some considerable reasons
cannot bring it in here; nevertheless we intend it to usher in the Catalogue of
their Successors, and join them together in the last Chapter, where our Reader,
is hence he cast his eye thither, may read it in due Order.

Of what materials this principal Ensig^ was at first made, we have not yet
found, nor is it described by any, before P^lydore ^irgile, and he, but in
general, as to the ornamental part of it, to wit, That it was Angl. H^^t. l.
19. p 37^.
adorned with Gold and precious Stones, and had a Buckle of Gold at the end,
wherewith to fasten it about the Leg. But doubtless, it was also wrought with
rich Embro^dery, and thereon the Symbolical word or Motto was raised with Gold,
Pearl, and sundry sorts of Silks; as may be guessed from the Garters anciently
placed on the left shoulder of the Knights-Companions Mantles, and these other
little embroidered Garters, wherewith their Surcoats and Hoods were heretofore
adorn^d, which we shall describe by and by.

But touching those made in the last Age, we have received more particular
satisfaction: for we find, that the Garter sent to Em^nuel Duke of Savoy, ann.
1 and 2. Phil. and Mar. was set with Ex Collect. Will le Neve Eq. Aut. nupe:
Clarencieux R. Armorum.
Letters of Goldsmiths Work* the Buckle and Pendant of the same, and on the
Pendant, a Ruby and a Pearl hanging at the end. The Garter made for Francis the
Second, anno 6. Eli^. was Ex Collect. Aug. Vincent nuper Windesor ^eraldi.
richly wrought with Letters of Gold, garnished with Stones: the Buckle and
Pendant weighing MS. fol. pen. Georg. Owen, nuper Yo^k Herald. p. 154.
three Ounces and a half and half quarter, was richly set with Rubies and
Diamonds. The French King Henry the Fourth, had a Garter of Ib. p. 229.
Purple Velvet, embroidered with Letters of Gold, garnished with Diamonds and
Rubies; and the Garter of Christier^ the Fourth King of Denmark, was Ib. p. 299.
embroidered with Gold and Pearls.

But that Garter sent to Gust^vus Adolphus King of Sweden, did excel all
others, bestowed by former Sovereigns, for richness and glory: each Letter of
the Motto being composed of Diamonds. A particular Inventory whereof (taken the
24. day of May, anno 14. Car. 1. when delivered by the Sovereign's Command, to
the custody of the Dean and Chapter of Windesor, to be preserved there in
memory of that famous King) we here exhibit; it being the transcript of that
Counterpart, signed by Doctor Christopher Wren, then Dean of Windesor, and
seven Canons of that College, upon the receipt thereof.

Under the Letters of the Garter Small Diamonds on [the lower] side 52 Item, on
the upper side of the Garter of Small Diamonds 52 In the Letter H Diamonds
small 10 In the Letter O Diamonds small 12 In the Letter N Diamonds small 11 In
the Letter I Diamonds small 4 The first stop Diamond 1 In the Letter S Diamonds
small 11 In the Letter O Diamonds small 12 In the Letter I 4 In the Letter T
Diamonds 10 The Stop, 1 In the Letter Q Diamonds 13 In the Letter V 9 In the
Letter I 4 The Stop, 1 207 In the Letter M Diamonds small 11 In the Letter A
Diamonds small 10 In the Letter L Diamonds small 6 The Stop, 1 The Letter Y
Diamonds 6 The Stop, 1 The Letter P 10 The Letter E 9 The Letter N 11 The
Letter S 11 The Letter E 9 85 In the first Button, Diamonds 6 In the second 6
In the third 6 In the fourth 6 In the Star of longer Diamonds 7 Small Diamonds.
31 In the Chapes border, Diamonds of a bigger size 32 In the Cross, four faucet
long Diamonds, and four three square faucet Diamonds 8 One large Diamond long
and fauce^ encompassed with seven square Diamonds and faucet 8 In the Buckle,
one faucet table Diamond in the end, and twenty seven in the compass and tongue
28 In the Hinge of the Buckle, one soul square Diamond, and eleven other faucet
and square Diamonds 12 88 Total of the Number 411
See the Trustees Book of Sales.
This rich Garter, being (for greater security) buried in St. George's Chapel,
at the beginning of the late War, was discovered by Cornelius Holland, and
fetched thence by John Hunt Treasurer to the Trustees for sale of the late
Kings Goods, and sold by them to Thomas Beauchamp their then Clerk.

The Garter which his said late Majesty wore upon his Leg at the time of his
Martyrdom, had the Letters of the Motto composed likewise of Diamonds, which
took up the number of 412. It came into the hands of Ex relatione praed. Tho.
Beauchamp.
Captain Preston (one of the late Usurper's Captains of Horse) from whom the
said Ex relatione praed. Tho. Beauchamp.
Trustees rereceived it, and sold to Mr. John Ireton, sometimes Lord Mayor of
London for 205 l. But since the happy Restoration of the present Sovereign,
Mr. Ireton was summoned before the Commissioners, empowered by a Commission
under the Great Seal of England, to enquire after the Crowns, Plate, Jewels,
etc. of the said late Sovereign, which had been concealed or imbezeled, and
being charged with the buying the foresaid Royal Garter, and not denying it,
Composition was offered him, according to the direction of the Commission (as
in all other like cases, where any thing could not be had in kind) but he
refusing the offer, the Kings Attorney General proceeded against him in an
Action of Trover and Conversion, in the Court of King's Bench, which coming to
trial in Trinity Term, (...) upon a full hearing, a Verdict was given for the
King, against the said John Ireton for 205 l. and 10 l. Costs of Suits.

The Motto of the now Sovereign's Royal Garter, is set with Diamonds upon Blue
Velvet, and the borders wrought with fine Gold Wire; the Diamonds which frame
the Letters of the Motto are Rose Diamonds, much of a bigness, but those which
make the Stops, table Diamonds; and the number which set each Letter are as
follows.

In the Letter H small rose Diamonds 10 In the Letter O 12 In the Letter N 11
In the Letter I 4 The first stop Diamond 1 In the Letter S 9 In the Letter O 11
In the Letter I 4 In the Letter T 8 The Stop, 1 In the Letter Q 12 In the
Letter V 9 In the Letter I 4 The Stop, 1 In the Letter M 13 In the Letter A 10
In the Letter L 6 The Stop, 1 In the Letter Y 8 The Stop, 1 In the Letter P 9
In the Letter E 9 In the Letter N 12 In the Letter S 8 In the Letter E 9 In
each of the four Ilot holes six little Diamonds 24 In the Buckle, two very
large Diamonds, four somewhat lose, three less than they, and four small
Diamonds 13 In the Tab, three very large Diamonds, six a little lesser, one
somewhat less, four smaller Diamonds, two less than they, and fourteen small
Diamonds 30 Total 250
The Hinge of the Buckle is pure Gold, and thereon the Sovereign's Picture to
the breast, curiously cut in flat-stich, crowned with a Laurel, and vested in
the Military Habit worn by the first Roman Emperors. The Tab or Pendant is also
Gold, and on the back side thereof engraved a Saint George on Horseback,
encountering the Dragon. The order of placing the Diamonds on the Buckle, Tab,
and about the Ilot holes, may be seen in the Draught which (with the rest of
the Noble Ornaments, that make up the whole Habit and Ensigns of the Order,
exactly taken from the particulars themselves) is placed at the beginning of
this Chapter.

This Noble Ensign [the Garter] was at the Foundation of the Order, appointed
to be worn on the Po^^d. V^gi^. Angl. Hist. l 1^. p. 378.
left Leg, a Lib. N. p. 5^*
little beneath the Knee, and so has the usage in all time since continued.
And its apparent, that the manner of placing this Garter on the left Leg of the
Knights-Companions Sepulchral Portraictures, was very early brought into use;
seeing in that Alablaster Figure, of Sir William Fitz Waren (who died a
Knight-Companion of this Noble Order, in the Ex vetust^ Codice de Epis^^p^s and
P^^ribus Dunelmens. Ecclesis. vide Tho. Walsingh. sub anno 1361.
five and thirtieth year of the Founder's Reign) lying with his Lady on a
raised Monument, in the North side of the Chancel of Wantage Church in
Berkshire (and yet to be seen) with his Surcote of Arms upon the breast) the
resemblance of his Garter (but without any Motto) is carved upon its left Leg.
In like manner is the Garter Ex Collect. Silae Taylour genesis lib. D. f. 129. b.
represented on the left Leg of the Alablaster Portraicture of Sir Richard
Pembridge, elected Knight of this most Noble Order, in the Founder's Reign, and
in the room of Sir Thomas Vfford: whose Monument is erected in the Ex Collect.
Silae Taylour genesis lib. D. f. 129. b.
South side of the Cathedral Church of Hereford, below the Pulpit, and
encompassed with a Rail of Iron Spikes.

The next Monument in time, whereon we have seen the Garter so represented, is
that made for Sir Simon Burley ( See the Inscript. in Mr. Dugdales History of
St. Paul's Cathedral, p. 103. and Placita coram Rege an. ^. H. ^ rot. 46. Here Is.
beheaded anno 1388.) and raised in the North wall siding the Quire of St.
Paul's Cathedral London, almost over against the Monument of John a Grant Duke
of Lancaster. Thence forward the usage became more frequent (and then the Motto
began likewise to be cut thereon) insomuch as even until these days, the Garter
is to be seen thus represented, upon all the Monumental Portraictures of those,
who were since Companions of this most Noble Order.

And albeit this Princely Ensign of the Order, was at first designed for an
Ornament to the left Legs of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions; yet was not
its use confined only thereto, but extended to some other particulars: For, in
the next place it was (and that ancienly also) made use of to incircle the
Scutcheon of St. George's Arms, worn by the Sovereign and Knights-Companions on
the left shoulder of their Mantles; who within a short time after took it to
surround each of their proper Coats of Arms: which usage, their Successors in
this most Noble Order have retained, as a peculiar privilege, but not
permitted to any other, except the Prelate of the Garter their principal
Officer.

The first Example which has occurred to our view, is the before mentioned
Monument of Sir Simon Burley; where on the front toward the head is a
Scutcheon of his Arms, impaled with his first Wives, set within a Garter
(wanting the Impress) but another having the same impalment (placed below the
Feet) is surrounded with a Collar of SS, of the fashion with that about his
neck.

The Monument also of Ioane Wife to Ralph Nevill Earl of Westmerland, Daughter
to John a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster (who died on the Feast Day of St. Brice, anno
1410.) raised on the South side of the Quire in the Cathedral Church of
Lincoln, has the Arms of Nevill, impaled with those belonging to the said
Ioane, incircled with a Garter: And by these two (among other Examples) it
appears to have been the usage about those times, to surround Scutcheons of
Arms, and other Devices, with a Collar of SS also: for so, on this great Ladies
Monument, is there such a Collar, fashioned like that of Sir Simon Burley's
placed about a square, whereon, what was painted does not now appear.

Another ancient instance is that Scutcheon, viz. MS. in Bibl. Hatton.
Sable, three Ostrich Feathers Argent, surrounded with the Garter, set up in
the Glass Windows of Greenwich Church in Kent, by Humfry Duke of Gloucester,
and supported with a Greyhound and an Antilope. It is said, that these three
Feathers were the Badge of King Henry the Fourth, which he had from John a
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster his Father, who bore them for his Device (as might be
seen not long since in the North Window, against his before mentioned Monument,
in St. Paul's London) and placed in a Field Sable as here, but the Pens were
powdered with Ermyns, for a difference from the Black Prince's Feather. The King
likewise, so also the House of Somerset, gave the White Ostrich Feather for a
Device; but all the difference lay in the Pen, for the Kings Pen was Or, the
Princes Argent, the Duke of Lancasters Ermyn, and the Duke of Somersets
Compony, Argent, and Azure.

The Arms of Sir Lewis Robsort Lord Bourchier, one of the Knights of this
Order, Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, are to be seen painted
within a Garter, on each side his Monument, in St. Paul's Chapel in
Westminster Abbey. Afterward we find at the Interment of Richard Duke of York,
Father to King Edward the Fourth (slain at the Battle of Wakefield) that every
corner of the Majesty Scutcheon (set over the Image of the defunct) had MS. in
Offic. A^m. [I. 3.] f 8 b. vide lib. I. 11. in ead. Offic. f. 84.
a Scutcheon of the Arms of France and England quarterly, and four Angels Gold,
holding the Arms within a Garter.

In like manner, some of the Scutheons prepared for the Funeral of John
Viscount Wells (who married Cicely, third Daughter to King Edward the Fourth
and died the MS. in Offic. praed. [I. 3.] f. 32.
9. of February anno 14. H. 7.) were Ibid. f. 2.
surrounded with the Garter; and so were others having his Ibid. f. 2.
Ladies Arms, of both Metal and Color. At the Interment of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk in Thetford Abbey (who dyed anno Aug. Vincents discovery of Errors in
Brooks Nobility, p. 356.
16. H. 8.) there was provided a Shield of his Arms Ex praef. MS. [I. 3.] fol.
103.
within a Garter, and a Coronet set over it. A Target also of the Arms of
George Earl of Shrewsbury MS. in ead. Offic. [I. 11.] f. 67. b.
within a Garter was born at his Funeral, anno 33. H. 8.

It was the custom (begun with us about the Reign of King Henry the Seventh)
when the Obsequies of any Foreign Prince were celebrated here in England, to
paint the Scutcheon of such Princes Arms within the Collar of that Order,
whereof he was Sovereign, or a Fellow-Companion; for instance,

At the Obsequies of the French King Charles the Eighth, celebrated in the
Cathedral of St. Paul's London, the Scutcheons of the Arms of France, were
placed MS. [I. 3.] f. 10.
within the Collar of the Order of Saint Michael, of which he was Sovereign. At
each end of the Hearse, 18 and 19. Aug. 1557. MS. [I. 15.] in ead. Offic. f.
246. b.
when the Obsequies of John King of Portugal, were kept in St. Paul's
Cathedral, there was among others, one great Scutcheon of his Arms, Ibid.
within the Collar of the Golden Fleece, wrought with Metal upon Wax, in regard
he was one of the Knights of that Order. The Obsequies of the Emperor Charles
the Fifth, being performed in Westminster Abbey the 22. and 23. days of
December anno 1558. there were ten great Scutcheons, Ib. f. 284. b.
compassed with Garters; to show he was a Fellow, and Knight-Companon of this
Order.

And upon the same account, where any Foreign Princes, were not only
Sovereigns of one Order, but Companions of another; their Herses were garnished
with Scutcheons of their proper Arms, surrounded with the Collars, or principal
Badges of both those Orders. Hereupon we find, at the Obsequies of Francis the
First, the French King, celebrated the 19. of June in St. Paul's Lond^n, anno
1. E. 6. the Hearse was adorned with the Scutcheons of the Arms of France,
placed both MS. [I. 11.] f. 112.
within the Garter of St. George, and Collar of St. Michael's Order; in regard
he had been a Fellow of the one, and Sovereign of the other.

At the Obsequies performed for Henry the Second of France, on the 9. of
September, anno 1. Eliz. in St. Paul's also, there were some Scutcheons of his
Arms, incircled both with the Lib. l. 13 f. 8.
Garter and Collar of the l. 14. f. 7.
Golden Fleece, he having been a Knight-Companion of both these Orders; under
the Joysts was a Majesty Scutcheon of Black Taffaty, of this Kings Arms within
a Garter, crowned with an Imperial Grown: This Scutcheon was garnished in eight
places, with eight Rundles, and therein his Impress Donec totum impleat Orbem,
with three Crescents, and two D's of the Roman Letter, linked back to back; and
in several other places of the Hearse, were fastened other Scutcheons of his Arms
within this principal Ensign of the Garter.

King Henry the Eighth was first of the Sovereigns of this most Noble Order,
who introduced into his Great Seal, the Scutcheon of his Arms, incircled within
a Garter; as may be Speeds Chr^n. f. 765.
seen placed on either side of his Portraicture, sitting in his Royal Throne.
Since his Reign, all succeeding Sovereigns have born their Arms within the
Garter, not only in their Great and Privy Seals, but also in those other
belonging to their Courts of Justice; and generally in all things (except
Coyns) whereon the Scutcheon of their Arms have been since cut, carved, graved,
painted, or wrought (in imitation of whom the Knights-Companions have done the
like) But there were an. 21. Car. 1. certain half Crowns stamped in the West of
England, having the Sovereign's Arms so encompassed, and this was the first
Money, whereon the Royal Garter appeared amongst us.



And the present Sovereign, intending the augmentation of the Honor of this
renowned Order, as in many other things, so in advancing the reputation of this
Noble Ensign by a more public way; has caused the irradiated Cross of St.
George, encompassed about with the Royal Garter, to be stamped in the Center of
his Silver Coin made upon the alteration of it, anno 14. Car. 2.

There were likewise Medals, heretofore stamped upon several occasions, wherein
the Garter was designedly added, some of which are here exhibited; As that in
the year when Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, was crowned King of
Bohemia, and Robert Cecil Earl of Salisbury, made Lord Treasurer of England,
both Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order.



We have seen Gold Rings cast into the Figure of Garters, the ground on the
outside enamelled with a deep Blue, through which the golden Letters of the
Motto appearing, set them off with an admirable beauty. And it seems such
Garter Rings have been of ancient use, since the Preface to the Black Book of
the Order, taking notice of wearing the Garter on the left Leg and Shoulder,
adds also the Interdum Pollice gestare. lib. N. p. 15.
Thumb; by which we suppose is meant Gold Rings, made into the fashion of
Garters, and bestowed by some new installed Knights upon their Relations and
Friends, to wear in memorial of so great an honor conferred upon them.

Among the Officers belonging to the Order, the Prelate is allowed to bear his
proper Arms, (impaled with those of his See) within the Garter: and the rest of
the Officers are permitted only to wear the Badges of their Office, surrounded
with the same, to express their peculiar relation to this most Noble Order.

Besides the manner of bearing Arms within the Garter of this Order, the
Garter, either in whole or part, has been given by way of Armory, (but without
the Motto) and in sundry manners of bearing. As in the Seal of Arms, belonging
to the Office of Garter, Principal King of Arms; where the Garter (surrounding
a Crown) is placed in Chief, between one of the Lions of England, and a Flower
de Lis of France. And to instance in Families; we find, Pat. 17. H. 7. pars 2.
m. 1. vide porro MS. Offic. Arm. [G. 15.]
Argent, three demi Garters Azure, buckled and garnished Or, granted by King
Henry the Seventh, to his Servant Peter Nerborne: and Ibid. See also Glovers
Ordinary, p. 419.
Sable a Garter Or, between three Buckles of the second, to be born by the name
of Buckland or Bowland in the County of Northampton.



SECT. II. Of the Mantle.
IN the Founder's Statutes, mention is made of no other Robe among those
appointed for the Habit of this most Noble Order, but only an upper Garment, to
which is there given the name of Mantle; and is the chief of those Vestments,
which the Sovereign and Knights-Companions wear upon all solemn occasions
relat^ng to the Order.

That this kind of Mantle was transferred and derived to us from the ancient
Greeks and Romans, is not to be doubted; since it so little differs in fashion
from their Pallium or Toga. For the Panciroll. lib. 1. rerum memorab. deperdit.
Tit. ^4.
Grecian Pallium, was a kind of long Cloak, which only wanted a Collar or Cape:
and the Car. Sigonius de Iadiciis, l. 3. c. 17 p. 459.
Roman Toga, a Garment as common in fashion with, and proper to them, as the
Pallium to the Grecians; and the use so ancient, as Romulus is noted by In Vit^
Romali.
Plutarch to have worn it.

We find the Pallium further described to be Panci^^il. eod. lib. Tit. 43.
a kind of upper Robe, that covered the whole Body, made fast on the right
shoulder with a Fibula, or Clasp: It was usually worn over the Tunica, or short
Coat, whence grew the Proverb, Tunica Pallio propinquior est; and is more
particularly observed by Eq. Aur. Anglo. Wittemb. p. 137.
Erhard. Cellius from the authority of Livie, Suetonius, Tacitus, and other
Latin Authors to have been a Garment, made without Sleeves, that reached down
to the Ancles.

In describing this upper Robe called the Mantle, (the Sovereign's being
differenced from the Knights-Companions, only by a long Train) we shall first
set down the various Names given it in the Records of the Order, secondly the
Materials whereof made, thirdly the Color, fourthly the Quantity, and last of
all the Ornamental Trimming used about it. Wherein, though some things
hereafter inserted, may perhaps to some seem light and trivial, and fitter to
fill up a a Tailors Bill, than have place in a serious Discourse; yet well
knowing they will be thought to others worthy remembrance, and as much
esteemed, as necessary to be known; we thought good, not to omit the least
particular, that might contribute to the satisfaction of any enquiry.

In the Founder's Statutes it is called Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 3.9.11.16.20 etc.
Mantellum, 1. (...) Name.
and in Henry the Fifth's Mante^^, both which in English we render a Mantle.
But the Exemplar of the Founder's Statutes entered in the Black Book, and the
Statutes of Henry the Eighth call it Trabea, which Lib. 5. c. 32. vide etiam
Romans Hist. Anthologia, p. 154. Trabea qunque Toga erat, Panciroll. Rer. memor.
deperd^^. L. 1. Tit. 45.
Rosinus also reckons among the different kinds of Mantles or Gowns. And in the
20. Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, it is applied both to the
Mantle and Surcoat. Sometime it is called Lib. N. p. 30.31.310.
Chlamyda, sometime Lib. R p. 120.
Stola, but in other places (and more agreeable to the Greek and Latin
denomination) Lib. N p. 209.
Pallium, and Ib. p. 317.
Toga.

In the second place, 2. Materials.
as to the Materials; That Mantle made for the Founder, against the first Feast
of this Order, appears to have been of Ex Rotul. Comp^^ Io. Cok^ Cler. mag.
Gardrob. ab an. 21. ad 23. E 3. m. 8. penes Remem. Regu in S^accario.
fine Woollen Cloth. And it is not unlikely, the Founder made choice of Cloth
for the Robes of the Order (rather than any richer material) to the end he
might give a reputation to that our homebred and native Commodity: albeit we
find in the Statutes of Institution, a permission for the Proxies of Foreign
Princes, to bring over with them Mantles of Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 20. vide H. 5.
Stat. Art. 20.
Silk or Velvet, when they came to receive the possession of their Principals
Stalls; either because other Countries were better furnished with such
Commodities, than our English Cloth, or that it might rather stand with the
liking or esteem of Foreign Princes, as accounting Silk or Velvet the nobler
material.

How long the Sovereigns of this most Noble Order continued wearing of Cloth,
we cannot directly say, the first time we discover their Mantles to be made of
Ex lib. vocat. Co^om, in Offic. mag. Gardrob. f. 47. and 52.
Velvet, is about the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth; which
sort of Silk has thence continued in use until this day. About this time also
we observe the Mantles of Foreign Princes, were likewise made here of Velvet;
for so was Ibid f. 92.
that sent to the King of Portugal, elected Lib. N. p. 91.
anno 13. H. 6.

As touching the Mantles of the Knights-Companions, there is no question, but
they were of the same materials, with those made for the Sovereign of the
Order; namely, at first, of fine Woollen Cloth, and when the Sovereign changed
Cloth to Velvet, they did so likewise: But we cannot meet with equal
satisfaction in this particular, as we have done in the Mantles belonging to
the Sovereign, because the Knights-Companions provided this Robe at their own
charge, and their private accounts, through many casualties were of no great
durability; but their Surcoats were of the Sovereign's donation, and
consequently the particulars of them remain on Record, in the Rolls and
Accounts of the great Wardrobe.

The Color of these Mantles is appointed by the Statutes to be Ed. 3. Stat.
Art. 11. H. 5. Stat. Art. 11.
Blue; 3. Color.
and of this colored Cloth, was the Ex praed. Rot. Comp^^. Io. Coke m. 8.
first Robe made for the Founder; by which, as by the groundwork of the Royal
Garter it is not unlike, he alluded (in this no less than that) to the Color
of the Field in the French Arms; which a few years before he had assumed in
Quarter, with those of his Kingdom of England: But the Color of the Surcoat
was changed every year as will appear by and by. Of the same De Velvet blodio,
vid. lib. praed. vocat. C^tom. f. 47.54.
Color were the Velvet Mantles made in King Henry the Sixth's Reign, who
though he changed the Stuff, yet did he not vary the dye.

It is also manifest, that the Blue Color was retained to King Edward the
Fourth's Reign, for when this Sovereign sent the Habit and Ensigns of the Order
to Iulianus de Medicis, the Mantle was made of Ex Coll. Iac. Ware Eq. Aur.
Blue Velvet.

But in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, there is no mention at all of the
Color of this upper Robe, save only of the Mantle, which a Foreign Princes
Proxy is enjoined to bring along with him, when he comes to assume the Stall of
his Principal, which though it be not directly to the point, yet is it there
noted to be of Hen. 8. English Statutes Art. 21.
Blue Velvet: and it is more than probable, that the Blue Color continued
still in use; for within a few years after the compiling this last mentioned
Body of Statutes, it appears, the Mantle sent to James King of Scotland, was of
Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton.
Blue Velvet. And Utu^tur Pallio coeruleo. Angl Hist. l. 19 p. 378.
Polydore Virgile, who wrote his History about that time, affirms as much.
Moreover in the ancient form of admonition and signification, appointed to be
spoken at the Investiture of Foreign Princes, and then in use, it is called
the Mantle of Accipe Chlamydem hanc coeli^i coloris. lib. N p. 310.
Celestial Color.

If we pass from the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, to the first and second
years of King Philip and Queen Mary, it will appear, the Mantle sent to Emanuel
Duke of Savoy was likewise of Ex lib. War. Dorm. temp. H. 8. E. 6. Ph. and
Mar. and ^liz. Reg. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. page 364.
Blue Velvet.

But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign (upon what ground is no where mentioned) the
Color of Foreign Princes Mantles, was changed from Blue to Purple: for of
that Color were the Mantles sent to the French Kings, Ex lib. War.
particular. temp. Eliz. R. in Offic. praed. p. 85.
Charles the Ninth, anno 6. Eliz. and Ib. p. 201.
Henry the Third, an. 27. of the same Queen: So also to the Emperor Ib. p. 17.
Maximilian, an. 9. Eliz. to Ex lib. 4. in Offic. praed. p. 446.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark, an. 24. Eliz. to Ib. p. 157.
John Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 21. Eliz. and to MS. fol.
penes praef. Geo. Owen, York fol. 299.
Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark, an. Iac. R. 4. but that sent to Erh.
Cellius in Eq. Aur. Anglo. Wirtemb. page 135.
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg in the same year, was of a mixed Color, to wit,
Purple with Violet.

Thus the Purple Color came in, and continued till about the 12. year of King
Charles the First, when that Sovereign (having determined to restore the Color
of the Mantle to the primitive Institution, namely a rich Celestial Blue) gave
directions to Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nuper Cancel. hujus Ord.
Mr. Peter Richant Merchant (afterward Knighted by him) to furnish himself
with a parcel of Velvets of that Color from Genoa, and upon their arrival into
England commanded 3. Ian. 1637.
Sir Thomas Row, then Chancellor of the Order, forthwith to signify by
Letters to all the Knights-Companions his Sovereign Pleasure; that every one of
them should take so much of that Velvet as would make new Robes, against the
following St. George's day, and satisfy for them; in obedience to this command
the Chancellor within ten days gave notice thereof to the Knights-Companions.

Hereupon all the Knights furnished themselves with new Mantles at the rate of
thirty seven shillings a yard, being the price the Sovereign paid to Mr.
Richaut for the Velvet of his own Robes; and the first time these Mantles were
worn, was to honor the Installation of the present Sovereign.

And because there were many Knights-Elect to be Installed, after the happy
return of the present Sovereign, it was therefore Ordered, at a Chapter held at
Whitehall, the 14. of January, an. 12. Car. 2. (called to consider what
preparations were fit and necessary to be made, against the grand Feast of St.
George then at hand) That directions should be given to the Master of the
Wardrobe, to send abroad for special good Velvets, of Skie-colour and Crimson,
and other materials of the proper Colors for the Mantles and Surcoats, both of
the old Knights-Companions, and those that were then to be Installed; which was
accordingly done, and they brought over in time to accommodate them at the said
Feast.

4. Quantity.
Albeit the just number of Else of Cloth, which went to the making the Founder's
first Mantle, are not set down, yet in gross for his Mantle, Hood, and Surcoat,
there was allowed Ex praed. Rot. Camp. Io. Coke, m. 8.
10 Else of long Cloth. The Mantle of King Henry the Sixth took up Ex lib.
praef. vocat. Cotom. f. 52.
one Piece, 5 Else and 3 quarters of Blue Velvet; and those sent to Ex lib. 4.
in Offic. mag. Guard. p. 446.
Frederick the Second, and MS. fol. penes Geo. Owen nuper York Heraldi. p. 299.
Christiern the Fourth, Kings of Denmark, and to the French King Ex lib. War.
particular temp. Eliz. R. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. p. 201.
Henry the Third, contained each 20 yards of Velvet. This we find to be the
allowance for the Mantles of Foreign Princes, and are the more large by reason
of their long Train, which being wanting in the Mantles of Knights Subjects, 18
yards served to make one of them. The full length of the present Sovereign's
Mantle, from the Collar behind to the end of the Train, is 3 yards; the length
of the foreside 1 yard and 3 quarters; from the foot along the bottom to the
setting on of the Train is 2 yards; and from thence, the length or compass of
the Train is 2 yards.

The left shoulder of each of these Mantles have (from the Institution of the
Order) been adorned with one large fair Garter, 5. Trimming.
containing the Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense: These were distinguished from
the lesser Garters, anciently embroidered upon the Surcoats and Hoods, of the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions, by the name of Ex eod. lib. voc. Cot^m. f.
43.47.12.92.96. b and 99.
Garters gross.

Within this Garter was embroidered the Ib. f. ^2. b. Vid. Hist. The. de la
Mar^ p. 156. b. MS.
Arms of St. George, viz. Argent a Cross Gules; and was heretofore wrought upon
Ib. f. ^2. b. Vid. Hist. The. de la Mar^ p. 156. b. MS.
Satin, with Gold, Silver, and Silk; but in succeeding times, more cost was
bestowed upon this Ensign; the embroidery being curiously wrought upon Velvet,
with Damask, Gold, and sundry sorts of Purls, Plates, Venice Twists and Silks;
and the Letters of the Motto and Borders of the Garter, composed of fair
Oriental Pearl. The Garter fixed upon the Mantle of the present Sovereign, is
encompassed with large Oriental Pearl, so also are the Letters of the Motto,
and the Cross within the Garter (an exact Figure whereof is to be seen in the
Plate set at the beginning of this Chapter) the Diameter of this Garter is
seven Inches, but the depth, from the upper part to the end of the Pendant, ten
Inches.

In the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, it seems to have been the fashion to
garnish the Mantle with three or four Welts drawn down the sides, and round the
bottom; for so have I found it expressed on the Monument of John Talbot, Earl of
Shrewsbury, set in the South Wall of the Chancel in the Church of Whit^hurch in
Shropshire.

About this time also the Lining of this Robe, was Ex ^od lib. f. 47.92. and 96
b
White Damask, and afterward Ex vet. pergam Cod. in Offic. mag. Guard. p. 47.
White Satin; but of later times, it was lined with White Lab. War. D^rm.
temp. H. 8. etc. f. 264
Tassaty, which continues yet in fashion.

For further Ornament, the Mantle had fixed to its Collar, a pair of long
strings, anciently woven of Ex lib. praed. voc. C^tom. f. 52 b. and 96. b.
Blue Silk only; (called Cordans, Robe-strings, or Laces) but of later times Ex
Collect. praef. Aug. Vincent.
twisted round, and made of Venice Gold, and Silk of the Color of the Robe; at
each end of which, hung a great Ex eod. lib. voc. Cotom loco nuper cit
Knob or Button wrought over and raised with a rich Caul of Gold; and Tassels
thereunto of like Silk and Gold.

Lastly, at the Collar was usually fixed, an Ex lib. terti^ in praed. Offic. p.
17.
Hook and eye of Gold; for the surer fastening it about the shoulders.

SECT. III. Of the Surcoat.
WE observed before, that the Mantle or upper Robe is only taken notice of in
the Founder's Statutes, but not the Surcoat or Kirtle; nevertheless this part
of the Habit, is as ancient as the other, being made use of at the Institution
of the Order: For such a Garment the Founder then made, together with his
Mantle (as also a Hood) to wear at the first Feast of this most Noble Order.

And as the Mantle was derived from the Greeks and Romans, so was the
Panciroll. li^. 1. ver. deperdit. Tit. 44.
Surcoat also; it being not much unlike the Tuni^k or upper Coat, now in
fashion with us, and worn over the Vest. This Garment among the Romans was
called Tunica, and worn, Rosin. antiq. Romans l. 5. c. 33.
next under the Toga, but both Rosin. antiq. Romans l. 5. c. 33.
narrower and shorter than it; it was girded close to the Body with a Girdle,
and so girded, that the Quintil^. ^. 11.
Hem of it reached a little below the Knee, or to the middle of the Ham. Rosin.
loco cit. Baisius de re Vestiar. p. 212.
It was the proper Mode of the Roman Citizens, and by its trimming were the
three degrees among them known: For the Rosin. loco cit. Baisius de re Vestiar.
p. 212.
Senators Tunicks, were embroidered or purfel'd over with broad purple Studs,
the Knights with narrow ones, and the Plebeians plain, and without any such
embroidery.

In seting forth the Surcoat which was heretofore annually bestowed by the
Sovereign on the Knights-Companions, and therefore called his Liberationes
dicuntur res necessariae quae vel ex debito, vel honori gratia, Magi^^ratui,
Hospitibus, seu Peregrinantibus ministrantur. Spelman. Glossar. verbo Liberatio.
Livery, we shall follow the method used in describing the Mantle, and say
something of the Name, Materials, Color, Quantity, and Garnishing.

As to the Name, 1. Its Name.
we observe, this Garment has had sundry denominations; that bestowed on it in
the old Rolls of the great Wardrobe is Ex Rot. Compot. Johan. Newbury, an. 34.
E. 3. m. 1. penes R^mem. Regis in Scaccario, and Rot. Compot. Hen. de Snaith,
an. 37. E. 3. m. 3. Vide porro Rot. Compot. Alani de Stoke an. 7. R. 2. m. 9.
and 15. and lib Comp. de liberat. Pannorum, etc. temp. R. 2. in Offic. mag.
Gardrob. f. 155.167.173.184.194.
Roba, a Robe; but more properly (as the Founder's first Surcoat is called)
Rot. Compot. Johan Coke, ab anno 21. ad annum 23. E. 3. m. 8. and lib. R. p.
120.
Tunica, which Name is also given it, in the Red Book of the Order. In English
it is rendered Gown, Kirtle, MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 1.] f. 19.
Surcoat, Sir Tho. Rows Iournal. p. 35.
Vndercoat, and Robe.

The first of these English Names, [ Gown] is attributed to the Surcoats of the
Sovereign and Foreign Princes, in the times of Ex Lib. praed. vocat. Cotom.
Henry the Sixth, Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Ware Eq. Aur
Edward the Fourth, and Ex vet, MS. penes praef. Will. le Neve Eq. Aur. f. 295.
Henry the Seventh; but since his Reign, and (till very lately) it has been
bestowed also on the Surcoats of Knights-Companions; and that of Kirtle
sometimes given to those sent to Foreign Princes, as does almost every where
appear among the Books of Warrants, in the great Wardrobe; but the rest are
terms made use of in our Age.

2. Materials.
As the first Mantles, so the first Surcoats were made of Ex praef. Rot. Comp.
Io. Coke, m. 8. vide etiam lib. Comp. de Liberat. pannor. temp. R. 2. f.
124.155.167.173.184. etc.
Woollen-Cloth: and though the Cloth of the Mantles, was in time changed to
Velvet, yet were the Surcoats for some time after made of Ex lib. vocat. Cotom.
f. 47. and 92.
Cloth, at least till after the Office of Chancellor of the Garter was erected
by King Edward the Fourth, as appears by the Ex vet. pergam. Cod. in Offic.
mag. Gardrob. p. 12.
Precedent of this Livery, in the Sovereign's great Wardrobe; where after the
distribution of materials for this Garment, proportionable to each Degree of
Nobility, the like follows for the Liveries, given to the Officers of the
Order, among whom the Chancellor is there mentioned. But at length they also
came to be made of Velvet, which sort of Silk is still retained.

3. Color
The Color of this Vesture was anciently changed every year, commonly into one
of these four Colors, either Blue, Scarlet, Sanguine in grain, or White; but
the Color of the Mantles remained one and the same, as at the Institution,
until Queen Elizabeth's Reign, namely Blue: and note that the Surcoats of the
Knights-Companions, were always changed to the same Color with the Sovereign's.

The Founder's first Surcoat was of the same Cloth and Color with his Mantle,
viz. Ex pread. Rot. Compot. Io Coke. m. 8.
Blue; but that Surcoat provided for him in the 34. year of his Reign, was Ex
rot. Io. Newbury, m. 13.
Black Cloth. And of the Ibid. m 1.
same Color were those he bestowed (against the Solemnity of the Feast held
that year) upon these following Knights-Companions, namely, the Ibid. m. 1.
Black Prince, the Earls of Vlster, Richmond, and Salisbury, Edmund of Langley
(his Son) Sir Richard la Vache, Sir Hugh Wrotesley, Sir Reignald Cobham, Sir
Bartholomew Burgherst, the Lord Mohun, Sir Walter Manney, Sir Nele Loring, Sir
Walter Paveley, Sir William Fitz Waryn, Sir Miles Stapleton, the Earls of
Stafford, Warwick, and Suffolk, and Sir Thomas Vghtred. But we conceive this
mourning Color was then assumed, because the Pestilentia minor.
Pestilence began again to increase; the dreadful remembrance of that great
Pestilence, which so furiously raged eleven years before (called Pestilentia
magna) inviting to all kind of humiliation. The Surcoats which the Sovereign
gave the Dukes of Lancaster and Clarence, and 14 other Knights-Companions, Ex
praef. Rot. Comp^t Hen. de Snaith, m. 3.
an. 37. E. 3. were of Cloth, Sanguine in grain.

Those 24. provided for the Feast of St. George, an 7. R. 2. were Ex praed.
R^t. Comp. Alani de St^ke, m. 15.
Violet in grain; whereof one was for the Sovereign, the other 23. for these
Knights-Companions following, Ib. m. 9.
John King of Castile and Leon, Duke of Lancaster, the E^^^^ of Cambridge,
Buckingham, Derby, Kent, Warwick, Stafford, Salisbury, Northumberland, and
Nottingham, the Lords Nevil, Basset, and John Holland, Sir Guy Bryan, Sir
William Beauchamp, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Nele Loring, Sir John Sulby, Sir
Lodowick Clifford, Sir Simon Burley, Sir Richard Burley, Sir Bryan Stapleton,
and Sir Sultan de la Trane.

Anno 11. R. 2. there were made against St. George's Feast, three and twenty
Surcoats of De Panno Blank long. Videsis lib. Camp de Liberat Panror. and tem^
R. 2. f. 155. and 167.
White Cloth, for the Sovereign and 22 Knights-Companions. And in the 12. and
19. year of the same King, the Sovereign bestowed on the same number of
Knights, Surcoats of Ib. f. 155. and 173. b.
long Blue Cloth, as were the first.

The 23 Surcoats provided for the Feast of St. George, an 1. H. 5. were of MS.
in Bibl. Hatton.
White Cloth.

Anno -- H. 6. the Sovereign's Gown or Surcoat was made of Ex lib praed. vocat.
Cotom. f. 47.
Scarlet; and so was that sent to the Ib. f. 92.
King of Portugal in the 13. year of the same King. Anno -- H. 6. the Sovereign
had Ib. f. 51.
White Cloth; and of Ib. f. 71. b.
like Color were the Surcoats provided for 20 Knights-Companions in the --
year of his Reign.

Afterward the before mentioned four Colors, began to be laid aside, and
others brought into use; for the Surcoat sent to Iulianus Medices, in the Reign
of King Edward the Fourth, was Ex Autogr. penes Iac. War^ Eq. Aut.
Purple Velvet.

And by the Sovereign's Warrants entered in the great Wardrobe, toward the
latter end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and since; it is manifest the
Surcoats of the Sovereign, and all the Knights-Companions were Crimson Velvet:
Nor was this Color altered in the Surcoat, though the late Sovereign restored
the Mantle to its first and ancient Color, an. 12. Car. 1.

It is evident that in provisions of Surcoats made for the Knights-Companions,
4. Quantity.
against one and the same Feast, there has been some difference in the
Quantity of the Cloth allowed: for we find, an. 34. E. 3. the Earls of
Stafford, Warwick, and Suffolk, as also Sir Thomas Vghtred, had then allowed
for each of their Surcoats, Ex Rot. Compos. I^. Newbury. m. 1.
6 Else of Cloth (perhaps the tallness of their stature required it) when the
other 15 Knights-Companions were allowed but Ex rot. Compos. I^. Newbury. m. 1.
5 Else, being the Ibid. m. 13.
same quantity put into the Sovereign's Surcoat at the same time.

The Dukes of Holland and Clarence (an. 1. H. 5.) with the Earl of Arundel,
were allowed Ex lib. MS. in Bibl. Hatton.
8 Else of Cloth apiece, the Dukes of Bedford, Gloucester, and York, the Earls
of Westmerland and Warwick, the Lords Gray, Fitzhugh, and Roos, Ex lib. MS. in
Bibl. Hatton.
6 Else apiece, the Earls of Dorset, with six Barons, and five
Knights-Batchellors, but Ex lib. MS. in Bibl. Hatton.
5 Else apiece.

Afterward, when the number of Else of Cloth, Garters, and Furrs came to be
ascertained for each Degree, all the Knights-Companions (even the Prince of
Wales) were stinted to a certain allowance of Ex vet. pergam. Cod. fol. in
Offic. mag. Gardrob. f. 1^.
5 Else of Cloth. But since Velvet came into use, the allowance for Surcoat and
Hood (as appears by the Sovereign's Warrants) has been eighteen yards; that
is, while the Surcoat reached down to the feet, but now it being the fashion to
wear it shorter, the allowance is but ten yards.

The length of the now Sovereign's Surcoat, is one yard and a half; and of the
sleeve one yard wanting a Nail.

In the last place, 5. Trimming.
the ornamental Trimmings of these Garments, especially at the time of
Instituting the Order, are worthy observation; for they were then, and for a
long time after, garnished or Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Io. Coke m. 8.
powdered all over with little Garters, embroided with Silk and Gold Plate; in
each of which was neatly wrought the Motto, Honi soit qui mal y pense. Besides,
the Buckles and Pendants to these small Garters were Silver, gilt. Of these
embroidered Garters, there were laid upon the first Surcoat and Hood made for
the Founder, no less than Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Io. Coke m. 8.
168.

In King Richard the Second's Reign, the little Garters that adorned the
Surcoats of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, were wrought in embroidery
upon Lib. comp. de Libera Pannor. etc. temp. R. 2. f. 155.173.184: and Ret.
Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 15.
Blue Taffaty, with Cyprus and Soldat Gold, and Silk of diverse Colors; and the
Letters Lib. comp. de Libera Pannor. etc. temp. R. 2. f. 155.173.184: and Ret.
Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 15.
Gold.

And as the Sovereign was not limited in the proportion of Cloth or Velvet for
his Surcoat; no more was he confined, to a certain number of Garters, wherewith
to adorn it: nor do I find, that any of the Knights-Companions were, until the
Precedent of the Livery of the Garter was settled. For an. 1. H. 5. the D^kes of
Holland and Clarence, the Earl of Arundel, the Dukes of Bedford and Gloucester,
had each of their Surcoats adorned with MS. in Bibl. Hatton.
120 Garters: but the Duke of York, and the rest of the Earls, Barons, and
Knights-Batchelors wore but 100.

The setlement in the Precedent of the Livery was made in relation to the
Degrees of honor of each Knight-Companion, according to which, they had an
allowance of a greater or lesser number of Garters, that is to say A Duke 120
Garters. A Marquess 110 Garters. An Earl 100 Garters. A Viscount 90 Garters. A
Baron 80 Garters. A Baneret 70 Garters. A Knight-Batchellor 60 Garters.


About the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, the Sovereign's number of Garters did
not much exceed those which the Founder allowed to himself at the Institution;
for the Surcoat and Hood of the said King, took up but Ex praed. lib. (...)
Cotom. f 52. b.
173. and the King of Portugal, an. 13. H. 6. Ib. f. 92.
120 Garters. But this manner of adorning these Garments, grew at length quite
out of fashion (perhaps when Cloth was altered to Velvet) and the plain Surcoat
has to this day continued in use.

In the second place it is to be noted, that all these Surcoats (whilst made of
Cloth) were lined with Fur, of one and the same kind, to wit, with Bellies of
pure Miniver; only the Sovereign's were E* praef Rot. Compot. Io. Newbury m.
13. and Lib. Comp. de liberat. Pan^^, remp. R. 2. f. 129 vid^ porro lib. praed.
vocat Cotom. f. 51 b. and f. 104.
purfled with Ermyn; and of these it seems a like proportion was at first
allowed to all the Knights-Companions, viz. Ex eod. R^t. Comp Io. Newbury m. 1.
and Rot. Comp. praef. H S^ith m. 3. and Rot. Comp. praed. Al. de Stoke m. 9.
200 Bellies.

Yet in the Reign of King Richard the Second, some difference began in the
allowance to the Knights-Companions; for a Baron and all Degrees upward had the
same allowance of Ex eod. lib. Comp. de liberat. Pannor f. 167.173. and 184.
200 Bellies, but the Degrees under a Baron only Ex eod. lib. Comp. de liberat.
Pannor f. 167.173. and 184.
120. Howbeit an. 1. H. 5. the Barons were equalled to the Knights-Batchellors,
for all Degrees MS in Bibl. Hatton.
above a Baron were allowed a Fur of 200 Bellies, but the Barons and Knights
Batchellors Furs were only of 120 Bellies.

Afterward by the Precedent of the Garter, there was another Proportion set;
the Prince, a Duke, a Marquess, an Earl, had each of them Ex vet. pergun.
Codic. in Offic. mag. Gardr. p. 12.
5 Timber of pure Miniver allowed to a Surcoat, but the Viscount, Baron,
Baneret, and Bachelor Knight, but 3 Timber apiece. In time these Furs also
were laid aside, and then the Surcoats came to be lined with White Sarcenet, to
which, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, White Taffaty succeeded, and that still
continues.

What became of these Surcoats heretofore, seeing the Knights-Companions had
new ones every year, appears from this Note entered in the Black Book of the
Order, Page 318.
That on the Eve of the Feast of St. George, the Knights wore to Vespers the
Soveraign' s Livery or Surcoats used by them the preceding year, which after
that night they did not wear (for the new Surcoats were first worn on the
Feast Day) but the Ensigns and Ornaments of this kind, were afterward disposed
of to the use of the College.

SECT. IV. Of the Hood and Cap.
THE Hood comes in the next place to be spoken of, which in King Henry the
Eighth's Statutes, and the Black Book of the Order, is called Humerale; but in
the Rolls of Accounts in the Sovereign's great Wardrobe, Capucium. In the
French it is Chaperon, a word used in the Statute, an. 1. Ric. 2. c. 7. and
also retained in an old English Draught of Henry the Eighth's Statutes, that
seems to have been prepared for the view of the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, at their solemn meeting in Chapter at Windesor, an. 11. H.
8. for it carries the date of 29. of May, in that same year; on which day that
memorable Chapter was held, for Reforming and Explaining the Statutes of the
Order.

Hoods were anciently worn for defense of the Head, against the inconveniences
of weather, etc. but in later times Caps and Hats have supplied their place.
How they were then worn and sat upon the Head, may be observed in that Vide
infra Chap. 26.
Plate, which exhibits the Portraictures of the first Founders of the Order,
standing completely robed. As also with some variety of fashion in succeeding
times, in the Pictures of Dugdales Antiq. of Warwick^h. p. 121.
William Beauchamp Lord Bergaveny, Richard Earl of Warwick, Humfry Earl of
Stafford, and John Duke of Norfolk. Yet is not the Hood quite laid aside, since
still kept hanging down the back (almost like a Pilgrims Hat) as if put in
hopes (being so ready at hand) that it may again be restored to its former use.

This Hood was Ordained, and is yet retained as part of the Habit of this most
Noble Order: And though neither it, nor the Surcoat is remembered in the
Statutes of Institution, or in either of its Exemplars, nor does King Henry the
Fifth's take notice of it, yet is it of equal antiquity with the rest of the
Habit; as appears from several places before cited, out of the Rolls of the
great Wardrobe; and Henry the Eighth's Statutes have made special observation
of it, as part of the Habit, for there the Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and Collar,
are called Art. 3.
the whole Habit of the Order. Nay, before this time, mention is made of it in
the Black Book anno 22. H. 7. where at the Investiture of Philip King of
Cas^ile, the Mantle, Kirtle, Page 184.
Hood, and Collar, are expressed to be the whole Habit, wherewith he was invested.

The form of this part of the Habit is perfectly described in the Plate at the
beginning of this Chapter. It was heretofore, and now is, generally made of the
same materials with the Surcoat, and consequently of the same Color. Moreover
it was anciently trimmed and garnished, with a proportion of little embroidered
Garters, lined with Cloth of a different color, and such as would best set off
to view; but now with Taffaty, as is the Lining of the Surcoat; of all which
mention is made, in those authorities cited before, and relating to the Surcoat.

As to the Cap, which in use and place succeeded the Hood, we shall briefly say
thus much: That it has been, and yet is made of Black Velvet, lined with
Taffaty, but the fashion has several times varied: for in the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth, the Cap was flat, as appears in a Proceeding of that
Sovereign, and the Knights-Companions, fairly limned in the Page 19^.
Black Book of the Order. In Queen Elizabeth's time, it was a little raised in
the head, as may be seen in another Proceeding in her Reign, which Chap. 20.
hereafter follows. But in King James his Reign, they were much more high
crowned; and the present fashion is shown in our before mentioned Plate.

This Cap has been usually adorned with Plumes of white Feathers, and Sprigs,
and bound about with a Band, set thick with Diamonds; Lib. R. p. 146*
so was that Cap provided for the Installation of the present Sovereign: And
sometimes the Brims have been tackt up with a large and costly Jewel.

It seems the custom of wearing Caps and Feathers at the grand Solemnities of
the Order, had for some time (about the beginning of King James his Reign) been
neglected; and thereupon, in a MS. penes Edw. Fanconbridge genesis
Chapter held the 13. of April, an. 10. Iac. Regis, this laudable usage was
re-established.

To all these may be fitly added, the Cross of the Order, encompassed with a
Garter, which by King Charles the First was Lib. R. p. 29.
Ordained to be worn, upon the left side of the Sovereign's and
Knights-Companions Cloaks, Coats, and Cassocks, when they did not wear their
Robes. The Order for which we shall here insert.

Charles R.

Ex Collect. Praef. Will. le Neve.
WHereas the Robes concerning the Order, first, having the same ordinary use
which Cloaks have at this time, and now are worn only at the Feast of St.
George, Installing of Knights, and holding of Chapters, so that the Arms of the
Garter, not being daily worn thereon, may be thought an omission, whereby the
Order does receive some diminution of honor, contrary to the intention of the
Founder. King Charles out of his princely desire by all due means to advance
the honor of the said Noble Order, at a Chapter holden at his Palace of
Westminster, on the 27. day of April, in the 2. year of his Reign of Great
Britain, the same day, being by Prorogation appointed for the day and Feast of
St. George, for that year, His Majesty, with eleven Knights of the Order, viz.
Edward Earl of Worcester Lord Privy Seal, Robert Earl of Sussex, William Earl
of Pembroke Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's House, Philip Earl of Montgomery,
Francis Earl of Rutland, George Duke of Buckingham Lord high Admiral of
England, William Earl of Salisbury, James Earl of Carlisle, Edward Earl of
Dorset, Henry Earl of Holland, Captain of his Majesty's Guard, and Thomas Earl
of Berkshire, has Ordered and and Ordained, That the Knights and Companions of
the Order, and the Prelate and Chancellor of the same, shall after three months
next ofter the date before mentioned of the said Order, wear upon the left part
of their Cloaks, Coats, and Riding Cassocks, at all times when they shall not
wear their Robes, and in all Places and Assemblies, an Escotcheon of the Arms
of St. George, that is to say, a Cross within a Garter, not enriched with
Pearls or Stones; that the wearing thereof may be a testimony apert to the
World, of the honor they hold from the said most Noble Order, Instituted and
Ordained for persons of the highest honor and greatest worth.


And it seems it was not long after e're the Glory or Star (as it is usually
called) having certain beams of Silver that spread in form of a Cross, was
introduced and added thereunto, in imitation (as is thought) of the French, who
after that manner wore the chief Ensign of the Order of the Holy Ghost, being
the resemblance of a Dove, irradiated with such like beams.

And whereas some allow this Symbol of the Holy Ghost, to be properly enough
surrounded with a Glory, like as are the representations of the Heads of our
Savior and his Apostles, by a general consent among Painters, yet censure it
altogether improper for a Garter to be so adorned; let them consider that King
Edward the Fourth, encompassed his White Rose with the like Glory (whereof both
the Stone-work, and Wood-work of St. George's Chapel in Windesor Castle afford
diverse instances) and then there will be found something of Precedent for it,
long before Institution of the Order of the Holy Ghost, as also of its
application to other no less than sacred things. But this King assumed this
Devise, upon the Sun's appearance like three Suns, which suddenly united
together into one, immediately before his fortunate Victory at the Battle of
Mortimer's Cross: an occasion, which he thought himself much obliged to
perpetuate.

And they mistake, who take it to be the Garter, in this new Ornament, that is
thus irradiated, but there is something else in it, which was then thought more
worthy of the Glory, and from it, not the Garter, do the beams and rays spread;
namely the Cross of the Order, esteemed glorious, since it shined so in Heaven,
at its appearance to Constantine the Great; which that it may more evidently
appear, a draught of the Medal stamped in memorial of adding this honorable
Devise is here represented, whereby it is manifest, the Glory issues from the
Cross, not Garter.



SECT. V. The Robes anciently assigned to the Queen and great Ladies.
HAving thus dispatched our discourse concerning the Robes of the Order, we
shall next give some light to a Custom taken up shortly after its Institution,
of honoring the Queen, some of the Knights-Companions Wives; and other great
Ladies, with Robes and Hoods, of the gift of the Sovereign, and of the same
materials, as were the Sovereign's and Knights-Companions Surcoats; garnished
also with little embroidered Garters, and lined with rich Furs; which Robes
they likewise wore during the Solemnity of the Feast of St. George.

The first mention of this, which has occurred to us, is Ex praed. Rot. Comp.
Alani de Stoke m. 9.
an. 7. R. 2. (though we conceive it is elder) where, against the Feast of St.
George, appointed to be held that year, such kind of Robes and Hoods were
provided for the Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9.
Queen, the Sovereign's Mother, the Duchess of Lancaster, the Countesses of
Cambridge, Buckingham, Penbroke, Oxford, and Salisbury, the Ladies Philippa and
Katherine, Daughters to the Duke of Lancaster and the Lady Mohun.

They were made of Cloth Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9.
Violet in grain, like as the Sovereign and Knights-Companions Surcoats that
year. The Robes lined with Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9.
Fur, but the Hoods, with Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9.
Scarlet, and both embroidered over with Ex praed. Rot. Comp. Alani de Stoke m.
9.
little Garters; and the proportion of Cloth, Furs, and Garters were allowed
according to their several Degrees. For the Queens allowance was Ex praed. Rot.
Comp. Alani de Stoke m. 9.
8 Else of Cloth, and half an Ell of Scarlet, for the lining of her Hood; the
Sovereign's Mother had allowed her one whole Cloth, and a double proportion of
Scarlet: but we conceive she had two Robes and Hoods made at this time, in
regard so large quantity of all things were assigned her, besides the
particular number (accounting the Queen for one) are but 11. and cannot else
reach the total of Robes provided for them, and expressly set down to be Ibid.
m. 1^.
12.

The Duchess of Lancaster had the allowance of half a Cloth, and half an Ell
of Scarlet, the Coun^ess of Cambridge 7 Else of Cloth, and half an Ell of
Scarlet; and the rest of the Ladies the same proportion of Cloth with the
Knights-Companions; that is, each of them 5 Else apiece, and half an Ell of
Scarlet.

According to their proportion of Cloth, was also their proportion of Minivers,
the Queens allowance was two Furs, each of them containing 300 Bellies of pure
Miniver; the Sovereign's Mother had double that proportion; the Duchess of
Lancaster, and Countess of Cambridge a like proportion of Minivers as had the
Queen, but all the rest of the Ladies had only one Fur, consisting of 200
Bellies of pure Miniver* Besides, the embroidered Garters provided to adorn and
garnish the Ibid. m. 1^.
24 Surcoats of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, and the Ibid. m. 1^.
12 Robes for the Queen and other Ladies, amounted to the number of Ibid. m. 1^.
2900 Garters.

In like manner were there prepared against the Feast of St. George, an. 11. R.
2. Lib. Comp. de Liberat. Pannor. temp. Ric. 2. in Offic. praed. f. 167.
15 Robes and Hoods for the Queen and other Ladies, of the same livery and
suit, which the Sovereign and Knights-Companions then wore: namely, white long
Cloth, and blue Cloth for the lining of their Hoods: the proportion in all
things being like the former: Lib. Comp. de Liberat. Pannor. temp. Ric. 2. in
Offic. praed. f. 167.
The Duchess of York having here the like allowance as had the Duchess of
Lancaster above mentioned.

Anno 13. R. 2. the Ladies Robes and Hoods were Ibid. f. 184.
Sanguine Cloth, and the lining of their Hoods Cloth in grain; and in the 19.
year of the same King they were Ib. f. 173.
Blue Cloth, and long Cloth in grain for lining their Hoods. In both these
years we find the Duchess of Aquitane had double the proportion of Cloth
allowed her (as had also the Duchess of York) viz. 14 Else (the Queen having
then but the former allowance of 8 Else) and yet her proportion of lining both
for the Robe and Hood, was no more than is mentioned before be allowed the
Queen.

But an. 1. H. 5. the proportion of Cloth, Minivers, and Garters were alike to
Ladies of all Degrees, whether Dutchesses, Countesses, or other Ladies, and
that was to each 5 Else of White Woollen Cloth, (only the Queen Mother had 8
Else of White Cloth, and 8 Else of Black Cloth) a Fur containing 200 Bellies of
Miniver pure, and 100 embroidered Garters. And by a Ex Collect. Guil. le. Neve
Eq Aur. nuper Clarenc.
Letter dormant, under the Privy Seal, dated the 3. of November an. 12. H. 6.
and directed to the then Master of the Sovereign's great Wardrobe, the like
Livery (both for Color of Cloth, number of Else, Bellies of Miniver, and
Garters) is commanded to be provided, for the Countess of Suffolk, against the
succeeding Feast of St. George.

The last mention we find of these Liveries was MS. penes Hen. St. George Ar.
Richmond Herald.
an. 16. E. 4. when at the Feast of St. George, held the Sunday after the 27.
of February at Windesor, the Queen, the Lady Elizabeth the Kings eldest
Daughter, and Duchess of Suffolk the Kings Sister, had for their Livery Murrey
Gowns embroidered with Garters.

Besides, these Robes worn by the Ladies, at the Festivals of the Order, there
seems to be some intimation of wearing a Garter also on their left arms, in
like manner as the Knights-Companions do on their left Legs; for it is observed
to our hand, from the Countess of Ex praef. lib. vocat. C^^om. f. 92.
Tankerviles Monument, that she is portrayed with such a Garter on her left Arm.

After a long disuse of these Robes by the Queens of England, and
Knights-Companions Ladies, there was (at the Feast of St. George, celebrated
an. 14. Car. 1.) endeavor used to have them restored; for the then Deputy
Chancellor moved the Sovereign in Chapter (held the Sir James Palmers large
Iournal, p. 16.
22. of May) Sir James Palmers large Iournal, p. 16.
That the Ladies of the Knights-Companions might have the privilege to wear a
Garter of the Order about their arms; and an upper Robe, at Festival times,
according to ancient usage. Upon which motion the Sovereign gave Order, Sir
James Palmers large Iournal, p. 16.
That the Queen should be acquainted therewith, and her pleasure known, and the
affair left to the Ladies particular suit.

The Sea his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 59.
10. of October in the following year (the Feast of St. George, being then also
kept at Windesor) the Deputy Chancellor, See his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 59.
reported to the Sovereign in Chapter, the Answer which the Queen was pleased
to give him to the aforesaid Order; See his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 59.
Whereupon it was then left to a Chapter to be called by the Knights-Companions
to consider of every circumstance, how it were fittest to be done, for the
honor of the Order; which was appointed to be held at London, about
Alhollantide after: but what was then, or after done, does not appear; and the
unhappy War coming on, this matter wholly slept.

SECT. VI. Of Collars in general.
THE Collar is an Ornament, not of late, but ancient invention; and certainly,
could we not deduce its antiquity very high, yet the wonderful consent of most
Nations therein, would sufficiently plead for it, since such a consent can
scarce be found, unless in things most ancient.

As to its Antiquity, the Author of the first Book of ^ Genesis 41. v. 42.
Sacred Writ, setting down the Ornaments bestowed by Pharaoh on Joseph,
mentions the Collar to be one, and of Gold; that being the Metal whereof it was
in all times ordinarily made: And it may be inferred, the use of it in that,
was the same as in this Age, viz. to be worn about the neck; in regard Pharaoh
put it about Ioseph's Neck.

Again, the Draught of that most ancient Hierogliphical Table, reserved of old
in the Temple of Isis in Egypt, and most happily conserved till of late years
(when, though it unhappily perished at the Athan Kircher. Oedip. Tom. 3. p. 80.
sacking of Mantua by the Spaniards, an. 1630. yet was fortunately set forth
before in Picture by Laurentius Pignorius) does evidence the great antiquity of
this Ornament among them; for there are to be found incircling the Necks of the
Images of Isis and Osiris such like Collars, in a manner extending to their
shoulders: Their workmanship seems curious, being intersected with various
lines, and divided with Tablets and precious Stones.

The Collar became first and principally famous among the Romans, for having
given a Live. l. 7. c. 10.
Surname of perpetual memory to one of the chiefest Families in Rome, derived
unto it from T. Manlius Torquatus, who fought with a Champion of the Gauls,
near the River Anio, Anno V. C. 392. and having vanquished him, Gell l. 4. c.
14.
cut off his Head, then plucked off his Collar, and (bloody as it was) put it
about his own neck. Livy says, L^^o ^itato.
the Soldiers, when they presented him to the Dictator, were heard to Surname
him Torquatus, and from him that honorable name descended to his Posterity.

In further memory of this gallant action, and to show the original of this
Surname, the representation of the Collar of this Gaul, is found stamped upon
some Roman Coyns, in particular that referring to F^uv. Vrs^^. de Familiis
Romanor. p 152.
L. Torquatus, Consul with Fasti l. 1.
L. Cotta, An V. C. 688. which we have here inserted, to the end its fashion
may be the better known.



And we shall herewith note, that when one of another Tribe became adopted into
this Family, he also did assume this Badge of Honor; as may be seen in another
Coin relating to D. Iunius Silanus, sometime Flor. Epit. L. 54.
Praetor of Macedonia, adopted into the Manlian Family of the Torquati; though
the fashion of the work be somewhat differing from the former.

In eldest times, none but Kings and Princes wore Collars, and therefore their
first use seems to be a note of Dignity and Power: as is evident out of Daniel,
where is noted, that the Assyrian Kings used this Ornament. Afterward men
famous for wisdom, excelling in Counsels, and thereby beneficial to their
Country, had Collars bestowed on them, for tokens of Reward; and this is plain,
as in the Example of Joseph, so likewise from the Dan. c. 5. ^. ^.
Proclamation of Belshazzar King of Babylon, among the Rewards proposed to him,
that could read and interpret the Writing on the Wall. But the Collar was
bestowed as a Reward also upon those, whose famous actions and military
enterprises merited well, and rendered them deserving of eminent recompenses,
though otherwise persons of no great or extraordinary note.

Thus the Romans among the Such were the Coronae, Armillae, Hastae, Phalerae,
Vexilla, etc.
Dona and Praemia Militaria, those solemn Rewards, wherewith they honored
Virtue, which upon occasion of merit and desert, they bestowed among such of
their Commanders and Soldiers, as had gallantly exposed their lives to dangers
for the service of that Commonwealth; and no less to excite others to like
performances, than to recompense the deserving for great services done; among
these (we say) Collars were of the number, and the honor of receiving them
thought worthy to be preserved for the notice of Posterity, in Marble
Inscriptions; of which sort there are many collected by the industrious Page
358, Inscr 2. p. 391. Inscr. 4. p. 443. Inscr. 2. p. 1102 Inscr. 4.
Gruter, out of whom, for a specimen of this kind, we have transcribed this
that follows, Page 429, Inscr. 1.
M. LICINIO. MVCIANO. etc.

This custom of bestowing Collars, as a peculiar Reward for military and
memorable services, was continued down to, and used by the later Emperors, as
the learned Budaeus observes. And we read of Investing a Knight of the
Sepulcher with a Collar, at his Creation: where as soon as the Ceremony of his
Ordination is finished, the Padre Guardian kisseth the new made Knight, and Fr.
Mennen. Delic. Equest. p. 46.
puts about his neck (according to the manner of Ancients) a Golden Collar,
with a Cross hanging thereat.

Most fitly therefore have the Sovereigns of Military Orders, added this
Ornament of the Collar to their Habit, and bestowed it on the Fellows and
Companions; many of whom have meritoriously deserved it, upon account of those
ancient qualifications, Wisdom and Valor.

SECT. VII. The Collar of the Order.
HEreupon also, in addition to the Ensigns and Ornaments of this most Noble
Order of the Garter, there was instituted a Collar, composed after a peculiar
manner, exactly relative to the name and title of the Order; to the wearing of
which, the Sovereign obliged both himself, and Knights-Companions, and His and
their Successors.

This Collar was Ordained to be Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 38.
Gold, 30 ounces Troy weight, but not above: howbeit, that Collar sent to
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, weighed 34 ounces and a quarter; and that
belonging to the late Sovereign King Charles the First, 35 ounces and a half;
which after his Sufferings coming into the hands of Ex Relatione Tho. Beauchamp
genesis
Thomas Harison, sometime called Major General Harison, was by him delivered to
the Trustees for sale of this Kings Goods, who Ex Relatione Tho. Beauchamp genesis
Anno 1649. sent it to the Mint with the Ex Relatione Tho. Beauchamp genesis
Regalia here particularized to set the Stamp on work for the first Gold that
the upstart Commonwealth coined, viz.

The Imperial Crown, Inventory Book of the late Kings Goods, f^l. 36. a.
weighing 7 l. 6 ounces, enriched with 19 Saphirs (3 of which were exceeding
large) 232 Pearls, 58 Rubies, 28 Diamonds and 2 Emeralds. The Queens Crown,
weighing 3 l. 10 ounces 1 half, enriched with 20 Saphirs, 22 Rubies, and 83
Pearls. An ancient Crown weighing 2 l. 1 ounce, enriched with one fair Diamond
(valued by the Trustees, who rated such things far beneath their worth, at 200
l.) 13 other Diamonds, 10 Rubies, 1 Emerald, 1 Saphir (valued by them at 60 l.)
and 70 Pearls; which Stones and Pearls weighed 3 ounces. The Globe or Orb, Fol.
37.
weighing 1 l. 5 ounces 1 quarter. Two Coronation Bracelets (adorned with 3
Rubies Ballas, and 12 Pearls weighing an ounce) in all 7 ounces 1 quarter. Two
Scepters, weighing 18 ounces 1 quarter. A long Rod Silver gilt, weighing 1 l. 5
ounces. One Gold Porringer and Cover, weighing 15 ounces 1 half. One Chalice,
adorned with 2 Saphirs and 2 Ballas Rubies, weighing 15 ounces 1 half. Two
Patena's enamelled, weighing 25 ounces 1 half. Two Spoons, with flat heads,
weighing 5 ounces 1 quarter. One Taster, enamelled with a Phoenix, weighing 5
ounces 1 half. Two Offering Pieces and a Sey of Gold, weighing 10 ounces 1
quarter. Queen Edith's Crown (formerly thought to be of massy Gold, Fol. 40. ^.
^.
but upon trial found Silver gilt) enricht with Garnets, Pearls, Saphirs, and
other Stones, weighing 50 ounces. King Elfrid's Crown, of Gold Wirework, set
with Stones, and two little Bells, weighing 79 ounces ^ half. A Patena
enamelled, set with Stones, weighing 23 ounces 1 half. The Ampulla, set with
Stones and Pearls, weighing 8 ounces 1 half. A large Staff, with a Dove on the
top, the upper part Gold, the lower part Silver gilt, weighing 27 ounces. A
small Staff, with a flower de Lis on the top, being Iron within, and Silver
gilt without. Two Scepters, one set with Pearls and Stones, the upper end Gold,
weighing 23 ounces, the lower end Silver gilt. The other Scepter Silver gilt,
having a Dove weighing 7 ounces 3 quarters. The Gold of the Tassels of a
Liver-coloured Robe (adorned with Pearl) weighing 4 ounces, also the Gold of
the Neck Button of the Coat, weighing 1 ounce. A pair of Silver gilt Spurs, set
with 12 Stones, (having Straps of Crimson Silk) weighing 6 ounces 3 quarters.
Besides these, there were other parts of the Regalia fetched from
Westminster-Abbey, and sold by these Trustees, namely One large Chalice of
Glass, wrought in Figures, and set in Gold, with Stones and Pearls, weighing 68
ounces 1 half. A Staff of black and white Ivory, having a Dove on the top, the
binding and feet Gold. A Silver Spoon gilt weighing 3 ounces. One Crimson
Tafsaty Robe. Ibid. f. 41.
One Robe trimmed with Gold Lace. One Liver-coloured Silk Robe. One Robe of
Crimson Tafsaty Sarcenet. One pair of Buskins Cloth of Silver. One pair of
Shoes Cloth of Gold. One pair of embroidered Gloves. Three Swords, with
Scabards Cloth of Gold. One Horn Comb.


It was further appointed by King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, that this Collar
should be composed of Art. 38.
pieces of Gold in fashion of Garters, the ground enamelled Blue, and the
Letters of the Motto Gold. In the midst of each Garter, two Art. 38.
Roses placed, the innermost enamelled Red, and the outermost White; contrarily
in the next Garter, the innermost Rose enamelled White, and the outermost Red;
and so alternately continued: but of later times these Roses are wholly Red.

The number of these Garters are so many, as be the ordained number of the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions, by the Institution of the Order, viz. Twenty
six; being tied together with as many Knots of Gold: and this fashion has in
all particulars hitherto continued invariable.

Nor ought the Collar to be garnished or enriched with precious Stones (as may
the George which hangs thereat) such costly embelishments being absolutely
prohibited by the Ibid.
Law of the Order.

At the middle of the Collar before, is to be fastened the Image of St. George
armed, sitting on Horseback, who having thrown the Dragon upon his back,
encounters him with a tilting Spear. This Jewel is not surrounded with a
Garter, or row of Diamonds, as is the lesser George, but made according to the
representation in the Plate above, and called the Great George. It is allowed
to be Ibid.
garnished with Diamonds, and other enrichments, at the pleasure of the
Knight-Companion who owns it; and upon that license, has been frequently
adorned with variety of costly art, whereon the Diamonds and other precious
Stones are so disposed, as may upon its motion and agitation cast out the
greater luster.

But before the establishment of this Article by King Henry the Eighth, it
appears the Knights-Companions were invested with Collars at their
installations; for the Black Book takes notice of a Propriam Ordini^ Togam
Trabeam Humerale ac Collare statim induit. p. ^84.
Collar among the Ensigns of the Order, wherewith Philip King of Castile was
invested, an. 22. H. 7. but whether a Collar of SS, or other fashion, does not
there appear. Nevertheless this doubt is in part cleared, by an old memorial of
the ceremonies used at the MS. in Ofic. Arm. [L. 12.] f. 27.
Creation of Henry Lord Stafford Earl of Wiltshire (Brother to Edward Duke of
Buckingham) 3. Feb. an. 1. H. 8. where it is noted, that after he was invested
with the Robes of his State and Dignity, MS. in Ofic. Arm. [L. 12.] f. 27.
The Collar of the Garter was put about his neck, denoting him a Knight of that
Order.

And to make it yet more evident, there is found in a Penes Arthur. Com.
Anglesey.
Vellom Book of Statutes in French, sent to Maximilian the Emperor, signed the
5. of January 1508. by T. Rowthale then Register of the Order. And in In
Biblioth. Ha^^on.
another belonging to Edward Stanley Lord Mounteagle, elected Lib. N p. 202.
an. 6. H. 8. a particular Article (namely the 41.) that Ordains a Collar to be
publicly worn by each Knight-Companion, there called the Collar of the Order,
which though it be not in all respects agreeable to the fashion of that
prescribed by King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, yet comes it very near, and
said to be a Gold Collar, coupled together by several pieces of Links in
fashion of Garters, with a Vermilion Rose, and the Image of St. George hung
thereat. The reason of the Knights-Companions wearing it, the times appointed
therefore, the License for putting it to mending, the command not to enrich the
Collar, but the George only, and obligation not to sell, pawn, or alienate it
for any necessity whatsoever, are wholly the same, as were afterward enjoined
by Art. 38.
King Henry the Eight; so that in truth he did no more but adjoin to his Body
of Statutes, a Decree, which (for the main) had been in practice before.
Besides, an. 11. H. 8. upon interpretation of the 11. Article of the Statutes
for wearing the Habit of the Order, at the grand Feast of St. George; the Ibid.
p. 209.
Collar is there enumerated among those Ornaments (as part of the whole Habit)
that a Knight-Companion is obliged to wear.

In further proof that the Collar of Garters was used before King Henry the
Eight's Reign, let us offer here the Monument of Sir Giles Daubeney (who died
an. 22. H. 7.) erected in St. Paul's Chapel seituate on the north side of St.
Edward's Shrine in Westminster Abbey, whereon his Portraicture, in his Robes of
the Order, is adorned with such a Collar, as King Henry the Eighth's Statutes
do afterward describe.

As the Garter sent to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, so the great George
(pendant at his Collar, weighing seven ounces) was set with large and
resplendent Diamonds; the particulars and order do fully appear, out of the
Counterpart of that Inventory (mentioned at the beginning of this Chapter)
taken upon its delivery into the custody of the Dean and Canons of Windesor,
and were as follows.

In the three Chains of the George, small Diamonds 10 In St. George's Feather,
three small, middlemost wanting 2 In his Forehead 1 In his Breast Plate, four
faucet Diamonds, of a reasonable bigness 4 In the right Arm, faucet big 4 In
the left Arm 4 In his Baces, of a big sort 4 Thigh, Knee, Leg, and Foot, one in
each 4 The Horses head, in the forehead a faucet Diamond 1 In his Crest, very
small, beside two wanting 5 In his Mane, four lozenge Diamonds 4 In his Neck 1
In his Bridle [4] small, one wanting 3 On his shoulder, two square, and two
lozenge Diamonds of a bigger size 4 On his buttock, one square Diamond, and
eight about, on his Traps and Crupper six, four wanting on the border of his
saddle behind 21 Four square Diamonds large, at the skirts and leg 4


Between the fore legs, one fair square Diamond 1 The Dragon's forehead 1 In
his Wing and Body, faucet Diamonds, one wanting 9 Total of the George are just
87
This George (with the Collar) was sold by the Trustees for sale of the late
Kings Goods, to the before named Thomas Beauchamp.

Of what account this Noble Ensign of Honor [the Collar] has been with the
Sovereigns, and Knight-Companions, not only of the Order of the Garter, but
other Military Orders; may be observed from the Pictures of some of them, as
also their Seals, Coyns, and Medals: which later passing up and down, after a
public manner, proclaim its honor throughout the world: for in these they have
been pleased to exhibit as well their Effigies, as Scutcheons of Arms,
incircled therewith; and also the Symbols of their several Orders pendant
thereto.

There is a Picture (hanging in his Majesty's Gallery at Whitehall) of Philip
Duke of Burgundy, Founder of the Golden Fleece, adorned with the Collar of that
Order. And the leading example of the like representation in Seals, was first
given by a Successor of his, above 180 years since, as appears from the great
Seal of Sigilla Commit. Flandria. p. 116.
Maximilian and Philip his Son, Archdukes of Austria, Burgundia, etc. fixed to
the agreement of Peace made between them and the Flemings, an. 1485. wherein
the Pictures of both these Princes are represented, wearing their Collars of
the Golden Fleece; and this fashion has been since continued in Seals, by
their descendents Kings of Spain, Sovereigns of that Order.

The French King Lewis the Eleventh, after he had instituted the Order of St.
Michael, caused his Picture to be drawn (hitherto preserved at Fountain-bleau)
with the Collar of that Order; the Copy of which Francois de Mezeray, having
exhibited in his Tom. 2. p. 98.
History of France, we thence made a draught of it.

In like manner, in a Picture of Ame the Tenth Duke of Savoy (now hanging in
the Gallery at Whitehall) is represented the ancient Collar of the Annunciade,
and thereon the Motto in old Characters, used at the Foundation of that Order:
All which we have caused to be etch'd ( Tab. 1.) for the Readers satisfaction;
together with the Medals made upon the Coronation of King Charles the First at
Westminster, and of the present Sovereign there also, on the Feast day of St.
George (Patron to this most Noble Order of the Garter) an. 1661. in both which,
the Collar of the Garter may be seen placed over their Royal Robes.

Soon after the Institution of the Order of the Holy Ghost, the French Kings
were represented wearing the Collars both of St. Michael and the Holy Ghost; it
being Ordained by the Statutes of the later Order, Art. 37.
that whosoever should be honored with both Orders, should wear their Collars,
together: and perhaps, upon the same ground it was thought fit, that the
Collars of both the Garter and the Thistle, should be expressed in the Coronation
Medal of King Charles the First in Scotland, an. 1633.

And as the Sovereigns, so the Knights-Companions of several Orders, have
assumed this manner of adorning their Effigies with the Collar of that Order,
whereof they were Fellows: the Copies of some of their Medals and Coyns, are
also expressed in Tab. 2. that is to say, the Funeral Medal of Sillage Numis.
elegantic* ^um. p. 62.
Lewis King of Hungary, Knight and Companion of the Golden Fleece, another
Medal of Ibid. p. 27^.
. James the Fourth King of Scotland, Knight of the Order of St. Michael,
stamped at such time as he invaded England, an. 1513. one of Ib. p. 4^.
Christierne the Second, King of Denmark, upon his Expedition against the
Swedes: as also the Dollars of George Duke of Saxony, Henry Duke of Brunswick,
and a piece of Gold of Sigismund the Fourth King of Poland; which last is now
in his Majesty's rich Cabinet of Medals. And in like manner are extant the
Pictures of diverse Knights-Companions of the Garter in Painting, Limning, and
Sculpture, adorned with the Collars of that Order.

And to make this Noble Ensign become ornamental to the Arms also both of
Sovereigns and Knights, they have been placed (sometimes with their
Quarterings) within it; the first we find ordered in this manner, was a Seal of
Sigilla Com. Fland. p. 95.
Charles the bold, Duke of Burgundy, Chief and Sovereign of the Order of the
Golden Fleece, put to an Instrument, dated anno 1470. and whom we observe to
have adorned the neck of the Lion of Flanders therewith, in another of his
Ibid. p. 107.
Seals, as in Tab. 3. The Chiefs of other Orders did the like, as may be seen
from other examples of Coyns and Medals in the same Table: But the Sovereigns
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, usually incircled their Arms, not within
the Collar of the Order, but the Royal Garter, that being its principal Ensign.

This led on the custom to the Fellows and Companions of other Orders, to
encompass their Arms with the Collars, both in Coyns, Medals, etc. examples of
some are added by the Graver, in Tab. 4. Among these is the draught of a Seal
of Charles Count Palatine of the Rhine, incircled both with the Garter and
Collar of the Order, and is the first example we have met with, wherein both
these Ensigns are used together. The last in the 4. Table, is the full
Achievement of Bernard de Foix de la Valette Duke of Aspernon, etc. set
beneath his Effigies, graved at Paris by P. Van Schuppen, where his Arms and
Quarterings are encompassed with the chiefest Ensigns of those three Orders,
whereof he was a Brother and Companion.

And here it is proper to observe, that the more ancient the Order, whose chief
Ensign is after this manner represented, the nearer ought it be set to the
Scutcheon of Arms being the more honorable place: and consequently, a great
mistake was committed, in marshalling the Collars of the several Orders, about
the Arms of the Duke of Chevereux, in his Plate remaining over his Stall at
Windesor, where the Collars of St. Michael and of the Holy Ghost are both
placed nearer to his Scutcheon, than is the Garter.

SECT. VIII. Collars of SS.
IT will not be amiss in this place, since there are now in use with us several
sorts of Collars, worn as Badges of lower and inferior Honors (some of which
are adorned with part of the Collar of the Garter) and vulgarly called Collars
of SS: to note down a few things concerning them: having first given a more
exact account, as to their antiquity, than yet has been made public among us.

Histor. de Divis ^am vet. quam novi Testamenti. Edita Basiliae, an. 1557. p.
258.
Georgius Wicelius informs us, that he found a Book remaining in the Library at
Fulda, where (in the life of the two Brothers Simplicius and Faustinus, both
Senators, and Videsis Baronii Annal. ad annum Christi 30^. ne^non Surium, Tom.
3. ad diem 31. Mait.
suffered Martyrdom under Dioclesian) is a description of the Society of Saint
Simplicius, consisting of persons noble in their own Families; and so coming to
describe the Collar used, as the Note and Badge of their Society, he says thus:
It was the custom of those persons to wear about their necks Silver Collars,
composed of double SS, which noted the name of Saint Simplicius: between these
double SS the Collar contained 12 small plates of Silver, in which were
engraved the 12 Articles of the Creed, together with a single Tresoyle. The
Image of Saint Simplicius hung at the Collar, and from it 7 Plates,
representing the 7 gifts of the Holy Ghost.

As to the manner of their suffering, it is thus set down in an old Legend; MS*
in Biblioth. Coton.
They were commanded to undergo the sentence of death, their Bodies to be bound
together by the neck to a Stone, and sent to the Bridge over the Tiber in Rome,
and thence thrown into the River: All which was executed upon them, the MS.
287. year after the Incarnation of our Savior.

How long since the Collar of SS came into use here in England, we no where
find, though we have done our endeavor to be satisfied: But if credit may be
given to a Monument, standing at this day entire, in the Collegiate Church at
Warwick it will appear, to have been at least 300 years since, and worn as an
Ornament for Women as well as Men: for there the Portraicture of Margaret Wife
of Sir William Peito (said to be buried in the Reign of King Edward the Third)
has a Collar composed of SS, drawn about and set close to her neck; which the
Graver, in the Page 350.
Antiquities of Warwickshire, has t^^ugh mistake, represented like to a set
Ruff. There was to be seen a Collar of SS, also about the neck of Sir Simon
Barley's Statue in St. Paul's Cathedral London, but the Monument perished in the
dreadful fire anno 1666.

And it is probable, that to these Collars, the passage in Walsingbam (cited by
Titles of Honor, p. 835.
Mr. Seldom to this purpose) should refer; where speaking of the Earl of Kent's
coming to Sunning near Reading in Berkshire, where Richard the Second's Queen
then lay, to comfort her with the assurance, that her Husband was then at
liberty; Walsingh. Ia^ anno 1400.
to the end he might gain credit to his relation, forthwith plucked off the
Collars from some there present that wore them, leting them know, they ought
not to wear a Badge, so particularly relative to Henry the Fourth.

In the ancient creation of an Esquire in England, part of the Ceremony was,
that the King put about his neck a Cambd. Brit. p. 128.
Silver Collar of SS, as an Ensign of that Dignity: and our learned Seldom
contemns not the authority of that old Ballad, The Canner of Camworth, to
Titles of Honor, p. 836.
prove the making of Esquires in King Edward the Fourth's Reign, by bestowing
such Collars.

But that the Golden Collar was the undoubted Badge of a Knight, may be
instanced in a multitude of Examples, deduced from the Monuments of persons of
that Degree in the Reigns of Henry the Sixth, Edward the Fourth, Henry the
Seventh, Henry the Eighth, and since: and so justly and legally appropriate
thereto, that in the Anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13.
Act of Parliament made for reformation of Apparel, there is a Proviso entered,
That Knights, notwithstanding, might publicly wear a Gold Collar of SS, though
since it has grown out of fashion.

Theater d' Honn. ^. 9. c. 2.
Andrew Favin tells us, that our King Henry the Fifth Instituted an Order,
surnamed Knights of the SS, on the day of the Martyrs St. Crispine and
Crispianus: of which Institution, though he found nothing mentioned in our
English Histories, yet out of the Chronicle of I. Iuvenal des Vrsins, where it
treats of the Battle of Agin-Court, he collected this following relation.

Ibid.
The King of England exhorted his men, and commanded, that if any of them had
trespassed against another, they should be reconciled, and confess to the
Priests, that were in their company, otherwise no good could happen to them in
their undertakings: He further exhorted them to be civil in their march, and to
do their duty well, and thus agreed with them: That all those of their company
who were not Gentlemen, he would make them so, and give them Warrants for it,
and have them thence forward enjoy such Privileges as the Gentlemen of England
had; and to the end they should be particularly known from other, he gave them
leave to wear a Collar powdered with the letter S.

Among the variety of Collars of SS now in use with us, there are these
following differences in Figure and Fashion.

The Lord Mayor of London's Collar is Gold, having a knot (like one of those
which tie the Garters together, in the great Collar of the Order) inserted
between two SS, and they again placed between two Roses, viz. a White Rose
within a Red; and in the middle before the Breast, is a large Portcullis,
whereat hangs a most rich Jewel, set with fair and large Diamonds

The Collars of the Lords Chief Justices of both the Benches, and the Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, are (in Camb. Remains, p. 1^3. Edit. an. 1639.
memory of the before mentioned Saint Simplicius, a Senator and consequently a
Gown-man) formed of the Letter S and a Knot alternately; having a Rose set in
that part of it, which falls out to be in the middle of their Breasts, and
another on their Backs: the five Flowers of these Roses, are made of five large
Pearls.

Those Collars which appertain to the Kings and Heralds of Arms, so likewise to
the Sergeants at Arms, having been bestowed by former Kings, and renewed to
them by his present Majesty, to be worn upon all days of solemn attendance for
his honor, are also composed of SS, linked together; in the middle of the
Breast is a Rose, and another in the middle of the Back, at each of which hang
three small drops of Silver. But the SS in the Collars worn by the Kings of
Arms, are made somewhat bigger than the others; and in that part lying on
either shoulder, ^ a Portcullis taken in between the SS, which are wanting in
the rest.

The general difference between the Collars, appropriate to the Degrees before
named, is this: All such persons as are honored with Knighthood, have allowed
them Collars of Silver gilt, but to Esquires those of Silver only: and
therefore he that is created an Herald is also in part of that Ceremony made an
Esquire, by putting on a Collar of SS of Silver about his neck: and so is a
Sergeant at Arms.

The Kings of England have sometimes heretofore drawn a Collar of SS about
their Arms, in like manner as we have showed, how the Garter does surround
them: and we have seen impression of King Henry the Eight's Privy Signet,
whereon his Royal Arms (crowned) are incircled with a Collar of SS, to the
lower end of which is affixed two Portcullisses.

SECT. IX. The lesser George.
WE do not find among the Records of the Order, that the Image of St. George
was at any time worn by the Sovereign, or Knights-Companions before the Breast,
or under the right Arm, as now used, until the 13. year of King Henry the
Eighth: But then that Sovereign past a Decree in Chapter held at Greenwich, the
morrow after St. George's day, with consent of the Knights-Companions, present
to this effect. Lib. N. p. 212.
That every Knight of the Order, should wear loosely before his Breast, the
Image of St. George in a Gold Chain, or otherwise in a Ribband, the same to be
thence forward placed within the ennobled Garter; to the end a manifest
distinction should thereby appear, between the Knights-Companions and others of
the Nobility and Knights, who according to the fashion of those times, wore
large Gold Chains, the ordinary Ensign of their Knighthood. And thus the
wearing the Medal or Jewel (usually called the Lesser George, to distinguish it
from the other George worn at the Collar of the Order) was first enjoined, and
has since been constantly so used.

This George was for the most part made of pure Gold, curiously wrought by the
hand of the Goldsmith, but we have seen diverse of them exquisitely cut in
oni^'s, as also in Agats, and therein such happy choice of the Stones, that by
joining thereto the Workmans skill, in designing and laying out the Figures, to
express the History, the natural tincture of the Stones have fitted them with
Colors, for Flesh, Hair, and every thing else, even to admiration. In this
Jewel is St. George represented in a riding posture, encountering the Dragon
with his drawn Sword.

By the last Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes this George is allowed
to be enriched and garnished at the pleasure of him that wears it (as is the
great George) which for the most part has been curiously enamelled, and the
Garter about it set with Diamonds, in the best order either art or invention
could devise. And of what weight and bigness these lesser Georges formerly
were, may be judged from that sent to the French King Charles the Ninth, being
MS. fol. penes. praef. G. Owen. p. 154.
an ounce and a half, and half quarter weight.

The variety of Workmanship shown in those Gold Chains, whereat this Jewel
hung, was usually great, and the Artists upon all occasions express much
ingenuity and skill in them, according to the fancy or pleasure of the persons
for whom they were made.

But within a short time, wearing the lesser George in Silk Ribb^nds, as well
as Gold Chains was indifferently used and at pleasure (so were the Symbols of
Foreign Orders, as appears from sundry Coyns and Medals) but the Color of
these Ribbands at their first use were Black, as is noted of those belonging to
the Georges, wherewith Ex Collect. praef W^le Neve. Eq. A^^.
John Dudley Viscount Lisle, the Lords Saint John and Parr were invested, an.
35. H. 8. and in the Pictures of several Knights-Companions about that time
(both painted in Oil, and limned with Water Colors) the Ribbands of their
Georges are visibly Black.

That small Chain, whereat hung the lesser George sent to Emanuel Duke of
Savoy, an. 1. and 2. Phil ^amp; Mar. was formed of Ex. Collect. praef W^le
Neve. Eq. A^^.
twelve pieces of Gold, in every of which were set three small Diamonds; and of
twelve other like pieces, wherein were three Rubies and twenty four Pearls.

It appears by a Letter sent from MS. in Offic Armor. [L. 2.] p. 2.
Sir Richard St. George Knight Clarenceux, and the Heralds of Arms, to Henry
Earl of Holland, dated the 10. of July 1627. MS. in Offic Armor. [L. 2.] p. 2.
that the Blue Ribband had some years before been added to the Ornaments of the
Order. And it is said Ex relatione Will. Dugdale Ar. No^^oy.
that Robert Earl of ^ssex being in France, and observing the Jewels of the
Order of St. Michael and St. Esprit, worn in Blue Ribbands, upon his return did
occasion the altering those Ribbands, whereat the George hung, into that
Color: And I have seen the Penes Erasm. Moyse nuper de To^^enham in Com. Mid.
Ar.
Picture of Queen Elizabeth drawn toward the end of her Reign, wherein was
represented the Lesser George, hanging before her Breast at such a Blue Ribband.

It was not long e're this Color grew into great estimation with the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions; the rather, for that it was the ground of the Garter,
and color of the Mantle of the Order. And toward the 22. May an. regni sui 20.
later end of King James his Reign (because the Color of the Ribband had not
been peculiarly expressed in any Article of the Statutes, and the Blue or Sky
Color used for some years past) it was Decreed, Lib. R. p. 12.
That for the future it should always be of a Blue Color, and no other: Lib.
R. p. 12.
nor in time of mourning for any of the Knights-Companions, of what Degree
soever, should the Color be changed.

The ordinary manner of wearing this Ribband in time of peace, was (till of
late) about the neck, down to the middle of the Breast, where the lesser George
hung; but now for the more convenience of riding or action, the same is spread
over the left shoulder, and brought under the right arm, where the Jewel hangs.



But where the Pictures of the Sovereign, or any of the Knights-Companions are
drawn in Armor, there, even to this day, the George is represented, as fixed
at a Gold Chain, instead of the Blue Ribband, and worn about the neck (not
brought under the right arm) which also was so exhibited in the three pound
pieces of Gold, stamped at Oxford by the command of his late Majesty of ever
blessed memory King Charles the First, whereby he published to the world, that
the true and just occasion of his taking up Arms in the late War, was to
maintain the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Land, and the Privilege of
Parliaments. And in like manner is the Gold Chain represented in a Medal of
Charles Count Palatine of the Rhyne, now senior Knight-Companion of this most
Noble Order.

Among those rich and invaluable Jewels, and other choice Curiosities of his
said late Majesty, which came to the hands of the Trustees appointed for sale
of his Goods, there were several of these lesser Georges 15. Oct. 1651.
sold by them to the foresaid Thomas Beauchamp, the particulars whereof, how
low they were valued, and for what sold, appears thus from the Book of Sales.

Valued at Sold for A George containing 161 Diamonds, which came from the
Countess of Leicester, and was discovered by Cornelius Holland. 60 00 00 71 02
00 A George cut in an Onix, with 41 Diamonds in the garnish. 35 00 00 37 00 00
A small George with a few Diamonds -- 8 00 00 9 00 00 A George with 5 Rubies
and 3 Diamonds, and II Diamonds in a Box. 10 00 00 11 00 00 A George cut in a
Garnet -- 7 00 00 8 00 00 Total -- 120 00 00 136 00 00

The George which his said late Majesty wore at the time of his Martyrdom, was
curiously cut in an Onix, set about with 21 large Table Diamonds, in the
fashion of a Garter: On the back side of the George was the Picture of his
Queen, rarely well limn'd set in a Cafe of Gold, the lid neatly enameled with
Goldsmiths work, and surrounded with another Garter, adorned with a like number
of equal sized Diamonds, as was the foreside. A Draught of this Jewel, in three
parts, open and shut, we have exhibited to the Readers view, among the Ensigns
of the Order, at the beginning of this Chapter.

Nor will it be unfitly here remembered, by what good fortune the present
Sovereign's lesser George set with fair Diamonds was preserved, after the
defeat given to the Scotch Forces at Worcester, an. 4. Car. 2.

Among the rest of his Attendants then dispersed, Ex relatione Geo. Barlow genesis
11. I^nii 1660. ac Roberti Milward ar. and Isaaci Walton genesis
Colonel Blague was one, who taking shelter at Blore-pipe House (within two
miles of Eccleshall in Staffordshire) where one Mr. George Barlow then dwelt,
delivered his Wife this George to secure. Within a week after Mr. Barlow
himself carried to Robert Milward Esquire (now second Justice of the great
Sessions of the County Palatine of Chester, one of the Commissioners of the
Privy Seal, and Son unto Sir Thomas Milward Knight, late Chief Justice of the
said great Sessions, both persons of known loyalty, and great sufferers for his
late Majesty) he being when a Prisoner to the Parliament, in the Garrison of
Stafford; and by his means was it happily preserved and restored: for not long
after he delivered it to Mr. Isaac Walton (a man well known, and as well
beloved of all good men, and will be better known to posterity, by his
ingenious Pen, in the lives of Doctor Done, Sir Henry Wotton, Mr. Richard
Hooker, and Mr. George Herbert) to be given to Colonel Blague then Prisoner in
the Tower; who considering it had already past so many dangers, was persuaded
it could yet secure one hazardous attempt of his own, and thereupon leaving the
Tower without leave taking, hasted the presentation of it to the present
Sovereign's hand.

We shall hereunto subjoin this Observation: That other Princes in Christendom
(besides the Sovereigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter) have assumed the
bearing St. George encountering the Dragon, and in like posture (though not so
anciently, nor upon the same account) as they: probably having chosen him
Patron of their Countries or Families, as namely the Emperors of Russia, the
Dukes of Mantua in Italy, and the Counts Mansfield in Germany, which will
better appear by the exhibits of some of their Seals and Coyns here.

The first is the Great Seal of Borice-Feodorwiche Emperor of Russia, affixed
to his Letters sent to Queen Elizabeth, dated at his Imperial Palace of Mosko
the 12. of June 1602. and 39. year of his Reign: A Translation of which was
most courteously afforded me by Mr. Ia. Frese (Interpretor to the Russian
Ambassadors, sent over hither to his now Majesty, an. Dom. 1660.) and is as
follows.

By Gods providence, We the great Lord, Emperor, and great Duke Boreece
Feodorwiche of all Russia Self-upholder, of Wolodeemer, Mosko, Novograde,
Emperor of Kazan, Emperor of Astracane, and Emperor of Seebeeria, Lord of
Psokosske, great Duke of Smolenskee, Twerskee, Ugarskee, Permskee, Vaticekee,
Bolgarskee and other; Lord and great Duke of Novagradia, the lower Countries,
Cheringoskee, Rezanskee, Rososkee, Yaroslaveskee, Beloozerskee, Leeflandia,
Udorskee, Obdorskee, Kondinskee, and Commander of all the Northern parts, and
Lord of all the Iverskee Countries, and Granziskee Empires, and of the
Caberniskee Countries, Cherkaskee, Igorskee, and of many other Kingdoms, Lord
and Conqueror.

We have likewise seen another of this Emperors great Seals, fixed to his
Letters, bearing date the 31. day of May, an. Dom. 1594. which he also sent to
Queen Elizabeth, and was presented to her at Richmond, the 14. of October
following, by his Ambassador Evanowich: the Circumscription containing the same
Style and Titles above set down.

There is preserved in the Archives at Oxford, an Instrument containing Letters
testimonial of this Emperor, given to Doctor Christopher Ritinger his chief
Physician, the Seal whereof is Silver gilt, but differs in size and design from
the former, and contains on the reverse the Figure of St. George and the Dragon
only. A translation of the whole Instrument I have transcribed hither, as it
was communicated to me by my worthy friend Mr. Thomas Hyde, the present
Library Keeper of that famous University, a Gentleman of eminent Learning, in
all kinds, and especially in the Oriental Tongues.

By the great mercy of God, We, great Lord, Emperor and great Duke Borrys
Feodorwich of all Russia sole Commander, of Volodemersky, Moscovesky,
Novogorodsky, King of Cazansky, King of Astracansky, King of Sibersky, Lord of
Vobsky, and great Duke of Smolensky, Twersky, Ugorsky, Permesky, Votsky,
Bulgarsky, and many others, Lord and great Duke of Novogorod, Levelandsky,
Udorsky, Obdorsky, Kondnisky, and all the Northern parts, Commander. Lord of
Iverskyland, King of Grusinsky, Caberdinsky Country; Chercasky, and the Country
of Iversky, and of many other Kingdoms Lord and Commander, together with our
princely Son Pheodor Burrissiwich of all Russia, do by these our princely
Letters, given unto Doctor Christopher Ritinger Physician, Hungarian born,
acknowledge his true, faithful, and willing service unto our Highness: in which
his profession, We Lord, King and great Duke Burrys Feodorwich of all Russia,
have sufficiently tried his skill, on our princely person, which he carefully
performed for the better preservation of our health: and through Gods great
mercy, by his diligent and faithful service has cured our Highness of a
dangerous sickness. And therefore we Lord King and great Duke Borys Feodorwich
of all Russia sole Commander, with our princely Son Pheodor Burryssiwich, in
regard of his great learning and faithful service to us, have admitted him to
be our Princely Doctor, to minister Physic, and attend on our royal person: to
which end we have granted him our Letters, and hereby we testify his
sufficient knowledge and practice in Physic, who has by our selves well
deserved, to publish and make known the same. And if the said Doctor
Christopher shall repair to any other Princes, Countries, Emperors, Kings,
Curfists, Archdukes, or Dukes, to offer his service unto them, We do by these
our princely Letters wheresoever they shall come, give true testimony on the
said Doctor Christopher's behalf, to be of great learning, sufficient
knowledge, well practiced in Physic matters: as also in that profession,
careful, diligent, and trusty to be credited, We having had sufficient trial of
his faithful carriage, in all true and honest services toward us. These our
Princely Letters, given in our great and chiefest Palace in the Kingdom of
Mosco, in the year of the creation of the World 7109. and in the month of
August.

The Style about the Seal.
By the great mercy of God, We great Lord, Emperor, and great Duke Borys
Feodorwich of all Russia sole Commander, Lord and Governor of many other
Countries and Kingdoms.

The third, is the great Seal of Alexeye Michailowiche, the present Emperor of
Russia, wherewith was sealed the Letter sent to his now Majesty, an. Dom. 1660.
by his Ambassadors, Duke Peter Semoenowiche Prosoroskee, Lord and Possessor of
the Dukedom of Tool, and Evan Offonosyewiche Zelabuskee, Namestinck of
Coormeskee. Which having obtained by the favor of Sir William Morice Knight
and Baronet, late principal Secretary of State, we also here exhibit to public
view, with a translation of this Emperor's Style, rendered into English by the
said Mr. Ia. Frese.

By Gods mercy, We the great Lord, Emperor, and great Duke Alexeye
Michailowiche of all the great and lesser and white Russia Self-upholder, of
Moscovia, Kneveskee, Wolodeemerskee and Novagardskee, Emperor of Kazan, Emperor
of Astracan, Emperor of Siberia, Lord of Pscosskee, and great Duke of Lettow,
Smolenskee, Twerskee, Wolniskee, Podolskee, Ugarskee, Permskee, Waticekee,
Bolgarskee, and others. Lord and great Duke of Novogradia, the lower Countries,
Cheringoskee, Rezanskee, Polotskee, Rostosskee, Yaroslasskee, Belozerskee,
Udorskee, Obdorskee, Kandinskee, Weetepskee, Meestesloskee, and of all the
Northern parts Commander. Lord of the Iverskee Countries, Cartalinskee,
Groonsiskee, and Igerskee Empires, and of the Kabardinskee Countries,
Cheringosskee, and Igorskee Dukedoms, and of many other Dukedoms Eastern,
western and northern, from Father and Grandfather heir apparent Lord and
Conqueror.

This representation of St. George and the Dragon we find assigned for Arms to
Anne de Russie, Daughter to Iaroslaus King of Russia and Moscovia, married to
Henry the First King of France, in the year of our Lord 1051. and thus
blazoned. S. Marthe Hist. Geneolog. de la Maison de France. Tom. 1. l. 12. c.
4. p. 453.
De Gueules, a un homme a Cheval, d' Argent, tenant une Lance en la main, qu'il
darde en la gueule d'un Dragon renverse.

The Counts of Mansfield in Germany, have likewise frequently stamped on their
Coyns, the Figure of St. George killing the Dragon: from which we have singled
out one, bearing the name of St. George, and placed it under the Number IV.

In the last may be seen the Effigies of Vincentius Duke of Mantua and
Montserat, a Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece, and on the Reverse
thereof, St. George encountering the Dragon, in the manner generally worn by the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order of the Garter.

SECT. X. When the Habit, or part of it, ought to be worn.
THere are several solemn days and occasions, on which the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions of the Garter are enjoined to wear, either the whole Habit
of the Order, or some part of it.

The more solemn, and which require a full conformity, as to wearing the whole
Habit, that is, the Garter, Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, Collar, Great George, and
Cap, are first, the high Festival of the Order (commonly called St. George's
Feast) whether it be solemnized on the 22, 23, or 24. days of April annually,
or any other days within the following year by Prorogation. And for this there
is clear Text, in all the Bodies and Exemplars of the Art. 3*
Statutes; as also to the time how long they ought to be worn on every of those
days, before the Sovereign or Knights-Companions put them off.

For first, it was Ordained, Art. 3*
That the Knights-Companions should put on the whole Habit, on the Eve of St.
George, before the Sovereign proceeded to the Chapel, to hear Divine Service;
and being so habited, should attend the Sovereign to the Chapterhouse, thence
to the Chapel, and return with him back, continuing in the same manner habited
(as well such of them as should be minded to Sup, as those that should not)
until after Supper; Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 3.
nor might they put off their Robes until the Sovereign or his Deputy had put
off his, or declared it time for his or their so doing.

By the same third Article of the Statutes, the wearing of the whole Habit was
also enjoined on the Feast day of St. George, both at their Proceeding in the
morning to the Chapterhouse or Chapel, at their return to Dinner; from thence
to the second Vespers, and back to Supper; as also till Supper should be ended,
and until the Sovereign or his Lieutenant took leave of the rest of the
Knights-Companions.

Secondly, it is manifest from King Henry the Eighth's Art. ^.
Statutes, that the Eve the day of St. George, and morrow following, were
appointed to be kept with solemn service, and holding of Chapters, wheresoever
the Sovereign should then be, though the Grand Feast and Solemnity of St.
George were prorogued, to some further time in the year: And therefore, when by
reason of such Prorogation, the Knights-Companions do meet in any other place
besides the Castle of Windesor, to attend the Sovereign for the observation of
St. George's day only, they then are appointed to wear the whole Habit of the
Order, from beginning of the first Evening Service, until the last Evening
Service on St. George's day.

Thirdly, on such other days of the year, whereon the Grand Feast is held by
Prorogation; and during such part of the Eve, and day of the Feast, as is
before appointed, when the said Feast is held on its proper day.

Fourthly, by absent Knights, whenever the Grand Feast of St. George should
be celebrated, and E. 3. H. 4. Stat. Art. 11. H. 8. Stat. Art. ^.
wheresoever they should at such time happen to reside or be Ord. Stat. in Lib.
N. Art. 9.
if at liberty, and not under restraint) in like manner, as if then present
with the Sovereign or his Deputy, in the place where he should celebrate the
Feast. The time of wearing the whole Habit in this case, extends but to the end
of the second Vespers, as in the second instance above.

Fifthly, in like manner are the Knights-Companions to wear the whole Habit of
the Order, at the Feasts of Installation, I mean such of them as are appointed
by the Sovereign to assist at that Ceremony; where, if it begin in the Evening,
then are they not disrobe themselves, till after Supper; and being the next
morning habited as before, then to proceed to the Chapterhouse or Chapel, and
not put off their Robes till Dinner be ended.

The less solemn Occasions, are those which require wearing the Mantle, or
Collar of the Order only.

And they are, first, upon the ^ 8. Stat. Art. 12.
morrow after the Grand Feast day, when the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
proceed to the Chapel, and make their Offering of Gold and Silver; for it then
suffiseth that they put on the Mantle only: which (service being finished) they
were wont to leave at the Chapterhouse door, as they went out of the Chapel.

Secondly, as often as E. 3. H. 5. S^at. Art. 3.
Chapters are called, and in what place soever held, either for Elections, or
other Causes, as it shall please the Sovereign to name.

And also as often as it is requisite for the Sovereign, or any of the
Knights-Companions, to Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 16.
enter into the Chapel of St. George at Windesor: and with reference hereunto
was it Ordained; E. 3. Stat. Art. 1^. H. 5. Stat. Art. 15.
That every one of the Knights-Companions, should leave a Mantle at Windesor,
to the end, that upon any sudden and unexpected occasion of access thither,
there might be Robes found in readiness for the due observing the Statutes in
this point, with all the Commands and Decrees of the Sovereign.

Its manifest that anciently (in pursuance of this Article) both the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions left Mantles in the Vestry at Windesor, for such
accidental Occasions: for in the Inventory of Ornaments belonging to the
Chapel taken an. 8. Ric. 2. We find remaining at that time in the Vestry, a
Mantle belonging to the Sovereign, another to John Duke of Britain, a third to
John Holland Earl of Huntingdon, another to Edmund Langley Earl of Cambridge,
and one to Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, all of them then alive. And by a Decree
past, at the Grand Feast, anno 1. H. 6. the Lib. N. p. 75.
Mantle of the young Sovereign was appointed to be left at Windesor, as the
Statutes required. It is further to be noted, that this Article of the Statutes
was confirmed by King Henry the Eighth's Art. 15.
Statutes: by force whereof the Mantles of the Emperor Ex. Autogr. p^nes
Christ. When nuper hujus Ord. Regist.
Charles the Fifth, and Anna Duke of Montmorency Constable of France, were left
in the custody of the Dean and Canons of Windesor. And heretofore, in the
general Bill drawn up of things necessary to be prepared for Installation of a
Knight-Companion, there were usually MS. in Bibli^b. Coton [sub effigy Iulii
F. 11. vide Collect. Aug. Vincent.
two Mantles set down, the use of the one being therein expressly mentioned to
remain in the College at Windesor, and the other for all other occasions
elsewhere.

These Mantles thus enjoined to be left in the College for sudden chances, the
owners living; were anciently committed to the Custody of the Black Rod, as we
find it granted by Pat. 1. H. 5. pars. 3. m. 18.
Letters Patent to John Athelbrig, with the grant of that Office, and fell
after the death of the Owners, to the Dean and Canons of Windesor, being then
reserved, either for public use of the Knights-Companions, when they casually
came to Windesor, or else sold, sometimes to the Heirs of the Deceased, or
other Knights-Companions, who succeeded in the Order (as that of Charles the
Fifth was to the Earl of Bedford, and that of the Constable of France lent to
the Earl of Warwick, an. 7. Eliz.) which appears from the Ex. Collect. G. Evans
modo unius Ca^^nic Colleg. Windesor.
Accounts of the Chanter of the College, in the Reigns of King Henry the
Fourth, King Henry the Fifth, King Henry the Eighth, Queen Elizabeth, and King
James, who in all times answered the full benefit thereof to the College; as
Ex. Collect. G. Evans modo unius Ca^^nic Colleg. Windesor.
being a certain and unquestionable due to the Dean and Canons; and this they
have accordingly had and enjoyed.

And yet we find some of the College made over bold with the Robe of Sigismond
the Emperor and Videsis Injunct. Eborac. Archiep. Art. 19.
sold it while he was yet alive: But the Archbishop of York (who, as Chancellor
of England, was Visitor of the College) upon a Visitation made by him shortly
after, viz. the 22. of February, anno 1431. Videsis Injunct. Eborac. Archiep.
Art. 19.
kept the Money from being distributed among those who had sold it, and
reserved the dividend to the Dean and Canons, who should happen to be of the
College at the time of that Emperors death: and withal commanded for the
future, under pain of Excommunication, Ibid.
That no Dean and Canon should presume to withdraw or aliene any of the
Knights-Companions Mantles, while he was alive, but the same as much as
possible, should be well, decently, and faithfully kept and preserved.

But we are informed, that the before mentioned Statute was altered Ex. Autogr.
per Sacrament. praef. D. Christ. Wren attestat. 12. Mar. 1651.
anno 9. Eliz. and a new one made to this effect, Ex. Autogr. per Sacrament.
praef. D. Christ. Wren attestat. 12. Mar. 1651.
That the Knights-Companions should be bound by Oath, to take care by their
Wills, that after their decease, all the Ornaments which they had received,
should be restored; the Robes to the College, and the Jewels to the Sovereign
that gave them.

We come, in the last place, to the times of wearing the Collar of the Order,
with the Great George thereunto appendant, which is not only enjoined to be
worn (as part of the Habit) at the Grand Feasts, and Feasts of Installation,
but also at other times, when not any of the rest of the Habit (saving the
Garter) is appointed to be worn, as in special, at the H. 8. Stat. Art. 38.
principal and solemn Feasts of the year: and other Feast days, to which a
particular Order in Chapter, anno. 4. Eliz. thus directs.

The Holy days, and Sundays, within the twelve days. Saint Matthias day. Holy
days in Easter week. Saint Marks day. Saint Philip and Jacobs day. Holy days in
Whitson week. The Feast days of St. Peter. St. James. St. Bartholomew. St.
Matthew. St. Luke. St. Simon and Jude. St. Andrew, and St. Thomas.

Besides these, the Sovereigns and Knights-Companions have been accustomed to
wear this Noble Ensign, upon the Aniversary of the Sovereign's Coronation, of
the Gunpowder Treason, and now lately, on the present Sovereign's Birth day. So
also heretofore, upon some occasional Ceremonies, not relative to the Order; as
when a Knight-Companion has been created into Titles of Dignity and Honor, he
had the MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 12, f. 27.]
Collar of the Garter added to his Investiture, as appears in the case of Henry
Stafford, created Earl of Wiltshire, an^o 1. H. 8. And at a Chapter held the
twenty second of May 1622. it was Ordained, Lib. R. p. 13.
That such Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order, as should afterward
assist at the Funeral of any Knight-Companion, should wear the Collar apert, at
the said Funeral: and it was* so observed by the Dukes of Ormond and Richmond,
the Earls of Manchester and Sandwich, at the solemn Funeral of his Grace George
late Duke of Albemarle.

Howbeit, the custom is otherwise, as to wearing the Garter, that principal
Ensign of the Order; for though it be enjoined to be worn, especially at the
Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 3.
Grand Feast, and all times of entering into St. George's Chapel, or holding of
Chapters; yet does not this imply, that it may be left off, at all other times
as may the rest of the Habit: for indeed it ought daily to be worn, both by the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions. And therefore was it Decreed, even at the
Institution of the Order: Ibid. Art. 12. and H. 5. Stat. eod. Art.
That if any of the Knights-Companions should in public be found without his
Garter, and that the same was not buckled about his Leg, in deoent and usual
manner; upon challenge thereof, he should presently pay, a Ibid. Art. 12. and
H. 5. Stat. eod. Art.
Noble to the Dean and College of Windesor. By King Henry the Eighth's
Statutes, the Fine was raised to a Art. 10.
Mark: the same to be paid forthwith after challenge made, by any of the five
Officers of the Order, or as before, by the Dean of Windesor; beside which Art.
10.
Fine, the Knight lies liable to a Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 10.
check.

But the Article in the Statutes of Institution being penned too strictly, and
without any exception, the several occasions of military or necessary affairs
discovering the inconvenience; King Henry the Fifth admitted of a
qualification, and in case of riding with Boots, Ordained, That it might
suffice, if the Knight-Companion wore some H. 5. Stat. Art. 12. and H. ^. Stat.
Art. 10.
Ribband or Silk Lace, to represent the Garter: nevertheless in this very
Article there is a Proviso added, That no Knight-Companion should enter into
Chapter, without his Garter buckled about the Leg.

To conclude, King Henry the Eighth's Statutes provide, that the Gold Chain,
whereat the Lesser George (in that Age) hung, should be worn Art. 38.
all other days of the year, except the Art. 38.
principal and solemn Feasts, whereon the Great Collar was Ordained to be worn,
and except in time of War, Sickness, or long Voyage; in any of which cases, it
should suffice the Knight-Companion concerned, to wear only a Silk Lace or
Ribband, with the Image of St. George thereat: and the Blue Ribband, having
since succeeded in place of the Gold Chain, the Injunction of this Statute,
extends to it in all particulars.

CHAP. VIII. THE Officers APPOINTED FOR THE SERVICE OF THE Order.
SECT. I. The Prelate's Institution his Oath, Robe, and Privileges.
TO give increase and augmentation to the Honor of this most Noble Order, the
Founder constituted certain Officers, namely, a Prelate, Register, and Usher,
to whom he assigned several and particular duties: Some of his Successors added
the Chancellor, and Garter, upon the same account, and all of them sworn to be
of the H 8. Stat. Art. 15.
Council of the Order. Among these, the Prelate and Chancellor are usually
called the Lib. N. p. 237.
principal, the other three, the inferior Officers of the Order; known and
distinguished by the Robes or Ensigns of their peculiar Offices.

In this Chapter, we shall only give some account of their Institution, Oath,
Habit, Ensigns, Privileges, and Pensions; for as to the nature of their
Offices, so far as they relate to the Duties enjoined them within the Order,
they are, for the general, set down in that ancient Establishment, recorded in
the Page ^32.
Black Book, Entitled, Constitutiones ad Officiales Ordinis [Garterii]
peculiariter attinentes, etc. established by King Henry the Eighth, in the MS.
in Offic. Armor. [M. 8.] f. 31.
13. year of his Reign, an. Dom. 1521. The ancient Habits and Ensigns assigned
to the Officers of the Order.
The present Habits Ensigns and Badges belonging to the Officers of the Order
and adjoined to his Body of Lib. N. P. 232.
Statutes, from whence we have transcribed them into the Appendix. But more
particularly their duties are to be met with in several places of the ensuing
Discourse, where they properly fall in to be treated of.

The Prelate is the first and principal Officer belonging to the Order, His
Institution.
and in the Founder's Statutes is called Art. 18.
Prelatus Ordinis; thus we see his Office is as ancient as the Institution of
the Order, and that the then Bishop of Winchester [William de Edyngton] was the
first Prelate, is as apparent Art. 18.
thence. He is an Officer of honor only, and has not either Pension or Fees
allowed him.

By the said Constitutions this Office is vested in the Bishops of Winchester
for the time being; and from sundry passages in the Annals of the Order, it is
further manifest, that the Successors to William de Edyngton, have continued
Prelates to this day, except the interruption only of a few months, anno 7. E.
6. immediately after publishing this Kings Statutes; wherein the other four
Officers were constituted anew, to attend the service of the Order, but the
Chap. 8.
Prelate wholly set aside.

Of what estimation this See has been, may be collected from the precedence
granted to the Bishops thereof, by an Act of Parliament, Entitled, Rot. Parl.
an. 31. H. 8. n. 10.
An Act concerning the placing of the Lords in Parliament Chamber, and other
Assemblies and Conference of Council, wherein it is Enacted, that this Bishop
shall sit next to the Bishop of Durham, who has place (by that Act) assigned
him next the Archbishop of York: though before, in Constitut. u^ Officialis
Ordinis attinentes. cap. 1.
respect of the honor and pre-eminence of this most Noble Order, he had
precedence and place, granted above all Bishops, and next unto the Archbishops.

At this Officer's admittance, Oath.
he is obliged to take an Oath in the presence of the Sovereign or his
Lieutenant, which consists of these particulars.

1. Vide Append. Number, VI.
To be present in all Chapters, whereunto he is summoned. 2. To report all
things truly, without favor or fear. 3. To take the Scruteny faithfully, and
present it to the Sovereign. 4. To keep secret and not disclose the Counsels of
the Order. 5. To promote and maintain the honor thereof. 6. To withstand and
reveal, what is designed to the contrary.
This Oath is read or pronounced in Chapter by the Register of the Orde^, the
Lib. R. p. 39. and 84.
Gentleman Usher of the Black-Rod holding the Book, whilst the Prelate kneels
between the Sovereign's knees.

As the Knights-Companions had their Surcoats bestowed on them at the
Sovereign's charge, Robe*
and therefore called the Kings Livery; so had the Officers of the Order, their
Liveries or Robes, out of the Sovereign's Wardrobe likewise, and in particular
the Prelate of the Order: For in the Rolls of the Great Wardrobe we find that
Domino Willielmo de Edyngton Episcop^ Winton. ad unam Robam sibi, de Liberatura
Domini Regis, contra Feslum Sancti Georgii, de secta Militum de Garterio,
saciend. and Furrurand. per Literam Privati Sigilli, Scilicet, ^ Pannus
Sanguin. in grano. ^ Mantell. de 454 Ventr. Miniver pur. ^ Furrura de 244
Ventr. Miniver pur. ^ Furrura de 270 Ventr. Miniver pur. ^ Capucium de 154
Ventr. Miniver pur. ^ Furrura dimid. de Biss, furr'ata de Biss. Ex Ro^^ Compoti
Hen. de Snaith Custodi^ mag. Gardrob. Regis an. 37. E. 3. m. 3.
William de Edyngton had allowed him for his Robe of the Sovereign's Livery,
against the Feast of St. George, anno 37. E. 3. one Cloth of Sanguine in Grain,
and a large quantity of Furs, for trimming it up.

We have had occasion in the Sect. 3.
last Chapter to observe, that the word Roba in the Rolls of the Wardrobe, is
used to signify a Surcoat (being there applied to the Knights-Companions
Surcoats) not Mantle, which in reference to the Prelate is to be understood by
it. And we find this Robe, so assigned to the Prelate, noted to be of the Suit
or Color of the Knights-Companions Surcoats, the foresaid year, viz. Rotul.
praed. m. 3.
Sanguine in grain. But whereas each Knight-Companion had Ibid.
5 Else of this Cloth for a Surcoat, the Prelate's allowance is said to be, one
Cloth of the same Color: Yet what difference there was in Measure, between one
Ell, and so many as made one Cloth, we have not hitherto learnt: but in Fur the
Prelate much exceeded them, every Knight-Companion then having but Ibid.
one Fur of 200 Bellies of Miniver pure.

Anno Ex Rotulo Compori Alani de Sto^e Custod mag. Gardrob. Regis m. 8.
7. Ric. 2. we meet with the same allowance of Cloth and other materials to
William de Wyckham (then also Prelate) but the difference lay in the viz. ^
Pannum Violettum in grano. ^ Mantellum de 600 Ventr. ^ Capucium de 140 Ventr.
Miniver pur. ^ Furrura de 400 Ventr. ^ Furrura de 360 Ventr. Miniver gross. ^
Furrura de Biss de ^40 Best. Ibid.
Bellies of Minivers, whose number now was much increased: and that the same
allowance was made him, in the 11. and 19. years of the said King. But in these
three Instances, the Color of the Cloth was different, and changed to that
assigned for the Knights-Companions Surcoats those very years, to wit, Ibid.
Viol^t in grain, Lib. Comp^t. de Liberat. Pannorum, etc. temp. R. 2. f. 167.
White, and I^id. p. 173.
Blue. And anno 12. H. 6. the Robe of Henry Beaufort Cardinal and Prelate, was
F^ Lib. vocat. C^tom. in Offic. mag. Gardrobe, f. 91. b.
White, as then were the Surcoats of all the Knights-Companions; whence it is
evident, the Livery anciently allowed the Prelate, annually varied in Color,
as did the Knights-Companions Surcoats.

In that ancient Precedent of the Liveries of the Garter, recorded in an old
Velam Manuscript, remaining in the Sovereign's Great Wardrobe, wherein the
Surcoats bestowed on the Knights-Companions are reduced to a certainty, as to
the measure of Cloth, number of Furs and Garters, nevertheless proportioned
according to their several Degrees; there the Prelate has the following
allowance for his Livery.

Fol. 12.
24 Yards of Woollen Cloth. 18 Timbr. pur. Miniver. 18 Timbr. gross. Miniver. 3
Timbr. de Biss.
By all which it is manifest what Materials and Color the Prelate's Robe was
of, as at the Institution of the Order, so for a long time after; nor can we
find, any alteration therein, until the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and
then his Habit was Constitutiones ad Official. Ord. attinentes. cap. 1.
ordained to be of Crimson Velvet, lined with White Taffaty, faced with Blue,
and thereon richly embroidered, sundry royal Cognizances, such as appear on the
front of the Prelate's Robe, in the Draughts of the Officers ancient Habits
placed at the beginning of this Chapter.

The first of which is the Rose of England crowned.

The second, one of King Edward the Fourth's Badges; and may be seen in several
places of the Stone-work, in and about St. Georges Chapel at Windesor.

The third is the Flower de Lis of France, crowned.

And the fourth King Edward the Third's peculiar Badge, viz. the Sun Beams
issuing out of a Cloud. Ex Rot. Comp. Ioh. Come Clerici Provisionis mag.
Gardrob. m. 9.
Forty of these Clouds, embroidered with Gold, Silver, and Silk, having in the
middle the Saxon Letter E of Gold, were provided to trim several Garments made
for this King in the 21. year of his Reign, and garnished with Stars.

As the left shoulder of a Knights-Companions Mantle, so the right shoulder of
the Prelate's Robe, is ordained to be embroidered with a Ibidem.
Scutcheon of St. George's Arms, encompassed with the Garter; and Ibidem.
adorned with Cordons of Blue Silk mingled with Gold.

After a while (though we find not the certain time) the Color of this Robe
became changed to Murrey, the allowance of Velvet Ex vetust. pergam MS. in
Offic. mag. Gardrob. p. 46.
16 yards, of White Sarcenet for lining 12 yards, and a Garter for the shoulder
embroidered with Purls of Damask Gold. But by a Warrant dated the 22. of March
anno 23. Eliz. directed to the Master of the great Wardrobe, for the Livery of
the Order for Bishop Watson, then newly admitted Prelate. The quantity of
Velvet was increased to Lib. Warrant. particul. temp. Eliz. Reginae in Offic.
mag. Gardrob p. 232.
18 yards, but the lining and Garter as before, so also the Cordon, having
Buttons and Tassels of Blue Silk and Venice Gold. The like Robe in all
particulars was made for his Successor Bishop Cooper, upon the Sovereign's
Ibid. p. 359.
Warrant (11. April an. 26. Eliz.) and for Bilson, by a Ex lib. partic.
Warrant. ab an. 1593. ad ann. 1603. p. 167.
like Warrant an. 41. of the same Queen.

About the 12. year of King Charles the First, the Prelate and Chancellor
petitioned the Sovereign to restore them their ancient right and estimation, in
relation to their Robes and Badges of Honor, upon their outward Garments;
whereupon it was Ordered in a Chapter held the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1.
(being the Feast Day celebrated by prorogation for the year 1636.) among many
other things relating to the Honor of this most Noble Order, Lib. R. p. 122.
That the Knights-Commissioners (newly established by Ibid. p. 118.
that Chapter) should consider of the Robes to be worn by the Prelate and
Chancellor, and certify the Sovereign the ancient Color and Form.

But we have not met with any thing further done in relation thereunto, during
that Sovereign's Reign; nor until after the happy Restoration of the present
Sovereign, and then by Warrant under the Signet of the Order, (dated Feb. 19.
an. 13. Car. 2.) the Prelate had assigned him for his Livery of the Order one
Robe of Appendix Number. IX.
Purple Velvet, containing 18 yards, and 10 yards of White Taffaty for lining,
as also a Scutcheon of St. George within a Garter, wrought with Letters and
Purls of Damask Gold and Pearls, having Laces, Buttons, and Tassels of Purple
Silk and Venice Gold; but what inducements the Sovereign had, for changing the
Color from Murrey to Purple we have not heard.

An Account being thus given of the Prelates Robe, it follows that we note, at
what times he is enjoined to wear it, concerning which it is set down in
express Text, Constitut. ad Offic. Ord. attinentes. cap. 1.
That he should be obliged to wear it yearly on the Vigil and day of St.
George, wheresoever he is at his Liberty, whether it be in Parliament, or any
other solemn occasion, or Festival whatsoever.

The Honors conferred on this Officer are, Privileges.
That his Place in all Proceedings and Ceremonies of the Order is on the Ibid.
right hand of the Chancellor. That he may Ibid.
marshal his Arms within the ennobled Garter, and accordingly has it been
customary for the Prelate, to surround them (impaled with those of the Sea of
Winchester) with this Noble Ensign. He has allowed him convenient Ibid.
Lodgings within the Castle of Windesor, and these are in a Tower, situate on
the North side of the Castle in the middle Ward, called Lib. R. p. 55.
Winchester-Tower. And as often as he shall come thither, or to any other place
at the Sovereign's command either to celebrate the Solemnity of St. George, or
do any act or thing belonging to the Order, he ought to have allowed him of the
Ex praef. Constitut. c. 1.
Court-Livery for himself and Servants, according to the rate that Earls
resident in Court are used to have.

Lastly, at a Chapter held the 27. of April, anno 2. Car. 1. this Officer (so
also the Chancellor) had the Privilege granted to Vide supra cap. 7. Sect. 4.
p. 216.
wear upon the left part of his Cloak, Coat and Riding Cassock, at all times
when he should not wear his Robe, and in all Places and Assemblies a Scutcheon
of the Arms of St. George, but not enriched with Pearls or Stones, That the
wearing thereof might be an open testimony to the World, of the honor he held
from this most Noble Order.

But not long after there was some restraint put upon this Act, though I do not
find it repealed.

SECT. II. The Institution of the Chancellor's Office, his Oath, Robe, Badge,
and Pension.
AT the Institution of this most Noble Order, His Institution.
E. 3. Stat. Art. 26.
The Common Seal was ordained to remain in the custody of whomsoever the
Sovereign should please; nevertheless, such person is expressly appointed to be
Art. 30.
one of the Knights-Companions. Among them in after times Sir John Robertsack
(to whom its custody was committed, by Decree in Chapter an. 1. H. 6.) is styled
Lib. N. p. 74.
Custos Sigilli Ordinis; and within a few lines in the Book and Page now cited
(the same Chapter still sitting) there is mention made also of the Dominus
Guliel. Haryngton per Cancellarium excusatus est. Ibid.
Chancellor: where though the reference be not to Sir John Robertsack by
express Name, yet in all likelihood is intended to him, the Seal of the Order
being at his Nomination delivered into his keeping. And though in the course of
the Annals there recorded, this Title is given to Sir John Robertsack,
preceding the entry of the Ibid. p. 75.
Decree, which constituted him Keeper of the seal, yet is it probable his
nomination past one of the first things in the Chapter; after which, the
Register might justly afford him that Title, though not as yet drawn up into an
Order: That work being commonly done after the Chapters were broke up.

But King Edward the Fourth, finding it necessary to settle the Office of
Chancellor of the Garter, in a person distinct from the Knights-Companions, and
subservient to them, Ordered, in a Chapter held at his Palace of Westminster
the 4. of November, in the 16. year of his Reign, Lib. N. p. 141.
That the Seal of the Order should be delivered to Richard Beauchamp then
Bishop of Salisbury to keep during pleasure; and he to be called Chancellor of
this most Noble Order.

Not long after, this King by Appendix. Number. IV.
Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England, bearing Test at Westminster,
the 10. day of October, in the 15. year of his Reign, declared, That though
among the Officers of the Order of the Garter, the Office of Chancellor was not
appointed by the Founder's Statutes, yet was it nevertheless very lawful and
necessary. And therefore did Ordain, that for the advancement and good of the
Order in those Affairs, there should be constituted an Officer named
Chancellor. And forasmuch as this Office was great, and of great charge, and
required an able and dextrous person, it was his further pleasure, that none
should be admitted thereinto, unless he were of Ecclesiastical Dignity, that is
to say, a Bishop. Moreover, considering the Chapel of St. George in the Castle
of Windesor, was founded and established within the Diocese of Salisbury, and
having regard to the prudence and diligence of Richard Beauchamp then Bishop of
that Diocese, who out of mere love toward the Order, gave himself the leisure
daily to attend the advancement and progress of that goodly Work, wherewith the
King was then in hand, in the Castle of Windesor, for enlarging the Chapel
there, He did therefore likewise Ordain and Establish the said Bishop for the
term of his life Chancellor of the Order, and did further Will and Ordain, that
after his decease his Successors Bishops of Salisbury should always have and
hold the said Office of Chancellor. Nevertheless, in this Patent there is a
Proviso, that the Kings Concession, should be put in execution by the advice of
the Knights-Compaenions, and without prejudice of the Bishop of Winchester in
those things, which, touching the Order, ought by the Statutes of Institution
to belong unto him.

This Office being thus conferred upon Richard Beauchamp* personally, for term
of life, and perpetually, to the succeeding Bishops of the Sea of Salisbury,
diverse of his Successors (some of whom are remembered in the Black Book, though
the names of special Officers are seldom set down in Chapter Acts) were, by
virtue of this Grant, continued therein, and executed the Office; nor does it
appear by the Records of the Order, that any other person had been invested
therein, besides the Bishops of Salisbury, until an. 7. E. 6. that Sir William
Cecil, then Principal Secretary of State, was made Chancellor; concerning which
more by and by.

If recourse be had to the Constitutions peculiarly relating to the Officers of
the Order, it will appear, Cap. 2.
That this Office is very noble and honorable, of great trust and care,
requiring a person of much Honor and Reputation to exercise and manage it: In
which regard it is therein provided, that no man should be advanced to this
Dignity, unless he be a Prelate of the Church, viz. Archbishop, or Bishop, or
of some other such like eminent preferment therein: Or if a Layman, then to be
a Knight of known Extraction, expert, learned, and of untainted Reputation.

By this Clause, a Layman no less than a Clergyman was made capable of this
Office, nevertheless it amounted not to a devesting the Bishop then living, or
excluding any of his Successors, unless it had pleased the Sovereign after
making that Constitution, to have passed by the Bishop of Salisbury, and
bestowed it elsewhere, which he did not; for Edmund Audeley the then Bishop,
some time after the establishing these Constitutions, and his immediate
Successor Cardinal Campeius (till he went to Rome) if not more of them,
enjoined and executed the same.

But upon Reformation of the Order by King Edw^rd the Sixth, his Statutes
wholly leave out the Ecclesiastics, and Cap. 9.
appoint that the Chancellors Office should be executed by a Knight, qualified
as before. And thereupon Sir William Cecil was constituted Chan^ellor, whose
Patent bears date the Pat. 7. F. 6. pars
12. of April anno 7. E. 6. And here first entered a secular person, though he
enjoyed the Office but a while, for the Lib. C p* ^.
27. of Sept^m^er following, Sir William Petres was admitted thereinto, since
which time, until now, the Chancellorship has continued in the execution of
persons of that rank and quality.

Notwithstanding which, in a Charter granted to the Bishop of Salisbury the
(...). 4. Eliz pars prima
first of Dec an. 4. Eliz. (confirming the Charters of Queen Mary, King Henry
the Eighth, and King Henry the Seventh) as also in another by the late
Sovereign King Charles the First, ( Pat. 4. C^^. 1. p. 25.
6. Mar. an. reg. sui 4.) the forementioned Letters Patent made to Bishop
Beauchamp by King ^dward the Fourth, are therein recited totidem verbis, and
confirmed, as a tacit Reservation of the right and title of the Bishop of
Salisbury, whenever the favor of the Sovereign should grow propitious to
that See.

It does not appear that any of the Bishops of Salisbury, after the Reign of
King Edward the Sixth, concerned themselves for recovering the Execution of
this Office to their See, until the Ib. p. 165.
sixth year of King James, that Henry Cotton then Bishop, upon the death of Sir
Edward Dyer sometime Chancellor, set forth by Petition to the then Sovereign,
That this Office belonged to him and his Successors Bishops of Salisbury, and
therefore humbly prayed Restitution thereof to the Church of Salisbury.

But before the Sovereign would determine any thing hereupon, he was pleased to
call the two Chief Justices and Chief Baron to advise with, who were of opinion
(says the Blue Book) Ibidem.
That this Office was not completely or sufficiently annexed to the Bishopric
of Salisbury by King Edward the Fourth. But Sir Edward Cook, one of those
Judges, Reports the point upon which it was void, to be 4 part Institut. p. 200.
the incertainty of the Grant, for that a new Office was erected, and not
defined what Jurisdiction or Authority the Officer should have. And yet we find
elsewhere this third reason given, MS. de Festis temp. Iac. Regis f. 147. ^
penes Ed. Walker Eq. Aur. modo Garter, Princ. R. Armorum
That the Grant was in the Sovereign's disposition, because the Patent was
granted without Fee. With one, or more of these opinions, the Sovereign's
judgment being swayed, He forthwith nominated Sir John Herbert one of his Privy
Council to the Chancellorship, and so this Affair slept, until anno 12. Car. 1.

When John Davenant Bishop of Salisbury (Sir Francis Crane Chancellor being
lately dead) with all due humiliation remonstrated to the Sovereign, That the
Office of Chancellor was perpetually annexed to his See, by the foresaid
Letters of King Edward the Fourth, and though in following times it had been
bestowed upon Laymen, yet he humbly desired his right might be restored.
Whereupon at a Chapter of the Order held in the Chapterhouse within the Castle
of Windesor, the 5. of December in the year aforesaid, the Sovereign proposed
to the Knights-Companions present, Sir Thomas Rows Iournal. p. 2. vide etiam
Lib. R. p. 115.
That though he had of his especial Grace, made Election of Sir Thomas Row
Knight for his Chancellor at that time, yet having understood a Claim made by
the Bishopric of Salisbury, that the place was annexed to that See. He
commanded the Lords-Companions of the Order, to take the pretense of right into
their considerations: To which proposition of his Majesty, the Lords humbly
answered, That they thought it was not their part to search for the Title of
any; but that if the Bishop of Salisbury did produce his Evidence, and the
proofs thereof, he might present it in Chapter, to his Majesty, to be
considered.

Upon this encouragement, the Bishop prepared a Petition, which was Ibid. p.
12. and Lib. R. p. 121.
present^d and read in Chapter, held at the Feast of St. George celebrated at
Windesor, the 18. of April ensuing, and here inserted.

Ex. Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nuper hujus Ordin. Cancel.
To the King's most Excellent Majesty Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the
Garter. The humble Petition of John Bishop of Sarum, your Majesty's Chaplain in
Ordinary.
Shows, THat whereas your Majesty's most noble Progenitor, King Edward the
Fourth, did by Letters Patent, erect and establish one Office of Chancellor of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, and did then also grant a Charter unto
Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury, and his Successors for ever, that they
should execute that Office, in consideration that the Chapel of St. George in
your Majesty's Castle of Windesor, was within the Diocese of Sarum, and for
other considerations in the said Charter specified. Which Office was enjoyed by
the said Richard Beauchamp, and diverse of his Successors in the Sea of Sarum,
according to the Charter, which Charter has also been confirmed under the
great Seal of England, by some other Kings and Queens since the Reign of King
Edward the Fourth. And was lastly most graciously confirmed by your Royal
Majesty, in the fourth year of your happy Reign. But to the great prejudice and
dishonor of the Sea of Sarum, the use and exercise of the said Office, has
been for many years discontinued from the Bishops of your Majesty's said Church.

May it therefore please your most Excellent Majesty, out of your accustomed
goodness to the Church, graciously to consider of your Petitioners Claim and
Charter, and if your Majesty shall so think fit, to vouchsafe your Petitioner a
hearing, or to refer the examination thereof to some others. That thereupon
such course may be taken for the restoring and preserving of the right of the
said Church herein, either for the present or future time, as your Majesty in
your Princely wisdom shall find agreeable to honor and justice.

And the Petitioner according to his duty, shall pray for your Majesty's long,
happy, and glorious Reign.

To the substance of this Petition it was objected*

1. Rows Iournal* and Lib. R. Locis cit.
That the Great Seals of England, did not work within, or upon the Statutes and
Rules of the Order of the Garter.

2. That no Grant could prescribe or limit the present Sovereign; it being a
Fundamental Law within the Order, Suprema Lex, was Supremi voluntas.

3. That it did not appear by the Records of the Order, that the place of
Chancellor was any otherwise conferred upon Richard Beauchamp Bishop of
Salisbury, than, quam diu Regiae celcitudini complaceret: So as the free
disposition thereof did remain with the Sovereign.

To the first; It was Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
answered by way of exception, as to the Grant of Offices: forasmuch as the
power of the Great Seal of England, was anciently took into, and became legal
within the Order in like Cases, and not any Patent for an Office, from the
Institution of the Order unto that time; had past under the Seal of the Order,
but under the Great Seal of England, and in particular the Office of Chancellor
(as was manifest enough from their Enrolments) For besides the first Grant made
by King Edward the Fourth, when the Office came afterward into the hands of
Laymen (from the Patent granted to Sir William Cecil to that made to Sir
Thomas Row) all past under the said Great Seal; which had not been done, if
any legal defect had been therein.

To the second; it being so as was objected, it thence appeared, that the
Sovereign was as much at liberty to restore this Office to the Sea of
Salisbury, as continue it to secular Dignities.

To the third; What was alleged out of the Records of the Order, related only
to the time of delivering the Seals to Bishop Beauchamp, but when afterward
the Office was erected by Letters Patent, it was then granted to him during
life.

Something was replied from the Judges opinions, given in this case, an. Iac.
Regis 6. but the Sovereign thought it was not then well considered, to permit
the Chapter Acts of this Order, which has Statutes and Rules of its own, and
wholly independent from other Laws, to receive construction and determination
from the Measures and Rules of our Common Law, and therefore notwithstanding
what had been objected against the Bishops Claim, the Sovereign was pleased
justly to pronounce; R^^^^ I^^^nal. page 12.
That he ought to be heard: and to that purpose, gave the Chancellor order to
signify unto him, that he should prepare and set down in writing, a brief of
the Vouchers and Proofs of his Pretentions, in verification of his Petition,
and send them to the Chancellor, to be delivered to the Knights-Commissioners
(appointed for the Affairs of the Order) to consider of them, and present them
at the next Chapter to the Sovereign, who would therein take such Order, as was
conformable to his most impartial and untainted Justice.

The 4. of October after, in a Chapter held at Windesor during the Feast of St.
George, the Chancellor represented the said Bishop's Petition, with the
Vouchers to his Pretensions, which the Bishop exhibited no otherwise than as
Inducements and humble Motives, for restoring the ancient right of the Church
of Salisbury, and perpetually re-uniting the Chancellorship of the Order to
that See, if it should seem agreeable to his Will, Wisdom, and Justice. Ibid.
p. 27.
But the Knights-Commissioners having not to that time met, the business was
again referred to them to be considered* prepared and abreviated for the
Sovereign's consideration and final judgment. All which the Chancellor by
Letter thus signified to the Bishop.

Ibid. p. 3^.
Right Reverend and my very good Lord,
I May have justly incurred the censure of your Lordship, either of want of
manners, or prevarication, that I have not given you an account of the trust
you pleased to repose in me, and that I so willingly undertook, both out of
true respect I bear to your Lordship, and duty and service to the Church, whose
cause you solicit; but I hope your goodness will acquit me of any of these
crimes, and be pleased to take my just excuse, that I deferred only, to give
you a more certain answer than yet I am able, ^^ left a longer delay might
endanger the good opinion, which I desire to preserve with ^ou, you may be
pleased to know; that at the last Chapter of the Order held in October at
Windesor, I represented your Lordships Petition, and all the several Vouchers
and verifications of your demand and pretension, but his Majesty having not
leisure at that time to enter into a full debate, did refer it to the
Knights-Commissioners standing for the Order, both to consider and to deliver
their opinions, and to make report to him at the next Feast, reserving to
Himself the final judgment. Of this I have made a Record and registered it in
the Acts of the Order for continuance of your Claim. I have since solicited the
Knights-Commissioners often to meet upon it, and other occasions of the Order,
but hic labor hoc opus, I cannot procure them till after the Term, when I
beseech you to believe, that I will be a faithful Remembrancer, and Advocate of
your cause, and that as soon as I can get any resolution, I will thereof render
you an account: and if they will do nothing therein, I will again bring it to
his Majesty. In this business, I cannot omit to let you know, the care of his
Grace my Lord Archbishop of Canterbury in your behalf, who does often call upon
me, and if you please to take notice thereof to him, and to desire him to move
his Majesty to command some of the Knights to meet and to hear it, it will
procure both a quick and effectual dispatch, and there shall be of my part no
manner of omission, to testify to your Lordship both my reverence to your
person, and desire to deserve of you the name of

Your Lordships most humble servant Tho. Row
St. Martyns-Lane 29 Nov. 1637.

Nor was this worthy Chancellor unmindful of his promise, for the next time the
Knights-Commissioners sat, which was the first of February following at
Whitehall, Rows Iournal. p. 36.
He to their considerations presented the foresaid Petition, Claim, and
Vouchers, to be heard by them according to the former Order: But it was their
opinion, That unless the Bishop were himself present, it would be labor lost,
and that they could not conclude in the cause, without hearing his own Reply:
And therefore they entered not into the debate, but Ordered the Chancellor to
write a Letter to his Lordship, that whenever he came up to London, he should
be heard personally, and his reasons considered, and to the Sovereign
represented.

The Letter upon this occasion was as follows.

Ibid. p. 37.
My Lord,
IT has pleased the Lords Knights-Commissioners for the Garter, to meet upon
Thursday last, the first day of this Month: where in the first place I
presented your Lordships Petition to his Majesty, and read the Order of
Reference upon it made in Chapter, and offered unto their consideration the
authentic Vouchers to every part, sent me by your Lordship, and urged your
Claim as far, as if it had been my own, both by succession of Bishops of
Salisbury in the Office of Chancellor until Henry the Eighth, and of the first
Grant made under the Broad Seal, and of continual renewing thereof in all the
Charters of Bishops since, to your Lordship, and all other arguments, which
either my wit could present, or to which by sincerity, and your trust, I was
obliged. But could not induce their Lordships to view them, nor to make any
report upon the cause, all the answer I obtained, was, that it was not proper
for me to be the Advocate, nor for them to hear, where I could not be furnished
with a reply on your part, if they found cause to except against any part of
the title, and so they would not judge you by any prejudice: But commanded me
to signify to your Lordship, that whenever your occasions should bring you
to London, or the Court, that they would hear you, and from you only receive
the information. And that when your Lordship should call upon them, they would
give you such an answer as the justice of your cause should merit.

I am sorry to write your Lordship so weak effects, but I desire you to
believe, that I have proceeded with all faith and integrity, and that I could
do no more: Of this proceeding I acquainted his Grace my Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, who did think it fit that I should signify to you, how the
business stood, that you might be the better prepared against your coming to
London, where I shall be ready to do you all service in my power, and until
then will keep your Papers safe for your use: Unless his Majesty, to whom I
purpose to render an account of the business, make a new Order for more
expedition, which I believe will not be done before your coming, or the next
Chapter. In hope and desire to be of more use to your Lordship when you shall
make your own Claim, or in any other of your commands, I shall ever rest

Your Lordships most humble servant Tho. Row.
St. Martins-Lane 6. Feb. 1637.

After which we find not, that the Knights-Commissioners met, either upon this
or any other Affair relating to the Order, before the Feast of St. George,
begun to be held at Windesor the 20. of May, an. 14. Car. 1. and to that, being
added the Ceremonies of the present Sovereign's Installation, the Bishop of
Salisbury thought it not convenient to interrupt any part of that great
Solemnity, with the consideration of this Affair; and the Scotch War shortly
after breaking forth, and troubles growing high at home, the further
prosecution was laid aside, and not revived until the 19. of November, an. 21.
Car. 2. when Seth Ward now Lord Bishop of Salisbury took encouragement upon the
former grounds and the Sovereign's favor, to set on foot this Claim by a
Petition presented in Chapter then held at Whitehall, where after a full debate
and consideration had of the justness of his Claim, he obtained the following
Decree for re-establishment of this Office on the Bishop of that See upon the
first vacancy.

Vide Lib. Caro^in. p. 65.
At a Chapter of the most Noble Order of the Garter, held by his Majesty
Sovereign, and the most noble Companions hereafter named, in the Red Chamber
next the Bedchamber in Whitehall, the nineteenth of November 1669.

Present His Majesty Sovereign.
His Royal Highness the Duke of York. Duke of Ormond. Earl of Oxford. Earl of
Manchester. Prince Rupert. Earl of Bristol. Earl of Sandwich. Duke of Monmouth.
Officers Prelate the Bishop of Winchester. Officers Register, Garter, Usher.

The Sovereign then declared, That the reason of calling this Chapter was to
consider of the pretensions of Dr. Seth Ward Bishop of Salisbury, exhibited in
a Petition, concerning the Title and Claim of himself and his Successors, unto
the Office of Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter (when the same
should become void) the Bishop grounding the equity of his Claim, upon a
Charter first granted by King Edward the Fourth, in the 15. year of his Reign,
unto Richard Beauchamp Bishop of Salisbury and his Successors for ever, which
Charter has been since confirmed under the Great Seal of England, by other
Kings and Queens, and particularly by King Charles the First, of ever blessed
memory; hereupon the Bishop being called in, and commanded to produce his
proofs to make good that his pretension, accordingly the Bishop humbly offered
an authentic Copy of the original Charter, of the said King Edward the
Fourth, renewed and confirmed by the said King Charles the First, in the fourth
year of his Reign; The which being read and duly considered, together with the
Objections to the contrary, particularly that the possession and execution of
the said Office of Chancellor, had been for above an hundred years, committed
unto Laymen, notwithstanding which, the Sovereign and Companions, being fully
satisfied with the justness of the Claim of the said Bishop, grounded upon the
aforesaid Charters, and likewise considering, that the returning of the said
Office to the first Institution, would be for the honor and dignity of the said
most Noble Order, the Sovereign thereupon, with the unanimous consent of the
most Noble Companions then present, did Declare and Ordain; That the Bishop of
Sarum, and his Successors for ever, shall have and execute the Office of
Chancellor of the said most Noble Order, and receive and enjoy all Rights,
Privileges, and Advantages thereunto belonging, immediately upon the first
vacancy of the said Office.

Proceed we next to the Oath the Chancellor takes at his admission, Oath.
which we find to be the Lib. N. p. 313.
same with the Prelate's, and in the like humble posture, that is, upon the
Knee, and usually administered by the Lib. C. p. 107.112. and Lib. R. p. 114.
Sc^ Palmers large Iournal. p. 57. and Lib. Carolin. p. 24.
Register of the Order. When Sir James Palmer was to be admitted Chancellor (
Palmers large Iournal p. 56.
17. Ian. an. 20. Car. 1.) the Register moved the Ibid. 57.
Sovereign. That in regard his Majesty had made choice of him for that Office
in place of Sir Thomas Row deceased; and though he had long executed the same,
in his absence, and taken the Oath as Deputy Chancellor, yet being now elected
Chancellor, ought to take the Oath in the quality he was in: The Sovereign and
Knights-Companions present thought it fit to be done, and thereupon the
Register gave him the Oath; after which being saluted by the
Knights-Companions, and joy given him of his new Office, he went on with the
business of the Chapter.

It is clear from the Precedent of the Sovereign's Livery of the Garter, Robe
that the Chancellor's Robe, was at first the same with the Prelates, both for
Cloth and Color, but his proportion of Cloth far less, having allowed him but
Ex Vetust. MS pergam. in Officio mag. Gar^rob. p. 2.
5 yards when the Prelate had 24. nor but 3 Timber of Miniver gross, where the
Prelate had 19. beside a large quantity of other Furs. Nor was the Color
settled to one kind, until the Constitutions of his Office, appointed it to be
Cap. 2.
the same with the Prelates, [Crimson] for no doubt, it was before annually
changed (as was the Prelates) to the Color of the Knights-Companions Surcoats.
Howbeit by the Plate of the ancient Habits of the Officers, it is visible to
have wanted the Royal Badges, wherewith the Prelate's Robe was then
embroidered. When the Color of the Prelate's Robe was changed to Murrey, then
was the Chancellors so also, and made alike in all other particulars. The
proportion allowed to Sir Thomas Smith for his Livery, an. 14. Eliz. was Ex
Lib. tertio particular. Warrant. temp. Eliz. Reg. p. 203.
18 yards of Murrey Velvet, 12 yards of Sarcenet for the Lining, one Garter
wrought with Pearls of Damask Gold, for the shoulder one Lace (or Cordon) with
Buttons and Tassels of Blue Silk and Venice Gold. And the same materials and
proportions were afterward given out of the Sovereign's great Wardrobe, to the
succeeding Chancellors.

But an. 13. Car. 1. the Prelate and Chancellor endeavored a Reformation of
their Robes, and upon meeting of some of the Knights-Commissioners at Whitehall
the first of February in the foresaid year, who heard and debated several
things relating to the Order, it was determined, Rows Iournal. f. 36.
That the said Knights should move the Sovereign for a new Robe for the
Chancellor (notice having been given to the Knights-Companions about a week
before, to provide for themselves new Mantles of Celestial Blue) and the Color
being in question, upon the Reformation of the Knights Robes, it being alleged
( but without ground) that the Prelate and Chancellor for their upper Robe had
from the Foundation, the same Stuff and Color that was worn by the Knights, it
was referred to the Sovereign. But herein nothing was done till an. 13. Car. 2.
when the Color both of the Prelate and this Officers Robe, was changed to
Purple.

Badge.
Besides this Robe, the Chancellor of the Order has an honorable Badge assigned
him to wear, first granted to Sir William Peter's, and his Successors, the 9. of
October, an. 1. and 2. ^hil. and Mar. viz. Lib. C. p. 16.
a Rose Gold, enclosed within a Garter, which he and the succeeding Chancellors
of the Order have ever since worn daily about their necks; at first in a Gold
Chain, but since in a Purple Ribband. The Figure of which with those Badges
worn by Garter and Black-Rod are to be seen at the beginning of this Chapter.

It seems something to this purpose had been in design a little before, so soon
as the Chancellorship became vested in a Layman; for King Edward the Sixth's
Statutes did Ordain, Cap. 9.
That the Chancellor should wear about his neck a Cross of the Order, with a
Red Rose in a White, of Gold, all compassed within a Garland of Red and White
Roses.

And because it was suggested to the late Sovereign King Charles the First,
That there were differences and uncertainties in some Books remaining with the
Chancellor touching the wearing his Badge; He thereupon gave out the following
Warrant, under His Royal Hand and Signet of the Order to ascertain the form
therein described, and manner of wearing it.

Charles R.

CHarles by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, Ex Original penes praef.
Iac. Palmer.
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, etc. To all and singular to whom these presents shall come
Greeting. Whereas there are differences and uncertainties in Books of our most
Noble Order of the Garter, remaining in the custody of the Chancellor of our
said Order, about his wearing of his Badge or Token about his Neck. And because
our pleasure is, that the same might be certain and constant: We do therefore
of our Sovereign Power and Authority, to whom in any ambiguities arising, the
Interpretation, decision, correction, solution, and dispensation of all
Statutes only belongs, and with the knowledge and consent of our Companions of
our said Order, at this time remaining with us, Decree and Ordain that our
trusty and well beloved Servant Sir James Palmer Knight and Baronet, Chancellor
of our said Order (and his Successors) shall wear about his neck at all times
in honor of his said place (that thereby he may be known to be of that Office
and Dignity, as has been accustomed) a Medal or Jewel of Gold, enamelled with
a Red Rose (within a Garter of Blue enamel with this sentence inscribed Honey
soit qui mal y pense) or such a one as We or the rest of the Knights-Companions
of the said most Noble Order of the Garter, do or shall from time to time
hereafter wear in our Collars of the said Order, in particular reference unto
us and them: And in the reverse thereof he shall bear the Scutcheon of St.
George enamelled within a Garter also, in reference to the Order it self, which
he only shall wear hanging by a light Purple Ribband, or in a Gold Chain, as
has been accustomed. Given at our Court at Oxenford under the Signet of our
Order, the 16. day of December, in the twentieth and one year of our Reign 1645.


Among the Officers of the Order the Chancellor has place next beneath the
Prelate, Privileges*
and in all Proceedings and Sessions, goes and sits on his left hand. And
as it was provided by the Constitutions of the Officers, That if the Chancellor
happened to be a Layman, he should be also a Knight, and have other personal
endowments, before set down. So did the late Sovereign King Charles the First
conceive it requisite to confer some further note of honor and estimation upon
this Officer, in relation to place and precedence without the Order, to which
effect there past the following Decree.

Lib. R. p. 49. vide etiam Lib. l. 25. in Offic. Armor. f. 62.
At a Chapter of the most Noble Order of the Garter held by the Sovereign at
Whitehall the 23. of April 1629. present the Right honorable the Earls of
Mullgrave. Montgomery. Rutland. Carlisle. Holland. Suffolk. Pembroke. Arundel
and Surrey. Salisbury. Dorset. Barkshire. Northampton.


Charles R.

THE Chancellor of the Order, being by the Institution a place of honor, and
so disposed of, that the same has ever been possessed by persons of great
worth and virtue, yet because it appears not, that any declaration has been
made of the Rank and right of Place belonging to that Office, His Majesty has
therefore by the advice of all the Knights present at the Chapter, held upon
the day and Feast of St. George, Ordered and Decreed that Sir Francis Crane the
present Chancellor, and all others that shall succeed him in that place
hereafter, shall in right of that place, in all assemblies, and upon all
occasions, be ranked and placed immediately after Knights, Privy Counselors,
and before the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the persons holding both places
being in pari gradu, and consequently before all others, whom the said
Chancellor is to precede. And to the end public notice may be taken hereof,
and the respects known that is due to that place, His Majesty has commanded an
Entry thereof to be made in the Register of the Order. And is pleased, that the
Earl Marshal of England shall likewise cause the same to be entered in the
Office of Arms.


And to the end the place belonging to the Chancellor of the Exchequer may be
certainly known, we have thought fit to transcribe hither so much of the Decree
and Establishment of King James, made the 20. of May in the 10. year of his
Reign, as will evidence the same.

Pat. 10. Iac. pars 10. m. 8.
And his Majesty does likewise by these presents, for Himself, his Heirs, and
Successors, Ordain, That the Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter, the
the Privy Counselors of his Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the Master of
the Courts of Wards and Liveries, the Chancellor and Under-Treasurer of the
Exchequer, Chancellor of the Duchy, the Chief Justice of the Court commonly
called the Kings Bench, the Master of the Rolls, the Chief Justice of the Court
of Common Pleas, the Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and all other the Judges and
Barons of the Degree of the Coife of the said Courts, now and for the time
being shall by reason of such their honorable Order, and employment of State
and Justice, have place and precedence in all places, and upon all occasions
before the Younger Sons of Viscounts and Barons, and before all Baronets, etc.

The foresaid Constitutions appoint the Chancellor of the Order an Cap. 2.
Habitation within the Castle of Windesor, like as has the Prelate, and that
is the South-west Tower, in the Lower-Ward of the Castle ^hence called the
Chancellors-Tower. It appears the possession thereof had been for some time, in
the hands of others, and therefore in a Chapter held at Whitehall the 5. of
November, an. 5. Car. 1. It was decreed to be Lib. R. p. 55.
restored unto Sir Francis Crane then Chancellor of the Order, and after his
decease, to descend to his Successors in right of this Office. These
Constitutions also Ordained, Loco citato.
That this Officer should have the like Diet and Liveries in the Sovereign's
Court, as were allowed to the Prelate.

Pension.
At the erection of this Office, the Chancellor had no Pension allowed him,
toward defraying his charge in the Execution thereof: nor until the
Constitutions relating to the Officers were established: but thereby is settled
on him a Ibid.
Pension of 100 l. per annum, in consideration of his Employment, or else an
allowance proportionable in Fees, Offices, or other Promotions, over and beside
his Lodgings in the Castle, and Liveries at Court.

But as to Fees or Perquisites, there are none due to this Officer; and for
that reason he has not only the foresaid Pension, but all his disbursements
touching the Affairs of the Order allowed him, even to Paper, Wax, and Wafers:
and indeed those persons who formerly enjoyed this Office, have thought it much
below them, to accept either of Fee or Gratuity for any thing done within the
Order: and so that truly noble person Sir Thomas Row (sometime the worthy
Chancellor of this Order) out of an extraordinary sense of Honor, affirmed in a
24. Nov. 1637.
Letter to Doctor Christopher Wren, Register, upon the tender (but his refusal)
of some Gratuity; That his Office was an Office of Honor, and not of Fees, and
that he had alw^ys excepted against Fees for the disbursements of the
Sovereign's Money. Though he acknowledged some had given his Clerk a small
Gratuity for the bare Engrossing of an Alms-Knights Patent, but nothing further.

Seals of the Order.
And because the Custody of the Seals of the Order, belong to this Officer,
before we leave this Section, it will be here the fittest place to say
something concerning them.

It appears by the Statutes of Institution, to have been then agreed, E. 3.
Stat. Art. 26.
That there should belong to this most Noble Order a Common Seal. This is
confirmed by the Statutes of King Art. 26.
Henry the Fifth, and since called the Pat 15. E. 4. p. 4. m. 18.
Great Seal of the Order.

The use of this Seal is declared to be to E. 3. Stat. Art. 27.
seal not only the Original Statutes, appointed to remain perpetually within
the Treasury of Windesor College, as also those E. 3. Stat. Art. 27.
Copies of which each Knight-Companion is obliged to have one in his keeping,
but likewise all Ibid. Art. 30. H. 5. Stat. Art. 31.
Letters of License to any of the Knights-Companions desirous to purchase Honor
abroad, and all Ibid. Art. 30. H. 5. Stat. Art. 31.
Mandates and Certificates relating to the Order.

After what manner this first Seal was designed, or what was engraven thereon,
we yet could never find: Polidore Virgile tells us, Angl. Hist l. 19. p. 379.
That when the Founder of the Order had made choice of St. George for its
Patron, he represented him armed, mounted on a Horse, bearing a Silver Shield,
and thereon a Red Cross. But whether St. George thus designed was engraved on
the first Seal, or only a Scutcheon of his Arms, as in after times, is not
certain: But this Author notes, that the Founder clothed his Soldiers in White
Iackets or Coats, and on their Breasts and Backs sowed Red Crosses, parallel to
the Arms anciently assigned to St. George, as also to the Kingdom of England,
placed under his Patronage, which Arms the Sovereigns of this Order have ever
since advanced in their Standards, both by Land and Sea.

But besides this Common Seal King Henry the Fifth, in the Lib. N. p. 67.
9. year of his Reig^. Instituted a H 5. Stat. Art. 31. vide Lib. N. p. 67. and
68.
Privy Signet, in case weighty Affairs should occasion the Sovereign to go out
of this Kingdom: The use whereof was to set to all Acts made by the Sovereign
beyond Sea, to difference them from those of his Deputies here in England.



King Henry the Eighth's Statutes ordain the making both of a Common-Seal and
Signet; and direct, that the Arms of the Order should be engraved upon each of
them. The Common-Seal used in his Reign we have seen and represented in the
inserted Plate under the Number [I] the Signet being designed after the same
manner, but less. The use of this Seal was continued (as appears from several
Commissions of Lieutenancy, that have come to our hands) until the Reign of
King James, and then altered to that Draught placed under number [II].

There was a like Seal made at the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the
First, which being Rows Iournal, p. 11. vide Lib. R. p. 121.
judged too little for the honor of the Sovereign's Commissions, it was
afterward Decreed in Chapter held the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1. Rows
Iournal, p. 11. vide Lib. R. p. 121.
That a new one should be made of a larger size, with the accustomed Arms and
Motto, and the care thereof left to Sir Thomas Row the then Chancellor, and it
appears he executed this Command with all due consideration, by the nobleness
of the design exhibited under the Number [III]. In the same Decree direction
was given for making a new Signet, the former being thought too big for
Letters; this also was effected by the said Chancellor, and represented under
the number [IV].

It was at the same Chapter further Decreed, Lib. R. p. 119.
That all Legations to deliver the Order to Foreign Princes, all other Acts
bearing the style of Commissions, all Patents of Offices and Fees, all Grants
or Licenses to go out of the Kingdom, should be sealed with this Seal, which
should be thence forward called the Great Seal of the Order. So also the Ibid.
Book of Statutes sent to Elect Knights or Foreign Princes, being fixed to a
Label of Blue Silk and Gold, according to ancient Custom. And Ibid p. 12^^
that all Letters concerning the Order, whether of signification of Election,
or Lieutenancy, or Summons upon Prorogation, or other directions from the
Sovereign, should only be sealed with the Signet.



These two Seals were by the said Decree appointed to be thenceforth Lib. R. p.
120.
born before the Sovereign in all public Assemblies, during the celebration of
St. George's Feast, or in other its Solemnities, by the Chancellor of the
Order, in a Purse of Blue Velvet. And Rows Iournal. loco cit.
command given to Sir Thomas Row to provide one accordingly. On the Vide
Compot. The. Row nuper Cancellar. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
foreside of which Purse, was richly embroidered (by Edmund Harison the
Sovereign's Embroiderer) with fine Venice Gold and Silver, Gold and Silver
Purls and Plates, and variety of colored Naples Silks, the Arms of St. George
impaled with the Sovereign's, surrounded with a Garter, and Crowned, having a
very fair running work or compartiment round about, the charge of which came to
Vide Compot. The. Row nuper Cancellar. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
13 l. 6 s. 10 d.

By the Statutes of Institution it was Ordained, Art. 31. vide ^. 5. Stat. Art.
31.
That in case the Knight-Companion, to whose trust the Sovereign did commit the
Seal of the Order, should upon any lawful occasion happen to be absent from the
Court, he should in the mean time leave it behind him, with some other of the
Knights-Companions present with the Sovereign, to the intent it might be always
near him, so long as he remained within the Kingdom: but if the Sovereign went
beyond Sea, then his Deputy was to have the same disposal of it, as himself
had: and the Signet of the Order should suffice him to Seal all such Acts and
Writings as should be made there.

The distance from Court, is by the Cap. 2.
Constitutions for the Officers of the Order, limited to 10 Miles, and by the
Art. 29.
Statutes of King Henry the Eighth to 20.

Upon consideration whereof we find See his Iournal. p. 21.
Sir Thomas Row Chancellor having some occasions Anno 13. Car. 1. to be absent
from the Court above 20 Miles, acquainted the Sovereign therewith, and tendering
him the Seals of the Order, He was pleased to dispense with the Statutes, and
give him leave to keep them, nevertheless in his own Custody.

SECT. III. The Register's Institution, Oath, Mantle, Badge, Privileges, and
Pension.
THis Officer was one of the three constituted at the Institution of the Order,
His institution.
under the Title of E. 3. Stat. Art. 34.
Registrator and Ord Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 36.
Registrarius, and so is called in the Art. 18. and 36.
Statutes of King Henry the Fifth. Yet in the Black Book he is frequently
styled Scriba, and in the Registrum Chartaceum, and Blue Book, Actuarius.

What was the first Register's Name, or who were his Successors, unto the Reign
of King Henry the Fifth, we cannot discover, but it may be presumed they were
Canons of Windesor, because this Office was at first appointed to E. 3. Stat.
Art. 34.
one of the College, namely a Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton. Art. 36.
Canon Resident there: besides, those Registers we meet with, mentioned in the
Black Book from the Reign of King Henry the Fifth, to the beginning of King
Henry the Eighth, were also Canons of this College, among whom (and the first
we observe so called) was John Coringham, as (among other Testimonies) the
fragments of a Glass Inscription in the Chancel of Clure Church, near Windesor,
were he was Rector, witnesses.

The first Dean of Windesor, constituted Register of the Order, was Regist.
Chartac. f. 53. b.
John Vescy, an 8. H. 8. the next Lib. C. p. 7.
Owen Oglethorp, an. 1. Mar. many of whose Successors in this Deanery (though
not all) have since been admitted to this Office, nevertheless as they were Non
quatenus Decanised quatenus Canonici ejusdem muneris capacces sactisunt. Tho.
Frith in suo Decan. and Canonie. Catalog.
Canons not Deans of Windesor. And it is not unlike, but the Deans were made
choice of for this Employment, as being enabled to support the reputation of
the Registership with the Revenue of this Deanery, better than any of the Canons
though with addition of the Pension appointed thereto. But at a Chapter held at
Whitehall the 22. of April, an. 11. Car. 1. it pleased the then sovereign to
declare Lib. R. p. 107.
how suitable and convenient it seemed to him, that the Office of the Dean and
Register should meet in one and the same person, as for some time past it had
been enjoyed, and therefore commanded this his judgment and purpose to be
entered among the Annals of the Order, that so it might pass to future times,
from Example into Rule.

If we look into the Constitutions of this Office, we shall find that a Cap. 3.
Secular person is made capable of this Employment no less than an
Eccle^^^stick, howbeit to be a Cap. 3.
man of singular integrity, eminent quality, a Knight, and w^ll ^^proved of for
Experience and Learning. But if an Ecclesiastic, then is it appointe^ that he
be I^id.
Learned, a professor either of Divinity or Law, that it either Canon or Civil
Law, in which respect he is supposed to have dignity in some Cathedral Church,
or else promoted by the Sovereign to a Canonship at Windesor. Nevertheless,
whether he be a Layman or Ecclesiastic, there is here put upon him
Qualifications suitable to what the Statutes of Institution do Ordain, to wit,
Art. 24. vide cuam H. 5. S^at. A^t. ^6.
That he be a very knowing person, able to perform the office, and Ord. Stat.
in ib. N. Art. 33.
most fit both for Learning and Virtue.

The particulars of the ancient Oath, Oath
taken by the Register, are set down in the Statutes of Institution, the
substance being A^t. 2^. H. 5. Stat. Art. 3^.
To enter upon the Registry with all fidelity, the Scrutenies, Elections,
Penalties, R^conciliations, and all other Acts relating to the Order. To which
in one of the Exemplars this general Clause is added, Ord Stat. in Lib. N. Art.
33.
That he shall faithfully discharge his Duty in all things. But in King Henry
the Eighth's Reign, the Lib. N p. 313.
same Oath was enjoined him, as the Prelate and Chancellor took.

At this Officer's admittance, he takes the Oath, kneeling at the Sovereign's
feet, while the Prelate heretofore prono^nced the words, for so did he when
Lib. C. p. 7.
Owen Oglethorp took it an. 1. Mar. so likewise upon Ibid p. 23.
John Boxolls admitt^^ce an. 5. and 6. Phil. and Mar. But being absent an. 3.
Eliz when George Carew was sworn, the Oath was administered by the Ib. p. 32.
vide etiam p. 194.
Chancellor. An. 4. Car. 1. the Prelate, Chancellor, and Register took their
Oaths at one time, and then the Ceremony was ordered in this manner, Lib. R. p.
39.
First Doctor Matthew Wren Register took it kneeling between the Sovereign's
knees, the Black Rod holding the Evangelists, whereon he laid his hand, and
Garter read the words out of the Black Book: this done the Register read the
words of the Prelate's Oath when he was sworn, and in the last place did the
like to the Chancellor. Thus also did Garter read the words to Doctor
Christopher Wren, admitted Register, Ibid. p. 107*
an. 11. Car. 1. as also Lib Carolin. p. 22.
an. 12. Car. 2. to Doctor Brune Ryves.

What Habit was assigned this Office at the Institution of the Order we do not
find; M^ntle.
but it afterward appears by the Precedent for the Livery of the Garter, that
his allowance was the same with the Chancellors, that being 5 yards of Woollen
Cloth, and three Timber of Miniver gross, and as much as those
Knights-Companions had, who were under the Degree of an Earl.

The Habit wherein he is represented in a Lib. N. p. 196.
Proceeding of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, appears to be Ecclesiastic, viz.
a Black Gown, a Surplice over that, reaching to his Ancles, and thereon a
Mantlet of Furs; but the Cap. 3.
Constitutions of his Office appoint him not any, wherein there seems some
defect, seeing the Habits thereby assigned both to Garter and Black Rod refer
to the Registers, to be the same with his. Notwithstanding from the Plate of
the Officers ancient Habits, exhibited above, it may be plainly seen to be a
Mantle, somewhat of a Russet Color, faced with a pane of Blue, whereon is
embroidered a Flower de Lis, crowned Gold, then another pane of Red, thereon a
Lion crowned Gold, and so are they alternately placed to the bottom. To this
Mantle belong Cordans of Silk, Blue and Yellow.

Since that time, not only the Register's, but also Garter's, and Black-Rod's
Robes have received some alterations; for by a Decree in Chapter held at St.
James's House, the first of June an. 4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. these Officers were
assigned Mantles of Crimson Satin, lined with Taffety, and a Scutcheon of St.
George's Arms embroidered on the left shoulder, but not encompassed with a
Garter, having like Buttons and Tassels, as were appointed to the Prelate and
Chancellor. The Proportion of Satin assigned to each Mantle was Ex Lib. pr^f.
particular. War. in mag. Gardrob. p 131
14. yards, and as many yards of White Taffety.

And though the Register's Mantle was an. 27. Eliz. made of the preceding
materials and had like trimming, yet did it differ in proportions, here being
allowed Lib. particular. War. temp. Eliz. R. p. 201.
18 yards of Crimson Satin, and but 12 of Taffety. From hence these Mantles
continued unalterable in every thing until after the present Sovereign's return
into England, when (20. Feb. an. 13. Car. 2.) there issued a Appendix Numb. X.
Warrant to the Master of the Great Wardrobe, to prepare for this Officer, as
also for Garter, and Black Rod, for their Liveries Mantles of Scarlet Satin,
each containing 18 yards, and 10 yards of White Taffety for lining, but
agreeable in all other things with the former: yet why the Color became
altered, the Warrant does not express.

Though this Officer has not any Badge assigned, Badge.
for daily wearing, yet in the Plate at the beginning of this Chapter, he seems
(at the public Solemnities of the Order) to have heretofore carried a Scrowle
in his hand, and by the Proceeding in Queen Elizabeth's Reign ( Cap. 21. Sec^.
3.
hereafter inserted) a Book, both proper Symbols of his Office.

In Doctor Christopher Wren's Registership, the Sovereign gave him command to
cover the Red Book of the Order with Crimson Velvet, and assigned for the
Device two Pens in Saltire within the Garter, above which these two Letters C.
R. crowned; all being wrought in rich embroidery (so also the Border) with
Venice Gold and Silver, Purls and Plates of Gold and Silver, and various
Colors of Naples Silk by Edmund Harison the then Sovereign's Embroiderrer,
after the manner here expressed, cost Vide Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
12 l. 17 s. 6 d. This Book he was commanded to bear before his Breast, on all
solemn occasions, when he wore his Mantle; and thereupon, for his better ease
and convenience, he made a Belt and Ouch to hang it at.



So great a regard had the Sovereigns of this Order, Privileges.
not only to this Officer, but likewise to Garter and Black-Rod, that they took
them into a particular protection, and by the Constitutions of their Offices,
Granted, Cap. ^.
That they, their Goods and Servants should securely remain under the perpetual
protection and safeguard of the Sovereign. And if any injury or violence should
I chance to be offered them, either by subjects or Forreiners, whenever they
should exhibit their complaints to the Sovereign, either Himself, with the
Knights-Companions, should afford them Justice, or cause it to be administered
according to right and equity; but if the adverse party should refuse to submit
his cause to the Sovereign, then the Sovereign and Knights-Companions should
show themselves so far inclinable toward these Officers, as to be ready to
allow them all due favor, countenance, and protection, as much as should be
consistent with justice and equity.

Upon the strength and security of this ancient Privilege, and to avoid the
charge and tediousness of a Suit at Law, Doctor Christopher Wren, Register,
petitioned the Sovereign in Chapter held at Whitehall the Lib. R. p. 12^.
19 of April an. 13. Car. 1. against one Thornhill, who under pretense of
digging for Saltpeter, had so undermined his Pigeon-house, built on the
Rectory of Knoil-magna in Wiltshire, that it fell down: Upon reading of the
Petition it was resolved by the Sovereign and Knight-Companions, Rows Iournal.
page 15.
That they would consider the extent and purport of ^^e Grant in the
Constitutions, and until it were farther declared, the Rows Iournal. page 15.
Chancellor of the Order should have power upon Information from any of the
said Officers, of any rigor upon controversy begun in any other Court, to
write Letters under the Signet of the Order, That all vexation against them
should be superseded, until information of the Cause were given to, and
determination therein resumed by the Sovereign, or leave of him obtained to
proceed.

After this it seems Thornhill was summoned before the Lords-Commissioners of
the Navy, and his Ibid.
negative Answer given them, represented to the Sovereign in another Chapter,
held the 4. of October ensuing, whereupon it was Ordered, Ibid.
That the Chancellor should write a Letter to the same Lords-Commissioners, and
another to the Earls of Pembroke, Arundel, and Dorset, three of the
Knights-Companions of the Order, to be enjoined to them, that they, or any
three of them should convent the said Thornhill before them, and write their
Letter to any Gentlemen or others near dwelling unto Knoil-magna, to view and
testify the truth, to hear any further proof on the behalf of either party,
and to give sentence according to Justice, that so a tedious suit in Law might
be prevented, and the dignity of this most Noble Order protected. These
Commands the Chancellor performed the Ibid. p. 30.
10. of November following, and Certificates being returned from the Country,
the Knights-Companions (in a Chapter held the Palmers Iournal pro anno 163^. p.
21.
23. of May an. 14. Car. 1) were moved to peruse them, which they promised to
do; but Palmers Iournal pro anno 163^. p. 21.
before they could meet, Thornhill, being Indicted conveying Saltpeter to
Dunkirk, fled: and so the prosecution of this business fell.

Upon the same ground was it, that the Register obtained from the late
Sovereign his gracious protection for Himself, Servants, and Estate, in the
late War, in the form following.

Charles R.

WHereas by the ancient constitutions and Laws of our most Noble Order of the
Garter, Palmer^ large Iournal. p. 68.
the Register of our said Order is to have his person and estate secured from
violence and injury, to the end he or his Ministers may securely live under our
perpetual protection and safeguard, and as often as he shall be molested for
himself, or for any thing that belongs unto him, he is to receive our
protection, and the assistance of the Companions of our said Order according to
equity and right.

These are therefore to will and command all men of what condition soever they
be, not to trouble or molest Doctor Christopher Wren Dean of Windesor, and
Register of our most Noble Order of the Garter; or any of his Ministers
whomsoever, or any thing that belongs to him whatsoever, but to suffer his
Person, servants, and Estate to be in quiet, security, and peace, without any
injury or violence to be offered by any unto him or his, as they and every of
them will answer the contrary at their peril. Given at our Court at Oxford,
under the Signet of our Order, the 12. day of December in the 19. year of our
Reign.


This Officer by the Constitutions of his Office, Pension.
has a Pension of Cap. 3.
50 l. per annum allowed him; or proportionable in Fees, Offices, or other
Profits. And an. 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. the like Pension was granted to Lib.
C. p. 18.
Owen Oglethorp, Dean of Windesor, out of the Exchequer, until some
Ecclesiastical Preferment of like value should be conferred on him by the
Sovereign. The same was confirmed to Ibid. p. 192.
Doctor Maxey, by Decree in Chapter 23. April an. Iac. Reg. 16. and afterward
to Lib. R. p. 4.
Doctor Beaumont by Letters Patent under the Great Seal of England in the 20.
of the said King: for which there is a Gratiae itaque amplissimae and perennes
pro maximo isto favore Regiae celsicudini sint semper debitae and exolutae.
Ibid.
most grateful acknowledgment entered among the Annals.

But there needed to assignment of Lodgings at Windesor to this Officer, as
there was to the rest, considering both the Canons and Dean were provided of
Houses belonging to their Ecclesiastical Dignities within the College, at the
Institution of the Order.

SECT. IV. Garter' s Institution, Oath, Mantle, Ensign, Badge, Privileges, and
Pension.
His Institution.
KIng Henry the Fifth Sovereign of this most Noble Order, Appendix Numb. V.
seriously contemplating its honor upon good and mature deliberation, and with
advice and consent of all the Knights-Companions, Appendix Numb. V.
Ordained and Instituted this Officer, and for the Dignity of the Order, was
pleased he should be the Appendix Numb. V.
Principal Officer within the Office of Arms, and chief of all the Servants of
Arms.

The services enjoined him relating to the Order, were in time preceding
performed by Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Windesor Herald at Arms, an Officer created with that Title, by King Edward
the Third, much about the time of his Instituting the Order; and an annual
Pension of Pat. 41. E. 3. pars 1. m. 13.
20 Marks granted him out of the Exchequer, by Letters Patent for life, which
received confirmation from King Pat. 3. R. 2. p. 1. m. 10.
Richard the Second.

But as to the nature of his employment, comprehended under this later part of
his Title, and thus annexed to the Office of Garter, we have here no direct
occasion to discourse off; nothing therein properly relating to the service he
is to performed within this Order. Nevertheless, where any are desirous to be
informed of it, some part of his Privileges, Employments, and Duty, are to be
found in the Cap. 4.
Constitutions of his Office, others in the In Archiv. Offic. Arm.
Constitutions made by the Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, an. 10.
Eliz. and lastly by the In Archiv. Offic. Arm.
Lords Comissioners constituted for the Office of Earl Marshal, dated the 22.
of November an. 20. Car. 2.

Sir William Brugges was the person first created Garter, and called in the
Institution of his Office Iartier Roy d' Arms des Anglois, but else where his
Title is found to run thus, Pat. 7. H. 6. m. 8.
Willelmus Brugges alias dictus Gartier Rex Armorum. This Sir William became a
great Benefactor to St. George's Church at Stamford, and in the Windows of the
Chancel caused to be represented King Edward the Third, with his 25 first
Knights-Companions kneeling, habited in their Mantles, and Surcoats of Arms:
which upon my journey thither, an. 1664. I found so broken and defaced, that no
tolerable Draught of them could be taken, fit to exhibit to the Readers
satisfaction.

John Smert, the immediate Successor to Sir Will. Brugges, had this Office
given him by Letters Patent under this Title Pat. 28. H. 6. m. 25.
Johannes Smert Rex Armorum de Garteria, and John Wrythe was styled Pat. 18. E.
4. p. 2. m. 28.
Principalis Heraldus and Officiarius in^liti Ordinis Garterii Armorumque Rex
Anglicorum. But Pat. 4. E. 6. p. 2.
Sir Gilbert Dethick, leaving out Heraldus, joined Principalis with Rex, and so
it has continued since Principalis Rex Armorum Anglicorum, Principal King of
English Arms.

In the Constitutions of his Office, he is called Cap. 4.
Garterus Rex Armorum Angliae, whom the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
thereby Ordained, to be a Gentleman of Blood and Arms, of untainted reputation,
and born within the Kingdom of England. Besides, as King Henry the Fifth did
before, so does King Henry the Eighth here declare, Ibid.
That he should be chief of all the Officers of Arms, attending upon the Crown
of England.

The substance of his Oath administered by the Register at his admission, Oath.
whilst he humbly kneeleth at the Sovereign's feet, in the Chapter House, is 1.
Appendix Number. VII.
To yield obedience to the Sovereign and Knights-Companions. 2. To keep
silence, and not disclose the secrets of the Order. 3. To make signification of
the death of each Knight-Companion. 4. To execute all things faithfully,
committed to his care. 5. To enquire diligently after all the Noble Acts of the
Knights-Companions, and certify them to the Register. 6. To be faithful in the
exercise of his Office.


And we find it observed, that an MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl.
Oath, consisting of these particulars, was administered to Garter, at a Chapter
held at Greenwich, an. 28. H. 8. which is to be understood of Sir Christopher
Barker, admitted Garter that very year.

We find no allowance given to this Officer for his Habit in the Precedent of
the Garter for Liveries, Mantle.
nor among the Books in the Sovereign's Great Wardrobe, whence it may be
presumed, he had no particular Habit assigned him at first, but was
distinguished from the rest of the Officers of the Order, by his Coat only,
embroidered with the Sovereign's Arms, like as the Provincial Kings then wore.

But after the Constitutions of the Officers were established, there was
appointed him a Cap. 4.
Habit, in all things like to the Registers (saving that the Ground whereon the
Lions and Flowers de Lis were embroidered, was wholly Red) and this to be worn
only at the Public Solemnities of the Order; the fashion and embroidery of
which appears in the Plate exhibited at the beginning of this Chapter. Queen
Mary caused it to be made of Lib. C. p. 24.
Crimson Satin, and so it continued till shortly after the present Sovereign's
return, when the Color was altered to Scarlet.

This Officer is appointed to bear a Constitut. ad Officiales Ordin attinentes,
Cap. 4.
White Rod or Scepter at every Feast of St. George the Sovereign being present,
Ensign
gilded at both ends, and at the top a Scutcheon of the Arms of the Order,
impaled with the Sovereign's Arms. In the forementioned Plate, the Figure of
this Scepter has these Arms crowned, but no directions for it given in the
Constitutions, nor for the Crown on his head, wherewith he is there
represented, which at these Solemnities of the Order, neither is, nor has been
used that we can discover.

There was assigned him by Queen Elizabeth a Lib. C. p. 53.
Badge of Gold, Badge.
to be worn daily by him and his Successors, before the Breast, in a Gold Chain
or Ribband, and ^hereon enamelled the Sovereign's Arms, crowned with an
Imperial Crown, and both surrounded with the Princely Garter; but Sir Edward
Walker when made Garter, obtained the Sovereign's License to impale therein St.
George's Arms, with those of the Sovereign's of the Order, of which Badge, the
foreside and backside are both alike.

There is a House appointed for his habitation within Windesor Castle,
Privileges.
and is the middle West Tower in the lower Ward, which thereupon has gained
the name of Garter's Tower. It was by a Decree in Chapter Lib. R. p. 55.
annexed for ever to the Office of Garter, and restored to Sir William Segar's
possession the 2. of May 1630. By the Constitutions of his Office he is to be
allowed Cap. 4.
Baron Service in the Sovereign's Court, and his Table served next after the
Dean of the Chapel, with such Cap. 4.
Liveries as of old were accustomed.

It appears that King Henry the Fifth, Pension.
after his instituting this Office, died, Appendix Number. V.
before he had settled any Pension upon Sir William Brugges, for supportation of
his little Estate, which the Knights-Companions taking into consideration, and
desiring that for the honor of the Order he should receive a reasonable
subsistence among themselves, by which he might more honorably comport himself
to the service of the Order, till the Infant King should come to age, and be
more largely provided for: Appendix Number. V.
They being present in Chapter, with the consent of the Prelate, did assign and
ordain the said Sir William to receive of each of them annually at the Feast of
St. George the Pensions following, viz.

Of the Appendix Number. V.
Bishop of Winchester Prelate 5 Marks. Of every Duke 5 Marks. Of every Earl 6
Nobles. Of every Baron or Baneret 4 Nobles. Of every Knight Bachelor 2 Nobles.

The first payment was agreed on to be made in hand, and so to continue yearly
without failings; with request to the absent Knights, that for the honor of the
Order, and causes in the Instrument express, they would consent to and approve
of their Ordinance and Agreement, which passed under the Seal of the Order, and
bears date in the Chapter House at Windesor in the Feast of St. George, an.
1422. but there is a mistake in the date, for at that time King Henry the Fifth
was alive, and died not till the 31. of August following St. George's day in
that year.

Afterward King Henry the Sixth, in consideration of the good services
performed by Sir William Brugges to his Father and Himself, with consent of his
Council Pat. 7. H. 6. m. 8.
granted him by Letters Patent an annual Pension of 20 l. out of the Fee Farm
of the City of Winchester during pleasure, which Pension upon surrender of this
Patent, He Pat. 24. H. 6. p. 1. m. 11.
granted a new to him and Agnes his Wife for their lives, and the longer liver
of them. And when this Office (upon Sir William Brugges death) was given to
John Smert Guyenne Herald (3. April an. 28. H. 6.) he had the Pat. 28. H. 6. p.
2. m. 25.
yearly Pension of 20 l. granted him therewith for life, out of the Exchequer.
But his Successor John Wrythe Norroy, obtained an increase of Pension to Pat.
18. E. 4. p. 2. m. 28.
40 l. per annum made payable out of the small Customs of the City of London.
This annual sum was after confirmed to Garter by the Cap. 4.
Constitutions of his Office and an Cap. 4.
augmentation from the then Knights-Companions also made to the Pensions
granted by their Predecessors upon the death of King Henry the Fifth, viz.

Of A Duke 4 Pounds. Of A Marquess 5 Marks. Of An Earl 4 Marks. Of A Baron 6
Nobles. Of A Knight-Batchellor 4 Nobles.

In succeeding times the Sovereign thought fit to increase his Pension to 50 l.
per ann. (now paid out of the Revenue settled upon the Order) and the
Knights-Companions yet to augment their Annuities, which they did by the
following Decree.

AT a Chapter holden at Windesor, Ex ipso Autogr.
the Feast of St. George being there solemnized the xiii, xiv. and xv. days of
September, Anno Domini 1617. It was Ordained and Decreed by the mutual consent
of the Knights and Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter then
present (the Sovereign thereto assenting) That their officer Sir William Segar
Garter Knight, King of Arms of that Order, should then, and from thenceforth
have renewed and paid unto him certain Annual Fees and Pensions, anciently due
to his Place and Predecessors, with an increase of ten pounds per annum, which
his Majesty forth of his Royal Bounty has given unto his said Servant for his
better maintenance and support; As also of Prince Charles Prince of Wales the
sum of eight pounds, and of every Duke of the blood six pounds; all other
Estates, viz. a Duke not of the Blood, four pounds, a Marquess five Marks, an
Earl four Marks, a Viscount seven Nobles, a Baron forty shillings, and a Knight
Bachelor that shall be of the Order, twenty six shillings and eight pence. All
which said sums of money, according to the several degrees of their Estates,
are to be paid unto the said Garter or his Assigns yearly at St. George's
Feast, or immediately after, as well by the Knights then present, as by those
that shall be absent, or hereafter are to succeed in the said Order. And after
the decease of the said Garter to his Successors for ever.

Prince Charles, Prince of Wales viii l. The Earl of Nottingham liii s. iv. d.
The Earl of Northumberland lviii s. iv. d. The Earl of Worcester liii s. iv. d.
The Lord Sheffeild xl s. The Earl of Suffolk liii s. iv d. The Earl of Sussex
liii s. iv d. The Earl of Derby liii s. iv d. The Earl of Exceter liii. s. iv
d. The Duke of Lenox iv l. The Earl of Southampton liii s. iv d. The Earl of
Mar liii s. iv d. The Earl of Penbroke liii s. iv d. The Earl of Montgomery
liii s. iv d. The Earl of Arundel liii s. iv d. The Earl of Somerset liii s. iv
d. The Earl of Kelly liii s. iv d. The Viscount Wallingford xlvi s. viii d. The
Earl of Rutland liii s. iv d. The Marquess of Buckingham iii l. vi s. viii d.
The Earl of Leicester liii s. iv. d.
Charles P.
Nottingham. E. Worcester. T. Suffolk. Will. Derby. Lenox. Penbroke. T.
Arundell. Fenton. J. Rutland. Northumberland. E. Sheffeild. To. Sussex.
Exceter. H. Southampton. Montgomery. R. Somerset. W. Walingford. G. Buckingham.
Last of all at Ex Colle^^. E. W. G.
St. Georges Feast held at Windesor the 22.23. and 24. of April, an. 15. Car.
2. Sir Edward Walker now Garter represented to the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions by Petition, That the annual Pensions of the Installed
Knights then in arrear for one year amounted to 94 l. 13 s. 04 d. according to
the proportions last above decreed, whereof the Sovereign's part (he being to
pay for all Stranger-Knights) was at that time 32 l. 13 s. 4 d. And therefore
humbly prayed, that his Majesty would please to grant him and his Successors,
to receive in lieu, not only of the said Pensions from Himself and
Knights-Companions both Strangers and Subjects, but for quitting his right and
just pretense to his annual Pension of 50 l. to his allowances for preparing
Scutcheons, and removal of Achievements, 100 l. per annum, out of the yearly
Revenue settled and assigned to the use of the Order.

This Petition the Sovereign was pleased to refer to a Ibid.
Committee of the Knights-Companions, namely the Duke of Albemarle, the Earls
of Lindsey, Manchester, Sandwich, and Strafford, who being attended by Garter,
and Ibid.
consideration had upon the Proposals contained in the Petition, they humbly
offered their opinions to the Sovereign, to grant him the said 100 l. per
annum, in lieu of what he offered to quit; and thereby he should not only
gratify him, by preserving the interest of his Office in a more certain way
than it was, but be freed from those small payments for Strangers, and other
yearly Charges the Petitioner pretended unto, as also exempt the Knights
Subjects from the payment of their annual Pensions.

Shortly after, the Ibid.
Chancellor, Register, and Garter attended the Sovereign with the Report, which
he approving of, ordered the Chancellor to pay unto Garter and his Successors
the said annual sum of 100 l. which he accordingly performed, and for testimony
thereof signed the ensuing Declaration.

Ex Collect. praed.
I Henry de Vic Knight Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter do
certify and declare, That upon certain Proposals made by Sir Edward Walker
Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms, to the Lords Commissioners for the
Affairs of the said Order, It was certified by a Writing under their said
Lordships hands, dated the 26. May 1663. That in lieu of all Fees and Salaries
in the said Proposals contained, the said Sir Edward and his Successors Garters
and Principal Kings of Arms shall be paid by me and my Successors, in the said
Office of Chancellor of the Garter, the sum of one hundred pounds by ^he year,
out of the Revenue of the Order; with which Writing having attended the
Sovereign, his Majesty was pleased to conform unto it, and to direct in his
Commission unto me, under the Seal of the Order, to pay and issue the said one
hundred pounds accordingly to the said Sir Edward Walker Garter. In witness
whereof I have set my Hand and Seal to this present Certificate, this 5. August
1664.

De Vic. Canc.

Touching the Duty of this Officer in general, it is to Constitut* ad
Officiales Ordin. attinentes Cap. 4.
perform or cause to be done, what business soever, relating to this Order, the
Sovereign, or Prelate, or Chancellor shall enjoin him to do: but his duty in
particular is dispersedly set down in the following Discourse, under such heads
to which it properly relates.

SECT. V. Institution of the Black Rod's Office, his Oath, Habit, Ensign,
Badge, Privileges, and Pension.
His Institution.
THis Officer was instituted by the Founder of this most Noble Order, but
whether so soon as the Institution of the Order does not yet appear. Howbeit
within a few years after, viz. the 13. of April in the 35. year of his Reign,
he granted to Videsis Pat. 50. E. 2. p. 1. m. 25. and p. 4. m. 5.
William Whitehorse Esquire for life, Officium Hostiarii Capellae Regis infra
Castrum de Windesore, with a Fee of twelve pence a day out of his Exchequer.

An. 3. H. 4. This Office is called Pat. 3. H. 4. p. 4 m. 21.
Officium Virgarii comitiv^ de la Garter infra Castrum Regis de Windesore: and
under that title was then granted to Thomas Sye with the Fees and Profits
thereunto belonging. In the Patent granted to his Successor John Athilbrigg,
an. 1. H. 5. we observe it called Pat. 1. H. 5. p. 2. m. 18.
Officium Virgarii sive Ostiarii, etc. Afterward it has this Title, Term
Mich. an. 1. E. 4. rot. 46.
Officium Virgae-baiuli coram Rege ad Festum Sancti Georgii infra Castrum Regis
de Windesore. And ever since it has past in Patents by the name of
Virgae-baiulus, Virgarius, or Nigri-virgifer. But in the Constitutions of his
Office he has given to him the title of Cap. 5.
Hostiarius; and these qualifications put upon him, Cap. 5.
That he be a Gentleman of Blood and Arms, born within the Sovereign's
Dominions; and if he be not a Knight at his entrance upon the Office, he ought
then to be Knighted.

As Garter was declared the Principal Officer of Arms, so was the Black Rod
(for the honor of the Order) appointed the Chief Usher in the Kingdom: And as
he is so, and frequently called Gentleman Usher of the Black Rod; so we shall
wave (as we did in the account of Garter's Office) all things appertaining to
his Employments, other than what directly relate to this most Noble Order.

In a Chapter held at Whitehall the 13. of February, an. 6. Car. 1. it was
Decreed, Lib. R. p. 71*
That the Office of Black Rod should from thenceforth successively, as soon as
the same should become void (James Maxwell Esquire then enjoying the Office) be
annexed to some one of the Gentlemen Ushers daily-waiters, whom the Sovereign
should appoint. This was obtained upon the Petition of the Gentlemen Vshers
daily-waiters, seconded by the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl Marshal, and diverse
others of the Knights-Companions, as appears from another Petition of theirs
presented to the Sovereign in Chapter held at Oxford, the Palmer's large
Iournal. p. 63.
17. of Ian. an. 20. Car. 1.

But it seems some years after this Decree past, viz. an. 1642. the Lord
Lenerick Secretary for Scotland, had (on Mr. Maxwell's behalf) obtained the
Sovereign's hand to a Warrant for passing Ibid.
Letters Patent, under the Great Seal of England, for two lives (his own, and
Mr. Alexander Thayne's) and the longest liver of them, whereby the Sovereign's
intention (signified in the foresaid Decree) to the Gentlemen-ushers was
frustrate; of which they complaining in this last mentioned Chapter, the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions then present (in regard this later Grant was
not only repugnant to the preceding Decree, and the Great Seal surreptitiously
gained, but ought to have passed the Seals of the Order, to be made
authentical, according to a Decree made, an. 20. Car. 1.) Ordered, Ibid.
That Peter Newton Esquire, should be presently sworn into this Office: Which
was then done in the presence of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions.

Nevertheless shortly after the present Sovereign's happy return, viz. Lib.
Caroli^. p. 23.
14. Ian. 1660. (the said Peter Newton being deceased) the Gentlemen-Vsher^
daily-waiters petitioned the Sovereign in Chapter for the void place, which
being read, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions Ordered, That the Petition
should be showed to Mr. Thaine, and he to be heard in the next Chapter, what
cause he could allege, why it should not be granted.

To this, Mr. Thaine drew up his Answer; which being taken into consideration
by the Sovereign, in a Chapter held at Whitehall, the 20. of February an. 13.
Car. 2. as also the Decree in Chapter before specified, which fixed the Office
to one of the Gentlemen-ushers daily-waiters, The Sovereign and
Knights-Companions adjudged and declared the said Thaine's Answer not
satisfactory, as to the right by him pretended to the said Office, and
thereupon confirmed the foresaid Decree: and further Ordered, Ibid.
That John Ayton Esquire one of the Petitioners should be forthwith sworn
Gentleman-usher of the Black Rod, to execute the place upon all occasions
hereafter, which was done by the Register of the Order in the presence of the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions, the Chapter sitting.

The Oath, Oath
as we find it given to this Officer in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
was, Appendix Numb. VIII.
Truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the points of the Statutes of the
Order, as to him belonged and appertained.

He has the like Habit, Habit.
with the Register and Garter, before described.

But his Ensign and Badge are somewhat different from Garter's; Ensign.
for first it was Ordained, Pat. 50. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25. vide Constitut. ad
Offic. Ordin. attinentes. cap. 5.
That he or his Deputy should carry a Black Rod (whence he has his ordinary
Title) before the Sovereign or his Deputy at the Feast of St. George within the
Castle of Windesor, and at other Solemnities and Chapters of the Order. On the
top of which there ought to be set a Lion of England. This Rod serves instead
of a Mace, and has the same authority to apprehend such persons as shall be
found Delinquents, and have offended against the Statutes and Ordinances of
this most Noble Order. And Ibid.
if at the command of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions he should apprehend
any one of the Order as guilty of some Crime, for which he is to be expelled
from the Order, it is to be done by touching them with this Black Rod, in
consideration whereof, his Fee is 5 l.

There is also assigned him a Gold Badge, Badge*
to be openly worn in a Gold Chain or Ribband before his Breast, composed of
one of the Knots in the Collar of the Garter, which tie the Roses together, and
encompassed with the ennobled Garter, being alike on both sides; which honor is
conferred on him and his Successors by Lib. C. p. 52*
Decree in Chapter held the 24. of April an. 8. Eliz.

It Is as ancient as King Henry the Fifth's Reign, Privileges.
that we find a Pat. 1. H. 5. p. 3. m. 18.
House in Windesor Castle granted to this Officer by Letters Patent (together
with his Office) during life, and the like provision is made for him by the
Cap. ^.
Constitutions of his Office. It is situate on the South side of the Castle in
the middle Ward. The said Constitutions give him Ibid.
Baron-service at Court, and Livery thereto appertaining; and besides these,
the Ibid.
keeping of the said Castle, and the two Parks adjacent.

Lib. R. p. 54.
King Charles the First, having taken into his hands the Little Park of
Windesor (by the resignation of Sir William Hewyd, who had it by Grant under
the Great Seal of England) and bestowed it upon the foresaid James Maxwell then
Usher of the Order. He also thought fit, with the advice and consent of the
Knights-Companions, at a Chapter held in the Withdrawing Chamber at Whitehall,
5. November 1629. to Order and Decree, That as the Custody of the said Little
Park was conferred on Mr. Maxwell in right of his Office (pursuant to the
institution) so the same should for ever after be annexed thereto, and not be
disposed of, but under the Great Seal of the Order, and that only to the Usher
of the Order for the time being.

Pension.
Lastly, this Officer had anciently a Pat. 50. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25.
Fee of 12 d. per diem allowed him, which we find continued down in the Letters
Patent whereby this Office was granted; beside which, the Constitutions of his
Office allow him an Cap. 5.
annual Pension of 30 l. heretofore paid him out of the Sovereign's Exchequer:
but by King Charles the First, assigned him out of the 1200 l. per annum,
settled upon the Order, touching which we shall Discourse in the next Section.

SECT. VI The payment of the Officers Pensions upon the new Establishment.
KIng James, sometimes Sovereign of this most Noble Order, well considering its
Institution, Nature, and Constitution; and that it was in the nature of a
distin^t Sovereignty, governed by Laws, Statutes, and Assemblies of its own;
and Himself as Sovereign, in matters and things immediately relating thereto,
had sole and absolute power of altering, changing, adding, or explaining. And
finding that the annual Pensions paid to the Officers of the Order (as those to
the Alms-Knights) and some other its Expenses, had been anciently made payable
out of his Receipt of the Exchequer, either upon and by virtue of the Great
Seals of England, or otherwise by Privy Seals; and conceiving it incongruous,
that the Officers should longer receive or challenge their Pensions by virtue
of any other Seal than that of the Order; and in some kind derogatory to the
Dignity of the Order it self, to permit other Seals longer to work within or
upon the same. He thereupon, with twelve Knights-Companions, in a Chapter held
at Whitehall the 2^. of May in the 20. year of his Reign, Ordered, Ex ipso
Aut^gr. vide etiam Lib. R. p. 12.
That all things concerning the Order should thereafter be passed under the
Seal of the Order only, and in particul^r, That the Ex ipso Aut^gr. vide etiam
Lib. R. p. 12.
Grants of Poor-Knights Places, after their being signed by the Sovereign,
should be passed under the Seal of the Order only, and none other.

And whereas at the Feast of St. George the following year, the Ex ipso Autogr.
vide p^rro. Lib. R. p. 15.
Chancellor had received from the Dean of Windesor a Note in writing of the
Pensions given to the Poor-Knights, and by whom, and in what manner the same
had been given; it was also Ordered, Ex ipso Autogr. vide p^rro Lib. R. p. 15.
That he should take advice of the Sovereign's Attorney General, how by virtue
of the Seal of the Order, the said Pensions might be paid and received, His
Majesty's further pleasure being, Ex ipso Autogr. vide p^rro Lib. R. p. 15.
That all Grants and Payments concerning the Order, should afterward pass
under the Seal of the Order only, and by virtue threof.

As to the Alms-Knights Patents, this Decree took effect, but in the other
generals referring to the Order, how far it was pursued we know not; for in
some of them we find it not observed. But in a Chapter held at Windesor, on the
22. of April in the 10. year of the Reign of his late Majesty of ever blessed
memory, debate was had about setting a part from the profits of his Revenue, to
the peculiar use of the Order, the annual sum of Lib. ^. p. 94.
1000 l. to be assigned out of the Receipt of his Exchequer, and employed
particularly in discharge of Expenses toward the Feasts of the Order,
Legations to Foreign Princes, payment of the Officers Pensions, and all other
Titles, by which any thing, should at any time be disbursed for the necessity
or reputation of the said most Noble Order.

Afterward at a Chapter held the 18. of April an. 13. Car. 1. the Sovereign
Ibid. p. 121.
tatified his Royal Assignation, and increased his gracious bounty to the sum
of 1200 l. per annum, settling it (for the uses aforesaid) in a Perpetuity for
ever, and making it payable out of the Customs in the Port of London; but to be
received by the Chancellor of the Order for the time being, as Treasurer of
this Money Ibid. p. 134.
of which he should be obliged to render an ac^ount, to the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions yearly at St. George's Feast. And in pursuance of this
Ratification, was pleased to give his Rows Iournal p. 27.
Attorney General directions to draw up a Book for his Royal Signature, to
warrant its passing under the Great Seal of England. The further care of which
Affair being committed to Sir Thomas Row then Chancellor, he readily undertook
it, and on the Ibid. p. 36.
first of February following, at a meeting of the Knights-Commissioners
(empowered to consider of matters touching the honor of the Order) gave them an
account that the same was dispatch. The Letters Patent bearing Test at
Westminster the Appendix Numb. XI.
23. day of January preceding.

He then also presented their Lordships with a List of the ordinary Fees and
Charges of the Order, upon consideration of which, it was thought fit, Ibid.
That there should issue out a standing Commission to the Chancellor, under the
Great Seal of the Order, to warrant the yearly Payments, and he to be
discharged, according as the said Patent had provided.

Hereupon a Commission was drawn up, which past the said Great Seal the 3. of
May, an. 14. Car. 1. Appendix Number. XII.
whereby the Sovereign declared his will and pleasure, and empowered the
Chancellor to pay out of the said annual Revenue of 1200 l. all and every the
yearly and ordinary Fees, Pensions, Sallaries and other Payments usually paid
to any the Officers of the Order, Alms-Knights, or others, who do their yearly
duty and service, any way unto the Order appertaining, either by Charter,
Grant, or Assignation, under the Seal or Signet of the Order, or by any other
lawful way whatsoever, and in particular

l. s. d. To Himself as Chancellor. -- 100 0 0 per annum. To Register of the
Order. -- 50 0 0 per annum. To Garter Principal King of Arms. -- 50 0 0 per
annum. To Usher of the Black-Rod. -- 30 0 0 per annum. To Thirteen
Alms-Knights. -- 237 5 0 per annum. Total -- 467 5 0

Appendix Number. XII.
All which yearly Pensions are thereby appointed to be quarterly paid, that is
to say, at the four usual Feasts in the year. As also any other annual and
usual charge, to any other inferior Officer or Servant, for their service or
attendance. And all these upon account thereof to be made and given, and
Acquittances to be produced for the receipt, to be presented to the Sovereign,
or so many of the Knights-Companions as he should depute in Chapter, to take
liquid, and allow the disbursments under their hands in writing, for the
Chancellor's discharge.

By virtue of the foresaid Letters Patent Sir Thomas Row, and in his absence
beyond Sea, Sir James Palmer Deputy Chancellor, received out of the Sovereign's
Receipts of Subsidies, Customs, and Imposts, the 1200 l. per annum, out of
which they paid the annual Pensions above mentioned, under the notion of
certain and ordinary charges, as also such as came within the compass of
uncertain and extraordinary Expenses; some of which as we can collect from the
Penes praf. I^c. Palmer.
Accounts of the said Chancellor and Deputy Chancellor, (they falling within
the disbursments of their time) were such as these; Mantles, when the Sovereign
pleased to bestow them on the Knights-Companions. Plate for the Altar in St.
George's Chapel at Windesor. Embroidery of the Purse for holding the Seals.
Removal of Achievements and Plates against Installations. Scutcheons set up at
St. George's Feast. Privy Seals and Fees disburst for receiving the 1200 l. per
annum. Fees for Installation of Foreign Princes, and Stranger-Knights.
Parchment used in Dispensations and Prorogations. Blue Wax for the Seals of the
Order.


By all which may be guest, what other particulars ought to be accounted
Extraordinary Charges; toward the discharge whereof this annual sum was to be
employed as far as it would go, to ease the Expenses of the Great Wardrobe,
formerly charged with Provisions of the Order, both for Foreign Embassies, and
Expenses at home.

And when Sir Thomas Row was sent Ambassador to Ferdinand the Third, Emperor
of Germany, he paid over to the said Sir James Palmer, upon the Ex ipso
Autograph.
Sovereign's Warrant dated the 4. of May an. 14. Car. 1. the sum of 600 l. then
resting in his hands of the said annual Receipts; which he adding to the
growing Income, disbursed in ordinary and extraordinary Expenses.

In reference to the manner of the Chancellor's passing his Account, as is
directed by the said Commission we find it thus done by Sir James Palmer: he
humbly moved the Sovereign in a See his Iournal pro anno 1639. p. 57.
Chapter held the 10. of October an. 15. Car. 1. That it would please him and
the Knights-Companions to view the disbursments made for the Expenses of the
Order, which thereupon being examined by the Knights in the Sovereign's
presence the same were found agreeable to the directions of the Commission, and
the Payments justified by the Acquittance of every Officer, to whom any Fee was
due (no payment having been made, but the Sovereign's hand was first had to
authorize the same) All which being seen and allowed, the Account (wherein his
disbursments exceeded his Receipts 37 l. 13. s. 10 d.) was esteemed just, and
allowed by the subscription of the present Sovereign then Prince, the Earls of
Penbroke and Montgomery, Salisbury, Holland, Berkshire, Duke Hamilton, and the
Earl of Northumberland.

SECT. VII. The Execution of these Offices by Deputies.
THough all the Officers of the Order are strictly obliged personally to attend
the duties of their several Places; yet in case of sickness, absence out of the
Kingdom, or other lawful or emergent cause, the Sovereign has pleased to
dispense with their attendance, and appointed other to officiate in their
stead; who on such occasions wear the Robe of that Officer for whom they serve:
So also in case of Vacancy.

The absence of the Prelate from the Grand Feast celebrated at Windesor, an.
31. H. 6. is noted in the Black Book to have been upon just cause, and the Lib.
N. p. 109.
Bishop of Bangor was appointed to celebrate Divine Service in his stead; who
the next morning celebrated Mass pro defunctis. The following year his place in
these Religious Duties was supplied by the Ibid. p. 112.
Bishop of Salisbury: as also an. Page 118.
36. and Page 119.
37. H. 6. And at all times of the Prelates absence since, the Sovereign has
appointed which of the Bishops should officiate for him.

The Office of Chancellor has been executed by Deputy also; to this may first
be referred a passage in the Page 237.
Black Book, where Doctor Tailor has the Title of Vice Chancellor. Of later
times when Sir Thomas Row was employed upon the forementioned Embassy into
Germany, Sir James Palmer Knight (one of the Gentlemen-Ushers of the Privy
Chamber) was deputed by the Sovereign to the execution of the Chancellorship
during his absence, having the Lib. R. p. 138.
Purse with the Seals delivered unto him by the Sovereign the 4. of May 14.
Car. 1. He first entered upon this Employment at the Installation of the present
Sovereign, being sworn by the Register of the Order (the Sea his large Iournal
p. 15.
22. of the said Month) durante deputatione and beneplacito Regis: which Lib.
Carolin. p. 22.
Clause was likewise added in the Deputy Chancellors Oath an. 12. Car. 2.

After Sir Thomas Rowe's return into England, being sick, and not able to
officiate at the Feast of St. George held at Whitehall the first of March, an.
16. Car. 1. Palmer's large Iournal. p. 29.
Sir James Palmer was again deputed Chancellor, to supply his place in that
particular Ceremony: As also a third time, when the Feast was kept at Ib. p. 35.
York, the 18. of April an. 18. Car. 1. and thence-forward he continued
Deputy-Chancellor unto the death of Sir Thomas Row; of which the Sovereign
having notice given him at Oxford, in Ib. p. 46.
November an. 1644. was graciously pleased to reserve the gift of this Office,
till Sir James Palmer's return to Court out of Wales (where he was employed in
his Service) and then Ib. p. 47.
gave him permission to wear the Badge and Ribband about his neck, till a
Chapter of the Order should be called to complete his admittance: in token of
his due acknowledgment for so high a favor, he humbly upon his knees gave the
Sovereign thanks, and received the honor of kissing his hand.

In the vacancy of the Registership, an. 2. H. 8. Lib. N. p. 199.
Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Durham supplied it, and an. Lib. C. p. 73.
18. and MS. penes G. O. Y p. 113.
19. Eliz. Doctor Day Dean of Windesor executed the Office, and attended at the
Feasts of St. George as Deputy Register, Doctor George Carew then Register
having license by his Patent to exercise it by himself or Pat. 3. Eliz. par. 10.
Deputy, with allowance of the Queen or Sovereign of the Order, in case of
sickness or other impediment. ^ After his death Dean Lib. C. p. 94. Quatnvis
Scribae five Actuarii nobilissimi Ordinis Officium supplevit, non tamen Jurat^s
nec admissus est. Tho. Fiith. in suo Custodum Catalog.
Day was commanded still to execute the Office during its vacancy (being 14
years) which he did, until advanced to the Bishopric of Winchester, an. 38.
Eliz. upon which Doctor Lib. C. p. 130.
Robert Bennet (who succeeded him in his Deanery) was the same year admitted
Register. Afterward toward the later end of Doctor Beaumont's time (he being
much broken with age and sickness) Doctor Lib. R. p. 35.
John King the junior Canon supplied the place.

The Office of Garter has likewise been supplied by Deputy, for in those
Embassies with the Ensigns or whole Habit of the Order to Foreign Princes,
where special occasions detained Garter at home, some of the Kings or Heralds
of Arms have been sent upon those Employments, nevertheless upon Garter's
recommendation of them to the Sovereign, of which several instances shall be
hereafter inserted. So also in case of vacancy, for we find that Clarenceux
King of Arms executed this Office after Sir Gilbert Dethick's death, in Ex
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
January an. 27. Eliz. being then sent in the Embassy with the Earl of Derby,
to carry the Habit of the Order to the French King Henry the Third. As also in
reference to the MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 8.
preparations, made for his Installation, the 15. of April following, and
service performed thereat, and at the Ibid. f. 10.
Feast of St. George ensuing.

And lastly the Constitutions of the Office of Black Rod admit of a Cap. ^.
Deputy to bear the Rod before the Sovereign, which is to be understood where a
lawful occasion hinders his personal service. And Lib. R. p. ^1.
Sir Peter Young (chief Gentleman Usher) executed this Office at the Feast of
St. George, held at Windesor, an. 6. Car. 1. James Maxwell Esquire Black Rod being
then in France upon the Sovereign's service. He being also sent by the King
into Palmer's Iournal pro anno 163^. p. 18.
Scotland, Peter Newton Esquire was appointed to wait in his place, at the
Feast held at Windesor the 8.9. and 10. of October, anno 15. Car. 1.

CHAP. IX. THE Election of a Knight INTO THE Order.
SECT. I. Of Summons to the Election.
THE Statutes of Institution Ordained, Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 18.
That whenever any of the Knights-Companions happened to depart this life,
the Sovereign ( or his Deputy) after certain notice had thereof, should
forthwith by his Letters Summon all the Knights-Companions, then within the
Realm (who were able to come) to meet him within six weeks after such notice,
in what convenient place soever be pleased to assign, for the Electing a new
Companion into the Society. Thus did the Law of this most Noble Order, in case
of Death, and to avoid long Vacancies, at first provide, wherewith we observe
the practice of elder times did punctually concur: and among other Testimonies,
they are not the least which may be collected from the ancient Letters of
Summons issued out upon this occasion.

For as soon as Garter (in discharge of his Lib er N. p. 314.
Oath, and pursuance of the Ibid. p. 237.
duty of his place) had made Ibid. p. 237.
Certificate to the Sovereign of a Knight-Companion's decease, or otherwise to
the Register of the Order; care was taken thereupon to fill up the vacant
Stall, within the time limited by this Article of the Statutes, or shortly
after; in order whereunto Letters of Summons were sent to the
Knights-Companions to appear at the Election, which has induced us to exhibit
two of these ancient Letters in the Number. XIII. and XIV.
Appendix: The first contains several particulars no less pursuant to the
Statutes, than worthy observation; and especially these.

1. First, the day whereon the defunct Knights-Companion died is therein set
down, and is a note useful in Story.

2. Direction is given for celebrating Masses, according to the tenor of the
Statutes, of which more shall be spoken in its due place.

3. Intimation that a Stall is become void by the Knights decease.

4. The Law of the Order vouched, which appoints an Election of another Knight,
within six weeks after Certificate made of the death of the former, to avoid
(as much as might be) an interval in succession, by a speedy filling up the
number of Knight-Companions.

5. The Sovereign's power asserted, where he sees cause to prorogue the
Election.

6. An Injunction to attend personally at the Election, under a penalty expressed
in the Statutes, of which more hereafter.

7. The Day, Place, and Hour for appearance, is with certainty appointed and
set down, to the end the Knights-Companions might so accommodate themselves, as
to be present at the time prefixed.

8. The end of coming is mentioned, with full disposition and preparation, to
perform what the Statutes in this case required.

9. Lastly, direction is there given to the Knight summoned, that in case any
accident obstructed his Journey, or hindered him from coming to the Chapter, he
should certify the reason of his default, against the day and time of his
appearance; of the sufficiency whereof, the Sovereign was to be sole Judge. And
generally of these heads, and to this purpose were the Letters of Summons in
succeeding times framed.

The before mentioned branch of the Statutes of Institution we observe (from
its insertion into the H. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
following bodies of Statutes) to have been sufficiently confirmed, nor has it
since received alteration; howbeit some enlargement and explanation was given
thereunto, in the Lib. R. p. 14.
21. year of King James, at a Chapter held the last day of the Feast, viz. the
Lib. R. p. 14.
24. of April at Windesor; where in the first place (among other things then
also established) it was thus Decreed: Lib. R. p. 14.
That the Sovereign being advertised of the death of a Knight-Companion of the
Order, the Knights-Companions remaining at the Court should move him to declare
his pleasure, whether he would that Letters should be sent to all the
Knights-Companions within the Realm, to attend his person for the choice of a
new Knight, at a day by the said Sovereign appointed, according to the ancient
Statutes of the Order; or be pleased to defer the Election until the day and
Feast of St. George, at what time Elections have been most usually made,
wherein the Soveraign' s pleasure and direction was to be followed and
observed, and according as he resolved, in what place it should be, so it ought
(by Letters directed to the Knights-Companions within the Realm) to be made
known unto them.

This deferring or proroguing the Election was (to say truth) no new thing, nor
more than what had been anciently practiced (though not indulged by the
Statutes of Institution, or declared Law, before this 21. year of King James)
as appears from the forecited Letters of Summons, both which take notice of
the limitation of time given by the Statutes, after Certificate of death, viz.
six weeks; within the compass whereof, a new Election was to be made. And where
a Chapter for Election could not conveniently be held, within that limited
time, it was enough if the Sovereign declared (as he did in that Summons sent
after Sir Robert D'umfrevils death, and entered in the Black Book) Page 82.
That being then involved in other business, he could not well attend this
Affair, and therefore deferred the time for Election unto the Eve of St. George
next following. So that it is plain, the Decree an. 21. of King James, was but
declaratory of an old and practiced Custom.

But of later times this formal way of Summons by Letter to Knights-Companions
attending at the Court, has been left off (yet continued to such as are
remote) and notice given them by a verbal message only: For the Chancellor of
the Order having known the Sovereign's pleasure, as to the day and place,
usually acquaints Garter therewith, who thereupon goes immediately to the
Knights-Companions then at Court, and desires their attendance at the Chapter,
according to the Sovereign's appointment.

And here it is to be understood, that no Knights-Elect, ought to be summoned
to a Chapter of Election, or are capable of giving their Votes therein, until
they be completely installed, either in Person or by Proxy: Nor indeed did any
necessity fall out from the Foundation of the Order, that did require they
should, until the late rebellious times, when the Castle of Windesor being
Garrisoned by the Parliaments Forces, it was not possible for his Royal
Highness the Duke of York, and his Highness Prince Rupert, to take possession
of their Stalls, in such manner as the Law of the Order enjoined.

Therefore the then Sovereign (to whom the power of dispensing with any of the
Statutes is reserved) did on the 17. of Ian. an. 1644. (so inevitable necessity
requiring) Palmer's large Iournal. p. 66. and 69. vide Appendix Number. XV.
dispense with their Installation in the Chapel of St. George at Windesor, for
the present, and invested them with all the Privileges of the Order; among
which, the power of giving their Votes in Chapter was one: Provided, these
Princes should first take the Oath given at Installations, and afterward
perform the accustomed Ceremonies at Windesor, so soon as it should be thought
fit, after the Castle was delivered out of the power of the Rebels, and
returned into the possession of the Sovereign of this most Noble Order.

In compliance with this Proviso they both then took the Palmer's large
Iournal. p. 65. and 66.
Oath: And on the Eve of the first Feast of St. George, celebrated after the
present Sovereign's happy Restoration, the Duke was Installed by the Earls of
Northumberland and Berkshire: and on the Eve of the second Feast, being the 22.
of April, an. 15. Car. 2. the Prince likewise, received his Installation by the
hands of the Duke of Albemarle and Earl of Lindsey.

SECT. II. The Place of Assembly.
BUT at what time soever this Ceremoney of Election is appointed, the same
ought to be celebrated in Chapter (for so is the assembly of the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions called, wheresoever or whenever held on this occasion)
whether at the Solemnity of St. George's Feast, which has been the ordinary
and most usual time, or on other certain days, set apart for this affair, by
more special appointment of the Sovereign. And therefore when the Sovereign
thinks fitting (in the interval of Feasts) to Elect any Foreign Prince, or
other person, either Stranger or Subject, He many times does it in peculiar
Chapters, called to that end and purpose; and then he appoints his own both day
and place, having the prerogative to declare them at pleasure.

This we find has been practiced both heretofore and of late times; and by
those few of many Chapters, holden at sundry places, most convenient to the
Sovereign's present occasions (drawn out and here exhibited) will be
sufficiently manifest, whereunto we shall add the Names of those Persons of
eminence, who at such times and places have been Elected.

Place. Day and Year. Knights Elected. 1. Sign of the Lion in Brainford. 11.
July 24. H. 6. Albro de Vasques Dalmadea Earl of Averentia* 1. Sign of the Lion
in Brainford. 11. July 24. H. 6. Lord Beauchamp. 1. Sign of the Lion in
Brainford. 11. July 24. H. 6. Lord Hoo. 2. Sovereign's Bedchamber at
Westminster. 27. Nov. 25 H. 6. Sir Francis Surreyne. 3. London within the
Bishop's Palace. 8. Febr. 39. H. 6. Richard Earl of Warwick. 3. London within
the Bishop's Palace. 8. Febr. 39. H. 6. Lord Bonvile. 3. London within the
Bishop's Palace. 8. Febr. 39. H. 6. Sir Thomas Kyriell. 3. London within the
Bishop's Palace. 8. Febr. 39. H. 6. Sir John Wenlock. 4. Tower of London. 8.
Aug. 14. E. 4. Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin. 4. Tower of London. 8. Aug. 14. E.
4. Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland. 5. Starchamber. 15. May 15. E. 4. Edward
Prince of Wales. 15. May 15. E. 4. Richard Duke of York. 15. May 15. E. 4.
Thomas Gray Marquess Dorset. 6. Sovereign's Bedchamber in the Wardrobe London.
10. Febr. 19. E. 4. Ferdinand King of Spain. 6. Sovereign's Bedchamber in the
Wardrobe London. 10. Febr. 19. E. 4. Hercules Duke of Ferrara. 7. Greenwich.
14. July 15. H. 8. Lord Ferrers. 8. Caelais. 27. Oct. 24. H. 8. Anne
Montmorency Earl of Beaumont. 8. Caelais. 27. Oct. 24. H. 8. Philip Chabot Earl
of Newblanke. 9. Hampton Court. 9. Jan. 32. H. 8. Edward Seymour Earl of
Hertford. 10. Windesor. 6. Aug. 1. and 2. Ph. and M. Emanuel Duke of Savoy. 11.
Whitehall. 8. Febr. 20. Eliz. John Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhyne. 12.
York. 12. Sept. 16. Car. 1. Thomas Earl of Strafford.

But for the most part, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
Whitehall (the Sovereign's usual Court of Residence) has been the place,
whereunto the Knights-Companions have been specially summoned, and peculiar
Chapters held for Election of Knights, in the interval between the vacancy and
St. George's Feast: Howbeit of late, while the present Sovereign was abroad
beyond the Seas, and wanted the full number of Knights-Companions to constitute
a complete Chapter, He has been necessitated to make use of his supreme power,
not only in Ex Collect. Edw. Walker Eq. A^r. Garter.
dispencing with the Ceremony of Election in Chapter, but also in Ex Collect.
Edw. Walker Eq. A^r. Garter.
supplying the defect of a Scrutiny, by making his own choice; nevertheless,
since his most happy return to the Throne of his Ancestors, Whitehall has also
recovered her accustomed Honors, and beheld again a most worthy advancement of
Knights into this most Noble Order, at a Chapter specially called and held in
the Bedchamber there, the first day of April, an. 13. Car. 2. in the Election
of the Duke of Richmond, the Earls of Lindsey, Manchester, and Strafford.

SECT. III. The Number of Knights that constitute a Chapter.
IN the next place we are to consider, what number of Knights-Companions ought
to assemble for constituting a complete Chapter of Election.

By the Statutes it is appointed, there should be E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5.
Stat. Art. 18 H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
^ix at the least, besides the Sovereign or his Deputy; the due observation of
which has been so strictly stood upon heretofore, that Elections were
ordinarily deferred, where the Chapters consisted not of so many. For proof of
which we find that the Duke of Gloucester, anno 9. H. 6. then Deputy to the
Sovereign (at that time in France) for celebrating the Feast of St. George at
Windesor, Lib. N. p. ^^*
forbore to proceed to Election, because the Number of Knights-Companions there
assembled, was less than the Statutes required to constitute a Chapter. We
likewise take notice, that anno 10. H. 5. no Election was made (the Feast being
also celebrated at Windesor) though one Stall was void, by the death of the Ib.
p. 69.
Lord Clifford; and probably the reason (though not expressed) might be for want
of that full number of Knights-Companions, the Statutes required: For the Duke
of Bedford (then the Sovereign's Deputy) had but Ib. p. 6^.
three Knights present with him.

But in this case we need not fly to conjectures, there are direct and clear
instances enough; wherein, if we abound, we hope the satisfaction they will
give the concerned Reader, beside the antiquity of the Precedent may obtain our
pardon.

In the Ib. p. 95.
22. year of King Henry the Sixth, or rather 23. (for so the Fol. 23. b.
Registrum Chartaceum has it in the hand of that very Age) Humfry Duke of
Buckingham, being deputed to celebrate the Feast of St. George at Windesor,
although there were at that time four Stalls vacant, yet did no Nomination
pass, one reason being Fol. 23. b.
because there was not present a sufficient Number to make Election. So when
the same King celebrated the Grand Feast Lib. N. p. 108.
personally at Windesor, in the 31. year of his Reign, having but three
Knights-Companions attending him thereat, and two Stalls void; the Election was
prorogued Lib. N. p. 108.
for the very same reason. In like manner the want of a sufficient Number of
Knights-Companions, happening at the Feasts held the 32.33. and 34. of Henry the
Sixth hindered the Election at those times: for at the first of them there were
but Ib. p. 111.
two Knights-Companions, beside the Sovereign's Deputy, and at the two last but
Ib. p. 112.114.
four besides the Sovereign, though the Registrum Chartaceum anno 33. names
five, by adding the Duke of Somerset.

At the Feast of St. George, celebrated at Windesor, anno Ex MS. in Offic.
Armor. [M. 15.] fol. 12. b.
1471. which answers to the 11. year of King Edward the Fourth (although from
what is spoken, concurrent with the following circumstances, both out of the
Dominus Johannes Ascheley literis suis per Garterum missis sufficientem
excusationem obtendit. At a fine celebritatis, quia minor erat illic numerus
quam ut Electioni suscipiendi sufficeret, eundem Rex accerceb^t, ut supplerer.
Lib. N. p. 132.
Black Book of the Order, and the Et puis envoyes per le Roy pour Messieur
Ashley John des^re a l' elexion condemayn apres St. George, fol. 42.
Registrum Chartaceum, we suppose it should more rightly be transferred to the
twelfth of this King's Reign; and therefore this passage throughout may fitly
be corrected by those Authorities) the Sovereign intending to make an Election,
and having but five Knights-Companions present with him, Calys Pursivant at
Arms, was sent to London for Sir John Astley, to come and furnish the Chapter;
in which, says this Fragment, there were chosen seven Knights, namely the
Prince, the King of Portugal, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Wiltshire, the
Lord Ferrers, the Lord Montjoy, and the Lord Howard.

But here are some other mistakes, for the Prince was not elected until anno
Lib. N. p. 138. vide Regist. Chartac. f. 44. b.
15. E. 4. and the King of Portugal not until the Lib. N. p. 149. Regist.
Chartac. f. 49. b.
22. year of the same King. As for the rest we not finding the true time of
their Election elsewhere, shall let them stand; having been loath to make use of
so imperfect an authority, but that the circumstance of sending for Sir John
Astley, to make up a Chapter, rather than violate the Laws of the Order, may be
faithfully enough related, and well worth observing through the other false
lights cast in, from the inadvertency of the Relator.

Lastly, the 31. of January, anno 21. Car. 2. being designed for the Election
of Christopher Duke of Albemarle, and there appearing but five Knights at the
Chapter, the Election was put off till the 3. of February following, at which
time a statutable number of Knights being present, his Election past.

SECT. IV. Dispensation for want of a full Number.
AND whereas some may suppose that the Sovereigns of this Order in later times,
have appeared less careful in the due observation of its Statutes and Laws than
were their Predecessors, by making use of Dispensations, where the number of
six Knights-Companions have been wanting, they are to consider the License
herein, is no other than an advantage to be laid hold on, in cases of necessity
only (for necessity can bring a sufficient plea, where the infringement of a
Decree is objected, in the Law of this Order) and withal to show that the power
and prerogative of Dispensation is reserved to the Sovereigns of this most
Noble Order, in all cases of exigency: albeit not to be made use of, where
there is a possibility to perform the Rules and Injunctions of the Statutes.

The Sovereigns therefore in succeeding times, for sundry reasons, and upon
important and urgent occasions have been induced to dispense with this branch
of the Statute, as to a full Number of Knights-Companions; in case so many were
not in readiness as the Law appointed to make a complete Chapter. And the first
liberty we observe to have been taken herein, was by King Henry the Eighth, in
the Lib. N. p. 266.
26. year of his Reign; who after he had received intelligence of the death of
the Lord Montjoy, immediately called a Chapter at Whitehall, where no more than
Ibidem.
five Knights-Companions being present, the absence of the rest were excused by
his special favor, and the Idem and Ibidem.
Injunction of the Statute (as the Annals further add) concerning the due
Number of Nominators, were by the same clemency remitted, because of the
exigency of the time and place; and forthwith upon a Scruteny then taken, James
the Fifth King of Scotland was elected into the fellowship of this most
illustrious Order.

From this time to the late Rebellion, we meet not with the like case; but then
the wickedness of those days created new necessities, which occasioned or
rather enforced the then Sovereign (one of the exactest observers of the Laws
and Ceremonies of this Order) most unwillingly to awaken this dormant
prerogative, which he first put in execution at a Chapter specially called for
the Election of that deserving and renowned Knight, Thomas Earl of Strafford,
held at the City of York, upon the Palmer's large Iournal. p. 25.
12. day of September, anno. 16. Car. 1. where at that time and place, by his
Supreme Authority, he dispensed with the defect of Number of Palmer's large
Iournal. p. 25.
six Knights-Companions (having then with him Palmer's large Iournal. p. 25.
four only, some of the rest being employed in his Service against the Scots)
and gave Sir Thomas Row then Chancellor of the Order, directions to prepare a
Dispensation accordingly; which (in regard that Sovereign did therewithal
command should be Palmer's large Iournal. p. 25.
entered among the Annals of the Order) we have thought fit to insert in the
Numb. XVI*
Appendix.

Afterward, when several of the Knights-Companions so much adhered to the
Long-Parliament, that no summons could draw thence their attendance upon the
Sovereign, though but to celebrate the grand Festival of their Patron (much
less to the completing Chapters of Election) to which the Oath taken at their
Installation had equally obliged them; the Sovereign was constrained to make
further use of his Supreme Authority, in this very particular; and thereupon at
the Feast of St. George celebrated at Palmer's large Iournal. p. 35.
York, upon the 18.19. and 20. days of April, in the 18. year of his Reign, in
a Chapter held on the Eve of the said Feast, by Himself and but Ibid. p. 36.
four other Knights-Companions, viz. Prince Charles, the Prince Elector, the
Earl of Lindsey, and Duke of Richmond and Lenox, it was Ordered, Ibid. p. 36.
That Letters of Dispensation should be drawn up by Sir James Palmer (then
Deputy Chancellor) for the insufficient Number (as wanting of six Knights) to
hold a Chapter of Election; and for authorizing the Knights then present, to
deliver in their Votes, according to custom in other Scrutenies, that so the
Sovereign might proceed to the Election designed. By virtue of which
Dispensation, the Ibid. p. 42.
Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, were Elected Fellows and Companions of this
most Noble Society.

The like Dispensation was made for the defect of Six Knights, to hold a
Chapter of Election at Oxford, upon the second day of March, ann. 20. Car. 1.
there being then but Ex Aut^gr. penes praef. Jacob Palmer.
five Knights-Companions present with the Sovereign, namely the Duke of York,
Prince Rupert, the Earls of Dorset and Berkshire, and the Duke of Richmond and
Lenox; at which Chapter, William Prince of Orange, Son-in-Law to the Sovereign,
and Bernard de Foix Duke of Espernon were Elected.

Last of all, in reference to the holding 29. Mar. 1. Apr. 10. Apr.
three several Chapters, preparatory to the Feast of St. George, and Grand
Installation celebrated at Windesor the 15.16. and 17. days of April, in the
13. of his Majesty the now Sovereign's most happy Reign (one of which Chapters
was called for the Election of four Knights, and to deliberate with the
surviving Knights-Companions) the Sovereign was pleased (the 29. day of March
immediately foregoing) to pass the like Lib. Carol. p. 24 and 2^.
Dispensation, under the Signet of the Order, and his own Sign manual for this
defect; and Appendix Number. XVII.
thereby made those three Chapters as legal and of as much force and validity,
as if the Number of Knights-Companions, required by the Statutes, had been full
and complete.

SECT. V. Of opening the Chapter.
WE are now arrived at opening the Chapter, whereinto neither the Sovereign of
the Order, nor any of the Knights-Companions are to enter, without wearing both
their Mantles and Garters, for so the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 3.
Statutes of the Order ordain, and so has the Law been understood, in case
where a Chapter has been held elsewhere than at Windesor; as for instance at a
Chapter held at Whitehall, for the Election of John Count Palatine of the
Rhine, an. 20. Eliz. the MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 23. b.
Earl of Huntingdon, and the Lord Gray of Wilton, not having their Mantles then
at Court, not permitted to enter into that Chapter, to give their Votes for his
Election.

The late Sovereign King Charles of ever blessed memory Palmer's large Iournal
p. 25.
determining to call a Chapter for Electing the foresaid Thomas Earl of
Strafford at York, where neither He, nor any of the Knights-Companions then
attending his person, had their Robes of the Order with them, and taking notice
of the Injunction of the Statutes now mentioned, did by his supreme authority,
as Sovereign of the Order, Appendix. Number. XVI.
dispense with the Knights-Companions then present, for coming into the Chapter
without their Mantles.

Afterward, upon great necessity, occasioned by the late Rebellion, the same
Sovereign was enforced to make further use of his Prerogative, relating to this
particular, in some Palmer's large Iourn. p 48. and 55. vide Autogr. penes
eurdem Iac. Palmer.
following Chapters held at Oxford.

In like manner shortly after the present Sovereign returned to his Throne, a
like Dispensation pas'd under the Signet of the Order (the Great Seal being
then under the hand of the Graver, but not finished) dated the 10. of January
in the 12. year of his Reign, He being then necessitated to make use of his
Supreme authority for holding a Chapter the 14. of January following, in regard
the Knights-Companions, then in being, were not as yet provided of new Robes.

Presuming then, that a full Number of Knights-Companions (in obedience to
their Summons) are attending the Sovereign, habited in their Mantles and
Garters, and entered into the Chapter House at Windesor, or other place
appointed for this their Assembly, the Sovereign having taken his Seat, at the
upper end of the Table, and given leave to the Knights-Companions to sit; the
occasion of their being called together, is first declared, either by the
Sovereign himself, or by the Chancellor of the Order, upon his command.

The next thing in course, is to give the Sovereign information of all the
Stalls then void, the notice of which vacancies, if (as sometimes formerly) the
Sovereign happens to be in foreign parts, ought to be before sent him, by his
Lib. N. p. 65.
Deputy or Lieutenant; but if in England, and present in Chapter, then to be
presented by the Chancellor, or in his absence, by the Register or other
Officer of the Order.

This done, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions enter into consideration how
the room of the defunct Knight, or Knights, shall be Lib. C. p. 109
supplied; and sometimes (where two or more Stalls are found void) whether they
shall be all filled up at that time, or if not, Lib. C. p. 109.
how many Knights then Elected.

But where the Scruteny is intended to be taken in the Choire of St. George's
Chapel at Windesor, these or the like particulars (referring to Election) are
commonly considered of on the Feast day, in the Chapter held immediately before
Vespers; wherein it is most usually Ordered, That the Scruteny shall be taken
in the said Chapel that following Afternoon, and so was it Decreed on St.
George's day anno 5. E. 6. viz. Lib. N. p. 304.
That the Elections of Knights should be taken that Evensong, and in the
Chapel.

After this, the Chancellor begins to collect the Knights-Companions Votes, and
this is frequently termed, the taking of a Scruteny: To the full understanding
the nature of this Action and Ceremony, we shall proceed to certain
considerations preparatory thereunto; beginning with what concerns the
Nomination of the Persons to be proposed to Election.

SECT. VI. That Knights only present in Chapter ought to Nominate.
THE Nomination of those persons proposed to the Sovereign's Election, belongs
only to such of the Knights-Companions as are present in Chapter when the
Scruteny is taken; for therein not only all the Bodies of the Statutes are
positive, but Entrances to that purpose, are made in sundry places of the
Annals; insomuch, that from the Institution of this most Noble Order, it has
not been otherwise used, that we can collect.

And it is observable, that anno 26. Eliz. (the Feast of St. George being
celebrated at Greenwich) the Earl of Warwick, and Lord Burley (Lord Treasurer
of England) fell both ill of the Gout, upon the Feast day, which occasioned
their absence at Evening Prayer, whilst the Scruteny was taken: whereupon we
find their Lib. C. p. 95.
indisposition of body, and absence noted in that Scruteny instead of, and in
those peculiar places, where their Nominations should else have been entered,
had they been present at the taking thereof. And beside this we meet with an
observation made upon the same occasion, by Robert Cook Esquire, then
Cl^renceux King of Arms^ MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 8.
That as for those Knights-Companions, who happen to be absent, when the
Scruteny is taken, although this absence be occasioned by accident of sickness,
or with the Sovereign's license, nevertheless, in regard of this their absence,
at that very time their Votes may not be received.

Those Knights-Companions that come late to the Chapter, lose also the
privilege of giving their Votes for that time, which so happened to Lib.
Carolin. p. 44. and 45.
Prince Rupert and the Earl of Strafford at the Chapter held for the Election
of James Duke of Monmouth in the Privy-Chamber at Whitehall the 29. of March,
an. Dom. 1663.

Now though none of the absent Knights-Companions can give a Proxy to Vote, or
otherwise send their suffrages into the Chapter or Chapel, there to pass in
Nomination; yet anciently (about the Reigns of King Henry the Fifth, and King
Henry the Sixth) when diverse of the Knights-Companions were frequently employed
in the Wars of France, and consequently so strictly obliged to their several
Commands, that they could not personally attend the celebration of the Feast of
St. George at Windesor, it was usual for the Commander there in chief, with
consent of those Knights-Companions, to make a formal Certificate or
Presentment (but not to pass it by way of Nomination or Vote, for that the Law
of the Order did not permit) to the Sovereign of the Order, or his Lieutenant,
and Knights-Companions assembled at the Feast, of such persons famous for
martial Valor and Virtue, with an account of their notable services and
achievements (attested by other persons of honor also) as were at that time,
and in that Kingdom, employed in the Sovereign's service, and seemed worthy the
honor of Election; to the end that famous and deserving men might be preferred
to so noble a Dignity. Which manner of Recordation we having most happily
lighted upon, among the Collections made by the great industry of William
Dugdale Esquire, now Norroy King of Arms; and esteeming it to carry the just
reputation, both of authority, for informing us of this custom, and of
antiquity, for the hand of that time, cannot without injury to its due worth
omit.

My Lord the Duc of Bedford remembrith, as by the Statutes of the Diver of the
Gartice, the Election of the Stalls void; be says in the voice of the
Brethren, and of the Fellowship, being at the time at the Fest, in the presence
of the Soverain or his Deputy; Yt thinkyth to my said Lord, that for his
acquital to Knighthood, yt fytteth him to give in knowledge to the King,
Soverain of the Order, and to his Fellowship of the same Order, the great
honors of the notable Knights, that from time to time exercyseth, and have
exercysed in Knighthood, and especially in the service of their Sovereign Lord;
and of such notable Knyghts, as my Lord of Bedford, for the time remembers him
of; he has, by the advyce of them of the Fellowshyp of the Order, being now in
France, in the Kings service, and givyng in charge to the said Garter, King of
Arms of the Order, to show their ^ames to the King, and to expound part of
their Deeds, Acts, and of their worthynesse. First, to expose the honor of Sir
John Radeclyff, that has contynowed all the time of the victorious King that
last dyed, whom Christ absolve, at the first landing of him at Ches de Cau^.
Quies-de Caux, where the said Radeclyff receyved the order of a Knight, and
after continowed the Seige of Hareflew; And after with my Lord of Excester, at
the Battle of Vallemont, and of Quiesde Caux. And also sythen the death of the
said victorious King, Radeclyff being Seneschall of Guyen, has brought by his
labor in Knyghthood, to his Sovereign Lord's obeisance, within the Duchy of
Guyen many dyverse Cities, Towns, and Fortresses. And in especial deserved
great and notable merits, at the Seige of the City of Bazas.
Bazates, which Seige was accorded, appointed, and set day of Battle, and of
Rescous, the which day was kept and houlden, with great power on both sides,
and under Banners displayed, the Enemies doubtyng to fight with Radeclyff,
required him of apoyntment they to depart, under saufe conduit, from the said
field, the which saufe conduit he granted them, for the term of eight days,
like as they required. The honor and the empruise, rested in the said
Radeclyff, and to his high merit; for incontinent followying, was delyvered to
him, the reddyssion and possession of the said Cytty of Bazates. And also the
said Radeclyff was at the Battle of Assincourt, and has contynowed and
exercysed the Armies, the space of xxviij. Winter unreprothed. And in the time
of his Esquierhood, was at the Battle of Shrewsbury, and at the Journey of
Husks, with the Lord Gray at the discomfiture and taking of Owenson.

Sir Thomas Ramston. Sir William Oldegall. Sir Rauff Butler. Sir To. Harlyng.
Sir Gilbert Halsall.
Item, my Lord the Duc of Bedford, beseeches the King, Sovereign of the Order,
to have also for recommendyd to his good grace and highness, other of his
Subjects and Servants, now being in his service, in his Realm of France, which
has done, and yet does take great pain by their Knyghtly labor, daily to
serve the merit of worthyness and prowess; as Sir Robert Hungerford, Sir
Thomas Beamont, Sir John Popeham, Sir Nicholas Burdett, Sir Rauff Nevell, Sir
Edward Wyver, Sir John Robesart, Sir Tire Robesart, Sir William Bretton, Sir
Thomas Kyngston, Sir Richard Hankford and dyverse other.


But lest peradventure it may seem to some, that the Knights-Companions present
in Chapter can at their pleasures, Nominate or propose to Election such persons
as they think fit, so they be qualified according to the Statutes of the Order;
this privilege is to be understood of Knights Subjects only; for in all cases
concerning Strangers, the Sovereign does but permit, and may direct and confine
the Knights-Companions to the Nomination of such, as He at any time intends to
Elect, which Prerogative we find more particularly asserted in the 31. year of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and third year of King Charles the First.

In the first of these instances, the Page 113.
Blue Book of the Order records, That at a Chapter held immediately before
Vespers on Saint George's day, the Earl of Huntingdon, then Lieutenant for the
Sovereign, acquainted the Knights-Companions, That the Sovereign did
Locum-tenens certiores Lacit Commilitones superiorem permittere ipsorum
voluntari, quemcunque externum Principem, quen suis suffragiis comprobarent in
hunc Ordinem Eligere. Ibid.
permit them, or leave it to their pleasure, to choose into the Order whatsoever
Foreign Prince they should by their Votes approve of.

Hence there may be observed two things, First, that the Knights-Companions
have not the privilege and liberty to nominate what Foreign Prince they
please, but the same is derivative from the Sovereign, and only by his
particular license or leave, at some times permitted to them.

Secondly, if this Paragraph be well weighed (as also that which succeeds) it
is most clear from the context, that Nominare ought to be understood here by
the word Eligere, and that the power delegated to the Knights-Companions from
the Sovereign, was only to Nominate, not Elect. For it immediately follows, A
Capitulo ibant ad Vesperas, dum illae celebrantur, Equites Nuncupationes
Votorum ineunt quas Pra^larus Ordinis excepit. ead. page
That the Knights-Companions went from the Chapter to the second Vespers, and
while the Divine Offices were celebrating, the Prelate received their
Nominations, and that very Evening the Lieutenant presented them to the
Sovereign, for her to consider of: which had been needless, if the
Knights-Companions had been empowered by her said License, to have made the
choice themselves: But the contrary is yet more evident by that which follows,
for the next morning, all the Knights-Companions attending the Sovereign in
Chapter, she her self made there the Election, not of any Foreign Prince, but
of the Ibid. p. 114.
Earl of Sussex, and Lord ^uckhurst.

In the other Instance anno 3. Car. 1. the Sovereign in a Lib. R. p. 33.
Chapter, held before Vespers on St. George's day, signified it to be his
pleasure (three Stalls being then vacant) that out of Foreign Princes (the
Quorum nominatio ad se solum spectat. Ibid.
Nomination of whom (says the Annals in that very place) belongs only to the
Sovereign; that is, the Sovereign has the prerogative to direct the
Knights-Companions to Name, or impose upon them the Nomination of such Foreign
Princes as he pleases) they the Knights-Companions should Choose, which must
nevertheless be understood to Nominate, or enter down into the Scr^teny (not
Elect) Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry of Nassau, Prince of Orange:
For there a little after, it in like manner appears (when the Scruteny was
presented to the Sovereign) that Himself, not the Knights-Companions, made
Election of them.

And it is further manifest by the Scruteny Lib. R. l^co citato.
there inserted, that both these ^rinces were named by every of the
Knights-Companions then present, according to the Sovereign's signification
(which has been usually done at all other times, upon the like occasions, as
may be seen by the Scrutenies entered in the Annals) But concerning the third
person then to be Elected, the Sovereign (intending him to be a Knight-Subject)
Lib. R. l^co citato.
left it wholly to their pleasure, to Nominate whomsoever they esteemed worthy
of their Votes.

Since this time, the Nominations in like cases have been sufficiently owned,
by the Knights-Companions themselves, to be a Prerogative belonging to the
Sovereign: For, to the end they might more readily and fully comply with the
observance of this particular; it was moved in a Ex Autograph penes praef. Ia^.
Palmer.
Chapter held at Oxford, the second day of March, an. 19. Car. 1. Ex Autograph
penes praef. Ia^. Palmer.
That it might become a custom for the Sovereign to de^l^re before hand,
whether He would Elect any Foreign Prince, and whom; that so the
Knights-Companions might be sure to Name him in the Scruteny.

SECT. VII. Of the Number, Qualifications, and Degrees of the Persons to be
Nominated.
ANother consideration in our progress toward the act of Election, is touching
the Number, Qualifications, and Dignities of the Persons Nominated, which may
be best known from another branch of the before mentioned Article of the
Statutes, and is to this effect, E. 3. Stat. Art. 18.
That every one of the Knights-Companions present at the Election, should
Nominate for himself nine very sufficient Persons, whom he should judge free
from all reproach and scandal, whether Subjects to the Sovereign, or
Foreigners. Provided they are known not to favor or abet any party at enmity
with him: that is to say three Earls, or others of higher degree, three Barons,
and three Knights.

The things chiefly observable out of this Text, we rank under five heads.

First, The Number of Persons Nominated, or to be given in by every
Knight-Companion, are to be exactly Nine. Secondly, They ought to be of
unblamable Reputation. Thirdly, Either Subjects to the Sovereign, or else
Strangers. Fourthly, Such as are known not to be engaged in any party against
the Sovereign. Lastly, to be Earls (or of greater dignity) or Barons, or
Knights.
1. For the first of these, their Number; every one of the Knights-Companions
assembled in Chapter are enjoined to name nine, neither more nor less. So also
says King Henry the Fifth's Art. 18.
Statutes, whereunto are consonant the Art. 19.
Statutes of King Henry the Eighth. And in this particular the Statutes have
been hitherto observed (except in one case) as from the Entries of those many
Scrutenies, in the Annals of this most Noble Order, is fully evident.

As to Numbers, we are taught that great Mysteries lie wrapped up in them, the
excellency and dignity whereof, and particularly of this number Nine (which
Poet. l. 1. c. 1.
Scaliger calls the most perfect number) are largely celebrated among the
Learned, both ancient and modern, which are easy to be met with; wherefore we
shall not spend further time to insist upon them.

But why our Royal Founder made choice of this Number, to be put in Nomination,
above all other, unless he had some reflection on the Nine Worthies (men
reported famous for valor and martial exploits, and therefore not unlikely to
be at first proposed as Examples to the Knights-Nominators) or otherwise
considered it as a trebled threefold Cord, and Symbol of perfect stability and
solid amity (for so also is the number Nine accounted to signify) can neither
easily nor certainly be resolved.

2. As to the second point; the Injunction in the Statutes of Institution takes
order, that the Persons designed for Election, should be free from all
reproach, and of untainted reputation; and according to those of King Henry the
Fifth, are to be Art. 18.
the best and most sufficient Knights, and freest from reproach, that the
Nominators know. To the same purpose speaks the Exemplar entered in the Black
Book, Art. 17.
Such as are fittest, and whom they who Nominate believe to be free from
ignominy and dishonor. And to this Act of Nomination belongs part of the
second Article in Henry the Eighth's Statutes, Lib. N. p. 215.
That no Knight-Companion should name any Person whom he thinks or esteems in
his Conscience, to have upon him any spot of Reproach: But on the contrary in
another place of the same Statutes, it is provided, that they be nominated and
proposed, Art. 19.
out of the number of the most worthy and select Knights.

How tender the Knights-Companions were in ancient time of infringing the
Statutes in this particular, is manifest from a notable passage, which fell out
Lib. N. p. 121.
an. 39. H. 6. at a Scruteny taken the 8. of February, in the Bishop of
London's Palace; where John de Foix Earl of Lib. N. p. 121.
Kendall, a Gascoigner by birth, (which makes the Example more eminent, where a
Stranger became so tender of the honor of the Order) not being acquainted with
the Lib. N. p. 121.
quality and merit of Knights and honorable Persons among us, so well and
sufficiently, as to name such whom he was confident were irreprehensible, and
without blemish, forbore to Lib. N. p. 121.
nominate any person at all. And certainly, seeing the Statutes put very
considerable qualifications upon the Deputies and Proxies made choice of for
the Installation of Strangers (as shall be discourst of in its proper Cap. 16.
Sect. 2.
place) much more caution and regard ought to be used and had, both in the
Nomination and Election of Knights, into this so Illustrious Society.

3. Touching the third point; the Statutes make indifferently capable of being
Nominated or Elected, either Knights-Subjects, or Strangers, [Free Princes or
their Subjects] and it was so even at the Institution, upon the first choice;
where among the 25 Elected Knights, 23 of them were Subject^ (among whom we
reckon Piers Capdall de la Buche) but Sir S^nc^io dabric^^^^rt* and Sir Henry
Eme were both born Strangers, and Subjects to other Princes.

And thus was it practiced, not only in the remaining part of the Founder's
Reign, and during the Reigns of three of his Successors, as appears in the
Catalogue of Knights elected in their times; but also ever since, as is more
particularly and fully evident, from the Scrutenies taken and entered throughout
the Annals of the Order.

Of those who were admitted into this Noble Order by Election, we shall in the
last Chapter give an account in a complete Catalogue of them: Here we think it
sufficient, to insert the Names of such, as having not been Elected, are not to
be forgotten, out of this very respect, that by their standing Candidates in
Elections into this Order, have the fame of being mentioned in the principal
Register of Honor now in the Christian world: Giving a List, not of all (for
that were too numerous) but only those of eminent quality in Foreign parts,
with the time when the Scrutenies were taken, that transmitted them to our
hands.

A Catalogue of some Strangers, who have been Nominated yet not Elected.
Franciscus Sforza dux Mediol^ni -- 28. H. 6. Franciscus secundus dux
Britanniae -- 13.14.15.22. E. 4. Henricus quartus Rex Legionis and Castillae.
14. E. 4. Matthias Corvinus Rex Hungariae -- 19.22. E. 4. Fredericus s^cundus
Dux Austriae -- 22. E. 4. and 1. R. 3. Philippus quartus Dux Burgundiae -- 14.
H. 7. Franciscus Maria Dux Vrbini -- 1.2. H. 8. Vladislaus Secundus Rex
Hungariae -- 1.2.6.8. H. 8. Christianus secundus Rex D^niae -- 6.8. H. 8. Dux
Barrye. -- 8. H. 8. Comes Galaciae -- 8. H. 8. Alphonsus Dux Ferrariae --
13.15. H. 8. Lodovicus secundus Rex Hungariae -- 13.14.15. H. 8. Maximilianus
Sforza Dux Mediolani -- 14.15.16. H. 8. Marchio Piscarae -- 17. H. 8. Johannes
tertius Rex Portugalliae -- 17.18.26.28. H. 8. -- Marchio Mantuae -- 18. H. 8.
Carolus Burbonus Dux Vandosme -- 24. H. 8. Guilielmus Dux Clivensis -- 32. H.
8. -- Dux Bavariae -- 32. H. 8. Dux Alvae -- 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. Dux Medinae
Coeli -- 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. Comes Fereae -- 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar.
Franciscus secundus Rex Galliae -- 1. Elizab. Franciscus tertius Comes
Palatinus -- 10.11.12.13.16.17. Eliz. Augustus Dux Saxoniae -- 11. Eliz.
Alphonsus secundus Dux Ferrariae -- 13. Eliz. -- Dux Andegavensis --
13.22.23.24. Eliz. Rambrith de Walsey -- 25. H. 6. Johannes de Voynada -- 25.
H. 6. Dominus Grabazenby -- 24. H. 8. Dominus Humers -- 24. H. 8. Dominus
Johannes Mount -- 24. H. 8. Dominus Harmibolt -- 24. H. 8. Dominus Boysy --
24. H. 8.
4. In the fourth place, they are not in a capacity of Nomination, who are
known to have taken contrary part against the Sovereign; or as the Exemplar
entered in the Black Book more largely than any of the Statutes express, Art. 17.
such as are not his Adversaries, or Abettors or willing defenders of his
Adversaries. But concerning such, we no where observe they had room in the
Scrutenies, all Knights-Companions having been more wary and discreet, than by
Nominating a known or public Enemy, to put either disrespect upon the
Sovereign, or offer violation to the Statutes.

5. In the fifth and last place, concerning the Degree, Rank, and Dignity of
the Nine Knights propounded to Election; the Statutes of Institution appoint,
That they be, first three Earls, or persons of greater dignity, secondly, three
Barons, and thirdly, three Knights; or as it is in Henry the Fifth's Statutes,
Art. 18.
trois Contes, ou de greigneur estat, trois Banerets, and trois Batchelers.
These Degrees are to be ranked in three Classes, and they distinguished by
three Divisions, all comprehending the three Degrees aforesaid.

As touching the first of these Divisions; whereas all other Bodies and
Exemplars of the Statutes make positive mention of Earls only (taking in
nevertheless the higher Degrees though not named) the Statutes of Henry the
Eighth express themselves in this point somewhat more amply than the rest, by
mentioning in the first Class, Art. 19.
Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, or persons superior to these in Degree, wherein
the highest Dignities are included.

In this place we may properly observe, the different Title ( viz. Baneret)
that Henry the Fifth's Statutes (but now mentioned) has given us, instead of
Baron; and not only in this Article, but in all Art. 21.22.
other, where there is occasion to speak of Barons; nevertheless the Record
intends by it, to signify no other than the very same Degree, namely a Baron.
For albeit a Baneret, who had his name 2. part Institut. f. 667.
a Vexillo, from the Banner, was usually taken to signify a Degree of Honor
next beneath that of Baron, both heretofore and in later times (as may be
collected from that famous Pat. 10. Iac. pars 10. m. 8.
establishment made on the behalf of the younger sons of Viscounts and Barons)
yet formerly among our Records it is found to be a Synonimy to Baron, and so
clearly made out by our most learned Title of Honor, p. 736.737
Seldom, and is to be so taken here; and not as a distinct Title of a lower
Degree, because also we observe the Banerets ranked in all Scrutenies before
King Henry the Eighth established his Statutes (except An 14. H. 7. vide Lib.
N. p. 172. and 173.
one) with the Knights-Batchelors not with Barons.

Besides this, something further may be said concerning the Title of the third
and lowest rank in this Classis; for in the Statutes of Institution they are
called Art. 18.
Milites Bachalauri, in those of King Henry the Fifth Art. 18.
Batchelers, and elsewhere Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 17.
Bachalauri, and H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
Bachalauri Equites, which in common acceptance are all the same with Milites;
though thus rendered to express and manifest their difference from Knights
Banerets, who are of a higher Degree of Honor. And here we have an occasion
given to note, That there is no place in a Scruteny for any under the degree of
Knights Batchellors.

And though Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton Art 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat.
Art. 19.
three of the Nine named are appointed to be Barons, and three other Earls, or
of a higher Degree, yet must these six be such as have received the Order of
Knighthood, else ought not their names be either given or taken in Nomination;
for the Text is plain, That each of the Knights assembled at the Election shall
name nine Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Hatton Art 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat.
Art. 19.
Knights.

Thus his late Majesty of blessed memory, in the sixth year of his Reign,
intending to choose James Marquess Hamilton into the Society of this Order,
conferred the honor of Lib. R. p. 59.
Knighthood upon him immediately before his Nomination; and the Annals in that
place give this Remarque upon the Action, and the reason for it, Ibid.
Because by the Statutes it is provided, That none should be Elected into the
Order, that have not been dignified with the title of Knight.

Yet it seems the Ceremony of Knighting the person designed for Election, was
not so strictly and duly observed as it ought, but that sometimes this branch
of the Statute was either not taken notice of, or else confounded with the
second Article, throughout the several Bodies of the Statutes, which prohibits
the Choice or ^lection of any person into the Society (of which we shall speak
by and by) as this does the Proposal or Nomination; and thereupon perhaps it
was conceived, that although the Nomination, Election, and sometimes delivery
of the Ensigns of the Order, were first dispatched and past, yet it was well
enough if the honor of Knighthood were conferred afterward. As it was in the
case of William Earl of Derby, and Thomas Cecil Lord Burleigh, anno 43. Eliz.
where the Register notes, Lib. C. p. 144.
that as soon as their Election was past, and they brought into the Chapter,
the Earl of Derby (who it seems had not been Knighted before) was dubbed
Knight, with a drawn Sword, according to Custom, after which they had the
Garter and George put on by the Sovereign her self.

In like manner Page 159.
Vlrick Duke of Holstein, and Henry Earl of Northampton, immediately after
their Election (being the last day of St. George's Feast, an. 3. Iac.) and
before they received the Ensigns of the Order, had the dignity of Knighthood
conferred on them by the Sovereign. So also in the case of the Earl of Suffolk,
an. 3. Car. 1. which the Red Book of the Order taking notice of, says, Page 35.
that as soon as it was understood, that the Earl had not received the Order of
Knighthood before, the Sovereign immediately drawing his Sword Knighted him;
which was not done till after his Page 35.
Election, and Investiture with both the George and Garter.

Thus also did the Ceremony of Knighthood succeed the ^lection of his sacred
Majesty the present Sovereign, the 21. of May, an. 14. Car. 1. For Palmer's
large Iournal. p. 9.
after he had been Elected, and the Ensigns of the Order placed upon him, and
that the two senior Knights (the Earls of Penbroke and Montgomery, and of
Arundel and Surrey) were entreated by the rest of the Knights-Companions, to
present his Highness to the Sovereign in the name of all the rest, to be
initiated into the Title and Dignity of a Knight-Batchelor, he was conducted by
the said Earls (his Supporters) into the Presence Chamber in Windesor Castle,
where before the Chair of State, he most solemnly Palmer's large Iournal. p. 9.
received the Order of Knighthood from the Sovereign his late Majesty of
blessed memory.

To Lib. R. p. 143.
honor which Knighthood, and the memory thereof, four of the chief Nobility
then present were also Knighted, namely, the Earls of ^ssex, Saint Albans, and
Elgin, and Viscount Grandison; the first of them being conducted from the great
Chamber to the Sovereign's State, between two Batchellor Knights, Sir Frederick
Hamilton, and Sir Robert Huniwood; the second by Sir Roger Palmer Knight of the
Bath, and Sir Henry Mildmay; the third by Sir John Meldram and Sir William
Withrington; and the fourth by Sir John Harpur and Sir John Lucas.

Afterward the Law in this point began again to be more rightly understood,
and by that time his Royal Highness the Duke of York, came to be Elected (which
was on the Palmer's large Iour. p. 42.
20. of April, an. 18. Car. 1. being the last day of the Feast of Saint George,
then celebrated at the City of York) the Sovereign appointed and accordingly
conferred the honor of Knighthood upon him, the Palmer's large Iour. p. 42.
day before, which he received upon his knees; being first conducted into the
Pres^^e Chamber, between two of the Nobility, who were also Knights, namely,
the Ibid. p. 39.
Marquess of Hertford, and Viscount Grandison: In honor and memorial whereof,
there were also four Noblemen Knighted at that time, the Ibid. p. 39.
Earl of Carnarvan, supported by Sir William Killegrew and young Sir Arthur
Ingram; the Lord George d' Aubigne, sapported by Sir William Howard and Sir
Peter Wyche; the Lord John Stewart, by Sir Peter Killegrew and Sir Capell
Bedell; and the Lord Bernard Stewart by Sir Edward Savage and Sir Henry ^lount.

And thus Ex Collect an. E. W. G.
Prince Edward Count Palatine of the Rhine, and George Duke of ^uckingham, Ex
Collect an. E.W.G.
being designed by the present Sovereign to be admitted into this most Noble
Order, were both first Knighted at Saint Germans in France, an. Dom. 1649. and
afterward had the Ex Collect an. E. W. G.
Ensigns of the Order sent unto them by the hands of Sir Edward Walker Garter,
who, in right of his Office, invested them therewith.

Nevertheless in the case of his Highness Prince Kupert, who had the honor to
be Elected, with his Royal Highness the Duke of York, an. 18. Car. 1. His want
of Knighthood became no impediment thereunto, being then a Prince in another
Country, viz. Count Palatine of the Rhine and Duke of Bavaria, and might
therefore justly claim the privilege, to come within the rule of Foreign
Princes, mentioned a little lower.

But herein also the Sovereign, to come as near to the intention and observance
of the Statute as he could (where there was a possibility to do it, and the
honor also would be well accepted by the Prince) thought it requisite by
Commission, under the great Seal of England, to empower Palmer's large Iournal.
p. 45.
Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, and George Lord Goring (late Earl of
Norwich) both being then in Holland, or either of them, to Palmer's large
Iournal. p. 45.
Knight the said Prince, Palmer's large Iournal. p. 45.
before the putting on his Garter (seeing it could not possibly be done before
his Election) which was intended to be sent and presented unto him, by the
hands of Sir John Borough Garter; but his Page 48. and 53.
death after happening, the Sovereign's intention herein was frustrated. Albeit
the Prince upon his coming afterward into England, received both the Garter
and George from the Sovereign himself at Page 33.
Nottingham, nevertheless without being Knighted, which to excuse it may well
be alleged, that the Sovereign might not take into his thoughts this part of
the Ceremony, it being a time of so greas business and trouble, occasioned by
the then setting up of his Standard.

However, upon the Id. p. 62.
17, day of January, an. 1644. when a Decree past in Chapter, then held at
Oxford, that both the Duke of York and the Prince should enjoy all Id. p. 65.
Rights and Privileges of the Order, though they were not hitherto Installed
(until Windesor was free from the Enemy, but then to perform the Ceremonies of
Installation there) the Prince, Id. p. 65.
before he took his Oath, was conducted by the Earl of Berkshire, and Duke of
Richmond and Lenox (two of the Knights-Companions) unto the Sovereign, and
kneeling down received the honor of Id. p. 65
Knighthood from him. There being at the same time, Id. p. 65
two of the Nobility likewise Knighted in memorial of that Solemnity; namely,
the Lord Henry Seymour, second Son to the Marquess of Hertford, brought up to
the Sovereign between Sir John Stawell Knight and Baronet, and Sir Francis
Lloyd Knights; and the Lord Capell conducted between Sir Richard Willis and Sir
Thomas Corbet Knights.

SECT. VIII. Of the Scruteny, and by whom it ought to be taken.
ALL this being premised, we are led directly to the Scruteny it self, in
reference to which we shall first consider by Whom it ought or has been
usually taken, next the time when, and then the manner and form thereof.

By the Statutes of Institution the collecting Knights-Companions Votes, and
entering them in the Scruteny, properly belongs to the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H.
5. Stat. Art. 18
Prelate of the Order, and upon him is this employment conferred, not only by
the other H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
Bodies of Statutes that succeeded, but also by the Lib. N p. 232.
Constitutions of his Office, and the obligation of his Ib. p. 313.
Oath; whose right thereunto we find afterward duly Wintoniensis Antistes
Ordinis Praelatus cujus illud er at Officium, summa cum reverentia and soliram
Equitu^ nomenclaturam procedit. etc. lib. C. p. 100.
asserted, upon this Officers taking a Scruteny, anno 27. Eliz. on the Feast
day of St. George.

Nevertheless the Statutes provided, that if the Prelate were at any time
absent, then the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18.
Dean of Windesor, or the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18.
Register, or the E. 3. Stat. Art. 18.
Senior Residentiary of the College, or the Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 17.
Secretary or Scribe of the Order, should undertake the employment; and the
Constitutions of the Officers say, the Lib. N. p. 232.
Chancellor, Dean, or Register shall in like case do it; which when they did,
it is frequently mentioned to be performed by them, Lib. N p. 77. and 89.
in absence of the Prelate, as implying a reservation of his right to the
employment; or as in another place more expressly, In absentia Prelati cujus
Ordinarium alioquin id erat Officium. Idem p. 84.
In the absence of the Prelate, whose particular duty otherwise it had been.
Now there are various Examples of all these, given us in the Annals of the
Order, but among the many, take these that follow, and first of the Prelate.

The Prelate of the Order gathered and received the Suffrages from the
Knights-Companions, Lib. N. p. 64.
anno 9. H. 5. when John Earl Marshal, and four other Knights were Elected. The
like did Henry Beaufort Lord Cardinal, Prelate of the Order, upon the Election
of the King of Portugal, Id. p. 91.
an. 13. H. 6. And when the Duke of Norfolk was Elected, Page 105.
an. 28. H. 6. the Prelate then also collected the Suffrages; which he likewise
did, upon the Feast days of St. George, celebrated in the Lib C. p. ^^.
12. Idem. p. 62.
13. Pa^. 64.
14. Page 100.
27. Page 103.
28. Page 108.
30. Page 113.
31. Page 119.
34. and Page 128.
35. years of Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

Sometimes the Scrutenies have been collected, both by the Dean of Windesor and
the Register of the Order jointly; as at the Elections of Lib. N. p 77.
John Lord Talbot an. 2. H. 6. of Page 81. and Regist. Chartac. f. 13. b.
Sir John Fastolf, an. 6. H. 6. and the Duke of Conimbero.
Quinbery, an. Lib. N. p. 84.
5. H. 6. all taken at the Feasts of St. George celebrated at Windesor.

And peradventure the Dean, at those times, received the Votes from the
Knights-Companions on the Sovereign's side, while the Register collected those
other on the Prince's; for we observe, that in King Henry the Fifth's Reign, in
employments of other natures (but of like manner as to the performance) one
whereof was, to signify the pleasure of the Sovereign to the
Knights-Companions, about their giving due Reverence, first to God, and
afterward to Himself; and the other in a Ceremonial, which directs and
appoints the manner and order of Regist Chartac. f. 9. b.
Censing the Knights-Companions; in both which, the Dean was sent to perform
the service on the Lib. N. p. 65.
right hand the Choire [the Sovereign's side] and the Register, on the Lib. N.
p. 65.
left.

Sometimes the Register of the Order took them himself alone, as at the
Election of Ib. p. 89.
John Earl of Arundel, an. 10. H. 6. as also at another Election of the Page 92.
Earl of Monteyne and Sir John Gray, an. 14. H. 6. And we likewise find, that
when the Office of Register was void, and Thomas Ruthall Bishop of Duresme,
executed it during its vacancy, the Bishop himself Page 199.
an. 2. H. 8. collected the Suffrages. In like manner, when William Day Dean of
Windesor, officiated in the absence of George Carew Dean of the Chapel and
Register of the Order, at the Feasts of Saint George held at Whitehall the Lib.
C. p. 73.
18. and MS. penes ^. O. ^. p. 113.
19. years of Queen Elizabeth, he performed this service.

This duty was likewise performed by the Register, from the 15. year of King
Henry the Eighth, to the end of his and his Sons Reign, as appears by the Black
Book of the Order, in those places, where the taking of Scrutenies is treated
of, as also on the day of St. George, celebrated the first of Queen Elizabeth
by Lib. C p. 29.
John Boxhall, and again at the Feast of St. George held, an. 1. Iac. by Page
150.
G^le^ Thompson, who in the several times were Registers of this most Noble
Order. Nevertheless here it must be understood, that what was in these
Instances done by the Register or such as officiated for him, was on the behalf
of the Prelate, and not otherwise.

But in the Page 7.
beginning of Queen Mary's Reign we find the Chancellor of the Order began to
perform this service, being by Art. 19.
King Henry the Eight's Statutes, adjoined to those other Officers, before
appointed to collect the Scrutenies, In absence of the Prelate, and thereby
made capable of the employment; which afterward we observe somewhat tacitly
noted to be performed, as if in his own right, when the Register has done it,
in the Chancellor's absence. Though in truth it was no other, then as when the
Bishop of Duresme, and Doctor Day (immediately before remembered) took the
Scruteny in the vacancy of the Office, and absence of the Register,
nevertheless on the behalf of the Prelate.

For instance, an. 4. Eliz. the Register in the MS. penes W. Le. N. Cl.
absence of the Chancellor (who was sick) upon the Feast day of St. George
collected the Suffrages; and an. 8. ^liz. George Carew then Register of the
Order, took the Votes of the Knights-Compaions, Lib. C. p. ^ t.
in absence of Sir William Petre Chancellor of the Order. So also anno Page 161.
Iacobi 4. where the cause of the Chancellor's absence is noted to be MS. penes
Guil. Dugdale Ar. modo Norroy Reg. Armor.
sickness, and an. 6. Iac. to be Lib. C. p. 166.
death.

In the first of these Instances we find the Prelate expressly mentioned to be
present; in the two following his presence employed, for it is said, that the Ex
cod. MS. pen. Guil* Dugda^e.
four Officers of the Order did attend both Feasts, whereof (the Chancellor
being wanting) the Prelate must needs be one.

Now all these passages seem to relate to the Chancellor's, rather than the
Prelate's right, by this Remarque; That every of the Scrutenies were taken in
the absence of the Chancellor, which looks something like a cautionary note,
that intended the preservation of the right of performing this service to the
Chancellor, rather than the Prelate.

Furthermore, when a Deputy Chancellor has been admitted to officiate in the
Chancellor's absence, he and not the Prelate has taken the Scruteny, though
present; as at that made for the Election of his sacred Majesty the present
Sovereign, the Palmer's large Iournal. p. 18.
20 day of May, an. 14. Car. 1. and at another Scruteny taken the Palmer's
large Iournal. p. 1^.
22. of May following. As also when the Suffrages were collected, for the
Election of his Highness the Ibid. p. 40.
Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, at York anno 17. Car. 1.

But there is one passage more (upon taking a Scruteny, an. Iac. 22.) which
seems advantageous to the Chancellor in this point, where it is said, Suffragia
quum dedissent praenomin^ti militi^s, and ca supremo detulisse^, Cancellarius,
qui eis ex officio excipiendis incumbeba^, Supremus etc. lib. R. p. 23.
That when the Knights-Companions had given their Votes (as in the Annals they
are described) the Chancellor who, according to his Office, was to receive
them, presented them to the Sovereign. Howbeit in truth, we find no sufficient
ground for the Register to record this as done by the Chancellor, by virtue of
his Office, or any one Act or Decree of Chapter that has suspended or taken
off the Prelate's right, which is reserved to the Prelate, even by the Pat. 15.
E. 4. par. 3. m. 18.
Patent for erecting the Office of Chancellor, particularly in those things,
which touching the Order, ought by the Statutes of the Institution to belong to
him. But forasmuch as at the usual time of performing this Ceremony in the
Chapel, the Prelate (if present) is presumed to be officiating at the Altar,
in discharge of another part of his Duty: Upon this consideration has the
service been then imposed upon the Chancellor and others.

Lastly, we have observed the Scruteny to be once taken by Palmer's large
Iournal. p. 27.
Garter, an. 16. Car. 1. at the Election of the renowned Thomas Earl of
Strafford; but this was at a time when not only the Prelate, but all the other
Officers of the Order, excepting Sir John Borough Garter, were absent; and
consequently this Service being so performed by him, ought rather be judged
(from what has been said) to have been done in the Prelate's, than
Chancellor's right.

SECT. IX. The Time when.
BUT whosoever of the Officers of the Order they were that gathered the
Knights-Companions Suffrages, the time when they entered upon this duty (in the
intervals of Feasts, where the occasion required a peculiar Chapter to be
called for Election) was usually after the Chapter had been opened, and the
matter of Election proposed by the Sovereign; after which (to the execution of
this accustomed employment) the Officer usually proceeded with great Reverence
and all possible Respect.

Howbeit upon an extraordinary occasion (in the interval of the Grand Feasts)
the Sovereign has sometimes, caused and assembly of the Knights-Companions to
be had at the Castle of Windesor, who in the Choire of St. George's Chapel
(not Chapter House) after the more solemn way, have delivered in their
Nominations, and returning thence into the Chapter House, He there has made
his Election. Thus did King Henry the Eighth, upon the Lib. N. p. 288.
7. of June in the 17. year of his Reign in reference to the Election of the
Ibid. p. 249.
Lord Henry Fitz Roy (so is he styled in the Scruteny, and there ranked among
the Barons) for as yet he was not created Duke of Somerset and Richmond, nor
until the Pat. de an. 17. H. 8. pars 1.
18. day of the same Month) and Ralph Nevil Earl of Westmerland; the Ceremony
of whose Nominations having been performed in the Lib. N. p. 249.
Choire, the Sovereign returned into the Chapter House where the Election
passed.

Again we observe, that the Lib. R. p. 139.
20. of May an. 14. Car. 1. being Trinity Sunday, the Sovereign caused a
Chapter to be held that afternoon in the Chapter House at Windesor, in
reference also to the Nomination and Election of his Sacred Majesty, the
present Sovereign; at the breaking up whereof, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions proceeded immediately to Saint George's Chapel, where at
Palmer's large Iournal. p. 5.
Evening Prayer (which was not within the compass of the Fe^st, for that began
not until the next day) the Scruteny was taken.

And besides those Examples, which show the Nominations have been collected
(upon peculiar occasions) in the Choire at Windesor, there are also one or two
Instances, where it appears they have been also taken in the Chapel at
Whit^hall, as on the Lib. R. p. 2^.
15. of May, an. 1. Car. 1. at the Election of Edward Earl of Dors^t, Henry
Earl of Holland, and Thomas Viscount Andever (afterward Earl of Berkshire) as
also on the Lib. R. p. 2^.
4. of July the same year, whereat the Duke of Chevereux was chosen one of the
Companions of this most Noble Order.

Otherwise, and that most usually, the Suffrages have been collected at the
second Vespers, or in the time of Evening Prayer, on St. George's day, or that
day whereon the Feast of St. George has been celebrated by Pr^r^gation. And
with this note of time do we find the taking of diverse Scrutenies marked.

Howbeit, we once have met with a scruteny, made in the Chapter House at
Windesor, on the Lib. R. p. ^9.
Eve of the Grand Feast, at which the Person immediately Elected was sent for
in, and had the Id. p. 61.
Ensigns of the Order placed upon him: when forthwith the Sovereign proceeded
to the Chapel, and after some space the Elect Knight followed to his Id. p. 61.
Installation.

And this was the case of James Marquess Hamilton, an. 6. Car. 1. who being
necessitated to begin his Voyage the next morning toward Germany (whither he
went General of 6000 Foot, in assistance of the King of Sweden) occasioned the
Sovereign to dispatch these Ceremonies on the Eve of the Feast.

Formerly the time wherein the Scruteny was begun to be taken in the Chapel
may be noted to have been spoken of somewhat general and indefinite, as in the
Cellesian. W. le N Cl.
2. MS. fol. ilnes eund. W. le N. ^l.
3 MS. fol. ilnes eund. W. le N. ^l.
4 MS. penes c. praef. W. D. N.
5. MS. penes praef. W. D. N.
8. and MS. penes praef. W. D. N.
9. years of Queen Elizabeth, during the time of Evening Prayer. And so in like
manner, an. Lib. C. p. 160.
4. Iac. and an. Lib R. p. 30.
13. Car. 1. And when the Feast of St. George was held at Whitehall upon the
18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1. the Annals say, Lib. R. p. 122.
That the Sovereign recreated himself with the melody of Evensong, during
which, the Chancellor collected the Votes of the Knights-Companions.

But in some other places, the time of this Action, is delivered more limited
to a precise time, or some particular part of Evening Prayer. As an. 26. and
27. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 94.
Whilst the Choire sung the service. And the like, an. Ib. p. 18 s.
14. Iac. but an. 4. Car. 1. while the Anthem was sung, after the second
Less^n, Lib. R. p. 44.
but more frequently after the first Lesson, as in the 2. and 9. years of King
Charles the First, lb. p. 33.
while the Anthem was singing, or during the Anthem of the blessed Virgin,
called the Magnificat; and which is all one with than an. 14. Car. 1. viz.
Palmer's large Iournal. p. 25.
assion as the first Lesson was read, or Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1638. p. 23.
at the first Lesson, which is there remembered to be, the Palmer's Iournal pro
an. 1638. p. 23.
usual part of the service, in which the Nomination ought to begin.

SECT. X. The Manner and Order of it.
AFter what manner the Knights-Companions Votes ought to be collected, when the
Scruteny is taken in the Choire, if we have recourse to the celebration of
Saint George's day at Greenwich, an. 28. H. 8. entered into the Black Book of
the Order, we shall be informed from the then Register, Page 269.
That he used his diligence in going to and fro, from one side to the other, to
demand and redemand the Suffrages, from the Knights Companions, according to
the variety and order of their Stalls, which like course and proceeding we find
recorded, in eisdem terminis, to have been observed by the Chancellor, anno
Lib. C. p. 88.
24 Eliz. And without question was generally thus performed at other times; for
in other places of the Annals, it is mentioned to be done lb. p. 42.
de more, after the usual manner, as an. 5. Eliz. or Page 94.
juxta Ordinis Constitutiones, according to the Ordinances and Decrees of the
Order, as anno 26. Eliz.

That the Officer who collects the Nominations, ought to begin at the youngest
Knight-Companion, and so proceed upward toward the eldest, does plainly appear
from the order mentioned to be used in the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
2. and the MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 114.
20. years of Queen Elizabeth, as also an. Palmer's Iournal pro anno 1639. p.
23.
15. Car. 1. But to give the Reader a more particular account of this Ceremony,
with its circumstances, as it was performed in his late Majesty's Reign of
blessed memory, and doubtless long before, though it has not been our good hap
to meet therewith in scriptis, it was as follows.

Ex relation. Chr. Wren. nuper Regist. hujus Ordin. and Dan. Stokes nuper unius
Praeb. Reg. Cap. S. G^or. Windesor.
First the Officer arose, and went into the middle of the Choire, directly over
against his own Seat, where he made two Reverences, first toward the high
Altar, and next to the Sovereign: thence he proceeded up the Choire, near the
hault pace, against the Stall of the Junior Knight-Companion, and there made
like Reverences: This done, he went up to the Stall of the said Junior Knight,
and with a single Reverence to him only, demanded whom he pleased to Nominate,
which having taken (making to him a second Reverence) he descended into the
Choire, and thence passed to the next senior Knight on the other side (unless
by reason of the vacancy of that Stall he sat on the same side with the
Junior) and received his Nominations. Ex relation. Chr. Wren. nuper Regist.
hujus Ordin. and Dan. Stokes nuper unius Praeb. Reg. Cap. S. G^or. Windesor.
From the second Knight-Companion he again crossed the Choire to the third, and
in like manner he ascended, according to the seniority of the Knight-Companions
present (always crossing the Choire where there was occasion) until he arrived
at the senior Knight-Companion; and having thus received all their Nominations,
he returned into the middle of the Choire, and after usual and accustomed
Reverences, took his Seat.

This method and order of collecting the Votes, as to the general, and in the
Choire, ought likewise to be observed, when they are taken from the
Knights-Companions in Chapter, they being ranked in due order, on each side the
Table, according to the seniority of their Elections, and position of Stalls in
the Choire, the Officer who gathers them beginning with the Junior, and thence
orderly ascending to the Senior Knight-Companion; concerning which more need
not be said, than is before delivered.

And that it may be understood in what form every Knight-Companion ranketh the
Names of those Persons he proposes, and how each Classis is distinguished and
divided, the following Scruteny will fully enough declare, it being taken the
12. day of May, an. 13. H. 6. upon the vacancy of one Stall, happening by the
death of Sir Here Tanke Clux a German by birth, and is the first Scruteny we
find marshalled among the Annals of this most Noble Order.

Nominabant Principes. Barons. Equites. Dux Exoniae Ducem Norfolciae Dominum
Lovell Dominum Tho. Stanley Dux Exoniae Ducem Warwici Dominum Audley Dominum
Ioh. Holland Dux Exoniae Comitem Oxoniae Dominum Dudley Dominum Ioh. Steward
Marchio Suffolciae Ducem Norfolciae Dominum Lovell Dominum Iacobum Fenys
Marchio Suffolciae Comitem Devoniae Dominum Audley Dominum Ric. Woodvyle.
Marchio Suffolciae Comitem Oxoniae Dominum Foix Dominum Andream Ogard Comes
Salopiae Ducem Warwici Dominum Audley Dominum Rogerum Fenys Comes Salopiae
Ducem Norfolciae Dominum Dudley Dominum Thomans Stanley Comes Salopiae Comitem
Oxoniae Dominum Foix Dominum Thomam Kiriell Dominus Sudeley Ducem Norfolciae
Dominum Foix Dominum Rogerum Fenys Dominus Sudeley Ducem Warwici Dominum Lovell
Dominum Iacobum Fenys Dominus Sudeley Comitem Devoniae Dominum Audley Dominum
Gulielm. Bonevile Dominus Willoughby Ducem Warwici Dominum Wells Dominum Thomam
Kiriell Dominus Willoughby Ducem Norfolciae Dominum Lovell Dominum Io.
Montgomery Dominus Willoughby Comitem Oxoniae Dominum Laware Dominum Rob.
Shotesbroke Dominus Scales Ducem Warwici Dominum Foix Dom. Edm. Hungerford.
Dominus Scales Comitem Oxoniae Dominum Clyfford Dom. Guliel. Beauchamp Dominus
Scales Comitem Devoniae Dominum Laware Dom. Andream Ogard Dominus Johannes
Fastolph Ducem Norfolciae Dominum Boucer Dominum To. Hungerford Dominus
Johannes Fastolph Ducem Warwici Dominum Audley Dominum Rob. Roos Dominus
Johannes Fastolph Comitem Oxoniae Dom. Gray Ruffyn Dom. Andream Ogard Dominus
Johannes Beauchamp Ducem Warwici Dominum Foix Dominum Rogerum Fenys Dominus
Johannes Beauchamp Comitem Devoniae Dominum Lovell Dominum Iacobum Fenys
Dominus Johannes Beauchamp Comitem Oxoniae Dominum Audley Dominum Robertum Roos

Here may be observed, how each Knight-Companion has his own Name prefixed to
those Persons for whom he gives his Vote, to the end it may be known and
remembered by whom the Knights-Candidates are Nominated, and these are ranked in
three several Divisions.

The first contains the Degrees of Earls, Marquesses, Dukes, Princes, Kings,
and Emperors; howbeit at a Scruteny taken an. 24 H. 6. in a Chapter held at
Brainford, Lib. N. p. 98.
Albro Vasques Dalmadea (who immediately following is styled Comes Averentiae)
is by mistake ranked but in the second division, among the Barons, and twice
among the Knights, in the Votes of the Marquess of Suffolk, and Earl of
Shrewsbury: but this Error peradventure arose for want of due information
either of the Law in the Statutes, or his Degree; the later of which is more
probably true, for being a Stranger, his Title of Earl might not be so
generally known; nor is it taken notice of in the Scruteny it self, though in
the Annals immediately after.

And which is more apparent, the Earl of Oxford, Devonshire, and Arundel (whose
degrees were sufficiently known) at a Scruteny taken an. Lib. N. p. 98.
24. H. 6. are once ranked in the second division among the Barons, and an.
Page 197.198.
1. H. 8. the Earl of Derby is three times so placed, and again an. Page 211.
13. H. 6. the Earl of Devonshire twice. But this happened not through any
oversight, or neglect in observation of the Statutes in this particular, but
because at these Nominations, wherein they are so placed, the first division
(to which they belonged) happened to be filled up with those other higher
degrees, appertaining to the same Classis, that is to say, Kings or Dukes; as
when the before mentioned Earls of Oxford, Devonshire, and Arundel, were named
in the place of Barons, the King of Portugal, the Dukes of Warwick and Norfolk,
were set down in the place of Princes; and so it fell out in like manner in the
other instances.

On the contrary an. 15. and 16. E. 4. the Lord Richard Gray one of the Queens
Sons by her former Husband Sir John Gray of Groby Knight, in respect of his
alliance to the Royal Family, is ranked in the first Division among the Lib. N.
p. 138 140.
Princes, under this Title Dominus Richardus filius Reginae, and afterward,
an. 19. of the same King, set only among the Ib. p. 144.14^ 148.149.
Barons, as well with the former Title, as this, Ricardus Dominus Gray. But in
the 22. of the same King, he is thrice registered among the Princes, and as
often with the Barons; whence we see, that sometimes the place among Princes
may be afforded of courtesy to Persons of most eminent Relation, but then
again as it is not their due, so such of the Knights-Companions as rank them
lower, pass no diminution on their honor.

Within the second Division are placed Barons and Viscounts; for Viscounts were
in all Scrutenies, after the first Erection of that Dignity, ranked with Lib.
N. p. 99.104.110.244* and Lib. C. p. 17* 47.51.55.57* 59.60.62. ^^*
Barons, until the Lib. C. p. 157.
3. of King James (saving only Lib. N. p. 289
John Dudley Viscount Lisle, an. 35. H. 8. who by every Knight, the Duke of
Norfolk excepted, is ranked in the first Division with the Princes) and in a
Scruteny then taken, Robert Cecil Viscount Cranborne is the second Viscount
that we observe to have been ranked with Princes, from whence it became usual
so to do, in succeeding Scrutenies, until an. Palmer's large Iournal. p. 21.
14. Car. 1. and then upon a question put in Chapter (held at Westminster the
Palmer's large Iournal. p. 21.
23. Maii anno praedicto, whether Earls Sons and Viscounts were elegible with
Barons; it was resolved they were, and that by all practice (except in the two
cases now mentioned) it was usually done, and it seems so again observed near
that time, for in Ex eod. Iournal. p. 5. and 18.
two Scrutenies taken the 19. and 21. of that instant May, the Viscounts are
therein reduced to the second Division, and ranked with Barons.

Finally, in the third Division the Knights-Batchellors receive their place; so
also did Banerets, until King Henry the Eighth in his Art. 19.
Body of Statutes gave them equal rank in Scrutenies with Barons. Only in that
one Scruteny taken an. Lib. N. p. 171.172.173.
14. H. 7. Sir Reignald Bray, Sir Richard Gouldford, and Sir Rice ap Thomas
(all three Rot. pergam nuper pen. Sim. Archer Eq. Aut.
created Banerets at the Battle of Black Heath) are registered among the Lib. N.
p. 172.173.
Barons, and yet two of them are oftener ranked with the Lib. N. p. 172.173.
Knights-Batchellors in the very same Scruteny.

But though the word in King Henry the Eighth's Latin Statutes is Baronettus
instead of Banerettus, yet is this a mistake met with anciently in some both
Records and Books, as well as in those places of the Annals, all written long
before the Title of Baronet was conceived, or the Dignity in use with us; for
the Pat. an. 9. Iac. Reg. pars 2 5.
first Creation of that happened but in this last Age. And hereof more
satisfaction may be received Cooks Instut. pars 2. f. 667. Selden's Tit. of
Hon. p. 736 and 737. Spelman's Gloss verbo Baronct^us.
elsewhere.

In the last place, he who demands these Suffrages, given according to the
judgment of each Knight-Companion present, is by the Statutes of Institution
appointed to take them in ^. 3. Stat. Art. 18
writing. In pursuance of which, we find it so observed, at a Scruteny taken
an. 2. H. 6. for the Election of Regist. Chartac. fol. 12. b.
John Lord Talbot and Furnivall (afterward created Earl of Shrewsbury) where
the Dean of Windesor and the Register of the Order, Regist. Chartac. fol. 12. b.
wrote down the Votes and Nominations of every one of the Knights present at
the day of Election.

Again, at a Scruteny made an. 4. H. 6. (so also at sundry other times) to
supply the Stall of Ralph Earl of Westmerland, then lately deceased (for whom
mistakingly, the Black Book of the Order sets down Page 81.
Sir Henry Fitz. Hugh, in whose room a little before in the same Page 78.
Book an. 3. H. 6. it appears the Lord Scales was Elected, and elsewhere, that
Regist. Chartac. f. 13. b.
Sir John Fastolse was chosen a Companion of this most Noble Order, upon the
death, not of Sir Henry Fitz. Hugh, but of the said Earl of Westmerland) we
find it noted, that the Lib. N. p. 81.
Dean and Register wrote down in order (according to their seniority) the Votes
of the Knights-Companions.

And after the Scrutenies began to be entered on the Pages of the Annals, it is
evident the general practice has gone along with the Injunction of the
Statutes, only there are two Instances of an Election made, without taking a
Scruteny in writing; one in the case of Prince Henry, and Christierne the
Fourth, King of Denmark; where the Knights-Companions in a Chapter held at
Whitehall the 14. of July, an. Iacobi Regis primo, gave their Votes Lib. C. p.
150.
Viva Voce, and forthwith the Sovereign Elected them both into the Fellowship
of the Order. The other was the case of James Marquess Hamilton, Elected the 2.
of February in the 20. year of the same King, with the Lib. R. p. 4.
vocal consent of all the Knights-Companions present.

But it is to be considered, that this course, and the omission of taking the
Scruteny in writing, is not only contrary to the Law of the Order, so enjoined
for a more certain memorial of the action, and more faithful transmission of it
to Posterity, but exceeding prejudicial to persons of Honor and Merit; whose
Names would otherwise live with great reputation among the Candidates of this
Illustrious Order: and of which honor many deserving persons will be hereafter
deprived, if the Injunction of the Statutes be not observed in this particular.

SECT. XI. The Presentation of it to the Sovereign.
THE Suffrages being recieved from the Knights-Companions, the Officer by whom
they are collected, is to present the whole form of the Nominations to the
Sovereign, with all due Reverence; for so is it recorded, an. Lib. N. p. 64*
9. H. 5. when the Prelate of the Order had taken the Scruteny.

If these Votes were taken in Chapter, the Paper wherein entry was made has
been usually forthwith presented to the Sovereign's hands, who upon perusal of
it made Election and Choice before the Chapter broke up; of which practice we
could give sundry Instances, did not the generality thereof render it needless.

But if collected in the Chapel; sometimes it was immediately delivered to the
Sovereign, before he went thence, though no Election were made until the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions met in Chapter the next morning. And thus in
the MS. penes W. le N. Cl.
2. and Lib. C. p. 42.
5. years of Queen Elizabeth, as soon as the Nominations were all received, the
Chancellor of the Order (who then took them) presented the Scruteny to the
Sovereign, Ex Collect an. W. le. N. Cl.
before Service ended: the like did the Register of the Order, an. MS. penes W.
D. N.
8. Eliz.

At other times it has not been presented until Vespers were finished, as in
the MS. penes W. D. N.
4. Lib. C. p. 66.
14. and Lib. p. 103.
28. years of Queen Elizabeth, and the Lib. C. p. 166.
6. Ib. p. 172.
9. Ib. p. 184.
13. and Ib. p. 187.
14. of King James.

Lastly (and which has been frequent in use of later times) the Scruteny has
not been presented to the Sovereign until the next morning, after opening the
Chapter (customarily held before Morning Prayer) as in the Ib. p. 63.
13. Page 70.
15. Page 84.
22. and Page 108.
30. years of Queen Elizabeth, and again in the Lib. R. p. 35.
3. Ib. p 90.
9. Page 97.
10. Page 124.132.
13. Page 142.
14. Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639 p. 20.
15. and Palmer's large Iournal p. 42.
17. years of the Reign of his late Majesty of ever sacred memory: against
which last time of presentation, it was transcribed into a little Palmer's
large Iournal p. 42.
Book, and with all due reverence offered upon the Knee, Lib. R. p. 142.
before any thing else was treated of in the Chapter.

If the Sovereign be absent from the Chapel when the Votes are collected, that
Officer by whom they are taken, is to present them into the hands of the E. 3.
H. 5. Stat. Art. 18.
Sovereign's Deputy, or Lieutenant; who thereupon is obliged to deliver them to
the Sovereign, either that Evening or the next Morning.

Besides the general practice has gone along therewith, as we see an. Lib. N.
p. 77.
2. H. 6. where the Dean of Windesor, and the Register of the Order having
collected the Vote of every Knight, Lib. N. p. 77.
they were immediately presented to the Sovereign's Deputy. So also when John
Duke of Bedford was Lieutenant, an. 4. H. 6. the Votes taken for Election, Ib.
p. 81. vide Regist. Chartaceum. f. 13. b.
were delivered unto him. Again anno 20. Fliz. Sir Francis Walsingham then
Chancellor, having taken the Suffrages, forthwith (before Evening Prayer was
ended) gave them to the MS. penes G. O. Y p. 114.
Earl of Sussex, then Lieutenant to the Sovereign: and the like did the Prelate
to the Lib C. p. 103.
Lord Howard of Effingham Lieutenant, an. 30. Eliz. as also in the Excad. lib.
33.35.36. and 37. years of the said Queens Reign.

And that the Lieutenant in discharge of his duty, did present them afterward
to the Sovereign, appears likewise from several places in the Blue Book of the
Order: for after the Nominations were received, and delivered to him by the
Prelate, in the said 30. year of Queen Elizabeth, Ib. p. 113.
He presented them unto her: and to the like purpose is it remembered in the
Vota Nominantium excepit Praelatus Ordinis, qui ea Locum-tenenti exhibit, and
is Superiori Lib. C. p. 119.
34. Vota Nominanti^m excepit Cancellarius, except a sine mora Locum-tenenti
tradidit, eademque ille postmodum Supremae exhibebat. Ib. p. 131.
38. and Nomina in Scrutinio excepta, Locum-tenenti Cancellarius obtulit, hic
Suprema: Ib. p. 137.
40. years of this Queen.

But it seems in the 12. year of King James, some exceptions were taken, for
that the Chancellor did not present the Scruteny to the MS. de Festis temp.
Iac. R. pene^ E. W. G. f. 151. b.
Prince (at that time the Sovereign's Lieutenant) but afterward to the
Sovereign himself: wherein he committed an Error, which some of his Predessors
had fallen into before, viz. an. Lib. C. p. 32.33.
2. MS. fol. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 4.
3. and Lib. C. p. 91.
25. Eliz.

SECT. XII. His Considerations thereupon, referring to the Qualification of
each Person to be Elected.
THE Scruteny being thus taken, and presented to the Sovereign, we now proceed
to those particulars, which are to be weighed by him, upon view and
consideration had thereof.

For, as the Knights-Companions are obliged by the Statutes to Nominate no
other than such as can abide the Test of those Qualifications before remembered;
so is there a standard of Honor, provided and ordained for the Sovereign,
whereby to measure the Extraction, Quality, and Merit of the Person proposed to
Election; lest peradventure in less circumspect times, the favor of the
Sovereign might become over indulgent, to Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 2.
inferior or unworthy persons, who ought here utterly to be rejected, because
this Order, Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 2.
consisting of goodness and honorable virtue, does not admit or uphold
unworthiness and villainy.

Here then falls in to be considered the substance of the second Article,
throughout all the Bodies and Exemplars of the Statutes, wherein the
Qualifications for Election are exhibited, as in the 18. Article are those for
Nomination. In the first of which viz. those of Institution, the words E. 3.
Stat. Art. 2.
That none shall be Elected into the Order, etc. can refer to the Act of
Election only, if we consult the rest of the Statutes, and compare them with
this place; for thus they severally deliver themselves, That none shall be H.
^. Stat. Art. 2.
Elected Companion of the Order. That none shall be H. 8. Stat. Art. 2.
Elected and Chosen a Companion of this Order. All pointing to the time of
Election more properly and directly, than to any other Ceremony succeeding,
either of Investiture with the Garter and George, Installation, or to what ever
else it may nore dubiously be wrested, from the Expressions of Ord. Stat in
Biblioth. Hatton. Art. 2.
Admitting and Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 2.
Receiving Knights into this Order, used in the Exemplars of the Statutes of
Institution. And that this does so is further cleared, from another passage in
the said second Article of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, which speaking of
the last point of Reproach, says, the guilt thereof so incapacitates any man's
Election, that he ever after ought to be esteemed unworthy of Election into the
Order.

The Qualifications and Endowments are chiefly noted to be two; first, that the
Person in Nomination be a Gentleman of Blood; and secondly a Knight and without
Reproach. As to the first of these, finding the phrases somewhat varied
throughout the Statutes, we shall therefore single them out.

By the Statutes of Institution no man ought to be Elected, Art. 2.
unless he be a Gentleman born, and so says King Henry the Fifth's Art. 2.
Statutes. The Exemplar entered in the Black Book says, Art. 2.
unless he be worthy upon the account of Birth and Arms; whereunto is added (in
this Exemplar only) Art. 2.
that he be one eminent for his demeanor and good Report; hereby linking
together, Blood and Virtue, which indeed make the noblest Conjunction. Finally,
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes speak a little larger, and appoint him to be a
Art. 2. Eum nomine and armis nobilem esse, qui proprii Cognominis, Tessaram
gentilitiam gestar, and eo sanguine genirus est, cujus idem insigne and nomen
propria sint. MS de Art Heraldica apud Iurisp. Heroic. p. 438.
Gentleman by Name, Arms, and Blood; and lest this Character might seem in any
part obscure; a Gentleman of Blood is determined to be H. 8. Engl. Stat. Art. 2.
one descended of three descents of Nobles, viz. of Name and Arms, both of his
Father and Mothers side.

For most certain it is, that Gentility is not made perfect or accomplished in
the Person in whom it takes beginning, but rather completed by Succession. And
we find among the Romans, though the Father was free born, and of the
Equestrian Cense, yet was it further requisite, that the A^no V. C. 775.
Constiturum est ne cui jus Annuli esser nisi cui ingenuo ipsi Patri Avoque
paterno sextertia 40 census fu^ssent. Plin. l. 32. c. 2.
Grandfather should be so likewise, for obtaining a Ring, one of the Symbols of
the Equestrian Order with them. Whence have been wisely found out, those three
Degrees of Gentility; Beginning, Increase and full Ripeness: for Iurisprudentia
Heroica. p. 8. a.
Gentility has its beginning in the Grandfather, its increase in the Father,
and full ripeness in the Son; and therefore in the constitution of Gentility,
the Father and Grandfather (bringing renown and reputation to the Son, by same
and estimation of life and actions) are at least required to make it perfect
and complete; because it cannot naturally and congruously grow to ripeness in
the Son, unless it has formerly increased in the Father, and long before begun
from the Grandfather.

As to this particular, there is a memorable instance in that of the Lord
William Pagit, divested of the Garter, about five years after his ^lection;
upon pretense of his King Ed. 6. Diary in Bibl. Colton, Sir I^. Hawards life of
the said King. Print. 1636 p. 344.
not being a Gentleman of Blood by either Father or Mother.

But it is also observable in the Blue Book, that this severity toward him
proceeded not altogether from defect in point of Extraction, but most from the
prevalence and practice of John Dudley Duke of Northumberland ( A quo
procurance Duce Norhumbriae suerat injustissime ac immeritissime deturbatu^.
Lib. C. p. 6.
by whose means he was most unjustly and undeservedly put out of the Order)
happily grudging the great honor he had formerly done the said Lord, when being
Earl Marshal of England, Ex. Collect. Pat. Arm. d Rob. Glover nuper Somerset.
Herald. f. 45. b.
his good advice and character of him procured from King Edward the Sixth, a
new Grant of those Arms, under the Great Seal of England, which he had sometime
before Ex. Collect. Pat. Arm d Rob. Glover nuper Somerset. Herald f. 45. b.
received from Garter Principal King of Arms.

But admit the defect of Blood and Arms for three descents, were the true cause
of his deprivation of the Garter; yet what follows is mis-related by Hist. E.
6. loco cit.
Sir Io. Howard (as also by Chronic. f. 1026.
John Stow) to wit, that the George and Garter were forthwith bestowed upon the
Earl of Warwick eldest Son to the Duke of Northumberland (who out of Dugdales
Antiq. of Warwickeshire p. 339. a.
courtesy was so called, as a commonly Dukes Sons, in the life time of their
Fathers, are entitled of some Earldom, whereof their Fathers have the honor)
but more truly had he said, they were bestowed upon Sir Andrew Dudley, Brother
to the said Duke.

For although we find the said Earl of Warwick put in the Scruteny, entered
among the Annals of the Order, of Edward the Sixth's Reign, and taken at a
Chapter held on St. George's day, an. 6. Ed. 6. (the Lord Pagit being Lib. N.
p. 320. vide Autogr. penes praef. Guil. Dugdale. See also King Ed. 6. Dyary in
Bibl. Cotton.
degraded in a Chapter held on the Lib. N. p. 320. vide Autogr. penes praef.
Guil. Dugdale. See also King Ed. 6. Dyary in Bibl. Cotton.
Eve of the said Feast) yet was not the Earl Elected at that or any other time;
nor was any other person then chosen, who had the honor to be inserted into
that Scruteny, except the Lib. N. p. 321.
Earl of Westmerland, and the said Lib. N. p. 321.
Sir Andrew Dudley.

But to return; the Ensigns of this most Noble Order were not with more
disgrace taken from, than with honor restored to the Lord Pagit, as soon as
Queen Mary came to the Crown; and that by as great and absolute authority, as
did deprive him of them, namely by Decree in Chapter, holden at St. James's the
27. of September, an. 1. Mar. so that this Honor might be said, to have been
rather wrongfully suspended than justly lost.

For in confirmation of this Lords restoration, he had the Lib. C. p. 6.
Garter forthwith buckled on his Leg again, by two of the Knights-Companions
present, and the Lib. C. p. 6.
Collar of the Order put about his shoulders, with the George depending
thereat. And a command then also given Garter, to take care that his Lib. C. p.
6.
Achievements should be again publicly set up, over his Stall at Windesor:
being the same he before possessed, viz. the 9. on the Sovereign's side.

In this case of the Lord Pagit, we observe that the very Records of the Order,
brand his degradation of injustice upon the foresaid pretense, as if it were
inferable thence, that when Honor is conferred upon the score of Virtue, and
great Endownments, the consideration of these supplies the defect and obscurity
of Extraction. Whence it came that the then Sovereign (whose prerogative it was
H. 8. Stat. Art. 1.
to declare and interpret the Statutes) being at that time present in Chapter,
thought fit to qualify the Law, and gave him this honorable commendation, Lib.
C. p. 6.
That he had highly deserved of the Nation by his Prudence and Counsel.

And though the Exemplar entered in the Black Book has the qualification of
Art. 2.
Virtue and good Report inserted only into it; yet we observe the same (in
effect and practice) considered in foregoing times, with great circumspection,
by the Sovereigns and their Lieutenants before Election; and that the
Magnanimity, Fortitude, Prudence, Generosity, Fame, Reputation, and other
Virtues and Merits, whether innate or acquired, of the Person proposed to
Election; have been by their prudent Inquisition looked into, deliberately
weighed, and brought to the Rule for trial, as to their fitness and capacity of
the honor of this most Noble Order.

These and such like Qualities we see Ille Nominatos expendens, ut alii^ ^lii
Fortitudine, Prudentia, reliquisque Virtutibus ac Meritis antecellerent, e
Comitibus Iohannem Comitem Mareschallum (ut vocant) etc. aptissimos atque quam
dignissimos and ob id in Ordinem suscipiendos esse decrevit. Lib. N. p. 64.
King Henry the Fifth took into his consideration, at an Election in the 9.
year of his Reign, and for which he preferred before others (then Nominated and
presented unto him) John Earl Marshal, William Earl of Suffolk, John Lord
Clifford, Sir Lewis Robertsack, and Sir Here tanke Clux. In like manner did
Ibid. p. 77.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester (Deputy to King Henry the Sixth, in the second year
of his Reign) weigh and examine diligently with himself, the Fortitude and
Prudence, with other the illustrious Actions and deserts of John Lord Talbot
before his Election; and thereunto gave an approbation worthy his own judgment,
and not less than that noble Candidates virtue merited.

It is further remembered in the Annals of this Order, that for these and such
like noble and heroic Qualifications, persons in after times were likewise
preferred in Election before others: And particularly, we observe it taken
notice of, an. 28. H. 8. upon the Election of Sir Nicholas Carew, Lib. N. p.
271.
That he was a very fit person, upon the eminency of his Extraction and Fame,
and the many worthy and noble Actions he had performed; so as that all present
did without any delay unanimously approve of his Election. Of like nature those
Commendations given to Henry Earl of Cumberland upon his Election, wherein also
particular services are taken notice of, viz. the Ibid. p. 274.
many famous and loyal Achievements performed by him, both at several other
times, and then more especially, when the tumult of Rebellion, began to break
forth in those Borders, where he had his habitation.

The second Point is, That unless he be a E. 3* Stat. Art. 2.
Knight, he is not qualified for Election, (or as one of the Exemplers express
it In Bibl. Hatton. Art. 2.
unless girded with the unstained Girdle of Knighthood) and the same in terms
do the other H. 5. H. 8. Stat. Art. 2.
Bodies of Statutes declare. Whence we may again mind the Reader of the
singular regard and jealousy the Law of the Order has of this particular
Qualification, above the rest:

And lest chance or inadvertency might let slip a Person not Knighted into the
Scruteny (besides the two former cautions given touching Nomination) yet is it
also here (in another Article) a third time remembered and provided against, to
secure such from passing through the Sovereign's Election. For this cause also
were the words Lib. N. Ord. Stat. in Art. 2.
ut minimum (That he be at least a Knight before he be elected) added as a
special Item, to give a more than ordinary caution, when the Sovereign comes to
make his Choice.

And to make it clear, that the second Article in the Statutes has long since
received this construction, we shall insert an eminent case, which fell out
Lib. N. p. 246.
an. 17. H. 8. where the Sovereign (keeping the Feast of St. George at
Greenwich) having Elected the Lord Roos (created Earl of Rutland, the 18. of
June following) into the Society of this most Noble Order, and being Page 247.
advertised on the morrow after St. Georges day, while the Mass of Requiem was
celebrating, that he had not before received the dignity of Knighthood,
according to the Statutes, which positively enjoin, Ibid.
That whosoever is elected into this Society, should be in degree at least a
Knight, that is actually Knighted beforehand; for so the words ut minimum here
in this place also of the Annals vouched, ought justly to be understood, in
regard the Lord Roos, was at the time of his Election a Baron of this Realm,
and consequently stated in a higher degree of honor than a Knight: The
Sovereign therefore immediately after Mass, recalled the Knights-Companions to
a new consultation, whereat he declared the Election void, for the reason
before alleged, and commanded the Ensigns of the Order, [the Garter and
George] so lately received to be withdrawn, which being accordingly done, He in
the same place, drew his Sword, and therewith dubbed him Knight, and then
proceeded, with the Knights-Companions present, to a new Election, wherein the
said Lord Roos was with their unanimous consent again Elected a Companion, and
so declared by the Sovereign's own mouth: by whose command also, the aforesaid
Ensigns and Ornaments were restored unto, and placed upon him by the Dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk.

And declaratory to this, is it since recorded in the Red Book of the Order,
Page 143.
That none of the English, Scotch, or Welsh Nation, how considerable soever
otherwise, in the prerogative of Blood or Virtue, can be Elected into this most
honorable Society, but that he ought to be first ennobled and rendered capable
by this first Degree of Knightly honor.

But in reference to Foreign Princes being in their own Country, this Law has
now no force; for by a Decree made at Whitehall, in a Chapter there held, the
Lib. R p. 117.
18. day of April, an. 13. Car. 1. it being the day whereon the Feast of St.
George was also celebrated, these words [ ut minimum] are explained to relate
to Placuit Supremo, ut solos Majestati suae subditos Lex ea comprehenderet,
primi hujus gradus expertes; Non autem Principes Exteros superiori gradu
ornatos, Ib. p. 119.
all Subjects, of what Degree soever, within the Sovereign's Dominions (
Placuit Supremo, ut solos Majestati suae subditos Lex ea comprehendret, primi
hujus gradus expertes; Non autem Principes Exteros superiori gradu ornatos, Ib.
p. 119.
not Foreign Princes) who before their Election at least (if not Nomination)
ought to be Knighted, as the Basis and first Degree of Chivalry.

And as they ought to be Knights, The three points of Reproach.
so as well Knights free from Infamy or Reproach; for so the Art. 2.
Statutes of Institution enjoin. In Henry the Fifth's Statutes it is thus
rendered, Art. 2.
Chivalier sans reproach, which is the same with H. 8. Stat. Art. 2.
Eques irreprehensus. And we find it one of the Arguments used by John Duke of
Bedford, on the behalf of Sir John Radcliff, to promote his Election; Ex
autogr. penes W. D. N.
That he had continued and exercised the Armies, the space of eight and twenty
Winters unreproached.

But for as much as the points of Reproach may be accounted many and diverse,
and through their incertainty and number, rather become Traps to enshare, than
Rules for caution and direction, Stat Art. 2.
King Henry the Eighth determined and limited them to Three only.

The first species or point of Reproach is, 1. Conviction of Heresy.
where a Knight has been convicted of Heresy, against the Catholic faith,
or suffered any public punishment for such offense. Here we may see, Heresy
is reckoned among those defects that deprive men of Honor, in as much as
bending its force against the Catholic Church, it not only renders a man in
the balance of Honor of no weight, but more than all other sins makes him
infamous. And therefore when either by Tongue, Pen, or Actions, a man
endeavors to trample under foot the sacred Law, scandalizeth Government,
seduceth others, or in like execrable wickednesses discovers himself, he is
judged void of Conscience and ^quity, and a most notorious destroyer of that
divine part of man, the Soul and consequently deserving, not of external infamy
alone (which the guilt of this Offense justly co^tracts) but other punishments
extending to life.

The second Point of Reproach is, 2. Attainture of Treason.
where any Knight has been arraigned, convicted, and attainted of Treason.
Nevertheless Queen Elizabeth qualifies this point by a Decree in Chapter held
at the Tower the Lib. C. p. 26.
12. of January, in the first year of her Reign (which we conceive was made
upon occasion of restoring in Blood William Marquess of Northampton, and the
Lord Robert Dudley, after created Earl of Leicester, who with others had been
attainted of high Treason in the first of Queen Mary, and the attainder
confirmed by Parliament the same year) viz. Decretum est, si quis ex familia
nobili, aut generosa procrearus, cujus utetque parens avus and proavus generosi
sucrint. Laese Majestatis vel ante hac condemnatus est, vel post hac
condemnabitur, si el post eam condemnationem a Principe, ignoscatur, ita ut ad
family sue beneficium, Insignia and dignitatem restituatur; rabbus ortus
majoribus quales antea notati sunt, sitque hujusmodi qualem ejus Ordinis Leges
and Institut^ describunt, ut is deinceps Ordinis nobilissimi capax sit, and in
ejus Comilitonum adlegi and coaptari rite poss^. Ib. p. 29.
That in case any Person (so convicted) were pardoned by the Sovereign, and
restored in Blood, every such Gentleman in Name, Arms, and Blood, and descended
as aforesaid, being otherwise qualified according to the ancient Statutes of
the Order, should be thenceforth accounted Eligible and might be chosen a
Companion. And we find that the very next St. George's Feast, held the Ibid. p.
29.
22.23. and 24. of April following, the said Marquess of Northampton, and the
Lord Robert Dudley (who during the remaining part of Queen Mary's Reign, lay
under the burden of a heavy fate) had now recovered the Privileges of Honor,
and were preferred in Nomination, and on the last day of the said Feast Page 30.
Elected into this most Illustrious Society.

And here may further notice be taken of the said Marquess of Northampton's
case, who having been restored in Blood, and his restoration to the honor of
this most Noble Order also designed (for he had been formerly, an. 35. H. 8.
Lib. N. p. 289.
Elected and Ib. p. 290.
Installed) it was thought necessary to descend to a new Nomination and
Election, which as may be collected from the aforesaid Decree ought now to be
done, and was in him accordingly performed, the Lib. C. p. 31.
3. of June, anno primo Eliz.

3. Flying from Battle.
The third and last Point of Reproach, is where a Knight-Companion has fled
from Battle, in which the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, or other Captain
(having the Kings authority) were present, when Banners were displayed, and
both sides proceeded to fight. Now for a man to carry himself cowardly in the
Field, abandon his Colors, leave his Prince, Friends, and Companions in hazard
of life; are undoubtedly things highly reproachful, and draw dishonor upon the
Order, the Sovereign, and Knights-Companions; and a sufficient testimony, that
he valueth more his life than his honor, and prefers an infamous safety before
an honorable death.

If we look back into ancient History, we shall meet with a great Example of
Honor and Courage in Maccab. l. 1. c. 9. ver. 4.5.6.
Judas Maccabeus, who though he had but 800 of 3000 men left him (the rest
being fled out of fear to encounter Bacchides Army, consisting of 20000 Foot,
and 2000 Horse) and those 800 too forward to follow after; yet rather than
cowardly forsake the Field (whereby in all likehood, he might have saved his
life which was there loss) he encouraged his Soldiers to receive the onset of
his Enemies, with these words, Verse 10.
God forbid that I should do this thing, and flee away from them; if our time
be come, let us die manfully for our Brethren, and let us not stain our Honor.
And to say truth, the resolution of a right Martialist ought to be either to
return with Honor, or die upon the Bed of Honor.

By the Laws of King Edward the Confessor, where a Soldier in any expedition
either by Land or Sea, runs from his Colors, his Lamberts Arch. f. 147. de
Heretochiis Edit. Cant abr. 1644.
life and Estate was made liable to answer the Offense. And sad experience,
having from time to time made appear the inconvenience, danger, and loss
occasioned by such cowardly and dishonorable departure out of the Field; at
length our Parliaments, taking the same into serious consideration, made it
Stat. 18. H. ^. c. 19.3. H. 8. c. 5.2. E. 6. c. 2.4. and 5. Ph. and Mar. c. 3.
Felony without benefit of Clergy, forasmuch as this Offense tended to the
hurt and jeopardy of the Stat. 7. H. 7. c. 1.
King, the Nobility, and all the Commonwealth. And to secure our Naval Forces,
as well as Land Armies, Queen Elizabeth extended the Statute of 18. H. 6. cap.
19. no less to Mariners and Gunners, to all intents and purposes, than to other
Soldiers.

But much greater may the danger be, and far more dishonorable to them than
private Soldiers, where a Commander in chief, or other Officers (having the
conduct of an Army, or any part of it) shall herein offend; of which there is a
notable example in Thomas Earl of Lancaster, who an. 12. E. 2. was Walsingh.
sub. an. 1319.
proclaimed Traitor for leaving the Army at the Seige of Berwick, the
consequence whereof proved the loss of the whole design. And therefore, whoever
is culpable of any of these three points of Reproach, is altogether Lib. N. p.
216.
incapable of Election into this most Noble Order.

Ere we pass further, let us take notice of an Error, which Polydore Virgil
has linked with one justly observed and refuted by the learned Pen of Histor.
of St. George, part. 3. chapter 3. sect. 6.
Doctor Heylin, and which Eq. Aut. Anglo Wirtemb. p. 24.
Erhardus Celius has transcribed from the said Polydore; namely, that the
Knights-Companions have certain Laws belonging to their Order, whereby they are
obliged, Hist. Angl. l. 19. p. 378.
To defend and help one another, and in time of Battle never to betake
themselves to shameful flight.

But the first of these Clauses, is not in truth, any part of the Statute Law
of the Order; nor is the latter otherwise to be taken, than as one of those
points of Reproach laid down in the second Article of King Henry the Eight's
Statutes; which renders the person nominated incapable of Election, if known
guilty thereof.

Now that which gives some umbrage to the Knights mutual assistance and
defense, is an Article of the Statutes, which prohibits the arming themselves
one against another. For to avoid begetting of Feuds among them, whereby
brotherly love might be extinguished (a thing in all Societies specially to be
preserved) it was not the Founder's least care to provide against so great a
mischief. And therefore he Ordained (which since the ensuing Bodies of Statutes
have confirmed) E. 3. Stat. Art. 29. H. 5. Stat. Art. 30. H. 8. Stat. Art. 33.
That none of the Knights-Companions should Arm themselves against any of their
Fellows, unless either in the cause of his Sovereign, or his own just quarrel.

Upon this Clause some of them took hold, when in the great and fatal
controversy between the Houses of York and Lancaster, they divided themselves
to either side, and both pretended to take part with the King: some sticking
close to Henry the Sixth, whom they accounted Sovereign of the Order, both de
facto, and de jure; others taking part with Edward the Fourth, as esteeming him
Sovereign de jure, though not de facto.

But to make the obligation and tie of this most Noble Fraternity more strong,
and to preserve a perpetual unity among the Companions thereof, left they
should unhappily engage in factions one against another, specially to the
effusion of blood: it was further Ordained, Ibid.
That if a Knight-Companion should happen to be retained in the service of a
Foreign Prince, to take up Arms in his quarrel, and after his Adversary desired
to entertain another Knight-Companion on his side also; he that was last
invited, was bound to wave the proffer, and in no wise to give his consent. And
therefore in all Reteynors of War, the Knight-Companion was obliged to make a
special precaution, that his engagement should become void, if any of his
Fellows were before retained on the other side. And if at the time of his
reteynor, he knew not that another of his Fellows had been engaged with the
Adversary, so soon as it came to his knowledge, he was obliged to relinquish
the service he before undertook.

Besides these three points of Reproach, in a Manuscript of the Statutes in
English, which has before it the whole preamble to Henry the Eight's Statutes,
and did belong to Henry Gray third Marquess Dorset, Duke of Suffolk, as appears
by his Coat of Arms, painted in the beginning of it within a Garter, and his
Name subscribed with his own hand, under the Coat; we find a fourth point of
Reproach, added to these other Three, in these words.

The fourth point of Reproach is, That if any Knight of the Order from
henceforth, by prodigality or riot, wilfully and negligently misspend, sell,
aliene, or do away his Patrimony or Livelihood, by reason whereof, be shall not
be able honorably to maintain himself and his Estate, in such honorable
manner, as may conserve the honor of the said Order, and of himself; In this
case he shall be summoned by the Usher of Arms of the Order, called the Black
Rod, by Commandment of the Sovereign, his Lieutenant, or Deputy to appear
before his Majesty, or his Commissioners, and the Knights of the Order, at the
next Chapter ensuing, there to be examined before the Sovereign, or his said
Commissioners, and the Knights and Companions of the said Order, and if he be
found in such great default of Prodigality, insolent Riot, or wilful
negligence; That then the Sovereign, with the advice of the Company of the said
Order, may deprive and degrade him of the said Order, at the said Chapter, if
it be their pleasure.

But this point of Reproach is not inserted into King Henry the Eighth's
Statutes; nevertheless the substance thereof appears to have been approved of
before: for we find among some Orders prepared in the Chapters held at
Windesor, by the Marquess of Exiter, and other Knights-Companions then present,
the 25. and 26. days of May, an. 8. H. 8. one of them was something to Deinde
quatenus Equites hoe Insigni Subligaculo decorati, si praeclari slatus obliti,
minus honest viverent, excluderentur ab hac honoranda Societate; nis^
commoniti propere resipuerint. Lib. N. p. 204.
this purpose.

SECT. XIII. Of other Inducements for Election.
AMong the number of these Candidates, the Sovereign is to regard those who
have E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
most voices, or whom he conceives likely to contribute most to the E. 3. Stat.
Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
honor of the Order, and prove most E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18.
H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
serviceable to himself, or most E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H.
8. Stat. Art. 19.
useful to his Crown and Kingdom.

Touching the first of these Inducements, 1. The having most voices.
the greater number of Voices; we find the Law has not been always observed,
as from the many Scrutenies, entered in the Annals will appear, if need were to
refer thereunto. Nevertheless it is sometimes noted to have taken place, as at
the Election of the Duke of Conimbero:
Quinbere, an. 5. H. 6. where after a due and sufficient examination had of the
Scruteny then taken, the said Duke Lib. N. p. 84.
by the consent of most voices, was then Elected into the Stall of Thomas Duke
of Exiter. This plurality of Voices is again taken notice of (among other
Inducements) for the Election of Sir Nicholas Carew, the Lib. N. p. 271.
24. of April an. 28. H. 8.

It is remarkable that one time when the number of Voices, on the behalf of two
Knights, were upon Examination found equal (which happened in the case between
Sir John Fastolf, and Sir John Radcliff, an. Ib. p. 81. vide Regist. Chartac.
f. 13. b.
4. H. 6.) Sir John Fastolf, being by the Sovereign's Lieutenant esteemed the
more Ib. p. 81. vide Regist. Chartac. f. 13. b.
worthy of the two, obtained the Election.

The second Inducement relates to such, 2. Being most honorable for the Order.
as in probability may bring most reputation to this Order, or advance the good
and prosperity thereof; and these have been chiefly Foreign Princes, esteemed
so in respect of that high pitch of Honor they attained, and whose eminent
Valor and Worthiness proclaimed them deserving, both of Nomination and
Election.

And therefore the late Sovereign of blessed memory, See the Commission of
Legation.
upon consideration had of the Glorious Achievements and high Renown of
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, judged it a part of his respect, not only to
render him all offices of kindness and friendship, as to a Prince nearly
allied, and his most special friend; but also to impart to him, as far as in
him lay, the greatest and highest honors that might be, and especially such
wherewith the Military Virtue of a great Captain was wont to be adorned.

But the general consideration, for which the Sovereigns thought fit to Elect
Foreign Princes into this most Noble Society, and to impart to them these
Testimonies of Honor, has been expressed in the Commissions of Legation to be in
respect of their Glorious Merits, ennobled by the luster and grace of their
Heroic Virtues, their eminent Nobleness, Grandeur, Prowess, and Magnificence,
the renown of which, Fame had divulged and spread abroad through the World.

3. Serviceable to the Sovereign.
Thirdly, where the advantage of the Sovereign's service was cast into the
Balance, it frequently out-weighed other pretentions; insomuch, that ( an. 2.
H. 6.) the consideration of the Lib. N. p. 77.
Eminent services of John Lord Talbot, for his King and Country; appears to be
the strongest motive for his Election. And Ex Collect. E. W. G.
the great zeal and affection which John Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin had, to
engage himself in the present Sovereign's service and Cause, for the recovery
of his just rights (besides his eminent and famous actions, performed in
several military Commands, wherein he had been for many years employed) was the
strongest inducement that swayed with the Sovereign, to choose him a
Knight-Companion of this most Noble Order, an. 10. Car. 2.

4. And useful to the Kingdom
But the last of these Inducements is of greatest latitude, for thereby the
Sovereign has power to reject whosoever he pleases, though exceed in number of
Voices or other Qualifications, and to Elect a Person, but once named, which
appears full enough in the case of Casimire the Fourth King of Poland, an. 28.
H. 6. who having but the Lib. N. p. 104.
single Vote of the Lord Scales, yet upon consideration had by the Sovereign,
how advantageous he might become to his, and his Kingdoms, Interest, passed in
Election.

And of later times (as appears in some of the Preambles to the Sea the
Appendix.
Commissions for carrying the Ensigns, etc. to Foreign Princes) the advantages
which the Sovereign has conceived to possess himself of, in the improving,
confirming, and establishing of a most strict and inviolable Bond of Friendship
and fair correspondency, between him and Foreign Princes, their Realms and
Subjects; has been a main Inducement to Elect such into the Order.

SECT. XIV. That the Sovereign only does Elect.
UPon the vacancy of any of the Knights-Companions Stalls, the Election of new
Knights E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
appertains to the Sovereign, and in some case to his Lieutenant; in
declaration of which, it is recorded in the Black Book of the Order, Page 65.
That if any Stalls fall vacant, it should belong to the Sovereign to Elect new
Knights, wheresoever he were resident; provided he have with him the complete
number of Ib. p. 65.66.
six Knights-Companions; but if he be beyond Seas, wanting that Number, and the
Feast of St. George held by his Lieutenant at Windesor, Ib. p. 65.66.
in such case the Election belongs to the Lieutenant, who is first to be
certified of the Sovereign's pleasure, as also who they are that in His esteem
appear fit persons to be chosen, to the end such Information may guide his
Election.

This power of Election is fully acknowledged by the Knights-Companions
themselves to be in the Sovereign, as appears out of their Letter sent to King
Henry the Fifth then in France, and dated at Windesor, on the morrow after
Saint George's day, where it is said, Et quia metuendissime domine plane
noverimus, quod vestra regalis sublimitas ubicunque suerit locorum potest prout
decet and convenit vacantibus Stallis Commilitonum vestri Collegii militaris;
adhibito numero corundem pro Electione celebranda, requisito tales little l^^o
subrogare and praficere, quo^ vestrae coronae regiae tanta celsitudo
versimiliter magis sencerit profituros ac morum probitate and nobilitate
sanguinis noverit praepollere, Ex vetusto Codice MS. penes Sylam Tailor Genesis f.
158. b.
That the Sovereign in what place soever residing, may, as is most fitting,
elect into a vacant Stall (there being a sufficient number of Knights called to
the Election) such as he shall judge serviceable to his Crown, or do exceed
others in deserts, and nobleness of descent. Observable herewith is this, that
at the publishing the Election of Emanuel Duke of Savoy, King Philip and Queen
Mary, being at that time, joint Sovereigns of the Order, it is called, the
Election of the MS. p. 14.
King and Queen.

This grand Prerogative of the Sovereign, being not duly considered by Polydore
Virgil, occasioned his committing a great mistake (and De jure and Privileg.
Militum l. 1. c. 15.
Claudius Coteraeus from him) for speaking of this Order, and the succession of
new Knights into the rooms of those deceased, he has this passage, Angl
Histor. l. 19. p. 378.
One Knight is received into the room of another deceast, by the Choice and
Election of all the r^st. But Erhard Celly being as much ignorant of the
Sovereign's Prerogative, and rather more mistaken, sticks not to affirm,
Anglo-Wirtemb. p. 103.
That no person may be received into this Order. not so much as by the
Sovereign, unless with the common consent or suffrage of all the
Knights-Companions.

But these passages are altogether erroneous; the Knights-Companions part being
only to Nominate the Persons (nevertheless qualified as aforesaid) but the
right of Election remains wholly in the Sovereign of the Order. For whosoever
He designs, appoints, and chooses, is forthwith admitted: His only pronouncing
the Name of the Person in Chapter being sufficient.

For after the Scruteny has been taken, and presented to the Sovereign, in the
manner and order before laid down, He peruseth it himself, or otherwise the
Chancellor, or other Officer of the Order that took it, Lib. R. p. 13^.
reads it over to him; which done, the Sovereign (with reference to the
considerations before expressed) forthwith resolves upon some one, or more of
the Knights, named in the Scruteny, and thereupon openly and publicly Supremus
pro Electis tres illustrissimos Principes (Ducem Brunswick, Comites Salisbur.
and Carliolensem) pronunciabat. lib. R. p. 23. Supremus Comitem Northamptoniae
Electum pronunciat. Ib. p. 4^. Supremus accepta and perpensa Nomenclaturae
Schedula, Electos pronunciat Comites Danbiae and Moritoniae. Ib. p. 90.
declares the Name of him, or them, whom he does Elect: by which bare act of
Pronunciation, and without any further Ceremony, the Person or Persons so
named, stand and become Elect Knights: And this is the manner used at the
conferring an Election; except now and then the Sovereign is pleased to give
his reasons why the Knight is Elected by him.

But though this act of Election be settled by the Law of the Order upon the
Sovereign, yet is the consent of the Knights-Companions thereunto, frequently
entered down among the Annals, and sometimes mentioned in the Commissions of
Legation to Foreign Princes: Not that the single act of Election is in truth
the act of the whole Chapter, or is invalid or incomplete, without the joint
consent of the Knights-Companions present at the Election; but their consent so
expressed is to be understood, as an honorary respect given them by the
Register, and signifying rather than applauding or praising the Sovereign's
Choice, as being in their judgments, according to the merits of the Person
Elected, than a necessary circumstance, contributing to the ratification or
strengthening the Election made by the Sovereign, as if defective without it.

SECT. XV. The Scruteny ought to be entered among the Annals.
AMong other the duties laid upon the Register and set down in the E. 3. Stat.
Art. 34. vide H. 5. Stat. Art. 36.
Statutes of the Order, and Constitutions of the Officers this is one; of which
mention is made to this effect, Lib. N. p. 235.
That the Registers part is to set down and record for a memorial, the
Elections (or Scrutenies) and Names of the Knights Elected. But in succeeding
times a scruple arose, whether this need be done, when the Scruteny should be
taken, yet no Election made?

To clear which doubt, in a Chapter held on Saint George's day, an. 5. Eliz. we
find it the Sovereign's will and pleasure, that thence forward it should be
enacted, and accordingly it was established for a Law within this Order, Lib.
C. p. 42.
That if any Nominations were taken from the Knights-Companions, the same
should be entered in the Annals, though there were no Election made of any
Person into the Order at that time. Which we suppose was so decreed, out of
great respect to those Princes and Noble Personages, who in future times should
by the glory of their actions appear but worthy the honor of Nomination into so
Illustrious an Order. And in pursuance of this Decree, there is frequent
mention made of the delivery of the Scruteny into the hands of the Register, to
make entry thereof accordingly.

For instance, an. 22. Eliz. the Blue Book says, page 82.
That the Chancellor himself delivered the Knights-Companions Votes to the
Register, to be committed to writing, for a perpetual memorial; and accordingly
the Register, as his duty obliged him, having transcribed them, put them into
their proper place, with all care and fidelity. In like manner, an. 26. Eliz.
After the Chancellor had presented the Scruteny to the Sovereign, he delivered
it to the Register, Ibid. p. 94. and 100.
to insert among the Annals of the Order, who immediately committed it to
posterity, after the accustomed form. Again, an. 34. of the same Queen, Ibid.
p. 120. and 131.
The Votes were delivered to the Register, who took care to Record them,
according to the usual order. Nevertheless since the aforesaid Law passed, the
Entry of Scrutenies has been sometimes omitted, either through the Registers
not calling to memory the duty enjoined by the before mentioned Decree, or else
by some accidental miscarriages, or other neglects.

As for Example, in some places of the Annals, instead of Scrutenies we find
Excuses entered, as an. 28. Eliz. where it is said; That the Lib. C. p. 103.
Prelate immediately after Vespers, presented the Scruteny to the Sovereign,
but because there was Lib. C. p. 103.
no Election made of any new Knights, in regard of the crowd of weighty and
pressing affairs, which seemed very much to concern the Sovereign and State, it
was laid aside Ibid.
and through neglect lost; at least it came not to the Ibid.
Registers hands, to be inserted in its proper place. So an. 18. Eliz. although
the Dean of Windesor took the Scruteny at Vespers, on St. George's day,
nevertheless it is said, Ib. p. 73.
That no Election was made, nor any thing else done. The like Excuse is made,
an. 5. Car. 1. but the fault is here laid on the Chancellor; for though the
Scruteny had been taken by him during the Vespers of the Feast day, Lib. R. p.
50.
yet would be not suffer it to be entered.

In the next place we read, That the Votes being presented to the Sovereign,
an. 31. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 113.
they were left with her. And an. 11. Car. 1. the Lib. R. p. 108.
Scruteny of Algernon Earl of Northumberland, never came to the Registers
hands, and lastly an. 33. Eliz. we only find, Lib. C. p. 118.
that the Chancellor delivered the Votes to the Lieutenant, but no mention is
there made, what became of them afterward.

But the Law yet remains in force, that all Nominations and Votes of the
Knights-Companions ought to be entered among the Annals; whether Election be
made or not, unless it shall please the Sovereign, for any extraordinary
reason, upon particular occasions, to forbid it. One Example (and but one) of
such a Prohibition we have met with, an. 40. Eliz. where Lib. C. p. 137.
by the Queens special command, the Scruteny then taken was not recorded among
the acts of this most Noble Order; nor is any thing thereof to be found in the
Blue Book. But it is there also said, that the Register took care to set down
all the passages as they happened, Ibid.
the Names only excepted.

And that it may not seem strange, why the Scruteny is not inserted in the
Registry, an. 44. Eliz. this account is given, Ibid. p. 146.
That upon assembling the Knights-Companions, it seemed good to the Sovereign
for several urgent Reasons, best known to her self, to give commandment; Ibid.
That for that time they should wholly forbear all Scruteny of Votes and
Nomination of Persons; except which, there was nothing wanting to the height of
Solemnity at that meeting. But this we find noted in the Annals, to be Ib.
praeter mor^m, contrary to the usual Custom.

SECT. XVI. The Scruteny ought not to be viewed until it be entered.
HEnce we are led to take notice of the following passage: It seems the Ex
Collect. Rob. Cook Ar. nuper Clar. R. Armor. fol. 10.
Earls of Derby and Rutland, two of the Knights-Companions (on the morrow after
St. George's day, an. 27. Eliz.) were desirous to have seen the Scruteny, which
was delivered into the Dean of Windesor's Custody to be Registered, in pursuance
of the before mentioned Decree, an. 5. Eliz. But he gave them a modest denial,
and said Ex Collect. Rob. Cook Ar. nuper Clar. R. Armor. fol. 10.
it ought not to be seen before it was Registered.

Whereupon the Earls, not satisfied with this answer, requested the opinions of
the rest of the Knights-Companions (present at that Feast) in this case; who
upon consideration thereof adjudged the point Ex Collect. Rob. Cook Ar. nuper
Clar. R. Armor. fol. 10.
against them. And since this occasion, we have observed it elsewhere noted. Ex
Autogr. pen. praef. Iac. Palmer.
That no Knight-Companion ought to see whom the other has named.

SECT. XVII. Of Scrutenies taken, yet no Election made.
IT has often happened, that though the Nominations for Election, have been
formally taken, presented, and perused, yet has not the Sovereign thought fit
at present to make any Election, being moved thereunto from several
considerations; principally where an intent was to keep open a Stall: But this
must be understood of such Scrutenies as are taken of course, at the Vespers on
the Feast day.

The most notable Example in this kind, is that of Sigismond the Emperor, who
died in the Lib. N. p. 94. MS. in Offic. Arm. [F. 9.] f. 19. b.
16. year of King Henry the Sixth, and whose Stall was not disposed of till 21.
years after, viz. the Lib. N. p. 119.
37. year of the said King; and then determined to be reserved for Lib. N. p.
119.
Prince Edward, the Sovereign's only Son, he being at that time about six years
of age.

This is that Emperor, whose Election (being about the Ibid. p. 57.
7. of May, an. 4. H. 5.) is the first Election we find Registered in the
Annals, where he is styled Ibid. p. 57.
Sigismundus Imperator Almanicus. He was then lately come into England, and so
was the Duke of Holland, Ibid. p. 57.
cum praeclaro Duce de Briga, una ex comitatu Imperatoris (as he is there
styled) who hitherto had the ill fortune not to be remembered in any of the
Catalogues of Knights-Companions, that we have yet met with; nevertheless at
the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor, the day abovesaid, was Ibid. p.
57.
Elected Knight of this most Noble Order.

And the reserving a Stall was sometimes given by the Sovereign, as a reason
for deferring his Election; as upon the 4. of October, being the morrow after
the Feast of Saint George, held by prorogation at Windesor, an. 13. Car. 1.
(when the Scruteny, taken the day before, was read over in the Chapter House)
where the Sovereign declared, Lib. R. p. 132.
That he would receive no man into the Order, before his Son Charles:
whereupon, all the Knights-Companions gave their sense, Lib. R. p. 132.
That this resolution, was rather an effect of Justice than fatherly
indulgence; since they all acknowledged him to be more a Prince by merit and
towardliness of his youth, than by the fortune of his Birth, at which the
Sovereign expressed his satisfaction, no otherwise than by silence.

For such like cause, an. Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 34.
15. Car. 1. when the Scruteny was presented to the Sovereign, by the
Chancellor of the Order, the 10. of October (being the last day of the Feast,
celebrated at Windesor by prorogation) the Sovereign declared, Palmer's Iournal
pro an. 1639. p. 34.
That he had a purpose to have chosen Prince Rupert his Nephew, a Knight of the
Order, but being then a Prisoner with the Emperor, he would not Elect any at
that time: Whereupon the vacancy of a Stall was reserved.

At other times, we note the pleasure of the Sovereign in deferring Elections,
to be frequently entered down only in the general, and without expressing the
cause, as an. 13. Eliz. on the morrow after St. George's day, upon perusal of
the Scruteny by the Sovereign in Chapter, held in the Privy Chamber, where the
Blue Book tells us; Page 63.
That the said Sovereign made no Election, though there were two Stalls vacant.
Nay although there were found to be three Stalls void, on the Feast days in the
Lib. C. p. 87. and 93.
23.24. and 25. years of the said Queens Reign; nevertheless upon receipt of
the Scruteny no Election was made by the Sovereign, until the following year,
viz. an. 26. Eliz. Thus was it in the 2.8.11. and 12. of King James, where no
other mention is made than this, C. p. 156.
None were admitted into the Order this year. And in such case, the Sovereign
only Palmer's large Iournal. p. 20.
views the Scruteny, Palm. Iourn. p^^ an. 1639. f. 34.
approves of every Knight-Companion's Nomination, and gives them thanks.

Sometimes we meet with this Prorogation of Elections recorded, as done at the
pleasure of the Sovereign only; and at other times, by the Sovereign, with the
approbation of the Knights-Companions.

To the first of these pertains a memorial entered, an. 22. Eliz. on the 24. of
April, at a Chapter held before Morning Prayers; where the Knights-Companions
received notice, Lib. C. p. 84.
that it was the pleasure of the Sovereign to prorogue the Election for that
time. And an. 38. Eliz. though there was an Page 132.
earnest expectation on the morrow after Saint George's day, of the Election of
a new Knight, yet Page 132.
it seemed good to the Sovereign, to prorogue the Election to the following
year.

Again, an. 10. Car. 1. on the morrow after the Feast day, then celebrated at
Windesor, when the Scedule of Nominations taken the Evening before, was
presented to the Sovereign in Chapter by the Chancellor, and one place void;
Lib. R. p 97.
The Sovereign did not think fit to make any Election at all.

As touching the second, we meet with this instance, an. 27. Eliz. Lib. C. p.
101.
That with the concurrent approbation and assent, of the Knights-Companions
then assisting, the Sovereign thought fit to put off the Election to another
time. But as to the reason of this seeming difference in the Sovereign's
absolute power, yet taking in the Knights-Companions approbation, it may be
said, as is already spoken, in the act of Election; That though it be the
unquestionable prerogative of the Sovereign, to prorogue Elections at pleasure,
yet ought of respect and honor to the Knights-Companions, their approbation
has been sometimes expressed.

SECT. XVIII. The Penalties inflicted on Knights-Companions who appear not at
an Election.
LAstly, to close up this Chapter; where any Knight-Companion has received
Summons to appear at a Chapter of Election, and does E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5.
Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
refuse to come, or wilfully withdraw himself, unless he be hindered for some
just cause; and the reason of that impediment E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat.
Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
signified to the Sovereign, under his Seal of Arms beforehand (which if found
to be just and reasonable is forthwith E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art.
18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
allowed and accepted, if otherwise, rejected and disallowed) his disobedience
was Ordained to be punished with the payment of E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5.
Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
one Mark (which King Henry the Eighth's Statutes enlarged to twenty shillings)
to the Dean and College of Windesor, and heretofore disposed toward praying
for the Souls of the desunct Knight. At his next coming to Chapter, he is to
tarry E. 3. Stat. Art. 18. H. 5. Stat. Art. 18. H. 8. Stat. Art. 19.
kneeling upon the ground in the midst of the Chapter, before the Sovereign (or
his Deputy) and the whole company there present, which penalty he must still
undergo, until such time, as finding favor with them he be restored.

And for greater caution this Clause was herefore inserted in the Letters of
Summons, as appears (among others) in that which issued out after the death of
Sir Robert D'umfrevile, where after the time and place for Election was
certified, and command given to observe both; the Letter closes thus, Regist.
Chart. f. 12. b.
Et se estre ny pouer nous signifies soubz, etc. And if it cannot be
accomplished, that is, if the Knight-Companion could not meet at the appointed
time, to perform his part in what the Statutes oblige, he should then signify
to the Sovereign under his Seal the cause of his impediment; that so he might
perceive by his excuse, whether it were worthy acceptance, or he in fault or
not.

CHAP. X. THE Investiture OF A KNIGHT SUBJECT WITH THE Garter and George,
SECT. I. The Notice given to a Knight Subject of his Election.
IN reference to this Ceremony, we are first to premise something, concerning
the notice to be given the Knight-Elect of his Election into this most Noble
Order; whether he be at such time personally at Windesor, or other place where
the Chapter is then held, or employed in some more remote parts within the
Kingdom, or elsewhere beyond the Seas, upon the Sovereign's Affairs.

To the newly Elect-Knight, who upon this acquisition of Honor happens to be at
Windesor, or wheresoever else the Chapter is held, Constitut. ad Official*
Ordin. attinente^. c. 4.
Garter (immediately after the Sovereign has signified his pleasure, in
Election of the person) is sent out of the Chapter to give him notice of it;
for we find this employment recorded as part of the Constitut. ad Official*
Ordin. attinente^. c. 4.
duty of his Office, and asserted to be so by the general practice; and (among
other Precedents in the Annals) upon the Election of the Ibid.
Lord Howard, and Sir Henry Marney, an. 2. H. 8. (both then present at Court)
it appears that Garter was forthwith sent out of the Chapter, to give them
notice thereof, and to conduct them to the Sovereign 's presence; where both
were invested, with the two principal Ensigns of the Order, the Garter and
George. And upon the like service was he employed, at the Election of Sir Ib.
p. 271.
Nicholas Carew an. 28. H. 8. and of the Lib. C. p. 66.
Lord Burghley, and Lord Gray of Wilton, an. 14. Eliz.

And as Garter has been accustomed to carry the verbal notice of Knights
Election; so also the Sovereign's Letter, signifying Election, to a Knight then
likewise at Court, where the Sovereign is pleased (for the greater honor of the
Person) to wave a verbal notice, and send Letters of signification in its
stead. And in such case these Letters are drawn up by the Chancellor of the
Order, and pass under both the Sovereign's Sign manual, and Signet of the
Order. Such a particular Honor was afforded the present sovereign; to whom
Palmer's large Iournal p. 7.
immediately after his Election, in a Chapter held at Windesor, the Sovereign
directed the following Letter, presented to him by Palmer's large Iournal p. 7.
Sir John Borough Garter, who found him walking in St. Palmer's large Iournal
p. 7.
George's Hall.

Charles R.

OUR most dear and entirely beloved Son, Rows Iourn. p. 42.
having to our great comfort seen, and considered the ripeness of your youth,
and conceived joyful and pregnant hopes of your manly virtues, in which we are
assured, you will increase to your own honor, both in prowess, wisdom, justice,
and all princely endowments: and that the emulation of Chevalry will in your
tender years provoke and encourage you, to pursue the glory of heroic action,
besitting your royal birth, and our care and education. We with the Companions
of our most Noble Order of the Garter, assembled in Chapter, holden this
present day at our Castle of Windesor, have elected and chosen you one of the
Companions of our Order. In signification whereof, we have sent unto you by our
trusty and well beloved servants Sir John Borough Knight Garter, and our
Principal King of Arms, these our Royal Letters, requiring you to make your
speedy repair unto us, to receive the Ensigns of our most honorable Order, and
to be ready for your Installation, upon the 21. day of this present Month.

Given under the Signet of our Order, at our Castle of Windesor, the 20. of
May, in the 14. year of our Reign 1638. To our dearly beloved son Prince
Charles.

This is the only Instance we have met with, where a Letter was sent to an
Elect-Knight, and he at the same time present at Court. But when an Election
passes, and the Knight Elected is remote from Court, then the general form of
the Letter is both to signify his Election, and summon him to his Investiture
with the Garter and George: of which see a Precedent in the Number. XVIII.
Appendix.

But where the Sovereign is pleased to descend to mention particular services,
or other inducements for a Knights Election, there the Preamble of the Letter
is worded accordingly: and that this has sometimes, though but rarely been
used, appears thus in that Letter which certified Election to Sir John
Fastolfe, Appendix Number. XXI.
We considering the virtuous fidelity you have shown, and the honorable
exploits you have done, in the service of our thrice renowned Father, and that
in our service also, you (as many others) have given proofs of that honor and
those deserts wherewith God has endowed you, always suffering, as is the part
of a good and faithful subject, the pains and toyls of War, for the vindicating
and maintaining of our just right, claims, and title; have chosen you one of
our Companions of our Order, etc.

Where the Letter barely signifies Election; that is when the Sovereign does
not design a present Investiture with the Garter and George, but defers that
Ceremony till the Elect-Knight comes to Windesor, to take possession of his
Stall; in such case notice of the day of his Installation is also inserted
toward the end of the Letter, and upon his appearance at Windesor, so soon as
he is called into the Chapter House, the Garter is first buckled about his left
leg, next follows his Investiture with the rest of the Ornaments of the Order,
and lastly his Installation. And thus (in the case of Henry Earl of Cumberland,
an. 29. H. 8.) was the Investiture with the Garter deferred, till his
appearance at Windesor, where that Ceremony, as also his Investiture with the
Habit and Collar, and lastly his Installation, were dispatched at one time.

SECT. II. His Reception into the Chapter House.
IF the Elect Knight be near where the Chapter is held, and that Garter has
been sent forth to give him notice of the Honor, and to usher him into the
Chapter House to receive the Garter and George, before the Chapter break up;
intimation being given of his approach, the Sovereign sends forth two of the
Knights-Companions to meet him, who after a mutual salute, conduct him between
them to the presence of the Sovereign, Garter going before them.

For instances herein, first of Strangers, we shall remember Lib. C. p. 159.
Vlrick Duke of Holstien, an. 3. Iac. R. who being sent for by Garter, was
introduced into the Chapter between Prince Henry and the Earl of Dorset, and by
them presented to the Sovereign: So Lib. R. p. 23.
Christian Duke of Brunswick, an. 22. Iac. R. proceeded with much state and
honor, in the midst between William Earl of Penbroke and Philip Earl of
Montgomery, to receive the Garter and George.

The Collect. E. W. G.
6. of November, an. 14. Car. 2. Christian Prince of Denmark being Elected in a
Chapter, held in the Withdrawing Room at Whitehall, and then absent, Garter was
sent next day by the Sovereign, to give him notice thereof, with desire to be
present the following day, at the foresaid place, to receive his Investiture;
where the Sovereign and several of the Knights-Companions being assembled,
Collect. E. W. G.
Garter was sent out for the Prince (then at the Earl of Bath's Lodgings in the
matted Gallery) and thence ushered him into the Lobby between the said Gallery
and the Withdrawing Room; where he was received by the Earls of Lindsey and
Manchester, and conducted between them into the Chapter, Garter preceding them,
and after three obeysances they brought him up to the Sovereign.

Among Knights-Subjects, we find the Lib. C. p. 66.
Lord Burghley and Lord Gray were conducted ( an. 14. Eliz.) to the Sovereign
by the Lord Clynton and Earl of Bedford; and Ib. p. 109.
Robert Earl of Essex, Thomas Earl of Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton
(present at Greenwich, an. 30. Eliz. when their Election passed) Ibid.
were severally led into the Chapter; the first of them between the Earls of
Worcester and Penbroke; the second between the Lord Hunsdon and Lord Gray of
Wilton; and the third between the Earl of Leicester and Lord Burghley; and as
soon as they were brought up before the Sovereign, with all Reverence and
Humility they fell upon their knees.

In like manner, an. 4. Iac. R. Ex lib. C. p. 163.
Robert Earl of Salisbury proceeded up to the Sovereign's Throne, between the
Earls of Nottingham and Dorset; and Viscount Bindon, between the Earls of
Suffolk and Northampton. And an. 22. Iac. R. the Earl of Arundel and Surrey,
and Earl of Kelly, took Lib. R. p. 23.
William Earl of Salisbury between them, and presented him to the Sovereign: So
also in the Reign of his late Majesty of blessed memory, it is remembered, that
the Ibid. p. 45.
Earl of Northampton was conducted to his receipt of the Garter, in the
Chapter House at Windesor, between the Earls of Penbroke and Montgomery, an. 4.
Car. 1. and the Earls of Danby and Moreton, being Elected also at the same
place, an. 9. Car. 1. the Ib. p. 90.
former of them was conducted to the Sovereign by the Earls of Penbroke, and
Arundel and Surrey, and the Ib. p. 90.
latter by the Earls of Salisbury and Carlisle. And when the present Sovereign
appeared upon his Letter of Summons, at the Chapter held in the Withdrawing
Chamber in Windesor Castle, to receive his Investiture, two of the senior
Knights, viz. Philip Lib. R. p. 142.
Earl of Penbroke and Montgomery, and Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surr^y, were
sent forth to conduct him in, who (ushered by the Palmer's large Iournal p. 8.
Black Rod) brought him between them up to the Sovereign.

The Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Duke of Monmouth being Elected at a Chapter held in the Withdrawing Room at
Whitehal, the 28. of March an. 15. Car. 2. Garter was immediately sent to him
in the Sovereign's Bedchamber, who being met at the door the Earls of Lindsey
and Manchester, Garter (the Black Rod joining himself to him in the Room)
passed to the lower end of the Room before the Duke and the two
Knights-Companions, whence they proceeded up to the Sovereign with three
Reverences.

Lastly, at the Election of Ibidem.
James Duke of Cambridge, in the same Room at Whitehall (3. Dec. an. 18. Car.
2) Garter was also sent fort into the Bedchamber, to acquaint him that the Earl
of Manchester and Duke of Monmouth were appointed by the Sovereign and Chapter
to bring him in thither. That done, the said Knights-Companions arose and went
to the Duke, whom meeting at the Bedchamber door, they took their compass about
the rest of the Knights-Companions (then standing) and brought him between them
( Garter and Black Rod preceding) from the lower end of the Room close before
the Sovereign.

SECT. III. The Ceremonies of Investiture with the Garter and George.
THE Knight-Elect being thus introduced, and brought to the Sovereign, having
first with all reverence bowed himself before him, it was usual heretofore to
make a short gratulatory speech, in acknowledgment of so great an evidence of
the Sovereign's royal bounty, and the Knights-Companions respects: The
substance of such an address, we find coucht in that speech made by Sir
Nicholas Carew, after he had been conducted into the Chapter House at Windesor,
to receive his Investiture, an. 28. H. 8. who first Lib. N. p. 271.
giving infinite thanks, both to the Sovereign and the whole Society, for that
they had vouchsafed to receive him into the honor of this most illustrious
Order, being a person in his own esteem most unworthy thereof; in the next
place professed, That whereas he was preferred in this choice before many others
much more deserving than himself, it was not to be attributed to his merits, or
any thing by him performed, but merely to the Sovereign's bounty, and the
favor of the Knights-Companions present toward him.

The bestowing of so singular an honor, being thus thankfully acknowledged the
Ceremony of Investiture with the two principal Ensigns of the Order begins,
first with the Garter, as the most ancient and chiefest Ensign, and next with
the George: but the further Investiture with the Habit, and other the Ornaments
of this Order, are to be completed at the time of the Elect-Knights
Installation at Windesor.

Now the manner and order in the aforesaid Investiture, was anciently as
follows; first the Elect-Knight set his left foot upon a Stool, and then one
of the Knights-Companions, by the Sovereign's appointment, as his Substitute,
buckled the Enobled Garter about his left leg; and this is to be seen in
Picture in the margent of an old Draught of the Combats of Sir John Astley, set
forth in the Page 73.
Antiquities of Warwickshire, where the said Sir John's Investiture with the
Garter, is represented after the aforesaid manner. But of late times, the
Elect-Knight Ex Collect. A. V. W.
kneeled on his right Knee, whilst this Ceremony was performed; during which,
the Lib. N. p. 201
words of Admonition or Signification at this part of the Investiture are to be
read.

The Forms of Admonition anciently used at the Investiture of Knights-Subjects
are inserted in the Numb. XXXVI.
Appendix; but that particularly relative to the putting on the Garter, is
entered in King Henry the Eighth's Book of Art. 27.
English Statutes, and is as follows.

Sir, the loving Company of the Order of the Garter has received you their
Brother and Fellow, and in token of this, they give and present you this
present Garter, which God grant that you receive and wear from henceforth to
his praise and glory, and to the exaltation and honor of the said Noble Order,
and your self.

Afterward it was decreed in a Chapter held at Windesor the 5. of August, an.
1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. to this effect, Lib. C. p. 12.
That not only the same Advertisements and Admonitions which were wont to be
given to Strangers at their Investitures, should be likewise given to
Knights-Subjects, that in time to come should be Elected and Installed; but
also, that among the Knights-Companions there should not be any Investiture
differing either in Ceremony or Habit.

Hereupon the foresaid words of Admonition at putting on the Garter were left
off, and Lib. N. p. 310.
those used at the Investiture of Strangers given and continued to
Knights-Subjects; the English Version of which may be seen at the end of the
said English Statutes, which thence we have transcribed hither: being
pronounced by the Chancellor, if the Sovereign or his Lieutenant be present,
otherwise by the Register.

To the land and honor of Almighty God, his imaculate Mother, and Saint George
the holy Martyr, tie or gird your Leg with this. Noble Garter, wearing it to
the increase of your honor, and in token and remembrance of this most Noble
Order; remembering, that thereby you being admonished and encouraged, in all
just Battles and Wars, which only you shall take in hand, both strongly to
fight, valiantly to stand, and honorable to have the Victory.

But against the Investiture of the present Sovereign, the words of
Signification, being better weighed and considered, were put into this form.

Palmer's large Iourn. p. 8.
To the honor of God omnipotent, and in memorial of the blessed Martyr St.
George, tie about thy Leg for thy renown this Noble Garter; wear it as the
Symbol of the most illustrious Order, never to be forgotten or laid aside: That
thereby thou may be admonished to be courageous, and having undertaken a just
War, into which only thou shall be engaged, thou may stand firm, valiantly
fight, and successfully conquer.

The Princely Garter being in manner aforesaid buckled on, and the words of
Signification pronounced, the Elect-Knight is brought before the Sovereign, who
puts about his Neck the George, pendant at a Sky colored Ribband; at which
part of the Ceremony, the Admonition used at the adorning of an Installed
Knight with the Collar of the Order (changing only the word Collar for Ribband)
is pronounced; but were thus framed for the before mentioned occasion, of the
present Sovereign's Investiture with the George and Ribband.

Ibid.
Wea^ this Ribband about thy Neck, adorned with the Image of the blessed Martyr
and Soldier of Christ St. George; by whose imitation provoked, thou may so
overpass both prosperous and adverse encounters, that having stoutly vanquished
thy Enemies, both of Body and Soul, thou may not only receive the praise of
this transient Combat, but be crowned with the Palm of eternal Victory.

In further progress upon this Ceremony, we shall note, that so great a respect
has been given to Foreign Princes who receive the honor here, that the
Sovereign most usually performs the Investiture himself: For so when Philip
King of Castile received a personal Investiture, in the Chapter House at
Windesor, it was from the Lib. N. p. 184.
Sovereign's own hands, for he took the Garter from the King of Arms, put it
about the Kings Leg, and Prince Henry fastened the Buckle.

Queen Lib. C. p. 79.
Elizabeth her self buckled the Garter about the Leg of John Casimire, Count
Palatine of the Rhyne; and hung about his Neck a Gold Chain with the George at
it. The like honor did Ib. p. 15^.
King James to the Duke of Hol^tein in the third year of his Reign.

And now and then (though seldom) out of special grace and favor has the
Sovereign done this honor to a Knight-Subject: though when Queen Eliz. was
pleased to adorn the Lord Burghley with the Garter, the Annals note it to be
done as it were Ib. 65.
by the by; and Henry Earl of Susse^. an. 31. Eliz. received these Ensigns of
the Order from the Ib. p. 113.
Sovereign her self. The like favor did she to the Ib. p. 1^^.
Earl of Shrewsbury in the 34. year of her Reign. So also did Ib. p. 159.
King James invest Henry Earl of Northampton, with the principal Ensigns of the
Order; as a person worthy so great an honor: and lastly, his R. p. 142. and
143. vide porro Palmer's large Iourn. p. 8.
late Majesty of blessed memory, placed both the Garter and George upon the
present Sovereign, the 21. of May 1638. with his own hands.

Sometimes the Sovereign has performed but part of the Investiture, and
commanded the senior Knight to do the rest. Thus when the Earl of Devonshire
an. 13. H. 8. received these Ensigns, it was on this manner; first the
Sovereign reached out the Garter to the Marquess Dorset, and commanded him
buckle it about his left Leg, which as he was doing, the Duke of Norsolk gave
him his assistance; then the Lib. N. p. ^11.
Sovereign put on the Gold Chain, with the Image of Saint George at it. At the
Investiture of Christian Duke of Brunswick, an. 22. Iac. R. the Lib. R p. 23.
Sovereign put about his neck the Blue Ribband, whereat hung the Effigies of
St. George; and the Earls (who introduced him to the Sovereign's pres^^^e)
buckled on the Garter. The like did the Ibid. p. 45.
late Sovereign to William Earl of Northampton, an. 4. Car. 1. at which time
the Earl of Penbroke fastened the Garter about his left Leg; and an. 9. Car. 1.
the Earls of Danby and Moreton were both of them invested with the George by
the I^. p. ^9.
Sovereign himself, while the Earl of Penbroke invested the former, and the
Earl of Carlisle the latter with the Garter.

So also (since the Sovereign's happy return) in the cases of the Prince of
Denmark, the Dukes of Monmouth, Cambridge, and Albemarle, was the Investiture
begun with the George.

And thus we see, that an. 22. Iac. Reg. the order of Investiture began to be
inverted, the George and Ribband being then first put on, and the Garter last:
Nevertheless, the Garter as it was the first, so the principal and most worthy
Ensign of the Order, and therefore in the practice of all former times, thought
fit to have the precedence of Investiture given it; and was so observed at the
Investiture of the present Sovereign.

Lastly, the Investiture with these two Ensigns, has for the most part been
heretofore performed by the two senior Knights, and at the command of the
Sovereign, but always in his presence, the Chapter sitting; but if absent, then
by his Lieutenant: and so it happened an. 31. Eliz. for the Lord Buckhurst being
Elected at Whitehall, upon the 24. of April that year, and coming to Court
(having no knowledge of his Election) after the Sovereign was risen (yet
leaving the Chapter sitting) her Lib. C. p. 113.
Lieutenant invested him both with the Garter and George.

The Solemnity of Investiture being completed, the Elect-Knight recollecting
himself with all befitting humility, Lib. N. p. 211.
renders thanks to the Sovereign for these Tokens and Ensigns of Honor, and
after, with due respects, salutes the Knights-Companions, Palmer's large
Iournal p. 9.
who thereupon re-salute the Elect-Knight, and joyfully receive him into their
Fellowship Society.

In case two or more Elect-Knights receive the honor of this Investiture at one
time, then so soon as the senior has been Invested, and his humble thanks
presented, he Ex Collect. A. V. W.
passes down toward the Chapter House door, and there stands, while the next
junior is in like manner invested; which Ceremony being ended, he also goes
down, and stands with the other Elect-Knight; and so do the rest in order (if
there be more present, that attend their Investiture) until the Chapter break
up.

SECT. IV. Of sending the Garter and George to an Elect-Knight Subject.
WHere a Knight-Subject at the time of his Election is remote from Court, or
beyond Sea, and the Sovereign determines to send him the two principal Ensigns
of the Order, the charge of this employment does of right belong to Constitut.
ad Official. Ordin. Altinentes c. 4.
Garter; and herein there are diverse Precedents. Sir Thomas Wriothesley Garter,
was sent to the Ex vet. MS. penes Io. Vincent genesis p. 159.
Earls of Arundel and Westmerland, with the Garter and George, an. 17. H. 8. So
also was Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter, sent upon the like employment, to the Earl
of Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Westmerland an. 6. Ed. 6. to the Earl of Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Sussex, an. 1 and 2. Ph. and M. to the Lord Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Gray of Wilton, an. 3. and 4. Ph. and M. to the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 3. Eliz. to the Earl of Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Bedford, an. 6. Eliz. to the Earl of Lib. C. p. 44.
Warwick an. 5. Eliz. (being then at Newhaven in France) to William Ex Collect.
E. W. G.
Earl of Worcester an. 12. Eliz. to Ex Collect. E. W. G.
William Lord Cobham an. 26. Eliz. and to the Lord Scroop the same year who
then was at Carlisle in Cumberland.

This Investiture of the Lord Scroop, was the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
last action in this kind, which Sir Gilbert Dethick performed; who had served
four Sovereigns of this Order, an Officer of Arms, the space of Ex Collect. W.
le N. Cl.
65. years, whereof he had been Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Garter 38. years, and having most worthily and faithfully accomplished his
service, upon his return to London from Carlisle aforesaid, he languished by
the space of ten weeks or thereabouts, and dyed the Ex Collect W. le N. Cl
3. day of October, an. Dom. 1584. in the 81. year of his age.

The Letters heretofore sent from the Sovereign along with these Ensigns of the
Order to the Elect-Knights, have for the most part been drawn after the form of
those certifying Election; only instead of the last Clause, which therein
requires the Elect Knights repair to the Sovereign: for receiving the Garter
and George from him, in these was an allowance to Appendix. Number. XIX.
use them, as to their Election appertain.

And these were the two general forms of Letters, sent upon the foresaid
occasions: all further difference lay, not in the body, but direction of the
Letters, which were evermore worded according to the quality of the person to
whom sent: as to a Knight Batchellor, the direction was, To our trusty and
wellbeloved, etc. to a Baron, Right trusty and wellbeloved, etc. to an Earl,
Right trusty and right wellbeloved Cousin, etc. and to a Duke, Right trusty,
and right entirely beloved Cousin, etc.

But we observe the forms of those Appendix. Number. XX.
Letters, sent upon like occasion to Knights-Subjects, when the present
Sovereign was beyond the Seas, were penned after another manner, and (the
necessity of those times requiring) contained some other particulars, namely
(besides a large preamble relative to the Election of Knights, eminent for
noble birth and heroic virtue) additional clauses of (1.) Power to wear the
Star of Silver about St. George's Cross: (2.) The great Collar of the Order:
And (3.) to style themselves Knights and Companions of the Order of the Garter,
in as ample manner as if they had been Installed at Windesor; with an assurance
of receiving the whole Habit there, when the Sovereign was restored to the
possession thereof.

And it appears from some of these To the Duke of Ormond Marq. of Mortross, etc.
Letters, that by reason Sir Edward Walker Garter was otherwise employed in the
Sovereign's service, when they were sent, therefore the Sovereign made choice
of other persons to carry both the said Letters and Ensigns of the Order,
nevertheless Letters to Duke Hamilton. Marq. of Newcastle. etc.
reserving unto him as Garter, the rights of h^s Office.

Howbeit, the said Sir Edward looking on the disposing this employment to
others, as an invasion upon the rights of his Office, and having a just regard
to the preservation of the interest of his Successors, no less than his own;
humbly petitioned the present Sovereign for redress, and obtained his gracious
Reference thereupon to several Knights-Companions of the Order, to examine the
matter, and make report both what they found, and what they thought fit to be
done therein; upon whose Report the Sovereign did him full right, by his
gracious Declaration. All which Proceedings we think necessary to insert here,
for clearing and settling the interest of so ancient an Office.

Ex Collect. E. W. G.
To his sacred Majesty, Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. The
most humble Petition of Sir Edward Walker Knight Garter, principal King of
Arms, and Officer of the said Order.
In all humility representing, THat by the especial favor of his late Majestly
your Royal Father, of ever glorious and blessed memory, he was created Garter
Principal King of Arms, and was thereby to enjoy all immunities and advantages
thereunto belonging, as amply as any of his Predecessors.

That since your Majesty's accession to the Crown, he has by right continued
in the said Office, it being granted during life by Letters-Patent.

Notwithstanding which, there have lately some disputes arisen about the
execution of that part of his Office, wherein he conceives himself most
concerned, and for which his Office was at first erected.

He therefore, in all humility, appeals to your Majesty, as Sovereign of the
said Order, and Protector of the Officers thereof, for the vindication of his
just rights, which were never questioned, until this time of general Invasion,
hoping clearly to make it appear.

First, when any Foreign Prince is chosen, that the Ensigns of the Order are
sent and delivered him by an Ambassador, and Garter joined with him in the
presenting thereof.

Secondly, that until this time of Rebellion (wherein your Majesty cannot
formally either Elect, or Install any subject) the Garter has rarely been sent
to any of them, but according to the Statutes was always delivered them in the
Chapterhouse, Garter, and the rest of the Officers of the Order assisting.

To prove the first, he refers himself to the Statutes, and to the constant
practice; As for example, the Garter was delivered by the Earl of Arundel, and
Garter King of Arms, to Philip the second King of Spain, in the time of Queen
Mary. By the Lord Spencer, and Sir William Dethick Garter, in joint commission
with him, to the Duke of Westemberg, in the first year of King James. By the
Lord Carleton, and Sir William Seagar, to Maurice Prince of Orange. By Mr.
Peter Young Gentleman Usher, and Mr. Henry St. George, Richmond Herald, Deputy
to Sir William Seagar Garter, to the King of Sweden, by whom they were both
Knighted: and, as he remembers by Sir William Boswell, and Mr. Philpot Deputy
to Sir John Borough Garter, to the now Prince of Orange, from all which,
Garter and his Deputies received large and honorary rewards.

To the second, by the Statutes, no Knight chosen or elect shall be installed
by Attorney, except he be a Stranger, or bus^ed without the Realm, for the
affairs of the Sovereign; nor receive the Garter, but in Chapter, so that the
sending of the Garter to any subject, rarely happens. The only example he
remembers, is, of that sent by Garter to the Lord Scroop President of the
North, in Queen Elizabeth's time. As for the other alleged of that sent to the
Earl of Holland, into France, it is subsequent in time, and was only the
delivery of the Garter, and no completing of the Order, and may (if it were
so) for ought appears to the contrary, have been done by Garter's consent.
Besides, he is in the affirmative, and so to be believed touching the rights of
his own Office and Profession, before others that understand them not.

By all which he hopes it is evident, That Garter is the proper Office to be
sent with an Ambassador, to present the Order to a Foreign Prince, and that
your Majesty sends not Ambassadors, to your own Subjects. So then it follows,
when any such cases happen (as of late have done) that Garter only, or his
Deputies, and none other, ought of right to be employed therein.

Wherefore, not to mention at large, how that your Majesty has by your Royal
Letters, with dispensation, fully invested eight most noble and eminent persons
with the Order, and all the rights and honorary advantages thereof, and his
preparing the Letters, and settling the manner and form, without any notice
taken of him for doing thereof as yet, and that a great advantage has been
made by another, be performing that which he hopes fully to evidence is the
right of his Office.

He does therefore in all humility appeal unto your Majesty, Sovereign of the
said most Noble Order, beseeching that he may be heard, to make the particulars
appear either before your Majesty alone* or attended by as many of the
Companions of the Order, Peers and Council, as your Majesty shall please to
call to that purpose, or by any other way that shall seem best to your Majesty:
And that he who has disputed it may be present, and then if it shall appear
that the right is his, that he may have your Majesty's Declaration to fortify
it, with direction, that the same be entered in the Register Book of the said
Order, that so the Precedents that have been of late made, may not for the
future be brought in example against him, or his Successors, to the prejudice
of his right, and the loss of the greatest honor and advantage of his Office.
The which will more reflect on him than any that have held that Office
formerly. He having had the extraordinary happiness to enjoy more of his
Sovereign's favors and employments, than any of his Predecessors.

And (as in duty bound) he shall ever pray, etc. At the Court at Breda the 21.
of April 1650. His majesty is graciously pleased to refer the consideration of
this Petition, to the most honorable Lords, the Dukes of Buckingham and
Hamilton, and the Marquess of Newcastle, Companions of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, to examine the Allegations of this Petition, and such other proofs
as the Petitioner shall produce, for the justifying of his right; and thereupon
to make report unto his Majesty what they find, and think fit to be done
therein.

Rob. Long.




Breda 27. May 1650.
WE George Duke of Buckingham, William Duke of Hamilton, and William Marquess
of Newcastle, Knights of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having read and
considered the within written Petition, do find the Allegations therein
mentioned to agree with the Statutes and ancient practice of the said Order.
And that Garter King of Arms; and his Deputies, ought to bear all
Letters Patent, appertaining to the Brethren of the said Order, and all
Elections to the Knights-Elect. And we do therefore make this Report to your
Majesty, to the end you may be pleased to maintain the Petitioner in his just
rights. And that no examples lately made may be brought in Precedent against
him, or his Successors in the said Office.

G. Buckingham. Hamilton. W. New Castle.



His Majesty's Declaration of the Rights of Garter King of Arms to Sir Edward
Walker.
Charles R.

Ex ^od. Collect.
CHARLES the Second of that name, by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. And Sovereign of the
most Noble Order of Saint George, called the Garter. To all and singular the
Princes and Peers, Knights and Companions of the said most Noble Order,
Greeting. Whereas we have for the continuation and honor of the said most Noble
Order (in this time of general Rebellion in our Dominions) by our power, as
Sovereign of the said Order, lately Elected into the Fellowship thereof, diverse
eminent persons, whom for their great Nobility, Courage, and Fidelity, we have
esteemed worthy of the same; and have by our necessary dispensations, fully
invested them with all the honorary privileges and advantages thereof, and
have employed diverse of our Servants, and others unto them, with Letters
missive declaring the same. And whereas we have been by the humble Petition of
our trusty and well beloved Servant, Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter,
principal King of Arms, and Officer of the said Order, informed, That by the
Statutes and ancient practice of the Order, when any of our Predecessors, have
Elected any Foreign Prince thereinto, that the Ensigns thereof were always sent
and delivered by an Ambassador, and Garter King of Arms joined with him in the
doing thereof. And that when any of our Subjects was Elected, the Garter was
delivered him in the Chapter House, or (being employed abroad) was sent unto
him by Garter King of Arms Officer of the said Order. All which we having taken
into our consideration, were graciously pleased for the preservation of the
rights of the Officers of the said Order, to refer the examination of the
particulars unto our right trusty and entirely beloved Cosens and Counselors,
George Duke of Buckingham, William Duke of Hamilton, and William Marquess of
New Castle, Knights and Companions of the said most Noble Order, who upon due
examination of the particulars, have made their Report, That they find all the
allegations abovementioned, to agree with the Statutes and ancient practice of
the said Order. And that Garter, King of Arms, and his Deputies, ought to bear
all Letters, Patents appertaining to the Brethren of the said Order, and all
Elections to the Knights Elect; Wherefore, to the end that the rights and
privileges of the Officers of the said Order may be fully preserved and
established, We are graciously pleased (by the advice of the said most Noble
Companions) hereby to declare, that although we have (in regard of the other
employments of the said Sir Edward Walker Garter, in our service) sent the said
declaratory Letters with the Garter, by others, unto the persons Elect, yet
that the doing thereof shall not be brought in example against him the said Sir
Edward Walker Garter, or his Successors in the said Office, to the prejudice of
his right, We being fully satisfied, that it is his right, and properly belongs
unto his Office, as Garter, King of Arms to perform the same. And we do
therefore hereby command, that an Entry be made hereof, in the Book of the said
most Noble Order, by the Register thereof, as soon as conveniently it may be
done, To the end it may appear, we have preserved the said Garter King of Arms,
and his Successors in their just rights, and that he has not failed to prove
the same.

Given at the Castle at Breda this 28. day of May, in the second year of our
Reign. Anno Domini 1650.By his Majesty's command Rob. Long.


We shall further add, that together with the Letters signifying an Election
and the Ensigns of the Order, it was anciently in use, to send the Book of
Statutes under the Common Seal of the Order, no less to a Knight-Subject, than
(in like case) to a Stranger; and to the same end, viz. that he might peruse
and advise thereupon, whether he would accept of the Election or not: for so it
appears by the Appendix. Number. XXI.
Letters signifying Election sent to Sir John Fastolf, an 4. H. 6.

Within a few days after his Highness Prince Rupert was Elected into this Order
(being then in Holland) a Palmer's large Iournal p. 45.
Commission of Legation was prepared to be sent thither with the Garter and
George by Sir John Borough Garter, to perform the Investiture with them: but
Sir John Ibid. p. 48. and 53.
falling sick and dying, prevented the designed Ceremony. Nevertheless, some
while after the Prince had been in England, the then Sovereign thought fit to
command Sir Page 48.
James Palmer Chancellor of the Order to attend his Highness, to declare the
reasons, why the said Commission was not sent and executed, as was designed, as
also to deliver him the Commission it self; to the intent (being prevented of
receiving his Installation at Windesor, because that Castle continued in the
possession of the Rebels) it might remain with him as a memorial of this
Sovereign's Princely favor, and respect to his quality and merits, as also for
a further evidence of his admittance into this Noble Order, since there was no
other memorial thereof, but the minutes of his Election and this Commission.

On Page 48.
Monday therefore the 14. of Ian. 1644. the said Chancellor accompanied with
Dr. Chr. Wren Register, and Sir Edward Walker, then newly made Garter, attended
the Prince at his Lodgings in Oxford, who having notice of their coming,
received them with all obliging civility: and after a little pause, the
Chancellor made known to his Highness the Sovereign's Commands in the following
Speech.

Ibid. p. 49.
May it please your Highness,
THE Kings of England Sovereigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter, ever
since that honorable Foundation, have thought fit (not only for the reward of
eminent services done by their own Subjects, but also for encouragements to
noble acts of Chivalry and virtue, and partly for further augmentation and
extention of the renown and honor of that most Noble Society) have made it so
estimable amongst all the Foreign Princes of Christendom, that they have (...)
thought their fames sufficiently advanced, till they have been taken notice of
by this Princely Society, and Elected into this most Noble Order of the Garter.
Which ^l^ction has been so welcomed, even to the Emperors and Kings of hig^est
degree of Renown in Europe, that no tie of alliance, amity, or league has
proved a stronger bond of affection between this and Foreign Crowns, than that
of the Companionry of the most Noble Order of the Garter; in which nine
Christian Emperors fi^ty five crowned Kings, and four hundred Princes and
Peers, having taken the Oath of homage and fealty to the King of England, as
their Sovereign in the said most Noble Order, have already had their Names and
glorious Acts registered in the Records thereof.

According to which Example of his Majesty's Progenitors of famous memory, his
Majesty King Charles my Master Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
did at a Chapter held at his City of York, the 20. of April in the 18. year of
his Reign (when though many Stalls remained vacant) yet did think sit then to
elect but two Knights only; namely, Prince James Duke of York his Son, and your
Highness his Nephew; whom his Majesty thought worthiest to make choice of, not
only for your Princely descent of Blood, but for his own particular interest in
that noble consanguinity (as being the Son of his only beloved Sister the
virtuous Queen of Bohemia) and for many eminent virtues besides (as well
heroical as moral) inherent in your person.

And that his Majesty's affection to you might be the more emphatically
expressed, he elected your Highness a Companion of the Order in the company of
his own Son, both to manifest thereby the intimateness of affection to your
Highness, as well as to show Prince James his tender years, a glorious pattern
for his Princely imitation of valor and martial Achievements; in which
choice, his Majesty did not prove himself a King of Grace and Goodness only,
but a King and a Prophet also; as if he could by his foreseeing judgment
divine, how happy an instrument of valor and safety you would after prove, to
his Crown and dignity, in their greatest distresses. In the conduct of whose
Armies, your, Highness has hitherto been so prosperous and successful, that it
will be my duty to truth, as well as to the propriety of my Office, to give a
timely recordation of each particular to the Register of the Order, that he may
eternize the memory of your noble Acts, to remain in the Records of the Order,
that posterity may know as well as we find, what happy assistance your Princely
Conduct (of his Majesty's Armies) has brought to his Kingdoms and Dominions.

Sir, the Reasons and Motives of this your Election being so many, it behooves
me now to inform your Highness, the reasons why this Commission has not been
sooner delivered unto your hand; and those are, that immediately upon your
Election at York, his Majesty commanded me to draw up a Commission of legation
to Sir John Borough Knight (then principal King of Arms and Garter) ^o bring
the Ensigns of the Order, together with the notice of your Election, unto your
Highness then in the Low Countries, and to perform the same with all the
Solemnities thereunto belonging. Another Commission also under the Broad Seal
of England was directed to the right Honorable the Earl of Arundel and Surrey,
Earl Marshall of England; and to the Lord Goring his Majesty's Ambassador
extraordinary with the States of the United Provinces; to give your Highness
the honor of Knighthood, a Ceremony always by the Statutes of the said Order
necessarily to be performed to any Elected Knight, before he can be admitted to
be a Companion, and receive the Ensigns of the Order of the Garter. But the
said King of Arms then falling sick shortly after dyed, and your Highness
suddenly coming in person into England, that Ceremony was prevented by those
casualties, and his Majesty at Nottingham himself performed that Office, in
delivering both the Garter and George unto your Highness; since which time your
continual employments in his Majesty's Wars, and your absence thereby
necessarily enforced from Oxford (where the Commission and Seals of the Order
remained) the delivery thereof was necessarily delayed till this present; when
his Majesty's express command to me, and to those Gentlemen Officers of the
most Honorable Order, is to deliver it now unto your Highness hands,
considering the place of your Instalment at the Castle of Windesor is
necessarily prevented (by reason of the possession thereof by the Rebels) and
no other memory, but your Election and this Commission remains upon Record. But
his Sovereign Majesty is so desirous to invest you and the Prince his Son, in
the full privileges of the said Order and society, that as soon as a competent
number of Knights can be assembled to make a Chapter, his Majesty determines to
consult of a course how the Instalment at Windesor may (if possibly it can) be
dispensed with, that rather than you should be deprived longer of the full
enjoyment of all rights of Installation, his Majesty is fully determined to
make ordinary rules of Ceremony and Order, to give place to extraordinary
Examples of merit and fidelity, already so amply performed by your Highness to
his Crown and dignity, which is the sum of what his Majesty has commanded me
to present unto your Highness, which he desires, you to take in good part till
the rest can be performed.


At the ending of this Speech, Sir Ibid. p. ^^.
James Palmer presented the Commission to the Prince, who gave this Majesty
many humble thanks for this gracious Message, and acknowledged his Majesty's
favors far beyond his desert; but promised he would study to be more worthy by
his actions, than in return of words, with many thanks to the Chancellor and
the other Officers of the Order for their pains: whereupon they took their
leave, and the Chancellor went immediately to his Majesty, and rendered him an
account of this Employment.

SECT. V. The Manner of a Knight's Investiture.
IN ancient time it was part of the Ceremony, belonging to the Investiture with
the Garter, of an Elect-Knight (whether a Stranger or Knight Subject) to give
him an Oath, which we find called, The Oath in such cases accustomed to be
taken, and was to this effect, that the Knight Appendix. Number. XXI.
should well and faithfully keep and observe, so far as God should enable him,
all that was contained in the Statutes of the Order. But we find not of late,
that the taking such an Oath, at performing this Ceremony has been imposed
upon any but Foreign Princes, of which anon.

It is also observable that an. 4. H. 6. a particular Appendix. Number. XXII.
Commission issued to the Earls of Warwick, Salisbury, and Suffolk, with power
to any two or one of them, to receive this Oath from Sir John Fastols, upon his
Investiture: And this was besides the Oath, which his Proctor was afterward to
take at Installation, as is manifest out of the Letters of Procuration, whereby
the said Sir John Fastols gave to his Procter license to take on his behalf,
Regist. Chartac. fol. 14. b.
such Oath as should be required at the time of his Installation.

As to the Ceremony and manner of Investing a Knight-Elect with the Garter and
George, albeit we have discourst thereof before, we nevertheless think it
necessary to subjoin two or three considerable Instances as most proper to this
place.

When MS p. 3.
Philip Prince of Spain, an. 1. Mariae, had these Ensigns of the Order sent
him, the Sovereign joined Garter King of Arms, with the Earl of Arundel to
perform the Investiture, who upon notice of his arrival on the Coast of
England, set forward on their journey to Southampton, where on MS p. 3.
Friday the 20. of July, they took Water, and meeting the Prince before he
landed, entered his Barge, Ib. p. 4.
and gave him notice of his Election in a short speech, which being ended,
Garter having the Garter in his hand, Ib. p. 4.
kissed it, and so presented it to the Earl, who forthwith fastened it about the
Princes Leg: in like manner Garter presented the Earl with the George hanging
at a Chain of Gold, who put it also about the Princes neck.

The Ceremony of Investiture being thus performed, the Prince came on shore at
Southampton, and on the uppermost stair there were ready attending his landing,
the Ib. p. 4.
Marquis of Winchester, Lord high Treasurer of England, with diverse other
Lords; the Prince gave the Ib. p. 4.
Lord Williams his White Staff, and made him Lord Chamberlain of his Household;
and Sir Anthony Brown Master of his Horse, presented him from the Queen a Horse
with a Footcloth of Crimson Velvet, richly embroidered with Gold and Pearls,
having the Bridle and all other Furniture suitable, whereon he rode to the
Cathedral, and after Prayers to the Lodgings prepared for him.

Touching Garter's Investiture of the Earl of Warwich, at Newhaven in France,
the first of May, an. 5. Eliz. it was as follows,

First Garter repairing to the Earls Lodgings, MS fol. penes W. le N. Cl. f.
10. b.
put on his Mantle in the next Chamber to the Earls, and thence proceeded into
the Earls Chamber, where having made three Reverences, he buckled the Garter
about his left leg, and next put on the George and Ribband about his neck;
reading to the Earl the words of Signification, appointed to be pronounced at
the Investiture; which done, Garter retired into the Room, where he had put on
his Mantle and there disrobed himself, and so the Ceremony ended.

And it seems to have been a custom about these times, for the Nobility and
others, the Allies or Friends to the Elect-Knight, to send unto him by Garter
several Garters and Georges, as tokens of congratulation for the Honor he was
at this time to receive; which so soon as the Investiture was finished, and
Garter returned from putting off his Robe, he delivered unto him, with the
particular services and respects of those his Friends who had so bestowed them;
for such we find to have been sent by Garter, and presented to the aforesaid MS
fol. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 10. b.
Earl of Warwick at New Haven, and to the Ex. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Lord Scroop at Carlisle, an. 26. Eliz.

At Garter's return to Court, he is obliged to deliver an account to the
Sovereign how he has discharged his employment, and therewith by special
directions from the Elect-Knight, also present the Lib. C. p. 95.
highest thanks he can express, as well to the Sovereign as the rest of the
Knights-Companions, for honoring him with a reception into so illustrious an
Order.

We shall close this Section, with a brief account of the Investiture of his
Highness the late Duke of Gloucester at the Hague, on Easter Day in the
morning, being the Lib. Carolin; p. 16.
14. day of April 1653. in reference to which Ceremony there was provided, 1.
Collect. E. W. G.
A Garter with the Motto, to be tied about his left Leg. 2. A George in a
Ribband, to put about his Neck. 3. An embroidered Cross of St. George within a
Garter and Star, to be sowed on the left shoulder of the Dukes Cloak. 4. A
Velvet Cushion, whereon the Ensigns and Ornaments of the Order, as also the
Letter signifying his Election, were to be laid.


Moreover, for the honor of the Order, and his said Highness, Sir Edward Walker
Garter, humbly proposed as follows.

Collect. E. W. G.
That he might be assisted by two or four Knights, in performing his duty.

That his Highness the Duke, might receive the Ensigns of the Order, in the
Presence Chamber of the Princess Royal, or in his own, accompanied with the
Queen of Bohemia, her Highness Royal, and some other persons of Honor and
Quality.

That his Highness having placed himself under the State, Garter should take
the Cushion upon his Arms, on which were to be laid all the particular
Ornaments above mentioned; and being assisted with the Knights, and a passage
left for him to make his three obeysances, he should proceed up toward the
Duke, and lay the Cushion with the Ornaments on a Stool set near his Highness
for that purpose.

That he should signify to his Highness, in few words, the cause of his
coming; and then deliver into his hand the Sovereign's Letter.

That his Highness having received it, should break it open, and deliver it
back to Garter to read, which he having done should return it to his Highness.

That after this, he should proceed to the Investiture of his Highness with the
Ensigns of the Order.

Which having finished, briefly to represent unto his Highness, in a Speech
somewhat of the quality and splendour of the Order.

And lastly, to kiss his Highness hand, and attend what he should please to say
and so depart.

According to these proposals and in the same order, were all things performed;
and the Speeches then made to his Highness by Sir Edw. Walker, and first that
signifying the cause of his coming was as follows.

Ex cod. C^l* lect.
May it pl^^se your Royal Highness, HIs sacred Majesty the King your Royal
Brother, Sovereign of the most Noble ancient and renowned Order of Saint
George, called the Garter, has commanded me Garter Principal King of Arms and
Officer of the most Noble Order, humbly to attend your Highness, and from his
Majesty to deliver unto your Highness the Ensigns of that most Noble Order,
together with Letters of Dispensation, for the present investing your Highness
in all the honorary Ornaments and accidents thereof. And because the Reasons
inducing his Majesty to Elect your Highness, into this most Noble Society and
Fellowship of the Order, are best expressed in his Majesty's gracious Letters, I
do humbly present them unto your Highness, that they may be read, and then I
shall proceed in full obedience to his Majesty's Commands, to Invest your
Highness with the Garter and George therewith sent.

Having spoken this, he proceeded to the Investiture, which being finished, he
thus continued his Speech.

Now that your Highness is by his Majesty's Royal Election and Dispensation for
the present Invested, and made a Companion of this most Noble and famous Order,
I shall humbly presume (according to the obligation of my Office) succinctly to
represent unto you Highness, somewhat of the antiquity and reason of the
Institution, what qualifications are requisite to all persons Elected, and how
in all ages (since the Institution) this Order has been highly valued and
esteemed: All which, I believe, your Highness having lived from your Cradle
under the power and barbarous restraint of the most unparalled Rebels and
Traitors usurping in England, has not yet known.

And first, for the Antiquity and Institution of this most Noble Order, your
Highness most glorious and victorious Ancestor King Edward the Third (for the
honor and encouragement of Martial Actions, and to oblige unto him by the
nearest ties of Royal favor and society, such persons of eminent birth, as by
valiant and noble acts had highly merited of him) Instituted this Order, and
Elected into the Fellowship thereof (with himself the Sovereign) the number of
25. other renowned Knights, by giving them the Garter, with this most
significant and generous Motto, HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE, assigning them
likewise a peculiar and stately habit, ordaining them yearly to attend him on
the Feast of St. George, at his Castle of Windesore (the seat of the
Foundation) where be regally entertained them, and framing Statutes which
themselves and their Successors were obliged to observe, for the honor of the
Sovereign and the Order.

By which Statutes, in the second place, the proper qualifications are fully
declared, which are principally, that every person elected into this most Noble
Order, be a Knight without reproach, a Gentleman of Blood and Arms, of three
descents by Father and Mother, a man of courage, a lover of Justice, and of
unblemished fame and honor; who likewise at his Installation is by Oath obliged
to defend and sustain the honor, quarrels, rights, and dominions of the
Sovereign, and to endeavor the augmentation of the Order; And if any one
elected into this most Noble Society shall be either convict of Heresy,
Treason, Cowardice in flying from the Kings Banner or Standard in the field, or
that by prodigality he has wilfully wasted his Patrimony, he may (if the
Sovereign and Companions please) be degraded and deprived of the Order as
unworthy thereof.

Lastly, The Institution of this most Noble Order has been so inviolably
observed, as that the Sovereign and Companions have never augmented their
number, and but very rarely dispensed with any of the qualifications, whereby
the dignity and splendour of the Order has been entirely preserved. And so
great a value and high esteem has been set upon this most Noble Order, as the
greatest and most powerful Monarchs of Europe have accounted it an honor to be
Companions thereof, amongst whom the Emperor Sigismund, in the Reign of King
Henry the Fifth, and that most potent and glorious Emperor Charles the Fifth,
in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, came personally into England to receive
it. And although the number of the Companions from the first Institution (now
full 303 years) is with your Highness but 444 persons, yet of them there have
been 8 Emperors, and 52 Kings and Princes of Foreign Countries, besides other
most illustrious and eminent persons, some of them Strangers, the rest Subjects
to the Kings of England, Sovereigns of the most Noble Order.

Thus Sir, I have represented unto your Highness, the noble ends for which this
Order was Instituted, the qaulifications required, and the care in preserving
the dignity and honor thereof: I shall now presume to add, that as your
Highness most Royal extraction is equal to any Prince of Europe, so your most
towardly and generous inclination gives great assuran^e, that you will
encourage magnanimity and honorable enterprises, appear equal to the most
renowned Princes that have been Companions of this most Noble Order; And as
your Highness bears the Title of the Duke of Gloucester, so that you will
inherit the great and heroic virtues of that excellent Prin^e your
Predecessor, Humphry Plantagenet Protector of the Realm and Person of his
Nephew King Henry the Sixth, who by his great wisdom, bounty, and justice,
obtained the title and appellation of the good Duke.

I shall conclude with my humble and real Prayers for long life, honor, and all
prosperity to your Royal Highness, the most high, mighty, and excellent Prince,
Henry Duke of Gloucester, Knight, and Companion of the most Noble Order of the
Garter.

SECT. VI. Allowances and Rewards given to Garter for his service in this
Employment.
THE Sovereign of this most Noble Order bears the charges of Garter,
whenever, and as often as he is sent to any Elect Knight Subject; either with
Letters to signify his Election, or the Garter and George, wherewith to invest
him; and this is commonly proportioned, according to the length or shortness of
the Journey.

The allowance for that Journey which Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter made into the
Counties of Lincoln and Cumberland (by the Lib. C. p. 96.
Sovereign's command given in Chapter) first to the Earl of Rutland, and next
to the Lord Scroop, an. 26. Eliz. appears to have been Appendix. Number. XXIII.
20 l.

Besides the Sovereign's allowance to Garter, he has been accustomed to
receive honorable gratuities and rewards from the Elect-Knight himself, after
the Investiture performed; and these have usually been proportioned according
to the esteem of the honor he receives, and his particular inclinations to
Garter, and the service done by him. Among whom we find the Ex vet. MS. fol.
penes Johan. Vincent Gent. p. 159.
Earl of Arundel, an. 17. H. 8. gave to Thomas Wriothesley Garter 10 l. in
Angelotts, being then at his Manor of Dawnley, and Ex vet. MS. fol. penes
Johan. Vincent Gent. p. 159.
Ralph Earl of Westmerland, elected at the same time with the said Earl of
Arundel, then at Myle-end, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. But the Ib. p. 160.
Earl of Northumberland, an. 23. H. 8. gave Garter for the verbal certifying
him of his Election 4. l. though he went no farther than the Chapter House door.

Lastly, an. 26. Eliz. the Earl of Rutland honorably rewarded Garter at Newark;
and the Lord Scroop gave unto him Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
30 l. in Gold, a Velvet Cloak, and a Gallaway Nag, and to William Dethick York
Herald, who then went along with Garter to Carlisle Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
10 l. But since these times, the Knights-Elect have greatly enlarged their
Gratuities to Garter, for his service upon this occasion.

CHAP. XI. OF Preparations FOR THE Personal Installation OF A KNIGHT.
SECT. I. That Installation gives the Title of Founder.
THE Installation or Inauguration of a Knight of this most Noble Order,
consists in a conjunction of many Ceremonies, and contains the most solemn part
of those, whereby so great an honor is conferred; indeed that which compleateth
all the rest. And till this great Ceremony be duly and solemnly performed, the
person Elected has not the honor of being reckoned among the number of
Founders, but barely passes for an Elect Knight, and no other. For the express
Text is, E. 3. Stat. Art. 19.
That in case a Knight Elect dye before his Installation, he shall not be named
one of the Founders. And the reason is there given, E. 3. Stat. Art. 19.
forasmuch as he has not had the full possession of his state; and in this
point do the other H. 5. Stat. Art. 19. H. 8. Stat. Art. 20.
Bodies of the Statutes agree. Howbeit as soon as the Ceremonies of Installation
are completely finished, the Knight is unquestionably vested in full possession
of all the Honors and Privileges belonging to a Founder of this most Noble
Order.

But to quicken each Elect Knight, who is either a Subject to the Sovereign, or
resides within his Realm (and consequently in a more ready capacity of
receiving Installation, then one remaining in Foreign parts) to the full
attainment of his honor, or otherwise to wave what has been conferred on him,
by the Act of Election; the compass of E. 3. Stat. (...) 19. H. 5. Stat. Art.
19. H. ^ Stat. (...). 20.
one year after such his Election, is allowed him by the Statutes for
Installation (albeit for sooner speeding thereof, the Statutes do as well
appoint him to use all convenient diligence) otherwise his Election is ordained
to be absolutely Ibid.
null and void. Nor can any thing hinder* but that the Sovereign may then freely
proceed to a new Election; unless the Ibid.
Elect-Knight send or produce an excuse for such delay, sufficient and fit to
be accepted by the Sovereign, or his Deputy, and the whole Society; or that the
Sovereign himself think fit to defer the Ceremony of Installation for some
longer time.

For which cause, when certain Articles concerning the honor of the Order had
been prepared by the Sovereign's Lieutenant, and ten Knights-Companions,
approved by the Sovereign, and in a Chapter held Lib. R. fol. 14 and 15.
24. April an. 21. Iac. R. ordered to be observed; one of them was for hastening
the Installation, after a Knight had been Elected, nevertheless with this
Exception, Ibid.
unless for some special cause, the Sovereign should think fit to defer the
same, until the Eve or day of Saint George next following the time of Election.

SECT. II. Of the Time and Place appointed for Installation.
THE Feast of Installation has not been hitherto fixed to any certain time,
but always rested in the pleasure of the Sovereign to assign a convenient day;
which has been obtained, either upon the suit of the Knight-Elect, or some
other of the Knights-Companions, whose favor and esteem with the Sovereign was
best able to prevail. Such a one do we find the Lord Burghley, MS. fol. penes.
G. O. Y. p. 203.
an. 35. Eliz. (partly in regard he had been Lieutenant at St. Georges Feast
immediately preceding, and partly by reason of his being Lord Treasurer of
England) who on the behalf of the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland obtained
the 19. of June in the foresaid year, to be appointed for the day of their
Installation.

It sometimes fell out that though the day for Installation was set down,
nevertheless, upon some extraordinary occasion intervening, it has been
protogued to a further and more convenient time for the Sovereign's Affairs:
and the most remarkable instance is that, an. 3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. when the
Lib. C. p. 20.
Earl of Sussex, the Lord Gray, and Sir Robert Rochester, Knights Elect, had
their Lib. C. p. 20.
Installation together with St. George's Feast, prorogued to the 10. of May in
the year aforesaid. But Ib. p. 21.
many and urgent affairs, relating both to the King and Queen, happening about
that time, not only the Ib. p. 21.
Grand Feast, but the Solemnity of their Installations were in a Chapter held
the 3. of the same Month, prorogued to the Ib. p. 21.
5. of December following, and on the last day of October preceding, were they
again prorogued to the first Sunday after Twelf-day, in case the King should
not return into England before the said 5. of December. After all this on the
5. of January following, the Grand Feast was prorogued a fourth time to the 20.
of February next coming. Nevertheless it was then Ordered, that the Earl of
Sussex (one of the three Elect Knights) should be forthwith Installed, which
was performed on the 8. of the same January. And the 6. of February following,
the Lord Gray also obtained an appointment for his Installation, and that was
celebrated the 20. of April ensuing; but we do not find that Sir Robert
Rochester ever received that honor.

But though the time of Installation be arbitrary and uncertain, yet has the
place been from the Institution of the Order, fixed (as an essential Privilege)
only to the Sovereign's free Chapel of St. George in the Castle of Windesor;
within whose Choire stand erected the Sovereign's and Knights-Companions
Stalls, and under its sacred Roof their Banners and Achievements are set up,
as Monuments of their high deservings, and so great honor. For albeit the
celebration of the Grand Feast of St. George, happened to be withdrawn from
Windesor, by a Decree past an. Lib. C. p. 54.
9. Eliz. nevertheless the Ibid.
Feast of Installation was therein excepted, and appointed to be solemnized at
that place. And this was again provided for among the before mentioned Orders,
an. Iac. Regis 21. to wit, p. 15.
That after an Election made of a Knight of the Order, his Installation should
be performed at Windesor, according to the ancient Custom and Statutes of the
Order.

When therefore the Sovereign has been pleased to prefix a certain day, for
Installation, in order to this great Solemnity, several things are necessarily
to be prepared; as namely, (1.) a Commission to admit and install the
Elect-Knight, (2.) Letters to each of the Commissioners, and the Elect-Knight,
for their repair to Windesor, (3.) Warrants for the Sovereign's Livery, (4.) a
Bill or Warrant for the removal of Stalls and Achievements (all which are to
be obtained from the Sovereign under his Sign manual by the Chancellor of the
Order) and (5.) lastly the Knights own Preparations; among which his
Achievements are to be got in readiness for setting up, so soon as he is
Installed.

SECT. III. Of Commissions for Installation.
IN the first place we are to note, that no Elect-Knight can be Installed
unless by the Sovereign of the Order himself, or (being present) by such of the
Knights-Companions whom he shall verbally authorize, or (if absent) by his
Commission drawn up in writing, and past under the great Seal of the Order,
directed either to his Lieutenant, or Knights-Commissioners.

We have met with but one Instance, where the Sovereign ^ath been pleased to
honor a Knight by performing the Ceremony of Installation himself, and that was
in the case Philip King of Castile and Leon an. 22, H. 7. yet it is probable
enough that Sigismond the Emperor, and anciently some other Foreign Princess of
eminence and dignity, might receive Installation from other of the Sovereigns,
though no memorial thereof has been transmitted to us. As to the Sovereign's
verbal appointment, we shall mention it Chap. 12. Sect. 6.
by and by: But in reference to Installation by Commission we shall speak of it
here. For it was Ordained by the Statutes of Institution, Art. 25. vide eliam
H. 5. Stat. Art. 25.
That in case the Sovereign should be absent out of the Kingdom at the time of
Installation of any of the Knights, so that he could not personally perform
those things his Office obliged him to, it should be lawful for him to
constitute as his Deputy in this affair, whomsoever of the Society he should
think fit, and he to have power and authority in the Sovereign's name to
perform and execute those things, which it would have been his own part to have
done, had he been present.

By virtue of this Article the Sovereign's Deputy or Lieutenant (in his
absence) performed the Ceremony before the Reign of King Henry the Eighth,
which was usually done at the Feast of St. George (for the Celebration of which
he had another Commission) but in the Commission given out for Installation,
formerly the Lieutenant was first named, and the Appendix Number. XXIV.
Knights-Companions appointed for his Assistants at the said Feast, were joined
with him in the Commission for Installation, to assist in that Ceremony also;
but of later times, the Commission has passed to the Number. XXV.
Lieutenant alone.

King Henry the Eight enlarged the powers given by the former Statutes to a
Deputy, to H. 8. Stat. Art. 28.
two or more of the Knights-Companions, that should exercise the same by the
Sovereign's Letters of Commission. And therefore by the liberty and privilege
of this Article, whenever after the Sovereigns did appoint an Installation,
at other times of the year, than at the Feast of St. George, they then
delegated their authority to such of the Knights-Companions as were thought
most fit to perform this great Ceremony.

And the very next year after making this Statute, we find such a Appendix Number.
XXVI.
Commission issued to the Marquess Dorset, and Earls of Devonshire and Kent, to
Instal the Lord Ferrars of Chartley; the substance of which has been ever
since, and is yet retained, though the form has received some little
Variation, as may be seen by two other Commissions immediately following in the
Number. XXVII and XXVIII.
Appendix.

The particular powers granted by the Commissioiners are these, to accept and
admit the Knight Elect into the Order, to receive his Oath, and to Instal him:
and the general power is, to do and accomplish every thing which belongs to
his due Admittance and full Installation, as to the Statutes and laudable
Usage^, Rules, and Customs of this Order appertains.

We shall only add this observation out of the Commission given to the Lib. N.
Pa^. 306.
Marquess Dorset and the Lord Cobham, an. 5. E. 6. for Installation of the Lord
Dar^y (which else is the same verbatim, with former Commissions) that in the
last clause of general power, the word Lib. N. Pa^. 306.
Usage is put down, instead of the words Statutes and laudable Customs, which
were generally inserted in the more ancient Commissions; perhaps, as
restraining the Ceremonies of Installation, to such as were in use about that
time, (when many Ceremonies accustomably used were forborne) not what the
Statutes and laudable Customs of formerly days, had appointed and prac^ised:
Howbeit, shortly after, these words were restored to the Commissions of
Installation as appears from a Appendix Number. XXIX. Commission made to the Earl
of Huntingdon,
and Lord Clynton, an. 2. and 3. Ph. and Mar. for the Installation of Anthony
Brown Viscount Mountague.

SECT. IV. Letters of Summons.
BEsides the Commission impowering the Sovereign's Lieutenant, or
Knights-Commissioners therein named to Instal the Elect-Knight, it has been
usual for the Sovereign (upon the Chancellors motion) to issue out Letters of
Summons under his privy Signet (but of late under the Signet of the Order) both
to the Commissioners for Installation, and to the Elect Knights. Those to the
Commissioners are directed severally to each, nominated in the Commission: the
effect whereof, is to give them notice of the Installation, and to require
their repair to Windesor, against the day therein assigned, to the end the
Elect Knight might proceed to his Installation; a Precedent whereof is also
added in the Number. XXX.
Appendix. But at the Installation of Algernon Earl of Northumberland, an. 11.
Car. 1. a Numb. XXVIII.
Clause to this purpose is inserted into the Commission it self.

Those directed to the Elect Knight, pass likewise under the Sovereign's Sign
manual and Signet of the Order, by which he is required to repair to Windesor
Castle, at a certain day therein prefixed, to proceed to his Installation,
according, to the Statutes of the Order; and of this kind we have also inserted
a Form in the Numb. XXXI.
Appendix. Where note, that if there be two or more Knights appointed to be
Installed on the same day, the like Letter is sent to each of them, the
difference being only in the direction.

Besides these Letters sent from the Sovereign, the Chancellor (in case the
Sovereign afford his presence) in his Circular Letters to the
Knights-Companions for their repair to the Feast of St. George, gives them also
intimation of the designed Installation. And if the said Feast be held either
by the Sovereign or his Lieutenant, he dispatcheth a Letter to the Prelate of
the Order, signifying the Sovereign's commands for his attendance at the day
appointed: In both which cases, as also if the Installation be dispatched by
Commissioners, he writes his Letters to the three inferior Officers of the
Order, purporting the same command. The conveyance of all which appertain to
Garter, and are left to his care and trust by the Cap. ^.
Constitutions relating to the Officers of the Order; whose allowance and
reward upon these and such like service, shall be noted in its due place.

SECT. V. Warrant for the Livery of the Order.
THE third thing to be obtained by the Chancellor of the Order, is the
Sovereign's Warrant, directed to the Master of the Great Wardrobe for the time
being, to deliver so much Velvet for the Livery of the Order as will make the
Knight Elect a Surcoat and Hood, and as much Sarcenet or Taffety, as will line
them.

Of such a Warrant there is an ancient Precedent in Latin entered in the Black
Book of the Order, and transferred to the Number XXXII
Appendix; together with which, we have also inserted another Number XXIII.
Precedent in English, for delivery forth of materials for the Livery, to Sir
John Wallop Knight, Lib. N. p. 291.
Elected an. 35. H. 8. And in the same form run all the Warrants we have seen
in the Reigns of Ex vet. Cod. MS. in Offic. mag. Guard. Regin page
72.81.126.127.148. etc. Videfis lib. War. dormant in eod. Offic. page
57.60.68.94. etc. Et lib. tertium War. particul. page 126.171.231.110.298.
Queen Mary, and Ex vet. Cod. MS. in Offic. mag. Guard. Regin page
72.81.126.127.148. etc. Videfis lib. War. dormant in eod. Offic. page
57.60.68.94. etc. Et lib. tertium War. particul. page 126.171.231.110.298.
Queen Elizabeth.

There is also to be provided a Book, wherein King Henry the Eighths English
Statutes are written in a fair and legible hand upon Vellom: having in the
beginning the Sovereign's Arms impaled, with those of the Order, and the proper
Arms of the Knight for whom the Book is provided, both fairly limned and
surrounded with the Garter.

This Book of Statutes is prepared by the Register of the Order, to whom, for
the writing there is an allowance made, which generally in the Reigns of King
Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Eliz. was Ex Autogr. pene W. Le N. Cl.
2 l. but at King James his coming to the Crown, it was enlarged to Ex Autogr.
pene W. Le N. Cl.
3 l. 6 ^. 8 d.

SECT. VI. The Removal of Achievements and Plates.
BEsides these particulars before mentioned, there is a Warrant or Scheme
prepared for the Sovereign to sign, wherein the order of the Stalls in the
Choire at Windesor is set down, according as he appoints them to stand at the
ensuing Installation; by virtue of which, Garter is empowered to removed the
Plates and Achievements of the present Knights-Companions, that so way be made
for the Elect Knight, or Knights, and to fix the new Plates and Achievements
within and over the Stalls, in such order as they are ranked in the said Scheme.

In reference to this alteration, Garter (so soon as the Sovereign's pleasure
is known touching an Installation) brings to the Chancellor of the Order, the
Names of the present Knights-Companions, ranked in the order they then sit in,
their Stalls (in which the Stalls void are to be so noted) to the end he may
present them to the Sovereign; who, upon observing the series wherein they be
already placed, may the better consider and determine how to alter and seat
both them, and the new Elect Knights.

And we find in the vacancy of Garter's Office, this Employment was put upon
Clarenceux; for Ex Collect. R. Cook modo Clarenc. page 8.
an. 27. Eliz. the Sovereign's Warrant for removal and placing of Plates and
Achievements was delivered to Ex Collect. R. Cook modo Clarenc. page 8.
him five days before the Installation of the Earl of Rutland, the Lords Cobham
and Scroop, who thereupon fixed them according to the direction therein given.

This Section may be further enlarged, by adding thereunto an account, upon
what ground this Alteration and Removal came to be made, and how it continues
now in practice, seeing it was otherwise at the Institution of the Order;
wherein we must first have recourse to the Statutes of the Order, and ancient
practice grounded thereupon.

Among the Statutes, 1. The Elect Knight to succeed into the Stall of his
immediate Predecessor.
those of Institution did Ordain, E. 3. Stat. Art. 21. vide etiam H. 5. Stat.
Art. 21. H. 8. Stat. A^^. 22.
That if any Earl, Baron, or Knight Batchellor should depart this life, he that
succeeded in his place, of what condition or state soever, should possess the
same Stall, which his Predecessor held before, without changing: So that it
might happen for an Earl (or Duke) to succeed a Knight, and a Knight an Earl
(or Duke). And it was thus at first appointed, E. 3. Stat. Art. 21.
That it might be known who were the first Founders of this most Noble Order.

Now how punctually this Article of the Statutes has been observed, and what
care was generally taken (for a long time after the Institution of the Order)
that none chosen should interrupt or change this course, we shall show in the
following Instances; conceiving it very material to make use of those Tables,
yet preserved in the Chapter House at Windesor (but heretofore in the Heylin's
Hist. of St. George, Part. 3. c. 4. sect. 1.
Choire of St. George's Chapel there) wherein are collected the Names of all
those Knights Companions, who succeeded one another in each Stall until the
beginning of King Henry the Seventh's Reign, a transcript whereof we have
inserted in the Appendix next after the Constitutions belonging to the Officers
of the Order.

From which Series of succession, and other Authorities, we shall note how
exactly the Law in this point has been kept and observed, even unto King Henry
the Eighth's Reign (when it received some alteration in this particular) with
reference no less to Election than Installation: for we find in the Annals
several Knights designed to the Stall of their immediate Predecessor, by the
honor only of Election, albeit prevented of Installation by death, or other
accidental occasion, and the Statutes do not bind him only, who shall fortune
to attain the honor of Installation, but him E. 3. Stat. Art. 21.
who shall come after or succeed the desunct Knight, which may as well be
understood of, and applied to an Elect, as Installed Knight; though the before
mentioned Tables take notice only of the latter of these.

First therefore, we shall instance in foreign Kings, among whom we see the
King of Denmark [ Ericus] to have received Installation in Lib. N. page 18. and
64.
King Henry the Fifth's Reign, not according to his own state and degree (as a
King) but into the Stall of that Knight-Companion whom he succeeded, namely the
Duke of Bavaria, it being the eighth on the Sovereign's side, whose first
Predecessor and Founder was Sir John Gray of Codnore Castle in the Country of
Darby.

Besides, John [the First] King of Portugal (a Knight-Companion in Lib. N. page
18. and 64.
King Henry the Fifth's time also) was installed in the second Stall on the
Sovereign's side, which belonged to Henry Duke of Lancaster, his first
Predeccessor, and to this King did succeed (in the same Stall) his Son Edward
King of Portugal elected Ibid. p. 91.
an. 13. H. 6. to whose Successor [ Humfry Duke of Gloucester] Ib. p. 114.
an. 34. of the same King, succeeded Alphonsus [the Fifth] King of Portugal,
and to him, as says the French Table, John [the Second] King of Portugal. But
I rather doubt this Table (as to the last King) is mistaken for the second
Stall, not on the Sovereign's but Princes side; because there we find (as may
be seen) George Duke of Clarence seated; and the Black Book says, this King of
Portugal was Elected, an. 22. E. 4. Ib. p. 149.
in the place of George Duke of Clarence, whose Stall had been long vacant, and
whereinto an. 19. E. 4. had been Elected (though perhaps not installed) Ib. p.
145. sub finem.
Henry King of Spain. So the King of Poland [ Casemir] was Elected. Ib. p. 105.
an. 28. H. 6. into the sixth Stall on the Princ^s side, at that time void by
the death of the Duke of Conimbero, whose first Founder was Sir John Mohun.

Again Alphonsus King of Aragon and Naples, Ibid p. 105.
an. 38. H. 6. was Elected into the Stall of Don Albro Vasques Dalmadea Count
d' Averence, being the seventh on the Sovereign's side, Sir Hugh Courtney first
possessing it. Ferdinand King of Naples and Sicely, Elected MS. penes Syl.
Tayl^r. fol. 160.
an. 3. E. 4. was Installed in the third Stall on the Princes side, Ralph Earl
of Stafford having been the first installed therein. To this King succeeded
Hercules Duke of Ferrara, Lib. N. p. 145.
Elected, an. 19. E. 4. and after him Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin, chosen a
Companion of this most Noble Society by King Henry the Seventh.

Lastly, we find that Alphonsus King of Sicely and Jerusalem, being Elected
also by King Henry the Seventh, received his Installation in the second Stall
on the Princes side, whose first Predecessor was Thomas Beauchamp Earl of
Warwick.

In the second place, if we descend to Foreign Princes, it may be observed that
William Duke of Gueldres, Elected by King Richard the Second, was installed in
the sixth Stall on the Sovereign's side, which Sir John Beauchamp, one of the
first Founders sometime possessed. That William of Henault Earl of Ostervant
(afterward Earl of Holland, Haynalt, and Zeland) chosen Companion of the Order
by the said King Richard, was installed in the eleventh Stall on the
Sovereign's side, whose first Predecessor was Sir John Cha^dos. That Robert
Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria, Elected by King Henry the
Fourth, was installed in the eighth Stall on the Sovereign's side.

That Philip Duke of Burgundy was Elected by Lib. N. p. ^7.
King Henry the Fifth (though not Installed) into the Stall of Sir John
Clifford, which appears to be the eleventh on the Princes side. Sir James
Audeley one of the first Founders, having been first placed therein. And that
an. 28. H. 6. Henry Duke of Brunswick was Elected into the Duke of Suffolk's
Stall ( viz. the seventh on the same side) it having been the Stall of Sir
Thomas Holand (Earl of Kent) one of the first Founders. And lastly, that
Frederick Duke of Vrbyn sat in the twelfth Stall on the Sovereign's side, he
therein succeeding Sir Walter Blount, an. 14. E. 4. and having Sir* Otho Holand
(Brother to the aforesaid Sir Tho. Holand) for his Founder.

Add to these the Sons of Kings, and we find Peter Duke of Conimbero, one of
the Sons to John the First King of Portugal (Elected Ibid. p. 84.
an. 5. H. 6.) to have been Installed in the sixth Stall on the Princes side,
therein succeeding the Duke of Exceter. So also Henry Duke of Visen (another of
this Kings Sons) Elected an. 21. H. 6. succeeded Sir Simon Felbrige in the
lowest Stall on the Princes side, whose first Predecessor therein was Sir
Walter Pavely.

And as the Statute was carefully observed with reference to the Election and
Installation of Foreign Princes, so no less in relation to the Princes of the
Blood at home, among whom, let us (in the third place) observe the placing the
Sons of the Founder of this most Noble Order, where first we see Lyonel Duke of
Clarence his third Son to have been Installed in the sixth Stall on the
Sovereign's side, whose immediate Predecessor was Sir John Beauchamp one of the
first Founders. In like manner John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster his Fourth Son
was Installed in the seventh Stall on the Princes side, having Sir Thomas
Holand for his Predecessor, and a Founder.

Again Edmund of Langley Duke of York his fifth Son was Installed in the
seventh Stall on the Sovereign's side, Sir Hugh Courtney, one of the first
Founders, being first placed therein. And Thomas of Woodstock Duke of
Gloucester his sixth Son sat in the eighth Stall on the Sovereign's side, whose
first Predecessor was Sir John Gray, one of the first Founders likewise.

It may be further observed that the Rule in the Statute was strictly pursued
in relation also to the Sons of King Henry the Fourth, for Thomas Duke of
Clarence his second Son, was seated in the seventh Stall on the Princes side.
John Duke of Bedford and Regent of France his third Son, was installed in the
seventh Stall on the Sovereign's side; viz. opposite to the Duke of Clarence
his elder Brother, and in a Stall of higher dignity. And Humfry Duke of
Gloucester his fourth Son, s^t in the eleventh Stall on the same side.

To instance next in the Brothers and Sons of King Edward the Fourth; George
Duke of Clarence was placed in the second Stall on the Princes side. Richard
Duke of Gloucester (afterward King of England and Sovereign of this Order) was
Installed in the fifth Stall on the Sovereign's side, whose first Predecessor
was Sir John Lisle. And Richard Duke of York, the said Kings second Son,
received his Installation in the fourth Stall on the Princes side.

In the last place, if we review the foresaid Tables, we shall find, that as
the Knights-Companions of higher dignity, assumed the Stalls (when they became
vacant) though often of the lower sort, so some of the lowest degree among
them, have had the honor to be Installed in Seats of superior rank; and this
merely by virtue and observance of the Law in this case provided.

Among these Knights-Companions we shall first reckon Sir Philip la Vache, a
Gascon, who in the Reign of King Richard the Second was first Installed in the
Princes Stall (that being void by the death of John of Gaunt, in whose room he
happened to be Elected) though afterward removed to the third Stall on the
Sovereign's side. As also Sir John Dabrichcourt, Elected an. 1. H. 5. who died
possessed of the said Princes Stall in the fifth of the said King.

Next, Sir Nicholas Sarnesfield, Standard Bearer to the Founder, who succeeded
Hugh Earl of Stafford, and after him Sir William Arundel, imediate Successor to
the said Sir Nicholas, were both installed in the second Stall on the
Sovereign's side. Sir John Robsart an Heynower, was an. 9. H. 5. installed in
the second Stall on the Princes side. Sir Gilbert Talbot, and after him Sir
John Gray were both installed in the third Stall on the Sovereign's side. And
in the third Stall on the Princes side was Ralph Stafford one of the first
Founders installed, in which Stall successively sat Sir Alan Boxhull, Sir
Bryan Stapleton, and Sir William Scroop.

We could add here diverse other instances, how the Knights-Companions, both in
the case of Elections and Installations, have succeeded in the Stalls of their
immediate Predecessors; but these already inserted may suffice, since they
include the chief and most considerable particulars; and sufficiently manifest
that the usage and practice down to the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, was
pursuant to the ancient Law of the Order.

But we are here to note, that notwithstanding each Knight was by the before
mentioned Article appointed to succeed his immediate Predecessor, in the Stall
void by his death; yet does there follow an Exception, as to the Stall
belonging to the Prince of Wales. This Stall is the first on the left hand at
the entrance into the Choire of St. George's Chapel at Windesor, and wherein
Edward the Black Prince was Installed; from this Stall does the whole range of
Stalls on the same side take their denomination, and to which the E. 3. Stat.
Art. 21. H. 5. Stat. Art. 21. H. 8. Stat. Art. 22.
Prince of Wales as soon as he is Elected into the Order, has a due Title.

But though this Stall de jure belongs to the Prince of Wales; nevertheless
heretofore when the Sovereign had no Heir, then was it (for the present)
disposed of (otherwise a defect in the full number of Knights-Companions would
have ensued) to some other Knight, who received the honor of Installation
therein.

The first that obtained that honor (besides Princes of Wales) was John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, it being conferred on him by Decree of the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions (Richard the Second, having no issue, neither then nor
afterward) and thereupon removed thither, from the seventh Stall on the same
side, wherein he had been installed at his first admission into the Order.

But the first Knight-Companion that happened to be installed in it, was Sir
Philip l^ Vache (a little before remembered) and a very great honor it was, for
one of his rank: But it fell to him by the then Law of the Order, being elected
into the room of the said Duke of Lancaster, who dyed possessed thereof.

Howbeit shortly after (such was the change of times) King Henry the Fourth
coming to the Crown, and his eldest Son being Rot. Parl. an 1. H. 4. n. 72.
created Prince of Wales, laid then claim to this Stall by virtue of the
foresaid Statute, and had it surrendered to him. Nevertheless, that the former
possessor might suffer as little deminution in the honor of his Session, as
might be, he was removed no lower than to the Stall, which King Henry the
Fourth lately held when Earl of Derby, viz. the third on the Sovereign's side,
and had now relinquished for the Sovereign's royal Stall.

Upon the death of King Henry the Fourth, and removal of King Henry the Fifth
from the Princes Stall (whereby a vacancy therein ensued) to the Sovereign's
Seat: Sir John Dabrichcourt (Elected an. 1. H. 5.) was Installed therein, and
he ( an. 5. of the same King) dying possessed thereof (of which a notable
testimony remains, by the continuance of his Plate in that Stall to this day)
and the Sovereign yet unmarried, the Emperor Sigismond became the next
Successor to Sir John Dabrichcourt, both into the Society of the Order, and the
Princes Stall. He dying Lib. N. p. 94.
Albert Duke of Austria, afterward Emperor (there being hitherto no Prince
born) was Elected in his room, an. 16. H. 6. but this Emperor was never
Installed, and thereupon during his life (near 20. years after his Election)
the Princes Stall was not otherwise disposed of, but remained vacant, and so is
it noted in several Pages of the Ibid page 95.101.104.108.109.112.113.114.
Black Book.

But some few years before King Henry the Sixth dyed, he had a Son born, to
wit, in the 32. year of his Reign, in which regard, though the Emperor
Frederick was Elected into the Order, Ib. p. 117.
an. 35. H. 6. upon the death of Albert, yet was the said Stall reserved for
the Prince (but he never possessed it) and the Emperor Ib. p. 119.
an. 37. H. 6. Installed by Proxy in the Duke of Somersets Stall, then lately
deceased, being the eighth on the Princes side.

In King Edward the Fourth's Reign, we find the right in this Stall returned
again to Edward Prince of Wales, his eldest Son; and in King Henry the
Seventh's Reign to Prince Arthur; but upon his death, Maximilian Son of
Frederick King of the Romans, and after Emperor, sat therein: So also did the
Emperor Charles the Fifth (his Grandchild) in regard that as yet, there was no
Son born to the Sovereign.

But Prince Edward being born, while this Stall was possessed by Charles the
Fifth, it happened also that the King of Scots dyed, which caused King Henry the
Eight to reserve his Stall (the third on the Sovereign's side) for the Prince,
albeit he never had possession of it, nor was ever Elected into the Order,
though we find him An. 32. H. 8. Lib. N. p. 281.
once registered in a Scruteny. And King Henry the Eighth dying, Prince Edward
became both by inheritance and succession, Sovereign of this most Noble Order,
by virtue of the first Article of the Statutes; not needing any Ceremony to
make him so.

From this time to the eighth year of King James there was no Prince of Wales;
which King, finding the Princes Stall void at his entrance upon the English
Throne, did (in a Chapter held the Ex. Collect. A. V. W.
3. of July, an. 1. Iac. Regis) advance the French King Henry the Fourth, from
the second Stall on the Sovereign's side into it; and appointed Prince Henry to
be Installed Ex. Collect. A. V. W.
in that Kings void seat, where he remained till an. 3. Iacobi. that
Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark came to be Installed by his Proxy, to
make way for whom, the Prince (though his Senior both by Election and
Installation) was removed yet lower, viz. to the Ex. Collect. praef. R. Cook,
1^. fol. 17.
second Stall on the Princes side, and the said King Installed in the Seat
which Prince Henry had to that time possessed. And yet MS. penes Edw.
Fauconbridge.
an. 9. Iac. R. upon the death of the foresaid French King, not the Prince (as
was his right, since now he was created Prince of Wales) but the MS. penes Edw.
Fauconbridge.
said King of Denmark was translated to the Princes vacant Stall; hereupon
Prince Henry was returned again to the MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge.
second Stall on the Sovereign's side, which he enjoyed while he lived, and
upon his death MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge.
Prince Charles was removed into it, an. 11. Iac. R. and there rested all King
James his Reign.

In like manner, when the present Sovereign came to be Installed, the then
Sovereign finding him prevented for assuming the Princes Stall (the foresaid
King of Denmark yet living) assigned to him the second Stall on the Sovereign's
side, (wherein himself sat, while Prince of Wales) and where hitherto the
present Sovereign's Plate remains fixed as a memorial of his Installation
therein.

2. Removal upon extraordinary Occasion, by Order of Chapter.
Albeit (as has been before cleared) that the Knights-Companions at their
Election or Installation succeeded the immediate defunct Knight in his Stall,
yet do we also observe, that sometimes, after Installation, as an especial mark
of favor and indulgence, the Sovereign has been pleased (though but seldom
and rarely) to advance a Knight-Companion to a higher Stall (when it became
vacant) then that wherein he was at first Installed. And though there be no
such liberty given by the Law of the Order, nevertheless in the first Precedent
(very early after the Institution) in the case of John of Gaunt Duke of
Lancaster (who as is before noted was removed from the seventh Stall on the
Princes side (wherein he was first placed) to the Princes Stall it self) this
act is said to be done See the second Table in the Appendix.
by the decree of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions; and no doubt, but as
this was done by so good authority, so upon no less inducements to the
Sovereign and whole Society. But there are few of these extraordinary cases,
which (taking up little time) we will remember here.

William of Henalt Earl of Ostervant, was advanced by King Richard the Second
from the eleventh Stall on the Sovereign's side, to the Duke of Britains Stall,
it being the second on the Princes side. Next, Humfry Duke of Gloucester, in
the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, having been first installed in the eleventh
Stall on the Sovereign's side, was (when he came to be Lord Protector) removed
to the second Stall on the same side. Afterward Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick,
by the Lib. N. p. 121.
consent of the Knights-Companions in Chapter, an. 39. H. 6. was translated to
the Duke of Buckingham's Stall, the Lord Bonvill, to the Lord Scales his Seat,
Sir Thomas Kyriell to the place of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Lord Wenlock
to the Stall of Viscount Beaumont. And lastly, Ferdinand King of Naples and
Sicily, was removed to the third Stall on the Sovereign's side, after he had
been installed in the third on the Princes side: yet this was an advance of so
little honor, as it is scarce worth taking notice of, being but the very next
above that, wherein he was first Installed.

But King Henry the Eighth thinking it requisite for the Sovereigns of this
most Noble Order, 3. Translation at pleasure by the Sovereigns Warrant.
to be empowered by a general Law, to do that at pleasure, which the former
Sovereign's did not but by the power of particular Acts or Orders in Chapter;
after he had confirmed the Art. 22.
ancient Law of succeeding in the Stall of the immediate Predecessor, not to be
changed without the Sovereign's License (nevertheless excepting Strangers) he
in the next succeeding Article established this Privilege upon Himself and
Successors, Art. 23.
That if there were any Place or Stall void, the Sovereign at his own pleasure
might advance and translate any Knight of the Society into the void Stall, so
that it were higher than that wherein he sat before.

This in effect did vacat the ancient Law of succeeding in Stalls by him
seemingly confirmed to Knights-Subjects; for afterward Translations preceding
to Installations, became so frequent, that the right an Elect-Knight had to his
Predecessors Stall was seldom enjoyed. Howbeit, hereby he settled a power to
gratify and oblige such of the Knights-Companions as should be thought worthy
the honor of advancing, without recourse had to a Chapter for a special and
particular allowance: and from hence the Custom began to issue out Warrants
under the Sovereign's Sign manual for the Translation of Stalls, some
convenient time before the day of Installation approached, and consequently the
alteration and removal of such of the Knights-Companions Helms, Crests,
Banners, and Plates, who should receive the honor of a higher Place; their
Achievements being by virtue of such Warrants set up over the Stalls, to which
they were advanced, there to remain during the time their owners continued
therein.

And now that we may see in what manner King Henry the Eighth made use of the
powers and privileges settled by the foresaid Articles, both as to the removal
of Stalls, and doing it by special Warrant (which is Garters discharge) we
shall exhibit a few Examples; first showing in what order the Stalls were
ranked, shortly after passing this Law, that by comparing some following years
with these Schemes, the alteration may with greater readiness be discerned.

Knights of the Order of the Garter, as they stood ranked in their Stalls, Anno
17. H. 8.
The Sovereign's side. The Princes side. 1. The Sovereign. 1. The Emperor
Charles the Fifth. Ex Collect. Tho. Wrothes^^^ pen. G. O. Y. f. 1. b.
2. Duke of Richmond. 2. Archduke of Austria. 3. Marquess Dorset. 3. Duke of
Norfolk. 4. Marquess of Exceter. 4. Earl of Northumberland. 5. Earl of
Shrewsbury. 5. Duke of Suffolk. 6. Earl of Essex. 6. Earl of Arundel. 7. Earl
of Worcester. 7. Viscount Lisle. 8. Viscount Fitz Walter. 8. Lord Bergaveny. 9.
Lord Dacre. 9. Lord Ferrars. 10. Lord Dudley. 10. Lord Darcy. 11. Earl of
Westmerland. 11. Lord La Ware. 12. Earl of Rutland. 12. Lord Sandys. 13.
Viscount Rocheford. 13. Sir Richard Wingfield.

Knights of the Order of the Garter as they stood ranked in their Stalls Anno
18. H. 8.
Ibid.
1. The Sovereign. 1. The Emperor Charles the Fifth. 2. Duke of Richmond. 2.
Archduke of Austria. 3. Marquess Dorset. 3. Duke of Norfolk. 4. Marquess of
Exceter. 4. Earl of Northumberland. 5. Earl of Shrewsbury. 5. Duke of Suffolk.
6. Earl of ^ssex. 6. Earl of Arundel. 7. Earl of Westmerland. 7. Viscount
Lisle. 8. Viscount Fitz-Walter. 8. Lord Bergaveny. 9. Earl of Rutland. 9. Lord
Ferrars. 10. Lord Dudley. 10. Lord Darcy. 11. Void. 11. Viscount Rochford. 12.
Lord Mountjoy. 12. Lord Sandys. 13. Sir William Fitz Williams. 13. Sir Henry
Guldeford.

In the latter of these two Schemes, drawn for the Translation of Stalls, an.
18. H. 8. it may be observed, first, that on the Sovereign's side the Earl of
Westmerland was advanced from the eleventh Stall to the seventh, being void by
the death of the Earl of Worcester: The Earl of Rutland from the twelfth to the
ninth, that being also void by the Lord Dacres death; then Viscount Rochford
from the thirteenth Stall to the eleventh on the Princess side, where the Lord
La Ware lately sat, but then also deceased. And lastly, the Lib. N. p. 252.
three newly Elect Knights were thus disposed of at their Installation; first
the Lord Montjoy into the twelfth Stall, then lately void by the removal of the
Earl of Rutland, next Sir William Fitz Williams into the thirteenth Stall, from
whence Viscount Rochford was removed, and lastly, Sir Henry Guldeford into that
void by the death of Sir Richard Wingfield, viz. the thirteenth on the Princes
side; but the Stall from whence the Earl of Westmerland was removed, remained
yet void.

An appointment for the Translation of Stalls upon admission of Francis the
French King, An. 19. H. 8.
Ex Collect. prefat. Tho. Wrothersley, fol. 12. vide etiam MS. in Offic. Arm.
[M. 17.] fol. 31.
1. The Sovereign. 1. The Emperor. 2. The French King. 2. The King of Bohemia.
3. Duke of Richmond. 3. Duke of Norfolk. 4. Marquess of Exceter. 4. Marquess
Dorset. 5. Earl of Shrewsbury. 5. Duke of Suffolk. 6. Earl of Essex. 6. Earl of
Arundel. 7. Earl of Westmerland. 7. Viscount Lisle. 8. Viscount Fitz Walter. 8.
Lord Bergaveny. 9. Earl of Rutland. 9. Lord Ferrars. 10. Lord Dudley. 10. Lord
Darcy. 11. Earl of Oxenford. 11. Viscount Rochford. 12. Lord Mountjoy. 12. Lord
Sandys. 13. Sir William Fitz Williams. 13. Sir Henry Guildford.

The setlement of Stalls made the Ex Collect W. le N. Cl.
26. of January, in the following year, affords us these observations.

First, by reason of the French King Election (which past the Lib. N. p. 215.
21. Oct. an. 18. H. 8.) and to make room for his Instalment in the second
Stall on the Sovereign's side (which hitherto had been possessed by the Duke of
Richmond) both the said Duke and Marquess of Dorset were removed lower, the
Duke into the said Marques's Stall, and the Marquess into the Earl of
Northumberla^ds, then lately void by death.

And this was now so done, that the Sovereign might express what honor he could
to a King, between whom and him there had lately past so great endearments. All
the rest of the Stalls may be observed to stand ranked, as they did the year
before; and the void Stall on the Sovereign's side to be here supplied by the
Installation of the Earl of Oxford, Elected in the same Chapter with the French
King.

In the 20.21, and 22. years of King Henry the Eighth, the Stalls received no
alteration; and but little an. 23. of the same King; when the death of the
Marquess Dorset occasioned advancing the Duke of Suffolk into his void Stall,
and placing the Earl of Arundel in the Dukes. Whereupon the Earl of
Northumberland (Elected in the room of the Marquess Dorset) was Installed in
that which the Earl of Arundel relinquished: and in this order they continued
the MS. in Offic^. Arm [M. 17.] sol. 33. b.
24. and 25. years of this King.

Nor was there any removal made an. 26. H. 8. for albeit the Earls of Beaumont
and Newbl^nke [French Noblemen] were elected in a Chapter held at Callire the
27. of Oct. an. 24. H. 8. yet at their Installation, they were placed in the
two Stalls, then void by the death of two of the Knights-Companions, viz. the
Ex C^llect. Tho. Wrothesley Garter, penes G. O. Y. f. 6. b.
first in the Stall of the Lord Dudley, and the other in that of Sir Henry
Guilford.

But the alterations became yet more considerable, and extended almost to a
general Translation, which were made in the Stalls, an. 27. H. 8. upon the
admission of James the Fifth, King of Scotland, (one Stall being then void by
the death of the Lord Montjoy) for there remained unchanged only these five,
viz. the Earl of Rutland, and Earl of Beaumont (but called only Lord Beaumont
in the Warrant for Translation) on the Sovereign's side; and the Emperor, the
King of Bohemia, and Duke of Suffolk on the Princess side.

Nevertheless this so great an alteration was not made but upon consultation in
Lib. N. p. 267.
Chapter held at Greenwich on St. George's day, in the aforesaid year, where
the Sovereign with the assent of the rest of the Knights-Companions present,
thought it expedient, that forasmuch as the said King of Scots, was newly
admitted into the Society of the Order, and that there ought to be assigned a
Stall answerable to his greatness; that the Stalls of the Knights-Companions
should be translated, Ibid.
so as the said King should be placed next to the King of the Romans, and the
rest to be ranked according to the Sovereign's pleasure; and thereupon it was
given in charge to Garter, to see the same accordingly performed. The setlement
of the Stalls at this time, as it was sub-signed by the Sovereign, coming to
our hands, we have exactly transcribed hither.

The Kings Highness appointment for the Stall of the King of Scots, An. R. sui
27.23. April 1535.
1. The Sovereign. 1. The Emperor. 2. The French King. 2. The King of the
Romans. 3. The King of Scotland. 3. The Duke of Richmond. 4. The Duke of
Norfolk. 4. The Duke of Suffolk. 5. The Marquess of Exceter. 5. The Earl of
Shrewsbury. 6. The Earl of Arundel. 6. The Earl of Essex. 7. The Earl of
Northumberland. 7. The Earl of Westmerland. 8. The Earl of Wiltshire. 8. The
Earl of Sussex. 9. The Earl of Rutland. 9. The Earl of Oxenford. 10. The Lord
Beaumond. 10. The Viscount Lysle. 11. The Lord Burgaveny. 11. The Earl of
Newblanke. 12. The Lord Ferrars. 12. The Lord Darcy. 13. The Lord Sandys. 13.
Sir William Fitz William. Henry R.

In this Scheme we find the King of Scots, placed in the Duke of Richmond's
Stall, who with the Duke of Norfolk, the Earls of Shrewsbury, Arundel, Essex,
Northumberland, Westmerland, and Sussex, were all removed into the next Stall
below that which each of them sat in before, whether it were on the Sovereign's
or Princes side. The Marquess of Exeter to the next below his own on the
Sovereign's side, Viscount Lisle from the seventh to the tenth Stall on the
Prince's side, the Lord Abergaveny from the eighth on the Prince's side, to the
eleventh on the Sovereign's side; the Lord Ferrars from the ninth on the
Prince's side, to the twelfth on the Sovereign's side; the Lord Darcy from the
tenth on the Prince's side, to the twelfth on the same; and the Lord Sandys
from the twelfth on the Prince's side, to the thirteenth on the Sovereign's.

And as these before mentioned Knights Companions were removed lower, so the
Earls of Oxford, Wilts, and Newblanke, were honored with higher Stalls than
they before possessed; for the first of them was advanced from the eleventh Stall
on the Sovereign's side to the ninth on the Prince's, the second from the
eleventh on the Prince's side to the eighth on the Sovereign's and the third
from the thirteenth of the Prince's to the eleventh on the same side. So that
in this last example, though many of the Knights-Companions were removed lower,
yet it may be observed, that the English Nobility were now ranked according to
their Degrees; first Dukes, next a Marquess, then Earls, next Viscounts,
afterward Barons, and last of all Knights.

Some few removals were made in the following years of this King, but none of
so great note as this last mentioned, and therefore we need not enlarge our
Instances. Nor were there any considerable translations, in the Reigns of King
Edward the Sixth, or Queen Mary.

But immediately after Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, by consent of the
Knights-Companions in Chapter held the 12. of January an. 1. Eliz. the
Atchievments of Lib. C. page 28.
Philip King of Spain (late Sovereign of the Order) were removed to the Stall
of the Emperor Ferdinand, void by his being advanced into the Princes Stall,
for which Lib. C. page 28.
Garter had then command given him.

And when the French King Charles the Ninth was Elected into this Order, to
wit, on the Lib. C. p. 48.
morrow after St. George's day an. 6. Eliz. it occasioned the Sovereign then to
alter some Stalls, to leave one vacant for him: and the better to observe this
alteration (which was considerable) we shall first show how they stood ranked
on the Eve of the said Feast.

Elizabeth R. MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 14.
1. The Sovereign. 1. The Emperor Ferdinand. 2. The King of Spain. 2. The Duke
of Savoy. 3. The Constable of France. 3. The Duke of Holstein. 4. The Earl of
Arundel. 4. The Marquess of Winchester. 5. The Earl of Derby. 5. The Earl of
Penbroke. 6. The Duke of Norfolk. 6. The Lord Clynton. 7. Void. 7. The Marquess
of Northampton. 8. Void. 8. Void. 9. The Lord Effingham. 9. The Earl of Sussex.
10. The Earl of Shrewsbury. 10. The Lord Hastings. 11. The Viscount Mountagu.
11. The Lord Robert Dudley. 12. The Earl of Northumberland. 12. The Earl of
Warwick. 13. Void. 13. The Lord Hunsdon.

The 14. of May following, being appointed for the Installation of Francis Earl
of Bedford, and Sir Henry Sidney, Elected at the same time with the French
King, the Stalls were removed, by the Sovereign's appointment, and settled in
the following order.

Elizabeth R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. The Emperor Ferdinand. Idem fol. 17.
2. The King of Spain. 2. Void. 3. The Duke of Savoy. 3. The Constable of
France. 4. The Earl of Arundel. 4. The Duke of Holstein. 5. The Marquess of
Winchester. 5. The Earl of Derby. 6. The Earl of Penbroke. 6. The Duke of
Norfolk. 7. The Lord Clynton. 7. The Marquess of Northampton. 8. The Lord
Effingham. 8. The Earl of Sussex. 9. The Earl of Shrewsbury. 9. The Lord
Hastings. 10. The Viscount Mountagu. 10. The Lord Robert Dudley. 11. The Earl
of Northumberland. 11. The Earl of Warwick. 12. The Lord Hunsdon. 12. The Earl
of Bedford. 13. Void. 13. Sir Henry Sidney.

Where, beside the translation of the Stranger Princes (whom we shall mention a
little below) we see the Marquess of Winchester, the Earls of Derby and
Penbroke, the Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Clynton, were each of them seated
in the next lower Stall to that they enjoyed before. And by the advancement of
the Lord Effingham, Earl of Shrewsbury, Viscount Mountagu, and Earl of
Northumberland, each a Stall higher on the Sovereign's side; and the like
advance of the Earl of Sussex, Lord Hastings, Lord Dudley, and Earl of Warwick,
on the Princes side; the eighth Stall on the Sovereign's side, and that
opposite thereunto on the Princes, were now filled up. The Lord Hunsdon was
likewise advanced from the lowest Stall on the Princes side, to the twelfth on
the Sovereign's; and lastly the two Elect-Knights were installed in the twelfth
and thirteenth Stall on the Prince's side.

Beside the power established upon the Sovereign's of this most Noble Order, of
translating Stalls, when a vacancy happened, King Henry the Eighth further added
this larger Prerogative Art. 23.
That the Sovereign once in his life, might if it pleased him, make a general
Translation of all the Stalls at his pleasure, except of Emperors, Kings,
Princes, and Dukes, who (being settled in Stalls agreeable to their Dignities)
should keep their Stalls and Places (if such a general Translation happened)
unless advanced to a higher Room and Stall. In which Translation, the long
continuance in the Order, and the praises, worthiness, and merits of the
Knights-Companions were to be considered and remembered.

But this branch of the Sovereign's Prerogative in the Order, was never yet
made use of as we can find (though that Translation an. 27. H. 8. came something
near it) perhaps lest it might raise too great animosities among the Knights
Subjects, forasmuch as that of translating only (when there happened a vacancy)
Begot great emulations, which at length introduced an alteration, and to which
we shall pass, after we have taken notice of a Clause added in the 22. Article
of King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, relating to Stranger Princes.

Here therefore it is to be observed, that the ancient Law of succeeding in
Stalls, was also, in relation to them, whollyaltered: For King Henry the Eighth
upon the establishment of his Body of Statutes, not only appointed those
Strangers, then present of the Order, to be seated next himself, but that Art.
22:
all Emperors, Kings, and Princes should hold their Stalls after their Estates,
and the very next unto the Sovereign, though Knights-Subjects upon vacancy
became removeable at pleasure.

Hereupon the Emperor Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Maximilian the Second, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
and after him Rudolph the Second his Son, had the Princes Stall assigned them
after their Election into the Order.

The French Kings MS. in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] f. 31.
Francis the First, Ex ipso Autogr.
Henry the Second, Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles the Ninth, Collect. A. V. W.
Henry the Third, and Ex Collect. praef R. Co^k f. 12.
Henry the Fourth, were Installed in the next below, being the second on the
Sovereign's side. And when there were more then one King at a time in the
Order, the second Stall on the Prince's side was assigned to him, of whom the
former had precedence allowed him, in relation to his State and Dignity, not of
antiquity in the Order; as it was by the King of Ex praef. Collect. Tho.
Wriothesl^y.
Bohemia, an. 19. H. 8. The King of MS. penes W D. N. f. 19.
Spain, an. 8. Eliz. So also upon the same Rule, and for the same Reason was
sometimes the third Stall on the Sovereign's side possessed by Kings, as in the
cases of Ex ipso Autogr.
James the Fifth King of Scotland, an. 27. H. 8. and Collect praef. R. Cook f.
6.
Frederick the Third King of Denmark, an. 25. Eliz.

And lastly we find, that Princes Strangers were placed next to Kings,
according to their state as were the Dukes of Ex ips^ Autogr.
Savoy, Montmorency, and Holstein an. 3. Eliz. MS. penes G. O. Y f 115.
John Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhine an. 25. Eliz. and Collect. A. V. W.
Frederick Prince Palatine, and Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 11. Iac. Regis.

But notwithstanding these Assignments of Stalls to Strangers, they were
nevertheless subject to removal; sometime to Stalls higher than their own, upon
the death of a Stranger, who died possessed of a superior Stall, and sometimes
again to others lower, for the advancing a Knight of greater dignity, where the
upper Stalls were already filled: else could they not be placed or hold their
Stalls according to their respective States, as the Statute does enjoin; nor
indeed would any Stranger King (since the ancient manner of succeeding in
Stalls received alteration) have accepted of Election into the Order, unless
room had been made to seat him in a Stall suitable to his Dignity.

Instances of Advancement in translation of Stalls are of Ferdinand Emperor of
Germany, who after the death of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, his Brother, was
advanced from the second Stall on the Prince's side into the Prince's Stall,
Lib. C p 28.
an. 1. Eliz. Of Philip the Second King of Spain, advanced from the second on
the Prince's side to the Ib. p. 37.
second on the Sovereign's an. 2. Eliz. after the death of the French King
Henry the Second. Of Henry the Fourth of France, advanced from the second on
the Sovereign's side to the Collect. A. V. W.
Prince's Stall, an. 1. Iac. R. Of Christerne the Fourth King of Denmark, an.
9. Iac. R. from the second on the Sovereign's side to the said MS. penes Ed
Fauc^nbridge ge^.
Princes Stall, after the death of the French King Henry the Fourth. And of
Christierne the Fifth King of Denmark, advanced from the fourth Stall on the
Prince's side, to the second on the Sovereign's, an. 22. Car. 2.

Among the Princes Strangers, we find Emanuel Duke of Savoy advanced from the
third on the Prince's side to the Lib. C. p. 37.
second of the same side, an. 2. Eliz. John Casimire Count Palatine from the
fourth on the Sovereign's side, to the C^llect. W. le N Cl.
third on the ^rince's an. 32. Eliz. four years after the Duke of Holstein's
death. Frederick Prince Palatine an. 1. Car. 1. was advanced from the second on
the Prince's to the Collect. W. le N Cl.
second on the Sovereign's side: And Henry Frederick Prince of Orange, from the
third on the Sovereign's to the Collect. W. le N Cl.
second on the Prince's, an. 10. Car. 1. upon the death of the King of Sweden.

In those instances of Removals lower after Installation, we shall first
remember, That an. 6. Eliz. when the French King Charles the Ninth was Elected,
the superior Stalls were already filled with Strangers, and there was no way
left to make room for him to the Stall designed him by the Sovereign, but by
removal of some of those Knights Strangers lower, and thereupon for the
present, Emanuel Duke of Savoy was removed one Stall lower, viz. to the MS.
penes W. D. N. f. 17.
third on the Sovereign's side, Anne Duke of Montmorency to the MS. penes W. D.
N. f. 17.
third on the Prince's side, and the Duke of Holstein to the fourth on the same
side.

But the said French King was not Installed until the 16. of January an. 8.
Eliz. and before that it was concluded to MS. fol. 24. b.
remove the King of Spain to the Duke of Savoy's Stall, voided as before, and
to Instal the French King in the King of Spain's void Stall, MS. fol. 24. b.
which was accordingly done; so that on this occasion there were four
Strangers, and five Knights Subjects (before remembered) removed lower, to make
way for the French King.

The 20. of April, an. 2. Iac. Reg. the Duke of Wirtemberg was installed in the
Collect. praef. Rob. Cook, p. 15.
third Stall on the Prince's side, and on St. George's Eve in the following
year advanced a Stall higher, viz. to the third on the Sovereign's side. The
16. of May ensuing Ib. p. 16.
Vlrick Duke of Holst had assigned him that Stall from whence the Duke of
Wirtemberg was advanced, and installed therein: But against the Installation of
Christierne the Fourth King of Denmark (which happened to be the 9. of September
in the same year) the Ib. p. 17.
Duke of Wirtemberg was removed back to the Seat wherein he was Installed, and
the Ib. p. 17.
Duke of Holst advanced into his void Stall. All which will appear more clear,
from the appointment of Stalls on these occasions which follow.

A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Installation of Frederick Duke of
Wirtemberg, Anno. Iac. Reg. 2. Ex Collect. praef. R. Cook f. 15.

James R. 1. The Sovereign 1. The French King. 2. The Prince 2. Void. 3. Earl
of Nottingham. 3. Duke of Wirtemberg. 4. Earl of Ormond. 4. Earl of Dorset. 5.
Earl of Shrewsbury. 5. Earl of Cumberland. 6. Earl of Northumberland. 6. Earl
of Worcester. 7. Lord Sheffield. 7. Earl of Suffolk. 8. Earl of Devonshire. 8.
Sir Henry Lea 9. Earl of Sussex. 9. Lord Scrope. 10. Earl of Darby. 10. Lord
Burghley. 11. Duke of Lenox. 11. Earl of Southampton. 12. Earl of Mar. 12.
Earl of Penbroke. 13. Void. 13. Void.

The order of Stalls at St. George's Feast, Ibid.
an. Iac. Regis 3.
James R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. The French King. 2. The Prince. 2. Void. 3. Duke
of Wirtemberg. 3. Earl of Nottingham. 4. Earl of Ormond. 4. Earl of Dorset. 5.
Earl of Shrewsbury. 5. Earl of Cumberland. 6. Earl of Northumberland. 6. Earl
of Worcester. 7. Lord Sheffield. 7. Earl of Suffolk. 8. Earl of Devonshire. 8.
Sir Henry Lea. 9. Earl of Sussex. 9. Lord Scrope. 10. Earl of Darby, 10. Lord
Burleigh. 11. Duke of Lenox. 11. Earl of Southampton. 12. Earl of Mar. 12.
Earl of Penbroke. 13. Void. 13. Void.

A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Installation of Vlrick Duke of Holst,
Ibid. Fol. 16.
the 16. of May an. Iac. R. 3.
James R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. The French King. 2. The Prince. 2. Void. 3. Duke
of Wirtemberg. 3. Duke of Holst. 4. Earl of Nottingham. 4. Earl of Ormond. 5.
Earl of Dorset. 5. Earl of Shrewsbury. 6. Earl of Cumberland. 6. Earl of
Northumberland. 7. Earl of Worcester. 7. Lord Sheffeild. 8. Earl of Suffolk. 8.
Earl of Devonshire. 9. Sir Henry Lea. 9. Earl of Sussex. 10. Lord Scroope. 10.
Earl of Derby. 11. Earl of Exceter. 11. Duke of Lenox. 12. Earl of Southampton.
12. Earl of Mar. 13. Earl of Penbroke. 13. Earl of Northampton.

Ib. Fol. 17.
A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Installation of Christierne the Fourth,
King of Denmark, the 8. of Sept. an. Iac. Reg. 3.
James R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. The French King. 2. The King of Denmark. 2. The
Prinoe. 3. Duke of Holst. 3. Duke of Wirtemberg. 4. Earl of Nottingham. 4. Earl
of Ormond. 5. Earl of Dorset. 5. Earl of Shrewsbury. 6. Earl of Cumberland. 6.
Earl of Northumberland. 7. Earl of Worcester. 7. Lord Sheffeild. 8. Earl of
Suffolk. 8. Earl of Devonshire. 9. Sir Henry Lea. 9. Earl of Sussex. 10. Lord
Scrope. 10. Earl of Derby. 11. Earl of Exceter. 11. Duke of Lenox. 12. Earl of
Southampton. 12. Earl of Mar. 13. Earl of Penbroke. 13. Earl of Northampton.

Here in this last Scheme we see Prince Henry was removed from the second on
the Sovereign's, to the second on the Prince's side, to make room for the King
of Denmark. And though the Duke of Chevereux An. 3. Car. 1. upon the death of
the Duke of Brunswick, was advanced from the third Stall on the Sovereign's
side into the MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
Duke of Brunswick's void Stall, namely the second on the Prince's side:
nevertheless, the year following, upon the admittance of Gustavus Adolphus King
of Sweden, he was removed MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
two Stalls lower; and at that time the Prince Elector Palatine one.

4. The ancient Law of succeeding in Stalls altered.
But let us return from the Removal and Translation of a Knight-Subject, after
he had been installed, to the Assignment of his Stall at the time of
Installation it self, and (in the last place) note, That on the 24. of April
an. 6. Eliz. instead of the ancient Law which appointed each Elect-Knight to
succeed in the Stall of his Predecessor, and the latter, which permitted a
Translation at pleasure, a new one was introduced; being framed (as was
conceived) upon a more equal ground than the former, and to avoid as much as
might be the danger of emulation, which was this, Lib. C. p. 49.
That all Knights who for the future were admitted into the Society of the
Order, should take and be installed in the lowest Stall, according to the
course and seniority of their Election; except only stranger Kings and Princes.

Whereupon it came to pass, that when a Knight-Subject Elect was to be
Installed (he taking the lowest Stall) all the Knights-Companions, between him
and the vacant Stall, were removed higher, to the end such vacancy might be
supplied: or if two or more were to be Installed at one time, they took the
lowest Stalls according to the seniority of their Election; the senior
Knight-Elect being placed higher than the junior. And albeit this manner and
order in Removals is now become a thing of course, and the method easy; yet
may it not be done, or the Achievements, Banners, or Plates removed, unless
the Sovereign Sign a Warrant as formerly, wherein they are orderly ranked, to
justify Garter for so doing, which will be the more easily understood by the
insertion of a Scheme or two.

The order of Stalls as they stood at the Feast of St. George an. 29. Eliz. Ex
Collect. ^. V. W*

Elizabeth R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. Void. 2. The French King. 2. The King of
Spain. 3. The King of Denmark. 3. Void. 4. Duke John Casimire. 4. Void. 5. The
Viscount Mountague. 5. The Earl of Leicester. 6. The Earl of Shrewsbery. 6. The
Earl of Warwick. 7. The Lord Hunsdon. 7. Void. 8. Void. 8. The Earl of
Worcester. 9. The Earl of Huntingdon. 9. The Lord Burghley. 10. The Lord Gray.
10. The Earl of Derby. 11. The Earl of Penbroke. 11. The Lord Howard of
Effingham. 12. Void. 12. The Lord Cobham. 13. The Lord Scrope. 13. Void.

A Translation of Stalls made against the Feast of Installation, an. 30. Eliz.
Elizabeth R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. Void. 2. The French King. 2. The King of
Spain. 3. The King of Denmark. 3. Void. 4. Duke John Casimire. 4. Void. 5. The
Viscount Mountague. 5. The Earl of Leicester. 6. The Earl of Shrewsbury. 6. The
Earl of Warwick. 7. The Lord Hunsdon. 7. The Earl of Worcester 8. The Earl of
Huntingdon. 8. The Lord Burleigh. 9. The Lord Gray. 9. The Earl of Derby. 10.
The Earl of Penbroke. 10. The Lord Howard of Effingham. 11. The Lord Cobham.
11. The Lord Scroope. 12. The Earl of Essex. 12. The Earl of Ormond. 13. Sir
Christopher Hatton. 13. Void.

The first of these Schemes show how the Stalls were ranked on St. George's
Eve, an. 29. Eliz. and the second how altered against the Installation of the
Earls of Essex and Ormond, and of Sir Christopher Hatton, the 23. of May an.
30. Eliz. by which those three Elect Knights appear to be Installed in the
lowermost Stalls, (as the last mentioned Decree enjoins) and by reason that the
Earl of Essex and Sir Christopher Hatton were settled on the Sovereign's side,
the vacancy before in the eighth and twelfth Stalls of the same side became
filled up; the Earl of Huntingdon (seated before in the ninth Stall) being
advanced into the eighth, the Lord Gray into the ninth, and the Earl of
Penbroke into the tenth Stall.

So also by the like advance of the Earl of Worcester into the seventh on the
Prince's side, the vacancy is therein supplied, and the other
Knights-Companions seated below him, by a joint and orderly removal, left the
twelfth Stall for the Earl of Ormond, and the thirteenth void for the next
Elect Knight.

The like order was observed by King James, as appears by another Scheme of the
Stalls, settled in Chapter held the Lib. C. p. 1^0.
3. of July an. 1. Iac. R. at the Election of the Duke of Lenox, the Earls of
Southampton, Mar, and Penbroke.

Ex Collect. Iobannis Vincent Genesis
Stalls altered at a Chapter held at Windesor, the 3. of July an. 1. Iac. R.
James R. 1. The Sovereign. 1. The French King. 2. The Prince. 2. Void. 3. The
Earl of Nottingham. 3. Void. 4. The Earl of Ormond. 4. The Lord Buckhurst. 5.
The Earl of Salop. 5. The Earl of Cumberland. 6. The Earl of Northumberland. 6.
The Earl of Worcester. 7. The Lord Sheffeild. 7. The Lord Howard of Waldon. 8.
The Lord Hunsdon. 8. The Lord Montjoy. 9. Sir Henry Lea. 9. The Earl of Sussex.
10. The Lord Cobham. 10. The Lord Scrope. 11. The Earl of Derby. 11. The Lord
Burghley. 12. The Duke of Lenox. 12. The Earl of Southampton. 13. The Earl of
Mar. 13. The Earl of Penbroke.

From hence it appears that these Elect-Knights were Installed in the lowest
Stalls; and so were all other Elect-Knights Subjects throughout his Reign and
since, except the Prince of Wales, and Charles Duke of York, Sons to the said
Sovereign: for the Prince was Installed in the second Stall on the Sovereign's
side; and upon the election of the said Duke of York, MS. fol. penes E. W. G.
f. 149. a
an. 9. Iac. R. the second Stall on the Prince's side was first designed for
him, and in Ibid. f. 149. b.
place answerable thereunto, did he proceed to the Chapel, the morrow after
St. George's day upon which he was elected. But upon Whitsunday following, at a
solemn debate in Chapter, it was determined; Ibid. f. 149. b.
That notwithstanding he was the Sovereign's Son, yet should he have no more
pre-eminence than other Knights-Companions, but come in as a Puisne, and that
his Ibid. f. 149. b.
Achievements (which it seems had been set up over the Ibid. f. 149. b.
second Stall on the Prince's side) should therefore be removed to that Stall
next above the Viscount Rochesters (being the eleventh on the same side) and so
to be Ibid. f. 149. b.
consorted with the Earl of Montgomery (before whom he proceeded on Whitson
Monday to the Chapter House toward his Installation) and it was moreover then
Decreed, Ibid. f. 149. b.
that all Princes not absolute, should be installed thenceforth in the puisne
place.

But after this, endeavors were used to advance the said Duke into the Stall
to which he was first appointed, and the Kings of Arms were consulted with in
the case, who certified that Ex. ipso Autogr.
Richard Duke of York second Son to King Edward the Fourth, was Installed in
the fourth Stall on the Prince's side, and had precedence of the Duke of
Suffolk, the Earls of Douglas and Essex, who were elected long before him: That
Henry Duke of York, second Son to King Henry the seventh, was Installed in the
third Stall on the Sovereign's side, and had place of the Duke of Buckingham,
and the Earls of Oxford and Derby his ancients: and lastly, that Henry Fitz Roy
Duke of Richmond, base Son of King Henry the Eighth, had place and precedence
before the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk and others. Whereupon it was thought
fit, that the Sovereign's Children should be as well privileged in this case,
as Stranger Princes; and therefore in another MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge, genesis
Chapter, held at Whitehall on the 13. of April (being Easter Monday) an. 10.
Iac. R. the Order which past the year before for making the Duke a Puisne, was
MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge, genesis
abrogated, and he translated to the second Stall on the Prince's side, and
paired with Prince Henry; as may be also seen by the order of the Stalls then
settled, and entered in the Page 174.
Blue Book of the Order.

We need not bring hither more instances in proof of the observation of the
Chapter Act made an. 6. Eliz. as it has relation to Knight Subjects, since the
same has been to this time punctually pursued; but in regard Strangers are
therein excepted, it will be necessary to note here concerning them, that the
rule and practice continued as established by King Henry the Eighth, viz. That
they were Installed in Seats next to the Sovereign, according to their state
and dignity.

We shall only add an instance of the manner of placing both Strangers and
Knights Subjects at one and the same time: for at the coming of King Charles
the First to the Crown, there were of both conditions to be Installed in one
day, namely the Duke of Brunswick a Stranger Prince, the Earls of Salisbury and
Carlisle Knights Subjects, elected by King James the Lib. C. p. 23.
31. of December in the 22. year of his Reign; as also the Earls of Dorset and
Holland, with Viscount Andover, elected by the said King Charles, the Ibid. p.
26.
15. of May following, and the Duke of Chevereux elected the Ibid. p. 26.
4. of July after. And when the Removal of Stalls was considered on for
admission of these seven Elect Knights, it was determined, that the Dukes of
Brunswick and Chevereux should be installed in the uppermost Stalls among
Strangers, as King Henry the Eighth had ordained, but the Knights Subjects in
the lowermost Stalls, according to the constant practice, since passing the
Decree an. 6. Eliz. as does appear from the setlement of Stalls then made, and
thus Entitled.

A Remove of Banners and Plates at the Feast of St. George, Ex ipso Antogy.
and Installation holden at Windesor the 13.14. and 15. days of December, an
1625. At which time were Installed the Dukes of Brunswick and Chevereux, the
Earls of Salisbury, Carlisle, Holland, Dorset, and the Viscount Andover, as
follows.
Charles R. 1. King Charles Sovereign. 1. The King of Denmark. 2. The Prince
Palatine. 2. The Duke of Brunswick. 3. The Duke of Chevereux. 3. The Earl of
Northumberland. 4. The Earl of Worcester. 4. The Lord Sheffield. 5. The Earl of
Suffolk. 5. The Earl of Sussex. 6. The Earl of Derby. 6. The Earl of Mar. 7.
The Earl of Penbroke. 7. The Earl of Montgomery. 8. The Earl of Arundel. 8. The
Earl of Somerset. 9. The Earl of Kelly. 9. The Visc. Wallingford. 10. The Earl
of Rutland. 10. The Duke of Buckingham. 11. The Earl of Leicester. 11. The Earl
of Salisbury. 12. The Earl of Carlisle. 12. The Earl of Dorset. 13. The Earl of
Holland. 13. The Viscount Andover.

Shortly after the Restoration of the present Sovereign to his Crowns and
Kingdoms, when several Knights-Companions, both Strangers and Subjects, were to
be Installed, debate was had in Chapter held at Whitehall the 10. of April, an.
13. Car. 2. about placing their Achievements over their Stalls, whereupon the
following Order issued.

Charles R.

WHereas diverse Elected Knights and Companions of our most Noble Order of the
Garter, Ex Collect. E. W. G.
are by our special appointment, to be installed in the Chapel of our Castle
of Windesor, upon the 15. day of this instant, and that some of them who are
Strangers, do not yet, nor are likely to appear either in their own persons or
by their sufficient Proxies, at the said Instalment, and so might run hazard to
lose the benefit and advantage of their pre-election in point of rank and
precedence in respect of some of our Subject Knights, who though since Elected
will be first installed, without some expedient taken therein to prevent it.
There being no reason (nor is it in our intention) that those Noble Persons
should suffer that prejudice for want of that usual formality, and for which
they are not in fault, but others, who according to the Statutes and ancient
Custom were to give timely, advertisement to the said Foreign elected Knights,
and to summon them by themselves or Proxies to assist at the said Instalment:
Our will and pleasure is you proceed forthwith to the placing of the Hatchments
of all the respective Knights and Companions of our said Order, whether
Installed, or Elect, Subject, or Strangers, over the Stalls which we do in
manner as follows assign and appoint them in our foresaid Chapel.

2. The Duke of York. 1. -- 1. The Sovereign 2. The Elector Palatine. 3. Prince
Elector of Brandenburg. 3. Prince of Orange. 4. Prince Rupert. 4. Prince
Edward. 5. Earl of Salisbury. 5. Earl of Berkshire. 6. Earl of Northumberland.
6. Duke of Espernon. 7. Duke of Ormond. 7. Duke of Buckingham, 8. Earl of
Southampton. 8. Marquess of Newcastle. 9. Earl of Bristol. 9. Prince of
Tarente. 10. Count Marshin. 10. Duke of Albemarle. 11. Earl of Sandwich. 11.
Earl of Oxford. 12. Duke of Richmond. 12. Earl of Lindsey. 13. Earl of
Manchester. 13. Earl of Strafford.

And for so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant, any Statute or Custom
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Given under the Signet of Our said Order at our Court at Whitehall the 10. of
April 1661. By the Sovereign's command Hen. de Vic.
To our trusty and wellbeloved servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, and
Principal King of Arms of our most Noble Order of the Garter.




So that here we see the Stranger Princes are settled in the upper Stalls,
nearest the Sovereign, according to their several dignities and degrees, and
all the Knights Subjects (among whom were reckoned the Duke of Espernon, the
Prince of Tarente, and Count Marshi^) according to the times of their
Elections: this being in confirmation as well of the setlement made by King
Henry the Eighth, as of Queen Elizabeth before remembered. And among the Knights
Companions in this setlement it is to be noted, that though the Earl of
Southampton did not receive his Garter and George, till the Sovereign's happy
return into England, and then from his own hands* yet was his place and
precedence here allowed him according to the time of his Election, in the Isle
of Iersey, in January an. Dom. 1649. some few days before Duke Hamilton, and
the Marquess of Newcastl^ were elected.

But the 10. of January, an. 14. Car. 2. the Sovereign and Knights-Companions,
assembled in Chapter, Ordered, Lib. Carolin. p. 43.
That thence forward all Princes Strangers of what condition soever, should
have precedence among themselves, according to the seniority of their Elections
and Installations; and thereupon the Sovereign's Warrant issued out to Garter
under the Signet of the Order, dated the 30. of March following, to authorize
him to set up their Achievements in the Chapel of St. George at Windesor, in
the order here exhibited.

Charles R. Lib. Caro^in. p. 43.
1. The Sovereign. 1. Void. 2. Duke of York. 2. Prince Elector Palatine. 3.
Prince Rupert. 3. Prince of Orange. 4. Prince Elector of Brandenburg. 4. Prince
of Denmark. 5. Earl of Salisbury. 5. Earl of Berkshire. 6. Earl of
Northumberland. 6. Duke of Ormond. 7. Duke of Buckingham. 7. Earl of
Southampton. 8. Marquess of Newcastle. 8. Earl of Bristoll. 9. Prince of
Tarente. 9. Count Marshin. 10. Duke of Albemarle. 10. Earl of Sandwich. 11.
Earl of Oxford. 11. Duke of Richmond. 12. Earl of Lindsey. 12. Earl of
Manchester. 13. Earl of Strafford. 13. Duke of Monmouth.

Nevertheless the 19. of November, and. Dom. 1669. at a Chapter held at
Whitehall, upon due consideration had of the Law made by King Henry the Eighth,
for placing of Strangers, as also of Queen Elizabeth for Knights Subjects, and
to remove all Orders made in alteration thereof; the Sovereign by the advice
and consent of the most Noble Companions present, was pleased to Ordain and
Declare, Ibid. p. 7^.
First, that the Princes of Wales, and such Emperors and Kings, that should be
of the Order, should be placed in the nearest Stalls, to that of the Sovereign,
according to their Elections and Installations.

Then, that all other Sovereign Princes, and Princes of the Blood, should be
placed in the Stalls, next unto Kings according to their seniority in the Order.

And thirdly, that all other his Majesty's Subjects and Strangers, not of the
dignity above mentioned, should be installed in the lowest Stalls, according to
their antiquity in the Order, and the ancient Practice.



Thus stands the Law for setlement of Stalls at this day. And whereas the Stall
commonly called the Prince's Stall, was and had been long void, the Sovereign
by the advice of the most Noble Companions (present in Chapter the said 19. of
November) was pleased to order, Ib. p. 73.
That the present King of Sweden should by his Proxy be placed in that Stall,
and his Achievements hung up thereon accordingly, in convenient time: All
which being done as this Order directed, the Stalls at the Feast of St. George
celebrated, an. 23. Car. 2. were ordered in the following manner.

1. The Sovereign. 1. The King of Sweden. 2. King of Denmark. 2. Duke of York.
3. Prince Elector Palatine. 3. Prince Rupert. 4. Prince of Orange. 4. Prince
Elector of Brandenburgh. 5. Prince Elector of Saxony, 5. Duke of Ormond. 6.
Duke of Buckingham. 6. Duke of Newcastle. 7. Earl of Bristol. 7. Prince of
Tarente. 8. Count Marshin. 8. Earl of Sandwich. 9. Earl of Oxford. 9. Duke of
Richmond. 10. Earl of Strafford. 10. Duke of Monmouth. 11. Duke of Albemarle.
11. Void. 12. Void. 12. Void. 13. Void. 13. Void.

SECT. VII. Preparations made by the Knight Elect.
HAving in the preceding Section laid down the ancient Law of succession into
void Stalls, and of Translation from one Stall to another; with several
instances, both while such removals were at the Sovereign's pleasure, and
after, when they became confined to the regular course now observed; and having
also discourt concerning those things which are to be prepared for the
Installation of a Knight Subject on the Sovereign's part, and for which his
Warrants and Letters issue forth, as is before showed at large: we come now to
consider, what is further to be prepared for the Knight Elect, at his own
charge, against the day of this great Solemnity, and they are chiefly these
which follow.

1. A Mantle or upper Robe, with its appurtenances. 2. A Collar of the Garter,
and Great George. 3. A Cap of black Velvet adorned with Plumes. 4. An Helm,
Crest, Mantlings, and Sword. 5. A Banner of his Arms. 6. A Plate of his Arms
and Style. 7. A Cushen, to carry his Robes and Collar upon. 8. Lodging
Scutcheons.
Mantle
We do not find that the Mantle of the Order was anciently bestowed by the
Sovereign upon Knights Subjects, as was the Kirtle or Surcoat; nor indeed of
late (unless now and then as a peculiar favor) for seeing the Lib. R. p. 43.
and 120.
Injunction for returning the Mantle upon the death of a Knight-Companion, is
restrained to such only on whom the Sovereign should vouchsafe to bestow them,
it is thence evident, that the Sovereign is not obliged to give the Mantle at
all, nor to all, but only where himself pleases. But it appears that the
Sovereign always bestowed the Mantle (together with the rest of the Habit) upon
Strangers, after he had Elected any of them into the Society of the Order. And
when the whole Habit was sent over by Garter to the King of Portugal an. 13. H.
6. the Ex lib. vocat Cotom. in Offic. mag. Gardrob. fol. 92.
Mantle, Surcoat, and Hood were accounted for together in the Accounts of the
Great Wardrobe; and the like has been done in all such cases since.

Howbeit of late times the Sovereign, as an especial mark of favor, has been
pleased now and then to give a Knight-Subject the Mantle also: as did King
James to Lib. War. in Offic. praed. a festo S. Mich. 1623. ad an. 1624.
James Marquess Hamilton, an. 21. Iac. R. and King Charles the First to War.
curr. in eod. Offic. de an. 1628.
Theophilus Earl of Suffolk an. 4. Car. 1. to Lib. War. de an 1629.
William Earl of Northampton, an.] 5. Car. 1. and an. 14. Car. 1. Sir James
Palmer by this Sovereign's direction Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
paid for the Velvet and Taffety of the Earl of Kelly's Mantle and Surcoat to
Sir Peter Richaut, and put it upon the Account of Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac.
Palmer.
extraordinary charges of the Order.

Besides which the present Sovereign, as a mark of like favor, caused 17
Mantles (with the usual Liveries of Surcoat and Hood) to be provided against
the Grand Feast of St. George, an. 13. Car. 2. which were bestowed not only
among the new Elect Knights, but the three senior Knights-Companions also
namely, the Earls of Salisbury, Berkshire, and Northumberland; for which see
the Warrant in the Numb. XXXIV.
Appendix.

But the Elect Knight being otherwise to provide the Mantle at his own charge,
directions may be had in the Sect. 2.
Chapter of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, as to all the materials for
making thereof.

The Collar of the Order with the Great George is to be provided by the Elect
Knight, unless where the Sovereign is pleased to bestow the Mantle; and in such
case he also bestows the Collar, and then a like Warrant issues to the Master
of the Iewel-house, as did for providing the 17. Collars Appendix Number. XXXV.
an. 13. Car. 2.

The Black Velvet Cap, 3. Cap:
mentioned and described ^hap. 7. Sect. 4.
before, and therefore needless to speak of it here; is also to be provided at
the charge of the Knight Elect.

Likewise the Helm, 4. Helm, Crest, etc.
and Crest, with Mantlings thereunto belonging, also a Sword and Girdle
(usually called within the verge of this Order, the Achievements of a
Knight-Companion) are to be got in readiness, by the care and direction of
Garter, but at the Elect Knights cost; all which are to be set over his Stall,
as soon as his Installation Fees are paid.

This honor, that every Knight-Companion should have his Helm, Crest, and
Sword, hung up over his Stall in the Chapel of St. George at Windesor is
particularly provided for, in all the several Bodies of Statutes; and are
ordained to remain there during the lives of the possessors, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
in memory (or as a ^hd. Stat. in B^l. Hatt^n Art. 9.
Token or Mark of Honor) of him that bears them, and a testimony of the defense
of the Church, as the Oaths of Military Orders require.

The Helms, used for this purpose and upon this occasion, are made of Steel
large and fair, and of a more than ordinary proportion: they are likewise (for
the most part) of two sorts, the one appointed for Sovereign Princes, and
framed Collect W. le N. Cl.
open, with large Bailes or Bars; the other for Knights Subjects, whose Vizors
are made Collect W. le N. Cl.
close. About King Henry the Eighth's Reign the Knights Subjects Helms were
parcel gilt with fine Gold in Oil, wrought with Rabeskys and other works, and
burnished with fine Gold. But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and since, it has
been the Custom to gild their Helms all over, placing St. George's Arms in the
middle before the Vizors.

The Mantlings that hang down on either side the Helm, which, with the Wreath,
are in some places called Lib. N. p. 67.70. videsis Stat. in Pabl. Ha^ ^ Art.
7. and ^. 8. Stat. Art. 8.
Appendixes, are all of Tissue or Cloth of Gold, and heretofore lined with
Coll^ct. W. le N. ^^.
Sarcenet; but in Queen Mary's Reign they began to make use of Collect. W. le
N. ^^.
White Satin, for of such were the Linings to the Mantlings of Collect Io.
Vincent.
Anthony Brown Viscount Montague, and Collect Io. Vincent.
William Howard Lord Admiral.

At the bottom of these Mantlings hang a pair of gilt knobs, burnished with
Gold, from which issue Tassels of either Gold or Silver (according as is the
metal in the Knights Coat Armor) mixed with Silk of the chief Color in his
Arms.

Upon the Helm and Mantlings is placed a Wreath of corded Silks, of the Knights
colors, which was heretofore made of Sarcenet, but now of Taffaty.

The Crest of the Knight is placed either upon these Wreaths, or issuant out of
a Crown, or ducal Cap; turned up with Ermyn, and of what kind soever the Crest
is, the same is neatly carved in wood, and either gilt or wrought in its proper
colors in Oil.

Directly before the Helm, an arming Sword hangs down, the Pomel, Cross, and
Chape are gilt; the Scabberd is made of the same Tissue or Cloth of Gold, as
are the Mantlings, and so is the Girdle thereunto belonging; but the Buckles
and Pendants are of Copper gilt.

It appears a little before, that the custom of setting up the Helm, Crest, and
Sword, over the Knights Stall is as ancient as the Institution of the Order;
but when their Banners were first hung up, is not so clearly manifest; for
neither do the Statutes of Institution, or King Henry the Fifth's Statutes take
notice of them.

The first mention of them that we find is in the Black Book of the Order, an.
2. H. 6. where the Lib. N. p. 7^.
Banner of the King of Portugal, is particularly named among the Achievements
then set up over his Stall, but Henry the Eighth's body of Statutes makes
particular Art. 8.
mention of them.

The fashion of the Sovereign's and all the Knight-Companions Banners are
square; but it does no where appear to us, of what size their Banners anciently
were; yet in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, we find them Collect. W. le N. Cl.
videsis MS. 4. penes E. W. G.
two yards and a quarter long, and a yard and three quarters broad, beside the
Fringe (which is made of Gold or Silver and Silk, of the colors in the Wreath)
and thereon are wrought or beaten upon Taffaty-Sarcenet, double-Sarcenet, or
rich Taffaty, with fine Gold and Colors, on both sides, the paternal Coat of
the Knights Companion, together with his Quarterings, or so many of them as he
please to make use of, wherein Garter is to take care that they be warrantably
marshalled.

And because a Collect. W. le N. Cl.
single Coat was conceived not to stand fair enough in a Banner of this
proportion, therefore the Sovereign has been pleased (where a Knight-Companion
wanted Quarterings) to grant a new Coat to bear in Quarter with his paternal
Coat; as did King James to Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Robert Carr Viscount Rochester, afterward Earl of Somerset; to whose paternal
Coat (8. Iun. an. 9. Iac. R.) he first added a Ex. Collect. I. V. genesis
Lion passant gardant Or, in the dexter part, as an especial gift of favor,
and then a new invented Coat to be born in quarter therewith, viz. Ex. Collect.
I. V. genesis
Quarterly Or and Gules, a Lion Rampant sable over all. He also granted to Sir
Thomas Erskin (afterward created Earl of Kelly) a Coat of Arms to be quartered
with his paternal Coat, viz. Ibid.
Argent, a pale Sable.

These Banners of Arms are fixed to the end of long Staves, painted in Oil,
formerly with the Colors of the Wreath, but now Red: Their ends are put into
Sockets of Iron, well fixed in the Wall, directly over the Knights-Companions
Helms and Crests; and commonly lined with thick Fustian, to preserve them.

6. Plates of Arms.
Besides these, there is also to be provided a Copper-plate gilt, whereon a
Scutcheon of the Knight-Elect's Arms, and Quarterings within a Garter, are
engraved and enamelled in Colors, with his Helm, Crest, and Supporters, and
underneath his Style and Titles of honor: which Plate, Garter usually takes
care to provide, and is to be fixed on the back of the Knight-Elect's Stall
assigned for his Installation.

7. Cushen.
Moreover a Velvet Cushen is to be also provided, whereon to carry the
Knight-Elect's Mantle, Collar, Hood, and Book of Statutes before him, in the
proceeding to the Choire at his Installation. Concerning the materials and
garnishings of some of these Cushens, we find this account of those used at the
Installation of the Lord Treasurer Weston, the Earls of Exceter and Lindsey,
Installed an. 6. Car. 1. that each of them contained one yard and a half of
Crimson Velvet, one Ell of rich Taffaty for their lining, and 4 yards of
Fringe, and 4 great Tassels.

8. Lodging Scutcheons.
Lastly, there has been commonly provided a convenient number of Lodging
Scutcheons, of the Elect-Knight's Arms, environed with a Garter, with his Style
and Titles underneath; and these Garter also gets in readiness, for it has
been an ancient custom, to distribute at the Inns in the Knight's passage, to
and at Windesor, these Scutcheons, to be set up in the principal Rooms of those
Houses, as a memorial of the honor of the Knights Installation.

Such of the foresaid particulars as are committed to the care of Garter to
prepare and make ready, the charges thereof have been sometimes cast up, and
the Account stated and paid off beforehand; by which means he was the better
enabled to furnish out the same, for so did the MS. fol. penes G.O.Y. p. 203.
Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz. And in Garter's Bill there
is to be inserted the price of a Trunk, the charge for Carriage of those things
he provides for the Knight-Elect to Windesor, and for their setting up.

Lastly, besides all these things before mentioned, to be prepared and provided
either by the Chancellor of the Order, or Garter; there are other to be taken
care for, by the Knight-Elect, relating more particularly both to himself and
his retinue; as his own Apparel, the number of his Attendants and Servants,
with their Clothes and Liveries, his Coach and Sadle Horses, both for himself
and them; with diverse other things necessary for setting forth his Cavalcade
and Proceeding, to and at Windesor; all which have usually been the richest and
best that could be made or gotten, that so the show might be furnished out,
with all possible splendour and gallantry.

Together with these, the Provisions for Diet at Windesor (if the Feast be kept
at the Elect-Knight's charge and expense) is to be considered of, and to that
end for the most part some one of the Clerks of the Sovereign's Kitchen is to
be consulted, who commonly undertakes the management of that Affair.

To conclude this Chapter, the Hall or Room where the grand Dinner is to be
kept, the Chapter House and Chapel, ought chiefly to be set forth and adorned
with rich and sumptuous Furniture, against this solemnity, over and beside what
is of ordinary and necessary use.

The Hall or Dining room, to be furnished with rich hangings* and if the
Sovereign or his Lieutenant hold the Feast, then* must there be a Colle^t W. le
N. Cl.
Cloth of State set up at the upper end of it: but not if the Installation be
performed by Commissioners.

The Chapter House is then also to be hung, a rich Carpet spread upon the
Table, and set about with Velvet Chairs and Cushens; and because in the late
times of plundering, this place had suffered its share, and nothing found there
upon the present Sovereign's happy return, that was worth taking away; his said
Majesty in a Chapter held the 14. of January an. 12. Car. 2 am^ng other
preparations relating to the Order, caused directions to be given to the M^ster
of the Wardrobe, to provide Velvet for Chairs to furnish the Chapter House, and
Cushens to be used in the Choire of St. George's Chapel, which accordingly
were made ready for the service of the following Fe^st.

Against the Installation of Philip King of C^stile and ^^n. a^. 22. ^. ^. The
Ex (...) MS. penes W ^ N. ^l. vide Lib. N. p 183.
Table in the Chapter House was covered with cloth of Gold, and the Forms with
Baudkin; before the Sovereign was laid a Cushen of Cloth of Gold, whereon a
Crucifix lay, and the Ex (...) MS. penes W ^ N. ^l. vide Lib. N. p 183.
Evangelists turned open to the place of the Canon, with several Tapers burning
on either side. At the upper end of the Table toward the right hand was set a
Chair for the Sovereign* under a golden C^nopy* with Cushens of Cloth of Gold,
and on the left hand a Stool with like garnishing, for the King of Castile.

In St. Georges Chapel, the high Altar is to be richly adorned with Plate, the
Sovereign's Stall with a Canopy, and other usu^l ornaments, and lastly* the
Stalls of the Knights-Companions present at this Ceremony with Velvet Cushens.

As to the furnishing of other places in the Castle of Windesor, on such a
solemn occasion, we will in the last place borrow an account from the Relator
of the Ceremony of Installation of the aforesaid King of Castile and Leon,
whose words are these.

To writ of the great rich cobbord, Ibid.
which continually stood in the great ball, which was all guilt Place; or of the
great and rich beds of estate* hangyngs of rich Cloth of Gold, or of the rich
and sumptuous clothes of Arras, with diverse Clothes of estate, both in the
Kings Logging, and in the King of Castil's Loggings, so many Chambers, Haulle,
Chapel, Closetts, Galleries with odir Loggings, so richly and berely well
appointed, with dibers odir things, that I suffice nor cannot discern, and as I
suppose* few or none that there were, that ever saw Castle or odir Logging, in
all things so well and richly appointed, and the great continual fare, open
household, so many noble men so well appareilled, and with so short warnyng,
heretofore as I think has not been seen.

CHAP. XII. THE Personal Installation OF A Knight Subject.
SECT. I. Of the Cavalcade to Windesor.
IN former times, the Knights-Elect frequently took their journey from London
to their Installation at Windesor, in the nature of a solemn and stately
Cavalcade; and this Proceeding on Horseback was generally set forth with
exceeding pomp; whether we consider the great number of their honorable
Friends, who on gallant Coursers rode along with them, or the multitude of
their own Attendants well mounted, the richness of whose Apparel, Jewels, Gold
Chains, rich embroideries, and Plumes of Feathers of their Lords Colors, even
dazzled the Eyes of the beholders.

Suitable thereto was the Feast, which had in it all manner of magnificence and
plenty, as well as provision, as all other things that could add glory
thereunto: and in which the ^lect-Knights (when kept at their charge) strove
not only to exceed their Predecessors, but one another: Insomuch that
Ambassadors and Strangers esteemed it one of the goodliest sights, that was to
be seen in Christendom; and to which (as is noted by a ^^vi^ Chi^^^ ^^ron. S^x.
^^b. 26.
Stranger) a great concourse and innumerable multitude of People, used to flock
from London and other places, some reasonable distance from Windesor, to behold
the Solemnity. But to make the splendor of the Cavalcade no less conspicuous
to the City of Lond^n* than Town and Castle of Windesor, the Knights-Elect have
taken up their Lodgings sometimes in the Strand, at other times in Salisbury
Court, then in Holborn, or within the City; to the end it might pass through
some of the eminent streets, for the Peoples satisfaction, whereof we shall
here descend to some particulars.

Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury, in order to his Cavalcade an. 34. Eliz. was lodged
in MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. page 203.
Mr. Gresham's house (afterward knighted, and this house since known by the
name of Gresham College) whence he rode MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. page 203.
through the City, accompanied with sundry of his honorable Friends, and a
numerous and gallant Train of Attendants and Servants to Charing Cross; where
he met MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. page 203.
George Earl of Cumberl^nd (his Companion Elect) and thence both together rode
toward Windesor, within a mile or two of which place, MS. fol. penes G. O. Y.
page 203.
Garter King of Arms met them, and set their Attendants in order; and thence
the Elect-Knights took their way, in goodly Equipage through the Town into the
Castle, the Proceeding being thus ordered.

Trumpets, two and two. Gentlemen in Blue Coats and Gold Chains. Gentlemen of
note. Garter. Gentlemen-ushers. Earl of Ormond. The two Elect-Knights. Baron of
Essingham.
With their Footmen about them. Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen of Quality.
All their Servants in the rear.
In like manner Custom and Peace begat many such glorious Cavalcades, during
the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, and King James, specially that at the
Installation of MS. penes E. W. G. f. 147.
Robert Earl of Salisbury, and Thomas Viscount Bindon, May 21. an. 4. Iac. R.
who came to Windesor honorably MS. penes E. W. G. f. 147.
accompanied, with a great appearance of Nobility, Knights, and Gentlemen of
special note.

But the fate of this Solemnity, much like that glorious body the Sun (whose
luster at such times it strove to outshine) had at sometimes its short
intermitting Clouds, at others, long nights, and the glory thereof appeared but
now and then, when the pleasure of the Sovereign grew auspicious, or the honor
of the Order became placed upon more generous Spirits. And to say truth, there
may grow an excess in such Solemnities, even to surfeit; which is then best
cured by a long abstinence. Nor was this Festival at all times free from this
distemper; but then the Sovereign readily cured it, by taking away the cause,
and prohibiting excess in their Attendants.

Hereupon it was that King James, observing those Excesses the Knights-Elect
run into upon this occasion, and willing to check the growing inconveniences,
took occasion against the Installation of Francis Earl of Rutland, Sir George
Vill^rs Knight (after created Earl, then Marquess, and lastly Duke of
Buckingham) and of Viscount Lisle, an. 14. of his Reign, to forbid Ibidem.
Livery Coats, for saving charge, and avoiding emulation; and shortly after, in
a Chapter held at Whitehall, an. 16. Iac. R. with the consent of the
Knights-Companions then assembled, put some restraint upon the number of
Attendants; and Decreed, Lib. C. p. 191
That every of the Knights-Companions should have 50 persons to attend him unto
the annual Solemnities of the Order, and no more.

Some little exceeding (above that allowed number) we meet with afterward in
the Attendants of Gentlemen and Yeomen upon William Earl of Northampton an. 5.
Car. 1. to the number of fourscore, who began his Cavalcade to Windesor, from
Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Salisbury House in the Strand; and certainly would have exhibited a more
glorious show, had not the continual Rain for Lib. R. p. 47.
three days space together impeded: Nevertheless conceiving that a Proceeding
designed with so much gallantry as it was, ought to outlive the accident of
foul weather, we shall insert the order of it here.

The order of riding to the Installation of William Earl of Northampton, Ex
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
the 20. of April, 1629. Trumpets, whose Banners were of Damask, and thereon
the Earls Arms within a Garter, with his Crest and Supporters. The meanest of
his Servants, as Grooms, and Teomen, in Blue Coats, two and two. His Lordships
other Servants in Blue Coats as Gentlemen, Esquires, and Knights two and two.
Two Secretaries; Mr. Ralph Goodwyn, and Mr. Francis Mewse. Steward, Mr.
Cuthbert Ogle. Controller, Mr. William Goodwyn.
Two Pages, Thomas Floyd, and Francis Brown. His spare Horse, led by the
Gentleman of his Horse. His Chaplain to distribute his Alms. Pursuivants at
Arms, two and two. Heralds at Arms, two and two. Gentleman Usher, Mr. Walter
Thomas, bareheaded. Earl of Berkshire. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Salisbury.
The Senior Herald covered.
Noblemen in their places, two and two. Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, which
accompanied him. The Commissioners Servants. Other Noblemens, Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen's Servants.
Thus Henry Earl of Danby, and William Earl of Morton, being to receive the
honor of Installation, an. 10. Car. 1. so disposed of themselves, for their
more commodious passage and the peoples view; that the one lodged at Ex
Collect. W. le N. Cl. vide Lib. R p. 93.
Warwick House in Holborne, the other at Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. vide Lib. R
p. 93.
Dorset House in Salisbury Court near Fleetstreet, and proceeded severally
through the Streets to Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl. vide Lib. R p. 93.
Hide Park, each between two Noblemen to support him, with their Footmen in
rich Coats on either side them.

Their Gentlemen-ushers rode bare-headed, and before them the Officers of Arms
wearing their Coats, then their Servants in Blue Coats and Cognizances (as was
the ancient manner) all led on by Trumpets. The rest of the Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen followed after each Knight-Elect in Troop, according to their
Degrees, those of the best quality foremost. In particular, the Proceeding of
the Earl of Morton, was marshalled in the following order.

Trumpets, Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
two and two. Grooms in Coats, two and two. Yeoman two and two. Gentlemen, two
and two. Secretaries. Steward. Gentleman of the Horse.
Pages. 4 Officers of Arms. Gent. Usher bare. Lancaster Herald covered. Earl
Morton supported between two chief Lords.
Footmen on each side in rich Coats. Noblemen and Gentlemen, according to their
Degrees.
At Slow (two miles on this side Windesor) they all made a stand, and being put
again into order, proceeded to Windesor Castle, where alighting in the lower
Court, the Knights-Elect were thence conducted to their several Lodgings.

To these already mentioned, we shall add the order of that stately Cavalcade,
set forth by Algernon Earl of Northumberland, from Dorset house in Salisbury
Court, toward Windesor the 13. of May an. 11. Car. 1. which though the last
this age has beheld, yet was it not the least in pomp and glory; and disposed
as follows.

Mr. Butler. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Mr. Havelocke. Mr. Hillman. Mr. Eglebie. Mr. Gradye. Mr. Williams. Mr.
Sheares. Mr. Collins. Mr. Simpson. Mr. Barnard. Mr. Gates. Mr. Johnson. Mr.
Fenwick. Mr. Granger. Mr. Cappon. Mr. Brown. Mr. Rushton. Mr. Percy. Mr.
Gibbons. Mr. Musgrave. Mr. Millar. Mr. Heron. Mr. Potter. Mr. Dodsworth. Mr.
Githens. Mr. Blackstone. Mr. Harris. Mr. Hall. Mr. Newland. Mr. Hubbald. Mr.
Lamb. Mr. Clarke. Mr. Emery. Mr. Meriwether. Mr. Guppie. Mr. Cobbie. Mr.
Holdridge. Mr. Baldwine. Mr. Thorneton. Mr. Edmunds. Mr. Francis Mose. Mr.
William Mose. Mr. Cartwright. Mr. Cardinal. Mr. Wivild. Mr. Pagler. Mr. Smith.
Mr. Taylour.
Pages, being Earl Sons, viz.
Mr. William Herbert. Mr. Philip Cecil. Mr. John Herbert. Mr. Algernon Sidney.
Heralds at Arms, two and two.
Mr. Blu^devile Gent. Usher, bareheaded. Norroy King of Arms. Marquess of
Winchester. Earl of Northumberland. Earl of Kent.
And somewhat behind him the rest of the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen in
order, the best foremost, two and two, the Coaches closing up the Troop.

There was a public Cavalcade des^^n'd from Somerset House in the Strand to
Windesor Castle, when the present Sovereign was to be Installed; which though
it took not effect, yet is fit to be remembered by the insertion of the then
Chancellor's Letter to each Knight-Companion, for making preparations to
accompany him thither.

May it please your Lordship,
THE Kings Majesty Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Row^
Iournal. p. 39.
having determined to create the Prince his eldest Son Knight, and to propose
him in Election to be a Companion of his Order, for the better convenience of
his Installation has prorogued by a Commission under the Seal of his Order,
given the 25. of February now remaining in my Custody, the celebration of the
Feast of St. George from the 22.23. and 24. of April next, whereon it should
have been solemnized, unto the 21.22. and 23. of May, immediately ensuing, and
thereby given Command to all the Knights-Companions, and Officers of his Order,
that they should attend his royal person at his Palace of Whitehall upon those
days appointed. In discharge of the duty of my place, and by special order, I
do signify unto your Lordship his Majesty's will, and that it is his pleasure
for the more honor of the Prince, and the noble Feast of his Election and
Installation, that your Lordship should be attended with your Servants and
Retinue according to solemn Custom, and be prepared to accompany his Highness
from Somerset House in the Strand unto the Castle of Windesore, upon the 19. of
that month, to assist at the Ceremony, and Feast of his Installation upon the
day following: Praying your Lordship that you will be pleased to take knowledge
hereby, both of the time and place designed, and of the Sovereign's order, I
humbly rest

In all due obedience and observance Tho. Row.
St. Martin's Lane 27. Feb. 1637.

When this Letter was sent, the Sovereign intended to create the Prince Ex
Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer
Knight of the Bath, which Ceremonies were designed to begin at the old Palace
at Westminster, upon the 21. day of May an. 13. Car. 1. as also to hold the
Feast of St. George, for that year, at Whitehall, on the 23. of the same
Month; and to take the Scruteny that Evening for his Election into this Order:
The next day was designed to invest him with the Garter and George, and the day
following, to set forward the Cavalcade toward Windesor, wherein also the
Knights of the Bath (intended to be created with the Prince) were to ride in
their Robes. But this resolution being changed, and the intention of creating
the Prince a Knight of the Bath, altered to that of a Knight-Batchellor, the
Ceremony thereof was deferred to Windesor; and so the Cavalcade followed not.

It was the manner heretofore, for the Sovereign's Lieutenant (when the
Sovereign thought fit to appoint the Installation at the same time with the
Feast of St. George) to ride to Windesor, attended with a gallant Train, and no
small number of his own Gentlemen and Yeomen richly habited, and in all things
well appointed; as was seen in that Cavalcade of the Collect. Io. V. Genesis
Duke of Norfolk Earl Marshal of England, and Lieutenant to the Sovereign, for
St. George's Feast, an. 5. Eliz. (at which time the Earls of Northumberland and
Warwick were to be Installed) who had then attending on him Collect. Io. V. Genesis
200 of his own Gentlemen and Yeomen.

The Lieutenant and his Assistants (or otherwise the Knights-Commissioners, if
the Feast of St. George be not then held) being arrived in the Castle,
forthwith retire to their Lodgings, which most usually have been prepared at
the Deans house, the Rooms therein being the fairest, and best fitted
accommodation in the Castle (next those of the Sovereign's in the upper Ward)
but the Knights-Elect were at all times furnished with Lodgings, in some of the
Prebends houses.

SECT. II. The Offering in the Chapel, on the Eve of the Feast.
IF it so happened, that the Installation passed by Commissioners, and the
Cavalcade set forth from London in the morning of the day preceding the
Installation, and arrived at Windesor Castle early that afternoon; then the
Knights-Commissioners have been accustomed to put on their MS. fol. penes, G.
O. Y p. 203.
Mantles only (at the Chapter House door) and enter St. George's Chapel to
offer; but without the attendance of MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 147.
Heralds, or any solemn Proceeding before them into the Choire (only brought
in by the Prebends) where having taken their Stalls with usual Reverences (the
order of which shall be discoursed at large in the 20. Chapter) and heard an
Anthem, they passed up to the Altar, with the MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 147.
Verger and MS. penes G. O. Y. loco cit.
Garter before them, and there made their MS. penes G. O. Y. loco cit.
Offering, both of Gold and Silver, according to usual custom. As soon as the
Vespers were ended, they descended from their Stalls (after the accustomed
manner) and departed to their Lodgings; and in this case the
Knights-Commissioners Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
put not off their Mantles, till after Supper.

In this manner was the Ceremony of Offering (on the Eve of the Installation)
performed by the ^x ^^d MS. pen^^ G. O. Y. lo^^ ante ^i^ate.
Lord Admiral, and Earl of Ormond, Commissioners for the Installation of the
Earl of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz. as also by the Earls of MS
penes E. W. G f. ^47.
Nottingham, Worcester, Suffolk, and Southa^pton, Commissioner^* appointed for
the Installation of the Earl of Salisbury, and Viscount Bindon, a^. 4. Ia^. R.
But at the Installation of the Earl of Rutland, and others, an. 26. El^z. the
Lord Hunsdon (one of the Commi^sioners for that Solemnity) refused to go to the
Chapel to Offer alone, albeit he arrived at Windesor Castle MS. 4 penes W. le
N. Cl.
timely enough on the Eve; because he wanted the company of Viscount Mountague
(joined in Commission with him) who came not thither till the MS. 4 penes W. le
N. Cl.
next morning.

The Offering thus made, at the Knights-Commissioners coming to the Castle, on
the ^ve of Installation, is in conformity to an Article in the Statutes to this
ef^^^t * F. 3. Stat. Art. ^6 vide etiam H 5. Stat Art * 16. and H. 8. Stat.
Ar^. 17.
That if any of the Knights-Companions being upon a Journey, F. 3. Stat. Art.
^6 vide etiam H 5. Stat Art * 16. and H. 8. Stat. Ar^. 17.
should accident^lly pass by Windesor Castle, he is to turn in thither (if he
can with convenience, and be not hindered by some just and allowable cause) in
honor of the place, and prepare himself to enter into the Chapel to Offer;
first putting on his Mantle, without which he must never presume to enter into
it.

After the Knight-Companion had entered the Castle, the Canons-Resident were by
this Article appointed to meet and receive him, and with due reverence conduct
him into the Choire. If it were in the time of high Mass, the Knight was
obliged to stay and hear it, in honor of God and St. George, but if he came
thither in the afternoon, he was to stay till the Canons, with the rest of the
Choire, had sung the Anthem de Profundis, which being ended, he proceed^d to
the high Altar and Offered, and returned to his Stall, with usual Reverences,
and then departed.

But if the Knight-Companion Ibid.
passed through the Town of Windesor, and did not go to the Chapel to Offer,
in manner as before is ordained; so often as he omitted doing thereof, he was
bound upon his obedience to walk a mile on foot to the Chapel, in honor of St.
George, otherwise for every time he failed to offer one Penny, Art. 17.
which by King Henry the Eighth's Statutes is enlarged to a Groat.

It seems at last, there happened some dispute about the just distance (intended
by this Article) from the Castle, and to the end the Knig^ts-Companions might
fully know when they came within the breach of this Injunction, it was thought
requisite by King Henry the Eighth, to ^^t down a certain bound, which in his
Statutes is there declared to be Art. 17.
two miles: within which, if any of the Knights-Companions come, and do not
repair to the Chapel and Offer, he is liable to the penalty or mulct above
specified.

And because it oftentimes fell out, that some of the Knights-Companions did
accidentally ride within the said limits, whilst they took the pleasure of
hunting in Windesor Forest (some part of it lying near the Castle) nevertheless
could not conveniently leave their sport to perform all the Solemnity required,
they usually (in such case) sent their Offering in money to the Canons, which
being received, the Knights took it for a dispensation of the Ceremony,
enjoined by the Statutes.

But they still apprehending inconvenience in this Article, endeavors were
used to have it interpreted with greater latitude, which so far took effect,
that at a Chapter held at Windesor the 10. of October, an. 15. Car. 1. it was
ordered to be considered of at the next Chapter, Sir James Palmer's Iournal pro
anno 1639. p. 60.
that so some provision might be made to save the Knights from breach of their
Oath, if they came within the foresaid limited distance of Windesor Castle, and
passed thence without Offering. But nothing being then done, nor at any time
since, the Law stands as it did.

SECT. III. The Supper on the Eve.
THE Supper at night, after their arrival at Windesor, is but in the nature of
a private Meal; and prepared for the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and the
Knights-Elect, generally in the Deans House; and where, on the Eve of
Installation of the Collect. W. le. N. Cl.
Earl of Rutland and Lord Cobham, an. 26. Eliz. the Commissioners, supped
together, with such Lords and Gentlemen of account, as came along with them; no
Nobleman having above Collect. W. le N. Cl.
one servant to wait on him at the Table; the rest had their diet prepared in
the Town at their own Inns.

But now and then they have been permitted to sup in some of the Rooms in the
Sovereign's Lodgings; for MS. in Offic. Arm. [L.1.] p. 19.
there was the Supper made ready at the Installation of the Lord Russel and
other Elect Knights, an. 31. H. 8. and at the Installation of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and Lord Hunsdon, an. 3. Eliz. the Lieutenant and Knights supped in
the Ex. Collect. W. le. N. Cl.
Great Chamber there, all sitting together at one Table, in the Ex. Collect. W.
le. N. Cl.
same order as was used at other times; but the Ex. Collect. W. le. N. Cl.
Heralds then supped in St. George's Hall. And in the 34. of Queen Elizabeth,
when the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland were Installed; all the Lords and
Gentlemen supped together at one long Table set in the MS. penes cund. G. O. Y.
p. 203.
Council Chamber.

SECT. IV. The order in Proceeding to the Chapter House.
WE come now to the chief Circu^^^ances of this great Solemnity; namely the
particular Ceremonies of Installation, managed and ordered after either the
Sovereign, (or in his absence his Lieutenant or Commissioners) and
Knights-Elect, are arrived at Windesor. In reference to which we shall premise
this general note; That since neither the Statutes of Institution, nor the
Statutes of King Henry the Fifth afford us a Formulary, for the personal
Installation of a Knight-Elect (though each of them contain some part of those
Ceremonies, observed at the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20 H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.
Installation of Strangers by Proxy) yet those made by King Henry the Eighth do
exhibit (in short) the Art. 20.
order and method thereof; which we shall make use of as we pass along, and
regularly place those directions, under their proper heads.

We must further observe, that if the Installation be appointed together with
the Feast of St. George, then either the Sovereign (and consequently the
Knights-Companions) or else his Lieutenant and Assistants are present; but if
any other time of the year, then it passes by Commissioners only: and where we
mention the Sovereign and his Lieutenant, and Commissioners together, there the
Case or Rule inserted, will suit with every of them.

After such time therefore as the Sovereign (his Lieutenant or Commissioners)
have prefixed an hour wherein to begin the Proceeding to the Chapter House, in
order to the Installation of the Elect Knight (which Ceremony for the most part
has been performed and dispatched on the Evening of their arrival at Windesor,
but sometimes the next morning) all the Knights-Companions and Elect-Knights,
the Officers of the Order, and of Arms, the Prebends of the College, and
Alms-Knights are to give their attendance: that is to say, the
Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order on the Sovereign in his inward
Lodging* the Elect-Knights and Officers of Arms in the Presence Chamber, the
Prebends and Alms-Knights in the Great Chamber, where they wait the Sovereign's
coming forth.

The attendance to be given upon the Sovereign's Lieutenant, and such of the
Knights-Companions as are appointed for his Assistants, is by the Officers of
the Order and of Arms, the Prebends and Alms-Knights, either at his Lodgings,
or else where, as he shall appoint; but not by any other of the
Knights-Companions. For though we find the Knights-Companions have sometimes
proceeded to the Chapel, before the Sovereign's Lieutenant, when an
Installation was celebrated, yet has it been at such time only, as they came
to Windesor with the Sovereign, chiefly to hold St. George's Feast; where
though the Sovereign through indisposition of body or weighty affairs, could
not pass down to the Chapel on the Eve of the Feast, yet they being obliged by
the Statutes to celebrate Vespers, did on this occasion, not that of
Installation proceed thither; as it fell out at the Installation of MS. penes
E. W. G. ^. 144.
Prince Henry, and four other Knights, an. 1. Iac. R. when the Proceeding began
from the Presence Chamber, and thence past to the Chapter House in the
following Order.

Alms-Knights. Prebends. Pursuivants. Heralds. Vlster King of Arms. Lion King
of Arms. Clarenceux King of Arms.
The four ^lect-Knights. Knights-Companions. Black Rod. Register. Garter.
Chancellor.
The Sovereign's Lieutenant, leading the Prince in his hand.
The Knights-Companions proceeded likewise before the Sovereign's Lieutenant,
at the Installation of the Duke of MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
Brunswick and five other Elect-Knights, the 23. of Nov. an. 1. Car. 1. but the
Sovereign was then at Lib. R. p. 29. and 30.
Windesor Castle (though not in the Proceeding) and the Feast of St. George
there also solemnized.

But upon the Sovereign's Commissione^s, neither the Knights-Companions, nor
the Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer videsis alium Autogr. in Bibl. Cot^on.
Prelate nor Chancellor do give the^r attendance; only at the Grand Feast of
St. George, an. 13. Car. 2. the Chancellor then waiting on the Sovereign at
Windesor in the duties of his place, out of a particular regard to his Royal
Highness the Duke of York (being then Controller of his Household) attended the
Commissioners in the proceeding to his Installation.

The Proceedings upon this solemn occasion, have been generally ordered on
foot: Nevertheless, upon some extraordinary account marshalled and disposed on
Horseback, in manner of a Cavalcade; as was set forth at the Installation of
Ex. vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 293. b.
Philip King of Castile, an. 22. H. 7. and that when the MS. in Offic. Arm.
[L.1.] fol. 19.
Lord Russel, and other Elect-Knights were installed, an. 31. H. 8. So also at
the Installation of the MS. p. 11.
Earl of Sussex, an. 1. and. 2. Ph. and Mar. which King Philip honored with his
own presence; Himself, and several of the Knights-Companions, MS. p. 11.
riding on Horseback from his Lodgings in the Castle, down to the Cloister door
at the East end of the Chapel, and there alighting, proceeded directly into
the MS. p. 11.
Chapter House.

When the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon were installed, an. 3. Eliz. the
Proceeding was likewise ordered on Ex. Collect. W. le N. Cl
Horseback. So also at the Installation of the Ex. Collect. I. V. genesis
Earl of Northumberland, and Earl of Warwick an. 5. Eliz. and lastly at the
Installations of Francis Duke of Montmorency, the Viscount Hereford, and the
Lords Burghley, Gray, and Shandos an. 14. Eliz. concerning which it is further
observed; Ex. ^od. Collect.
that the Sovereign's Lieutenant, and Knights-Assistants did then put on their
Robes in the Sovereign's Lodgings in the Castle, and meeting in the
Presence Chamber, proceeded down to the outward Hall door, in the upper Ward of
the Castle, where taking their Horses, adorned with foot Clothes, they
proceeded on Horseback to the West door of the Chapel.

If the Proceeding was ordered on Horseback at the beginning of the Feast, it
continued the same throughout at the usual times, so often as the Sovereign his
Lieutenant or Commissioners) went to the Chapter House, or Chapel; and all the
returns were marshalled in the like order as the settings forth.

As concerning the marshalling this proceeding to the Chapter House, it has
been done after the same manner and order, as that celebrated on the Eve of the
Grand Feast of St. George (in relation to the degrees, whereof it was composed)
of which we shall discourse at large Chap. 20.
below; nevertheless, where there happened any considerable difference, it
shall be noted in this Section, as we have occasion.

To begin now (as we shall do there) with Servants and Attendants belonging to
the Knight-Elect; who (if they be taken into the Proceeding) pass on first, two
and two in rank, according to their quality; those of the meanest condition
foremost.

Next the Alms-Knights in their Habits, and usual order.

Then follows the Verger of the College.

After him the Prebends or Canons; but what attendance they have given
heretofore at Installations we cannot make appear; for in those Schemes left us
of Proceeding to Installations in the Reigns of King Henry the Eighth, King
Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and part of Queen Elizabeth, we find them not
inserted, though since they are.

Next to the Prebends of the College do the Pursuivants, Heralds, and
Provincial Kings of Arms, proceed in a Body.

And after them the Knight-Subject Elect, unless the Proctor of an absent
Knight-Subject pass at the same time in this Proceeding, whose place is
immediately next after the Provincial Kings: And if it so happen that the
Proctor to a Stranger-Prince be then also present, he is to proceed between the
Knight-Subject's Proctor, and the Knight-Subject Elect. But Prince Henry at his
Installation, an. Iac. R. 1. went in a place MS. sol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. a
above all the Knights-Companions, and was paired with the Earl of Nottingham,
the Sovereign's Lieutenant for that occasion.

Where two or more Elect-Knights proceed to their Installation at the same
time, they take place, according to the seniority of their Election; proceeding
two and two together; and if the number be odd, the junior Elect-Knight passes
alone.

Some other notices may here take place; as first, that the Elect-Knight passed
heretofore in his ordinary Apparel (wearing over it long since a short Gown,
afterward a Cloak, and of later times a Coat) as did the Earl of Collect. I.
V. genesis
Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. and the Earls of Collect. I. V. genesis
Penbroke and Derby an. 16. Eliz. And this also the Annals of the Order, and
other Authorities particularly note of the Earl of Lib. C. p. 114.
Sussex and Lord Buckhurst, an. 31. Eliz. of MS. penes E. W. G. f. 149. b.
Charles Duke of York and others an. 9. Iac. R. of the Duke of Lib. R. p. 18.
Lenox an. 22. Iacobi, the Earl of Collect. W. le N Cl.
Northampton, an. 5. Car. 1. and Marquess Lib. R. p. 18.
Hamilton the year following.

But this was before any peculiar under Habit was appointed to the
Knights-Companions; for now there being a Cloth of Silver Doublet, and Trunk
Hose established to be worn at the Feasts of Installation and of St. George,
the Elect-Knight proceeds in this Habit, and so did the Duke of Albemarle, an.
23. Car. 2.

Secondly, In this Proceeding to the Chapter House he wears only the Garter
about his Leg, and the George and Ribband wherewith he was invested, either
about his neck, or (as of late) drawn under his right arm; which being omitted
by Sir George Villars, and Viscount Lisle, is noted to be MS. penes E. W. G. f.
153. a.
contrary to order.

Thirdly, that the Earl of MS. penes E. W. G. f. 153. a.
Rutland with his Fellow Elect Knights, an. 14. Iac. Reg. proceeded bareheaded,
as also the Duke of Collect W. le N. Cl.
Lenox, an. 9. Car. 1. and so did the Duke of Albemarle, an. 23. Car. 2.

Fourthly, the Elect Knight does not always go in this Proceeding, but
sometimes stays at his Lodgings in the Castle, as did the Earls of MS. penes G
O Y p. 203.
Shrewsbury and Cumberl^nd an. 34. Eliz. or else at some other convenient place
near unto the Chapter House, till he be sent for in thither, to receive
Investiture with the Surcoats; an instance whereof we have in the Duke of
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Montmorency, an. 14. Eliz. and the other Elect Knights that were to be
installed at the same time with him, who (before the Sovereign's Lieutenant and
Assistants proceeded to the Chapter House) went privately from the Sovereign's
Lodgings down to the House of Mr. French (then one of the Prebends) for the
Dean was absent at that time and his House unprovided for their Reception) and
rested in the Parlour until they were sent for: Or otherwise he has gone
privately into the East Isle of the Chapel behind the High Altar and there
stayed till called in, as did the Duke of Monmouth, an. 15. Car. 2.

If the Sovereign be present at the Installation, the Knights-Companions
proceed next after the Knights-Elect (or the Proctor to a stranger Prince)
according to the order of their Stalls; but if the Sovereign's Lieutenant, then
his Assistants go in their place: of which there is a President at the
Installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon an. 3. Eliz. the
Proceeding being ordered in the following manner.

Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Vergers. Alms Knights. Officers of Arms. Elect-Knights. Assistants to the
Lieutenant. Officers of the Order. Earl of Arundel Lieutenant.
And if the Installation be dispatched by Commissioners, then the three
inferior Officers of the Order, immediately follow the Knight-Elect and
proceed next before the Commissioners (because they have no Assistants
appointed them to pass between, as has the Sovereign's Lieutenant) and thus we
find them marshalled at the Installation of the Earl of Northampton, an. 5.
Car. 1.

Lib. C. p. 114. videsis Autogr. in Biblioth. Cotton.
The Earls Servants. Alms-Knights. Prebends. Heralds. Elect-Knights. Officers of
the Order. The Sovereign's Commissioners.
Nevertheless once (and but once) viz. an. 16. Eliz. at the Installation of the
Earls of Collect. I. V. genesis
Penbroke and Derby, we find the said Officers did precede the Elect-Knights;
but this was through mistake.

Something more may be added, concerning these three Officers place and order,
in proceeding at the Solemnities of Installation, since there has heretofore
fallen out both question and dispute thereupon: For at the Installation of the
said Earl of Northampton, some question and debate happening touching their place
in this Proceeding, it was at length concluded; Lib. R. p. 48.
That from the Castle to the Chapel they should proceed before the
Commissioners, but in returning from the Chapel to the Castle they should
follow.

We suppose the Question (whatsoever it was) chanced not to be propounded till
the Proceeding was ready to pass on, and then star^ed on a sudden; because the
Heralds not readily resolving (as the Annals note) seems rather to proceed from
suprize, than want of ability to answer; and it also appears, that the
determination which took place was grounded but upon Tandem igirur per
conjecturam conclusum est. etc Ibid.
conjecture; and how fit soever it was them thought, yet if well considered,
will appear not consonant to Precedents and Practice, both before and since; as
also to the usual rule, where all returns are marshalled answerably to their
settings forth, unless the condition of any person in the Proceeding be in the
mean time changed.

But perhaps it will be answered, that the ground of this resolution, of
following the Commissioners in their return, was because the authority
wherewith they were empowered, seemed to cease as soon as the Knight was
Installed; and consequently the attendance, which that authority exacted from
the Officers, then ceased also. Yet if so, what needed any Proceeding back at
all, but that the Commissioners should have put off their Habits in the
Chapter House, and pass thence privately to their Lodgings? But to proceed,

It is further to be observed, that when Installations pass by Commissioners
only, these three inferior Officers wear their Robes (for they are appointed to
be worn. Lib. C. p. 24.
at all solemn Assemblies of the Order, no less than at the Feasts of St.
George) but bear not the Ensigns of their Offices in the Proceeding. And this
seems to be deduced from particular Injunctions, laid down in the Constitutions
appertaining to the Officers of the Order, which appoint Cap. 4.
Garter, and Cap. 5.
Black Rod, to bear the Ensigns of their Offices at the Feast of St. George,
when the Sovereign or his Deputy shall be present, whence it may be inferred,
that if either happen to be absent, they need not bear them: We also find this
in practice, and their Ensigns not carried at the Installations of Ex Collect.
R. Cook nuper Clar. fol. 28.
Frederick King of Denmark, and John Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhine, an.
25. Eliz. next of the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Rutland and Lord Cobham the following year, and thirdly so noted in
the Page 48.
Red Book of the Order. But if the Sovereign himself be present, or that he
constitute a Ex Collect. I. V. genesis
Lieutenant in his stead, the Register then carries the MS. penes Ed.
Fauconbridge, genesis
Red Book, and Garter, and the Black Rod, bear each of them their Rods. And
note also, that in every Proceeding to Installation by a Lieutenant or
Commissioners Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 32. videsis MS.
Garter carries the Sovereign's Commission in his hand to the Chapter House
before them.

We now are arrived at the place of the Sovereign (his Lieutenant or
Commissioners) which is in the Rear, and with which we shall close the ordinary
Proceeding.

But because we would give some instances where the Sovereign, willing to add
honor to the Elect-Knights, has appointed their Installation at such time, as
he personally solemnized the Feast of St. George, we shall insert here first
that memorable but mixed Proceeding on Horseback (when the Election and
Installation of Philip King of Castile and Leon, past an. 22. H. 7.) from the
Sovereign's Lodging in the Casile, to the South door of St. George's Chapel,
and was thus ordered.

Lib. N. p. 183. videsis MS. vet. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 294. b.
Knights according to their Degrees. Lords after their Degrees.
Knights-Companions, in their whole Habit, bearing company with some of the
Knights of the Order of Toyson d' or. Prelate of the Order. Archbishop of
Canterbury.
The Spanish Ambassador. Toyson d' or, King of Arms, in his Coat of Arms.
Garter King of Arms in his Coat of Arms.
The Sword. The Prince. Philip King of Castile. King Henry the Seventh,
Sovereign of the Order.

Another but later instance, shall be that at the Feast of St. George, an. 9.
Iac. R. when MS penes E. W. G. fol. 149. b.
Charles Duke of York, Thomas Earl of Arundel, and Robert Viscount Rochester,
were installed.

MS penes E. W. G. fol. 149. b.
Alms-Knight. Prebends. Officers of Arms. Visc. Rochester. Earl of Arundel.
Duke of York. Knights-Companions. Officers of the Order. The Sword. The
Sovereign.
The same Sovereign with several of the Knights-Companions, proceeded also to
the Chapel at the personal Installation of Lib. C p. 1^8.
Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 10. Iac. R. the Feast of St.
George being then solemnized; and again at the Installation of the Ex eod. MS.
penes ^. W. G
Earl of Rutland, Sir George Vill^rs, and Viscount Lys^^, in the 14. year of
the same King. The like honor did King Charles the First to the Lib. R p 20.
Earl of Suffolk an. 4. Car. 1. and to the Ibid. p 8^.
Duke of Lenox an. 9. Car. 1. as also to the ^a^m. l^rge Iourn ^. 11.
present Sovereign, when his Installation was celebrated at Windesor an. 14, of
the same King. To these examples we may add, the present Sovereign's personal
appearance at the Grand Feast of St. George, held next after his happy
Restoration; whereat 12 Elect Knights Subjects received the honor of
Installation, namely, the Dukes of Ormond, and Buckingham, Earl of Southampton,
Marquess of Newcastle, Earl of Bristol, Duke of Albemarle, the Earls of
Sandwich, and Oxford, Duke of Richmond, and the Earls of Lindsey, Manchester,
and Strafford.

As also at the Installations of the Prince of Denmark, and James Duke of
Monmouth, the 22. of April, an. 15. Car. 2. and lastly of the King of Sweden,
the Duke of Saxony, and Christopher Duke of Albemarle, the 28. of May, an. 23.
C. 2.

Lastly, at this Solemnity of Installation, the Sovereign proceeds in full
Robes, having the Sword of State born before him by a Nobleman not of the
Order, his Train-Bearers and Attendants following, and the Band of Pensioners
closing up the Proceeding.

The Sovereign's Lieutenant and his Assistants (so also the Commissioners)
proceed in full Robes likewise, which we find not only mentioned, but the
particulars MS. in Offic. Arm. [L 1.] fol. 19.
enumerated; an. 31. H. 8. when the Earl of Arundel and his Assistants,
installed the Lord Russel, and two other Elect Knights; but the Sovereign's
Lieutenant (not any of the Commissioners) has his Train carried up, and this
service is usually performed by some of his own Gentlemen. The Collect. W. le
N. Cl. fol. 4. b.
Earl of Arundel's Train was carried up by his Gentleman Usher, an. 3. Eliz.
And the Ibid. fol. 11. b videsis Collect. I. V. genesis
Duke of Norfolk's, an. 5. Eliz. by Sir Nicholas Strange, his Chamberlain.

The Processional w^y (if the Proceeding take beginning in the Presence
Chamber) is down thence into the upper ward of the Castle, and through the
other Wards in at the Cloister door, and so to the Chapter House; but if from
the Deans house, then the way is but short, and taken only through the
Cloisters, into which there is an immediate passage from the Deanery.

The Proceeding having entered the East door of St. George's Chapel, and passed
by the Chapter House door, makes a stand in the North Isle; while first the
Lib. C. p. 114.
Officers of the Order, next the Knights Commissioners; or else the Knights
Assistants and the Sovereign's Lieutenant; or lastly the Knights-Companions,
and the Sovereign (with the Sword born before him) pass into the Chapter House.
But the MS. in Offic. Arm. [H.2.] f. 8. b.
Knight (or Knights) Elect, ought not as yet to enter, but as they come in at
the Chapel door, fall off on the left hand into the East-Isle, behind the high
Altar, where they may either walk or repose themselves at pleasure (on Velvet
Chairs or Stools, with Cushens, there prepared for them) MS. in Offic. Arm.
[H.2.] f. 8. b.
until they are called into the Chapter House. And this has been so usual a
custom, that we find very frequent mention made of it; amongst others, it is
thus noted of the Earl of Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. that he entered not into
the Chapter House with the Lieutenant and Assistants, but Ex Collect. I V. genesis
walked before the door, until he was called in. The like did the Lib. C. p.
110.
Earls of Essex, and Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton, while the
Commissioners appointed for that Installation, an. 30. Eliz. went into the
Chapter House. At the Installation of the Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars,
and Viscount ^ysle, an. 14. Iac. R. there were prepared in the foresaid Isle,
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Stools set upon Carpets, one an Ell distant from another, on which they sat,
according to the order of their Election, whilst the Sovereign,
Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order entered into the Chapter House. So
an. 1. Car. 1. the Earl of Salisbury, and the rest of the Elect Knights, MS.
penes Ed. ^auconbridge.
retired out of the Proceeding as it entered the Chapel, and rested themselves
in Velvet Chairs placed in the aforesaid Isle. Lastly, all the Elect Knights
that received their Installation at the Gr^nd Feast of St. George, happily
celebrated in the 13. year of the present Sovereign did the like.

Nevertheless, out of extraordinary respect to great personages, they have been
sometimes (though but rarely) admitted into the Chapter House, with the
Sovereign or his Lieutenant; among whom Lib. N. p. 183.
Philip King of Castile and Leon, an. 22. H. 7. was one, and also MS. penes E.
1^. G. f. 149. b.
Prince Henry, an. 1. Iac. R. he being led in by the Sovereign's Lieutenant,
while the other four Elect Knights (installed at that Solemnity with him) sat
upon Benches in the accustomed place, until they severally received their
Summons to enter.

Sometimes the Sovereign and Knights-Companions in their Proceeding to
Ins^allation, have waved going to the Chapter House, and passed immediately
into the Choire, as did King James an. 9. when Ibidem.
^harles Duke of York, and others were Installed: The like did King Charles the
First at the Installation of the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Suffolk; but then the Sovereign had held a Chapter in the Lib. R. p.
38.
Privy Chamber, immediately before the Proceeding set forward, and it is to be
noted, that in the former instance, when the Proceeding came as far as the East
end of the Chapel, the Duke of York, and the two other Elect Knights, with
Norroy before them, went out of the Proceeding into the Chapter House, and
there reposed themselves while the Sovereign proceeded on to the South door of
the Chapel, and thence into the Choire.

SECT. V. The Ceremonies performed in the Chapter House.
AFter the Lieutenant's entrance into the Chapter House, 1. Reading the
Commission.
and opening of the Chapter; Lib. C. p. 110. and 114.
Garter (with three Reverences) presents first the Commission Collect. W. le N.
Cl. and I. V.
of Lieutenancy to hold the Feast, next that of Installation, to the Lieutenant
(or if the Installation pass by Commissioners, then only the MS. penes Arthur
Commit. Anglesey. f. 119. a.
Commission of Installation to the Senior Commissioner) which being received,
he delivers it to the Register of the Order, who forthwith Lib. N. p. 277. vide
etiam Lib. C. in locis cit. and porro page 135. and 140.
reads it, for to him this duty appertains, as is recorded in the Page 181.
Black Book of the Order, upon occasion of Garter's reading the Commission for
Installation of Sir Thomas Brandon, an. 22. H. 7. the Register being then
absent.

When the Register has read the Commissions, he MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. Page
203.
returns them to the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and he again to the custody
of MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. Page 203.
Garter, as it is noted to be done at the Installation of the Earls of MS. fol.
penes G. O. Y. Page 203.
Shrewsbury, and Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz.

If the Sovereign be present, 2. Receiving the Elect Knight into the
Chapter House.
the Chancellor acquaints him that the Knights-Elect are without, otherwise the
Lieutenant and Assistants (or Commissioners) consult together for some short
space, touching the manner of calling in, and receiving the Elect-Knight; which
being concluded on, they immediately send out for him; and Lib. N. page 277.
videsis Collect. I. V. genesis and Lib. R. page 5. and 6.
Garter is usually employed in this service, Lib. N. page 277. videsis Collect.
I. V. genesis and Lib. R. page 5. and 6.
who with all due respect invites and conducts him, to the Chapter House door.
But an. 34. Eliz. Garter went to the Ex eod. MS. penes G. O. Y. in loc. cit.
Lodgings of the Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, where they waited the
Summons from the Commissioners, and having delivered his message, they
forthwith repaired to the Chapter House; their Train attending them to the door.

At the Installation of Francis Duke of Montmorency, the Earl of Leicester
(then the Sovereign's Lieutenant) as an evidence of singular respect, sent from
the Chapter MS. in quarto penes W. le N. Cl. f. 25.
two of the four Assistants assigned him, (namely the Earl of Bedford, and Sir
Henry Sidney) to Mr. French his Lodgings; who taking MS. in quarto penes W. le
N. Cl. f. 25.
Garter and the Officers of Arms before them, led him thence between them, into
the Chapter House.

When there are two or more Elect-Knights that wait without in the East Isle,
expecting to be called in; Garter first conducts the ^x Col^^ct. I. V. ^en.
senior by Election, to the Chapter House door, and afterward the next, and so
the rest in like order: for Instance, an. 14. Iac. R. when three Elect-Knights
remained without, Garter came forth and made his Reverence to the Earl of
Rutland (the senior Elect-Knight) and ^x Col^^ct. I. V. ^en.
first ushered him to the Chapter House door, leaving the other two reposing
upon their Seats; again, Garter returning the second time, introduced Sir
George Villars, the next senior Knight-Elect; and last of all brought Viscount
Lisle the junior Elect to the same place. In like m^nner and order did Garter
perform this service to all the Knights-Elect, according to their seniority of
Election, an. 13. Car. 2.

As soon as Garter has conducted the Elect-Knight to the Chapter House door,
two of the Commissioners (when the Installation is performed by Commissioners)
or two of the Knights-Assistants (when by the Sover^ign's Lieutenant) or two of
the senior Knights-Companions (if the Sovereign himself be present) receive him
MS in Offic. Arm [H. 2] fol 8 b and ^ide et^^m MS penes G. O. Y. fol 162.
without. Thus did the two Commissioners receive the Earls of Collect. I. V.
genesis
Derby and Pe^broke, an. 16. Eliz. and the Lib. C. page 110.
Earl of ^ssex an. 30. ^liz. In like manner did two of the Lieutenants four
Assistants, receive the Lib. N. p. 277.
Lord Cromwell, an. 29. H. 8. as also the Earl Ex pr^^d MS. penes eund. G. O.
Y. fol. 80.
of Huntington, an. 3. E. 6. and Earl of Collect. I. V. genesis
Northumberland, an. 5. ^liz.

The Elect-Knight being thus received, is immediately Lib. N p. 277.
conducted from the Chapter House door up to the Sovereign (his Lieutenant or
Commisioners) unto whom he makes humble Reverence, and after some short
congratulation, the Lieutenant (or senior Commissioners) in a short speech
makes Ibid.
known to him, the effect of his Commission, and Lib. C. p. 114 videsis MS.
pr^^d. penes G. O. Y. fol. 203.
declares the Sovereign's bounty and ready kindness toward him, for a full
admittance into this most honorable Society; which the Elect-Knight most humbly
and gratefully acknowledges and accepts.

When Philip King of Castile and Leon, was to be Installed (which he personally
received at Windesor the 9. of Feb. an. 22. H. 7.) the Ex vet. MS. penes W. le
N. Cl. fol. 294.
Sovereign himself (being present in the Chapter House) rose up from his
Throne, and gave him information of the Statutes and Ceremonies of the Order,
and what they obliged him to perform; to all which he gave his ready assent.

The Complements at receiving the Elect-Knight into the Chapter House being
over, 3. Investing him with the Surcoat.
he disrobes himself of his Lib. N. p 274. and 277. Lib. C. page 114.135.140.
and Lib R. p. 6. and 18.
upper Garment, and then the Surcoat or Kirtle is taken from the Table (where
it and the rest of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order are decently and
separately laid in readiness before hand) and he invested therewith; at the
doing of which these words of Admonition (entered at the end of King Henry the
Eighth's Book of English Statutes) are to be read or spoken.

Take this Robe of Purple to the increase of your honor, See also the Appendix,
Number. XXXVII.
and in token or sign of the most honorable Order you have received; wherewith
you being defended, may be bold not only strongly to fight, but also to offer
your self to shed your blood for Christ's Faith, the liberties of the Church,
and the just and necessary defense of them that be oppressed and needy.

After this, his Sword is close girt about him, over his Surcoat, by the MS.
penes E. W. G. f 2^ vide etiam Collect. I. V. genesis
Commissioners (or the Assistants to the Lieutenant, or some of the
Knights-Companions) and sometimes (in way of assistance) Garter has put on the
Elect-Knights Surcoat, girt his Sword about him, and laid his Hood over his
shoulder, as in the case of the MS.
Earl of Rutland, an. 26. Eliz. And as soon as this Ceremony is dispatched, the
Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) proceed into the Choire leaving the Elect-Knight
behind them.

The Hood was heretofore put on in the Chapter House (for so King Henry the
Eighth's Art. 20.
Statutes do appoint) Collect. I. V. genesis
after the Elect-Knight has been invested with his Surcoat, and before he
proceeded to his Installation; but of late, because it must be MS. in Offic.
Arm. [I. 1.] p. 19.
taken off again in the Choire, and laid aside, to the end the Mantle may be
put on, and after that laid on the shoulder a second time (over the Mantle) it
has been conceived a sort of diminution in the investiture, to take off any
part of the Habit before the whole investiture be completed. Whereupon at the
beginning of King James his Reign, it was thought more convenient, that the
Hood should be carried upon the Cushen by Garter into the Choire, together with
the Mantle and Collar, and not be put on till after the Investiture with the
Mantle, and so was it observed at the Feast of St. George. an. 13.15. and 23.
Car. 2.

And though anciently it was laid over the left shoulder of the Elect-Knight,
and so worn upon all occasions, yet an. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. the wearing
thereof being taken notice of to obscure the Scutcheon of St. George
(embroidered on the same shoulder of the Mantle it was therefore in a Chapter
held at St. James's, on the 22. of April, in the foresaid year Decreed, See the
Decree entered at the end of King Henry the Eighth's Book of English Statutes.
That thenceforth the Knights-Companions should wear their Hoods on the right
shoulders, to the end the Scutcheon might be the better seen and appear.

Nevertheless there was a question moved, an. 12. Iac. R. MS. penes. E. W. G.
f. 151. b.
whether the Knights-Companions should not restore the usage of wearing their
Hoods to the left shoulder; which it seems was overruled, and the custom of
wearing them on the right, thought fit to be continued, as the foresaid Decree
appoints. And on the Eve of the Feast of St. George an. 23. Car. 2. some of the
Knights-Companions, supposing the Hoods ought to be worn rather on the left
shoulder, did so wear them to Vespers, but the next morning being better
persuaded, of the Law and later Custom, they altered them to the right.

To great Princes-Strangers, there is a liberty given by King Art. 20.
Henry the Eighth's Statutes, to receive (if they please) their Habit wholly
within the Chapter House, and before they enter their Stalls; and it thereby
appears, that this was the Custom in times past; and whereof we have an
Instance in Philip King of Castile an. 22. H. 7. who was Lib. N. p. 18 a.
videsis vet. MS. penes W. le. N. Cl. f. 295.
fully invested in the Chapter House with the Garter, Surcoat, Mantle, Hood,
and Collar, the Sovereign himself putting his hand to his Investiture with the
Mantle.

Hereupon King Philip (Grandchild to the foresaid King of Castile) was invested
with the whole Habit of the Order, before he assumed his Stall, for arriving at
Windesor the 3. of Aug. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. he proceeded to the Chapel, and
received his Investiture within the MS. page 11.
West door; where was prepared a Form (adorned with Carpet and Cushens) and
there the MS. page 11.
Register of the Order, delivered the Mantle, to the Earls of Derby and
Penbroke, who kissing it, presented it to the Queen, and Lib. C. p. 11.
she her self (assisted by the said Earls) invested the King therewith; next
Garter gave the Collar to the Earls of Arundel and Penbroke, who presented it
also to the Queen, with the like ceremony wh^rewith the Mantle was delivered;
and She thereupon put it about King Philips neck, and forthwith the
Knight-Companions (having also robed themselves within the Chapel door)
proceeded before the King and Queen, who with joined hands passed into the
Choire; where being arived, the Queen Ibid.
led him to the Sovereign's Stall, which having ascended, they both sat therein.

But as the foresaid Statute leaves this to the pleasure of the
Stranger-Prince, and was permitted only for gaining of time, so have not any
(who received a Personal Installation at Windesor since) been fully invested
before they entered the Choire. For Collect R. C. Cl. f. 25 and 26.
Francis Duke of Montmorency, an. 14. Eliz. and MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151.
^rederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 10. Iac. R. were both invested
with their Surcoats only in the Chapter House; but received the Mantles, Hoods,
and Collars in their Stalls, after they had taken their Oaths.

SECT. VI. The Proceeding into the Choire.
THE Elect-Knight habited as before, forthwith passes from the Chapter House
along the North Isle, and so in at the West door of the Choire, in solemn
order; but his place in this Proceeding is changed, for here he is led between
two of the Knights-Companions. This is noted in the Ed^^^ s^^t sin^^^^m e^
Consilio. p. 99.
Black Book to be the order wherein Albro Vasques d' Almadea Earl of Averence,
and two other Elect-Knights proceeded to their Installation, an. 24. H. 6. And
albeit the Statutes of Institution, and those made by King Henry the Fifth are
silent in the order of this Proceeding; yet for an Elect-Knight to be led to
his Stall, between two other of the Knights-Companions is no modern Ceremony;
since we also find that Ibid. p. 108.
Viscount Bouchier, an. 30. H. 6. past to his Installation between the Lord
Hastings and Lord Beauchamp. But the order of Proceeding is precisely set down
in Art. 20.
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, to wit, That the Elect-Knight attended by
his Gentlemen and Servants, shall be led between two other of the
Knights-Companions, the Officers of the Order going before them.

To this Rule the constant practice has been answerable, at all Installations
since; the Knight-Elect proceeding either between Lib. C. p. 114.
two of the Knights-Commissioners, when there has been no Lieutenant, or
between two of the Lib N p 274. and 27^ videsis MS. in ^ffic. A^m. [H. ^.] f^l.
8. b
Knights Assistants, where a Lieutenant was constituted, or lastly between the
two Lib. C. p. 178. and l^b R p ^9.
senior Knights-Companions, the Sovereign being present. Of which cases we
shall here assign each a President.

Collect. W. le N. Cl.
A Proceeding from the Chapter House into the Choire, at the Installation of
the Earl of Rutland, an. 26. Eliz. Viscount Mountagu and Lord Hunsdon being
Commissioners for that Solemnity.

Verger with his Rod. Alms-Knights, two and two Pursuivants, Heralds, and
Norroy. Black Rod. Register. Clarenceux, who then executed the Office of
Garter.
Lord Hunsdon. Earl of Rutland. Viscount Mountagu.

Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Another Proceeding from the Chapterhouse at the Installation of the Lord
Russel, an. 31. H. 8. the Earls of Essex and Rutland, being then the
Lieutenants's Assistants.

Heralds. Register. Garter.
Earl of Rutland. Lord Russell. Earl of Essex.

Collect. W. le N. Cl.
A third Proceeding at the Installation of the present Sovereign, an. 14. Car*
1. the two senior Knights-Companions being appointed to conduct the Prince from
the Chapter House to his Stall in the Choire.

Alms-Knights, two and two. Officers of Arms, two and two. Black Rod. Register.
Garter.
Earl of Arundell The Prince Earl of Penbroke.

But when there has been three Commissioners nominated, then the two senior
Commissioners take the Knight-Elect between them, and the MS. penes Arthur.
Commit. Anglesey. fol. 119. a
junior Knight Commissioner proceeds before them; and thus was it ordered at
the Installation of the Earls of Essex, and Ormond, and Sir Christopher Hatton,
an. 30. Eliz. where the Lib. C. p. 110.
Earl of Essex proceeded from the Chapter House into the Choire, between the
Lord Hunsdon and Earl of Worcester, and the Lord Gray the junior Commi^sioner
past singly before them.

In all cases where the Sovereign is present at an Installation (since the
Custom of Investing with the Collar in the Chapter House was left off) this is
generally to be observed; that so soon as the Investiture with the Surcoat is
finished, the Sovereign passes from the Chapter House into the Choire, with
the whole Proceeding before him, leaving the Elect-Knight behind. And so soon
as he and the Knights-Companions have taken their Stalls, in the Ex. Collect.
I. V. genesis
usual manner, the two senior Knights-Companions, upon the Sovereign's verbal
directions, descend from their Stalls and stand under their Banners, while the
Alms-Knights (but not the Prebends) Officers of Arms, and the three inferior
Officers of the Order pass out of the Choire in usual manner, and proceed
before them to the Chapter House, from whence they introduce the Elect-Knight
into the Choire to his Installation. But if there be more Knights to be
Installed, then the two next senior Knights descend, and after them the next
seniors to them, till all the Elect-Knights are conducted in.

And this course is likewise observed when a Lieutenant is constituted, and
has been generally so practiced, since the Investiture with the Collar, was
performed in the Choire, and particularly at the Installations of the MS.
penes. E. W. G. f. 144. a. and 146. a.
Duke of Lenox, MS. penes E. W. G. f. 144. a. and 146. a.
and Earls of Penbroke, Mar, and Southampton, an. 1. Iac. R. and of the Duke
of Holstein and Earl of Northampton, an. 3. Iac. R. In this Proceeding to
Installation, the Register usually carries a Book of the New Testament for the
Elect-Knight to take his Oath upon; as also the Oath it self, fairly written in
Parchment.

Lib. N p. 274.277. and Lib. C. p. 110.
Garter bears before the Knight-Elect his Mantle, until he arrive at his Stall,
and Art. 20.
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes place this service upon some one of the
Knights-Companions likewise; but we have not found in all our search, that it
was ever performed by any of them.

It should seem, that about the time when this Injunction passed, it was the
Custom for Garter to bear the Mantle upon his arm; for we find it so carried at
the Installation of the Lord MS in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] p. 19.
Russel, and others an. 31. H. 8. But it was not long after, that the laying it
on a Velvet Cushen began.

The great Collar of the Order was also laid upon the Cushen; at the
Installation of MS. fol. 20. b.
Sir Henry Sidney, an. 6. Eliz. of the Col^ect. I. V. genesis
Earl of Derby, an. 16. Eliz. of the Ex Autogr.
Earl of Rutland, an. 26. Eliz. and of the Ex eod. Collect I. V. genesis
Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 34. Eliz. and in this manner born before the
Knight-Elect, an. 13. Car. 2. and before the Duke of Monmouth, an. 15. Car. 2.
and the Duke of Albermarle, an. 23. Car. 2.

With these the Hood (though heretofore put on in the Chapter House, yet) of
late has been laid upon the Cushen, and also the Book of Statutes, and so we
find them born by Garter before MS. penes. E. W. G. f. 144. b.
Prince Henry an. 1. Iac. R. and Frederick Ibid. f. 151. a.
Elector Palatine in the 10. year of the same King, as also before the Knights
Installed, an. 13. Car. 2. and since.

And here we must note, that when Garter bears these Ornaments and Ensigns upon
the Cushen before an Elect-Knight, or a Proctor, he is always placed between
the Register and Black Rod in the Proceeding.

Lastly, in this Proceeding also the Knight-Elect goes bare headed, holding
his Cap in his hand, and so did the Duke of Albermarle, an. 23. Car. 2. for it
has been thought incongruous to the order of Investiture (as is before noted
of the Hood) to put on any part of the Habit or other Ornaments that must be
taken off again, before the Investiture be completed; and the due place (among
the Ceremonies of Investiture) for putting on the Cap is not till all the other
be finished.

SECT. VII. The Ceremonies of Installation.
WHen the Proceeding has entered the Choire, the Alms-Knights and Officers of
Arms, make their obeysances toward the high Altar, and the Sovereign's royal
Stall, in the same manner and order as we shall Chap. 20. Sect. 6.
describe anon to be done on the Eve of St. George. Then they proceed up to the
steps before the Altar and Collect. I. V. genesis
divide themselves, next the Officers of the Order make their like double
Reverence, and last of all the two Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or
Knights-Companions) and Knight Elect, all three together.

After this the Officers of the Order turn aside toward the Stall, 1. Taking
the Oath.
designed for the Elect Knight, and approaching near it, stand below in the
Choire, while the Commissioners (or Assistants, or Knights-Companions) pass
into the MS. penes Arthur Comi^ Anglesey, f. 119.
lower row of Stalls (sometimes called the MS penes E. W. G. f. 144 a.
middle row) directly under the designed Stall, Lib. C. p. 14 c. and Li. R. p.
154
leading the Elect Knight with them. And in this H. 8. Stat. Art. 20. videsis
Lib. C. page 110.114 140.
place is he to take his Oath, called in the Annals, the Lib. C. p. 50.
Sacred Oath of the Order of the Garter: during which time he ought to stand
between the Knights-Companions, who brought him thither.

At the Installation of Prince Henry an. 1. Iac. R. the MS. fol. penes E. W. G.
l^c. cit.
Sovereign's Lieutenant himself, with the Lord Buckhurst (the next senior
Knight-Companion) led him directly under his own Stall, and there gave him his
Oath. And when the Earl of Shrewsbury was Installed, an. 34. Eliz. we find it
noted, that the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206.
senior Commissioner first entered the lower row of Stalls; but an. 31. H. 8. at
the Installation of the Lord Russell, and others, the MS. in Offic. Arm. [L.
1.] p. 19.
junior Assistant went up first.

The Knight Elect being thus placed, the Register of the Order (standing before
them, but below in the Choire) Lib. N. p. 274. Lib. C. p. 114.151. and Lib. R.
p. 6.19.47.61.85 and 145.
reads or pronounces the Oath, for it is part of his duty, to administer the
same.

In this solemn Ceremony, the New Testament whereon the Oath is taken (commonly
opened in some place of the Gospels) is indifferently held by one of the three
inferior Officers of the Order, for sometimes the Ex. Collect. I. V. genesis
Register has held it, as at the Earl of Ex. Collect. I. V. genesis
Derby's Installation, an. 16. Eliz. as also at the Installation of the Autogr.
Earl of Rutland, and Lord Cobham, an. 26. of the same Sovereign. At other
times Garter has held it, as an. 5. Eliz. when the MS. penes. W. le N. Cl. f.
11. b.
Earl of Northumberland took his Oath, and an. 10. Car. 1. at the Installation
of the MS.
Earl of Moreton. But when the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206.
Earl of Shrewsbury was sworn, an. 34. Eliz. the Usher of the Black Rod,
performed this Office.

While the Oath is administering, the Elect Knight holds his right hand upon the
Lib. R. p. 6^.
holy Evangelists, and as soon as the Register has ended pronouncing the words,
the Elect Knight answers, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
I will, so help me God, and then takes off his hand reverently kissing the
Book; and by this Ceremony seals his obligation to the Statutes of this most
Noble Order.

The Ceremony used when Philip King of Castile and Leon, took the Oath (which
to him was administered in the Chapter House at Windesor) an. 22. H. 7. was
this, The said King laid his hand upon the Lib. N. p. 184. videsis vet. MS.
penes. W. le N. Cl. f. 294.
Canon (under which was placed the Book of the Statutes of the Order, by the
Prelate, to whom it was delivered by the Register) and repeated the words of
the Oath, and having reverently kissed all those things, by which he swore, he
took a Pen from the Prelates hand, and signed the Oath he had taken, with his
own handwriting; and forthwith delivered it to the Sovereign then present.

Now the Oath which a Knight-Subject takes, at his personal Installation, being
of very great weight and concernment, it is fit we here render some account of
the nature and form thereof, and (leaving those others taken by
Stranger-Princes, and their Proctors, and the Deputies of Knights-Subjects, to
their proper places) enquire, what was its original form, and how, when, and
upon what occasion it received addition and enlargement.

First then, the form of the ancient Oath, which the Statutes of Institution
appointed to be taken by the Elect-Knight was very short, but comprehensive,
and was, E. 3. Stat. Art. 24.
That he should well and faithfully observe, to the uttermost of his power, all
the Statutes of the Order.

This was the full content of the Oath, taken by the first Founders, and to
which they also affixt their Lib. N. p. 2^.
Seals; and so it continued without alteration or addition, till toward the
end of King Edward the Fourth's Reign. But at a Chapter held at the Kings
Wardrobe in London the 10. of February, in the 19. year of the same King, it
was Decreed, That all the Knights-Companions then alive, and all such as were
afterward admitted into the Order (and that before they took possession of
their Stalls) should be obliged to take this Oath, also Lib. N. p. 146
That they would aid support, and defend, with all their power, the Royal
College of St. George, within the Castle of Windesor, as well in its
possessions, as all other things whatsoever.

In pursuance of which Decree, there was a form drawn up, wherein both Oaths
were joined together, and entered in the Black Book, the Transcript whereof we
have placed in the Number. XXXVIII.
Appendix. But when the Register of the Order pronounced the Oath, (he
premising such compellation as was due to every Elect Knight by name) it was
altered to the form Number. XXXIX.
there likewise following.

This Clause (relating to the maintenance and defense of the liberties of the
College) we also find retained in the Oath drawn up for the Prince of Wales,
and entered for a Precedent in the Annals of the Order, which we have also
thought fit to subjoin to the Appendix, Number. XL.
former.

But when King Henry the Eighth new modelled the Statutes, we observe this
Clause to be omitted, and some other particulars of another nature added to the
general Oath, for due observation of the Statutes; as first, instead of
maintaining and defending the College in its rights and possessions; there is
adjoin'd a Clause, to defend the Honors, Quarrels, Rights, Dominions, and Cause
of the Sovereign, to augment the Honor, and accomplish all the Statutes,
Points, and Ordinances of the Order, as may be seen at large in his Body of
Art. 27.
Statutes, all which we find sum'd up together, in that form of the Appendix,
Number. XLI.
Oath, taken by the Earl of Cumberland, at his Installation an. 29. H. 8.

In the third year of King Edward the Sixth, at the Installation of the Earl of
Huntington, and other Elect Knights, a new form was agreed on, by consent of
the Earl of Derby, then the Sovereign's Lieutenant, and the Knights-Assistants
appointed for that Solemnity; the alteration being such, as the Reformation in
Religion, and the Sovereign's Interest, thought fit to make: and to the end the
difference between this and former Oaths may be observed, it is also inserted
in the Number. XLII.
Appendix.

But an. 1. Eliz. the Blue Book affords us a notable instance, of a
dispensation for taking the Oath at the Installation of the Duke of Norfolk and
others, in regard the Lib. C. p. 31.
Rites and Ceremonies of Religion were then altered, and no new form of an Oath
yet settled; for which cause the Earl of Penbroke (then the Sovereign's
Lieutenant) dispensed with their taking any Oath at that time; upon promise
Ibid.
they would observe such Statutes and Orders, as the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions should decree to be observed and kept in the next Council of
the Order.

And accordingly (within a short time after) another Form was Ordained, wherein
the words of Obligation were put in the Negative: And this is the form of the
Oath, taken by a Knight-Subject at this day; it being recorded at the end of
the Red Book of the Order, both in Latin and English, and thence transcribed
into the Number. XLIII.
Appendix.

2. Investiture with the Mantle, etc.
As soon as the Knight-Elect has taken the usual Oath, he is led by the
Knights-Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) up to the
Stall appointed for him, through that entrance next beneath it, and by them
placed before it. In the mean time Garter advances into the lower row of
Stalls to the place where the Elect Knight stood, when he took his Oath, and
from thence he presents to them (with due Reverence) the Mantle, Collar, and
Book of Statutes, who invest the Elect Knight first with the E. 3. Stat. Art.
H. 5. Stat. Art. 19 H. 8. Stat. Art. 20.
Mantle, by putting it upon his shoulders.

But we have met with some Examples, where Garter has delivered the Mantle,
while the Elect-Knight remained in the lower row of Stalls, and wherewith he
was invested before he went up to his Stall; and these were in the cases of the
Ex Collect. I. V. genesis
Earl of Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. of MS. 4. penes W le N. Cl.
Francis Duke of Montmorency, and others, an. 14. Eliz. the MS. penes E. W. G.
f. 148.
Earls of Dunbar, and Montgomery, an. 6. Iac. R. and the Palmer's large Iourn.
page 13.
present Sovereign, an. 14. Car. 1. Whereto may be added, that those
Elect-Knights installed at the Grand Feast of St. George, most happily
celebrated, an. 13. Car. 2. were constrained to receive their Investiture below
in the C^oire, yet dire^tly under their proper Stalls. But this happened through
the great c^^course of people, which at that time had flockt to Windesor
(greedy to behold the glory of that Solemnity, which for many years had been
intermitted) and rudely forced, not only into and filled the lower row of
Stalls, but taken up almost the whole Choire.

But it is noted in the Red Book that the Investiture with the Mantle and
Collar, has been sometimes performed by the Black Rod: as at the Installation
of the Lib. R. p. 47.
Earl of Northampton, an. 5. Car. 1. and of the Lord Treasurer Ibid. p 51.
Weston, the Earls of Exiter and Lindsey, and James Marquess Hamilton, an. 6.
Car. 1. Nevertheless this is to be understood, of this Officers asistance given
to the Knights-Companions whose Office it only is, and no otherwise.

MS. fol. 20.
Whilst the Ceremony of Investiture with the Mantle is performing, the words of
Admonition proper thereunto are pronounced, and are these that follow.

Take this Mantle of Heavenly Color in sign and token of the most honorable
Order you have received, See the Appendix. Number. XXXVI. and XXXVII.
and to the increase of your honor, signed and marked as you see with a red
Scutcheon of our Lords Cross, to the intent that you being always defended by
the virtue and strength thereof, may p^s^ through your Enemies, and then also
overcome and vanquish, so that at the last for your worthy and approved acts,
you may after this temporal Chivalry come to eternal triumphant joys in Heaven.

But at the Installation of the present Sovereign, the received some
alteration, and were put into this form.

Receive this Robe of Heavenly Color (the Livery of this most excellent Order)
in augmentation of thy honor, Palm. la^ge Iourn. p. 13.
enobled with the Shield and Red Cross of our Lord, by whose power thou may
safely pierce Troops of thy Enemies, and be over them ever victorious; and
being in this temporal warfare glorious in egregious and heroic actions, thou
may obtain eternal and triumphant joy.

In the next place the Commissioners (or Assistants or Knights-Companions) lay
the Hood upon MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 80 and 87.
the Knights right shoulder over the Mantle, and bringing the Tippet athwart
his Breast, tuck it under his Girdle, at which his Sword hangs.

And lastly, they tie the Collar about his shoulders, over his Mantle and Hood,
and at this part of the Investiture these words of Admonition are also
pronounced.

To the increase of your honor, Appendix. Number XXXVI and XXXVII
and in token of the Honorable Order you have received; Take this Collar about
your Neck, with the Image of the holy Martyr and Christ's Knight St. George, by
whose aid you being defended, may pass through the prosperities and adversities
of this world; that having here the Victory, as well of your Ghostly as Bodily
Enemies, you may not only receive the glory and renown of temporal Chivalry,
but also at the last the endless and everlasting reward of Victory.

This form of words received likewise alteration when the present Sovereign was
to be Installed, being varied after this manner.

Wear this Collar about thy Neck, Palm. large Iournal. p. 8.
adorned with the Image of the blessed Martyr and Soldier of Christ St. George,
by whose imitation provoked, thou may so overpass both prosperous and adverse
encounters, that having stoutly vanquished thy Enemies, both of body and soul,
thou may not only receive the praise of this transient Combat, but be
crowned with the Palm of eternal victory.

And here (before we pass further) it will be needful to observe, that
anciently at the Solemnities of Installation when the Sovereign or his
Lieutenant was present, the Elect-Knight after he had been invested with the
Mantle in his Stall, was immediately conducted out of the Choire, back to the
Chapter House (where the said Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) was accustomed to
remain till he returned) there to receive Investiture with the Collar of the
Order, from the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant's) hands; which being done, he is
said to have received the full possession of his Habit.

And this is evident, first from King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, which direct
(after the Elect-Knight's Investiture with the Mantle) Art. 20.
That he shall return into the Chapter House, where he shall receive from the
Sovereign or his Deputy, the Collar of the Order; and secondly from the
Practice about that time, as is manifest in the cases of the Lord Lib. N. p. 254
Montjoy, Sir William Fitz Williams, and Sir Henry ^ouldford, installed an. 18.
H. 8. and the Ibid. p. 277. videsis Lib. vocat. Dalton. p. 119. b.
Lord Cromwell, an. 30. H. 8. as also of the MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] page 19.
Lord Russell, Sir Thomas Cheney, and Sir William Kingston, installed an. 31.
H. 8. of the MS. penes G. O. Y. fol. 87.
Marquess Dorset, Earl of Derby, Lord Seymour of Sudeley, and Sir William
Pagit, an. 1. E. 6. of the Ibid. fol. 80.
Earl of Huntingdon, Lords La Ware and Cobham, and Sir William Herbert, an. 3.
E. 6. so likewise of the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Shrewsbury, and Lord Hunsdon, an. 3. Eliz. of the Collect. I. V. genesis
Earl of Northumberland, an. 5. Eliz. and of the Collect. R. C. Cl. page 26.
Duke of Montmorency, an. 14. Eliz.

The Proceeding back into the Chapter House, upon this occasion, was ordered
almost after the same manner, as that before mentioned into the Choire, only
with this difference; that the new installed Knight took here his place,
according to the dignity of his Stall: and so did the aforesaid Duke of
Montmorency, when he returned to the Chapter House, to receive his Collar; for
because the Stall wherein he had been installed, was of a Ibidem.
higher rank, than either of those belonging to the two Assistants, that
conducted him to his Installation, they therefore proceeded before (not on
either side) him thither.

But this is observable, that when the Sovereign's Lieutenant remained in the
Chapter House, while the Elect-Knight proceeded to his Installation, the Usher
of the Black-Rod, proceeded not with the said Knight, but stayed behind, to
attend upon the Lieutenant: as appears from the notices of the before mentioned
Installations, of the Lord Russell, Earl of Huntington, and Earl of
Northumberland; and as soon as the Investiture with the Collar was finished,
the Lieutenant proceeded to the Choire in the Rear and the new invested and
installed Knight in place according to his Stall: A President or two of such
Proceeding follows.

The Lieutenant's Proceeding into the Choire, at the Installation of the Lord
Russell and others, an. 31. H. 8. after they had received their Collars in the
Chapter House.

Officers of Arms. Knights newly installed, the junior foremost.
Knights-Assistants.
Black-Rod. Register. Garter.
The Lieutenant.
In the same manner was the Lieutenan's Proceeding ordered at the Installation
of the Marquess Dorset, and others, an. 1. E. 6.

After the Proceeding had entered the Choire, and the Lieutenant and
Knights-Companions taken their Seats, with the usual Ceremonies; the Service of
the Church began.

But when the Installation was performed by Commissioners, then was the Collar
of the Order laid on the Cushen with the Mantle, and born before the
Elect-Knight to his Stall, were, after his Investiture with the Mantle and
Hood, he received Investiture with the Collar also, and among sundry examples
we shall instance in these; The Collect. I. V. genesis
Lord William Howard, an. 1. and 2. Pl^l. and Mar. was first invested with his
Mantle, and then had his Collar put about his neck by the Lord Collect. I. V.
genesis
Clynton and Lord Pagit, the two Commissioners appointed for his Installation.
The Collect. I. V. genesis
Earl of Lincoln, and Viscount Mountague, Commissioners for the Installation
of the Collect. I. V. genesis
Earls of Derby and Penbroke, put on their Collars in their Stalls: and thus
was it done by the Commissioners at the Installations of the Autogr.
Earl of Rutland, and Lord Cobham, an. 26. Eliz. and of the MS. fol. penes G.
O. Y. p. 206.
Earls of Shrewsbury, and Cumberland, an. 34. of the same Queen.

And in like manner, at all Installations solemnized since Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, where the Sovereign has vouchsafed his presence (the ancient Custom of
returning to the Chapter House for the Collar being laid aside) the
Knights-Companions who led the Elect-Knights to their Stall, did there invest
them with the Collars also; as we find in the case of the MS. penes E. W. G. f.
153. b.
Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars* and Viscount Lisle, an. 14. Iac. R. who
being come to their several Stalls, were first invested with their Mantles,
next their Hoods, and after that their MS. penes E. W. G. f. 153. b.
Collars. In like manner did the Auto^. penes Camer. Scacca^i.
Earls of Dorset and Holland invest the Earl of Su^^olk with the Collar in his
Stall, an. 4. Car. 1. and thus has it been observed, at all Installations
since, where the Sovereign has been present at the Solemnity.

As soon as the Ceremony of Investiture, 3. Delivery of the Book of Statutes.
with the Mantle, Hood, and Collar, is finished; the Commissioners (or
Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions,) take the MS.
Book of the Statutes of the Order, and deliver it into the hands of the new
invested Knight. Thus this part of the Ceremony was observed to the MS. fol.
penes G O. Y. p. 206.
Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland after their Investiture, an. 34. Eliz. and
to the MS penes E. W. G. f. 153. b.
Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars, and Viscount Lysle, an. 14. Iac. R. and
so generally to all Elect-Knights since.

This Book the Knight is to keep safe in his own custody, both for instruction
and direction, in such things as relate to the Laws and Ceremonies of this most
Noble Order, therein contained.

After this, they also give unto him the Black Velvet Cap, adorned with Plumes
of White Feathers; and this in particular is noted to be the last among the
Ceremonies performed at the Installation of the present Lib. R. p 146.
Sovereign.

All things relating to the full Investiture being ended, 4. Placing the Knight
in his Stall.
there only remains, to complete this great Ceremony, the Installation it self,
which is performed in the following manner.

The new invested Knight, standing before his Stall, and turning himself
toward the High Altar, first makes an humble Reverence thitherward, and after
a like obeisance toward the Sovereign, or in his absence toward his Stall,
(Thus is it noted of Ex. Collect. I. V. gen:
William Lord Howard, 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar.) which having done, the Lib. C.
p 110. and Lib. R. p. 61.
Commissioners (or Assistants or Knights-Companions) forthwith jointly embrace
him, with much joy (as their Fellow and Companion) according to the Custom of
Installations, and set him down in his assigned Stall; thereto adding their
wishes for his happiness and honor.

With the like MS. in Offic. Arm. [lib. L.] page 19.
courteous and civil expressions and congratulations, we find this Ceremony was
closed to the Lord Russel, an. 31. H. 8. which he answered with equal respect;
giving moreover to the Knights who installed him, great thanks for the honor of
their assistance: and to the Marquess Dorset and others installed, an. 1. E. 6.
the Commissioners for that Ceremony, added this Vote, MS. f^l pen^^ G. O. Y. p.
87.
That God would give them much honor; and after such like Complemental respects
have past, the Commissioners (or Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions)
take their Stalls.

But we have a notable instance in relation to this Ceremony, at the
Installation of Philip King of Castile, an. 22. H. 7. where the Sovereign
himself, Lib N. p. 184
solemnly introduced him into his Stall (being the Ex ve^. MS. pen. W. le N.
Cl. fol. 29^.
next unto his own) and Ex ve^. MS. pen. W. le N. Cl. fol. 29^.
therein placed him. At which action it seems there was a form of words
pronounced, relating to the Elect-Knight's Session and act of Installation, no
less than at his Investiture, though we are not so happy as to know them: the
Relator of the manner and order of this great Ceremony, having in the place of
the words added an etc. and left a blank for them; but with this short note at
the instant of Installation; Ex vet. MS. pen. W le N. Cl. fol. 295.
The Sovereign saying these words, Don ^ils, etc.

SECT. VIII The Order observed, when two or more Knights are Installed in one
day.
WHen there are two or more Elect-Knights appointed to receive the honor of
Installation at one Solemnity; and that the Ceremony is performed by two
Commissioners (or two Knights-Assistants) then as soon as they have finished
all the Ceremonies of Investiture and Installation, due to the senior of them,
they leave him so possessed of his Stall, and forthwith Ex. Collect. I. V. genesis
vide MS. penes Arthur. Commit. Anglesey. fol. 119. a.
return to the Chapter House; the Proceeding of Alms-Knights, Officers of Arms,
and the inferior Officers of the Order (after their usual Reverences made in
the middle of the Choire) passing forth before them, to the Chapter House, and
thence they conduct the next senior Elect-Knight into the Choire, where they
perform all the circumstances of Investiture and Installation to him, as they
did to the first Installed Knight: Which having finished, they leave him also
in his Stall, and Ex. Collect. I. V. genesis vide MS. penes Arthur. Commit.
Anglesey. fol. 119. a.
proceed back as before for the third Elect-Knight, and after the like manner
do they introduce and instal him, and so the rest (if there be more that wait
their Installation) till all be installed.

This seems to have been the ancient practice, for it is noted in the Annals,
that Viscount Beaumont, and the Lord Sudeley, Commissioners appointed by King
Henry the Sixth, for the Installation of Albro Vasques d' Almadea Earl of
Averence, the Lord Beauchamp, and Sir Thomas Hoo; led them into the Choire Lib.
N. p. 99.
singly and apart by themselves, and there installed them in their proper
Stalls. And thus is it noted of the two Assistants at the Installation of the
Earl of Huntingdon and others, an. 1. E. 6. who MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. page 80.
after they had invested and installed the said Earl, MS. fol. penes G. O. Y.
page 80.
proceeded back to the Chapter House, for the Lord La Ware, and he being
installed, they MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. page 80.
returned again for the Lord Cobham, and lastly for MS. fol. penes G. O. Y.
page 80.
Sir William Herbert. In like manner, when the Commissioners had given the
Proctor to Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, possession of his Principals Seat, an. 1.
and 2. Ph. and Mar. they Collect. I. V.
proceeded back for William Lord Howard, and conducted him to his Installation.
Thus did the Commissioners by the Earl of Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 29.
Penbroke, an. 16. Eliz. when they had first installed the Earl of Derby; and
by the MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206.
Earl of Cumberland, after the Earl of Shrewsbury had been installed.

When the Sovereign has nominated three Commissioners to his service, in such
case they have returned Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 34.
altogether to fetch in the other Knights (after the Ceremonies of Installation
were performed to the senior Elect-Knight) singly, that were to be installed,
and alternately changed their places in the Proceeding to the several
Installations: (one of them always going single and foremost) an instance
whereof we have at the Installation of the Earls of Essex, and Ormond, and Sir
Christopher Hatton, an. 30. Eliz. where the Earl of Essex having been first
conducted to his Installation, between the Lord Hunsdon, and Earl of Worcester,
the Lord Lib. C p. 110.
Gray the third Commissioner went single next before them, then all three
Commissioners returned to fetch in the Earl of Ormond, who proceeding into the
Choire, between the Lord Hunsdon and Lord Gray, the Earl of Ibid. page 111.
Worcester went alone immediately before them; and his Installation being
likewise dispatched, Sir Christopher Hatton was conducted to his Stall, between
the Earl of Worcester and the Lord Gray, the Ibid. page 111.
Lord Hunsdon in this proceeding going next before them.

If the Lieutenant had four Assistants appointed him, (which was necessary when
there were many Knights to be installed) the order of their Installation has
been as follows; first two of the senior Knights-Assistants conducted the
senior Elect-Knight to his Installation, next the two other Assistants
proceeded with the second Elect-Knight, and installed him; then again the two
senior Knights-Assistants introduced the third Elect-Knight to his Stall, and
in this manner they alternately changed, till all were installed. Thus was it
ordered at the Installation of Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 26.
Francis Duke of Montmorency, and others, an. 14. Eliz. for at this Solemnity
the Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 26.
Earl of Bedford, Sir Henry Sidney, the Earl of Worcester, and the Earl of
Huntington, were appointed Assistants to the Earl of Leicester (then the
Sovereign's Lieutenant) the Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 26.
two first conducted the Duke to his Stall, and the two last the Earl of Essex,
then the two first proceeded again with the Lord Burghley, and the two last
with the Lord Gray, and lastly the two first proceeded a third time, with the
Lord Shandos between them.

And the like method and alternate change is observed, if four Commissioners be
constituted, as at the Installation of Frederick King of Denmark, and John
Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. Ibid. fol. 31.
25. Eliz. where the Kings Proxy was conducted into the Choire, between the
Earl of Ibid. fol. 31.
Leicester, and Lord Hunsdon, being the two senior Commissioners, and the
Prince between the Ibid. fol. 31.
Earl of Huntingdon, and the Lord Charles Howard, the two junior Commissioners.

But some have been of opinion, that the Commissioners nominated to this
employment, ought not to divide the duty, and part of them to instal one
Knight, and part another, and by such an alternation to dispatch the Ceremony,
as in the former cases; but on the contrary, that all should jointly assist at
each Installation. And in favor of this opinion, there is an instance at the
Installation of the Earl of Salisbury and Viscount Bindon, an^ 4. Iac. R. for
the said Earl, having been brought in to the Choire, and both invested and
installed by the Earls of Nottingham and Suffolk, (then the two senior
Commissioners) the other two Commissioners, who were left behind in the
Chapter House, to conduct Viscount Bindon to his Stall, calling to mind that
all four were MS. penes E. W. G. f. 147. a.
joint Commissioners, conceived that the said Earl was not legally installed by
the two other, because themselves had not been assistant at the Ceremony. And
upon consultation with the senior Commissioners, it seems this opinion
prevailed so far with them, that they agreed to impart it to the Earl of
Salisbury, who thereupon Ibid.
descended into the lower Seats before his Stall, and there all Ibid.
four Commissioners gave him his Oath again, then led him up into his foresaid
Stall, and a second time Ibid.
Invested and Installed him; each of the four Commissioners putting to their
hand: and the like Ibid.
joint assistance was given by them to the Viscount Bindon, installed at the
same time.

But this method was not only new, but different from former practice, for in
all like cases as before are cited, we have observed that both the
Knights-Commissioners, and Lieutenant's Assistants have constantly divided the
employment, by an alternate change; and besides, where the Sovereign has
authorized his Lieutenant to peform this Ceremony, and appointed some of the
Knights-Companions to assist therein, these Assistants and not the Lieutenant
have done the duty appertaining to the Installation, that part of it of
investing with the Collar heretofore in the Chapterhouse, and the whole duty at
the Installation of Prince Henry, excepted.

And it is to be further noted, that this way of joint assistance at the
installation of the Earl of Salisbury, was afterward thought so little
essential or necessary, that it became no Precedent; for at the very next Feast
of Installation, when the Ibid. f. 148. a.
Earls of Dunbar and Montgomery were installed (in the sixth year of the same
King) and for which Ceremony four Commissioners were likewise appointed; the
two senior of them installed the Earl of Dunbar, and the two junior, the Earl
of Montgomery; and this we find again in Practice, an. 10. Car. 1. when the
Autogr.
two senior Commissioners installed the Earl of Danby, and the other two the
Earl of Morton.

But in the last place, if the Sovereign be present, and consequently that the
Knights-Companions perform this Ceremony of Introduction, Investiture, and
Installation, there is commonly then so many of them, as can go through the
whole work, without changing by turns, after the manner used when done by a
few, either Commissioners or Assistants, and therefore in this case the order
is thus,

First, the two senior Knights-Companions (having descended from their Stalls,
and past out of the Choire to the Chapter House with the Proceeding before
them) conduct to his Installation the eldest Elect-Knight, and having performed
that whole Ceremony, they return and take their Stalls with accustomed
Reverences. Then the two next senior Knights-Companions, descend and go out,
and return with the next senior Elect-Knight, to his Installation, and after
that two other Knights-Companions go out and fetch in the third, and so the
rest in due order.

And this method, we observe to have been practiced at the Installation of
Prince Henry, and other Elect-Knights, Lib. C. page 151. videsis MS. fol. penes
E. W. G. f. 144. b.
an. 1. Iac. R. for after the Prince had been placed in his Stall, by the Earl
of Nottingham and Lord Buckhurst; the Lib. C. page 151. videsis MS. fol. penes
E. W. G. f. 144. b.
Earls of Shrewsbury and Cumberland, came down from their Stalls, and went to
the Chapter House, taking the Proceeding before them, and thence conducted the
Duke of Lenox to his Stall, and returned to their own. In like manner the Lib.
C. page 151. videsis MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 144. b.
Earls of Northumberland and Worcester, went next out for the Earl of
Southampton; and having installed him, the Lib. C. page 151. videsis MS. fol.
penes E. W. G. f. 144. b.
Lord Sheffield, and Lord Howard of Walden, past forth of the Choire, and
brought in the Earl of Mar; and lastly, the Lib. C. page 151. videsis MS. fol.
penes E. W. G. f. 144. b.
Lord Montjoy and Earl of Sussex, Installed the Earl of Penbroke.

The like order was observed at the Installation of the Ibid. f. 153 a
Earl of Rutland, and others, an. 14. Iac. R. who having been left behind in
the Chapter House, while the Sovereign proceeded to the Choire, were afterward
by several Knights-Companions ( Lib. C. p. 188.
the seniors going out first) introduced to their Installations; one after
another, according to the seniority of their Election.

But to be more particular in the order of the Ceremony in this case, we shall
lay down the method observed at the grand Feast of St. George, held at
Windesor, an. 13. Car. 2. which was as follows.

First, the two senior-Knights, the Earls of Salisbury and Berkshire, descended
from their Stalls with the usual Reverences, and stood before them.

Next the Alms-Knights came down in a body, from the hault paces of the Altar,
into the middle of the Choire, and having there made their double obeysances
proceeded forth.

After them the Officers of Arms descended also (the Pursuivants foremost) and
having made the double Reverences in the middle of the Choire, went out after
the Alms-Knights.

Then followed the three inferior Officers of the Order, having first made
their usual Reverences.

And lastly, the two Senior Knights joining together in the middle of the
Choire, (after their double Reverences) past out in the Rear.

In this order they proceeded toward the Chapter House; and when the
Alms-Knights came near the door, they fell off and divided themselves; the like
did the Officers of Arms, and both thereby opened a way for the Officers of the
Order, and Knights-Companions, to pass between them into the Chapter House;
where being entered, they first brought forth the Duke of Oromnd (the senior
Elect-Knight) and taking him in the middle between them, the Proceeding went
before into the Choire, in the same order as it came thence, Garter then
bearing (on a Velvet Cushen) his Mantle, Hood, Collar, and Book of Statutes.

The Alms-Knights being entered the Choire, made their double obeysances in the
usual place, and ascended the hault-paces of the Altar, flanking on the other
side.

After them, the Officers of Arms did the like.

Then the three inferior Officers of the Order, coming up into the middle of
the Choire, made their double Reverences, and so passed before the Knights to
the place directly under the Stall designed for the Duke, wither he (conducted
as aforesaid) followed, after that he and the two Knights-Companions had also
made their usual Reverences, in the middle of the Choire; for the Crowd was so
great through the concourse of People to this grand Festival that the
Knights-Companions could not pass into the lower row of Stalls with the Duke,
(being the usual place for the Elect-Knight to be brought unto) but were
necessitated to invest him below in the Choire.

After the Duke was Invested and Installed, the Proceeding (ordered in all
points as before) went again to the Chapter House, and brought the Duke of
Buckingham into the Choire, where he received his Installation, in the manner
aforesaid.

But the day being far spent, and these Proceedings to and from the
Chapterhouse taking up much time; the Sovereign to shorten the Ceremony,
commanded that with the next Proceeding, all the rest of the Elect-Knights,
being eight, (beside two Proxies) should be introduced at once; which command
being obeyed, and each Elect-Knight placed before his Stall, they took the
Oath, received their Investiture, were led up to their Stalls, and took
possession of them by a solemn Installation.

And in regard so many Elect-Knights were introduced together, it was thought
fit (because necessary) that their Mantles and Collars should be also brought
in the Proceeding, and to effect this, each Knight-Elect appointed one of the
Gentlemen that attended on him, to bear the Cushen (whereon his Mantle and
Collar were laid) before him to the Choire door, which was accordingly done;
and where they stood holding them in their arms, until Garter had in due order
(as they were to be made use of) fetched them into the Choire.

And here we may insert this general Rule, That at all Installations where some
of the Elect-Knights are not sent for in to the Chapter House, to receive
investiture with the Surcoat (before the senior Elect-Knight has been
conducted to his Stall, but left to repose themselves, in the East Isle of the
Chapel, during his Installation (as has many times happened) the
Knights-Commissioners or Assistants, upon their return to the Chapter House,
send Garter for the next senior Elect-Knight, whom they receive at the door
thereof, and having invested him with his Surcoat, and girt his Sword about
him, proceed with him to his Installation in the usual order: and the same
method is observed, if there be more Elect-Knights that wait their calling into
the Chapter House. And thus we find it practiced to Sir MS. in Offic. Armor.
[L.1.] page 19.
Thomas Cheney, and Sir William Kingston, an. 30. H. 8. after the
Knights-Assistants had returned from the Installation of the Lord Russell; and
to the Earl of Collect. I. V. genesis
Penbroke, as soon as the Knights-Commissioners had installed the Earl of
Derby, an. 16. Eliz. as also to the Earl of MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 206.
Cumberland, when the Commissioners returned from the Installation of the Earl
of Shrewsbury, an. 34. Eliz. and lastly to the Autogr.
Earl of Morton, after the Earl of Danby had received his Stall, an. 10. Car. 1.

The Knight or Knights having now received a complete Installation, the
Knights-Commissioners (Knights-Assistants, or Knights-Companions) with all
civil respect take their leaves of the last installed Knight, and descend into
the Choire, and with usual Reverences take their own Stalls, but the senior
Knight-Companion ascends first. Where note, if the Stalls of the Commissioners,
or Assistants, or Knights-Companions be on the same side with the last
installed Knight, they then descend not into the Choire, but (after their
Reverences made above) pass directly to them along the Stalls, and this we find
done by the Lord Ex eod. MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. in loc. cit.
Howard of Essingham, and the Earl of Ormond, an. 34. Eliz. when they had
finished the Installation of the Earl of Cumberland.

The Ceremonies and Circumstances of Installation being finished, the Officers
of Arms first, next the Alms-Knights descend from the Steps of the Altar, and
take their several stations in the Choire. Then one of the Prebends of the
College (but if the Sovereign be present, the Prelate with the Serjcant of the
Vestry before him) is conducted to the Altar by the Verger of the Chapel, and
there begins the Service appointed by the Church, which being finished, the
Proceeding passes out of the Choire in the usual order (the new installed
Knight being ranked according to his Stall) either to the Presence Chamber, or
the Lieutenants, or Commissioners Lodgings, as the occasion is.

SECT. IX. The Offering of Gold and Silver.
BUT if the Installation be solemnized in the morning, the Service of the
Church having proceeded as far as the Offertory, two of the Prebends (appointed
to receive the Offering) are conducted to the Altar by their Verger, and
forthwith first the Alms-Knights, and then the Officers of Arms ascend again to
the steps of the Altar, and flank on each side as before.

After this, Garter summons down the Knights-Companions to the Offering; who
descend with usual Reverences, and stand in the Choire under their proper
Stalls, whilst the Sovereign's Lieutenant descends from his Stall, and offers
(first) for the Sovereign (he receiving the Bezant from the senior Knight) and
then returns to his Stall.

And at this instant was the usual time heretofore for offering the defunct
Knights Achievements; which by King James his appointment was altered, and
ordained to be performed before the Elect-Knights were installed; of which we
shall speak Chap. 25.
anon.

The Lieutenant after a short stay in his Stall, descends again, and proceeds
up to the Altar to make his own Offering both of Gold and Silver, and then
returns; and after him do the rest of the Knights-Companions (including those
newly installed) offer in their due order, the circumstances we shall largely
set down in our discourse upon the offering on the Chap. 21.
Grand Feast Day.

But when the Installation passes by Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 33.
Commissioners, there is then Collect R. C. Cl. f. 33.
no Offering made for the Sovereign; but the commissioners offer first,
beginning with the two MS.
Seniors, and after them the other Knights-Companions in their due order.

The Ceremony of Offering at the Installation of Ex ver. MS. penes W.le N. Cl.
f. 295. b.
Philip King of Castile, an. 22. H. 7. is remarkable, and therefore we shall
note it here: For he descending from his Stall into the Choire, and Ex ver. MS.
penes W.le N. Cl. f. 295. b.
standing before it (as the other Knights-Companions did) the Sovereign left
his royal Stall, and hastened down to proced to the Offering; to which the King
would have Lib. N. p. 185.
followed, this the Sovereign would not permit, but obliged the King to proceed
along with him Ex eod. vet. MS.
on his left hand, though he Ex eod. vet. MS.
desired to perform his duty as a Brother of the Order, and Knight-Companion,
so that at last they both made their Offerings, Lib. N. loc. cit
so near together, that though the Sovereign had the precedence, yet was it
hardly observable.

SECT. X. Of the Grand Dinner at the Installation.
ON the day of Installation, there has from ancient time been accustomably
prepared, a very sumptuous and noble Feast; and though it was agreed on in
Chapter, an. 3. E. 6. Lib. N. p. 302 videsi^ lib. vocat. Dalton. p. 129. b.
That the Knights-Elect from thenceforth might be installed by Commission
without a Feast, yet after his Reign, we find the old usage of making a Feast
at this Solemnity restored.

If the Sovereign appoint the Installation to be when the Feast of St. George
is also celebrated, and himself personally present, the Feast is then kept at
the Sovereign's charge.

If in such case he constitute a Lieutenant, the Installation Dinner is kept at
the expense of the Lieutenant; and usually prepared in some of the Sovereign's
Lodgings in the Castle, but seldom in St. George's Hall; though MS penes W. D.
N. f. 5. b.
there, the Earl of Arundel, at the Installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury and
Lord Hunsdon, kept his Feast, an. 3. Eliz.

But when the Installation is kept at any other time of the year, without the
joint observation of St. George's Feast, then the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 34.
new installed Knight or Knights are at all the charge; who for the most part
have had the Grand Dinner prepared at the Dean's Lodgings. Nevertheless, where
ever it is appointed, thither do the Sovereign (his Lieutenant and Assistants,
or Commissioners) together with the new installed Knights proceed in full
Robes, which at the Installation of the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 87.
Marquess of Dorset and other Knights, an. 1. E. 6. we find noted to be MS.
penes G. O. Y. f. 87.
according to the ancient custom.

At the Installation of the Lord Russell, Sir Thomas Cheney, and Sir William
Kingston, an. 31. H. 8. the Sovereign's Lieutenant MS. in Offi^. Armor. [L.1.]
page 19.
washed alone, the water being brought up with three Reverences; after him did
his two Assistants walh, and lastly the three new installed Knights.

The Lieutenant's place at the Table, is somewhat on the MS. penes W. D. N. f.
5. b.
left hand the cloth of State, and there sat the Earl of Arundell, Lieutenant
for St. George's Feast, when the Earl of Shrewsbury and Lord Hunsdon were
installed, an. 3. Eliz. But the other four Knights-Companions (his two
Assistants, and the two new installed Knights) sat toward the MS. penes W. D.
N. f. 5. b.
Tables end on both sides, for that they could not well sit all on a side.

But of late times, viz. at the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Installation of the Earl of Northampton an. 5. Car. 1. a question was started,
whether the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) should sit at Dinner in their Habit,
or not? since the powers given them by their Commissions, seem to terminate as
soon as the Knights are installed (though it was allowed that the new installed
Knight ought to sit in his Robes) as also because at the Installation of the Ex
lib. vocat. Dalton. page 119. b.
Lord Cromwell, an. 29. H. 8. after all the Ceremonies were finished in the
Chapel, the Knights went to the Deans house, and there put off their Habit,
and Ex lib. vocat. Dalton. page 119. b.
dined in their ordinary Apparel. So also at the Installation of the Earl of
Autogr.
Rutland, and Lord Cobham, an. 26. Eliz. the Commissioners when they were
returned from the Chapel, did put off the Autogr.
Habit of the Order, before they went to Dinner, and the new installed Knights
kept on Autogr.
only their Surcoats; and thus sat all Dinner while.

What was answered to these objections, or whether they dined without their
Habit, we do not find; but the practice to the contrary, to wit, of keeping on
the whole Habit till the grand Dinner be ended, has been at other times
generally observed.

At the MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis videfi^ MS. fol. penes W. D. N. fol.
5. b. and 12. b.
second Course (called also the MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 151. a. and 153. b.
second Mess, and second MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 151. a. and 153. b.
Service) does Garter (accompanied with the Officers of Arms) proclaim the
Styles, and Titles of honor of the Sovereign (if he be personally or by
Lieutenant present) in Latin, French, and English, and cries Largess thrice:
next the Styles of the new installed Knights in French or English only, with
two Largesses, and in that order they were installed. Thus was it done at the
installation of Ibid.
Charles Duke of York an. 9. Iac. R. of Ibid.
Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne an. 10. Iac. R. of the Ibid.
Earl of Rutland, and others, an. 14. Iac. R.

Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 301.
Philip King of Castile dined with the Sovereign in his Privy Chamber, the day
of his installation an. 22. H. 7. whose Style was proclaimed by Garter not in
the same Room, but at the Sovereign's Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 301.
great Chamber Door, and in St. George's Hall (after Largess had been thrice
cried) in this manner.

Ex vet. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 301.
Du treshault trespuissant tresexcellent Prince, Ic Roy de Castile de Leon and
de Granade Archdue Daustrich, Due de Bourgoine, and Chevalier de la tres-noble
Order de la Iartier.

When the Sovereign constitutes a Lieutenant, then is the Lieutenant's Style
also proclaimed, and to his other Titles is added that of this present honor of
Lieutenantship; and afterward the Styles of the new installed Knights; which
we find noted at the installation of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and Lord Hunsdon,
an. 3. Eliz. where Garter and the Officers of Arms proceeded into the middle of
St. George's Hall (the Grand Dinner being held there) and after three
obeysances, proclaimed their Styles (only in French) as follows.

MS. penes W. D. N. f. 5. b.
Du tres-noble and puissant Seigneur, Henry Fytz Allen, Conte de Arundell,
Seigneur Matravers, and de Clun, Chevalier du tres-noble Order de la Iartier,
and Lieutenant de cest noble Feste de St. George.

Du tres-noble and puissant Seigneur, George Conte de Shrewsbury, Seigneur
Talbot, Furnivall, Verdon, and Strange de Blakmer, Chevalier du tres-noble
Order de la Iartier, and Iusticier des Forrestz and Chasez, de la Riviere de
Trent envers le North.

Du tres-noble seigneur Henry Carry, Baron de Hunsdon, Chevalier du tres-noble
Order de la Iartier

The order of this Ceremony is more particularly noted at the Installation of
the Duke of Montmorency, and others, an. 14. Eliz. and was thus; first Collect.
R. C. Cl. fol. 27.
Garter cried Largess, and next proclaimed the Sovereign's Style, and Titles of
honor, in three Languages, then going two foot back, he proclaimed the
Lieutenants Style only in French, with two Largesses; after that he cried one
Largess for the Duke, and lastly for all the other new installed Knights, only
two Largesses, and the other Officers of Arms did the like; and still as Garter
had finished his proclamation of the Styles, the Heralds joined with him in
crying Largess; and so with Reverence they departed the Hall.

But we are in the last place to note, that when neither the Sovereign is
present, nor his Lieutenant, then the Sovereign's Style is Ex Collect. W. le N.
Cl.
not proclaimed, nor those of the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Commissioners, but only of the Ex collect. W. le N. Cl.
new installed Knights.

As Soon as Dinner is ended, the Knights-Companions rise from the Table, and
withdraw to disrobe themselves, and therewith the Solemnity of Installation
takes ending: but if at any time the Solemnities continue to that evening and
the following day; it is only, because the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) is
present, upon the account of celebrating the Feast of St. George, and not with
reference to the Solemnity of Installation.

We shall conclude with this Observation, that the ancient custom of preserving
the memory of remarkable actions by some Emblematical Representations, Figures
and Devises (whereof, for the last Century, Sylloge Numismatum Elegantiorum.
Lukius affords plenty of Examples) is still continued in use; and therefore
upon consideration had of the honor they thereby brought the persons to whom
they related, was it, that the late Sovereign, of ever blessed memory, thought
fit to perpetuate the Solemnity of the present Sovereign's Installation, by
certain Medals; whereof the forms and inscriptions were these.



SECT. XI. Of setting up the Knights Atchievments.
THE last thing to be done, at this great Solemnity, is setting up the Helm,
Crest, Sword, Banner, and Plate of the new installed Knight, over his Stall, in
the Chapel of St. George at Windsor; to which purpose they are to be provided
in readiness, according to the Chap. 11. Sec. ^.
directions before given. This, though it be no part of the Ceremony of
Installation, yet is it a consequent thereunto, and an unseparable appendix;
and therefore proper enough to be added here.

The setting up of Trophies, Ensigns, and Achievements of honor anciently in
Churches, as well in the life time of such worthy and deserving men, who had
performed some gallant action, as on their Tombs and Monuments after their
death, was chiefly designed to this end; that the Beholders thereby put in mind
of their great virtues, might be excited to the imitation and pursuit of true
Nobility, Valor, and Virtue.

Hereupon at the Institution of this most Noble Order, the Achievements of the
Knights-Companions, were thought fit to be set up in the Choire of the said
Chapel; and hence also the remarkable Plates, wherein their Escotcheons of
Arms, curiously wrought in enamel, were fastened to the back of their Stalls.
Lib. N. p. 10
Not that the outward form of such things, have in them any great force; but
that the memory of great actions done, beget that ardour in the breasts of
excellent persons, which never is at rest, till some eminent achievements of
theirs have over-taken the others fame and glory.

By the Statutes of Institution it is ordained, that the time for setting up
the Achievements shall be E. 3. Stat. Art. 19.
when the Elect-Knight comes to Windesor Casil^, that is, to his Installation,
and not before; and the reason is there likewise given, Ord. Stat. in Bibliuth
Harton Art. 19.
lest it should happen (he not coming within the time limited for his
Installation and consequently the vacating his Election thereupon ensuing) that
a new Election being made, those Military Ensigns might seem to be
disgracefully withdrawn, and an Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. p. 18.
occasion of dishonor given, which otherwise could not be avoided, if they
should be suddenly taken down from a place so high.

Now it is most clear, that the intention of this Article extends to the
^inishing the Ceremonies of Installation, before the Achievements ought to be
set up, by so carefully providing against the dishonor of taking them down, in
case the Election should become void, which must certainly happen, if the
Knight-^lect died but the hour before he were completely installed. And
accordingly in the ancient Deputation both to Appendix, Number. XLIX. and ^.
Sir William Philip, and Sir John Fasi^l^ power is given their Proctors first
to demand, receive, and obtain their Principals Stalls, and next to tender
their Helms and Swords, to be hung up in the Choire of Windesor according to
custom: and for clearer information of the order and course in this Ceremony,
it may be observed, that the Sovereign empowered his Commissioners Appendix,
Number. L1.
first to give the Deputy possession of his Principals Stall, and after to
receive the Achievements, and place them over it. Herewith it may be
considered, That the Achievements are set up in memorial of the Knight-Elect's
being installed a Companion of the Order; and it is incongruous in the rules of
Honor, to have the sign or memorial of an action, precede the action it self.

Again, the Statutes of this most Noble Order expressly provide, That the
Knights Achievements shall not be permitted to be hung up, until all the E. 3.
H. 5. Stat. Art. 12 H. 8. Stat. Art. 24.
Duties and Fees enjoined by the Statutes, to be paid the College, be first
discharged: but it is certain there are no Fees due (and consequently cannot be
challenged) till the Ceremonies upon which they become due are completely
^inished. And it is remembered as the Custom in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, for the
Elect-Knights Collect. A. V. W.
Steward, or some other of his Servants, to bring money with them to Windesor
and there pay the Fees at the Chapel door, so soon as the Installation was
dispatched, to the end the Achievements might immediately after be set up.

But to clear all doubts which may arise upon this point, it was in a Chapter
held at Whitehall, the 4. of February, an. 22. Car. 2. Ordained and Decreed,
Lib. Carolin. p. 81.
That not any of the Achievements of an Elect-Knight shall be set up in the
Chapel at Windesor, before he be Installed and the Fees of Installation paid.

It should seem that though anciently they did not set up the Elect-Knights
Achievements before he was installed, yet were they prepared and brought to
Windesor, and disposed of or E. 3. Stat. Art. 19.
set before his Stall: and in case of his not coming to receive Installation,
then (being no otherwise placed) might be the easier removed without the
Choire, in as decent a manner as could be, that so the honor of Ord. Stat. in
Lib. N. p. 18.
Knighthood might be preserved entire; nevertheless to be thenceforth kept for
Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. p. 18.
public use, and benefit of the College.

Where we find mention made in the Annals of any person employed to set up the
Achievements of a Knight, it is to be understood, that he was his Proctor, and
installed on the behalf of that Knight whose Achievements he so hung up. And
the Lord Lib. N. p. 64.
Fitz Hugh, who set up the Achievements of the King of Denmark an. 9. H. 6.
took also possession of that Kings Stall, for, and on his behalf, and in his
name.

There is but a single instance (as we remember) where one man hung up a
Knights Achievements, and another was installed for him: and this happened, an.
29. H. 6. where the Lord Ibid. p. 105.
Ryvers, having been Elected to the Stall of the Lord Hungerford, the Regist.
Chart. f. 28. b.
4. of August that year, his Sword and Helm were hung up on the 8. of September
next after, by William ^ouden, ib.
Bobden his Esquire and Guyen Herald, and he installed the Ibid.
30. of October following, by Sir Ibid.
William Crafford his Proctor: But this was contrary to the Law of the Order.

Moreover, where the setting up of a Knights-Atchievements, is barely mentioned
without taking notice of the Installation, it is to be understood, that such
Knights Installation was also solemnized at that time: as in the case of the
Lib. N. page 76.
King of Portugal, concerning whom the Annals only Lib. N. page 76.
note, that he had taken care to set up over his Stall his Helm, Sword, and
Banner, and all things belonging thereunto, at the Feast celebrated at
Windesor, an. 2. H. 6.

In what manner and order these Achievements are fixed, will partly appear
from the Statutes, viz. the E. 3. Stat. Art. 9. vide Ord. Stat. in Bibl.
Hatton. Art. 9.
Helm and Crest, are thereby appointed to be set over each Knight-Companion's
Stall, and the Sword to hang directly underneath them. But the Plate is nailed
to the Back of the Knights Stall.

And here for a Corollary to this Chapter, let us add, That as the Statutes of
two of the most noted Orders of Knighthood in Christendom, have in them the
substance of those of the Garter, and being of later Institution, cannot but be
acknowledged Copies from this Original; so we here think it requisite, to
exhibit the manner of Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order of
St. Michael, of our King Edward the Sixth, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Robert
Earl of Leicester, to the end the Reader may also observe, that the order of
our Ceremonies used at the Investiture of a Knight-Companion of the Garter, is
also the Precedent to theirs of St. Michael.

The manner of receiving the Order of Saint Mychaell, by King Edward the Sixth.
MS. penes Arthur Commit. Anglesey f. 874. a
FIrst, the King's Majesty to be in his Privy Chamber, accompanied with his
Noblemen, and all them of the Order of the Garter, to have their Collars about
their necks, and the French King's Ambassador to enter with the Order, and so
after his obeisance, the proposition to be given, and after the proposition
done, the King's Majesty must put off his uppermost garment, the Ambassador
shall invest him with the Robes of that, and afterward, when the King is full
invested, then all the Noblemen to proceed before the King, and the Ambassadors
which be in Commission to go before the King, with the Noblemen, in order, to
the Chapel, and after them the two French Lords, then the King of Arms, then
the Sword, then the King's Majesty himself, then the Lord Chamberlain, and the
Vice-Chamberlain to bear the train of the Robes, and in this order to proceed
to the Chapel, and the King to go into his Stall, and the other into their
Stalls, and at the Offering time the King's Majesty to Offer, and the greatest
man about the King to give the King his Offering, and then the two other to
offer according to their Estates; when the King is in his Stall, and when all
the Service is done, they to proceed in like order, as they came to the
Chapel, to the place appointed for Dinner, and none to sit at the King's
Board, but only the two Knights which be of the same Order of France; and after
Dinner, the King's Majesty to put off his Robes, and to near such Apparel as
shall please his Majesty. Note, the King's Majesty when he passes by the
French King's Stall, is to make but only a beck with his head.

Add hereunto, That King Edward the Sixth observed the Anniversary of St.
Michael, after the same manner and order as Strangers were long before obliged
to do that of St. George; and caused his Collect. E. W. G.
Arms, surrounded with the Order of St. Michael to be set up in his Chapel at
Hampton Court, each Michaelmas-day after his acceptance of that Order, during
his life.

The order and manner of furnishing the Chapel at the Queen's Palace of
Westminster, against Thursday the 24. of January 1565. Anno. 8. Eliz. Reginae,
that the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Leicester received the Order of Saint
Michael there.
ITem, MS. f. 24. b.
the said Chapel, both before and behind the Stalls to the ground, was hanged
with rich Arras, and the upper part from the Table of Administration to the
Stalls, hanged with like Stuff, which said Table was richly garnished with
Plate and Jewels as follows. First, to the wall was set in a row five gilt
B^sins, and before them another row, and in the middle a gilt Cross between two
great gilt Cups covered, garnished with Stone, a Ship or Ark likewise
garnished, a Fountain of Mother of Pearl, and a pair of gilt Candlesticks;
before that another row, in the middle whereof was set a rich Basin and Ewer
gilt railed over with Gold, between two great Mawdlyn Cups with Covers, two
great Leywres, two Cru^ts, and a Pax all gilt, and over the said Table on the
wall upon the Arras was fastened a front of Cloth of silver, embroidered with
Angels of Gold, and before the said Table to the ground, a front of the same
suit.

The Dean's Stall was garnished with Cushens, and a rich Cloth of Estate,
whereon was set within a black Table, the Arms of the French King, within his
own Order, under a Crown Imperial, the ground palee of 6. Blue, White and
Orange Tawney, without any style.

Then on the same side over the 6. Stall on the Arras hanged a like Table, with
the Arms within the Order, Crest and Supporters of the Deputy, Mouns^eur
Remboilliet (with a Cushen before him) the Table palee of six Ar. and Sa. the
Arms, Sab. a Saulter Ar. the Crest a Lion couchant Ar. collored Or, his
supporters two Woodmen with Clubs in their hands the great end downward, and
under his Style written, viz. Messier Jacques D'angennes Seigneur de Remboilliet
Chivaler de L'ordre du Roy, and Captain des Cinquantes hommes des Arms de
ses Ordonnances.

On the other side on the Arras over the eight Stall hanged a little Table
palee of six Ar. and Gu. with the Arms within that Order of the Duke of
Norfolk, under a Dukes Crown, with no Crest, nor Supporters, but his Style, De
treshault, puissant and tresnoble Prince, Thomas Dac de Norfolk Conte Marishall
D'angleterre, Seigneur de Mowbrey Segrave and de Brews, Chivaler de tresnoble
Order de la Jarritier, and aussi du tresnoble Order de St. Michell.

On the third Stall beneath on the same side, hanged a like Table Palee of six,
Or and Az. with the Arms in that Order of the Earl of Leicester, under an
Earls Crown, without Crest or Supporters, but his Style, Du tresnoble and
puissant Seigneur Robert Conte de Leicester, Baron de Denbeigh, Chivaler du
tres-noble etc. and Grand Escuyer de la Royne nostre Souveraigne.

On the ground before the Duke and Earls Stall, stood two Chairs with Cushens
for them to sit on, if they pleased, till they took their Stalls. And about the
Stalls on the South side was set a Chair, Carpet, and Cushen, where the
Ambassador Ledger sat all the Ceremony time, And below before the Deputy's Stall
was set a Form, covered with a Carpet for Monsieur Doze alias St. Michell, to
sit on; And above that on either side were Tables and Forms, for the Gentlemen
and Children of the Chapel.

The receiving of the said Order of St. Michaell, Thursday the 24. of January,
Anno 8. Reg. Elizab.
Fol. 25.
ITem, about 10. of the Clock the said day, the Ambassador Ledger, with
Mounsieur Remboilliet the French King's Deputy, together with the other Lords
and Gentlemen accompanied with certain English Gentlemen, came to the Court at
the Queen's Palace of Westminster, where, at the Gate, they were met by the
Earl of Warwick and others, and conveyed up to the Queen's great Closset,
whither after a while came the Duke of Norfolk and Earl of Leicester; And for
that the said Duke and Deputy, had not till then seen either other, they then
embraced each other, and then communed a while; And then the said Deputy left
the same Lords there, and he with Mounsieur Doze alias St. Michaell, Mr. Garter
and others, went down through the Chapel into the Vestry, where he shifted
him, into the Robes and Habit of the Order of St. Michaell as follows.

First, Having on before his Hose, Shoos, Girdle, and Scaberd of White Velvet,
he there put on a Cote with Sleeves of Cloth of Silver, the edges laid with
Gold Lace, and over that his Mantle of Cloth of Silver broad guarded with
Scallop shells, environed with Clouds and Rays of the Sun, and other Embroidery
of Gold very richly, lined with White Taffeta, and on the right shoulder it was
tied, and turned up on the left shoulder, to put his Arm underneath, at, and
over that on his right shoulder, lay his Hood of Crimson Velvet, spreading all
over his back, the Tippet over his breast, the end put under the Hood, on the
left shoulder, guarded and embroidered like the Mantle; And over the oder lay
the Collar of Gold, made with Knots and Scallop shells, whereat hanged the
Picture of St. Michaell, garnished with Stones. And whiles the said Deputy was
shifting him, the Duke and Earl came down into the Chapel, apparelled as
follows, And first, the Duke with his Shoes, Hose, Girdle, and Scabbard of
White Velvet, his nether stockings of white Silk knit, his Cote with the
Sleeves on of Cloth of Silver, the edges laid with Gold Lace, and in a short
Gown of Russet Velvet, guarded with the same, surred with Leopards, and faced
with Lisards, the sleeves set with eighteen pair of Agglets of Gold, and a Cap
of black Velvet with a Silver band; the Earl of Leicester likewise in all
points apparelled, but that his Gown was Russet Satin, guarded with Velvet,
furred and faced as the other, the Sleeves set with thirty pair of Aglets of
Gold, and in his Cap a White Feather, and so the Duke and Earl being come into
the Chapel, stood beneath on the ground, before their Arms and Stalls, And
then they there staying, proceeded forth of the Vestry into the Chapel two
Noblemen, named Mounsieur Cleremont and Mounsieur de Luppe carrying the two
Mantles and Hoods in their arms, after them Mounsieur Doze alias Saint Michaell
King of Arms, carrying the two Collars lying on a Cushen upon his arms, without
any Cote of Arms, but ^earing about his neck, hanging at a Riband, at his
breast the Arms of France, within the Order of Gold, After him followed the
Deputy Remboilliet, doing reverence to his Majesty's Stall as he passed by, and
there went up and stood with his back to the Communion Table, The Ambassador
then standing somewhat near him; Then St. Michaell went and brought the Duke
and Earl to the Deputy, before whom his Secretary read the Commission, whereby
he had authority from the King his Master, to make those two Noblemen Knights
of the Order of St. Michaell, which read out, on Cushens they two kneeled down,
and the Deputy himself read unto them their Oaths, which ended they stood up,
and then Doze alias St. Michell took off their two Gowns, and they two again
kneeled down, and the two Lords, Mounsieur Cleremont and Mounsieur de Lupe,
presented the Mantles and Hoods to the Deputy, who put on the same. First that
on the Duke, and then the other on the Earl himself, reading unto them the
signification thereof, And then the said Deputy put on their Collers, likewise
reading the signification thereof, which said Mantles, Hoods, Collers, and
Cotes were sent them by the French King, and were in all points like to the
Deputy's before declared, and the Cotes were sent them to their Chambers before
they came, where they put them on. Then the Deputy with St. Michell before him,
and the other two following proceeded down, and after reverence done to the
King's Stall, took theirs, the Deputy first, the Duke next, and the Earl last.
Then the Prayers, as the Letany and Commemoration began, and at the Offering
time, the Deputy came forth of his Stall, and stood in the middle of the
Chapel, below, before his Stall, and made his obeisance both to the Table, and
his Masters Stall, and then proceeded with St. Michell before him, up to the
Offering, making as he passed by a beck to either of his Companions (they
sitting or standing still in their stalls) which Offering ended, he returned and
took his Stall. Then the Duke of Norfolk came forth making obeisance to the
French King's Stall and proceeded up with St. Michell before him, and Offered
and returned to his Stall. And then the Earl of Leicester likewise offered.
Then the Service being ended, with reverence to the King's Stall, they
proceeded forth of the Chapel, first St. Michell, then the Earl, then the
Duke, last the Deputy, till they came into the Counsel Chamber, where they
dyned, all three sitting in three Chairs on one side of the Table, which Dinner
ended, they went all three into the Privy Chamber to the Queen, and after a
while came forth into the Counsel Chamber, where they put off their Cotes,
Mantles, Hoods, and Collars, and put on their usual Apparel; And then the said
Duke and Earl brought the Deputy to the Great Chamber Door, where they took
their leave of him, and they returned into the Chamber of Presence again, and
so ended this Ceremony.

CHAP. XIII. THE Installation OF A KNIGHT SUBJECT BY Proxy.
SECT. I. The original cause of making Proxies.
THere was no liberty given at the Institution of the Order, to Instal a
Knight-Subject by his Proctor or Deputy; but on the contrary in the Founders
Statutes, was inserted this express Prohibition, E. 3. Stat. Art. 24.
That none of the Knights-Elect should be permitted to be Installed by Proxy,
unless he were a Stranger.

The Law in this particular continued unaltered, till the Reign of King Henry
the Fifth, when John Duke of Bedford, the Sovereign's Deputy for holding the
Feast of St. George at Windesor, an. 7. H. 5. and other the Knights-Companions
then present, took it into consideration, That where a Knight-Subject, Elected
into the Order, was at that time employed beyond the Seas, in service of the
Sovereign, and likely to continue there upon that Employment, it was concluded,
that the said Duke should make an address to the Sovereign, by Letter under the
Seal of the Order (he being at that time engaged in the War with France)
wherein, for the reasons set down in the Letter (which we have inserted in the
Number. XLIV.
Appendix) he should petition him, to remove from the Statutes, all manner of
scruple, and (in cases of like hazard and danger) to Ordain, Regist. Charrac.
f. 6. b.
That Knights-Subjects might be permitted to receive the privilege and favor
of a complete admittance, and full possession of their Stalls and rights, by
their Deputies or Proctors, no less than Strangers; notwithstanding the clause
in the Statutes to the contrary.

It likewise appears from that Letter, as also from the Lib. N. p. 59. and 62.
Black Book of the Order, that Sir John Gray, and the Lord Bourchier had been
installed at the foresaid Feast by their several Proxies, which the Sovereign's
Deputy permitted out of great tenderness to their persons, lest by an over
punctual and too rigid an observance of the Statutes in this point, the
foresaid Knight, through the misfortunes and casualties of War, whereunto they
were daily exposed; should be snatched away by a sudden death, and so want the
desired suffrages of those Masses, ordained to be sung for a defunct Knights;
as had been seen in the case of diverse other, prevented thereof by over much
delay.

Nevertheless, by that more ample and large Copy of the foresaid Letter,
recorded in the Registrum Chartaceum (which we think necessary also to add in
the Number. XLV,
Appendix) it appears, that the Sovereign, and Knights-Companions remaining at
that time with him in France, had before (upon the Duke of Bedford's request)
signified their approbation of installation by Proxy; by the favor of which
Certificate, and virtue of this consent (though as yet not formed into a
Decree) Sir John Gray, and Sir John Robessart were installed upon their Letters
missive, wherein they only named their Proctors. In this Letter it also
appears, that the Lord Bourchier's Proctor (made so by a deprecatory Letter
sent over to his Deputy from the Regist. Chart, fol. 6. b.
Countess of Stafford) was only promised to be installed, in regard there was
no express caution given in the Statutes, concerning the sufficiency of this
sort of Proxy.

But to clear all doubts, which for the future might arise, it was among other
things Decreed, an. 9. H. 5. Lib. N. p. 67. propesinem.
That where any Elect-Knight was actually in the Sovereign 's Wars, or
otherwise employed abroad upon the Sovereign 's affairs, he should possess and
enjoy the privilege of a Stranger in this particular, namely, to be admitted
to his Stall by a legal Proxy; who should do and perform all things enjoined
to the Proxy of a Stranger. Which Decree we find added to Art. 20.
King Henry the Fifth's Statutes.

Hereupon, it was in a short time after enjoined the Elect-Knight (upon notice
of his Election) to Regist^ Char^ac. f. 14. b.
take care that his Proctor should be appointed to take possession of his Stall
with all possible speed; to the end he might enjoy the rights and privileges
of a Founder; for such an obligation we find laid upon Regist^ Char^ac. f. 14.
b.
Sir John Fastolf, who at the reception of the Garter, was in France, and there
employed in the Sovereign's service.

But King Henry the Eighth, besides his confirmation of this Decree, for
allowance of a Proxy in the foresaid two Cases, further enlarged it, to Art.
26.
such as the Sovereign should either command or permit by License, to be
installed by Proxy, which is to be understood of Knights-Elect within the
Kingdom, no less than those beyond Sea. By virtue of which clause, the Earl of
Dorset, being Lib. R. p. 28.
sick, an. 1. Car. 1. obtained the Sovereign's License, to be Installed by
Ibid. p. 29. videsis MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
his Deputy Ibid. p. 29. videsis MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
Sir Richard Young, who accordingly took possession of the Stall appointed for
him.

SECT. II. Letters of Procuration.
WE noted before, out of the Fol. 6. ^.
Registrum Chartaceum, that Sir John Robessart, Elected into the Order by King
Henry the Fifth, was Installed by virtue of his Letter missive, sent to (Sir
Thomas Bar) his Proxy. But the same Register in another place, calls it a
Ibid. fol. 5.
sufficient Procuration under his Seal of Arms, enabling him to Ibid.
do and perform in his name, all things which might appertain to the observance
and Ceremony of his Installation.

The Copy of this Instrument we have not met with, but that other Letter
missive which Sir John Gray directed to Sir John Lisle, to take the possession
of his Stall, and by virtue of which he was Installed, is transferred to the
Number. XLVI.
Appendix. Nor have we seen the before mentioned Deprecatory Letter, sent over
from the Countess of Stafford, for the Installation of Hugh Stafford Lord
Bourchier, but it seems to have been esteemed so sufficient and authentic, as
to obtain for his substitute the title of Lib. N. p. 59. and Regist. Chartac.
f. 6. b.
Proctor.

This example became a President to the now Countess of Bristol, whose Lord
having been Elected a Knight-Companion of this Order, by the present Sovereign,
and being absent on an Embassy when the Grand Feast of St. George happily
celebrated, an. 12. Car. 2. was drawing on, she wrote a Letter to Sir Richard
Fanshaw Knight and Baronet, to desire him Number. XLVII.
to appear and act at that following Solemnity, in quality of her Lord's Proxy.

And because there grew some doubt from the Lord Bourchier's Case, of the
sufficiency of such a Nomination, the request of the said Countess was thought
requisite to be strengthened by the Sovereign's Authority and Number. XLVIII
Nomination likewise, which being obtained was ratified under the Seal of the
Order.

And doubtless in the case of a Knight-Subject, the Sovereign may if he please,
nominate and appoint a Proxy for Installation, where the Elect-Knight has not
done it himself; for here all those considerations of grand respect, form of
the Oath, etc. always afforded to Strangers have no place; and this is evident
from the Collect. A. V. W.
Sovereign's Letters of Summons, to the Commissioners nominated for
Installation of the Lord Collect. A. V. W.
Gray, an. 4. and 5. Ph. and M. who at that time was Prisoner in France; and
whose Deputy, Collect. A. V. W.
Sir Humfry Radcliff Knight is therein mentioned to have been appointed by the
Sovereign her self.

The first President of Letters of Procuration or Deputation, drawn into a
solemn form, is that made by Sir William Philipp, whereby he (having obtained
the Sovereign's License) impowers two Knights, namely Sir Andrew Butreley, and
Sir John Henington, or either of them (as their occasions would permit) to
supply his place, and take possession of that Stall which should be assigned
him, in the Choire at Number. XLIX.
Windesor.

This Procuration and the time of Sir William Philipp's Installation by virtue
thereof, is entered in the Lib. N. p. 62.
Black Book of the Order, under the eighth year of King Henry the Fifth, but
certainly misplaced; for though the year of our Lord, or of the Sovereign's
Reign be wanting in the date of the Instrument, yet is there added a note
remarkable enough; to wit, that it was made while the Sovereign lay in Siege
before Roan in France, which as our Chronicles report was begun the Fabian^
Chron. part 7. page 499.
13. of October an. 5. H. 5. and taken the 19. of January following, so that by
this account, the Procuration was sealed the 11. of November, an. 5. H. 5. and
ought to have been placed in the Annals under that year.

Besides this, the Registrum Chartaceum expressly says, That Sir William
Philipp was Installed the Fol. 5.
same day with Sir John Robessart (and so it is also expressed in the Duke of
Bedford's before mentioned Number. XLIV.
Letter) which Solemnity is there entered as held on the Regist. Chartac. loco
cit.
17. of February, and though the year be not set down (and all the former part
of this Register wanting) yet in the course thereof, it may be observed, that
the following year is the 7. of H. 5. Add to all this, that the Black Book it
self, under that seventh year, ranks both Page 58. videsis Regist. Chartac. f.
6.
Sir John Robessart, and Sir William Philipp, for Knights-Companions among the
other Knights Installed before that year, and notes them to be then attending
upon the Sovereign in Normandy; whence it may be collected, that Sir William
Philipp was installed, if not in the 5. yet in the 6. year of King Henry the
Fifth at the farthest. And that this Procuration made by Sir William Philipp
became a President in that Age, appears from the Appendix, Number. L.
Deputation given by Sir John Fastolf to Sir Henry Inghouse, and Sir William
Breton, under his Hand and Seal of Arms, which is Regist. Chartac. fol. 14. b.
little different from Sir William Philipp's Procuration, in Ibid. fol. 5. b.
French, unless in the alteration of the Persons Names.

SECT. III. Qualifications of a Proxy.
AS touching the Qualifications of a Proctor nominated by a Knight-Subject,
they are the same with those wherewith the Proxy of a Stranger is to be
endowed, and of which we shall discourse Cap. 16.
anon: that permissive clause in the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20.
Statutes affording the same favor to a Knight-Subject, as to Strangers, and
is the ground whence he derives like Privileges.

We shall only add here, that not any Deputy or Proxy for a Knight-Subject,
has at any time been admitted to be Installed for an Elect-Knight, under the
degree of a Knight; it being thought fit (as in other essentials and
circumstantials, so especially and chiefly in this) that a Knight-Subject
should exactly observe the Rule, which the Statutes have imposed on a Stranger.
And in this respect, the case is very observable, where Sir Lib. N. p. 59.
videsis Regist. Chartac. fol. 6.
William Lysle (though one of the Alms-Knights of Windesor, yet in Degree a
Knight) was not refused but allowed Proctor to Sir John Gray, an. 7. H. 5.

It appears by the Characters given to the Proctors nominated by Sir William
Philipp, and Sir John Fastolf, that the Qualifications required in a Proctor
(viz. to be (1.) a sufficient Proctor, of (2.) unblamable Reputation, and at
least (3.) a Knight) were to be found in them: for when the Sovereign was
induced (by reason that the Employments of Sir William Philipp's in his
service, detained him beyond Sea) to give him leave to nominate his Proctor, it
may be observed, that this License was not granted, but under this Proviso,
That his Procuration should be executed by a Regist. Chartac. fol. 5. b. and
Lib. N. p. 62.
Knight at least in degree, ennobled with Arms, and of an honest and untainted
reputation. And when the said Sir William did make choice of and depute his
Proctors, they were Knights, and such and so nobly qualified, Lib. N. p. 62.
That there was nothing wanting in them which belonged to true valiant Knights:
and the like Character is bestowed upon those two Knights nominated by Sir John
Fastolf, to take the possession of his Stall; to wit, Regist. Chartac. f. 14. b.
That in them there could be found no defect of ought that should belong to
magnanimous and courageous Knights.

SECT. IV. Preparations for Installation.
THE day for Installation of a Knight-Subject by Proxy, being by the Sovereign
appointed, there are to be provided for him, and got ready against the
Solemnity, these things following.

First, 1. Commissions for Installation.
a Commission for Installation is to be drawn up, and by the Chancellor of the
Order presented to the Sovereign for his Sign manual; to which is after affixt
the great Seal of the Order. The substance of the ancient Commissions may be
found in Appendix, Number. L*L*
that directed to Sir John Robessart, an. 5. H. 6. to accept of Sir Henry
Inghouse, one of the two Knights which Sir John Fastolf had constituted for his
Proxy; himself being at that season employed in the Wars of France; the powers
granted by the Sovereign to the said Sir John Robessart were these.

1. Appendix, Number. L* L*
To conduct Sir Henry Inghouse to Windesor Castle. 2. To put him in possession
(as from the Sovereign) of the Stall assigned to his Principal. 3. To invest
him with all the Benefits, Honors, Prerogatives, Franchises, and Liberties
thereunto appertaining. 4. To receive his Mantle, Helm, and Sword; and set them
up where the Earl of Westmerland's stood, in whose room he was Elected. 5. To
ad thereunto all usual Solemnities. 6. Lastly, this Commission contained an
Injuction to all the Knights-Companions, to suffer and permit the said Sir John
Fastolf, fully and peaceably to possess the said Stall, Places, Honors,
Franchises, Prerogatives, and Liberties, in the same manner as the Statutes
import, without any contradiction or scruple.
There is another Precedent almost as ancient in a Appendix Number. LII.
Commission granted to the Earl of Essex, the Lords Berners, and Wenlock, for
Installation of the Earl of Worcester, and other Elect-Knights by their
Proxies, an. 2. E. 4. in regard they for the present were, and for some time
would be, so far employed about the Sovereign's Person, and in his Service,
that they could not receive a Personal Installation: but the Commissioners
Authority in this is comprised in fewer particulars than the former, namely to
Appendix Number. LII.
admit, receive, and establish with all convenient speed, the Elect-Knights by
their Proctors into their Stalls at Windesor, in the same manner, as if one,
and all of them had been present in their own persons, any Ordinance or Statute
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Of later times the Commissions granted upon such occasions, differ from those
made for the Personal Installations of the Knights themselves, only be
premising the cause of their Principals absence, and the Employment or
Negotiation he is then engaged in, and then authorizing the Commissioners to
admit the Proxy, into his Stall; a Precedent of which kind is added in the
Number. LIII.
Appendix to the former.

In the next place, 2. Letters of notice to the Commisioners.
where the Installation by Proxy is performed by two or more Commissioners;
the Sovereign directs Letters to each of them, giving notice of the intended
Solemnity, and requiring them to make their repair to his Castle of Windesor,
by a certain day therein prefixed, to the end the Proxy may proceed, to take
possession of his Principal's Stall. Of such a Letter see also a form in the
Number. LIVE.
Appendix.

3. And for Removal of Stalls, etc.
And as there is, upon admission of an Elect-Knight, installed by Proxy, the
same ground for removal of Stalls in the Choire, as for one who receives a
Personal Installation; and in like cases: So is it usual to issue out the like
Warrants from the Sovereign to Garter, some time before the Solemnity, to
remove the Achievements and Plates, and place them in the order as his Warrant
directs.

Anciently the Stall for the Elect-Knight was assigned in the body of the
Commission, which issues out for his Installation; as it appears in the before
mentioned Number. L.
Commission for admitting Sir Henry Inghouse, Proctor to Sir John Fastols, to
whom the Stall which the Earl of Westmerland held, while living, was Number. L.
thereby appointed for him.

4. Mantle of the Order.
The rest of the particulars to be prepared against the day of Installation, are
provided at the Knight's own charge; and they are first, his Mantle of the
Order, which, according to the injunction of the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 5.
Stat. Art. 20. H. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
Statutes, the Proctor is obliged to bring along with him to Windesor, at the
day appointed for Installation.

5. Achievements.
Garter is also to be consulted with, as to the preparing the Elect-Knight's
Achievements; namely, his Helm, Crest, Mantlings, Sword, and Banner of Arms;
and to bring these to Windesor, is likewise part of the duty assigned to the
Proctor by the Locis supra citat.
Statutes.

6. Plate of Arms.
Besides these Achievements, the Proxy is to provide a Plate of Brass gilt,
whereon is to be engraved the Arms, Crest, and Supporters, enamelled in their
proper Colors, together with the Style of the Elect-Knight: and this to be
fixed upon the back of his Stall.

7. Velvet Cushen.
A Velvet Cushen also for Garter to bear the Mantle on when the Proctor proceeds
to the Choire.

8. And Lodging Scutcheons.
Lastly, A dozen or more of Lodging Scutcheons to set up at the Inns by the way,
and other places in Windesor.

SECT. V. Proceeding to the Chapter House.
THE next thing to be considered of, is the Proceeding to the Chapter House,
and therein chiefly the Proxie's place; for it will be needless here, to speak
of his journey to Windesor Castle, his arival there, or ordering of this
Proceeding, in relation to those Degrees whereof it is composed; since what
has been already said touching these particulars, and other circumstances,
having reference to the Personal Installation of an Elect-Knight, may be made
applicable to a Proxy, or else such part of them as he shall judge most
conducing to the honor of his Principal.

The place therefore belonging to the Proxy of a Knight-Subject in this
Proceeding, is that immediately after the Provincial Kings of Arms, because as
yet he has not taken possession of his Principal's Stall, which gives him a
place in his return according to its dignity; and in this place did the
Proctors of the Marquess (since Duke) of Newcastle, and Earl of Bristol,
proceed (bare-headed) to the Chapter House, an. 13. Car. 2.

And though this be the Proxie's usual place, in this Proceeding, yet Sir Henry
Sidney, Proctor to the Earl of Warwick, an. 5. Eliz. (and it is the only
instance we have met with) proceeded immediately before the Alms-Knights; the
order of which Proceeding was as follows.

First, MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 11.
Gentlemen Attendants. Knights. Sir Henry Sidney Proctor. Alms-Knights. Verger.
Pursnivants. Heralds. Provincial Kings. E. of Northumberland, a Knight-Elect.
Visc. Mountague Assistants. Lord Loughborow Assistants.
Black-Rod. Register. Garter.
Duke of Norfolk Lord Lieutenant.
Lastly, the Proxy (as in the case of an Elect-Knight) passes into the East
Isle behind the high Altar, as soon as he ariveth within St. George's Chapel
(while the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant, or Commissioners proceed into the
Chapter House) and there MS. in Offic. Armor. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b.
reposeth himself, till he be sent for in; for so did the foresaid Proctors to
the said Marquess of Newcastle, and Earl of Bristol. But if the Proxy pass not
in the Proceeding, he then goes privately to this place before the Proceeding
sets forward.

SECT. VI. Transactions in it.
AFter the Chapter is opened, 1. Reading the Commission.
the first thing done, is for MS. in Bibl. Matson.
Garter to present the Commission or Commissions, which he carried in the
Proceeding thither, as well that for MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11.
Lieutenancy (in case a Lieutenant then held the Feast) as of Collect R C. Cl.
f. 32. videsis MS. f. 20.
Installation (for admitting a Proxy) the order of which, and by whom read, is
noted before in the Sect. 5.
precedent Chapter.

2. Receiving the Proxy.
The Letters of Procuration or Deputation are in the next place read, after
which, the Proxy is sent for into the Chapter House by Garter, who conducts
him to the door, and there the Commissioners (or Ex e^d. MS. penes W. D. N.
loco cit. vide etiam Collect. R. C. Cl. fol praed.
Assistants or Knights-Companions) receive him: But an. 5. Eliz. Sir Henry
Sidney exhibited his MS. penes W. D. N. loco ante cit.
Deputation after he was called in: Or sometimes the Proxy produces his
Deputation before the Proceeding pass to the Chapter House, for so did Ibid. f.
17. b.
Sir George Howard, Deputy to the Earl of Bedford, an. 6. Eliz. and in such
case, there is no need of admitting the Proxy into the Chapter House, but that
he may rest without, till the Sovereign (his Lieutenant, or Commissioners) are
past into the Choire, and he sent for in thither; at which the Mantle was wont
to be laid upon his right arm, at the Chapter House door, by the
Knights-Companions appointed to introduce him.

3. Delivery of the Mantle.
Heretofore, so soon as the Proxy was admitted into the Chapter House, and the
Letters of Procuration read, the Mantle of his Principal was usually laid upon
his E. 3. Stat. Art. 20.
right arm by the Sovereign's Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and being so laid,
part of it was also Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 32.
spread upon the Proxies shoulders, the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 32.
Scutcheon of St. George lying uppermost, and the Cordons laid fair to be seen;
and in this manner he bore it in the Proceeding to the Stall of his Principal,
where he h^^^ it till E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
Service was ended. But now, the present Sovereign has directed the Mantle to
be born upon the left arm.

But an. 5. Eliz. the Earl of Warwick's Proctor had the Mantle born before him
into the Choire by MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b.
Garter, in the same manner as is used to Knights Personally Installed, and not
delivered him, till he had MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b.
taken the Oath; and at the delivery thereof the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 11. b.
words of Admonition were pronounced by the Register of the Order. So was it
observed to the Proxies of the Duke of Newcastle, and Earl of Bristol, an. 13.
Car. 2.

SECT. VII. Proceeding to the Choire.
THE Proxy proceeds from the Chapter House door, H. 8. Stat. Art. 21. vide MS.
penes W. D. N. f. 11. b. and MS. f. 20. and Lib. R. p. 19.
between the Sovereign's Commissioners (Assistants, or Knights-Companions):
Concerning the order of this Proceeding, so much is spoken Chap. 12. Sect. 6.
before, that we shall need to add but one Example, and that is an. 6. Eliz.

MS. f. 20.
Verger. Alms-Knights. Officers of Arms. Officers of the Order.
Lord Hunsdon. Proctor to the Earl of Bedford. Lord Clynton.

SECT. VIII. Ceremonies performed there.
Taking the (...).
THE Proceeding having entered the Choire the Commissioners (Knights-Assistants,
or Knights-Companions) conduct the Proxy into the MS. fol. 20.
lower Stalls directly under the Stall designed for his Principal, where the
Ibid. p. 20. b.
Register of the Order reads the words of the Oath, while the Proxy ( MS.
penes W. D. N. fol. 17 b.
laying his hand upon the Book) MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 17 b.
repeats after him, and in confirmation thereof MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 17 b.
kisseth the Book; and this Oath his Lib. N. p. 62. sub sinem.
Deputation impowers him to take, in the Ibid.
name and behalf of his Principal.

The form of the Proctor's Oath has no difference from the Oath which an
Elect-Knight himself takes; the substance of the ancient Oath is Chap. 12.
Sect. 7.
already noted down; and that taken of later times may be seen in the Number. LV.
Appendix. Nevertheless some variation and enlargement (though the same in
effect with the ancient Oath) do we observe to be in that Form, which Sir Number.
LVI.
Thomas Bar (Proctor to Sir John Robessart) took, viz. Reg. Chartac. fol. 5.
Faithfully to keep and observe all the Articles of the Statutes whatsoever, in
all things appertaining thereunto, according to the form and efficacy of the
said Statutes, and to the utmost of his power.

The Oath being taken in this solemn manner, 2. Giving possession of the Stall.
the Proctor is led up into the Stall of his Principal, where both the Knights
who conducted him into the Choire, first take the Mantle and lay it on his left
(though formerly on his right) arm, next laying their hands upon him, in the E.
3. Stat. Art. 20. M. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
Name of his Lord and Master (from whom he received his Dputation) set him down
therein: and so the Ceremony of Installation being fully finished, the Service
of the Church begins.

If the Installation be performed in the morning, Offering at the Altar.
then there is an Offering of Gold and Silver; at which time the Proxy in his
turn comes down from his Principal's Stall, and stands before it, and when the
Sovereign has offered (or the Lieutenant for him, and for himself, or
otherwise the Commissioners)as also the rest of the Knights-Companions present,
in their due order, then the Proxie's MS. in Offic. Armor. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b.
turn coming (being joined with the Knight sitting in the opposite Stall to
that of his Principal, if he be present at this Solemnity, and having two
Officers of Arms before them) he proceeds to the high Altar, and there
offers both Gold and Silver; and afterward returns and takes his Stall in
the same order as the Knights-Companions do. In this manner an. 5. Eliz. the
MS. penes W. D. N. f. 12. b.
Earl of Warwick's Proxy, joining himself with the Earl of Northumberland
(installed at the same time) jointly proceeded to the Offering, with Richmond
and Lancaster Heralds before them. The like did the Proctor to the MS. fol. 20.
b.
Earl of Bedford, and offered together with the Lord Hunsdon, an. 6. Eliz.

As soon as the Ceremony of the Offering is finished, the Service of the Church
proceeds, which being ended, the Proceeding returns in the same order it came
to the MS. fol. 21.
Chapter House, except that now the Proxy takes his place, according to the
dignity of the Stall, of which he lately took possession for his Principal: But
in regard the Statutes do expressly declare, E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 8. Stat.
Art. 21.
That after the Proxy has been admitted to the Stall of his Principal, he
shall neither wear the Mantle, nor have any Voice in Chapter, nor presume to
enter there in the absence of him that sent him; therefore has it been the
common practice to take off the Mantle from his arm, at the Chapter House door,
in his return from the Choire, so that at this place the bearing thereof has
usually terminated, having for the most part been delivered to the MS. praed.
loco cit.
Verger of the Chapel (though sometimes to the Ex cod. MS. penes W. D. N. f.
11. b.
Sexton, at other times to Ibid. f. 13. b.
Garter, so also to the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 33.
Black-Rod) who has taken it from off the Proxie's arm, and carried it into
the Chapter House; this done, the Proctor retires privately out of the
Proceeding to his Lodgings.

Nevertheless it appears (but by what indulgence is not recorded) that though
Garter took from Sir Henry Sidney, an. 5. Eliz. the Mantle at the Chapter House
door, on the Evening as he returned from taking possession of his Principal's
Stall, yet the next morning he MS. pen. W. D. N. f. 12.
rode in the Proceeding to the Chapel (the celebration of St. George's Feast
continuing) with the Mantle on his right arm, on the left hand of the Earl of
Northumberland (the place of his Principal) and, having entered the Choire, took
his Principal's Stall; afterward he bore the Mantle in the Lib. C. p. 45.
grand Procession, at the Offering of Money, and during divine Service; and from
the Chapel proceeded in the foresaid place up to the Castle to Dinner.

In the Afternoon of the said Feast Day he again Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f.
13.
rode on horseback in the Proceeding to the Chapter House door, (but Ex eod.
MS. penes W. D. N. f. 13.
there the Mantle was taken from him and laid within upon the Table, whilst he
retired into the East Isle of the Chapel) and at the rising of the Chapter was
it again delivered to him, whence he proceeded in his Principal's place to the
second Vespers.

The next morning after the Lieutenant and his Assistants had ended the
Chapter, the Ex eod. MS. penes W. D. N. f. 13.
Mantle was again laid on his arm, and in that manner he passed into the
Choire, where he entered the Stall of his Principal, and afterward Ex eod. MS.
penes W. D. N. f. 13.
Offered in the same order he did on the Feast day; and when the morning Service
was finished, the Lieutenant and Assistants returned to the Chapter House door,
where they put off their Mantles, and at the same place the Sexton of the
College received the Mantle from him.

SECT. IX. The Grand Dinner.
AT Dinner the Proxy sits with the Lieutenant (or Commissioners) and takes the
place where his Principal should sit if he were present; and this was so
observed at the Installation of the Earl of Warwick, an. 5. Eliz. MS. penes W.
D. N. f. 12. b.
for the Sovereign's Lieutenant sat on the left hand of the Cloth of State,
his two Assistants, the Earl of Northumberland (newly installed) and the said
Earl of Warwick's MS. penes W. D. N. f. 12. b.
Proxy sat on the same side.

The Style of the Knight, who is installed by Proxy, is proclaimed in French
or English, at the usual time, and in his due place, together with the other
Styles that then ought to be proclaimed, as we find it observed an. 25. H. 8.
at the Installations of the Earls of Lib. N. p. 264.
Beaumont and Newblanke by their Proctors (for they were Knights-Subjects,
though not to the Sovereign, and therefore not improper to be made use of, for
an instance in this case) in the order following.

MS. in Offic. Armor. [L. 1] fol. 46.
Du noble and puissant Seigneur le Compte d' Essex, and de Enseigneur de
Bourchir, and de Loueyn, Lieutenant, and Depute de la Feste Saint George,
Chevaler, Friar and Compaignon de la tres-noble Order de la Jartier. Du
tres-noble and puissant Seigneur la Conte de Beaumont, Seigneur de Montmorency,
premier Baron, grand Maistre and Mareschall de France, Baron de Montberon, and
fere -- tertenois Seigner de Lysleadam, de Compiegne, de Chantelly and de
Escouen, Gouverneur and Lieutenant General pour le Roy trescristien au Paris de
Longuedoe, Chevaler friar and Compaignon de la tres-noble Order de la Jartier.
Du tres-noble puissant Seigneur le Conte de Neublance, Seigneur de Beron, Baron
d' Aspremont, Buransay, Beaumont, Paygin, Mirebeau, and de Fonteyne
Fran^ccedil; ois, Admiral de France, Gouverneur and Lieutenant General pour
le Roy tres-cristien, en la Duche de Bourgoigne, Chevalier, Friar and
Compaignon de la tres-noble Order de la Jartier.
And when the forementioned Earl of Warwick was installed by Proxy, the order
was thus.

MS. penes W. D. N. ^. 12.
Du tres-hault puissant, and tres-noble Prince, Thomas Duc de Norffolk, Conte
Marshall d' Angleterre, Seigneur Mowbray, Segrave, and de Brews, Chivalier du
tres-noble Order de la Jartier, and Lieutenant de ceste noble Feste de Seint
George. Du tres-noble and puissant Seigneur Thomas Conte de Northumberland, and
Baron de Percye, Chivalier de tres-noble Order de la Jartier. Du tres-noble,
and puissant Seigneur Ambrose Conte de Warwick, Baron de Lisle, Chivalier, etc.
Maistre de L'artillerie de la Royne nostre Sovereign, and Lieutenant pour sa
Majesty, au pais de Normandy, and Defendeur de la Ville Francois de grace.
To conclude, the Proctor is to take care that the Achievements and Plate of
his Principal be set up in the Chapel of St. George, so soon as the
Installation is completed, for he is obliged to Lib. N. p. 62. videsis Regist.
Chartac. f. 5. b. and f. 14. b.
offer and present them to that end, according to custom, which does further
appear, not only out of the ancient Letters of Procuration, but also by
Commissions for Installation, which appoint, Regist. Chartac. f. 15.
That the Sovereign's Deputy should receive from the Proctor his Principal's
Helm and Sword (for we find no mention of the Banner till afterward) and place
them over his Stall.

CHAP. XIV. THE Signification of Election TO Strangers.
SECT. I. Within what time, and in what manner Certificate is made of their
Election.
FOrasmuch as Strangers Elect are for the most part Emperors, Kings, or
Sovereign Princes; the necessity of whose affairs, obliged them to abide in
their own Dominions, and seldom or rarely permitted them, to receive a Personal
Installation in the College of the Order; therefore several Privileges (...)
thought fit, by the wisdom of the Founder of this most Noble Order, to (...)
and established in their favor: as principally the giving them hon^^ (...) of
their Elections, allowing convenient time of consideration for Acceptance,
affording to them Investiture in their own Countries, and permitting their
Installations to be performed at Windesor by Substitutes, or Deputies.

It was therefore by the Statutes of the Institution Ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art.
20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.
That when any such were chosen into the Order, they should be certified of
their Elections by the Sovereign; and besides, that at his charge, the E. 3.
Stat. Art. 20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.
Garter should be sent over to them, with the Mantle and Statutes of the Order,
sealed with the Common Seal. And this to be done with all convenient speed, so
E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. 5. Stat. Art. 20.
that they might have notice thereof at least within four months, from the
time of Election, to the end they might advise and determine with themselves
(from consideration had of the tenor of the Statutes) whether they would
receive, or refuse, the honor of this most Noble Order.

In pursuance of these directions, it became customary for the Sovereign,
together with his Letters to the Elect Stranger, giving signification of his
Election, to send (and that by way of solemn Embassy) the Habit and Ensigns of
the Order, as also a Book of the Statutes; and in case the Election were
accepted, then the Elect Stranger might receive Investiture, before the return
of the persons by whom the Habit was sent.

And this is manifest from the direction given, upon the Election of Edward
King of Portugal ( N. Rittershus. in Tab. Reg. Portugal. edit. Tubing. an. 1658.
Son of King John and of the Lady Philippa, Daughter to John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster) at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor the 8. day of May
an. 13. H. 6. to wit, Lib. N. page 91.
That because the Election then but newly transacted, was not known to the said
King, it seemed good to the Chapter, Lib. N. page 91.
that he should be speedily certified thereof: And that Garter King of Arms
should be sent over to him to signify his Election; and upon his acceptance
thereof to present him with the Garter and Habit of the Order, as also with the
Book of Statutes; which he was likewise appointed to carry over with him.

And it may be presumed, that a Certificate of Election was sent to the Duke of
Vrbin, within the time limited by the Statutes; since it appears, that (being
Elected the Lib. N. p. 136.
18. of August an. 14. E. 4.) all things were fitted for his Installation
against the following St. George's Feast, at which he was Installed. And upon
the Election of the King of Portugal, an. 22. E. 4. the Register observes, that
notice was s^nt to him of his Election, Ibid. p. 149.
within the appointed time.

The purport of which Letters certifying a Stranger's Election, may be
understood and known from Appendix, Number. LVII.
that which King Edward the Sixth sent to the French King Henry the Second,
whereby (briefly) for his eminent Nobleness and Virtues, and to augment and
improve the brotherly amity and fair correspondency between them, He had in
Chapter, with the consent of the Knights-Companions, Chosen and Elected him
into the number of the Society of the Garter, and therefore thought good to
acquaint him therewith; desiring also the said King to give him and the Society
the honor of consenting to and accepting of the Election; forasmuch as he
should thereby perform that which would be very acceptable and grateful to him,
as he should more fully understand by the Ambassadors who were preparing for
their journey, to Invest him with the Habit.

The right of bearing these Letters signifying Election, and returning the
Stranger's answer, belongs to Garter; being confirmed to him by the Cap. 4.
Constitutions appertaining to his Office.

We see before, that the Certificate of Election was ordained to be dispatched
within four months, from the time of Election. Nevertheless to afford the
Sovereign more liberty, where the nature of the Affair required it; King Henry
the Eighth added this necessary Clause to the foresaid Article. That where the
Sovereign had any great or high impediment, He H. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
should defer certifying the Election, till a more opportune or convenient time.

But in this particular we observe, that like liberty had been taken, in times
preceding, though no provision by Statute was made for it before; as namely,
by King Henry the Sixth, in the case of Frederick the Third, E^peror of
Germany, who having been Elected an. Lib. N. p. 117.
35. of the said King, had not Letters sent him to signify his Election until
the (...) page ^^^.
following year. It likewise appears, that Letters to the (...) page ^^^.
same effect were then also dispatched to the King of Aragon, the Duke of
Brunswick, and King of Poland, who had been Elected Ibid. p. 105.
eight years before.

And yet we find it recorded, that the Ibid. p. 114.
Habit and Ensigns of the Order were sent by special Ambassadors to all three,
an. 34. H. 6. viz. two years before; but perhaps this ought to be understood of
their being but then designed and ordered to be sent, and upon second thoughts
might be stopped, or if they were sent, might miscarry by some accident; for if
they had arrived at these Princes Courts, it would have been needless to send
other Letters to give notice of their Election, Ibid. p. 118.
two years after. But to clear this doubt, we after find a Ib. p. 119.
second mention of sending the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to the King of
Poland, an. 37. H. 6. by which it is sufficiently apparent, that the first
Embassy took no effect.

In the foresaid Memorial entered in the Page 114.
Black-Book of the Order, and placed under the 34. year of King Henry the
Sixth, touching the King of Aragon, King of Poland, and Duke of Brunswick; we
suppose the King of Aragon is mistaken for the King of Portugal, Elected an.
25. H. 6. Since the Le Roy de Portugale est ^sluz and ad ^e Ja^^^ti^r, and le
Mantel envoi^z par Fetiplas, f. 32. b.
Registrum Chartaceum calls him King of Portugal, and both authorities agree in
sending over Mr. Fetipla^e with the Garter and Mantle, though the Black-Book
does not distinguish (as does the Le Roy de Portugale est ^sluz and ad ^e
Ja^^^ti^r, and le Mantel envoi^z par Fetiplas, f. 32. b.
other) to which he was sent.

It may much rather be presumed that Mr. Fetiplace was sent on this Legation to
the King of Portugal (not Aragon) since Cambd. Brit. in Aureb.
Beatrix the natural Daughter of John King of Portu^^l was his Mother, and This
Gentleman was Progenitor to the Family of Fetiplace, late of B^sse sl^gh in
Berkshire, of Swinbroke in the Country of Oxford, and many other Families of
note of the same Name, now residing in those Counties.
he by this relation, and being in those times a MS. in Offic. A^mor. [C. 18]
f. 35.
Courtier in King Henry the Sixth's Court, might the sooner obtain the honor of
this Employment: And there is in the Registrum Chartaceum another particular
(co-relative with the former) yet more clear and full than the Black-Book; for
it tells us that Mr. Le Roy le Poleyne est Estuz, and ad le Jarretier and se
Mantel envoyez par Newport. f. 32. b.
Newport was at the An. 34. H. 6.
same time sent in the Legation with the Garter and Mantle to the King of
Poland.

But to return; we have not found that King Henry the Eighth, or any of his
Successors, Sovereign's of the Order, have made much use of that liberty
(granted by the foresaid Article of his Statutes) for deferring the
Significatory Letters of Election beyond the time appointed by the Statutes of
Institution. And that it may be the better observed, how soon notice of
Election has been given to Strangers, we will insert all the instances in this
kind, that have come to our knowledge.

It is recorded, that the French King Francis the First was Elected Lib. N. p.
257.
Oct. 21. an. 19. H. 8. and albeit we find not the exact time, when the
Sovereign's Letter for giving notice of his Election was sent him; yet must
that complement be most certainly dispatched within the time limited by the
ancient Statutes, since we observe he was Installed within three months after,
viz. the Ex Aut^gr. in Bibl. C^tt^n.
25. of January following.

When James the Fifth King of Scotland was Elected [ Ian. Lib. N. page 267.
20. an. 26. ^. 8.] the Lord William Howard was Lib. N. page 267.
forthwith sent to inform him of his ^lection. Henry the Second of France
(before mentioned) having been Elected the Ibid. p. 305.
24. of April, an. 5. E. 6. had Letters of signification sent him in May
following.

Emanuel Duke of Savoy was chosen a Knight-Companion Lib. C. page 14.
6. Aug. an. 1 and 2. Ph. and M. and the same day it was Decreed, Lib. C. page
14.
That Letters should be sent unto him with the illustrious Garter, and other
Ensigns of the Order: But hereby is to be understood, the Sovereign's
Credential Letters sent to accompany the Habit of the Order (the Commission for
delivery whereof bears test the 17. of October following) not the Letters
signifying his Election; for it appears clearly from the said Credentials, that
the Sovereign had not only before that time given him notice of his Election,
but that the Duke had returned a cheerful and ready acceptance of the honor.

The Election of Charles the Ninth of France, passed the Lib. ^. p. 4^.
24. of April, an. 6. Eliz and in Collect A. V. W.
May ensuing the Lord Collect. A. V. W.
Hunsdon carried him the Habit of the Order, which he received at MS. penes W.
le N. Cl. fol. 16. b.
Lions the 24. of June following; and the French King Henry the Fourth, and
James the Sixth King of Scotland (afterward Sovereign of this most Noble
Order) were both Elected together, the Lib. C. p. 117.
24. of April an. 32. Eliz. to the Collect. A. V. W. videsis Hist. And. du
Chesne page ^114.
former of these, the Certificate of Election was sent by Sir Edward Stafford
Knight, and to the Collect. A. V. W. videsis Hist. And. du Chesne page ^114.
later, by the Earl of Worcester.

Lastly, Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, Elected the Lib. C. p 150.
14. of June, an. 1. Iac. R. Maurice Prince of Orange, chosen the Ibid. p. 177.
19. of December, an. 10. Iac. R. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry
Prince of Orange, both Elected the Lib. R. p. 35.
24. of April, an. 3. Car. 1. as also Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne
chosen a Knight-Companion the Ibid. p. 80.
18. of April, an. 9. Car. 1. had Letters sent to signify their Election
within a few days after they were Elected. And at such times as the present
Sovereign made Election of any Stranger, whilst he remained abroad; care was
also taken to send his Letters, to acquaint them with their Election, Collect.
E. W. G.
immediately after the Ceremony of Election had past.

SECT. II. Of Notice given of an Election, before sending the Habit.
HEre it is to be observed, with how much more caution than the former, the
Statutes made by King Henry the Eighth do Ordain, to Art. 21.
send Letters that signify Election, and the Book of Statutes only at the
first; but not the Garter and Mantle, till a return be made, whether the
Stranger-Elect (after consultation had with the Statutes) will receive the
Order or not. And Art. 21.
after the Certificate of Acceptance returned to the Sovereign, then, but not
before is it there also Decreed, to send a solemn Embassy with the whole Habit,
George, and Collar. And consonant to these directions in the Statutes has the
Practice sometimes been: As for instance, in the cases of the French King Henry
the Second, an. 5. E. 6. and Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar.
both remembered a little before; as also in that of Erhard. Cellius in suo Equ.
Aur. Anglo. Wirtemb. p. 107. and 108.
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, to whom Queen Elizabeth sent Letters signifying
his Election, shortly after she had chosen him into the Society of the Order,
to which the Duke returned thanks and acceptance, by two Ambassadors, Benjamin
a Buwinkhausen of Walmeroet one of his privy Council, and Cristopher ab
Haugwitz Master of his Horse: who received a promise from the Sovereign, that
the sending him the Erhard. Cellius in suo Equ. Aur. Anglo. Wirtemb. p. 107.
and 108.
whole Habit of the Order should not be long deferred, howbeit the same was not
sent during her life.

SECT. III. Notice of Election sent with the Habit.
WHen the Sovereign has been well assured beforehand, that the Elect-Stranger
would not refuse the Honor; upon such confidence, the same Embassy (as
anciently before the adding this Clause) dispatched both Ceremonies. The
Sovereign's Letter certifying Election being first presented, together with the
Book of Statutes, to peruse and consider of; and if (upon consideration
thereof) the Stranger declared his acceptance, then within few days after, the
whole Habit of the Order was with due Solemnity delivered.

And thus do we find it directed, shortly after the Election of James the Fifth
King of Scotland; the Lord William Howard (sent on that Embassy) his
Instructions as to this point, being as follows.

Appendix, Number. CII.
That he should within five or six days next after he had been with the said
King of Scots, for his first Embassade and resort to Court there, and in most
reverend fashion deliver unto the King of Scots, the Letter Missive of
Certification of his Election into the noble Order of the Garter, from the
Sovereign of the Order, with due commendation from his Highness.

The Letter read, and the said King consenting to the Reception of the said
Order, then incontinent the Book of Statutes to be delivered unto him, and a
day appointed to have his consentment on the Articles of the said Statutes.

In like manner were the Letters certifying Election, and the Commission for
presenting the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, dispatched together to Christian
the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 1. Iac. R. and sent by the Earl of Rutland who
went hence Collect. A. V. W.
within a fortnight after the said King had been Elected. As also to Gustavus
Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry Prince of Orange, within two months; their
Election falling on the Lib. R. p. 35.
24. of April, an. 3. Car. 1. and the date of the Commission for delivering the
Order being on the Collect. Tho. Row Eq. Aur. nup. Ord. Canc. f. 207.
24. of June following.

The manner and order of the delivery of these Letters signifying Election,
when the Habit is sent therewith, is thus.

Autogr^penes W. lo N. Cl.
First the Ambassador and Officer of Arms, having notice given them of the
first Audience, do present themselves to the Stranger-Prince, in the accustomed
manner of Ambassadors; and deliver the Sovereign's Letters Missive, with all
due reverence. The Ambassador therewithal signifying (after some short general
Complement from the Sovereign) how his Master and the honorable Society of the
Garter, in respect of his renowned prowess, valor, virtues, etc. and for to
establish and augment the amity which is betwixt them, has Elected him into
the most renowned Order of St. George; and that the Sovereigns do never Elect
any Stranger, but such as they do most highly honor, and therefore desires that
it may be accepted as a true testimony thereof: to which end the Sovereign has
sent him over, and his Herald there present, to perform the Ceremonies due
thereunto.

But of late, when through the Sovereign's multitude of Affairs (in particular
the late Sovereign while engaged in the Wars) or suddenness of the occasion,
they have had no convenience for the present, to send a special Commission of
Legation, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order to any Stranger: They
therefore thought fit, at such time as they sent their Letters signifying
Election, to Commissionate their Agent, residing in that Princes Court, and
Garter Principal King of Arms, to deliver part (but the two chief and Appendix,
Number. CV.
most peculiar) of the Ensigns of this most illustrious Order, namely the
Garter and George, pendent at a Blue Ribband, to the Elect- Stranger; deferring
the solemn Legation till a further and more convenient time.

The first Precedent we have met with in this kind, was an. 10 Iac. R. when Du
Chesne Hist. p. 1138.
Sir Ralph Winwood, and William Seagar Esquire Garter, (afterward Knighted) were
Commissionated to deliver only at the present the Garter and George to Maurice
Prince of Orange, the Appendix, Number. LXXII.
rest of the Habit being intended to be presented afterward in their due time.
And this was so done, within five days after his Election; that Ceremony being
dispatched on the Lib. C. p. 117.
19. of December in the foresaid year, and the Sovereign's Letter's of notice,
and the Commission, both bearing date the Ioh. Olers in Geneal^g. Com.
Nass^via, p. 89. Videsis Continuat. Thuani. p. 331.
24. of the same month.

In like manner were the Garter and George only, sent over to Charles Prince
Palatine of the Rhyne, and presented to him by William Boswell (then) Esquire the
Sovereign's Agent in Holland, and John Philpot Esquire Somerset Herald, an. 9. Car.
1. So the late Sovereign, by reason of the many disturbances occasioned by the
unhappy War with the Long Parliament, could not conveniently send over to
William Prince of Orange, and Bernard de Foix Duke of Fspernon, other Ensigns
of the Order, than the George and Garter.

And lastly, during the present Sovereign's abode in Foreign parts, it was the
general practice (in regard the whole Habit, could not with convenience be
provided, nor the Ceremonies of Investiture fully performed) to present the
Elect-Knight in confirmation of his Election (whether he were a Stranger, or
Subject) with the Garter, George, Ribband, and sometimes a Saint George's
Cross, irradiated within a Garter, to be fixed on the left shoulder of their
Cloaks or upper Garments, of which we shall speak more largely in the following
Sect. 3.
Chapter.

SECT. IV. Certificate of Acceptance.
AFter that the Sovereign's Letter signifying Election, has been delivered by
the Ambassador, and the Elect-Stranger does readily accept the Order, and
thereupon is desirous to have it confirmed to him; he is obliged by the
Statutes, to return to the Sovereign a H. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
Certificate of such his acceptance, and desire of ratification.

And we observe, that before this additional Clause made by King Henry the
Eighth, this ceremonious course had been of ancient time practiced, and both
expected from, and observed by the King of Denmark; who having been Rot.
pergamen. penes Sim. Archer Eq. Aur. nup. defunct.
Elected an. 6. H. 5. was an. 8. of the same King, taken notice of, for Lib. N.
p. 61.
not returning (before that time) an answer whether he would accept of the
honor of the Order, or not? And it appears, that before the next St. George's
Feast in the following year, Ibid. f. 64.
he sent over to the Sovereign his ready acceptance, both of the honor of his
Election, as also of the Ensigns of the Order; and thereupon Ibid. f. 64.
directions were then given for his Installation by his Proxy the Lord
Fitzhugh.

But for an instance (after the said additional Clause) we have one remarkable
enough, in the preamble of the Sovereign's Appendix, Number. LVIII.
Credential Letters to the Duke of Savoy, an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. sent
together with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order; in which it appears,
Appendix, Number. LVIII.
that the Sovereign having given him notice of his Election into this most
Noble Order, he had returned back his cheerful and ready Acceptance of, and
singular satisfaction in the said choice; and therefore cordially wished that it
might attain its due effect.

In succeeding times it was thought necessary (in case where the whole Habit of
the Order was sent over to a Stranger, together with the Sovereign's Letters,
signifying his Election) to make a provisional Decree (which passed the 18. of
April an. 13. Car. 1.) Lib. R. p. 120.
That Garter, and all others (whom it pleased the Sovereign jointly to
commissionate with him) should be most punctually careful, that they delivered
not the Ensigns of the Order into the hands of any such Prince, till they were
fully satisfied by his Letters Patent of his kind and grateful acceptance
thereof, Sir Tho. Rows Iournal. p. 11.
or in case of refusal to forbear their presentation.

And that care was taken for the due observation of this Decree (even in such
case where only the Garter and George were sent) appears from the Instructions
of the Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nup. hujus O^^. Cancel.
4. of March, an. 19. Car. 1. sent to Sir William Boswell Knight, he being
appointed by the then Sovereign to present those two principal Ensigns of the
Order, to William Prince of Orange, the said Sovereign's Son in Law; where
among other things he is expressly commanded, Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq.
Aur. nup. hujus O^^. Cancel.
to take a Testimonial from the said Prince, of his kind acceptance thereof,
before he should deliver those Ensigns of honor to him.

The like Ex Autogr. penes Iac. Palmer Eq. Aur. nup. hujus O^^. Cancel.
Clause (for demanding of a Certificate of willing and grateful Acceptance of
the Order) we also find to have been inserted in those Instructions, under the
same date, for the delivery of the Garter and George to Bernard Duke of ^^ernon.

SECT. V. Of an Election not accepted of.
THat there has been a non-acceptation of this honor, by the person Elected,
appears in that single case of Philip the Second Duke of Burgundy; who having
been Elected by King Henry the Fifth, then in France into the Stall of the Lib.
N. p. 77.
Lord Clifford, (slain at the Siege of Ib. p. 69.
Meux in Brie) had not ( an. Ibid. p. 75.
1. H. 6.) sent his answer whether he would have his Election confirmed. It was
therefore concluded on, at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor, in the
foresaid year, by Humfry Duke of Gloucester (then Deputy to the Sovereign)
having therein the unanimous consent of the Knights-Companions present, to send
Ibid.
Letters to the said Duke Elect, Ibid.
by which he might be entreated to give his Resolution, whether he would accept
of the Election or not.

It seems the Duke of Burgundy returned no answer to this Letter, and therefore
at the next years Feast, it came again to be considered of, by the Duke of
Gloucester (the Sovereign's Deputy for that Feast also) and the
Knights-Companions present, and upon further debate it was thought fit, Ibid.
p. 77.
that there should be those persons sent over to him with the Nomination, who
should desire to receive his final answer.

And then it appears, that the Duke of Burgundy, well considering the Statutes
of the Order, and reflecting on the Ibid.
Quarrels between the Duke of Gloucester, and the Duke of Brabant his Uncle,
made a most plaucible excuse, refusing the Election, least Ibid.
he should be forced, either dishonorably to violate the pious Constitutions of
the Order, or the obligations of Alliance.

The substance of this Excuse, was afterward represented to the Sovereign's
said Deputy, and Knights-Companions, in a Chapter held at Windesor, an. 2. H.
6. Ibid.
who considering the reason and manner thereof, the long voidance of the Stall,
and the strictness of the Statutes in this case, vacated the former Election,
and proceeded to a new one, which brought Ibid.
John Lord Talbot, into the room and Stall of the said Lord Clifford.

This is the only instance of any Stranger, who after Election refused his
acceptance of the Order. On the contrary, how desirous and earnestly solicitous
some others (even of the highest rank) have been of admittance into this
illustrious Society, may appear by these few Examples.

Alphonsus King of Naples, and Duke of Calabria, did with Heylins Hist. of St.
George, part 3. Chapter 3. Sect. 6.
great importunity solicit his Election into this Order, and was accordingly
chosen, an. 7. H. 7.

The Black-Book of the Order, mentioning the Election and Installation of
Philip King of Castile, says, that Lib. N. p 183.
he not only assented to what was offered, namely the honor of admittance into
the Order; but with much gladness and infinite thanks accepted thereof. A
little before, we are informed, how Ib. p. 178.
gratefully the King of Denmark, an. 20. H. 7. accepted of his Election. And in
the memorial of the Sovereign's sending his Ambassadors, with the Ensigns of
the Order to the French King, Francis the First, it is noted, Ib. p. 257.
that he received them with such a Regist. Chartac. f. 66.
cheerfulness of mind, as the Affair required.

Some few years before this King was Elected, Ferdinand Brother to the Emperor
Charles the Fifth was chosen into the Order, of whom it is said, Eq. Aur.
Anglo-Wirtemb. lib. 1. p. 28.
That he took it for a very high honor, to be made a Colleague of this most
Noble Society; and that he Bakers Chron. Edit. 1665. p. 291.
received the Order at Norimberg in Germany to his great contentment.
Maximilian his Son was presented with the Habit of the Order, by Thomas Earl of
Sussex; MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 110.
who giving the Sovereign an account by Letter of his reception thereof;
affirms, that he received the Honor gladly, and with manifest satisfaction.
Such is also the expression of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, in his
Letters of Procuration to the Lord Willoughby, Appendix, Number. LXVII.
That he received the Order with as much gratitude, as if it had been presented
to him by the Sovereign her self.

But that which Erhardus Celius reports of Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wirtemberg. l. 3.
p. 82.
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, is beyond all; who being in England, and seeing
the Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wirtemberg. l. 3. p. 82.
magnificence of the Castle and Chapel of Windesor, was induced by the sight
of the illustrious Arms and Ensigns of Honor of so many great Princes and
famous Personages of this most Noble Order, to wish himself one of the renowned
Society.

Being afterward Elected, he expressed his acknowledgments of the Honor done
him, not only by a solemn Embassy to Queen Elizabeth, but also by the Ib. l.
5.6. and 7.
great Preparations he made, the vast Expenses he was at, and his extraordinary
munificence in Rewards, at his Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the
Order; which indeed were such grand testimonies of his glad acceptance of this
additional flower of Honor, as nothing could more fully evidence it to the
World. To these we may add the Ex relatione Edw. Nicholas Eq. Aur.
re-iterated solicitations made to the present Sovereign, on the behalf of
Frederick Guillaume Marquess of Brandenburgh, and his great impatience till his
Election was past, though not easily nor suddenly obtained.

In fine, how acceptable this Honor has been to several other Kings and
Princes, and what esteem and value they have set upon it, may be further seen,
in their several Certificates, sent back to the Sovereign of this most Noble
Order, after their Investitures with the Habit and Ensigns thereof.

CHAP. XV. THE Investiture of Strangers WITH THE HABIT and ENSIGNS Of the ORDER.
SECT. I. The Time for sending the Habit and Ensigns unlimited.
ALbeit the Statutes of the Order do appoint and prefix a time, within which
the Sovereign's Letters giving notice to a Stranger of his Election, ought to
be sent unto him, as before is showed; yet as to the sending a solemn Embassy,
with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, they do not limit a certain time, but
leave that wholly to the Sovereign's pleasure; wherein his convenience, and
other Interests, as also those of the Elect Stranger, are to be consulted and
considered.

But nevertheless, the Statutes of Institution appoint and direct, that this
Legation shall be dispatched Art. 20.
with convenient speed; which must needs be interpreted with such latitude, as
may refer both to the Sovereign's convenience of sending, and the Stranger's
capacity of receiving.

And therefore we find it six years after the Election of the Kings of Aragon
and Poland, and the Duke of Brunswick, e're we meet with the first notice of
the Sovereign's determination of sending over the Habit of the Order to them:
For they having been Elected the Lib. N. p. 104.
4. of August, an. 28. H. 6. the preparations for the intended Legation were
not made until the Ibid. ^15.
34. year of the same King. And doubtless some cause, within the limits of that
convenience (allowed to the Sovereign by the foresaid Article of the Statutes)
or the accident of miscarriage might fall out, particularly in reference to the
King of Poland, (if not of the other) because Ibid. p. 119.
three years after the former Order for Legation had past, we find new
directions issued for sending the Ensigns of the Order to him.

But in King Henry the Eighth's body of Statutes, this Clause of sending the
Legation with convenient expedition, is wholly omitted, and the Sovereign is
now unlimitted as to the time: by which liberty it has come to pass, that the
Habit and Ensigns have been sent over, sometimes soon after the Stranger's
Election, at other times not till some years after, and at all times when the
Sovereign has thought fit and convenient.

Thus was it four years after Frederick the Second King of Denmark had been
Lib. C. p. 77.
Elected, before Peregrine Lord Willoughby of Ersby, together with Autogr.
penes Rob. Com. Ailesbury.
Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter, and Robert Glover Somerset Herald (by Order of
Chapter Lib. C. p. 87.
24. Apr. an. 24. Eliz.) were sent over into Denmark, to present him with the
Habit of the Order.

Maximilian the Emperor was Elected, the Ibid. p. 52.
24. of April, an. 8. Eliz. but it was above a year after ^re the Commission
issued out to the Earl of Sussex, (viz. 20. May, an. 9. Eliz.) for carrying the
Ensigns of the Order over to ^im.

It was seven years after the Election of the French King Henry the Third,
before the Collect. W. le. N. Cl.
Warrant issued out to provide his Robes, and almost two years longer ere the
Lib. C. p. 97.
Earl of Derby went over with them: in all, about nine years and something
above eight months.

And in another instance of a French King, namely Henry the Fourth, we find it
six years and a half from the time of his Election, to his reception of the
Habit and Ensigns of the Order, which Solemnity fell on the Collect. W. le N.
Cl.
10. of October, an. 38. Eliz..

Lastly, we observe that it was five years and a half, after the Election of
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, before the Embassy with the Ornaments of the
Order, were sent unto him: for we find he was Lib. C. p. 134. videsis Collect.
R. C. Cl. p. 11. and Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wirtemb. p. 107.
Elected at St. George's Feast, an. 39. Eliz. and the Commission of Legation to
the Lord Spencer, and Sir William Dethick bears Test at Woodstock, the Number.
LXXI. vide du Chesne Hist. p. 1138.
18. of Sept. an. 1. Iac. R.

SECT. II. Preparations made for the Legation.
IN reference to this solemn Embassy, there are several things to be provided
before the Ambassadors or Commissioners take their journey; as first (1.)
Credential Letters, (2.) Commission of Legation, (3.) Warrants for the Habit
and Ensigns of the Order, and (4.) other Necessaries.

1. Credential Letters.
The Credential Letters are (as to particulars) drawn suitable to the present
occasion, by the Chancellor of the Order, and directed to the Stranger-Elect;
but the substance (in general) is Appendix, Numb. LVIII. LIX. LX. LXI.
That the Sovereign having elected him into the Society of the Order, has sent
his Ambassadors with full power to present the Habit, and perform the
Ceremonies in such case due and accustomed, as if himself were present. And
further, to desire him, Appendix, Numb. LVIII. LIX. LX. LXI.
to give credit to all that his Ambassadors shall say or perform in his behalf,
in reference to their Commission, as he would do to himself.

These Letters pass under the Sign manual of the Sovereign, and Lib. R. p. 120.
Signet of the Order; but it is observable, that those sent to Emmanuel Duke of
Savoy were subscribed both by Appendix, Number. LVIII.
King Philip and Queen Mary.

The Commission of Legation is likewise to be prepared by the Chancellor o^ the
Order, 2. Commission of L^^^^^^n.
fairly engrossed in Velom, and sealed with the Lib. R. p. 119. and 120.
Great Seal of the Order; the substance of which (for the most part) has been
as follows.

Appendix, Number. LXII. LXIII. etc.
First, the merits and worthiness of the Elect-Stranger to deserve the honor of
Election, and the reasons inducing the Sovereign to confer the same upon him:
are elegantly set forth in the Preamble.

Secondly, the persons nominated for this honorable employment, are ordained,
authorized, and deputed (and therein styled) Ambassadors, Procurators, and
special Messengers; and so are they acknowledged to be, by the Strangers-Elect
in their Certificates of the Receipt of the Habit.

Thirdly, their power, authority, and special command, is to address themselves
to the Stranger-Elect, and to present and deliver him from the Sovereign, the
Garter, Mantle, and other the Ensigns of the Order, with due and accustomed
Ceremonies and Solemnities: where note, that if there were four or five joined
in a Commission (as it happened sometimes heretofore) then any five, four, three,
or two were of the Quorum, whereof the Principal in the Embassy was always one.

Fourthly, they were empowered to require from the Stranger-Elect his Oath,
according to the form and manner prescribed in the Statutes, but this clause we
only find inserted in the Commissions of Legation, to Charles Duke of Burgun^y
an. 9. E. 4. and Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, an. 15. H. 8. and omitted in
all Commissions since that time.

And lastly, to perform, accomplish, and dispatch those things, which they
should judge necessary on this occasion; in like manner as if the Sovereign
should or were obliged to do, if he were present in his own person. And this
latitude was thought convenient, to allow the Ambassadors, in case any matter
in Ceremony, or other Circumstances should be thought necessary or expedient to
use (not repugnant to the Statutes of the Order) which their Instructions had
not sufficiently provided for.

As touching the first of these particulars, we have spoken to it Chap. 9.
Sect. 13.
already, but the second particular, relating to the persons nominated in the
Commission, to perform this service, we conceive most proper to handle here.

The first Embassy upon this occasion, Of Persons nominated in the Commission.
recorded in the Black-Book of the Order. is that to Edward King of Portugal,
an. 13. H. 6. to whom, Lib. N. p. 91.
for the dignity of the Affair, Garter was thought sit by the Chapter to be
sent alone with the Hab^t of the Order: And hence is the original of Garter's
claim to this Employment.

Nevertheless, in succeeding times, as the Order grew up into esteem, both at
home and abroad; some one of the Knights-Companions was made choice of by the
Sovereign to be the Principal in these Legations; as were Galliard Sieur de
Duras, sent to Charles Duke of Burgundy, an. 9. E. 4. Ibid. p. 25^.
Arthur Pl^rta^enet Viscount Lysle, to the French King Francis the First, an.
19. H. 8. William Marquess of Northampton, to the French King Henry the Second
an. 5. E. 6. Edward Lord Clynton and Say, to Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1. and
2. Ph. and Mar. Henry Lord Hunsdon, to Charles the Ninth French King, an. 6.
Eliz. Thomas Earl of Sussex, to Maximilian the Emperor, an. 9. Eliz. Henry Earl
of Derby to the French King Henry the Third, an. 27. Eliz. And Gilbert Earl of
Shrewsbury to Henry the Fourth, the French King, an. 38. Eliz..

Sometimes other Noblemen, and persons of great quality (though not
Knights-Companions of the Order yet) correspondent to the Degree of the
Stranger-Elect, or to the esteem the present Interest begat with the Sovereign,
were employed chief in these Embassies; among whom Collect A. V. W.
Sir Charles Somerset (created after Earl of Worcester) was sent to the Emperor
Maximilian, an. 6. H. 7. Henry Lord Morley to Don Ferdinand Prince of Spain,
Archduke of Austria, an. 15. H. 8. The Lib. N. p. ^67.
Lord William Howard, Brother to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, to James the Fifth
King of Scotland, an. 26. H. 8. The MS. quarto penes Arthur. C^m. Anglesey. p.
133. b.
Lord Willoughby of Fr^^^ to Frederick the Third King of Denmark. Roger Earl of
Rutland to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 1. Iac. R. The Lord
Spencer of Wormleighton to Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, the same year. Sir
Ralph Winwood to Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 10 Iac. R. Sir Jacobs Spene of
Wormston, to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, an. 3. Car. 1. Dudley Viscount
Doncaster, to Henry Prince of Orange, the same year. And Sir William Boswell,
to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 9. Car. 1.

In Embassies of this nature, it was heretofore usual, to join some persons of
rank and quality, or Office near the Sovereign, in the Commission; and such
were Sir Ibid. page 133. b.
John Scott, Controller of the Sovereign's House, and Sir Thomas Vaughan,
Treasurer of his Chamber, both joined in Commission with Galliard Sieur de
Duras. Sir William Hussy with the Lord Morley; and Sir Ibid. page 133. b.
Nicholas Carew, and Sir Anthony Brown, with Viscount Lysle.

To these persons, the Sovereign thought fit sometimes to add a Doctor of the
Civil Law, or an Ecclesiastical person having dignity, and such as had the
Language of the Country whither they were sent; not only the better to make
answer to such questions, as the Stranger-Elect might start, upon his perusal
of the Statutes, but also to inform him touching the Institution of the Order,
or other Historical passages, relating to the Founder, the preceding or present
Knights-Companions, or honor of the Garter: all which (if judiciously and
accurately rendered) might add reputation to the Order, and beget in the
Stranger-Elect the better esteem of it.

Besides, an Ecclesiastical person was in those times thought fittest to Lib.
N. p. 309 sub finem.
administer the Oath, and to Ibid. p. 310.
pronounce the words of Signification, at the time of Investiture with the
Habit and Ensigns of the Order.

And for these Reasons was Appendix. Number. LXII.
John Russell Doctor of the Civil Law, and Archdeacon of Berkshire, joined in
Commission with the aforesaid Galliard Sieur de Duras; and Ibid. Number. LXIII.
Edward Lee Doctor in Divinity, Archdeacon of Colchester, and the Sovereign's
Almoner, sent over with the Lord Morley: In like manner was Lib. N. p. 257 and
Regist. Chart. f. 66.
John Tailour, Archdeacon of Buckingham, and Vicechancellier D' angleterre, so
called. in the Certificate of Francis the First his Receipt of the Habit.
Vice Chancellor, joined with Arthur Plantagenet Viscount Lysle; and Doctor
Collect. A. V. W.
Goodrick Bishop of Ely with the Marquess of Northampton.

But of later times, the Sovereign's Ambassador, resident with the
Stranger-Elect, has supplied this place; as did Collect. A. V. W.
Sir Thomas Smith in the Legation sent over to the French King Charles the
Ninth; and Sir Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Edward Stafford in that to the French King Henry the Third; and Collect. W. le
N. Cl.
Sir Anthony Mildmay, when the Earl of Shrewsbury was sent upon the like
Legation to the French King Henry the Fourth.

Garter joined in the Legation.
Besides the before mentioned persons, Garter Principal King of Arms, was always
joined in these Commissions of Legation, not only to keep on foot his right to
the employment, but to manage the ceremonious part of this Solemnity: and if we
shall be thought over numerous in Instances to justify this particular, let
our Reader excuse it, since it is to make good the Privilege of an Office, and
maintain the interest of an ancient right.

This reason (we presume) will also excuse our repetition here, of the ancient
President when Lib. N. p. 91.
Garter carried over the Habit of the Order, to Edward King of Portugal, an.
13. H. 6. to which we shall subjoin the Embassies to Charles Duke of Burgundy,
where Sir Collect. A. V. W.
John Writh Garter, was joined in the Commission with Galliard Sieur de Duras,
and that to Collect. A. V. W.
Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbyn, an. 22. H. 7.

Sir Collect. A. V. W.
Thomas Wriothesley was also joined with Sir Charles Somerset, in the Legation
to the Emperor Maximilian; with the Append. Number. LXII.
Lord Morley sent to Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and with Ex. Collect.
praed.
Arthur Viscount Lysle, to the French King Francis the First.

Lib. N. p. 267.
Sir Christopher Barker, Garter, was also sent with the Habit of the Order into
Scotland (immediately after the Lord William Howard) who jointly presented the
same to King James the Fifth.

Sir Gilbert Dethick likewise was joined in the Commission with the Marquess of
Northampton, in the Embassy to the French King Henry the Second; also with the
Lord Clynton in that Emanuel Duke of Savoy; with the Lord Hunsdon in that
Legation to Charles the Ninth, with the Earl of Sussex, in that to the Emperor
Maximilian, and with Peregrine Lord Willoughby, in that to Frederick the Second
King of Denmark.

Afterward Sir William Dethick (his Son and Successor in the Office of Ga^ter)
was in like manner joined in Commission with the Earl of Shrewsbury, sent to
Henry the Fourth French King, and with Robert Lord Spencer to Frederick Duke of
Wirtemberg.

Lastly, Collect. E. W. G.
Sir William Segar, when the Habit of the Order was sent to Henry Prince of
Orange, was MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 18.] circa medium.
joined in Commission with Viscount Carleton, for the presentation thereof.

And it is here further to be noted, that at such times as any other of the
Officers of Arms were employed in this Affair (as has sometimes happened, when
Garter could not undertake the Voyage in person) such Officer (recommended by
him to, but approved of by the Sovereign) was sent to execute his Office,
nevertheless, under a particular reservation of his Rights.

And therefore the Embassy to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, falling out
near to the Coronation of King James (in reference to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
preparations for which grand Solemnity, Garter could not be spared) Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
William Segar Esquire then Norroy King of Arms, was joined in Commission with the
Earl of Rutland.

When Henry St. George Esquire Richmond Herald, was joined with Sir James Spens
Knight, and Peter Young Esquire in the Commission of Legation to a Gust^vus
Ado^p^us King of Sweden, he went See before fol. 303 Sir Ed. Walkers Pet. for
the rights of his Office.
Deputy to Sir William S^g^r, Garter, and was Col^ect. E. W. G.
accountable to him for the Rewards he did receive. Nor was I^h^ Pl^^^ Esquire
Somerset Herald any otherwise sent, than Deputy to Ga^t^r, though joined in
Commission with William Boswell Esquire for delivery of the Garter and George to
Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne. an. 9. Car. 1.

In like manner, when the Embassy was less solemn, and only part of the Ensigns
of the Order sent, Garter has been jointly employed with the other
Commissioners: for so was William Segar Esquire Garter, with Sir Ralph Winwood, for
presenting the Garter and George to Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 10. I^c. R.

But beside the ancient right, the usage and prescription on Garter's side (as
is before laid down) we find it declared by a Decree in Chapter (passed the 18.
of April, an. 13. Car. 1.) Lib. R. p. 120.
That the carrying of the Ensigns of the Order to Stranger-Princes, does
properly belong to Garter.

Besides those persons joined in the Commission of Legation, Heralds attendant
in the Legation.
there has been often times appointed either Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Norroy King of Arms, or some one of the Heralds* to go in the quality of an
Attendant on this Service, not only for the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
honor of the S^veraign, but of the Stranger that is to receive the Habit; in
regard the Collect W. le N. Cl.
Ceremonies of Investiture with the whole Habit, require the presence and
assistance of two Officers of Arms; concerning which we have met with these
Presidents.

MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 106.
Lancaster Herald attended the Embassy to Charles the Ninth French King.
Chester Herald, and Rouge Dragon Pursuivant at Arms, waited on the Embassy, to
the French King Henry the Third. A Herald also attended the Embassy to Emanuel
Duke of Savoy. York Herald attended that to Maximilian the Emperor: And
Somerset Herald to the French King Henry the Fourth.

And whereas there went only Norroy to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark; it
was because no more of the Officers of Arms could be then spared, from their
necessary attendance on the Sovereign's Coronation then at hand. So in the
Embassy to Maurice Prince of Orange, one Herald sufficed, Collect W. le N. Cl.
because the Garter and George only (not the whole Habit of the Order) were
sent unto him, and consequently there was then but little service to be done at
such an Investiture.

Concerning other Companions and Attendants in these Legations, they are both
for Quality and Number such and so many, as the Chief in the Legation thinks
sufficient, for the honor of the Sovereign, and the reputation of the Embassy:
and in what Equipage some of these Ambassadors have been attended heretofore,
may be seen from the following Lists.

Ex cod. MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [ sub. ^ffigie I^lit] C. 9.
The Names of the Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, that accompanied the
Marquess of Northampton in his Legation, with the Habit of the Order to the
French King Henry the Second, 15. May an. 5. E. 6.

The Earls of Worcester. Rutland. Ormond. Viscounts Fitzwalter. Lysle. Lords
Bourgoune. Bray. Evers. Mr. Throgmorton. Mr. Sidney, both of the Sovereign's
Privy Chamber. Sir William Cobham. Sir John Cutts. Sir John Perrott. Sir
Anthony Guydot. Sir Gilbert Dethick. Mr. Fitz Williams. Mr. Carre. Mr. Knolles.
Mr. Edw. Warney. Mr. Fr. Warney. Mr. Young. Mr. William Thomas Secretary to the
Lords Commissioners. Mr. Nicholas Alexander. Mr. Lucas Frugard. Chester Herald
at Arms. Rougdragon Pursuivant at Arms The whole number of Noblemen and
Gentlemen, with all their Trains, was 260.
MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 118.
The Names of the Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen, who accompanied the Earl of
Sussex in his Legation with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, to Maximilian
the Emperor, an. 9. Eliz.

The Lord North, Baron of Kyrtling. Sir Egremond Radcliff, the Ambassadors
Brother. Sir Thomas Mildmay. Sir Gilbert Dethick, Garter Sir Henry Cobham Two
of the Sovereign's band of Pensioners. Sir Edmund Powell Two of the Sovereign's
band of Pensioners. William Dethick Rouge Cross Pursuivant at Arms. William
Weston, one of the Queens Servants.
Gentlemen attending on the Ambassador.
John Valpe Doctor of Physic. Anthony Overton Prothonotary. William
Chancellor, Chaplain. George Frevill, Robert Butler. William Mesten. Henry
Mildmay. Thomas Higham. Peter Gough. Arthur Hevingham. Albert Philipps.
Servants to the Ambassador.
Henry Eritage. James Bradshaw. William Hamlett. Thomas Gest. Simon Smith.
Thomas Barber.
Servants to the Lord North.
Arnold Segrell Leonard Dickes:
Servants to Sir Tho. Mildmay.
John Strange. James --
Servants to Sir Gilbert Dethick.
Charles Poirett. John Rudde. John Child. John Fletcher.
Servant to Sir Henry Cobham.
Hans --
Servant to Sir Edmund Powell.
Charles --
The Names of the Emperor's Gentlemen, MS. penes ^ O. T. f. 154.
that waited upon the Lord Ambassador the Earl of Sussex, in Vienna 1567.

Casper van Mynkonitz, Sewer. Seymfred van Alderston, Carver. Marquess Spiller,
Cupbearer. William van Pellustrans Heralds of Arms. Hans Poyntsott Heralds of
Arms. Nicholas Radode, Comptroller of the House. George Swikle, Clerk of the
Kitchen. Item 10. Archers. Item 10. Holbardiers George Weaver, Master Cook. In
the Kitchen 10 persons. In the Cellar 5. In the Larder 5. In the Confectionary
5. In the Chaundry 2. In the Wardrobe 3. In the Scullery 3. And one Porter. In
all 62 persons.
The Names of the Noblemen, Ibid. f. 32.
Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, who gave their attendance on the Earl of
Derby, sent Ambassador with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, to the French
King Henry the Third, 20 Ian. an. 27. Eliz.

The Lord Sands. The Lord Windsor. Mr. Scroop, Son and Heir to the Lord Scroop.
Mr. Windsore, Son and Heir apparent to the Lord Windsore. Sir Richard Shirborne
Knight, Treasurer Sir Randolph Brereton, Knight. Mr. Clarencieux, King of Arms.
Mr. Anthony Cook, Heir to Sir Anthony Cook Mr. Gerard, Son and Heir to Sir
Thomas Gerard. Mr. Fleetwood. Mr. Newdygate. Mr. Stallange. Mr. Somerset Herald
of Arms. Mr. Crompton. Mr. Smith. Mr. Denton. Mr. Milles Secretary. Mr. Thomas
Arderne, Steward. Mr. Fox, Comptroller. Mr. Newton, Gentleman Huisher. Mr.
Philipps, Chaplain. Mr. Alexander, Gentleman of the Horse. Mr. Moorcrost,
Physician.
The Earls waiting Gentlemen.
Mr. Dawney, Son and Heir to Sir John Dawney. Mr. James Legh, Son and Heir to
Sir Pierce a Legh. Mr. Warenne. Mr. Thomas Shirborne. Mr. Stanley. Mr. Charles
Doyley. Mr. Chevalier Matchett. Mr. Richard Starkey. Mr. Brereton. Mr. Thomas
Hamner, Mr. Richard Lloyd. Mr. Salisbury. Mr. Richard Bussy. Mr. John Downs.
Mr. Francis Starkey. Mr. Baptist. Mr. Thomas Randolph. Mr. Tusser. Mr. Anthony
Chambers. Mr. Nicholas Forton. Mr. Gervase Rosell. Thomas Burscogh Clerks of
the Kitchen. Roger Iollibrand Clerks of the Kitchen.
In the third place, 3. Warrants for the Habit.
there is to be prepared for this Legation, Warrants for the Habit and Ensigns
of the Order; and these are also to be drawn up by the Chancellor of the Order,
who is to attend the Sovereign for his Sign manual thereunto.

One Warrant is to be the Master of the Sovereign's Great Wa^drobe, to deliver
to Garter King of Arms, the Appendix, Numb. LXXVI. LXXVII. LXXVIII. and LXXIX.
Mantle, with a Scutcheon of St. George within a Garter, embroidered on the
left shoulder, and Tassels thereunto belonging, as also the Appendix, Numb.
LXXVI. LXXVII. LXXVIII. and LXXIX.
Surcoat and Hood.

There is also another Warrant drawn up, for the delivery of the Ensigns of the
Order to Garter; namely Ibid. Number. LXXX. LXXXI. LXXXII and LXXXIII.
the rich Garter, the Great Collar of the Order, with a George appendant, and
another smaller George hanging in a Blue Ribband: together with Cases for them,
lined with Purple Velvet, and gilt on the outside.

And sometimes these Ensigns have been delivered out of the Iewel-house to the
Herald at Arms, joined in the Legation in Garters's stead, as where those sent
to Charles King of Sweden, an. 20. Car. 2. But those provided for John George
Duke of Saxony to Sir Thomas Higgons, the principal in the Legation to him; for
which they gave their Ibid. Number. LXXXIV. and LXXXV.
several Receipts.

The Sovereign's Warrant for the delivery of those Ensigns sent to Maximilian
the Emperor, was directed to the Lord Treasurer of England, for which Garter
gave his Ibid. Number. LXXX.
Receipt. But for those sent to the French King Henry the Fourth, the Warrant
was directed to the Master of the Iewel-house: and out of this Office have all
the Ensigns of the Order, before mentioned, been since delivered.

There are several other Necessaries to be provided, 4. Other Necessaries.
which may pass as appurtenances to the former, and are sometimes inserted into
the Sovereign's Warrants for the Habit of the Order, and at other times issue
forth by particular Warrants; namely,

A Appendix, Numb. LXXXVII. amp; LXXXVIII.
Black Velvet Cap, with white Feathers and a Heron Sprig.

A Appendix, Numb. LXXXVII. amp; LXXXVIII.
Girdle and Hangers of the same colored Velvet with the Surcoat.

A yard of Purple Velvet has been usually allowed out of the Great Wardrobe,
for covering the Book of Statutes which the Sovereign sends to the
Elect-Stranger; and for the Velom, Writing, and Binding the said Book, there is
a Fee paid by the Sovereign to the Register of the Order, which generally has
been proportioned according to the Degree of the Stranger, for this Officer had
allowed him for the Book sent l. s. d. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
To the French King, Henry the Fourth -- 5 0 0 To John Casimire Count Palatine
-- 4 0 0 To the Duke of Holstein, an. 3. Iac. -- 3 6 8 To the King of Sweden,
an. 3. Car. 1. -- 3 0 0

That Book of Statutes sent to the French King Henry the Third, was fairly
bound in Append. Number. LXXVIII.
Crimson Velvet, and edged with Gold Lace: That to the French King Henry the
Fourth was MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 104.
painted with Arms, wrought with Goldsmiths work, bound in Blue Velvet, with
Laces of Gold and Silk. But to be more particular, we will insert a Transcript
of the Bill of Charges for the Book of the Statutes, provided for and sent to
James the Fifth King of Scotland, an. 26. H. 8.

s. d. MS. vet. penes G. O. Y. f. 1.
First, For Vellym -- 5 0 Item, For illumyning the Arms and Letters -- 10 0
Item, For writing -- 20 0 Item, For Binding and Gilding -- 2 8 Item, For half a
yard of Purple Velvet -- 7 0 Item, For half a yard of Crimson Satin -- 7 0
Item, For the Purple Silk for the Laces -- 0 4 Item, For the white and green
Silk for the Seal -- 1 0 Item, For red Silk for the Strings and garnishing of
the Book -- 1 0 Item, For an Ounce and a half of Venice Gold -- 5 2 Item, For
shaping, making of the Bag, and garnishing -- 3 4 Item, For the Red Sarcenet
for the lining of the Bag -- 1 4 Item, For a Box -- 0 8 1 4 6

This Book of Statutes ought to be Sealed, with the E 3 Stat. Art. 20 H. 5.
Stat. Art. 20 H. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
Common Seal of the Order; which not only the Statutes of Institution, but all
the other succeeding Bodies of Statutes do appoint: Besides, at a Chapter held
at Whitehall, 18. Apr. an. 13. Car. 1. this Law was confirmed, and thereupon it
was again Decreed. Lib. R. p. 120
That the Book of Statutes sent to any Stranger-Prince should be sealed with
the Great Seal of the Order, affixed to a Label of Blue Silk and Gold.

There is also to be provided a large Purple Velvet Cushen, to carry the Robes
on, when they are to be presented; this is put likewise into the Sovereign's
Warrant, and provided by the Master of the Great Wardrobe; and it usually
contains Collect. A. V. W.
one yard and a quarter in length, being adorned Ex Lib. War. particular in
Offic. mag. Gardich. a^. an. 1593. ad an. 1603. page 85.
with Fringe, Cauls. and Tassels of Gold and Purple Silk, and within it a Ex
Lib. War. particular in Offic. mag. Gardich. a^. an. 1593. ad an. 1603. page
85.
Pillow of Fustian filled with Down.

There were two Velvet Cushens prepared for the Service of the Duke of
Wirtemberg's Investiture, an. 1. Iac. viz. MS. fol. penes G O Y p. 193.
one of Purple for the Sovereign's State, and another of Crimson for the Dukes:
So also were there carried over the same year, for the Service of Christian the
Fourth King of Denmark, Ibid. p. 299.
two Purple Cushens garnished with Fringe, Buttons, Cauls, and Tassels. Two
Majesty Scutcheons are likewise to be provided, painted in Oil, and gilded with
fine Gold; the one whereof to have the Arms of the Sovereign surrounded with a
Garter, under an Imperial Crown; the other of the Stranger's Arms, within a
Garter also, and such a Crown as belongs to his Dignity. Both these are to be
put in Frames, painted, and gilt, with their several Styles fairly written
underneath the Arms, and set upon the back of the Sovereign's Stall, under the
State, as also on the back of the Stall of the Stranger-Elect. But there were
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
three Majesty Scutcheons sent over in the Legation to Henry Prince of Orange,
in regard that at his Investiture Frederick Prince Elector Palatine was present.

And in case the chief person in the Legation be a Knight of the Order, then is
he to have a like Scutcheon of his Append. Number. LXXVIII.
own Arms to set over his Stall also: for so had Henry Earl of Derby provided
for him at the Sovereign's charge, when he was sent with the Habit to the
French King Henry the Third.

The remaining Necessaries are such as relate to the Transportation of the
Habit of the Order, and what appertains to them, to wit;

Ibid. Number. LXXVI LXXXVII. LXXXVIII.
One pair of fine Holland Sheets, to fold the Habit in. Two Sweet Bags of
Taffaty, to lay amongst them. Two Trunks, to put the said parcels in. One
Sumpter Saddle.
All which are to be provided at the Sovereign's Ex e^d. MS. penes G. O. Y. f.
97 b.
charge, and is also his gift to the Elect-Prince.

What further Warrants are to be obtained from the Sovereign, 5. Warrants for
allowances to Garter and the Herald.
relate to Garter, and such other Officer of Arms as is appointed to attend the
Legation; as first, a Warrant whereby the Sovereign ascertains an allowance for
their Diet and Reward, during their Journey, and till their return; and upon
which most commonly, for greater certainty of the payment, the Sovereign's
Privy Seal is obtained.

The allowance to Garter in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, was 10 s. a day
for his diet, and 10 s. a day the Sovereign's Reward, in all 20 s. per diem.

Appendix. Numb. LXXXIX.
Thus much we find to have been allowed Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter, in the
Embassy to the French King Henry the Second, and appointed to Appendix. Numb.
LXXXIX.
begin the 28. of April, an. 5. E. 6.

The like Ib. Number. XC.
sum per diem was allowed him in the Legation to Maximilian the Emperor, and to
Ib. Number. XC.
begin seven days before his arrival at the Sea side: In this service MS fol.
pene^ G. O. Y. p. 159.
250 days being spent, his allowance came to 250 l.

In the Voyage to Frederick the Second King of Denmark, the said Sir Gilbert
Dethick, had the Appendix, Number. XCI.
same allowance given him, which Appendix, Number. XCI.
began the 29. of June an. 24. Eliz. (being the tenth day before his embarking)
and ended the 2. day of October following.

And when Clarenceux was sent Collect. W. le N. Cl.
in the place of Garter (that Office being void by the death of the said Sir
Gilbert Dethick) with the Earl of Derby, to the French King Henry the Third,
the like sum of Appendix, Number. XCII.
20 s. per diem was also allowed him, to begin from the 17. of Ian. an. 27.
Eliz. though the said Earl went not till the Appendix, Number. XCII.
26. of the same month, and returned not till the 16. of March following.

We further find, that the very MS. in Bibl. Hatton. fol. 227 b. and MS. fol.
penes G. O. Y. p 61.
same allowance was also settled upon Sir William Dethick Garter, when the Habit
of the Order was sent to the French King Henry the Fourth, which Journey began
the MS. in Bibl. Hatton. fol. 227 b. and MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p 61.
11. of September, an. 40. Eliz. and lasted till the 7. of November ensuing, in
all 60. days. As also in his Voyage to the Duke of Wirtemberg, which began the
Ex eod. MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 60.
6. of September, an. 1. Iac. R. and ended with his return to Hampton Court, on
Christmas Eve following, and amounted to 109 l. But an. 10. Iac. upon the
carriage of the Habit over to Prince Maurice of Nassau, the allowance to Sir
William Segar, Garter, was increased to Appendix, Number. XCIII.
30 s. a day: so much also was after allowed to the same Sir William Segar,
when the Habit of the Order was sent over to Henry Prince of Orange an. 3. Car.
1. viz. Ibid. Number. XCIV.
15 s. per diem, for his Diet, and the same sum per diem by way of Reward.

Of this daily allowance Garter has usually obtained an advance beforehand,
for his better support by the way: For instance, he had an advance of Ibid.
Number. XC.
two months pay for his Voyage toward Vienna, and when he accompanied the Lord
Hunsdon into France, he had an advance also of MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 106.
40 l. In like manner when Clarenceux went in the Legation to the French King
Henry the Third, he received a Appendix, Number. XCII.
hundred Marks beforehand.

When any of the Heralds were sent in Garter's place, the same allowances were
made them, as if Garter had gone in person; for we find the sum of Ibid. Number.
XCV.
30 s. a day allowed to Henry St. George Esquire Richmond Herald sent with the Earl
of Carlisle to Charles King of Sweden, whither he began his Journey the 5. of
February, an. 21. Car. 2. As also to Number. XCVI.
Tho. St. George Esquire Somerset Herald, sent with Sir Tho. Higgons to the Duke of
Saxony, upon the like Employment, the 27. of February following.

As concerning the allowance to such Officer of Arms, not joined in, but
appointed to attend any of these Legations, it was as follows.

If he were a Herald, his allowance was the moiety of what was given to Garter;
to wit, heretofore 5 s. per diem for his Diet, and the like sum for the
Sovereign's Reward, in toto 10 s. per diem. And if a Pursuivant at Arms was
sent on this Employment, his allowance was half as much per diem as an Herald
had.

Agreeable hereunto was the allowance given to Ibid. Number. LXXXIX.
Chester Herald, and Ibid. Number. LXXXIX.
Rouge Dragon Pursuivants in the Embassy to the French King Henry the Second,
an. 5. E. 6. and Ibid. Number. LXXXIX.
there called the old Rate. So also to Somerset Herald, in the Voyage Ibid.
Number. XCI.
to Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and to the same Herald when he
attended the Legation to the French King Ibid. Number. XCII.
Henry the Third, and likewise in that Embassy to MS. in Bibl. Hatton. fol.
227. b. and MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 65.
Henry the Fourth of France.

Moreover the Herald or Pursuivant had also a proportionable part of their
daily allowances advanced beforehand, to fit them for their Journey, like as
Garter had; as in the foresaid Legation to Henry the Third, Somerset Herald an
advance of an Append. Number. XCII.
hundred Nobles.

Over and above the before mentioned allowances to Garter, for Diet and the
Sovereign's Reward; he has also an allowance for Ibid. Number. XC.
Postage, both outward and homeward, of himself and his Servants, and
Transportation of the Habit of the Order, and other things necessary for the
Voyage: and of this, because there can be no estimate made beforehand, whereby
to ascertain any allowance for the same, it has been usual to insert a Clause
in the Sovereign's Warrants, including the allowances for these things, to be
such as Ibid. Number. XC.
Garter (upon his return) should in a Bill of particulars, subscribed with his
hand, signify to the Treasurer and Chamberlains of the Exchequer to have been
disbursed by him.

The Warrant to furnish Garter or the Herald with Ibid. Number. XCVII. and XCVIII.
Posthorses from place to place, is commonly had from the Lords of the Privy
Council, or Secretary of State: as likewise for convenient Ibid. Number. XCVII.
and XCVIII.
Shipping, for the Transportation of himself, Servants, Trunks, and other
necessaries, when he passes over Sea, either before or after the Lord
Ambassador, and is not provided for in his Ship.

SECT. III. The Ceremonies of Investiture.
THE Ceremonies observed at a Stranger Prince's Receipt of the whole Habit and
Ensigns of the Order, are highly solemn, whether we consider the manner of
Investiture performed by the Sovereign's Ambassadors, or the Festivity and
Triumphs added by the new Invested Stranger; and therefore that nothing may
hinder a full prospect into the state and magnificence of both, we shall handle
the same at large; and give such instances thereof, as may illustrate so great
a Solemnity.

First then, 1. First Audience.
the Commissioners joined in the Legation (after their arrival at the
Elect-Stranger's Court, and receiving notice of their first Audience) are to
present themselves in the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
accustomed manner of Ambassadors, Garter or his Deputy going in breast with
the chief in the Legation, if there be only himself joined in the Commission
with the Lord Ambassador: and in that Collect. W. le N. Cl.
place is it remembered, that William Segar Esquire Norroy King of Arms (sent in the
place of Garter) did proceed with the Earl of Rutland, at their first audience
before Christian the Fourth King of Denmark.

Being arrived near the Elect-Stranger, they present the Letters Appendix, Number.
CII.
certifying Election, or their Credential Letters from the Sovereign; and after
some short general Complement delivered from the Sovereign of the Order, by the
chief Ambassador in the Legation, he further makes known how that the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter, have elected him
into that most renowned Society, for the reasons which are commonly laid down
in the Preamble of their Commission, and which he ought then to repeat; further
acquainting him, that the Sovereign does never Elect any Stranger into the said
Society, but such as he does most highly honor and respect; and therefore
desires him, that he would accept of it, as a true testimony thereof; to which
end he adds, that the Sovereign has sent him over, together with Garter
Principal King of Arms (or his Deputy) to perform the Ceremony of Investiture.
And this is the substance of his address for the general representation of his
Affair.

But more particularly in this first speech, he is to prosecute the method and
order laid down in his Instructions, concerning which we have some light from
those given to the Earl of Shrewsbury upon his Embassy, with the whole Habit of
the Order to the French King Henry the Fourth, which were as follows.

Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
First, you shall let the King understand, that the King who was first
Institutor of this Order, did principally dedicate the same to Noble persons,
remarkable for extraordinary valor and command in martial Affairs; and as both
We and Our Predecessors have usually bestowed it upon personages of highest
Estate and dearest unto Us, so both these respects concurring in this Election
of him (as that Prince whose preservation we have ever held most dear, and who
liking personal valor and experience has gotten to himself the greate^
reputation by the same, that ever any Prince has done in Europe) we have had
no small desire long ere this time, to possess him of this further pledge of
our perfect amity, being one of the greatest signs of honor, wherewith we can
honor any Prince; and therefore do desire him to make no other judgment of the
protraction of the same hitherto, but that his own uncertainties of residence,
in regard of the continual actions of War, wherein he is daily engaged, has
given us cause to think, it would have come unseasonably unto him; when now
that the Treaties and other Circumstances seem more fitting, we assure our
self, that it shall be received with that sure measure of good will and
kindness, wherewith we offer it; and as we take our self honored by such and so
choice a Companion, so can no Prince go before Us in Our true and perfect
obligation, to the rights of all happiness in all his Fortunes.

After the formality of this first address is over, and that the Stranger has
by his answer accepted of the Election, and consented to the reception of the
Order; then does the Ambassador, immediately MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol.
47. vide eti^m Appendix, Number. ^II.
deliver to him the Book of Statutes (that so he may peruse them before he
assume the Habit) and desires his consideration thereupon: Next, both the
Commissioners in the Legation present him with the George and Ribband, and put
it about his Neck, for so did Collect. E. W G.
Sir James Spens and Mr. Henry St. George, Richmond Herald, to Gustavus
Adolphus King of Sweden the 21. of September, an. 3. Car. 1. and in the last
place, the Ambassador moves him to be pleased to name both a fit time and
place, for his consent to the Articles of the Statutes, and the reception of
the Habit; which being appointed (after some further Complements) the
Ambassadors depart for that time.

In the interim, 2. Preparations for the Investiture.
before the day of Investiture, time is usually set apart for Conference
between the Sovereign's Ambassadors, and some of the Elect-Princes Council,
touching the ordering of the Ceremonies at this great Solemnity, and wording
the Oath to be by him taken, before he is invested (in case any Exceptions
shall be made to the general Oath of the Order, or that the form thereof has
not been fully agreed upon beforehand) in relation to which we shall
particularly discourse in the following Sect. 11.
Chapter.

MS. in Bibl. C^ton. [ sub effig. Iulii C. 9.]
Garter is likewise to consider, what places in the Elect-Princes Court
(fittest to perform the Ceremonies in) are to be made ready, and in what
manner; as also to instruct his Officers, what duties and services are on their
part to be undertaken.

If the great Hall, or other large Room, be appointed for the place of
Investiture, there ought to be prepared a Table, with a rich Carpet, whereon
the Habit and Ensigns of the Order are to be laid, during the reading of the
Sovereign's Commission of Legation; with another Table for the Stranger, who
receives the Order, and a third for the Sovereign's Ambassadors.

In the Church or Chapel into which the invested Stranger is to proceed, to
hear Divine Service, is to be erected a Stall (under a Ibidem.
Cloth of State) on the right hand entrance of the Choire, for the Sovereign of
the Order, within which is to be fixed the Majesty-Scutcheon of the Sovereign's
Arms, mentioned among ^^e preparations made for the Legation.

Also another Stall placed at that distance from the Sovereign's Stall, and on
the same side of the Choire, as is the Stall designed for the Elect-Stranger,
in the Choire at Windesor; over which a State is likewise to be set, and within
the Stall sixth the other Majesty-Scutcheon of his own Arms, brought likewise
over by Garter or his Deputy.

And lastly, a third Stall for the Lord Ambassador, who (if he be a
Knight-Companion of the Order) has in like manner a Scutcheon of his own Arms
within a Garter, set over it; for so had the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 239.
Marquess of Northampton, at the Investiture of the French King Henry the
Second, an. 5. E. 6. and the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Derby at that of Henry the Third, and the Constable of France (being a
Knight-Companion of the Garter) attending at the former of these two
Investitures, in his whole Habit, had also a Ex eod. MS. penes cund. G. O. Y.
l^c. cit.
Scutcheon of his Arms, placed over the Stall provided for him.

And we are further to note, that underneath all these Scutcheons of Arms, the
Styles and Titles (fairly written) of the Sovereign and each Knight-Companion
are to be affixed.

But where there has followed no solemn Proceeding to Church after
Investiture, the Sovereign's Scutcheon of Arms with his Titles have been set up
at the upper end of the Room where the Investiture was performed, so also the
Stranger-Knights at due distance: for so was it done at the Investiture of
Collect. E. W. G.
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, which he received in his Tent at the Leaguer
near Darshaw in Prussia the 23. of September, an. 3. Car. 1. and likewise at
the Investiture of Collect. E. W. G.
John George Duke of Saxony, the 13. of April, an. 22. Car. 2.

Besides the before mentioned Preparations, the Church or Chapel into which
the new Invested Stranger proceeds, is to be richly adorned: This, for
instance, we find done at the Investiture of Henry the Third, the French King,
the Church of Augustine Friars in Paris, being hung with rich Arras, and all
the Choire and Stalls with Cloth of Gold: and how the Church of St. Vlrick at
Studtgard was adorned at the reception of the Habit by Frederick Duke of
Wirtemberg will appear by and by.

The day whereon the Solemnity of Investiture is to be celebrated, 3. The order
of Investiture.
the Elect-Stranger sends his Coach, and some persons of Quality to accompany
the Sovereign's Ambassadors to his Court. At the Investiture of Henry Prince of
Orange, Vide Gulielmi Segar Suprem^ Relationem, inter Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, sat with Viscount Charleton in one
Boot of the Prince's Coach, and Sir Vide Gulielmi Segar Suprem^ Relationem,
inter Collect. W. le N. Cl.
William Segar in the other; who arriving at the Court, were met by the said
Prince, at the foot of the Stairs, and conducted thence into his great Chamber.

After such time as the Elect-Stranger and the Sovereign's Ambassadors have a
while retired, the Stranger has usually first entered the Room, appointed for
the Ceremony, and stood under his own State, expecting the coming in of the
Ambassadors, and notice thereof being given them (they reposing themselves in a
Room near unto it) forthwith proceeded in manner following.

Servants to the Lord Ambassador, two and two.

The Herald in his Coat of the Sovereign's Arms, bearing the Mantle, Surcoat,
Hood, and Cap on his arms, and if there be a Pursuivant attending the Embassy,
he (wearing his Coat) proceeds before him, bearing part of the said Habit.

Garter, vested in his MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [ sub effigii Iu^^i] C. 9.
rich Coat of the Sovereign's Arms also (but at the Investiture of the Duke of
Wirtemberg he wore his Robe of Crimson Satin, so did Clarenceux at the
Investiture of the French King Henry the Third, and lastly Richmond and
Somerset at the Investiture of Charles King of Sweden, and the Prince Elector
of Saxony) bearing on a Cushen the Garter, the Collar of the Order, with the
great George, the Book of Statutes, and the Commission of Legation.

Lastly, the Lord Ambassador, or chief in the Embassy, who, if he be a
Knight-Companion, proceeds in his complete Habit.

If there happen to be any other Knight-Companion present at this high
Solemnity, he also wears his whole Habit of the Order, as did Ex praes.
Relatione.
Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, at the Investiture of Henry Prince of
Orange, an. 3. Car. 1. the like did the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 239.
Constable of France, when the French King Henry the Second received the whole
Habit at Castlebriand the 21. of June, an. 5. E. 6. The said Constable also
paired in the Proceeding with the Sovereign's Ambassador, into the said Kings
Privy Chamber, the place appointed for performing this Ceremony.

In this Proceeding up to the Sovereign's State, they all make three
Reverences, and drawing near thereunto, the Ambassador's Servants fall o^f on
either side, for the Herald to pass up to the Table set before the Sovereign's
State, where being arrived (with a single Reverence) he lays down the Robes
thereupon.

Then Garter draws near the Table also, and with a like Reverence toward the
Sovereign's State, deposites there the Ensigns of the Order.

The Lord Ambassador follows and makes his Reverence toward the Sovereign's
State, and after turning to the Stranger-Elect, and doing him Reverence, he (or
some other fit person thereto appointed) delivers himself in a short, but grave
and learned, Oration; In which he not only Lib. N. p. 309.
sets forth the praises of the most illustrious Order, and of the King the
Sovereign thereof (his Majesty's hearty affection and good will appearing in
this Action) but also the virtues, the memorable and praise worthy Actions of
the Elect-Stranger, to whom the Habit and Ensigns of the Order are sent:
neither are his Ancestors (if happily any of them have attained and enjoyed the
honor, reputation, and dignity of this Order) to be passed over in silence;
whereby his heart (already sufficiently of it self breathing impatience and
desire) may be so much the more inflamed with an earnestness to obtain the
honor and favor of this so great a dignity.

He adds beside, that the Sovereign having well weighed these and the like
things in his mind, and maturely advised thereof with his Knights-Companions;
they were persuaded and well satisfied in themselves to nominate and choose him
before others, to the end that he might both himself be honored by the choice
of such a person, and also thereby give an increase and addition of Luster to
those renowned actions and virtues, which already were a chief ornament unto
him.

Lastly, he points toward the Ensigns of the Order, which he declares to have
been sent by the Sovereign, out of great love and singular affection to
dignifie him therewith, as to a person unto whom he wished as well and honorably
as to any other Prince whatsoever: and withal entreats him kindly to accept
of, and wear them in remembrance of the Sovereign and his Order.

This, Ibid.
or the like Oration being ended, the Ambassadors present their Commission of
Legation to the hands of the Elect-Stranger, who delivers it to his Secretary,
and he publicly reads it.

At the before mentioned Investiture of the French King Henry the Second, the
MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [ sub Effig. Iulii C. 9.]
Bishop of Ely, one of the Commissioners in the Legation, made the Speech, to
which the Cardinal of Loraine returned answer, in the said Kings behalf, with
all thankful acknowledgments of the honor of the Order.

And when Henry the Third of France received the Habit of the Order, Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
Sir Edward Stafford, the Sovereign's Leiger Ambassador, performed this service.

After the Commission is read, Garter presents the Oath, fairly written, which
is administered to the Elect-Stranger, where if any exceptions were before made
and admitted, they must be here rehearsed; as we find it directed in the
Appendix, Number. CII.
Instructions given for the Investiture of James the Fifth King of Scotland.

But the Oath was not taken by the French King Henry the Third, till after his
Investiture, and in the Augustine Friars Church in Paris; which being before
prepared and written on Parchment in Letters of Gold; the said King there Lib.
C. p. 97.
signed it, by the subscription of his name [ Henry] and then delivered it to
his Secretary, to have his Privy Seal put to it. So also was the Duke of
Wirtemberg, an. 1. Iac. Exhard Cellius Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wittemb. p. 134. and 135.
first Invested in his great Hall at Studtgard, and then proceeded to the great
Church, Ibid. 153.
where he took the Oath.

The Lib. N. p. 310.
Ceremony of the Oath being finished, Garter takes from off the Cushen the
Garter, and having kissed it, presents it to the Lord Ambassador, who kneeling
down, puts it with all Reverence about the Stranger's left leg, being assisted
by Garter, and therewithal Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Garter pronounces these words of Signification.

Lib. N. p. 31^
Ad laudem atque honorem Omnipotentis Dei, intemeratae Matris ejus, and Sancti
Georgii Martyris; cinge Tibiam tuam hoc insigni Subligaculo, circumferens in
augmentum honoris tui, and in signum ac memoriam illustrissimi Ordinis, nusquam
oblivioni daturus, aut omissurus, quod eo moneris; ut valeas, inquam, and velis
in justo bello, quod solum inibis, stare firmiter, agere fortiter, and
feli^iter omnino vincere.

This being said, Garter next takes the Surcoat, and delivers it with the
Ceremony of a Kiss to the Lord Ambassador, who (after the Elect-Stranger has
put off his Cloak, or upper Garment and Sword) puts it upon him in this manner:
First the Collect. W. le. N. Cl.
Lord Ambassador begins at the Stranger's right arm, and Garter (or the Leiger
Ambassador if present) assists at the left shoulder. The Stranger being thus
vested with the Surcoat, both the Lord Ambassador and Garter gird his Sword
about him, with a Velvet Girdle of the same color, at the doing whereof Garter
says these words.

Lib. N. p. 310.
Capito vestem hanc purpuream, ad incrementum honoris, and in signaculum Ordinis
accepti: qua munitus non vereberis pro fide Christi, liberate Ecclesiae, pro
jure, and oppressorum atque indigentium necessaria tuitione, sanguin^m etiam
fundere, nedum fortiter ac strenue dimicare.

After this, Garter takes up the Mantle and Hood, which having in like manner
kissed, he delivers to the Lord Ambassador, who invests the Stranger therewith,
and lays the Hood upon his MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1. f. 47.] videsis MS. penes
G. O. Y. f. 239.
right shoulder (the Train being given into the hands of some noble Personage,
to be born up) Garter also pronouncing these words.

Lib. N. l^co cit.
Accipe Clamidem hanc Coelici coloris, in Signum Clarissimi hujus Ordinis, and
in augmentum etiam honoris tui, rubeo Clypeo Dominicae Crucis, uti cernis,
insignitam: ut cujus virtute semper ac vigore protectus per Hosts tutus abeas,
eos ubique superare valeas, and pro clarissimis denique ^^ritis, post egregiam
hanc hujus temporis militiam, ad aeterna vereque triumphalia gaudia pertingas.

And in the last place, Garter takes up the Collar, and with a Kiss also,
presents it to the Lord Ambassador, who places it about the Stranger's
shoulders, at which part of the Investiture Garter utters these words.

Ibid. 311.
Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, ad augmentum honoris, and in signum quoque
clarissimi Ordinis a te suscepti, cum imagine sanctissimi Martyris, and Christi
Militis Georgii: cujus praesidio suffultus, Mundi hujus tam prospera quam
adversa sic pertranscas, ut animae pariter ac corporis hostibus hic strenue
devictis, non temporariae modo Militiae gloriam, sed and perennis victoriae
palmam denique recipere valeas. Amen.

As soon as this Ceremony of Investiture is finished, the Lord Ambassador
congratulateth the new invested Stranger in the Sovereign's name, and in the
name of all the Knights-Companions; and then delivers to him his Velvet Cap,
adorned with White Plumes, and next the Book of Statutes.

By the Instructions drawn up for the Investiture of Appendix, Number. CI. and CII.
Iulianus de Medicis, and Appendix, Number. CI. and CII.
James the Fifth King of Scotland (though the form of the words of Admonition
and Signification, are therein more briefly coucht) it may be observed, that
this was the ancient series and order of Investiture, and was performed MS. in
Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol. 47. videsis MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 156. in the case of
the Emperor Maximilian, and fol. 239. in that of the French King Henry the
Second.
all together, and MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1.] fol. 47. videsis MS. penes G. O.
Y. p. 156. in the case of the Emperor Maximilian, and fol. 239. in that of the
French King Henry the Second.
before the Stranger proceeded to the Church.

The Stranger being thus Invested, stays a while in the Room, where he
received this honor, and either discourses with the Ambassador, or else is
entertained by him, with some short congratulatory Oration: which Complement
being ended, he goes to the Church in a solemn manner, having the Train of his
Mantle carried up.

The Proceeding to the Chapel, after the Investiture of the French King Henry
the Second.
MS. in Bibl. Coton. [ sub. effig. Iuli^] C. 9. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 239.
Gentlemen of France and England. Noblemen of France and England. Knights of
the Order of St. Michael in their Collars. Commissioners of England, where Sir
John Mason placed himself with Monsieur de Omable, above the other
Commissioners, because he was the Sovereign's Ambassador Resident. Chester
Herald, in the Sovereign's Coat of Arms. Marquess of Northampton, and Constable
of France. Serje^nts at Arms. Garter in the Sovereign's Coat of Arms.
The French King in the Habit of the Order of the Garter.
Cardinal of Chattillion. The Cardinal of Loraine.
His Train born by the Duke of Longueville, as great Chamberlain of France.
At the entrance into the Church, all in the Procession make three Reverences,
the first toward the high Altar, the next toward the Sovereign's Stall, and
the third toward the new-invested Stranger's Stall.

The Lord Ambassador proceeds toward the Seat assigned for him, and stands
before it till the Stranger has ascended his Stall, and after that (making his
Reverences as before) he takes his; then Garter, making the like Reverences,
sits down on a Chair, placed for him before the Sovereign's Stall.

But the Herald at Arms ought to be often near the Stranger, or else the Lord
Ambassador, to inform them of the order of the Ceremony, if there be occasion;
because Garter is obliged to attend the Sovereign's Royal Stall.

After a solemn Anthem sung, Garter passes into the middle of the Choire, and
by a Reverence, first to the Invested Stranger, and next to the Lord
Ambassador, gives them the Signal for descending.

They being both come down, Garter passes up before the Stranger to the high
Altar, where he makes his Offering of Gold and Silver, being accompanied with
the Lord Ambassador, the Herald laying the Cushen whereon he kneels while he
offers.

But in case a Knight-Companion of the Order be sent on this Legation, then he
proceeds first up to the Altar, preceded by Garter, and offers for the
Sovereign, which done, he returns to his own Stall: Next the Invested Stranger
proceeds up (preceded as before) and offers, and returns back to his own Stall;
afterward the foresaid Knight-Companion proceeds up again, and at this time
offers for himself: and in this MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 156.
order was the Offering made, when the Emperor Maximilian was Invested at
Vienna, the 4. of January, an. 10. Eliz.

At the Investiture of the French King Henry the Second, there was a solemn
Mass sung, and at the Offering time Ibidem. fol. 239.
Garter proceeded before the King, to the Altar, and Monsieur: Dangennes the
Duke of Vendosme's Brother, presented to the King his Offering; and when he was
returned to his Stall, the Ibidem. fol. 239.
Constable of France proceeded up with Garter before him, and offered; and in
like manner after him the Ibidem. fol. 239.
Marquess of Northampton, with Garter also before him, made his Offering and
returned to his Stall.

The new-invested Stranger having offered, returns to his Stall, and the Lord
Ambassador, with three Reverences takes his Seat, the Organs or other Music,
playing all the while.

As soon as the solemn Service is finished, the Stranger descends again from
his Stall, and with the Proceeding before him, returns in the same order he
came, to the Room where he received his Investiture.

And it is observable that the Emperor Maximilian, out of compliance with the
Protestant Religion, caused on the day of his Investiture, all Ibid. f. 110.
Prayers to Saints, Incensing, and other matters and Ceremonies, not used by
the Church of England, to be wholly omitted at the service in his Chapel.

At these great Solemnities, the invested Strangers have heretofore held most
magnificent Feasts, but they of late are not so much in use: And when Dinner
was ready they proceeded thither in their whole Habit, which they Ex Autogr. in
Bibl. Hatton.
wore all Dinner while.

At the Investiture of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 1. Iac. the
Sovereign's Styles and Titles of honor were proclaimed thrice ( Collect. W. le
N. Cl.
before they sat down to Dinner) and the said Kings twice: But when Collect. W.
le N. Cl.
Maurice and MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 18.] circa medium.
Henry Princes of Orange received Investiture, the Styles were proclaimed
immediately after they were Invested, and in the same Room, that Ceremony being
performed to both in an MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 18.] circa medium.
Afternoon.

We have had the perusal of a fair Vellom Penes Job. Vincent genesis
Manuscript, wherein there is very curiously limned the order and manner of
Maximilian the First (King of the Romans) his sitting at Dinner, on the day of
his Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, together with Sir
Charles Somerset and Sir Thomas Wriothesley, sent on the Embassy to present him
therewith. As also the order observed of sitting at Dinner by Don Ferdinand
Prince of Spain, Archduke of Austria, on the like solemn occasions; the Lord
Morley and Sir William Hussy sitting on his right hand, and Doctor Lee the
said Sir Thomas Wriothesley on his left, these four being joined in the
Commission of Legation to him; which two Draughts for Antiquity's sake, we have
copied thence, and thought good here to exhibit.

The Manner of sitting at Dinner of Maximilian king of the Romans, on the day
of his Investiture.


The Manner of sitting at Dinner of Ferdinand Prince of Spanie, on the day of
his Investiture.


At the Feast made on the like occasion by the French King Henry the Second, he
MS penes G. O. Y. f. 239.
admitted to his Table, (beside the Marquess of Northampton, the principal
person in the Legation) the before mentioned Constable of France; and all three
sat in their full Robes of the Garter, which they MS penes G. O. Y. f. 239.
put not off till after Dinner: The MS penes G. O. Y. f. 239.
Cardinal of Loraine, fate also at the Kings Table, but it was on the other
side.

When the Investiture has been performed in the Afternoon, then was the grand
Dinner turned into a Supper; and thus it fell out at the Investiture of Ibid.
f. 1^^.
Maximilian the Emperor, and two of the French Kings, namely MS. fol. 19.
Charles the Ninth, and Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Henry the Third, as also of Genealog. Com ^assovia, p. ^^.
Maurice Prince of Orange.

But when Henry Prince of Orange received the Ensigns of the Order, there was
no Feast at all, but purposely omitted, to prevent the difference which might
have been occasioned, by MS. in Offic. Armor. [L 18.]
the precedence and place between Ambass^dors, drinking of Healths, and other
Complements. Only the next day, the said Prince invited MS. in Offic. Armor. [L
18.]
Garter to Dinner, who sat on the same side with him, yet at a MS. in Offic.
Armor. [L 18.]
convenient distance, and on the other side of the Table were placed, MS. in
Offic. Armor. [L 18.]
Count Lodowick of Nassau, and Colonel Bogg a Scotchman.

Thus have we briefly touched at the most material particulars, relating to the
Investiture of Strangers; of which Solemnity, and the honor they derived from
it, some have thought fit to transmit the memory to Posterity, by Med^ls, with
Inscriptions relating thereto. Such were those of Gold and Silver, which
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg caused to be made, Erhard Cellius Eq. Aur.
AngloWirtemb. l. 7. p. 184.
having on one side his Effigies, and on the other the Arms of Studtgard (his
chief City) and over them the imperial Eagle crowned; some of which were
preserved, and others dispersed abroad, for a perpetual commemoration of that
solemn act of his Investiture, with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. So also
those made by Charles King of Sweden at his Investiture, emblematically
pointing out the happy concord settled between the Crowns, both of this and that
Kingdom, being copied out and here inserted.



What is wanting in the course of the Solemnity on the day of Investiture, may
be supplied from the large account we shall give of the Ceremonies on the Eve
and Feast Day of St. George, from whence many things may be transferred to
their use, who shall be employed abroad upon the Like Legations.

Yet for their sakes, whose curiosity will like a more particular account of
the Solemnities in Foreign parts, we have thought fit to insert here the
Relations of some eminent Investitures, wherein several passages may seem
remarkable enough, while drawn together in a continued Narrative, but perhaps
would not appear so, if taken asunder; nor indeed can diverse minute things (in
some kind worthy of knowledge) be precisely referred to those few heads we have
chosen to discourse of, without too much straining.

A Relation of the manner of investing the French King Henry the Third, with
the Habit and Ensigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter, An. Dom. 1585.
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
HEnry Earl of Derby, appointed by her Majesty, Ambassador to Henry the Third
French King, and to invest him with the Order of the Garter, took his leave of
the Queen's Majesty at Greenwiche the 20. of January, an. 27. Eliz. and with
him, such Gentlemen as were present, were admitted to kiss her Highness hand;
Mr. Cook, Clarenceux, appointed to attend in that Voyage, in place of Garter,
whose room was void, and Robert Glover, Somerset Herald, likewise appointed to
that Journey.

On the 26. of January, the Earl, with his Train, passed from London to
Gravesend, where taking Posthorses they rid to Sittingborne, and from thence
to Dover, where they embarked, and landed at Callis, on the first of February;
on the third of February the Earl with his whole Train went from Callis to
Boloigne to Bed, where they were very well entertained; On the fourth of
February they rid to Monstreuil, on the fifth to Abbevil, where they were met
with 150 shot of Hacquebusiers: On the sixth they took their Journey to Amyens,
being by Monsieur Crevecoeur, accompanied with 100 Gentlemen, and best
Citizens, met half a Mile without the Town; that night the said Crevecoeur
presented the Earl, with great store of very large and good Fresh Water Fish,
and the Town with Wine of diverse sorts, and the day following, being Sunday,
the said Crevecoeur invited the Earl to Dinner, which Dinner was highly
commended; after Dinner the Earl with his Train went to Breteuil to Bed, the
next night to Cleremont, where they stayed Tuesday, and Wednesday, the tenth of
February he went to Luserche; on the eleventh to St. Dennis, where by the way
he was met by Sir Edward Stafford, her Majesty's Ambassador, resident with the
French King, who brought with him diverse Gentlemen of England, to the number of
thirty horse, and so accompanied him to St. Dennis, where they kept Company all
the day following, being Friday.

On Saturday his honor made his Entry into Paris, about two or three of the
Clock at Afternoon, there being of the Lord Ambassadors Train more than two
hundred horse, and midway between St. Dennis and Paris there met with them
(sent from the King) the Duke of Montpensier, a Prince of the blood; the Lords
Chauigny, le Chapelle, Comte de Lude, de Pienne, de Malicorne, de la
Mothefelon, who had sometimes been Ambassador Leiger in England, D'estree,
d'Abin, de Fontaines de Cornusson, the Marquess of Curton, the Comte de
Grignan, all Counselors to the Council, and Knights of the Holy Ghost, the
Duke of Iremonille, the Counts of Brisac, de Creance, Sancerre, and of Lazure,
with a great number of Lords and Barons, Gentlemen of the Chamber; these did
accompany the Earl of Derby, unto Hostell de Longuevill, sometime called the
Hostell of Anjou, there was his Lordship with the other Lords and Gentlemen
lodged, where was three Tables very sumptuously furnished for them, all of the
Kings cost; the one Table in the great Chamber, for the Lords and Gentlemen,
Servants to her Majesty; the other in the Hall, for the Earl of Derby's
Gentlemen; and a third in a Gallery beneath, for Gentlemen's Servants, besides
livery into every Chamber, both of Wax, Wood, Wine, and such like, in as great
plenty as could be desired.

On Sunday, the said Earl, betwixt the hours of two and three in the Afternoon,
went from his Lodging by a Postern, through the Garden, accompanied with the
said Lords de la Mothefelon, de Curton, and Grignan, together with others, and
and found the Captains of the Regiment of the Kings Guard, making two ranks on
either side of the streets, beginning from the Postern to the Louvre Gate, who
welcomed ^im in the Kings behalf; without the Gate of the said Louvre he was
received by the Lieutenant of the great Provost of France, and his Archers; at
the Louvre Gate by the Sire de Montigny, Captain thereof to his Majesty, and
his Archers; which Archers, together with those of the great Provost, made two
ranks from the said Gate of the Louvre to the foot of the Stairs, from which
foot his Lordship was received by the Sire de Pardillon, the French Lieutenant
of the Switzers, of the Kings Guard, which from the foot of the said Stairs to
the door of the Hall, made two ranks for his Lordships passage; at the entrance
of the Hall his Lordship was received by the Sire de Chasteau Viaux, Knight of
the Holy Ghost, and Captain of Archers of the Kings Guard, who likewise from
the said door unto the door of the Antichamber, made two ranks; from the door
of the Antichamber his Lordship was received by Sire de Combault, Knight of the
Holy Ghost, Chief Master de Hostell to his Majesty, and by his Gentlemen
Waiters, and there in the said Antichamber all the said Earl of Derby's
Officers and Gentlemen, wearing Liveries, were appointed to stay; and the
Queens Servants that proceeded next went still forward; at the Entry of the
Chamber of Estate, his Lordship was received by the Sire de Lenoncourt, Knight
of the Holy Ghost, chief Escuier of the Kings ^scurie, and the other Escuiers
of the Escuire, together with the Lieutenant of the hundred Gentlemen of his
Majesty, who made two ranks from that Chamber door to the Chamber of Audience,
every of them having Halberts in their hands; at the Entrance of the
Antichamber his Lordship was received by the Duke Joyeuse, accompanied with the
Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber Ordinary, who made two ranks from that Chamber
door, to the door of the Chamber Royal, into the said Chamber Royal.

First entered all the Gentlemen, the Queen's Majesty's Servants, the Lords that
had received and accompanied the said Earl, and Lords, and the said Duke de
Joyeuse, accompanied the said Earl of Derby unto the Bars, that stood about the
haultp^ce or mounting floor in the said Chamber, where the King stood at his
Beds fe^t, accompanied with the said Barriers on his right hand, with the
Cardinals of Bourbon, Vandosme, and Joyeuse, and on the left hand with the
Lords, the Princes of Conty, the Comte de Soissons, and D. Montpensier, Princes
of the Blood, the Dukes of Nevers, Delboeufe, de la Joinuille, de Retz,
Monsieur le Chancellour^ Sier de Villequier, du Bouchage, de la Valette,
d'Antragues, de la Chappelle aux Urfius, Chavigny, la Vivone, Comte de
Mauleurier, Clermont, Denitragues, de l'Archant, and other Knights of the Holy
Ghost, and Counselors of the ^states in great number.

The said Earl with the Lord Ambassador Ordinary of England, only entered the
said halt-space within the Barriers unto his Majesty, of whom they were
received with great courtesy, and as amiable countenance as could be; and the
Earl delivered the Queen's Majesty's Letters unto the King, with great
reveren^e, and then making rehearsal of that he had in charge to say, the said
Ambassador presented unto the King the Lord Sands and Windsore, and other the
English Knights and Gentlemen, which all one after another mounted upon the
halt-pace, kissed their hands, and did reverence unto the King. Then the Earl
took his leave, and was conducted by all the Lords and Captains unto the place
where they had first received him.

After, he went to salute the Queen Mother, and at the entrance into her
Chamber he was received by Monsieur de Lansac, Knight of the Holy Ghost, and
Knight of Honor unto the said Queen, whom he found accompanied with her Niece,
the Princes of Loraine standing at her Beds head, the Princes of Conde and the
Duchess of Nevers standing at the Beds feet, the Duchess of Duzez and of
Retz, and other Ladies and Gentlewomen in great number; from thence his
Lordship was conveyed to the Queen Regents Chamber, and at the entrance whereof
he was received by the Comte de Fiesque, Knight of the Holy Ghost, and her
Knight of Honor, finding her accompanied with the Duchess of Montpensier, and
Joyeuse who stood at her Beds feet, the Lady of Royden her Lady of Honor, and
other Ladies and Gentlewomen in great number, and then returned to the
a^oresaid Hostell de Longueville.

On Monday the 15, of February, the King by Mou^eur de Mothefelon, told the
Lord Ambassador his mind, touching the receipt of the Order, that he intended
to receive it on Thursday following, in the Afternoon at the Augustine Friars,
which was done accordingly, the 18, day of February, an. 27. Eliz.

About two of the Clock in the Afternoon, the Earl and Leiger Ambassador, and
all the other Gentlemen of their Train, in Coaches, were conducted from the
house of Longueville, where the Earl of Derby was lodged, unto the house of
Monsieur de Mantuliet, Provost of Paris, where the Earl did put on his Robes of
the Garter, and Clarenceux then representing the place of Garter, did put on
his Mantle, and made ready the Kings Robes. The King also with a great number
of his Nobility came from the Louvre to the same house of Mantuliet, for whom
there was provided two Chambers, in the inner Chamber over the Chimney was set
up a cloth of Estate, and on the left hand thereof a board covered with a rich
Carpet; against the end of which board the King did stand in a short Gown of
rich Taffata, having on either hand of him some sixteen of the greatest of his
Nobility, the rest abode in the outward Chamber (for so was the Kings pleasure)
that there might be the more room, and freer access for the Earl, and the
English Noblemen and Gentlemen; all things being put in good order, the King
sent the Earl word by Monsieur Lamothe, Fluelon, and Monsieur de Rhoades,
Master of the Ceremonies that he stayed for him.

Whereupon thirty of the English Gentlemen, accompanied with as many French
Gentlemen, proceeded two and two together up the Stairs before the Earl,
toward the King, then marched Somerset Herald in his rich Coat of Arms,
bearing on his Arms the Kings Kittle, Mantle, and Hood; after him went
Clarenceux in a Robe of Crimson Satin, having on his arms a fair large Cushen
of Purple Velvet, and thereon the Collar of the Order of the Garter, and the
little Chain with the George. After Clarenceux went the Earl in his Robes, and
the Ambassador Resident: And being thus come before the King, Somerset (after
due reverence) laid the Robe he bare upon the Table, that the King leaned unto,
so also did Clarenceux the Cushen, with the Jewels thereon. The Earl also being
entered, and having made his due reverence, Clarenceux delivered him his
Commission, who giving the same reverently to the King, he forthwith gave it to
his secretary Pinart to be read, according to the form: Though at that time it
was not read at all.

That done, Clarenceux delivered unto the Ambassador the Garter, who gave it
unto the King, who also kissing the same kneeling, did put it about the Kings
left leg, the Ambassador pronouncing these words following.

See before p. 402.
Ad laudem atque honorem Omnipotentis Dei, etc.

That being done, Clarenceux killing the Kirtle of Crimson Velvet gave it to
the Ambassador, who also delivered it to the Earl, and he to the King, putting
the same on with a Crimson Velvet Girdle, whereunto was put a gilt Rapier;
which Girdle and Rapier was formerly provided by a Gentleman of the Kings
Chamber, at the doing whereof the Ambassador pronounced these words following.

Page 403.
Capito Vestem hanc purpuream, etc.

The Kirtle being put on, Clarenceux delivered the Mantle of Purple Velvet, and
the Hood of Crimson Velvet, which the Earl put upon the King also with the
assistance of the Ambassador, that pronounced these words following.

Ibid.
Accipe Clamidem hanc Coelici coloris, etc.

Lastly, Clarenceux kissing the Collar of Gold, gave the same also to be put
about the Kings neck, which was done by the Earl, the Ambassador using these
words following.

Ibid.
Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, etc.

After the King was thus invested with all the Habilements of the Order as
aforesaid, the Earl delivered unto him, first the Book of Statutes of the said
Order fairly bound in Crimson Velvet, and Gold Lace; which Book the King gave
to the Duke of Joyeuse, to carry after him to the Church; and lastly, the small
Chain with the George, which was by the Earl delivered to the King, which also
was delivered by him to the Duke of Joyeuse.

These Duties thus performed, the King standing invested with his Robes, and
the ^arl likewise by him, the Ambassador for and in the name of the Earl (for
want of the Language) used a Speech to this effect.

Sir, we rejoice greatly, to see your Majesty now invested into this honorable
Society and Order of the Garter, desiring of God, that long and most happily
you may wear and use the same to his Glory, and the advancement of your own
greatness, equal with all your Predecessors, being right well assured (for so
has her Majesty commanded my Lord to say unto you) that if her Highness, and
the residue of the Knights of this Order, certainly had understood of the day
and time of this your Majesty's reception of the same, both she, and all they
would not have failed, in their Robes, to celebrate this day, in token of the
honor and prosperous success they wish unto your Royal Person.

When the King had thus received the Order, and was invested as aforesaid, he
proceeded to the Church of the Augustines; some 15 or 20, score off to
Evensong, being about 4 of the Clock, the way being all railed in with Timber,
and gravelled with fine Sand, and guarded on each side with the Kings several
Guards, that the Train might not be troubled in proceeding.

The body of the Church was hanged with rich Arras, and all the Choire of the
same Church and Stalls with Cloth of Gold. At the entry of the Choire was
erected two Cloths of State, one for the Queens Majesty, and that was over the
Stall on the right hand of the same Choire, and the other for the French King,
and that was over the Stall, next unto the Queens Majesty, on the left hand;
within these two States royal were affixed the Arms of these two Princes, viz.
over the Queens Stall the Arms of England and France quarterly, and over the
Kings Stall the Arms of France, both within the Garter, and set in Frames of
Wood richly gilt. The Earls Stall was about eleven Stalls beneath her
Majesty's, and on the same side, whereon was also affixed the Earls Arms within
the Garter, and his Style fairly written under them; directly before the Queens
Cloth of State was placed a Form, covered all with Cloth of Gold, for Mr.
Clarenceux to sit upon, during the time of Evensong.

At the right side of the Altar within the same Choice was made a place of
bords S^affoldwise, two yards high from the Ground, covered with rich Carpets,
and hanged with Cloth of Gold, whereon was placed the Queen Mother, and Queen
Regnant with other Ladies and great Princes, and directly on the other side
against them was another place made and erected, whereon stood the Popes
Nuntio, with the Cardinals, and all the Ambassadors that then were in Paris.

All things being thus put in Order at the Church, and all persons placed
therein according to their Degrees, the King proceeded thither in this sort
following.

First, Trumpets and Drums. Then thirty English Gentlemen, accompanied by the
Kings especial order and care, with thirty French Gentlemen, of equal or better
degree. Then the Lord Windesor, with a French Lord. Then the Lord Sands, so
also accompanied. Then Sergeants at Arms with their Maces. Then Somerset Herald
at Arms. Then Clarenceux. Then the Ambassador Leiger Sir Edward Stafford. And
then the Earl of Darby Chief Commissioner. After him followed the King, his
Train being born by a Brother of the Duke of Joyeuse, being a Gentleman of the
Kings Privy Chamber. And after the King came the Princes of the Blood Royal.
Then Dukes, Marquess^s, Earls, and other Noblemen.
Note, That the King had especially ordered, that for her Majesty's special
Honor, none should that day proceed before him, but English and such French as
were ordered to go with them, and his own Nobility to wait behind him.

Note also that all personages of the Order of the Holy Spirit, went next to
the King in their Cloaks of the Order, and Collars of Gold about their necks of
the same Order, the person of the King was guarded all the way, by a number of
Gentlemen Pensioners, with their Pool-axes in their hands.

In this order, the King with his Train entered the Church, and in the entering
in of the Choire, Somerset Herald in his rich Coat of Arms made his three
Reverences, the first toward the Altar, as it was formerly agreed upon before
by the Lord Ambassadors. Secondly, toward the Queens Stall. Thirdly, toward
the Kings Stall.

And after him, Clarenceux entering the same Choire did the like. Then the
Ambassador Leiger, then the Earl; which done, the said Earl went before his own
Stall, and there stayed till the King had taken his Stall Royal, and then the
Earl making his Reverence as before went up into his Stall.

After him the Ambassador Leiger did the like, and went into the Stall next
beneath the Earl, toward the High Altar; Then Clarenceux having made the like
Reverence, sat him down on his Form placed as aforesaid, directly against the
Queen's Stall, where he remained till the Choire began to sing Magnificat.

At which time he stepped forward into the midst of the Choire, and there
making his three Reverences, as aforesaid, turned himself to the Earl and
Leiger Ambassador, then the Ambassador came forth of his Stall, and making his
three Reverences, followed Clarenceux over the Choire toward the King, and
there stayed before the Kings Stall, until Clarenceux returned and fetched the
Earl unto him, who making his three Reverences, came also with Clarenceux
before the King, to the right side of his Stall, where standing, Clarenceux
delivered the Oath, fairly written in Parchment and Letters of Gold, which by
the Earl was laid before the King to be Signed, the Ambassador Leiger being
ready to have read it (but that the King said it needed not, because he was
privy to it before) who taking it in his hands, received of his Secretary
Pinart a Pen with Ink, and therewith did subscribe his Name, only by the Name
of Henry, which done, he gave the same unto the said Secretary, to have the
Privy Seal put thereto, which was done accordingly, and the next day delivered
to Clarenceux.

After the King had thus taken his Oath, as aforesaid, the Earl and the
Ambassador with Clarenceux before them, returned back to their Stalls, not
omitting three Reverences, and there remained till the end of Evensong, at
which time the King standing up in his Stall, being ready to depart, all the
other Strangers Ambassadors, presented themselves before him, with words of
special Congratulation, to whom he gave several thanks and answers, and so
departing out of the Church, in the same order as he came thither, he returned
again to the House of Mantuliet, where in the same Chamber as he had put the
Robes on, he put them off, and after some speeches with the Earl, and
Ambassador some Quarter of an Hour or thereabouts, he departed with his
Nobility over the Water to the Louvre, leaving the Earl and Ambassador, and all
their Trains, to return in their Coaches through Paris to the House of
Longueville.

The same night, the Earl with the Lord Ambassador, and all the English
Gentlemen that were the Queens Servants, did sup at the Court, the Earl and the
Ambassador at the lower end of the Kings Table, at which Board did also sit
with the King the two Queens, and six or seven other great Ladies, among whom
the Lady Sheffield was one, and at another Table in the same Chamber did sit
diverse great Ladies all along one side, and over against them the Lord Sands,
the Lord Windesor, and the other English Gentlemen. Supper being ended, and the
place ordained for dancing, the King took his Wife by the hand, and danced with
her; the like did diverse other great Lords and Ladies of France, and lastly,
three English Gentlemen; I omit the description of the Masque, and other
^^ngular Music both costly and curious, whereby the Evening was spent till
three of the Clock the next morning.

On the 28. of February, the Ambassador with his Train took their leave, at
whose return from the Court to his Lodging, he was presented that night with a
rich Cupboard of Plate, worth 1200 l. at the least, and unto Mr. Clarenceux was
given a Chain of Gold worth 120 l. and better, of 236 links; to Master Somerset
a Chain of 150 links, worth 100 Marks; and to Thomas Milles a Chain of the same
value.

On Thursday next, the Earl with his Train set forward homeward, from Paris
unto St. Dennis, and so were lodged all the way in the same Lodgings that
before they had been received in, and arrived prosperously in England, from
Boloigne to Dover, the 12. of March, and on the Tuesday following were brought
to the Queen'^ Majesty's presence at Greenwich, who graciously welcomed them
home.

A Relation of that pompous Solemnity, celebrated at the Duke of Wirtemberg's
Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the most Noble Order of the Garter,
an. I. Iac. R. extracted out of Erhardus Cellius his Eques Auratus
Anglo-Wirtembergicus.
RObert Lord Spencer of Wormleiton, and Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, Garter
Principal King of Arms, were joined in Commission, bearing Test at Woodstock,
the 18, day of September, an. I. Jac. R. to present and invest Frederick Duke
of Wirtemberg and Teck, with the Habit, and Ensigns of the most Noble Order of
the Garter.

They began their Journey in the beginning of October, an. 1603, and came to
the City of Studtgard the second of November following.

Upon their arrival, Lib. 4. p. 12^.
they presented their Credential Letters, which being re^d the said Duke began
to treat the Ambassadors with the highest respect imaginable, and to put all
things into a readiness for his solemn reception of the Ornaments of the Order.
To which end, he sent for his three Sons, with their Tutors, from the Ca^^^^ of
Tubing, where they followed their Studies, to be present at this Solemnity;
likewise he ordered the Vice President and twelve Assistants of his Ducal
Con^istory, an^ all the principal and most noble Persons of his Court to be
present.

Moreover, he appointed an English Lord, and the Lord Benjamin Buwingkshausin,
one of his Privy Council, to be the principal Contrivers, Directors, and
Managers of all things that should belong to the setting forth of this
Solemnity; for the performance of which, two places were especially allotted,
prepared, and adorned, namely the great Church of Studtguard where the
Investiture was to be conferred, Page 1^3.
and the great Hall of the Castle called from hence Hypocaustrum Equestre,
whence the Proceeding was to begin, and p^ss toward the Church.

At the entrance of the Choire were four stately Stalls erected with their
Canopie^, Footstools, and ascents on each side, and covered with Velvet; the
first Stall was assigned to the Sovereign of the Order, on the back side
whereof his Majesty's Arms and Style were engraven, Page 12^
besides his Style written underneath in French thus.

Du tres-hault, tres-puissant, and tres-excellent Prince Jacques, par la grace
de Dieu Roy d' Angleterre, d' Escosse, France, and d' Irelande, Defenseur de la
Foy, etc. Souveraigne du tres-noble Order de la Iartier.

The second Stall was placed on the right hand next to the Sovereign's, in like
manner adorned and assigned to the Principal Ambassador the Lord Spencer, who
in conferring the Order was to represent the Sovereign's person.

The third Stall was on the left hand next to the second, assigned to Sir
William Dethick, Garter, Principal King of Arms.

The fourth Stall was also on the left hand over against the Sovereign's
Throne, after the same manner made and adorned, assigned to the Elect Duke: and
on the back side thereof his own Arms and Style also engraven, besides his
Style likewise underwritten in French thus.

Du tres-hault, Page 125*
puissant and tres-noble Prince, Frederick par la grace de Dieu, Duke de
Wirtemberg and Teck, Comte de Montbeliardt, Seigneur de Haydenhemb, etc.
Chevalier du tres noble Order de la Iartier.

There were also on the right and left hand of the Stall, Benches or Seats
continued on either side as far as the Altar; these Seats were all covered with
red Cloth, and also the stone Pavement, from the steps of the Vestry unto the
Stall of the Elect-Duke, and so from the middle of the Vestry unto the Altar,
in the form of a Cross. The Altar was covered with red Silk hanging down to the
ground, in the middle of which three gilt Basins were set upright; the first
for the Sovereign, the second for his Ambassador, and the third for the
Elect-Duke.

Page 126.
The Hall of the Castle was magnificently set out with rich Hangings, and other
costly Furniture. Toward the East and South were placed five stately long
Tables covered with Velvet, as also the Seats and Benches about them; the
middlemost of these Tables was called the Sovereign's Table, in honor of the
King of England, though absent; over the Sovereign's Chair was set a stately
Canopy of Silk, and on the back side of the Seat toward the middle thereof,
were fixed his Majesty's Arms with his Style underwritten, after the same manner
as on his Stall in the Church.

Page 127.
At the right hand of the Sovereign's Table were two other Tables, the one for
the Lord Ambassador Spencer, the other for Sir William Dethick Garter, both
covered in like manner with Silk, and adorned with Canopies, and their Arms.

On the left hand of the Sovereign's Table were likewise two other Tables, one
for the new invested Duke, covered and adorned with his Arms, and a Canopy in
the same manner as in the Church; the other for the Duke's Wife and Children,
who were ten in number of either Sex.

Besides those that were particularly warned to be present at this Feast (which
was cheerfully performed by them) there came diverse of their own accord, from
all parts of the Dukedom, drawn by the fame of a Feast and Solemnity, the like
whereof had not been in those parts within man's memory.

Page 128.
The day appointed for this Solemnity, namely, the 6. of November, an. Dom.
1603, being come, the Peers, Nobles, and Counselors of the Duke of Wirtemberg,
according to Summons, appeared at the Castle of Studtguardt, attending the
Dukes coming forth.

Lib. 5. p. 130.
And at length be proceeded out of his Bedchamber, most splendidly clad, in very
rich and sumptuous Habit; there going before him, first the Nobles of his
Dukedom, the great Master of his Court, the Marshal, the great Master of his
Hall, the Tutors and Attendants of the Dukes five Sons, then the five young
Princes themselves, going next immediately before their Father, who thus
illustriously attended entered into the said Hall, and placed himself between
the Sovereign's Table and his own, expecting the coming of the Sovereign's
Ambassadors.

The Elect-Duke was most sumptuously habited from Head to Foot, his Hose were
Ash Color and seamless, his Breeches, Doublet, and Sleeves were of Silk
pricked, slasht, and fringed, there shining all along through the Cutwork the
gilt Plate upon which it was wrought; his Sleeves were wrought after the manner
of a long Pretext or Senators Robe, with the finest sort of Linen, embroidered
with Needlework Blue, upon his Wrists were Bracelets of costly Gems, upon his
Fingers Gold Rings, most exquisitely wrought and inlaid with Rubies, Diamonds,
Saphirs, Emeraulds, and other such like precious Stones, casting forth a
radiant mixture of diverse colors; the Collar of his Doublet was in like manner
of the finest and softest Linen, and of a Blue Amethist color, and wrought all
about with oylet holes, his Cap was of Silk ending in a Cone at the top, and
girt about with a Hat-band of Gold and precious Stones, especially Pearls of a
very large size, and also a Circle of white Plumes erected up toward the top,
and bending a little downward at the end. His Shoes were likewise of Silk
adorned with Roses, Page 131.
artificially wrought with Precious Stones, Gold, and Pearls, a cross his
middle he had a Belt very skilfully wrought, and adorned with a Sword appendant
to it on the left side, and a Dagger (inserted into the Belt) the Hilt and
Handle whereof were all wrought about and enamelled with Gold and Precious
stones, his Cloak was of black Silk, bordered about with several orders or rows
of

Not broad Gold Fringe.

long after, the Lord Ambassador Spencer, from another part toward the South,
came forth out of his Chamber, through a little Stone Gallery, into the Hall
where the Duke was. There went before him Sir Gilbert Dethick, Garter, clad in
a long Crimson Mantle reaching down to his heels, lined within with White Silk,
and carrying in both hands a Cushen of Crimson Velvet, upon which were laid the
Robes and Ornaments of the Order, as the Gold Collar of the Order, with the
George hanging at it, Page 13^.
the Blue Garter and the other Vesiments and Ensigns belonging thereunto; and
making thrice a low Reverence, first to the Sovereign's Table, and next to his
Highness the Duke as he drew near; he gently laid down the Cushen with the
aforementioned Ornaments upon the Sovereign's Table; in the mean time the Lord
Ambassador Spencer representing the person of the Sovereign, bowing himself to
the illustrious Elect-Duke placed himself at his right hand, whom his Highness
courteously received, as also Garter King of Arms, taking them by the hand.
After which the Lord Buwingkshausen made an Oration in the Dutch Tongue,
wherein he briefly touched upon all the Circumstances of the occasion of this
solemn meeting, which were more at large contained in the Commission of
Legation and the Sovereigns Letters, which after a low obeisance were delivered
by the Lord Ambassador into the Dukes hands, who presently gave them to his
principal Secretary and Councellor the Lord John Stattler, standing near him,
to read them publicly in that solemn assembly.

Before the Letters of Legation were read, Page 134
in the attentive hearing of the whole Assembly, Garter made a short speech
also in French, to the illustrious Elect Duke, wherein he declared the will and
pleasure of ^is most serene Master the Sovereign of the Order; which speech
being ended, and the Commission read, they proceeded to the Investiture.

Garter first devesied the Duke of his Cloak, Sword, and Dagger, which
according to the custom of the Order, he reserved to himself as his own Fees;
but presently in the room thereof he invested him with a Surcoat of Crimson
Velvet lined with White Taffaty, which he girded close to his Waste with a
silken Girdle, by which there hung a Fauchion or shorter kind of Sword, Page
135.
made plain after the ancient fashion: Over his Surcoat he put on the Mantle of
the Order, which reached down to his heels, with a long Train behind, and
buttoned before at the top; it was of Velvet, and of a mixed color, Purple with
Violet, and lined within with White Tafsaty, as also faced with the same, and
very neatly fringed, and made after the ancient fashion used at the Institution
of the Order, over the left shoulder whereof hung the Tippet or Hood.

The Duke splendidly clad with the aforesaid Vestments of the Order, proceeded
from the Hall through the four square Court of the Castle, and over the large
Bridge to the Church of St. Ulrick, to receive the rest of the Ensigns of the
Order, there sounding all the time of his Procession several Trumpets, and
other Musicians, placed on high in the Stone Gallery of the Castle.

As to the order of the Proceeding, Page 143.
it was in this manner, First went two Trumpeters belonging to the Troops of
Horse, whose Trumpets were adorned with silk Banners, painted with the Arms of
Wirtemberg in their proper colors, and after them ten other Trumpeters in the
same equipage: Next a Flute-player and a Drummer, the military Music belonging
to the Foot. These fourteen Musicians were clad in Silk intermixed White and
Red, at equal intervals, and Caps of black Velvet on their heads. After these
rode the Captain of the Lifeguard, habited in the same color, but more
richly, and with a gilt Truncheon in his hand, then the Troop of the
Lifeguard, habited in like manner as before is specified, and carrying
Pollaxes. Next, after a little interval, went the Lord Marshal Baron
Princenstein, carrying in his hand a Silver Wand; then came all three together,
Anwill the great Master of the Hall, Page 144.
Hugwizt the great Master of the Horse, and Daxperg Captain of the Horse-Guard.
After them rode the Knights in a long Train, and then the Sovereign's
Ambassador's Retinue of Knights and Gentlemen, very splendidly accoutred and
adorned; next the chief Peers and Nobles of the Dukedom, together with the
principal Courtiers and chief Officers of the Duke's household, after whom rode
the Duke's five Sons, in the richest and most splendid equipage that could be
imagined; at a little distance from them came very nobly attended and also
accoutred, Garter, King of Arms, carrying before him with both hands, the
Cushen upon which lay the Ensigns of the foresaid Order; namely the Great
Collar of the Order, with the Image of St. George, in a riding posture, hanging
at it, also the Garter wrought with Gold and P^ecious Stones. He carried
moreover the Book of the Statutes of the Order. Next after Garter, came jointly
together the Lord Ambassador Spencer, Page 145.
richly glistering with Gold and Precious Stones, and with him the illustrious
Duke of Wirtemberg himself, so personable, and withal so magnificently
attired, that he attracted the admiration of all upon him; some thinking his
Habit to be Turkish, some Hungaric, some Imperial, others Electoral, others
Pontifical: The Train of his Mantle was held, and carried after by Count
Lodowick Leostein.

Page 148.
The last part of the Procession consisted of the grand Counselors and Senators
of Wirtemberg, as namely, the Lord Eberard, Lord of Limpurg, hereditary
Cupbearer of the sacred Roman Empire, Great Master of the Court of Wirtemberg,
James Reenhard Doctor of Law, Assistant at the Imperial Chamber, and
Chancellor, besides many other Counselors and Noblemen.

Page 150.
Thus nobly and magnificently attended, the Duke entered into the Church, where
in the midst of the Body thereof, he and the Lord Ambassador Spencer, walking
upon Red Cloth, spread for that purpose; they first made obeisance, according
as the manner is in England, to the Sovereign's Royal Stall, all the rest of
the Company doing the like as they past by; then the Lord Ambassador went to
his own Stall, placed at the right hand next after the Sovereign's, and seated
himself therein, Garter also placed himself in his, and lastly the Duke
possessed his Stall on the left hand: As soon as they were seated thus in the
Church, a loud volley was discharged by 300 Musketeers.

Page 151.
The concourse of People at this Solemnity was very great, but to repress the
Crowd from rushing in with too much violence, there were placed at the entrance
both of the Church and the Castle, on the one side a row of Musketeers, and on
the other a row of Halberdiers.

Page 152.
The Sovereign's Ambassadors and the Duke being thus seated, each in their
Stalls, the Peers and Nobles that attended took their places also, the English
Nobles and Gentlemen on the right hand of the Lord Ambassador Spencer, those of
Wirtemberg on the left hand of their Duke; and in the first place on the
foremost Seats, covered with red Cloth, sat the Dukes five Sons, vested in
ducal habits. Then began a threefold sacred Music, first the Organ played to
certain Anthems, next the Children of the School sung certain Psalms in Dutch,
lastly the principal Musicians of the Court sung in Consort: and during the
Music the Investiture of the Duke went forward.

For the Lord Ambassador Spencer and Garter rising from their Seats, went upon
the red Woollen Cloth toward the Duke, and making a low obeisance to him with
great honor and respect, they addressed their speech to him in a certain form
of words, commonly used upon that occasion, and presented unto him the Ensigns
and Ornaments of the Order.

Page 153.
First they delivered into his hands the Book of the Statutes, which he again
delivered unto his chief Secretary the Lord John Stattler, who stood ready at
the Duke's side, according to his place, to receive it; and who thereupon
delivered to the Ambassadors, Page 162.
from the Duke an Oath, to keep and observe faithfully all the Statutes and
Articles of the Order. After that, the Garter was tied upon his Highness left
leg, a little beneath the Knee; Then they put the Collar about his neck.

Page 163.
All these things being performed, the Lord Ambassador Spencer, and Garter,
congratulated the Duke with much respect, and a while held discourse with him;
and then after a low obeisance made to the Sovereign's Stall, they returned
toward their several Seats.

Lib. 6. p. 164.
Then the Music ceasing, that most eminent Divine John Magirus Councellor to
the new invested Duke, and President of Studtguardt, made a most learned and
elegant Sermon, wherein he discourst of the friendship and discord of Princes,
and showed how excellent a thing the mutual concord amity and benevolence of
Princes was, how much it was to be esteemed by their Subjects, and what great
benefits and conveniences arose from thence.

Sermon ended, Page 180.
the Music was again renewed, which consisted of the Voices of two Youths clad
in White Garments, with Wings like Angels, and standing oppo^ite one to
another; so after a Tenor, an Altus, and a Base was sung, the Organ and other
instrumental Music, together with vocal, went together in (...).

After, Page 183.
according to the Custom at the Anniversary Feast of St. George ^t Windesor,
the new invested Duke rising from his seat, and thrice as he passed by making
Reverence to the Sovereign's Stall, went upon the Red Cloth ( Garter going
b^^ore) immediately to the Altar, (his Train being held up by Count Leostene,
and his Sword carried after him by his Esquire of honor) where when he was
come, the Reverend Divine Faelix Bidembachin, Chaplain to his Highness, set a
gilt Basin upon the middle of the Altar, into which the Duke put 50 Ducats,
which he took out of a little red silk Purse, giving charge to his said
Chaplain to distribute them to the Poor; which done he betook himself again to
his Stall, saluting the Sovereign's in passing by as before.

The Solemnities in the Church being finished, Page 184.
this illustrious company returned to the great Hall in the Castle, in the same
order and pomp as they proceeded thence, the Trumpets sounding, and the Guns
going off.

After several congratulations from the Lord Ambassador Spencer, Page 185.
and Garter, and many other noble Personages, to the new invested Duke, in the
said Hall, they parted and went to their several Chambers till Dinner was ready.

Dinner time being come, Lib. 7. p. 190.
the Duke and Lord Ambassador Spencer, with all their Train, went into the
great Hall to Dine; where the preparation and order of the Feast, was after the
manner of St. George's Feas^ in England; the Sovereign's Table was served with
all manner of varieties, as if he had been there present himself, the Carver
and Sewers and all other Officers attending and serving on the Knee.

Also Water was presented by three that carried the Basin, Page 193.
Ewer, and Towel, with the same obeisance as is used in England, to the
Sovereign, being present. Water also was presented to the Duke after the custom
of Wirtemberg, the like to the Lord Ambassador Spencer and Garter, to the
Duchess and the Duke's Children.

Then each ones proper place was assigned by certain Officers appointed for
that purpose. Page 194.


At the four ends of the Sovereign's Table were placed Tasters; he that was at
the North side received the Dishes from the Sewers, and delivered them to him
that stood opposite on the South side, who standing on the right side of the
Sovereign's Chair, tasted of the meat cut off it, and put it upon a Plate that
was laid as for the Sovereign, and after a while changed the Plate, giving it
to him that stood at the West Side, and did the like with the rest of the
Viands.

The fourth Taster stood at the East side of the Table, Page 196.
and his Office was to taste and administer the Sovereign's Wine; reaching it
over to the Southern Taster, that stood by the Sovereign's Chair, in like
manner as the meat was served.

Likewise the Duke, Page 212.
the Lord Ambassador Spencer, and Garter, had their se^eral Tables as has been
said before, and sat under their several Canopies, and at another Table sat
the Duchess and her ten Children.

After exceeding plenty, Page 213.
state, and variety of Dishes, there were served all manner of Curiosities in
Paste, as the Figures and shapes of several kinds of Beasts and Birds, as also
the Statutes of Hercules, Minerva, Mercury, and other famous persons. All
Dinner time and a pretty while after, the English and the Wirtemberg Music
sitting opposite to one another, Page 230.
these on the Dukes side, the other at the Sovereign's and Lord Ambassadors
side; sung and played alternately to one another.

After Dinner certain Balls were danced in a long Gallery of the Castle, Page
233.
toward the Paradise of Studtguardt.

This Festivity lasted that night and the next day, Page 245.
and afterward the English Guests were conducted to see some of the principal
places of the Dukedom; as Waltebuch, the University of Tubing, etc. where they
were entertained with Comedies, Music and other delights, Page 259.
and at their return to Studtguardt, were presented with very magnificent
gifts; and being to return for England were accompanied by the Duke as far as
Asperg, Page 260.
where with great demonstration and expressions of amity and affection on both
sides, solemn leave was taken.

A Relation of the order observed when Maurice Prince of Orange was Invested,
an. II. Iac. R.
Johan. Olers in Genealog. Commit. Nassovia page 90
On the 4. of February, an. 1613. the Citizens of the Hague met in Arms,
together with the Troops of Prince Maurice, of Prince Henry his Brother and the
Earl of Chastilion; the Citizens, kept Guard in the outermost Court, where also
several pieces of Ordinance were placed, and the three aforementioned Troops in
the innermost Court. From the Palace to the Shambles were Pitch Barels placed,
as also at the Sovereign's Ambassadors Lodgings.

At 3 a Clock in the Afternoon the States of the United Provinces assembled in
the usual place, where other person of great quality were admitted as
Spectators. The first that came thither was Refuge the French Kings Ambassador,
who took his Seat at the upper end of the Table; not long after came Prince
Maurice, conducted by the Sovereign's Ambassador, and those deputed by the
States; before them went 12 Trumpets sounding, and after several Noblemen and
Persons of Honor two and two, the Guards attending on each side. After these
went Garter Principal King of Arms, vested with his Coat of Arms, embroidered
with the Arms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and carrying in his
hand a Purse of Green Silk, wherein were the Garter and George; next him went
Prince Maurice, and after him his Brother Henry, the Prince of Portugal, and
others of his kindred, as the Earls of Nassau and Lippia; then several of the
Nobility, and many others of great quality.

Then Prince Maurice taking his place where these Solemnities were performed,
sat at the upper end of the Table, at the left hand of the French Kings,
Ambassador, but Sir Ralph Winwood the Sovereign's Ambassador, took his place in
the middle over against the President of the States, and began a short Oration
in French to this effect.

My Lords, from those things which I have in the Convention declared, by the
command of the King my Master, you have sufficiently understood his purpose, of
conferring the Order of the Garter upon Prince Maurice, as also the causes,
wherewith he thought himself moved to do it; and whereas it has been decreed,
by the common suffrages of the Knights-Campanions of the Order, that he should
be joined in Companionship with the Elector Palatine, it seemed good to the
Sovereign, to command me to present him with the Ensigns of this Order, and
has confirmed this his command by the testimony of his Commission, under the
Great Seal of England, which Commission I here deliver unto you, and pray it
may be read.

Hereupon he delivered the Commission to the President, from whose hand the
Secretary then taking it, read it aloud; which having finished, the Sovereign's
Ambassador continued his discourse.

Both the honor of this Order, and ancient Custom require, that it be sent out
of England to Stranger Princes, by persons of honor peculiarly deputed to this
Employment, and who are themselves Knights-Companions of the Order, or at least
deserve to be so: but because that the Ceremonies there used, seem not so well
to agree with the Discipline of your Church, and that the conditions thereof
are not altogether consistent with the state of your Commonwealth, it has
pleased the Sovereign of the Order, for the avoiding all scandal, to confer
this Order without any pomp, or external magnificence. We have therefore made
choice of this place, in compliance with your pleasure, as the most commodious
for the performance of our duty, in that we might present it in the presence of
your Lordships, who, as being the Supreme Lords of this State, will not think
much to be Eyewitnesses of that honor, which the King of Great Britain your
best Friend and Allie, offers to the chief General of your Armies, and
Governor of your Provinces, as also to your whole State in general, whereof
each of you are a part. Nor could his Majesty have given greater testimonies,
either of his affection toward the happy State of your Commonwealth, or of the
joy which he has conceived, for that he sees your Affairs, after so many
troubles and storms, brought to a Haven of rest and quiet, or likewise of his
most entire good will; wishing that that League of Friendship which is
contracted between his Kingdoms and your Provinces, may be perpetual and
inviolable. Now therefore, desiring first your good leave, we shall convert our
Address to Prince Maurice.

At this instant, Garter King of Arms opened the Silk Purse, and took out the
Garter, set with rich Diamonds, and laid it on the Table, and then the
Ambassador addressed himself to Prince Maurice in the following manner.

To you my Lord, we offer in the name of the King my Master, the Order of the
Garter, which we may say without boasting or flattery, is the most ancient and
most illustrious Order of all Europe, which in all times has been kept
inviolable, without any spot or blemish, wherewith all the greatest Emperors
and Monarchs suing to be graced and adorned, have esteemed the greatest part of
their felicity, that they could obtain it; his Majesty judges the greatness of
your Family, which he acknowledges to be most illustrious, worthy of this
Honor, your piety also and zeal to promote the Reformed Religion, likewise your
warlike virtues, which the God of Hosts has blessed with so many Victories, but
especially those high merits, whereby you have obliged these United Provinces,
and by consequence his Realms, and so thereby the whole Christian World, his
Majesty being altogether of opinion, that the quiet of Christendom consists
much in the happy state of these Provinces, and that the condition of these
Provinces what ever it be, and that of those Realms have a mutual dependence
one upon the other: This is the motive and sole cause that has induced his
Majesty to confer upon you an Honor, the greatest his Kingdoms can bestow, of
which behold these the Marks and Ensigns [and with these words produced the
Garter] which your Excellency is to receive from us, according, to the commands
of our King, and those altogether free from any Ceremonies, except such wherein
you shall voluntarily and willingly consent to be engaged.

This Speech being ended, Prince Maurice in brief gave thanks for the Honor
offered him, and then forthwith the Ambassador and Garter having made due
obeisance, tied on the Garter about his Leg; next Garter took out of the
forementioned Purse, the Golden Medal, whereon was the Effigies of St. George,
with the subdued Dragon under his feet, this Medal hanging upon a Blue Ribband,
Garter put about the Princes Neck, after which he unfolded a Parchment, wherein
were contained the Titles of Prince Maurice in French, which he read aloud.

The high, mighty, and excellent Prince, Maurice Prince of Orange Earl of
Nassau, Catzenelleboge, Viand, Dietz, Meurs, Linge, Marquess of Vere and
Flushing, Baron of Grave, the Territory of Kuyke, Lece, and Nyervaert,
Governor and Captain General of Gelderland, Holland, Zealand, Vtrecht,
West-Friesland, Zutphen, and Overyssell, Admiral General of the United
Provinces, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

As Soon as he had made an end of reading these Titles, presently all the
Trumpets sounded, and the Troops in order shot off their Pistols, which Volly
was seconded by the Trained-Bands, after which the great Guns were discharged.

These things being thus performed, and silence made, Sir John Oldenbarnevelt
Lord of Tempel, making an Oration in the name of the States General, reckoned
up in brief, the Leagues contracted heretofore at several times, between the
Provinces and the Kingdom of Great Britain, and thereupon rendered humble thanks
to the King for the continuance of them, specially for that by this action he
went about to manifest the same to all men; for as much as that so remarkable
Honor, which his Majesty was conferring on those Provinces in the person of
Prince Maurice, their Governor and Commander both in War and Peace, was an
honor used to be shown but only to the very choicest of his Friends; but most
principally of all for that he was pleased to confer this honor on Prince
Maurice, without enjoining any strict obligation upon the receipt of the Order.
Next he gave thanks to the Ambassadors, for the diligence they had employed in
this affair; and lastly, directing his speech to Prince Maurice, he in the name
of the States General, congratulated his new honor, assuring him on their
behalf, that they conceived very great joy and satisfaction, and wished him a
very long and a happy enjoyment thereof, to the glory of God, and the
enlargement of his Family, and the conservation of the public liberty of the
United Provinces, in which thing, as hitherto they had done, so for the time to
come, they would for ever afford him their best and most faithful assistance.

As soon as he had finished his Speech John Utenbogard Minister of the Hague,
as he had been ordered, standing at the end of the Table, made a very admirable
and learned Sermon, wherein he most devoutly praised God, for what had happened,
imploring him to bless Prince Maurice, in his new obtained honor, and to endue
him with his Grace.

The Sermon ended, the Trumpets sounded, the Muskets also, and great Guns were
again discharged: Then Prince Maurice (accompanied by the Ambassadors and other
Noble Persons) returned in the same order as he came, and then again the third
time Vollies of great and small shot were discharged; after which the Soldiers
and Trained-Bands went every one to their own homes and quarters. At Evening
the pitched Barels were set on fire, and Bonfires kindled; a magnificent
entertainment also was given by Prince Maurice to the Ambassadors, Princes and
great Persons above mentioned, at which, while Healths were drunk to the King
of France and Great Britain, all the Guns were again discharged.

A Remonstrance made by Sir William Segar, Knight, Garter Principal King of
Arms, joined in Commission with the right honorable the Lord Carleton,
Ambassador to the high and mighty Prince, Henry Prince of Orange, for
presenting him with the Noble Order of the Garter, 1627.
MS. in Offic. Armor. [ L. 18. circa medium.]
WE took our journey from Whitehall, on a Thursday to Gravesend, being the -- of
April, Anno Domini 1627. and lodged there that night. On Friday morning we
embarked in two Merchants ships of London, in the one went the Lord Ambassador
Carleton, Secretary of State of the Kings Majesty King Charles, accompanied
with the young Lord Dormer, and diverse other Gentlemen, his Followers and
Servants; my self embarked in the other Merchants Ship, with my two Sons, Mr.
Henry Lennard, my three Servants, Trunks, and other Provisions.

We set sail about 9 of the Clock, and sailed all that day and night following,
and arrived on Saturday at Delf Haven in Holland, about 6 of the Clock in the
Evening; where being landed we could have no lodging in the Town, all was taken
up for the Lodging of the Lord Ambassador, and his Train, and I forced to hire
two Wagons for the transport of me and mine, our Trunks and baggage to the
Town of Delf, whither we came about eleven of the Clock that night, and lodged
at the Sign of the Golden Fleece.

The next day being Monday, the Ambassador coming by water to Delf was
entertained and feasted at the English House by the English Merchants, and that
Afternoon was conveyed by Water, in the Princes Barge to the Hague; and by the
way was met with, by his Excellency, and diverse of the States, who complemented
his welcome.

My self followed his Lordship by Wagon and had my Lodging and Diet provided
in the Chastelins House in the Hague, where I was well entertained and
accommodated. The day following being Tuesday, my self with my two Sons, an Mr.
Lennard, went to kiss his Excellencies hands, who very kindly entertained me,
and remembered he had seen me there before, upon the like occassion, with his
Brother Maurice Prince of Orange; so after our humble salutations we departed.

It was about nine or ten days before we could be resolved, whether the Order
should be accepted of or not; for the French Ambassador there resident, opposed
it by all means possible that he could, alleging it stood not with the French
King his Masters honor, considering the League between him, the Prince, and
States, that his Enemy the King of Great Britain, should be so much favored and
honored by the Prince, as to have the Order of the Garter by him received, the
King of Great Britain having entered his Dominions in hostile manner, surprised
the Isle of Ree; slain his People, and endeavored to relieve Rochell, which he
held Rebels to him; all which by the wisdom of the Lord Ambassador Carleton,
was so discreetly answered, and so far prevailed, that a day was appointed for
the reception of the Order, which was to be done on the Sunday following, in
the Afternoon, and was performed as follows.

The Prince of Orange his Regiment of Shot and Pikes, the English Regiment, and
some Dutch Companies, having placed themselves in two Battalions, on either
side of the great Court of the Princes Palace, we proceeded between them.

First went a number of Colonels and Captains, English, Scots, and Dutch,
after whom followed the chief Officers of his Excellency's Household, then my
self, bearing on a Purple Velvet Cushen the Robes of the Order, the great
Collar, and the Garter, and a lesser Jewel of the George, fastened to a Blue
Ribband, with King Charles his Commission, under the Great Seal of England: The
Prince went between the Lord Ambassador and the Palsgrave, who that day wore
the whole Habit of the Order of the Garter. We were conducted up the great
Stairs, through the old Hall of the Palace, and so brought to the Council
Chamber of the States General, who were all placed on either side of a long
Table, the whole length of the Room.

The Estate of the Table was bolden in the midst thereof, where four Chairs
were placed, the Prince of Orange and the Ambassador took the two middlemost
Chairs, the Palsgrave on the right hand, and my self on the left. The French
Ambassador, and the Venetian, sat at the upper end of the board. The Earl of
Coningburg, President of the Council of the States, the Treasurer, and Admiral
of Holland sat opposite to the Prince, and all other of the States on either
side in their degrees. Silence being made, the Ambassador Carleton stood up,
and began his Harangue or Oration, signifying, that by the Example of the great
love and amity long time continued; between the Queen's Majesty of England,
Elizabeth of famous memory, and Prince Maurice, with the States General of the
United Provinces; King James her successor intending no less good, welfare, and
prosperity to his Excellency, and the States then and still being, had
presented him with the Noble Order of the Garter, as to his intimate Friend,
Confederate, and Ally, which he princely accepted, acknowledged, and used
during his life. And that now the high and mighty Prince, King Charles his son,
understanding of the right noble and valorous disposition of his Excellency,
Henry Prince of Orange, and having a like desire, as his Father had, to
continue the same amity and friendship inviolably between them, had made
especial choice of him the said Prince, to be a Companion and Consrere of the
said most Noble Order, which he was there by Commission to present his
Excellency withal.

The Oration ended, the Ambassador presented his Majesty's Commission, under
the Great Seal of England, during the reading whereof, by one of the
Secretaries of the States; The whole Table of the States stood up, their heads
uncovered, only the French Ambassador excepted, who sat covered.

Then Garter, after Reverence made, with an audible voice, pronounced in French
the Style of the King of Great Britain, as is accustomed, and after it the
Style of Henry Prince of Orange; which done, by a signal made at one of the
Windows, the Trumpets sounded, the Drums struck up, and a thousand Musket shot
were discharged in Volley.

Then stood up at the Table a French Orator, who began his Harangue in the
praise of the Noble Order of the Garter, relating as he said he was informed,
how many Emperors, Kings, and Princes had been thereof, applauding the worthy
Election and choice of both the famous Princes of Orange, Prince Maurice lately
deceased, and Prince Henry then Governing; only be excepted against the
patronage of Saint George, who was he said, but a Legendary Saint, and not
Canonical, nor approved by general Councils, and in effect, but a moral
Allegory: For every Christian man that for his Faith would fight, and defend
the Church, yea and for the same suffer Martyrdom, he should conquer the
Dragon, that is the Devil, and be as much holy reputed as St. George. But the
Order to be styled of the Garter, was more significant, because it carried with
it a bond or tie of Fellowship, as a Symbol of Amity and Friendship between
Princes, being Companions of the said Order. So concluding his Harangue with a
Prayer for the Sovereign's prosperity King Charles, and the whole Fellowship of
the said most Noble Order of the Garter, he ended.

Then the Lord Ambassador Carleton, with his Excellency the Prince of Orange,
the Prince Palatine, and my self standing up, the Ambassador took the great
Collar with the George, and assisted by the Palatine, put it over the head of
his Excellency, and fastened it on his shoulder; for at that time he refused to
wear the Robes of the Order, because he said, his Brother Grave Maurice had not
done it, but laying up his leg on my Chair, the Ambassador and I put on the
Garter.

Which done, by another signal, six and thirty Canons reported, and so way
being made, we returned that way as we came, the Trumpets sounding, and the
Drums beating, until his Excellency was entered into his Court. That day or
night we had no Feast, for avoiding Precedence and Place between the
Ambassador, drinking of Healths, and other complements, which might have
occassioned question or difference on either party. That night Bonfires of
pitched Barels were made through the Town, as is accustomed to be done in all
their Triumphs.

The next day following, being Monday, I was invited by a Messenger to dine
with his Excellency, where, in his great Chamber, the Table ready furnished
with meat, without Ceremony of other service, or attendants, but his own Pages,
being half a dozen in number, his Excellency sat down, not at the end of the
Board, but at the right hand thereof, and Count Lodowick of Nassaw his Uncle on
the left hand side, I was placed on the Princes side, at a convenient distance
from him by his Marshal; Colonel Boage a Scottish man sat right against me,
next to Count Lodowick, and these were all the Guests at the Table; during
Dinner, his Excellency asked me sundry questions, namely, whether Queen
Elizabeth did wear the Garter of the Order about her leg, as the Knights did? I
answered, I thought not, for it was not proper for her Sex so apparently to
show her leg. Then he demanded, whether the Institution of the Order was from
the fall of a Blue Garter from the Ladies leg, with whom the King danced? I
told him it was so holden by tradition, but the truth was otherwise, as it is
recorded in the old Register Book of the Order, that King Edward the Third
returning home after his conquest of France, to remunerate those Knights, that
had done him the most noble service in that Expedition, did select of them the
number twenty five, and gave them Blue Garters embroidered, and buckled under
the Knee, with this Motto, Honey soit, qui mal y pense, as a caveat to avoid the
emulation of other, who might perhaps presume, they had deserved as much honor
as others. Now the question may be asked, said the Prince, why a Garter rather
than any other thing should be made an Order? It is to be answered, said I,
that at that time most men (especially men of Arms) wore their Boots close up
gartered, and buckled with thongs of Leather under their Knees (a Custom yet
used of some men for the strengthening of their Leg) so with diverse other
trivial questions the Dinner was spent and ended, and I with due thanks and
humble salutations took my leave.

Tuesday morning I delivered the Robes of the Order to the Master of his
Wardrobe, and on Tuesday in the Afternoon, I with my Sons, and Mr. Lennard
kissed his Excellencies hands, and took our leave, who most princely thanked us
for the pains we had taken to do him honor.

Wednesday in the morning, I was presented with four Chains, one for my self of
the value of 240 l. sterling, two Chains for my Sons, the third for Mr.
Lennard, being all lesser in value than those which I had received of Grave
Maurice by 130 l. The Ambassador Lord Carleton had a standing Cup with a Cover
of 500 l. being of pure Gold. The same day in the Afternoon I gave Rewards to
the Chastellain, and his Wife, with the Servants of the House, and taking my
leave that night of the Ambassador, with whom I supped, I took my Journey on
Thursday in the morning by Water to Delf, where I hired two Wagons to
transport me to Maisland Sluice, where I took shipping for England, in the same
Merchants Ship that brought me thither.

Friday morning, the first of June, we set sail, and on Saturday in the
Afternoon we all safely arrived at Gravesend, thanked be God; Tuesday
following, I went by Coach to Oatlands, and delivered my Letters to the King,
from the Prince of Orange, and the Lord Ambassador Carleton, making a brief
relation of the performance of our Employments, which it was his Majesty's
pleasure I should do.

A Relation of the Investiture of Charles the Eleventh King of Sweden, with the
Habit and Ensigns of the Order drawn up by Henry St. George, Esquire; Richmond
Herald.
Charles the Eleventh, King of Sweden, etc. being elected into the most Noble
Order of the Garter, at a Chapter held by the Sovereign and Companions of the
said Order, the 18. day of June 1668. The Right Honorable Charles Earl of
Carlisle, etc. was by the Sovereign appointed his Ambassador extraordinary to
the said King, and Henry St. George, Esquire Richmond Herald, was commanded to
attend the Ceremony of his said Majesty's Investiture, in the place of Garter
Principal King of Arms.

Being furnished with all Necessaries for this service, as the Robes, Collar,
George, Garter, etc. and having received his Majesty's Commission, under the
Seal of the said Order; they set sail from Greenwich in the Anne (a Yaght
belonging to his Royal Highness the Duke of York) on Friday the 5. of February
1668. and landed at Rotterdam on Sunday the 7. of the said Month, from whence
they proceeded on their journey to Stockholme, first to Hamborough, and then to
Lubeck, where my Lord Ambassador having received command from the King, to go
for Denmark, they took shipping at Framond (the Port of the said City) on
Saturday the 20. of March, and landed at Copenhagen on Monday the 22. of the
said Month. After same 10 days there, in which time his Lordship dispatched his
business in that Court, they again imbarqued themselves in a Frigate of the King
of Denmark's, and arrived at Stockholme, on Saturday the 10. of April, being
Easter Eve, where his Excellency continued some weeks incognito, till the
arrival of his Train and Equipage.

Saturday, June the 5. the Countess of Carlisle landed at Stockholme, and about
a week after arrived the Ship with my Lord Ambassador's Goods and Retinue.

Wednesday the 7. of July, my Lord Ambassador made his Entry into Stockholme,
and on Saturday the 10. of the said Month had his public Audience of the King.

Monday the 26 of July my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, at a private
Audience, delivered their Credentials concerning the Garter; and his Majesty of
Sweden received the lesser George.

Thursday the 29. of July was appointed for his Majesty's public reception of
the whole Habit of the Order, which Ceremony was performed as follows; Abouth
three of the Clock that Afternoon, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, were
by two principal Senators Count Neile Brahe, and Count John Steenbook, the
Master of the Ceremonies, with the King's Coaches, Pages, and Footmen (all in
new Liveries) with many Officers and Cavalier, conducted to the Castle, being
come into the great Court, they were met at the Stairs foot (where they
alighted) by several of the King's Servants, and so conducted up to certain
Rooms, where the Robes, etc. were deposited (having been sent thither that
morning) here my Lord Ambassador for a while reposed himself, whilst Mr. St.
George made ready the Robes, etc. and put on his Mantle, and having now notice,
that his Majesty was come into the Great Hall, they proceeded thither, Mr. St.
George bearing the Robes, etc. on a Velvet Cushen: At the entrance into the
Hall, they were met by the Rix-Marshall Count Gabriel Oxenstiern (having in his
hand a long Staff of Silver gilt) and conducted to the upper end of the Room,
which was enclosed within a Rail and Ballister. Here stood the King in a Suit
and Cloak of Cloth of Silver, with a large Plume of White Feathers in his Haet,
under a State of Crimson Velvet, fringed with Gold, to the back of which said
State was affixed an Escotcheon of his Majesty's Arms within the Garter, and
his Style underneath; on the King's right hand was erected a like State for the
Sovereign, with an Escutcheon of his Arms, and his Style also underneath, with
a Chair and Footstool. Opposite to the King of Sweden's Chair, was placed a
Chair, like in all things to that of the King's, for my Lord Ambassador, and on
the left hand of my Lord Ambassador was a Chair set for Mr. St. George, and
near it, close to the Rails, was a little Table to lay the Robes on. On the
King of Sweden's left hand, at a good distance, near the other end of the
Rails, sat the Queen, under a lesser State of Cloth of Silver, the haut-pas
was covered with Turkey Carpets, as was also all the ground within the Rails,
where stood the Regents and the rest of the Senators (all in Cloaks and Bands
as is used at their Dyets and most solemn Assemblies) with Chairs behind them:
The whole Room was hung with Tapestry, having a great number of Scaffolds in
it, filled with the principal persons of quality, both of the Courtand City.

After my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, had saluted the King, Mr. St.
George placed the Robes, etc. on the Table, and having made an obeisance first
to the Sovereigns State, then to the King of Sweden, stood before his own
Chair, till the King and my Lord Ambassador were both of them seated; they
being seated. Mr. St. George sat down on his Chair, until the Trumpets and
Kettle Drums ceased (which had beat and sounded from their first entrance in
the Room) all being quiet Mr. St. George arose, and making an obeisance first
to the Sovereign's State, and then to the King of Sweden, stood by the Table,
then the Ambassador arising, began his Speech to the King, which ended, his
Secretary delivered a Copy of it, in the Swedish tongue, to the Ambassador, who
gave it to the Lord Stein Bielk, who delivered it to a Secretary, by whom it
was read aloud, whereunto a Reply was made by the same Senator, in Swedish;
this Reply translated into English, was given by the said Senator to the
Ambassador, and by him to his Secretary, who read it in English. Then did Mr.
St. George deliver the Commission under the Seal of the Order, to my Lord
Ambassador, who presented it to the King, who having received it gave it to a
Secretary, by whom it was read aloud.

The Commission being read, Mr. St. George divested the King of his Cloak,
Sword, and Belt, untying also the Silk Garter on his left leg, and delivered
the Book of the Statutes of the Order to the Ambassador, who presented them to
the King, then was the Garter of the Order presented to his Majesty by Mr. St.
George, who at the delivery pronounced the accustomed words in Latin, which
ended, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George did both of them buckle it on the
King of Sweden's left leg; in like manner was presented the Surcoat, the
Girdle, and Hangers with the Sword, the Mantle, the Hood, the Collar, and great
George, last of all the Cap and Feather. His Majesty thus fully invested with
the whole Habit of the Order, continued standing under his State, whilst Mr.
St. George descending from the haut-pas, toward the lower end of the Rails,
returned, and having made three obeysances as he came up, proclaimed the Style
of the Sovereign in Latin, French, and English; and afterward the Style of the
King of Sweden in French only.

This being done, Mr. St. George returned and stood before his Seat, whilst my
Lord Ambassador complemented his Majesty in a short Speech in English, which
was afterward read in Swedish by a Secretary; and a Reply made by the before
named Senator Stien Bielk in Swedish read in English by my Lord Ambassador's
Secretary.

After this another Senator, viz. Baron John Gyllenstiern, did in a long
Harangue congratulate his Majesty's Election and Investiture into this most
Noble Order; which ended, the King, my Lord Ambassador, and Mr. St. George took
their Seats again, whilst the Trumpets and Kettle Drums beat and sounded, being
the signal for the firing 124 great Guns, from the Ships of War in the River,
and several parts of the City, and of diverse Vollies of small shot from Horse
and Foot, purposely drawn into the Town for this occasion; after they had all
fired the first time, they gave a second Volley, which being near ended, my
Lord Ambassador, and Mr St. George arose, and making their obeisances to the
King (who stood in his Robes under his State) they withdrew, and were conducted
by the before mentioned Senators Count Brabe and Count Steenbook, to the same
Room from whence the Robes of the Order had been brought, where Mr. St. George
put off his Mantle, and after a little repose, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St.
George were in the same manner conducted home to my Lord Ambassador's House.

About eight of the Clock that Evening, my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George
were again brought to Court in the King's Coach, by Count Torstenson, and the
Master of the Ceremonies, to Supper; where in a fair Room, under a state of
Crimson Velvet, sat the King covered, and in the Robes of the Order, on his
left hand the Queen, and on her left hand my Lord Ambassador, all under the
State, at each end of the Table sat two of Regents, and on the other side of
the Table near each end, sat two of the senior Senators, and between them
stood two Carvers.

At another Table in the same Room sat Mr. St. George, with the other Senators
and the Officers of the Army; during Supper, several Healths were drank, as the
Sovereign's, the King of Sweden's, the two Queens, the Duke of York's, the
Companions of the Order, etc. at each of which were fired 4 great Guns, 24
being purposely planted for that service, under the Wall of the Castle: Supper
being ended my Lord Ambassador and Mr. St. George, having waited on the King
and Queen back again in the same manner they attended them to Supper, about
three of the Clock the next morning, they were again conducted home by Count
Torstenson, and t^^ M^ster of the Ceremonies, in the King's Coach; and as they
descended from the Castle, the 24 great Guns were all fired twice over.

Sunday, the 1. of August, my Lord Ambassador, and Mr. St. George were by Count
Torstenson, and the Master of the Ceremonies, in the King's Coach, brought to
the Castle about 7 of the Clock in the Evening, from whence they went with
their Majesty's in their Barge, to see the Fireworks which had been preparing
about three Months, as English mile from Stockholme (in honor of this
Solemnity) this divertisement continued about two hours, and was concluded with
a Banquet; which ended, they returned in the same manner, being saluted both in
their going and return, with four Guns from each Ship of War in the River,
besides the Guns from the Fort; At their landing, Count Torstenson, and the
Master of the Ceremonies were ready to conduct my Lord Ambassador, and Mr. St.
George home, in the same manner as they came.

Thursday the 19. of August, Mr. St. George received his Majesty of Sweden's
Letter to the Sovereign, and a Certificate of his Majesty's Reception of the
said Order, both signed by the Queen and the Regents.

Sunday the 22. of August, Mr. St. George took his leave of the King and Queen,
being attended by the under Master of the Ceremonies.

Thursday the 2. of September, Mr. St. George was presented by the under Master
of the Ceremonies, with a Chain of Gold, and a Meddal set with Diamonds, from
his Majesty.

Saturday the 4. of September, Mr. St. George began his Journey from Stockholme
to the Sound by Land, and came to Elsineur the 12. of the said Month; the 29.
he took shipping for England, and landed at Hull the 20. of October, the 27. he
came to London, and was the next day by the Earl of Carlisle (who was newly
returned) brought to his Majesty in his Bedchamber, where be kissed the King's
hand, presented the King of Sweden's Letter to his Majesty, and so concluded
his Employment.

The Fireworks above mentioned, which the King of Sweden caused to be
prepared, to close the Solemnity of his Investiture, and manifest to the world
his great satisfaction in the honor received, were ordered in the following
manner.

In the middle of the work was erected a great Pillar 52 foot high, on the top
of which was placed a gilt Crown; 18 foot below the Crown were the initial
Letters of the Sovereign 's and King of Swedens Christian Names, set breast to
breast: and below at the Foot were placed several Military Colors, both of
Horse and Foot, filled with Fireworks.

This Pillar stood in the middle of four antique Trophies, filled with Fire,
and upon each side of the Pillar, 40 foot distance from it, was placed St.
George on Horseback, having the Dragon under his Feet, of 24 foot in length,
and 28 in height, and on each side of St. George two Pyramids of 36 foot high.

In several places of the Work were set great Wind-Pipes, filled with Water,
for playing of Water-Balls, and round the Work about 2000 Musket-Pipes, 60
together in a Frame, with 72 Chests in and about the Work, full of Rackets 12
foot high, besides 28 Chests with Swarmers in the Earth, 2 foot high; and above
1000 Pattroles fired by Degrees, which flying high threw from them all sorts of
Figures of Fire. Lastly, at each corner a Fire Murser, which threw up all sorts
of pleasant Fireballs, and in their breaking presented several Figures.

A Relation of the Investiture of John George Duke of Saxony, with the Habit
and Ensigns of the Order, drawn up by Sir Thomas St. George Knight, Somerset
Herald.
John George the Second, Duke of Saxony, was elected into the Society of the
most Noble Order of the Garter the 18. of June 1668. at a Chapter held at
Whitehall, and by the Sovereign and several of the Companions of the Order, Sir
Thomas Higgons Knight, and Thomas St. George Esquire Somerset Herald, in the place
of Garter Principal King of Arms, were then appointed and ordered to carry the
Garter, with the Habit and other Ensigns appropriated to the Order, to the said
Duke of Saxony; which being provided and delivered unto them, on the 27. of
February following they set forward from London, and arrived at Dresden the 5.
of April 1669. and lodged at an Inn, from whence they gave notice to the Hoff
Marshal of their arrival.

Upon Wednesday morning about 10 of the Clock, being the 7. of April, the Duke
of Saxony sent his Coach and several of his Servants, for them to their
Audience, where Sir Thomas Higgons presented his Majesty's Credentials, and Mr.
St. George the Book of Statutes, the Elector having sent to see them the day
before.

They were conducted from this Audience by the Duke's Servants to their several
Lodgings within the Castle, where they remained and were entertained at the
Duke's charges, and attended by his Servants during their stay at Dresden.

Upon the 8. of April in the morning, the Duke sent a Complement to them,
acknowledging how sensible he was of his Majesty's great affection unto him, in
sending him the Order of the Garter, and that he was very desirous to receive
it, whereupon they desired an Audience, to which they were conducted about 4 of
the Clock in the Afternoon by the Dukes Servants.

Being brought to the Duke, Sir Tho. Higgons told him that he understood by his
Secretary Mr. Voght, his Electoral Highness was very desirous to be invested
with the Order of the Garter, and that thereupon he and Mr. St. George were
come to present his Electoral Highness with the George and a Blue Ribband,
which was usually worn by the Companions of that most Noble Order, before their
Investiture, whereupon he gave them thanks; and then Mr. St. George delivered
to Sir Tho. Higgons the George, and by him it was presented to the Duke, who
having received it, and viewed it a little while, returned it again to Sir Tho.
Higgons, then he and Mr. St. George put it about his neck; which being
performed, the Duke returned thanks, and declared that he intended to be
invested on Tuesday or Wednesday following, whereof they should receive more
particular notice.

Upon the 9. of April the Duke sent to them by his Secretary, to signify that
he had resolved to be invested on Tuesday following, and thereupon discoursing
about the Ceremonies, said that his Electoral Highness had given order for the
furnishing a stately Room for that occasion, which he was ready to show them,
but that if any part of the Ceremony were accustomed to be performed in the
Church, he desired that might be omitted; which being by them consented unto,
they repaired to the Room appointed, and gave directions how it should be
ordered.

Upon Easter Day, being the 11. of April, they were attended by several of the
Duke's Servants to Church first, and after to Dine with him.

Upon Tuesday the 13. of April, between 10 and 11 of the Clock in the morning,
the Duke sent a great number of his Servants to them, to let them know he was
ready to receive the Order; whereupon Mr. St. George put on his Ro^e or M^ntle,
and having placed the Habit, Collar, George, Garter, and his Majesty's
Commission upon a Blue Velvet Cu^hen, they were conducted to a little Room
appointed for that purpose, where the Duke stayed for them, Mr. St. George
carrying the Robes and the other Ensigns of the Order, which he presented to
the Duke, and after placed them on a Table standing by him.

Then Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George, having first prayed the Duke's
leave, took off his Cloak, and his Sword and Belt, which the said Mr. St.
George had for his Fee, and after that the Blue Ribband and George, which they
had presented to him before, which Mr. St. George delivered to one of the
Duke's Servants.

The Duke being in this posture, Mr. St. George took the Surcoat which Sir
Thomas Higgons and he presented to the Duke, and then put it on; after that the
Girdle and Hangers, which they likewise girt about him, having receive^ another
Sword from the Master of his Horse.

Then the Duke's Secretary brought and laid upon the Table before his Electoral
Highness, the Letters Testimonial engrossed in Parchment, of the presenting him
with the Ensigns of the Order, which he there signed, and being sealed by him
before them, they were delivered to Mr. St. George by the Duke.

These things being thus performed, they proceeded to the great Room prepared,
where the principal part of the Ceremony was to be accomplished, where there
was a great concourse of People, and toward the upper end on the right hand
was a place raised, where sat the Duchess, the Prince of Saxony and Princess,
the Princess of Anhalt, and below them a great many Ladies of quality, and the
Ladies of the Court.

First passed the Dukes Servants two and two.

Then the Cap and Feather, carried by Mr. St. George's Son.

Next Mr. St. George, carrying the rest of the Habit and the Ensigns of the
Order.

Then Sir Thomas Higgons.

After him the Duke of Saxony in his Surcoat, his Sword girt about him.

On each side, and closing the Rere, were his Guard of State richly habited,
with Partisans in their hands, the Staves covered with Blue Velvet, and set
thick with gilt Nails.

In this manner they passed through diverse stately Rooms, entertained with
several sorts of Music, until they came to the great Room, where there was
also excellent Music of several sorts, with Kettle-Drums and Trumpets, placed
in a high Gallery at the lower end, which entertained them as soon as they
entered.

In this Room was two States of Crimson Velvet, the one at the upper end for
the Sovereign with a Chair and a Footstool, and an Escotcheon of the
Sovereign's Arms within a Garter, having his Style underneath, set over the
Chair; the other on the side of the Room on the right hand of the Sovereign's
State for the Duke, with an Escotcheon of his Arms within a Garter, and his
Style underneath; and on the left hand two Chairs, the one for Sir Thomas
Higgons, the other for Mr. St. George.

Being entered this Room, as they passed from the lower end, three obeysances
were made to the Sovereign's State going up, then the Duke going to his State,
and there standing, Mr. St. George placed the Robes on a Table on the Duke's
right hand; which being done, Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George did go to
their Chairs opposite to the Duke's, on the left hand of the Sovereign's State,
making their obeysances to it as they passed by, then the Duke sat down, and
they did the like. Then being entertained with Music for a little while, they
rose from their Seats, and making their obeysances as before to the Sovereign's
State as they passed by it, and repaired to the Duke, who standing up, they
placed themselves on each side of him: being in this posture Mr. St. George
took up the Commission, and holding it in his hand, Sir Thomas Higgons made a
Speech to the Duke, relating to the Antiquity and Nobleness of the Order,
declaring how many Emperors, Kings, and Foreign Princes had been Companions
thereof since its institution, and in relation to the election of his Electoral
Highness of the splendour and greatness of his Family, etc. which having ended,
Mr. St. George gave the Commission to Sir Thomas Higgons who presented it to
the Duke, which he caused to be read with a loud voice by his Secretary, and
then received it again, and delivered it to Mr. St. George.

After this Mr. St. George took the Garter, and with the assistance of Sir
Thomas Higgons, buckled it about the Duke's left Leg, then they put on the
Mantle, the Hood upon the right shoulder, and last of all the Collar and George.

Thus being fully invested, Mr. St. George spoke to the Duke as follows,
Ayant investi vostre Altesse Electorale avec tous les habits and les autres
ornaments du tres-noble Order de la, Iartiere, Je souhaite toute sort de
prosperity de grandeur and de longue vie au tres-hault tres-puissant and
tres-illustre Prince Iean George le Second, par la grace de Dieu Due de Saxe,
de Iuliers Cleves, and des Montz, Archimareschall and Prince Electeur du Saint
Empire, Landgrave de Thuringe, Margrave de Misnie, and de la haute and basse
Lus^re, Burgrave de Magdeburg, Conte de la March and Ravensperg, Seigneur in
Rauenstein, and Chevalier du tres-noble Order de la Iartiere; which being
ended, the Trumpets and loud Music sounded.

The Music ceasing, Sir Thomas Higgons congratulated his Electoral Highness's
Investiture, whereupon one of his Council made a Speech in Latin, declaring
his Electoral Highness's great obligation to the King of Great Britain, how
highly he esteemed the Order, and his Majesty's particular kindness to him,
etc. and concluded with his thanks to Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George.

Then Mr. St. George took the Cap and Feather and presented it to the Duke,
which he put on; and they returned in the same order as they came, to the
Chamber from whence they brought him, Mr. St. George's Son bearing his Train;
and there they left him and retired, being attended to their Apartments by the
Duke's Servants. About half an hour after, the Duke sent his Servants again for
them, they found him in the same Room where they left him, in the Habit of the
Order, and in the same manner as before they passed to the Room, where the
Duke's Dinner was upon the Table, and they dined with him that day, the Duke
wearing the Habit of the Order, and Mr. St. George his Robe. After Dinner they
attended him back to the same Room, and there took their leaves and departed.

Upon Sunday the 18. of April, the Duke's chief Chamberlain came to Sir Thomas
Higgons first, and after to Mr. St. George, and presented each of them with a
Chain of Gold, and the Electors Picture set in Diamonds hanging at it, and also
to each of them a Basin and Eure; he also presented Mr. St. George's Son with a
little Jewel of Diamonds, and invited them to Dine with the Duke, and the
Master of the Ceremonies presented all their Servants.

On Monday the 19. of April, Sir Thomas Higgons, and Mr. St. George took their
leaves of the Duke to return for England, and dined that day with him: and that
Evening the Duke's Secretary brought them a Proxy, under the Duke's hand and
Seal to the Earl of Bath, to be installed for him at Windesor.

The next morning being Tuesday, the 20. of April (Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr.
St. George, having before hired a Boat to carry them down the River of Elbe to
Hamburgh) the Dukes Coaches and Servants attended them to their Boats, and
there all but two of them took their leaves of them, those two that remained
had laid in provision, and attended and defrayed them by the Dukes command, as
long as they traveled in the Dukes Territories, which was within two German
Miles of Magdeburgh, and there they took their leaves.

Sir Thomas Higgons and Mr. St. George parted at Hamburgh, the former to go for
England by the way of Holland, the other by shipping. Upon Sunday the 16. of
May, Mr. St. George arrived first in England, and that day Fortnight Sir Thomas
Higgons; and when Mr. St. George kissed his Majesty's hand at his return, he
was pleased to confer the honor of Knighthood upon him, with the same Sword the
Duke of Saxony gave him.

By way of Coroll^ry to the present Section, it will be necessary to give an
account of those Transactions relating to this most Noble Order, which past,
during the interval of the late Rebellion and Usurpation.

The present Sovereign, by reason of his frequent removals from several places,
beyond the Seas, where his rebellious Subjects had forced him to retire, was
obliged to dispense with the accustomed Ceremonies of the Order, and to such
Strangers as he was pleased to Elect, to send only the George and Garter,
together with the Glory or Star of Silver (to wit the Cross of St. George
irradiated within a Garter, curiously wrought in rich embroidery) to be worn
upon their upper Garments: Declaring also, that the Investiture therew^^^
should be sufficient to style themselves Knights-Companions of this most Nob^^
Order, as effectually, as if they had been formally, and with the usual
Solemnities, installed at Windesor Castle, where then it was not possibly to be
done.

And in these Cases, instead of such formal Commissions of Legation, as had
been accustomed to be made out, the Sovereign sent only his Letters Appendix.
Number. CIII CIV. CV. ^ CVII.
signifying Election to the Elect-Stranger, and a Number. C^^ and CVIII.
Warrant to Sir Edward Walker Garter, under his sign manual, whereby he was
authorized, according to his Office, to deliver those Ensigns to the
Elect-Stranger, with such Ceremonies as were usual, and might be performed in
the place where he was.

Of this kind were the Warrants issued out to the said Sir E^ward Walker, for
delivery of the Garter, George, and Star Ex Collect. E. W. G.
to Charles Prince of Tarante, to Ex Collect. E. W. G.
William Prince of Orange, to Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Frederick William Marquess of Brandenburgh, and by virtue of which he invested
these Princes with them.

The manner and order of Investiture of a Stranger upon these occasions, was
briefly thus.

The Stranger-Elect, to whom the Ensigns were sent, entered into the Room,
appointed to receive the Ceremony, and placed himself under the State.

In the mean time, Garter, having retired into another Room near thereunto, put
on his rich Coat of the Sovereign 's Arms, and placed the Garter, George, and
Cloak ( on the left shoulder whereof was embroidered the Cross of St. George,
within a Glory of Silver) upon a Velvet Cushen; then taking them on his arms
before him (together with the Sovereign 's Letters) went toward the Room,
where the Elect-Stranger expected his coming, and where (a free passage being
made) he proceeded up with three Reverences, and being arrived near unto him,
laid down the Cushen on a Table, placed for that purpose, near the foresaid
State.

This done, he began his Oration, and having made an entrance, sufficient to
usher in the delivery of the Sovereign 's Letters, he presents them to the
Elect-Stranger, who opening the same, returned them back for Garter to read,
which having done he redelivered them to him.

These things being dispatched, he took the Garter from off the Cushen, and
kneeling down, first buckled it on the Elect-Strangers left leg, next he took
the Blue Ribband and George, and hung it about his Neck, and lastly the Cloak,
which he put likewise over his shoulders; and leaving him thus Invested,
proceeded on with his Harangue: which being ended, he attended what the
Invested-Stranger should please to say, by way of acknowledgment, or thanks to
the Sovereign, for the Honor received: and then with usual obeisance departed
the Room to put off his Coat.

The Copy of Sir Edward Walker's Speech, made in delivering the Garter, to
William Prince of Orange, at the Hague, on Sunday in the Afternoon, being the
4. of May 1653.
May it please your Royal Highness,
I Have lately received the Commands of his sacred Majesty, Ex Collect. E. W. G.
the King your Brother, Charles the Second of that name, by the Grace of God
King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith, and
Sovereign of the most Noble and Renowned Order of St. George, called the
Garter, humbly to attend his Nephew the Prince of Orange, only Son unto your
Royal Highness, and to deliver unto him the Ensigns of that most Noble Order,
with his Majesty's Letters of Dispensation investing his Highness with the most
splendid Ornaments thereof. But because the tenderness of his Highness age
allows him not the capacity to comprehend the great honor the King has done
him, in this early electing his Highness into this most Noble Society, the
Reasons whereof are best expressed in his Majesty's gracious Letter; I shall
therefore humbly address my self unto your Royal Highness, his Mo^her and
Tutrix, and by your permission, open and read his Majesty's Letters, and ^^all
then, in obedience to his Majesty's Commands, deliver unto his Highness the
Garter and George therewith sent. The Investiture being dispatched, he thus
proceeded.

Now that his Highness is by his Majesty's gracious Election and Dispensation
Invested, and become a Companion of this most Noble Order, I should according
to the obligation of my Office, represent unto his Highness somewhat of the
Antiquity, Nature, and Dignity of this most famous Order; but (as I said
before) the tenderness of his Highness age denying him the notion of matters of
this kind, my hopes and wishes shall supply that present de^ect, which are,
that as his Highness grows in years, under the happy tuition of your Royal
Highness, and observing that he wears an Order and Habit not common to others,
that he will with curiosity examine the cause of that effect, and then I doubt
not but he will be informed, and with delight retain in his memory, that it was
the most victorious King of England, Edward the Third, his Highness Ancestor,
that 300 years past for noble and generous ends instituted this Order, that it
was the King his Uncle that elected him thereunto in his ins^ncy, That ^e is of
an Order near 100 years more ancient than any other merely Military, and that
it has been so highly valued and desired, as that the greatest Monarchs of
Europe in their times have been Companions thereof. And to make the impression
deeper, his Highness will then also find, that his great and excellent Father,
your Royal Highness Husband, was a Companion of this most Noble Order, as were
formerly those two most potent and fortunate Supporters of this State, his
Highness most heroic Grandfather Henry, and his great Uncle Maurice, all
Princes of Orange in succession; The great Examples of whose admired and noble
actions, as of other his Royal and Princely Ancestors, will certainly induce
his Highness with alacrity and vigor to endeavor to be equal unto them in all
honor, magnanimity, and princely virtues.

I shall conclude, that as your Highness hopeful Son, the Prince here present,
is the youngest that ever yet was chosen into this most Noble Society, so it
cannot be otherwise esteemed, than an early Omen of his future felicity and
greatness, which with length of days and all prosperity, is humbly and heartily
wished by me unto his Highness, the most high, mighty, and excellent Prince,
William Henry of Nassau, Prince of Orange, etc. Knight and Companion of the
most Noble Order of the Garter.

A brief Journal of Sir Edward Walker's passage and employment, in passing from
Amsterdam to Hamborough, and so from thence to Berlin, to deliver the Garter,
to his Electoral Highness, Frederick Guillaume Marquess of Brandenburg, An.
Dom. 1654.
ON Tuesday in the Afternoon, Ex eod. Collect
being the 17. of March New Style, I began my Journey, and arrived at
Hamborough the Monday following being the 23. I stayed there from Monday till
Thursday in the Evening, and then I departed with the Messenger of Berlin. On
Monday morning I came to Spanda, a good Town, where there is the strongest Fort
I ever saw, of four Bulwarks, environed by the River Sprey, and a Morass
toward Berlin, from which place the Elector has caused the Wood to be felled,
that he might see this Fort from his Castle at Berlin.

At 11 of the Clock that day I arrived at Berlin, here I lodged my self in the
Burgomasters house, a good Inn, and that Afternoon sent for one Mr. Roe an
Englishman, but an old Servant of the Electors Family; to him in general I
made my self known, and desired his advice for my addresses, he presently went
and acquainted the Electors Marshal with my Arrival, who presently informed the
Elector, and so I had answer, if I sent to the Marshal the next day at 10 of
the Clock, I should understand his Highness pleasure; accordingly I sent, and
the Marshall returned me answer, that at 11 his Highness would send a Gentleman
to conduct me to the Court, and accordingly there came his Carver, in one of
his Highness Coaches, to conduc^ me thither, where when I was arrived, I was
brought through two or three Rooms (the Guards standing in order in the first,
and Gentlemen in the rest) by the Gentleman to the Electors Antichamber; there
his Chamberlain received me, and brought me into his Highness ^ed-chamber, to
whom I presented my self in the best posture I could, and briefly gave him an
Account of my Employment, and delivered him his Majesty's Letter, which he
presently opened and read, and in few words of great respect acknowledged his
Majesty's favor: After that I delivered him her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia's
Letter, which he received with great demonstration of affection, and then
returned to discourse with me about the time and manner of receiving the Order.

Hereupon I having prepared a Paper of all things necessary, that so I might do
my best for his Majesty's honor and service, I presented it unto his Highness,
which he presently gave to Monsieur Scurein (one of the chief of his Council,
and the only person, besides his Chamberlain, then present) to read, which he
did, and it gave the Elector so full satisfaction, as he proposed to receive
the Order the next day being Wednesday; but I being weary, and besides other
particulars being to be advised, I put it off till Thursday: so I took my leave
of his Highness for that instant, and the Surintendant being Hofmaster to the
Electrix, brought me to her Apartment to wait upon her, to whom I likewise
delivered her Majesty's Letter, she received me with great favor, and told me
her Mother had given her notice of my coming, so after some questions of the
young Prince of Orange, the Princes Royal, etc. I took my leave, and was
conducted into his Highness Dining Room, where the Dinner being on the Table,
he presently appeared, leading his Mother who with her Brother the Palatine of
Zimerne, his Lady, with a Son and Daughter came to this Court few days before.
The old Electress, seeing me present, with high civility seemed as if I should
apply my self unto her; hereupon I briefly told her, that I was assured, had
her Majesty the Queen of Bohemia known I should have found her there, I should
have had the honor to have brought her Letters from her Majesty, which she took
in good part, so she placed her self with her Sister-in-Law, her
Daughter-in-Law, the young Electress her Sister, the Princess Katherine, and
the young Princess of Zimerne on the outside of the Table; in the interim the
Elector, the Duke of Zimerne and his Son washed, the Chamberlain giving the
Towel, then the Gentleman gave water to the Ladies, so they took their places
at a long Table; at the end sat the Duchess of Zimerne, and the old Electress
on the inside of the Table, the Electress, the Princess Katherine, and the
young Princess of Zimerne, on the outside sat the Duke of Zimerne, then the
Elector (then stood the Carver) and below sat the young Prince of Zimerne, and
below him the Chamberlain, opposite to the young Prince and next to his Sister
I was placed, beneath me the Master of the House to the Old Electress, and then
at the end sat the Electors Master of his Horse, and another: The Table was
excellently served, having at the first course 20 Dishes of gilt Plate, covered
with Silver, and the Plates the same; so was the second course, and at the
third, the Banquet was served in, in as many standing scalloped Cups gilt. At
the second course the Elector began to me his Majesty's Health, and a while
after the Duke of Zimerne the Queen of Bohemia's, and these were all the
Healths past at the Table, so as to my great joy, instead of drinking after the
German mode, I rose from Table thirsty.

Dinner being done, his Highness and the Ladies returned into her Highness
Chamber; in the interim I stayed in the Dining Room, where the Marshal came and
told me, his Highness had given order, I should be lodged near the Court, at
his Stables, and should have a Coach to wait upon me to come to Court that
Evening, and so constantly while I stayed. I excused the first, at least till
the next day, and the last for that time, and so returned to my Lodging. The
next day after Dinner, I went into the Electress Room with the Elector, and
presently the old Electress applied her self to entertain me, and did so near
an hour. Then I took my leave of her and the Elector for that time, and was
brought by one of his Gentlemen to my new Lodging at the Stables, where (after
a large half pace, at the top of a Stair) I was brought into my Stove hung with
good Arras, at the upper end were two large round Tables, the one covered with
a Carpet of Crimson Velvet fringed with Gold, the other of Cloth of Gold, on
which stood a great Silver Basin and Ewer, out of that Room I went into my
Bedchamber hung with silk Hangings, the Bed was of Cloth of Gold Damask, and
the Counterpart of ri^h Cloth of Gold, and Cha^rs of Crimson Velvet; toward
Evening I was sent to, to know whether I would sup at the Court or there, I
desired the last at my Lodging, in regard I was to deliver the Garter the next
day. So in the Evening Wax Candles were brought me in great Silver
Candlesticks, and Wine and Beer in two great standing gilt Cups, and then eight
or ten Dishes of meat in Silver Dishes, and (the Table being covered with rich
Damask Linen) the meat was brought by six or eight Footmen, and a Page of the
Electors to wait upon me, toward the end of Supper, five or six Plates of
Sweetmeats were set on the Table, and so the Supper ended.

The next morning being Thursday, the 3. of April, Stilo Novo, I made my self
ready to deliver the Garter, and about 10 of the Clock went to Court conducted
by a Gentleman sent of purpose, when I came there I found all things ready as I
had designed, and presently the Elector came and set himself under the Cloth of
State, a Table standing by him whereon to lay the Garter, etc. Then I presently
retired into another Chamber, and put on my Coat of Arms, having laid on a
Velvet Cushen his Cloak, the Garter, George, and his Majesty's Letter (which
was again delivered me, as I had proposed, to be then publicly read) so having
made my three Reverences, I approached near his Electoral Highness, and then
laid down the Cushen, and applied my self by way of introduction in the French
Tongue, to give an account of my Employment, and therein again delivered to his
Highness his Majesty's Letter, which he re-delivered me. Then having finished
my introduction, I read openly his Majesty's Letter, which done, I again
delivered it to him, and kneeled down and put on the Garter, then the George,
and lastly the Cloak, and so proceeded with the rest of my Harrangue; which
done, the Elector in few words returned humble thanks to his Majesty, for the
great honor he had done him, in making him Companion of so Noble and worthy an
Order, and was likewise pleased to give me thanks for the pains I had taken in
bringing it unto him; so I made my Reverences and departed to put off my Coat.
During the time of exercising my Function, I saw him very well pleased with it,
and after, all the Company present, being his Council and Servants,
congratulated his admission.

Presently after his Highness came forth to Dinner with the accustomed company,
and as formerly he drank to me his Majesty's Health; afterward the Duke of
Zimerne began his Highness Health to me, and her Majesty of Bohemia's Health
and the Electresses passing, Dinner was ended, so being weary I went not into
the Elector's Chamber, but returned to my Lodging; where I had not been long,
but the Elector accompanied with the Duke of Zimerne, and most of his Court,
came to the Escure to see his Horses, so I presently went down to wait upon his
Highness, who used me with high civility, causing me to put on my Hat (for by
the way, at home I never saw him covered) at first I saw his Stables full of
excellent Horses, at least 30 of several breeds for the Great Saddle, thence he
went up Stairs, the Stable being a quadrangle well built, and the Rooms above
divided into six or eight Rooms, all full of Carbines, Pistols, Swords, rich
Armor, etc. of diverse fashions and richness, and the two last of very rich
Saddles of all fashions, and Furniture for Horses, many of them set with
Turquoises, Rubies, Emeralds, etc. and one set with Diamonds; which done, his
Highness took his Coach and departed. That Evening I had a Supper at my Lodging
as formerly, and the Mr. de la Lane grand Esquire came to me from his Highness,
telling me he had order, if I pleased, to wait upon me to show me the Fort at
Spanda, and likewise that at Castrein 10 Miles off, I excused the last as being
far off, and would take the opportunity of seeing the other at my return.
Friday I went to Court again, and then I delivered his Highness the Copy of my
Speech, and told him I had no more to do now, but to attend his Commands,
resolving to depart about the middle of the week following.

The next day being Saturday I dined at Court as formerly: The following day
being Easter Day, I went early to the Court, and waited on the Elector to the
Church, which by a Gallery is joined to the Court; I had the honor immediately
to precede his Highness leading his Mother, and to have a stool set me in his
Clo^^, whi^^ ^^ at the lower end opposite to the Altar above his Chamberlain,
next the young Prince of Zimerne; there I heard the Service and Sermon, which
ended, the Elector an^ all the Company went down to receive the Sacrament,
leaving me in the Clos^t w^t^ t^o Lutheran Gentlemen to bear me company; all
being done, we returned in t^^ s^^^ order we came to Church, and went
immediately to Dinner, which was serve^ up as formerly, but the number of
Dishes of all sorts surpassing other days, yet there p^st only his Majesty's
health, and the Elector's at that time. That Evening I suppe^ ^t Court, where
the entertainment was agreeable to the former.

Monday after Dinner I represented to his Highness, that having obeyed his
Majesty, in delivering the Order, I had no more to do, but to beseech his
Highness (...) to depart on Thursday, and therefore prayed him to honor me with
his Comm^^^^ on Wednesday, which he granted, though at Dinner he proposed to me
to go and see his strong Fort at Castrin 10 Dutch Miles thence, but I excused
it, saying, I would satisfy my self seeing that at Spanda two Miles in my way
back, which is of great strength both by art and situation.

The next day being Wednesday, I sent to have audience, to take my leave of his
Highness in the Morning, but I was put off till after Supper. Yet I waited on
his Highness to Dinner, and after Dinner I waited upon the old Electress, the
Duke of Zimerne, and his Lady and Children, and the Princess Katherine, and had
Letters from most of them to the Queen of Bohemia and Princess Louisa, with as
great testimonies from them of their affection and good wishes to his Majesty,
and res^ect and thanks to my self as was imaginable: After Supper that Evening,
I took my (...) of his Electoral Highness, who with all respect delivered me
his Letter to his Majesty, and then with extraordinary civility he dismissed
me. After that, although the ^lectress had taken Physic that day, I had
audience of her, who gave me her Letter to the Queen of Bohemia, and when I
desired one to her Mother, she told me she had written by the Post, and so I
returned to my Lodging.

The next morning being Thursday, Mon^^eur le Cane Captain of his Highness
Guard and Master of his Horse brought me a Present of 100 pieces of Gold,
weighing each 5 Daiats, which were coined of purpose for me, u^ing much
Complement from the Elector his Master in the delivery, and then presently by
his Highness Order, he brought me out of Town in one of his Highness Coaches,
there being two other Gentlemen with him: and first he showed me the place of
casting Ordinance, where there were newly cast two great whole Cannons and a
very large Mortar-piece, then through a very large Park we came to Spanda,
where at the entry of the Fort I was saluted with three pieces of Cannon, and
met by the^ Governor, who showed me all the strength and provisions thereof,
which are in all kinds very great both of Br^ss, Ordinan^e, and Arms. After
that, I was very well entertained at Dinner by the Governor, and after Dinner
saw the Elector's Lodgings, where only the great variety of rare Stags-horns is
worth observation, and so the Messenger being arrived, I took my leave of the
Governor and Mons^uer le Cane, who brought me out of the Fort, and through the
Town, returning by the same way and means. Thus I came to Hamburg on Monday
following, and so returned to Amsterdam on Sunday night the 20. of April.

Shortly after the present Sovereign was most happily restored to his Kingdoms,
he took care to send over the rest of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order (
namely the Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, and Collar) to the said Prince Elector of
Brandenburgh, who had yet been invested but with part; these were committed to
the care of Garter, who thereupon sent them to Prince Maurice of Nassau to be
conveyed to the said Elector; the Receipt of which, with the Elector 's
particular thankful acknowledgments to the Sovereign, may be found in the Number.
CIX^ CX. CXI. CXII. and CXIII.
Appendix.

SECT. IV. Certificates of having received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.
THE great and magnificent Solemnity of Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns
of this most Noble Order, being completely finished, and the Ambassadors having
fully performed their duties therein, with all circumstances of honor, as
belongs to so great a Ceremony, they are yet further to obtain from the new
Invested Stranger, before their departure, a public Instrument, testifying the
reception of the said Habit and Ensigns, signed with his Hand, and sealed with
his Great Seal.

This we find anciently done, as appears from that Certificate sent back by
Charles Duke of Burgundy, bearing date at Gaunt the 4. of February an. 9. E. 4.
and was generally demanded and obtained since that time, as will fully appear
from the several Certificates sent from those Stranger-Princes, to whom the
Habit and Ensigns of the Order have been presented.

Hereupon was a Clause to this effect usually added in the Instructions, given
to Ambassadors in such their Legations, as appears from those to the Lord
Howard and Garter, in the Embassy to James the Fifth King of Scotland; namely,
Appendix, Number. CII.
That Garter should remember (after the Investiture was performed) to purchase
and solicit a Certificate from the said King, of his reception of the Order,
and taking the Oath, both under his Seal.

The form and substance of those Certificates which have come to our view, are
much alike; for Ibid. Number. CXIV. etc.
after a recital of all the powers given to the Ambassadors, named in the
Commission of Legation, the Stranger-Prince first makes Certificate of his
Receiving, and Investiture with the Garter, Mantle, Surcoat, Collar, and other
Ornaments of the Order, and that they have been presented to him by the
Sovereign's Ambassadors, with due honor, and all the Solemnities accustomed:
and generally where the Letters signifying Election, and the Habit of the Order
have been sent together, the Certificate of receiving them has also contained
the Strangers grateful acceptance of the Order, together with his due thanks
(in such cases necessary to be returned) and an acknowledgment, how acceptable
the choice, and assumption into this Society, has been to him.

And in some of these Certificates, namely from Ibid. Number. CXV.
Ferdinand Prince of Spain, an. 15. H. 8. from Number. CXVI.
Francis the First, the French King, an. 19. H. 8. and from Number. CXIX.
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, an. 3. Car. 1. we find, the taking the Oath
appointed by the Statutes to be also certified, with such qualifications and
under such conditions, as had been advised and agreed upon, between them and
the Sovereign's Ambassadors beforehand.

Of the return of these Certificates, the Annals of the Order sometimes take
notice, as in particular, that of Lib. C. p. 89.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark, which the Lord Willoughby brought back
with him, Lib. C. p. 89.
signed by that King, and sealed with his Great Seal, which he presented to the
Sovereign in the Lib. C. p. 89.
Chapterhouse at Windesor, upon the finishing of his Legation; as also that of
the French King Ibid. p. 97.
Henry the Third, by the Earl of Derby.

Moreover by a late Lib. R. p. 120.
Decree an. 13. Car. 1. care was taken to oblige the Ambassadors to produce
these Certificates to the Sovereign at their return.

And besides the Certificates testifying the Investiture, sometimes the
Stranger-Prince has been pleased to give therewith, a particular testimonial
of Garter's punctual discharge of his duty in the Legation, or of the Officer
of Arms employed in his stead; as did See the Letter inserted at the beginning
of E^h. Ce^^us his Eq. Aur. Anglo-Wirtemb* in the Sovereigns Library at St.
James's.
Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, in a Letter to the So^^raign, an. 1. Iac. R. The
like did Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, in the preamble of his Seld. Tit of
Honor. p. 459.
Diploma, whereby he testifies the bestowing upon Henry St George Richmond
Herald, the honor of Knighthood.

Of those Gratuities given to Garter by Strangers, after they had received
their Investiture, notice of some of them have come to our hands, which we
therefore think fit to mention here.

Ferdinand Archduke of Austria gave him a Ex Collec^. E. W. G.
Cup worth 22. l. and 100 Rhenish Guilders. The French King Francis the First
Ex Collec^. E. W. G.
250 Crowns. James the Fifth King of Scotland Ex Collec^. E. W. G.
100 Crowns of the Sun. John Casimire Count Palatine of the Rhyne, a Gold Chain
and a Cup worth 30 Pounds. Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, a Eq. Au^
A^glo-Wirtemb. p. 2^9.
rich Sword and Dagger, a Chain of Gold with his Picture hanging at it, and
lastly 1000 Rix Dollars. Maurice Prince of Orange a MS. penes ^. O. Y. p. 132.
Chain of 6 pound weight, and a Medal with his Picture thereat, set about with
Diamonds. Charles Prince of Tarent a Ex Relatione E* W. G.
Diamond of 200 l. value. William Prince of Orange Ex Relatione E* W. G.
1200 Dollars. Frederick William Elector of Brandenburgh Ex Relatione E* W. G.
100 pieces of Gold, each of the value of 10 Rix Dollars. John Gasper Count
Marchin about Ex Relatione E* W. G.
2^0 l. in Gold. Charles the Eleventh King of Sweden gave to Henry St. George
Esquire at his Investiture, a Ex Relatione E* W. G.
Gold Chain and a Medal pendant thereto, worth 200 l. And lastly, John George
Duke of Saxony bestowed on Thomas St. George Esquire a Ex Relatione E* W. G.
Silver Basin and Eure, a Gold Chain and Medal, and a Sword with a Cross Hilt
of Agat, adorned with Gold.
CHAP. XVI. THE Installation OF A Stranger by Proxy.
SECT. I. Touching the Choice and Nomination of a Proxy.
THE Invested Stranger, of what Dignity, State, or Condition soeever, is
enjoined by the Statutes (after such his Investiture) to send hither a Ed. 3.
Stat. Art. 20.
Proctor or Deputy (for we find both Titles indifferently applied to one
person) to be installed on his behalf, in the Seat assigned him within the
Chapel of St. George at Windesor.

The time limited by the Statutes of Institution, for sending him hither, is
Ed. 3. Stat. Art. 20.
eight Months after Investiture with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. Yet in
King Henry the Fifth's Statutes it is but Art. 20.
seven Months; and those of King Henry the Eighth allow only Art. 21.
seven Months and no more, and that not only after Investiture, but after the
Stranger has Art. 21.
certified the Sovereign of his Reception of the Order.

The French King Francis the First, was so earnest for the completing this
honor, that he Lib. N. p. 257
speedily (after he had received the Habit and Ensigns) dispatch^ his Proctor
hither, to perform what the Statutes required in this particular. And for the
general we observe so little slackness in Stranger-Princes, nay so great a
forward^ess to obtain the accomplishment of this Honor, that their Deputie^
have been installed for them within the limited time.

But King Henry the Eighth's Statutes have further provided, Art. 21.
That in case a Stranger do not send his Deputy or Proctor within seven Months,
without having a reasonable excuse, and such as should be allowed by the
Sovereign or his Deputy, the Election (notwithstanding his former acceptance)
should be also void, except so it be, that the Stranger be hindered or disturbed
by great Affairs, and then might he send his Excuse to the Sovereign or his
Deputy, within one month after; and according as the Sovereign or his Deputy
should allow or disallow of ^is Excuse, that then the Sovereign or his Deputy
might give unto him four months of respite more, within which time, if he
neither come nor send his Deputy to be installed for him, then the said
Election should be void for that time.

And sometimes it has fallen out, that through the multiplicity of Affairs,
Strangers could not punctually observe the ancient Law of the Statutes in this
point; nevertheless, by virtue of the limitation in those Statutes of King
Henry the Eighth, upon a sufficient cause, the Sovereign has been pleased to
excuse the delay; but the instances are very few, as that of the French King
Charles the Ninth, who was Ex Collect A V. W.
invested at Lions, an. 6. Eliz. but not installed till the Lib. C. p. 5.
22. of January, in the eighth year of the same Queen.

And when of late the Garter and George only were sent to a Stranger, the
Ceremonies of Installation have also been dispensed with till a more convenient
time, as appears from the Ex Autogr* penes praef. Iac. Palmer*
Instructions of the 4. of March, an. 19. Car. 1. given at the sending these
two Principal Ensigns of the Order to William Prince of Orange, and Bernard de
Foix Duke d' Espernon (in regard of the interruptions then given by the
Rebellion here) nevertheless Ex Autogr* penes praef. Iac. Palmer*
then to be performed with all usual Rites and Honors due to persons so nearly
allied unto, and so much esteemed by the then Sovereign of the Order.

Such Dispensations, and for the same reason, was the present Sovereign
necessitated to give those Strangers, whom he honored with Election into this
most Noble Order, while he remained in Foreign parts.

And upon his Majesty's happy Restoration, among many other things relating to
the Order, this particular was at several Chapters, taken into serious
consideration, in reference not only to the Duke d' Espernon and Prince
Maurice, that were dead, but those Strangers also then living, both wanting the
full complement of their Honor by a formal Installations; for at a Chapter held
at Whitehall the 10. of April, an. 13. Car. 2. Lib. Carolin^ p. 27.
directions were given to Garter, to place the Banners, and other Achievements
of the surviving Strangers over their respective Stalls: The Sovereign then
also did by his Supreme power (induced by diverse considerable reasons) Collect.
E. W. G.
dispense wholly and absolutely with their Installations, nevertheless declared
them and every of them to be esteemed Companions, and to enjoy all privileges
of the Order, as if they had been installed Personally, or by Proxy; with this
further declaration notwithstanding, That as the like necessity and conjuncture
could never happen again, so he would not upon any motion or pretense
whatsoever give the like Dispensation. Finally, at another Chapter, held at
Whitehall the 20. of February following, it was concluded, and the Sovereign
again declared his pleasure, to dispense with the said Strangers Installations
by a formal Act, thereupon commanded to be drawn up by the Chancellor; which he
having performed, read it in a subsequent Chapter, where it received
approbation. A Copy whereof here follows.

WHereas it is expressly provided by the Statutes of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, Ex Lib. Collect. Hen. de Vic. Bar. nuper buju^ Ord. Cancel. p. 23.
That no Companion Elect of the same, shall enjoy the privileges of a complete
Knight thereof, before he be actually installed, either in his Person o^ by his
sufficient Proxy, within the accustomed time, and according to the usual Rites
and Formalities, which some of those noble Persons, who though Elected, could
not possibly perform and receive, during the late troubles, nor legally since
our return into our Dominions, by reason of the space of time elapsed since
their Election, beyond that which is allowed and prescribed by the Statutes, as
also for the many difficulties and encumbrances, through which the performance
of their Installations must pass, in some of them who are Strangers, and have
their abode in Foreign and remote parts; which we taking into our
consideration, and that if not all, most part of the foresaid Knights were
admitted into our said Order, without those Formalities, which at other times,
to have omitted had been an unexcusable breach of Statute: We conceiving it no
more irregular to pass by the Statutes, in matter of their Installation, than
it was in point of their Election, the observation of the usual forms in either
of them having proved equally difficult or rather impossible; for these and
other reasons, particularly for the avoiding that prejudice, which some of the
said Companions, who are now dead, and have a like interest therein, with those
that survive them, would have undergone (who for want of being installed, would
have been left out of the Catalogue of the Founders in the Register-Books of
our Order) as we heretofore declared our pleasure to be, That such of them as
are dead, should not for want of being installed, be deprived of the honor of
being called Founders, and for those that are yet alive, that they should not
suffer likewise in that respect, or in point of their Ranks and Precedence: And
accordingly with the advice and consent of our other Companions, in the Chapter
held the 10. of April last, we did regulate the Stalls, and command their
Hatchments to be set up in the Chapel of St. George, in our Castle of
Windesor, according to their Elections in point of time, We continuing in our
former purpose, for the putting an end to the irregularities which the late
troubles occasioned in our foresaid Order, and the many questions and
difficulties which have ensued thereupon, and especially in this particular, We
have thought good to dispense with the Installation of all the said Knights,
whether they be Subjects or Strangers, dead or living, and whatsoever omission
of, or contravention to the Statutes, may have happened upon that account, And
that the same notwithstanding, they all shall be held and reputed for complete
Knights of our foresaid Order, and enjoy all the privileges and advantages of
it, with the rest of the Companions, in as full and ample manner, as if they
had installed and performed all the Rites, and Ceremonies, usual upon such
occasions.


But it seems to rest in the pleasure of the Stranger, whether he will choose to
send over hither any person of his own Court, or give his Procuration to some
one of the Sovereign's Subjects, to receive his Stall, and in his name to take
possession of it; the later of which has been several times done, out of
desire to favor some of our Nobility, or other persons of quality at Court,
with this honor: For instance, Frederick the Second King of Denmark; gave his
Procuration to the Append. Number. CXXI. and CXXII.
Lord Willoughby (principal in the Legation, for the carriage of the Habit of
the Order to him) to be installed for him; and in like manner, Append. Number.
CXXI. and CXXII.
John Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, deputed Sir Philip Sidney to the same
Employment: Lib. R. p. 41.
Viscount Dorchester was installed for Henry Prince of Orange, to whom he (and
Sir Williams Segar, Garter) had before carried the Habit and Ensigns: and this
was done by virtue of a Deputation penned in Lib. R. p. 41.
French, and sent him hither from the said Prince. The Earl of Carlisle
received his Deputation from Charles King of Sweden at Stockholme; and the
Prince Elector of Saxony sent his hither to the Earl of Bath.

But it has sometimes happened, that a Proctor for the installation of a
Stranger, has been appointed and nominated by the Sovereign of the Order,
though the Principal had named another before, perchance induced thereto by
some extraordinary necessity. Thus it happened in the case of Maurice Prince of
Orange an. 10. Iac. R. who having deputed MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge.
Count Henry his Brother to be installed for him, and he having put to Sea in
order thereto, but by reason of MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge.
contrary winds, not arriving in England before the day appointed for his
Installation, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions ordered, that MS. penes Edw.
Fanconbridge.
Lodowick of Nassau, Kinsman to the Elect Prince, should take possession of his
Stall on his behalf; to the end that the honor designed the said Prince, in
accompanying Frederick Prince Elector Palatine to his personal Installation,
might not become frustrate.

A case somewhat like to this, was that of John George Duke of Saxony; for
having sent over his Procuration to John Earl of Bath, and he being detained in
the West by extraordinary occasions, when St. George's Feast was held at
Windesor, an. 23. Car. 2. wrote to the Chancellor of the Order, to obtain the
Sovereign's Dispensation for his not appearing there in the name of his
Principal; who E^ Praef. li^. Collect. Hen. ^^ ^ic. p. 159.
representing his humble request to the Sovereign, in Chapter held on the Eve
of the said Feast, he was pleased to grant it, and appointed Heneage Earl of
Winchelsey to be the Duke's Proxy, who performed the whole service.

And there is an ancient Example in this kind, Lib. N. page 164.
an. 9. H. 5. where the Sovereign nominated the Lib. N. page 164.
Lord Fitzhugh, Procter for the King of Denmark; which yet was not done, till
after the Sovereign had been certified, that the said King had been invested
with the Habit and Ornaments of the Order, and also Lib. N. page 164.
obliged himself by Oath to the observation of the Statutes.

In like manner it is recorded, Lib R p. 40.
that the Earl of Cleveland was by the Sovereign appointed Deputy, for the
Installation of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden; and yet not unlike but this
might be by consent of the said King, though the Annals herein are silent; (as
is very usual, and sometimes in circumstances and passages of note) for if we
look toward the end of the said King's Certificate, returned of his Receipt of
the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, we shall there find he desired, Appendix*
Number. CXIX.
that the Qualifications therein before mentioned, might be admitted into his
Oath, when any solemn attestation should be made by his Proctor in his Name;
whence it may be well enough (and without much wresting) inferred, that he had
not then named his Proctor, but probably either by a private Letter, or verbal
message, returned by those (or some of them) joined in the Legation with the
Habit, might leave him and the time to the choice and appointment of the
Sovereign.

But suppose the Sovereign (being loath to defer this King's Installation too
long, considering the hazards of War) did appoint a Deputy for his
Installation, without his direction; as the case stood he might do it, and not
entrench upon that leave given a Stranger by the Statutes, to choose his own;
because in the body of the said Kings Certificate, there is set down the very
qualifications wherewith his Oath should be taken by his Proctor, which being
allowed and admitted by the Sovereign, any further concern in this Affair was
but matter of indifferency.

But if the Sovereign, having nominated a Proctor, should also cause him to
take the ancient Oath, in its absolute nature and form, not allowing those
qualifications, which the interests of his Principal, to his Religion, or to
other Princes Orders, and such like, might justly exact (which without
consulting an invested Stranger, cannot well be known or set down) and such an
Oath as his Principal had neither allowed of, nor consented unto: this might
seem good cause of exception, and be esteemed done in prejudice to his
preingaged interests.

SECT. II. The Proctor's Qualifications.
BUT whether the Proctor be nominated by his Principal, or by the Sovereign,
the Statutes of the Order put some qualifications upon the person so sent, or
appointed as aforesaid: and first,

That he be E. 3. Stat. Art. 20
Procurator sufficiens, and Ib. Art. 24.
idoneus; that is, Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 19.
such a person who has been always accounted of an unblamable conversation,
not branded with any note of infamy, but altogether irreproveable. And such as
one was Dominus Franciscus -- Deputy to Hercules Duke of Ferara, who in the
Black-Book of the Order, is characterised to be Page 147.
a Knight of an incorrupt Fame; nor are we to doubt, but that other Proctors to
Strangers were such, though the testimonials of their virtue do not appear in
the Annals of the Order.

Secondly, the Proctor ought to be a person E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. Vide^i^ H. 5.
Stat. Art. 20. and H. ^. Stat. Art. 21.
correspondent to the State and Dignity of that Stranger which does depute him;
so that answerable to the dignity of the Invested Knight, ought to be (in some
Proportion) the quality of the Proctor. And how this Injunction has been
observed, will sufficiently appear in the following Scheme.

Knights. Proctors. Emperor. Maximilian the First. Marquess of Brandenburgh.
An. 6. H. 7. Kings. Ericus King of Denmark. Lord Fitzhugh. An. 9. H. 5. Kings.
Francis the First of France. Andrian de Tercelin Lord of Bross. An. 19. H. 8.
Kings. James the Fifth King of Scotland. Lord John Erskine. An. 26. H. 8.
Kings. Charles the Ninth of France. Jacques Lord Remboilliet. An. 8. Eliz.
Kings. Frederick the Second King of Denmark. Peregrine Lord Willoughby of
Ersby. An. 24. Eliz. Kings. Henry the Fourth of France. Sier de Chastes
Vice Admiral of France. An. 42. Eliz. Kings. Christierne the Fourth King of
Denmark. Henry Ramell, hereditary Lord of Wosterwitz and Beckeskaw. An. 3. Iac.
R. Kings. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden. Thomas Wentworth Earl of Cleveland.
An. 4. Car. 1. Kings. Charles King of Sweden. Charles Howard Earl of Carlisle.
An. 23. Car. 2. Arch Duke Ferdinand Archduke of Austria. George de Halwyn,
Baron of Gomyns. An. 16. H. 8. Dukes. Peter Duke of Conimbero. John Lord
Typtost. An. 6. H. 6. Dukes. Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin. Sir Balthazar de
Castilian Knight. An. 22. H. 7. Dukes. Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Johan Thomas
Langusts des Contes de Stropiane. An. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. Dukes. Adolph Duke
of Holstein. Walter Devereux Viscount Hereford. An. 3. Eliz. Dukes. Henry
Prince of Orange. Dudley Carleton Viscount Dorchester. An. 4. Car. 1. Dukes.
John George Duke of Saxony. Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey. An. 23. Car. 2.
Earls. Anne Montmorency Earl of Beaumont. Sir Amye de Courteney Knight Sier de
Villert. An. 25. H. 8. Earls. Philip Chabot Earl of Newblank. Sir James
Deschateners Knight Sier de Beaulion. An. 25. H. 8.

Thirdly it is provided, Ibid.
that he be a Knight, and without any manner of Reproach; and if it so happen,
that he have not received the degree of Knighthood, the Sovereign is to bestow
that honor, before he be allowed to take upon him the execution of his
deputative power; for none but Nam f as non est alios quam Milites munus istud
in se suscipere, R. page 20.
Knights are capable of this Honor, or Ibid. p. 159.
permitted to bear the Ensigns of so great an Order.

Hereupon the Lord Willoughby of Ersbie, Proctor for Frederick the Second King
of Denmark, and Sir Philip Sidney, for John Count Palatine of the Rhyne; were
Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 30.
both Knighted by the Sovereign at Windesor Castle, the morning before they
proceeded to take possession of their Principals Stalls.

Notwithstanding, there was a reason why this particular was not strictly stood
upon (though moved) in the case (and it is the single case) of Lib. C. p. 1^^
Henry Ramell, Deputy for Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 3. Iac. R.
for it being taken notice of, that he was not a Knight, certain persons were
sent from the Sovereign to signify his pleasure, that he should be advanced to
the honor of Knighthood, before he took upon him the Ensigns of the Order, in
his Kings behalf; to which he made answer, (...). R. p. 1^^.
that he appeared here not in his own, but in the name of the King of Denmark,
and that such a Degree of honor was unusual in his own Country (being born in
Pomerania) and therefore humbly desired that he might be excused for receiving
the honor. Upon which answer the Sovereign was pleased to Ibid.
dispense with him, and forthwith the said Deputy (but no Knight) Ibid.
received the Ornaments of the Order, and was admitted to take the Stall
assigned to the said King his Principal.

SECT. III. His Letters of Procuration.
THE authority wherewith an Elect-Stranger invests his Proxy, is chiefly
deduceable from the words in his Letters of Procuration or Deputation, which
ought to pass under the Hand and Seal of his Principal, and do generally
contain these particulars.

First, Appendix* Number. CXXI. CXXII. and CXXIII.
he premiseth the Sovereign's Election of him into the Order of the Garter, and
his Receipt of the Habit and Ensigns thereof; then takes notice of the
obligation which the Statutes of the Order put upon him, for sending a Proxy
to take possession of his Stall, in regard the dignity whereunto he is advanced
in his own Country, will not permit him to repair personally to Windesor; and
being not only desirous, that the Election and Investiture should obtain its
due effect, but to fulfill, as far as in him lies, the Injunctions of the
Statutes, in what concerns the assuming of his Stall, and taking the Oath
appointed, He therefore ordains, authorizes, and deputes, a person fitly
qualified (named in the Deputation) his sufficient Proctor and special Deputy,
to appear at the Castle of Windesor on his behalf, and in his Name at the next
Solemnity that should be held there, to supply his room, and receive possession
of the Stall assigned him, according to the usual form; and to perform in all
respects those Ceremonies and things, in his behalf, due and accustomed, or
should appear to belong any way to the splendour or ornament of the Order: As
also to take the accustomed Oath, with those qualifications, and in that form,
as had been (or should be) agreed upon; and further to fulfill all other
things, which he should think necessary, to be performed on this occasion, or
whatsoever thing might require a more special command, than was contained in
the Letters of Procuration; and as fully as the Stranger should be obliged
unto, and would do, if he were there present in his own person. Lastly, there
is usually added a Clause of Ratification and Confirmation of all such things,
as the Proctor should say or do, in reference to the Solemnity of Installation.

SECT. IV. Of the Proctor's Reception.
SOon after the arrival of the Proxy, and that the Sovereign is acquainted
with the occasion of his coming, he at some convenient time Collect. W. l^ N.
^l.
gives him Audience; after which a day for Installation is assigned, (where
the Sovereign or his Lieutenant are present) the Sovereign nominates some of
the Knights-Companions his Commissioners to perform the Ceremonies.

Heretofore, the Sovereign has caused the Proctor to be received with very
great state; for so was Ex ve^. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b.
Sir Balthazar Castilian, sent hither from the Duke of Vrbin, an. 22. H. 7.
whom Sir Ex. ve^. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b.
Thomas Brandon, with a goodly company of his own Servants, well horst, met at
the Sea side; and thence continually kept company with him, till they came near
Deptsord in Kent, where, by the Sovereign's command, he was met by Sir Ex ve^.
MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b.
Thomas Dokara, Lord of St. John's, and Sir Thomas Wriothesley Garter: The said
Sir Thomas Dokara had attending him Ex ve^. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. 24. b.
30 of his Servants all in new Liveries, well horsed, every Gentleman bearing a
Javelin in his hand, and every Yeoman a Bow, and a Sheaf of Arrows, and so they
conveyed him to his Lodging. The next day they conducted him to London, and by
the way there met him diverse Italians, and Paulus de Gygeles the Popes
Vice-Collector, to whose house he was conveyed and there lodged.

The Reception also of James Lord Rambouillet, Proctor for the French King
Charles the Ninth, was very noble; to whom, as soon as the Sovereign heard of
his arrival at Gravesend (being Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Tuesday the ^8. of January an. 8. Eliz.) she sent thither Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, Mr. Midlemore, and other Gentlemen, who the next
day landed him at the Tower-Wharf, where all taking Horse, they conducted him
to his Lodgings, near St. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Mary's Spittle, without Bishops-Gate; within which place lay the Ambassador
Leiger of France.

SECT. V. The Preparations for Installation.
THE Preparations for the Installation of a Stranger by Proxy, are the same as
for the Proxy of a Knight-Subject, and mentioned as before, namely the (1.)
Commission for Installation, (2.) Letters of notice to the Commissioners. (3.)
Warrants for removal of Stalls, (4.) for the Strangers Achievements, and (5.)
some other particulars of less note: All which are to be obtained by the
Chancellor of the Order, under the Sovereign's Sign Manual, to which the Signet
of the Order is to be affixt.

1. Commission for Installation.
The form of the Commission is much the same, with that drawn up for
Installation of a Knight-Subject, both as to the material and circumstantial
parts; whereof we have Chap. 11. Sect. 3.
already discourst. The Appendix. Number. CXXIV. CXXV. CXXVI. CXXVII.
Preamble constains the same matter, and the authority wherewith the Proxy is
empowered, and is penned with like words; the variation lies only in those
expressions, which lay down the causes of the Stranger's absence, and for the
most part are generally expressed, but if in particular, then are the words
fitted with alterations suitable to the occasion.

2. Letters to the Commissioners.
The Letters sent from the Sovereign to each of the Commissioners appointed for
Installation, Ibid. Number. CXXVIII. and CXXIX.
giving them notice and information of the Solemnity, and requiring their
attendance at Windesor, on the day assigned, are of the same nature with those
prepared against the Installation of a Knight-Subject by his Proxy; the
necessary alterations being taken in, where the occasion requires.

3. Warrants for removal of Stalls.
Thirdly, a Warrant for the Removal of Stalls, is likewise to be obtained from
the Sovereign, and sent unto Garter, to see it put in execution, according to
its tenor, whereby a Stall being assigned to the Stranger, his Proxy having
taken possession thereof, may set over it the Achievements of his Principal.
The ground of this Removal, and the practice thereupon, in relation both
Strangers and Knights-Subjects, is discoursed of at large, among the (...) 11.
Preparations made for the Personal Installation of a Knight-Subject.

In the last place, 4. Warrants for Atchievement^.
a Warrant is to be drawn and signed by the Sovereign, for providing the
Stranger's Achievements at the Sovereign's charge; namely, his Helm, Crest,
Mantlings, and Sword, together with a Banner of his Arms and Quarterings; and
these the Proctor is E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. H. ^. Stat. Art. 20. H. ^. Stat. Art.
^1.
enjoined to bring along with him to Windesor.

Sometimes a Warrant has been directed to the M^^ter of the Wardrobe, to
provide but some part of these Achievements; and another Warrant to the Lord
Treasurer of England, to deliver Garter money to provide the other part; in
each of which, the particulars relating to either are enumerated. For so were
the Warrants drawn up, for the Achievements of the French King Ap^endix, Number.
CXXX, and CXXXI.
Henry the Second. At other times the direction has been to the Master of the
Great Wardrobe, to provide and deliver to Garter the whole, who thereupon put
the charge upon account; as were those Warrants for Achievements for the Ibid.
Number. CXXXII. and CXXXIII.
Duke of Chevereux and King of Sweden.

Sometimes particular Warrants have been directed to the Master of the
Wardrobe, to deliver forth several parcels of the Materials, for the making up
these Achievements, to the persons employed in the work, or oversight thereof,
as were those Warrants to deliver the Ibid. Number. CXXXIV CXXXV. CXXXVI. ^
CXXXVII.
Sovereign's Embroiderer, and to Ibid. Number. CXXXIV CXXXV. CXXXVI. ^ CXXXVII.
Garter so much Velvet, Cloth of Gold, etc. for making the great Banner and
other the Achievements of Charles the Ninth, and Henry the Third the French
Kings, and Christian Prince of Denmark.

But it appears that Garter has sometimes laid out the money, for making all,
or part of the Achievements, and then he delivered his Bill of disbursements
into the Wardrobe, as is manifest from those Bills drawn up for the
Achievements of Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark, MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 160 and 156.
John Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and the MS. penes G. O. Y. f. 160 and 156.
Duke of Holstien.

Besides the Achievements, 5. Some other particulars.
some other things used at the Solemnity, are commonly included in the foresaid
Warrants, as (1.) a Plate of Brass gilt, whereon are engraven and enamelled in
Colors the Stranger's Coat of Arms and Quarterings, within a Garter; as also
his Helm, Crest, and Supporters, and underneath these his whole Style and
Titles of Honor: (2.) A Majesty Scutcheon, to be set over the Sovereign's
Stall, and another over the Strangers, there to remain during the time of
Installation. And when Prince Henry was constituted the Sovereign's Lieutenant
for St. George's Feast, at which time also Christian the Fourth King of Denmark
was installed; he likewise had a Ex Autogr. penes ^uil. Knight, an. 1657.
Majesty Scutcheon placed (...) his Stall: (3.) Some Lodging Scutcheons of his
Arms, marshalled in the same order as they are in his Plate: and (4.) a Cushen
of Crimson Velvet, whereon to lay the Mantle, when Garter bears it before the
Proctor into the Choire, in case the Proctor does not carry it on his own arm.
Lastly, for the carriage of all these things to Windesor, a Trunk is likewise
to be provided.

We do not think it needful to place the Mantle of the Order here, with those
things that are to be prepared at the Sovereign's charge against this
Solemnity; for the E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. vide etiam H. 5. Stat. Art. 20. and H.
8. Stat. Art. 21.
Statutes of Institution appoint the Proxy to bring one with him, not that the
Sovereign should provide it, having done that before at the Ibid.
Legation with the whole Habit: Nor have we found in the Rolls or Books of the
Sovereign's Great Wardrobe, any account made for providing a second Mantle,
when the Proxy of a Stranger came hither; which, had the Sovereign been at
such charge, would not have been omitted.

SECT. VI. The Proctor's Cavalcade to Windesor.
THE day appointed for the Installation drawing on, the Lib. N. p. 316.
Proxy was heretofore accompanied on Horseback, from London to Windesor, with
the Sovereign's Lieutenant and his Assistants (if the Feast of St. George were
then also celebrated) or otherwise the Sovereign's Commissioners, with a very
great Retinue.

Amongst the rest, when Adrian de Tercelin, Deputy for the French King Francis
the First, rode to Windesor, the day before his Installation (being the 24. of
Ian. an. 19. H. 8.) Autogr. in Bibl. Coton, vide MS. fol. penes G. O. Y. p. 21.
all the Knights-Companions that were in Commission for that Solemnity,
assembled at the Lord Sandys his Place, near St. Paul's Church in London,
whence they rode to the Deputies Lodging, then at the Dean of Paul's his House;
and thence accompanied him in good order and gallant equipage, to the Castle of
Windesor; where Lodgings were prepared for him at the Dean's House.

In like manner on Tuesday the 15. of January an. 8. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D.
N. f. 24. b.
Earls of Sussex and Leicester and Lord Clinton, ( Lib. C. p. 50.
three of the four Commissioners appointed for the Installation of the French
King Charles the Ninth) with other Lords and Gentlemen, took their Horses at
the Ex MS. praed.
Court Gate at Westminster, and with a great Train rode to the Lodging of the
said Kings Proxy (being then at St. Mary's Spittle in London) whence they took
their way through Holborn toward Windesor, the Earl of Southampton, Viscount
Mountague, Sir Henry Lea, and Sir Edward Vmpton met them at Langford near
Colebrook with their Hawks, and there showed the Proxy variety of sport, with
which he being exceeding well pleased, they rode to Windesor; where he was
accommodated with Lodgings in the Dean's House, Lib. N. p. 316.
for that has usually been the place to entertain the Stranger's Proxies, when
they came to Windesor, upon this solemn occasion.

SECT. VII. Supper after his arrival there.
THE Evening of their arrival passes with a Supper, for the most part costly
and sumptuous; but the principal entertainment is reserved to set forth the
magnificence of the following days Dinner, in case the Instalment be appointed
to be solemnized on the next morning.

At the Installation of the French King Francis the First, all the Autogr. in
Bibl. Coton.
Commissioners met at the Marquess of Exceter's Lodgings, and went together to
the Dean's House, where they were entertained by him at Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Supper, all at one Table, at another Table sat Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Garter, with certain of the Deputy's chief Gentlemen, and some of the Heralds;
and at a third Table sat the Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
rest of the Heralds, and other of the Proxy's Servants.

The MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25.
Commissioners, and other Noblemen, who also accompanied Charles the Ninth's
Proctor to Windesor, supped (the Evening of their arrival) with him; he MS.
penes W. D. N. fol. 25.
himself sitting at the upper end of the Table, then the Earls of Sussex and
Leicester by him, one against the other, next the Earl of Southampton, and
Viscount Mountague, then the Lord Clinton, and Lord Herbert of Cardiff, after
them two Strangers, namely Monsieur Cleremont, and Monsieur de la Lupe, then
lower sat the Lord Gray, and other Strangers, and last of all sat Monsieur Doze
alias St. Michael, the French Herald, at the lower end, opposite to the
Proctor. MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25.
Garter, Black-Rod, and diverse Strangers, supped with the Dean; and in the
Parlour and Hall sat diverse Pensioners, Gentlemen, and Strangers.

SECT. VIII. Of the Proceeding to the Chapter House.
WHat has been before set down, touching the public Proceeding to the
Chapter House, at the personal Installation of a Knight-Subject, and other
particulars relating to that Ceremony, will extend hither, both as to order and
circumstances; and there needs no further instruction here, but to look back to
the Chap. 12. Sect. 4.
Discourse thereupon: Nevertheless, this general rule is to be born in mind,
That the place of a Stranger-Prince's Proctor here, is Collect. W. le N. Cl.
next after the Provincial-Kings (unless the Proctor of a Knight-Subject happen
to intervene) and Collect. W. le N. Cl.
before the junior Knight-Companion (unless a Knight-Subject Elect pass then in
the Proceeding) of which we have an instance at the Installation of the Dukes
of Lib. R. p. 29*
Brunswick and Chevereux, and the Earl of Dorset by their Proctors, but the
Earls of Salisbury, Carlisle, and Holland, with Viscount Andover, in person,
an. 1. Car. 1. when the Proceeding was ordered as follows.

MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge. gen*
First, two Waiters of the Sovereign's Hall in their Livery Coats, bearing
white Rods. Alms-Knights. Prebends of the College. Officers of Arms. Proctors
to the absent Elect-Knights. Elect-Knights in person. Knights-Companions.
Black-Rod. Register. Garter. Chancellor. Prelate.
Sovereign's Lieutenant. Courtiers and Gentlemen in the Rear.
Only in the single case of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 3. Iac*
(as an extraordinary respect and honor) his Proxy went in the Proceeding to
the Chapter House, MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 146. b.
next before the Sovereign's Lieutenant.

As we had an example before, of a Proctor to a Knight-Subject, who past in
this Proceeding before the Alms-Knights and Officers of Arms, namely, Sir Henry
Sidney, Deputy to the Earl of Warwick, an. 5. Eliz. so here (in the case of a
Stranger) the Viscount Hereford, Proxy to the Duke of Holstien, Lib. C. p. 37.
installed the 15. of December, an. 3. Eliz. who went in the Proceeding to the
Chapter House before the Officers of Arms also: which Proceeding was ordered in
this manner.

Collect. W. l^ N. Cl.
Gentlemen, and Knights. The Proctor, and Ambassador of Holstein together.
Officers of Arms. Register and Garter. Lord Hastings Commissioners. Lord Paget
Commiccioners.
If the Proxy of a Stranger pass in the Proceeding which the Sovereign, or his
Lieutenant, or Commissioners make to the Chapter House, then does he for the
most part give his attendance in the Presence Chamber, or in that Room, from
whence the Lieutenant or the Commissioners do proceed, and there joineth
himself thereunto.

But sometimes the Commissioners, after their setting forth (as an act of grand
respect) have taken the Proxie's Lodgings by the way, and there received him
into the Proceeding. Instances in this, are first Prince Henry, Lieutenant at
the Installation of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, who proceeded from
the Ex eod. MS. penes eund. E. W. G. loco citato.
Presence Chamber, down to the Deans House (where the said King's Proxy
lodged) and Ex eod. MS. penes eund. E. W. G. loco citato.
received him at the Door, from whence the Lieutenant passed to the
Chapter House. And at the Installation of the Duke of Wirtemberg, Lib. C. p.
153.
19. April an. 2 Iac. R. the Commissioners proceeded from their Ex. MS. praed.
Lodgings (having the Alms-Knights and Officers of Arms before them) unto the
Dean's House, where Ex. MS. praed.
Grave van Eveston his Proctor likewise lodged; and from whence to the
Chapter House, the now full Proceeding passed.

We observe, that the Proxies of Strangers have not always gone in the
Proceeding, but sometimes stayed at their Lodging in the Castle, till the
Commissioners were ready to send for them into the Chapter House. And thus it
was at the Installation of the French King Charles the Ninth, for on the MS.
penes ^* D. N. f. 25.
16. of January, an. 8. Eliz. in the morning (at the Earl of Leicester's
Lodgings in the Castle) the other three Commissioners met, where they and the
three inferior Officers of the Order, robed themselves, and went thence to the
Proxie's Lodging; and having a while conferred with him, took leave and MS.
penes ^* D. N. f. 25.
proceeded to the Chapter House. After some time of consulation there, they Ex
Collect. A. V. W.
sent out Garter to the Proctor, with desire to repair to them, who, upon the
delivery of the message, was forthwith conducted by Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Garter (attended with the Earl of Southampton, the Lords Herbert and Gray, and
many others) to the Chapter House door; where being arrived, the Earls of
Sussex and Leicester (being the two senior Commissioners) received him between
them.

Sometimes the Proxies have past privately to the East-Isle of St. George's
Chapel, and there rested, before the Sovereign and Knights-Companions went
i^to the Chapter House (or proceeded into the Choire, without entering
thereinto, for ^o it has sometimes happened) as did the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Cleveland, and Marquess Dorchester, Proxies for Gustavus Adolphus King
of Sweden, and Henry Prince of Orange, an. 4. Car. 1. The like did the Lib. R.
p. 84.
Earl of Dover Proxy to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, an. 9. Car. 1,
and of late, Sir George Carteret, Proxy to Christian Prince of Denmark, an.
15. Car. 2. So also the Earls of Carlisle and Winchelsey, Proctors to Charles
King of Sweden, and John George Prince Elector of Saxony, an. 23. Car. 2.

SECT. IX. The Ceremonies performed therein.
WHen the Proceeding has arrived at the Chapter House door, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions (or the Lieutenant and his Assistants, or Commissioners)
with the Officers of the Order before them, enter to hold their Consultation:
but first the Stranger's Proctor is Lib. N. p. 316.
entreated to stay without, until his Deputation or Letters of Procuration be
read, to the end they may understand the elect thereof.

To this purpose we find it also MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b.
directed, (under an ancient hand) that where any Knight is installed by his
Deputy, he ought to stay without the Vestry (or Chapter House) door, until he
be brought in by two Knights-Companions: Hereupon the Collect. A. V. W.
Lord Pagit, one of the Commissioners for installation of the Duke of Savoy,
when the Proceeding was come to the Chapter House door, acquainted his Proxy
with this Custom and Injunction, and desired him to walk aside, which he
accordingly did.

The East-Isle behind the High Altar, is the MS. fol. penes E. W. G.
accustomed place for the Proxies to walk or repose themselves in, till they be
called into the Chapter; as it is also for the Deputies of Knights-Subjects,
where Chairs and Cushens are ready prepared for this occasion.

The first thing done, 1. Reading the Commissions.
after the Chapter is opened, is Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Reading the Commission for Installation, by the Register of the Order (but if
the Sovereign be present at the Installation, no Commission issues) and next
the Letters of Procuration; this being as the most proper, so the most
accustomed place for this act.

Nevertheless, at the Installation of the French King Francis the First (we
know not by what (but certainly a most unusual) compliance, the Autogr. in
Bibl. Haton.
Commissioners went from the Chapter House, after they had called in and
invested the Earl of Oxford (then also present to receive his Installation)
with his Surcoat and Hood, unto the Deans House, where the Proctor was lodged,
and in the great Chamber there, Autogr. in Bibl. Haton.
showed him the Sovereign's Commission, and in it the authority for admitting
him into the Stall of his Lord and Master: Whereupon the Proctor Autogr. in
Bibl. Haton.
presented them with his Procuration, by which he was empowered to take the
possession of his Principal's Stall, and further to do and perform all such
Ceremonies, as to the Order of the Garter did appertain, which Instrument was
forthwith read before them, by the Register. This Ceremony being ended, they
all proceeded to the Chapel; where entering, they waved their return into the
Chapter House, and passed directly into the Choire.

After some time of consultation in the Chapter House, 2. Receiving the Proxy
into the Chapter House.
the Proxy is sent for in thither by Garter, who conducts him to the
Chapter House door; and his Collect. W. l^ N. Cl.
Reception there by the Commissioners, is after the same manner, and with the
same circumstances of respect and ceremony, as is used to the Knight-Elect, or
to his Proxy. But whether he ought to enter into the Chapter House, or be
admitted any further than the door or Porch thereof, (and to pass thence
immediately into the Choire) has been. some question; because the practice
seems to have been sometimes one way, and sometimes another.

All that we find to prohibit his entrance thereinto, is an expression in the
Lib. N. p. 31^.
short Ceremonial of Installation of Strangers by Proxy, entered in the
Bla^k-Book, where it says, That the Mantle is to be laid on the Proctor's
right shoulder in the Porch of the Chapter House, Ibid.
because he is not to enter into it.

And there are two instances, where the Mantle was delivered to the Proctor at
the Chapter House door, from whence some may infer, that the Practice also of
those times was agreeable to the aforesaid direction; namely, that of the
Proctor of the French King Ex A^^ogr. in Bibl. Haton.
Francis the First, an. 19. H. 8. where Ex A^^ogr. in Bibl. Haton.
Garter stood at the Chapter House door, with the Mantle, and as the Proceeding
passed by presented it to the two Senior Knights-Companions (the Marquess of
Exeter and Viscount Lysle) who placed it upon the Proctor's right arm, and of
the Proctor to Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1 and 2. Ph. and M. who entered not into the
Chapter House, but had the Mantle of his Principal, laid on his arm and spread
upon his shoulder at the Ex Collect. A. V. W.
door.

But these instances (if duly weighed) cannot properly or with advantage, be
alleged to prove the assertion, because the affairs relating to both, received
dispatch in the Proctor's Lodging, a little before, and where the Proctor
himself was present; which Convocation or meeting of the Commissioners and
Proctor, cannot be called less than a Chapter (though not held in the
Chapter House) from the Transactions which passed therein, namely producing the
Sovereign's Commission, and the Proctor's Instrument of Deputation, which were
both read before them by the Register, and the Proctor accordingly admitted,
which being finished, nothing referring to the present occasions, required
their passing into the Chapter House, or remained to be done till they came
into the Choire*

But the general practice runs strong on the contrary side, for we find, that
the Proxy for Lib. C. p. 5. and MS. pene^ W. D. N. f. 25.
Charles the Ninth of France, an. 8. Eliz. was met at the Chapter House door,
by the Earls of Sussex and Leicester, who took him Lib. C. p. 5. and MS. pene^
W. D. N. f. 25.
in thither between them; where after the Register had read as well the
Sovereign's Commission for Installation, as his Lib. C. p. 5. and MS. pene^ W.
D. N. f. 25.
Letters of Procuration, and the Commissioners had admitted him Deputy for the
said King, they all came forth and laid Lib. C. p. 5. and MS. pene^ W. D. N. f.
25.
his Principal's Mantle on his right arm and shoulder, the Lib. C. p. 5. and
MS. pene^ W. D. N. f. 25.
Train whereof was born by the Earl of Southampton, assisted by the Lord
Herbert of Cardiff.

Again it is remembered, an. 25. Eliz. that Garter conducted the Proxy of Ex
Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 30. sub finem.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark, to the Chapter House door; and at that
place the Earl of Leicester and Lord Hunsdon, received and led him in. So also
was Christian the Fourth's Proxy MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
led in thither, by the Earls of Nottingham and Dorset; and an. 10. Iac. R. MS.
fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
Lodowick Count Nassaw, Proctor to Maurice Prince of Orange, was MS. fol. penes
E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
called into the Chapter House and there MS. fol. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
left, while the Sovereign and Knights-Companions proceeded into the Choire:
And so in like manner was Sir George Cartret Vice-Chamberlain, Proctor to
Christian Prince of Denmark, an. 15. Car. 2. and the Proctors to the King of
Sweden and Duke of Saxony, an. 23. Car. 2.

Nor are these instances, and the practice in this latter case (in truth)
derogatory to the Statutes, which though it prohibit the Proxies entrance into
the Chapter House, yet does not this Prohibition extend to any time before, but
after the Ceremony of Installation is finished; for the Article of the Statutes
having first directed the delivery of the Mantle to the Proxy, and next the
assumption of his Principals Stall, in these words, Dictus Procurator
installatus, it immediately subjoins E. 3. Stat. Art. 20. videsis H. 5. Stat.
Art. 20. and H. 8. Stat. Art. 21.
that from thenceforth (namely the time of installation) he shall neither wear
the Mantle, nor enter into the Chapter, nor have any voice there, by virtue of
any power granted unto him: all which are prohibitions, plainly relateing to
the future, and after such time as the Ceremonies of Installation are past, and
not to any time preceding.

And it seems the Law has been thus understood, in regard the greater stream
of Practice has gone along with it; for not only the Proxies of Strangers (as
before is observed) but generally of Knights-Subjects, have been called into
the Chapter House, and there received the Mantle before they proceeded into the
Choire.

3. Delivering him the Mantle.
The Ceremony of delivering the Mantle to the Proctor is performed by the Ibid.
and loc. sequent.
Sovereign, his Deputy, or the Commissioners (Garter presenting it to them) and
the manner thereof was heretofore, by putting it upon the Proxies Ibid. and
loc. sequent.
right arm, Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 19.
or shoulder, in the name of his Lord and Master, there to hold it until the
end of Divine Service.

But as there has happened some doubt, touching the entry or not entry of
Proctors into the Chapter House, before they proceeded to Installation; so
likewise here, concerning the receiving of the Mantle, viz. whether in the
Chapter House, or Stall allotted to their Principal, of which there are
Examples.

That part of the Article of the Statutes of Institution which concerns this
point runs thus, That the Mantle E. 3. Stat. Art. 20.
tempore Installationis Procuratoris, shall be laid upon his Arm. etc. but
whether this shall be strictly limited to that instant of time, when the
Proctor is brought to the Stall of his Principal, or with some greater latitude
construed, to be during the time of Installation (including the very first
action, or beginning of the Ceremony of Installation, namely, the being called
to the Chapter House door, and entrance into it) is the question; because there
are instances in both, but the latter is more warrantabale by the Statutes and
general practice.

The 21.
Article in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes, being much more large in
description, and passing further in setting down the Ceremonies of
Installation, than any of the former (the particulars of which, as in the rest,
so to this point, we take to be as well placed in a true series and order of
action) having mentioned the Sovereign (or his Deputy's) laying the Mantle on
the Proxies Arm; it immediately follows (as the very next thing to be performed
in course of time) That afterward he shall be led by two Knights, from the
Chapter House door, unto the Stall, and there being shall make his Oath, and be
installed; but it says nothing of laying the Mantle on the arm of the Proctor,
now at the instant of installation in the Choire; for that was directed to be
done before. It is also recorded in the Black-Book, where the order of this
Ceremony is more fully and particularly set down, That Lib. N. p: 316
Garter shall take the Mantle upon his Arms, and deliver it to both the
Knights-Commissioners, and that they (according to the tenor of the Statutes)
shall lay it on the Proctors right shoulder, in the Porch of the Chapter House.

Besides which, and the ancient usage of receiving the Mantle in the
Chapter House, or at the Chapter House door, either before or in the Proceeding
to the Choire, by the Proctors of the French King Francis the First, of Emanuel
Duke of Savoy, Ex Collect. A. V. W.
of Charles the Ninth the French King, and Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 30.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark; we have likewise the Examples of later
times, as that of the Proctor for Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, an. 4. Car.
1. who Lib. R. p. 40.
proceeded into the Choire with the Mantle upon his arm; and that at the
Installation of Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, the Ibid. p. 83.
5. of November, an. 9. Car. 1. where the Earl of Dover his Proxy bare the
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Mantle on his right shoulder into the Choire, and Garter carried the Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
Collar of the Order, before him, on a Velvet Cushen.

But there are several modern instances, where the Mantle has been born to the
Choire (and sometimes the Collar of the Order with it) not by the Proctor but
by Garter before him, and delivered in his Principal's Stall; as in the
Proceeding of the Proxy for the Duke of Wirtemberg, an. 2. Iac. when MS penes
E. W. G. f. 145. b.
after he had taken the Oath and was led into the Duke's Stall (not before) was
the Robe laid upon his arms and so was it done in the following year, at the
Installation of Ib. f. 146. b.
Christian the Fourth King of Denmark.

So also at the Installation of Er fol. 151.
Maurice Prince of Orange, an. 10. Iac. Garter performed the like service for
him, and in the very same manner, and after he had taken the Oath appointed,
the Mantle was laid upon his arm. And lastly, MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
after the Proxies of the Duke of Brunswick and Chevereux, had taken the Oath,
not only the Mantles but Collars were placed on their arms.

Which manner has so far prevailed, as to be continued in practice since the
Restoration of the present Sovereign; for at the Installations of the Prince
of Denmark, Charles King of Sweden, and Duke of Saxony, Garter carried the
Mantle on a Cushen before their Proctors into the Choire, nor was it laid on
their arms, till they had taken their Oaths, and so laid, that the Cross of St.
George might be conspicuous.

SECT. X. Of the Proceeding to the Choire.
BUT let us pass on to the Proxie's proceeding into the Choire, concerning
which, King Henry the Eighth's Statutes direct, (as is remembered a little
before upon another point) Art: 21*
That he shall be accompanied and led by two Knights-Companions of the Order,
from the door of the Chapter House, unto the Stall assigned to his Principal;
agreeable to which is that passage in the short Memorial of Installation entered
in the Black-Book, That as soon as the two Knights have placed the Mantle on
his arm, Page 316.
they shall take him between them, and conduct him to the Stall of his Lord:
and thus assisted have all Proxies proceeded to the Choire.

But in relation to the order of the rest of the Proceeding, it will be
necessary to exhibit a Scheme or two.

The ordinary Proceeding into the Choire, the Installation being celebrated
when the Sovereign's Lieutenant holds the Feast of St. George.

Alms-Knights. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Verger of the Chapel. Prebends of the College. Officers of Arms. Black-Rod.
Register. Garter.
The Proxy between two Knights-Assistants. The Lieutenant having his Train
born.
The Proceeding into the Choire, at the Installation (by Commission) of Charles
the Ninth the French King, an. 8. Eliz.

MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b. vide etiam Collect. A. V. W.
Gentlemen, attendants on the Sovereign's Commissioners. Gentlemen, attendants
upon the Proctor. Verger of the Chapel. Alms-Knights. Officers of Arms.
Black-Rod. Register. Garter.
Viscount Mountague the two Junior Commissioners. Lord Clinton the two Junior
Commissioners. The Proctor, between the Earl of Sussex and Earl of Leicester
(the two senior Commissioners) his Train being born by the Earl of Southampton,
assisted by the Lord Herbert.
Since the Custom of receiving the Collar in the Chapter House was laid aside,
if the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) was present at an installation of a
Stranger, so soon as the Mantle was delivered to the Proctor, or (as of late)
that he has been admitted, according to the purport of his Deputation, the
Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) proceeds to the Choire with the
Knights-Companions present, and leaves the Proxy behind him in the
Chapter House, and after he and the Knights-Companions have taken their Stalls,
directs two of the Knights-Companions to descend; who taking the Alms-Knights,
Officers of Arms, and the three inferior Officers of the Order before them,
pass to the Chapter House, and bring thence the Proxy to his Installation.

Thus was it done an. 4. Car. 1. at the Installation of the King of Sweden,
when Lib. R. p. 40. vide MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
William Earl of Penbroke, and Philip Earl of Montgomery, proceeded forth of
the Choire, and introduced the Earl of Cleveland, Proctor to the said King: In
like manner, the Lib. R. p. 84.
Earls of Penbroke and Arundel went out to conduct in the Earl of Dover,
Proctor to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne.

So also were the Duke of York and Prince Rupert sent out, to introduce Sir
George C^rterett Proctor to the Prince of Denmark an. 15. Car. 2. and the Earl
of Carlisle Proctor to the King of Sweden, an. 23. Car. 2. And where there are
more than one Stranger, at the same time to be installed by Proxy, there the
two next senior Knights pass out, as did the Lib. R. p. 40.
Earls of Kelly and Salisbury, who brought in Sir Dudley Carleton, Proctor to
the Prince of Orange, an. 4. Car. 1. and the Dukes of Ormond and Buckingham,
the Earl of Winchelsey, Proctor to the Duke of Saxony an. 23. Car. 2.

In this Proceeding the Proxy goes bare-headed, for so did the before
mentioned Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Dover, Sir George Carterett, the Earl of Carlisle, and the Earl of
Winchelsey.

SECT. XI. The Ceremonies of Installation.
WHen the Proceeding has entered the Choire, and Collect. W. le N. Cl.
paid the accustomed Reverences, both toward the Altar and the Sovereign's
Stall, and the Alms-Knights, Officers of Arms, and of the Order, taken their
usual Stations; the two Commissioners (Knights-Assistants or
Knights-Companions) and Proctor make their Reverences together, and then is he
conducted by them into the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
lower Stalls, directly before the Stall appointed for his Principal, the
foresaid Officers of the Order standing below in the Choire.

If the Installation pass by more than two Commissioners, then the two Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
senior Knights-Commissioners bring him to the foresaid lower Stalls, and
perform the Ceremonies belonging to his Installation, while the rest of the
Commissioners at their entrance, take their Station Collect. W. le N. Cl.
below in the Choire, before their proper Stalls, and there Stand until the
Installation be finished. And the like do the Lieutenants Assistants, except
the two senior that are employed in the Ceremonies of Installation.

The Proxy thus introduced into the lower Stalls, Taking the Oath.
Sedere Deputato non licet. Lib. R. p. 40 circa finem.
stands there while the Register Collect. W. le N. Cl.
pronounces the Oath of the Order to him, after whom he Lib. R. p. 41.
repeateth the words distinctly; during all which time he Ex Collect. R. C. Cl.
p. 32.
lays his hand upon the New Testament, and lastly kisseth the Book.

The ancient Oath, Art. 24.
appointed by the Statutes of Institution, to be taken by a Stranger's Proxy,
is short, absolute, and without limitation or exception, and in all points the
same with that, which a Knight-Companion himself took, at his Personal
Installation, viz. Art. 24.
Faithfully to observe to the utmost of his power, the Statutes of the Order.

But afterward the Sovereigns and Fellows of those other Orders of
Knighthood, whereof Kings of Free-Princes are Sovereigns, (as the
Golden-Fleece, Monsieur St. Michael, and the Annuciade) before their admition
into the Order of the Garter, sued for, and obtained the allowance of some
relative exceptions or provisoes, to be added to the foresaid Oath; which
commonly were such as stood with the interest of their Religion, their great
state or dignity, or precedent obligation to the Orders they had before
accepted.

There is a Precedent entered in the Page 311. Appendix, Number. CXXXVIII.
Black-Book, of the Oath to be taken by an Emperor; whereby he is obliged to
Page 311. Appendix, Number. CXXXVIII.
promise upon his Royal word, and give his Faith, upon his honor and the holy
Evangelists, Page 311. Appendix, Number. CXXXVIII.
That he will faithfully and truly, to the utmost of his power, observe the
Statutes of this most Noble Order, and that particularly in every branch and
Article thereof; Page 311. Appendix, Number. CXXXVIII.
at least so far as they can or ought to be observed by him, and so far as they
shall not be contrary or derogatory to those, whereunto he has before given
his name and sworn, and saving all other conditions agreed on.

Besides this, there are also two other Precedents lodged in the Page 312. Ib.
Number. CXXXIX,
Annals, the one of the form of the Oath, as it is fitted for the Proctor of an
Emperor or a King; the other for the Proctor of a Prince, Archduke, and every
other inferior degree to a Knight, including him also.

By the first of these, the Page 312. Ib. Number. CXXXIX,
Proctor is to oblige himself in the name and behalf of his Lord, Page 312. Ib.
Number. CXXXIX,
and with a sincere heart and true faith shall promise and swear, that his said
Lord shall well and faithfully fulfill and observe, all and every the Statutes,
Ordinances, and Decrees of this Order, according to the force, form, and
effect; any way thereunto belonging, saving the conditions before agreed on
between him and the Sovereign. By the second he is Ibid. Number. CXL.
also in the name and behalf of his Lord, with a real heart and sincere faith,
to promise and swear, That his said Lord shall faithfully observe and fulfill
the Statutes, and every several Branch and Article thereof, according to the
force, form, and effect of the same, Ibid. Number. CXL.
at least so far as the Sovereign's Dispensation shall limit and appoint. But
we have not found any of these Precedents made use of, because being rather too
general, they have otherwise and more particularly fitted the Oath to the
present interest and occasion, at least so far, as they could obtain the
Sovereign to condescend unto.

And hereupon Philip King of Castile and Leon (Sovereign of the Order of the
Golden Fleece) when he received a Personal Installation at Windesor, an. 22. H.
7. though the Oath he took was absolute and without limitation, viz. Lib N. p.
184 Append. Number. CXLI.
To observe all the Statutes of the Order of the Garter, according as they were
contained in the Book then lately sent unto, and accepted by him; as
faithfully, as if every one of the Articles were then rehearsed unto him, and
to fulfill them from Article to Article, at faithfully and readily as he looked
for help from God and all his Saints. Yet nevertheless, soon after he obtained
the Sovereign's free and full Dispensation, in these two things only; first,
Lib. N. loc. cit.
that the use of the Collar, and the other Ensigns of the Order, might be left
to his pleasure; and secondly, that he might not be obliged to be present at
future Chapters.

Not long after, some other Exceptions were admitted, but such were obtained
with very great difficulty, and much debate had between the Sovereign's
Council, and the Stranger-Princes Ambassadors, lest otherwise the dignity and
reputation of the Order should (instead of being kept up) be lessened; because,
where the forbearance or omission of any circumstance, either in the
Investiture or Ceremony of Installation, has been yielded unto, it has
sometimes or other been taken notice of, and brought into Precedent, to the
prejudice of the Order. Therefore great circumspection ought to be taken, in
yielding to the omission of any part of so grand a Ceremony: And the standing
upon terms has not been without good success, since known, that though other
Interests (different or contrary to the Sovereign's) have sometimes assaulted
Strangers desirous of this Honor, yet their present necessities of obtaining
his Friendship, by receiving this Order, have caused them (though with some
unwillingness) to accept of this obliging Tie from him.

The Exceptions that were allowed to Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, when he
took the Oath at his Investiture at Noremberg, the 8. of December, an. 15. H.
8. were these that follow.

Append. Number. CXLII.
Not to wear the Garter and Collar, but at some certain times in the year, at
his own pleasure.

That if he were not in place convenient, to go to hear Mass on St. George's
day, he should cause a Priest to say it in his presence.

Not to be obliged, if busied in weighty Affairs, to wear the Garter, Collar,
or whole Habit of the Order on St. George's day, longer than during Divine
Service: Nevertheless he promised, if he could not then wear it, for a whole
day together he would willingly wear it upon some other solemn day, within the
compass of the year.

And much to the same purpose is that Proviso, added in the Oath of Emanuel
Duke of Savoy, taken the 6. of November, an. 1. and 2. Pb. and Mar. viz. To
Ibid. Number. CXLIV:
observe the Statutes of the Order, so far forth as they might be conveniently
observed by him, and were not inconsistent with those things, wherein he had
formerly bound himself by Faith and Oath; yet not to be obliged to wear the
Garter and Habit of the Order, but when he should see good, and have
convenience so to do, and never else.

Of another nature were the Exceptions which Francis the First of France
procured to be admitted into the Oath, taken by Adrian Tercelin his Proctor,
an. 19. H. 8. viz. Ibid. Number. CXLV.
To observe the Statutes of the Order of the Garter, so far as they were
consistent with, and not contrary or prejudicial to the Statutes of the Order
of St. Michael, and other Orders, which his Principal had before taken of other
Princes.

And like to this, was the Oath of Charles the Ninth, adding only an exception
of any thing contrary to his royal dignity, which was received from him in the
Church of the College of St. John's at Lions in France, the 24. of June in the
morning after Mass, an. 5. Eliz. namely, Ibid. Number. CXLVI.
To observe the Statutes of the Garter, so far forth as they were not contrary
or derogatory (1.) to his greatness Royal, (2.) the Statutes of St. Michael,
nor (3.) to any other Oath, which he had before taken.

Near to these, were the Provisoes allowed in the Oath made by Maximilian the
Emperor at Vienna, the 4. of January an. 10. Eliz. Ibid. Number. CXLVII.
To observe the Statutes, so far forth as they were not contrary or derogatory
to his (1.) Greatness and Majesty Imperial, nor to the (2.) Statutes of any
other Order, nor any (3.) Oath which he had before taken.

But by the French King Henry the Third, because now our Church was reformed,
the Exception of the Catholic Religion, was thought of consequence to be
gained from the Sovereign, and thereupon the Proviso in the Oath, which he took
in the Chapel of the Augustins in Paris, an. 27. Eliz. runs thus, Ibid. Number.
CXLIX.
so far forth as the Statutes of the Order should not be found contrary (1.) to
the Catholic Religion, his (2.) Greatness and Majesty Royal, and (3.) the
Statutes and Ordinances of the blessed Holy Ghost, and St. Michael.

And this was the form of the Oath word for word, which Ibid. Number. CL.
Henry the Fourth of France took at Roane, an. 38. Eliz. And when Monsieur de
Chastes came over four years after, to be Installed for him, viz. an. Lib. C.
p. 14^
42. Eliz. his Oath then taken, referred to the Appendix, Number. CLI.
form of the foresaid Oath, which Henry the Fourth himself had before made, and
upon the Conditions agreed on, between the Sovereign and his Master.

Such like Exceptions were allowed, in the Oath of Gustavus Adolphus and
Charles Kings of Sweden; Ibid. Number. CXIX. and CXX.
To observe the Articles of this Order in all things, which should not be any
way derogatory to the Religion by him professed, his Dignity and Majesty Royal,
or contrary to any other Articles or Orders.

Frederick the Second King of Denmark at his reception of the Habit of the
Order, Lib. C. p. 90.
took in effect the usual Oath, and to observe the Statutes of the Order, Number.
CLII.
so that they were not derogatory to those he had before sworn unto, or other
conditions whereunto he had been formerly obliged: And yet I find that his
Proctor, Lib. C p. 89.
an. 25. Eliz. obtained a larger latitude both in point of Religion, and
particular Interest, being admitted to take the Oath with these reservations,
Append. Number. CLIII.
so far forth as the Statutes of the Order, concerned the said King, and should
be agreeable to the Word of God. And the same Oath was taken by Sir Philip
Sidney, Proctor to John Count Palatine of the Rhyne; But Lib. R. p. 160
Henry Ramel, Proctor to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, an. 3. Iac. R.
took it with the salvo of those Append. Number. CLIV.
Conditions and Covenants, wherein his Master had been already pre-ingaged.

But the Princes of the Empire have allowed them another manner of Exception,
as appears by that Oath of Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, an. 1. Iac. R. viz.
Ibid. Number, CLV.
To observe the Statutes, so far as they were not inconsistent with the
Constitutions of the sacred Roman Empire, and faith which he owed to the Roman
Emperor and his Empire.

And with a like Salvo did Frederick Prince Palatine of the Rhyne (personally
installed at Windesor, Lib. C. p. 178*
an. 10. Iac. R.) take this Oath, viz. MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151.
Salvis sacri Imperii constitutionibus.

But as touching the Proxies of such Strangers, not Sovereign Princes, but
Subjects; the form of their Oath is usually framed (by the indulgence and
dispensation of the Sovereign) with just limitations, not only relative to
their obligation to the Statutes of any other Order, which they had before
accepted, or any Oath formerly taken, but sometimes to the fidelity and
allegiance, which they owe to their Sovereign Lord and Prince. And hereupon the
Earl of Newblank's Deputy, an. 25. H. 8. was sworn to the observation of the
Statutes, MS.
so far forth as they were not contradictory to the Statutes of the Order of
St. Michael, his Principal being one of the Fraternity of that Order.

After the MS. ^in Offic. Arm. [H. 2.] fol. 8, b.
Oath has been administered to a Strangers Proxy (with such or the like
exceptions before set down) the two Knights-Commissioners Collect. W. le N. Cl.
pass up with him into the higher row of Stalls, and so to that assigned for
his Principal; where being arrived, they take the Mantle from Garter, and lay
it upon the Proctor's left arm, with the Scutcheon of St. George uppermost; for
so was it ordered to be born, in a Chapter held at the Feast of St. George the
28. of May, an. 23. Car. 2. and to be a standing Rule for the future; and the
Proxies to both the King of Sweden and Duke of Saxony did so observe it the
same day, at and after Evening Service.

The next thing that follows is the act and ceremony of Installation, which is
briefly thus; first, the Commissioners, who conducted the Proxy into the
Choire, jointly embrace him; next, the Proxy makes his Ex Colle^^. A. V. W.
double Reverence, and lastly the Commissioners, according to the custom of
Installations, Lib. N. p. 316
set him down in his Principal's Stall, where he has used to remain during the
time of Divine Service.

But by the foresaid Order in Chapter held the 28. of May, an. 23. Car. 2. the
Proxies are prohibited for Ex eod. Lib. Collect. H. de Vic. loco cit.
sitting in their Stalls during the time of Divine Service, but on the contrary
directed to stand before them, in the uppermost Row of Stalls ( Lib. R. p. ^4.
uncovered) holding their Mantles on their right arms until it be ended.

And thus this great Ceremony of Installation with all its Circumstances being
finished, the two Knights (between whom the Proxy proceeded to Installation)
descend into the Choire, and stand before their own Stalls, and after a while
ascend up into them with usual Reverences, but the senior Commissioners first;
and then begins the celebration of Divine Service.

SECT. XII. The Proctor's Offering.
THE Proctor having now received the possession of his Principal's Stall,
performs his part in all the following Ceremonies, while he stays in the
Choire, as if his Lord and Master were present, until he has surrendered up his
Mantle; the chiefest of which is, the Offering of Gold and Silver, and this he
does according to the MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 2.] fol. 8. b.
degree and seniority of his Principal's Stall, in case the Installation be in
the morning.

If the Installation be celebrated when St. George's Feast is held by the
Sovereign's Lieutenant, the Proxy ought not to offer, until the Lieutenant
have first offered for the Sovereign. And in case the Lieutenant's Stall be
higher than the Stranger's for whom the Proctor is installed, then the
Lieutenant also offers for himself before him.

As to the order observed in Offering by the Proctor, he does it with all the
circumstances of Ceremony, as if his Lord were present.

First, when the Knights-Companions descend from their Stalls (which Ceremony
begins with the junior Knight) he also descends in his turn and course, and
places himself below in the Choire, before the Stall of his Principal.

Then in case he have an opposite Knight-Companion present, he joins himself
unto him, and so proceeds up toward the Altar to the Offering, taking the
Officers of Arms before him; but if not, he then proceeds alone without him,
having his Train born, and a Knight-Companion, or some other great personage,
suitable to his degree, attending on his left hand, to give him the Offering,
with Carpets and Cushens spread to kneel upon at the time of Offering; after
whom the Lib. N. p. 316.
rest of the Knights-Companions present offer, every one according to the
seniority of their Stalls.

The Proctor to Francis the First of France, was Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
served in all respects, as if himself had been there present, and at the time
of the Offering, Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Sir Richard Sands (who was of greatest quality there present excepting the
Knights-Companions) gave him his Offering, Ex Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
after whom the residue of the Knights-Companions offered in their due order.

Charles the Ninth's Proctor proceeded up to the Offering first, (no Feast of
St. George being then solemnized, and consequently no Lieutenant to offer for
the Sovereign) with the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b.
three inferior Officers of the Order before him; he had his MS. penes W. D. N.
fol. 25. b.
Train carried up, and the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b.
Earl of Sussex (the principal Commissioner) following, delivered him the
Offering; for whom also a MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b.
Carpet and Cushen was laid, and assay thereof taken by Mr. Monk, Servant to
the Earl of Leicester, MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 25. b.
instead of a Gentleman Usher, with the assistance of a Yeoman Usher.

Henry Ramel, Deputy to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark, was ushered up to
the Offering by MS. penes E. W. G. f. 146. b.
Garter, and the Black-Rod ( MS. penes E. W. G. f. 146. b.
still bearing the Mantle of his Principal on his arm) and having his MS. penes
E. W. G. f. 146. b.
Train born up by a Gentleman.

When the Proxy has offered, he returns back to his Lords Stall, in the same
manner as do the Knights-Companions, that is, by the Ex. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
East end of the Stalls (not through the body of the Choire) and so along till
he arrive at the Stall of his Principal, as did the foresaid Ex eod. MS. penes
E. W. G. loco cit.
Henry Ramel.

Divine Service being finished, and like honor in all respects showed to the
Proxy, as would have been done to his Principal, had he received a Personal
Installation; the Poxie ought to remain in his Masters Stall, until his next
junior Knight have left his Stall, and then is he to descend after him, and
stand below before his Stall, until his turn come to join himself again to the
Proceeding, and so to pass out of the Choire.

Where note, that sometimes the Proctor has been received at his coming down
from his Lords Stall by the two Knights-Commissioners, who installed him; for
so were the Ex Collect, R C. Cl. p. 31.
Proctors of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and of John Count Palatine
of the Rhyne, between Ex Collect, R. C. Cl. p. 31.
whom they also proceeded to the Chapter House door, in the same manner as they
were conducted to the Choire.

But rather the Proctor ought, in this his return, to take the place of his
Principal (as he did at the Offering, and which in truth is his right) as we
find it allowed to the Proctor of Francis the First of France, who went Ex
Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
behind alone, in his Principal's place, and followed the Knights-Commissioners
from the Choire, to the place where he lodged.

In like manner Viscount Hereford, Proxy to the Duke of Holstien, an. 3. Eliz.
who though in his Proceeding to the Choire, he went before the Officers of
Arms, yet in his return from Installation, passed Collect. W. l^ N. Cl.
behind the Knights-Commissioners, in the room and place of the Duke, and the
Ambassador of Holstien followed him, because the said Duke's Stall was higher
than any of the Commissioners, as many be seen by the following Scheam.

Alms-Knights. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Officers of Arms. Garter and Register. Lord Loughborough Commissioners. Lord
Pagit Commissioners. The Proctor. The Ambassador of Holstien, and Sir Henry
Pagit. Knights and other Gentlemen.
The like did the Proxy for Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, and Henry Prince
of Orange, an. 4. Car. 1. who as they returned from the Choire, MS. p^nes Edw.
Fa^conbridge
held the rooms of their Principals, among the Knights-Companions in the
Proceedings: So also the Proctor to Charles Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, in
his Collect. W. le N. Cl.
return; but was then commanded by the Sovereign (present in the Proceeding) to
Lib. R. p. 8^.
put on his Hat, which he had kept off in all the preceding parts of the
Ceremony.

As the Proctor passes along by the Chapter House door, he has usually
heretofore delivered up his Mantle there, and so is it directed in the Page 316.
Black-Book of the Order; as did the Proctor to the French King Francis the
First, an. 19. H. 8. So also the Duke of Savoy's Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Proctor, an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. And at the same Collect. W. le N. Cl.
place did the Verger receive the Mantle from the Duke of Holstein's Proctor
an. 3. Eliz. But of later times when the Sovereign has been present at the
Installation, some Proxies have been permitted to go along in the Proceeding to
the Presence Chamber, covered, as were the Proxy to MS. penes Edw.
Fauconbridge.
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, to Lib. R. p. 85*
Charles Count Palatine of the Rhyne, to Ex Lib Collect. praef. Hen* de Vic p.
158.
Charles King of Sweden (the Train of whose Mantle was born by Monsieur
Leyonberg, the Swedish Resident) and to John George Duke of Saxony, whose Train
likewise was carried up by Mr. Richard Richaut, one of the Earl of Win^helsey's
Gentlemen.

SECT. XIII. The Dinner.
WHen the Installation has past in the morning, there has usually been
prepared a great Dinner at the Sovereign's charge; we shall need here only to
mention such particulars as are peculiar to the Proxy of a Stranger, or
different from the Instances set down in our discourse of this particular, in
the Chap. 12. Sect. 10.
Personal Installation of a Knight-Companion.

And first, Lib. N. p. 316.
before Dinner (if the Installation pass by Commissioners) the Proxy
(representing the State of his Principal) shall wash alone he shall sit at the
chief place of the Table, and alone, and shall be served alone; but the other
Knights-Commissioners shall sit at the end of the Table.

Thus was it observed at the Installation of Ex lib. vocat. Dalton. p. 105. b
Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, an. 14. H. 8. and of Ibid. p. 112.
Francis the French King, an. 19. H. 8. for when the later of these was
Installed, the Dinner was held at Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
the Deans-house, and his Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Proctor washed alone, and sat down to Dinner in a Chair: nor did any of the
Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Knights-Commissioners sit at his Mess. The services were all performed to him
in every particular, as Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
though his Principal had been present, saving his Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Cloth of State. The Lord Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Coton.
Marquess of Exceter, and all the other Knights-Companions (having first
washed) sat on both sides the same Table, yet beneath the Proctor, and in their
whole Habits of the Order.

The Dinner was likewise prepared in the Dean's great Chamber, at the
Installation of Charles the Ninth the French King, whose Proctor was served
with Water and a Towel by the MS. penes W. D. N. f. ^6.
Earl of Southampton, and Lord Herbert; Sir John Radcliff performed the Office
of MS. penes W. D. N. f. ^6.
Sewer, Henry Brooks alias Cobham Esquire was MS. penes W. D. N. f. ^6.
Carver, and Mr. Francis Hervy, Cupbearer.

This Proctor had a MS. penes W. D. N. f. ^6.
Cloth of State allowed him, under which he sat at Dinner, the Mantle lying by
him all the while on a Stool and Cushen; at the MS. penes W. D. N. f. ^6.
Tables end, on the Ex Collect. A. V. W.
right hand, sat the four Commissioners in their Robes, being served Ex
Collect. A. V. W.
apart from the Proctor.

But if the Sovereign's Lieutenant be present, the Proctor dines at the same
Table with him, and then a little before the second course is brought in, is
the Sovereign's Style proclaimed in MS. penes E. W. G.
Latin, French, and English with usual Ceremony: but otherwise, only the Style
of the new Installed Prince, and but once.

The Style and Titles of Christian the Fourth King of Denmark were proclaimed
in MS. penes E. W. G.
Latin, and of Maurice of Orange in MS. penes E. W. G.
French.

Dinner being ended, all rise in MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26.
order and wash; first the MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26.
Proxy alone, and after him the Knights-Commissioners; and thence they
accompany the Proctor to his Chamber, where having left him, they retire to
their own Lodgings, and MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26.
there put off their Habits.

The Proctor to Charles the Ninth took the Mantle of his Principal, on his arm
into his Chamber, when he rose from Dinner; and MS penes W. D. N. fol. 26.
there delivered it to Garter.

So soon as the Solemnity of Installation is over, the Proctor is to take care,
that Garter forthwith set up the Achievements of his Principal over his Stall,
and fix the Plate of his Arms upon the back thereof; in memorial of the Honor
done him, by this Ceremony of Inauguration into the most Noble and most
Honorable Order of the Garter.

And sometimes we find the Proxy has, upon his request, obtained an
Instrument under the Sign manual of the Sovereign, and Seal of the Order,
attesting his being conducted to St. George's Chapel at Windesor, and placed
in, and taken possession of the Seat assigned to his Principal, in whose name
he has also taken the Oath, attested by his subscription, and performed all
the Ceremonies in due form as the Statutes direct; for so did the Append. Number.
CLVI:
Sieur de Chastes, Proctor to the French King Henry the Fourth, an. 42. Eliz.

In close of all, let us here remember, that the present King of Sweden,
against his late Installation, caused both Gold and Silver Medals to be made in
memory of that Solemnity, and to perpetuate the honor so received: Those of
Gold were bestowed upon the Knights-Companions present, and other persons of
quality, and those of Silver distributed among some of the Officers attending
at the Installation, and others. The Devise was suitable to the occasion, and
present interest of both Kings, as may be observed from the Representation here
exhibited*



CHAP. XVII. THE Duties and Fees PAYABLE BY THE KNIGHTS COMPANIONS AT THEIR
Installations.
SECT. I. Touching the Fees due to the College of Windesor.
SUch was the piety and bounty of our Ancestors, that they thought no work well
performed, without being attended with some charitable donation, especially if
it had relation to the Church, whereunto they generally bore a venerable
esteem. Hence was it, at the Installation of this Order, ordained, E. 3. Stat.
Art. 22. H. ^. Stat. Art. 22* H. 8. Stat. Art. 24.
That every Knight-Companion should at his entrance bestow a certain sum of
money, according to his quality and degree, That is to say,

l. s. d. The Sovereign of the Order -- 26 13 4 A Stranger-King -- 20 0 0 The
Prince of Wales -- 13 6 8 Every Duke -- 10 0 0 Every Earl -- 6 13 4 Every Baron
-- 5 0 0 Every Knight-Batchelor -- 3 6 8

What use these sums were employed in, and how distributed, appears by the
appointment there set down, viz. E. 3. Stat. Art. 22. H. 5. Stat. Art. 22. H.
8. Stat. Art. 24.
Toward the relief of the Canons of Windesor, the Alms-Knights, and
augmentation of the Alms deeds there appointed perpetually to be done. To the
end E. 3. Stat. Art. 22. H. 5. Stat. Art. 22. H. 8. Stat. Art. 24.
That every one entering unto this Military Order, might thereby more worthily
obtain the Name, Title, and Privilege of one of the Founders of the order:
Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 21.
It being supposed a worthy and just thing, that whosoever obtained this
Privilege, should add some small increment to this Foun^ation.

Not long after establishing the Statutes of Institution, the Titles of
Marquess and Viscount, came to be special dignities, for Robert Vere Earl of
Oxford, was the first among us, who as a distinct dignity, received the title
of Cart. an. 9. R. 2. m. 13.
Marquess, the first of December, an. 9. R. 2. and John Lord Beaumont the first
here also that had the Title of Pat. 18. H. 6. part 2. m. 21.
Viscount conferred on him, as a distinct Title of Honor, the 12. of February,
an. 18. H. 6. And whereas both these Degrees of Honor, at their Creations, were
settled as intermediate, the first between a Duke and an Earl, for so says the
R^t. Parl. an. 9. R. 2. m. 3. n. 17.
Roll (where it speaks of the Marquess his precedence) the Marquess was
commanded to sit among the Peers in Parliament, in a higher place (than his
Degree as Earl of Oxford could justly challenge) viz. R^t. Parl. an. 9. R. 2.
m. 3. n. 17.
between Dukes and Earls; and the Viscount between Earls and Barons, as the
said Viscount Beaumont, is by his first* Patent ranked, to wit, Pa^. 18 H. 6.
ut supra.
above all Barons; and afterward in another Patent, to render his place more
certain and apparent, Pat. 23. H. 6. part 2. m. 20.
above all Viscounts afterward made and created, and before and above the
Heirs and Sons of Earls, and immediately and next to E^rls, both in all
Parliaments, Councils, and other Places.

Upon these grounds, and suitable to the ranks of Honor thus settled, ^ere the
Fees of Installation to the College, from Knight-Companions of these Degrees
proportioned, for shortly after the precedence so granted and settled to the
said Viscount Beaumont (his latter Patent bearing date the Ibid. Pat.
12. of March, an. 23. H. 6.) the Sovereign with the unanimous consent of the
Knights-Companions, at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor the Lib. N. p.
95.
12. of May following, Decreed, Ibid. p. 97.
That a Marquess, forasmuch as his Degree of Honor was above an Earl, and
intermediate between him and a Duke should therefore contribute more than an
Earl. Now the sum for an Earl, being (as appears above) set at 10 Marks, the
Marquess was by this Decree, obliged to pay 33 s. 4 d. more than the Earl; viz.
in toto 8 l. 6 s. 8 d. And for the same reason also, was a Viscount enjoined,
to give the proportion of ^6 s. 8 d. more than a Baron; and so his whole Fee
amounted to 5 l. 16 s. 8 d. The Installation Fees of these two Degrees, being
thus added to the former, were with them confirmed by King Henry the Eighth's
Art. 24.
Statutes.

And though in all the Bodies of the Statutes, the Sovereign of the Order is
charged with payment of Fees to the College, no less than the rest of the
Knights-Companions, yet is it to be understood only of those Sovereigns, who
were not (before the assumption of their Stall) elected into this Order: for we
see in the case of King Henry the Sixth (the first Sovereign that had not
before his being so, been elected a Knight-Companion) there past an order in
Chapter, Lib. N. p. 75.
an. 1. H. 6. for payment of his Fees, upon assuming his Stall, according to
the appointment of the Statute.

The case also of the Lord Weston is here observable, who although at the time
of his Installation (the 5. of October, an. 6. Car. 1.) he was seated in no
higher a rank of Nobility, than the Degree of a Baron; yet being then by an
honorary Title Lord Treasurer of England, did (for the honor of his Office) not
only pay as much as an Lib. R. p. 66.
Earl ought by the Statutes, but in all other customary Fees and Duties bare a
proportion to that Dignity.

But the matter of Installation Fees, Lib. Carat. p. 48.49.59.66.67.73. and 74.
being by several Petitions represented to the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
in Chapter, since the present Sovereign's happy return, was referred to the
standing Committee of Knights-Companions, to make enquiry and take into their
examination, all the pretentions and demands thereunto: in relation to which,
much time having been spent in a diligent and full examination thereof, through
the zealous endeavors, and continual solicitations of the Register, out of
respect to his Successors, the College and Choire of Windesor, so also of
Garter on behalf of his Successors, the Officers of Arms, and other the
Sovereign's Officers and Servants claiming Installation Fees, and due
consideration had of the reasons and proofs to justify the same, as also to
the reasonableness and equity of the whole matter: Finally, a Report was made
the Ib. p. 84.
5. of March, an. 22. Car. 2. by the Duke of Ormond, the Earls of Sandwich and
Manchester, whereby such Installation Fees were thought reasonable and
requisite to be paid by the Knights-Companions, as were contained in an annexed
Schedule, ascertaining the sums, proportioned according to the Dignities and
Degrees of the Knights-Companions; which, both Append. Number. CLVII.
Report and Schedule being afterward Ibid. p. 87.
read over and approved by the Sovereign, part of it containing the Fees due to
the Dean and Canons, Choire, and Alms-Knights of Windesor, the Register,
Garter, Black-Rod, and Officers of Arms, were commanded to be entered upon the
Register of the Order, in perpetuam rei memoriam, to prevent all future
questions and controversies that might otherwise arise; the other part, wherein
was set down the Fees payable to the rest of the Sovereign's Servants, was
appointed to be only signed in Garter's Bills, with all the other Fees as they
became due.

In this Decree the Installation Fees made payable to the Dean and Canoni are
these, l. s. d. Ex ipso Autogr.
A Stranger-King 20 00 00 A Stranger-Prince 10 00 00 The Prince of Wales 20 00
00 A Duke 10 00 00 A Marquess. 08 06 08 An Earl 06 13 04 A Viscount 05 16 08 A
Baron. 05 00 00 A Knight-Batchellor 03 06 08

These Fees ought to be paid E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 2^ H. 8. Stat. Art. 24.
at the time of the Knights Installation, whether Personal or by Proxy, so
also for a Stranger; and as to the practice, it has been thus; See before, p.
367.
to pay them by the hands of some one of the Knights-Companions Servants, so
soon as the Ceremonies of Installation were ended; and in truth, that which
quickened their care herein, was the strict injunction repeated in all the
Bodies of the Vide etiam Lib. Carol. p. 81.
Statutes, which do expressly prohibit the setting up of their Achievements,
till payment be made.

That anciently the Alms-Knights shared in the Fees paid to the College,
Alms-Knights*
is manifest from the Statutes of Institution, the use for which they were
given, being therein expressed to be E. 3. Stat. Art. 22.
toward relief of the Alms-Knights, no less than the Canons, and so say the H.
3. Stat. Art. 22. H. 8. Stat. Art. 24.
succeeding bodies of the Statutes. Howbeit, since their re-establishment by
Queen Elizabeth upon a new Constitution, they have received Installation Fees
apart from those paid to the College, which by the foresaid Establishment of
Installation Fees, an. 22. Car. 2. are made Ex ipso Autogr.
equal and alike to those thereby payable to the Dean and Canons.

The Choire of Windesor, Choire, etc.
under which not only the Vicars, but the Vergers, Choristers, Sextons, and
Bell-Ringers, are comprehended, reap some benefit by the Installation of a
Knight, and have in all times been thought deserving of Fees among others, who
performed service at these Solemnities: Hereupon were they taken into the
Establishment made, an. 22. Car. 2. which has settled on them these following
Fees, viz.

l. s. d. Ex ipso Autogr.
A Stranger-King 16 00 00 A Stranger-Prince 08 10 00 A Prince of Wales 16 00 00
A Duke 08 10 00 A Marquess 06 15 00 An Earl 05 10 00 A Viscount 04 00 00 A
Baron 04 00 00 A Knight-Batchellor 03 00 00

SECT. II. Fees due to the Register, Garter, Black-Rod, and Officers of Arms.
Register.
IN the rank of those Officers to whom Installation Fees are due, stands first
the Register, who by the Constitutions of his Office, is to have of every
Knight-Companion Lib. N. p. 235.
13 s. 4 d. in money, and a Robe.

After that Doctor Matthew Wren had enjoyed this Office for some few years, and
supposing himself defrauded by the concealment of part of his Fees, he
petitioned the Sovereign, that the Fee anciently due to his place, might be
restored and settled, with the allowance of a Robe, or composition for it from
the new installed Knight; the grounds of which address were set forth in the
following Petition.

To the Kings's most sacred Majesty, Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the
Garter. The humble Petition of Matthew Wren, Register of the said Order.
Shows, Autogr. penes Doct. Chr. Wren nuper Ordinis Regist.
THat at his first entry into this Office, the Black-Book (wherein the chiefest
Record's of the Order are) being in the custody of Sir William Segar then
Garter, he was forced to receive from him the Instructions which concerned his
place: And whereas at the Installation of any Knight, the said Sir William
Segar did use to make a Bill of such Fees as were to be paid, wherein of later
years, he would set down for the Register but half as much as for himself, upon
whose athority the Register for a while rested, and knowing no other had no
more; Copies of which Bills are privately transmitted from one Lords Officer to
another.

But since the Black-Book was by the honorable Chapter remanded to the
Registers custody, upon survey of the Records, and view of the Statutes (in the
Book by him latey exhibited to your Sovereign Majesty) the rule for the
Registers Fee in more express Text, than for any Officer else, appears; That as
often as any Knight chosen into the Order, is installed, the Register shall have
of him thirteen shillings and four pence, and a Robe. [Statut. de Officialibus
Ordinis, cap. 6.]

He therefore most humbly beseeches, on the behalf of his place, that,
according to every Lords Oath, not wittingly to break the content of any
Statute, this Statute may be without question observed, and the Robe be allowed
him; and that Sir John Burrowes, no^ Garter, may have order to reform this
Error, with such of the Companions or their Officers, as have not yet paid the
Register an Installation Fee.

But in case that any Lord, shall rather choose to compound with the Register
for the said Robe* That it may now please your sacred Majesty, for the avoiding
of all exception to the said Register, to set down a proportion meet to be
demanded for the same by him; who both in the order of his place is before Mr.
Garter, and in the proportion of his Annual Fee from your Sovereign Majesty
above him.

At the Court at Greenewich, the 6. of May 1634.

It is his Majesty's pleasure, that all Fees due to the Officers of the Order,
by the Institution, shall be precisely paid; and that this particular of the
Register shall be satisfied, according to the words of the Institution, and not
according to the custom lately used, of which Mr. Garter is to give notice, as
there shall be occasion.

Fr. Crane, Cane.


But it seems that nothing was done in his time, upon the Sovereign's Answer to
this Petition, besides its entry into the Page 98.
Red-Book; and thereupon afterward, when his Brother Doctor Christopher Wren
had succeeded him in the Register's place, and the Robe assigned him out of the
Sovereign's Wardrobe at his entrance into his Office, being of the value of Ex.
Collect. praed. Dr. Chr. Wren.
28 l. 1 s. 0 d. according to this valuation of his Robe, a Ex. Collect. praed.
Dr. Chr. Wren.
like value was proposed (by way of Composition) upon the Knights-Companions
Batchellors (the lowest Degree among the Knights of the Order) to be paid him
in lieu of the said Robe, supposing they could not give him less: and from
hence was raised the Ex. Collect. praed. Dr. Chr. Wren.
proportions, for each several Degree of honor, upon those who should be
admitted into this most Noble Order, thus s. d. l. s. d. Ex. Collect. praed.
Dr. Chr. Wren.
Imprimis for a Knight-Batchellor 13 04 and 28 00 00 Item for a Baron 13 04 and
30 00 00 Item for a Viscount 13 04 and 32 00 00 Item for a Earl 13 04 and 34 00
00 Item for a Marquess 13 04 and 36 00 00 Item for a Duke 13 04 and ^8 00 00
Item for a Prince 13 04 and 40 00 00

Afterward, taking occasion from the Instalment of the present Sovereign then
Prince, an. 14. Car. 1. the Dean desired the Deputy-Chancellor, to know the
Sovereign's pleasure once again, and to Palm. large Iournal, p. 23 and 24.
represent, that the Registers Fees were anciently 13 s. 4 d. in money, and the
Robe in kind; and seeing that the Sovereign was pleased to allow increase of
Fees, to the other Officers of the Order, particularly to Garter King of Arms
40 l. at the Installation of the said Prince, and every other Officer in
proportion; and that it stood both with the honor of the Prince, to give as
honorable a Fee, as any Prince Stranger, at his Installation, and also with the
Dignity of the Registers place, to expect no less than others, that were not
above him in rank; that it would therefore please the Sovereign, to think the
Register worthy to make the like Plea.

Thus much the Deputy-Chancellor represented to the Sovereign at Greenewich,
sometime after the Prince's Installation, and thereupon the Sovereign was
graciously pleased, to think it most reasonable, on the Register's behalf, and
Ordered, Palm. large Iournal, p. 23 and 24.
that at every Installation of a Prince, the Register should receive for his
Fee 13 s. 4 d. and 40 l. in lieu of his Robe; and that Prince Charles (then
newly installed) should pay him the said sums, which was accordingly done; and
the same were since settled on this Officer by the Establishment of Installation
Fees, made Ex. ips^ Aut^gr.
an. 22. Car. 2. to be thenceforth paid, not only by the Prince of Wales, but
for the Installation of a Ex. ips^ Aut^gr.
a Stranger-King; whereto is added for a Ibid.
Stranger-Prince 38 l. 13 s. 4 d. But those thereby made due from
Knights-Subjects of other Degrees, are the same as were proposed by Doctor
Christopher Wren, mentioned a little above.

Next to the Register does Garter claim both Droits and Fees, Garret.
for his service and attendance at this Solemnity, who in reference to its
preparations, and employment at the time, has a greater share of business than
any other Officer of the Order: As to the first of these, it was Ordained by
the Constitutions of his Office, Lib. N. p. 236.
That as often as any Knight should happen to be Installed, he might challenge
for himself the Garments worn by him, immediately before his Investiture with
the Surcoat of the Order. And the constant practice has interpreted this, to
be the Knight's upper Garment, anciently a short Gown, of later times a Cloak,
but now a Coat; which he puts off in the Chapter House, when the Investiture
begins.

When Garter had received the Gown of Philip King of Castile, immediately
before his Investiture with the Robes of the Order, an. 22. H. 7. he came
before the Sovereign, and MS. veter. penes W. le N. Cl. f. 295.
humbly besought him to give thanks to the King, who, for his sake, had
bestowed it on him, which the Sovereign accordingly did.

Heretofore, when Garter had received the Knight's Gown, he immediately put it
on, and wore it during the whole Ceremony of Installation, and therefore the
Gown of Henry Duke of York, second Son to King Henry the Seventh, MS. fol.
penes Io. Vincent, p. 151.
though he was very young when installed, was made large enough for Garter's
use. But because this short Gown has been so long out of fashion, as to be
well nigh forgotten, we shall therefore mention several of the kind, wherein
their description will appear remarkable enough, both for their materials, and
the then fashionable Trimmings.

King Henry the Seventh's Gown, at his assumption of the Sovereign's Stall, was
made of Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Io. Vincent p. 151.
Black Velvet, and lined with Cloth of Gold, full of red Roses. Prince Arthur
wore a Gown of Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Io. Vincent p. 151.
Crimson Velvet, lined with Black Velvet, when he proceeded to his
Installation. And the Gown made for the foresaid Henry Duke of York, was of Ex
amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Io. Vincent p. 151.
Crimson Velvet, lined with Black Satin.

In the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the materials of some of the Knights
Gowns, were as follows.

The Lord Dudley's, of Ex eod. MS. p. 157.
Tinsel Satin Violet, lined with Black Sarcenet. The Lord Howard's of Ex eod.
MS. p. 157.
Tawney Velvet, furred with Leopards. The Lord La Ware's, of Ex eod. MS. p. 157.
Tawney Velvet, lined with Black Bogye. The Earl of Devonshire's, of Ibid. p.
158.
Cloth of Silver, lined with Cloth of Gold. The Viscount Lysle's of Ibid. page
159.
Black Velvet, furred with Black Bogye. The Lord Fitz. Walter's, of Ibid. page
159.
Black Damask, and double Black Velvet. Henry Fitz Roy Duke of Richmond, of
Ibid. page 159.
Black Satin, with Buttons and Aglets of Gold on his Sleeves, and furred with
Sables. The Earl of Arundel's of Tawney Velvet, lined with Black double
Sarcenet. The Earl of Westmerland's of Ibid. page 159.
Black Velvet, lined with Satin, with Aglets of Gold. The Earl of Oxford's, of
Ibid. p. 160.
Black Satin, lined with Jennets. The Lord Russell's of MS. in Offic. Arm. [L.
1.] f. 19.
Black Velvet, lined with Black Satin. The Coat of King Philip (installed an.
1. and 2. Ph. and Mar.) was MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132.
embroidered on Velvet, with Gold-Wire, of Goldsmiths work, and lined with
White Taffaty: His Gown was made of MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132.
Purple Velvet, garnished with the same, and twisted Silver Lace laid on the
Guard; his other Coat of Velvet embroidered with Silver, lined with White.

This kind of upper Garment or Gown continued also in fashion, a great part of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, for we likewise find, that the Earl of Leicester's
Gown was made of MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132.
Velvet, guarded with four gards of the same, and thereon 38 pair of Aglets. The
Lord Burghley's of MS. penes praef. G. O. Y. p. 132.
Taffaty, with three gards of Velvet, and three dozen of great Buttons of Gold.
The Lord Buckhurst's of Ibid.
Velvet, with a broad embroidery guard, and Buttons of Gold. The Lord Shandos
Ibid.
of Satin, with a broidered guard of Velvet, and two dozen of Gold Buttons. The
Earl of Worcester's of Ibid.
Velvet lined with double Sarcenet, with a paceman Lace about it. The Duke of
Norfolk's of Ibid.
Black Satin, furred with Squirrels, faced with Sables, with -- pair of
Aglets. The Earl of Bedford's such another Gown, but had a Silver Lace about
it. The Lord Hunsdon's of Satin, furred with Luzarts, and guarded with -- The
Earl of Warwick's of Russet Satin, embroidered all over with Russet Lace, and
furred with Cony. The Duke of Northumberland's was a loose Velvet Gown, furred
with Pavilion, and had a falling Cape.

But at length, the fashion of this upper Garment began to alter, and by that
time John Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, was received into the Order,
it was converted to a Cloak, for such was his upper Garment (and of Velvet)
faced and furred with Sables, and two Gold Laces guarded thereon, cut, with
Buttons and Gold Lace, where the Sleeves were wont to be. And ever since, till
of late, has the Cloak been most in fashion, for an upper Garment, but very
much varied both as to materials, lining, and ornament.

Sometimes Garter had not this Garment in kind, but received a Fine in lieu
thereof; and this by virtue of a Decree made in Chapter, an. 25. H. 6. wherein
it was ordained, Regist. Chart. f. 2^. b.
to be at the pleasure of every Knight-Companion, at the time of his
Installation, whether Garter should have the Garment which each Knight did then
wear, or a composition in money according to his Estate.

Since when the Compositions grew higher, as this upper Garment was made
richer; for Ex. Collect. E. W. G.
Algernon Earl of Northumberland bestowed on Garter upon this occasion for Fees
and Droits Ex. Collect. E. W. G.
200 l. in Gold, and Henry Earl of Danby, the Habit he wore on the day he rode
from London toward his Installation with Ex. Collect. E. W. G.
100 l. in the Pockets, and by the late Sovereign's order, at the Installation
of his Son Prince Charles our now Sovereign, Garter received for his Fee Ibid.
40 l. and for the composition of his upper Garment 60 l. in the whole 100 l.
The like sum was given the present Garter, by the Dukes of Ormond and
Albemarle, and the Earls of Sandwich, Lindsey, and Manchester, shortly after
their Installations, by particular agreement; but herein his Fee for
signification of their several Elections was included.

Finally, by the Establishment of Installation Fees, an. 22. Car. 2. the
composition set upon each Knight-Companion, for his upper Garment, was thus
rated, proportionably less than what was paid for the said Prince, an. 14. Car.
1. viz.

l. s. d. Ex ipso A^togr.
A Prince of Wales 60 00 00 A Duke 55 00 00 A Marquess 50 00 00 An Earl 45 00
00 A Viscount 40 00 00 A Baron 35 00 00 A Knight-Batchellor 30 00 00

Besides this Droit or Composition, there has in all times been paid to
Garter, by every Knight-Companion a Fee for his Installation, proportioned also
to his state and dignity, which was likewise brought to the following certainty
by the said late Establishment.

l. s. d. Ibid.
A Stranger-King 30 00 00 A Stranger-Prince 20 00 00 A Prince of Wales 40 00 00
A Duke 35 00 00 A Marquess 30 00 00 An Earl 25 00 00 A Viscount 20 00 00 A
Baron 15 00 00 A Knight-Batchellor 10 00 00

The Fee anciently due to the Black-Rod at the Installation of a Knight,
Black-Rod.
like all other Fees, has in succeeding times received augmentation; for the
Fee paid him at the Installation of Prince Charles, an. 14. Car. 1. was 40 l.
and by the foresaid Establishment an. 22. Car. 2. he has allowed him

l. s. d. From a Ex ipso Autogr.
Stranger-King 20 00 00 From a Stranger-Prince 20 00 00 From a Prince of Wales
40 00 00 From a Duke 20 00 00 From a Marquess 18 00 00 Earl 16 00 00 Viscount
14 00 00 Baron 12 00 00 Knight-Batchellor 10 00 00

Officers of Arms.
As Fees were in all times paid to the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod for
their particular services, at the Feasts of Installation, so likewise have the
Officers of Arms accustomably received Fees, in reward of their attendance and
service at those Solemnities; which having been increased by the bounty of the
Givers, were by the said late Establishment (pursuant to the Fees, paid them
for the Installation of the now Sovereign when Prince) brought to the Ex ipso
Autogr.
same thereby allowed the Black-Rod, only in the Fee of a Stranger-King, they
have an addition of 10 l. more, his Fee to them being 30 l.

Besides these Installation Fees, when the Elect-Knights rode publicly from
London to Windesor, to their Installations, they were accustomed to bestow upon
the Officers of Arms, that attended them thither, Scarfs, Hats, and Feathers,
as did the Earls of Danby and Moreton, an. 10. Car. 1. viz. to Ex lib. Part. in
Offic. Armor. [3] f. 155. b.
each of them 9 Else of rich Taffaty, and a black Beaver Hat and Feather. And
the Earl of Northampton, upon the like occasion, an. 5. Car. 1. allowed Ib. f.
70. b.
35 l. to the seven Officers of Arms, that attended him to Windesor, in lieu of
Taffaty Scarfs of his Lordships Colors, and Beaver Hats, and gave each of them
besides, Feathers worth 20 s. a piece. Lastly, at the Installation of Charles
Prince of Wales, an. 14. Car. 1. there was given to the 13 Officers of Arms,
for the like allowance 10 l. a piece, in all Ex Autogr. penes E. W. G.
130 l.

SECT. III. Fees belonging to other of the Sovereign's Servants.
TO these forenamed Officers, we have seen added in the Lists of Installation
Fees of former times, some other here set down, who gave their attendance at
these Solemnities, with the several sums received: some were then accounted
Fees, and other run under the Title of Benevolences; all which nevertheless
were admitted into the List of Installation Fees established, an. 22. Car. 2.
and though not entered in the Register of the Order, yet are to be given in,
under the hand of Garter, with the other Fees payable at Installations, and to
be paid by every Knight, to all persons concerned respectively, according to
ancient custom. Ex ipso Autogr*


Viz. The Prince A Duke A Marquess An Earl A Viscount A Baron A
Knight-Batchelor l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. To the
Wardrobe -- 06 00 00 03 00 00 02 10 00 02 00 00 01 15 00 01 10 00 01 05 00 To
the Trumpets -- 12 00 00 06 00 00 05 00 00 04 00 00 03 00 00 02 10 00 02 00 00
To the Sergeant Trumpeter -- 02 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00
00 01 00 00 To the Musicians 4 Companies. -- 16 00 00 08 00 00 07 00 00 06 00
00 05 00 00 04 00 00 03 00 00 Knight-Harbenger -- 03 06 08 03 06 08 03 06 08 03
06 08 03 06 08 03 06 08 03 06 08 Drums and Fifes -- 04 00 00 02 00 00 01 15 00
01 10 00 01 05 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 To the Porters -- 06 00 00 03 00 00 02 10
00 02 00 00 02 00 00 01 10 00 01 00 00 Master Cook -- 03 00 00 01 10 00 01 05
00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Sergeant Porter -- 06 00 00 03 00 00 02
00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Vestry -- 02 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00
01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Yeomen Harbengers -- 06 00 00 03 00 00 02
10 00 02 00 00 02 00 00 01 10 00 01 00 00 Ushers of the Hall -- 02 00 00 01 10
00 01 05 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Grooms of the Chamber -- 03 00
00 01 10 00 01 05 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Yeomen Ushers -- 06 13
04 03 06 08 03 00 00 02 10 00 02 00 00 01 10 00 01 00 00 Quarter Waiters -- 08
16 00 04 08 04 03 16 08 03 06 08 03 00 00 02 10 00 02 00 00 Sewers -- 08 00 00
04 08 04 03 16 08 03 06 08 03 00 00 02 10 00 02 00 00 Buttery -- 03 00 00 01 10
00 01 05 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Pantry -- 03 00 00 01 10 00 01
05 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 Cellar -- 03 00 00 01 10 00 01 05 00
01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00 01 00 00

SECT. IV. Fees payable for Strangers.
AND because it was thought unfit (the dignity of the Order considered) that on
the one side Strangers should be liable to the demand of Fees, and on the
other, that charitable disposals should be defeated; provision was made in the
Art. 22. vide etiam H 5. Stat. Art. 22. and H. Stat. Art. 24.
Statutes of Institution, by obliging the Sovereign to pay the respective Fees,
for every Stranger that should be Elected, at the time of his Installation,
either Personally or by his Proctor. And the first example pursuant thereto
(that we have met with) is an Order made in Chapter at Windesor, an. 1. H. 6.
which appointed, Lib. N. p. 75.
That the usual Fees due for the Installation of the King of Denmark, should be
discharged by the Sovereign, as the Statutes did enjoin.

To which purpose, in after times have Privy Seals accustomably is^ued forth,
directed to the Lord Treasurer for the time being, to pay the Fees due for
Strangers Installations, unto the Register of the Order (and sometimes to him
and Garter) out of the Sovereign's Exchequer; but those due to the
Alms-Knights, since their Establishment by Queen Elizabeth, were paid to
themselves by particular Privy Seals.

And thus were the foresaid Fees paid out of the Exchequer, as they became due,
until the late Sovereign King Charles the First, did by Letters Patent, bearing
date the 23. day of June, in the 13. year of his Reign, setle an annual Pension
of Lib. R. p. 121
1200 l. unto and upon the Order; and by a Rowe's Iournal, p. 40.
Commission dated the 3. day of May the following year, was the Chancellor of
the Order, and his Successors empowered to pay out of the same, not only the
ordinary, but also extraordinary Charges of the Order, wherein the Fees for
Installation of Strangers are included.

But notwithstanding which, yet did Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Sir Henry de Vic the late Chancellor make some scruple to pay the Fees due to
the College, upon the Installation of Strangers, since the happy return of the
present Sovereign; whereupon it occasioned the Lib. Carol. p. 48.
Dean, Canons, Choire, and Alms-Knights, as also the Register, Garter, and
Black-Rod, to petition the Sovereign at the Feast of St. George, an. 15. Car.
2. for the continuance of some rights, and payment of their Fees, which being
Ib. p. 49.
referred to three or more of the Knights-Companions of the Order, upon full
examination of the matter, they made the following Report.

At the Court at Whitehall, the 16. of May 1663.
WHereas your Majesty, Ex Collect. E. W. G. vide et^am Lib. Carol. p. 49, 50.
etc.
Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, in a Chapter held in the
Castle of Windesor, the 23. of April past, where were present diverse Companions
of the said most Noble Order, was graciously pleased to receive a Petition,
humbly presented in the name of the Dean, Canons, Chaplains, Choire, and
Poor-Knights, belonging to your Majesty's Free Chapel of St. George in
Windesor, wherein they, in all humility, desired to have some Rights and Fees
(which are contained in a Schedule thereunto annexed) to be continued unto
them; which Petition, your Majesty was then graciously pleased, to refer unto
any three or more Companions of the said most Noble Order, to consider of, and
examine the particular, and accordingly to make Report unto your Majesty, what
they conceive proper to be done thereupon: And in like manner the said Lords
Referrees upon a Petition delivered the 24. of April, were to consider,
examine, and report the humble desires of the Register, Garter Principal King
of Arms, and the Gentleman-usher of the Black-Rod, Officers of the Order in
relation to the Fees demanded by them from your Majesty, for the Installation
of all Princes, and other Strangers, that are and have been, lately admitted
and declared, Companions of the said most Noble Order.

Hereupon, we the Knights and Companions of the said most Noble Order, whose
names are hereafter subscribed, meeting in the Council Chamger at Whitehall,
upon Saturday the 8. of this instant May, being then attended by Sir Henry de
Vic Knight and Baronet Chancellor, Dr. Bruin Ryves, Dean of Windesor Register,
and Sir Edward Walker, Garter Principal King of Arms (all Officers of the said
most Noble Order) have fully considered and examined, the pretenses and demands
of the Dean and Church of Windesor, as also of the Officers of the said most
Noble Order, whereby the ensuing particulars, were then made to appear.

First, That every Knight-Companion of the most Noble Order, within one year
after his Election, shall bestow for the use of St. George's Chapel at
Windesor, 20 l. in Plate at the least.

Secondly, That the Obit Moneys, upon the death of every Knight-Companion of
the Order, ought to be paid according to custom, and the Statutes of the Order.

Thirdly, That the Fees for Installation of all Strangers, are to be paid by
the Sovereign; and that those desired by the Register, Garter, the Officers of
Arms, etc. have been proved, to have been paid their Predecessors, by several
Privy Seals, for the Installation of diverse Princes Strangers, and are no other
for them, and the College of Windesor, than have been heretofore, and lately,
paid by the honorable Companions your Majesty's Subjects, at their
Installations (the old Installation Fees to the Canons and Poor-Knights being
therein comprised) not including therein other Fees and Gratuities, usually
paid unto many others of your Majesty's Servants by the Knights your Majesty's
Subjects (though not by your Majesty for Strangers) for any thing appears, nor
the Gratuities unto Garter for signification of Elections, or composition for
the upper Garments of the Companions, according to ancient Custom.

This being the true state of the whole matter, and we having met again
thereupon this 16. day of May, do humbly hereby Report the same unto your
Majesty, and do thereupon offer our opinion unto your Majesty, That we conceive
it may be fit for your Majesty (seeing the Sovereign is to pay for the
Installation of all Strangers) to give your Warrant unto Sir Henry de Vic,
Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the Garter, to pay unto the Register,
Garter, Usher of the Black-Rod, Canons, Poor-Knights, Choire at Windesor, and
Officers of Arms the several sums hereafter mentioned, for the six Foreign
Knights lately declared installed; as also for the Prince of Denmark, installed
by Proxy the 22. of April past; out of such Moneys, as he the said Sir Henry de
Vic has, or shall have in his hands, of the 1200 l. yearly assigned for the
use of the Order, since his first receipt thereof, viz.

For the Installation of the Prince of Orange.
l. s. d. To the Dean of Windesor as Register 38 13 04 To Garter Principal King
of Arms -- 20 00 00 To the Usher of the Black-Rod -- 20 00 00 To the Officers
of Arms -- 20 00 00 To the Canons -- 10 00 00 To the Choire and Choristers -- 6
00 00 To the Vergers, Sextons, and Bellringers 2 00 00 To the Poor-Knights --
10 00 00 126 13 04

l. s. d. For the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh for all as above 126 13 04 For
Prince Edward Count Palatine, etc. -- 126 13 04 For the Duke of Espernon -- 126
13 04 For the Prince of Tarent -- 126 13 04 For the Prince of Denmark -- 126 13
04 For Count Marchin -- 93 06 08 853 06 08

All which we humbly submit unto your Majesty's gracious determination.
Albemarle. Lindsey. Manchester. Sandwich.
Some few days after, the Ex Colle^^. praef. E. W. G.
Chancellor, accompanied with the Register and Garter, attended the Sovereign,
and fully represented and read unto him the Report above inserted, whereupon he
was graciously pleased to approve the same, and accordingly Ex Colle^^. praef.
E. W. G.
ordered the Chancellor to make payment of the several sums mentioned in it,
which he shortly after performed; among which, the Ib.
18. of November following, Sir Edward Walker Garter received from him the Fees
due to himself, as also those other due to the Officers of Arms, for their
attendance at the Installation of the Knights-Strangers, mentioned in the said
Report, amounting to the sum of 133 l. 6 s. 8 d. which he forthwith brought
into the Office of Arms, and there Lib. Part in Offic. Arm. [4.]
divided according to Custom.

Now, though the Sovereign has discharged the Installation Fees due from
Strangers, as appears before, yet did they besides, or their Proctors for them,
always bestow particular Largesses and Rewards upon the College, the Officers
of the Order and of Arms, the Alms-Knights, and some others who attended and
performed their duty at this great Solemnity; and in particular, Garter had
anciently bestowed on him a rich Gown, to wear at the time of Installation, or,
as of late, presented with some other thing of considerable value.

For it appears, that Maximilian King of the Romans, at his Installation an. 6.
H. 7. gave unto him for his Largess Ex MS. ver. pergam. penes I. V. genesis f. 1^1.
100 Renish Guildings.

That Philip King of Castile (personally Installed at Windesor, an. 21. H. 7.)
gave him besides a large Ibid.
Gown of Cloth of Gold, lined with Black Damask, Ibid.
40 Crowns of Gold for a Doublet.

And Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, installed by Proxy an. 16. H. 8. bestowed
on him a Ib.
Crimson Velvet Gown furred with Luzarts, a Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Cup of 22 l. value, a 100 Rhenish Guilders, and 60 Crowns of the Sun.

The French King Francis the First, gave him a Ibid.
Robe of Blue Velvet lined with Cloth of Silver, with Buttons of Gold
enamelled, and 80 Crowns of the Sun.

James the Fifth King of Scotland, Ib.
Gown of Black Velvet furred with Black Budge, with 16 pair of Aglets of Gold,
an 100 Crowns of the Sun, and another Gown.

Lastly, Charles King of Sweden gave him one of those Gold Medals bestowed on
the Knights-Companions at his Installation, but set about with three rows of
large Faucet Diamonds, and at the he^d an imperial Crown set also with Faucet
Diamonds; it was hung in a Gold Chain of excellent and curious workmanship, and
worn by Garter before his breast at the said Kings Installation: this rich
Jewel and Chain cost 404 l.

To the Officers of Arms, Strangers were also liberal, as appears by the
Largesses given by several of them, or by their Proctors, besides their
Installation Fees received from the Sovereign, viz.

Maximilian King of the Romans gave them Ex MS. verust. pergam. penes Io.
Vincent. genesis
100 Guildings. The King of Portugal -- Ex MS. verust. pergam. penes Io.
Vincent. genesis
30 Crowns. Philip King of Castile -- Ex MS. verust. pergam. penes Io. Vincent.
genesis
100 Crowns. Francis the French King -- Ex lib. Partition. in Offic. Armor. [1]
fol. 19.
60 Crowns. King Philip of Spain -- Ibid. f. 169.
38 l. 7 s. 0 d. Emanuel Duke of Savoy -- Ib. f. 172.
10 l. 0 s. 0 d. Adolph Duke of Holstien -- Ib. f. 220.
25 Crowns. Charles the Ninth of France -- Ib. f. 272.
30 Crowns. Francis Duke of Montmorency -- Ib. f. 314.
40 Crowns. Frederick Prince Palatine -- Ex lib. Partit. [2] fol. 177. b.
13 l. 6 s. 8 d.

And not only to Garter and Officers of Arms, but likewise to several others,
did the Proctors bestow Gratuities, as does appear from what Monsieur de
Tercelin Proctor to Francis the First of France, gave an. 19. H. 8.

To Garter for his Gown -- Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
60 Crowns. To the Black-Rod -- 6 Crowns. Officers of Arms -- 60 Crowns.
Gentlemen-ushers, Guard, and other of the Chamber 20 Crowns. Master of the
Household, and other Officers of the Household -- 30 Crowns. The two Sextons -- 2
Crowns Choristers -- 3 Crowns. Vicars and Clarks -- 6 Crowns. Vergers of the
College -- 8 Nobles
Besides it is evident from a Bill of particulars, which Prince Henry of Nassau
(Brother to Maurice Prince of Orange) paid to Sir William Seagar, that the
Alms-Knights, Trumpets, Drums, Fifes, and Musicians, received Gratuities also
upon the foresaid account.

CHAP. XVIII. OF THE Grand Feast OF THE Order.
SECT. I. The Grand Feast, appointed to be annually celebrated on St. George's
day.
AT the Institution of this most Noble Order, it was Ordained, That its high
and solemn Festival (commonly called St. George's Feast) should be annually
celebrated on the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 9* H. 8. Stat. Art. 8.
23. day of April, or Saint George's day, in honor of that Saint made choice of
for its peculiar Patron.

And it is very observable, that the Founders of several other Military Orders
(whose Institutions bear later date than this of the Garter) settled also the
Anniversary of their Festivals upon the Feast Day of their Patrons. Thus Philip
Duke of Burgundy, upon his erection of the Order of the Golden Fleece, making
choice of St. Andrew for its Patron, ordained the Grant Festival to be kept on
St. Ordinances du tresnoble Order de la Toison d' Or Art. 22.
Andrew's day. The like did Lewis the Eleventh of France, in appointing Stat.
de l'Ordre de Mons. St. Michael Art. 32.
Michaelmas day for holding the Feast of the Order of St. Michael. So also the
Solemnities of the Duke of Savoy's Order of the Annunciade, are annually held
upon our Heylin's Geogr. Lib. 1. p. 138.
Lady Day in Lent. And the Festival of the Duke of Burbons Order of Knights of
our Lady, on the day of the Andr. Faoin in le Theat. d' Honneur, lib. 3.
Conception of our Lady, being the 8. of December; in which kind more instances
might be produced, were it needful.

Since then the Founders of Knightly Orders, have generally appointed the
celebration of their Solemnities, on the days set apart by the Church, for
commemoration of those particular Saints, whom they had pitched upon for
Patrons; it will not be besides our subject to enquire, upon what grounds those
days were advanced into Festivals for the honoring such Saints.

The Church says Divin. Offic. Lib. 7. c. 1. nu. 1. Edit. Lugd. 1612.
Durand, celebrates the Feasts of Saints for several causes; first by way of
return of thanks to them for keeping a continual Feast for us, forasmuch as
there is joy among the Angels and holy Souls, in regard of on^ penitent sinner.
Secondly, because in honoring them, we are highly concerned our selves, their
cause of Festivity being indeed ours; for charity makes all things common. A
third reason he will have to be, that we may the better engage them to
intercede for us. Fourthly, in imitation of them, since by their examples, we
are the better incited to imitate their virtues. Fifthly, for confirmation and
advancement of our hopes, seeing mortal men, like our selves, advanced to that
height of glory; whereupon we have the less cause to despair of the like, since
the hand of the Lord is no way shortened. Sixthly, for the honor of the Divine
Majesty; because in them we honor and exalt God himself, who sanctified and
glorified them. Seventhly, that upon the contemplation of their beauty and
felicity, men may be weaned from their sins, and learn to contemn worldly
things. But the eighth and principal for our present purpose is, because the
keeping of the Anniversary Feasts of Saints, brings their actions and examples
the better to our memory, for our profit and edification; not that they stand
in need of our Prayers, being themselves perfectly happy, but that we should
give thanks and honor to God for them.

Nor has it been the practice only of later Ages, but even of the primitive
Christians also, to make Anniversary Commemorations of deceased Martyrs, as
appears from Rodolph Hospinian, who says, Hospin. de Origin Festorum
Christianorum, cap. 3. fol. 9. a.
That the ancient Christians, as they had an affectionate care and respect to
the Saints and Martyrs, while they were yet in the flesh, so neither were they
unmindful of them after their decease; for on those days, whereon, by suffering
Martyrdom* they were deprived of this life, they meeting at their Sepulchers,
celebrated their memorials; and this they did not only once, but every year,
namely, as often as that day came about, whereon they suffered.

But to resume the prosecution of our present discourse; the next thing to be
considered, is the Day whereon the Patron of this most Noble Order suffered
Martyrdom, and which was thereupon designed to be his Anniversary Festival.

SECT. II. The Anniversary of St. George fixed by the Church unto the 23. of
April.
THat the 23. day of April was the day whereon St. George suffered Martyrdom, by
beheading, appears from the Greek Hexamiter before his Commemoration, among
other Testimonies given us in that most elaborate Work, the Page 795.
Titles of Honor. Therefore on that very day, both the Greek and Latin Church,
from ancient time, appointed and observed the Natalis Sancti Georgii Martyris,
in commemoration of the Passion of that famous and victorious Martyr; as may be
seen in the ancientest Martyrologies, remembered both by our learned Tit. of
Hon. p. 807.
Seldom and Doctor Hist. of St. George, part 2. c. 5. sect. 3. vide Bed. in
Marty^olog.
Heylin.

And on this day also was the Natalis of St. George observed by our
Predecessors the Saxons, as appears by the old Saxon Martyrologie (remaining
now in Tit. Honor, p. 81^.
Benet College in Cambridge) whence may be also collected the estimation Saint
George had gained, even in the Saxon times.

But that we may the better understand the acception of this word Natalis and
Natalitium, in the matter of Martyrology, Durand tells us, That Rationale Lib.
^. c. 1. ^. 18.
Natalis or Natalitium, is said to be the departure of Saints out of this life,
as being then born to God, and a state of Glory, by a Nativity tending to
eternal life. By which it plainly appears, that in the Saints Calender, the day
of their Martyrdom or death, has been accounted their true Natalis, their
Nativity or Birthday, rather than that generally so accounted; namely, the
time of their first coming into the world. And with this the forecited
Hospinian agrees, affirming, Cap. 3. f. 9.
That the Chritians of the primitive Church, appointed not the days of Martyrs
Nativities to be celebrated as the Ethnicks used, but those of their death or
suffering. To which effect he cites St. Ambrose, and a little after adds, that
those days, whereon Martyrs resolutely underwent death for Christ's sake, they
used to call their Genethlia, their Natalia or Natalitia, by the testimony of
Origin and Tertullian.

And this kind of second birth, is also known by several other names, as Festum
transitus, so called Durandus, loco cit^to.
Because their souls departing from their bodies, pas^ through diverse and
unknown places, through the aerie, aetherial, and christalline Heaven, that at
length they may come to the empyreal. It is called also Obitus, Durandus, loco
cit^to.
Because then the Angels come to meet the Soul. Sometimes it is termed Passio,
because then the soul and body suffer most, as being violently separated one
from the other.

The transitus of the blessed Virgin Mary is called her Assumption. Deposition,
is properly belonging to St. John the Evangelist, who entered alive into the
place of Sepulture, and as it were deposited himself. Obdormition is the
refreshment, of the Saints after sleep, because Saints in their glorified
bodies, rise as it were newly awakened out of sleep. By all these several Names
are the Festivals of the Saints celebrated, which plainly denote, the day of
the second Birth or going out of the world, and not of the first or coming into
the world.

And it is further observable, that the Church, among the many Saints, who have
days appointed for their Commemoration, does not celebrate the Nativities of
any, but our blessed Savior, and St. John the Baptist: whereto those of the
Romish persuasion have added that of the blessed Virgin Mary.

SECT. III. St. George's day made Festum duplex.
AFter that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, had given increase of honors
to this their Patron's ^estival, our Church began to take a greater regard to
his day, because he was also esteemed amongst us, the Patron of our Nation, and
therefore bestowed an Titles of Hon. p. 814.
addition of honor thereupon.

For whereas it had anciently been accounted, only minus duplex, or, inferius
duplex (as beside the Testimonies, both of our learned Seldom and others, may
also be deduced from the interdiction of the minora servilia opera upon this
Saints day, by a Synod held at Oxford, in the year of our Lord 1222. cited by
De Orig. Fest. Christ. C. 4. f. 17: a.
Hospinian) it was petitioned in a Convocation, held under Archbishop Arundel,
an. 1. H. 4. MS. in Offic. principal. Cantuar. v^cat* Arundel. part. 1. f. 53.
b. Art. 2^.
that it might be observed and solemnized sicut caeterae Nationis suorum
Patronorum facta colunt; which though it took no effect, yet after at the
Constitutionem ha^ edidit Hen. Chicheley ad excitationem Regis Henrici Angliae
quinti, in par^es Normanniae transitum. Linwode in Glossa verbo ineffabilis
Provincialis, Lib. 2. C Ineffabilis de Feriis.
instance of King Henry the Fifth, this day was (in the Selden's Titles of
Hono^. p. 814.
3. year of his Reign) made MS. in Offic. Principal. C^ntuar. vocat Chicheley,
part. 2. f. 2.
Festum duplex, ad modum majoris duplicis, by a Canon of the Convocation, of
the Province of Canterbury: And so we find it noted to be observed, a long time
after, in the Calendar, set before the Horae beatissimae Virginis Mariae,
secundum usum Sarum, Printed at Paris, by Francis Regnault, anno Domini 1526.
But this is found so noted, only in some of the Missals used here in England,
for in the Roman Breviary and Missal, it appear^ to be but Semiduplex.

Now the better to explain, the abovementioned distinction of Festa majora
duplicia, and minora duplicia, Durand, as being very particular in this point,
may fitly be consulted herein, who says, Rati^n. Div. Offic. lib. ^. c. 1.
number. 31. vide etiam Gavant. Comment. in Rubricas Brev. Roman, Sect. 3. c. 2.3.
and 4.
Quaedam festa dicuntur in totum duplicia, quaedam simpliciter duplicia,
quaedam semiduplicia, etc.. Some Feasts are said to be totally double, some
simply double, some half double: The totally or greater double are so called,
because in them the Responsories, as well the greater as the shorter, as also
the Verses are sung by two, and because the Antiphones, both at Mattins and
Vespers are doubled; of this sort, are the Feasts of the Nativity of our Lord,
of St. Stephen, of St. John the Evangelists, Epiphany, Purification, etc.. The
lesser double Feasts are the second and third Feriae before the Octaves of
Easter and Penticost, the Commemoration of St. Paul, and in brief every Feast
which is ordained to be celebrated double in all Churches, whereas the greater
double Feast are kept in some particular Churches only. The half double Feasts
are such wherein the Responsories are sung by two, but neither are they begun
by two, nor are the Antiphones sung double, yet the Verses and short
Responsories are said, and these are the Feasts of St. Andrew, Nicholas, Lucie,
Thomas the Apostle, etc..

And the reason of this variety observed in the celebration of these Feasts, is
for that as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. cap. 15. ver. 21.
One Star difers from another in glory; so according to the degrees of merit
(says the same Loco jam citato.
Durand) their praise is so much the more or less celebrated in these Feasts.

This division of Durand appears to be the same in effect, with that taken
notice of by our learned Seldom; where Tit. Hon. p. 816.
Majora duplicia, answers to Durandus his duplicia in totum, the Minora, to the
simpliciter duplicia, and the Inferiora to the Semiduplicia; only herein Seldom
notes this difference, that the grand and high Feast of all, as Christmas,
Easter, and Penticost, etc. are not comprehended under the notion of Majora
Duplicia, but by the title of Principaliora. And as for the Festival of our
particular Patron St. George, however after-Custom had slackned that due honor
which was decreed unto it, by the above mentioned Canon; yet how great a
veneration it was thought worthy of, plainly appears, both by that part of the
said Canon, wherein it is Decreed to be one of the Festa majora duplicia, and
also by the reasons given at large for it, in the Preamble thereof, which are
these. MS in Offic. Principal. Cantuar. vocat. Chicheley part. 2. f. 2 and f.
114. vide etiam Council. Spelmann. Tom. 2. p. 669.
Upon consideration therefore of this appointment, proceeding from the
favorable and bountiful mercy of our God and Savior the faithful of the
English Nation, although at all times obliged to worship God in all his Saints,
yet as is testified by the general vote of the World, and the experience of
grace given from above, the best interpreter of all things, are they more
particularly bound to extol him with high acclamations, to sound forth his
praises, and to give him veneration and special honors, in the person of his
most glorious Martyr Saint George, as Patron and Protector of the said Nation,
since by his intercession, at we verily believe, not only the Military Power of
the English Nation, is strengthened, and made capable of repelling all hostile
incursions, in the time of War, but also our Spiritual Militia, the flourishing
estate of our Clergy, is under the tutelage of so great a Patron manifestly,
fortified in the prosperity of a holy and peaceful estate.

To this may be added, the division of Feasts into Generalia, which are called
Solemnitates, and Particularia, which are peculiar to one Church only, one
Parish or one Bishopric, and also into Mobilia, such as are not limited to one
certain day of the Month, as Easter Day, Whitsunday, etc. and Fixa, such as
constantly fall upon a certain day of the Month, as Christmas Day, Lady Day,
and several others: which, as falling into this subject of Feasts, we thought
fit to mention out of the before mentioned De Orig. Fest. Christian. c. 5. f.
19. a.
Hospinian, rather for satisfaction to the curious, than as necessarily
relating to the present discourse.

SECT. IV. The Place for celebrating the Grand Feast, assigned to Windesor
Castle.
AND as King Edward the Third, Founder of this most Noble Order, had fixed the
day of its Feast, to that of the Passion (or, according to the Church phrase,
the Nativity) of his Patron; so as to the place, wherein to perform its
Solemnities, he made choice of that of his own Nativity, the Castle of H. 8.
Stat. Art. 8. Froisard, l. 1. c. 100. Polid. Virgil. Angl. Hist. l. 19. p. 378.
Windesor, and appointed the observation of this Grand Festival, in a solemn
manner, and with due Ceremonies to be celebrated there, which for a long time
after was inviolably observed, either upon the very day by the Church made
sacred to St. George, or else upon some other appointed by Prorogation, not
long after: for which way of Prorogation, allowance was given by the E. 3.
Stat. Art. 9. H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 4.
Statutes of the Order, and of which the Registers are full of instances.

SECT. V. St. George's day kept apart from the Grand Feast, and how then
observed.
HOW this Noble Order spread its roots and flourished, from its first
plantation to the time of King Henry the Fifth, we can give no account, since
the Annals thereof are wanting unto his Reign; certain it is, that then it was
of a considerable growth; but afterward, the Civil Wars, toward the end of
King Henry the Sixth's Reign, caused it to stand at a stay. Under the
benevolent aspect of King Edward the Fourth, it seemed to recover; and whilst
King Henry the Eighth reigned, to have attained a greater height than at any
time before.

But though the several Branches of the Order received some augmentation, from
the favorable influence of this last mentioned Sovereign, yet the principal,
to wit, the Grand Festival, began to flag, by a removal of the observation of
St. George's day from Windesor (the place particularly appointed for it) and a
prorogatory celebration of the Grand Feast to other times. By which means, the
honor of that princely Seat, and the advantages accrewing by the performance of
the Solemnities there, were diverted to those other places, whereto the
observation of St. George's day was translated. The Article of the Statutes
causing this great alteration, and which clashed so much with the design of the
first Institutor, may be seen in the Sea Henry the Eighth's Statutes, Art. 4.
Appendix, where it is manifest, that when the Sovereign saw occasion, to
prorogue the celebration of the Grand Feast, he might legally do it; but when
he did so, it is there also evident, that the day of St. George, was
nevertheless ordained to be duly observed, singly by it self, in what place
soever the Sovereign (if within this Realm) should then reside; Windesor hereby
being not excluded.

It further implies the sacred Rites and Offices to be performed, with sundry
other concerns of the Order, for besides the particulars therein innumerated,
we may observe thence this general clause, that what other urgent Affair soever
(relating to the Order) should offer it self to be performed, the same might be
treated of, and receive dispatches in the Chapter held, where the Sovereign
then should be, as fully as if he were at Windesor Castle.

So that hence forward, all things began to be ordered, both on the Eve, the
Day of St. George, and the Morrow after, with full as great state, all Affairs
as legally dispatched, and all Ceremonies as magnificently performed (except
that of Offering up of Achievements, which is peculiar and local to the Chapel
of St. George in Windesor Castle) as could be observed, at the Grand Festival
it self.

And how (by virtue of this Article) and with that Ceremonies St. George's day
was held, when the Grand Feast was prorogued to some further time, is evident,
from a full and ample Precedent ( an. 22. H. 8.) now remaining in the Office of
Arms.

For albeit the Sovereign, with Lib. N. p. 258.
thirteen Knights-Companions, were at Windesor, upon the 22.23. and 24. of
April that year, yet did they at that time observe only the Feast day of St.
George (with the Eve and Morrow after) but deferred (by Lib. N. p. 258.
Order in Chapter) the celebration of the Grand Feast, unto the 8. day of May
ensuing; the Memorial whereof follows.

MS, in Offic. Arm. [M. 17.] fol. 32.
The King went not to the Chapter before the first Evensong, but immediately to
his Stall ( viz. in the Chapel of the Ibid.
Sovereign's Lodgings in the Upper Ward of the Castle of Windesor, not in the
Chapel Royal of St. George) The Bishop of London Lord Cutberde Tunstall elect
of Duresme did the Divine Service, and at Magnificat he and the Dean first
censed the Altar, and after the King; both the high Altar and the Altar which
was made before the King, were richly garnished with Images and over
garnishments of Gold, and Silver, and Gilt, etc. The Evensong the King returned
to his -- and his Grace, and the Knights of the Order were served of the void,
etc. And on the Morn at 9. of the Clock -- to be at Matyns, which was done
above the Ordinary, the King ordained in the honor of St. George, a right noble
Procession, whereat was 35 Copes of rich Cloth of Gold; after the Procession
the King went immediately to his Stall, and High Mass, and offered as
accustomed, That done; Dinner, and 4 of the greatest Estates sat at the kings
boards end. And the residue sat all along at the two Tables all on the one
side, as accustomed, and before Evensong the King went to his Closet to the
Chapter, and appointed the Duke of Suffolk to be his Lieutenant at the Feast,
which was appointed to be kept the eight day of May then ensuing, accompanied
with the Earl of Rutland, the Lord Sandys Lord Chamberlain, Sir William Fitz
Williams.

Memoramdum, That the low Evensongs that were said before the King. were of St.
George. Also the first low Mass in the morning song by the Lord George Gray of
Dorset; two oder Masses of the day, of the which Lord John Longland Bishop of
Lincoln sang the third Mass, the fourth low Mass was of Recordare, and was
appointed that the high Mass done, the Mass of Requiem should begin.

Thus here we have (1.) The attendance of the Knights-Companions upon the
Sovereign. (2.) the Chapter, which accustomably was held on the Eve of the
Feast, implied, by observing, that the Sovereign went not unto it. (3.) The
Ceremonies at the first Vespers. (4.) The Morning Service on St. George's day.
(5.) The Grand Procession. (6.) The Solemn Offering. (7.) The Grand Dinner. (8.)
The Chapter held before the second Vespers. (9.) The day for celebrating the
Grand Festival appointed. And (10.) The Mass of Requiem, on the morrow after
St. George's day celebrated.

SECT. VI. The Grand Feast neglected by King Edward the Sixth.
BUT King Edward the Sixth assuming the Sovereignty of this Noble Order, the
days became more gloomy, in as much as during his Reign, there was no
Anniversary of St. George kept at Windesor, by a Grand Festival. Under what
churli^h Fate this noble place then suffered, we cannot guess, other than the
common calamity of that Age, wherein most Ceremonies, solemn or splendid,
either (chiefly such as related to Divine Services) came under the suspicion of
being superstitious, if not idolatrous. Insomuch as at a Chapter held at
Greenewich, upon the MS. fol. pen. Rob. Com. Ali^b. p. 24. b.
22. day of April, in the second year of his Reign (an abolition being intended
of all such Ceremonies, as were not consonant to the King's Injuctions then
lately prescribed) it was Ordained and Decreed, that MS. fol. pen. Rob. Com.
Ali^b. p. 24. b.
then and for ever from thenceforth (at the Feast of this most Noble Order) no
other Ceremonies should be observed, than such as were appointed in the
following Letter. Which was at that Chapter agreed upon, and a little before
the next years Feast day of St. George, sent from the Lords of the Council to
the Knights-Companions, attributing the whole procedure, to the great piety of
the then Sovereign, and the care he took, that certain abuses and preposterous
Ceremonies of the Church, should be reformed: Whereby the Solemnity, State and
magnificence of this Grand Festival was very much eclipsed.

MS. 4. penes E.W.G.
AFter our most hearty commendations; For as much as the Kings Highness has
appointed a most godly Reformation of diverse abuses and rites in the Church, to
a more convenient and decent Order, of the which some has been used
heretofore, in the most honorable and amicable Order of the Garter, and being
not reformed, there should make a disagreeing from his Majesty's most godly
proceedings. Therefore it is his Majesty's will and pleasure, by the advice of
us the Lord Protector, and other his Highness Council, that all such things, as
be not conformable and agreeing to his Majesty's Injunctions, Orders, or
Reformations, now of late prescribed, should be also in that most Noble Order
and the Ceremonies thereof lest undone, and reformed as hereafter follows.
First, that no Procession be made with going about the Church or Churchyard,
but the Kings Majesty's Procession, lately set forth in English to be used. His
Majesty and other Knights of that honorable Order sitting in their Stalls, at
the entry such Reverence to be made to the King's Majesty only as was
heretofore. The Offering to be in the Box for the Poor, without any other
Reverence or kissing of any Paten or other thing, but only at the return due
Reverence to the King's Majesty as was used before. The Mass of Requiem to be
left undone, but yet both upon St. George's day, and the next day a Mass to be
sung with great Reverence; in the which immediately after the words of
Consecration is said, the Priest shall say the Pater Noster, and so turn and
communicate all, or so many of the Order or other, after they have done, as
shall be disposed godly at the same time to receive the Communion, according to
such order as is prescribed in his Highness Book of Communion, and without any
other Rite or Ceremony after the said Communion to be used, except it be some
godly Psalm or Hymn to be sung in English, and so to end the said Service. All
Chapters and other Rites concerning the said Order, not being contrary to
these, to remain as they have been prescribed and used, the which we have
thought good to signify unto you, that you may follow the same accordingly,
From Greenwich the 20. of April 1548.


This Decree we observe, signified not less than a Prohibition to the holding
the Grand Fe^st at Windesor (although it spoke not so plain) at least the
neglect of its celebration there, whilst King Edward the Sixth lived, makes it
to seem so. And albeit toward the end of this Sovereign's Reign, some care was
or seemed taken, for a permissive holding of the said Feast, either upon the
day of St. George, or some other day appointed by Prorogation, yet was it
without any regard had to the ancient and usual place, the Castle of Windesor.
For when the An. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. ca. 3.
Act of Parliament passed, An. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. ca. 3.
commanding the days therein mentioned to be kept holy, and none other (whereby
the celebration of many days besides, which in former time, by the Canons of
our Church appointed to be kept holy, were prohibited, and among the rest the
Feast day of St. George, it being not found among those Feast days at that time
established) It was considered, That a Proviso and allowance should be entered
in the aforesaid Act, for the celebration of this Feast, particularly by the
Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order, in these words.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that it shall
be lawful to the Knights of the right honorable Order of the Garter, and to
every of them, to keep and celebrate solemnly the Feast of their Order,
commonly called St. George's Feast, yearly from henceforth the 22.23. and 24.
days of April, and at such other time and times, as yearly shall be thought
convenient, by the Kings Highness his Heirs and Successors, and the said
Knights of the said honorable Order, or any of them, now being, or hereafter to
be, any thing in this Act heretofore mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

Which Act, although it suffered a An. 1. Mar. cap. 2.
Repeal by Queen Mary, yet strands it at this day in force, being An. 1. Iac.
R. cap. 25.
revived by King James, his repealing of that Statute of the first of Queen
Mary, Cap. 2.

SECT. VII. Removed from Windesor by Queen Elizabeth.
BUT that which gave the greatest and almost fatal blow, to the growing Honor
of this no less famous than ancient Castle of Windesor, and severed the Patrons
Festival from the Place, was a Decree made at a Chapter held at Whitehall, upon
St. George's day an. 9. Eliz. with the consent of the Knights-Companions then
present, being 12 in number (namely, the Earls of Arundel and Penbroke, the
Lord Clinton, Marquess of Northampton, Lord Howard of Effingham, Earl of
Sussex, Lord Loughborow, Viscount Mountague, Earls of Leicester,
Northumberland, Warwick, and Lord Hunsdon) to the effect following

Lib. C. p. 54.
That if on the Vigil and day of St. George, the Feast were not held at
Windesor according to the usual Custom, it should nevertheless be sufficient,
if the observation thereof were kept in the same place, where the Sovereign
should then happen to be, where also all the rest of the Knights-Companions
were obliged to be present, no less than if the Feast had been to be celebrated
at Windesor. And henceforward the glory which Windesor Castle had alone possessed
for some Ages, began to be distributed to other places, nay, so severe was the
later part of this Decree, to the interest of so flourishing a place, that it
welnigh extended to a prohibition of all other Celebrations there, since it
also commanded, Ibid.
That no other Solemnity under the notion of St. George's Feast, should
thenceforth be celebrated at Windesor, except upon occasion of the Installation
of some illustrious personage, and then also, not without the leave and
appointment of the Sovereign.

And to say truth, this Statutes was but too strictly observed, all the
remainder of her Reign; for we meet not with one Feast of St. George, held
simply and peculiarly as a Feast in honor of the Order's Patron at Windesor
(unless you mistakingly account any of the Feasts of Installation for those of
St. George, which for the most part were held at the charge and expense of the
Knights Installed) until the first year of King James: But then the Sovereign
(as yet in Scotland) taking notice that the MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl.
day of the Celebration of the Feast of St. George approached, and his Affairs
hindering him from the observation of the just day, because he could not be so
soon present, at any of his Houses of Residence, where the same was meet to be
kept, he therefore thought good to defer the Celebration thereof for a time,
until he could conveniently honor the same with his own presence. To that
purpose, by Commission dated the MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl.
5. of April in the first year of his Reign, he appointed Charles Lib. C. p.
147. vide etiam MS. pen. E. W. G. f. 12.
Earl of Nottingham his Lieutenant, for the Proroguing thereof unto the 3. day
of July next ensuing, Declaring also, that on that day he intended to Lib. C.
p. 147. vide etiam MS. pen. E. W. G. f. 12.
keep the said Feast and Ceremonies personally at Windesor.

This Lib. C. p. 147.
Commission being read (upon the Knights-Companions assembling at Whitehall, on
St. George's Lib. C. p. 147.
Eve following) they forthwith proceeded to Vespers, which being finished, all
the Knights-Companions present went up to the Closet, and there Decreed, Ibid.
That the foresaid Festival should be celebrated upon the day, which the
Sovereign had appointed.

And the Sovereign arriving at Windesor the Ibid. p. 150.
25. day of June following, shortly after constituted the said Earl of
Nottingham his Lieutenant, by Commission bearing date the second day of July
following, thereby impowering him to perform the Ceremonies of the Feast (which
it seems himself could not personally observe as was intended, though then in
the Castle) on the 2.3. and 4. days of the said Month, upon which days it was
with all pomp and state solemnized.

And thus after a long interval did the honor of the Feast then return, which
had this effect (toward the end of the same Sovereign's Reign, and in that of
his Son and Successor King Charles the First) that it begat a reunion of the
Feast and Place; whereby that ancient Fabric, famous for the Institution of
this most Noble Order, retrived the honor of having its Solemnities celebrated
within its Walls.

SECT. VIII. Of Prorogation of the Grand Feast.
HAving thus noted, that from the beginning of King Henry the Eight's Reign,
until of late years, the Grand Feast was seldom observed upon the precise day
of St. George; and that the occasion how both day and Feast, came to be
celebrated apart, took its rise from the indulgence of the Statutes, in point
of Prorogation: we shall further observe, that this Prorogation is of two
sorts, either absolute, as being enjoined by the Statutes of the Order, or else
arbitrary at the Sovereign's pleasure, when for some reason he saw just
occasion therefore.

To the first of these it is said, Prorogation by Statute.
E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
If the Feast day of St. George shall happen within 15 days next after Easter
day, it shall be E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
prorogued to the Sunday fortnight or 15. day next after Easter day, and the
reason of this is there set down, viz. E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
That every of the Knights-Companions might have the opportunity of coming
thereunto, without being constrained to ride upon any of those three holy days,
immediately following Easter day. The same rule for Prorogation, where there is
a concurrence of these two Feasts, is likewise enjoined in the Statutes of King
Henry the Fifth, and King Henry the Eighth.

And we observe, that when the Grand Feast (in this case of Easter) has been
kept before the expiration of the said 15 days, the Knights-Companions then
absent (to avoid the penances incurred for their non-attendance) have laid hold
of this following excuse, Lib. N. p. 171.
That the ancient Statutes of the Order were violated, in keeping the Feast
within fifteen days after Easter; and this was so alleged, when Sir Ibid. page
170.
John Denham (then also Lord Treasurer) held, as President, the Feast of St.
George at Windesor, the Ibid. page 170.
24. of April. an. 8. H. 7.

Anciently, where the Register mentions the Grand Feast to be held at Windesor,
beyond the day of St. George, we find upon Calculation, that Easter day (in
those years) fell too near the 23. of April, to celebrate the Festival on,
without breaking the Law, which was the real cause of those Prorogations: As
for instance in the Lib. N. page 90.
13. Regist. Char^ac. fol. 24.
24. and Lib. N. p. 115.
35. of King Henry the Sixth, when Easter day fell upon the 17. of April, and
consequently St. George's day within the following week. In like manner in the
Ib. p. 106.
29. and Page 111.
32. of the said King's Reign, Easter day happened yet nearer to St. George's
day, in the one upon the 25. and in the other upon the 21. of April. And in all
of these cases, care was taken to Prorogue the celebration of the Grand Feast,
until some further day in the Month of May, immediately following, as from the
before cited places does appear.

Again an. 11. H. 8. Ib. Page 208.
Quia festa dies Divi Georgii Paschatis in vigilia contigit, because the Feast
day of St. George happened upon Easter Eve, therefore the Sovereign summoned a
Chapter to be held, upon the Ib. Page 208.
Thursday before Easter day at Richmond, where it was then held; and although
there is nothing spoken, as to the Prorogation of the Feast, or when it was to
be celebrated, yet doubtless something there was to this purpose then enacted,
in pursuance of the foresaid Statute; else, why should it there be noted with
the word quia, if it were not out of respect to the Feast of Easter, and that
thereupon the said Chapter was then called.

To this place may be referred a Commission of Lieutenancy, made to Thomas Earl
of Arundel, for holding the Grand Feast at Windesor, upon the Lib. N. p. 179.
24. of May, an. 21. H. 7. (the Sovereign keeping the day of St. George that
year at Cambridge) the Prorogation being grounded upon the falling of St.
George's day, within the excepted 15 days of Easter, as appears by the then
Sovereign's Letters of notice to the said Lieutenant; which for the antiquity
thereof, as that it is a testimony of the punctual observance of the Statutes,
we have inserted in the Number. CLIX.
Appendix.

And as the Knights-Companions had prohibitions put upon the solemnization of
their Feast, in case of its interfering with Easter; so had the Church of
England in their observation of the day of St. George. For by the Ordinall of
the Church of Salisbury, published an. 1508. it appears to have been the usage
of that Church, that when the Feast day of St. George fell upon Easter day or
Easter Eve, the celebration thereof was then deferred to the 9. day or some
other day of May, as the case required in their Ecclesiastical Discipline: And
our learned Seldom observes it noted in the end of an old Manuscript Ordinal of
the Province of York, Tit. Honor, p. 816.
That when St. George's day happened to fall upon Easter Eve, the celebration was
anticipated, and cast into the 8. or 9. day preceding, or into the 16. or 17.
days of April.

Hereunto may we subjoin, that in the Solemnities of the Order, there has
sometimes been an omission (in part or in all) of the Service and Office
appointed by the Church to be used upon the day of St. George, when it happened
near to Easter, as it was an. 22. H. 8. St. George's day falling upon MS. in
Offic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32.
Saturday in Easter-week (the Sovereign then at Windesor celebrating the MS. in
Offic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32.
day there, though the Grand Feast, was prorogued to the 8. of May following)
wherefore the MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32.
Service of the Feast of Easter and not of St. George was celebrated on the
Vigil (in the MS. in Offic. Armor. [M. 17.] f. 32.
Chapel above, in the upper Quadrangle next St. George's Hall, not in the
College) but the low Evensongs said before the Sovereign, were of St. George.

In like manner Lib. N. p. 296.
an. 38. H. 8. Good Friday falling upon the 23. of April (the day used to be
kept sacred to St. George) the Service together with the Ceremonies wont to be
performed to the honor of God, and in memory of St. George, were prorogued to
Sunday the Lib. N. p. 296.
3. of May, being Low-Sunday, and the Lib. vocat. Dalton, p. 128.
Service of the day took place.

So reverend a regard was anciently had for the Feasts appointed by the Church
to be kept holy, and the Vigils thereof, as also to the Divine Service,
ordained to be celebrated thereon, that this Feast of St. George, was by King
Henry the Fifth's Statutes expressly prohibited to be held, if through the
Prorogations aforesaid, it should chance to fall out upon the Lib. N. p. 66.
24. and 25. days of April But in all other Rolls and Copies of these Statutes,
that have come to our view, we find the 26. day of April added to this place,
(and so afterward in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes) which was very
requisite, because otherwise the second Vespers of St. Mark, might from the
first Vespers of St. George receive interruption.

With these, the like Prohibition was enjoined, if the Feast fell upon the H.
5. Stat. Art. 9.
last of April, the first, second, third, and fourth of May, in honor of the
double Feast of St. Philip and Jacob, and of the Feast of the Invention of the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; for which cause in the 9. and 10. years of King
Henry the Eighth, the celebration of the Grand Feast was prorogued to the 10.
and 16. days of May at Windesor, which were the Sundays Lib. N. p. 205. and 207.
next following the Feast of the Invention of the holy Cross, in those two
years. So likewise if it fell on the Feasts of the H. 5. Stat. Art. 9.
Ascension, and Penticost.

Thus far in reference to these enumerated Festivals, did the Statutes of the
Order provide; as also where the case might fall within the compass of any
Idem, vide etiam H. 8. Stat. Art. 8.
other solemn Feast ordained by the Church, when the first or second Vespers
thereof might (through such Prorogations) be hindered or disturbed; which were
for ought we find, until the time of our Reformation of Religion (begun by King
Edward the Sixth) duly observed: But since upon passing the Act of Parliament
before mentioned, for singling some few days, out of those many, that were
before kept holy, there has been no due observation given to these
Injunctions, but that the Grand Feast of St. George, has by Prorogation, been
celebrated upon any of them indifferently, the Feast of Easter only excepted.
And in this case of Easter, after such time as the Statutes were new modelled
by King Henry the Eighth, the time for Prorogation of the Grand Feast was left
more arbitrary (so also when it fell out upon any Fish or Fasting-day) Ibid.
even at the Sovereign's pleasure; and therefore since then (when the said two
Feasts happened to concur) the adjournments have passed but for some few days.

As for instance, St. George's day, an. 18. Eliz. fell upon Easter-Monday, and
thereupon the Sovereign appointed a Chapter to be held in the Privy Chamber at
Whitehall, on MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 123.
Easter Eve, wherein it was Ordered: That the Feast of St. George should be
adjourned, until Tuesday the MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 123.
24. of April (being Tuesday in Easter week) and by this appointment, the very
day celebrated by the Church, for that of St. George, became the Eve to the
Grand Feast, and was so observed by the Sovereign and Knights-Companions.

Of later times, viz. MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. b.
an. 12. Iac. R. when St. George's day fell upon MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. b.
Easter-Eve, the celebration thereof was deferred until MS. penes E. W. G. f.
151. b.
Thursday then next following.

Lastly, his late Majesty of ever sacred memory, being a great restorer of the
ancient Solemnities and Discipline of this Order, punctual even in
circumstances of Honor, and extraordinary tender of infringing any of the
Statutes, having prorogued the Feast of St. George from the Palmer's Iourn. p.
32* and 33.
8.9. and 10. days of February, in the 18. year of his Reign, to the Palmer's
Iourn. p. 32. and 33.
18.19. and 20. days of April following, at the City of York; and the time
falling out to be within 15 days of Easter, although he might (by the power of
King Henry the Eighth's Art. 8.
Statutes, and those Precedents before recited) have kept the same upon the
days designed: Nevertheless without a particular Dispensation drawn and made
authentic, by the Great Seal of the Order, and his own Royal Signature, would
not proceed to the Ceremonies of that celebration.

We come now to the second sort of Prorogations, Prorogation^ at pleasure
which are merely arbitrary, and wholly dependent upon the Sovereign's
pleasure, yet warranted sufficiently from the words [ Causa postulante] set
down in the beginning of the Fourth Article of King Henry the Eighth's
Statutes; as also by the great latitude given unto the Sovereigns of this most
Noble Order, out of compliance with their urgent Affairs, in the 8. Article
following, quo Supremus volet prorogabitur. But we observe, that long before
the making this Statute, something of like nature had been practiced, and the
Grand Feast prorogued at the pleasure of the Sovereign (the day of St. George
being nevertheless observed) albeit the Registers render not the cause: To
manifest which, we shall instance in a few Examples. The first thing memorable
in this kind (of which any Record is extant) is that an. 5. H. 5. when about
the Lib. N. page 57.
18. of August (near 4 Months after St. George's day) the Sovereign (then
engaged in War with France) having reduced to his obedience the not
inconsiderable Town of Lib. N. page 57.
Caen, and made the Duke of Clarence Governor thereof; Lib. N. page 57.
took order as far as the present exigency of Affairs would permit, to have the
Feast of St. George there celebrated, and with great solemnity created 15
Knights into the Order.

So Ex lib. vocat. Dalton.
an. 22. E. 4. the Sovereign with the rest of the Knights-Companions, kept all
the Solemnities of the Order in Ex lib. vocat. Dalton.
St. Paul's Church London, and dined in the Bishop of London's Ex lib. vocat
Dalton.
Palace (at which time he received from the Pope a Ex lib. vocat. Dalton.
Sword and Cap of Maintenance) and albeit the mention of St. George's day occur
not expressly in the place, whence we have this account, nevertheless, observing
both out of the Page 148.
Black Book, and the Fol. 49.
Registrum Chartaceum, that the Grand Feast, it self, was by the Lord Matrevers
held at Windesor, within few days after St. George's day, that very year, viz.
the 29. of April. Therefore these Solemnities at St. Paul's, may most probably
be thought to have been observed upon the very day of St. George; for they
could not be celebrated in any part of the year following the aforesaid 29. of
April, because the Grand Feast it self was then already past.

In like manner King Henry the Seventh, in the 20. year of his Reign, went on
Lib. N. page 177.
St. George's day in solemn Procession and very great State, to the
forementioned Cathedral, yet notwithstanding on the 4. of May following, the
Grand Feast was observed at Lib. N. page 177.
Windesor, by the Earl of Lib. N. page 177.
Arundel (deputed by the Sovereign) and four other of the Knights-Companions
appointed for his Assistants.

Again, an. Regist. Chart. f. 53. b. and Lib. N. p. 204.
8. H. 8. the Sovereign being at Eltham on St. Regist. Chart. f. 53. b. and
Lib. N. p. 204.
George's day, it was in a Chapter there held, Decreed, That the accustomed
celebration of the Feast of St. George, should be observed at Regist. Chart. f.
53. b. and Lib. N. p. 204.
Windesor, upon Sunday next after Trinity Sunday, being the Regist. Chart. f.
53. b. and Lib. N. p. 204.
25. of May ensuing; and the Marquess Dorset was then also appointed Lieutenant
to the Sovereign for holding thereof, and the Earl of Essex (in whose room the
Lord Regist. Chart. f. 53. b. and Lib. N. p. 204.
Poynings was afterward substituted) with the Lords La Ware, Mountegle, and
Lovell his Assistants.

And from this time it became annually customary, especially all the subsequent
years of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, Queen Mary's, and unto the 9. of Queen
Elizabeth, to keep the day of St. George, wheresoever the Sovereign at that
time abode, which for the most part was at Greenewich, or Whitehall, on which
day (as also on the Eve and morning after the day) the usual Solemnities were
observed, and a noble Feast provided, as has been said: But as to the
celebration of the Grand Festival it self, that was in one of the Chapters,
held during the foresaid celebrations, and most commonly on St. George's day,
adjourned unto some further time, and then solemnized at Windesor by
Prorogation, not by the Sovereigns themselves, but by their Lieutenants and
their Assistants, especially deputed and appointed for that purpose.

But to proceed with the causes of Prorogation, which were either for some
considerable reasons, or upon emergent occasions. An. 1. Mariae, the Sovereign
celebrating the day of St. George, at her Manor of St. Lib. G. p. 7.
James's, Philip then Prince of Spain, and Henry Earl of Sussex, were on the
Ibid. p. 9.
morrow after elected into the Order; whereupon it was also decreed, Ibid. p. 9.
That the inauguration of these two Knights-Elect, should be prorogued until
the Prince came over into England, which happening upon the 21. day of July
following, the Grand Feast, together with that of the Elect-Knights
Installations, were appointed to be celebrated together; to which purpose a
Appendix, Number. CLX.
Letter was afterward sent unto the Knights-Companions for their repair
thither, against the 5. of August then next following.

Again, an. Lib. C. p. 19.
3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. at a Chapter held at Westminster upon the 22. of April,
the Ibid. pt. 20.
Feast of St. George (together with the Installation of three Knights at that
time Elected) was appointed to be held at Windesor, on the Ibid. pt. 20.
9. day of May following, and by a Chapter summoned at the same place, the Ib.
p. 21.
3. of May before the appointed day for keeping the Feast, the same was
prorogued unto the Ib. p. 21.
5. of December following, Ib. p. 21.
because of the manifold and urgent affairs of the King and Queen. But before
that designed time, another Chapter was held at Saint James's, upon the Ibid.
page 22.
last day of October in the 4. and 5. years of their Reigns, wherein it was
again prorogued unto the Ibid. page 22.
first Sunday after Twelfth-day, viz. the 9. of January then following, Ibid.
page 22.
if by that time the King (who it seems was gone out of Flanders) should return
into England; but there appearing afterward no hopes of his coming over
against that prefixed time, another Chapter was summoned and held at Greenewich
the Ibid. page 22.
5. of January, wherein it was Decreed, Ibid. page 22.
urgent Affairs requiring, that the said Feast should be further prorogued,
unto the Ibid. page 22.
20. of February next coming, and then the Lieutenant and Assistants appointed
to the first Prorogation, should celebrate this solemn Feast at Windesor, in
manner as it was Decreed, the 22. of April preceding. Nevertheless, the Ibid.
p. 23.
sixth day of February after, in another Chapter, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions Decreed, to prorogue the last mentioned Prorogation unto
Ibid. p. 23.
St. George's day, then next following, Ibid. p. 23.
Because both in respect of the meeting of the Parliament, and other Affairs of
great importance, as also by reason of the War that was begun, the said Feast
could not conveniently be before observed.

In like manner, an. 2. Eliz. upon the Ibid. page 33.
24. of April, it was Decreed, that on Sunday the Ibid. page 33.
5. of May the Feast of St. George should be observed with the accustomed
celebrations; but that morning in a Chapter held at Whitehall, Ibid. p. 34.
for very high and important causes, was it prorogued until Sunday the 12. day
of May immediately following, on which day it was solemnized at Windesor.

Again, King James having designed his Journey into Scotland (to begin the Ib.
p. 189.
20 of March, an. 14. regni sui) he assembles a Chapter at Whitehall, the
second day of that Month, and therein, by reason that for the cause aforesaid,
Ib. p. 189.
Saint George's Feast for the year ensuing, could not conveniently be kept on
the accustomed day and place, decreed to celebrate the same at Windesor the Ib.
p. 189.
13. day of September next following, where it was accordingly observed.

So also for causes of another, but sadder nature, an. 17. Iac. R. viz. Queen
Anne's Ib. p. 192.
death, and the Sovereign's dangerous Ib. p. 192.
sickness, which had brought him also near to the gates of death, was the Grand
Feast prorogued from St. George's day, to the Ib. p. 192.
26. of May in the same year, and then celebrated at Greenewich.

And an. 1. Car. 1. the Sovereign not thinking sit Lib. R. p. 26.
for several causes, at that time to keep the Grand Feast, prorogued it from
the Lib. R. p. 26.
22.23. and 24. days of April, unto the 16.17. and 18. of August following,
thence again until the Ibid. page 28.
4.5. and 6. of October, and lastly to the 23. 24. and 25. of November in the
same year, and then observed it at Ibid. page 28.
Windesor.

Sometimes this Feast has been put off, out of a respect unto the day, whereon
it fell, as Ibid p. 17.
an. 22. Iac. R. St. George's day then happening upon a Friday, the Sovereign
therefore prorogued it until the 26. 27. and 28. days of April, at which time
it was celebrated at Windesor: And the authority unto which regard was had in
this place, was that Clause in the 8. Article of King Henry the Eighth's
Statutes, wherein the keeping of St. George's Feast was prohibited, if it fell
upon any Lib. N. page 218.
Fish or Fasting days.

So also Lib. Carol. p. 82.
an. 22. Car. 2. it falling upon a Saturday, was prorogued to the 27. 28. and
29. days of April following.

And albeit in times past this Feast has been, for the most part upon
Prorogations, observed upon a Sunday, yet of late in veneration to this day, it
has been likewise prohibited, as an. 2. Car. 1. St. George's day falling upon
a MS. penes Ed. Fauconbridge, genesis
Sunday, thereupon the Solemnity was put off until MS. penes Ed. Fauconbridge,
genesis
Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday following, being the 26.27. and 28. of April,
upon which days it was observed at MS. penes Ed. Fauconbridge, genesis
Whitehall. But where the MS. penes Ed. Fauconbridge, genesis
Eve happened upon a Sunday (as it did the MS. penes Ed. Fauconbridge, genesis
next year after) there the Feast received no MS. penes Ed. Fauconbridge, genesis
Prorogation.

In the year of our Lord 1636. the Sovereign was moved, by reason of the Row's
Iournal, p. 4.
Contagion and Sickness, dispersed into several places of the Kingdom, and to
avoid the danger of the concourse of much People, during the Infection as well
for other great and important Affairs, to give several Prorogations to this
Feast, from the 22.23. and 24. d^ys of April (being the usual days of this
Solemnity) first to the Ibid.
8.9. and 10. days of July following, then again to the 26.27. and 28. of
September, and from that time unto the 13.14. and 15. of December, and lastly
to the 17.18. and 19. of April in the 13. year of his Reign; upon which last
appointed days it was solemnized at Ibid.
Whitehall. Where on the Lib. R. p. 125.
morrow after the Feast, it being considered in a Chapter, that the day of St.
George was near at hand, and for other special reasons, the Sovereign was there
pleased to defer the Celebration of the approaching Feast, unto the Lib. R. p.
125.
25.26. and 27. days of September ensuing: And on the 13. day of the said
September, prorogued the Prorogation unto the Row's Iournal, p. 22.
2.3. and 4. of October next following, to Windesor, where it was accordingly
observed.

Within few Months after, the Sovereign having determined to create the then
Prince (now most happily the present Sovereign) a Knight, and to propose him in
Election, as a Companion of this most Noble Society, did for the more
convenience of his Installation (the Ibid. p. 38.
25. of February, an. 13. Car. 1.) defer the celebration of the Grand Feast
from the 22.23. and 24. days of April then coming on, to the 21.22. and 23.
days of May, when the same was observed with high Solemnity. This being the
third Grand Festival, which had been celebrated personally by the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, within the Revolution of one year, and something more, and
to keep up the honor of Windesor Castle, two of them were solemnized within its
Walls. And before the return of the next Anniversary of St. George, the
Sovereign upon consultation had (in Palmer's Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 2.
February, an. 14. Car. 1.) with diverse of the Knights-Companions, about the
Prorogation of the Feast, which was supposed could not (by reason of his
important occasions to repair into the North) be celebrated at the usual time
in the next ensuing April; thereupon he thought fit to adjourn the same, (which
was done the Ibid. page 3.
26. of February aforesaid) unto the Ibid. page 3.
2.3. and 4. of July next coming ( York being the place the Sovereign thought
most convenient to hold the Feast at) but afterward being in his Camp near
Barwick, and taking into consideration, the impossibility of keeping the Feast
at York upon the before designed days, and conferring with some of the
Knights-Companions, that then attended on his person, he the Ibid. page 7.
22. of June, an. 15. Car. 1. adjourned the same until the Ibid. page 7.
8.9. and 10. of October following to Windesor, at which time it was Page 16.
there celebrated.

After this, the troubles and tempest of War approaching, the Prorogations
became more frequent, and such places appointed to hold the Feast in, as the
Sovereign thought most convenient, or had occasion to reside at. Nevertheless
the adjournments passed always regularly under the Great Seal of the Order, and
the Sovereign's Sign Manual.

SECT. IX. Of Commissions for Prorogation.
WE have not met with any Precedent of Commissions for Prorogation of the Grand
Feast of St. George, more ancient than that of the Append. Number. CLVIII.
11. of December, an. 12. Car. 1. left us by Sir Thomas Row, wherein is notice
taken of all the former adjournments of the Grand Feast, from St. George's day
preceding until that time, with the reasons thereof, and chiefly upon
consideration had of the then spreading Sickness, together with a command to
the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, to attend upon the Sovereign
on the new assigned days, viz. the 17.18. and 19 of April following, for the
celebration of the said Feast.

As to the substance hereof, the succeeding Commissions do very near agree, yet
with some small difference; as first, the Preambles are general and run thus:
Whereas upon special Reasons, and other important Affairs, etc. except only
that Commission issued the 25. of February An. 13. Car. 1.
1637. whose Preamble being fitted to the particular occasion, was this, Row's
Iournal, p. 38.
Whereas we have determined to create the Prince our eldest Son a Knight, and
to propose him in Election, as a Companion of our most Noble Order, for the
more convenience of his Installation, we have thought fit to defer the
celebration of the Feast of St. George, etc.

But in the Commissions of Prorogation of the Grand Feasts, dated the Ibid. p.
16.
19. of April, and the Page 38.
25. of February, an. 19. Car. 1. the place appointed for Celebration is
omitted, which defect we find in the above mentioned Precedent also.
Nevertheless, afterward that material part came to be inserted, and first of
all in that Commission of the 26. of February, an. 14. Car. 1. where the place
(being the City of York) is put into the body of the Commission. And when the
late War drew on, and consequently the Sovereign could not so well ascertain
the place beforehand, because of his continual and uncertain motion, according
as occasion and advantages offered themselves: Then we observe, that the Grand
Feast was appointed to be kept at any such place, as (when the time appointed
by Prorogation was near expired) should seem to the Sovereign most convenient.
But from the body of the Commissions, the nomination of Place, afterward
slided downwards into the close, and showed it self in that part, where the
Injunction was given, for the Knights-Companions and Officers to attend upon
the days before appointed, being expressed either thus, Com. 20. Apr. an 18.
Ca^. 1.
Wheresoever we shall then be, etc. or else thus, 13 Feb. 18.2. Apr. 19. and
20. Ian. 20. Car. 1.
at such Places as we shall timely appoint, etc. which later way of
signification was first used in Commissions issued forth, after the Sovereign
came to setle at Oxford.

Now the most ordinary course, preparatory to the issuing forth such
Commissions of Prorogation, has been by the Sovereign's Declaration in
Chapter, or otherwise the signification of his pleasure, to the Chancellor of
the Order at any other time, who thereupon drew up the Commission, and
presented it to the Sovereign, for his Sign Manual, and then affixed thereunto
the Great Seal of the Order. Nevertheless, where the Chancellor was not at
hand, to receive the commands for adjournment, immediately from the Sovereign,
we find his pleasure in this particular, was then signified to him by some
other hand, with command to summon the Knights-Companions and Officers
accordingly. For so was it done by Sir Row's Iournal, p. 22.
Francis Windebanke, Knight, one of the Principal Secretaries of State, by his
Letters from Oatlands, directed to Sir Thomas Row, dated the 11. of September,
an. 13. Car. 1. for Prorogation of the Grand Feast, from the 25. of September
then near at hand, unto the 2.3. and 4. of October following.

And as all the preceding Adjournments of the Grand Feast, have been either
Decreed in Chapter, or directed immediately from the Sovereign: So have we also
seen a Precedent that has empowered a Lieutenant, to prorogue the same,
nevertheless to the time and place before appointed by the Sovereign, and
mentioned in the Commission of Lieutenancy. And this was a Commission directed
to Charles Earl of Nottingham, an. MS. quart. penes W. le N. Cl.
1. Iac. R. wherein, after the Sovereign had premised the impediments, which
hindered him from his personal observation of the said Feast, upon the prefixed
day then near approaching, he thereby made choice of the said Earl to be his
Lieutenant, and empowered him to assemble in Chapter, upon the Vigil of St.
George, such of the Knights-Companions, as might be conveniently gotten
together, and then and there to intimate unto them the great causes that
withheld him from keeping the Feast at the set time, and by virtue of the said
Commission to defer the same until the 3. of July following. Furthermore
charging and requiring all the Knights-Companions not to fail to be present at
that day, wheresoever the same should happen to be, to perform and celebrate
with him the said Feast, according to the laudable Orders and Institutions of
the Order. And lastly, he required the said Lieutenant to give warning of his
pleasure to all other Knights-Companions, who should not be present at the
Chapter by him assembled.

SECT. X. That the Grand Feast ought to be celebrated once every Year.
AND though Prorogations of the Grand Feast have been occasionally made use of,
upon the several and important reasons above discoursed of, and sometimes a
necessity has fallen out to appoint two, three, or four of them in a year, by
proroguing the Prorogations; yet is no such Adjournment legally to be enlarged
beyond the next St. George's day ensuing, because that every year, that is,
once before the revolution of the year determine (the year in this case entering
upon St. George's day) the Grand Feast ought to be solemnized. For so we see it
was not only ordained at the E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
Institution of the Order, but confirmed by the succeeding H. 5. Stat. Art. 9.
H. 8. Stat. Art. 3.
Statutes. And where our Historians take notice of the Grand Feast, they speak
the same thing, to wit, That it ought Froisard. l. 1. c. 100. and Polid. Virg.
Aug. Hist. lib. 10. p. 378.
annually to be observed; Hence it is frequently called in the Registers, Annua
Festivitas, Solennitas annua, Celebritas annua, Epulum quotannis, Convivium
quotannis, and the like.

Of late times an occasion happened, which br^^ght this Clause of the Statutes
into a solemn debate in Chapter, which for the result thereof became very
remarkable: And the Order thereupon drawn up, being full and positive, not only
as to the occasion, but also as to the circumstances, and determination, may
not unfitly come in here.

Ex ipso Autogr. pen. Iac. Palmer nuper Ca^cell.
At a Chapter held in Whitehall the 26. day of February 1640. Present.
The Sovereign. The Earl of Penbroke and Montgomery. The Earl of Salisbury. The
Earl of Holland. The Earl of Lindesey. The Prince. The Earl of Arundel and
Surrey. The Earl of Dorset. The Earl of Berkshire. The Lord Marquess Hamilton.
The Duke of Lenox.
The Chancellor. Garter.
The Sovereign proposed unto the Knights of the Order, that having prorogued
the Celebration of the Feast of St. George from time to time, unto the first,
second, and third of March, so near unto Lent, that if the Feast were not held
on those days, it could not be held within the year, because the 23. of April
for the next year did fall upon Good Friday, and so consequently must have been
kept in Lent for this Year, or not at all: And considering the great and
important Affairs of the Parliament, he moved this Question, Whether if there
were no Feast kept this year, it would be any blemish unto the Honor of the
Order, or not? And whether he might not dispense with the Statute, and defer it
until the next Year? requiring the Knights and Companions to consult and to
give their opinions therein: The result whereof was, that though they did all
confess an absolute power to dispense in the Sovereign, yet some of the Knights
proposed unto him, that seeing from the Institution until this day, there was
not found any year wherein the Feast was wholly omitted, but that some of his
Ancestors, though engaged in War beyond the Seas, either solemnized the Feast
in their own presence, or by Commission in England, which was averred by the
Chancellor to be both the fundamental Statute and constant practice. They
humbly besought the Sovereign, not to begin to make a breach in that constant
order, which has been so long and uninterruptedly continued; whereupon it was
resolved by general Vote, that the Feast should be celebrated upon those before
appointed days in the last Prorogation.

By which determination it sufficiently appears, of what concernment the then
Sovereign and Knights-Companions, conceived it to the Honor of the Order, and
observation of the Statutes, for the Grand Feast to be celebrated once within
the year. Besides we may observe, that it was not thought expedient to be
dispensed with, albeit the weight of important Affairs were justly alleged to
balance the Law, and ground a further Prorogation. Nay, rather than the
Statutes should suffer violation, the said Feast was Palmer ^ Iourn. p. 29.
accordingly solemnized on the said first, second, and third days of March,
although so straightened in time, that there was not above two days space, to make
preparation and provision for the doing of it.

But within a few years after, the unhappy distractions had prevailed so far,
that the Sovereign was necessitated to assume his power of dispensation in this
particular, and by continued annual Prorogations from the 22.23. and 24. days
of April, an. 18. of his Reign (being then at York) to defer the Solemnity from
year to year; so that during the remainder of his Reign, this Grand Celebration
had never the fortune to be again observed.

And here the glory of this solemn Feast began first to set with us, unto which
succeeded a long night: But blessed be God we have lived to behold it rise
again, and seen the Royal Sovereign and most Illustrious Knights-Companions
fill those too long vacant Stalls, and late languishing Fabric with wonted
luster.

CHAP. XIX. OF Preparations FOR THE Grand Feast OF THE ORDER.
SECT. I. Of Letters giving notice of the Time and Place.
Toward the setting forth and celebration of this Grand Festival, there are
several things to be prepared beforehand, chiefly such as are usual and of
course; nevertheless among these we shall have opportunity, now and then, to
touch upon some things extraordinary, where the occasion has invited the
Sovereign, to give any additional luster to the state and glory of the Feast.

The things therefore to be prepared of course, are (1.) Letters directed to
all the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, resident within the
Kingdom; to give them notice of the time and place, when and where the Feast is
to be celebrated. (2.) Letters of Dispensation to such Knights-Companions as
the Sovereign shall please to excuse from their attendance at the Feast. (3.)
Commissions of Lieutenancy (and sometimes of Assistance) when the Sovereign
cannot personally solemnize the same. (4.) Warrants for the Removal of
Atchievments, if at this time there be any such occasion. (5.) Scutcheons and
Styles to be set upon the back of each Knight-Companion's Stall, if the Feast
be held elsewhere than at W^^desor. (6.) The Chapel to be decently adorned.
(7.) the Great Hall (or (...) place where the Grand Dinner is to be prepared)
to be likewise very no^^^ ^^^nished. And (8.) lastly, Officers to be appointed
(besides those of the Or^^^ and of Arms) who are to give peculiar attendance
upon the Sovereign at (...) Grand Solemnity.

As touching the first of these particulars, the Chancellor of the Order is to
at^^nd the Sovereign, in convenient time before the approach of St. George's
day, to know his pleasure, whether he will hold the Grand Feast on that day* or
otherwise prorogue the Solemnities to some further time, and whether it shall
be celebrated at Windesor, Whitehall, or what other place.

If the Sovereign shall be induced to Prorogue the Feast from St. George's day
to some further time, then is the Chancellor to draw up a Commission to that
purpose, of which we have discourst in the preceding Sect. 9.
Chapter. After this, Letters issued out, anciently under the Sovereign's Sign
Manual, both to his Lieutenant (when he held not the Feast in Person) as also
to each of the Knights-Companions, giving them notice of the time and place;
some of which are placed to the Number. CLIX. and CIX.
Appendix; but of late, the Chancellor has been appointed to dispatch these
Letters of notice in his Number CLXI. and CLXII.
own name.

But whether the Feast be held upon the day of St. George, or on any other day
by Prorogation, the Sovereign's pleasure was usually known so long before the
appointed time, that these circular Letters sent from the Chancellor, issued
out, sometimes Ex Collect. W. le N Cl.
six, Row's Iournal, p. 16.
five, Ib. p. 5 and 20.
four, Ib p. 39.
three, two or Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
one Month at least, before the assigned day. And in cases where Prorogations
have been yet further adjourned, care has been taken to issue out new
Commissions in like convenient time before the old were expired; as may be
observed in the cases of adjournments mentioned in the last Chapter, that so
those Knights-Companions, who are most remote from Court, may have sufficient
time to prepare, either for attendance at the day assigned, or upon just
occasion procure the favor of Letters of Dispensation for absence: And
further, that the absent Knights may thereby take notice of the day set,
because such are obliged to hold the Feast in their own Houses at the same time.

Besides, the Letters directed to the Knights-Companions, the Chancellor is
likewise to write his Letters to each of the Append. Number. CLXIII.
Officers of the Order, to give them the like notice.

SECT. II. of Dispensations for not attending at the Grand Feast.
IT having been complained of, by the Chancellor of the Order, and taken notice
of by the Sovereign, and Knights-Companions, in a Chapter held at the
Celebration of the Grand Feast, at Whitehall the 18. of April, an. 13. Car. 1.
Rowe's Iourn p. 10. ^^de etiam Lib. R. p. 119.
That of late years, diverse Knights-Companions of this most Noble Order, had
neglected both their attendance upon the Sovereign at the Feast of St. George,
or to send under their Seals of Arms, their probable Excuses, and Petitions,
for License and Dispensation, contrary to the most ancient Statutes and their
duty: It was therefore then among many other things Ordered and Decreed, Rowe's
Iourn p. 10. ^^de etiam Lib. R. p. 119.
That from thenceforth every Knight of the Order, should be bound to attend
upon the usual days, or such as should be assigned by Prorogation. But in case
of Sickness, or other important business, by reason whereof they might have
cause to be excused, they should send under their Seals of Arms to the
Chancellor, the reasons of their desire for leave of absence, twenty days at
least before the usual or assigned time, to be presented by him to the
Sovereign; and whosoever should neglect so to do, except in sudden accidents,
should not be dispensed with, but incur the penalty of the Statutes.

And it is evident, that this way of enjoining the Knights-Companions, to send
the cause of that impediment, which should hinder their said attendance, under
their Seals of Arms, has been very ancient; for the Black Book records an
Order in Chapter, held at the Grand Feast, an. 1. H. 6. Lib. N. page 79.
to this very purpose; it further enjoining, that Lib. N. page 79.
when such absent Knights were present at the next Feast, they should be
obliged then to render the reason, why they should not undergo the penalty of
their former absence, since the Statutes enjoin it.

In pursuance of the before mentioned Decree of the 18. of April, Sir Thomas
Row, then Chancellor, added to those his Letters, dated the 18. day of May
1637. and directed to the Knights-Companions under the Seal of the Order (which
signified, that for special reasons and other important Affairs (in a Chapter
held at Whitehall, on the 19. of April in the foresaid year) the Sovereign had
prorogued the Grand Feast, from the 22.23. and 24. days of April, an. 14. Car.
1. to the 25.26. and 27. of September then next ensuing) this following
Postcript.

Row's Iourn. page 20.
According to two Acts made in Chapter, in the presence of the Sovereign, the
18. of April 1637. concerning the neglect of the Knights and Companions of the
most Noble Order of the Garter, in their attendance upon his Majesty at the
Feast of St. George, and a command expressly received, to signify so much to
your Lordship: I have sent to your Lordship, the true Copy of the Sea Chap. 22.
Sect. 4.
Acts themselves; it being resolved in case of omission of your lawful and
timely excuse, under your Seal of Arms, and in occasion of absence, of keeping
the Solemnity in your own house, that no dispensation shall be given, but your
Lordship shall incur the penalties of the ancient Statutes, which are; You
Videsis E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
shall not be admitted to the Chapter, nor to your Seat the next year; but
shall stand before it as do the Choristers: In Procession you shall march
before, and not in your place among the Knights, and shall Offer last; and that
this Penance being done, you shall come before the Seat of the Sovereign, and
ask absolution; but if two years successively your Lordship shall omit your
attendance and timely suit for Dispensation, you shall pay Twenty Marks, and
that sum be doubled for every year of such omission, until you be reconciled,
and pardoned by the Sovereign; whereof I beseech your Lordship to take
knowledge.

It afterward appears, by an Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 61.
Order past in Chapter, of the 9. of October, an. 15. Car. 1. that this early
notice to be given, from such of the Knights-Companions, as upon the causes
before mentioned should be absent, was appointed in favor chiefly of the
Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 61.
Officers of the Sovereign's Household, who (by knowing in due time, who should
be absent and who not) Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 61.
might make timely and certain provision for the said Feast.

Upon notice sent by the Chancellor to the Knights-Companions as aforesaid, if
any of them should happen to be sick, weak, infirm, or have any other lawful
impediment or occasion, which might justly hinder or excuse their repair to the
Court, and attendance at the Feast; they may acquaint the Chancellor therewith;
whose duty it is to represent the same to the Sovereign, and thereupon to
procure his Letters of Dispensation for their absence, if the Sovereign be so
pleased.

Which Letters are to be conveyed by Garter, or carried by whomsoever he shall
appoint; for which there was a Fee by the Mile allowed him, by the following
Order, past at a meeting held by the Knights-Commissioners, for regulating
things relating to the Order, the first of October an. 13. Car. 1.

Row's Iourn. page 37.
Whereas it having anciently been the Office of Garter King of Arms, to
disperse and send Letters for Prorogation, Dispensation, and other Commands of
the Sovereign, unto the Knights absent from the Court, which in many cases must
be chargeable, it was this day Ordered, That if he should send any Act of
favor or Dispensation to any Knight absent from his Majesty's Court, or four
Miles from the City of London; he to whom such Dispensation should be sent,
should pay to his Servant or Messenger, for every days Travel, as much as is
allowed and paid to any other Messenger of his Majesty's House or Chamber.

Variety of occasions and accidents, as grounds to move the Sovereign, and
inducements to obtain his Dispensation, we have seen in several Letters sent to
Sir Tho. Row, when Chancellor, upon the before mentioned Injunction. Decreed
an. 13. Car. 1. and always the causes have been inserted in the Preambles of
the Dispensations, some of which are to be seen in the Numb. CLXIV. CLXV.
CLXVI. and CLXVII.
Appendix.

SECT. III. Of Commissions of Lieutenancy and Assistance.
TOuching the third particular, namely, the preparing Commissions of
Lieutenancy, in such cases where the Sovereign cannot personally celebrate the
Feast; as also Commissions for those, whom he thinks fit to appoint for his
Assistants; we shall transfer the Discourse thereof from hence to that head in
the Sect. 5.
next Chapter, under which we shall speak of the constituting a Lieutenant; and
only note here, that the Chancellor is to draw up these Commissions, and attend
the Sovereign for his hand, and afterward to pass them under the Lib. R. p.
120.
Great Seal of the Order.

SECT. IV. Warrant for the removal of Achievements.
IF there be occasion for the removal of any of the Knights-Companions
Achievements, at the Grand Feast (which has seldom happened, unless an
Installation were at the same time celebrated) then does the Chancellor obtain
the Sovereign's Warrant, directed to Garter, for the doing thereof: Concerning
which (as also the cause and reason of such removal) we have already, and at
large discoursed, among the Chap. II* Sect. 6.
Preparations to be made for the Personal Installation of a Knight-Companion;
that place being most proper, in regard the removal of them does chiefly
concern that Ceremony.

SECT. V. Scutcheons of Arms and Styles.
HEretofore when the Celebrations of St. George's day were kept at any other
place besides Windesor-Castle, it was thought most necessary to provide large
Paper Scutcheons; wherein were marshalled the Arms and Quarterings of the
Sovereign and each Knight-Companion, in Metal and Color, encompassed with a
Garter; and thereon Crowns, Caps, or Coronets peculiar to each Dignity, with
their Styles and Titles fairly printed underneath (but without Crests or
Supporters) to be set on the back side of their Stalls, on the Eve of the
Feast: But the Sovereign's Arms were impaled with those of St. George, over
which an Imperial Crown was placed, and these (in defect of the Plates and
Banners, set over their Stalls in the Choire of St. George's Chapel at
Windesor) did serve for directions to the Knights-Companions, that by the view
of them, they might the more readily and certainly know their proper Stalls.

We have not met with any memorial of this usage, that reaches higher than an.
21. H. 7. when the Sovereign holding the day of St. George at Cambridge, Ex
ipso Autogr*
Kings College Chapel was furnished with Scutcheons of the Knights-Companions
Arms; but to show the use was ancient, there is this note put into the
memorial, [ as was yearly accustomed.] An. 22. H. 8. the Sovereign being at
Windesor on the Eve of St. George, MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 17.] p. 32.
appointed the Service of the Church to be celebrated in his MS. in Offic. Arm.
[H. 17.] p. 32.
Chapel, in the upper Quadrangle of Windesor Castle; and there being present
with him 13 Knights-Companions, MS. in Offic. Arm. [H. 17.] p. 32.
each of them had set over their heads a Scutcheon of their Arms.

This manner of adorning the Stalls was afterward solemnly established, and
enlarged to absent Knights, by an Order of Chapter held at Greenewich, an. Lib.
N. p. 302.
3. E. 6. wherein by the Sovereign and Knights-Companions it was agreed, Lib.
N. p. 302.
That from thenceforth, every Stall upon St. George's Eve, should have an
Escotcheon of the Arms of them which were absent, as well as those that were
present, at their several costs and charges.

But this cannot be understood of the Stalls situate in the Chapel of St.
George at Windesor; for besides, that we have met with no ancient account of
any such custom in that place, we find a memorial rather implying the contrary,
when Queen Elizabeth, in the 6. year of her Reign, held the Feast of St. George
upon its proper day at Windesor Castle; namely, MS. fol penes W. D. N. f. 14.
That there was no Scutcheons of the Knights-Companions Arms set up there, but
only the Plates: And without all doubt, had it been the usage to fix Scutcheons
in the Choire of that Chapel, as at other places, they would not at that time
especially have been omitted, because then the Sovereign appeared upon an
extraordinary occasion, and where many things were added to heighten the glory
of that Grand Feast, by reason the Ib. f. 15. b.
Peace between England and France was to be proclaimed at this Festival, in the
presence of the French Ambassador; and was accordingly done with great
Solemnity on St. George's day in the morning, at the East entrance into the
lower Ward of the Castle, at the top of the Hill toward St. George's Chapel;
and to which place the Sovereign Ib. f. 15. b.
in her whole Habit of the Order (the French Ambassador being near her) with
the five Officers of the Order, and Knights-Companions before her, and before
them the Officers of Arms and Trumpets, proceeded in a stately and well ordered
Cavalcade; and after Clarenceux King of Arms had Ib. f. 15. b.
ended the Proclamation, they continued the Proceeding thence to the Chapel,
in the same state and order.

As to the practice and constant usage of setting up Scutcheons of Arms, since
an. 3. E. 6. and at such time as St. George's day was held elsewhere than at
Windesor, we have seen variety of Testimonies.

The care of ordering and providing of which belonged to Garter, but the
Sovereign of the Order was at the charge (notwithstanding the said Order, an.
3. E. 6.) which heretofore Append. Number. CLXVIII. CLXIX and CLXX.
we see was paid out of the Treasury in the Exchequer; and since the
establishment of 1200. l. per an. (settled by the late Sovereign King Charles
the First, to discharge the ordinary and extraordinary expenses of the Order)
the allowance issued See Sir James Palmer's Accounts.
thence, and was paid by the Chancellor of the Order. But now the charge is
placed upon Garter, he having an allowance therefore included in the
augmentation of his Pension, an. 15. Car. 2.

We find Privy-Seals to have issued as high as the Ex Collect. praef. W. le N.
Cl.
15. of Queen Elizabeth, for the annual allowance of 7 l. Scutcheons, employed
for the use aforesaid, and that the price sometime before, was much about that
rate; for the three and twenty Scutcheons, provided against St. George's Feast,
an. 1 and 2. Ph. and Mar. came to Apend. Numb. CLXVIII.
6 l. 1 s. 8 d. and those five and twenty set up the following year, to Apend.
Numb. CLXVIII.
6 l. 11 s. 8. d. some difference then also being in the work, which inhanced
the price, viz. those provided for Princes at Apend. Numb. CLXVIII.
6 s. 8 d. a piece, and each of the rest at Apend. Numb. CLXVIII.
5. s.

The Sovereign, the Prince of Wales, and Stranger Kings and Princes, have
accustomably had, at these times, Majesty Scutcheons set up over each of their
Stalls, but the rest of the Knights-Companions Lodging Scutcheons only; and we
have seen an account of Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
four Majesty Scutcheons, prepared for every St. George's Feast, from 1613. to
1619. to wit, one for the Sovereign, another for the King of Denmark, a third
for the Prince of Wales, and a fourth for Frederick Count Palatine of the
Rhyne, at 6 s. 8 d. a piece; but so many Knights-Companions as attended the
Sovereign at those Feasts, had each a Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
Lodging Scutcheon at 2 s. 6 d.

From the marshalling of Arms, quartered in the Knights-Companions Scutcheons,
and ordering their Styles (printed always in French) there are several things,
no less useful than worthy observation: for,

First, though the Plates of Arms and Quarterings, fixed in each
Knights-Companions Stall at Windesor, continue there without alteration, or
very seldom changed from that order, wherein they were marshalled at the time
of their Installation; yet these Scutcheons and Styles annually set up, do
admit of frequent alteration, as there is occasion; either by adding more
Quarterings, altering the Styles, or amending any thing that is amiss. For
instance,

Whereas the Duke of Savoy before 5. Eliz. bore MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 9. a.
Gules a Cross Argent, it was then altered into MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 9. a.
5 Coats, that is to say, in the first quarter Westpahli^, Saxe modern, and
Angry, in the second Chablais, in the third Aouste, the fourth as the first,
and over all, in the middle, the foresaid Scutcheon of Savoy.

When the Lord Hunsdon was installed, an. 3. Eliz. he had Ibid. ^. 6. ^.
12 Coats of Arms, thus marshalled in his Plate, 4, 4, and 4, the first Carey,
the second Spencer, the third Somerset, the fourth Bullen, the fifth Ormond,
the sixth Hoo, the seventh Rochford, the eighth Seyntomer, the ninth Malmains,
the tenth Wichingham, the eleventh St. Ledger, and the twelfth Hangford: But an.
7. Eliz. his Scutcheon received an addition of Ib. f. 19. a.
four other Coats, viz. Beauchamp, Warwick, Berkley, and Gerard, and these were
inserted next to Somerset, the third Coat in his said Plate.

But on the contrary, where Ambrose Earl of Warwick had Ib. f. 13. b.
21 Coats put into his Plate, an. 5. Eliz. and they marshalled in this order,
5.5.5. and 6. namely, 1. Sutton. 2. Paganell. 3. Gray of Ruthin. 4. Hastings.
5. Quincy. 6. Malpas. 7. Somery. 8. Valence. 9. Talbott. 10. Warwick. 11.
Beauchamp. 12. Berkley. 13. Lisle. 14. Gerard. 15. Guilford. 16. Houlden. 17.
West. 18. and 19. quarterly de la Ware and Cantilupe. 20. Mortimere of Wigmore.
and 21. Greely: at the Feast of St. George held at Whitehall, an. 9. Eliz. his
Scutcheon contained but Ib. f. 27. a.
16. viz. 4.4.4. and 4. namely, 1. Sutton. 2. Paganell. 3. Somery. 4. Malpas.
5. Gray of Ruthin. 6. Hastings. 7. Valence. 8. Ferrers. 9. Quincy. 10. Chester.
11. Talbot. 12 Beauchamp. 13. Warwick. 14. Berkley. 15. Gerard. and 16. Lisle.
So that here was seven Coats taken out of the former, namely, Guilford, Holden,
West de la Ware and Cantilupe quarterly, Mortimere and Greely, and two added,
viz. Ferrars and Chester.

But the greatest and most frequent variations are in the Styles and Titles of
Honor, set under the Scutcheons, and these relate unto, and are occasioned
principally from their attaining or resigning of Offices or Dignities.

We find that the Style set under the Scutcheon of Ferdinand the Emperor, at
St. George's Feast, an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. was as follows, Autogr. penes
praef. W. le N. Cl.
Du tres-hault tres-excellent and tres-puissant Prince, Ferdinand par la grace
de Dieu Roy des Romans, de Hungary, and Bohemie, Archiduc d' Austrie, Duc de
Bourgoigne, etc. Chevalier du tresnoble Order de la Iarretiere.



But an. 5. Eliz. in the said Emperors Style, the Titles of MS. fol. penes
praef. W. D. N. fol. 9.
King of Hungary and Bohemia were left out, because Maximilian his Son, had a
little before obtained (and at that time enjoyed) both those Kingdoms.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Styles of Philip King of Spain (who while
Queen Mary lived was Co- Sovereign of this most Noble Order) run thus, Autogr.
penes praef W. le N. Cl.
Du tres-hault tres-excellent and tres-puissant Prince, Philip par la grace de
Dieu, Roy d' Espaigne, des Deux Cicels, and Jerusalem, Arch-Duc d' Austriae,
Duc de Bourgoigne, Millan, and Brabant, Comte de Hapsburge, Flanders, and
Tyroll; Chevalier du tres-noble Order de la Iarretiere.



But at the Feasts of St. George, an. 28.29. and 30. Eliz. the Title of
Catholic Prince was also given him, viz. Sir Will. Ne^e^ MS. of (...).
Du tres-hault tres-excellent tres-puissant and Catholic Prince Philip, etc.

And till an. 26. Eliz. we observe the Title Sir Will. Ne^e^ MS. of (...).
des Deux Cicils were continued to him; but Sir Will. Ne^e^ MS. of (...).
an. 28. Eliz. and so forward, the word Deux was omitted, nevertheless Ibid.
an. 36. Eliz. that word is again added; but withal we find this marginal note
entered over against the said Style, Ibid.
This was forbidden to be set up at Greenwich, the 22. of April, an. 1594.

If we proceed with a few instances, relating to Knights-Subjects, we shall
find that among them, there has happened the most frequent alterations, and
almost every year some additions or omissions.

In the Duke of Norfolk's Style, an. 3. Eliz. the MS. fol. penes praef. W. D.
N. f. 2.
Lieutenantship of the North was omitted. In the Earl of Rutlands, at the same
Feast, MS. fol. penes praef. W. D. N. f. 2.
President of the Council in the North, was added. The Marquess of Winchester,
an. ^. Eliz. caused the Title of Ib. fol. 2. b.
B^ron of St. John to be omitted, because his eldest Son, then bore that honor.
In like manner was the Title of Ib. fol. 2. b.
Lord Strange left out of the Earl of Derby's Style, an. 4. Eliz. in regard his
Son was then so called, and a Baron of Parliament. As to these and such like
particulars, a multitude of Examples might be cited, but let these suffice.

We shall close this point, with this further observation; That where a
Stranger-Elect, has received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order (though not
installed he has been allowed the honor, of having a Scutcheon of his Arms set
on the back of that Stall designed for him, on the Eve of St. George, next
after such his Investiture: an instance whereof we have in the French King Ib.
f. 19. a.
Charles the Ninth, an. 7. Eliz. the Lord Hunsdon having took his journey into
France, in May before, with the Habit of the Order, and therewith invested the
said King. But on the contrary it is observed to our hand, that the Emperor
Maximilian, having been Ibid. fol. 26. b.
Elected the 24. of April, an. 8. Eliz. had not any Scutcheon placed in his
Stall the next St. George's Feast; and the reason is there given, Ibid. fol.
26. b.
because he had not as then received the Habit and Ensigns of the Order.

SECT. VI. Of adorning the Chapel.
THE Chapel where the Divine Services are to be celebrated at this Grand
Feast, whether it be that of St. George's at Windesor, or the Sovereign's at
Whitehall, or elsewhere, in what place soever the Sovereign is pleased to keep
the day of St. George, is usually set forth and adorned with peculiar and most
rich Furniture; the care and oversight whereof at Windesor, is committed to the
Dean of the College, but at other places, to the Dean of the Chapel at
Whitehall.

The Altar, as the principal place in the House of God, has been thought
worthy (in all times and Churches, where decency and reverence have been
retained) of the richest and most costly furniture; and in particular, this in
St. George's Chapel at Windesor, from time to time, by the addition of pious
Benefactors has been adorned with Vessels, sumptuous both for materials and
workmanship: How plentifully it was stored an. 8. R. 2. (which was within 36
years after the Institution of this most Noble Order) with Plate, Jewels, and
other Church Ornaments, is evident from an Inventory, of all the rich Furniture
of the Chapel, then taken by Walter Almaly, the second Custos (or Dean) there.

But a great part of these, and other succeeding Contributions toward the
Furniture, both of the high Altar and this sacred Chapel, were in the MS.
penes Peregr. Ho^y de Bisham in Com. Berks at.
2.3. and 5. years of King Edward the Sixth, sold by the mutual consent of the
Dean and Canons, for the sum of MS. penes Peregr. Ho^y de Bisham in Com. Berks
at.
1489 l. 8 s. 0 d. (besides Copes, Vestments, Cloths of Arras, Altar-Cloaths,
Albes, Frontlets, and other Ornaments, which they distributed among themselves)
alleging a necessity so to do, for MS. penes Peregr. Ho^y de Bisham in Com.
Berks at.
defraying the building of some part of the Castle Wall, taking down the high
Altar, paying the Tenths and Subsidies of the inferior Officers of the
College, bringing Water to their Houses, the charges of Visitations, and loss
by the fall of Money: taking themselves only to be owners and disposers
thereof, by virtue of the first Article in the Statutes of Foundation of the
College.

What was left (being but a small portion in comparison of what was there, when
one Ibid.
Mr. Henley took an Inventory of them an. 36. H. 8. appears from an Inventory
taken the Ibid.
16. of July 1552. by Sir Philip Hoby, Sir Maurice Berkl^y, Mr. Tho. Welden,
and Mr. John Norrys, Commissioners empowered by the King to survey the Jewels,
Plate, and Ornaments of all kinds, within the College of Windesor; as also to
take an Ibid.
account from the Dean and Canons of what things had been sold, alienated,
distributed, or made away since their first coming to the said College.

We find very little of Plate or other Ornaments, since this time, bestowed
upon this Chapel, until King James of blessed memory became Sovereign of this
most Noble Order. But he taking into his pious thoughts the nakedness of this
Altar, and considering how decently sacred Vtensils would become the Service of
God, made some convenient provision for the adorning thereof, which at length
was best resolved on and effected, by the free Contributions of the
Knights-Companions themselves.

For at a Chapter held at Whitehall, April 23. an. 16. Iac. R. it was Decreed,
That every of the Knights-Companions (as well those already of the Order, as
such afterward admitted into it) should give to the use of the Altar, in the
said Chapel, a Lib. C. p. 191.
piece of Plate, of the value of 20 l. at the least. And it is evident that
whatever had been done in former times, for the greater Ornament of this
Chapel, was by a general contribution, of the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, whose Benevolences were always correspondent to their
several Degrees: For thus were the contributions ordered, for the erection of
the Lib. N. p. 118.
Statue of Saint George on Horseback, an. 36. H. 6. and for finishing the Ibid.
p. 204.
Rood-loft, and Lanthorn of the Chapel, an. 8. H. 8.

Lib. R. p. 30.
This was again proposed by the late pious Sovereign, at another Chapter held at
Windesor the Ibid. p. 29.
24. of November, an. 1. Car. 1. and agreed unto by all the Knights-Companions
present, the reverend Epi^copus L^ndinensi^ liberrime suscepit se si^niliter
tan^undem da^urum. Ib. p. 30.
Doctor Land, then Bishop of London (who at that Feast officiated in the
absence of the Prelate, and a zealous promoter of all pious designs) freely and
liberally undertaking to bestow a piece of Plate of the like value.

But it seems, notwithstanding all this ready concurrence, the work went on but
slowly; for in a Chapter held at Windesor, the Ibid. p. 41.
24. of September an. 4. Car. 1. the Feast of St. George being then celebrated
there, the want of the designed Plate being signified, it was therein further
Decreed, Lib. R. p. 43.
That all the pr^sent installed Knights, should take care before the following
Feast of St. George (and all other within a year after their Election) to send
every one of them 20. l. at the least to the Dean of Windesor, to be bestowed
in Plate, for the use of the Altar. And the Lib. R. p. 43.
Sovereign being humbly entreated by the Knights-Companions, that He himself
(in way of example to all) would bestow some gift, most readily and willingly
condescended.

This pious Decree was again confirmed at a Chapter held at Windesor the Lib.
R. p. 63.
6 of October an. 6. Car. 1. and Numb. CLXXI.
Commissionary Letters therewithal ordered to issue out forthwith, under the
Seal of the Order; whereby the Dean and Canons of Windesor were not only
empowered, but commanded, either by themselves or their Deputy, to demand and
receive the sums of Money, so decreed to be paid to the use aforesaid; not only
from the Knights-Companions then living, but also from those who died after the
24. of November an. Dom. 1625.

And that we may observe, the zeal toward this religious design slept not with
the Sovereign, on the Lib. R. p. 70*
13. of February following, he gave the said Dean order to demand Ib. p. 72.
100 l. out of the Privy-Purse, as his own free gift; which was paid the next
morning, being Ib. p. 72.
an eternal monument of his Kingly piety and devotion.

And that it might appear what was given, by whom, and how bestowed, toward
the furnishing of the Altar, it was also appointed, that a short Ib. p. 72.
Historical account of these sacred Offerings and Gifts, should be made and
preserved in the Chapter House at Windesor.

The Book designed for this purpose is now with his Majesty, being a large thin
Folio in Vellom, wearing this Title.

S Y N TH E O
Memoriae Veritati, Virtuti Sacrum,
Altar liberae Capellae Regiae Sancti Georgii Martyris, infra Castrum Regale
Windesoriense, C. Wren Decanus Windesoriensis, An. Dom. 1637.

It contains the Orders made in Chapter the 24. of November 1625. the 24. of
September. 1628. the 6. of October. 1630. with the Commissionary Letters which
thereupon issued, and the Order of the 13. of February following, together with
the Names of all the Knights-Companions present at each Chapter.

After these follow the Arms and Quar^erings, very fairly limn'd in Metal and
Color, within a Garter, over each a Coronet suitable to the dignity of the
person, and underneath are entered the Styles of all the Knights-Companions, who
were of the Order an. 1625. or admitted after, to the time of making the Book;
as also the sum which each Knight paid to the Register. But as to any account
of Plate provided upon the Sovereign and succeeding Knights-Companions
Contributions, there is none, though probably intended, to fill up the many
blank leaves that followed.

The Ib. p. 68*
first that presented his Offering; was Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey, Earl
Marshal of England, therein giving the rest a noble example, by a delivery of
his 20 l. into the hands of the Dean of Windesor: So that a competent sum being
afterward collected, and the money decreed by King Henry the Eighth to An. 32.
H. 8. Lib. N. p. 284.
pious uses, instead of celebrating the Obits of deceased Knights Ex Collect.
D. Chr. Wren. nuper Ordinis Regist.
added thereunto by Order of Chapter, all was wholly employed toward Plate for
the foresaid Altar.

To hasten the payment of these Contributions, the Dean and Canons deputed
William Ryley, then Blue Mantle Pursuivant, afterward Lancaster Herald at Arms,
to collect the Moneys to be raised, both upon the Order of the 6. of October
an. 6. Car. 1. and also upon the Obits; and for his pains therein he was
allowed See Sir James Palmer's accounts for Obit Money
2 s. in the Pound.

But notwithstanding all his diligence and solicitation, it appeared to the
Chapter held at Windesor, the Lib. R. p. 86.
6. of November an. 9. Car. 1. that there were several of the
Knights-Companions; and the Executors of others yet in arrear, and to the end
the same might be speedily collected, there was set (in the said Chapter) a
penalty in the nature of a nomine poenae, of Lib. R. p. 86.
twenty shillings a Month, to be levied upon those, who should longer delay the
payment thereof.

And now at length (a considerable sum having been collected) the work began to
be set on foot, and the Workman made choice of, was one Christian Van Vianan of
Vtrect, a man excellently skilled in chasing of Plate: and to give him due
praise in this undertaking, he discovered a rare ingenuity and happy fancy, as
the skilful did judge while the Plate was in being, and the designs of each
piece yet to be seen (among the present Sovereign's rare collection of Draughts
and Sketches) can sufficiently manifest.

The agreement with him, made by the forementioned R^w's Iourn. p. 21.
Earl Marshal, Sir Francis Windebanke, and Sir Francis Crane, then Chancellor
of this most Noble Order, was at 12. s. the Ounce: Whereupon (24. Apr. an. 10.
Car. 1.) the Sovereign gave command under the Signet of the Order, to pay unto
him Lib. R. p. 97.
600 l. by way of impress, toward making the Plate, after the receipt of
which, he forthwith disposed himself to the work.

And before the Month of June 1637, he had finished and made ready for the use
of the Altar, nine pieces of Plate, which the Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac.
P^^mer Cancel. vide porro Row's I^urn. p. 21.
3. of July following, were delivered into the Chapter House at Windesor, Sir
Thomas Row then Chancellor, Doctor Stokes Lieutenant for the Dean, Doctor
Some, Doctor Elly, and Doctor Collens then Canons of the said College, being
present; the particulars whereof with their weight here follows.

ounce. d. weight Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. P^^^mer Cancel. vide porro
Row's I^urn. p. 21.
Two little Candlesticks, chased and gilt, for Wax Candles 92 06 Two Chalices,
with four Patens -- 113 1 Two great Candlesticks neat, for Tapers -- 553 15
These thr^^ Bas^n^ conta^^ed the whole History of Christ, in chased work.
Two little Basins -- 251 15 One great Basin -- 210 00 1220 17 l. s. The value
at 12 s. the Ounce came to -- 732 10 Besides nine Cases -- 9 10 742 00 Of which
he received by way of Lib R p. 97.
impress -- 600 00 The rest, being -- 142 00 was paid unto him by Doctor
Stokes, the foresaid 3. of July.

But notwithstanding all the foresaid care taken by the then Sovereign, to
promote the work; and a subsequent Order passed in Chapter the Row's Iourn* p.
13.
18. of April an. 13. Car. 1. commanding the Chancellor to signify the
Sovereign's commands, for due payment of the Obits, and other sums due
according to the Statutes, yet were some of the Knights so visibly backward in
their payments, That, at a Chapter held the Lib. R. p. 133.
14. of June following, when the first parcel of Plate before mentioned was
finished (an account being given by the Chancellor to the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions of Lib. R. p. 133.
784 l. received upon the two Orders aforesaid, and that 774 l. thereof had
been disbursed) there appeared to be Lib. R. p. 133.
389 l. not undemanded, but unpaid; and which the Lib. R. p. 133.
Dean of Windesor could not receive, some of the Knights-Companions Row's
Iourn. p. 27.
deferring, and others refusing, etc. Litera ad Cancel. May 24.1637.
although there had not wanted diligence both in taking several journies, and
giving many sollicitous attendances at London.

This Affair being thus represented to the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
present in Chapter, their names being also read over who were in arrear, it was
thereupon Ordered, Lib. R. p. 133.
That the Chancellor should write in the Sovereign's name a peremptory Letter
to every Knight-Companion, so behind in payment, to command present
satisfaction, and signify in case of omission the Sovereign's displeasure,
which very much hastened the bringing in of the Arrears, a Copy of which Letter
here follows.

My Lord,
I Am commanded to put your Lordship in mind of two Statutes of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, Row's Iourn. p. 31.
whereof you are a Knight and Companion, the first being one of the Foundation,
that every Earl should pay 50 s. to the Treasury in Windesor, for pious uses,
upon the death of any Knight and Brother of the Order; and that the money being
unpaid one whole year, should be increased one third part, as a Fine, or mulct;
the other made in a Chapter the sixteenth year of King James of blessed memory,
and confirmed by three several Acts, of the first, fourth, and sixth years of
his Majesty now happily reigning, That as well all the Knights of the Order
then living, as all that should be chosen and admitted then after, should give
and pa^. 20 l. to the use and ornament of the Altar, and Chapel of Saint
George in Windesor; according to which Constitutions, there having lately been
made diverse pieces of rich Plate, presented, and consecrated in that Chapel,
to the near value of 800 l. the Dean of Windesor, and Register of the Order,
being by Statute Collector of such moneys received and disbursed, did bring in
his full account unto his Majesty, the Sovereign and the Knights of the Order,
at the Solemnity of the Feast of Saint George for this year, held by
prorogation upon the 2.3. and 4. of October; upon the view whereof your
Lordship being found behind, and not having paid the sums expressed in the
enclosed paper, with the Reasons how they did grow due, taken out of his
account in writing, it was resolved in full Chapter, and registered among the
Acts of the Order, that those several sums should be called for, and collected
before the next Feast. In pursuance whereof, I then received command from his
Majesty, with the approbation and consent of all the Knights then assembled, to
signify to your Lordship, under the Signet of the Order the Sovereign Will,
That you make present payment of your arrearages, and to deliver it unto the
bearer hereof, who is appointed Collector for this service; which if your
Lordship shall delay, or refuse to do, being only the observance of the
Statutes, to which you are obliged, both in honor and by your Oath; I have also
express order to return your answer, and to signify to you the displeasure of
his Majesty, of all which respects I am confident your Lordship will be most
tender. And so I humbly take my leave.

Your Lordships in all due observance Tho. Row.
St. Martyns-Lane 9. Nov. 1637.

And yet notwithstanding all these Injunctions, in the List of the
Knights-Companions, who ought to have paid, the Sea Sir James Palmor's account.
Earls of Somerset, Sussex, and Mar, were at last returned insolvent.

All this Plate was Vasa argentea tertium deaurata, Operis vere Dae*dalci.
treble gilt, and thereon were the Scripture Histories rarely well designed and
chased; and especially the great Basin, and the Covers of two Books; hereafter
mentioned; for I find the said Van Vianan See his Accounts.
complaining, that he was a great loser, at the rate agreed upon; so much and
so good work had he bestowed on them above the rest.

Upon the Row's Iourn. p. 22.
22. day of July, after the delivery of this Plate into the Chapterhouse, order
was given by the Sovereign to the Chancellor, to remove and carry the before
recited parcels, to Croyden or Lambeth (wither the Dean of Windesor, or some of
the Prebends should also go) there to be consecrated by his Grace Doctor Land,
the then Archbishop of Canterbury; and from thence, they to see it returned,
and safely delivered into the Treasury of the Dean and Chapter of Windesor. But
they went not thither according to the appointment; for this solemn and sacred
action was deferred till the next Feast of St. George, celebrated at Windesor;
wherein at a Chapter held the 2. of October in the year aforesaid, the said
Plate was ordered to be Ibid. p. 24.
offered the next morning at the Altar, and there to be consecrated to God and
his Service for ever, by the Prelate of the Order.

And because the whole Ceremony was performed with great veneration, and all
due reverence, his late Majesty being a high promoter of Ecclesiastical decency
and holy discipline; we think fit to present it here at large.

On the 3. day of the said Month of October, being the Feast day (held by
Prorogation at Windesor-Castle) in the time of the Row's Iourn. p. 24. vide R.
p. 128.
Second Service, at the Versicle, Let your light so shine before men, etc.
Walter Bishop of Winchester, then Prelate, standing before the middle of the
Altar, read certain select Verses out of the Old Testament, concerning the
dedication of Solomon's Temple, and the Riches thereof, the first of which was
taken from the 35. Chapter of Exodus ver. 4. the second being the 21. vers^ of
the same Chapter; and the third taken out of the second Chapter of St.
Matthew's Gospel verse 11. and afterward fitted himself for the Offering.

At which time, the Sovereign descended from his Throne, as in the manner of
Offering, and thrice bowed down toward the Altar, Ibid.
worshipping and adoring God in the middle of the Choire, and so past to the
Degrees of the Altar; where humbly kneeling, did present and offer to God, the
before mentioned great Basin, devoutly saying, Ibid.
Part of thy bounty to us, O Lord Almighty, I offer to thee and to thy Service.

The Offering was forthwith received by the Prelate, and set upon the Altar;
which done, every one of the Knights-Companions present (after the example of
this holy King) in their due ranks and single, did offer his piece of dedicated
Plate, (...)
with the same words, and in like manner.

And that their ordinary Offering of Gold and Silver might not be interrupted or
omitted; all the Knights-Companions at the time of offering the Plate, (...)
made the same in another Basin, held by one of the Prebends.

Every of these holy Vessels being thus offered, and decently placed upon the
Altar, the Prelate with his hand touched every piece severally, Lib. R. p. 129.
as on God's part receiving them; and after made the following Prayers of
Consecration and Benediction.

O Lord God, Heavenly Father, we thy most humble servants do earnestly entreat
thee, that thou will graciously vouchsafe to accept these sacred Offerings, by
the hands of our most gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles, and the most
honorable Companions, which are here present dedicated to thee. Grant me
beseech thee, and cause, that whatsoever is this day offered unto thee, may be
preserved from all profane use, and may for ever abide consecrated to thy
service, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Let us bless thee our most glorious Lord God, for that it has pleased thee to
put into the heart of our most gracious Lord Charles, and of these Princes, to
dedicate these oblations to thy service. Regard we beseech thee, from the
Highest Heavens, and power out thy blessings upon the head of his most gracious
Majesty: Bless him in his Royal Person, in hi^ most gracious Queen Mary, in the
most illustrious Prince Charles, and in all the rest of the Branches of the
Royal Stock. Bless we pray thee, all those whose donations offered to thee, we
have here this day received: Let thy blessing fall down (as the dew of Heaven)
upon them, and upon their posterities, and upon all things which they have from
thee; and grant that by the holy and debout use of these things, which are here
offered, the glory of thy name may ever he proclaimed, and thy Majesty may by
these our due observances be exalted, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

These sacred Ceremonies being Ib. p. 130.
completed, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions marched to the great Hall to
Dinner.

But to make some further addition to the Glory of this Altar, his Majesty that
now is, at the time of his Installation into this most Noble Order (being the
22. of May 1638. Palmer's Iourn p. 17.
offered two large gilt Water-pots, chaced with Histories also, weighing 387
Ounces 10 penny weight, wrought all by the hand of that ingenious Artist, the
before mentioned Christian Van Vianan, which amounting (at 12 s. the Ounce) to
the sum of 232 l. 10 s. besides 2 l. 16 s. for the Cases, and his journey to
Windesor, in to^^ 235 l. 6 s. Od. was paid by Sir. Tho. Row's Accounts.
Warrant from the Sovereign, dated the 20. of November, 1638.

These sacred Vessels were afterward delivered by Palmer's Iourn. p. 17.
Indenture, one part remaining with the Chancellor, and the other with the Dean
and Chapter of Windesor, to be kept for the service of the Altar.

And yet the bounty of this pious Sovereign, King Charles the Martyr, rested
not here; he thought the Altar was not with all these sufficiently furnished,
and therefore finding, by an Ib. p. 28.
Account rendered by the Chancellor in Chapter, the 23. of May 1638. that there
had been collected (upon the aforementioned Letter of the 9. of November 1637.
sent from the Chancellor) 137 l. 4 s. more, to the end it might be also
employed, in further addition toward this so pious a work, and so religious a
design; Ex Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer
the said Money was by Sir Philip Palmer, then Deputy Chancellor, immediately
given to the said Christian Van Vianan, by way of impress, for the providing of
more Plate for the use also of the said Altar; and the 25. of March following,
a Penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
Warrant issued under the Sovereign's hand, and Signet of the Order, for the
advancing 200 l. more to the said Van Vianan, for finishing this additional
Plate, bespoken by the Sovereign, as aforesaid; which sum was paid unto him,
the Sea Vianans Acquit.
27. of March following.

The Plate made upon the last advance, was two great Candlesticks, weighing
together See Vianans Accounts.
471 Ounces; on the foot of the one, was excellently chaced, the Histories of
Christ's preaching in the Mount; and on the other, those of the lost Groat and
Sheep. Two Covers for Books, both weighing 233 Ounces; the one for a Bible,
contained the Histories of Moses and the Tables, David and the Ark on the one
side, and on the other, Christ's preaching on the Mount, the sending of the Holy
Ghost, and St. Paul falling from his Horse. The ot^^r Cover was for the
Common Prayer; having the Angel of Incense on the one si^^ and the King healing
the Evil, the manner of our Preaching and Christning on the other: and two
great Flaggons, whereon were the Histories of Christ's Agony and Passion,
weighing 268 Ounces; all being Silver gilt.

And now if we sum up the number, weight, and value of all the before mentioned
parcels of Plate, wrought by the said Van Vianan, for the service of the Altar,
we shall find them to be 17. pieces, weighing 3580 Ounces, 7 Penny weight, and
amounting (with some other small Charges) to the sum of 1564 l. 6 s.

These last mentioned Parcels were finished against the Feast of St. George
held at Windesor, the Palm. Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 16.
8.9. and 10. days of October 1639. upon the last day of which Feast, in the
time of the Second Service, the Knights-Companions descended from their Stalls,
and Ibid. p. 63.
Offered the same at the Altar; and thereupon, after the usual manner, and with
the accustomed words, were they consecrated by the Prelate of the Order; and
the Ex. Autogr. penes praef. Iac. Palmer.
19. of November following, delivered to the custody of the Dean and Canons of
Windesor.

And doubtless, this pious King would have bestowed much more in honor of this
sacred place, had not the late unhappy times drawn on; an Age indeed so wicked,
that the most solemn dedication to God, could not protect these holy Vessels
from profane hands; for a Generation rose up, who would have us think, they
did God good service, when they stripped his Church, of all that the piety of our
Ancestors, for his sake, had endowed it with: and among other sacred places,
this Chapel of St. George received not the least share of misfortune.

For on the 23. of October 1642. (Sir John Seyton having that day seized on
Windesor Castle, for the Parliament) one Ex Autog. penes D. Chr. Wren ^^per.
Ord. Regist.
Captain Fog came immediately to the College, and demanded the Keys of the
Treasury; but not finding the three Key-Keepers, he caused a Smith to make
strong Bars of Iron, who with them brake down the stone jaums, forced open two
doors, and Ex Autog. penes D. Chr. Wren ^^per. Ord. Regist.
carried thence all the aforesaid rich chased and other Plate, made sacred and
set apart for the service of God; (except two double gilt Chalices weighing 62
Ounces, and two double gilt Flagons, weighing 98 Ounces one half) an action to
be stigmatized with an indelible Brand!

Ex alio Autogr. penes praef. D. Chr. Wren.
About the end of May following (not long before the Recess of the College)
Colonel Ven, then Governor of Windesor Castle for the Parliament, was instant
with the Dean of Windesor, and the Officers there, that he might see, what
Goods were in the Chapter House and Vestiaries; which having viewed, he within
a few days after demanded all the Keys, and kept them; saying, Ex alio Autogr.
penes praef. D. Chr. Wren.
The Charge of them, as well as of the Castle, lay on him, and he would keep
them. How he afterward disposed of the Ornaments and rich Goods, hitherto
safely deposited there, for holy uses, and service of the Chapel, I cannot
tell; but this I can assure, that the Inventory following, is a perfect
transcript, from the Copy thereof made by the hand of Doctor Chr. Wren, the
late reverend and worthy Dean, out of the College Book, and by him delivered
to me, of all the particulars, Colonel Ven so possessed himself of.

A Memorial of the Goods and Monuments belonging to the King's Majesty's Free
Chapel and Treasury at Windesor.
Imprimis, 6 Long Cushens of Cloth of (wire) Gold, fringed and tasseled
sutably. Item, 2 other long Cushens of Cloth of Gold, interwoven with tufted
Flowers of Crimson Velvet fringed, and tasseled sutably. Item, One other long
Cushen of Cloth of Gold, backed with Blue wrought Velvet, fringed and tasseled,
Gold and Blue. Item, 4 Long Cushens of rich wrought Velvet, Blue, fringed and
tasselled sutably. Item, 8 Cushens of wrought Velvet Azure, upon a yellow
ground bottomed sutably. Item, The Hangings of the head of the Choire, 12 foot
deep, of Crimson Velvet and Gold. Item, The great Bible ruled, covered with
Purple Velvet, with thick Silver bosses double gilt, strung with Blue Ribband,
fringed with Gold. Item, Another large Bible imbossed. Item, 13 Rich Copes,
embroidered and wrought in Gold. Item, 2 Rich Copes of Wire-Gold. Item, A
Pulpet-Cloth and long Cushen of Crimson tusted Velvet, interwoven with Gold.
Item, Another larger Pulpet-Cloth, Crimson Damask, interwoven thick with
Flowers de Lis, Portcullices, Roses, and Crowns of Gold. Item, The Blue Velvet
Robe of Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, embroidered with the Garter, Pearl
and Gold, with the strings and Tassels suitable, Blue and Gold. Item, 4 Other
rich Robes of Purple Velvet, with like Embroideries, Strings, and Tassels.
Item, 2 Large Pieces of Cloth of Gold, never used (designed for State Cloths)
given out of the Wardrobe to the College. Item, A large Carpet of Wire-Gold,
for the Communion Table. Item, A large Cushen of the same suit. Item, The Cloth
of State of rich Baudekin, over the Kings Seat, and at the back. Item, Another
of Crimson and Gold Velvet, checquered. Item, A great Brass pendant
Candlestick, with 12 Branches. Item, One lesser, with 6 Branches. Item, 6 Great
Brass spouts, to quench Fires. Item, 12 Leather-Buckets. Item, The great Brass
Basin, given by the Founder, with a foot to it for Christnings. Item, 2 Fair
standing Brass Candlesticks, double gilt. Item, One Brass Lamp, to hang in the
body of the Church. Item, The great Brass Desk in the middle of the Chapel,
with the Bible in two Volumes, on each side fairly bound and embossed. Item, 13
Seats of the Poor-Knights, lined with Scarlet, etc. Besides all the long
Wainscot Pews moveable, serving at the Sermons and Divinity Lectures, thrice in
the week. Item, 19 Wainscot Seats, with Ballisters, etc.
But no less pious than his Predecessors, has the present Sovereign manifested
himself, who finding (shortly after his happy Restoration) that through the
licentious barbarism of the late times, the sacred Vtensils formerly dedicated
to the use of the Altar, had been sacrilegiously plundered, and being
religiously earnest to set again on foot, so laudable a way of provision, for
supply of all things necessary to its service and ornament, upon the Lib.
Carol. page 32, and 33.
Petition of the Dean and Canons of Windesor, exhibited in Chapter held at
Whitehall the 20. of June, did with the cheerful and ready consent of the
Knights-Companions, revive the foresaid Decrees, for raising the like sums of
money, both from Himself, and the present and future Knights-Companions, which
by virtue of the foresaid Decrees had been formerly collected.

Hereupon, his Lib. Carol. page 32, and 33.
Highness James Duke of York, bestowed a fair piece of Plate of 100 l. value,
and the Lib. Carol. page 32, and 33.
Earl of Southampton gave not only what the Statutes required, but half as much
more, toward the Plate designed to be bought with the rest of the
Knights-Companions Money. And to enable Dr. Brune Ryves the now Dean of
Windesor, to collect and receive, not only from the rest of the present
Knights-Companions, but all other, wit^in one year after their Election, the
sum of 20 l. a piece, and thereof to give an account at the following Chapter,
and so successively of slackness or failer if any should be, the Sovereign in
November following, issued out his Warrant unto him, under the Sign Manual and
the Signet of the Order.

How the money hereby collected was bestowed, as also what other Plate was
added to the Furniture of the said Altar, by some other piously disposed
persons, will appear by the following Inventory, taken by Dr. Brown Chanter,
and Dr. Evans Steward of the College, the 20 of July 1667. and from them
transmitted to my hand.

A pair of plain gift Flaggons, bought with the money collected from the
Knights-Companions, weighing 150 Ounces. A pair of wrought Flaggons, with great
Bellies, having the Figure of St. George on Horseback on their Covers, the rest
all Feather-work, bought with the Knights money, weighing 414 Ounces. One plain
small Basin, wrought and gilt only in the middle of it, weighing 25 Ounces and
one half. A pair of plain gift Chalices and Covers, bought also with the
Knights money, both weighing 163 Ounces and one quarter. A large embost Basin,
with the Figure of Mary Magdalen, washing our Saviors Feet, weighing 198
Ounces. A pair of large Taper Candlesticks embost, with Nozles to them,
weighing 264 Ounces. These Chandlesticks and Basin were obtained of her
Highness Princess Mary about November 1660. by Dr. Brown, but she dying before
the following Christmas, the charge (being 233 l. odd money) lay upon the
College. A pair of large Basins gilt and embossed with the History of Christ,
at his last Supper upon one; and on the other, of Christ blessing the young
Children coming to him, being obtained by Dr. Brown of her Highness the
Duchess of York 1661. both weighing 305 Ounces. A plain gilt Corporas, the
gift of Sir Richard Fanshaw, weighing 24 Ounces. A double gilt Chalice and
Cover, with a broad Foot, having a Cross on the Cover, and another on the foot;
the gift of the Lady Mary Heveningham, weighing 33 Ounces.
We see in the foregoing Inventory, taken 1643. that formerly there was
belonging to the Altar a large Carpet of Wyre-Gold, this we find mentioned in
the Inventories taken the 4. of February, an. 43. Eliz. the 9. of November, an.
17. Iac. R. and the 12. of December 1638, an. 14. Car. 1. and being seized on
by Colonel Ven, as aforesaid, is now supplied in a Covering, given by the
present Sovereign, consisting of seven panes of Cloth of Gold, and purple
Velvet, with a fair broad Gold Fringe toward the Front, and a narrow Gold
Fringe on the two sides. There is now also two Diaper Table-Cloths, Diamond
work, made to lie upon the Altar, and two fine Holland Cloths, with great
Buttons and red Crosses in the middle, to cover the consecrated Elements, in
the time of the Communion.

If we should pass hence to the ancient Ornaments of the Chapel, we shall find
them many and rich, even so early as See the Inventory of ^^em taken by W^lter
Almaly.
an. 8. R. 2. but because their particular mention will better suit with the
larger Discourse, we intend upon the Chapel it self, we shall refer it to that
work, and here remember only these two, namely the Image of our Lady, and
Equestrian Statue of St. George.

There is notice taken of an (MS. vet. penes Sil. Tailor genesis fol. 159.
Image of the blessed Virg^^ Mary, given to this Chapel by King Henry the
Fifth, in the first year of his Reign, which weighed 117 pound Troy weight. He
liking the workmanship, caused (MS. vet. penes Sil. Tailor genesis fol. 159.
John Cause a skilful Dutch Goldsmith, to give some additional ornament
thereto; after which, it then weighed Troy weight 165 pound and one quarter;
and this Image, in the (MS. vet. penes Sil. Tailor genesis fol. 159.
9. year of his Reign, he commanded to be set up in St. George's Chapel, there
to remain for ever.

As to the other, there is an Order of Chapter, an., 36. H. 8. entered in the
Page 118.
Black-Book, by which it appears, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions.
(to increase the honor of their Patron) agreed to raise money and employ it
toward making his Page 118.
Statue sitting on Horseback; the Sovereign's proportion of this contribution
was 5 l. every Duke gave 2 l. an Earl 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. a Baron 1 l. and a
Batchellor Knight 13 s. 4 d. These two being thus mentioned, we need insert no
more here, seeing that Inventory taken an. 8. R. 2. and the others since, will
afford plenty of such like rich and excellent pieces of work, which heretofore
belonged to this sacred place.

The East wall of the Chapel is now adorned with 22 panes of Cloth of Gold and
Purple Damask, the gift of the present Sovereign: But those in the late
Sovereign's Reign were of Crimson Velvet and Gold. In the middle of these
Hangings over the Altar, have been heretofore placed very rich Altar-Cloths,
concerning some of which, we have met with a Memorial, which informs us, that
it pleased the late Sovereign, in a Chapter held at Windesor the Lib. R. p. 88.
6. of November an. 9. Car. 1. to give command, that two little pieces of Arras
Hangings, then hanging over the Altar (in one of which was wrought the Lib. R.
p. 88.
Picture of St. George on Horseback, and on the other, of the Assumption of the
Lib. R. p. 88.
blessed Virgin) should be preserved in such places where the Dean and his
Lieutenant should think be^^ for the use of the said Altar at the Grand Feast,
and other Festivals of the Order: Hereupon they were Lord Chamberlains Book of
Warrants, ab an. 1634. ad an. 1641. p. 56.
fetched from Windesor, to set over the Altar in the Chapel at Whitehall, an.
11. Car. 1. the Feast of St. George being then celebrated there.

There are now two other pieces of Arras, which are appointed to that use; the
one has the Pictures of Christ's and his Disciples at Supper; given by the late
Right Reverend Father in God Bryan Lord Bishop of Winchester, Prelate of the
Order; the other, of Christ and the two Disciples at Emmans, wrought after
Titian's Original, given by the right Honorable, the Lady Mordant, Wife to the
Lord Mordant, late Constable of Windesor.

As to the Sovereign's Royal Stall, it has in all times had over it a rich
Canopy, the back and forepairs adorned with materials of the same suit, with a
long Velvet Cushen before, to lay his Books on, another shorter for his Seat,
and a third to kneel on. The Canopy prepared against the Grand Feast, an. 13.
Car. 2. and which now adorns it, is made of two panes of Purple Velvet, and one
of Cloth of Gold, having a broad Gold Fringe at the bottom, a narrow one at the
top, and an inner Valance of the same, with a Purple Silk Fringe; the back and
fore piece is of three panes also, one of Gold, the other two of Purple Velvet,
with a narrow Gold Fringe about it. The three Cushens are of Purple Velvet,
garnished with Gold Fringe, and Tassels of Silk and Gold.

Each of the Knights-Companions Stalls, are also furnished with the like number
of Cushens.

Lastly, The Pulpit is hung with Crimson Damask, inwrought with small Flowers
of Gold, Portcullices, Flowers de Lis and Roses, all crowned; this Pulpe^-Cloth
was preserved from the ravenous hands of Colonel Ven, and now restored to its
former use.

It may be judged how other of the Sovereign's Chapels, wherein the solemn
Services at the Grand Feast were celebrated, besides this of St. George at
Windesor, have been set forth and adorned, by one or two Examples in that kind;
for MS. in Offic. Arm. M. 17 fol. 3^.
an. 22. H. 8. though the Sovereign held the Feast of St. George at Windesor,
yet on the Evening, he went not to St. George's Chapel, but heard Divine
Service in the Chapel above in the upper Quadrangle (at the West end of St.
George's Hall) which MS. in Offic. Arm. M. 17 fol. 3^.
Chapel was hanged on both sides, a rich Cloth of State set up, and a haut pas
of a foot high for the Sovereign, as also a little foot pace, 13 inches broad,
and 7 inches high for him to kneel at. The MS. in Offic. Arm. M. 17 fol. 3^.
High Altar and that set before the Sovereign, were richly garnished with
Images and other Ornaments of Gold and Silver gilt, etc.

We also find, that at the Feast of St. George held at Whitehall, MS. penes W.
D. N. f. 9. b. vide etiam MS. f. 20.
an. 5. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D. N. f. 9. b. vide etiam MS. f. 20.
Chapel was hung with Cloth of Gold, and the Stalls both before and behind
with Cloth of Tissue, set with Scutcheons at their back. The Sovereign's Royal
Stall was adorned with a Cloth of State, and furnished with Cushens, as were
the Emperor's, the French King's, and the Sovereign's Lieutenant's. But Ibid.
f. 20.
an. 7. Eliz. all the Stalls of the same Choire were hung with Carpets, both
before and behind.

At the Feast held there an. 19. Car. 2. the Chapel was hung with the rich
Hangings of Silk and Gold, wherein the twelve Months were with excellent skill
described. The Altar was furnished with chased gilt Plate, viz. one large B^son
in the middle, and two less on either side, two fair Candlesticks with
unlighted Tape^s, and two large Water-Pots; on the lower rank was set another
Basin, four Flaggons and two Service-Books, covered with like gilt Plate; and
lastly, the Sovereign's Stall had the rich Furniture of Cloth of Gold and
Purple Velvet fetched from Windesor to adorn it.

SECT. VII. The furnishing of St. George's Hall.
THE care of making ready and furnishing St. George's Hall (or other Room,
either there or elsewhere, set apart for the Grand Dinner) is committed partly
to the Gentleman-usher of the Black-Rod, and partly to the Sovereign's Surveyor
General of his Works.

The Surveyor-General, upon directions given him by Warrant from the Lord
Chamberlain of the Household, causes a Floor to be raised at the upper end of
the Hall, whereunto is an ascent of three steps, and thereon he raises a Table
12 Foot long, and 3 foot and a half broad for the Sovereign to dine at. On the
left hand of this Table, is set a Cupboard for Plate, and a side Table for
Glasses, etc. to serve the Sovereign's Table, as occasion shall require. Upon
the uppermost step of the raised Floor, is set a strong Rail with Banisters
cross the Hall, to keep off the Crowd from the Sovereign's Table, that so the
Officers appointed to attend thereat, may with more liberty perform their
several Duties and Services.

On the right hand of the Sovereign's State, and below the Rails, are Tables
placed for the Knights-Companions to dine at, which sometimes has been but MS.
in Offic- Armor [M. 17] f. 28.
one Table, continued to the lower end of the Hall, with a long Form on the
back side; but of late the same space has been taken up, and furnished with
several small Tables; those set up an. 23. Car. 2. were 6 foot long, and 4 and
a half broad, and set at two Foot distance, each from the other. At the Grand
Feast held at Whitehall, Lib. R. p. ^^.
an. 8. Car. 1. the Tables for the Knights^Companions were (like the
Sovereign's) fenced in with Rails; within which the Waiters only being
admitted, the Dishes of Meat and the Banquet, were thereby handsomely freed from
the troublesome (yet usual) crowd and rapine of the people; the like has been
done at all times since, with Bars to open and shut against every Table.

Opposite to these, between the Hall Windows, are set so many side Tables, each
5 foot long, and 2 and a half broad, all raised in with Bars, as are the Tables
provided for the Knights-Companions; so that each of theirs has a side Table,
furnished with Plate, Glasses, Wine, Beer, etc. to serve it.

The Hall being thus far prepared, the Black-Rod receives the Lord
Chamberlain's Warrant, for taking into his Custody such rich and costly
Furniture, both for the Sovereign's State, and hanging the Hall, as is thought
worthy to contribute to the honor of this Festival. The St^te, placed at the
upper end of the Hall before the Sovereign's Table, is usually the richest; the
Hanging of the b^st sort: and such were the four pieces of Arras, wherein were
wrought the History of St. George, bought by Lib. vot. Cot ^. p. in Offic. Mag
Ga^drob. f. ^^. b.
King Henry the Sixth. The Story of Abraham and Lot (most curious for design
and workmanship, most costly for Silk and Gol^) with the rich Lord Chan*
berlayn's R^^ of Warrants from 1634. ^o 1641. p. 16.
State, Chair, Cushens, and Stools belonging to the Queen's PrivyChamber, did
adorn the Presence Chamber at the Feast held at Whitehall, an. 11. Car. 1. And
the same Hanging were made use of in the Banqueting House there, an. 19. Car. 2.

And in case the appearance at Windesor, of the Nobility and great Personages,
with their Trains, be extraordinary, then does the Sovereign, upon such an
occasion, direct his Letters to the Dean and Prebends, desiring them to give
way, that the Black-Rod may survey their Houses, and therein appoint Lodgings
for so many as may be entertained there; and thus was it done, upon the coming
hither of the Emperor Sigismond, Lib. N. Page 57.
an. 7. H. 5: for the Sovereign being desirous that their Servants and
Attendants, as well as others of his own Retinue, might be in all respects
handsomely accommodated, and because the Privilege was granted to the Dean and
Canons, in the Charter of 27. E. 3. That no person, of what state or condition
soever, might upon any color lodge or tarry in their Houses without their
consent; he thereupon wrote his Appendix N. CLXXII.
Letter to them, thereby desiring liberty and allowance, for the Black-Rod to
take up Lodgings in their Houses, in such an extraordinary case; yet withal
signified, it was not his intention, that under color of this they should be
so charged for the future.

In A Book entitled St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamberlayns Office.
May an. 23. Car. 2. a little before the Grand Feast was held at Windesor,
there fell out some dispute between the Gentlemen-ushers daily Waiters, and the
Knight-Harbenger, who should appoint Lodgings in the Dean and Prebends Houses,
for any of the Knights-Companions, or other persons of quality of the Court.
The A Book entitled St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamberlayns Office.
Knight Harbenger, alleged that by his Patent he ought to assign Lodgings for
all persons, that are not lodged in the King's Palace, and that the
Gentlemen-ushers have nothing to do either without the King's House, or with
those who are not the King's Houshold-Servants, as some of the
Knights-Companions are not. But after much discourse on both sides, before the
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, which occasioned a further enquiry into the
matter, the only person for this Affair, appeared to be the A Book entitled
St. Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamberlayns Office.
Gentleman-usher of the Black-Rod, who is an Officer of the Order within the
College, and whose Predecessor carried the before mentioned Letter from King
Henry the Fifth, to the Dean and Canons; besides he is one, whom they have
since willingly admitted of in such occasions, and consequently not been
invaded by a strange Officer, and thereupon were the A Book entitled St.
Georg's Feast, in the Lord Chamberlayns Office.
pretensions of the Knight-Harbinger set aside.

SECT. VIII. Officers and Servants appointed to attend at the Grand Feast.
THE Names of those Noblemen, which the Sovereign appoints to the principal
Offices of this Grand Feast, are put into a List, signed by the Lord
Chamberlain of the Household, and delivered to the Black-Rod, who is to give
them notice some convenient time before the Feast begin, that thereupon they
may fit themselves to perform the duty of their several places.

Lord Chamberlains Book of Warrants, from 1634, to 1641. page 256.
A List of those Lords that gave attendance at the Grand-Feast, an. 14. Car. 2.
when the present Sovereign was Installed. A List of those Lords that attended
the Sovereign, at St. George's Feast held at Windesor the 8. of October, an.
15. Car. 1. For the Sword. For the Sword. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Denbigh.
The Great Basin. The Great Basin. Earl of Bedford. Earl of Denbigh. Earl of
Hertford. Earl of Monmouth. Earl of Clare. Lord Edward Howard. Earl of St.
Albons. Lord Herbert of Cardiff. Lord Herbert of Ragland. The Cupbearer. The
Cupbearer. Lord Herbert of Cardiff. Earl of Essex. The Carver. The Carver. Lord
Wharton. Earl of Carlisle. The Sewer. The Sewer. Lord Grandison. Earl of Dover.
The Surnap. The Surnap. Lord Edward Howard. Earl of Elgin. The Ewer. The Ewer.
Lord Slego. Earl of Devonshire. The Train. The Train. Duke of Buckingham. Lord
Russel. Earl of Oxford. Lord Herbert. Lord Buckhurst. Lord Cranborne.

The Gentlemen of the Sovereign's Privy-Chamber, who bear the Canopy, are those
that are at the time of the Feast in waiting; and these that follow performed
that service at the Feast held in October, an. 15. Car. 1.

Ibid. p. 340.
Mr. Gilbert North. Mr. John Carey. Mr. John Frecheville. Captain John
Tyringham. Mr. Edward Tyringham. Sir Peter Kellegrew. Mr. Henry Wentworth. Sir
William Berkeley. Sir Henry Bruce. Sir Richard Young. Sir Robert Wind. Sir
John Weldram.
Besides these, several other of the Sovereign's Officers and Servants have
notice from the Lord Chamberlain, to give their particular attendance at the
Grand Feast, and of what quality they usually are, will appear by the List of
those appointed to attend at Windesor the 29. of May, an. 23. Car. 2.

A Book entitled St. George's Feast in the Lord Chamberlains Office.
Lord Chamberlain, and Servants. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Groom of the Stool.
Gentlemen of the Bedchamber. Bedchamber-men. Privy-Purse. Secretaries of State.
Secretaries of Scotland. Gentlemen-ushers of the Privy-Chamber. 12 Gentlemen of
the Privy-Chamber in waiting 4 Gentlemen-ushers daily Waiters. 2 Carvers. 2
Cupbearers. 2 Sewers. 8 Quarter-Waiters, Gentlemen-ushers. 2 Pages of the
Presence. 2 Chaplains. 2 Esquires of the Body. 2 Physicians. 2 Apothecaries. 2
Chyrurgeons. 4 Sergeants at Arms. Mrs. Sempstress and Landress to his Majesty.
8 Sewers of the Chamber. 4 Grooms of the Chamber. Pages of the Back-Stairs. 14
Lords to attend his Majesty. Captain of the Guards. Officers of the Guard.
Officers of the Robes. Yeomen of the Guard. 2 Grooms of the Privy-Chamber. 3
Masters of the Tents. Groom-Porter. Master of the Ceremonies. Marshal of the
Ceremonies. Aid of the Ceremonies. Removing Wardrobe. Iewel-house. Gentlemen of
the Chapel. Musicians. 5 Messengers. Yeomen of the Bows and Guns. 16
Trumpeters. Captain Cook, and the Children of the Chapel. Serjeant-Trumpeter.
Drum-Major, 4 Drummers and a Fife.
St. Alban.

CHAP. XX. THE ORDER OF THE Ceremonies ON THE Eve OF THE Grand Feast.
SECT. I. Of the beginning of the Grand Feast.
HAving in the precedent Chapter spoken somewhat of the Institution of the
Grand Festival, which the Statutes of this most Noble Order have fixed to the
day of St. George; we come now to treat of its Celebration, with the Ceremonies
performed throughout this great Solemnity, devised to set forth and illustrate
the glory thereof: In the observation of which, both the first Institutor, and
all succeeding Sovereigns have shown the utmost of their provision and care:
well knowing, that what is once slightly observed, will soon fall into
disesteem, if not contempt. And here, what first occurs to our consideration,
are the Day, the Hour, and the Place, when and where the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions are to meet, in order to the beginning of the Feast.

As to the first, although St. George's day (or such other day as the Sovereign
shall please to nominate and appoint, by Prorogation in lieu thereof) be indeed
the principal and Grand day of the Feast, yet does the Feast take commencement
upon the Eve, and determines not until the third day following; and so the
whole Solemnity takes up, inclusively, three days.

And this is clear from several Articles of the Statutes, wherein the course of
the Ceremonies, to be observed at this Grand Solemnity, are set down; whether
performed on the Eve, the Feast Day, or the Morrow after: And these three days
together did the Sovereigns hold the Grand Feast, whether they personally
celebrated the same, or deputed other of the Knights-Companions to that
Employment, the Clause in the Commissions of Deputation, limiting their power,
either in general, during the time of the Feast; or in particular, upon the d^y
of St. George, the day going before, and that following, viz. the last day of
the Feast. In like manner, when in succeeding times, Commissions of Prorogation
of the Grand Feast were made use of, we find the three days continuance of the
^east to be particularly mentioned in the body of those Commissions, namely,
the day wherein (by such appointment) the Feast was to begin, the Grand day it
self, and the day whereon it ended.

The directions given in the Statutes, for the order and course of this
Solemnity, to begin with the Eve, run ^hus, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
Every year, upon St. George's Eve, shall be an assembly or meeting of all the
Knights-Companions of the Order, at Windesor Castle, etc. and the same is
positively enjoined by all other H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 3.
Bodies of the Statutes.

And as the Grand Feast is generally, and for the most part, said to take
commencement, An. 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 22, 25, and 2^. H. 6. and 1. Mar. and
9, 11, 13, 20, 29, 30, 31, 33, and 34. Eliz.
in Vigilia Sancti Georgii, or, as it is otherwise expressed in the An. 23. H 6.
Black Book, in Vigilia future celebritatis, or, An. 14, and 15. Eliz.
Vigiliis Divi Georgii, or, An. 2 and 4* Iac. R.
in Vigilia Festi: So has the time of this preceding day several other
denominations given unto it in the same Register, as An. 17, 18, and 19. Eliz.
Vesperi ante diem Sancti Georgii, An. 43. Eliz.
in Vesperiis Georgianis, An. 42. Eliz. and 3, 14, and 15, Iac. R.
in Vesperiis Festi, An. 38. Eliz.
in Vesperiis Commitionum, and other whiles An. 3, 8, 12, 32. Eliz.
Pridie Divi Georgii, An. 27. H. 6.
Pridie Georgianae Solemnitatis, An 38, and 39. Eliz.
Pridie Festi, An. 6. Eliz.
Pridie feriarum Divi Georgii, and sometimes An. 18, and 20. Iac. R.
Pervigilia, and lastly in plain English, An. 5. E. 6.
St. George's Even. All which signify one and the same thing, and are but
various names given to the Evening of the day foregoing, either that of St.
George, or that whereon the Grand Feast is appointed to be held by Prorogation.

Thus we see, the Founder began his Solemnity upon the Eve of the Feast day;
which doubtless was in conformity to the Custom of the Church, who made the
Vigils and Eves part of the ensuing Festivals, and as Ushers to the Grand
Solemnities. And because the meaning of the word, and first occasion of
observing also the Eves of Solemn Days, or great Feasts, by the Church, may
happily be to many unknown; it will be here proper enough, to give a touch upon
the original of this Custom.

Hospinian handling this particular, in his Book De origin Festorum
Christianorum, draws the antiquity of Vigils out of the Epistle of Plinius
secundus and the authority of Ecclesiastical Writers, from the Apostles times,
and the next succeeding Age; for says he, Cap. 7. fol. 25. b.
In the Apostles days, and sometime after, when the Christians durst not appear
in public, because of the continual snares, Treacheries, and persecution of
Tyrants, and Enemies of their Religion; they were forced to meet in the night
time, and early before day, for the exercise of their devotion. And in the
first Church after the times of the Apostles, when they stood not in fear of
any persecution, they Cap. 7. fol. 25. b.
watched and fasted in their Churches all the week before Easter, or
Passion-week; but especially on the Eve of the Resurrection; whence grew the
Custom, both for Christian men and Women, to Cap. 7. fol. 25. b.
watch and fast on the Eves of great Solemnities, in their Churches; and at the
Sepulchers of Saints and Martyrs.

And Durand gives a reason, why these meetings were called Vigils, Rationale
div. Offic. lib. 6. cap. 7. Nu. 8. Edit. Lugd. 1612.
because anciently in the principal Feasts two Nocturnal Offices were performed
[probably Watching and Praying] for the People which came to the Feasts, watched
all night in the Churches, spending their time in the praises of God.

But as the best things may be abused, even Virtue and Religion it self, so it
happened in this religious duty, as Hospinian thus further relates, Loco supra
citato.
That forasmuch as in process of time, these Nocturnal Watchings occasioned
much wickedness, therefore were the Women forbidden access thereto; Can. 35.
Ellbertine Concilii:.
because under pretense of Prayer, great abuses were oftentimes committed.

Whence it came, that these kinds of Vigils, as Loco supra citato.
Durand affirms, were also at length prohibited; which prohibition received
confirmation from Hospin. de Orig. Fest* Christ. cap. 7. page 26. ^
Pope Innocent the Third, in the year of our Lord 1210. and in the room thereof
Iejunia, or Fasts, were appointed. Hospin. de Orig. Fest* Christ. cap. 7. page
26. ^
Nevertheless those sorts of Fasts still retained the name of Vigils, as most
properly implying the Duty originally enjoined. And Durand further informs us,
that this Institution was also called Dispensatio, Loco sup cit.
because the Fast was put in the place of the Vigil.

And yet to show the antiquity of Vigils, it appears that, before Christianity,
the ancient Greeks and Romans had the same kind of preparations, to some of
their grand or solemn Feasts; and particularly at the Dioscor. lib. 1. cap. 136.
(...), or Feast of Ceres. I. Ionston de Fest. Hebr. and Grec. page 93.
Vratislawe excus. an. 1660.
For, three days before this Feast, the Women were to abstain from all manner
of Venery, to which end they strewed Agnus castus, and such Herbs, under their
Beds, as Loco sup. cit.
Dioscorides, speaking of that Herb, testifies. Not. Hist. lib. 24. cap. 6.
Plin^ also says the same; and much to that purpose, the Scholiast of
Nicander, I. Ionst. loc. sup. citato.
and on the third day they fasted; and this kind of profestum, Prolog. Aulul.
Plautus plainly calls Vigilae where he says, Prolog. Aulul.
Is adolescentis illius est avunculus
Qui illam stupravit noctu Cereris vigiliis.
And this the Uncle is of that young man
Who her by night at Ceres Vigils ravished.


In the Ho^pin. de Orig. Fest. Christ. f. 26. a.
Temples of Isis and Aesculapius, the like nocturnal Vigils were also
celebrated: Analogous to which were those Ho^p. de Festis Iud. and Ethnic. fol.
158. b.
Nocturnal Rites of Cotytto, kept by the Corinthians, mentioned by Suidas,
Hesychius, and Lib. 1. Satyr 2.
Iuvenal. Talia secreta coluerunt Orgia taeda,
Cecropiam soliti Baptae lassare Cotytto.
Sir Rob. Stapleton's Translation.
At Athens such the Baptists Orgies were,
When they their public Torches did advance, And tired out their Cotytto in a
Dance.
Which likewise for the same kind of abuses above mentioned, were condemned by
several, chiefly by Eupolis, an ancient Comoedian in his Baptae, as the
nocturnal of Bacchus by In Bacchi^
Euripides.

(...) To Women's honors dangerous and unsafe.
And for this cause were the Vigils many times Hospin. de Orig. Fest. Christ.
p. 26. a.
prohibited by the wisest of the Ancients, though Heathens, among whom Romulus
was one, who made a Law, that no night Vigils should be kept in any Temple at
Rome. An account of their wicked and beastly Ceremonies used in the Nights, and
why they were likewise afterward banished out of Rome and Italy, may be seen
at large in Lib. 39 sub. finem.
Livy.

But to proceed to the second Point, the Hour; as the Eve was appointed by the
Founder, for the commencement of the Anniversary of this Grand Feast, so to
make the time yet more certain, the Statutes express the exact Hour of meeting,
for beginning the Solemnities, to be at the Hour of Tierce, which in many other
places is called Lib. N. p. 74, 82, 142, and 218. Regr. Chartac. fol. 9. g.
Hora tertiarum. But this seemed not sufficient, to express clear enough, the
meaning of a Law, wherein the punishment for late coming was enjoined, and by
the strength of which, the penalty might be levied; and therefore in a Chapter
held at Windesor, upon the Lib. N. page 142.
10. day of May, an. 17. E. 4. A scruple being raised among the
Knights-Companions then assembled, concerning the Exposition of these words
Lib. N. page 142.
Hora tertiarum, the day before the Feast; whether it were intended at three a
Clock in the Afternoon, or at the Hour of the Church, accustomably used after
Prime, before Noon. Lib. N. page 142.
Because it seemed most agreeable to the Statute, and to the reason of the
Statute, and to the penalty there enjoined that it should be taken for the,
Hour after Prime before Noon; it was determined, that thereforth it should
inviolably be so observed.

The Fol. 46.
Registrum Chartaceum records the same interpretation of the words; and to
let us see that this was immediately put in practice, in it there is entered
down the Names of those Knights-Companions, present in the Chapterhouse with
the Sovereign, both in the Morning and Evening of the said 10. day of May
(being the Eve of the Feast of St. George) that is to say Ibid.
before Noon, Thomas Marquess Dorset, William Earl of Arundel, Henry Earl of
Essex, Anthony Earl Rivers, John Lord Scrope, Thomas Lord Mantravers, John Lord
Dudley, and Sir John Astley; and in the Ibid.
Afternoon, the Prince, George Duke of Clarence, Richard Duke of York, James
Earl Douglas, John Lord Howard, Sir William Parre, Walter Lord Ferrars, and Sir
Thomas Montgomery.

Another instance of which Practice, we again meet with, an. Lib. N. page 166.
3. H. 7. on the Eve of the Grand Feast, held by Prorogation at Windesor; where
the Sovereign (in regard of the arrival of several Ambassadors there, and
treating about the Affairs concerning which they came) Lib. N. page 166.
put off the usual Chapter until Noon. Whence it evidently appears, that the
custom at this time also, was to begin the Solemnity in the Morning, and then
to hold a Chapter as the first thing; which although (for the reasons before
mentioned) the Sovereign though fit to defer until Noon; nevertheless, he
commanded in the mean time, that the Lib. N. page 166.
Earl of Shrewsbury should be installed, which was accordingly performed at the
Mass of the Virgin Mary.

As to the express acception therefore of the Hora tertia, so far as it relates
to the entrance upon our Grand Festival, and how near the same, expounded and
practiced as above, agrees with that hour of Tierce, celebrated by the Church,
and reckoned as one of the Canonical Hours, set apart for Divine Worship; may
best be deduced from what is discoursed at large by Lib. 3. cap. 3, 4, 5. etc.
Durant, de Ritibus Ecclesiae Catholicae, and by Lib. 5. Cap. 2* 3, 4, etc.
Durand in his aforesaid Rationale, speaking both of them concerning the
Canonical hours of the Church, which though agreed on by both to be the same in
effect, are by Durant most positively delivered, to be seven in Number, viz.
Matutinae lauds, or Mattins, the Prima Hora, or Prime, the Hora tertia, the
Hora sexta, the Hora nona, Vespers, and the Completorium, besides the Nocturnum
Officium, the Office for Nights; which is also divided into four Vigils, the
Conticinium, Gallicinium, Intempestum, and Antelucinium; which several hours,
after what manner they divided the day, it is pertinent to our purpose to
enquire, since from thence may be collected, what time of the day was their
hour of Tierce, seeming to be the same (determined by King Edward the Fourth,
as aforesaid) in some respect.

And though these Authors do not very punctually determine the course of these
Hours, yet it may well enough be implied, that since their Mattins was
performed about break of day, and their Prime, by consequence, at 6 a Clock in
the morning, the hour of Tierce was most probably 9 a Clock in the Morning, and
so the rest at 3 hours distance one after the other; and this determination is
clearly confirmed by my late worthy friend Mr. Somner, in his Saxon Dictionary,
from an old Birthfrithus Ramesiensis MS. verbo Kyppiole.
Saxon Author, whose words, he having cited in that Language, thus renders;
Sacram horam diei (veterum) tertiam (nostram) autem Nonam ante meridiem,
Archiepiscopi cum Clero sestiva celebrant bilaritate: The Archbishop with the
Clergy, celebrate with feasting and mirth, the sacred hour of the day, which
among the Ancients was the Third, but with us the Ninth hour, before Noon. This
Hora tertia, or hour of Tierce, was by our Ancestors the English-Saxons, called
(...), as we find in venerable Bedes History of the Church of England, Lib. 4.
c. 22.
(...) i.e. a Tertia Horae quando Missae fieri solebant; and so is it rendered
by the said Mr. Somner, Dict. Sax. Lat. Anglicum^ verbo (...).
(...), Tempus ante meridianum, hora diei veterum tertia, nostra nona, the
Forenoon, the third hour of the day, that is nine of the Clock with us. So in
like manner is it used in an old Manuscript of the holy Festivals of the
Church, composed in meeter about the Reign of King Edward the First, in the
life of St. Brandon.

Penes Sil. Taylour genesis fol. 72.
This Fowls long es her Matyns; well right tho it was time,
And of the Sauter sede verse; and seithe also Prime,
And Undarne seithe, and Midday; and afterward seith non.
And each tide of the day long as cristenemen scholde don.
Of the Third, Sixth, and Ninth Hours, Lib. de Iejun. adversus Phychic. c. 10.
Tertullian takes notice, as the most remarkable in humane Affairs, for the
division of the day, the distinction of business, and more peculiarly to be
solemnized by Prayers and Divine Service; but especially of all the rest the
Durantus de Rit. Eccl. Cathol. page 909.
Hora Tertia, is by pre-eminence called the Golden hour, and in the Canon Law
Canon. fin. distinct. 44. and concilio Mart. Papae, Can. 61. and 65.
Hora sacra, doubtless, as being most peculiarly dedicated to some celebration
of Divine Service.

But notwithstanding the foresaid declared and decreed Exposition made by King
Edward the Fourth, we find it an. II. H. 8. declared to be meant and intended
for the hour of three in the Ab hora primarum Vesperarutn post meridiem. Lib.
N. page 209.
Afternoon; and when King Henry the Eighth came to model the Statutes of the
Order, he in two several Articles, declares and expounds this Hora teria (which
the English Version of those Statutes, renders the Hour of Tierce) to be Lib.
N. page 216. Art. 3.
Hora tertia post meridiem, three a Clock in the Afternoon; and in another
Article of the same Statutes, Ex eod. Lib. p. 218.
Hora tertiarum, id est Hora teria post meridiem; and elsewhere Lib. R. 107.
Hora tertia Vespertina vel Pomeridiana, which Hour as it was then settled to be
the punctual time for the Knights-Companions meeting, to enter upon the
Solemnity of the Feast, so has it ever since continued unaltered, and usually
observed.

Thirdly, the Place of Assembly, which, for the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions has been in such of the Sovereign's Privy Lodgings, both at
Windesor or elsewhere, as he has appointed, and for the most part, either in
the Lib. R. p. 5.94.107. and 117.
Privy, Ib. page 38. Rows Iournal, p. 8. Palmers Iournal pro an. 1639. p. 16.
See his large Iournal, p. 2. and 29.
Withdrawing, or Lib. C. page 194.
Bedchambers. To this appointed Room do the Knights-Companions repair, to give
their attendance on the Sovereign, first having invested themselves in full
Robes, either in their Collect. W. le N. Cl.
own Lodgings, or some other convenient Room at Court, where Lib. R. p. 5.
Garter is to attend them, with notice of the approaching hour.

The Knights-Companions being come to the Sovereign, so also the Officers of
the Order, habited in their Mantles, and bearing in their hands the Symbols of
their several Offices, they wait the Sovereign's being vested in his Robes, and
until he pass into the Rows Iournal, p. 23. Lib. R. page 126. Palmers Iournal
pro anno 1639. page 16. and his large Iournal, p. 36.
Presence Chamber, or Lib. R. p. 5. and 39.
give beginning to the Feast, by opening the Chapter at this their meeting,
before he go thither.

About the same time, the Provincial Kings, Heralds, and Pursuivants, wearing
their Coats of the Sovereign's Arms, so also the Band of Pensioners, armed with
their Pole-Axes, assemble in the Presence Chamber; but the Prebends of the
College, vested in their Taffaty Mantles over their Surplices, and
Alms-Knights in their Mantles and Surcoats, come no nearer than the
Guard-Chamber. Lastly, the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Companions
meet without the Guard-Chamber door, whence spreading themselves down the
Stairs, through the Stone Gallery, into the upper Ward of the Castle, or as far
as their number will reach, all wait the Sovereign's coming forth into the
Presence.

And here we think it needful (once for all) to inform our Reader, in regard
not only the Feast Day of St. George, but the Grand Feast held in honor of the
Order, has been kept in several other places besides Windesor Castle, more
especially Whitehall, St. James's Greenwich, and York; that there are many
Ceremonies and other particulars (hereafter falling under our discourse) which
alter not with the Place, but appertain to the Festival, and are therefore to
be observed every where alike; as for instance, the form of Proceeding, the
manner of holding Chapters, the Ceremony of Offering Gold and Silver, the order
of Electing Knights-Companions, Swearing of Officers, and such like: But others
there are precisely local and particular, as the Prebends and Alms-Knights,
going in the Proceedings, the Offering up of Achievements, etc. to Windesor
only; when therefore we speak of any of the former fort, which properly belong
to the Feast, and not to the Place; it is to be understood, that as heretofore
they have been, so now ought they to be performed in the celebrations thereof,
wheresoever solemnized.

For since the withdrawing of the Grand Feast from Windesor, some of the
Officers of Arms, curious in the observation of these Solemnities, performed in
other places, have afforded us greater plenty of Memorials, relating to the
ceremonious part thereof, than any in former Ages did, while the same was
continued at Windesor, and therefore, when the true place where the instance
lies, shall be also cited by us, we would not have our Reader mistakingly
conclude, that the Precedent urged, does not full enough answer our purpose,
unless it had been also fetched from Windesor. But that in these cases, the
Ceremony or Example in such as is peculiar to the Feast, not the Place, where
it is held; and ought to serve, and be used without alteration at any Place,
where it shall please the Sovereign to keep the Grand Feast. And for those
things appertaining to each other place, where the Feast has been observed,
as well as at Windesor Castle, we shall at all times note them with sufficient
difference of place, as often as we have occasion to draw them into Example.

SECT. II. Of setting the Proceeding in order.
IN setting forth the order of Proceeding to the Chapter House on the Eve of
the Grand Feast, We are to consider the Persons, who constitute and make up the
same, together with the course observed in putting them in their due place and
rank: In order to which, we shall pursue our wonted method, and as a fore-hand
satisfaction, note down and make observation of what materially relates
thereunto, as we first meet with the Persons and Degrees that so they may
afterward become applicable (if need be) when the same thing returns again
into our discourse.

The particulars whereof we shall handle in the order and series as they
proceed, whether it be in Bodies or Single, beginning with those of inferior
rank and so upwards and therein consider, first the Persons, who peculiarly and
more immediately relate to this most Noble Order, and who customarily and of
duty do, and are obliged to attend, to make up the ordinary and constant
Proceedings; and secondly, such who have now and then been occasionally or
accidentally received thereinto ad augendam pompam, or otherwise, in regard
their employments entitle them to a near attandance upon the Sovereign at other
times; both which sorts, we shall (as occasion is offered) again consider,
either as among themselves, or in relation to the other Degrees who go in the
Proceedings, next before or after them. And all this, to the end that the
pretensions to precedence, among and between all Persons and Degrees herein
concerned, may be the better made known and understood, and consequently
without much difficulty be decided.

First then, we think fit for methods sake, to begin with those of the lowest
rank and quality, namely the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Companions;
and thence rise upwards with the next higher Degree, according to the rule and
right of precedence.

We are to consider therefore, that in times past the Knights-Companions
appeared at the Grand Feast, attended with a goodly and numerous Train; but
that having been removed from Windesor to other places, (as has been before
remembered) much of this glory was laid aside: Nevertheless, within a few years
after that King James became Sovereign of this most Noble Order, the luster of
Attendants began to revive; for we find it entered upon the Register, in the
4-year of his Reign, Lib. C. p. 163.
That the ancient Custom, which for some years had been intermitted, wherein,
at the Solemnity of this Feast, all the Knights-Companions were wont to go
attended, each with a large Train; was recalled and brought back again into use.

Which height of gallantry, made splendid in the number of Attendants, and
richness of their Apparel, within ten years after grew up to such excess, or
rather exorbitancy, that it stood in need of a restraint, wherefore The
Sovereign by the unanimous advice of the Knights-Companions, Ordained, Decreed,
and Commanded, Ibid. p. 189.
That every one of the Knights-Companions of the Order, should have to attend
upon his person, at the yearly solemnization of the Feast of the Order, 50
persons, and no more: The reason whereof we find elsewhere noted to be, MS. pen
E. W. G. fol. 153.
for saving of charge, and avoiding of emulation. But in the beginning of his
late Majesty's Reign of ever blessed memory, the gallantry of Attendants, began
again to increase and augment, insomuch that at the Grand Feast held at
Whitehall the 22, 23. and 24. of April an. 8. Car. I. we find it observed, Lib.
R. p. 77.
That the Knights-Companions came forth attended, each with a Train of Servants
very richly clad.

But to return, and enter upon the Proceeding; to the end the Servants and
Attendants of the Knights-Companions may be exactly marshalled, the Usher of
the Hall (whose Collect. W. le N. Cl.
duty it is to rank them) ought to call for a Lift from Garter, of such
Knight-Companions as are to be present at the Grand Feast, noted with their
several places in the Proceeding, for his better directions, in assigning the
Attendants their due places, the order whereof is thus: First, the Ibidem.
junior Knights Attendants, proceed one before another, on the left hand upon
whose right hands the second eldest Knight's Attendants go in equal rank with
them; for this we observe to have been the general rule; where the
Knights-Companions proceed in pairs, their Attendants go together; those
belonging to the senior Knight of the two, on the right hand, and to the junior
upon their left. But the order is otherwise, where any of the
Knights-Companions proceed single and alone (which often falls out, as shall be
noted in its due place) for then the Attendants belonging to that single
Knight, go two and two, on both sides the way, opposite one against another.

But when the Grand Feast is celebrated at Whitehall, there the Ibidem.
Knights-Companions Attendants are marshalled by the said Usher, on both sides
the passage, from the outward door of the Guard-Chamber down into the Hall,
taking up all the room as far as the old Chapel; and because here they do not
proceed in regard of the shortness of the processional way, but only make a
stand for the Proceeding to pass through them, they are ranked in a way
different from that used at Windesor; nevertheless relating more especially to
the order observed by their Masters: which method, in the Sovereign's
Proceeding to the Chapel, at the before mentioned Feast, held at Whitehall an.
8. Car. I. we find thus described, Ibid.
The eldest Knights-Companions Servants, were ranked on the right hand of the
passage, the chiefest of them nearest unto the old Chapel door; and the second
Knight (being Companion to the eldest) his Attendants stood on the left side,
the chiefest of them also next to the said old Chapel door. And in case the
eldest Knights Fellow or Companion be not present in this Proceeding, then the
eldest Knights Servants ought to be placed opposite one against another, upon
each side of the said old Chapel door: The like order is to be taken in
marshalling the Servants of the other Knights of this most Noble Order, whose
Companions are then absent.

Secondly, the order of Proceeding amongst the Alms-Knights (who an. 1. Car. 1.
had MS. pen Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
two Waiters of the Sovereign's Hall, in their-Livery Coats, bearing white Rods
in their hands, to proceed before them) is in general two and two together; the
junior in place foremost on the left hand, and his next senior on his right. And
if sickness, or other lawful impediment, chance to hinder one or more of them,
from going in the Proceeding, his junior is advanced into his place, and
consequently all the other juniors do in like manner alter their places, and
advance, to the end the superior place be still-supplied, according to the
right rule of marshalling the singles that compose a gross Body; but in this
case, if their Number that attend happen to be odd, the Governor of the
Alms-Knights goes last of all, and alone.

Thirdly, the Verger of the College has his place next Collect. W. le N. Cl.
after the Alms-Knights, and immediately before the Prebends of the College;
who being habited in a Gown, bears a Silver Verge, the Ensign of his Office.
Nevertheless, heretofore when the Prehends went not in the Proceeding, on the
Eve of the Grand Feast, the Verger proceeded first of all, MS. pen. W. D. N. f.
15. a.
before the Alms-Knights, for so was it observed on the Eve of St. George at
Windesor, an. Ibid.
6. Eliz. and in this manner we see it expressed, in the Proceeding set forth by
Marcus Gerchard.

Fourthly, under the general Rule, relating to the Alms-Knights, are
comprehended the Prehends of the College, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and
Provincial Kings; insomuch, that where either of the said Kings are absent, the
Ex Collect.. praefat. W. le N. Cl.
senior Herald is advanced, and goes in breast on the left hand of him who is
then present: So also where any of the Heralds are wanting, his next junior
ascends into his place, whereby it sometimes falls out, that the senior
Pursuivant is joined to the left hand of the junior Herald. And if through
these defects and absence, the number of the Officers of Arms be odd, then
(with this difference in the foresaid rule observed among the Alms-Knights) the
youngest Pursuivant goes single by himself.

Touching the right of precedence, between the Officers of Arms and Prebends of
the College, in proceeding before the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, we
find there has been heretofore not only some question started, but the place
contended for; insomuch that at the Installation of the Earls of Shrewsbury and
Cumberland, an. 34. Eliz. the MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 106.
Prebends took place, and upon the 24. of May, an. 39. Eliz. at the
Installation of Thomas Lord Howard of Walden, and others, the Prebends again
endeavored to pass Ex Collect. Rob. C. Cl. fol. 33.
between the Officers of Arms, and Officers of the Orders; but Charles Lord
Howard of Effingham then Lieutenant to the Sovereign, delivered his opinion on
the Ibid. 34. fol.
behalf of the Officers of Arms, against the Prebends.

Yet did not this so settle the order of Precedence, or quiet the Prebends, but
that the contention again broke out, an. 1. Iac. R. at the Installation of the
Earls of Penbroke, Mar, Southampton, and Duke of Lenox which happened on the
Lib. C. page 151
ninth, not MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
second of July, in the foresaid year) even to such a height, that the
Prebends, Pursuivants, and Heralds contended in the Proceeding; but the
controversy was on the next morning composed, by the Lord Admiral (then the
Sovereign's Lieutenant) the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Worcester, and the
order in proceeding thus settled; first, that the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
Alms-Knights should go foremost, the Pursuivants next, then the Prebends, and
then the Heralds and Kings of Arms. And this Order in Proceeding, was
afterward observed on the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
2I. of May an. 4. Iac. R. at the Installation of the Earl of Salisbury, and
Viscount Bindon, as also the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
19. of May an. 6. of the same King, at the Installation of the Earls of
Dunbar, and Montgomery.

Howbeit an. 9. Iac. R. and so afterward, we do not find the Pursuivants
mentioned in the Proceeding by particular name, nor otherwise, than in this
following order, viz. Alms-Knights, Prebends, Heralds, etc. but it may be
presumed that the Pursuivants then joined again in Body with the Heralds,
(though for some years before divided from them, by the interposition of the
Prebends) as well as the Provincial Kings, and all of them under the Title of An.
9. Iac. R.
Heralds, and sometimes 14. and 15. Iac. R.
Officers of Arms.

And though at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation, on Sunday the Lib. C. page
190.
14. of September, in the said 15. year of King James, it is noted, that the
Prince (being then the Sovereign's Lieutenant) proceeded to Morning Service on
the Feast day, with the Lib. C. page 190.
Alms-Knights, Heralds, Prebends, and Officers of the Order before him; from
which manner of expression, it may perchance be supposed, that the Heralds went
at that time next after the Alms-Knights, and before the Prehends nevertheless,
MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 154. b.
elsewhere we find them on the Eve of the foresaid Feast ranked in this
following order.

The Alms-Knights. The Prebends. The Officers of Arms. The Knights of the
Order, etc.
And doubtless, they proceeded in the same order to the Chapel on the next
morning, notwithstanding what is before said to the contrary, those expressions
being interwoven with the general account given of the Ceremonies of the whole
Festival, and more subject to mistake, where the Relation of the Proceeding is
carried on in a continued Discourse, than where ranked (as is before exhibited)
in particular lines, and in the order and form of a Proceeding: Besides, we no
where meet with any Order or Decree, nulling the foresaid determination, made
an. 1. Iac. R. which places the Prebends before the Heralds. Finally, to give
an end to the disputes in this point, we find, that upon the Eve of the Feast,
held at Windesor the 23.24. and 25. of November an. 1. Car. 1. the MS. penes
Edw. Fauconbridge.
Prebends proceeded next before the Pursuivants, and the Pursuivants
immediately before the Heralds and Provincial Kings; that is to say, all the
Officers of Arms (except Garter, whose place is elsewhere) proceeded in one
entire Body together; which order we find to be the same in all Proceedings
after, that we have met with, and was so observed at the Grand Feast held at
Windesor Lib. Carol. page 39.
an. 13. Car. 2. and ever since. But to proceed,

All the before mentioned Attendants wait in their several stations, till the
hour of Tierce, when the Sovereign (having the Knights-Companions and Officers
of the Order before him, and his Train carried up) passes toward the Presence
Chambers; notice of whose coming being given, the Band of Pensioners make the
accustomed Guard and Passage, along the Presence Chamber, the seniors standing
toward the Lobby door; within which Guard, on either side, do the Officers of
Arms place themselves: Upon the same warning, the Yeomen of the Guard clear a
like passage from the Presence Chamber door, along the Guard-Chamber, unto its
outward door, for the Proceeding to pass through.

At the Sovereign's approach, one of the Gentlemen-ushers attending with the
Sword of State (the point resting upon the ground) delivers it to such one of
the Nobility (not being a Knight of the Order) whom the Sovereign, as an
honorary favor, has before nominated, to bear it from thence before him in
all the Proceedings of the Feast; during which action the Knights-Companions
proceed forward, and being entered the Presence Chamber, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
flank on each side the State, with some small distance between them, and there
make a stand. The Sovereign being also entered, passes to the step before the
State (the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Nobleman who bears the Sword, and the five Officers of the Order, retiring a
little on his right hand) and then turning himself toward the
Knights-Companions, stands there a while, until they have made their Sir Tho.
Rows Iourn. page 23. See also Sir James Palmers large Iourn. page 11. and his
Iourn. pro an. 1639. page 16.
Reverences unto him; which being performed, he re-saluteth the
Knights-Companions by Sir Tho. Rows Iourn. page 23. See also Sir James Palmers
large Iourn. page 11. and his Iourn. pro an. 1639. page 16.
putting off his Cap. This done, the Sovereign puts his Cap on again,
whereupon every of the Knights-Companions put on theirs, and immediately rank
themselves, according to their due place, on both sides the State.

For the right understanding whereof, we are in the fifth place to note, that
the order and method wherein the Knights-Companions are ranked (if they be all
present) is two and two together, the Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
junior foremost on the left hand, for that is his place in all Proceedings. But
where any of them be absent, the Rule is different from that appropriate to the
before mentioned Degrees; for although it be recorded, that upon the Eve of the
Grand Feast held at Windesor, an. 7. H. 5. The Knights-Companions, Lib. N. p.
58.
went together in order into the Chapter House and Choire. Yet this being
expressed but in general terms, how it ought to be understood, will more fully
appear, from the particular directions given for the order of the
Knights-Companions proceedings in King Henry the Eighth's Statutes; where the
Art. 2.
Law directs each Knight-Companion to proceed alone, at such time as his Fellow
(who possesses the Stall opposite unto him) is absent; but the order of such
Proceeding will by a Scheme be made more evident.

The Proceeding of the Knights-Companions, present on the Eve of St. George, to
the Closet at Whitehall, an. 3. Eliz.
MS. fol. pen. praesat. W.D.N.
The Lord Hunsdon. The Lord Robert Dudley. The Lord Loughborow. Void. The
Viscount Mountague. The Earl of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Sussex. Void. The
Marquess of Northampton. The Lord Clynton. Void. The Lord Howard of Effingham.
The Earl of Westmerland. Void. The Duke of Norfolk. The Earl of Penbroke.
In this Proceeding there are four Knights-Companions who proceeded alone,
first the Lord Hunsdon, then being the junior Knight, because the Lord Gray his
Fellow on the right hand, was in this Proceeding absent, and consequently his
Stall became Void. Secondly, the Earl of Westmerland, in regard the Earl of
Rutland, his left hand Companion, was then also warting. Thirdly, the Marquess
of Northampton, whose right hand Fellow, the Lord Pagit, was likewise absent:
and lastly, the Earl of Penbroke, because the Stall opposite unto him was then
void by the death of the Earl of Huntington.

And to avoid all questions and disputes, touching precedence of the
Knights-Companions among themselves, at Feast, Installations, Chapters, or
other occasional meetings, relating to the Affairs of the Order, and to setle
an indisputable rule for them to observe, it was in the 16. year of the said
King Henry the Eighth Decreed, in affirmation and explanation of the foresaid
Article of the Statutes, that Lib. N. p. 318
Each Knight-Companion should take place in Procession, Station, or sitting at
the Table, thenceforward, as he had his Seat or Stall in the Choire, and not
according to the degree of his birth or condition, unless the Sovereign were
pleased that any should be made choice of, according to the Nobility of his
Family, to sit at the end of his own Table, and perform any other thing by the
by. And this is the Law, which settled the precedence among the
Knights-Companions.

Sixthly, the manner of Proceeding among the Officers of the Order, differs
from all before spoken of; for, being five in number, the three inferior
Officers (when they are all present) march in breast, and (of later times) in
this following order: The Register in the middle, Garter on his right hand, and
the Usher of the Black-Rod on his left.

But we find the form and course of Proceeding among these three Officers, has
anciently been observed otherwise, and therein we meet with much diversity, as
for instance; in the Proceeding of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, fairly
limned and inserted in the Black-Book of the Order, at the beginning of the
Acts of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, there Garter is placed in the middle,
having the Register on his right hand, and the Black-Rod on his left, (so also
at the Installation of the Ex lib. vocat* Dalton. page 119. b.
Lord Cromwell, an. 29. H. 8.) Nevertheless, in another Proceeding of the
Sovereign, the Knights-Companions, the Officers of the Order, and the
Alms-Knights, designed and etched by M^rcus Gerch^rd See Chapter 21. Sect. 3. sub.
finem.
hereafter inserted; there the Register is put in the middle, Garter upon his
right hand, and Black-Rod on his left, as is the order at this day. And in
truth, all Relations described in writing, of the manner of Proceeding since
(which has come to our view) are in this point delivered very imperfect and
promiscuous; having neither distinction of the right hand man, or which of the
foresaid three Officers went in the middle, to guide us with any certainty. For
sometimes, when they come to speak of this very point (and here we take in what
we find of proceeding upon other occasions, besides those used at the Grand
Feast, in regard they ought to be alike in all) they thus deliver themselves.
-- Then followed the Usher, Garter, and the Register, as it is set down in the
MS. fol. penes. W. D. N.
2.3.4.5.6. and 7. years of Queen Elizabeth: At other times thus, -- then went
Garter, the Register, and Gentleman-usher, MS. in Offic. Arm. [L. 1. fol. 19.
b.]
an. 31. H. 8. MS. pen G.O.Y. fol. 87.
1. E. 6. and 1. Car. 1. and again thus, -- then the Register, Garter, and
Black-Rod, as in the Collect. A. V. W.
5. and MS pen. praef. G. O. Y. f. 203.
34. of Queen Elizabeth, and the MS. penes E. W. G.
6. and MS. penes E. W. G.
15. of King James: And lastly thus, -- then Garter, Black-Rod, and the
Register, as an. Collect. A. V. W.
16. Eliz. and MS. praef. pen. E. W. G. f. 147.
4. Iac. R. Other Examples there are which may be reduced to one or more of
these heads, or the like uncertain manner of placing these three Officers; but
these are the most obvious, and we need not be more particular. And seeing the
error, or at least inadvertency of the Relators, have left the matter so
confused, we cannot confidently enough say to what method such contrariety in
ranking them heretofore can refer; in regard they agree not in position of
place, nor does that clear enough set forth where, how, or in what particular,
the right appears due to the priority of their several Offices.

After these 3 Officers the two superior proceed together, the Prelate on the
right hand and the Chancellor on the left; yet an. 11. H. 8. we find that
Garter and Black-Rod proceeded MS.
between the Prelate and the Sword, but the very same morning at the Grand
Procession, the Prelate proceeded MS. in Offic. Arm^r. [ M. 1^.] page 26. b.
next before the Sovereign, affirming that was his room and place, and the
other Officers of the Order went before him.

After the Officers of the Order follows the Sword, which is carried
immediately before the Sovereign. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
it was born on the Eves of St. George, solemnized at Whitehall by some of the
Baronage, for instance, an. 3. Eliz. by the MS. penes W. D. N.
Lord Wentworth, an. 5. Eliz. by the MS. penes W. D. N.
Lord Scroop, an. 7. Eliz. by the MS. penes W. D. N.
Lord Shandos, an. 9. by the Lord MS. penes W. D. N.
Cobham, and an. 10. by the Lord Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Herbert. But of later times, the employment has been conferred upon persons
of higher rank, as an. 4. Car. 1. upon the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Dover, an. 8. Car. 1. upon the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Stanford, an. 9. Car. 1. upon the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Danby, and an. 13. Car. 2. upon the Lord Viscount Mordant, then Constable of
the Castle of Windesor.

We are now arrived at the Sovereign's place in the Proceeding, E. 3. Stat.
Art. 3.
Et notandum quod superior Ordinis tempore Processionis in dicta Capella
transibit retro totam sociorum Comitivam; which though the Statute mentions
here to be performed at the Grand Procession, yet does it refer to all those
times the Sovereign shall proceed to or from, no less than within the Chapel.
And indeed this is the chief place in all Proceedings, Lib. N. p. 57. and lib.
vocat. Dalton, p. 36.
being retained by King Henry the Fifth, as Sovereign of the Order, when
Sigismond the Emperor was in person with him at the celebration of the Feast of
St. George at Windesor, an. 4. H. 5. In ancient time, the Sovereign (if he were
at Windesor to celebrate the Grand Feast) proceeded to the Chapel in person,
as well on the Eve as on the Feast Day: But Queen Elizabeth was the first, who
went not to the Chapel on the Eve of the Feast, held in the MS. fol. pen.
praef. W. D. N. f. 15.
6. year of her Reign (though present in Windesor-Castle) but deputed the Earl
of MS. fol. pen praef. W. D. N. f. 15.
Arundel for that purpose; unless we shall here except King Henry the Sixth,
who by Lib. N. p. 111.
reason of sickness on the Eve of the Feast, celebrated an. 32. of his Reign,
was necessitated to make a Deputy in his stead, and thereupon appointed the
Duke of Lib. N. p. 111.
Buckingham, President of that Feast. The aforesaid omission of Queen Elizabeth
at Windesor, and sometimes afterward, when the Grand Feast was observed at
Whitehall, or Greenwich (first occasioned through her indisposition of health)
as in the MS. pen. G. O. ^. page 114.
18. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
25. 29. and 31. years of her Reign, gave afterward the occasion to King
James, who at those three Grand Feasts he celebrated at Windesor, in the 1. 15.
and 21 years of his Reign, went not to the Chapel on the Eve, but deputed for
the first MS. pen. praesat. E. W. G. fol. 151. a.
Charles Earl of Nottingham, at the second the Lib. C. page 189.
Prince, and at the third the Lib. R. p. 5.
Earl of Worcester. The like deputation did his late Majesty of ever blessed
memory, King Charles the First, give unto the Ibid. p. 29.
Earl of Worcester on the 23. of November, being the Eve of the Grand Feast,
held by Prorogation an. primo regni sui, who proceeded to the Chapel in his
stead. But on the Ex. Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
Eve of the Grand Feast, celebrated by Prorogation upon the 23. 24. and 25.
days of September, an. 4. Car. 1. the ancient custom (for many years
intermitted) was restored, and the Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
Sovereign (making no Lieutenant) proceeded to the Chapel, not only on that
Eve, but duly observed the same Ceremony upon all Eves of the Grand Feast
thence forward, in his own person. So did the present Sovereign in all the
Grand Feasts held since his happy return. In those celebrations of the day of
St. George, observed by Queen Elizabeth at Whitehal and Greenwich, before the
9. year of her Reign (wherein the Grand Feast was removed from Windesor) as
also after that year, she went not on the Eves into the Choire to Vespers, but
only to the Closet of the Chapel; whither she proceeded from the Chamber of
Presence, with all usual state, though in her MS. fol. pen. praef. W. D. N.
ordinary Apparel, and without the Robes of the Order, and where the celebrated
the first Chapter, accustomably held on the Eve, and there deputed her
Lieutenant, who supplied her place in the Proceeding thence, and in the Choire,
whilst the A Proceeding of the Sovereign, and Knights Companions, at the Feast
of S. George. designed by Ma^^^^rd and set forth in the 20 year of Queen
Elizabeth by Thomas Dawes sometime Rougecroix Purs^^ (...)
remained in the Closet until Evening Prayers were finished; at which time the
Lieutenant returning to the Closet, the whole Proceeding passed again before
her, unto the Presence Chamber. But throughout King James his Reign, we cannot
collect, that the Sovereign went at all, either to the Closet, or into the
Chapel, upon the Eves of St. George, (when the Feast was celebrated at either
of the foresaid places) but rather held the first Chapter before Vespers, in
some of the Privy-Lodgings, where he constituted his Lieutenant, who
immediately went into the Presence Chamber, and from thence proceeded to the
Chapel, to Evening Prayers.

Before we pass further, it will be necessary to observe, that from the
Presence Chamber, called in the Statutes the E. 3. H. 5. Sta^ Art. 3.
Great Chamber, and elsewhere, the Lib. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 1^] sol. 26. b.
Chamber of Estate, or the Kings Dyning-Chamber, this first Proceeding to the
Chapter House, and all that follow during the Feast begin, and there take
ending.

And now to close up the Ordinary Proceeding, the Band of Pensioners having
stood*in the Presence Chamber, and made a spacious Lane for the Proceeding to
pass through, so soon as the Sovereign and the Attendants upon his Train, are
passed by, they (with the Captain of their Band or his Lieutenant before them)
immediately fall in, two and two, from each side of the way, after the
Proceeding, the seniors first, and so accordingly in order; and follow thence
the Sovereign to the Chapter House door: but at the Feast held Ex Colle^^.
praesat. W. le N. Cl.
an. 8. Car. 1. they went in guard, on Ex Colle^^. prasat. W. le N. Cl.
each side the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, the Lord Goring their
Lieutenant (for the Earl of Sussolk their Captain was absent) going in the head
of them.

Having under these precedent heads spoken as much as we conceive needful, to
usher in the ordinary and usual Proceeding, upon the Eve of the Grand Feast; we
think fit to exhibit a Scheme thereof here.

The Attendants on the Knights-Companions.
Alms-Knights. Verger of the Chapel. Prebends of Windesor. Officers of Arms.
Knights-Companions. Black-Rod. Register. Garter. Chancellor. Prelate. The
Sword.
The Sovereign. Train-bearers. Captain of the Pensioners. Pensioner.
To the foregoing Proceeding, we shall touch upon those persons of quality, who
to increase the pomp and state of it, have occasionally been received
thereinto; as also such, other eminent in place and degree, as (though their
Offices do not particularly relate to this most Noble Order) have nevertheless
been taken into the Proceeding, merely by reason of their requisite attendance
upon the Sovereign, in his Proceedings upon all other occasions.

On St. George's Eve an. 3. Eliz. the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 2.
old Ambassador of Sweden was present, and being accompanied by the Earl of
Hertford, went in the Proceeding to the Closet at Whitehall. He had place
assigned him next after the Train-bearers, and immediately before the Ladies
Attendants upon the Sovereign; and the next morning, when the Sovereign
proceeded to the Chapel, the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 2.
new Ambassador of Sweden went in the same place. So also the French Ambassador
an. 6. Eliz. had place Ibid. fol. 17. ^.
near the Sovereign, at her proceeding to Morning Service on the Feast Day at
Windesor.

As to those admitted upon the account of their Offices, we observed Henry Earl
of St. Albans, the present Lord Chamberlain of the Household (being not hitherto
a Knight of the Order) was allowed place on the right hand of the Sovereign,
somewhat behind, in the Proceeding to the Chapel, at the Grand Feast an. 23.
Car. 2. and the Vice-Chamberlain on his left hand.

The Vice-Chamberlain (who in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign was
taken in to assist at the bearing up the Sovereign's Train) went on the
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
left hand the Sword of State, on the Eves of St. George at Whitehall, an.
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
3. and Collect. W. le N. Cl.
8. Car. 1. and 19. Car. 2.

The Dean of the Sovereign's Chapel at Whitehall, attends the Sovereign in the
Proceedings thither, and the place he goes in is a Collect W. le N. Cl.
little behind the Sovereign toward his left hand. Next the Dean goes the
Collect W. le N. Cl.
Clerk of the Closet; and then the Collect W. le N. Cl.
Master of the Robes; so also of late one of the Masters of Requests, and then
the Collect W. le N. Cl.
Gentleman of the Robes.

SECT. III. Of Proceeding to the Chapter House.
HAving treated at large under the precedent head, concerning the due rank and
place of all those persons, that ordinarily or occasionally have gone in the
Proceeding; wherein all saving the Sovereign and Knights-Companions pass
bareheaded, we now pass to the Place whither the Proceeding is directed.

The first solemn action, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions are obliged
to perform, at the entrance upon the Grand Feast, is to celebrate a Chapter;
and therefore it has been most usual for them, to proceed from the
Presence Chamber, Lib. R. p. 23, and 126. Rows Iourna^ p. 23. See also Palmers
Iourn. pro an. 1639. page 16.
Every one in their due place and order; first to the Chapter House, to consult
of things of course, and next into the Choire, to hear Divine Service. And
though it be not positively set down in the Statutes, which of these two shall
precede, yet that the Chapter ought to be held before the first Vespers, is
naturally enough to be deduced out of that branch of the Statutes, where the
penances and penalties to be inflicted on such Knights-Companions, as come late
to the Feast, are laid down. For there we find it provided, E. 3. H. 5. Stat.
Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
of the Knights-Companions appear not on the Eve, precisely at the hour of
Tierce, they shall not be permitted for that time, either to enter into the
Chapter, or to have voice in any thing done therein; and then (the Article
proceeding with other penalties upon other defaults) it immediately follows;
That if any of them come not before the beginning of Vespers, they shall not be
allowed to enter into their Stalls. So that hence it is evident, that the
course and order intended was, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions should
first celebrate a Chapter, therein to dispatch the business of the time; and
after that broke up, then next proceed into the Choire to Vespers. Moreover,
the general practice in all succeeding times (beginning with King Henry the
Fifth's Reign) does most fully demonstrate, that a Chapter was of custom held
before the first Vespers; whereof we shall urge these following Examples in the
point, as being recorded in the Registers of the Order.

When John Duke of Bedford, Deputy to the Sovereign, celebrated the Solemnities
of St. George at Windesor, an. 7. H. 5. he and the Knights-Companions present,
at the designed hour, on the Eve, entered together into the Lib. N. p. 58.
Chapter House and Choire. Again an. 5. E. 4. the Lord Berners, the Sovereign's
Lieutenant, and other Knights-Companions, Ibid. p. 129.
met at Windesor, in an honorable equipage, for the accustomed holding of
Chapters, and the solemn celebration of Divine Service. An 7. Car. 1. Oct. 4.
(after the celebrations of the Grand Feast began to be restored to Windesor) we
find it recorded more fully to our purpose, viz. that Lib. R. p. 74.
before Vespers, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions went first to the
Chapter House; but business being put off till the morrow, they all proceeded
to the Choire. So an. 9. Car. 1. the Sovereign and Knights-Companions are said
Lib. R. p. 84.
first to go to the Chapter House, and by and by it follows, as soon as they
came to the Choire, etc.

Lastly, we find there are recorded by Sir Thomas Wriothesley sometime Garter
King of Arms, in an Pen. G. O. Y.
old Velom Manuscript of his, the Chapters accustomably held, during the
celebration of the Grand Feast, in the following order.

1. Upon the Even of St. George, before Evensong. 2. The next day, either
before Matins or before the Grand Pro^ession. 3. The same day also before
Evensong. 4. And lastly on the next morning before the Mass of Requiem.
At all which times, Chapters have (for the most part since) been held by the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions: and herein the Chancellor of the Order is not
only to know the Sovereign's pleasure, but also whether he will hold any of
them publicly in the Chapter House, or privately in any Room of his
Privy-Lodgings, or in the Closet, before the Proceeding pass to the Chapel.

As this ancient Custom of holding a Chapter on the Eve of the Grand Feast, was
constantly observed, when celebrated without prorogation; so also has a
Chapter been in like manner held before Vespers on the Eve, at such time as the
Feast Day of St. George only has been observed, when (for any cause) the
Anniversary of the Grand Feast received Prorogation; as for instance, an. 1.
Mar. a Chapter was held at the Manor of St. James's, on the Lib. C. page 7.
Vigil of St. George, before the first Vespers; whereunto is fixed this note,
Lib. C. page 7.
Vt moris est; and the Grand Feast for that year received Ibid. page 9.
adjournment, until the coming of Philip then Prince (after King) of Spain. So
an. 8. Eliz. the day of St. George being celebrated at Greenewich, it appears
that a Chapter was holden there Page 50.
on the Eve before Evening-Prayer; and the Grand Feast for that year prorogued
to the first Page 52.
Sunday after Trinity Sunday, to be kept at Windesor.

In like manner, though the celebrations of the Grand Feast were by Queen
Elizabeth removed from Windesor, and observed at other places (as has been
before discoursed) yet this usual Custom of holding a Chapter on the Eve, was
in such cases constantly practiced; after which the Proceeding to Evening
Prayer succeeded, as is manifest by these following Testimonies. An. 29. Eliz.
After a relation entered in the Ibid. page 105.
Blew-Book of the Order, of what had past in Chapter, held on the Eve of the
Feast at Greenwich, it Ibid. page 105.
there follows, that the Sovereign's Lieutenant and Knights-Companions
proceeded to Evening Prayer. So also an. 39. Eliz. Ib. page 133.
on the Eve of the Feast, the Lord Charles Howard, was by the Sovereign (in
Chapter) constituted Lieutenant; which done, they in a solemn manner straight
way went to Prayers. And the Page 136.
next year, when in a Chapter called on the Eve of the Feast at Whitehall,
after the Earl of Page 136.
Shrewsbury had been made Lieutenant for the holding of that Feast, and other
customary things dispatched therein, the Register notes, that Page 136.
Vespers were solemnly celebrated.

And because the Processional-way to the Chapter House, as also to the Chapel,
both public and private, as well at Windesor, as elsewhere, are fit to be
known and remembered; we shall in the next place trace them out.

The public Processional-way to the Chapter House at Windesor, The
Processional way.
used time out of mind, led from the Presence Chamber, down through the
Cloister, and the great Gate of the Kings Lodging, into the upper Ward of the
Castle, thence through the middle Ward, and part of the lower, to and through
the passage, between the East End of the Chapel, and Tomb-house, and thence
into the Chapter House, situate at the North-East Corner of St. George's
Chapel.

But sometimes the Sovereign has thought sit, to wave this public
Processional way, and pass along the private way, which leads from the King's
Privy-Chamber, down the Stairs into the Terrace, viz. through Lib. R. p. 39,
and 61.
that most stately Walk lying on the North side the Castle, and entering again
at a door, heretofore made through a part of the Castle Wall, into one of the
Canons Lodging adjoining to Winchester Tower (now made up) went thence through
the Cloisters, into the Chapter House; nevertheless proceeding in the order
before showed, as it was on the Eve of the Feasts, held in the Collect. W. le
N. Cl.
4. MS.
7. and Ex Collect: praesat.
9. years of King Charles the First.

But when the Grand Feast was (heretofore) celebrated at Whitehall, the Chapter
was usually held in the Sovereign's MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. fol. 7. b. 20, 26,
and 27. b. and intra Collect. W. le N. Cl. de an 2. Eliz. vid. etiam MS. f. pen
G. O. Y. page 1^^.
Closet, built over the entrance into the Chapel; and then the Processional
way thither, lay from the Presence Chamber into the Guard-Chamber, and through
the Gallery, thence into the outward Closet, or Ante-camera, and so to the
Sovereign's Closet.

But the Sovereigns of this most noble Order, or their Lieutenants, have not
always (though generally) proceeded upon the Eve of the Grand Feast, first to
the Chapter House, and thence into the Chapel; but sometimes gone immediately
into the Chapel, to Evening Prayer, without entering the Chapter House at all:
and at these times, the Processional way at Windesor, differed from the former
only in this, that when the Procession arrived near unto the forementioned
passage, at the East end of the Chapel, instead of entering thereat, it went on
to the South door of the Chapel, and thence into the Choire, In like case,
when the Sovereign went not to the great Closet at Whitehall, to hold the usual
Chapter before Vespers, the public processional way then led from the
Presence Chamber into the Guard-Chamber, and so down the great Stairs into the
Hall, thence into the old Chapel, and lastly, in at the door of the new
Chapel. And at Greenwich, from the MS. fol. pen. W. Dugdale Norr.
Presence Chamber down into the Hall, and thence into the Chapel. But these
ways we take to be used at such time only, when the Sovereign has held a
Chapter in some of the Privy Lodgings, before the Proceeding set forward; which
Chapter being ended, there was then no need of going to the Chapter House or
Closet, but immediately into the Choire.

And thus we find it to have been observed at Windesor, upon the Ibid. fol. 15.
a.
22. day of April an. 6. Eliz. where after the Knights-Companions and Officers
of the Order, were assembled in the Queen's Privy-Chamber, a Chapter was there
called, and the Earl of Arundel constituted her Lieutenant for holding the
Feast; at the breaking up whereof, the Proceeding began (the said Lieutenant
supplying the place of the Sovereign) which passed along the public
processional way, directly unto the Ibid. fol. 15. a.
South door of the Chapel, where they entered, and went thence into the Choire,
Ibid. fol. 15. a.
without going to the Chapter House at all.

So was it an. 20. Iac. R. at Whitehall, where the Prince had been constituted
the Sovereign's Lieutenant in Chapter, Lib. R. p. 1.
He and the Knights-Companions proceed to the Chapel to Evening Prayers,
according to the Custom. So also upon the Lib. R. p. 29.
23. of November, an. 1. Car. 1. being the Eve of the Grand Feast, celebrated
at Windesor by Prorogation, before the Proceeding began, a Chapter was held,
wherein the Earl of Worcester was Lib. R. p. 29.
constituted Lieutenant, and the Sovereign dispensed with the nonappearance of
the absent Knights-Companions; after which, the said Lieutenant, and the rest
of the Knights-Companions, together with all the Officers of the Order,
proceeded from the Presence Chamber, immediately into the Lib. R. p. 29.
Chapel, to hear Divine Service.

In like manner on the Lib. R. page 38.
23. day of September (the Eve of the Grand Feast) an. 4. Car. 1. a Chapter was
called Lib. R. page 38.
in the Sovereign's Bedchamber at Windesor, where the new Officers were sworn;
and when that was ended, the Proceeding began to the Lib. R. p. 39. vide etiam
Collect. W. le N. Cl. and Autogr. pen. Edw. Fauconbridge.
Chapel, and so into the Choire.

And lastly, 17. Apr. an. 13. Car. 1. at the Hour of Palmers Iourn. p. 8.
Tierce in the Afternon, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions opened the
Chapter in the Lib. R. p. 117.
Privy-Chamber, and thence proceeded to the Chapel; this day being the Eve of
the Feast, held by Prorogation for the 12. year of his Reign.

And although upon the Eve of the Grand-Feast an. Lib. R. p. 5.
21. Iac. R. after the Sovereign had held a Chapter in the Lib. R. p. 5.
Privy-Chamber at Windesor, and thereat sworn Sir George Moor into the Office
of Chancellor to this most Noble Order; the Sovereign's Lieutenant (the Lib. R.
p. 5.
Earl of Worcester) together with the Knights-Companions, proceeded to the
Chapter House, and there held another Chapter; yet was not this second Chapter
called for Affairs appertaining to the Grand Feast (they being dispatched in
the Privy-Chamber before) but only in reference to the calling in, and
investiture with the Surcoat, of Ibid. p. 6.
James Marquess of Hamilton, who was that evening installed.

We shall close this head, with acquainting our Reader, that though the
Proceedings to the Chapter House or Chapel on the Eve of the Feast, have most
commonly been on foot; nevertheless, now and then, upon an extraordinary
occasion, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions have proceeded on Horseback; as
an. 3. H. 7. the Grand Feast being then held by prorogation at Windesor, on MS.
penes Arth. Came. Anglesey, fol. 167. ^.
Sunday following the Feastday of St. George, at which time several MS. penes
Arth. Came. Anglesey, fol. 167. ^.
Ambassadors being arrived here from Foreign Kings and Princes, they, and many
of the Nobility of this Kingdom, with the King's Council, the two Archbishops,
the Bishops of Lincoln and Exceter, and the Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
repaired also thither.

On the Eve the Sovereign accompanied with the Knights-Companions in their
Mantles, and the Gowns or Surcoats of the Livery of the Ibid.
preceding year, rode from the upper Quadrangle down to the College. The Queen
and the Kings Mother, in like Ibid.
Gowns of that Livery, rode in a Chair covered with a rich Cloth of Gold, drawn
by six Coursers, harnised with the same Cloth of Gold, and 21 Ladies habited in
Crimson Velvet, rode upon white Palfreys, their Sadles of Cloth of Gold, the
Harness Goldsmiths work, with white Roses demy-trapper-wise. Sir Roger Cotton
Master of the Queens Horse, riding upon a Courser trapped with Goldsmiths work,
led her Horse of State in his hand, being furnished with a Saddle of Cloth of
Gold, and thereon three Crowns of Silver gilt, with Fimbres of the same Cloth
hanging down to the Knees on both sides, and harnised with Goldsmiths work
demy-trapper-wise: as soon as they alighted, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions proceeded to the Chapter House, and thence to Evensong;
which ended, they returned in the order they came.

King Henry the Eighth on the 28. of May in the 11. year of his Reign, MS. in
Offic. Arm. [ M. 17.] fol. 26. b.
at a Clock in the Afternoon, with all the Knights-Companions in the Habit of
the Order, proceeded from the Presence Chamber in Windesor Castle, till they
came to the Quadrangle, where they took their Horses, and rode according to
their Stalls, not after their Estates, next before the King; MS.
the reverend Father in God the Bishop of Winchester Prelate of the Order,
wearing on him a Mantle of Morrey, with a Scutcheon of the Arms of St. George
on the left shoulder, following all other the Knights of the Garter, the Sword
was born by the Earl of Westmerland next before the King, and Garter King of
Arms, and Sir William Compton Usher of the Black-Rod, went betwixt the Prelate
and the Sword, and all Gentlemen and Knights, Barons and Earls before the
Knights of the Garter, and thence rode to the Ex Lib. pra^^* M. loco cit.
middle door of the Chapel, and there alighted, and so proceeded without the
Choire unto the Chapter House.

Lastly, The Grand Feast being held at MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 15. a.
Windesor, an. 6. Eliz. and the Earl of Arundel chosen the Sovereign's
Lieutenant, MS. fol. penes W. D. N. f. 15. a.
he and the Knights-Companions proceeded on the Eve on Horseback, from the
Sovereign's Lodgings in the Castle, to the South door of the Chapel, and after
Evening Service returned in the same order.

SECT. IV. Of the opening of the Chapter.
THE Proceeding being arrived at the entrance into the Chapel, first the
Attendants upon the Knights-Companions divide themselves as they enter,
beginning at the outward door, and flank on each side the North Isle of the
Chapel, and so forward toward the West door of the Choire, making a stand
along the Isle for the Alms-Knights, Verger, Prebends, and Officers of Arms to
pass through them, who go on toward the said West door; and when the junior
Knights-Companions are entered into the Chapel, the Proceeding makes a stand,
while all the Knights-Companions following turn aside on the right hand into
the Chapter House, next the Officers of the Order, and lastly the Sovereign;
but the Nobleman that carries the Sword, the Train-bearers, Pensioners, etc.
stay without the Chapter House door in the North Isle, none being admitted in
but the Sovereign, the Knights-Companions, and the Officers of the Order; who
being all entered, the door is shut by the Gentleman-usher of the Black-Rod, and
every person severally takes his due place and station, whereupon the Chapter
immediately opens.

As the Chapter House is a place of public Convention, wherein all the Affairs
of the Order are transacted, having been made the more famous for those many
Laws, Acts, and Decrees of Honor and Nobless, which have received life and
confirmation therein: So does it seem to challenge as great a regard in the
order and method of setting out the Places of those Persons, who not only
assemble to consult, but such as are admitted to give attendance, as does the
Proceeding thither. In what manner and order the Sovereign, Knights-Companions,
and Officers of the Order are ranked at the holding of a Chapter, and during
its continuance, we shall find most fully and particularly described, in the
order observed upon the 28. day of May, an. 11. H. 8. when the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions most solemnly assembled in the Chapter House at Windesor, to
consult upon Reformation and Explanation of the Statutes of the Order.

First, the Sovereign upon his entrance, immediately Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Arm.
page 16.
proceeded to the midst of the North end of the Table (here called the Lib. M.
17. in Offic. Arm. page 16.
Vestments board) whereat his Chair, Cushens, and Cloth of State had been
prepared; next the Knights-Companions, whose Stalls in the Choire were on the
Sovereign's side, took the right hand of the Table, and those of the Prince's
side the left; then the Prelate of the Order came and stood at the corner of
the Table, upon the Sovereign's right hand, the Register and Garter went down
to the lower end, and stood there, whilst the Black-Rod kept the Chapter House
door on the inside.

And albeit the Chancellor of the Order be not here mentioned (as being not
present at that time) yet his place in Chapter is on the Sovereign's left hand
of the Table, at the upper end, in regard the nature of his Employment requires
that he be near the Sovereign.

It has seldom happened, but that upon opening of the Chapter, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, fell immediately upon debates relating to the business of
the time: Nevertheless, upon some peculiar and greater emergencies, all such
Affairs have been adjourned until the following Chapter, as it was an. Lib. R.
p. 73.
7. Car. 1. the Feast for that year having been prorogued unto the Month of
October, and it falling out to be very late, before the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions arrived at the Chapter House; after the Chapter was opened
they proceeded no further, than to Ibid. R. p. 74.
adjourn the discussion of Affairs, relating to the Order, until the next
morning, which otherwise would have put off the celebration of Vespers beyond
the canonical hour.

The like was done upon the Eve of the Grand Feast, an. Palmers large Iourn.
page 12.
14. Car. 1. for after the Sovereign had entered the Chapter House, and was set
down under the State, the Chancellor offering to the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions the business of the time, the Sovereign moved, Palmers large
Iourn. page 12.
in regard it was then late (besides the Ceremonies of the Princes Installation
were to be performed at the ensuing Vespers) that the matters depending should
be Palmers large Iourn. page 12.
adjourned until the next Chapter; which being agreed upon, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions advanced to the Chapel in their accustomed order.

SECT. V. Transactions in the Chapter held before the first Vespers.
BUT now to proceed to the Affairs treated of and transacted in the Chapter,
held before Vespers, on the Eve of the Grand Feast; which being opened as
before is showed, and no adjournment given thereunto: All things are then to be
debated, consulted of, and provided for, which concern the Lib. C. p. 93.
Honor and Dignity of this most Noble Order, and necessary conservation of the
interest thereof; and among these, some particulars are ordinary, and of
course, others extraordinary and occasional.

The matters of course (and indeed the proper business of the time) are first,
swearing and admitting Officers; secondly, debating about the
Knights-Companions then absent, and either dispensing with, or inflicting
penalties upon them; and thirdly, constituting or appointing an Officer, to
carry on the state and solemnity of the Feast in the Sovereign's absence. But
the other particulars, viz. those of extraordinary nature and occasional,
cannot so well be brought within Rule, seeing they are things wholly
accidental, whose contingency only begets a necessity of proposal or
discussion, and besides are usually adjourned to the next days Chapter:
therefore we have already touched upon them in their proper places, as we had
occasion offered.

As to the first, 1. Swearing of Officers.
we shall chiefly consider such Officers of the Order as happen to be nominated
since the Chapter, immediately preceding the Grand Feast. And touching these,
it has been thought most proper, to introduce them soon after the Chapter is
opened, that so (their respective Oaths having been administered unto them) they
might be ready to perform the duty of their several places, during the session
of the Chapter, and thence forward.

Thus on the Lib. R. page 5.
Eve of the Grand Feast, solemnized at Wind for an. 21. Iac. R. the Sovereign
appointed a Chapter to be held in the Privy-Chamber (before the Lieutenant's
proceeding to the Chapel) whereat Lib. R. page 5.
Sir George Moor was sworn Chancellor of the Order. In the same Chamber, an.
Ibid. p. 38.
4. Car. 1. upon the 23. of September, being the Eve of the Grand Feast held by
Prorogation (and before the Sovereign proceeded to Vespers) was Doctor Ibid. p.
39.
Nele Bishop of Winchester sworn Prelate, Sir Ibid. p. 39.
Francis Crane Chancellor, and Doctor Ibid. p. 39.
Matthew Wren (late Bishop of Ely) Register, Moreover, in the Chapter held on
the Lib. C. p. 85.
Eve of the Feast, celebrated at Whitehall an. Lib. C. p. 85.
23. Eliz. did Doctor Watson Bishop of Winchester make Oath, for his faithful
Execution of the Prelates Office, as also Doctor Ibid. page 33.
Thomas Cooper (his Successor in that See) who was admitted an. 26. Eliz. The
like did Page 127.
William Wickham, an. 37. of the same Queen: and in the same place, an. 40.
Eliz. Page 136.
Doctor Bilson also Bishop of Winchester, was sworn into this Office, at which
time was Richard Conisby admitted Gentlemen-Vsher of the Black-Rod. In like
manner Lib. R. page 107.
an. 11. Car. 1. did Doctor Christopher Wren, (Brother and Successor in the
Registers place, to the aforementioned Bishop of Ely) take his Oath, at a
Chapter held in the Privy-Chamber at Whitehall, on the Eve of the Grand Feast
there celebrated. Again Sir Francis Walshingham, and Sir Amias Paulet, were
both sworn Chancellors, on the Eve of the Feast, kept at Greenwich, the one
Lib. C. p. 75.
an. 20 and the other Page 107.
an. 30. of Queen Eliz. And lastly Page 194.
an. 18. Iac. R. at the same place was the Bishop of Windchester sworn Prelate,
the Bishop of Spalato Register, and James Maxwell Esquire Black-Rod.

Yet has it happened now and then, that some of the Officers of this Order,
have been sworn at other times, to wit, at Chapters next ensuing their
Nomination or Choice, whether such have been held on the Eve of St. George, or
on the Grand Feast Day, or otherwise called upon particular occasions; at which
time nevertheless, the administration of the Oath has been one of the first
things done therein, for the reason before mentioned.

Those Officers, whom we have observed to have taken their Oaths on the Eve of
St. George, that is to say, when only the day of St. George has been
solemnized, and the Grand Feast prorogued, were, first Owen Oglethorpe admitted
Lib. C. p. 7.
an. 1. Mariae, in a Chapter called at the Mannor-house of St. James. Secondly,
George Carew at Whitehall, Page 32.
an. 2. Eliz. who immediately succeeded John Boxhall, Successor to the said
Oglethorpe, in that Office. Next Doctor Horn, Bishop of Winchester, called MS.
penes W. D. N. fol. 2. b.
an. 3. Eliz. into the Chapter, then sitting in the Queens great Closet at
Whitehall, and there took the Prelates Oath.

Such Officers of the Order, as were sworn into their places, on the Grand
Feast Day, are Sir John Wooley Cahncellor, an. 31. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 112.
before Morning Prayers; so Ibid. page 130.
an. 38. Eliz. Sir Edward Dyer, and Doctor Robert Benet, who were admitted, the
one Chancellor, and the other Register, Ibid. page 130.
at a Chapter held before the first Morning Service, because they were not
nominated before the beginning of the Celebrations on the Eve; but either the
night following, or in the morning immediately before their admittance.

Lastly, those who have taken their Oaths at Chapters, called for peculiar
purposes, in the intervals of Feasts, were Ibid. p. 7.
Sir William Peter's, and Sir Thomas Row, both Chancellors, of the Order; the
one at the first Chapter that Queen Mary called, being the Ibid. page 5.
27. of Sept. an. 1. Mar. and the other at a Chapter celebrated at Windesor,
upon the Lib. R. page 114. and 115.
5. day of December, an. 12. Car. 1. As also Sir James Palmer, who, after the
Execution of the Office of Deputy Chancellor, for the space of six years and an
half, was upon the Palmers Iourn. page 58.
17. day of January, an. 20. Car. 1. sworn Chancellor, in a Chapter held at
Oxford, at which time Sir Edward Walker Successor to Sir Henry St. George, in
the place of Garter, was also sworn thereinto.

Dispencing with or inflicting of Punishments.
Touching the second Particular, debated in the foresaid Chapter, viz. the
dispensing with, or punishing of absent Knights; we are herein to consider,
that the Statutes of the Order enjoin, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
all the Knights-Companions to be present at the Celebration of the Grand
Feast; that is to say, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
those who are then within the Kingdom, or elsewhere, Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 3.
although the Service of St. George, according to the Rites of the Church, be
not at all celebrated: as in some cases we have already instanced, where the
Chap. 18. Sect. 8.
Service of the day, whereon that of St. George has fallen, as Good Friday,
etc. and not that of St. George has been preferred. But with this limitation;
E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 9. H. 8. Stat. Art. 8.
So that they be in a capacity, or may conveniently repair thither, and in
particular at the beginning of the Feast, viz. the hour of Tierce on the Eve,
as has been before observed.

And therefore the next thing usually entered upon in the said Chapter, is for
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions to take notice, whether any of the
Fellowship make default of coming at the hour assigned for their meeting, as
aforesaid: If so, then are such to be considered, under one of the three
general heads following. First, Stranger Princes: secondly, Late Comers, who
are by this time arrived at the Castle, or every minute expected; and thirdly,
such as have given notice, that they cannot be present during the continuation
of of the Feast: and in relation to Offenders of these three natures, Excuses
of Course, verbal Apologies, or Letters of Excuse, are or may be offered, or
presented on their behalf; and in case they be approved and admitted, then the
Penance, which by the Statutes ought otherwise to be inflicted, is remitted;
all which ought to be recorded.

Stranger Princes.
As to Stranger Princes, their default of appearance is excused, upon their
necessary residence in their own Territories, and the management of their
Affairs there: And of their Excuses of Course, and accustomed Dispensations, we
have diverse instances in the Registers of the Order, as an. 7. H. 5. where it
is said, Lib. N. p. 58.
That Strangers indeed who are not obliged to leave their own Dominion, but
with their own consent, as the Kings of the Romans, Portugal, and Denmarks,
were (according to the custom) for that reason excused.

So the following year, the Ibid. page 61. and 68.
same persons were out of affection and respect excused, as busied in their own
Affairs; Ibid. page 78.
and, as afterward, because they could not be spared from their own Kingdoms.
In the first year of King Edward the Fourth, in reference to the Kings of
Portugal and Denmark, and the Earl of Longueville, it is said, Ibid. p. 125.
They were excused (as always before in the same case) upon the account of
being Strangers. And lastly to the same effect of the King of the Romans, and
Duke of Ferrara, an. 19. H. 7. Ibid. p. 176.
They (because Strangers) were excused, as at all other times in the like case.
The like expressions are entered almost annually in the Reigns of King Henry the
Eighth, King Edward the Sixth, and downwards still upon the like occasions.

Late-Comers.
As to Knights-Companions comprised under the second general Heads, viz. those
who are tardy in their journey, or being come to the Castle, fall short of the
hour, or of attending the Sovereign to the Chapter House, either through
negligence, or want of timely notice, or other accident; the Penance set on
them by the Statutes of Institution, is, E. 3. Stat. Art. 9.
That they shall so far incur punishment from the Sovereign and Chapter for
their offense, as not to be permitted, for that time, to enter into the
Chapter, but shall tarry without at the door, and not have voice in any thing
that shall happen to be done there, unless they can allege a just excuse, or
render H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
such a sufficient cause, as the Sovereign or his Deputy shall approve of.

But we have observed few Defaulters in this kind, beside the Lord Bourchier,
Lib. N. page 116.
an. 35. H. 6. who being noted to come thither before Vespers, it seems to
imply, that his appearance was short of the Hour enjoined as aforesaid.

Concerning the third sort of Delinquents, Absent, during the whole Feast.
being those Knights-Companions, who are not only absent at the Hour of Tierce,
but likely to be so during the whole Feast; the Proceedings in the Chapter
relating to them are either upon what is presented and offered, in excuse of
their absence; or determined upon their neglect or default, of making Apology
for it.

Where Excuses for absence are offered, they are either by Letters, or word of
mouth; if by Letters, then are they sent either from the absent Knights
themselves, and directed to the Sea before Chap. 19. Sect. 2.
Chancellor of the Order, or else from the Sovereign to his Lieutenant on their
behalf, and both produced by the Chancellor. But it Excuses be made by word of
mouth, then they are delivered, either by the Sovereign himself; or upon motion
made, by some of the Knights-Companions present in Chapter.

In order to the first of these ways, Excuse by Letters.
of presenting the absent Knights-Companions excuses, we find the Custom of
sending Letters to that purpose, to have been very ancient: For at the Grand
Feast held at Windesor, by Humfry Duke of Gloucester, the Sovereign's Deputy,
an. 8. H. 5. it appears that the Lord Powis his Lib. N. p. 61.
Letter under his Hand and Seal (wherein he certified his present infirmity and
indisposition of Body) was produced in Chapter. And the following year the
Dukes of York, Norfolk, and Buckingham, with the Earls of Salisbury,
Shrewsbury, and Penbroke, Viscount Bourchier, the Lord Rivers, and Sir John
Fastolf, being all absent from St. George's Feast, Ib. page 119.
they declared the reason of their absence, by their Messenger. So an. 5. E. 4.
we find that the Lord Beauchamp sent his Page 1^9
Excusatory Letters, which were received. Again an. 19. of the same King, it is
noted, Page 144.
That all that were absent from this Solemnity, excused their absence by
Letters to that purpose, signed and sealed with their Arms. And this has been
the use in following times, whereunto several Memorials entered in the late
Sovereign's Reign concur; and among others, that an. 13. Car. 1. when on the
Eve of the Grand Feast, held by Prorogation upon the 17.18. and 19. days of
April, the Earls of Moulgrave, Lindesey, Suffolk, and Exceter, having Rows
Iournal, page 9.
signified by Letters under their Seals of Arms, their several excuses of
sickness and disability to attend, the Chancellor producing them in Chapter,
they were dispensed with by the Sovereign. The like Excuses made by Palmers
Iournal pro an. 1630 page 17.
Letters were accepted from the Earls of Suffolk, Danby, and Lindesey, an. 15.
of the same King.

There are entered in the Registers several Memorials of Letters, Letters from
the Sovereign.
sent from the Sovereign to his Deputy, when himself has not been present in
Chapter; wherein his excusing and pardoning the defaults of absent
Knights-Companions has been signified. As an. 22. H. 6. the Duke of Buckingham
being Lieutenant, the Dukes of Gloucester and Exceter, with the Lord
Hungerford, Lib. N. p. 94.
were excused by the Sovereign's Letters. So an. 36. of the same King, Viscount
Mountague being reckoned up amongst the absent Knights-Companions, the Register
says, Page 118.
he was excused by the Sovereign 's Letters. The Ibid. p. 142.
like is noted of the Dukes of York and Gloucester, and six other
Knights-Companions, absent from the Feast held an. 18. E. 4. the Lord Dudley
being then the Sovereign's Lieutenant. And so an. Page 148.
21. E. 4. concerning other absent Knights-Companions. Moreover an. 18. H. 7.
the Page 174.
Sovereign (it being his pleasure to be absent) sent his Letters thereupon to
the Earl of Darby his Deputy, to excuse also some others that were absent: So
also in the Page 179.
21. Page 180.
22. and Page 186.
23. of the same King. But an. 20. H. 8. we find no less than MS. in Offic.
Arm. [ M. 17.] fol. 30. b.
17 Knights-Companions at one time, excused and pardoned for their absence, by
the Sovereign's Letters sent unto the Marquess of Exceter, his Lieutenant for
the Grand Feast kept at Windesor the 27. of May in the foresaid year, viz.
three Dukes, six Earls, two Viscounts, five Barons, and one Knight Baneret.

And hitherto may be referred, what is spoken of the Dukes of Clarence and
Gloucester, and six other Knights-Companions an. 14. E. 4. that their absence
was excused Lib. N. page 134.
by the Sovereign's authority; the like expression is used in the case of the
Earl of Ibid. p. 143.
Northumberland, and others an. 19. of his Reign.

And from many Precedents, which we have seen, of Letters sent from the
Sovereign, and directed to his Lieutenant to accept of Knights-Companions
excuses, whose absence he had beforehand dispensed with; we observe those
Dispensations excused not the sending of their own particular Excuses; for it
is evident they were also expected, and that such allowance of absence was not
absolute, but in a manner conditional, the clause running thus. Appendix Number.
CLXXIII.
That you [the Sovereign's Deputy] allow these excuses, so far as they are
consonant to reason. And in all other Letters of the same nature, a Clause to
this effect has been inserted, Number. CLXXIV. and CLXXV.
That as the Sovereign thought good to advertise his Deputy, that for certain
causes he had dispensed with their attendance for that time; so he willed him
to accept their reasonable excuses in that behalf accordingly.

The Sovereigns verbal Excuses in Chapter.
Secondly, The absent Knights-Companions have had their Excuses frequently made
by word of mouth, either of the Sovereign, or some other of the
Knights-Companions present in Chapter. This favor of the Sovereign is either
done by himself, when present in Chapter, or by giving order to his Lieutenant
before the Feast begin.

In relation to what he has personnaly done in this case, we have many
Examples; as an. 6. H. 6. the Lib. N. p. 84.
Sovereign declared the reason of the Duke of Norfolks absence. So on the Eve
of the Feast kept at Windesor an. 26. H. 6. the Duke of York, the Earl of
Salisbury, Viscount Beaumont, the Lords Hungerford, Willoughly, and Sir John
Fastolf were absent, Page 101.
but excused by the Sovereign. Again, in a Chapter held on the Eve of the Grand
Feast, celebrated at Windesor an. 36. H. 6. the Duke of York, Earl of
Salisbury, and Viscount Bourchier, being absent, Page 117.
were excused by the Sovereign's own mo^th: the Page 168.
like is said on the behalf of the absent Knights, an. 3. H. 7. So an. 17. E.
4. on the Eve of the Feast held by Prorogation, the Dukes of Gloucester,
Buckingham, and Suffolk, with the Earl of Northumberland at that time absent,
Page 141
were excused by the Sovereign.

And to his Deputy before.
At other times, the Sovereign (not being present in Chapter) has before hand
verbally, (instead of Letters) given his Deputy or Lieutenant direction to
excuse the absence of several of the Knights-Companions. Thus it was in the
case of the Prince, the Earls of Surrey and Shrewsbury, and Lord Daubeny, who
an. 19. H. 7. Lib. N. p. 176.
were excused by the Sovereign, by word of mouth (to the Marquess of Dorset his
Lieutenant) because they were then employed in his service. And as touching the
Earls of Arundel, and Devonshire at the same time, the Register says, the Lib.
N. p. 176.
Sovereign with his own mouth excused them to his Dputy. Whereto we may add
what is recorded, an. 26. H. 8. Page 265.
All others absent were by the Sovereign at that time excused (to the Duke of
Richmond his Lieutenant) by word of mouth, and afterward by his Letters.

Excuses made by Knights Companions.
Of the latter sort, to wit, such as have been excused, upon the motion made by
some of the other Knights-Companions present in Chapter, we find that on the
Vigil of St. George an. 1. H. 6. Humfrey Duke of Gloucester being then the
Sovereign's Deputy, Sir William Harington's absence Lib. N. page 74.
was excused by the Chancellor, at that time Sir Lib. N. page 74.
John Robessart, one of the Knights-Companions. So an. 2. H. 6. Page 76.
The Deputy took upon him the Earl of Warwick's excuse.

But ere we proceed any further, it will not be amiss here to observe, what
effect the Excuses, presented on the behalf of absent Knights, have usually
produced; in reference whereunto we find the just and reasonable, favorably
admitted, some suspended, and diverse disallowed.

Excuses allowed, and in what cases.
Excuses easily allowed, were first Sickness (for those of the
Knights-Companions who have either been sick, far spent with age, or intent
upon public Affairs, have readily obtained excuse) which we meet with in the
Examples of the Lib. N. p. 61.
Lord Powis an. 8. H. 5. the Page 76.
Duke of Exceter, an. 2. H. 6. Page 85.
Sir Thomas Erpingham an. 6. H. 6. as also the Page 136.
Lord Dudley an. 15. E. 4. And of later times the Lib. C. p. 97.
Earl of Bedford, an. 26. Eliz. Ibid. p. 107.
Viscount Mountague, and the Earl of Warwick in the 30. of the same Queen, with
many others.

Secondly, The not recovery of Wounds received in the Sovereigns Service; for
such was the condition of Sir William Harington, an. 7. H. 5. whom we see
excused Lib. N. p. 58.
for his illness, occasioned from the Wounds, then lately received at the Siege
of Roan and elsewhere.

Thirdly, Impotency and old age; for which cause the Lib. N. p. 58.
Lord Burnell, an. 7. ^. 5. at the last mentioned Chapter, the Earls of Li^. c.
p. 112.
Shrewsbury and Warwi^k, and Lord Burghley an. 31. Eliz. and the Lib. R. page
126.
Earl of Moulgrave, an. 13. Car. 1. So also the Earl of Ex praef. lib. N. p.
^9. and 78
Westmerland, an. 2. and 3. H. 6. and the Earl of Lib. R. p. 126.
Suffolk an. 13. Car. 1. for the Rows Iourn. page 24.
weakness of his Limbs; were all of them excused for absence at those several
Feasts.

Fourthly, employment in the Sovereigns service; either abroad or at home: Of
the first sort was the case of Sir Robert Vmfrevile, excused an. 7. H. 5. Lib.
N. p. 58.
because he had been sent toward Scotland, to defend the Borders. So the Lord
Scroop engaged in the like Service, Lib. C. page 107.
an. 30. Eliz. his absence was immediately excused. As was that of the Duke of
Bedford and the Lord Tal^ot, an. 6. H. 6. Lib. N. page 84. and 85.
both being employed in the Wars of France, whilst the Grand Feast was
celebrated at Windesor. Again, the Earl of Ibid. p. 103.
Salisbury and Lord Faucombridge had such another Apology, an. 28. H. 6. And
lastly, the Earl of Essex an. 41. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 137.
who according to his Commission, was endeavoring to subdue by Arms the Irish
Rebels; and therefore deservedly excused.

Of the second sort of employment, to wit, at home, was that of the Earls of
Shrewsbury, and Hungtington, an. Ibid. page 81.
22. and Page 97.
26. Eliz. the first of whom was taken up in the managery of certain Affairs
enjoined him by the Sovereign; but the other being Ib. page 81.
President of the Council in the North, his absence was for that, and several
years following, favorably admitted. And a like case was that of the Earl of
Danby, an. 13. Car. 1. who Lib. R. p. 126.
for his necessary attendance at the Seat of Justice in Air, was excused of
his waiting on the Sovereign, at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation on the
2.3. and 4. days of October in the foresaid year.

Fifthly, When the Grand Feast has received Prorogation, and any of the
Knights-Companions have not had notice of the day whereunto it was prorogued;
and for non-attendance for want of such notice, Sir Simon Fehbridge an. 8. H.
6. (the Feast for that year, having been prorogued unto the Lib. N. p. 86.
22. of May) was excused by Humfry Duke of Gloucester, then the Sovereign's
Deputy.

Sixthly, When any of the Knights-Companions have been employed upon Embassy
or other Civil Affairs; as Sir Here Tanke Clux, who an. 3. H. 6. Ibid. p. 78.
was by the Sovereign sent in Legation to the Emperor of Germany, and also for
that an. 5. and 6. H. 6. Page 83.
he yet remained in the Emperor's Court by the Sovereign's command. In like
manner the Indulgence of the Sovereign excused the Earl of Derby and Lord
Cobham an. 30. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 107.
they being sent Ambassadors into the Low Countries, to treat with Philip King
of Spain about a Peace. To like purpose is that Entry made in excuse of the
Earl of Marr's absence in Scotland, and Earl of Carlisse's Embassy abroad, Lib.
R. p. 37.
an. 4. Car. 1.

Seventhly, When any of them have been in Captivity; as was Lib. N. p. 77.
Thomas Earl of Salisbury, and the Earl of Huntington, both Prisioners in
France an. 2. H. 6. So also the Earl of Ibid. p. 85.
Suffolk, the Lord Talbot, and Lord Scales an. 7. H. 6. the Page 10^
Lord Fauconbridge an. 30. and 36. H. 6. and Earl of Page 111.
Kendal an. 32. H. 6. and lastly, in the 4.5. and 6. years of Edward the
Fourth, Page 129. and 130.
Sir John Astley who was Prisoner there also.

Eighthly, When any of them have obtained the Sovereign's Letters of
Dispensation, of which sufficient is spoken before.

Lastly, some other just and lawful occasion, as well as accident, having
fallen out (not relating to those under the former heads) the Sovereign upon
information given in Chapter, has been pleased to allow of, as sufficient to
excuse the nonappearance and non-attendance of the Knights-Companions at the
Grand Feasts; in which rank, the foresaid Lord Fauconbridge's care of his
domestic Affairs, an. 32. H. 6. was readily admitted, Page 111.
because having been lately in Prison, he had obtained leave to go to see his
House and Lands in the Country. And the Earl of Arundel's absence an. 15. Car.
1. was pardoned, by reason of the Duchess of Richmond's Palmers Iourn. pro an.
1639. page 17.
Death, who died on the Eve of the Grand Feast, that so (he being the chief of
her Family) might be at hand to advise and assist, in all things conducing to
the honor of the deceased Duchess.

And as the Knights-Companions have been often excused, for not appearing at
the Grand-Feast, upon lawful and sufficient grounds, so has the Sovereign, for
like reasons, been pleased to license and dispense with their departure from
the same. Of this we have met with an Example an. 6. Eliz. in the Lord Hastings
of Longhborough, Lib. C. p. 46.
who falling ill a MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. f. 16. a.
little before the Offering on St. George's day, obtained license from the
Sovereign, to depart out of the Choire; and came no more abroad that day, nor
during that Feast. As also another in the Duke of Lenox an. 15. Car. 1. who
being forced to go back to London, by reason of the aforesaid Duchess of
Richmond's Palmers. Iourn. pro. an. 1639. p. 20.
death, had his excuse made in Chapter held the morning of the Feast day, by
the Deputy Chancellor; whereupon he obtained the Sovereign's Palmers. Iourn.
pro. an. 1639. p. 20.
allowance for such his departure.

We are next to consider Excuses, which though sent in due time, yet upon
debate and consultation in Chapter were suspended, rather than allowed; to this
head may be referred that case of several of the Pembr. and Montg. Salisbury,
Dorset, Holand, Berks. Northumberland.
Knights-Companions, who were members of the Lords house in the Long
Parliament. For an. 18. Car. 1. the Deputy Chancellor, having by command of the
Sovereign, and in discharge of the duty of his Office, sent unto each of them a
several Summons, for their attendance at the celebration of the Grand Feast, to
be held for the preceding year at York, upon the 18.19. and 20. days of April;
and notice thereof being given to the House of Lords, they immediately made the
ensuing Order.

Die Martis, 22. Maii 1641.
WHereas the Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's household, and some other Lords
of Parliament, Knights of the Garter, have been summoned to give their
attendance, and repair unto the City of York, for the celebration of St.
George's Feast; who acquainting this House with the Summons aforesaid, it is
this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that they attend the weighty
Affairs of the Kingdom, discussed in Parliament, whereunto they are obliged by
his Majesty's Writ, and the Law of the Land.

Jo. Brown Cleric Parliament.

Whereupon, every one of the said Knights-Companions, before the days appointed
by Prorogation for holding the Feast, sent their Petitionary Letters of excuse
to the Deputy Chancellor, wherein they professed their desire and readiness to
attend, in obedience of the said Summons; nevertheless, pleaded the foresaid
Order for the ground of their stay at London, and therefore desired him to
obtain for them the Sovereign's gracious Letters of Dispensation: But when the
said Letters were severally presented in Chapter, Palmers Iournal, p. 36.
held before Vespers on the Eve of the said Feast, the Sovereign would not at
present either admit or disallow of their Excuses; but Page 38.
deferred the consideration thereupon until the next Chapter, to be held by
Prorogation.

Of excuses which have not been allowed, the most remarkable is that of the
Duke of Norfolk, and the Lord Scales, an. 36. H. 6. who, in regard the causes
alleged to excuse their absence at the Feast, Lib. N. p. 118.
were not approved in a Chapter held on the Eve, were adjudged to the penalty
of the Statute; the latter being particularly fined by the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, in a Lib. N. p. 118.
Jewel to the value of 20 Marks, to be offered in the College: whereby the
rigor of the Statute appears to have been more strictly executed upon him,
than on the Duke (whose contempt might be of a less nature, though it seems
great enough to shut out his excuse) probably because the Lord Scales, having
been absent the year before, and no cause thereof being then showed in Chapter,
Page 117.
was therefore to suffer penalty for his absence, according to the Statute; so
that this it seems was the second fault.

But now to enter upon the second Branch of the third general head, which
relates to the proceedings upon the absent Knights-Companions neglect, or
default of sending their Excuses: We shall therein observe that some of them
have with difficulty been remitted, some left in suspense, and others sentenced
and referred, either to the Sovereign's pleasure, or the punishment assigned by
Law.

Of the first kind are those, Defaulters pardoned.
who having such a plea for their absence, as might induce the Chapter to
dispense therewith; yet were with much ado excused, because they neglected
giving the due intimation thereof, according to the Statutes. Such was that of
the Earl of Westmerland, an. 10. H. 5. who Lib. N. p. 69.
though not very well, yet had much ado to be excused; because he signified not
the cause of his absence, as the Statutes required.

So an. 12. Car. 1. The Earls of Rows Iournal, page 9.
Derby and Kelly, having made no Excuse nor Petition for Dispensation, were for
that omission blameable; but by the grace of the Sovereign for that time
pardoned.

Of the second sort are such, Suspended.
who through the indulgence of the Sovereign, or his Lieutenant (where probable
cause has induced it) have not had sentence passed on them at that present,
but were deferred, in expectation of some satisfactory cause to be showed: As
in the cafe of the Prince, the Duke of Tuckingham, and five other of the
Knights-Companions absent from the Feast held an. 18. H. 7. concerning whom,
Lib. N. page* 175.
no cause of Excuse was showed, but there was an expectation of one to be
alleged.

But as for those of the third sort, Sentenced and le^t to mercy.
upon whom sentence has passed, for default of sending their Excuses, they
have been left either to the pleasure of the Sovereign, or to those penalties
and penances which the Law of this Order does inflict: And first of such
Offenders as are left by the Chapter to the mercy of the Sovereign, we have
several Examples. Of the Earl of Essex, an. 18. H. 7. it is recorded, Lib. N.
page 175.
That his absence was referred to the Sovereign's indulgence. So an. 21. of the
same King, upon occasion of the absence of the Earls of Northumberland, Oxford,
Devonshire, Kent, together with the Lord Stafford, and no cause thereof
assigned, Ibid. p. 179*
they were left to the Sovereign's indulgence. To the Page 180.
like effect is the entry made of the Earls of Essex, and Kent, absent the
following year, without cause shown to the Chapter.

Lastly, Punished.
touching those on whom Judgment has passed, diverse instances may be given,
among which are these that follow. An. 10. H. 5. the Lord Willoughby, Sir
Robert Vmsrevill, Sir John Cornwall, and Sir William Harington, were in no
wise excused for their absence, Lib. N. p. 69.
because being within the Kingdom, they sent not the cause of their absence.
And an. 2. H. 6. the said Sir Robert Vmsrevile, was also found culpable, Page
77.
in regard no cause of his absence had been showed. Moreover, seeing the
reasons of the Duke of Norfolk's, the Lord Scales, and Fastolss absence an. 33.
H. 6. were not made known to the Chapter, Page 113.
they were left to the Judgment of the Statutes. And of the same Lord Scales,
an. 35. H. 6. it is recorded, Page 117.
that he gave no reason of his absence, therefore underwent the punishment
thereof.

Lastly, The Duke of York, the Earl of Salisbury, the foresaid Lord Scales, and
Lord Willoughby, for presuming to be absent from the Grand Feast, an. 30. H. 6.
Ibid. p. 107.
without showing any allowable cause, they were adjudged to the certain and
deserved penalties (of the Statutes) against the next Feast. And the said Duke
being again absent the very next year (and also the Lord Hastings) Page 108.
They were both adjudged to certain Penalties, as daring to be absent without
sufficient cause shown.

Besides these grounds for assigning Penances already mentioned, Penances where
Knights are absent at other times of the Feast.
there are (upon a few other causes, set down in the before recited ninth
Article of the Statutes of Installation) other Penances appointed, that is to
say, if the Knights-Companions be absent at other times beside the hour of
Tierce; which (if we were strictly tied to pursue the series and order of time)
would fall out to be spoke of, a little hence. Nevertheless, having had
occasion to discourse so much already of this subject, it will become further
beneficial to the concerned Reader, to bring all the Injunctions which are
included in the said Article, and muster up the Penalties for breach thereof,
in view together: nor will this anticipation at all interrupt our method, or
become improper for this place, if well considered, and therefore we shall
proceed with them here.

The Knights-Companions are further punishable, if they are absent at any of
the times here spoken of, viz. First, at the beginning of the first Vespers.
Secondly, at the beginning of the Morning Service, on the Feast day. Thirdly,
at the beginning of the Second Vespers. Fourthly, during the whole Feast. And
fifthly, at the Grand Feast next following.

For the first, admitting any Knight-Companion has failed of meeting and
attending on the Sovereign at the hour of Tierce, and thereupon suffered the
punishment of non-admittance into the Chapter House, and deprivation of Vote,
nevertheless if at the rising of the said Chapter, he be not ready to proceed
with the Sovereign, and other the Knights-Companions into the Choire, to the
beginning of the first Vespers; he ought not only to suffer the former, but
this additional penalty, E. 3. Stat. Art. 10.
That he shall not presume to enter into his Stall at that time, but tarry in
that part of the Choire, where the Taper-bearers are wont to stand,
nevertheless before his own Stall, until the holy Offices be ended. And the Law
of the Order is the same in King Henry the Fifth's and King Henry the Eighth's
H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
Statutes, only they render the place for the delinquent Knight to stand in, to
be before their Stalls in the Choristers places. And now how the penalty has
been inflicted, upon breach of the Law in this particular, we shall see by the
following instances.

At the Grand Feast celebrated at Windesor, an. 21. H. 7. when it seems the
Lord Kildare, Sir Gilbert Talbot, and Sir Richard Goulford came late to the
Chapel, we find this Memorandum fixed to their names, Lib. N. page 179.
They stood without (before their Stalls) by the Sovereign's permission, or
rather command. But yet this is not all the punishment which has been
inflicted upon the Knights-Companions for this offense (though it be all that
is set down in the foresaid Article) for an. 25. H. 6. upon the Eve of St.
George, the Marquess of Dorset not coming to the first Vespers, and being
convicted of his late coming, Ibid. p. 99.
was prohibited joining in the Nomination then made, for the Election of the
Page 100.
King of Portugal, into the room of the Duke of Gloucester.

Offenders in the second and third case, being such as neglect to come E. 3.
Stat. Art. 10.
before the beginning of the high Mass, or the E. 3. Stat. Art. 10.
second Vespers, called also the Hen. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
Vespers on St. George's day, have the like punishment with the former assigned
them, throughout all the Bodies of the Statutes; viz. Exclusion from their
Stalls, and station in the Choristers range.

An. 1. H. 6. we observe the Lord Willoughby noted to be absent upon the Lib.
N. p. 74.
Eve of the Grand Feast, but present on the day; and consequently he incurred
no further penance, than what his absence on the Eve drew on him. The MS. penes
G. O. Y. page 123.
Earl of Derby an. 18. Eliz. coming too late to the first morning Service, on
the Feast day, did for some short time undergo the aforesaid penance, but soon
after upon MS. penes G. O. Y. page 123.
Dispensation from the Lieutenant, went up to his Stall.

In like manner an. II. Car. 1. the Earl of Lib. R. page 107, 108.
Exceter came not to the Chapel, in the morning of the Feast day, till after
the Grand Procession; and so the Penance for his tardiness, should have been
according to the Statutes, stare Paviamento; but, upon consideration of his
age, and the soul weather, whereby it was occasioned, the Sovereign permitted
him to enter into his Stall.

And though absence at these times also be occasioned by Sickness, or some
unexpected accident, yet notice is to be given thereof to the Sovereign or his
Lieutenant. For instance, the Lord Burghley falling ill was absent Lib. C. page
127.
from the first Morning Service on the Feast day, an. 37. Eliz. but upon notice
given thereof, with the consent of the Lieutenant and Knights-Companions, he
obtained leave of absence. The Earl of Dorset an. 15. Car. 1. (the Grand Feast
being then celebrated at Windesor) Palmers Iournal. pro an. 1639. p. 22.
suddenly falling ill, before Evening Prayer, on the Feast day, besought the
Sovereign to excuse his attendance for the present; but the Ibid. page 33.
next morning being recovered, he attended the Sovereign, with the rest of the
Knights-Companions to the Chapter House.

The Penances inflicted upon any Knight (for the foresaid defaults) he is in
like manner to undergo, if he happen to offend in the like kind, when the Grand
Feast is prorogued H. 8. Stat. Art. 4.
from St. George's day, in what place soever it be celebrated.

But if he offend in all, and have neither license, nor reasonable or allowable
excuse for his absence, he is then H. 8. Stat. Art. 4.
prohibited entering his Stall, at the next St. George's Feast, where ever it be
kept; and moreover to pay, as a pecuniary mulct H. 8. Stat. Art. 4.
10 l. to be employed toward the Ornaments of the College. And we find the
former kind of Penance, to have been inflicted, upon Late Comers to Divine
Service, as well upon the Morrow after the Feast day, as on the Eve or Feast
day it self. For the Earl of Lindsey coming into the Chapel on the morrow
after the Feast Collect. W. le N. Cl.
held at Whitehall an. 8. Car. 1. after the Sovereign was entered, he suffered
the punishment of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
standing before his Stall a while, until the Sovereign signified his license,
that he might ascend thereinto. In like Manner, the Earl of Northumberland
coming somewhat late unto morning Service, on the last day of the Feast, held
by prorogation at Whitehall the 17.18. and 19. days of April an. 13. Car. 1.
did undergo the assigned Penance, Lib. R. p. 125. Rows. Iournal, p. 16.
of standing beneath his Stall in the middle of the Choire, but Lib. R. p. 125.
Rows. Iournal, p. 16.
upon the gracious permission of the Sovereign he was soon admitted thereunto.

But touching the fourth degree of offense, as it is far greater than any yet
named, so are there variety of Penances appointed to expiate the fault; and
therefore, if any Knight-Companion shall be so negligent, as not to come E. 3.
Stat. Art. 10.
to the celebrations of the Grand Feast, and yet have no justifiable reason of
his absence, such as may be allowed by the Sovereign or his H. 5. Stat. Art.
10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
Deputy, he shall not (at the Feast to be held the ensuing year) enter into his
own Stall, but stand below before it, in the place above mentioned: (2.) he
shall walk alone by himself, before the three Crosses, which in ancient times
were born in the Grand Procession. (3.) When the Grand Procession returns to
the Choire, he shall stand in the place before mentioned, the following part of
the Mass, until the time of the Offertory. (4.) He shall Offer last of all by
himself alone. And after the humble sufferance of all these Penances, he shall
forthwith approach the Stall of the Sovereign, or his Deputy, and there humbly
desire absolution for his Offense: Whereupon the Sovereign, or his Deputy,
shall restore him to his Stall and first estate. But we have not hitherto met
with any Record or Memorial, where the particulars of this punishment were
executed upon any of the Knights Offenders; albeit we too often find, where
many have neither appeared all the time of the Feast, nor sent Letters of
excuse, nor obtained license for their absence. As for instance an. 9. H. 6.
Lib. N. p. 88.
Sir Robert Vmsrevile, Sir Simon Felbrigg, and Sir William Harington, signified
not the cause of their absence: neither did the Duke of Page 177.
Buckingham, nor Earl of Northumberland, give any reason at all of their
absence. The like has been observed of many others, but without further
memorial of what the Chapter did thereupon.

Fifthly, and lastly, the Statutes ordain. That E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H.
8. Stat. Art. 9.
if any Knight-Companion remain within the Kingdom, and not having a sufficient
excuse, to be allowed upon humble suit as aforesaid, shall presume to absent
himself the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
next following year, and thereby become culpable of an omission of two years
successively, from the Solemnity before mentioned, he ought thereupon to be so
long E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
interdicted his own Stall, until, in the said Chapel, he shall have offered
at Saint George's Altar, a E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 10. H. 8. Stat. Art. 9.
Jewel to the value of 20 Marks, of lawful money of England; and thence forward
every year, so long as he shall continue guilty in that nature, the mulct must
be doubled until he be reconciled and pardoned.

By virtue of this last Clause of the foregoing Article, was the Lord
Maltravers an. 15. E. 4. Lib. N. page 137.
for such his absence, fined at 20 Marks. And the Lord Scales, an. 36. H. 6. in
a Jewel of Ibid. p. 118.
20 Marks value, which as probably may be collected, was the following year
endeavored, either to be mitigated or taken off; nevertheless we find the
sentence confirmed, and he Page 119.
left to pay the Fine imposed.

Of later times the greatest Offender, that we observed, against this Statutes,
was Ferdinand Earl of Derby; who having made no excuse, nor Petition for his
absence in two years, was at a Lib. R. page 126.
Chapter, held on the Eve of the Grand Feast, an. 13. Car. 1. accordingly
fined, and that with some further Rows Iournal, page 24.
note of negligence, but at the mediation of the Earl of Penbroke and
Montgomery, he was for that time remitted. Yet was he not guilty of any future
neglect; for, the following year, upon his humble Petition setting forth his
Ibid. p. 39.
age, weakness, and inability to Travel, he obtained a Dispensation for
attendance on the Sovereign at the Feasts of St. George during his life.

But the most memorable case in the prosecution of a contempt, was that against
the Earl of Arundel, who in a Chapter held Lib. N. p. 134.
an. 14. E. 4. was fined Lib. N. p. 134.
40 Marks, to be paid to the College of Windesor, for being absent from the
Solemnity of the Grand Feast, for two years together without any approved
cause: and the following year still continuing his Contempt, the mulct (by
virtue of the aforesaid Statute) was doubled, and he fined in the sum of Ibid.
p. 136.
80 Marks.

3. Of constituting an Officer to hold the Grand Feast.
Touching the third particular, amongst those things done of course, in the
Chapter held before the first Vespers, to wit, the nominating and constituting
an Officer for holding the same (if the Sovereign be not present) we are
beforehand to note the occasion and cause thereof, which was briefly this.

At the time of Instituting this Order, the Sovereign being engaged in Wars
with France and Scotland, which he then, and for some time after, personally
managed, thought fit to make provision for supply of his room, no less than in
case of sickness or other urgent occasion, where he should be hindered from
affording his personal presence, at such time of the year, whereon the Grand
Feast should happen; and hereupon allowance was given by the E. 3. S^t. Art. 8.
vide H. 5. Stat. Art. 8. H. 8. Stat. Art. 7.
Statutes to depute another in his stead.

When therefore such occasion afterward happened, a Commission was made out to
one of the Knights-Companions, some reasonable time before the approach of the
Feast; to the end, that by such a representation of his Person, none of the
ancient Ceremonies might be omitted, or any defect happen through his absence.
For till the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, we meet not with any
Commissions that stayed for the Sovereign's fiat so long as until the sitting
of the Chapter, held before the first Vespers. Nevertheless, seeing from thence
it has been for the most part thus practiced, we think it not improper to give
our account thereof here, amongst those things of course, which (if at this day
the appointing such an Officer shall be thought requisite) are usually
dispatched at the foresaid Chapter. And herein we shall speak, (1.) Of the
Person Nominated to this Office, (2.) his Title, (3.) the Ceremonies used at
his Constitution, (4.) the nature of his Employment, (5.) and the Dignity of
his Office.

1. Of his Nomination.
As to the Person Nominated, we observe, That (most usually) he has been one,
if not the chief of the Knights-Companions (we mean in Authority, Eminence, or
Birth) next to the Sovereign himself. Such were Lib. N. p. 58.68. and 80.
John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, and Ex eod. lib. page 61.86.87.92. and
93.
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, Ibid. p. 74.
styled also Earl of Henalt, Zeland and Penbroke, Lord of Frizland, Protector
and Governor of England; both, Sons to King Henry the Fourth, Brothers to King
Henry the Fifth, and Uncles to King Henry the Sixth. Ibid. p. 103.
Humfry Stafford Duke of Buckingham (Son and Heir of Edmund Stafford, by Anne
Plantaginet, Daughter of Thomas of Woodstock) made Chart. 25. H. 6. nu. 31.
Primer Duke of England 22. Maii, an. 25. H. 6. Lib. N. page 174.175.
Thomas Earl of Derby, Father-in-Law to King Henry the Seventh, the Dukes of
Ibid. p. 258.268. and 292.
Suffolk and Page 265:
Richmond, with Page 245, 246.
Marquesses of Dorset and Page 274.
Exceter, in King Henry the Eighth's time. The Lib. 6. p. 44.
Duke of Norfolk, Ibid. p. 50.
Marquess of Northampton, Page 68.
Earl of Leicester, and Page 119.
Lord Treasurers Burghley, and Page 140.
Buckhurst, under Queen Elizabeth. And in King James his Reign, the Sovereign's
eldest Sons the Princes of Wales, first Prince Henry, and after his death
Prince Charles, the late Sovereign of blessed memory.

Next we shall consider the Time, and Place, when, and where he has been
appointed to this Employment: Concerning the Time, we observe it anciently to
have been uncertain, but so long before the Feast day, as that this Officer
might make preparation, suitable to the state and grandeur this great Solemnity
required: For so when Henry the Sixth had deputed his Uncle (the aforesaid John
Duke of Bedford) to hold the Grand Feast at Windesor, on St. George's day, in
the fourth year of his Reign, we see the Commission bears date at Leicester,
Lib. N. p. 80.
the first day of April preceding. In like manner the same Sovereign, having
appointed John Earl of Shrewsbury to the same employment, the 14. of May an.
35. regni sui, his Commission bears date at Hereford, the Page 116.
18. day of April preceding. Again, that Commission given to the Marquess of
Exceter, for holding the Feast at Windesor, upon the 17. day of May, an. 20. H.
8. is dated at Richmond the MS. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 17] fol. 30, and 31.
24. of April, which was above three weeks before.

But in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the most accustomed time for this
Nomination, was in the Afternoon of St. George's day; the day for holding the
Anniversary of the Grand Feast, being in those days always appointed together
with this great Officer* Nevertheless in the Lib. N page 212.
13. Page 261.
24. Page 279.
31. and Page 294.
36. years of his Reign, the appointment of the Feast, and Nomination of this
Officer may be observed to happen on the morrow after the day of St. George; as
also Lib. C. p. 18.
an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. and an. Page 23.
4. and 5. of the same King and Queen; and for the most part it was so ordered,
until the 9. of Queen Elizabeth, in which year the Grand Feast was removed from
Windesor unto other places, as has been before noted. Afterward it became
customary to nominate him immediately before the first Vespers, which has
continued in use ever since.

Now the reason why so many days passed heretofore, between the date of the
Commission, and the time appointed for celebrating of the Feast, was because
this Officer (in those times) held the Feast at his own charge; and therefore
was it thought fit and reasonable, that he should have notice of the day
assigned early enough, to the end he might provide all things suitable to his
own honor, and the dignity of the person he was to represent. But afterward
when he was not named, till he entered upon the Execution of his Office, to wit,
immediately before the first Vespers, there needed no warning, the Sovereign
being at the charge of the Feast.

As to the place, where this Officer received the honor of Nomination, that we
always find to have been in Chapter, held at any the times aforesaid, and
wheresoever called.

Secondly, 2. His Title.
the person designed to this employment, is in the Art. 8.
Statutes of Institution, and those that H. ^. Stat. Art. 8. H. 8. Stat. Art. 7.
follow, called Deputy: The first we find to have been made so, was John Duke
of Bedford an. 7. H. 5. and the reason thereof given in the Registrum
Chartaceum is Fol. 6.
Because the Sovereign being then in Normandy, was employed in the recovery of
his right to that Dukedom.

And albeit the Title given by the Statutes to this Officer, be not
particularly mentioned in the Page 58.
Black-Book, where it speaks of the said Dukes holding the Feast of St. George
at Windesor, for the aforesaid year, but rather implied in the words Regiae
sublimitatis locum implevit; yet in the Registrum Chartaceum among other
memorials of that same year, it is expressly set down, and the said Duke there
styled Loco citat.
Depute del Order de Iaritier: wherein also the very same Ibid. fol. 7.
Title is given to Humphry Duke of Gloucester, he being appointed to celebrate
the Anniversary of the Feast at Windesor, the year following. And when the
foresaid Black-Book comes to inform us ( an. 1. H. 6.) that the said Duke of
Gloucester did execute his Office, and hold that Feast, we find him therein
called Page 74.
Deputatus Ordinis; which Title is given him also at other times, upon the like
occasion, as also to the Ibid. p. 103.
Duke of Buckingham an. 28. H. 6. to the Ibid. p. 106.
Earl of Exceter the year following, to Page 115.
John Earl of Shrewsbury, the 35. year of the same King, and to many others in
the Reigns of King Edward the Fourth and King Henry the Seventh.

Sometimes also, we find other Titles given to this Representative of the
Sovereign, as an. 10. H. 5. John Duke of Bedford (the second time of his being
such) is styled Ibid. p. ^^
Praeses Clarissimi Ordinis. Equivalent to this, is that expression of the
Black-Book, where it says, that at the Chapter begun at Windesor, an. 15. H. 6.
Page 92.
Praesidebat Nobilis Dux Gloucestriae. And in another place of it, that the
Grand Feast was observed at Windesor an. 8. H. 7. per Iohannem Denham Angliae
The saurarium Ibid. p. 170.
ibi Presidem; the like is said of the Ibid. p. 207.
Earl of Worcester, an. 10. H. 8.

In the Exemplar of the Statutes registered in the Black-Book, the Title of
Vicegerent is first mentioned, and indifferently used with that of Deputy; this
great Officer being in some of those Articles called Deputy, and in others
Vicegerent. But from that time to the 8. year of King Henry the Eighth we find
no further remembrance thereof.

And then the Commission granted to the Marquess of Dorset, for holding the
Grand Feast at Windesor that very year, invests him with such authority, Page
246.
as the Sovereign's Vicegerent ever used to have, and might claim by right;
whence it may be inferred, that some of the Knights-Companions had before that
time held the said Feast, under the Title of Vicegerent, though we have not met
with any of their Commissions. Afterward, an. 24. H. 8. the Feastival was
appointed to be held at Windesor, upon the 12. day of May, Page 261.
in qua Comes Arundeliae Supremi vicem gereret, or as it is expressed an. 28. H.
8. Page 272.
Northumbriae Comes Supremi vicem gerens. And that this Title was at other
times placed upon this Officer, may be implied from some other places of the
foresaid Register, where he is said, Page 274.
Supremi vices tenere, Page 279.
administrare, Page 283.
supplere, etc.

About the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Title of Locum
tenens, or Lieutenant, began to be taken up; for at a Chapter held at Eltham,
the Regist. Chart. fol. 53.
23. day of April an. 8. H. 8. it was determined, that the celebration of St.
George's day should be held at Windesor, upon the 25. of May following, Regist.
Chart. fol. 53.
Et quod potens vir, Marchio de Dorset, erit ad tunc regiae Majestatis Locum
tenens. And a little after, the same old Register, speaking of the Chapter held
on the Fol. 54.
25. and 26. days of the said Month of May, says they were celebrated Fol. 54.
per praedictum Nobilem Marchionem, Locum Regis tenentem, sub Sigillo Garterii
legitime deputatum: Which Title of Locum tenens, this Book also gives to the
Earl of Arundel, the ensuing year; and frequently to others, afterward
nominated to this Office. But the first time we find this Title expressly
mentioned in the Page 294.
Black-Book of the Order, is an. 36. H. 8. where the Sovereign Page 294.
constituted the Earl of Essex Locum tenentem, during St. George's Feast;
albeit it is before in the same Book, many times used, in a way somewhat
different; as for Example, such a one of the Knights-Companions (naming him who
is appointed to this Office) Regiae Majestatis locum Page 204.
impleret, or Page 253.
adimpleret, Page 258.
occuparet, Page 267.
suppleret, Lib. C. p. 23.
obtineret, and the like. Lastly, this Office has been for the most part
conferred, under the Title of Lieutenant in all succeeding times, and the other
Titles of Deputy, President, and Vicegerent laid aside, as is manifest from the
Blue and Red Books, and sundr^ original Commissions which we have seen under
the Seal of the Order.

But besides the usage of these Titles of Deputy and Lieutenant severally, we
have met with them sometimes joined together in one person, as in the Style of
Henry Earl of Essex, proclaimed at the holding of the Grand Feast an. 25. H. 8.
as follows; Autogr.
Du noble and puissant Seigneur, le Conte d' Essex and de Eu, Seigneur de
Bourgchir, and de Loveyn, Lieutenant and Depute de la Feste de Sancte George,
Chevalier, Friar, and Compaignon, de le tresnoble Order de la Jarretier. As
also in another of like nature, when Henry Courtney Marquess of Exceter and
Earl of Devonshire held the Feast an. -- H. 8. wherein he amongst his other
Titles, is also styled Autogr.
Lieutenant and Depute de la Feste de Saint George. And in the Blue Book also,
there is taken notice of the like conjunction of these two Titles, for an. 1.
and 2. Ph. and Mar. the Grand Feast having been prorogued unto the 25. day of
May, it is there recorded, Lib. C. p. 18.
that then the Sovereign appointed the Earl of Shrewsbury, Deputy and
Lieutenant.

To conclude, the Titles of this great Officer are sometimes expressed not so
much positively, as by way of Periphrasis, and that in several manners; as Lib.
N. p. 103.
Deputatus a Rege praesuit. Page 111.
Assignatus ore Regio praesedit. Page 142.
Virtute Regiae Commissionis Assignatus. Page 148.
Cui Supremus eam potestatem commiserit. Page 155.
Regiae sublimitatis commissione ac authoritate communitus. Lib. C. p. 19.
Regias vices subiret, Page 93.
gerebat, Page 99.
praestabat, Page 132.
suscepit, Page 108*
cui vices ejus demandatae sunt. Also Page 88.
Supremae absentis vice sufficitur. Page 101.
Suprema absentis potestatem reserebat. Page 112.
Supremus surrogatur. Page 143.
Ejus (viz. Supremi) absentis Officio fungeretur, with several other
variations, much of the same nature.

As to the third particular, 3. The Ceremonies of his Constitution.
the Ceremonies used at the constituting the Sovereign's Lieutenant, they were
these three; (1.) The reading of the Commission. (2.) Delivery of it to the
Lieutenant. And (3.) his taking an Oath. For the Commission being engrossed in
Parchment, and prepared ready by the Chancellor, it is brought into the Chapter
by him, and there read in the presence of the Lieutenant and
Knights-Companions, before it be delivered; for thus we find it recorded an.
19. H. 7. Lib. N. page 176.
The illustrious Lord Thomas Marquess Dorset, was empowered (to hold the Feast)
by the Sovereign's Letters of Commission which were read in Chapter. And at the
meeting in Chapter, on the day prefixed, for celebrating of the Grand Feast an.
17. H. 8. by the Duke of Norfolk, it is said, that Ibid. p. 249.
in the presence of the said Duke ( the rest of the Knights-Companions
attending him on either side) the Kings Letter was read, wherein the power
committed to the Duke was declared. So also, when the Earl of Penbroke
(Lieutenant for the Grand Feast, held the 3. day of June an. 1. Eliz.) was
arrived at Windesor with his Assistants, Lib. C. p. 31.
and a Chapter being held, the Sovereign's Letters were read, wherein she
conferred the Lieutenancy on the said Earl. So an. 3. of the same Queen, the
Earl of Arundel being Lieutenant, and the Grand Feast kept at Windesor, Ibid.
page 40.
The Letters of Legation (for so the Commission of Lieutenancy, and Letters of
Notice to the Lieutenants Assistants are here called) were openly read in
Chapter. And sometimes we find the Officer taken notice of, who reads these
Commissions; as when the Earl of Shrewsbury was constituted Lieutenant, at a
Chapter held in the Privy-Chamber at Greenwich, on the Eve of the Feast, an.
27. Eliz. his Commission was read by the Dean of Windesor. But an. 37. Eliz.
the Lord Cobham's MS. pen. G.O.Y. fol. 20.
Commission of Lieutenancy, and the Lib. C. page 192.
Prince's an. 19. Iac. R. were both read in Chapter by the Chancellor of the
Order; which being finished, in the next place the Ex pref. MS. pen. G.O.Y. and
vide Coll. R.G. Cl. fol. 9.
Sovereign (if present in Chapter) delivers it Lib. C. p. 41.
propria manu, to the Lieutenant, who receives it upon his MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol.
20.
Knees; as did the said Lord Cobham in the great Closet at Whitehall, an. 37.
Eliz.

Thirdly, the Lieutenant is to take an MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20.
Oath, for the due Execution of his Office (but the form thereof we have not
hitherto met with) before the Ceremonies of his Constitution are fully
dispatched. This Oath the Lieutenant takes in Chapter upon his MS. pen: G.O.Y.
fol. 20.
Knees, when sometimes the MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20.
Prelate and sometimes the MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20.
Register have read the words, whilst the MS. pen: G.O.Y. fol. 20.
Black-Rod held the Book; in attestation of which the Lieutenant MS. pen:
G.O.Y. fol. 20.
kisseth the same, and then arises. And we find that in the aforesaid 27. year
of Queen Elizabeth, the Lieutenant when he proceeded to Chapel (after the
Ceremonies of his Constitution were over) gave his Commission to Collect. R. C.
Cl. f. 9.
Clarenceux (who then waited in the Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 9.
place of Garter) to bear it before him thither.

And albeit, it has been the most usual way, for the Sovereign to constitute
his Deputy or Lieutenant for holding of the Grand Feast, or any part thereof,
by Commission, and to add thereunto the foresaid Ceremonies of Creation; yet
sometimes in great exigencies and sudden occasions, he has appointed this
great Officer by word of mouth; whereunto no other Ceremony has been adjoined,
than that of taking the usual Oath: as for instance, an. Lib. N. p. 111.
32. H. 6. the Sovereign being then at Windesor, and falling sick a little
before the Feast, the Duke of Buckingham was assigned his Deputy, Lib. N. p.
111.
Ore Regio, by word of mouth.

But before we take leave of this head, we shall observe, that, in the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, though in some one of the Chapters, held during the
observation of the day of St. George, both the Grand Feast has been prorogued
to a further time, and the Lieutenant nominated for holding the same: yet upon
just cause, or for some reasons urged, or excuse made, which the Sovereign has
approved of; some other of the Knights-Companions has been appointed to the
execution of this Office, instead of him who had been first nominated: Thus it
chanced an. 9. H. 8. when at the Celebrations of the day of St. George at
Greenwich, the Page 206.
Earl of Arundel was chosen the Sovereign's Lieutenant for holding the
Anniversary of the Grand Feast at Windesor, upon the 10. of May following, but
he Page 206.
not thinking himself able to perform the Duty, humbly objected his infirmity
of body, and disability otherways, and the Sovereign graciously admitting of
his alleged excuse, substituted in his stead the Marquess of Dorset. So also
when St. George's day was observed at the same place, in the 20. year of the
same King, at which time Charles Duke of Suffolk, was Reg. Chartac. fol. 66. b.
nominated to keep the Grand Feast at Windesor, upon the Reg. Chartac. fol. 66.
b.
17. day of May ensuing, the Black-Book says, Lib. N. page 257. and 258.
That afterward for certain causes, moving the Sovereign thereunto, that
Office was transferred from the aforesaid Duke, to the Marquess of Exceter, who
executed it consonantly to the dignity thereof. Again an. 32. H. 8. the Grand
Feast being prorogued unto the 9. of May, at a Chapter held on St. George's day
preceding, the Earl of Cumberland was appointed to celebrate the same. Ibid. p.
283.
But in regard the said Earl could not be present by reason of some urgent
Affairs; his excuse was accepted, and the Earl of Southampton supplied his room.

But what happened Ibid p. 272.
an. 28. H. 8. was more remarkable; for the Earl of Northumberland (then the
Sovereign's Deputy) was in the time of the first Vespers suddenly taken with
the Vertigo, or diziness in his head, and that accompanied with a distemper
over his whole body. Ibid p. 272.
From hence arose a great scruple, what was hereupon to be done; it being
conceived, that they could not conveniently proceed, without the presence of
the Deputy, and that another could not rightly be substituted in his room,
without new authority from the Sovereign: Ibid p. 272.
But whilst they were in the midst of this controversy, he recovered, and came
again among them, and performed all that was to be done, both on the Vigil, and
on the day it self.

But this may clearly be inferred, from this procedure of theirs, that if the
Deputy had not recovered, the Ceremonies of the Feast had been adjourned till
the Sovereign had nominated a new Officer. And not unlike, but upon reflection
had on this accident, and prevention of the like afterward, occasioned what
was done, An. 3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. to wit, the nomination of Lib. C. p. 21.
two Knights-Companions to be Deputies, namely, the Earls of Derby, and
Huntingdon; the second being designed to supply the place, in case the former
should be obstructed by Lib. C. p. 21.
indisposition, or weighty affairs.

4. The nature of his Employment.
The Authority and Obligations annexed to this Office of Deputy (or Lieutenant)
are deducible from the Statutes of the Order, which give him power E. 3. Stat.
Art. 8.
to hold a Chapter at the hour of Tierce, on the Eve of the Feast: as also on
the day it self, and punish Offenders against the Statutes. And though he be
thereby expressly prohibited, the Ibid.
making of any new Decrees or Ordinances, nevertheless he may H. 8. Stat. Art.
7.
correct and reform all points of the Chapter as shall seem necessary.

And now to show that the powers granted by the Commissions, are, as derivative
from, so pursuant to the Statutes, we shall insert in the Number. CLXXVI.
Appendix first, the most ancient Commission of Deputation that Record has
preserved, being that which King Henry the Sixth gave to his Uncle John Duke of
Bedford, in the fourth year of his Reign, to supply his place, when by reason
of his abode at Lib. N. p. 79.
Leicester, in expectation of the Parliaments sitting there, he could not
personally hold the Grand Feast at Windsor that year.

First then, in the Preamble, the reason and cause of making such a Commission,
is set down in general words. Next the Sovereign takes notice of the allowance
given him by the Statutes to constitute a Deputy, and thereupon sets down the
particulars wherewith he impowers him, namely, to hold Chapters, to reform what
is amiss, to make Elections, and by a general Clause, to perform all other
things which should be any way pertinent to the necessary observation of the
Statutes: to the end his Deputy, in one and the same Instrument, might both
understand the duty of his place, and be empowered to put the same in execution.
Such like particulars are also inserted in the Commission made to Ibid. p. 116.
John Earl of Shrewsbury, an. 35. H. 6. But in later Commissions they are
omitted, and supplied by a general Clause, which gives this Officer the same
authority as had been allowed him, or such as he of right might claim. Then
follows the words of Constitution (which in succeeding Commissions are expressed
with some variety As Eligimus, Assignavimus, Nominavimus, Constituimus,
Instituimus, and the like.
) and lastly a Clause commanding obedience from the Knights-Companions present.

In the Commissions of Lieutenancy, (though not at all in the Deputational
Commissions) we find the Title of this great Officer, inserted immediately
after the words of Constitution, in this following manner. We therefore by
these presents name, constitute, appoint, and ordain you to be our Lieutenant,
at the said Feast: Giving you full Power and Authority, to do and accomplish
every thing in the same, which to our Lieutenant there, in such cases
belongs, and has been accustomed, as it is expressed in that Commission of
Lieutenancy, given to the Marquess of MS. in Offic. Arm. [ M. 17.] fol. 30. b.
Exceter, dated at Richmond the 24. of April, an. 20. H. 8. and that other to
the Collect. A.V.W.
Marquess of Winchester, and dated at St. James's the 14. of May, an. 2. and 3.
Ph. and Mar. for celebrating the Grand Feast at Windsor, the 26. of the same
month: and not only in this, but in all other since, that have come to our view.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth and King James, when the Grand Feast was held,
either at Whitehall, or Greenwich, and the Sovereign present only at some part
of the Solemnity (as in the Chapters, or at the Chapel in the morning of the
Feast Day, and sometimes proceeded publicly to the Closet (not down into the
Chapel) to the first and second Vespers) but by reason of some weighty
affairs, could not conveniently be present in person, at all parts of Divine
Service, and other Ceremonies and things to be done and executed at the Feast,
neither on the Eve, nor on the day of St. George, nor the next day following;
in such case the Clause in the Commission, which constituted the Lieutenant,
was put after this manner, Rows Iournal, fol. 209.
We do therefore name, etc. you in our absence, to be our Lieutenant for that
purpose, etc. Or, as it is in that Commission made unto Prince Henry, an 4.
Iac. R. Autogr. pene^ W. D. N.
We have made choice of you to supply Our Peace, whenever we shall have cause
to be absent, at any time of the said Eve, Day, or Morrow: And do give unto you
full power and authority, to do and accomplish all things in Our absence,
incident and meet to be performed, for the honoring and celebration of this
Feast, as by the Statutes, and laudable usage, and Customs of Our said Order
does appertain.

Now how the Sovereign is to constitute such an Officer, appears from the
directions given in the Statutes of Institution, to wit, by his E. 3. Stat.
Art. 8.
Letters; and that these Letters since, do carry the style of Commissions, and
ought to pass under the Seal of the Order, and the Sovereigns sign manual, is
evident from diverse passages in the Registers, and from the Commissions
themselves: For instance, The before recited Deputations, made to John Duke of
Bedford, an. 4. H. 6. is said to be done, Lib. N. p. 79.
by a sufficient Commission delivered unto him, under the Common Seal of the
Order. So an. 8. H. 6. Humfry Duke of Gloucester, etc. was deputed Ibid. page
8^.
by a certain Commission, signed by the Sovereign under the Common Seal. And
for holding the Feast, an. 1. E. 4. Viscount Bourghier was also Deputed by the
Sovereign, Ibid. p. 125.
By a fit and su^^icient Commission. So also the Earl of Essex, an. 14. E. 4.
Page 134.
by the authority of the Sovereigns Commission. In like manner an. 18. E. 4.
Page 142.
The Lord Dudley was assigned by virtue of the Sovereigns Commission, to
observe the yearly Feast of St. George, and to perform all things according to
custom.

It may be further observed, that the Commissions of Lieutenancy (as ancient as
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth) are said in the close to issue forth Page
2^0.
under the Seal of this most Noble Order. So was that to the Duke of Norfolk,
an. 17. H. 8. And also that other to the Marquess of Exceter, an. 20. H. 8.
which runs thus, Yeoven under the Seal of Our Garter, etc. and according to
the Modern expression, Given under the Seal, etc.

These Commissions of Lieutenancy, Lib. G. p. 64.
an. 14. Eliz. and the six following years run under the title of Letters
Patent, and are so called in the Blue Book; but how justly, is to be
questioned. For in one of these Commissions, made to the Earl of Lincoln, an.
15. of the said Queen, the conclusion is the same with those other Commissions
of like nature, of former years, viz. Yeoven under the Seal of Our Order, at,
etc. and wants that Clause, or conclusive period, from which such instruments
(as we are informed) derive the Cooks second part Instit. p. ^8.
name of Letters Patent, to wit, In cujus rei testimonium has liter as nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes. Again, an. 12. Eliz. and for seven years after, we
observe from the said Blue Book that this Officer was made Page 60.
with the consent of all the Knights-Companions, a Phrase much like that used
elsewhere, touching the Election of Knights, as has been before taken notice
of. But, if duly examined, we shall find this expression of no more strength
to entitle the Knights-Companions to a joint power with the Sovereign, for the
constituting of a Lieutenant, than the other is to make them Coelectors; where
though something requisite to the obtaining of their consent, may seem to be
implied in the aforesaid words, yet we conceive those expressions were used by
the Register, as of his own choice, rather than such as the Law of the Order
will allow of.

5. The Dignity of his Office.
The Dignity of this Officer, as he Lib. N. page 246.
represents the Sovereign's person, and supplies his place, is very great.
Which, that we may the better set forth, we shall distinguish the Honors
annexed to this eminent Place, as they are essential, and necessarily
consequent thereto; or personal, that is, such as may additionally be conferred
upon him, at the pleasure of the Sovereign.

That this Officer, as an essential Honor to his Place, has from ancient time,
had some of the Knights-Companions assigned him for his Assistants, during the
whole Feast, is evident enough throughout the Registers; yet the first mention
of Assistants, as to the Title particularly given unto such persons, we find in
the Fol. 53. b.
Registrum Chartaceum, in the Decree made at a Chapter, called at Eltham, on
St. George's day, an. 8. H. 8. (wherein after the Anniversary of the Grand
Feast, had been appointed to be observed at Windsor, upon the 25. of May, then
next ensuing, and the Marquess of Dorset nominated the Sovereign's Lieutenant)
the Fol. 53. b.
Earl of Essex, the Lord de la Ware, the Lord Monteagle, and Sir Thomas Lovell,
were appointed Assistants to the said Marquess. Another instance in the same
Register concerning the celebration of the Grand Feast at Windesor, the
following year, upon the 10. day of May (the Earl of Arundel being appointed
Lieutenant) affirms that the Fol. 53. b.
Lords de la Ware, and Monteagle, and Sir Thomas Lovell, and Sir Henry Marney
were also appointed Assistants to the said Earl.

The number of Assistants were in those times uncertain, here above we see they
were four; Anno 21. H. 8. we find but Ibid. f. 66. b.
three: and afterward, an. 32. H. 8. they were reduced unto Lib. N. page 283.
two: which number, following times exceeded not, except once, and that was the
last year of the aforesaid King, when there were Page 298.
three appointed.

These Assistants were always appointed in Chapter, when the Lieutenant himself
was Nominated; and afterward had Letters of notice sent, to each of them, from
the Sovereign, requiring their repair to Windesor, a Transcript whereof see in
the Number. CLXXIX.
Appendix; of which form have we seen several other Letters, sent upon the same
occasion, to each of the Assistants, after they had been appointed to the said
Service.

And as before we have noted in the case of Lieutenants themselves, it has
sometimes chanced, that others were afterward upon occasion, put in the places
of those first named; so here amongst the Assistants, it has in like manner
happened: for the Lib. N. page 204.
Lord Poynings an. 8. H. 8. Registr. Chartac. fol. 53. b.
by the Sovereign's Commission was appointed Assistant to the Lieutenant, in
the room of the Earl of Essex, who had been before nominated. And the Earl of
Rutland being named one of the Assistants an. 22. H. 8. was afterward excused
by the Kings Letters, Ibid. f. 66. b.
whose place the Lord Montjoy executed. So an. 29. H. 8. the aforesaid Earl of
Rutland falling sick, after the time of his nomination, and before the approach
of the Feast day, the Lib. N. page 274.
Earl of Sussex was substituted Assistant in his place.

And sometimes a Quorum of Assistants have been nominated, as an. Lib. C. page
22.
3. and 4. Ph. and Mar. in case some of them should be absent: for the Lord
Pagit, the Lord Clynton, the Lord Howard of Effingham, and Sir Edward Hastings,
having been appointed Assistants to attend the Lieutenant at the following
Feast, it is added, Lib. C. page 22.
that at least any two of them, who at that time were nearest to the Kings
Court, should be there present, to assist the Sovereign's Deputy, according to
his Majesty's pleasure, as the Custom and their duty obliged.

Another Honor, essential to the Dignity of the Lieutenant is, that the
Sovereign lays an Injunction upon the rest of the Knights-Companions then
present, to yield Assistance and Obedience to him in all things, as if himself
were personally present: For so is it enjoined by the Commission to the
aforesaid Lib. N. p. 80.
John Duke of Bedford. And generally all Forms of Commissions since, close with
such like Injunctions of Obedience, in the execution of the Sovereign's
Authority.

To these Honors before spoken of, we might add some other of the like nature,
viz. that this great Officer possesses the Sovereigns Place, in all
Proceedings, and at the Table, that he has his Train carried up, that a
Reverence is given him by the Knights-Companions, an essay taken for him of the
Offering, and offers with Carpet and Cusheon; but these we reserve to speak
of at large by and by.

In reference to personal Honors (though generally all Lieutenants sit in their
own Seats in the Chapel) we find the Marquess of Northampton had assigned to
him a higher Stall than his own, during the whole Festivity of St. George: For
in the Chapter held on the Eve, an. 3. Eliz. the Celebration of the day of St.
George, being that year observed at Whitehall, the Sovereign decreed, Lib. C.
page 38.
that the foresaid Marquess, during only the time of his Deputation, should
take the Stall of the Earl of Shrewsbury, then lately deceased. Now the
Marquesses own Stall was at that time the MS. fol. penes W D. N. fol. 2. a.
eight Stall on the Princes side, but that which the Earl of Shrewsbury then
lately possessed, was the MS. fol. penes W D. N. fol. 2. a.
fourth on the same side, and next below the Duke of Holstein, whose Seat was
the MS. fol. penes W D. N. fol. 2. a.
lowest among the Stranger Princes then alive.

To conclude; it seems in time, the Duty incumbent on both the Lieutenant and
his Assistants, grew so burthensom, that the Sovereign took their attendance
and charge into consideration, and therefore in their favor decreed (at a
Chapter held on Registr. Chartac. fol. 65. b.
St. Georges day at Greenwich, an. 19. H. 8.) Registr. Chartac. fol. 65. b.
That the Knights-Companions Appointed or Deputed [Lieutenants or Assistants]
to be present or to keep the Feast of St. George in the College of Windsor one
year, should not be Appointed or Deputed to be present, or to keep it the year
next following, unless the Sovereign should please to be present at the day or
Feast. And to the same effect, though briefly, is this Decree recorded in the
Page 255.
Black Book. But more large and particular is it thus entered in one of the MS.
now remaining in the Office of Arms.

Lib. M. 17. fol. 33. b.
Memorandum, That the Sovereign of the Order King Henry the Eighth our
Sovereign Lord, by the advice of the Knights of the said Order, the 19. pear of
his most noble Reign, by virtue of a Chapitre holden at his Manor of Greenwich
the 23. day of April, Ordained and enacted by Act of Chapitre, that all such
Knights of the Order from thenceforth, which should be appointed by his
Highness to be his Lieutenant or Deputy at the Feast of St. George kept at his
Castle of Windesor, and all such other Knights as was to the said Lieutenant,
Attendant, and Assistant at that time, should, for the next year ensuing, be
clearly discharged and excused for their attendance at the said Castle; unless
any Knight of the Order upon his own devotion would be at the said Feast of St.
George at Wyndesor, then be to be there at pleasure.

Nor was that yet thought a sufficient indulgence to the Ibid.
Lieutenant and Assistants, to be absent from the next Grand Feast, and
therefore the said Ordinance was afterward an. 23. and 24. H. 8. extended to
the space of Ibid.
three years, from and after the said Feast.

And herewith we are to note, That this Officer always held the Feast, at his
peculiar charge and cost; and gave liberal Rewards to Collect. A. V. W. vide
etiam MS. penes G.O.Y. fol. 155. ^ 190.
Garter, and for his Scatcheons, as also to the Officers of Arms, the
Gentlemen-ushers, the Alms-Knights, the Vshers and Grooms of the Chamber, the
Clerks of the Kitchen, the Harbinger, and Groom-Porters, with the rest of the
Sovereign's Servants, Waiters of several Offices in the House, to the
Choristers, the Vergers, etc. that kept the Robes, and the Sexton, even to
those who made clean the Seats, and laid the Cusheons.

And because all things relating to the Feast, were set forth with exceeding
State and Nobleness (which was commonly every year augmented, each Lieutenant
striving to outvie his Predecessor in magnificence and liberality) his Expenses
became very great: In consideration whereof, the aforesaid Privilege was
granted, that so by a License of Non-attendance, for the three following years,
the Persons who had undergone the charge and trouble of these Offices, might be
in some measure eased. Nevertheless the generous Lord Fitz Williams was so far
from taking advantage of this indulgence, that he was one of the Assistants to
the Sovereigns Lieutenant, for the Regist. Chartac. fol. 66. and 67. vide etiam
Lib. N. sub an^ 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, and 25. H. 8.
six years next ensuing the Decree past, an. 19. H. 8.

SECT. VI. The Ceremonies relating to the first Vespers.
WE have now finished our Discourse upon the Particulars managed in the first
Chapter, held on the Eve of St. George; which being broke up, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, do immediately proceed from the Chapter House into the
Choire, to hear Vespers. In handling and describing the Ceremonies relating
thereunto, we shall consider, first, those performed before the Vespers begin;
secondly, the Course of Divine Service; and lastly, those used after it is
ended. Wherein we shall be particular and exact, not only in regard the State
thereof is both solemn and sacred; but because the same Order of Ceremony is to
be repeated, so often as the Sovereign and Knights-Companions enter the
Chapel, or depart thence, or go up into, or come down from their Stalls.

Proceeding to the Choire.
First then we are to presuppose, that the Officers of Arms, Prebends of the
College, and Alms-Knights, having attended in the North Isle of the Chapel,
during the sitting of the Chapter, do now upon the rising and coming forth of
the Sovereign, Knights-Companions, and Officers of the Order put themselves
into Rank, and continue the Proceeding (through the passage and Guard made by
the Knights-Companions Attendants, and the Sovereigns Band of Pensioners) from
the Chapter House door, along the said North Isle, and so to the West door of
the Choire, in like manner and order as they did proceed from the Chamber of
Presence to the Chapter House. The Organs then beginning to play, and
continuing on, till Vespers begin.

When the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Alms-Knights be arrived at the West Door, Entry thereinto.
they first enter in a whole Body, (while the rest of the Proceeding makes a
short stand) and pass forwards near to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
middle of the Choire, where they make a joint and low obeisance, first toward
the Altar, next (all Collect. W. le N. Cl.
turning about by the left hand) to the Sovereign's Royal Seat; then still
turning from the right to the left hand, they Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ascend the Haut Pas's even to the Rails set before the Altar, and forthwith
divide themselves, flanking on each side, (the Juniors standing nearest to the
Rails) and Collect. W. le N. Cl.
at such a spacious distance, that the Altar may be discerned by all that
follow in the Proceeding, when they draw near to make their Reverences.

As Soon as the Alms-Knights have made their obeisance, the Prebends of the
College enter in a whole body also, and having turned on the left hand, and
made the like double obeisances in the middle of the Choire, they divide
themselves, and take their Seats, every one in their Order. The Seats appointed
for them at this Solemnity (and at other times when any of the
Knights-Companions are present in the Chapel) is in the lower range of Seats,
and so ordered by Art. 14.
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes; albeit in their absence, the Prebends are
permitted to sit in the higher Seats, between (but not in) the Stalls of the
Knights-Companions.

While the Prebends are entering their Seats, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and
Provincial Kings of Arms (in a Body) enter also the Choire; and after their
double Reverences made, pass up toward the Altar, and join to the Alms-Knights.

But sometimes heretofore, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
to enlarge the Ceremony, as Collect. W. le N. Cl.
an. 3. and 8. Car. 1. the Pursuivants have by themselves advanced into the
Choire, and proceeding into the middle, there Collect. W. le N. Cl.
made their Reverences, first toward the Altar, and then turning about by the
left hand, did the like to the Sovereign's Stall, then, they ascended unto the
second Haut Pas before the Altar, where also Collect. W. le N. Cl.
dividing themselves on each side, (the Junior Pursuivants joining near to the
Senior Alms-Knights) Collect. W. le N. Cl.
kept the like spacious Lane between them, as the Alms-Knights did, to the end
also, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions might have the Altar in full
view, as they made their several Reverences toward it.

Next, the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Heralds proceeded in a Body by themselves, up to the middle of the Choire, and
there having likewise made the like double Reverences, ascended the first Haut
Pas before the Altar, and divided themselves, flanking even with the
Pursuivants.

In like manner the two Provincial Kings made their Entry, (doing their
Reverences) and placed themselves on each side upon the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
edge of the lowest Haut Pas, toward the Stalls. Thus they divided themselves,
not only here at their first entrance, but at all other times when they passed
up and down, or in, or out of the Choire, during the foresaid Feasts. But for
shortning of the Ceremony, (as of late has been the usual course) the
Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings join all in a Body, and perform this
part of the Ceremony together.

Afterward, the two Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Junior Knights-Companions enter, and passing on till they come near their own
Stalls, there make their Collect. W. le N. Cl.
double Reverences together, first toward the Altar, next the Sovereigns Royal
Stall; then they divide themselves, and take their stand Collect. W. le N. Cl.
directly before their Stalls. Thus also do the rest of the Knights present, at
their entry into the Choire, and in the same order as they past in the
Proceeding to the Chapter House; taking their several stations under their
proper Stalls, until the Sovereign shall have ascended his Seat. But where any
of the Knights want his Collect. W. le N. Cl.
opposite Companion, in such case he enters the Choire alone.

And this manner of doing Reverence and Obeisance, Manner of doing Reverence,
and when introduced.
was introduced in the Reign of Henry the Fifth, and has continued in use ever
since. For whereas from ancient time, the Knights-Companions at their entrance
into the Choire, and taking of their Stalls, gave Reverence to God, and toward
the high Altar, John Duke of Bedford, an. 6. H. 5. holding the Feast of St.
George at Windsor in absence of the Sovereign: It was then in Chapter decreed,
Lib. N. page 65.
That all the Companions of the Order, whenever they entered into the Choire,
and at their going forth, as likewise at their descent from their Stalls,
should do Reverence to the Sovereign, if present; or if absent, to his Stall:
Lib. N. page 65.
by which Ceremony they should own him as their Sovereign, and acknowledge all
manner of subjection and obedience to be due unto him. But when the Sovereign
returned out of France, he signified to the Knights-Companions, as, much more
reasonable and convenient, Ibid.
That at the Entrance and Departure aforesaid, the devout Obeisance due to Gods
honor, should be first paid to God, and toward his Altar, after the manner of
Ecclesiastics; and then, what of Honor was due to him, to pay it next to
Himself, or in his absence, to his Stall.

Next to the Knights-Companions does the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
enter in Breast, who proceeding also to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
middle of the Choire, do their double Reverences together, and then pass to
their Form, placed on the South side of the Choire MS. penes W. D. N. f. 7. b.
and 15. a.
before the Sovereigns Stall, and stand before it.

After them come in the Chancellor and Prelate, who having made their double
Reverences also, go from the middle of the Choire, and stand before their Form,
set between the Sovereigns Royal Seat, and that other but now mentioned. As
touching these two Forms whereon the Officers of the Order sit in the Chapel,
there is a special Decree for the allowance of them, entered at the end of the
Constitutions of their Offices, which is this; Lib. N. page 238.
Within the Choire of the Chapel, during the Celebration of Divine Service,
there shall be placed before the Sovereigns Seat two other Seats or Forms, one
before another; upon one of which shall sit the Prelate and Chancellor of the
Order, on the other the Register, Garter, and Usher of the Black-Rod.

Last of all, the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Sovereign enters, (having the Sword born before him, but his Band of
Pensioners stay at the Choire door, to keep off the press) who coming to the
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
steps which ascend to his Royal Seat, makes there a Reverence toward the
Altar, and then ascending thereinto, makes a Collect. W. le N. Cl.
second Reverence and seats himself.

And when (in the Sovereigns absence) his Lieutenant proceeds to the first
Vespers, he goes in the Sovereigns place, and as soon as he has entered the
Choire, and is come near the Sovereigns Stall, he stands, and makes a little
pause there; then MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. a. and 7. b. vide MS. penes G. O. Y.
page 123.
doing his Reverences, first toward the Altar, next toward the Sovereigns
Stall, after he has again stood a while before it, he MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3.
a. and 7. b. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. page 123.
ascends his own (which like unto the Stall of the Sovereign (Emperors,
Stranger Kings and Princes when present) is garnished with a MS. penes W. D. N.
f. 3. a. and 7. b. vide MS. penes G. O. Y. page 123.
Carpet and Cushion laid before it) where being arrived, he makes the double
Reverence a second time, and then sits down.

And now, in order to placing the Knights-Companions in their Stalls, Garter
(so soon as the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) is set down) makes again his
usual Reverences, in the middle of the Choire, then turns to the two Senior
Knights, and does his Reverence to each of them; whereupon, at one instant,
they make their double Reverences Collect. W. le N. Cl.
below, where they stood, and forthwith ascend at the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
first or Western entrance, that goes to the side Stalls; where being Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
arrive, they make again the double Reverence, and seat themselves.

But when the Sovereigns Lieutenant is present, each Knight adds a MS. penes W.
D. N. f. 7. b. and 20. a.
third Reverence to him, both when they ascend to, and descend from their
Stalls. And this third Reverence, not only they, but all the persons who pass
in the Proceeding add to their double Reverences, so often as there is occasion
to make it, after such time as the Sovereigns Lieutenant is entered his Stall,
and so long as he continues therein, both on the Eve, the Feast day, and the
Morrow after.

In like order, and with like Reverences do all the rest of the
Knights-Companions (having each waited the seating of his senior fellow) ascend
their Stalls, where they proceed by pairs; otherwise they take their Stalls
singly. But the place appointed for all but the two senior Knights-Companions
to enter into, and come out of their Stalls, is the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
middle entrance, or that at the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
East end of the Stalls, which of them fall out to be next below each Knight's
respective Stall, to avoid the trouble and inconvenience of passing before any
of their senior Companions.

The Knights-Companions being all seated, the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Prelate and Chancellor of the Order pass into the middle of the Choire, and
having made double Reverences, return to their Form and sit down. After them
does the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod, pass thither, there make their
Reverences, and then sit down on their Form, in the order as they proceeded.

As touching the Sovereign's other Attendants, we have observed, that the
Nobleman who carries the Sword retires before the Sovereign's Stall a little on
the right hand, and the Lord Chamberlain of the Household (if not a Knight of
the Order) and the Vice-Chamberlain on his left, until the Sovereign give them
leave to sit down; the Clerk of the Closet stands at the Sovereign's right
hand; but the young Noblemen that carry up the Sovereign's Train, and the
Gentleman of the Robes, sometimes repose themselves upon the Steps going up to
the Sovereign's Stall.

This great Ceremony of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions entry into the
Choire, and taking their Stalls being finished, preparation for the Vespers
begin; in reference to which the Prelate ascends to the Altar; it being
appointed among other things relating to the duty of his Office, That Lib. N.
p. 233.
Whenever the Sovereign should think fit to keep the Solemnity of St. George
at Windesor, he should be obliged to be present to celebrate divine service;
which if he purposely omitted, it is there provided, that Lib. N. p. 233.
for such omission he should be fined 20 Marks to the College, to be laid out
upon the Reparations that are there to be made, Lib. N. p. 233.
unless he allege to the Sovereign and the Knights-Companions some reasonable
and just cause of his being absent. And therefore, in case of Vacancy of the Sea of Winchester, Sickness, or other lawful occasion for absence, the
Sovereign has dispnesed with this penally, and appointed some other Bishop to
officiate for him. The Proceeding to the Altar on this occasion is in manner
following.

First the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Sergeant of the Vestry makes a double Reverence, Prelates going up to the
Altar.
then comes before the Prelate and makes a single one to him, who thereupon
arises from his Seat, and the Sergeant Collect. W. le N. Cl.
proceeds before him into the middle of the Choire; where standing a little
on the one side, the Prelate Collect. W. le N. Cl.
there makes a double Reverence, and from thence passing forward after the
Sergeant, and having ascended the uppermost Haut-pas before the Altar, he makes
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
one single Reverence toward the same, and so goes to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
North side of it.

In his ascent to the Altar, he has sometimes made Collect. W. le N. Cl. an.
11. Car. 1.
three double Reverences, viz. one before his Seat, a second in the middle of
the Choire, and the third on the first Haut-pas, and after these, the single
one above the Haut-pas's; all in a direct line before the Altar.

After the Prelate has arrived at the Altar, the two Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Provincial Kings, Heralds and Pursuivants, leaving their forementioned
Station, join together, and pass along the Choire, until the Kings come near to
the Form, whereon the Register, Garter, and Black-Rod sit, where all making
their double Reverences together, they divide themselves again on each side,
and there stand.

Lastly, the Alms-Knights come down into the Choire in a Body, and there make
their joint double Reverences, and then take their Chairs.

The like in every thing is performed in the Chapel at Whitehall, and other
places, where the Solemnity of the Feast is observed; where because the
Alms-Knights are absent, the Pursuivants at Arms ascend nearer the high Altar
than when they are at Windesor, that there may be room enough for the rest of
the Officers of Arms to stand in rank, yet so that the Provincial Kings stand
not further from it than the lowermost Haut Pas, to avoid pressing upon the
Junior Knights.

All these Ceremonies being finished, The Course of Divine Service
and the several Degrees in the Proceeding duly placed, the Choire, resembling
the celestial Spheres, where the Sovereign of this most Illustrious Order sits
as Sun, among the Planets and Stars, the Divine Office is begun by the Prelate
in a most solemn manner; which is now celebrated according to the Order of the
Book of Common Prayer, established by the Acts of Parliament made an. 1. Eliz.
and 14. Car. 2. being the same appointed in the Rubric for the Evening of the
22. day of April, or for the Evening of such other day, whereon the Feast by
Prorogation has been celebrated: Where sometimes to shorten the Ceremony, the
Prelate has omitted the Confession and Absolution, and began with the Pater
Noster; and frequently instead of the Magnificat, or Nunc dimittis, or one of
them, some choice-composed Anthems are sung to the Organ: and after proceeding
on with the Creed, and the rest of the Prayers in the accustomed order, to that
of St. Chrysostom, before which in the Reign of King James, was the following
Prayer used throughout the Feast.

O Lord, save our King, And mercifully hear us, etc.
Almighty and most merciful Father, we humbly beseech thee in the Name of thy
Son Christ Jesus our Lord and Savior, to direct and endue King James our most
worthy Governor, with the continual and plentiful grace of thine holy Spirit,
that as be is anciently and rightly descended from the valiant and prudent
Princes of this Realm, the first Founders and Cre^ors of this most noble Order
of the Garter, So be may abound and excel in all things acceptable to thee,
namely in the maintenance of piety, peace, justice, and unity, to the support
of good Learning, relief of the poor and oppressed; and grant most gracious
Lord, that all the Noble men of this Realm, especially such as be Companions of
this most honorable Order, may be truly deboted to godliness, balour, and
bertue, in such sort, that God may be thereby the better honored, their
Soberaigne serbed, the Commonwealth secured, and the memorial of their
well-doing remain to their posterity. And that we all may live and dye in thy
faith and fear, and walk in these good works, which thou have appointed us
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

O Lord, long preserve James our King, and all the Companions of this most
noble Order of the Garter, Amen.


Next follows the Prayer of St. Chrysostom, and last of all the Blessing. After
the pronouncing of which, at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windsor, in
the 15. year of the present Sovereign, there was an Anthem composed for the
present Solemnity, sung to the Organ and other Instrumental Music, placed in
the Organ loft: and this was the first time, that Instrumental Music was
introduced into the said Chapel.

When the Vespers are ended, the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Prelate goes to the middle of the Altar, and there before it (with great
reverence) makes an obeisance; and thence ( Collect. W. le N. Cl.
taking the Sergeant before him) descends to the middle of the Choire, where he
makes his double Reverences, and so Collect. W. le N. Cl.
returns to his Seat; whereupon all make ready to pass out of the Choire in the
following manner. And first,

Proceeding out of the Choire.
The Alms-Knights come from their Seats, and draw together into the middle of
the Choire, and having made their double Reverences, in manner first above
described, they ascend in a body upon the highest Haut Pas before the Altar
(the Junior near to the Rails) and there dividing themselves again, make a
Lane, and stand in the same places they did before.

Next them, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Kings make their double Reverences,
and ascend to the Altar, where dividing themselves, they stand where they did
before. All which is done, to the end the body of the Choire may be wholly
cleared, for the Knights-Companions to descend into, and stand over against
their Stalls.

After this, Garter rises from his Seat, and passing into the middle of the
Choire, makes there a double Reverence, then going forward till he Ex eod.
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
come over against the Junior Knights Stall, (for when they descend from the
Stalls, he is the first) he there bows toward him, and ( Ex eod. Collect. W.
le N. Cl.
if his Companion be present) then turns himself toward the opposite side of
the Choire, and immediately bows to him also, and then gives the Ex eod.
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
usual Signal or Summons for the Knights-Companions to descend, by the waving
or bending of his Scepter toward them; which done, he draws back to his Seat
without any other Obeisances. And the Reason given is, Ex eod. Collect. W. le
N. Cl.
for that at this time while Garter is retiring, the Junior Knights are making
their Reverences, and therefore it were not proper for him to be also doing his.

As Soon therefore as Garter has given the aforesaid Signal, the two Ibid.
Junior Knights-Companions (if both be present, otherwise the Junior alone)
rise from their Seats, and standing above before their Stalls, make their
double Reverence Ibid.
both at one time, and then descend into the Choire by the way they went up;
where making a second double Reverence, they forthwith place themselves
directly over against their own Stalls, and Ibid.
stand there.

Then the Ibid.
next Junior Knights (or Knight, if he be not paired with his Companion) arise,
and descend with like Reverences; and in like order, do all the rest that are
present at the Ceremony, each with his opposite Companion; but if he be
wanting, then he performs the Ceremony alone.

When all the Knights-Companions are come down, and placed before their Stalls,
the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register step forth, make their double Reverence all
at once, then retire before their Forms, and stand there. After whom, the
Chancellor and Prelate do the like.

As Soon as they have done, the Alms-Knights descend into the middle of the
Choire (the Puisnes going foremost) and there, turning about by the left hand,
as before, make their double Reverences together, and so pass out through the
West door of the Choire, and at some convenient distance thence, stand, till
the Prebends be also come out and joined to them, and moving a little further,
when the Officers of Arms are come forth, all then attend the coming out of the
Knights-Companions, and they, that of the Sovereign.

Whilst the Alms-Knights are passing out, as aforesaid, the Prebends of the
College came forth of their Seats into the Choire, and in the middle thereof
make likewise their double Reverence, and then pass out (the Verger of the
Chapel going before them) and join themselves to the Alms-Knights.

Next the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Kings descend into the middle of the
Choire, and there making a double Reverence, pass likewise forward

Then the two Junior Knights (or Knight, if his Companion be absent) make their
double Reverence in the middle of the Choire, over against their proper Stalls,
and proceed forth, and so do all the rest in order, the Seniors last. And here
(and all other times when the Knights-Companions pass out of the Choire, except
in the Grand Procession) do the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Choristers step in, and bear up their Trains to the Presence Chamber, which
piece of Service, was so at first permitted, to entitle each of them to the
favor of a half-piece gratuity, which the Knights-Companions have usually
bestowed upon them, in recompense of their officio^s Attendance.

After the Knights-Companions, the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register make their
double Reverences, and pass forward. The like do the Chancellor and Prelate,
and follow them.

Then does the Sovereign rise out of his Royal Seat, and having made his
obeisance toward the Altar above in his Stall, he descends, and does the like
again being descended.

But when the Sovereign is absent, his Lieutenant descends from his Stall MS 4.
pen. E. W. G.
with usual Reverences; and when he comes to the Sovereigns Royal Stall, he MS
4. pen. E. W. G.
stands a while before the entrance into it, and then making his accustomed
Reverence, proceeds out of the Choire.

The Sovereign having made his Reverences, proceeds forthwith out of the
Choire, (the Sword being born before him) thence he passes through the South
door of the Chapel, into the lower Ward of the Castle, and presently enters
into the same way, by which he came to the Chapter House; and as the Statutes
do ordain, E. 3. Stat. Art. 3.
returns in the very same order, viz. per modum Processionis back to the
Presence Chamber.

When the Servants and Attendants of the Knights-Companions are arrived at the
great Gate, in the upper Ward of the Castle, entering into the Sovereigns
Lodgings; (or to the same place, as far as their number reached, to make the
Lane for the Proceeding to pass through, when the Sovereign proceeded to the
Chapter House) then do they begin to divide, and rank themselves on either side
the passage, through the Stone-Gallery, up the Stairs to the Guard-Chamber
door, in the same order, as they were marshalled at the beginning of the
Proceeding; that so the whole Proceeding may again pass through them.

The Alms-Knights having entered the Guard-Chamber, and being come near to the
middle, the Juniors begin to fall off on both sides the Room; the next Seniors,
(and so forward to their Governor) following in due order, do place themselves
up further in the Room.

Whereupon the Prebends pass through the Lane so made, and as soon as they are
past the Alms-Knights, fall off on either side the Room, to the
Presence Chamber door. Then the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings
proceeding through the Lane made by the Alms-Knights and Prebends, do forthwith
enter into the Presence Chamber, and immediately fall off on either side,
toward the State, the Kings of Arms standing uppermost.

Then enter the Knights-Companions, and place themselves Collect. W. le N. Cl.
on each side of the State, in such order Collect. W. le N. Cl.
as they sat in their Stalls, the eldest nearest the State; but such whose
Companions are absent, stand alone. After whom follow the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Officers of the Order, disposing themselves conveniently near the State.

Lastly, the Sovereign (attended as before) passes to the step before the
State; where being arrived, he Collect. W. le N. Cl.
turns his Face toward the Knights-Companions, who immediately make their
Reverences Collect. W. le N. Cl.
jointly to him, and he thereupon puts off his Cap, and re-salutes them, which
done, the Sovereign and they withdraw into the Privy Lodgings, until Supper
time.

But in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when the Feast of St. George was kept at
Whitehall, or at Greenwich, and the Sovereign (as was usual for the said Queen)
proceeded no further on the Eve to Vespers, than to the great Closet, the
ordinary way, and thence sent her Lieutenant into the Choire: Then in such
case, when Vespers were ended, the Lieutenant returned from the Choire orderly
through the great MS. penes W.D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 9. b. and 26. a. Vide etiam
MS. penes praefat. Geo. O. Y. 123. and MS. 4. penes E. W. G.
Hall, and so back to the said MS. penes W.D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 9. b. and 26.
a. Vide etiam MS. penes praefat. Geo. O. Y. 123. and MS. 4. penes E. W. G.
Closet, and stood at the Door thereof attending the Sovereigns coming forth,
from whence they all proceeded before her into the MS. penes W.D. N. f. 3. a.
7. b. 9. b. and 26. a. Vide etiam MS. penes praefat. Geo. O. Y. 123. and MS. 4.
penes E. W. G.
Presence Chamber, and there the Ceremony (for that time) ended.

But in King James his Reign, when the Supper on the Eve, as also the following
Meals, were prepared in the Banqueting House, the Sovereigns Lieutenant
frequently returned from the Closet by the Lobby over the Terrace (since pulled
down) to the said MS. penes E. W. G.
Banqueting House, (the Noblemens Servants standing on either side the way)
instead of goin^ to the Presence; and passing up to the State, gave an end to
the Ceremony till Supper time: and so do we find it observed in the 7, 8, 9,
10, 12, 13, 14, and 16. of the said Sovereigns Reign.

When the Sovereign and Knights-Companions are retired, they are not to put off
any part of their Robes till after Supper; for that is prohibited by the
Statutes, E. 3. Stat: Art. 3.
not only to those that do not sup, no less than those which do. And hereupon
the 22. of April, An. 19. Car. 2. the Grand Feast being held at Whitehall. The
Sovereign having a desire to take the Air, after he had taken leave of the
Knights in the Presence Chamber, took Coach, and went into Hide-Park, taking
the Duke of Monmouth and Earl of Oxford with him, and all three in their whole
Habit of the Order. The Duke of York also at the same time, went in another
Coach, his Duchess accompanying him, but habited in full Robes likewise; and
so returned to Supper.

SECT. VII. The Supper on the Eve.
WHen the Sovereign is pleased to Sup publicly, on the Eve of the Feast at
Windesor, the Supper has been always prepared in St. George's Hall; and was
accordingly done an. Palmers large Iournal. page 14.
14. and Palmers Iournal, pro an. 1639. page 19.
15 Car. 1. and 13.15. and 23. years of the present Sovereign.

The usual place at Whitehall for this first Meal, was heretofore the Presence
Chamber, MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. a. 7. b. 20. a.
of latter times the Banqueting House; and at Greenwich either the MS. penes G.
O. Y. page 114.
Presence or MS. praef. W. D. N. penes f. 26. b.
Council Chamger; where the Sovereign or his Lieutenant were always present.
But when the Feast of St. George was celebrated at York, an. Palmers large
Iournal, page 38.
17 Car. 1. The Sovereign and Knights-Companions marched after the first
Vespers ended, to an Palmers large Iournal, page 38.
House prepared for that purpose, and Supped there; and thence returned to his
own Palace to Bed.

But if the Eve of the Feast fell out to be on a Fasting Day, as it did an. 22.
H. 8. upon MS. in Offic. Arm. M. 17. fol. 32.
a Saturday, and an. 11. Iac. R. upon a MS. penes E. W. G. f. 151. a.
Friday; the Supper was always omitted, and the Sovereign or his Lieutenant and
Knights-Companions were served of the Void only; concerning which Term, more
shall be spoken immediately.

Nor does the Sovereign when he suppeth publicly, pass privately to the place:
but as soon as notice is given that the first Mess is set upon the Table, he
forthwith enters the Presence Chamber, whence the Officers of the Order and of
Arms, the Knights-Companions in their full Robes (for so the E. 3. Stat. Art.
3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 3. H. 8. Stat. Art. 3.
Statutes of the Order direct in particular) having put themselves into their
usual and due Order, proceed before him into St. George's Hall. Where being
entered, the Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings, fall off all upon the
right hand, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
opposite to the Knights-Companions Table, the Junior Pursuivant standing
toward the lower end of the Hall.

Then the Knights-Companions passing up beyond them, formerly Collect. W. le N.
Cl.
divided themselves on either side, according to the Decree Lib. N. p. 31^.
an. 16. H. 8. and made a stand, each taking place, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
according to the order of their Stalls. But at the Feast held at Whitehall an.
19. Car. 2. the Sovereign directed, that they should stand all on the right
hand side, facing their Table.

Next the five Officers of the Order follow, who ascending Collect. W. le N. Cl.
beyond the Senior Knight, retire on the right hand; After them the Sovereign,
who coming up last (all the Officers of Arms Collect. W. le N. Cl.
doing him reverence as he passes by) goes directly to the Haut-pas, before
his own Table, where turning himself toward the Knights-Companions, and
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
putting off his Cap, they return their Reverences jointly to him.

After this, in order to the Sovereigns sitting down to Supper, he is first
served with Water by some Noblemen appointed for that Service. Next Grace is
said by the Prelate, and then does the Sovereign place himself in his Chair,
set in the middle of the Table. After whom the Senior Knight, conducted to his
Table by two Officers of Arms, sits down, and so do all the rest in due order,
at the Tables appointed for them. Whereupon the Officers of the Order and of
Arms, retire out of the Hall to Supper.

Now in regard all these last mentioned particulars are ordered alike, and in
the same manner, at the other Meals of this Grand Feast, as here at this: We
choose rather to transfer the further enlargement upon them, to our Discourse of
the Dinner on the Feast day, where these, and such things and services as are
also common to every Meal, are once for all brought to view, and handled at
large.

If a Lieutenant be constituted, he MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide
etiam MS. penes G.O.^. p. 114.
proceeds to Supper in full Robes, and in the same order as does the Sovereign,
whether it be to St. George's Hall, or elsewhere, and sits MS. f. pen. praef.
W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.^. p. 114.
alone at the Sovereign's Table, yet on the MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a.
vide etiam MS. penes G.O.^. p. 114.
left hand of the Cloth of State; being served in all points with MS. f. pen.
praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.^. p. 114.
Water, and by a MS. f. pen. praef. W.D.N. f. 3. a. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.^.
p. 114.
Cupbearer, Carver, and Sewer, as is the Sovereign himself.

This, and the other Meals were usually heretofore closed with Comfits, Spices,
and Wine, and of late times with a costly Banquet: which, after the Sovereign
has washed, is brought in and placed upon the Table.

This Banquet after Supper, The Void, what?
is that which in some places is called the Void, as an. 31. H. 8. it is
observed, that Supper being ended, the Pnesident and Knights-Companions had a
Lib. L. 1. in Offic. Arm. p. 19.
Void of Comfits and Hypocras, and an. 4. Eliz. a MS. pen. W.D.N. fol. 7. b.
Void of Spices and Wine. So Ibid. f. 15. a. and 20. a.
an. 6. and 7. of the same Queen, it is said, they were served of the Void and
departed, and an. 20. Eliz. it is likewise said, Supper being ended, and MS.
pen. G.O.T. page 114.
Voydance brought, they departed for that night. So also is it phrased in King
Henry the Eighth's Statutes, Art. 3.

But somewhat more fully an. 5. Eliz. when St. George's day falling upon a
Friday, at the return from the second Vespers, instead of a Supper (it being a
fasting night) the Lieutenant MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10. a.
standing in the middle before the Cloth of State, and the Knights along on
either hand, the Comfits, Spices, Sugar, and Wine were brought in, and in
several Bowls (or Chargers) presented; first MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10. a.
a Bowl to the Sovereign's Lieutenant, and then a Bowl to each two of the
Knights-Companions; and the Relator, at the close, noting also the posture they
took the Banquet in, calls it a Void; for he says, they had the MS. pen. W. D.
N. fol. 10. a.
Void standing. And lastly, the Feast happening on a Friday, an. 27. of the same
Queen, celebrated at Greenwich, it is noted by MS. quar^. penes E. W. G. fol. 9.
Robert Cook then Clarenceux, that when the Banquet was brought in, the
Lieutenant and all the Knights-Companions standing in order, were served of the
MS. quar^. penes E. W. G. fol. 9.
Void, because they had no Supper.

When Supper is ended, and the Banquet taken away, the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions Palmers large Iourn page 14.
proceed back (in the same order as they came) into the Presence Chamber; where
the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) standing on the step before the State,
saluteth them as before, and then MS. 4. penes E. W. G. fol. 2.
appoints the hour and place for the Knights-Companions to attend him the next
morning; which commonly is about MS. in Offic. Arm lib. M. 17. fol. 32. b.
8 a Clock, after which they make their Reverences, and all depart to their
several Lodgings.

The like if Supper be prepared in any other place besides the
Presence Chamber; for from thence (when it is ended) does the Sovereign (or his
Lieutenant) and the Knights-Companions proceed to the Presence, because the
Ceremony ought to end there. So we find it observed an. 17. Car. 1. when the
Feast was solemnized at York, where, though the Palmers large Iournal, page 38.
House appointed to sup at, was somewhat remote from the Sovereign's Palace,
yet the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order attended the Sovereign
thence, after Supper, to the Palmers large Iournal, page 38.
Presence Chamber in the foresaid Palace; and there, he taking leave of them,
they immediately retired to disrobe themselves. In like case an. 27. Eliz. the
Feast being then held at Greenwich, and the Sovereign's Lieutenant and
Companions supping in the Collect. R. C. Cl.
Great Chamber, (at the neither end of the Guard-Chamber) they thence attended
the Lieutenant to the Collect. R. C. Cl.
Presence after Supper; where the Lieutenant taking his place at the upper end,
and the Knights-Companions their places in due order, they stayed a while
there, and then departed.

The like did they the next day, both after the Grand Collect. R. C. Cl.
Dinner, and at night after Supper, because the Lieutenant dined and supped in
the said Great Chamber.

But when Supper was prepared in the Presence Chamber, at any of the
Sovereign's Courts, the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) and Knights-Companions
did take their leave one of another in the same Room, there being no occasion
for any formal Proceeding further. Nevertheless, if any of the
Knights-Companions accompanied the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) to his
Lodgings, they then went Collect. E. W. G.
after, not before him, in regard the Collect. E. W. G.
state of that nights Service ended in the Chamber of Presence; and after they
are retired to their several Lodgings, they have permission to put off their
Robes.

When the Sovereign or his Lieutenant do not sup in St. George's Hall on the
Eve of the Feast, or the following night, the Officers of Arms have formerly
had the liberty to eat their Suppers there; and this privilege and assignment
of a Table, was given them by a Decree in Chapter held the 16. of June, an. 8.
Eliz. as follows.

Lib. C. p. 53. videsis lib Partit. in Offic. Arm. [1. fol. 275.] and MS. penes
G. O. Y. fol. 93.
That forasmuch, as the Officers of Arms had formerly no certain place assigned
them, wherein they might eat their meat, the night next preceding the day of
St. George, and also on the Evening of the Feast day, they should from
thenceforth hold, within the Hall at Windesor, that Table, which was before
that time appointed for the Chancellor and Register, and other Officers of the
Garter, to sit at, on the day of the said Festival. But how they came to lose
the privilege, hereby granted, we cannot learn; for now instead of sitting in
the Great Hall, they are necessitated to eat their Meat in such Rooms of the
Castle, as upon the score of friendship they can obtain; and among others, at
the Grand Feasts held at Windesor an. 13. and 15. Car. 2. Captain Burgh, one of
the Alms-Knights, very courteously befriended them with the use of his lower
Room, to dine and sup in; and in the 23. year of the same King, Captain Hull,
another of the Alms-Knights, did them the like kindness.

CHAP. XXI. THE ORDER OF THE Ceremonies ON THE Feast Day.
SECT. I. The Proceeding to the Chapel in the Morning.
ALbeit the Celebrations of the Feast of St. George take up three days
inclusively, that is to say, part of the 22. all the 23. and part of the 24.
days of April; yet the 23. day [the day of St. George] is the Grand day,
wherein the chiefest and most solemn Ceremonies are celebrated; all things
being set forth after the noblest order that can be devised, for the greater
honor and luster of this Princely and Ancient Order of the Garter.

The Ceremonies of this Grand day may be divided, into Sacred and Civil; the
former solemnized in the Chapel, the latter in St. George's Hall. The Sacred
(as is most requisite) are first celebrated; in reference to which, the
Knights-Companions then present at Windesor, repair to the Sovereign in his
Privy Lodgings, about the hour he had appointed them the night before, vested
in the whole Habit of the Order; and thither also repair all the Officers of
the Order.

In the mean time, the rest of the Degrees and Persons, which completed the
Proceeding to the Chapel, on the Eve of the Grand Feast (and before remembered)
do repair to the several stations that were then appointed for them, and there
attend the Sovereign's coming forth into the Chamber of Presence, viz.

The Attendants on the Knights-Companions To the Passage from the Guard-Chamber
door, down into the Cloister and upper Ward. Alms-Knights and Prebends Into the
Guard-Chamber. Officers of Arms Into the Presence.

And in these several places, do they all rank themselves, in the very same
Order, as is before set down, and directed to be observed on the Eve.

Here it will be proper to note, that though the Sergeant Trumpeter, and the
Trumpets, do not pass in this Proceeding, nor in that on the Eve; yet at the
Feast held an. 23 Car. 2. they stood ranked one by one, when the Proceeding
came forth of the great Gate, in the Upper Court to Morning Service, on the
right hand against the Wall, but ^ounded not.

When the Sovereign (having the Knights-Companions, and Officers of the Order
before him) has entered the Presence, the Sword is delivered to the Nobleman
appointed to bear it; and after the Sovereigns usual Salutation, and
Knights-Companions Reverences returned, the whole Proceeding sets forward
toward the Chapel in the same Order, as on the Eve; the Knights-Companions
having their Trains born by some of their own Gentlemen.

At the Palmers large Iourn. p. 14. and 15.
foot of the Stairs, entering the Cloister or Stone-Gallery, do Palmers large
Iourn. p. 14. and 15.
twelve Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber attend, with a rich Canopy of Cloth of
Gold; who, when the Sovereign approaches receive him under it, and bear it
over his head, Palmers large Iourn. p. 14. and 15.
until he arriv^ at the Choire Door of St. George's Chapel; and this Canopy is
carried over the Sovereign only in the Morning of the Feast Day, not in the
Afternoon, nor on the Eve, nor the Day after the Feast.

The Processional way to the Chapel, is the same they traversed on the Eve, if
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions march to the Chapter House first; for Ex
Vetust. MS. pen. G.O.Y.
anciently it was the Custom to hold a Chapter in the Morning of the Feast Day,
either before Mattins, and sometimes when MS. f. p. 12. an. 1. and 2. Ph. and
Mar.
Mattins was finished before the Grand Procession set ^orward. This course
received interruption in Queen Elizabeth's time; during which no Chapter was
held in the Morning, but in the Lib. C. p. 94.
26. Ibid. p. 111.
31. and Page 130.
38. years of her Reign, and then only for admitting of some of the Officers of
the Order. But the time of holding this Chapter, was restored by King Charles
the First, who several times held it before the first Service began, as in the
Lib. R. p. 48.
5. Ibid. p. 140. See Palmers large Iournal, page 14.
14. and Palmers Iournal, pro an. 1639. page 20.
15. Years of his Reign.

But if no Chapter be at this time held, then as soon as the Proceeding comes
near to the Chapel, instead of entering the passage between the East end of the
Chapel, and King Henry the Eighth's Tomb-House, (as it does on the Eve,
because the Sovereign goes first to the Chapter House) it proceeds straight
on to the South Door of the Chapel, and thence into the Choire. Yet the
present Sovereign An. 15. of his Reign, appointed the whole Proceeding to pass
by the said South Door, along the Southside of the Chapel, and then to enter
in at the West Door, which was then, and since, so observed.

When the Alms-Knights are come to the West Door of the Choire, they enter, and
pass up above the steps to the Altar, in the very same manner and Order, as is
at large described and mentioned to be observed, upon the entry of the
Proceeding into the Choire, on the Eve of the Feast.

Then do the Prebends take their Seats, and

The Officers of Arms pass to the Haut Pas's of the Altar.

After this, the Knights-Companions proceed, and stand before their Stalls.

The Officers of the Order before their Forms, and

The Sovereign ascends his Royal Seat, as also

The Knights-Companions their Stalls.

Then the Prelate, conducted by the Sergeant of the Vestry, goes up to the
Altar,

The Officers of Arms descend into the Choire, and lastly

The Alms-Knights retire to their Seats.

All which being done, the Prelate begins the Morning Service; wherein he
proceeds according to the order prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, save
only that the first Lesson, being made proper to the Festival, is taken out of
the 44 Chapter of Ecclesiasticus.

This solemn Proceeding to the Chapel in the Morning of the Feast day, is, and
has been most usually performed on Foot; nevertheless sometimes heretofore,
the Sovereign and Knights-Companions have proceeded on Horseback, to enlarge
the state and gallantry of the show.

For it is remembered, that an. Vide Lib. vocat. Dalton.
16. E. 4. the Feast of St. George being then celebrated at Windesor, the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions Vide Lib. vocat. Dalton.
rode to the Chapel on Horseback, to hear Mass that morning: and with them
also rode the Vide Lib. vocat. Dalton.
Queen, the Lady Elizabeth the King's Daughter, and the Duchess of Suffolk the
King's Sister, the Lady Marchioness Mountague, the Marchioness Dorset, and
diverse other Ladies, in Vide Lib. vocat. Dalton.
Gowns embroidered with Garters; concerning which Habit we have Chap. 7. Sect.
5.
already spoken.

So also Lib. N. p. 166.
an. 3. H. 7. on the Morning of the Feast Day, did the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions proceed on Horseback to Matins, with equal splendour, or
rather more glorious, than on the Eve to the first Vespers: For the
Knights-Companions were vested in Surcoats of MS. penes Arth. Com. Anglesey,
fol. 167.
White Cloth, embroidered with Garters, (the Livery of the new year) the Kings
Courser was trapped with a Trapper of St. George, of white Cloth of Gold, and
the Lord Berners bare the King's Sword, his Courser being trapped with St.
Edward's Arms. This Proceeding was augmented by the presence of the Lib. N. p.
166.
Queen, and the Kings Mother, attended with a splendid Train of Ladies, and
others that waited on them, themselves being attired in the Livery of the
Order, and their Horses most richly accoutred with Foot-Cloths, Trappings, and
all other Furniture correspondant, in like State as on the Eve. Again, in the
20 year of the same Sovereign, who then held the Feast of St. George at MS.
Baynards Castle in London, he proceeded on Horseback to St. Paul's Church (in
like order as on the Evening before) where he heard Matins. And King Henry the
Eighth, at the Feast held at Windesor in the MS. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 17] fol.
27.
11. year of his Reign, rode with the Knights-Companions, about eight a Clock
in the morning, down to the College to hear Mattins, in like manner as on the
Eve, and alighted at the South door of the Chapel. The like did MS. page 12^
King Philip an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. And Queen MS. f. penes W.D.N. f. 15. b.
Elizabeth in the sixth year of her Reign, proceeded also on Horseback to the
Morning Service, in her whole Habit of the Order.

Lastly, an. 6. Eliz. the Lib. C. p. 46. vide MS. f. pen. W.D.N. p. 17. b. and
etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [ H. 12.] fol. 142.
Sovereign in the whole Habit of the Order (the French Ambassador riding near
her) and all the Knights-Companions with the Officers of the Order, and
Officers of Arms, proceeded on Lib. C. p. 46. vide MS. f. pen. W.D.N. p. 17. b.
and etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [ H. 12.] fol. 142.
Horseback to the Chapel on the Morning of the Feast Day. And in like manner
did the Sovereign's Lieutenant, at the same Feast, ride to the Lib. C. p. 46.
vide MS. f. pen. W.D.N. p. 17. b. and etiam MS. in Offic. Arm. [ H. 12.] fol.
142.
first and second Vespers, and to the Morning Service the day after the Feast.

It was a Custom begun by Queen Elizabeth, and used when she celebrated the
Feast of St. George, either at Whitehall or Greenwich, for the Ex eod. MS. pen.
W. D. N. vide et^am MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113, and 123. and Collect. R. C. Cl.
Sovereign's Lieutenant and the Knights-Companions in full Robes, attended with
the Officers of the Order and of Arms, to Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide et^am
MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113, and 123. and Collect. R. C. Cl.
meet in the Presence Chamber, (about 9 a Clock in the Morning of the Feast
day) and thence to Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide et^am MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p.
113, and 123. and Collect. R. C. Cl.
proceed as they did the Evening before, through the Guard-Chamber down into
the Great Hall, and thence into the Chapel, where they took their Stalls as on
the Eve; after which, Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide et^am MS. f. penes G.O.Y.
p. 113, and 123. and Collect. R. C. Cl.
Morning Prayer, according to the order established in the Church of England,
was begun and continued so far as the Letany; and this was called the Ex eod.
MS. pen. W. D. N. vide et^am MS. f. penes G.O.Y. p. 113, and 123. and Collect.
R. C. Cl.
first Service; which done, they all descended from their Stalls, in the
accustomed order, and Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide et^am MS. f. penes G.O.Y.
p. 113, and 123. and Collect. R. C. Cl.
proceeded back to the Presence, in the same manner, and by the same way as
they went to the Chapel, and there waited the coming of the Sovereign; before
whom they proceeded a second time to the Choire, where the Letany and Grand
Procession begun, (called the Ex eod. MS. pen. W. D. N. vide et^am MS. f. penes
G.O.Y. p. 113, and 123. and Collect. R. C. Cl.
second Service) at which the Sovereign was usually present, but never at the
first Service.

And the first memorial that we have met with, of this double proceeding to the
Chapel in the Morning of the Feast Day, is recorded in the Page 32.
Illustrissimus Comes Arundel (constituted the Sovereign's Lieutenant for that
Feast) cum reliquo Ordinis comitatu slipatus, Matutinis Precibus intersuit.
Postea vero omnes celeberrimi Ordinis Commilitones, illustrissimae Reginae
dederunt operam seduli, quae Sacellum est ingressa, inibique Regis sed^^l
recepta, quod reliquum erat celebritatis gratiose peregit.
Blue Book of the Order, an. 3. Eliz. And this double Proceeding and dividing
of the Service, continued throughout the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth and King
James, not only when the Feast of St. George was celebrated at Whitehall or
Greenwich, an. MS. pen. E.W.G.
7.8.10.12.13.14. and 16. Iac. R. but also an. Eod. MS.
15. Lib. C. p. 1.
20. Ibid. page 6.
21. and Page 19.
22. of the same Sovereign, when solemnized at Windesor, and also the Page 30.
first year of King Charles the First. But from that time, the Sovereign went
to the Chapel to the Lib. C. page 41.62.74.85.107.117. and 127.
beginning of Divine Service, and the celebration thereof continued on, without
any interruption, to the end; and this latter Custom has been ever since duly
observed by the present Sovereign.

But when it was known (before the Lieutenant proceeded to the first Service)
that the Sovereign did not go the Grand Procession, (as, when either through
indisposition of Body, or some other occasion, she could not come abroad) there
the Service being begun, continued; and at the usual time the Grand Procession
began, wherein the Sovereigns place was supplied by the Lieutenant.

Nevertheless once we observe, that the Sovereigns Lieutenant, at the Lib. R.
p. 1. and 2. an. 20. Iac. R.
finishing of the first service, proceeded back to the Sovereign's Lodgings
(the Feast being then kept at Windesor) not knowing of the Sovereigns
indisposition, which understanding to be such, as permitted him not to go in
the Grand Proceeding, he with the rest of the Knights-Companions, Lib. R. p. 1.
and 2. an. 20. Iac. R.
returned to the Chapel a second time, to celebrate the rest of that Mornings
Ceremonies.

SECT. II. The Proceeding to the second Service.
BUT when the Feast has been celebrated elsewhere than at Windesor, as soon as
the Prelate was come down from the Altar, upon finishing the first Service, the
Knights-Companions MS. fol. pen. W. D. N.
descended from their Stalls in usual order, and then the MS. fol. pen. W. D. N.
Sovereign's Lieutenant, with the Officers of the Order, and of Arms, proceeded
before him to the MS. fol. pen. W. D. N.
Presence, to conduct the Sovereign to the second Service. This second
Proceeding to the Chapel was disposed in the MS. fol. pen. W. D. N.
same order, as was that in the Morning to the first Service; only, in the
latter, because the Sovereign proceeded, the Sword also was carried. Here
follows a Scheme of one of these Proceedings, viz. an. 19. Eliz.

MS. pen. G.O.Y. page 113.
Pursuivants. Heralds. Provincial Kings.
This Lord and the three following Knights wanted their opposite Companions,
therefore went single.
Lord Howard of Effingham. -- -- Earl of Penbroke. -- Earl of Worcester. --
Earl of Bedford. Lord Viscount Mountague. Earl of Leicester. Lord Clynton. Earl
of Sussex.

The Usher. Mr. Dean of Windesor, in place of the Register. Garter. One Gent.
Usher. The Bishop of Winchester. Sword, born by the Earl of Southampton. One
Gent. Usher.

The Sovereign.
The year preceding the Sovereign had her Mantle born up in like manner from
her shoulders by the Earl of Northumberland on the right hand, and the Lord
Russel on the left. Ex eod. MS. page 123.
The Earl of Ormond (on the left hand) assisted the Robe on her shoulder. The
Earl of Rutland (on the right hand) assisted the Robe on her shoulder. The
Train of the Robe born by the Earl of Oxford, The Train of her Kirtle by the
Countess of Derby.

The Processional way from the Presence to the Chapel at Whitehall, is at this
time, the same as it was in the Morning to the first Service, viz. through the
G^^rd-Chamber and Great Hall. And as soon as the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions had ascended their Stalls, after the usual manner, in the
MS. penes W. D. N. f. 3. b.
3. Ibid. f. 8. a.
4. and Fol. 10. a.
5. years of Queen Eliz. a Psalm was sung (the Feast being celebrated those
years at Whitehall, at the ending of which) the Knights-Companions descended,
and stood before their Stalls, and then the Grand Procession began.

Sometime afterward, as an. 18. and 19. Eliz. instead of a Psalm an MS. fol.
pene^ G. O. ^. p. 123.
Anthem was sung by the Choire, in praise of the Sovereign's presence there,
with her Knights-Companions; which custom of singing an Anthem immediately
before the Grand Procession, was observed an. MS. pene^ E.W. G.
9. MS. pene^ E.W. G.
14. and MS. pene^ E.W. G.
16. Iac. R. and probably theuse continued long after.

But an. 4. Eliz. by reason that the Sovereign was not well, she somewhat
altered the usual processional way to the Chapel, proceeding from the
Presence, MS. fol. pe^ praef. W.D.N. fol. 8. b.
first to the great Closet, where she reposed her self, while the Choire was
making ready to advance in the Grand Procession; and when the Sovereign was
gone into the Closet, the Lieutenant and Knights-Companions leaving her there,
MS. fol. pe^ praef. W.D.N. fol. 8. b.
proceeded through the great Hall into the Chapel, where they took their
Stalls in due and solemn order, while the Choire sung a Psalm. After which the
Letany begun, and then the Knights-Companions descended from their Stalls in
usual order, and MS. fol. pe^ praef. W.D.N. fol. 8. b.
went the next way up to the Closet, having the Officers of the Order and of
Arms before them; where waiting the Sovereign's coming forth, they returned
before her again to the Chapel (the Choire having by that time advanced
forward in the Grand Procession) and proceeded through the body thereof.

SECT. III. Of the Grand Procession.
WE are now arrived at the Grand Procession of this Noble Order, which is
indeed the most solemn and most illustrious part of the whole Ceremony; to
usher in the state and magnificence whereof, it seems here both proper and
necessary, to premise somewhat concerning Procession in general, and by reason
of their correspondency, to say something of Triumphs, Cavalcades, and
Ecclesiastical Proceedings; those glorious and pompous Solemnities, which the
wisdom of all Ages, and custom in most parts of the World for all, or in all
parts for some, have thought most necessary to exhibit upon particular and
remarkable Occasions.

Procession is so called as it were Durant. de Ritibus Eccl. Cath. p. 427.
progressio a procedendo in publicam. The original of Processions some deduce
from the ancient Jews in the Old Testament; and well may we do so too, since we
observe the Israelites removal from Sinai to Paran, was N^mb. c. 10. v. 13.
according to the commandment of God, and the order and manner of their
Proceeding thus recorded.

Cap. 10. ^. 14. usque ad ver* 2^,
First went the Standard of the Camp of the Children of Judah, where Nahshon
the Son of A^inadab commanded in Chief.

Next that of Issachar.

Thirdly, that of Zebulon: and after these

The Tabernacle born by the Sons of Gershon and Merari.

Then followed the Standards of Ruben, Simeon, and Gad: and after them,

The Kohathites bearing the Sanctuary.

Afterward the Standards of the Camps of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin: And
lastly in the Rere came

The Standards of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali.

A second and most solemn Proceeding we have in the Book of Cap. 6.
Joshua, at the famous encompassing the Walls of Jericho; where Ver. 8. and 9.
first the Army proceeded on before the seven Priests, who sounded the seven
Trumpets of Rams horns, then the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord followed them,
and lastly the Rere came after the Ark.

Again, when the 2 Saln cap. 6. 1 Chronicles. c. 13.
Ark was fetched from Kiriath Iearim by David, unto the House of Obed Edom, it
was brought thither with great Ceremony, the King, and all Israel joining with
him in the Procession: And to be more particular as to the order thereof, David
himself informs us out of the 67. Psalm (which most Interpreters agree to be
penned upon this solemn occasion) that in this Proceeding, Ver. 25.
The Singers went before, the Minstrels followed after, and in the midst were
the Damsels playing with the Timbrels. Moreover, for the setting forth of this
Solemnity and celebration of the glory of God, not only vocal Music [ Psalms]
namely the 47. and 67. Psalms, as the Rabins are of opinion, were composed and
sung; but Musical Instruments to the honor of God, were also introduced, ^ Sam.
c. 6. ver. 5.
even all Instruments made of Fir Wood. 1 Chronicles. cap. 13. ver. 8.
And David and all Israel played before God, with all their might, and with
singing, and with Harps, and with Psalteries, and with Timbrels, and with
Cymbals, and with Trumpets. All which is not only our Warrant but Precedent.

Now in respect of the correspondence and alliance between the State of
Processions and Triumphs, and that a Triumph seems but to be a Military
Procession, We think it not amiss in speaking of Processions to divide them
into Military, Civil, and Ecclesiastical: Under the Military may best be
comprehended Triumphs, and the Transvection of the Roman Knights; under the
Civil, the pompous Entries or Cavalcades of Princes, into or through any great
City; and the Ecclesiastical are those generally so called, wherein the Church
proceeds upon a solemn account of Supplication or Thanksgiving: To all which,
in the last place, shall follow the order of the Grand Procession of this most
Noble Order; which in reference to the Degrees of the Persons appearing
therein, is composed of a mixture of such as are to be seen in each of the
three former.

Triumphs.
It is evident enough out of the sacred Story, that Triumphs were of ancient
time celebrated after the obtaining Victory over Enemies; and the Triumphal
Songs of Exodus cap. 15.
Moses, made upon the destruction of Pharaoh and his Armies in the Red Sea, and
of Judge. cap. 5.
Deborah and Barak, after the discomfiture of Sisera and Iabin, seem to inform
us so much. But a more particular account of a Triumph, with the order of
Proceeding, is recorded in the second Book of the Cap. 20.
Chronicles, where Iehosaphat having taken the spoil of the Children of Ammon
and Moab, it is said, that Ver. 27.
every man of Judah and Jerusalem returned, and Jehosaphat in the forefront of
them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy; and they came to Jerusalem with
Psalteries, and Harps, and Trumpets, unto the House of the Lord.

Besides the ancient Jews, the Grecians and Romans did oftentimes, upon the
gaining of signal Victories, ordain and celebrate Triumphs; which led to their
Temples, where Sacrifices were made, and there the Solemnity terminated.

It is a received opinion, that Pancir. li. rerum deperd. Cap. de Triumphis.
Bacchus first triumphed after his Victory over the Indians; and that at Rome,
Romulus was the first, who, at his return to the City, after a Victory, sending
his captived Enemies before, himself followed on foot, and after him marched
the whole Army in due order.

Mart. de Guichard. de antiq. triumph. spect. page 72.
But it is thought by some, that there was never any absolute Triumph
celebrated at Rome, till the time of Tarquinius Priscus, who triumphed over the
Sabins, and ancient Latins, as Lib. de Vir. illustr. p. 385.
Plinius secundus relates, and subdued 12 several Nations of the Tuscii. And
thence first came the Mart. de Guichard. page 73.
Fasces, the Trabeae, the Sellae curules, the Annuli, the Phalerae, the
Paludamenta, the Praetexta, the Currus Triumphalis, drawn with four Horses, the
Togae pictae, the Tunicae palmatae, and all other Ensigns of Triumph, mentioned
by Lib. 1. cap. 5.
Lucius Florus.

As concerning the word, Lib. 5. de lingua Latina.
Varro affirms that Triumphare has its appellation, for that such of the
Soldiers as returned with the Emperor, all the way as they marched from their
very entrance into the City, unto the Capital, used to cry out unto him in his
passage, with a loud voice, Io triumph, Io.

This Mart. de Guichardo de antiq. triumpspe^^ aculis, page 21.
Triumph was the highest honor the Roman City could bestow, and given to a
General when he had gained a Victory, with little loss to his own Army, and
great loss to the Enemy: And among the Roman Writers Lib. 2. c. 3.
Valerius Maximus observes, that it was provided by Law, that none should have
a Triumph granted, but upon the slaughter of 5000 of the Enemy in Battle.

These Triumphs were either M. Guich. de antiq. Triumph. spect. page 24.
Triumphi minores, termed also Ovations, or Majores, which were perfect and
entire Triumphs. In Ovations (granted upon putting an Enemy to flight without
effusion of blood, or obtaining a Victory against an Enemy of mean quality, as
Slaves, Pirates, or the like) Perot. in Cornucopia. fol. 74 col. 1.
the General either went on foot, or was drawn through the City with one Horse
only, and conducted to the Capital by Plebeians, or at most by Roman Knights;
the Sacrifice was only of Sheep, and thence called Ovation; whereas in a just
and complete Triumph, the General was drawn in a Triumphal Chariot by four
White Horses, and conducted into the Capital by the whole Senate going before
him, and the Sacrifice was of Oxen. Moreover in an Ovation the General wore a
plain Salmuth. in Pancir. lib Rerum d^perd. Cap. de Triumph.
purple Gown without any Gold or embroidery, and a Garland of Myrtle; but in
the greater Triumph (called properly Triumphus) he wore the Trabe^, or Garment
of State, and had his Temples adorned with a Wreath of Laurel.

What the order and state of these Triumphs were, will partly appear by the
description at large of that famous Triumph of Scipio the elder, out of
Appianus Alexandrinus: But for a general description of a Roman Triumph, it is
best seen from Onuphrius Panvinius, who has most accurately collected it out
of Lib. 2. and 5.
Dionisius Halicarnassaeus, Lib. 2. cap. 8.
Valerius Maximus, Lib. 7. c. 24.
Josephus de bello Iudaico, In vita Pauli Aemilii.
Plutarch, the aforesaid De Bello Lybico.
Appianus Alexandrinus and others.

And to perpetuate the memory of these glorious shows to posterity, and cause
them not only to outlive the triumphal day, but also that Age; The Romans in
public places of the City erected Statues, Columes, and Arches; and caused the
memorials thereof to be inscribed on Marbles, etc. We also meet with great
variety of emblematical Devices referring hereunto, in the Roman Coyns, both of
Gold, Silver, and Brass, as will appear out of Hubertus Gol^zius, Antonius
Augustinus, Franciscus Angelonus, Octavianus Strado, Adolphus Occo, and diverse
others, who have illustrated that Subject. Which Custom being revived, has
been often used (especially in this and the last Century) among the European
Princes; in the former of which Sylloge Numismatum, elegantiorum Edit. Argent.
1^20.
Johannes Iacobus Luckius affords us variety of Examples, among those which he
calls the Nummi Triumphales.

And for a description in painting, there is now to be seen in the Sovereign's
Gallery at Hampton Court in large pieces, the Triumphs of Caesar, done with
great Art by the famous and admirable Painter Andrea Montegua, which are also
extant of Evelins Sculptura, page 52. Transvection of the Roman Knights.
his own Engraving.

But to remember somewhat else, which more particularly suits with those
Proceedings of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, especially when celebrated on Horseback; we shall bring hither a
prospect of the stately Transvection or Cavalcade of the Equestrian Order among
the Romans, annually celebrated in Rome, on the Quintilian Ides, which answers
to our 15. day of July, concerning which, Dionysius Halicarnasseus affords this
commendation, that Lib. 6 p. 351.
certainly it was a gallant sight, and worthy the greatness of the Empire.

This solemn show was first instituted by Live. Dec. 1. lib 1. extremo, vide
etiam Val. Maxim.
Q. Fabius, that the pomp and glory of the Equestrian Order, might thereby be
the more fully observed; not for mustering the Knights before the Censors, who
were thereupon to note their defects or neglects; for that was done at another
time of the year, namely, on the 18. Calends of October, and the 18. Calends of
December, as may be seen among Gruters Inscriptions in a Marble Table of the
Inscript. Ian* Gruteri, p. 133.
Calendar of the Roman Fasts published by Cn. Flavius, and mentioned by Lib.
33. c. 1.
Pliny; which Table was, at the time that Gruter published his work, in the
House of Cardinal Mapheus.

The occasion of its Institution, the foresaid Loc. citat.
Dionysius Halicarnasseus does refer to the honor of Castor and Pollux, in
memory of a Victory, which the Romans had obtained over the Latins, near the
Lake Regilius, in the 357. year after the Foundation of the City; where those
two Gods seemed to lead on and assist the Roman Army against the Latins, and
when the Victory was gained vanished out of sight; but immediately appeared to
the Roman Citizens in the Forum at Rome, in that very place thereof, where
afterward the Temple (dedicated to their Names) was erected, and in the Habit
of Knights on Horseback; who having told the News of the foresaid Victory,
forthwith disappeared, and were no more seen.

Now the manner and order of this gallant Transvection, is likewise thus
related by the said learned Author, the Dion. Halicar. loco cit.
Sacrifice was first performed by the chief of the Equestrian Order, which
being finished, all the Knights who had Horses bestowed on them at the public
charge, (distinguished by Tribes and Centuries rode in order, as returning from
Battle) crowned with Olive Leaves, and apparelleled in Purple Mantles,
embroidered with branches of Palms, the Symbol of Victory. The beginning of
this solemn show being made from the Temple of Mars, erected without the City
(others say, from the Temple of Honor) and thence (leaving the other parts of
the City) they rode through the Forum, and passing by the before mentioned
Temple of Castor and Pollux, proceeded to the Capitol. They were sometimes not
less than 5000 Knights in this Proceeding; and as an augmentation of their
honor, they carried and exhibited to view, whatsoever had been bestowed on them
by their Commanders, as the reward of Valor in fight.

Turnebus explicating a piece of Julius Capitolinus in Vid. Hist. Aug. Veteres,
page 163.
Antonini Philosophi vita, is of opinion, Advers. lib. 25. cap. 18.
That this gallant Cavalcade was led on by an eminent Commander, who was called
Sevir, whom he there interprets to be the chief of the six Classes of Knights,
in such manner that every Classis had his Sevir; they relating as we suppose to
the six ancient Decuriae of Knights, instituted by Romulus, viz. the
Rhamnenses, Tatienses, and Luceres, all three being a little after doubled, and
so became six: For the said Author having ( Lib. 11. cap. 9.
in another place) mentioned these very six Decuriae, he also says, They who
commanded them were called Seviri. Now Mar. Aur. Antoninus, whom Capitolinus
says, was then created, Hist. Aug. Scriptores, page 163.
Sevir of the Troops of the Roman Knights, had been before by Antoninus Pius,
designed Consul with himself; whence it is very apparent, that the dignity of
Sevir was most honorable and eminent, since it was placed upon a Consul, and
had the command of all the Roman Cavalry.

In the year after Christ 1578. there was a Marble dug up in Saint Peter's
Church at Rome, whose Inscription (taken by Ios. Castalio) does relate to such
a Commander, and was this.

Vide Gruter Inser. ant. Romans p. 456. Inser. 4.
C. POMPVSIDIO FABIO FRATERNO X. VIR Stlitibus judicandis, id esi, super lites
judicandos..
STL. IVD. VI. VIR. EQVITVM. ROMANOR.
Vrsinus has also transmitted to posterity an Inscription of one of the
Equestrian Order, yet but a very young Knight; who having received the honor of
a public Horse, he also rode in this famous Cavalcade before he was a man; for
he lived not beyond the age of 16 years. The Inscribed stone is noted by Inscr.
ant. Romans page 1026. Inscr. 4.
Ianus Gruterus to be in a private House at Montefiasco Inscr. ant. Romans page
1026. Inscr. 4.
DIIS MANIBVS

To conclude, this grand Ceremony is mentioned also by Pliny, who speaking of
the Olive, says, Lib. 15. c. 4.
The Roman Majesty did afford great honor to the Olive, crowning therewith the
Troops of the Knights in the Ides of July. As also by Suetonius, who writing of
Augustus says, that In vita Aug. Cap. 38.
He frequently reviewed the Troops of the Knights, reviving the custom of
Transvection on Horseback, after a long interruption.

The Civil Processions or Cavalcades, Cavalcades.
are the solemn Entries of Princes, into, or riding through any great City,
which in all Ages have been set forth, with exceeding state and Pomp; being for
the most part solemnized (especially in these latter Ages) at Inaugurations,
Interviews, and Marriages of Emperors, Kings, and great Estates: as also at the
Entries of Ambassadors, and upon such like extraordinary occasions, of which a
few Instances.

Quint. Curt. Amsterl. 1650. lib. 5. page 95.
Alexander the Great after the taking of Arbella, proceeded on toward Babylon,
and upon his approach to the City, had it surrendered to him in a suppliant
manner by Mazaeus, a person of very great Fame and Eminency among the
Babylonians; by whose Example many went forth to meet him, amongst whom Quint.
Curt. Amsterl. 1650. lib. 5. page 95.
Bagaphanes the Kings Treasurer and Governor of the Castle, that he might not
come short of Mazaeus in his respect to Alexander, strewed all the way with
Flowers and Garlands, and on each side thereof were placed Altars of Silver,
which fumed with Frankincense and all manner of Odors. After him followed
diverse great Presents, droves of Cattle and of Horses, Lions also and Leopards
were brought forth in Coops, after these came the Chaldeans, and both the Poets
and Artificers of the Babylonians, with a sort of Musical Instruments,
wherewith they were wont to sing forth the praises of their Kings; the
Chaldeans, describing the motions of the Stars and the vicissitudes of times;
next the Babylonian Troops, so richly adorned both Men and Horses, that it
inclined rather to Luxury, then Magnificence. Lastly the King himself came
attended with his Lifeguard, and ordered the multitude of Citizens to follow
after in the Rear of his Foot, entering the City in his Chariot.

We might here extend our observation to the Entrance of our Savior into
Jerusalem: at which, Matthew. c. 21. v. 8.
the multitude spread their Garments in the way for him to ride on, (a Rite
ordinary among the Jews, at the Inauguration of a King, as we find the 2 Kings
c. 9. v. 13.
Captains did when Iehu was proclaimed King) and they Matthew. 21. verse. 9.
that went before, and that followed after cried Hosanna, that being the solemn
form of Acclamations, used by this people, especially Godw. Moses and Aaron,
page 134.
in the Feast of Tabernacles.

How sumptuous and stately the Ceremonies used in this last Age are, to set
forth and adorn the Cavalcades and Grand Proceedings among the Astatick Princes
(who very much exceed in this kind of Pomp and Magnificence) may be conceived
from that which Io. Albert Mandeslo relates, in his Page 122. See also Io^st
Schanten's Descript. thereof, an. 1636.
Travels into the Indies, concerning the King of Siam's annual Procession in
October, both by Land and Water, through his principal City (seated in an
Island on the River Menam) to one of his Chief Mosqueys; the greatness whereof
deserves particular relation, and is thus set down by him.

Page 122. See also Io^st Schanten's Descript. thereof, an. 1636.
In the head of this Procession march about 200. Elephants, each of them
carrying three Armed Men; then come the Music, consisting of Hoboyes, Tabours
and Cimbals; next come about a thousand men completely Armed, divided into
several Companies that have their Colors and Banners. Next to these follow the
Noblemen of the Kingdom on Horseback, and amongst them, many with Crowns of
Gold upon their heads, each attended with a Train of fourscore or a hundred
persons on foot. Betwixt these Noblemen and the Lifeguard, march two hundred
Soldiers, Japoneses, all very well appointed, who go immediately before the
Horses and Elephants, which are for the Kings Lifeguard, their Harness is
adorned with Buckles and studs of Gold, set with Diamonds and other precious
stones. The Servants who bear the Fruits, and other things for the Sacrifice,
march before certain Grandees of the Kingdom, whereof one bears the Kings
Standard, the other the Sword of Justice. These walk on foot immediately before
the King, who sits mounted on an Elephant in a Chair of Gold. The Prince his
Son, or some other Prince of the blood, follows next after him, and then
comes the Queen and the Kings other Women on Elephants, but not to be seen, as
being in certain wooden Closets guilt. The rest of the Household and six hundred
of the Guard, follow in the Rear, which by this means consists of fifteen or
sixteen thousand persons.

As to their Procession upon the River, the Order following is observed. First,
in the head of this Fleet passes about two hundred Noblemen, each in his
several Barge, where they sit in a gilt Cabin, and each Barge is rowed by three
or fourscore slaves. Then follow four Barges assigned for the Music; and next
follow about fifty Banks of State, each having fourscore, or fourscore and ten
Rowers, and after these come ten other gilt Barges, in one of which the King is
seated in a Throne of Gold, attended by diverse Noblemen, all upon their knees
before him, and amongst them, one of the chiefest Grandees who bears his
Standard. The Prince follows after him in another Barge with his Train, and
after him comes the Queen and the Concubines each in their Barges apart; and
lastly, in a great number of other Barges follow the Household Servants and the
Guards, so as this Procession consists of twenty five or thirty thousand
persons.

Together with this great Ceremony, the ordinary Proceeding of the King of
Iapan, either on Horseback or on Men's shoulders, in a Palanquin (related by the
said Mandeslo, as also by Fr. Caron in his Page 18.
description of Iapan) may be fitly remembered. Whether we regard the numerous
Train and Attendants, or the manner or order thereof: Idem, p. 182.
all of them marching with such gravity and so orderly, that there is not only
any one man to be seen out of his Rank, but a man hears not so much as a word
spoken; which may well deserve our wonder and admiration.

There is in the Sovereigns Privy Lodgings at Whitehall, the order of the King
of Gulcandale his Ordinary Proceeding, when he goes abroad, set forth in
Figures about a foot long, it is of that Countries manner of Painting, and an
extraordinary piece of Oriental Rarity, being sent thence to Sir Martin Noell
Knight, and by him presented to his now Majesty.

But we may not yet take leave of the Grandeur of these Oriental Princes, in
relation to these pompous shows, before we have referred our Reader to Conraed
Krammer's description of the magnificent and unparralleld Proceeding of the
Deyro, (who indeed is the true Prince of Iapan) when he past from his own Court
in the City of Meaco, to the Emperor of Iapans Palace in the same City, on the
25. of Oct. 1626. which is to be seen at large, Page 109.
Printed in English at the end of the foresaid Description of Iapan; nor may we
omit this; That the preparation for the said Emperors usual progress from Iedo
his present Imperial City, to Meaco, (the former Metropolis and as yet the
Court of the Deyro, (being 125. Dutch Miles) to visit the said Deyro, (which
happens once in 5. or 7. Years) takes up a Ibid. p. 20.
whole Year, before the Orders are given out, on what Day, and with what Train
every man shall go.

And to draw somewhat nearer Europe, the State and Pomp among the Turks,
however barbarous enough in other things, yet in these Ceremonies are exceeding
regular and stately; as may be seen in the Grand Seigniors Cavalcade to Sancta
Sophia, cut in Copper Plates by Evelyn's Sculptura, page 84.
Peter van Aelst, as also in the order of his Ordinary Penes eund. I. Evelyn.
Cavalcade, etched by Anthony Tempest.

But enough of these. We now come to give some Account of the Gallantry of our
Christian Princes, in this particular. Among whom the Triumphal Evelins
Sculptura, page 70.
Entry of Maximilian the First, Emperor of Germany, into Noremburg, is
excellently well designed, and cut in Wood by Hans Brossehaemer.

The Entry of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and Pope Clement the Seventh into
Bononia in Italy, an. 1530. in Order to his being Crowned King of Lombardy
there, is In Musaeo nostro.
graved in 40. Copper Plates with large Figures, excellently well designed, by
Nicholaus Hogenbergus.

Io. August. Pastorius in his Page 271.
Acta Publica, has exactly described the solemn Cavalcade, of the present
Emperor Leopold his Entry into the City of Francfort upon the Mayn, the 19. of
March 1658. where the 18. of July in the same Year ( Io. Iusti Winkelmani
Caesareologia, p. 119.
non sine difficultate and invidia tandem unanimi Octoviratus consensu) he was
Elected Emperor of Germany; and the first of August following had his
Inauguration solemnized there also. The Order of this Gallant show is to be
seen cut in brass by Gasper Merian, in a thin Plate 14.
Folio, Printed at Fran^fort the same Year.

In the same Acta Publica, are also described at large, the several Entrances
into that City, of the Electors of Page 257.
Mentz, Page 278.
Tryers, Page 284.
Collen, the Duke of Page 280.
Saxony, Count Palatine of the Page 286.
Rheyne, as also the Deputies or Substitutes of the two other Electors Page 262.
Bavaria and Page 282.
Brandenburgh: and the order of each Cavalcade is likewise particularly set
forth in Copper Plates, cut by the said Gasper Merian, and collected together
in the foresaid Book.

We could here insert the particulars of diverse other solemn Cavalcades,
exhibited upon like occasions, but we are unwilling to dwell longer upon them,
since many of them are to be met with.

Here in England it has been the ancient usage for our Kings and Queens, the
day before their Coronation, to ride from the Tower through the City of London,
in a most noble and magnificent Equipage* they being at those times attended on
by all the Nobility, Officers of the Household, and a gallant and splendid Train.

Among these, Proceedings, the order and pomp of that magnificent and numerous
Cavalcade of the present Sovereign, from the Tower to Whitehall, the day before
his most happy Inauguration is worthy observing, in that his Majesty's
Entertainments described by Mr. Ogilby, together with the sumptuous Arches
which then adorned the Streets; and how well that ingenious Artist Mr.
Weneslaus Hollar has merited both in designing and etching the same, is
obvious to every ingenious Eye.

Besides these, relating to the Inauguration of Princes, many other solemn and
particular occasions have been honored with sumptuous Cavalcades; such was that
of our King Henry the Eighth, when he entered Boulogne, and is to be seen in the
Sovereign's Gallery in Whitehall, being painted by a Disciple of Hans Holben.

Such was that brave Cavalcade of the late Duke of Florence, celebrated at his
Nuptials; which, together with the Scenes and other Representations, were
etched by the most excellent James Callot, an Artist of incomparable skill and
fancy in things of that kind.

So also that of Lewis the Fourteenth, the French King, with his Queen Maria
Theresa of Austria, into Paris, the 26. of August 1660. shortly after their
marriage, which was as full of splendour and magnificence as could be devised.
But among these, and indeed above all, none ought more deservedly to be
celebrated, than that which passed through London upon the 29. of May 1660. a
day since made venerable amongst us to posterity, upon the safe and most happy
return of the present Sovereign, to his Crown and Kingdom, to the unconceivable
joy of all his loyal Subjects.

In the last place, touching those Cavalcades made at the reception of
Ambassadors, we have met with two (and those very solemn ones) described at
large in the foresaid Page 260. and 263.
Acta publica of I. A. Pastorius, namely the entrance of the French and Spanish
Ambassadors into Francfort, that, upon the 19. of August 1657. this, upon the
24. of March 1658. when the Election was to be made of the present Emperor;
both which are likewise cut in Copper Plates, by the before mentioned Gasper
Merian.

Adam Olearius in his Voyages and Travels of the Ambassadors from the Duke of
Holstein to the great Duke of Muscovy, as also to the King of Persia, makes
mention of such Cavalcades, they being ordered according to the manner of those
Countries with very great Ceremony; Namely that of the Page 21.
Turkish Ambassadors entrance into Musco 17. Sept. an. 1634. he being met with
16000 Horse, besides the persons who made up the Cavalcade. Likewise that of
the Duke of Ibid. p. 13.
Holstein's Ambassadors entry into the same City 14. Aug. immediately
beforegoing. As also the entrance of the same Duke's Ambassador into Page 270.
Ispahan in Persia, the 2. of Aug. 1637.

To conclude, the Cavalcade of the Polish Ambassador upon his Reception into
Rome an. 1633. was a most magnificent Ceremony; it being made public in Aqua
Fortis, by the incomparable hand of Stephen della Bella a Florentine.

And now to come within the Verge of the Order of the Garter, we shall here
present to the Readers view, some few, yet stately Cavalcades, made upon the
Sovereigns entrances, not only into Windesor Castle, but other places upon
account of its Grand Solemnities, and of which we have happily met with these
following Memorials.

The 20. Year of King Henry the Seventh, the Feast of St. George was celebrated
at Baynards Castle in London; and the Sovereign (being at the Tower on the Eve)
Proceeded thence on Horseback to St. Paul's Church to Vespers, in the following
Order.

Ex ipso Autographo.
First, all the Noblemen aftir their Estates and Degrees, then the Officers of
Arms next before the Knyghts of the Order, then the Knyghts of the Order,
ryding in their Gowns of the Garter only, with their Collers without Mantells,
which Lyvery is of crymosin velvet lyned with white, next following them the
Bishop of Winchestre Prelate of the Order, then the Ambassadors, then the
Secretary and Aulmoner, then Gartier King of Arms of the Order, the Mayor of
London beryng the Mace rode on the left hand of the Kings Cote, then the Sword
borne by

then the King, Soverain of the Order, then followed the Prince, and after
certain Nobles, and then the Guard all on foot, the Aldermen and all the
Craftys of London standying in their Lyveries in places accustomed. And when
the King came to the West Door of Powles he did on his Mantell, and all the
Knyghts did on theyrs, and so entryd the Church, where somewhat within the
Church, there was ready the Bishop which did the Divine Service, with the
Deane and Chanons, etc. where they sensed and receyved the King as accustomed;
and from thens proceeded to the Queere, and entered their Stalls, and there herd
Evensonge; and aftir Evensonge, the King with the odyr Knyghts rode to Baynards
Castle his Logging, where his Hyghness remained that night.

The Ex alio Autogr.
16. of April in the following Year, the Sovereign began his Pilgrimage to the
Shrine of the Blessed Lady of Walsingham, and took Cambridge in his way
thither, where he arrived the Ex alio Autogr.
22 of the same Month, and was in this manner received.

Ibid.
First, the Mayor with his Brederen rode to meet the King, two or three mylle
out of the Town; Also Mr. Molory then Shereff of the Shire bore his rodd, and
gave his attendance, and as he approached nere the Unyversyte, within a quarter
of a mylle, there stood, first, all the four Ordres of Freres, and aftir odir
Religious, and the King on Horsbacke kyssed the Cross of everyche of the
Religious, and then there stood all along, all the Graduatts, aftir their
Degrees, in all their Habitts, and at the end of them was the Unyversyte Cross,
where was a Form and a Cushin, etc. as accustomed, where the King did alight,
and there the Bishop of Rochestre Doctor -- then being Chaunceller of the
Unyversyte, accompanied with odir Doctors, sensyd etc. the King, and aftir made
a little Proposition, and welcomed him; and then the King took his Horse ageyn,
and rood by the Blackfriers, thoroughe the Town, to the Queens College, where
his Grace was at that time lodgged, and there rested the space of a Hour, and
then did on his Gown and Mantell of the Gartier, and all odir Knyghts of the
Order there being present, gave their attendance in the Habit of the Order, as
apperteyneth, and roode from the Kings Logginge to the Chapel of the Kings
College, which was for the same cause ready appointed with Scochins etc. as is
yearly accustomed. The Bishop of Rochestre, being there Chaunceller, did the
Divine Service, both the Even, the Day, both at Mattens, etc. and sang the Mass
of Requiem on the Morrow.

With these, we shall remember the same Sovereigns noble reception of Phillip
King of Castile at Windesor, on Saturday the 31. of January, next ensuing the
foresaid Feast, where he was Installed Knight of this most noble Order, the 5.
of February following; which we find thus reported.

MS. penes W. le N. Cl. p. ^88. vide Lib. N. p. 182.
His Highness (King Henry the Seventh) having notice of the King of Castile's
approach, rode toward him a mile or two out of Windesor, and there in an
Arable Field (where the King of Castile by the Kings pleasure tarried his
comeing) met with him. And when the Kings Compaignie approached near to the said
King of Castyll, some stood on oon part, and sum on the odir part, and so
made a lanne, that the two Kings might mete togeder; and when the King of
Castyll perceyved the King, he took of his hat, and in like manner the King
took off his, and with a loving and glad countenance, everych salued and
embraced odir. The King with many odir good wordys welcomed him to his realm,
and the King of Castyll with humble and loving wordys smyling, thanked the King
of the great honors that he did him, and alsoo for the great plesirs and
kyndness, that the King had showed and done unto him, sython his arivall, and
at diverse times before; and the King took the King of Castyll on his left hand,
and in good ordonance Rode toward the said Castyl of Windsor, the Officers of
Arms beryng their Cots of Arms, and the Kings Trumpetts blew at the metyng,
and so by the way, etc. the Earl of Derby bar the Swerd right before the
King. Hit is to be noted, that there was many Noble men verily well appointed,
both in Cloth of Gold and Goldsmyth work, as my Lord Marquis, therle of Kent,
therll of Derby, the Lord Henry Stafford, with many and diverse odir Noble and
Gentlemen, which all for the most part, were in Velvet, and oder silks, right
honorably apparelled; and when the Kings entered the furst yate of the Castyll,
the Mynstrells and Shack^uth played, and when they approached near the place
where they alighted, the King of Castyll tarryed, and would have alighted before
the King, but the King would not suffer him, but took him forth with him, and
so lighted booth at oons, the King of Castyll sumwhat got before the King, and
in like Order, the Lords and odir Noble men, went before the Kings through the
Nedar Galarie toward the Hall, and as the King perceyved that the King of
Castyl's hatt was off, he took of his hatt, and would not do hit on again,
till the King of Castyl was almost ready to do on his; and so went up the
Stayres, and passed through the upper Galarie to the Kings great Chamber, which
was richly hanged with Cloth of Arras, and a great rich Bed in the same
Chamber, where remained the Knights and Esquires, and from thence to the 2d.
Chamber which was alsoo richly hanged, where remained Barons and Sic.
Baronetts and from thence to the 3d Chamber, which was hanged with a very rich
Arras, in the which there was a Cloth of Estate, and as rich a Bed as I have
seen, where remained the Bishopps, Erlls and Officers that attended upon him;
and from thence would have conveyed the King of Castill to the 4th Chamber,
which was all hangen with rich Cloth of Gold, the bordure above of Cremosin
Velvett, and brodered upon the Kings Arms, with other the Kings devyces, as
Roses, Portecolys etc. but the King of Castill excused him, and said, that the
King should not take the pain to convoye him to his Logging, then the King
showed him, that all that he had passed through was and should be his Logging,
and that the King thowght that place honored by his coming, and called him
Son, and said that he was as welcome unto him, as though he had been his own
Natural Son, and that his coming was not only agreeable and joyful unto
him, but also to all his Subjects, and that that Rome, and all his Servants
should be at the Commandment of the said King of Castill, and that he should
think that he were come to his own Faders House, and so desired him to goo at
his plesir to Dinner, or to shuft him: but when the King of Castill perceyved,
that that great Logginge was for him, he thanked the King bare headed, for he
had taken off his hood a little before, and said, that he was sorry that the
King had taken so much labor and pain for him, and for any words or thing
that the King might do, he would convoye the King to his Lodging, and so he
did; and after the King had showed him his Chamber, and would he should take no
further pain, the King would somewhat have reconvoyed him, but the King of
Castill would not suffer hitt, and so they enter salued the one the odir and
departed.

Another most magnificent Cavalcade, was that of King Henry the Eighth, and the
Knights-Companions into Windesor, upon the 27. of May, in the 11. year of his
Reign, being the day preceding the Eve of the Grand Feast (during which he
begun his Reformation of the Statutes of the Order) which was ordered as
follows.

MS. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 17] fol. 25.
On the 27. day of May being Friday, the King removed from Richemont toward
his Castle of Windesor, and appointed them about one a Clock at Afternoon the
same Friday, that all Noblemen, and oder which should wait upon his Grace,
should be ready between Richemont and Honslowe to attend upon him, and in
consideration of a scarcyte and straitnes of Lodgings, as well as in avoiding
and eschewing of the corrupt air, every Nobleman was taxed and rated to a
certain number of Horse, that is to say, every Duke at 60 Horses, a Marquess at
50 Horses, every Earl at 40 Horses, every Baron at 30 Horses, every Knight of
the Garter Batchellor at 20 Horses, and no odre Knight or Nobleman to have
above 16 Horses, with their Carriages and all. And the King, thus right nobly
companyed, rode to Colebroke, and at the Sign of the Katherines Wheel the King
took his Courser, and his Henchmen richly apparelled followed, and also the
Kings Horse of State led, Gartier King of Arms wore his Coat of Arms, the Lord
Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester and Prelate of the Order, with many odre great
Estates, gave their attendance upon his Highness. The Queen and the Ladies, and
their Compaignies stood in the field at the Towns end, besides the high way
toward Windesor, to see the Kings noble Compagnie pass by, and then the Queen
rode to the Fery next way to the Castle. The King rode by Slow, and so to Eton
College, where all they of the College stood along, in manner of Procession,
receiving his Grace after their custom.

MS.
The King entered Windesor with his great Horses, that is to say nine Coursers
with nine Children of Honor upon them, and the Master of the Kings Horses upon
another great Coursers back, following them, having and leading the Kings Horse
of Estate in his hand, that is to say, a rich Courser with a rich Saddle, and
trapped and garnished following the King, and so entered the Castle.

Ex Lib. praed. M. fol. 26.
At the Castle Gate, the Ministers of the College received the King with
Procession, and the King and Knights of the Order, at the Church door, took
their Mantles, and entered the Quere, and stood before their Stalls, till the
Sovereign had Offered and returned to his Stall; then every Knight offered
according to his, as by the Statute is ordained, and entered their Stallys,
which was a long Ceremony or ever they had all offered, because of the great
number of Knights that then was present, which were 19 in number besides the
Sovereign.

MS.
The Offering Done, the Sovereign and all the foresaid Knights of the Order,
(putting of their Mantles at the Church Door) with the Prelate and odre
Officers of the Order, as the Register, King of Arms, and Huishier of the
Order, called the Black Rodd, borne by Sir William Compton, according to his
Office of Hueshier; all these rode before the King from the College, unto the
Quadrate of the Castle, and so conveyed his highness to his Lodging.

MS.
The King had attendant on him, all his Officers of Arms, wearing their Coats
of Arms; and all his Trumpetts, which blew the Entry of the King, all the time
of the said Entry. The Lord Mountague, Henry Poole, hare the Sword before the
King, and Garter King of Arms rode next before the Sword, and Sir William
Compton rode on his left hand, bearing the Black Rodd.

MS. p. 10. and 11.
Another Cavalcade offers it self here, namely that of King Philip and Queen
Mary, who, after the Marriage solemnized between them at Winchester the 15. of
July 1554. arived at Windesor the 3. of Aug. following, where, at the nether
end of Pescod-street, they were met by the Major of Windesor and his Brethren,
and thence (the Trumpets sounding) they Proceeded with the Officers of Arms
before them, into the Castle, till they arrived at the West door of the
Chapel, where was prepared a Form with Carpets and Cushons, and at their
entry, the Bishop of Winchester sensed them.

The Queen having received the Mantle of the Order, with a reverential kiss
from the Earl of Derby and Penbroke (to whom it had been presented by the
Register of the Order) put it upon the King (assisted by the said Earls) the
Earls of Arundell and Penbroke, receiving the Collar of the Order from Garter,
presented it to the Queen (with the like Ceremony as was the Mantle) who put
it about the Kings Neck.

Then all the Knights Companions put on their Mantles, within the Chapel Door,
and Proceeded into the Choire, and stood before their Stalls according to
ancient Order. Then the Queen went into her Stall, taking the King by the
Hand, and setting him in the same Stall with her, and after a little space,
they both descended and Proceeded up to the High Altar ( the Queen keeping the
right hand) and there Offered; after which, they returned to their Stall, where
they reposed themselves, while all the Knights Companions present did Offer,
according to their Degree, and had taken their Stalls according to their
ancient Custom. Then was Te Deum, and de Profundis sung, which being finished,
they came all down from their Stalls, and Proceeded to the Chapter House Door,
where the King, and all the Knights Companions put off their Mantles; and
imediately going out of the Chapel, they took their Horses at the Chapel
Door, and Proceeded in Order, up to the Castle, where they reposed themselves
that night.

In the last place, we may properly add the duty of the College of the royal
Chapel of St. George, touching their Reception of the Sovereign, upon special
occasions; to wit, the manner to be observed by them in their Proceeding, to
meet the Sovereign of the Order, at his first coming thither in his royal
State, or in his return after some great Victory, or extraordinary Action
performed, or some Foreign or unwonted Achievement; according to the most
decent manner there observed, by the most invincible Prince King Henry the
Fifth, in the 9. year of his Reign: at which time he ordained, that this his
Ceremonial should be firmly observed for ever, in the like cases. The same in
Lib. N p. 307*
effect is also appointed by King Henry the Eighth, only the direction is put
into other words, and where the title of Custos is in the former Precedent
used, in the latter, that of the Dean is inserted instead thereof, and is as
follows.

Regist. Char. tac. fol. 9. b.
In the first place, a Form or Bench decently adorned, being placed after the
usual manner, in the midst between the Chapel of the College and the
uttermost gate of the Castle, the Custos and Canons are there to meet with all
the Officers of the College, each in their proper order and Habits, having a
handsome Cross carried before them, with two Torch-bearers, and two Censers. The
Register of the Order bearing the Kings Mantle, is to present it to his
Majesty, who being therewith invested by the Custos, assisted by the senior
Canon, the King is to be Censed five times, and then taking the Cross to kiss,
from the hand of the Custos, or some one of the more eminent Prelates then
present, he is to be conducted, in way of Procession, to the Chapel, the
Knights-Companions present vested with their Mantles, going orderly immediately
before the King, until he has arrived at the Faldstool before the high Altar,
for that purpose adorned, and there kneeling, till the end of the Responsory,
to be sung by the Choire, at his arrival, by appointment of the Praecentor, to
wit, Honor Virtus, or some such like, answerable to the Affair in hand, with a
Prayer also correspondant* And then kissing the venerable part of the Cross of
our Lord, and the Heart of St. George, he is to offer, and then to betake
himself to his Stall, and there to sit, till the Knights of the Order have also
offered, each in their turns, and placed themselves again in their Stalls, and
until the Anthem De Profundis has been sung by the Canons, with the accustomed
Prayers; then the Knights-Companions are to descend from their Stalls into the
Choire, each of them bowing himself toward the Altar, every time they so come
down, and thence proceed through the middle of the Choire,, unto the place
where the Chapter is to be celebrated, at the hour of Tierce, the Sovereign of
the Order following in the last place, as in all other Processions, and
consequently in his absence, his Deputy doing the same. These things thus
performed, they are to get up on Horseback, and conduct the Sovereign into the
place appointed by the Statutes; and the Proceeding being finished, the Bells
are to ring at convenient seasons.

Ecclesiastical Processions.
As touching Ecclesiastical Processions, they are of great antiquity in the
Christian Church; some are ordinary and stative, other extraordinary or
indictive.

The Ordinary, are those celebrated on Ascension-day, mentioned by Hom. 28. and
S^^m. ad Ascen. D^m.
St. Chrisostom, and on the Purification, by Sermon. 172. and 173.
St. Austin, Rabanus, St. Bernard, and diverse others. The Extraordinary are
commanded and appointed by authority on several occasions; such was that which
Lib. 7. Hist. Eccl. cap. 10.
Sozimus makes mention of, at the translation of the Relics of St. Miletus.
So also that of Ruffinus li 2. c. 5. Socrat. l. 3. c. 19. Theod. li. 3. cap 9.
the Christians of Antioch (when Julian the Apostate commanded the Coffin of
St. Babilas to be removed) who went a Procession with their Women and Children,
rejoicing and singing David's Psalms, and removed the Relics of St. Babylas,
from Daphney to Antioch.

A like Procession do we find celebrated, within the most Noble Order of the
Garter, on Collect Tho. Wriothesley Mil Garter. penes W le Neve Cl. p. 3.
Wednesday in Easter week, being the 27. of March 1504. at Greenwich, upon
reception of that noble Relic the Collect Tho. Wriothesley Mil Garter. penes
W le Neve Cl. p. 3.
right Leg of St. George, sent to King Henry the Seventh, then Sovereign, from
the Cardinal of Rowen being Lega^, by a Chaplain of his own, an Augustine and
Abbot of -- by Meaux; which was most solemnly ordered in the following manner.

Collect Tho. Wriothesley Mil Garter. penes W le Neve Cl. p. 3.
First, as the Orator of the Legate was landed, which landed before the Friars
yat of Greenwiche, he did on a surplis and a cope, holding St. George's Leg in
his hand, which was goodly garnished in Silver, like a Knights Leg armed with a
gilt Spor, etc. and immediately upon his arrival, there went to meet the said
Relic, first the Kings Chapel, all in Copis, with Cross etc. and on every
side of the Chapel, were diverse Yoemen of the Guard in their beten Cotys of
Goldsmith work, beryng certain Torches brenning, then the Bishop of Chestre in
Pontificalibus, the Dean on his left hand, and on every side of them certain of
the Officers of Arms, then followed the Kings of Arms, and next them the
Knights of the Order, beryng their Mantle and Collers of the Order, that is to
say, the Marquess of Dorset, the Erll of Surrey, the Erll of Shrewysbyry, the
Erll of Essex, the Lord Dawbeny the Kings Chamberlain, the Lord Herbert, Sir
Thomas Lovell Treasurer, and Sir Rich. Gilford Controller of the Household, and
next the Knights of the Order, followed the odir Lords and Noblemen, after
their Estates and Degrees in great nombre; and when the Bishop approached near
the Legates Orator, which was assisted by two Doctors, being Chappellyns to
the King. The Bishop censed the Relic, and then the Legates Orator, beryng
the Said saint George's Leg, went between the Bishop and the Dean, and returned
in lick order till they came to the Kings Chapel, where the Leg was set on
the high Aultre, and then the Quire sange O George, Page 4.
etc. that done the Knights and Officers went up into the Galery, and there did
off their Mantles, and the Officers of Arms their Cotys of Arms, and from
thence all the Noblemen went into the Kings great Chamber, to attend upon his
Grace, which immediately went to Mass, and at Offering time his Highness kissed
and offered the Leg, and so the second Relic remained in the Kings Chapel;
and after Mass the King returned to his great Chamber where he dyned, etc. with
Gods blessing and Saint George.

Again, of Processions some are called Synod. August. cap. 20. and cap. 23.
Lugubres, i. e. mournful; which seems to us to be properly termed
Supplications, being to implore some help, or to avert some evil impending,
wherein Letanies were also used, as that of The do^us the younger, who
instituted a Letany to supplicate for fair weather, and a mild temper of the
Air; wherein, as Lib 14. cap 2.
Nicephorus says, the Supplicants went in Procession with Hymns and
Adorations, Theodosius himself going before them in a mean Habit, singing of
Psalms; and thereupon the face of the Heavens changed, the troubled Air grew
calm and serene, and plenty of all things ensued; and whilst the Letany in our
Book of Common Prayer was used, the Grand Procession of the Order might well be
cast among the Lugubres, and in some places of the An. 28 and 30. Eliz. and 14.
Iac. R.
Blue Book we see it is so called; being only upon this occasion sung walking;
See Dr. Taylor's Preface to his Collection of Offices.
a gesture more anciently used, than the posture of kneeling or standing.

Others are called Letae, i. e. joyful; which are to give thanks for blessings
received: And such is the nature of the Hymn, appointed (by the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions command) to be sung in the Grand Procession of the Order,
an. 15. Car. 2. instead of the Letany, and since continued.

Having immediately before delivered somewhat of Proceedings, Military, Civil,
and Ecclesiastical; we shall now pass on to the Grand Procession of this most
Noble Order it self, which consists of persons Military, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical: The Military are the Sovereign, the Knights-Companions, and
Alms-Knights; the Civil are the Officers of the Order, Officers of Arms, and
other Attendant^; and lastly, the Ecclesiastical are the Prebends of the
College, the Choire-men and Choristers. And in reference to this magnificent
Solemnity (whether it fell out to be celebrated at Windesor, or at any other
place, where the Sovereign kept his Court) we are to consider, the (1.) Time,
when this great Ceremony took its beginning; next, the proper (2.) Place or
Processional way; then the (3.) Order and Manner of the Solemnity; and lastly,
the (4.) Pomp and State thereof.

The Grand Procession has been always celebrated, 1. The time when the Grand
Procession begins.
in the morning of the Feast day of St. George, or upon such other day, as the
Sovereign has appointed to hold the same by Prorogation; but as to the instant
of time when it began, we find it diverse and uncertain; but those variations
make no very great difference, having been ordered and appointed with
considerations had to convenience, and at such a part of the Church Service, as
was conceived most proper, and generally after the end of the last Collect,
appointed for the morning, in our Book of Common Prayer, immediately before the
Letany. Nevertheless an. 6. Eliz. the Feast being then held at Windesor, we
find it began MS. fol. pen. W.D.N. f. 15. a.
presently after the Te Deum was sung, and an. 20. of the said Queens Reign (at
Greenwich) MS. pen. G.O.Y page 114
after the reading of the second Lesson. Again an. 22. Iac. R. it is said to
begin Lib. R. p. 20.
when the second Morning Service was celebrating, and almost half done. And to
come nearer our times, the Grand Procession set forward an. 8. Car. 1. when
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
the first Service was finished, and an. 17. Car. 1. Palmers Iourn. p. 40.
after the Sermon. But at the Grand Feast solemnized at Windesor in the 13.
year of the present Sovereign, and since, it took beginning at the most usual
and accustomed time, viz. when the Prelate (then officiating at the Altar) came
to that part of the Common Prayer where the Letany was next to begin. Who there
making a pause, was conducted from the Altar by the Sergeant of the Vestry,
down to his Seat.

We come next to the second consideration, 2. The Processional way.
which is the compass of the Proceeding, or the Processional way; and that we
observe, not to have been always one and the same at Windesor; for sometimes we
find it confined within the walls of St. George's Chapel, but at other times
enlarged through the lower Court of the Castle (in diverse places of the
Registers called also the Churchyard) a few memorials in both cases are left
unto us, though none of very ancient date: as An. 15. Iac. R. Lib. C. p. 190.
The Sovereign and whole assembly of the Knights-Companions, going out at the
West door (of the Chapel) in remarkable pomp and order, proceeded about the
bounds of the Churchyard; that is, (as is elsewhere of the same Procession
more particularly expressed) MS. penes ^. W. G.
from the Choire through the middle I Will (or Nave of the Chapel) out at the
West door, down to the Castle Gate, so through the passage into the Cloister,
and by the Chapter House door again into the Choire. To which purpose, does the
Page 41.
Red Book briefly describe the passage of the Grand Procession an. 4. Car. 1.
and yet more particularly, the Grand Procession (celebrated at Windesor in the
15. year of the present Sovereign's Reign) passed down the Middle I Will of the
Chapel, through the West door, and so along the lower Ward of the Castle, near
unto the Castle Gate; from whence ascending toward the Alms-Knights old
Lodgings, unto, and through the passage, between the East end of the Chapel,
and the Tomb-house, into the Cloister, it entered into the Chapel, by the door
near the Chapter House, and from thence proceeding down the North Isle unto the
West door, and up through the aforesaid Middle I Will, it re-entred the Choire.

But when the Sovereign has pleased to shorten this great Ceremony, which,
either through his Lib. R. p. 20.
indisposition of health (as an. 22. Iac. R. when being so extremely taken with
the Gout, that he was Lib. R. p. 20.
carried, during the Grand Procession, in a Chair) or, upon other like occasion
he has sometimes done, then the Grand Proceeding has passed out at the East
door of the Chapel, and going through part of the Churchyard, has entered the
Chapel again at the South door, and so into the Choire; or else Lib. R. p. 62.
through the South door, and returning by the Cloister, at the East end of the
Chapel, has passed thence to the West door, then up the Nave, and so ascended
again into the Choire, as an. 6. of the same King.

Moreover, upon foulness of Weather, the Grand Procession has been celebrated
within the coverture of the Chapel, as MS. penes Edw. Fauconbridge genesis
an. 1. Car. 1. But more fully for the same cause (abundance of Rain) does the
Register observe, that an. 9. Car. 1. it Lib. R. page 85.
passed from the Choire to the West door of the Chapel, whence turning to the
left, it proceeded through the South I Will, and coming about by the East door,
descended at length by the North I Will again to the West door, and thence through
the Nave of the Chapel it returned into the Choire.

And this Ex Collec^ Io. Vincent. genesis
Processional way was in like necessity made use of, both by the Duke of
Norfolk, the Sovereign's Lieutenant for the Feast holden an. Ex Collec^ Io.
Vincent. genesis
5. Eliz. as also by the present Sovereign, an. Lib. Carol. page 29.
13. Car. 2.

And because it is necessary to know, which is the way where the Grand
Procession has usually passed, in other places honored with the celebration of
the Feast of St. George, as well as the Castle of Windesor, it will be requisite
here to describe the same, and set them down; and first we shall show how it
lies at Whitehall, the whole passage having been (both MS. penes G.O.Y. p. 113.
and 123.
formerly and of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
late) strewed with Rushes upon this occasion.

Here, the Grand Procession sets forth from the MS. penes W. D. N.
middle of the Choire (as in all other places) and so on, to the outward
Chapel door, thence through the Hall, and the left entrance of the Skreen
toward the Thames, then to the Hall Porch, and so along on the right hand of
the great Court (sometimes called the Utter, or outwardmost Court of the
Palace, as an. MS. penes G.O.Y. loco cit. vide etiam Collect. R. C. Cl.
2.3.5.7. and 26. Eliz. and Lib. R. p. 94. and 107.
10. and 11. Car. 1.) toward, and beyond the Signet Office, then turning on
the left hand toward the Court Gate, and yet on the left hand (on that side of
the Court which formerly lay toward the Terrace, but now near the covered
Walk) it passes in at the Hall Porch, and enters the Hall at the right
entrance of the Skreen, and thence into the old Chapel, and so into the New.

Where note, that in all solemn Processions, where the return is to the same
place, the regular turning is on the left, not right hand; and this the present
Sovereign well understood, when at the Grand Feast held at Whitehall, an. 19.
Car 2. the Foot Guards having made a Lane on the left hand of the great Court,
along by the covered walk, for the Proceeding to pass through, and a great part
of the Proceeding had gone that way, so soon as the Sovereign came to the steps
descending into the Court, (for by reason the Hall was shut up, being employed
for Masks and Scenes, the Proceeding passed from the Chapel up Stairs into the
Guard-Chamber, and so into the Court) He discovering the Error, caused all to
come back, and proceed on the right hand of the Court, toward the Hall Porch
and Signet Office, and make their return upon the left hand, according to the
right rule of turnings in solemn Proceedings.

At Greenwich we find the Grand Processional way an. 20. Eliz. MS. penes W. D.
N.
led out of the Chapel, through the Hall, beneath the Skreen, and thence going
round about the 2 d. Court, came in at the South Door, in the upper end of the
Hall, and so along the Hall again into the Chapel.

And when the Feast was celebrated at the City of York an. 17 Car. 1. The
Palmers Iourn. page 40
Grand Proceeding passed out of the Choire, and marched round the inside of the
Church only, and then returned back into the Choire, as it is usually observed
at Windesor, in rainy weather. Once, viz. an. 20 H. 7. the Grand Procession was
solemnized in St. Paul's Church London, of which the Black Book of the Order
gives but this short account. Page 177.
The most Illustrious Sovereign of the ^arter solemnly made his Procession in
St. Paul's Church London. But Ex ips. Au^eg^.
an old memorial calls this the Grand Procession, and notes it to pass about
the Church as the Custom was, Ex ips. Au^eg^.
to which solemnity there flockt as great a multitude of People, as had been
seen in that Church, at any time before.

Lastly, The way through which the Grand Procession passes, (wheresoever
Celebrated) is fenced in by the Yeomen of the Guard, and the Knights-Companions
Attendants and Servants, who standing on both sides, make a spacious Lane for
it to pass through, and keep off the Crowd, from pressing upon it.

The third consideration relating to the Grand Procession, 3. The Order in
Proceeding.
is the Order and Manner thereof; and herein (as to particulars) the more
ancient times afford us very little light. Nevertheless, that the same has
been Celebrated (even from the Institution of the Order) as part of those
Ceremonies used to set forth the solemnity of St. Georges Feast, we have
collective Evidence enough; and that, not only at Windesor, but other places,
where the Anniversary of St. George has been kept and observed.

To proceed then; What the Order of this Ceremony anciently was, may be
collected from that which an Old Relator says (where he sets down the order of
the solemn Procession made the Ex Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Armor. page 27.
29. of May, an. 5 H. 8.) namely, that it was Ordered Ex Lib. M. 17. in Offic.
Armor. page 27.
as of old time accustomed. Now the Proceeding he speaks of, was marshalled in
this manner.

Ex Lib. M. 17. in Offic. Armor. page 27.
First went the Alms-Knights, two and two on either side the Choire, then the
Officers of Arms, next after whom, came the Knights-Companions, after them the
Officers of the Order, and then went the Prelate of the Order, bearing the
Heart of St. George, under a Canopy honorably assisted, four Noblemen at the
Corners bearing each a Torch, and last of all the Sovereign.

And though here is no mention made of any Ecclesiastics that joined in this
Proceeding, yet if we consider, that throughout this Grand Ceremony, some part
of the Divine Office of the Church was Sung (which until of late was Gither the
Letany, or Te Deum,) it cannot be supposed, that the Chaplains and Priests were
left out.

And to clear this doubt, we have happily met with another Old Observator, who
informs us, That the Ex lib. L. 1. in Offic. Arm. page 17.
Priests not only went in the Grand Procession, but had a place assigned in it,
where the Gentlemen of the Sovereigns Chapel and Choire of Windesor, now go.

But it must be confessed, that the Records of the Order, are defective in this
particular relating to the Grand Procession, and speak not otherwise of it,
then in general, or at most, take notice but of some of those Degrees, that
attended in it, and this, but of late time neither; amongst which an. 23 Eliz.
it is said, that Lib. C. p. 8^.
they all Proceeded in order, as the Custom was, the Sovereign following in the
Rear of the Procession.

As to Place and Precedence, not only among them who Proceed here in Bodies,
but also those that walk singly by themselves, it is the same, in all points,
with the Sovereign Proceeding to the Chapel, on the Eve of the Grand Feast:
(Concerning which we have Chap. 20. Sect. 2.
already spoken largely enough) only here are some Persons added, which go not
in that, namely the Gentlemen and Choristers of the Sovereigns Chapel at
Whitehall, and the Petty Canons, Vicars, and Choristers of Windesor; the whole
Order is as follows.

The Morning Service having proceeded to the end of the second Lesson, and the
Prelate conducted by the Sergeant of the Vestry from the Altar to his Seat,
with usual Reverences,

The Alms-Knights rise from their Seats and pass to the middle of the Choire,
and after their accustomed Reverences, go up to the sides of the Altar.

Next, in like manner, do the Officers of Arms pass up.

Hereupon Garter rises from his Seat, and makes his Reverences, then waving
his Rod, summons the junior Knights-Companions to descend.

Whilst they and the rest of the Knights are leaving their Stalls, with usual
Reverences, the Gentlemen of the Chapel, Petty Canons and Vicars of Windesor
put on Copes, and make themselves ready to proceed.

Then the Knights-Companions being all come down, and having made their
accustomed Reverences, stand each under his proper Stall.

Then the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register rise, and after Reverences made,
stand before their Forms.

So do the Chancellor and Prelate.

This done, the Alms-Knights came down from the Altar, and passing into the
middle of the Choire, make again their double Reverences, and proceed out of
the Choire.

After them, all the Choristers pass in a body to the middle of the Choire, and
having made their double Reverences (so do all that follow) proceed forth, two
and two.

So do the Vicars of Windesor.

Next four of the Petty Canons come from their Seats, into the middle of the
Choire, and there begin to sing the Hymn.

Then follows the Sergeant of the Vestry, bearing his gilt Rod.

After whom, the Gentlemen of the Chapel at Whitehall.

Next, the Verger of Windesor Chapel, bearing his Silver Rod.

Then the Prebends of Windesor.

After whom, the Officers of Arms come down from the Altar, and pass on.

Then the Knights-Companions, the juniors first.

Then the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register.

The Chancellor and Prelate.

The Nobleman that bears the Sword of State.

Then the Sovereign above in his Stall, makes a Reverence toward the Altar,
and being descended, another below, then passes out and enters under the
Canopy, which waits him at the Choire door, having his Train carried up; the
Lord Chamberlain of the Household, if he be not a Knight of the Order, attending
somewhat behind the side of the Canopy, on the Sovereign's right hand, and the
Vice-Chamberlain at the like distance on his left, for so they waited in the
Grand Procession an. 23. Car. 2.

And lastly, the Band of Pensioners, who attend in Guard on each side the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions, with their Captain in the head of them.

In this order (at this day) they proceed with great devotion, the whole Choire
singing the Office appointed, which heretofore was the Letany; but that
Supplicational Procession, is now converted into a Hymn of Thanksgiving,
composed by the Reverend Doctor Brune Ryves, the present Dean of Windesor, and
Register of the Garter, at the command of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
in Chapter, held the 17. of April an. 13. Car. 2. which follows here.

An Hymn to be sung in the Procession at St. George's Feast instead of the
Letany.
Judge. 5. ^
HEar, O ye Kings; give ear, O ye Princes: I, even I will sing unto the Lord; I
will sing praises unto the God of Israel.

The Lord is my Rock, Psalm. 18.2.
and my Fortress, and my Deliverer, my God, my Strength, in whom I trust: my
Buckler, the Horn of my Salvation, and my high Tower.

The Lord is my Strength, Exodus 15.2.
and my Song: and he is become my Salvation.

The Right hand of the Lord is become Glorious in Power: The Right hand

In the greatness of thy Excellency thou have overthrown them, that rose up

Sing aloud therefore unto God, Psalm. 81.1.
our Strength: make a Joyful Noise to the God of Jacob.

CHORUS.
I will sing unto the Lord: for he has triumphed gloriously: Exodus 15.1. To
day will we sing this Song, We have a strong City: Salvation will God appoint
for Walls, and Bulwarks: Isay 26.1.
The Princes of the People are gathered together, Psalm. 47.9.
even the People of the God of Abraham: for the Shields of the Earth belong
unto God: he is greatly exalted.

We will therefore rehearse the righteous Acts of the Lord: Judge. 5.11.
even his righteous Acts toward the Inhabitants of the Villages of Israel.

We will not hide them from our Children, Psalm. 78.4.
showing to the generations to come the praises of the Lord: and his Strength,
and his wonderful Works, that he has done.

That the generation to come might know them, even the Children, which

That they may set their Hope in God: and not forget the works of God, but

Sing unto the Lord therefore, Psalm. 30.3.
O ye Saints of his: and let us give thanks for a remembrance of his Holiness.

Sing aloud unto God, Psalm. 81:1.
our Strength: make a Joyful Noise unto the God of Israel.

CHORUS.
The Lord is my Strength, and my Song: and he is become my Salvation: Exodus
15.2.
We will be glad, Psalm. 31.7.
and rejoice in thy mercy, O Lord: for thou have considered our trouble, and
have known our Soul in Adversities.

For our Sins thou did cast our Crown to the Ground: Psalm. ^07.40.
thou powredst contempt upon our Princes, and causedst them to wander in the
Wilderness, where there is no way.

Thou gave us like Sheep appointed for slaughter: Psalm. 44.11.
and did scatter us among the Nations.

Thou made us a reproach to our Neighbors: ae Scorn, and a Derision to them,

Thou made us a Byword among the Heathen: a shaking of the Head among

Thou did deliver thy Strength into Captivity, Psalm. 78.612
and thy Glory into the Enemies hand.

Thou gave thy People over also unto the Sword: and w^st wroth with thine

Nevertheless, Psalm. 106.44.
thou did regard our Afflictions: and heardest our Cry, and did repent,
according to the Multitude of thy Mercies.

But, Psalm. 32.7.
as the Lord was our hiding place, and did preserve us in the midst of our
trouble: so at last he has compassed us about with Songs of Deliverance.

For the Lord did awake, Psalm. 78.65.
as a man out of sleep: and like a Mighty man, that shouteth by reason of Wine.

His anger endures, Psalm. 30.5.
but a Moment; in his favor is life: Weeping may endure for a Night; but Joy
comes in the Morning.

God has turned our Mourning into Dancing: he has put off our Sackcloth,



CHORUS.
The Salvation of Israel is come out of Sion, the Lord has brought back the
Captivity of his People: Therefore shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be
glad: Psalm. 14.7. O! that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness,
and for his wondrous Works to the Children of Men: Psalm. 107.8.
Psalm. ^.4.
Thou, O God, have maintained my Right, and my Cause: thou satest in the Throne,
judging right.



Psalm. 37.35.
I have seen the Wicked in great power: and spreading himself like a green
Bay Tree.





Psalm. 85.1.
Lord, thou have been favorable unto thy Land: Thou have brought back the
Captivity of thy People.





Psalm. 18.49.
Therefore will we give thanks unto thee, O Lord; among the People: and sing
Praises unto thy Name in the great Congregation.

Psalm. 81.1.
Sing aloud unto God, our Strength: make a Joyful Noise unto the God of Israel.

CHORUS.
O give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his Mercy endures for Ever.
Let the Redeemed of the Lord say so: whom he has redeemed from the hand of the
Enemy: Psalm. 106.1, 2.
Psalm. 46.8.
O come hither, and behold the Works of the Lord: what Desolations he has made
in the Earth.



Psalm. 65.7.
He has stilled the noise of the Seas: the noise of their Waves, and the Tumult
of the People.

Psalm. 68.30.
He rebuked the Company of the Spear-men, the Multitude of the Bulls with the
Calves of the People: till every one submits himself with pieces of Silver:
He has scattered the People, that delight in War.

Psalm. 75.3.
He has broken the Arrows of the Bow: the Shield, the Sword, and the Battle.

Psalm. 98.1.
O! come therefore, let us sing unto the Lord a new Song; for he has done
marvailous things: His right Hand, and his holy Arm has gotten him the Victory.

Psalm. 60.4.
For he has given a Banner to them, that fear him: that it may be displayed
because of the Truth.

CHORUS.
The Lord is a Man of War: the Lord is his Name: Exodus 15.3. The Lord of Hosts
is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge: Psalm. 46.11. O! clap your Hands
therefore, all ye People: shout unto God with the voice of Triumph: Ps. 47.1.
Great deliverance gives he to the King: Psalm. 18.50.
and showed mercy to his Anointed, and to his Seed for evermore.

Then he made him, Judge. 5.13.
that remained, to have Dominion over the Nobles among the People: the Lord
made him have Dominion over the Mighty.

And he shall be as the Light of the Morning, 2 Samuel 23.4.
when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds: as the tender Grass
springing out of the Earth, by clear shining after Rain.

Thou, Psalm. 18.43.
O Lord, that have delivered him from the strivings of his People: Thou, that
have made him head of those, that rose up against him:

Let his Glory be still great in thy Salvation: Psalm. 21.5.
increase daily that Honor, and Majesty, which thou have laid upon him.

Fasten him as a Nail in a Sure place: Esaias 22.23.
and let him be for a Glorious Throne to his Father's house.

And hang upon him all the Glory of his Father's house: the Offspring, and
Amen.

CHORUS.
The Lord hear him in the day of his trouble; the Name of the God of Jacob
defend him: Psalm. 20.1. Send him help from the Sanctuary, and strengthen him
out of Sion. 2. Grant him according to his own Heart's desire: and fulfill all
his Counsel. 3. We will rejoice in thy Salvation, O Lord, and in the name of
our God will we set up our Banners: The Lord fulfill all his Petitions. 4.
The King shall joy in thy Strength, Psalm. 21.1.
O Lord: and in thy Salvation how greatly shall he rejoice?

Thou have given him his heart's desire: and have not withheld the request of

For thou preventest him with the Blessings of Goodness: Thou have set a Crown

Thou have made him most Blessed for ever: Thou have made him exceeding

For the King trusts in the Lord: and, through the mercy of the most high,

Thou will prolong the King's life: Psalm. 61.^.
and his Years, as many Generations.

CHORUS.
O satisfy him with a long life: and show him thy Salvation: Psalm. 91.16. Keep
thy mercy with him for evermore: and let thy Covenant stand fast with him:
Psalm. 89.28. Make his Seed also to endure for Ever: and his Throne as the days
of Heaven. 29. Cloth his Enemies with shame; but upon himself let his Crown
flourish: Psalm. 132.18.
How excellent is thy loving kindness, Psalm. 36.7.
O Lord: therefore the Children of men put their trust in the Shadow of thy
Wings.

Whom have we in Heaven, Psalm. 73.25.
but Thee, and there is none upon Earth, that we desire, besides Thee.

Many, Psalm. 40.5.
O Lord our God, are thy wondrous Works, which thou have done: and thy
Thoughts, which are to usward, they cannot be reckoned up in order to Thee. If
we should declare, and speak of them: they are more, then can be Numbered.

Psalm. 68.35.
O Lord our God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places: The God of Israel is
he, that gives strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.

CHORUS.
Rejoice, rejoice, O ye People: for the Lord will be merciful unto his Land,
and to his People: Deuteronomy. 32.43. The Lord will give Strength unto his People:
the Lord will bless his People with Peace: Psalm. 29.11. For who is God, save
the Lord? or who is a Rock, save our God? Psalm. 18.31. Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say Amen,
Praise ye the Lord: Psalm. 106.48. Glory be to the Father, etc. Amen.

The Grand Procession, when it has been celebrated at Whitehall (or elsewhere
beside Windesor) is for the most and principal part, ordered after the foresaid
manner, as may be seen by the following Scheme.

Sergeant of the Vestry with his gilt Rod. Choristers, in Surplices. Gentlemen
of the Chapel, in Copes. Sub-Dean, in a Cope. Dean of the Chapel, in a Cope.
Officers of Arms. Knights-Companions. Officers of the Order. The Sword.
Sovereign, under a Canopy, with his Train carried up. The Pensioners, as
before.
But in what this Grand Procession differs from that celebrated at Windesor, we
shall here note.

1. Here the Sergeant of the Vestry leads the Proceeding, and is followed by
the Choristers. 2. The Prebends and Choire of Windesor, and the Alms-Knights
are here wanting. 3. The Sub-Dean, and Dean of the Chapel, are Collect. W. le
N. Cl.
taken in, and proceed next to the Gentlemen of the Chapel, to whom sometimes
the Sovereign's Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Almoner has joined himself. 4. Whilst the Knights-Companions are descending
from their Stalls, the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Gentlemen of the Chapel go into the Vestry, to put on their Copes; but the
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Dean of the Chapel has his brought into the Choire, which he puts on below
under his Seat. 5. Lastly, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the MS. fol. pen. praef.
W. D. N. fol. 20. b. 4. The State and Pomp whereof.
Ladies Attendants went with the Pensioners on either side the Sovereign.
The State and Pomp of this Grand Procession, appears both solemn and
magnificent to the Eyes of the beholders, since the glory thereof is much
augmented, by the (1.) splendour of the Sovereign's Apparel, Canopy, and Train;
the (2.) Luster in which the Knights-Companions shine; the (3.) various Habits
of the rest of the Proceeding; the (4.) rich Apparel of the Retinue attending
thereupon; and (5.) lastly, the solemnity of the vocal Music.

We have already drawn into this Chap. 7.
discourse, Sovereign's Under Habit.
an account of the Sovereign's whole Habit of the Order, and set forth the
glory of his Robes, the richness of his Garter, Collar, and George; what falls
to have place here, is only the Apparel or Under Habit, provided for him
against this high Festival, and this was heretofore made of Cloth of Gold,
Cloth of Baudkin, and other the richest materials, which in their several times
were most in fashion and use; the same being set out and adorned with costly
Embroideries of Gold, Pearl, and precious Stones, and suitable thereunto were
the ornamental Trimmings.

If we look so far back, as to the time of the Institution of the Order, we
shall see, that the Founder caused to be made for him, against the first Feast
of St. George, these Garments following. A Ex Cor^po^. Io. Coke Cler. magna
Ga^drob. a an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9.
Ioump containing 4 Else of Blue Taffaty Ex Cor^po^. Io. Coke Cler. magna
Ga^drob. a an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9.
powdered with Garters, the Buckles and Pendants Silver and gilt, and no less
than Ex Cor^po^. Io. Coke Cler. magna Ga^drob. a an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9.
72 Buckles were used about it, and as many Pendants to adorn it. As also
another Ex Cor^po^. Io. Coke Cler. magna Ga^drob. a an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m.
9.
Ioump of Blue Satin, containing 3 Else, powdered with Ex Cor^po^. Io. Coke
Cler. magna Ga^drob. a an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9.
Blue Garters, and fitted with as Ex Cor^po^. Io. Coke Cler. magna Ga^drob. a
an. 21. ad an. 23. E. 3. m. 9.
many Silver and gilt Buckles and Pendants as the former. Besides these, there
was also provided for him a Mem. 11.
Satin Coat, a Cloak and Hood, with Mem. 11.
100 Garters, fitted with 100 Silver Buckles, as many Silver Pendants, and Mem.
11.
300 Bars of Silver.

But let this suffice; for in recounting things of this nature, the task would
be endless, and the satisfaction but to a few: Nevertheless those who are
curious to be informed, of the Robes and Habits of our Kings, throughout the
last f^^^ Centuries, may meet with sufficient satisfaction (even in the
qualities and particulars of all the Materials) among the Accounts of the Great
Wardrobe, in the Exchequer at Westminster.

The Registers of the Order have in them but light touches of this concern, and
not frequent neither; yet such as they afford shall here follow. Upon Saint
George's day an. 13. Eliz. it is noted, that the Lib. C. p. 62.
Sovereign wearing the Collar of the Order, and the rest of the Habit, was
pleased, to the great applause of the Spectators, and satisfaction of all
Strangers that were there, to grace the Grand Procession it self with her own
presence. In the 26. year of her Reign, she went the Grand Procession, wearing
the whole Habit of the Order, and a MS. pen. G. O. Y. page 113.
Diadem of Pearl on her head; and an. 28. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 103.
being gorgeously attired, in the rich Habit of the Order, went about the
Palace (at Whitehall) according to the custom, in Processional Pomp and
Supplication.

But it must be confessed, that this Queen (and only she, of all the Sovereigns
of this most Noble Order) did sometimes publicly proceed to the Chapel
(as well as to the great Closet) and also passed in the Grand Procession,
without wearing the whole Habit of the Order, as in the MS. penes W. D. N. fol.
6.
8. Collect. R. C. Cl. page 9.
27. Ex Collect.
29. and praef. W. le N. Cl.
30. years of her R^ign. the Feast day of St. George, being then held at
Greenwich, and so did she the MS. fol. pene^ W. D. N. fol. 27.
following year, when it was kept at Whitehall.

But this may admit of some excuse; first as a Woman, she thought her self not
so strictly tied, to the exact observation of the Rules of so martial an Order;
next, notice is often taken of her indisposition of health, at such times, and
the whole Habit, being thought a little too heavy and cumbersom, she only wore
the An. 4. Eliz.
Collar of the Order. Howbeit her other Apparel, splendid attire, and the
Luster of her Jewels, (at these Solemnities) exceeded both in richness and
glory, all that she wore at other times.

Among those things which contribute to the Pomp and State of this great
Ceremony, The Canopy.
the rich Canopy is not the least; which is born by Knights and Gentlemen of
Quality, over the Sovereign's head, while he passes in the Grand Procession,
and till he return to the Choire door.

That which was carried an. 18. Eliz. while this solemn Ceremony was in motion,
was a certain Ex e^d. MS. penes ^raefat. G. O. Y. p. 12^.
round Canopy of green Taffaty, and born on the sunny side, to shadow the
Sovereign from the heat of the Sun: by which description it should rather seem
to be an Vmbrella, than a Canopy; for generally Canopies are of another Figure,
viz. an oblong square, and made either of Silk and Gold rich Cloth of Gold, or
Cloth of Tissue; and to suit with both, it is sometimes called Lib. C. p.
178.185.
Vmbrella aurea, Ibid. p. 190.
Vmbraculum aureum, Ibid. p. 99.
or Canopium vel Coelum portatile auri, to which there are affixed Lib. R. p.
30.
6 Golden Staves, wherewith it is supported.

The persons appointed to carry the Canopy an. 11. H. 8. were MS.
4 Knights of the Body, when 4 other Knights bore 4 Wax Tapers; but since, they
are the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Gentlemen of the Sovereign's Privy Chamber in Ordinary, who at the time of the
Feast are in waiting. Concerning whom, there is this mention made in the Blue
Book, an. 26. Eliz. The Lib. C. p. 94.
Sovereign was pleased to follow the Grand Procession, certain persons being
placed already at the Choire door, who wear to bear the Canopy ( woven of Gold
and Silk) for her to walk under. In her Reign, there were not above Lib. C. p.
99. and Lib. R. p. 30.
6 appointed for this A sex Equitibus in altum extenso.
service, but of later times they have been increased to double that number;
the first mention whereof, that we have met with, is an. Ex praesat. Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
8. Car. 1.

The most usual place at Windesor, where the Canopy bearers attend, to receive
the Sovereign, when he enters upon the Grand Processions, is at the Choire door
(yet once we find they received him MS. penes E. W. G. sub an. 16. Iac. R.
without the outer door of the Chapel) and they who bear it make a stand, when
the Sovereign returns to the same place, where they received him, while he
passes from under the same into the Choire, to his Royal Stall. At Windesor
the Canopy is as well used, when the Sovereign descends from the Presence
Chamber, in the Proceeding to the Chapel, on the Feast day in the Morning, as
during the time of Procession; but at Whitehall, it is carried over the
Sovereign's head, during the time of the Grand P^^cession only.

The Train.
In this solemn Proceeding (and at all other times of Public Proceeding, during
the continuance of the Feast) the Sovereign has the long Train of his Mantle,
carried up by several of the young Nobility, appointed to this Service;
concerning which we shall observe,

That this Custom, of holding up the Train, is a very ancient kind of honor;
and derived (some think) from the Erbard. Cellii Aur. Equit. Anglo Wirtemb.
Lib. 5. p. 145.
Roman Emperors, others from the Popes, Cardinals, and Bishops; who, as they
used to kneel down to offer at the Altar, or perform any other part of Divine
Service, had the end of hindermost part of their Stoles, or long Robes, held up
behind from the ground, by their Arch-D^aecons, in token of great veneration
and honor. But what Erhardus Cellius affirms, as more peculiar to our purpose,
is this; Ibid.
That as Kings have anciently been accounted Priests, so King Edward, the
Founder of this most Noble Order, ordained this sacerdotal honor of the Train,
to be added to the Habit of the Order.

Which Ceremony of carrying up the Train, as it has been anciently afforded to
Kings, both in England, France, and elsewhere, so at length, it was drawn down
into use, by great Personages of both Sexes, at grand Solemnities, Assemblies,
Marriages, etc. whereof the foresaid Author gives Ibid. p. 146. and 147.
sundry Examples.

A description of the Train, together with the manner of bearing it up, as of
the Fashion and Figure, wherein it then shows it self, is also given us by him;
for speaking of the Duke of Wirtemberg's Train, that was carried up (according
to the English Fashion) at his solemn reception of the whole Habit of the Order
of the Garter, he takes occasion to tell us, that this Appendix or Supplement,
trailing from the hindermost part of his Mantle, is commonly called Syrma, as
being Ibid. page 145.
in the likeness of the Tail and Wings, which Nature has given for ornament to
the Peacock. The Page 147.
Lady Isabell, Daughter to the French King Henry the Second, when she was
married by Proxy to Philip the Second King of Spain, Retterbusius.
an. 1559. had her Train carried up from the ground, by Mary Queen of Scotland
(who had been lately married to the Dauphin of France) and two other young
Ladies, Sisters of the Bride.

This being premised, the Persons, together with their quality, who have had
the honor to bear up the Sovereign's Train, at the Grand Festival, or other
solemn Assemblies, relating to this most Noble Order, fall in now to be spoken
of; they being appointed by the Sovereign, and notice thereof sent unto them,
by the Lord Chamberlain of the Household, to the end they may give their
attendance accordingly.

The ancientest Example we have met with, of performing this Service, in
relation to the Solemnities of the Order, is that of Ex veteri MS. penes W. le
N. Cl. cujus faciei inscribitur, The Entertainment of the King of Castile fol.
295. b.
an. 21. H. 7. at the Installation of Philip King of Castile, when the
Sovereign's Train, as he went to make his Offering at the high Altar, was Ex
veteri MS. penes W. le N. Cl. cujus faciei inscribitur, The Entertainment of
the King of Castile fol. 295. b.
born up by one of the Canons of the College.

Queen Elizabeth had (for the most part) her Train carried up by great Ladies,
when she proceeded to the Closet at Whitehall, on the Eve of St. George; and in
particular, by the MS. penes W. D. N. f. ^. b.
Lady Marchioness of Northampton, in the third year of her Reign, an. 4. by the
Idem f. 7. b.
Duchess of Suffolk, an. 5. by the Fol. 9. b.
Duchess of Norfolk an. 6. by the MS. f. 17. b.
Lady Margaret Clifford, Wife to the Lord Strange, in the 7. and 9. years by
the Ibid. fol. 20. and 30. b.
Duchess of Somerset, an. 8. by the Countess of Rutland, and an. 10. on the
Eve of the Grand Feast, by the foresaid Duchess of Ibid. fol. 30.
Suffolk.

At other times, this service has been performed by persons of honor, both men
and women together, as on the Grand Feast day an. 19. Eliz. the MS. fol. penes
G. O. Y p. 113.
Earl of Oxford bore up the Train of the Sovereign's Robe, and the MS. fol.
penes G. O. Y p. 113.
Countess of Derby that of her Kirtle. But an. 5. Eliz. the Duchess of Norfolk
carried up the Train both of the Ex praefat. MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 10.
Robe and Kirtle.

Sometimes the said Sovereign had her Train carried up by the Register of the
Order, as on St. George's day an. Collect. W. le N. ^l.
2. and MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 3. b.
3. Eliz. But of late times young Noblemen have performed this Office, the most
honorable person, going on the right hand, as an. 3. Car. 1. Collect. W. le N.
Cl.
the Duke of Lenox, and Earl of Caernarvon, an. 8. Caer. 1. Collect. W. le N.
Cl.
Visc. Grandison, the Lord Wentworth, and the Lord Carew of Leppington. So 8.
Oct. an. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
15 Car. 1. the Duke of Buckingham and his Brother, with the Lord Buckhurst,
and Lord Cavendish.

Assistants have been usually appointed, to those honorable personages, who
carried up the Sovereign Train; and in this quality an. 18. Eliz. the MS. penes
G. O. Y. page 123.
Earl of Oxford, Lord High Chamberlain of England, assisted the Countess of
Derby, which service the Vice-Chamberlain had before discharged, for many years
together, viz. in the Videsis MS. penes praef. W. D. N.
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 th Years of Queen Eliz. and since the Gentleman
of the Robes, for so did Collect. W. l^ N. Cl.
Mr. Kirk an. 8, 9, and 11 Car. 1. The place of the Assistant, in the
Proceeding, is upon the left hand of the Train-Bearers.

This honor of bearing up the Train, has been in like manner afforded to
Stranger Kings, at such times, as they have personally been present at
Windesor, and in particular to Philip King of Castile, an. 21. H. 7. who in his
approach toward the High Altar, to make his Offering, had his Collect. Tho.
Wriothesley Mil. Garter, fol. 295. b.
Train carried up by his own Chamberlain.

In like manner the Lieutenants or Deputies to the Sovereign, constituted for
holding the Grand Feasts of St. George, (and consequently his representatives)
have had their Train carried up, in the Proceedings; For instance, the Earl of
Arundel, being the Sovereigns Lieutenant for holding St. Georges Feast, an. 31.
H. 8. after such times as he had offered for the Sovereign, his MS in Offic.
Arm. [ L. 1.] fol. 19.^
Train was let down, when he came to offer for himself, in the quality of a
Knight-Companion. And this has been the usage in all times since.

And not only the Train of the Sovereigns Lieutenant or Deputy, but sometimes
that of a Stranger Kings Mantle, has been carried up, when his Proxy proceeded
to Installation; as in the case of the French King MS. fol. 25. b.
Charles the Ninth, an. 8. Eliz. when Monsieur Rambouillet, bearing the Mantle
of his Principal upon his right Arm, had the Train thereof carried up, by MS.
fol. 25. b.
Henry Earl of Southampton, assisted by the MS. fol. 25. b.
Lord Herbert.

Furthermore, this Ceremony of bearing up the Train, has been also performed
unto Stranger Princes, in their own Countries, (and that in reference to the
Custom of England) at those solemnities relating to this most Noble Order,
whereof Aur. Equiz. Anglo-Wirtemb. Lib. 5. page 145.
Erhardus Cellius gives us an instance, in Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, who as
soon as he was invested with the Surcoat and Mantle, in the great Hall at
Studgardt, proceeded thence to the great Church of St. Vlrick, to receive the
rest of the Habit of the Order, having his Aur. Equiz. Anglo-Wirtemb. Lib. 5.
page 145.
Train born from the ground, by the Noble and Illustrious Count Lodowick
Leosten; Ibid.
who likewise carried it after him, throughout the whole Ceremony.

And lastly the Knights-Companions have (in this Proceeding) their Trains
carried up by their own Gentlemen.

Another piece of Ceremony, in the State of this Grand Proceeding, we find An.
18. Eliz.
once added, and that was the bearing of Queen Elizabeth's MS. praefat. pen^^
G. O. Y. page 113.
Cloak and Hat along with her; the one by Sir William Howard, the other by Sir
Christopher Hatton, then Captain of her Guard: but as this was the first, so
was it the last time that either of these, are mentioned to be thus publicly
carried.

2 Apparel of the Knights-Companions.
In the second place, the Cloths and Apparel (or under Habit) of the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions, have for many years past, been made of white Satin,
and in the fashion of the times; which the present Sovereign observing to be
laid aside, and others introduced, He, to prevent profuseness in Apparel, and
emulation among the Knights-Companions, as also to beget an uniformity and
equality, among them in the under, no less than in the upper Habit of the
Order, thought ^it to appoint a set, and constant Habit of Cloth of Silver,
made in the fashion of Trunk Hose, with white silk Stockings, to be worn by
himself and them, upon all solemn occasions, relating to the Order; for the
observation of which, an Appendix Number. CLXXX.
Order past in Chapter, an. 13 Car. 2.

As to other Ornaments the chiefest are the variety of rich Jewels, which
surround or adorn their Caps, and where else they may appear most conspicuous.

But besides the glory and splendour, which shoot from the Habits and Ornaments
of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, who are principal in this grand
Ceremony, there are others, that make up the body of the Proceeding, and may
fitly be compared to Stars of the middle and lesser magnitude, since we find
them adorned in Robes particular to their Offices, to distinguish and set off
the luster of the show; among whom are, first,

3. The Officers of the Order.
The five Officers of the Order, namely the Prelate, Chancellor, Register,
Garter and Black Rod; of whose Habits we have sufficiently spoken Chap 9.
before.

The Provincial Kings, Heralds, and Pursuivants, habited in their rich Coats,
and going together in one Body, 4. Officers of Arms.
appear more conspicuous, from the Royal Arms of the Sovereign of this most
Noble Order, richly imbroidered upon them with fine gold, purles, and twist;
the ground of the Provincial Kings Coats, being at this day blew Velvet, the
Heralds blew Satin, and the Pursuivants blew Damask.

5. Canons.
The Habit in which the Canons of the College proceed, is also peculiar, and
more remarkable, because of their particular reference to this most Noble
Order: for though as Clergy men, they are vested in Linen Surplices, at all
times of Divine Service, or the Celebration of Sacred Offices, yet at the
Solemnities peculiar to the Order, they wear a Mantle over those Surplices,
which is a Habit appointed for them, from the foundation of the Order.

These Mantles are of Taffety and of the ancient color, to wit E. 3. Stat.
Art. 5. H. 5. Stat. Art. 5.
Murry; upon the Ord. Stat. in Lib. N. Art. 5.
right shoulder of which is a Scutcheon of St. Georges Arms within a Rundelet,
imbroidered with Gold and Silk^; and bought at their own charge, for we do not
find them entered among the Liveries of the Garter, provided by the Sovereign.

6. Gentlemen of the Chapel, etc.
In Habits yet more glorious, do the Gentlemen of the Sovereigns Chapel at
Whitehall, the Petty-Canons, and Vicars of Windesor appear; who at this time
are also joined in one Body, to augment the Solemnity: for they are all (or the
most part of them) Vested in Rich Coaps of Cloth of Gold, Cloth of Bodkin, or
most costly Imbroideries: But the Children of the Chapel, and Choristers do
always proceed habited, in Surplices of fine Linen.

By a memorial we have met with, a. 22 H. 8. we find how well stored this
College then was, with such sacred Vestments; when at one Procession appointed
by the Sovereign in honor of St. George, there were MS. in Offic. Arm. [ M.
17.] fol. 32. b.
35. Copes of rich Cloth of Gold made use off.

These kind of Vestments, have been in all times worn in the Grand Procession,
whether the Grand Feast was kept at Windesor, or at Whitehall, or
Hampton Court, or Greenwich, even to the beginning of the late Wars, in which
the covetous barbarism of the then Reformers, sent most of them to the fire;
Besides, they are sometimes taken notice of, in the Registers of the Order, to
be used in the Grand Procession; as in particular, an. 15 Iac. Reg. it is
noted, that the Lib. C. p. 190.
whole Choire, being adorned in Copes, (for so we suppose the word Orarium may
signify, as well as Dalmatica Vestis) descended from the Altar, and sung the
Letany; and to like purpose is that recorded, an. Lib. R. p. 7. ^ide etiam p.
^0.
21. of the same King.

Alms-Knights.
7. Lastly, the Habits of the Alms-Knights [a Mantle and Kirtle] are not
unremarkable; they being grave and civil, and both for color and materials,
appear suitable to their Age and Degree. The Mantles are of Cloth, which the
Statutes appoint to be of a E. 3. Stat. Art ^ H 5. Stat. Art ^ H. 8. Stat. Art.
16.
Red Color, with a Shield of the Arms of St. George, but without any Garter to
surround them. In conformity whereunto, when Queen Elizabeth's Orders and
Rules, for the establishment of good Government, among these Alms-Knights were
An. 1. Eliz.
made; It was therein Ordained, that each of them should have yearly for their
Livery, a Artic. 4.
Gown of Red, and a Mantle of blew or purple Cloth, with a Art. 5.
Cross of St. George embroidered in a Scutcheon, (without the Garter) but to be
set upon the left shoulder.

In this Grand Proceeding, we observe the Habits so ordered, that the more
grave and civil, being placed between those that are rich and gallant,
entertain the Beholders with a more delightful prospect. For such we see are
the Officers of the Order, who proceed between the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions; the Canons of the College, who pass between the Heralds
and Gentlemen of both Chapel; and lastly, the Alms-Knights who go immediately
before the Choristers.

The Registers of this Noble Order make frequent mention of diverse persons of
rank and quality, 8. The Sovereign's and Knights Retinue.
who at this Solemnity of St. George, put themselves upon the duty of
attendance on the Sovereign, because, otherwise, related to his Service,
although in reference to the Order not so concerned, as to be taken into the
Proceeding. Such are diverse of the Nobility, sometimes great Ladies, many
considerable Officers of the Household, and other Courtiers; all richly habited
and attired, thereby adding to the Gallantry of this solemn Ceremony.

Concerning these it is remembered, an. 35. Eliz. that the Sovereign's
Proceeding in public to the Chapel, was not only attended in all points by
the Knights-Companions, and Lib. C. p 123.
other of her Nobles, but accompanied also with a great Train of her Ladies of
Honor, and a numerous concourse of Foreiners and Dowesticks, looking on and
wishing all happiness.

Nor may we here omit some other Servants, who attend upon the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions at the Feast, they deserving notice, both for their number
and rich Liveries. Such were the Henxmen anciently (now called Pages of Honor)
who waited on the Sovereign; Upon the Knights-Companions attended diverse
Gentlemen, wearing Blue Coats, and on their left Sleeves the Cognizances of
those Lords whom they waited upon, adorned with valuable Gold Chains: to these
we shall add, both Pages and Footmen, always clad in exceeding gallant and rich
Liveries.

At the Feast of St. George, an. 11. Car. 1. there was Exceptions taken by the
Earl Marshal, at the Earl of Berkshires Servants, for that their Cognizances
were adorned with MS.
Coronets set over them, and it was thereupon MS.
Ordered, to be amended against the next occasion of wearing them, upon a
public account. And by special directions from the late Sovereign King Charles
the First, in the beginning of his Reign, MS.
the Coats of the Footmen, belonging to the Knights of the Order, were then,
and for the future, forbid to have the Garter embroidered about their Badges,
as being too great an abasement of that first and chiefest Ensign of the Order,
to be worn by persons of so mean rank; which excess, for the same reason,
deserves reformation, in the Water-mens Badges, too frequently worn within a
Garter, in this Age.

The Henxmen followed, in the Grand Procession, near to the person of the
Sovereign, but the Gentlemen, Pages, and Footmen belonging to the
Knights-Companions, did not go in this Proceeding, but were Collect. W. l N. Cl.
marshalled before it set forward, from the Choire door, on both sides the
Processional way, and here and there intermixed with the Yeomen of the G^rard,
to keep off the Press.

The Habit wherein the Henxmen were usually dressed, was rich and gay, as could
be devised, being oftentimes embroidered with ingenious and pretty Devises,
such as best liked the fancy of the Sovereign. We have seen the Ex Lib. ^^cat.
C^tom, in Offic. mag. Gardrob. Regis, fol. 74.
account for the Apparel of 12 Henxmen, who attended on the Sovereign at St.
George's Feast, an. 11. H. 6. the Sleeves of their Gowns being embroidered,
each with three sprigs of Broom, and three Peacoks Feathers bound together,
wrought with Silks of diverse Colors, and the Sovereign's Motto [ Dieu and mon
Droit] embroidered thereupon.

9. The Music.
To complete the pomp of this great Ceremony, we may (in the last place) fitly
remember the Music as a part thereof; it being particularly taken notice of,
in most places of the Register, where the Grand Procession is recorded. The
Choires both of the Sovereign's Chapel at Whitehall, and this at Windesor,
being here (as before is noted) united; all singing the sacred Hymn together,
while the Grand Procession devoutly passes on.

This Hymn was composed and set with Verse and Chorus, by Captain Cook Master
of the Children of the Sovereign's Chapel; by whose direction some
Instrumental loud Music was at that time introduced, namely two double
Sackbots, and two double Courtals; and placed at convenient distance, among the
Classes of the Gentlemen of both Choires, to the end, that all might distinctly
hear, and consequently keep together, in both time and tune. For one Sackbot
and Courtal was placed before the four Petty Canons, who begun the Hymn, and
the other two, immediately before the Prebends of the College.

And now behold the Sculp of the Grand Procession, as it was ordered upon this
solemn occasion, an. 23. Car. 2. designed and etchedy Mr. Wineslaus Hollar; in
which, the Postures and Habits are expressed with singular spirit and freedom.

Return of the Grand Procession into the Choire.
Upon the return of the Grand Procession to the Choire door, the Alms-Knights
first advance into it, and after double Reverences, ascend above the Haut Pas's
to the Altar.

Next the Choristers, and in like manner the Vicars, Petty Canons of Windesor,
Gentlemen of the Chapel, and Prebends go to their Seats.

Then the Officers of Arms pass up, and join to the Alms-Knights.

After this, the Knights-Companions enter and stand before their Stalls.

The like does the Black-Rod, Garter, and Register.

As also the Chancellor and Prelate.

Then does the Sovereign take his Royal Stall.

The Knights-Companions ascend their Stalls.

The Officers of the Order sit down on their Forms: And all this is done in the
same manner and order, and with like Reverences, as at their entrance into the
Choire on the Eve of the Feast.

Then the Prelate, with two Prebends (appointed to read the Epistle and Gospel)
are conducted, the one by the Sergeants of the Vestry, the other by the Verger,
up to the Altar (which they approach with usual Reverences) the Prelate passing
to the North side, and the Prebends to the South, to finish the remaining part
of Divine Service.

Whereupon the Officers of Arms descend into the Choire, and,

The Alms-Knights go down to their Seats. Which, while they are so doing, the
two Prebends put on their Copes, at the South side of the Altar,

This done, the Prelate begins the second Service.

SECT. IV. The order of the Second Service.
THE order and course of the Second Service, since the time of Reformation in
the Church of England, has been celebrated according to the directions set
down in the Book of Common Prayer, established by Act of THE GRAND PROCESSION
OF THE Sovereign and knights Companions ANNO 23 CAROLI 2
Parliament, being the same commonly used on any other Feast Day; excepting
that a peculiar Epistle and Gospel, made proper to this Festival, has been
appointed to be read in their due place of the Service. The Epistle being the
33. Chapter of Deuteronomy; next follows the Gospel, taken out of the 5.
Chapter of the Gospel of St. John, beginning at the 24. Verse, and ending at
the 30. which being read the Creed is sung.

The Office appointed to be used on this Feast day in the Chapel of St.
George, in Windesor Castle, before the Reformation, may be seen in the
Breviarie and Missale ad usum ac consuetudinem Sarum, which we have transcribed
hither; for (in regard that the College of Windesor was situate within the
Diocese of Salisbury) the Statutes of the College did appoint and ordain, Cap.
21.
that the use and custom of singing, pronouncing, and celebrating Divine
Service, of attending in the Choire and at the Altar, or of celebrating about
it the Masses peculiar to the day, or of the Virgin Mary, as also for the dead,
as well in celebrating as reading, singing, standing, sitting, both in the
Choire and without it, and all things whatsoever, which were observed in the
Church of Salisbury, should be observed in this Chapel of St. George,
according to the convenience of place and exigency of persons: To the
observation of this Statute, they were also obliged by the Cap. 6.
Injunctions of John Archbishop of York, Chancellor of England, under the
penalty of paying 12 d. to the Treasury of the College, by every one, that
should be guilty of violating or infringing the same. What difference there is
between the foresaid Office, and that appointed to the use of the Church of
York (in regard it is but small) we shall also note, and then close this
Section with the Hymn and Prayer, out of the Primmer of Salisbury.

If any be further curious to know, what alteration has been made since our
Reformation, in this Office in the Roman Church (for since then, they have seen
cause to mend and refine diverse things, in their public Liturgy) they may
have recourse to the Breviarium Romanum and Missale Romanum, Ex decreto
Concilii Tridentini restitutum, wherein the Service is Heylins Hist. of St.
George, Part. 2. Sect. 8.
noted to be very solemn, and (for the honor of St. George) scarce any Festival
there, is celebrated, with more variety of proper and Divine Offices.

Officium proprium Sancti Georgii, prout extat in Portiforio ( seu Nota, Quod
Breviarium hoc Salisburiense Bedam sequitur, qui in suo Martyrologio, ad diem
23. Aprilis, ait Georgium Martyrium fuisse passum sub Daciano Rege Persarum: Et
Vsuardus in Martyrologio suo ad diem etiam Apr. 23. ait, Georgium Martyrio
coronatum in Perside, civitate Diospoli.
Breviario) Salisburiensi Londini excuso 1555. In proprio de Sanctis, In
Breviario Sancti Dominici. Paris. 1512. p. 44. In Oficio Sancti Georgii
occurrit eadem Oration, quae hic habetur in Breviario Salisburiensi, and tres
Lectiones ( ex gesti Sancti Georgii s. cuntum Ecclesiam Gallicanam, ita enim
habet Rubrica) quae quoad sensum, ut pene quoad verba ipsa, eaedem sunt cum his
Lectionibus Ecclesiae Salisburiensis.
Part. Hiemali, ad diem April 23.

Rubrica.
Sancti Georgii Martyris. Tres Lectiones, cum regimine Chori, duplex Festum.

Capitulum.
Iste sanctus qui pro Lege Dei sui certavit usque ad mortem: and a verbis
impiorum non timuit: fundatus enim erat supra firmam petram.

Oration.
Deus qui nos beati Georgii Martyris tui meritis and intercessione laetificas;
concede propitius, ut qui ejus beneficia poscimus, dono tuae gratiae
consequamur, per dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Lectio 1. Vide Nicephorum Callist. Hist. Lib. 7. c. 15. de Martyrio S. Georgii
sub Dioclesiano.

Sanctus and verus Dei Cultor Georgius Cappadociae regionis oriundus, cum
videret multos Deum blasphemantes, and cum Daciano daemones adorantes, spiritu
sancto repletus in hanc vocem prorupit: Omnes dii Gentium daemonia, Dominus
autem caelum fecit. Dacianus ait ei, qua temeritatis andacia, nobis injuriam
irrogans, Deos nostros daemonia vocas? fatere tum ex qua Provincia huc
advenisti, vel quo nomine vociferis.

Lectio 2.
Sanctus Georgius dixit: Christianu^ and Dei servus sum, Georgius nuncupor,
genere Capadocus, patriae meae comitatum gerens. Elegi vero temporali dignitate
carere, and immortalis Dei imperio servire. Dacianus ait ei: erras Georgi,
accede and immola Deo Appollini. Beatus Georgius respondet, Domino enim meo
Jesus Christo exhibeo culturam, Regi omnium seculorum, non Apollini auctori
Daemonionum.

Lectio 3.
Iratus Dacianus jussit S. Georgium in Equuleo levari, and extensum membraetim
ungulis lacerari. Deinde lateribus ejus lampades ardentes applicari; salem vero
in vulnera aspergi, and cilicio plagas ejus fricari; plumboque bullienti
Georgium immitti, extractumque per vicos ut reum fecit trahi. Cumque traheretur
ad locum supplicii, flexis genibus gratias egit Deo; and sic capitalem pro
Christo subiit sententiam.

Rubrica.
Caetera de Communi unius Martyris de Pasc. temporis.

What is set down above, is proper to St. George, but the rest of the Office
used on St. George's day (being common to him with other Martyrs) is not set
down, but referred to that part of the Portiforium, called Commune.

Secundum usum Sar^m, Mi^sa. Psalm. 63.
Sancti Georgii Martyris Officium.
Protexisti me Deus a conventu malignantium, Alleluia; a multitudine operantium
iniquitatem. Alleluia, Alleluia.

Psalmus.
Ibidem.
Exaudi Deus orationem meam cum deprecar: a timore inimici eripe animam meam.

Oration
Deus qui nos beati Georgii martyris tui, meritis and intercessione laetificas:
concede propitius; ut, cujus beneficia poscimus, dono tuae gratiae consequamur.
Per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum.

Lectio beati Jacobi Apostoli. 1.
Cap. 1.
Carissimi, omne gaudium existimate, cum in temptationes varias incideritis:
Scientes quod probatio fidei vestrae, patientiam operatur: Patientia autem opus
perfectum habeat: ut sitis perfecti and integri, in nullo deficientes. Si quis
autem vestrum indiget sapientia, postulet a Deo qui dat omnibus affluenter, and
non improperat: and dabitur ei. Postulet autem in fide nihil haesitans. Qui
enim haesitat, similis est fluctui maris, qui a vento movetur and circumfertur.
Non ergo existimet homo ille, quod accipiat aliquid a Domino. Vir duplex animo,
inconstans est in omnibus viis suis. Glorietur autem frater humilis, in
exaltatione sua: dives autem in humilitate sua, quoniam sicut flos foeni
transibit: Exortus est enim sol c^m ardore: and arefecit foenum, and flos ejus
decidit: and decor vultus ejus deperiit: Ita and dives, in itineribus suis
marcescit. Beatus vir qui suffert temptationem: quoniam cum prob^tus fuerit,
accipiet coronam vitae, quam repromisit Deus diligentibus se. Alleluia.

Laetabitur justus in Domino, and Psalm. 63.
sperabit in eo: and laudabuntur omnes recti cord.

Sequentia.
Organicis canamus modulis Georgii solennia. Omnigenis Domino vocibus reddentes
odas debitas: Qui in suis sanctis mirabilis nimis, multiplici virtutum flore
eosdem decorat, ac mirifice adornat. Nam and in ipsis quasi in quibusdam
musicis instrumentis, digito proprio fides agitat, fides virtutum sonoras; his
numerose percurrens singulas. Permiscet singulis diatessaron mellifluam
melodiam; quam generat virtutum matter illa, quae aliis decenter composita
reddit suavem symphoniam, qua sine cuncta fiunt dissona, necnon and frivola;
qua cum omnia sunt consona, necnon utilia: qua justi been morati, rite petentes
excelsa poli sidera alacres decantant nova cantica, in Cithara Threicia: quorum
agentes festa, consortia mereamur in coelesti patria.

Evangelium secundum Johannem.
In illo tempore, Chap. 13.
dixit Jesus Discipulis suis, Ego sirm vitis vera, and pater meus agricola est;
Omnem Palmitem in me non ferentem fructum tollet eum, and omnem qui fert
fructum purgabit eum, ut fructum plus afferat. Iam vos mundi estis propter
sermonem quem locutus sum vobis. Manete in me, and ego in vobis. Sicut Palms
non potest far fructum a semetipso nisi manserit in vite: sic nec vos nisi in
me manseritis. Ego sum vitis; vos palmites. Qui manet in me, ego in eo, hic
fert fructum multum, quia sine me nihil potestis facere. Si quis in me non
manserit, mittetur for as sicut palms and arescet: and colligent eum and in
ignem mittent and ardet. Si manseritis in me, and verba mea in vobis manserint,
quodcunque volueritis petetis, and fiet vobis.

Offertorium.
Confitebuntur coeli mirabilia tua Domine: Psalm. ^^.
and veritatem tuam in Ecclesia Sanctorum. Alleluia Alleluia.

Secreta.
Offerimus tibi Domine solemn sacrificium pro veneranda Sancti Georgii
martyris tui passione, deprecantes clementiam tuam: ut per haec sacrosancta
mysteria: antiqui hostis temptamenta, te triumphante, vincamus: and aeternae
remunerationis primum, te largiente consequamur per Dom.

Communio.
Laetabitur Iustus in Domino, Psalm. 3^.
and sperabit in eo: and laudabuntur omnes recti cord.

Postcommunio.
Mensae caelestis satiati dulcedine; humiliter te rogamus omnipotens pater: ut
intercedente beato Georgio martyr tuo: resurrectionis ejus simus participes
cujus sumus morte redempti. Qui tecum, etc.

Here note, that it belonged to the Lib. N. p. 109.
Abbot of Towerhill to read the Gospel, and to the Prior of Medemenham in
Norfolk to read the Epistle; for upon them was this duty imposed, until the
Reformation; and in whose absence, a Ibid. p. 112.
Canon, and a Vicar of the Chapel, supplied their place ( Ibid. p. 113.
He that read the Gospel, (after censing by the Epistoler) presented the Heart
of St. George, bestowed upon King Henry the Fifth by Ibid. p. 26.
Sigismund the Emperor) to the Sovereign and Knights-Companions to kiss.

The difference between the Office appointed for St. Georges Day, secundum
Sarum, and Ebor. is as follows.

The Office of the Church of York has the same Officium, Psalmus, Oration* with
Salisbury; but it has another Epistle, viz. 2 Cor. 5.1. beginning scimus
quoniam si terrestris; and ends with the fourth verse.

And other verses follow the Epistle, viz.

Versus. Confitebuntur coeli mirabilia tua Domine, etenim veritatem tuam in
Ecclesiam Sanctorum.

Versus. Angelus Domini descendit de coelo and accedens revolvit Lapidem and
sedebat super eum.

The Sequentia, is the same with Salisbury, But the Gospel is 16 Math. beginning
at the 24. verse. Si quis vult post me venire, etc. to the end of the Chapter.

The Offertorium and Communio, are the same also with Salisbury.

But the Secreta and Post-Communio, the same with the Roman Missal now in use.

The Office secundum Sarum, has the same Officium, Psalmus, Oration,
Offertorium, Communio and Gospel, with the Roman Missall.

But it differs in the Epistle, the Verse following, the Secreta, and
Post-Communion.

In the Primmer according to the usage of Salisbury, otherwise called Horae
beatissimae Mariae Virginis, secundum usum Sarum. Printed in a small Volume by
Winandus de Word, an. 1529. there is this Hymn to St. George among the
Suffrages.

Fol. 54.
De Sancto Georgio. Antiphona.
Georgi martyr inclite, te decet lans and gloria, praedotatum militia: per quem
Puella Regia existens in tristitia, coram dracone pessimo salvatae est. Te
animo rogamus and cord intimo, ut, cum cunctis fidelibus, coeli jungamur
civibus, nostris ablutis sordibus, ut simul cum letitia tecum simus in gloria,
nostraque reddant labia, lands Christo eum gloria.

Verse. Ora pro nobis beat Georgi Christi miles.

Resp. Ut hosts visibiles and invisibiles sint contra no^ valde debiles.

Oration.
Omnipotens sempiterne Deus qui deprecantium voces benignus exaudis, majestatem
tuam supplices exoramus: Vt sicut in honor beati ac gloriosissimi martyris tui
Georgii Draconem a Puella superare voluisti: Ita ejusdem intercessione hosts
nostr^s visibiles and invisibiles, ne nocere valiant, a nobis superari
concedas, per Dominum nostrum. Pater noster. Ave Maria.

The same Prayer I find in the Primmers Printed in a Large Quarto at Paris, by
Francis Regnault in the Years 1516, 1526, 1527, 1534. and in a small Vollume at
Roven, an. 1538.

SECT. V. The Offering of Gold and Silver.
Preparation^ for the Offering.
BEing now to speak of this solemn and sacred Ceremony, we shall premise; That,
whether it be performed in the Sovereign's Chapel at Windesor, or in any other
Church or Chapel whatsoever, the Ceremony is one and the same, having not any
thing peculiarly local to Windesor (except the Sovereign's Offering of Gold and
Silver instead of the Bezant) or otherwise varying with the place.

The accustomed time of Offering Gold and Silver on the Feast day, is mentioned
an. 22. H. 8. to be after the MS. in Offic. Arm. [ M. 17.] fol. 32. b.
Sovereign's return to his Stall, from the Grand Procession, in the time of
high Mass; and at this day begins, immediately after this first Sentence of the
Offertory is pronounced by the Prelate,

Let your light so shine before men, etc.

This said, the Organs begin to play (continuing so throughout the whole
Ceremony) and forthwith a Groom and Page of the removing Wardrobe (with
Reverence first made) unroll a long Carpet, and spread it from before the
Altar, downward, upon the Haut pas, ascending thereto, and then stand on each
side thereof.

Which being done, the Alms-Knights first, next the Pursuivants, Heralds, and
Provincial Kings ascend in usual order, to their wonted Stations before the
Altar, and dividing themselves, flank the Carpet on both sides.

Then Garter steps from his Seat, and, after his double Reverences, and the
usual manner of waving his Rod, the Knights-Companions descend in their
accustomed and regular order, and stand before their Stalls.

After this, the Black Rod goes from his Seat, makes his double Reverences in
the middle of the Choire, and ascends near to the Altar, toward which, making
a single Reverence, he turns his back, and immediately the Groom of the
removing Wardrobe, delivers unto him a little Carpet, anciently of Silk, now
of Cloth of Gold, which he (the said Groom assisting) spreads over that before
mentioned, lying on the Haut Pas's to the Altar.

Moreover the said Groom holds upon his arms, a fair Cushen of Cloth of Gold,
for the Sovereign to kneel upon, at the time of his Offering, which the Black
Rod forthwith lays upon the upper Haut Pas, before the Altar. And note, that
as-well in delivering as receiving the Cushen, each of them take the Assay
thereof, by kissing it.

These preparations for the Sovereign to offer, being made, the Prelate of the
Order takes a large gilt Basin into his hands, to receive the Sovereign's
Offering, and placing himself in the middle of the Altar, stands before it with
one of the Prebends to assist him.

The Sovereign at this instant arising from his Royal Seat, The Order of the
Sovereigns Offering.
makes his Reverence toward the Altar, and then descending makes a like
Reverence below, and ascends toward the Altar, attended as follows.

Garter. Register. Chancellor.
The Nobleman that bears the Sword. The Sovereign, having his Train born up.
The Knight-Companion, who is to give him his Offering, goes a little behind on
his left hand.

Being come into the middle of the Choire, he makes another Reverence, and at
the first Haut Pas his last.

And albeit, in other matters of Ceremony, the Sovereign performs his part E.
3. Stat. Art. 13 H. 5. Stat. Art. 13
last, yet at the Offering, first, and before all the Knights-Companions. And in
this point, Errhard Celius discoursing of the Duke of Wirtemberg's Offering, is
mistaken, where he says, the Sovereign or his Deputy Offer Eq. Aur.
Anglo-Wirtemb. fol. 183.
after all the Knights-Companions, and in the last place.

The Officers of Arms were anciently wont to lead on this Proceeding, and pass
before the Officers of the Order, and so we find it remembered Ex Veteri MS.
pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 295. b.
an. 22. H. 7. an. MS. page 12.
1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
2. and MS. G O. ^. page 113.
19. Eliz. and the like attendance was in those times given to the Sovereign's
MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. fol. 5. b. and fol. 12.
Lieutenant by them; but this is now altered, and they directed to proceed up
next toward the Altar after the Alms-Knights, as before, and together with
them, stand in flank on both sides the Carpet, while the Sovereign approaches
the Altar.

He that bears the Sovereign's Offering, is either the senior Knight, the
Prince, or the greatest Estate among the Knights-Companions then present, and
no other person (of what Degree soever) if he be not one of this most Noble
Fraternity, does perform this service. And once we find the senior Knight had
an Assistant for this service, namely an. 18. Eliz. when the Earl of MS. penes
G.O.Y. page 123.
Arundell went on the Sovereign's right hand, and the Earl of Sussex on her
left, to give her the Offering.

The Sovereign being come to the upper Haut Pas, kneels, at which instant, the
Black Rod on his Knee delivers (with Assay) the Sovereign's Offering to the
senior Knight, and he, kneeling, presents it to the Sovereign, which he
immediately offers into the Basin, held by the Prelate, assisted as before, who
at this instant heretofore also kneeled; but at the Feast celebrated an. 15.
Car. 2. the present Sovereign gave command, that the Prelate and Canon should
Lib. Carol. page 47.
stand, while himself, in the humble posture of kneeling, should make his
Offering.

Which having done, he arises and passes down the Haut Pas's, where turning
about he makes a Reverence toward the Altar, and thence conducted and
attended, as when he came up to Offer, at the entrance into his Stall, he turns
about and makes another Reverence, at both which times the Attendants bow
toward the Altar also, and ascending into his Stall, does the like again, and
then reposeth himself in his Seat. In that interim the Black Rod takes up the
rich Carpet and Cushen, and delivers them to the foresaid Groom, and so
descends (with Reverence) to his Form, and stands before it.

In Queen Elizabeth's Reign, it appears the Bezant was Offered by her, and
redeemed of course (so also at sundry times since) and noted ( an. 2. Eliz.) to
be of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
7 l. value. But at the Installation of the Duke of York at Windesor, an. 11.
Iac. R. there was a question proposed to the Dean and Canons, Collect. D. Chr.
Wren nuper Ord. Regist.
whether if the Sovereign should offer his Bezant, it might be redeemed or not?
Their answer then was, Collect. D. Chr. Wren nuper Ord. Regist.
that whatsoever was there offered, became the Dean and Canons without
redemption, whereupon the Sovereign waved offering his Bezant, and offered
Collect. D. Chr. Wren nuper Ord. Regist.
both Gold and Silver.

And besides, concerning this thing, there is an Entry made of a passage (upon
the Register of the Order) which happened an. 6. Car. 1. Lib. R. p. 62.
That whereas in other places (besides Windesor) the Sovereign is wont to offer
a certain golden piece (vulgarly called a Bezant) to be redeemed afterward, at
a certain price; Lib. R. p. 62.
The Usher of the Black Rod having sometime been admonished, that in these
services there is no redemption to be made, never presents the Bezant at
Windesor to the Sovereign, but Gold and Silver of English money.

When the Sovereign is absent, The Lieutenants Offering
and his Lieutenant offers for him, he performs the Ceremony in manner and
order following.

First (after the preparations made for the Offering, as aforesaid, and Garters
double Reverence toward the Altar and the Sovereign's Stall, with a third to
the Lieutenant) he descends from his Stall with his usual Reverences, and goes
to the steps ascending the Sovereign's Stall, and there stands a while; then
making his double obeisance, he proceeds toward the Altar (the Officers of the
Order going before him) with one other Reverence in the middle of the Choire,
and another at the first Haut Pas of the Altar, having his Train carried up.
The MS. penes praef. G.O.Y. p. 114 vide MS. 4. pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 11.
Carpet and Cushen is spread and laid for him, by the Collect. A. V. W.
Black Rod, and Yeomen of the Wardrobe, with Assay, and the Offering given also
with Assay, by the MS. penes praef. G.O.Y. p. 114 vide MS. 4. pen. W. le N. Cl.
f. 11.
Black Rod, to the senior Knight, or one of the Knights-Companions of highest
dignity, at that time present, who attending the Lieutenant up to the Altar,
delivers it upon his Knee, and he having put it, kneeling also, into the Basin
(held by the Prelate) returns back through the body of the Choire to the MS.
penes praef. G.O.Y. p. 114 vide MS. 4. pen. W. le N. Cl. f. 11.
Sovereign's Stall, in the same order, and with like Reverences as he came,
where standing a while again before it, he makes his single Reverence toward
it, and then goes up into his own Stall, where (if it fall out that the
Lieutenant is not the senior Knight) he stays to MS. in Bibl* Coton. [sub
Effig. Iulii^ E. 11.
receive the Reverences of all the Knights-Companions his seniors, as they go
up to offer, and when his own turn and course comes to offer, he descends with
a double Reverence, and proceeds up with his Fellow (if present) and Ibid.
offers for himself in his own place, and as one of the Knights-Companions; but
his MS. in Offic. Armor. [ L. 1.] p. 19. and MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 12.
Train is now let down, the Assay not given, the Carpet and Cushen taken away,
and only two Officers of Arms (but none of the Order) proceeds before him; and
as soon as he has thus offered for himself, he returns to his Stall, by the Ex
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
East end through the Stalls.

But it seems an. 7. Iac. R. that MS. penes E W. G. fol. 148. b.
Garter alone on the Feast day, brought up the Prince (then the Sovereign's
Lieutenant) when he came to offer for himself, which some of the
Knights-Companions observing, alleged that the service ought to have been
performed by MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 148. b.
Clarenceux and Norroy (he being the senior Knight) yet because Garter had so
brought him up the day before, it was thought good he should so continue And
this we look on as an oversight in Garter, if not ignorance, since at the same
time we find him guilty of another, as great an Error; for he brought down the
Knights-Companions out of their Stalls to offer, MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 148. b.
before the Epistle and Gospel were read, which the Relator notes to be done,
MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 148. b.
contrary to the use of former times, and in truth very absurd and
inconvenient; inasmuch as, besides their long time of standing below in the
Choire, while the tedious Ceremonies of the Offering were preparing and
performing, the Knights-Companions were now put to exercise their patience, by
the inconvenience of a longer standing there, even while the Epistle and Gospel
were read, and the Creed sung, and all this before the Offering did begin. But
the foresaid mistake was an. 11. Iac. R. rectified, and when the Prince (being
the Ibid. f. 1^1. b.
Soveraing's Lieutenant) came to offer for himself, he was then brought up by
Clarenceux and Norroy, and not by Garter.

When the Sovereign's Lieutenant has offered for himself, he MS. in Offic.
Armor. ut supra.
returns to the lower end of the Stalls, and passes thence toward his own,
where having paid his usual Reverences, he enters it again, and is there ready
to receive the Reverences of all the rest of the Knights-Companions, his
juniors.

This ceremonious course of the Lieutenant's returning up to his Stall, after
he had offered for the Sovereign, and there remaining, until his own turn came
to offer, and then to descend again, and offer for himself, and so return to
his Stall, was first appointed to be observed by Collect. A. V. W.
Decree in Chapter an. 7. Eliz. though the entry thereof into the Register of
the Order, was (we know not how) neglected; and this return has been since
duly observed, albeit the senior Knight (as very usual) was made the
Sovereign's Lieutenant, and then (there being no other Knight that possessed a
higher Stall than himself, to offer before him) he, resting a while there,
arose, and with usual Reverences came forth a second time from his Seat, and
went up to offer for himself, attended as is before mentioned.

As Soon as the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) is returned to his Stall, The
Knights Offering.
the two Provincial Kings pass down into the middle of the Choire, where making
a Reverence jointly toward the Altar, and next to the Sovereign, Clarenceux
turns himself to the senior Knight, and makes him a third Reverence, while
Norroy, at the same instant, does the like to the next junior Knight, and to
both, as an intimation of their going up to Offer; then each King retires a
little backward, toward the Stalls.

In the mean time, the two senior Knights-Companions draw near together, and
make their double Reverence, and upon the last turning of themselves,
Clarenceux and Norroy step forth and pass up before them, until they arrive
near to the Prelate (but where the senior Knight wants his opposite Companion,
the two Kings bring him up alone, and he Offers single) then making their
Reverences, first toward the Altar, next to the two Knights, Clarenceux
retires to the right side, and Norroy to the left, and make themselves ready
for a present return, before the Knights-Companions; who in the interim are
kneeling together, on the upper Haut Pas before the Altar, making their Offering.

This humble posture in Offering, was not (it seems) heretofore generally
observed by the Knights-Companions, and therefore an. 4. Car. 1. it occasioned
the passing a Decree to this effect; That in all Offerings to be thenceforth
made Lib. R. p. 44.
every one of the Knights-Companions ( in honor of God, and in testimony of
their obedience and Christian Piety) should most humbly bow their knees.

The Knights-Companions Offerings are both of Silver and Gold, which they put
into the foresaid Basin, held to them by the MS. penes E. W. G. sub an. 1 Iac.
R. vide Lib. R. page 52. and 8^.
two Prebends beforementioned, or by Collect. D. Chapter Wren nuper Ord. Regist.
one Prebend and the Chantor, and anciently by the Stat. Colleg. Art. 37.
Chantor only, when the Offering is made at Windesor; but by the Ex Collect.
Rob. C. Cl f. 2.
Subdean of the Chapel, when they Offer at Whitehall.

The Offering being made, the Knights-Companions rise, and forthwith divide
themselves, Clarenceux conducting the Senior Knight to the MS. penes G. O. Y.
page 113.
lower end of the Stalls, on the Sovereigns side, and there at parting from him
makes a Reverence to him; and Norroy conducting the next Junior Knight to the
lower end of the Stalls, on the Princes side, with a Reverence also leaves him,
and forthwith both Kings return to their Stations, before the Altar.

As soon as the Knights-Companions are MS. penes G. O. Y. page 113.
entered in, at the nethermost end of the Stalls, they make their double
Reverences together; and then pass along the Stalls, till they come to their
own, where making the like Reverences, they take their seats.

But if any Stranger King be present at the Offering, he retires not to his
Seat (after he has offered) by the lower end of the Stalls, as is before
observed, by other Knights, but along the Choire (like as does the Sovereign)
the same way that he proceeded up: for so did the MS, fol. indorsed Patents,
pen. eund. Geo. Owen. Y.
King of Denmark, an. 4. Iac. Regis, but the MS, fol. indorsed Patents, pen.
eund. Geo. Owen. Y.
Prince and all the other Knights-Companions, who Offered at the same time,
went back to their Seats by the nether end of the Stalls: viz. at the end
nearest the high Altar, which sometimes is called the MS. penes E. W. G.
upper end, and sometimes the MS. penes E. W. G.
East end, and often the lower end; for so did Prince Lib. N p. 174.
Arthur an. 15. H. 7. and Ex Collect. R C. Cl. fol. 27.
Francis Duke of Montmorancy, an. 14 Eliz. the like did MS. penes E. W. G. f.
155. b.
Prince Henry an. 16 Iac. Reg. and the Duke of York an. 19 and 23 Car. 2.

The Ceremonies of the two Senior Knights Offering being finished, the two
Senior Heralds, observing the end of the said Knights last Reverences, pass
down into the Choire, after the same manner as did Clarenceux and Norroy, to
bring up the two next Senior Knights-Companions to Offer, (for all Offer MS.
page 12.
according to the Seniority of their Stalls) who ascend in the same manner, and
with the same Reverences, as did the two Senior Knights, and after they have
Offered, are conducted to the lower end of the Stalls, and with usual
Reverences take their Seats.

In like manner, do the next two Senior Heralds go down, and bring up the two
next Senior Knights to Offer in the beforementioned Order; which being done,
they return to their Stalls as aforesaid. And after them the two Junior Heralds
descend, and bring up the two next Knights to the Offering, who return as did
their Seniors.

And if there be yet more Knights-Companions to Offer, then Clarenceux and
Norroy begin again, and go down to bring them up to Offer also. After them the
Heralds, again by turns, fetch up the rest of the Knights, who proceed up,
paired or single, as they have or want their Fellows, until all have made their
respective Offerings: for we find not, that the Pursuivants at Arms have at any
time performed any part of this Service. But to make the Ceremony more
apparent, we shall insert the Order in which the Knights-Companions were
conducted up to the Offering, at the Grand Feast, celebrated at Windesor, an.
13. Car. 2. together with the Officers of Arms that proceeded before them.

Duke of York. conducted to the Offering by Clarenceux and Norroy. Earls of
Salisbury and Berkshire. conducted to the Offering by York and Lancaster. Earl
of Northumberland. conducted to the Offering by Windesor and Richmond. Dukes of
Ormond and Buckingham. conducted to the Offering by Chester and Somerset. Earl
of Southampton. conducted to the Offering by Clarenceux and Norroy. Duke of
Albemarle. conducted to the Offering by York and Lancaster. Earls of Sandwich
and Oxford. conducted to the Offering by Windesor and Richmond. Duke of Richm.
and Earl of Lindsey. conducted to the Offering by Chester and Somerset. Earls
of Manchester and Strafford. conducted to the Offering by Clarenceux and
Norroy.
And it is to be noted, that where any Knight has his opposite Companion
absent, he goes up to Offer singly and alone, and so returns; nevertheless
with two Heralds before him (as may also be seen by the precedent Scheme) who
conduct him to the lower end of the Stalls, and there, with a joint Reverence
take their leave.

In this solemn Ceremony, the order wherein the Knights-Companions Offer, is
always according to the Dignity of their Stalls, wherein they sit; for they
obtain the honor and title of Seniority, according as their Stalls stand in
Order, nearer to the Sovereigns Stall.

As touching the Offerings themselves, The Offerings belong to the Dean and
Prebends.
which the Sovereign and Knights-Companions do at any time make, in the Chapel
at Windesor, they, of right, belong to the Dean and Prebends of that College;
having been conferred on them by the A. t. 33.
Statutes of the College. And it was also Ordained, that Art. 37.
the Chantor should see, that all the Offerings there made should be received,
collected, and faithfully kept, and at the end of every Month, or weekly if the
College required it, give a faithful account of what was so received. By which
it appears, that they were not only given to the Dean and Prebends, but care
was also taken, by whom they should be received, and when an Account should be
rendered. All which was confirmed by King Edward the Third, by the Bishop, and
Dean, and Chapter of Salisbury, to whose Jurisdiction the College of Windesor
does belong, and also by the Bishop of Winchester, Prelate of the Garter, the
last Day of November, 1352.

Nor do we find but that in pursuance of these Statutes, the Dean and Prebends
of the said College, have constantly enjoyed them, until Dr. Mountague came to
be Bishop of Winchester and Prelate of the Order; who, it seems, challenged a
right to the Offerings, which he had received at the Feast of St. George
celebrated at Windesor an. 21 Iac. Reg. Whereupon in a Chapter held on the last
Day of the said Feast, the Lib. R. p. 10.
Dean and Canons made their complaint against the said Prelate, for not only
receiving the Knights-Companions Offerings, but for detaining them, as also the
Sovereigns and Princes Offerings: Of which, the said Prelate being demanded, by
the Sovereigns Lieutenant and Knights-Companions present in the said Chapter,
he acknowledged, and further answered, that he had left them in the hands of
the Subdean of the Chapel, tanquam in deposito. But the Chapter being ready to
rise, the matter was not then further debated, but referred to the next Feast.

Autogr. in Ae^a^. Coll. Winds.
Bishop Andrews did also de facto, both receive and keep the Offerings,
whenever he, as Prelate, Officiated at Windesor; but his Executors to avoid
Suit, Autogr. in Ae^a^. Coll. Winds.
compounded for them.

It appears by the Page 43.
Red Book of the Order, upon Complaint of the Dean and Prebends of Windsor, in
a Chapter held the 24. of Sept. an. 4. Car. 1. that Page 43.
power was given to the Knights-Commissioners of the Order, to determine this
contention about the Offering, and withal it is there noted, that Bishop Neyle
the Page 43.
then Prelate himself also desired, that a Chapter might determine the matter.

But we have not met with any account of what these Commissioners (so empowered)
did, though by an Expression in the Page 52.
same Book, an. 5 Car. 1. one would guess, as though the thing had been
determined against the Prelate. For an Offering having been then made in the
Chapel at Windesor, and the Sovereigns Offering received by the Page 51.
Bishop of Norwich, that Officiated for the Prelate, and the Knights-Companions
Offering by the two Prebends, who assisted at the Altar, it is added: Ibid.
page 52.
That what was Offered, fell according to Law of the place, to the share of the
Dean and Prebends: And yet it appears, that the controversy was not ended,
since by a subsequent Order of Chapter, (6 Oct. an. 6 Car. 1.) Lib. R. p. 64.
and 65.
the matter was again referred to the nine Knights-Commissioners of the Order,
or any four of them, who were to hear both Parties, and make their Report, that
so the same might receive a determination. But here also it is immediately
noted, That the Ibid.
next Morning the Prelate (nequid nimis denique suae sententiae tribuere
videretur) voluntarily delivered to the Dean, 9 l. 4^. that sum being the moity
of the Offerings he had received from the Sovereign and Knights-Companions. The
next Feast after held at Windsor, viz. Page 73.
4. Oct. an. 7 Car. 1. the controversy was again Page 74.
resumed, and after some arguments urged by the Prelate, and answered by the
Register, it was Page 75.
Decreed, that the Dean should attend the Knights-Commissioners, at their next
sitting, with the Statutes, and other Grants to the College, and that from
them the controversy should be determined. After this, there is another
Memorandum made in the same Register, which informs us, that the Page 91.
Prelate by the hands of the Chantor delivered all the Offerings received at
the Feas^ Page 91.
an. 9 Car. 1. to the Canons, upon condition of restitution, if it chanced they
Page 91.
should be adjudged to him, and not to the Canons. And whether any final
determination was afterward made herein, we have not hitherto found. But since
the return of the present Sovereign, the Offerings received at the Feast of St.
George at Windesor, an. 13 Car. 2. were divided between the Dean and Canons
resident, the Prelate not disputing the right.

And now that we may see, what has ordinarily been Offered in Gold and Silver,
this following Account of the Offering received by the Bishop of Winchester,
(attested under his hand, and delivered to the Dean and Prebends of Windesor)
will give us some Information.

Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. praedict. Coll.
Sept. 24.1628. The Offering at St. Georges Feast at Windesor, besides the Kings
Offering of the Bezant not yet redeemed.
l. s. d. The whole Offering of the eight Knights -- 04 15 00.

Viz. in Gold. in Silver. s. s. The Lord Steward 10 01. Lord Chamberlain 10 02.
Earl of Kellie 10 02. Earl of Salisbury 10 02. Earl of Dorset 10 02. Earl of
Holland 10 02. Earl of Suffolk 10 02. Earl of Berk-shire 10 02. 04 15 00.

The Offerings on Thursday the 25 th Day.
s. s. His Majesty's Offerings 20 10. Lord Steward 10 01. Lord Chamberlain 10
02. Earl of Kellie 10 02. Earl of Salisbury 10 02. Earl of Dorset 10 02. Earl
of Holland 10 02. Earl of Suffolk 10 02. Earl of Berk-shire 10 02. 06 05 00.

l. s. d. The sum of both, besides the Kings Besant unredeemed is -- 11 00 00.

Of which, given to Mr. Cotton who waited at the Altar by me 5 s. for the rest
I am answerable.

R. Winton.

When all the Knights-Companions have Offered, and are returned to their
Stalls, then does the Chancellor of the Order make his Reverences; and after
him the Register, Garter, and Black Rod, theirs together, and take their Seats.

Upon this the aforementioned Groom, and Page of the removing Wardrobe, roll
up the long Carpet (spread for the Knights to kneel on) close to the foreside
of the Altar; which done, the Provincial Kings, Heralds, and ^ursuivants next,
and last of all the Alms-Knights, make their Reverences, and pass down into the
Choire, and take their stands before the Stalls, where they remain until the
Prelate has finished the Second Service: and then the Prelate, conducted by
the Sergeant of the Vestry, comes down from the Altar, with his accustomed
Reverences to his Seat. After whom, the two Prebends are brought down by the
Verger of the Ch^ppel, who make a Reverence toward the Altar before they
descend, next a double Reverence below the first Haut Pas; and lastly another
toward the lower end of the Choire, and so take their Seats.

SECT. VI. The Return to the Presence.
IMmediately after, all prepare to pass out of the Choire, and to proceed back
to the Presence Chamber, which is done in every point and circumstance, as is
set down to have been observed, in the Sovereigns return from the first Vespers.

That is to say,

The Alms-Knights ascend to the Rails before the Altar, and divide themselves
on either side.

The Pursuivants, Heralds, and Provincial Kings pass up to their usual station,
on the Haut Pas's before the Altar, and there divide themselves likewise.

Then Garter summons down the Knights-Companions, who orderly descend into the
Choire.

Next, the Officers of the Order stand up before their Forms.

All this being done,

The Alms-Knights descend, and pass out of the Choire.

The Prebends follow.

Next, the Officers of Arms.

Then the Knights-Companions.

After them the Black Rod, Garter, and Register.

Next, the Chancellor and Prelate.

Then the Sword; and lastly

The Sovereign himself, being attended, as when he entered the Choire; at the
Choire door he is received under the Canopy, by the Gentlemen that bear it, and
from whence the Band of Pensioners follow his person.

The Proceeding passes on through the South door of the Chapel, and here, the
Trumpets are taken in, and placed before the Alms-Knights, who found all the
way up, till they arrive at the stairs foot, going up to the Guard-Chamber: and
as soon as they cease, the Drums and Fises begin to beat and play.

Thence the Proceeding passes into the Presence Chamber, whither it first
ought to go, before the Sovereign pass into the Great Hall to Dinner, and being
there arrived, the Knights-Companions take their stands as usually, and after
the Sovereign's salutation and their Reverences, the Sovereign retires into the
Privy-Chamber for a little while, and the Knights likewise retire themselves,
till notice be given that Dinner is ready.

When the Feast was heretofore held at Whitehall, the return of the Sovereign
(or his Lieutenant) and Knights-Companions, from the MS. pen. G. O Y. page 113.
second Morning Service on the Feast day, was through the great Hall and
Guard-Chamber into the Presence, and thence they retired into the Privy
Lodgings till Dinner was ready. But since the Grand Dinner has been prepared
in the Banqueting house there, the Proceeding has passed from the Chapel,
through the said great Hall, over the Terrace (while it stood) and since, from
the Chapel, up the Stairs into the Guard-Chamber, down into the Great Court,
and so through the covered Walk into the said Room; where being entered, and the
Sovereign arrived near the State (after Salutation and Reverences made, as
usually done in the Presence Chamber) the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
retired till Dinner was ready; and hereupon in this Room now, as formerly in
the Presence, does the Proceeding from the Chapel take its termination.

SECT. VII. Of the Dinner on the Feast Day.
THE Sovereign and Knights-Companions having for a while retired, after their
return from Morning Service on the Feast day, they make ready to go into St.
George's Hall to Dinner; where all things are prepared against their coming.
But more particularly, the Sovereign's Proceeding to the Hall is, when he has
notice given him, that the Collect. W. le N. Cl. MS. pen. eund. W. le N. fol.
20. and 27. and MS. penes G. O. Y. p. 113.
first Mess is set upon his Table: the Dishes being brought up in the following
order; Wind Instruments, from the Gallery at the lower end of the Hall (where
the rest of the Sovereign's Music is placed) sounding all the while.

4 Sergeants at Arms, two and two. Controller. Treasurer. Sewer. The Messes
carried up by the Pensioners.
Master of the Household. A Clerk Controller. Second Clerk of the Kitchen.
Cofserer. A Clerk Controller. Chief Clerk of the Kitchen.



But in the Plate representing the Sovereign's sitting at Dinner, the Sergeants
at Arms, and Clerks that usually follow the Messes, are omitted, for want of
room.

This Dinner has several Names given to it in the Registers of the Order, all
describing and setting forth its magnificence, as Lib. N. p. 166.
Mensa splendida, Lib. C. p. 108.
Regium Eputum, Ibid. p. 194.
Epulum solenne, and the like: and for the Provisions made for it, they are
said to be Ibid. p. 184.
most costly and delicate, Lib. R. p. 108.
completely royal, and set forth with all befitting state and grandeur.

Upon the foresaid notice, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions come forth of
the Privy-Lodgings into the Presence Chamber, with the Officers of the Order
before him, and passes to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
middle of the State; where turning about, he makes a stand, while the Knights
place themselves on either side, in their Collect. W. le N. Cl.
usual order, the Officers of the Order Collect. W. le N. Cl.
retiring a little on the one side and on the other. And as soon as the
Knights-Companions have put themselves into rank and ord^r, they make their
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Reverences to the Sovereign, according to the usual manner, who thereupon
re-salutes them, as is accustomed.

It seems, the Prebends of the College had, in King Henry the Eighth's Reign,
discontinued the duty of their attendance on the Sovereign, as well at the Grand
Dinner, as at other the Services of the day, which caused an Order to pass for
the performance of their accustomed services, particularly at such times; for
at a Chapter holden at Windesor, the Ex Lib. M. 17 f. 25. b. in Offic. Arm.
12. day of May, the 24, year of the said King, it was Ordained by the Earl of
Arundel, then being the Kings Lieutenant, with the assent and advice of the
Knights of the Order there present; Ex Lib. M. 17 f. 25. b. in Offic. Arm.
That the Canons of the College of Saint George, being present at the Feast,
should have their Mantles according to the Statutes of the Order, and give
their attendance the day of the Feast, as well at Dinner and Grace, as at other
the Divine Service, and as of old time has been accustomed, in avoiding the
displeasures of, etc.

Immediately after the Knights-Companions have made their Reverences, the
Alms-Knights, Prebends, and Officers of Arms pass on before the
Knights-Companions, through the Guard-Chamber into St. George's Hall, the
Officers of the Order following; after whom comes the Sovereign, having his
Train carried up as at other times. And being entered a little way therein, the
Alms-Knights first, next the Prebends, and then the Officers of Arms, fall off
one after another, on the side opposite to the Knights-Companions Table,
Clarenceux nearest to the State.

Then the two junior Knights pass a little above Clarenceux, and there facing
their Table make a stand, and the rest of the Knights-Companions coming up
after, do in like manner make a stand, according to their seniority, the senior
nearest the State; through which Lane, the Officers of the Order proceed,
conducting the Sovereign till he draws near to the State, and then do the said
Officers Collect. W. le N. Cl.
retire, as did the former part of the Proceeding on the side opposite to the
Table; the Sovereign in the mean time passes on to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
State, and there turning himself about, receives the Reverences of the
Knights-Companions, and re-salutes them as usually.

After this the Sovereign, yet standing directly before the State, has
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Water brought him up with three Reverences, by the Noblemen assigned to that
service: the Lord Chamberlain, if he be not a Knight of the Order, otherwise
the Vice-Chamberlain, going before them; for so did the Earl of St. Albans at
the Grand Feast, an. 23. Car. 2. so also did Sir George Carteret an. 19. Car.
2. But an. 3. H. 7. some of the MS. penes Arth. Com. Anglesey, fol. 167.
Knights-Companions served the Sovereign with Water. And to be more particular
in the Ceremony of the Sovereign's washing, it is noted an. 2. Eliz. that the
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Earl of Arundel held the Towel, the Earl of Pembroke the Water, the Earl of
Derby, and Marquess of Winchester Assistants, the Basin, and the Earl of Derby
gave the Sovereign the Assay of it. Again an. 7. of the same Queen, the MS.
penes W. D. N. fol. 20. b.
Duke of Norfolk held the Towel, the Earl of Derby received it, the Earl of
Sussex brought the Water, and the Earls of Northumberland and Shrewsbury
Assisted; all these being Knights of the Order.



In like manner also, is the Sovereign's Lieutenant served with Water before
Dinner (but not by any of the Nobility) of which there are many Examples: among
the rest, that an. 3. Eliz. when Sir Ibid. fol. ^.
Tho. Berenger gave him the Water kneeling, and Sir -- Radcliff the Towell; as
also an. 7. Eliz. when Sir Et fol. 20.
Nicholas Poynes brought him the Towell, and Sir Tho. Berenger the Water.

When the Sovereign has washed, the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Prelate of the Order says Grace, being assisted with some of the Sovereign's
Chaplains; an. 7. Eliz. the MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 20. b.
Register of the Order assisted him, and an. 9. Eliz. the Ibid. f. 27. b.
Bishop of Rochester, then the Sovereign's Almoner.

Grace being said, the Sovereign sits down in his Chair, placed in the middle
of his Table under the State; for there is the most honorable Seat, and the
place where the State is held: And here we have occasion to offer to the
Readers view, a draught of the old Wooden Chair, said to be the Founders, yet
remaining in St. George's Hall at Windesor, in which the Sovereigns heretofore
sat at Dinner.

Most usually the Sovereign sat alone, though sometimes heretofore, he has
been pleased to admit some of the Knights-Companions to sit at his Table with
him: For instance in a few, Sigismond the Emperor, when he received a Personal
Installation at Windesor, at the Grand Feast held there an. 4. H. 5. it is
remembered, that the Sovereign out of great civility Lib. N. p. 57.
offered the chief place at the Table to him (which hitherto the King, as
Sovereign, had retained in the Lib. N. p. 57.
Chapel, and Lib. N. p. 57.
in all the Proceedings) which whether the Emperor accepted of it or not, is
not clear enough expressed in the Page 57.
Black Book, but we have met with an ancient memorial which is more particular,
and faith, that at Dinner the Emperor MS. in Offic. Armor. [ F. 9. Interments]
fol. 12. b.
kept the State, that is, sat in the middle, and another that says the MS. in
Bibl. Cott. sub effig. Vitell. A. 16. sub an. 4. H. 5.
King sat on the Emperors right side, and the Duke of Collect. Tho. Row nuper
Canc.
Bedford, the Lord Chancellor, the Bishop of Duresme on the Emperors left hand;
the Duke of Briga, and Collect. Tho. Row nuper Canc.
another Duke of the Emperors Train, sat both on the Sovereign's side, and all
of them on one side of the Table.

Moreover an. 11. E. 4. (the Sovereign then keeping the Feast at Windesor) the
MS. in Offic. Arm. [ M. 15.] fol. 12. b.
Prelate of the Order sat on his right hand, and the Duke of Gloucester and
Earl of Essex on his lest. So an. 3. H. 7. the Lib. N. p. 166.
Prelate sat alone on the Sovereign's right hand, at the end of the Table. And
in the 24. year of the same King (who then celebrated the Feast at Greenwich)
there sat with him at the Boards end the Dukes of MS. in Offic. Arm. [ M. 17.]
fol. 35. b.
Norfolk and Suffolk* the Marquess of Exceter, and the Lord Stephen Gardener
Prelate of the Garter.

It is also noted, that at the Feast held at Windesor an. 11. H. 8. only the
Lord Ex eod. MS. fol. 27. b.
Richard Fox then Prelate, sat on the right hand of the Sovereign, near to the
Boards end, being served with his MS.
Carver, Sewer, and Cupbearer, Mess, Course, and Service, as the Sovereign had.
In which MS. p. 13.
place sat also the Bishop of Winchester, an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. And an.
22. H. 8. Ibid. fol. 32. b.
four of the greatest States (being Knights-Companions) sat at the Sovereign's
Table, and the residue of the Knights at their own.

An. 2. Eliz. the Sovereign admitted the Earls of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Arundel and Derby, together with the Marquess of Winchester, to her Table, who
sat at the end thereof on the left hand; and the following year the Duke of MS
fol. penes W. D. N. fol. 3.
Norfolk, the Marquess of Northampton, and Earl of Arundel, sat also at the
Tables end. So an. 7. Eliz. the Duke of Ibid. f. 20. b.
Norfolk, and Marquess of Winchester; and an. 9. the Earls of Et fol. 27. b.
Arundel and Pembroke, whilst the other Knights-Companions sat at their own
Table.

But this favor and honor was not afforded to any of the Knights-Companions,
since her Reign, no, not at the Installation of the present Sovereign, though a
Ceremony carried on with designed indulgence and honor; but we find him then
placed at the same Mess with the Palmer's large Iourn. page 14.
senior Knight, at the upper end of the Knights-Companions Table.

As Soon as the Sovereign is sat down, the Knights-Companions Collect. W. le N.
Cl.
put on their Caps, and remaining so covered, forthwith retire against the
Tables prepared for them; where standing a while, Water is brought to them, and
they also Collect. W. le N. Cl.
wash; there being to MS. pen. W. D. N fol. 20 and MS pen. G.O.Y. page 123.
each pair a Basin and Ewer, and a Towel allowed, which are brought in by
Gentlemen of quality; and having washed, they all sit down.

The order of passing to their Seats at the Table an. 19. Car. 2. was on this
manner (and appointed so to be observed for the future) first his Highness the
Duke of York entered within the Rails at the upper end of the Table, and so
passed down the hither side, to the lower end, and thence up along the Bench
side to his place; in like manner followed all the other Knights, according to
the seniority of their Stalls; for it is ordained, that they shall sit in Hen.
8. Stat. Art. 11.
that order, not according to their Estates or Degrees (except the Sons or
Brethren of Stranger Kings, Princes, and Dukes, who shall keep their place^ or
rooms after their Estates) and all on the Lib. N. page 166. Hen. 8. Stat. Art.
11. and MS. p. 13.
right hand or further side of their Tables (not one over against another) two
and two at a Table, to one Mess. But those whose Companions are wanting sit
alone, and have a whole Mess allowed to each of them.

Their meat is usually brought up by the Yeomen of the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Guard, Collect. W. le N. Cl.
and are attended by some of the Gentlemen Pensioners, and others of the
Sovereign's Servants; two to each Table.

And now to descend to the Officers of the Order, 3. Officers of the Order had
a Table in the great Hall.
who though they sit not at this day in the great Hall at Dinner, yet anciently
it appears, they had a Table allowed them there. For first the Lib. N. p. 166.
Black Book rendering an account of the magnificent Feast of St. George, held at
Windesor an. Lib. N. p. 166.
3. H. 7. and having spoken somewhat of the Sovereign's splendid and sumptuous
Table, as also of that, of the Knights-Companions, placed on the right side of
the Hall, ^it tells us, that a Lib. N. p. 167.
little beneath the said Knights-Companions, there sat on both sides the Table,
the Lib. N. p. 167.
Dean, the Register of the Order, the Prebends, the Choire and Alms-Knights.

The said Register informs us further, that at the Table set in the Lib. N. p.
167.
middle of the Hall, sat the Lord Bothville Ambassador from the King of Scots,
the Lords Edmond of Suffolk, Gray, Morley, Latimer, La Ware, and Barness; a
little beneath whom sat the Choire of the Sovereign's Chapel.

At another Table, on the Lib. N. p. 167.
left hand side of the Hall, sat the President Kussemburg, with the Ambassadors
of the King of the Romans, and the Duke his Son; over against whom on the other
side sat the Lord Malpart, Ambassador from the Duke of Britagne, the Lord
Housey and others, MS. penes A^th. Com. Anglesey, f. 167. ^
Knights, Esquires, and Officers which had given their attendance at the high
Mass.

Moreover at the Feast holden at Windesor, MS. in Offic. Ar^^^. [ M. 17.] fol.
28.
an. 11 H. 8. we meet with an account of several other Tables set in St.
Georges Hall, beside those of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions: For on the
MS. in Offic. Ar^^^. [ M. 17.] fol. 28.
Southside, opposite to the Knights-Companions Table, was a Table placed for
the Lord Steward, at which then sat certain French Gentlemen, being Hostages of
France, accompanied with Earls and Lords, and none at that Board under the
Degree of a Lord. At MS. in Offic. Ar^^^. [ M. 17.] fol. 28.
the second Table of the said Southside, sat the Dean of Windesor, Doctor Vescy
Register of the Order, the Abbots of Towerhill and Medemenham (who that Morning
read the Epistle and Gospel) and the Choire or Chapel. And at the MS. in
Offic. Ar^^^. [ M. 17.] fol. 28.
West end of the same Table (which was all joined together as far as to the
Choire) sat the other Officers of the Order, as MS. in Offic. Ar^^^. [ M. 17.]
fol. 28.
Register, Garter, and Usher of the Black Rod, accompanied with the Lega^s
Brother, and four other Strangers, and beneath the Strangers sat diverse
Knights, next to them sat the MS. in Offic. Ar^^^. [ M. 17.] fol. 28.
Officers of Arms, then several other Gentlemen filled up the Table, unto the
Chapel adjoining to the Hall; the residue of Officers sat in the MS. in Offic.
Ar^^^. [ M. 17.] fol. 28.
Chapel at diverse Tables.

In the eighth year of King Charles the First, the Dinner being then prepared
in the Banqueting House at Whitehall, we find a particular mention of a Table
for the Officers of the Order, and in what part of the Room it was then set,
namely on the Lib. R. p. 78.
right hand side of the Banqueting House, over against the Table of the
Knights-Companions: who all sat after the manner of the Knights-Companions on
the further side of the Table; having their Meat brought and served up to them
by the Yeomen of the Guard, and some of the Soveraigns-Servants. And at the
Sovereigns command, signified by the Treasurer of the Household, they sat
covered all Dinner while, the Prelate and Register in their four cornerd Caps,
and the other three in their Hats. So also at the next Great Feast viz. an.
Ibid. p. 8^.
9 Car. 1. at Windesor, these Officers (Dining in the Great Hall) sat covered,
but not till such time as the Sovereign (by the Treasurer of the Household) had
given command for it.

And though it was by the Sovereigns command that they sat covered at this time
also, yet the following Afternoon it was moved against in Chapter, as a thing
unfit to be permitted; Ibid. page 98.
because some of the grand Nobility always served the Sovereign at this Feast
uncovered, and therefore not sitting that the Officers (being all of far lower
Degree excepting the Prelate) should sit with their Hats on. Whereupon it was
Ordered, Lib. R. p. 88.
That it should be referred to the further consideration of the
Knights-Commissioners.

Afterward we find it was Ordered in Chapter on the Eve of the Feast, an. 10
Car. 1. Ibid. page 94.
That these Officers should be at their choice, either to keep the Feast
privately by themselves, or sit uncovered where the Sovereign Dined. They
thereupon thence forward, forbore sitting in the Hall, or where else the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions sat; and at the Grand Feasts, celebrated at
Windesor, since the present Sovereigns Happy Return, they had their Messes
served up into the Chapel, at the end of St. Georges Hall, and there Dined.

By what is before spoken, touching the order of sitting at Dinner, an. 11. H.
8. it appears, that the Officers of Arms did then also sit at a Table in St.
Georges Hall, which joined to that, where the Officers of the Order also sat.
And among the memorials of the Feast held an. 19 Eliz. it is noted that on the
MS. pen. praefat. G.O.Y. page 113.
Eve thereof, the Heralds had at Supper, their allowance as accustomed, viz. 16
Dishes of Meat at the first course, and 8. at the second.

A Collect. W. le N. Cl.
little before the Sovereigns second course is sent for, all the press of
People (which throng toward the Knights-Companions Tables, out of curiosity to
behold them sitting at Dinner and observe their Services) are to be removed
away toward the side Tables; whereby a place may be left spacious enough, for
the Sovereign to take all the Knights-Companions in view; which being done, the
Sovereign Collect. W. le N. Cl.
stands up and drinks to them (and so is it remembered to be done by MS page 13.
King Philip and Queen Mary) they standing all the while uncovered, and which
they do altogether, till they have pledged him.

And Collect. W. le N. Cl.
immediately before the said course is brought in, The manner of proclaiming
the Sovereigns Style.
the Press is again removed, from the Knights-Companions Table, to make another
spacious lane from the lower end of the Hall up to the State. At which Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
lower end the Officers of Arms assemble, and there make themselves ready to
proceed up in the following Order.

Garter, Clarenceux and Norroy. Heralds, two and two. Pursuivants, two and two.
Having put themselves in the foresaid Order, they Ibid.
altogether make their Reverence to the Sovereign, and proceed near the side of
the Knights-Companions Table, until they come to the Ibid.
middle of the Hall, where after another Reverence made, they go still forward,
and when Garter has passed about Ibid.
two yards beyond the Knights Table, and come near the Haut Pas ascending the
Sovereigns State, they jointly make the like Reverence again.

Then Garter with a loud and audible voice, cries Larges^ thrice, (though
anciently but Collect. W. le N. Cl. and MS. fol. pen. G.O.Y. page 114.
twice.)

Upon Garters beginning to cry Largess, Lib. C. p 193.
all the Knights-Companions (except Kings and Great Princes, if any be present)
stand up uncovered (so did the Lib. R. p. 85.
Officers of the Order when they Dined in the Hall) until he has made an end.
Which Custom it seems had been, an. 7 Car. 1. for some years Ibid. page 74.
discontinued. Then Garter proceeds, and proclaims the Sovereigns Styles and
Titles of Honor; first in Latin, as follows.

Serenissimi, Excellentissimi, and Potentissimi First Introduced at the Feast,
an. 19. Car. 2. the word Princip^^ being used before.
Monarchae Caroli Secundi Dei Gratia Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae
Regis, Fidei Defensoris, and Supremi Nobilissimi Ordinis Garterii.

Which done, He and all the Officers of Arms, make another Reverence, and
Garter Proclaims the Sovereigns Style in French.

Du Treshault, Tres-excellent and Tres-puissant Monarque Charles le Second par
le Grace de Dieu, Roy de la Grande Britaigne, France, and d' Irelande,
Defenseur de la Foy, and Sovereign du Tres-noble Order de la I^rtiere.

Then Garter and the rest of his Fellows, make another Reverence, and lastly he
Proclaims the Sovereign Styles in English.



Of the most high, most Excellent, and most mighty Monarch Charles the Second,
by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defendor of the
Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

At the end of which (but not before) Garter and the rest join together, in
crying Largess thrice, and then they all make Reverence together.

Hereupon, sometimes the Treasurer of the Household puts the Sovereign's
Largess, (which is 10 l. in Gold) into Garter's Hat; and this is afterward
divided among the Officers of Arms, according to Custom. But an. 23. Car. 2.
the Lord Book entitled St. George's Feast, in the Lord Chamberlain's Office.
Chamberlain sent his Warrant to Sir Edward Griffin Knight, Treasurer of the
Sovereign's Chamber, to deliver this Largess Money to the Black Rod, and he put
it into Garter's Hat, so soon as the last Largess was cried.

The proclaiming the Style being finished, all the Officers of Arms retire
about Collect. W. le N. Cl.
3 yards backward, keeping their Faces toward the Sovereign, and there make
another Reverence, and then retyring yet backward, about the same distance,
they jointly make another Reverence, after which they retire out of the Hall
and go to Dinner.

This Ceremony ended, the Sovereign's second Course is brought up, in the
following order, first the Sergeants at Arms, next the Treasurer and
Comptroller of the Sovereign's Household, next the Sewer, then the Gentlemen
Pensioners bearing the Messes, then the Cofferer and Master of the Household,
the two Clearks of the Greencloth, the two Clearks Controllers, and lastly the
two Clearks of the Kitchen following all in the rear, habited in their Gowns,
and holding their Caps in their hands; and after the Sovereign's Table is
completely furnished, then is the second Course served up to the
Knights-Companions Tables, by the Yeomen of the Guard, in such order as was the
first.

The order of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions sitting at Dinner on the
Grand Feast day, an. 15. Car. 2. The order in proclaiming the Style, and
bringing up the second Course, with an exact prospect of the inside of St.
George's Hall at Windesor, we have here drawn together for the Readers better
view.

But where any Knight-Companion happens to be Installed at this Grand Feast,
and is present at Dinner, then Garter, and the Officers of Arms, proceed in
order (after they have proclaimed the Sovereign's Style as before) from the
lower end of the Hall, till they come before the new installed Knights Mess,
and there he cries Largess once, and proclaims his Style in English only, after
which they retire backward, and go to Dinner. Concerning which, we had a full
and remarkable instance in the 13. year of the present Sovereign, when the Duke
of York and other Knights were Installed: For after Garter had proclaimed the
Sovereign's Style, and he, together with the Officers of Arms, had retired to
the lower end of the Hall, they all proceeded again, as at proclaiming the
Sovereign's Style, to the upper end of the Knights-Companions Table, where his
Highness the Duke sat, and there Garter cried Largess twice, and proclaimed his
Style in English; then after a joint Reverence made, Garter and the Heralds now
joining with him cried Largess twice. This done, they went backward, as before,
to the next senior Installed Knight, and proclaimed his Style, and cried
Largess but once, the like to all the rest installed at that Festival, and so
they departed out of the Hall to Dinner.

It seems to have anciently been the custom of other great Feasts, besides this
of St. George, at the second Course, when the Sovereign's Style was to be
proclaimed, for Garter and the Officers of Arms, to proceed in order up to the
Kings Table, and there to cry Largess, and upon the receipt of the Kings
Largess (in the name of all the Officers of Arms) first to make some short
Oration to the King, and then to proclaim his Style; for so MS. intitul. King
Hen. ^. Proceedings pen. ^und. W. l^ Neve.
an. 20. H. 7. when the King kept his Easter in great State at Greenwich, have
we met with the following Speech (among some Collections of Sir Thomas
Wryothesley then Garter) made to the King in humble thankfulness, for the
Largess at that time bestowed upon the Officers of Arms.

Most high mighty and excellent Prince, most victorious and Christian King and
also our most dread Sovereign and naturell Lord, by whom, through Gods
provis^on, virtue is greatly incressed and vice oppressed, juxta illud
sapientis abhominabiles Regi agunt Impii qui Justitia formatur solium, the
which to your Highness is, Prove. 16.
viz. Incressing of virtue and honor perpetual, and to your subjects continual
Wealth test Salustio, quia diviciarum and form gloria fluxa atque fragilis est
virtus clara perpetuaque habetur and as concerning us your Officers of Arms,
and Servants of honor and of Noblesse, in as much as in us is, we humbly
thank your good grace of the great and abundant Largess geven unto us, in the
honor of God and of his most glorieuse Resurrection: and for as much as we
suffice not to geve graces condign unto your Highness, Nam quod praestare
tanto, etc. We meekly beseech almighty God long to preserve maintain and
encresse your most noble and royal Estate, which is the singular Welthe and
comfort of this your realm, and of all your true subjects; and to send you
the perfict knowledge and victory over all your enemies.

Nor was it unusual for Poets, in former times, to present the Sovereign with
the issue of their Fancies, having a subject so noble as this of the Grand
Feast; among whom, the following Verses were presented to King Henry the
Seventh, at the Feast of St. George celebrated at Windesor in the 3. year of
his Reign, probably by Mr. John Skeleton (after made Poet Laureat) who about
that time began to be of some esteem.

MS. penes Arth. Com. Anglesey, fol. 169.
O most famous Noble King! thy Fame both spring and spread,
Henry the Seventh our Soverain in eiche Regeon,
All England has cause thy grace to love and dread,
Seeing Embassadores sethe fore protectyon,
For Aid, help, and succore, which lies in thie Ele^yone.
England now Rejoice for Joyous mayess thou be,
To see thy King so florethe in Dignetye.
This Realm a Seaforte stood in great Iupardie,
When that Noble Prince deceased King Edward;
Which in his Days gate honor full nobly,
After his decesse nighe hand all was marred,
Eich Regione this Land despised mischefe when they hard:
Wherefore Rejoyse for joyous may thou be,
To see thy King so floreth in high dignetye.
France, Spain, Scoteland, and Britanny, Flanders also,
Three of them present keepinge thy Noble Feast,
Of St. George in Windsor, Ambassadors comying more,
Eich of them in honor both the more and the less,
Seeking thie grace to have thie Noble begesse;
Wherefore now Rejoise and joyous maisse thou be,
To see thy King so flourishing in dignetye.
O Knightly Ordere clothed in Robes with Gartere,
The Queen's grace and thy Mother clothed in the same;
The Nobles of thie Realm Rich in array, Aftere
Lords, Knights and Ladies, unto thy great same,
Now shall all Ambassadors know thie Noble Name,
By thy Feast Royal; now joyeous may thou be,
To see thie King so florishinge in dignety.
Here this day St. George Patron of this Place
Honored with the Gartere, these of Chevalrye,
Chaplenes synging processyon keeping the same,
With Archbushopes and Bushopes beseene nobly,
Much people present to see the King Henrye;
Wherefore now St. George all we pray to thee,
To keep our Soberaine in his dignetye.
At the Grand Feast held at Windesor, MS penes Ed. Fauconb. genesis
an. 4. Car. 1. the Queen (her Ladies attending) was conducted into St.
George's Hall, a MS penes Ed. Fauconb. genesis
little before the Sovereign's Styles were proclaimed, to see the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions sit at Dinner.

At the Feast there celebrated by the present Sovereign, The Queen's coming
into the Hall, to observe the Order of the Feast.
in the 15. year of his Reign, the Sovereign's Styles were not proclaimed (as
many times heretofore) until the second Course was set upon the Table, but it
was by the Sovereign's special direction, because he expected the Queens coming
into the Hall, to see the state and glory of the Feast; who staying something
long, and the second Course being already brought to the lower end of the Hall,
and the Sovereign seeing it stand there, gave command it should be set upon the
Table, but that the proclaiming of his Styles should be yet forborne.
Immediately after, the Queen attended with her Ladies, entered St. George's
Hall, and passing up the middle, came to the Sovereign's Table, where she was
seated on his right hand. Hereupon Garter, accompanied by his Fellow Officers
of Arms, proceeded up the Hall, and with usual Ceremonies proclaimed the
Sovereign's Styles, in Latin, French, and English.

In like manner, when the Duke of York was Installed at the Grand Feast, an.
13. Car. 2. his Duchess, desirous to see the order and grandeur of it, was
brought into the Hall, as soon as the Sovereign and Knights-Companions were set,
and passing to the upper end of the Table, where the Duke sat, she stood on his
left hand all Dinner while.

And it appears to be no new thing, that the Queens of England, have been
desirous to behold the magnificence of this solemn Feast; since we also find it
recorded an. 11. H. 8. that a MS. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 17.] f. 28.
little while before the second Course was carried in, Queen Katherine and her
Ladies came to the MS. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 17.] f. 28.
Gallery, at the end of the Hall (which was nobly prepared for her) to see the
honorable Services and Ceremonies there performed.

But besides the Queens of England, the Ambassadors of Foreign Kings and States
have counted it an honor, to have view of this Grand Feast; and amongst others,
we find the Sir John Fenets Observe. touching foreign Ambassadors. p. 34.
French Ambassador was an. 15. Iac. R. conducted into the Banqueting House at
Whitehall, by Sir John Fenet (then Assistant Master of the Ceremonies) about
the Sir John Fenets Observe. touching foreign Ambassadors. p. 34.
middle of Dinner, where he placed himself at the left hand of the Sovereign;
and having staid there about an hour, he descended to the Knights-Companions
Table, and there saluted the Prince, and the rest of the Knights of the Order,
as he passed along before them, and so departed.

At the Grand Feast kept at Whitehall an. 19. Iac. R. to the sight of which the
Ex eod. lib. Observe. p. 79.
Polonian Ambassador Osalinskie, Count Palatine of Sindomerskie, having
received an invitation, he went, about the middle of Dinner, to see and Ex eod.
lib. Observe. p. 79.
salute the Sovereign, the Prince, and Knights-Companions as they sat at the
Table; and thence retired into the Council Chamber, where he and the Ex eod.
lib. Observe. p. 79.
Arch Dukes Agent, Van Mab, had been before treated.

The next following year, on the Ibid. page 106.
22. of May, which was the day assigned for holding the Grand Feast at
Whitehall, the Prince (being the Sovereign's Lieutenant) supplied his place in
the Banqueting house at the Table, whither Ibid. page 106.
Don Carlos de Coloma the Spanish Ambassador, and Page 102.
Philip a second Son to the Lantgrave of Hesse (sent hither on a negotiation of
his Father) were conducted: the Spanish Ambassador Page 1^8.
standing at his Highness right hand, and the young Lant-grave at his left,
most part of the Dinner.

An. 3. Car. 1. the Page 107.
Ambassador of Denmark, Paul Rosenkrantz, and Ioachimi, and Monsieur Catz, the
Ambassadors and Deputies of the States, were conducted altogether, in the Page
107.
time of the second Course, to the Sovereign's Table, and there presented
themselves, at that side next the Sovereign's left hand; and after, passed down
along before the Knights-Companions (with their respects bestowed personally on
each Knight as they deemed fitting) and then returned by the way they entered.

But in this last instance, where there were more Ambassadors than one, and
from several Princes, a Question arose, Ibid.
whether they were to perform this Ceremony of seeing the Feast, and presenting
themselves at the Dinner, singly and alone, or jointly and together; insomuch
that the Danish Ambassador was of the mind to perform it by himself, Ibid.
which course was approved by the Lord Chamberlain: But the States Ambassador
Ioachimi, telling him that he and the French Ambassador had been joint
spectators, at a Feast two or three years before, at which time he was employed
a Commissioner hither, the Ambassador of Denmark came in along with the others.

Lastly (for we would not be over tedious with Instances) when the Grand Feast
was held at Whitehall an. 19. Car. 2. the Swedish Ambassador had not only a
place assigned him in the Choire, at the North side of the Altar, to behold the
Solemnities on the Feast day in the Chapel, and when the Grand Procession
passed into the Court, he also went out at the little door on the North side of
the Chapel, up to the Greencloth Chamber, whence he had a fair prospect of it,
and thence returned to behold the Ceremonies of the Offering. But when the
Sovereign was at Dinner, he entered the Banqueting House from the Privy
Gallery, and passing to the Sovereign's Table, stood there on the left hand of
the Queen, thence he went to salute the Knights-Companions at their Table,
beginning with his Highness the Duke of York; and at all these places was
attended by Sir Charles Cotterell Master of the Ceremonies.

In the last place comes in the Banquet, brought up to the Sovereign's Table by
the Pensioners, in the same order, and with the same Attendant^ as are the
Sovereign's Messes; only, in the place of the Clerk of the Kitchen, the chief
Clerk of the Spicery waits, but the Banquet for the Knights-Companions, is
brought up by the Yeomen of the Guard.

And now, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions have dined, the Knights
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
first rise, and having washed, place themselves a little below the State, in
their usual order, and there make their Reverences to the Sovereign; and hereof
we find particular mention made an. 24. H. 8. in these words, MS. in Offic.
Arm. [ M. 17.] fol. 35.
The Knights-Companions sat upon their Forms, notwithstanding their Boards were
taken up, and until the Lords, which at that Feast sat at the Soveraign' s
Table, were also taken up, and then they immediately arose, and went together,
and made their obeysances to the Sovereign.

After this, the Sovereign hears Grace, said by the Prelate, then is Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
Water brought up with the usual Ceremony, and the Sovereign washes.

The Sovereign's return to the Presence.
This being done, the Knights-Companions making again due Reverence to the
Sovereign, he puts off his Cap, and salutes them as usually, and forthwith
proceeds back to the Presence Chamber, with the Knights and Officers of the
Order before him, and being arrived at the step before the State, he again
saluteth the Knights-Companions; who having made their Reverences to him, he
appoints the MS. pen. G.O.Y. page 114.
Hour for their attendance again, to go to the second Vespers, and forthwith
passes thence into his Privy Lodgings, taking the Officers of the Order before
him, and the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Knights-Companions following after; thus they all retire till the time
appointed, to go to the second Vespers.

In like manner does the Sovereign's Lieutenant proceed from the Presence to
the Hall, or such other Room where the Dinner is prepared; only his place of
Session at the Table, is MS. pen. G.O.Y. p. 114. and MS. pen. W. D* N. fol. 8.
b.
a little on the left hand the Cloth of State, or at the Col. Rob. C. Cl. fol.
7.
end of the Table; and after Dinner he returns to the Presence, in the same
order as does the Sovereign.

But what order was taken in King Henry the Eighth's Reign, for the
entertainment of the Sovereign's Deputy at Windesor, during the continuance of
the Feast, may be seen by these following directions, which, to this
particular, are very observable.

MS. penes Rob. Com. Aylesbury.
Memorandum, that the Saturday at Wyndesor, the Lords and Knights of the Garter
keep the Chamber, and in like case the Sunday at Souper.
First the President, at the Board his mess allone. Item, the Lords or Knights
at the said Bordesende 2. Mess or 3. as the case requires, Wafers and Ipocras
the said Nights. Item, the said night there is oon halle kept for the Lords
Servants, and so servede when the Lords be at Soupere. Item, the Sunday
following, the President, with all the Knyghts of the Garter, do break their
falls with the Dean of Wyndesor, at his Gods, except 2. or 3. Chynes of Beif,
which be send from the Castle thythere. Item, the said Sunday, when the
President with the Knyghts be at hight mess, then there is a first halle
kept in the Castle for their Servants and othere. Item, the said Sunday at
Dinner, the President keeps the hall, with the Knyghts at the Boardsend at
Dynner; but the President sytteth not in the There of Estate, but by. Item, the
said Sunday, the Deane of the College with those College, sytting in thall at
the lattere dynere, and no more. Item, the said day and dynner, the Lords and
the Deane with the College, the Heralds and the Marshall be served with Wafers
and Ipocras. Memorandum, that the President, and the Knyghts of the Garter,
have both the Saturday at night and Sunday, void. Memorandum, that there be
sent the Monday following to the College for the Knyghts brekefasts, Bread,
Ale, Wine, a certain. 3. Ch^nes of Beife, a Surloyne of Beif, 4. Capons good,
18. Rabbetts, 18. P^gions, 18. Chyk. And other such, as the Steward of the
Feast thin^^ be^^. And all the rest, to be at the charge of the Deane.
SECT. VIII. The Ceremonies belonging to the second Vespers.
SInce the Ceremonies relating to the second Vespers at Windesor, are but the
Repetition of those, which have been performed on the Eve of the Feast; we
shall pass them over with more brevity, being very unwilling to cloy the Reader
with needless recitals.

The time for Proceeding to the Chapter House, has most usually been about
four a Clock in the Afternoon of St. George's day, but sometimes not before
five; and so long did the services of the Dinner hold, when the Feast of St.
George was celebrated at Windesor, the MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 154. b.
14. of September, an. 15. Iac. R. that the Knights-Companions proceeded by MS.
penes E. W. G. fol. 154. b.
Torch light to the Chapter House.

The place from whence the Proceeding begins is (as at other times) the Chamber
of Presence; in reference to which the Sword is there laid in readiness, on the
Chair under the State, and all other things put in order, as on the Eve of the
Feast.

The Persons whereof the Proceeding is composed, the manner and order thereof,
the public Processional way to the Chapter House, is the very same as on the
Eve; and when the Sovereign and Knights did at any time proceed to the Chapel
on Horseback, on the Eve and Morning of the Feast day, MS. penes Arth. Com.
Anglesey, fol. 167. MS. in Offic. Armor. [ M. 17. b.] and MS* pen. W. D. N.
fol. 16. b.
they have, in like manner, proceeded to the second Vespers.

It has been customary, for the Sovereign and Knights-Companions to hold a
Chapter before the second Vespers, and therein, for the most part, have been
transacted all Affairs relating to this most Noble Order; as the making new
Constitutions, regulating things amiss, reading Petitions, making Orders
thereupon, determining Controversies and Disputes referring to the Officers of
the Order, Alms-Knights, etc. and such like matters, either ordinary or
extraordinary; for instance,

An. 28 H. 8. we find it recorded, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
(having performed all the Ceremonies of the Feast (then held at Greenwich) viz.
on the Eve, Matins, and solemn Offering on the Feast Day, in the Morning) Lib.
N. page 69.
at the second Vespers, before they entered the Choire, they went aside to the
Sovereigns Closet, and there debated the ordinary affairs relating to the
Order: but besides this Instance, many other are scattered up and down the
Registers.

And frequently, both at Whitehall and Greenwich, (this Feast being there
celebrated) has this Chapter been held in the Sovereigns MS. penes W. D. N.
vide etiam MS. penes G.O.Y. page 113. and Collect. praefat. R C. Cl. fol. 9.
Closet, near the Chapel; from whence, at the breaking up thereof, the
Sovereign has now and then in MS. penes W. D. N. vide etiam MS. penes G.O.Y.
page 113. and Collect. praefat. R C. Cl. fol. 9.
Person, proceeded into the Chapel, to the second Vespers. But generally Ex
eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b.
remained in the Closet, during the celebration of those Divine Offices: and in
such case, the Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b.
Lieutenant supplying the place of the Sovereign, has proceeded from the
Closet, through the Hall into the Chapel. Where note, that the Ex eod. MS.
penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b.
Proceeding from the Presence to the Closet before the Sovereign, and thence
into the Chapel Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8. b.
before the Sovereigns Lieutenant (as also the returns thereof) are ordered in
all points, as on the Eve of the Feast.

But, if the Sovereign do not proceed to the second Vespers, then is this
Chapter held, in some convenient Room of the Sovereigns Privy Lodgings, before
the Proceeding begin, for so it was an. Ex eod. MS. penes eund W. D. N. fol. 8.
b.
6 Eliz. and an. Palm. Iourn. page 25.
13 Car. 1. when (at the hour of Tierce) many things were Decreed in a Chapter
there celebrated.

As soon as the Chapter rises, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions, proceed
to the West Door of the Choire, where the Alms-Knights being arrived, first
they, after them the whole Proceeding enters, in the usual order, and with the
accustomed Reverences and Ceremonies; all placing themselves, as they arrive at
the Stations and Seats formerly mentioned, and in that manner and Order, as
they did at their Entry into the Choire, to the first Vespers.

Which Ceremony of the Sovereign and Knights-Companions entrance and Session in
their Stalls, being finished, the Prelate ascends to the Altar as before, and
begins the Divine Service, during which, the Scruteny for Election of Knights
is most commonly taken; of which we have spoken at large in the Chapter of
Elections.

When the second Vespers are finished, the Proceeding passes out of the
Choire, the Knights-Companions and the Sovereign following, and returns to the
Presence Chamber, whence He and the Knights-Companions retire till Supper be
ready; all things being done, as when they past out of the Choire, and
Proceeded to the Presence at the finishing of the first Vespers.

But an. 15 Car. 1. it happening to be late, ere the second Vespers were ended,
the Sovereign went Palmers Iourn. pro an. 1639. p. 33.
not to the Presence Chamber from the Chapel, but marched directly to the
great Hall to Supper, by Torch light.

When the Feast has been kept at Whitehall or Greenwich, if the Sovereign went
MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 10. and 26. b.
into the Chapel to the second Vespers, the return of the Proceeding was
immediately thence through the great Hall, and up into the Presence. But if the
Sovereign proceeded no farther then the Ex fol. 8. b. vide etiam MS. penes
G.O.Y. page 113. and 114.
Closet, and there staid, both holding the Chapter and during Divine Service;
then the Sovereigns Lieutenant as he came from the Chapel, past also through
the Great Hall, and up into the Guard Chamber and thence to the Closet, where
receiving the Sovereign, they all proceeded thence before him into the Presence
in the usual order; where the Proceeding ending, all retired till Supper was
ready. Nevertheless if the Supper on the Feast Day at night was prepared in the
Banqueting House; then the Sovereigns return from the Chapel or Closet, was
over the Terrace, into the said Room, and up to the State there.

SECT. IX. Of the Supper on the Evening of the Feast Day.
IT has been very seldom seen, that the Sovereign has supped publicly in St.
Georges Hall, on the Feast Day; but when he does (as (...)
an. 14 Car. 1.) the Proceeding thither, the Ceremonies and attendance there,
and return thence, are in all respects performed, as at the Supper on the Eve.

But if the Sovereign's Lieutenant has on this night supped publicly (as
formerly it often happened at Whitehall) then this Meal was made in the MS. penes
W. D. N. fol. 4. and 8. b. and MS. pen. G.O.Y. page 113.
Presence Chamber, where the Lieutenant sat alone at the Sovereign's Table, on
the left hand of the Cloth of State, as was usual at other times, and the
Knights-Companions at a Table set along the side of the Room; all being served
after the accustomed manner.

Sometimes, at Greenwich, the Sovereign's Lieutenant and Knights-Companions
have supped in the MS. penes W. D. N. fol. 4. and 8. b. and MS. pen. G.O.Y.
page 113.
Council Chamber, as an. 8. Eliz. (and also in the Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 9.
Great Chamber, at the end of the Guard-Chamber on the Eve, as an. 27. of the
same Queen) And when Supper was ended, they all proceeded back to the
Presence Chamber, and there (having appointed the Hour of meeting the next
morning) took leave one of another, and departed to their several Lodgings, to
put off their Robes.

CHAP. XXII. THE Ceremonies OBSERVED ON THE Last Day OF THE FEAST.
SECT. I. Of Proceeding to the Chapter House in the Morning.
IT is observed by the Author of the Rationale, upon our Book of Common Prayer,
Page 128.
That great Solemnities have some days after them, to continue their memory in
Prorogationem Festi, which are Ibid. 174.
added as Attendants in honor of the Feast. And it may be well enough presumed,
that upon this ground, the Founder lengthened out the Feast of St. George with
part of the following day; one being too little to contain all the Ceremonies,
designed by him to set forth the State of this high Festival.

Among the Job. 7. v. 39.
Jews, the last day of the Feast of Tabernacles was taken for the greatest day;
but though it be not so to be understood here, yet does this last day share in
a very great part of the Solemnity of the Feast; for in the distribution of the
Ceremonies, there are appointed to it particulars, both Civil and Solemn. As
first, the Affairs transacted in Chapter, chiefly concerning the Election of
Knights, with their Proceeding to the Chapel; and secondly, the Services used
in the Chapel, viz. the Offering of Gold and Silver, and Hatchments of deceased
Knights-Companions.

The bringing of the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Sword into the Presence, the setting the Proceeding in order, and the manner
of the Sovereign and Knights Proceeding to the Chapter House, is performed in
the same sort as it was on the Eve of the Feast; the Solemnity differing only
in this, that then the Sovereign and Knights-Companions are obliged by the
Statutes, to proceed in full Robes; here, by the indulgence of King Henry the
Eighths Art. 12.
Statutes all are dispensed with, saving the upper Robe or Mantle: and where
then, the Image of St. George was worn pendent at the Collar of the Order, now
a blew Ribband suffices; and in lieu of their Caps and Feathers, they now wear
only their ordinary Hats.

First, therefore the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, repair to the Sovereigns Privy
Lodgings, and there attend his going into the Presence Chamber.

The Officers of Arms, Prebends, and Alms-Knights, as also the
Knights-Companions Servants, (habited as the Day before) meet in the several
places they then did, and there wait the Sovereigns coming forth.

The Sovereign attended with his Train-bearers, enters the Presence, and takes
his Stand before the State.

The Proceeding advances toward the Chapter House, in the accustomed Order.

Generally, and for the most part, the Proceeding passes on foot (and
sometimes on Horseback) the public way: yet the late Sovereign King Charles
the First, used now and then, to pass the private way, An. 7. Car. 1. MS. and
an. 14. Car. 1. Palm. Iourn. page 20.
over the Terrace. But an. 15 Iac. Reg. there was no solemn proceeding at all,
for the public way was so MS. penes E. W. G. f. 154. b.
pestered with Carts, that the Sovereign and Knights-Companions were
constrained to pass to the Chapter House in their ordinary Apparel, and put on
their Mantles there.

It was the ancient Custom, to celebrate a Chapter in the Morning of the last
Day of the Feast, before the Sovereign proceeded to the Chapel, whereinto the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions entering and opening the same, have given
dispatch to such affairs relating to the Order, as were, either not finished or
treated of in the Precedent Chapters: but the chief business then is to make
Election of Knights, where any Stall is void.

Which Chapter, has sometimes (when the Sovereign did not go to the Chapel)
been kept in the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Privy Chamber, and the present Affairs dispatched in that Room; and then the
Sovereigns Lieutenant waving the Chapter House, has proceeded straight on to
the Chapel, and entered in at the South Door thereof.

SECT. II. Of the Elect Knights Proceeding into the Choire.
WHere an Election has been made of a Person then present at Court, he is
called in to the Chapter House by Garter according, to the usual manner. Where
the Garter is buckled about his Leg, and the George put about his Neck; (of
which particular Ceremony we have Chap. 10.
already spoken) this being done, it has been usual for the Elect* Knight to
receive the further honor of passing immediately in the Proceeding to the
Chapel, whether it were from the Chapter House, or Presence Chamber, which he
does in his Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. ^. vid. etiam MS. pen. E. W. G.
ordinary apparel, always bareheaded, as did the MS.
Earl of Northumberland, an. 11 Car. 1. and without any other Ornaments of the
Order, saving the foresaid Garter and George: and the place allowed him in the
Proceeding, is between the Knights-Companions and the Officers of Arms, of
which there are a multitude of Presidents.

In this place MS. fol. pen. W. D. N. fol. 16. b.
Sir Henry Sydney rode, in the Proceeding to the Chapel at Windesor, an. 6
Eliz. and here went the Lord Ibid. MS. fol. 3. b.
Hunsdon immediately after he was elected, an. 3. Eliz. so also the Ibid. f.
10. b.
Earl of Northumberland the 5 th of the same Queen.

But where two Knights have been Elected, they then proceed together before the
Knights-Companions, (the Senior being taken on the right hand) as did the Earl
of MS. penes E. W. G.
Arundel and Visc. Rochester, an. 9 Iac. Reg. and the Earl of MS. penes E. W. G.
Rutland and Sir George Villars, an. 14 Iac. Reg. Howbeit Charles Duke of York,
being elected at the same time, went in the Proceeding MS. penes E. W. G.
next before the Prince his Brother, then the Sovereigns Lieutenant.

When the Proceeding is arrived at the Choire Door, the Alms-Knights, Prebends,
and Officers of Arms, the Knights-Companions and Officers of the Order, enter
with usual Ceremony, and take their several Stations, as on the Eve; and
lastly, the Sovereign, if present. The Elect Knight also enters in tourn as he
proceeded, and is Ex Collect. A. V. W.
placed by Garter next before the lowest Stall; or if there be two newly
Elected, and both proceed to the Chapel, the one is placed under the lowest
Stall on the Princes side, the other under the lowest Stall on the Sovereigns.
But if any great State pass in the Proceeding, he then is placed before such
Stalls as is designed for him; and so was MS. penes E. W. G. f. 149. b.
Charles Duke of York, an. 9 Iac. Reg. to wit, before the Stall next below the
Princes.

Being thus placed, they are there to Collect. A. V. W.
stand all Service time; for so did the Earl of Lib. R. p. 35.
Suffolk, an. 3 Car. 1. the Earl of Ibid p. 46.
Northampton, an. 4 Car. 1. and the Earl of MS.
Northumberland, an. 9 Car. 1. nor are they to make any more Reverences than at
their MS.
coming into the Choire, and passing out, unless a Stool be brought in and they
permitted to sit down, and then are they obliged to make their Reverences MS.
upon all occasions, when they either sit or rise.

Nevertheless, by reason of the length of the Ceremonies, and in case of Age or
Infirmity, the Knights Elect, have obtained License from the Sovereign, or his
Lieutenant, to sit down and be covered. So, for like cause, the Lord MS.
Burleigh in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and the Earl of Southampton, an. 13 Car.
2. were permitted to sit. The like indulgence had the Earls of MS. penes E W.
G. fol. 147. b.
Dunbar and Penbroke, an. 6 Iac. from the Prince, (then the Sovereigns
Lieutenant) and also the Earl of MS. penes E W. G. fol. 147. b.
Rutland, and Sir George Villars from the Sovereign, an. 14 Iac. Reg. and
lastly James Duke of York, Palm. large Iourn. page 421
an. 17 Car. 1. But, though the favor of reposing at this time is allowed, the
MS.
Stool may not to be brought into the Choire, before the Sovereign has been
pleased, by some public signal, to give him leave to sit down, and then to be
called for and not before; though it ought to be in readiness, in some place
near and unseen.

SECT. III. Of the Ceremonies performed at Divine Service.
AND now to pass on: When the Sovereign, has ascended his Royal Seat, The
Knights-Companions in due order take their Stalls.

The Officers of the Order their Seats; and then

The Prelate (with the Sergeant of the Vestry before him) goes up to the
Northside of the Altar, and begins the Morning Service.

After him, the Verger of the College proceeds up before two Prebends; who put
on their Copes on the Southside of the Altar, and assist in the Divine Offices.

But whereas the late Sovereign King Charles the First, of ever Blessed Memory,
had throughout all his Reign, a Sermon preached before him, on every Tuesday
Morning, it sometimes fell out that this latter Feast day, happened to be on a
Tuesday, (as it did an. 8. of the same Sovereign at Whitehall) and then
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
at such time as the Prelate was otherwise to proceed up to the Altar, the
Pulpit was brought into the Choire, and placed in the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
middle of the lowermost Haut Pas, and immediately the Sermon began: which
being ended, it was removed, and forthwith the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Prelate proceeded up to the Altar as usually, and began Service.

Mass of Requiem.
In this Morning Service (before the Reformation of our Church) was the Lib. N.
p. 109.
Mass of Requiem solemnly sung by the Abbot of Tower Hill, for the Souls of the
Knights-Companions and all faithful Souls departed; and this was taken care for
by the E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 14. H. 8. Stat. Art. 12.
Statutes.

As also, that at the Celebration thereof, E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 14. H. 8.
Stat. Art. 12.
all the Knights at the Feast should be present, unless any one were hindered
by some reasonable cause, or in special manner Licenced by the Sovereign.

At this Celebration were the deceased Knights-Companions Achievements also
Offered, with solemn Ceremony; concerning which we shall discourse at large
Chap. 25.
anon.

Offering of Gold and Silver.
Another Ceremony belonging to the service of this Morning, is the Offering of
Gold and Silver, which when the first Sentence of the Offertory has been
pronounced, is again performed by the Sovereign (or his Lieutenant) and
Knights-Companions present.

The Ceremonies and Circumstances appertaining thereunto at this time, are the
same throughout in all particulars, as are set down to be observed at the like
Offering on the Feast Day; and therefore for avoiding Repetition, we shall
refer the Reader to the place where that is treated on Chap. 21. Sect. 5.
before.

Proceeding out of the Choire.
After all the beforementioned Ceremonies in the Chapel, and Divine Service
are ended, the Prelate descends from the Altar to his Form; Whereupon all
prepare to go out of the Choire (which is exactly performed in the usual order,
as on the Eve of the Feast) from whence, the Sovereign and Knights-Companions
most commonly proceed to the Chapter House, where being entered, they
immediately MS. pen. W. D. N. fol. 16. b. and MS. penes E. W. G. de an. 15.
Iac. R vide porro Lib. R. p^g. 20. and 30. MS. page 14.
put off their Mantles, and therewith the Ceremonies of this Grand Feast take
ending.

Heretofore, when the Feast was held at Whitehall, the Sovereigns Lieutenant
and Knights-Companions were accustomed, to put off their Mantles Ex eod. MS.
penes W. D. N. f. 3. b. and 26. b. vide etiam Collect. W. le N. Cl. de an. 10.
Eliz. Et MS. penes G.O.Y. page 113.
without the Chappel-Door, as soon as they returned from Morning Service. But
an. 13 Car. 1. at the finishing of this Morning Service, the Lib. R. page 126.
Proceeding went back before the Sovereign to the Presence Chamber, so also an.
19 Car. 2. and in like manner an. 17 Car. 1. Palm. Iourn. page 45.
it marched before the Sovereign in order, from the Cathedral Church in York,
to the Sovereign Palace, before they put off their Mantles.

SECT. IV. The Diets at some of the Grand Feasts.
WE were unwilling to interrupt the Course of the Ceremonies relative to this
Grand Feast, with what some will esteem perhaps improper, if not trivial:
nevertheless since others judge it may contribute to the setting forth the
Grandeur and Magnificence of it, if the particulars of the Diets be made known,
we shall add for Corolary, an account of some of them here.

An Ordinance for the King, Lib. MS. penes Rob. C^^. A^lesbury, fol. 1.
the Queen, and the Knights of the Garter at Windesor, for Saturday Supper and
Sunday Dinner, the 28. and 29. days of May, an. 11. Reg. Henrici Octavi.
Saturday Supper Sunday Dinner first Course. first Course. Canell. Soppus to
Potage. A George on Horseback. Organs of Ling Standerd. Chikins in brewel.
Salmon Calver. Pestel of Heart for gr. sh. Pyke in Erblade. Capons in Erblade.
Plece. Cignets. Bremes mar. Carpes of Venison. Cunger gr. Capons of halt gr.
Solles in solemsauce. Herons. Moletts in grave. Pyke in Latum sauce. Tenches in
Gresell. sauce. Salman Calver. Carpe in sharp sauce. A made Dish. Creves mar.
Pies of Paries. Dowsetts desire. Custard planted with Garters. Tart covered. A
Tart closed with Arms. Fritor Lion. Prewne Orangs. Vno eq. per pero Leche.

Second Course. Second Course. Mainem^ Royal. A Sotelte. Halebut in engrailed.
Iely Ypocras. Fresh Sturgion. Kind Kid. Base. Fesants. Sour Moletts. Brewes,
or Mewes. Bremes aque dulc. Godwits. Perches in soil. Birds of the Nest. Eliis
gr. roast. Chikens. Chines of Salmon r. Peions. Porpos in Armor. Rabets. Creves
-- dozen. Peers made. Orangs bak. Sturgion r. Tart melior. Creves dd. Leche
Cumforte. Quales. Venison in past. Tart party. Orangs bak. Leche.

For the Knights Dinner on Sunday.
First Course. Second Course. Chikins in brewel. Iely Yppocras. Pestels or gr.
schare. Kyd or Lamb peru. Capon in Erblade. Fesaunts. Cignets or Green-Geese.
Quales. Carpis of Venison or Veal. Chikins. Herons or Gullys. Pigeons. Pyke or
Lampre p. Rabets. Salmon Calver. Sturgion r. Pies of Paris. Creves dd. Custard
Plancyd. Venison in past. Fryttors. Tart party. Bawdrets or Orangs bak. Leche.

This Fare follows the Knights at the second Table.
First Course. Second Course. Potage. A Viande. Gr. Schare. Lamb. Capon
boiled. Chikins or Pigions. Green Geese. Venison bak. or Tart. Veal roasted.
Creves dd. Pies or Custard. Leche or Frittor. Lampre pr. Frittor or Leche.

This Fare is for the first Hall.
First Course. Second Course. Potage. A Viand. Gr. Schare. Lamb. Capon boiled.
Chikins or Pigions. Green Geese for 12 or 16 Mess. Venison bak. Veal. Leche or
Frittor. Pies or Custard paru. Frittor.

Waste to be given by the great Officers Cxx, Mess. Ibid. fol. 3.

Beef, Veal, Geese, and Capon.
Waste to be dealt at Gate, viz. CCCC. Mess.
Beef, Veal, and Bakemeats, Venison or other.
This course for giving Waste, was continued until an. 12. Car. 2. that the
Purveyances and Provisions for the Kings Household, were taken away by Act of
Parliament.

A Proportion made for the foresaid Feast of St. George. Ibid. fol. 4*

Beef 24 Moulton 92 Veales. 74 Pykes 24 Lampre pr. 240 Cygnets 3 doz. Green
Geese 18 dd. Herons 8 dd. Fesants 4 dd. Brewz or Gullys 6 dd. Goddwitts 5 dd.
Birds of the Nest 200. Pigeons 50 dd. Chikins 52 dd. Rabits 36 dd. Capon of gr.
12. Capon k. 8. dd. Capon cos. 16. dd. Hens. 40. dd. Kyds 14 Lambs Sukkers 14
Lambs gr. 96 Young Cranes 3 doz. Dottrells 5 dd. Quails 15 dd. Creme 16 gall.
Crude 60 g. Milk 60 g. Butter and Eggs plenty. Peacocks with their Tails
Pastry. 16 Creme 24 g. Crude 80 g. Milk 76 g. Aples 200. Oranges. 300. Butter
to serve the said Feast. Eggs to serve the said Feast.

l. s. d. The charge of the whole came to 431 03 09

For the Feast of St. George, held at Whitehall, on Monday the 22. and Tuesday
the 23. days of April, in the 19. year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King
Charles the Second, An. Dom. 1667.

The Supper for the Sovereign on the Eve (being Monday night) was prepared and
set upon the Table in the Banqueting House, two by two, beginning at the East
end of it, and the rest of the Dishes were set upon the other Dishes, as
Rinders in the middle.

First Course. 1. Ducklings boiled xij. 21. Petty Paties. 2. Veal Arago. 3.
Salmon boiled j. case. 22. Rabbits fried xij. 4. Pidgeon Pie. 5. Green Geese
xij. 23. Sallet. 6. Gammon Bacon with iiij Pullets greatcourse. 7. Pike with
Prawns, Cockles, and Oysters. 24. Capon good per Sallets iiij. 8. Bisk Pigeons
xij. 9. Venison Pie. 25. Rabbits marrionated 10. Chines Mutton and Veal iij.
11. Chickens boiled xij. 26. Hashed Sallet. 12. Hens with Eggs hasht vj. 13.
Carps Great iij. 27. Cold Sparagra^s. 14. Oyster Pie. 15. Tongues and Vdders
iiij. 28. Pickled Sallets. 16. Capons boiled ij. 17. Kid j. case. 29. Sweet
breads Arago. 18. Pullet a Granow iiij. 19. Beatilia Pie. 20. Capons fat. v.
Second Course. 1. Veal Soust ij. 21. Tongues iiij. 2. Salmon col. 3. Pullets
Great vj. 22. Leich. 4. Tongue Pie. 5. Ducklings xij. 23. Anchovis, Caveare,
and pickled Oysters. 6. Leverets vj. 7. Lobsters vj. 24. Eggs of Portugal. 8.
Chickens fat xij. 9. Pheasants with Eggs vj. 25. Blamange. 10. Skerret Pie. 11.
Partridges xij. 26. Cream Pistache. 12. Turkey Chicks xij. 13. Crabs buttered
vj. 27. Sparragrass. 14. Tarts sorts. 15. Gammons Bacon ij. 28. Ielly. 16.
Pigeons tame xij. 17. Chickens marrionated xij. 29. Prawnes. 18. Lamprey Pie.
19. Pullets Soust vj. 20. Sallet.

Four Mess of Fare served to Supper on the Eve to the Knights-Companions
Tables, viz. one to the Duke of Yorks Table, and three to the other six Knights
then present, and one Mess of the same fare to the Prelate and the other
Officers of the Order.

First Course. Second Course. Capons boiled ij. Pullets great vj. Wildboar Pie.
Gammon Bacon ij. Kid j. case. Ducklings xij. Carpes great iij. Carpes Soust ij.
Chicken Pie frosted. Partridges viij. Gammon Bacon with 4. Pullets great.
Lamprey Pie. Oyster Pie. Bisk of Shelfish. Turkey Chicks xij. Venison Pie.
Prawnes. Bisk Pigeons xij. Pigeons tame xij. Tongue and Vdders iiij. Tongues
iiij. Pike great. Chickens fat xij. Capons fat iiij. Tongue Pie. Turkey Pie.
Rabbets xij. Jegot Multon ferst. Anchovis Caveare and pickled Oysters. Veal
Arago. Green Geese x. Leich. Beatilia Pie. Lobsters vj. Chickens boiled xij.
Sparagrass. Sweet Breads Arago. Tarts Sorts. Sallets. Ielly. Sallets. Blamange.

The Sovereigns Diet on St. Georges Day Dinner.
First Course. 1. Wild-Boar Pie. 21. Line Veal larded and col. iij. 2. Veal
Arago. 3. Chine of Beef. 22. Cold Sparagrass. 4. Haggest Puddings. 5. Beatilia
Pie. 23. Hasht Sallets. 6. Capons fat v. 7. Ducklings boiled xij. 24. Almond
Pudding. 8. Gammon Bacon and Pigeons. 9. Chines Multon and Veal iij. 25. Sweet
Breads. 10. Capons boiled ij. 11. Venison boiled. 26. Sallet. 12. Pikes roasted
ij. 13. Carpes great iij. 27. Petty Pattyes. 14. Pigs roasted ij. 15. Venison
Pie. 28. Puddings white and Black. 16. Green Geese xij. 17. Turbut. 29. Rabbets
fried xij. 18. Chicken Pie. 19. Turkey Pie. 19. Chicken marrionated xij. Second
Course. 1. Pullets Soust vj. 21. Pickle Sallet. 2. Tongue Pie. 3. Salmon col.
22. Tongues iiij. 4. Blamange. 5. Rabbets roasted xij. 23. Eggs Portugal. 6.
Crabs buttered vj. 7. Phesants with Eggs vj. 24. Shardoones. 8. Pigeons tame
xij. 9. Chickens roasted xij. 25. Leach. 10. Bisk shell fish. 11. Oysters,
Skerets, and Sweet-Breads. 26. Luke Olives. 12. Ducklings roasted xij. 13. Tart
sorts. 27. Sparagrass. 14. Lobsters roasted vj. 15. Gammon Bacon. 28. Pickeld
Oysters. 16. Piggs soust. 17. Lamprey Pie. 29. Prawnes. 18. Veal hasht. 19.
Salmon boiled j. case 20. Peacock Pie.

Four Mess of Fare served to the Knights-Companions, and one Mess to the
Prelate, etc. on St. Georges Day Dinner.
First Course. 1. Sallet. 17. Green Geese x. 2. Chickens boiled xij. 3. Loin of
Veal larded with coll. 18. Carpes great iij. 4. Turkey Pie. 19. Haggest
Pudding. 6. Salmon j. case. 5. Piggs ij. 20. Beatilia Pie. 8. Venison Pie. 7.
Chine Beef. 21. Pullets great vj. 10. Shoulder Multon in blood with Steaks. 9.
Gammon Bacon and iiij. Pullets great. 22. Sallett. 12. Capons fat iiij. 11.
Bisk Pigeons xij. 14. Kid j. case. 13. Chicken Pie frosted. 16. Veal Soust.
15. Wild Boar Pie. Second Course. 1. Sallet. 17. Leach. 2. Piggs Soust. 3.
Gammons Bacon ij. 18. Sparagrass. 4. Salmon col. 5. Ducklings xij. 19. Crabs
buttered vj. 6. Chickens fat xij. 7. Oysters, Skerrets, and Sweetbread. 20.
Lamprey Pie. 8. Bisk Shelfish. 21. Ielly. 10. Lobsters vj. 9. Pigeons tame
xij. 22. Blamange. 12. Tarts sorts. 11. Rabits xij. 23. Sallet. 14. Pullets
soust. 13. Peacock Pie in Pride. 16. Anchovis, Caveare, and Pickled Oysters.
15. Dried Tongues iiij.

The Banquet served at the Feast of St. George, the 22. and 23. of April an. 19
Car. 2.
Supper on the Eve.
For the Sovereigns Table, 8 Basins, 20 Boxes in each Basin, one pound in each
Box. Preserves 4 Dishes, two pound in a Dish. Creams 2 Dishes, and one pound of
Eringoes, and one pound of Rocks to garnish each Basin.

For 4 Mess of the Knights-Companions, and one Mess for the Prelate, etc. to
each Mess 2 Basins, 16 Boxes in a Basin, 3 quarters of a pound in a Box. 2
Dishes of Preserves, 2 pound in a Dish, and 2 Dishes of Creams, and half a
pound of Eringoes, and half a pound of Rocks to garnish each Basin.

The like for Dinner on St. Georges Day.
After Dinner and Supper, when the Sovereign and Knights-Companions wash, 6
Bouls, one for the Sovereign of 6 pound of Comfits, and ^ other Bouls for the
Knights-Companions and Prelate, etc. 4 pounds in each Boul, ^arnished with
Eringoes, and Rocks and Violet Cakes, half a pound of each to each Boul.

We have seen several Bills wherein the Diets belonging to the Officers of Arms
are set down, both for their Supper on the Eve, and Dinner on the Feast Day,
which were not less than 20 Dishes, and sometimes 24 Dishes besides the
Banquet: These Bills were usually given to the Junior Pursuivants, by the
Clearks of the Kitchen, by which they called for the Dishes.

Among the memorialls of the Grand Feast held an. 19 Eliz. it is noted, that on
the MS. penes G. O. Y. page 113.
Eve, the Heralds had at Supper the Diet as was accustomed, viz. MS. penes G.
O. Y. page 113.
16 Dishes at the first Course and 8 at the second: but see here their Diets at
the Grand Feast at Whitehall, an. 19 Car. 2.

Monday Supper 22 April.
First Course. Second Course. Sallets. Pullets great iij. Veal and Capon
boiled. Chickens fine viij. Chickens boiled viij. Pigeons fat. xij. Multon
roasted. Rabbits vj. Veal Roasted. Lobsters iiij. Turkey. Prawns CCC. Capons good
ii. Turkey-Pye. Lamb, side. Tart Sorts. Pigeon-Pye. Sparagrass CC. Stump-Pye.
Gamon Bacon. Green Geese vi. Tongues ii. Ielly.

Manchets fine x. Cheat fine vi. Course x. Beer viij Gallons. French Wine ii.
Gallons. Sack ii. Quarts. Ale iiij. Bottles.

The same served the next day Dinner, only the roast Veal was exchanged for
boiled Beef.

For Supper on Sunday night, at Windesor, the 28. of May 1671. being the Eve of
the Grand Feast, there was prepared for the Sovereign, the Diet hereafter
mentioned, and set upon his Table in St. George's Hall, in the order following,
two by two, beginning at the South end of the Table; which being filled, the
rest of the Dishes were set upon stands in the midst.

First Course. 1. Chickens boiled xii. 21. Petty Patties. 2. Salmon boiled. 3.
Veal Arago. 22. Rabits fried viii. 4. Lamb stewed. 5. Vmble Pie. 23. Sallet of
Herbs. 6. Bisk Pigeons xii. 7. Green Geese vi. 24. Mullets soust vi. 8. Pikes
with Pawnes, Oysters, and Cockles. 9. Chine Multon and Veal iv. 25. Rabits
marrionated viii. 10. Venison Pie. 11. Ducklings boiled xii. 26. Hasht Sallet,
with iv Capons. 12. Carpes great iii. 13. Hens hasht v 27. Soales marrionated
two pair. 14. Turkies aladob vi. 15. Venison boiled q. 28. Sallet of Pickles.
16. Bisk Shelfish. 17. Capons boiled ii. 29. Sweet breads arogo. 18. Pullets a
granoul vi. 19. Beatilia Pie with Patties. 20. Capons fat v. Second Course. 1.
Pullets fat roasted vi. 21. Tougues iv. 2. Veal and Pigs soust. 3. Cold Salmon.
22. Pease. 4. Ducklings x. 5. Tongue Pie. 23. Anchovis Caveare and pickled
Oysters. 6. Leverets vi. 7. Chicks fat xii. 24. Eggs of Portugal. 8. Lobsters
roast vi. 9. Pheasants with Eggs vi. 25. Blamang. 10. Turkey Chicks xii. 11.
Gaudwitts x. 26. Cream Pistache^. 12. Crabs buttered vi. 13. Quails xxiv. 27.
Scollops. 14. Pigeons tame xii. 15. Tarts sorts. 28. Ielly. 16. Gamons Bacon
ii. 17. Crawfish buttered. 29. Prawnes. 18. Egg Pies. 19. Ruffs xii. 20.
Pullets soust vi.

Seven Mess, or several Services of Fare, served on the Eve of the Feast to the
Knights-Companions; each Knight having a several Mess to Supper, and one Mess
of the same fare to the Prelate, etc.

First Course. Capons boiled ij. Chickens boiled xij. Crabs vi. Sallets
Pickles. Pikes great ij. Jegget Multon ferst. Chicken Pie. Rabbets fried viij.
Pullets hasht iv. Buck baked q. Capons fat iv. Salmon. Second Course. Quails
xviij. Turkey Pie. Tarts sorts. Ielley. Tongue Pie. Carpes large iij. Rabets
xij. Anchovies, Caveare and pickled Oysters. Blamang. Chicks fat xij. Lobsters
vi. Pullets great vi.

The Sovereign's Diet on the Feast day, when the Table being made less, the
Diet was reduced as follows.
First Course. 1. Wild Boar Pie. 2. Salmon. 3. Chine of Beef. 15. Sallet. 4.
Haggest Puddings. 5. Beatilia Pie with Patties. 16. Sweet-breads. 6. Gamon
Bacon with xij tame Pigeons. 7. Ducklings boiled xij. 17. Almond Pudding. 8.
Chickens boiled xij. 9. Chine Multon and Veal iv. 18. Petty Patties. 10. Pikes
roasted ij. 11. Buck baked q. 19. Hasht Sallet with 4 Capons. 12. Green Geese
vi. 13. Carpes great iij. 20. Chicks marrionated. 14. Chicken Pie frosted.
Second Course. 1. Pullets soust vi. 2. Tongue Pie. 3. Rabbets roasted xij. 15.
Sallets of Pickles. 4. Cream Tarts. 5. Pheasants with Eggs vi. 16. Eggs of
Portugal. 6. Crabs buttered vi. 7. Quails xxiv. 17. Ielly. 8. Pigeons tame xij.
9. Lobsters vi. 18. Luke Olives. 10. Chicks fat xij. 11. Gamon Bacon with ij
Tongues. 19. Pease. 12. Ruffs xij. 13. Tarts sorts. 20. Prawnes. 14. Ducklings
xij.

Seven Mess, or several Services of Fare served to the Knights-Companions, and
one Mess to the Prelate, etc.
First Course. Ducklings boiled xii. Chicks boiled xii. Rabbets fried viij.
Carpes great iij. Chine of Beef. Gamon of Bacon with iiij Pullets great. Buck
baked q. Stump Pie. Sallets of Pickle. Wild Bore Pie. Shoulder of Multon in
blood with Steaks. Capons fat iiij. Second Course. Phesants iiij. Quails xviii.
Artichokes. Anchovis Caviare and pickled Oysters. Chicks fat xii. Tarts sorts.
Ducklings vi. and Green Geese vi. Lamprey Pie. Ielly. Gamon Bacon with ii
Tongues. Pigeons tame xii. Red Dear Pie.

A Diet served to the Lords, that attended the Sovereign at Supper, on the Eve
of the said Feast.
First Course. Second Course. Capons boiled ij. Quails xviij. Chicks boiled
xij. Turkey Chicks x. Crabs buttered vi. Tarts sorts. Sallets of Pickle. Ielly.
Pikes Great ij. Tongue Pie. Iegget Multon ferst. Carpes large iv. Chicken Pie.
Rabbets xij. Rabbets fried viij. Anchovies Caviare, and pickled Oysters.
Pullets Hasht iv. Blamang. Buck baked q. Chickens fried xij. Capons fat iv.
Lobsters vi. Salmon. Pullets greese vi. Veal. Ducklings xij. Soals large ij
pair. Pigeons tame xij.

For the same Lords Dinner on the Feast day.
First Course. Second Course. Ducklings boiled xij. Pheasants iv. Chicks boiled
xij. Quails xviij. Rabbets fried viij. Artichokes. Carpes great ij. Anchovies
Caveare and Pickled Oysters. Chine Beef. Chickins fat xij. Gamon Bacon with iv
Pullets. Tarts sorts. Buck baked q. Ducklings vi. and Green Geese vi. Stump
Pie. Lamprey Pie. Salletts of Pickles. Ielly. Wild Boar Pie. Gamon Bacon.
Shoulder of Multon in blood with Veal. Tongues ii. Capons fat iv. Pigeons tame
xii. Veal. Red Deer Pie. Pullets of Greese iv. Crabs buttered vi. Blamang.

The Banquet served at the said Feast.
The Sovereign's Table on the Eve.
One Charger of China Oranges, containing 50. Seven Chargers of Confections, in
each Charger 20 Boxes; in each Box one pound of dried Confections. Two Plates
of Duke Cherries, 4 pound in each Plate. One Plate of Red Strawberries,
containing one Gallon. One Plate of White Strawberries, containing two Gallons.
One Plate of Ice Cream. Three Plates of liquid Sweetmeats, in each Plate 3
pound.
The same for the Feast day at Dinner.

To each of the 7 Tables for the Knights-Companions, on the Eve.
Two Chargers of Confections, in each Charger 14 Boxes. One pound of dried
Confections in each Box. One Plate of Duke Cherries, containing 2 pound. One
Plate of Red Strawberries, containing 1 Gallon. One Plate of liquid Sweetmeats,
containing 3 pound.
The same for the Feast day.

For the Prelate of the Garter, etc. on the Eve.
Two Chargers, 14 Boxes in each Charger. One Plate of Duke Cherries, containing
2 pound. One Plate of Red Strawberries, containing 1 Gallon. One Plate of
liquid Sweetmeats, containing 3 pound.
The same Service to the Lords who attended the Sovereign,
And so the same to the Prelate and Lords the next day.
One Charger of Confections for the Heralds, containing 10 Boxes each Meal.

The Dyets provided for the Officers of Arms at Supper and Dinner, were at each
Meal 20 Dishes:

The same Diet served in the same manner.
To the Prebends xx Dishes. To the Alms-Knights xx Dishes. To the Petty Canons
xx Dishes. To the Choristers xx Dishes.
The Diet served to the Officers of his Majesty's Board of Greencloth was xiv
Dishes.
To the Chief Cleark of the Kitchen vii Dishes To the Gentlemen of the Chapel
xiv Dishes To the second Cleark of the Kitchen vii Dishes To the Vestry iij
Dishes To the Officers of the Iewel-house iij Dishes. To the Yeomen Vshers x
Dishes. To the Children of the Chapel vi Dishes. To the Officers of the
Confectionary iii Dishes.
The Total of the Proportions of Provisions for the foresaid Feast.
Beef xx Mess. Chines Beef ix. Multon xvij. Cases. Veal x. Cases. Tongues and
Vdders xxxij. Piggs xlv. Lambs xx. Capons fat lxxx. Capons good ix doz. Pullets
fat xx doz. Hens and Pullets course vj. doz. Chickens fat xx. doz. Chickens
fine Lviij. doz. Pigeons tame xxiiij. doz. Green Geese xv. doz. Ducklings
xxxv. doz. Turkey Chickens ix. doz. Gaudwits ij. doz. Quails xxx. doz. Ruffs
xxiiij. Pheasants iiij. doz. Leverets vj. Rabbets xxxv. doz. Kids xvij. cases.
Cocks-Combs and Stones ij. doz. Peace xx Bushel. Sparagrass vj. M. Artichoaks
CC. Beef for Gravy, CCxlix l. Multon ij. Cases. Veals iiij. Pork j. case. Bacon
Lxxiiij l. Lard Cxxiiij l. Sweet Breads xviij. doz. Lambstones xx. doz. Pallats
x. doz. Marrow-bones vij. doz. Sheeps Tongues ix. doz. Veal Cauls xiiij.
Haggest bags xij. Galves Caldrons xviij. Ox Suet Lxviij l. Sheeps-feet vj.
Gang. The small Guts of an Ox. Neats-feet vj. Gang. Caules and blood vj.
Salmons xiiij. Soals large xxiiij. pair. Lobsters large Cxxxvj. Crabs large
Cxviij. Mullets Lx. Prawnes xij. M. Cockles viij. Quarts. Scollops iiij. C.
Lampry Pies xij. Sturgeon xxij. Mess. Whelks vj. Quarts. Pikes great xiiij.
Carpes great Lxxx. Trouts large xxiiij. Crawfish MD. Oysters xij. Quarts.
Westphalia Gammons Lxx. Dried Tongues C. Pickled Oysters xvj. Barrels. Anchovis
xij l. Caveare viij l. Butter CCCLxx l. Eggs MM. Barberies ij. Gallons. Onions
xij. Ropes. Cream ij. Gallons. Milk vj. Gallons.
Bake-meats for the said Feasts both hot and cold.
Hot. Steak Pyes xiij. Hot. Stump Pyes xxj. Hot. Vmble Pie j. Hot. Beatillia
Pyes with Patties vj. Hot. Venison Pyes xviij. Hot. Petty Patties ij. Dishes.
Hot. Tarts sorts xxxviij. Hot. Single Tarts xx. Hot. Egg Pies ix. Hot. Chicken
Pies frosted ix. Hot. Cream Tarts j. Cold. Tongue Pyes xxvij. Cold. Capon Pyes
xxvij. Cold. Lamprey Pyes xij. Cold. Wild Boar Pyes xij. Cold. Red-Deer Pyes
xij.
l. s. d. The whole charge of this Grand Feast amounted to -- 2394 17 08^

CHAP. XXIII. THE OBSERVATION OF THE Grand Feast BY Absent Knights.
SECT. 1. Absent Knights enjoined to observe the Grand Feast.
WIth what state and magnificence, and in what solemn order, the Grand Feast of
St. George has been, and ought to be observed, by the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions, either at Windesor Castle, or any other place, where the
Sovereign then happens to keep his Court, has been already laid down at large;
yet were not all the honors due to this high Festival, paid to those places
alone, but communicated sometimes (though in a less measure) to such other,
where any of the absent Knights resided at that time, and had obtained the
Sovereign's Letters of Dispensation, for non-attendance with the rest of the
Knights-Companions.

We have also shown how strictly the Statutes oblige the Knights-Companions to
appear annually at the Grand Feast, and what severe penalties they inflict upon
such as are absent: Yet lest the honor of the Order might receive diminution,
from too small an appearance at its public Solemnities, when perhaps some of
the Knights might then be employed in the Sovereign's service, both in remote
parts of the Kingdom and beyond Sea, or others sick, or not without a
reasonable excuse: it was further at the Institution of the Order Decreed, E.
3. Stat. Art. 28. H. 5. Stat. Art. 29.
That none of them should depart out of the Kingdom, without first acquainting
the Sovereign, and obtaining his special leave and license. Nevertheless such
as disposed themselves to undertake any military Expedition, or other honorable
design in the service of Foreign Princes, whence any glory of Knighthood might
be hoped for, upon such renowned undertakings, the Ibid.
Sovereign of his special grace, and for his favor toward and confidence in
the Knights-Companions, was wont to give them preference before the rest of his
Subjects, and grant them License to go beyond Sea.

But whatsoever the occasion of absence might be, it was then also ordained,
Art. 11.
That wheresoever any of the Knights-Companions resided, during the said Feast,
they should wear their Mantles of the Order, from the hour of the first
Vespers, on the Eve of St. George, till the second Vespers on the Feast day
were finished: as they should have done, had they been present in person with
the Sovereign or his Deputy, during the whole celebration of the Feast ( in
case they were not deprived of their Liberty) the H. 5. Stat. Art. 11.
Prorogation of the Feast notwithstanding.

SECT. II. More particular directions for their observation of it.
BUT perchance, because the custom of these Celebrations at home began to be
neglected, at least seemed indifferent to the absent Knights-Companions, either
to observe or not to observe them, it was thought needful by King Henry the
Eighth to revive, as also to enlarge the Law in this particular, and therefore
in the 11. year of his Reign, first in explanation of the said 11. Article of
the Statutes of Institution, He declared, and enjoined the wearing of the whole
Habit upon the Eve of St. George, viz. the 22. day of April, whether it should
happen to fall within the Feast of Easter, or without, if the Knight-Companion
were at liberty, and not under restraint. Then he enumerated the times for
wearing it, to wit, on the Eve, at all times of Divine Service, Dinner, and
Supper; and all this to be observed, unless in case of War, Sickness, Journey,
or other just impediment, when if the absent Knight did wear the Garter and
George, either in a Gold Chain, or Silk Ribband, it should be accounted
sufficient.

About three years after, when the same Sovereign made a general reformation
and explanation of the Statutes, he enjoined some other particulars to be done
and observed by the absent Knights-Companions (whether, by Hen. 8. Stat. Art: 3.
License or otherwise, any of them were in his own House, or any other place,
and not under restraint) that is to say, he should be bound to prepare a
Capital Stall in the Church or Chapel, where he designed to hear Service, to
the honor of the Sovereign: In which Capital Stall should be set up the Arms of
the Order within a Garter.

He should be likewise bound, to erect another Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Stall, that should be as far in distance (according to the proportion and
length of the said Church or Chapel) from the Stall of the Sovereign, and on
the same side, as was the said absent Knights Stall in the Castle of Windesor,
and therein should place his own Arms. Moreover he should wear the Collect. W.
le N. Cl.
whole Habit of the Order, and should hear Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Divine Service, such as by the Church is ordained for the said time; as well
the Even, the Morning, as the Afternoon on the Feast day. Then, that he should
first do Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Reverence toward the Altar, in the honor of God, and after toward the Stall,
wherein was fixed and set up the Arms of the Sovereign, as well and as often at
his coming in, as at his going out of the said Church or Chapel; as also as
often as he should pass before the said Arms. But Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Emperors, Kings, Princes, or Electors, are excepted, who may in this case so
place their Seats, and Stalls, as it shall seem most convenient to them.

In which Decree (being still in full force) we may observe, first the
Injunction upon an absent Knight, that does oblige him to celebrate the Feast
of Saint George, wherever he shall be, even then when the Sovereign and the
rest of the Knights-Companions hold the same; and next, the manner and order
thereof, that being at large set down, both in reference to the preparations
made in the Church, and his own deportment during the whole Ceremony. In
relation to which, it is to be understood, that much of the ordering and adding
to the glory of the Festival, and the absent Knights peculiar Honor, is left to
his own pleasure and disposal; as namely, 1. The Collect. A. V. W. vide MS.
pen. Arth. Com. Anglesey, fol. 237. a.
adorning the Church or Chapel with Arras, or other rich Hangings, and
furnishing the Sovereign's Stall; nevertheless with this caution, that it be
always prepared on the right hand the entrance into the Choire, but if there be
no Choire, then ought a partition of Hangings to be made, reserving an entrance
in the middle, and on the right hand a Cloth of State, whereon to be fixed the
Sovereign's Arms (impaled with those of St. George) and Style, the Seat
furnished with Cushens, and a Carpet and long Cushen, to lie on the Desk before
it. 2. In placing his own Stall (with his Arms over it) at its just distance
from the Sovereign's; to which purpose it is necessary, that Garter send him a
Scheme of the Stalls on both sides the Choire. 3. In proceeding to the Church,
both at 3 a Clock on the Eve of the Feast (where, habited in full Robes, he
must behave himself in all things, as if he were at Windesor) and all other
times while the Solemnity continues. That he be attended by a convenient number
of Gentlemen before him, well habited, with the Officers of his Household, and
also his inferior Servants in Liveries; two and two together, according to
their Qualities and Degrees, bare-headed; who are to return in the same order
as they go; the Gentlemen-ushers also are to go bare-headed, and the Herald, if
present, to take place next before the Knights person. 4. In his Dinner on the
Feast day, that it be noble, and his Attendance at the Table suitable; and that
he dine and sup alone at all times, unless there happen to be a
Knight-Companion with him. 5. In his Offering of money, that he make it not
only on the Feast day in the morning, but the next morning also, as soon as the
first sentence of the Offertory is pronounced. 6. That at Evening Prayer on the
Feast day, and also at the Supper following, he observe all things, as on the
Eve. 7. In wearing his Habit of the Order, until after Supper on the Eve, and
all the Feast day, until supper be ended at night. 8. That on the Morrow after
the Feast, he proceed to the Church in his Mantle only, and when Divine Service
is finished, then to put it off at the Church door.


And if any thing else, in the before recited Article seem short or obscure,
the large account in the Preparations for the Grand Feast, and course to be
observed in the celebrations thereof (before laid down and handled) will
sufficiently clear and explain, without the assistance of any further Comment.

But here we must note, that though the Statutes seem not to oblige the absent
Knights-Companions, to hold the Ceremonies of the Feast, longer than the
Evening on the Feast day, yet by the practice of ensuing years, they were
extended to the Morrow after, and consequently observed by the absent Knights,
so long as the Sovereign and Knights-Companions performed them at Windesor, or
elsewhere.

If the absent Knight be a person of eminent Degree, he is to be attended by a
Herald, or Pursuivant at Arms, or both, during the Solemnity of the Feast; to
add the greater luster thereto. Thus was Lib. N. page 173.
Prince Arthur an. 15. H. 7. attended at Hereford; and the like honor was
designed to the Earl of Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Leicester, when he kept the Solemnity of the Feast in the Low Countries, and
had been performed, but that the Herald dyed before St. George's day.

The nature of this Officers Employment on such an occasion, will partly appear
out of the Instructions, given by Ex Autogr. pen. Rob. Com. Aylesbur.
Sir Gilbert Dethick Garter (pursuant to the directions of the Statute) to
Henry Rees alias Berwick, Pursuivant at Arms, the 3. of April an. 1565. which
were to this effect.

1. That he should see a Capital Stall provided for the Sovereign (though not
there) with a Cloth of State, and before it a Carpet and Cushen, with a
Scutcheon of the Sovereign's Arms, impaled with those of St. George fixed
thereon.

2. That the Knight's Stall should be decently trimmed, with a Scutcheon of his
own Arms, fixed at the back of it, and that this Stall should be placed a good
distance from the Sovereign's Stall, according to the largeness of the Chapel.

3. That he should go before the Knight-Companion, to and from the Church, both
on the Even of the Feast, and Feast day, in his Coat of Arms; using such
Reverence as is meet and convenient, and sit on a Form before the Sovereign's
Stall.

4. That on the Feast day at Dinner, after the second Mess shall be served up
(having on his Coat of Arms) he shall proclaim the said Knight's Style in
French.

5. And lastly, when the Knight puts off his Mantle, either in the Church, or
where Service is said, then he to put off his Coat also, and return home (in
his ordinary Apparel) with him.

SECT. III. How to be observed in case of Sickness.
BUT in case of Sickness, and such as has confined the absent Knight to his
Bed, or would not permit him with safety to go out of his Chamber; the custom
was to prepare a Capital Stall for the Sovereign of the Order, with a Cloth of
State, Carpet, Cushens, and a Scutcheon of the Arms of the Order, impaled with
the Arms of the Sovereign, and his Style underneath, in the Ex MS. pergam.
penes Iohannem Vin^ent genesis
Chamber where he lay; as also another Stall for himself, placed according to
the before mentioned directions, which were there to remain during the Feast.
In which Room also were the Divine Offices celebrated, both on the Eve, the
Feast day, and the Morrow after. And if the Ib. see also Rows Iourn. page 10.
absent Knight were so sick that he kept his Bed, then was his whole Habit of
the Order laid thereon, during the time the rest of the Knights-Companions are
enjoined to wear theirs, More Majorum, Lib. C. page 119.
according to the ancient Custom and Statutes; and upon this account, Ambrose
Earl of Warwick falling ill at Greenwich, when St. George's day was there
celebrated an. 30. Eliz. retired to his Chamber, and there Collect. W. le N. Cl.
sat in his Robes.

SECT. IV. In what manner the Feast has been observed by absent Knights.
IN relation to the Celebrations performed by absent Knights, the Black Book
gives us a punctual account in a considerable Precedent; namely, of the Feast
of St. George holden in the Palace of Hereford, by Lib. N. p. 173.
Prince Arthur, an. 15. H. 7. he being then in the Government of his
Principality of Wales, and had with him Sir Richard Pool, one of the Companions
of the Order, then his Highness Chamberlain; this worthy Knight took care, that
all those things, which the Solemnity of the Feast required, and the Sovereign
and Knights-Companions did observe, according to the form of the Statutes and
accustomed manner, should be most exactly performed; and indeed Lib. N. p. 173.
there was nothing intermited in the Mass, in the first and second Vespers,
which solemn custom required should be done, in Censing, Fuming, Proceeding and
Offering, as well the Prince as the said Sir Richard, but it was undertook and
performed with much exactness.

Besides, the Princes Sword was born and held before his Stall, and his Herald
performed his Service with all ^^^^gence; also the Sovereigns Herald stood all
the while before the Sovereigns Stall, which was adorned with accustomed
Ornaments: and lastly, the Ibid. p. 174.
Bishop, who celebrated Divine Service, had his Seat erected near to the high
Altar.

But the public memorials of Sir Henry Sydneys holding two several Feasts of
St. George, the one at Shrewsbury, and the other at Ludlow, is worthy of a
place here; since these two Corporations, have caused them to be conspicuously
recorded in their Town Hall; and from whence I made Transcripts, when I
accompanied William Dugdale Esquire Norroy King of Arms, in his Visitation of
Shropshire, An. Dom. 1663.

That at Shrewsbury, being written in large Letters, upon a pain of Wainscot
over the Chimney, in the Chamber of Concord, in the Town Hall, is as follows.

Be it remembered, that in the Year of our Lord 1581. and in the 23d. Year of
the Reign of our most dread Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, the Feast of the
most noble Order of the Garter, was right honorably kept, in the good and
right renowned Town of Salop, by the Right Honorable Sir Henry Sidney, then
Lord President of the Council, established in the Principallity of Wales and
Marches of the same, one of the Companions of the same Order: the Arms of the
Sovereign and others, Kings, Princes, and Nobles, then Installed, in the said
Noble Order, were fixed in the Church of the same Town, during the Service and
Ceremonies, belonging to the same Order.

Be it further remembered, that at that time then was Elected but not Installed,
these Princes following, Rudolphus the 2d. of that name Emperor of the Romans,
King of Hungary and Bohemia, Archduke of Austria, Henry the 3 d. French King,
Christian King of Denmark, and the most Noble Prince John Casimire Duke of
Bavaria and Palatine of the Rhien; then being Bailiffs, William Jones, and
William Hering, who together with the Chieftains of the several Companies of
that good Town, did in most decent sort attend upon the said Lord President,
during the said Feast, together with the Aldermen and Bailiffs, Peers, in their
Scarlet Robes, and other Chieftains.

In the Gallery of the New-House at Ludlow are yet remaining, the several
Scutcheons of those Knights-Companions, which were set up in the Chancel of St.
Lawrence Church in Ludlow, in the 24. Year of Queen Elizabeth, when the Feast
of St. George was solemnized there; before which the following memorial is also
fairly written.

Be it remembered, that in the Year of our Lord God -- and in the 24 th Year of
the Reign of the most Excellent and Famous Princess, Elizabeth by the Grace of
God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland; The Feast of the most ancient and
most Noble Order of the Garter, was honorably kept in the Town of Ludlow, at
the usual days for keeping of the said Feast, by the Right Honorable Sir Henry
Sydney Knight, Lord President of the Council established in the Principallity
of Wales and Marches of the same, and one of the Companions of the same Order.
The Arms of the Sovereign, and all the Princes and Nobles, being Companions of
the same Noble Order, and Enstalled, were fixed in the Church of the said Town;
and there remained during the Ceremonies. And be it further remembered, that
before the same Feast there were Elected and not Enstalled, these Princes whose
names follow, Rudolphus the Second Emperor of the Romans, King of Hungaria and
Bohemia, Archduke of Austria, Henry the Third the French King, Christian King
of Denmark, and the most Noble Prince John Casimire Duke of Bavaria, and
Palatine of the Rhien, -- manifestly fixed in the Church -- then Bailiffs in
their own persons did honor the Feast, with their attendance.

Moreover the Town of Ludlow, to show their due respects to Sir Henry Sidney,
and readiness to contribute to the Triumphs of this Solemnity, met and drew up
the following Order, which we found entered in the Town Register.

10 th day of March 1581. an. 24 Eliz.
IT is agreed upon by this Assembly, that Mr. Bailiffs shall call before them,
the six persons undernamed of their Brethren, as soon as conveniently may, and
they all to confer and lay down a place, how my Lord President shall be
gratified by the Town, toward the keeping of St. George's Feast, if it be kept
here, and the said Bailiffs and their Associates, have Commission upon their
meeting, to call before them at convenient time, two out of every Occupation in
the Town, and confer with them how the charges may be levied, and the same two
to be of this Company, or other of the best sort of every occupation.

Thomas Blashfield. Richard Far. Thomas Cauland. William Poughnell. Richard
Rascoll. Thomas Langford. Richard Bailey.

In pursuance of which we also found, there was delivered out of the Treasury
to Mr. Bailiffs, the very same day, 10 l. and the 18 of April fol. 10 l. 19 s.
2 d. more, toward defraying the charges of such Preparations, as the said Town
made, upon that solemn occasion.

As to the manner used at the observation of the Feast by a Knight beyond Sea,
we have an instance in Robert Earl of Leicester, Grimston's Hist. of the
Netherlands, page 982.
Lieutenant for Queen Elizabeth, Governor and Captain General of the United
Provinces, who kept the Celebration of St. Georges Feast in the Netherlands An.
Dom. 1586. of which we have met with these broken Memorials.

He had a Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Scutcheon of the Order impailed with the Sovereigns Arms, fixed to the front of
his House, so also upon the back of her Stall in the Church; and his own Arms
at the back of his Stall.

He Proceeded on Horseback to the Church, William Seager, then Portcullis
Pursuivant at Arms, (by his appointment) riding before him wearing a Collect.
W. le N. Cl.
King of Arms Coat, which John Cock Lancaster Herald, (both of them See Wevers
funeral Monuments, p. 676. and 682. and MS. fol. pene^ E. W. G. fol. 144.
employed to attend the said Earl) had brought over thither, for that days
service, but it seems he dyed a little before St. Georges Day.

After Sermon, Portcullis proceeded before him to the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Offering, which the Earl made for the Sovereign and returned, and stood a
little while before the Sovereign's Stall, and then Offered for himself; which
done, he returned by the lower end of the Desk to his own Stall, with his due
obeysances.

Service being ended, he returned to his own Lodgings, and there dined.

At the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
second Course, Portcullis went up before it, between the Gentleman Usher, and
proclaimed only the Sovereign's Style and retired; during which Proclamation,
the Earl (sitting at a Table alone, on the left hand of the State) and diverse
eminent persons (who sat at a side Table) stood up and were bare.

The Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Sovereign's Trencher was laid under the State, and the whole Service performed
to that, with due Reverence, by diverse of her Servants there present, and the
Earl took his meat therefrom, as by the by.

Lastly, a learned Io. Leslaeus de rebus gestis Scotorum, Lib. 9. p. 439. Romae
1578. quarto, vide Iohannem Iac. Chester. in sais luminibus novis praerogativis
ad Vindictas Hispanica^. ^umine 13. p. 439.
Scotch Historian takes notice, that King James the Fifth, having been honored,
not only with the Order of the Garter by King Henry the Eighth, but next with
that other Order of the Golden Fleece (by the Emperor Charles the Fifth) and
not long after of St. Michael (by the French King Francis the First) kept the
several Feasts of the Patrons of those Orders, with great Solemnity an. 1534.
And to signify to the several Sovereign's, as also to proclaim to the world,
the great account he made of those Honors, he not only adorned himself on those
solemn Festivals, with the Ensigns of each Order, but fixed on the Gates of his
Palace at Lithgoe his Royal Arms, encompassed with the Collars of each of them,
together with that of St. Andrew, Patron of the Kingdom of Scotland.

SECT. V. Dispensation for Absence granted during life.
SOmetimes upon special favor of the Sovereign, and where Age or Infirmity of
any of the Knights-Companions has been made known to him by Petition, they
have obtained Letters of Dispensation for absence, not only from the Feast
approaching (of which we have Chap. 19. Sect. 2.
before discoursed) but also during life. Such indulgence was granted to the
Lord MS. in Offic. Arm. [ H. 12.]
Dacres an. 26. H. 8. and to the Earl of Derby an. 14. Car. I. both which
Precedents we have thought fit to insert in the Number. CLXXXI. and CLXXXII.
Appendix. The like with that to the said Earl of Derby, was likewise granted
to the Earl of Moulgrave, and under the same date, but both upon the following
conditions, as they are contained in a Decree passed in Chapter, the 18. of
April an. 13. Car. 1. which was this,

Rows Iournal, page 10. vide Lib. R. page 119.
That no Dispensation shall be granted, but with condition, that the absent
Knight shall send to Garter King of Arms, for his Scutcheons, at the same time
that he sends his excuse, and Petition for Dispensation. And shall solemnly
keep in his own House or abiding, the Feast, with all the sacred Rites and
Ceremonies, in his Robes and other Ornaments, if health permit; and in case of
Sickness, upon his Bed, according to the ancient Statutes.

This Act was thought of so great importance to be observed, that the then
Chancellor was commanded to transcribe and Rows I^urnal, page 10.
send it (with the Sovereign's pleasure) to each of the Knights-Companions
within the Realm, not only to remind those, who were present at making the
Decree, but also to inform the rest of the Fellowship, who were absent, of what
had been done.

The execution of which command was accompanied with a See before page 486.
Postscript of a Letter, whereby he acquainted them with the Penalties they
should be liable to, for their neglect and omission of due observation.

And we find, that in the following year, when the Sovereign (being at Berwick)
had prorogued the Feast to Windesor, the Letters of Notice, which Sir James
Palmer (then Deputy Chancellor) issued out, to the Knights-Companions,
contained a Clause to the foresaid purpose; Palm. Iourn. pro an. 1639. page 8.
That those Knights-Companions, who could not then come to Windesor, should
take notice of the prorogation, and solemnize the said Feast at their own
Houses.

CHAP. XXIV. THE Degradation OF A Knight-Companion.
SECT. I. Of the Degradation of a Knight-Batchellor.
SO heinous an Offense as that of High Treason, has been thought deserving the
loss, not only of Life and Estate, but Honor also: and thereupon when Sentence
has been to be given against a Knight, for so great a Crime, sometimes
Degradation from his Degree has preceded: and this as our Learned Seldom
faith, is done Titles of Honor, page 787.
as a respect of Honor to Knighthood in general; lest so much ignominy as
accompanied the Judgment for such an Offense, should lie on any that were a
Knight, when he suffered it.

In the Example of Sir Andrew Harclay, created Earl of Carlisle by King Edward
the Second, whose Degradation is reported in the Page 788.
Titles of Honor, it may be observed, that the principal part of the Ceremony
was, a solemn taking from him his Sword, and chopping off his Spurs, the chief
Ensigns of his Honor. And in that of Sir Ralph Gray, an. 4. E. 4. (one of whose
Crimes was for MS. in Offic. Arm. [ L. 15.] fol. 33.
betraying Sir John Astley, a Knight of this Order, into the hands of the Kings
Enemies, where he remained Prisoner for many years) besides the striking off
his Spurs, the tearing his Coat of Arms from his Body, and putting on another
Coat, whereon his Arms were reverst, was appointed to be done; but by the Kings
favor, the Judgment was not pronounced: To these, Sir William Segar adds the
Honor Milit. and Civil. Lib. 2. cap. 13.
bruising every piece of the Knights Armor, and casting it aside: beside which,
some Lib. 2. C. 4.
other Ceremonies of Degradation are mentioned by him, to have been more
anciently used.

SECT. II. The manner of Degra^ing a Knight-Companion of the Garter.
THE Ensigns of this Noble Order, are not to be withdrawn from a
Knight-Companion so long as he lives, unless he be found guilty of some of
those points of Reproach, set down in King Henry the Eighth's Art. 8.
Statutes, to wit, Heresy, Treason, or flying from Battle: We also find, that
Prodigality was made a fourth Point, where a Knight had so wasted his Estate,
that he was not able to support his Honor. And the not being a Gentleman of
Blood, both by Father and Mother, was the pretense, for devesting William Lord
Paget, an. 6. E. 6. But Felony comes not within the compass of this Statute,
as not being particularly specified among the Reproaches there reckoned up, and
so it was adjudged in a Chapter held the 6. of July an. 14. Iac. R. in the case
of MS. penes E. W. G. fol. 153.
Robert Earl of Somerset, then lately condemned for that Fact; whereupon his
Hatchments were not removed.

When a Knight-Companion is found guilty of any the Offenses mentioned in King
Henry the Eighth's Statutes, he is usually degraded at the next Chapter after;
and therefore, where the Sovereign intends to have this Ceremony put in
Execution, after he has acquainted the Knight-Companion therewith, he commands
Garter to attend such of them, as are appointed to go to the convict Knight,
who in a solemn manner, first takes from him his George and Ribband, and then
his Garter. And at the following Feast of St. George (or sooner if the
Sovereign appoint) Publication of his Crimes and degradation is made by Garter
(a Appendix, Number. CLXXXIII.
Warrant in the mean time issuing out to him, for taking down the Achievements
of the Knight) in the ensuing order.

First Garter, in his Lib. N. page 316. vide Collect. A. V. W.
Coat of Arms, (usually before Morning Prayer, if the Grand Feast, or Feast of
Installation be then held) standing on the highest step ascending to the Brazen
Desk, placed in the middle of the Choire in St. George's Chapel at Windesor,
the Officers of Arms standing about him, and the MS. vet. pen. G. O. Y. f. 71.
b.
Black Rod also present, reads aloud the Instrument for Publication of the
Knights Degradation; a Precedent whereof we have placed in the Number. CLXXXIV.
Appendix.

In which form, run all other Instruments in this kind, that have come to our
view, and only varied in the Preamble, where the nature of the Offense is
particularly set down for which he has deserved Degradation.

This being read, Lib. N. loco citat.
one of the Heralds deputed thereunto (a Ladder being raised to the backside of
the convict Knights Stall, and he, in his Coat of Arms, placed there before
hand) when Garter pronounces the words, Expelled and put from among the Arms,
etc. Collect. A. V. W.
takes his Crest, and violently casts it down into the Choire, and after that
his Banner and Sword, and when the Publication is read out, all the Officers of
Arms spurn the Achievements out of the Choire into the Body of the Church,
first the Sword, then the Banner, and last of all the Crest, so out of the
West-Door, thence to the Bridge, and over into the Ditch, and thus was it done
at the degradation of Ibid.
Edward Duke of Buckingham the 8 of June, an. 13 H. 8.

In reference to the degradation of Thomas Percy Earl of Northumberland, he was
first MS. in Offic. Arm. [ M. 6.] fol. 85.
Proclaimed Traitor (the 26 of November an. 12 Eliz.) at Windesor Castle: which
Proclamation was directed to the Constable of the Castle, and made by sound of
a Trumpet and the voice of an Herald, other of his Fellows assisting: and on
the day following, the Sentence of his degradation was published, and Chester
Herald (after Rouge Croix Pursuivant had read the Sentence) threw down the
Achievements, Ibid.
first his Banner, next his Sword, then his Crest, and lastly his Helm and
Mantlets, which Garter, assisted by the Officers of Arms, spurned out of the
West-Door of the Chapel into the Castle Ditch.

But in the case of Lib. C. p. 145^
Robert Earl of Essex (25 of May, an. 43 Eliz.) his Achievements were only
thrown down; and those of Ibid. page 153.
Henry Lord Cobham (12 Febr. an. 1 Iac. Reg.) only spurned out of the Church
Door, but by the Kings Clemency not into the Ibid. page 153.
Ditch.

But Degradation was not alone thought sufficient, and therefore an. 32 H. 8.
it was considered in Chapter, Lib. N. p. 283.
what course should ^e taken with the Names of such of the Order, as were
convicted of High Treason, and whether they should remain in the Registers, or
be razed out; for it seemed just, that Traitors, who had deserved to have their
Achievements disgracefully thrown down, should also have their Actions and
Names extinguished, and the Books wherein they were entered, to be esteemed as
polluted.

This being debated before the Sovereign: He, keeping a mean between both
extremes, determined, Ibid.
That wheresoever the Actions and Names of such Offenders should be found,
these words [ vah Proditor] should be written in the Margent; by which means
the Registers would be preserved fair, and not defaced with razures and blots.

SECT. III. Of Restoration into the Order after Degradation.
SOme of the Knights-Companions, who have injuriously suffered Deprivation of
the Ensigns, and Degradation from the Order, have lived to enjoy the Honor of
Restoration, and both re-elected and re-invested, and their Achievements
again set up, as were the Lord Pagits, an. 1 Mar. and the Marquess of
Northampton's, an. 1 Eliz. whose Cases we have Page 28^ ^ and 287.
before Reported.

Another Instance there is of Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, who being Degraded
by King Edward the Sixth, was, upon Queen Maries's coming to the Crown,
restored into this Noble Fellowship, as will fully appear by the Order for his
Restoration, which was this,

By the Queen.

Trusty and wellbeloved we greet you well; And whereas our Right Trusty and
right entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor the Duke of Norfolk, for the good
and valiant service by him of long time done to the King our Father, of most
famous memory King Henry the Eight, as well here within the Realm as abroad
with Foreign Princes, both in Peace and in War, and in respect of other his
good qualities and virtues, was by our said Father elected into the Company of
the most Honorable Order of the Garter, and duly invested in the same, from
which nevertheless afterward, in the time of our late Brother King Edward the
Sixth, whom God assoil, the said Duke was by our said late Brother and other
the Companions of our said Order of the Garter, through wrong information and
accusation clearly expelled and removed, and his Hatchments to his no small
slander and dishonor openly cast down, and taken from the Stall appointed for
him in our Chapel at Windesor. We let you wet, that we, minding to do Justice
to all men, have sythence our coming to the Government of the Realm, called a
Chapter for the redress of the Injuries aforesaid, and such like, and at the
same holden at our Manor of St. James the 27. day of Sept. last, by the advice
and consent of the Companions of our said Order, have restored the said Duke of
Norfolk to his former room and place, among other the Companions of our said
Order, as one that was injuriously put from the same, wherefore like as we have
willed him to use and wear the Garter, Collar, George, Robes, and other the
Apparel of our said Order, in such sort as he was wont to do before his said
wrongful deprivation. So have we also thought good to will and require both you
the Register of our said Order, to cancel and utterly to put out of your
Register all Writings, Records, or other mynyments making mention of the said
deviation: And you also Garter King of Arms for our said Order, to see his
Hatchments honorably set up in the place appointed for them, and his Banner to
be of such Arms as his Father bare and had set up aforetime, being late Knight
of the said Order, there to remain and continue among the Hatchments of other
our Companions of our said Order, according to the ancient Ordinances and
landable usages heretofore accustomed, at the seting up whereof, our Pleasure
is these our Letters shall be openly read, for a more plain Declaration of our
pleasure in the premises. And these our Letters shall be to you and either of
you, for the doing of the premises, and every part thereof a sufficient Warrant
and discharge.

Given under our Signet of our said Order, at our Palace of Westminster the 7.
of March, the first year of our Reign. To our Trusty and Well-beloved the Dean
of our Chapel at Windesor, Register of our Order of the Garter, and Sir
Gilbert Dethick alias Garter Knight King at Arms for our said Order, and to
either of them.



CHAP. XXV. Honors PAID TO DECEASED Knights-Companions.
SECT. I. Of the celebration heretofore of Masses, for the defunct
Knights-Companions.
WE observe it to have been the Custom in all Religious, and most Military
Orders, that, A. Men^^ Disq. 16. n. 8.9, etc.
when any of the Knights departed this life, the several Members of them should
contribute their devotions, for the benefit of their departed Souls, according
to their different qualifications; some in celebrating M^sses, or causing them
to be celebrated; and others in the recitation of Divine Offices, and
Almsgiving; as it were to satisfy the World of the honor they had, from their
being enrolled in their several Fraternities and Societies.

But the Order of the Garter has outvy'd all others in this particular; for as
the reputation which the Knights-Companions, while living, derived from their
admission into so renowned and illustrious a Body, specially Knights-Subjects,
who were thereby advanced to a Fellowship with their King and Supreme Lord, and
made Companions to Emperors, Kings, and Princes, was very great; so were the
several Honors paid to their memory after their decease, particularly in the
Royal Chapel of St. George at Windesor, very remarkable; not including the
Solemnities at their public Funerals, many times happening elsewhere; and these
we find reducible to five heads. (1.) The number of Masses celebrated for their
Souls departed. (2.) The fastening Plates of their Arms, at the back of their
Stalls. (3.) Offering up their Achievements at the Altar, and (4.) Depositing
Mantles in the Chapter House at Windesor.

As to the celebrating of Masses for the deceased Knights-Companions, though it
might suffice to say, that it was done consonantly to the persuasion of those
times, yet we shall not think it much to give the reasons thereof, as we find
them laid down in the Preface to the Black-Book of the Order, in direct
relation to this solemn Ceremony performed for them.

Lib. N. p. 8.
It was the general opinion then, That Monasteries, Convents, and Colleges,
were founded out of this motive, that, among devout, charitable, and well
disposed Christians, there should be a continual harmony of Prayer, as well for
the living as the dead. For the Living, that, in Peace and War, they might
manage all their Affairs with piety, prudence, and good success: For the Dead,
that having obtained remission, they might reign together in eternal bliss.
Ibid. page 9.
And not knowing what dangers might surround them, the living thought
themselves obliged the more servently to assist them with their Prayers;
supposing it uncertain, whether they were in glory or torment. Page 11.
That by pious Prayers, they might endeavor to turn Gods vengeance, due for
the many sins committed in this life, into clemency; inasmuch as continual
supplication was indeed very prevalent, and might reach the ears of the
Almighty. That this kind of commemoration moved the greatest Princes, to be so
expensive in sumptuous Structures, for the assembling such as should
continually pray therein, as also inferior persons, according to their
abilities, to promote their own and others salvation. And that the Princes
reflecting on the uncertainty of their own lives, and considering, that many
were in their Services cut off, amidst the hazards of War, and how doubtful
such a departure was, endeavored to assist them in the next World, since they
could no longer do it in this; which, if by any thing, was to be performed by
Prayer. Out of these persuasions, that this was availaable, they had their
recourse thereto, and so began to institute persons and places, for the making
of Prayers to that end.

With what has been delivered concerning the motive of this Office for the
dead, it may be also observed, that the Founder of the Order admitted into its
Institution, the commemoration of the departed Souls of the Knights-Companions;
and thereupon it came to be ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art. 17 H 5. Stat. Art. 17
Lib. N. page 223.
That as soon as the Sovereign should have true and certain intelligence brought
him of the Death of any of the Knights-Companions, he should cause to be
celebrated for the Soul of a Defunct Knight a thousand Masses.

And that all the rest of the Knights-Companions might (upon like notice)
contribute to the relief of the Soul of their deceased Fellow and Companion,
the Proportions were in like manner stated in the same Article of the Statutes,
thus.

A Stranger King 800. Masses. The Prince 700. Masses. Every Duke 600. Masses.
Each Earl 300. Masses. Every Baron 200. Masses. And a Knight Batchellour 100.
Masses.

Afterward, when the Titles of Marquess and Viscount were introduced among us,
the proportion of Masses imposed upon the former was 450. as being a Degree of
Dignity between those of a Duke and an Earl, on the latter 250. And the numbers
of all these Masses were Lib. N. p. 97.
rated proportionable to the Fees, enjoined to be paid, for setting up the
Knights-Companions Achievements over their Stalls.

Now to prevent the neglect in performance of this duty incumbent upon the
Sovereign, and surviving Knights-Companions, by this Article of the Statutes;
it was thought fit to set down for penalty, a complete E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H.
5. Stat. Art. 17. and Lib. N. p. 223.
doubling of the number of those Masses, to which at first they were enjoined
(according to their qualities and Degrees) if they were not celebrated within
three Months, after notice given of the deceased Knights Death, as aforesaid.
And if the neglect extended to half a year together, they were obliged, to E.
3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17. and Lib. N. p. 223.
quadruple their number, and E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17. and Lib.
N. p. 223.
so from time to time, until the years end. But if after all this, they should
not within the whole year perform what they were so enjoined; the Statute
further bound them, to E. 3. Stat. Art. 17. H. 5. Stat. Art. 17. and Lib. N. p.
223.
double the Masses from year to year, after the foresaid manner.

But to provide against any omission of the Sovereigns part, it was added to
the Registers Duty, an. 31 H. 8. to Lib. N. page 109.
put the Sovereign in mind, of giving Order herein, if at any time it should
happen, to be forgotten by him; to the end he might forthwith take care to have
the Masses celebrated, according to the said Injunction.

And because it was at length thought convenient, to withdraw this burden from
Stranger Kings and Princes, that branch of the Statute relating to them, was
made null, and in a Chapter held at Windesor, the 8. of May, an. 13 H. 6. the
same was by the Lib. N. p. 91^
Sovereign placed upon himself and his Successors, Sovereigns of this most
Noble Order.

But because all the surviving Knights-Companions, might the better perform
this Injunction, and cause the full number of Masses to be celebrated, care was
taken by the Sovereign to send Letters to every one of them, (at first, as well
to Knights-Strangers as Subjects) immediately after the decease of any Knight,
to signify the time of his Death, and put them in mind of the Injunction, which
the Statutes laid upon them. Of which Letters, some Precedents may be seen in
the Numb. CLXXXV. CLXXXVI. and CLXXXVII.
Appendix.

The difference between those Letters sent to the Knights-Companions beyond
Sea, and these at home, was only this, that in these directed to the latter,
(in regard of their nearness to the Court, and consequently in greater
readiness to appear at an Election.) The Letters contained a summons also, to
come to the Election of a new Knight, on such a day as the Sovereign had
therein appointed.

And it seems it was the custom for those Religious Houses, whether the
Sovereign sent directions, to celebrate either part or all the Masses due to
each deceased Knight, to make a formal Numb. CLXXXVIII.
return in writing, under their Lib. N. page 254.
Common Seal, of what they had done therein: which Certificates, were, also by
the Register, reported in Chapter to the Sovereign or his Lieutenant. For an.
18 H. 8. we find Lib. N. p. 254. and Regist. Chartac. fol. 65.
him acquaint the Sovereigns Lieutenant, with several such Certificates,
signifying the Celebration of 1000. Masses (upon the Sovereigns account) for
each of these Knights defunct; namely the Earls of Lib. N. p. 254. and Regist.
Chartac. fol. 65.
Arundel, Shrewsbury, Essex, and Rutland, the Viscount Fitz-walter, and Lord
Abergaveny, and at other times, (siting the Chapter) there were brought in
Ibid. p. 171.268. and 272.
such like authentic Letters, certifying the celebration of the Masses, for
the Souls of other defunct Knights.

This course of celebrating these Masses for defunct Knights, was constantly
observed and so continued, until the 32 d. year of King Henry the Eighth; at
which time, upon a motion made concerning those suffrages for the Dead, in a
Chapter held in his Palace at Westminster, on the 24 th of May, in the
aforesaid year this Decree passed. Lib. N. p. 283. See also H. 8. Stat^ in
English, Art. 18.
That every one of the Knights-Companions, in lieu of the said Masses, should
for the future, after the Death of any of their Brethren, according to the
rates of their Degrees hereafter mentioned, and immediately upon demand made
for the same, by the Register and Dean of Windesor, or one of them, pay the
several sums of money here specified.

l. s. d. Lib. N. p. 283. See also H. 8. Stats in English, Art. 18.
The Sovereign, 08 06 08. A Stranger King, 06 08 04. The Prince, 05 16 08. A
Duke, 05 00 00. A Marquess, 03 16 00. An Earl, 02 10 00. A Viscount, 01 01 08.
A Baron, 01 13 04. A Batchellor Knight, 00 16 08.

The moneys collected upon this Account (called Obit moneys) were by the
aforesaid Decree, appointed Lib. N. p. 283.
to be distributed and employed in Alms Deeds; of which sort, (as they are
there mentioned) are the Lib. N. p. 283.
reparation of Highways, the relief of the Poor, and other things of like
nature, as the Sovereign should from time to time limit and appoint.

And of the Ibid.
receipt of these sums, and their disbursements, it was also decreed, That the
Dean and Register, or either of them, should yearly in Chapter, present his
Account to the Sovereign under the penalty of Ten pounds, to be employed, for
such like use, for every such default. And, Ibid. p. 284.
that Knight-Companion whose portion did appear to be then unpaid, should by
way of penalty or fine, add unto his former duty, another third part of the
same; and so for every year that he should be behind, to pay a third part more,
than he was at first enjoined to pay, according to the rate before set down.

This charitable distribution, in a Chapter held at Greenwich, the 24. of
April, an. 5. E. 6. was enlarged to the Lib. N. p. 306.
relief and succor of the Poor, where most need was, in the Town of Windesor,
and other Towns, Villages, and Places, at and by the discretion of the Dean of
Windesor, Lib. N. p. 306.
he advising with some honest men, who could best give an account of such as
were truly poor and indigent.

To the bringing in of these Collections, the Sovereigns have sometimes
vouchsafed to cast their eyes, and an. 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. by an Order in
Chapter, a Lib. C. p. 14.
Scedule was appointed to be made, of all the moneys due and in arrear, upon
the decease of Knights-Companions, to the end they might be employed to public
and pious uses.

But though the foresaid Decree was confirmed by Lib. R. p. 87.
King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, yet for many years,
had the Collection of these Obit moneys been neglected, even till the 9. of
King Charles the First; and then the noble Earl of Ibid. page 86.
Portland, inflamed with zeal, for the restoring of so pious a work, did in
full Chapter held at Windesor, on the Ibid. page 83.
5. of Nov. in the aforesaid year, put the Sovereign in mind of the Decrees,
anciently made in this case. Whereupon it was ordained by the Sovereign, with
the consent of all the Knights-Companions present, Ibid. p. 87.
That the said Constitution, so honorable and charitable in it self, and to
which they were all sworn, at their entrance into the Order, should be revived,
and put in practice, and for ever hereafter observed, under the penalty
contained in the Statutes, both toward the Knights that were to pay the same,
and toward the Dean of Windesor, who was to collect it: And further, Ibid. p.
87.
That the same should begin for the five Knights, whose Achievements were at
that Feast offered: that is to say, for the King of Sweden, the Prince Elector
Palatine, the Earls of Northumberland, Banbury, and Rutland. And concerning
Ibid. p. 87.
Stranger Princes, it pleased the Sovereign to express himself, That, as by the
Statutes they are left to perform these payments by themselves, if they would,
so, if the same were not done by them, that them, and thenceforwards the same
should be paid by the Sovereign himself.

The Sovereign, whose total for these five deceased Knights, amounted to 129 l.
3 s. 4 d. caused the same to be paid to Doctor Christopher Wren, the then
Register of the Order: so did the Earls of Arundel and Surry, Salisbury,
Dorset, Holland, Berks, Portland, and Lindsey, the Total of each of theirs
amounting to 12 l. 10. s. But from the rest, (as the said Register himself
complained in his Dated 24. May 1637.
Letters to Sir Tho. Row, the then Chancellor of the Order) all his endeavors
could not obtain their proportions.

Afterward, Ex Collect. Doct. Chr. Wre^ ^aper Ord: Regist.
all the Sums of money, to be collected by virtue of this Decree, (together
with the Knights-Companions duties, at their first entrance into this Order)
were employed, toward the providing Plate for the Altar, within St. George's
Chapel in Windesor Castle; of which we have Chap. 19. Sect. 6.
already treated.

SECT. II. Of fixing on the Stalls, Plates of their Arms, and Styles.
THE next thing, provided for by the Statutes of Institution, was the deceased
Knights Honor; in commemoration whereof, among other things conducing
thereunto, it was ordained, E. 3. Stat. Art. 23 H. 5. Stat. Art. 23
That when any one of the first Founders should dye, there should be made in
metal a Scutcheon of his Arms, with his Helm or Crest, and fastened at the back
of his Stall, for a Ord. Stat. in Bibl. Ha^^on. Art 23.
mark of Honor to him that bore them. E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 2^.
And in like manner, that their Successors, should have a like Scutcheon fixed
on the backs of their Stalls; and to difference them, from those of the first
Founders, they were appointed to be made in bigness, E. 3. H. 5. Stat. Art. 2^.
less than theirs, and to be placed somewhat underneath them.

But this Article relates only to the Knights-Companions, not to the Sovereigns
of this most Noble Order; nor do we find, that any of them had Plates of their
Arms and Styles set upon the back of their Stalls, in manner as is before
prescribed, to the rest of the Knights-Companions.

King Henry the Eighth in his Body of Statutes, alters this Article in three
particulars; first, as to the time of setting up their Plates, he appoints it
to be (not after their death, but) Art. 25.
within a year after the Installation of every Knight-Companion: Secondly, as
to the nature of the Metal, that it may be such Art. 25.
as the Knight shall please himself: And lastly, as to the size, though he also
restrains the Knights Subjects to a lesser, than those of the first Founders,
yet gives he liberty to Knights Strangers, to Art. 25.
use their Plates and fashions at pleasure.

As to the first of these, we find not, but that it has been duly observed.
But the last (the size of the Plates) as will appear upon sight, has been
little regarded: For the very Plates of those Knights, who were installed soon
after the confirmation of these Statutes, and thence downwards, are bigger than
those of the first Founders. As to the other, relating to the Metal they are
off, it is to be acknowledged, that the succeeding Knights-Companions, did
prudently follow the example of their Predecessors, who appointed their Plates
to be of Copper, and thereby unexpectedly defeated the design of Avarice and
Rapine. Of which we have an instance in the Duke of Wirtemberg's Plate, for
that being of Silver and large withal, gave so great a temptation, that in the
late Wars it was forced from the back of the Stall whereto it was fixed, with
some difficulty sure, since they could not get it thence, without carrying away
some part of the Wainscot along with it.

But if the Metal of these Plates, were of small value, the workmanship about
them, was extraordinary, especially of late; the Plate it self being gilt over,
and the colors of the Armory and Supporters richly enamelled: all which,
though it added much luster to the Shield, yet did it nothing contribute to the
advantage of the Thief.

In tract of time, many of these noble and remarkable Memorials were by
sacrilegious hands torn off and imbezelled; which the late Sovereign of ever
pious memory having taken notice of, and desirous to put a stop to a mischief,
not in his power to prevent, as also to preserve the remembrance of the
precedent Knights-Companions, commanded the Dean of Windesor to describe the
Styles of those that remained in a Book, which he accordingly did, and laid it
up in the College. But what became of this Book, our most diligent enquiry,
could never find out. So that in May, An. Dom. 1659. by the civil permission of
Colonel Whichcott, then Governor of Windesor Castle, all we could do, was, to
draw the Arms and copy out the Styles, engraven on the Plates, then remaining
(whilst Mr. Wineslaus Holler was employed by us to take several Prospects of
the Castle and Chapel) from which, we have drawn these following observations.

First, That for many years after the Institution of the Order, the Plate
whereon the Shield was engraved, bore no other Inscription, but the deceased
Knights name set at the foot thereof, under the Scutcheon of his Arms.
Afterward his Chief Title of Honor began to be added, though now and then in
these first and elder times, both were omitted, as also their Crests. But about
the beginning of King Henry the Eighth's Reign, not only the Knights chief
Title, but all other his Titles of Dignity, whether Honorary, or Officiary,
(and every thing in that kind due) were drawn together in one Inscription,
concluding with that of Knight of this most Noble Order, and which, about the
same time, the Knights-Companions used to insert into both public and private
Instruments of writing, wherein any of them were concerned, a custom observed
by the Knights of other Sovereign Orders abroad. For in an MS. in Offic. Arm.
M. 14. fol. 49. b.
Instrument, dated at Bulloign, the 20 th of Febr. an. 1549. by the Noblemen
and others that were appointed to treat of a Peace, between King Edward the
Sixth, and the French King Henry the Second, we find, that such of them, as
were Knights of the Orders of either Kingdom, had the additions of their
Orders, (as also the Register of the Order of St. Michael, that title of his
Office) joined to their other Titles, in this manner.

John Earl of Bedford, Knights of the Order.

William Pagit, Knight also of the Order.

Francis de Mountmorency Seignior de Rochepot, Knight of the Order of France.

Gaspard de Colligny Seignior de Chastillon, Knight also of the Order.

Guilliame Rochetell Seignior de Sassy, one also of the French Kings Council,
chief Secretary, and Register of the Order.

At first, the Knights-Companions gave their Paternal Coats of Arms, singly and
without any Quarterings, but toward the beginning of King Henry the Fifths
Reign, they began to add their Quarterings, as may appear from the Scutcheons
of Hugh Lord Burnell, who died Lib* N. p. 67.
an. 9 H. 5. Sir Lewis Robessart Lord Bourchier, Robert Lord Willoughby, and
others.

Yet was not the same generally used, but left to the pleasure of the
Knights-Companions: But of latter times, this very thing was thought of such
concernment, and honor, that where a Knight has been elected, who wanted
Quarterings, the Sovereign has been pleased to grant him another Coat of Arms,
to quarter with his Paternal Coat, lest otherwise his Banner (which ought to
hang over his Stall) should seem too naked: as in the Case of Robert Viscount
Rochester, and Thomas Earl of Kelley, in the Reign of King James.

Shortly after the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, the Knights
compassed their Shields, with the Royal Garter; and thereon (if Noblemen)
placed the Coronet belonging to their Dignity, continuing the use ever since.
Thus adorned do we find the Scutcheon of Charles Duke of Burgundy, elected in
the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and yet we do not observe it used in all
the Reign of King Henry the Seventh. For though a Plate for Frank van Hall, (a
Knight elected by the Founder) is hitherto standing in his Stall at Windesor,
surrounded with a Garter, yet is not this Plate the workmanship of that Age,
but engraved and set up of late times; as may easily be observed, from the work
it self.

As touching Supporters; it is true, we observe two Plates to which Supporters
are added, the one of John Beaufort the first Duke of Somerset of that name,
elected an. 20 H. 6. the other of Anthony Woodvill Earl Rivers, elected an. 5.
E. 4. and besides these, until the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, there is not
one other example. But then it grew into a common usage; as also the ingraving
their peculiar Mottoes or Devises upon the Plates.

SECT. III. The Offering of Achievements.
A Third honor done to the defunct Knight, is a most solemn Offering up of his
Achievements at the High Altar, according to the magnificence of so great an
Order; namely the Banner of his Arms, his Sword, his Helmet, and Crest, with
its Mantlings: all which had been set up over his Stall, when he was Installed.

The Ceremony of Offering these Ensigns, does not appear to have been so
Ordained at the Institution of the Order, but rather an additional honor,
instituted by King Henry the Fifth, and the manner and order thereof, set down
in the 14 th Article of his body of Statutes.

This solemn Ceremony is local to the Chapel of St. George, within the Castle
of Windesor, and not to be celebrated, until certain notice be given to the
Sovereign of the Knights-Companions Death, or that he shall receive a
Certificate thereof. This appears in the case of the Duke of Ferrara; where at
the Feast of St. George, an. 20 H. 7. the vulgar report run for current, that
he was dead, nevertheless Lib. N. p. 178. See also Tho. Wriothe^^eys's old MS.
penes W. le N. Cl. page 7.
because the Sovereign had not then received any Certificate of the same, his
Achievements were not Offered up at that Feast.

There fell out a question, at the Feast of St. George held at Windesor, the 23
d. of May, an. 1 E. 6. which held some debate, viz. Collect prafat. W. le N.
Cl. Vide etiam MS. 4. penes E. W. G. fol. ^^.
whether the Achievements of King Henry the Eighth, which yet hung over the
Sovereigns Stall, should be taken down and Offered at the Mass of Requiem
ensuing, or not? in regard his Banner, Sword, Helm, and Crest, with Mantles,
had been offered up the 16 th of Febr. before, at his Interment within that
Chapel: whereupon it was determined, Collect prafat. W. le N. Cl. Vide etiam
MS. 4. penes E. W. G. fol. ^^.
That the said Achievements should not again be Offered, but remain over the
Sovereigns Stall for his Son King Edward the Sixth.

The Relator for justifying the legality of this determination, says, there
was found a like Precedent, in the case of King Henry the Sixth, who lies
buried in that Chapel; but we suppose him mistaken, and that instance (being
in truth much different from that of King Henry the Eighth,) not well
considered by him: For the case was this; When King Edward the Fourth came to
the Crown, he thought it unfit, that the Achievements of King Henry the Sixth
(who could not be accounted Sovereign of this most Noble Order, because no
longer King of England) should be continued over his Stall, They therefore by
the express command of King Edward the Fourth, signified by Lib. N. page 126.
Letters sent to his Deputy and the Knights-Companions, were by Garter taken
down and carried out of the Choire into the Vestry, and, in their place were
set up the new Achievements of King Edward the Fourth, and this was done at
the Feast of St. George held at Windesor Lib. N. page 126.
an. 1. E. 4. and long before the Death of King Henry the Sixth, which when it
happened, he was first buried at Chertsey Abbey in Surrey, and by King Concilia
Britann. Vol. 2. p. 712. and 713.
Richard the Thirds Command Reinterred on the Southside of the High Altar, in
St. Georges Chapel at Windesor, and therefore this cannot suit with King Henry
the Eighths Case, whose Achievements were not taken down at all.

But when the Sovereigns of this most Noble Order are not interred at Windesor,
then are their Achievements offered up at the next ensuing Feast, according to
the usual manner, as were those of Queen Elizabeth, which the Blew Book notes
to be done at Lib. C. p. 152 vide etiam MS. fol. penes E. W. G fol. 155.
Morning Prayer, the 11. of July, an. 1. Iac. R. The Banner being offered by
the Earl of Nottingham Lord Admiral (then the Sovereign's Lieutenant) and the
Lord Buckhurst, Lord Treasurer; the Sword by the Earls of Shrewsbury, and
Cumberland; and the Helm and Crest, by the Earls of Northumberland, and
Worcester; and also of King James her Successor, an. MS. pen. Ed. Fauconbridge
genesis
1 Car. 1. both these Sovereigns being buried at Westminster.

As to the time for performing this Ceremony, it was ordained to be on the Lib.
N. p. 66. vide H. 8. Stat. Art. 12.
Morrow after the Feast, when the Lib. N. p. 66. vide H. 8. Stat. Art. 12.
Mass was sung, for the soul of the Knights-Companions, and of all the Faithful
deceased; and H 5 Stat. Art. 14. vide porro Collect. W. le N. Cl. and MS. in
Offic. Armor. [ H. 2. fol. 8. b.]
before the Offering of Money. Thus was it ordered even, in the Lib. N. p. 67.
first precedent we have of this solemn Ceremony, and so was it duly and
constantly performed in succeeding times, till that of the Reformation, at
which the Mass of Requiem being abolished, this Solemnity was nevertheless
performed in the Morning Service on the Morrow, immediately after the
Offertory. But after Queen Elizabeth had removed the Feasts of St. George from
Windesor, and left those of Installation only to be held there, that Solemnity
was commonly dispatched in one day, and the Achievements of the defunct Knights
offered, before they went out of the Choire, as in the 16. year of her Reign,
at the Installation of the Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 29.
Earls of Derby and Penbroke, Ex Collect. R. C. Cl. fol. 29.
when as soon as the Morning Service was ended, in which the Ceremony of
Installation was performed, the Commissioners, appointed for that Solemnity,
came down from their Stalls, and offered the Atchievments of the Earl of Derby,
Lord William Howard of Effingham, and Lord Chandos.

And this was the first time, we observe this Ceremony to have been translated
from the Morrow after the Feast of St. George, to any other time, and the
ancient rule (as to the time) being thus broken, was never after restored, but
Ib. page 33. vide etiam lib. C. p. 111.121.124.135.140.164.
generally thence forward, the Offering of the defunct Knights Atchievments was
performed the very same Morning, wherein the Elect-Knights were Installed. For
Ib. page 33. vide etiam lib. C. p. 111.121.124.135.140.164.
the Installation being fully completed, toward the end of the second
Service, viz. at the time of the Offertory, the Atchievments were offered,
after which, succeeded the Offering of Money.

And yet once, when the Solemnity of Installation was celebrated at Evening
Prayer, being that of Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and John Casimire
Prince Palatine of the Rhyne, the 13. of January an. 25. Eliz. Lib. C. p. 90.
immediately after their Proctors had taken possession of their Stalls, and an
Anthem been sung, the Atchievments of Lib. C. p. 90.
Maximilian the Emperor, Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Francis Duke of Montmorency,
Henry Earl of Arundel, and Walter Earl of Essex, were with wonted honor, as the
Statutes of the Order required, severally Offered; but not without the sad and
sorrowful view of all the standers by.

Sometime before the day was thus changed, an intermixture of both the
Offerings together, viz. of Money and Atchievments began to be introduced; when
after the Offertory was read, the Sovereign's Lieutenant descended from his
Stall, and proceeded to the Altar, and there Offered both Gold and Silver for
the Sovereign, and so returned to his Seat; after which, the Offering of the
defunct Knights Achievements began, and that Ceremony being ended, the
Sovereign's Lieutenant proceeded again to the Altar, and there offered Money
for himself; and lastly, all the rest of the Knights-Companions present offered
Money in order. Thus we find these Ceremonies managed MS. fol. penes praef. W.
le N. Cl. fol. 13.
an. 5. Eliz. at the Offering of the Achievements of the Lord Gray, and an.
MS. f. 18. b.
6. Eliz. when the Achievements of the Earls of Westmerland and Rutland, and
the Lord Paget, were offered; the Earl of Arundel being the Sovereign's
Lieutenant at both these Feasts. But not long after, this course was altered in
part, and the Ex Collect. praef. R. C. Cl. f. 25. sub. an. 14. Eliz.
Lieutenant Offered not for the Sovereign, till after such time as the
Achievements of the defunct had been completely offered.

And albeit the day was thus changed, for performance of this Ceremony, yet was
not the Ceremony it self begun till after the Installation was finished, that
Solemnity having at all times the precedence; until an. MS. fol. pen. E. W. G.
Et Lib. C. p. 173.178.
9. Iac. R. when he, observing a kind of incongruity in the order of the
Ceremony, namely to Install a new Knight (and who, being thus installed,
frequently became one of those Knights, that offered part of the defunct
Knights Atchievments, as may be seen in diverse and sundry Examples) before his
Predecessor had been fully discharged of his Stall, gave order for Offering the
Atchievments of Ibid.
Sir Henry Lea, the Lord Scroop, Viscount Bindon, and the Earl of Dunbar,
first, and before the Instalment of the Elect Knights, Charles Duke of York,
Tho. Earl of Arundel, and Robert Viscount Rochester, which was accordingly
performed; as also at the Installation of Ibid.
Frederick Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Henry Prince of Orange, an. 10.
Iac. R.

And two years after, at the Ibid.
Installation of the Earl of Rutland, Sir George Villars (afterward created
Duke of ^uckingham) and Viscount Lisle, the Lord Admiral Ibid.
going out of the Choire, to fetch in the said Earl of Rutland, to his
Installation (according to the old manner, before the Offering of the
Atchievments, and as had been done the Lib. C. p. 184.
year before) the Sovereign remanded him, and again MS.
ordered, That the Atchievments of the Earl of Shrewsbury should be first
Offered, before any of the Elect Knights should be Installed.

Not long after, it was thought convenient, to perform this Ceremony on the Eve
of the Feast, presently after the first Vespers begun, and next to proceed on
with the Installation of the Elect Knight, whereby as much as possible, the
Stalls of the Knights-Companions might be supplied, and consequently the places
among them filled up, in all the rest of the Solemnities of the Feast: Thus was
it ordered, at the Installation of Lib. 3. p. 6.
Marquess Hamilton, an. 21. Iac. R. when the Atchievments of the Earl of
Exceter were Offered. In like manner, the following year, were the Atchievments
of the Ibid. page 18.
Duke of Lenox first offered, and an. 4. Car. 1. those of the Ibid. page 40.
Duke of Brunswick, and the Earls of Suffolk and Leicester, before the King of
Sweden, Prince of Orange, and Earl of Suffolk were installed; and at Ibid. page
61.84.127 vide etiam Palmers Iourn. pro an. 1639. page 19.
all times afterward during that pious Kings Reign, the Offering of
Atchievments was the first Ceremony performed on the Eve of the Feast, next
after the decease of a Knight, though no Installation followed; as were those
of the Earl of Carlisle, an. 13. Car. 1. and of the Earl of Kelly, in the 15.
year of the same Sovereign.

But if at that time any of the Elect-Knights were introduced into the Choire,
before the Offering of Atchievments began, they were appointed to Lib. R. p.
90. sub finem.
stand there, under the Stalls designed for them, till that Ceremony was
finished.

Thus the practice continued, of Offering the defunct Knights Atchievments,
before the Ceremony of Installation began; from the 9. year of King James until
an. 15. of the present Sovereign, when it was performed, at the time anciently
accustomed; for the Prince of Denmark (by his Proctor Sir George Carteret) and
the Duke of Monmouth were both Installed, before the first Vespers began, and
the Atchievments of Bernard de Foix Duke of Espernon, and Edward Count Palatine
of the Rhyne, were not Offered till the Morrow after the Feast day, immediately
before Divine Service began; so also was it observed at the Feast held an. 23.
Car. 2.

As to the manner and order of this Ceremony, among other Institutions of King
Henry the Fifth, it is thus appointed, H 5. Stat. Art. 14. vide porto Lib. N.
page 66.
That, as often as through the vacancy of any Stall, the Swords, Helms, with
the rest of the Achievements ought to be Offered, the Sword of the deceased
Knight shall be first Offered, being carried up to the high Altar, by two of
the Knights-Companions, whom the Sovereign or his Deputy shall assign to that
purpose, and afterward the Helm, with the Crest and Mantlings (for which we
sometimes find one general word [ Lib. N. page 101. and C page 111.140. and 163.
Insignia] used) by two other Knights-Companions, named also by the Sovereign
or his Deputy; and this Offering is to be made for them, Lib. R. p. 84.
in the order as they were Installed, not as they dyed.

But of the Offering of a defunct Knights Banner, we find no express mention,
till the 18. year of King Henry the Seventh, at which time the Lib. N. p. 175.
Banner of the Lord Brook was Offered, by Sir Edward Poynings, and Sir Richard
Pool; his Sword by the Earl of Surrey and Lord Strange; and in the last place
his Helm, with its Appendices, by the before named Sir Edward Poynings, and Sir
Richard Pool: But afterward the direction for Offering this Ensign of the
defunct Knights honor, was taken into King Henry the Eighth's Art. 12.
body of Statutes.

And note, that since the Offering of the Banner was introduced, it was (in the
order of Ceremony, and according to the before mentioned Precedent) to be
offered Ibid.
first, and so has it been observed; only once we find this course inverted,
viz. an. Lib. R. p. 18.
22. Iac. R. (but upon what account there is no mention) where, at the Offering
of the Duke of Lenox his Achievements, the Helm and Crest were offered in the
first place, the Sword in the second, and the Lib. R. p. 18.
Banner in the third.

Immediately after the entrance of the before mentioned Constitution of King
Henry the Fifth, in the Black Book, a Precedent for the order of this Ceremony
does also follow, which extended it self to future times, and was thus, Lib. N.
p. 67.
On the Morrow after the Feast of St. George ( an. 9. H. 5.) the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions assembled according to custom, to celebrate the Mass pro
defunctis, at which time the Sword of Thomas Duke of Clarence (who was slain at
Trussels Hist. page 92.
Bougy-bridge, in his return out of Anjou, on Ibid. p. 122.
Easter Eve preceding) was born to the Altar and offered up, by John Duke of
Bedford, and Humfrey Duke of Gloucester (Brothers to the defunct Duke) but his
Helm with its Appendices, were offered by the hands of the Sovereign, and the
said Duke of Bedford.

Besides this honor, thus paid to the deceased Duke of Clarence, there past the
like at that time, upon several other defunct Knights-Companions, namely on
Lib. N. p. 67.
Sir John Gray, whose Sword was offered up by Sir Thomas Erpingham, and Sir
Walter Hungerford, and his Helm and Crest by Richard Earl of Warwick, and the
Lord Fitz Hugh; and next on the Lib. N. p. 67.
Lord Burnell, whose Sword was offered by Sir Lewis Robessart, and Sir Simon
Felbrig; and his Helm, etc. by Sir John Cornwall, and Sir John Robessart. In
the fourth place, the Sword of the Lib. N. p. 67.
Lord Cameux, was offered up by Sir Lewis Robessart, and Lib. N. p. 67.
S^^ Here Tank Clux, and his Helm by Sir John Cornwall, and Sir John Robessart.

This solemn Ceremony being finished, in the order as is set down; the
Sovereign and Knights-Companions presently after decreed; Ibid.
That the Rites to be observed at the Offering of Achievements, should for the
future be in the foresaid manner performed.

The appointment of the Statute is before noted to be, H. 5. Art. 14. Lib. N.
page 66.
that the Sovereign shall nominate and assign the Knights-Companions, who are
severally to perform this Ceremony; and so is the direction set down in Art. 12.
King Henry the Eighth's Statutes. But generally heretofore, so few of the
Knights-Companions have used to attend the Feasts of Installation (at which
time most commonly were the Achievements of the defunct Knights offered) that
there has not been much choice, nay, for the most part not enough for the
enterchange of all the Achievements, but that those who have offered the
Banner, have been constrained to assist at the Offering, if not of the Sword,
yet of the Helm and Crest.

Nay, yet less, for the Feast of St. George an. 1. E. 4. was solemnized at
Windesor, by two Knights-Companions only, viz. Viscount Bourchier, the
Sovereign's Deputy, and the Lord Berners, at which time there being the
Achievements of six deceased Knights to be offered; namely the Dukes of York
and Buckingham, the Earls of Salisbury and Shrewsbury, of Viscount Beaumont and
the Lord Scales, these Lib. N. page 126.
two Knights-Companions performed the whole Ceremony, according to the ancient
Custom.

Moreover, an. 32. H. 6. there were but Ibid. p. 111.
three Knights-Companions that then held the Feast, namely the Duke of
Buckingham Deputy to the Sovereign, the Lord Sudely, and Viscount Bourchier;
the Ibid. p. 112.
two latter of which offered both the Sword and Helm of the Earl of Salisbury,
the Duke of Buckingham not enterchanging.

But notwithstanding these Examples, at another time, viz. an. 8. H. 7. Ibid.
p. 171.
because the number of the Knights-Companions, present at the Feast, were fewer
than the H. 8. Stat. Art. 14 and Lib. N. page 171.
Statute required; therefore the Offering of Achievements was then prorogued;
John Lord Denham, then Lord Treasurer of England, being President, and only the
Lord Scroop joined with him.

Again, when the number of Knights-Companions present, have been sufficient to
perform all the Ceremony severally, yet do we not observe the same anciently
executed by Knights-Companions, according to the series of their Stalls, which
is an argument, that the Rule of the Statute took place, and that the
Sovereign's choice and nomination, rather than the Knights seniority in the
Order, was observed. But since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the
Knights have generally proceeded to this Offering, according to their Lib. R.
p. 18. vide Coll. W. le N Cl. and A. V. W.
seniority, and where the course ended, then the Seniors began again: Besides,
there is variety of Examples, where the Sovereign's Deputy or Lieutenant have
joined in the Ceremony (though the instances where they have not, are more
numerous) so that thence it appears to be no diminution to their Honor, to
assist the other Knights, if it be also considered, that they are Companions
and Fellows, in all the concerns of the Order; nor was it anciently thought
otherwise, as is manifest from the Example which King Lib. N. p. 67.
Henry the Fifth gave, at the performance of this Ceremony, to the memory of
the Duke of Clarence, by himself and the Duke of Bedford, who then bore his
Helm and Crest up to the high Altar, and there offered it.

There is a memorial entered in the Ibid. page 84.
Red Book of the Order, an. 9. Car. 1. which charge it as an error, that the
Earl of Holland was more than once joined with the Earl of Berkshire (who then
wanted his opposite Companion) in Offering the then defunct Knights
Achievements; and withal, implies, that it had been more rightly done, if the
Earl of Berkshire had gone alone (in the last place) to offer the remaining
Ensign. But, with submission, this direction was not only contrary to the H. 5.
Stat. Art. 14. and Lib. N. page 66.
Article of the Statute, which positively enjoins, That every part of the
Achievements should be offered by two Knights-Companions (not by any one
singly or alone) but also to constant practice: For there is not one Example
throughout all the Registers of the Order (excepting this now mentioned) or any
other authority we have ever met with, where a Knight proceeded singly to the
Offering of Achievements. On the contrary, when a Knight-Companion happened to
want his opposite Fellow, commonly the next junior Knight present (how much
lower soever his Stall was placed) was joined with him, in assisting at this
solemn Ceremony, and of this there are many Examples; though we acknowledge it
to be otherwise, both in the direction and practice at the Offering of Gold and
Silver.

By what has been delivered, we see the principal persons concerned in this
solemn action, are the Sovereign and Knights-Companions of the Order: Nor may a
Proxy or Deputy be admitted, to perform any part of the Ceremony (though in
the Offering of MS. in Offic. A. m. [ H. 2 f. 8. b.]
Money he ought) as is clear from the Examples Collect. A. V. W.
of John Thomas l' Angust, Proctor for Emanuel Duke of Savoy, an. 1. and 2. Ph.
and Mar. and of the Deputies to Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 31.
Frederick the Second King of Denmark, and John Count Palatine of the Rhyne,
an. 25. Eliz. who descended not from the Stalls of their Principals, with the
rest of the Knights-Companions into the Choire, at the time of Offering the
Achievements; but Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 31.
remained therein during that Ceremony. S^r Ibid. fol. 33.
Thomas Scroop, Deputy also for the Installation of his Father the Lord Scroop,
an. 26. Eliz. intermedled not in this Offering, though he came down and Ibid.
fol. 33.
stood below in the Choire, before the Stall of his Principal, till the
Ceremony was finished, and then returned up again into it, in his due order.

We shall now proceed to the duties of the Prelate of the Order, the Prebends
of the College, and the Officers of Arms; as their services severally or
jointly relate to this Ceremony.

First then the Lib. R. p. 40. and 84. vide etiam MS. penes E. W. G. and
Collect. A. V. W.
Prelate, and two of the Prebends, ought to proceed up to the Altar,
immediately before Garter summons down the Knights-Companions to the Offering,
and there stand ready to receive the Achievements, as they are severally
offered up.

It is next the duty of the Provincial Kings and Heralds, to conduct the
Knights-Companions, when they proceed up to the Altar, bearing any part of the
defunct Knights Achievements, the whole of the Ceremony is briefly thus: ( MS.
fol. 18. b.
the Sexton having beforehand taken down the Achievements, and made them
clean, and (before service begin) placed them in readiness on a Form or Stool,
set directly under each defunct Knights Stall)

Collect. W. le N. Cl.
First, Garter rises from his seat, and proceeds into the middle of the
Choire, where after his usual obeysances, he summons the Knights-Companions to
descend; who forthwith in their accustomed order, and with the usual
Reverences, come down, and place themselves before their Stalls; whereupon
Clarenceux and Norroy (or in the absence of either, the senior Herald, or of
both, the two eldest Heralds) pass down from the Steps of the Altar, into the
body of the Choire; in the interim, Garter takes the Banner of the eldest
defunct Knight into his hands, (for its a general rule, that all the Knights
Achievements be offered, according to the seniority of their Instalment) and
presents it Collect: R. C. Cl. fol. 29. and Collect. A. V. W.
half rolled up to the two senior Knights-Companions; the two Provincial Kings,
being by this time come near to the ^wo senior Knights, there make their double
obeysances, and afterward another to the Knights-Companions, and then step a
little aside: in the mean time, the Knights having took the Banner between
them, make their double Reverence, and (preceded by the Kings) pass up to the
Altar, bearing it with the lower end of the Staff foremost, and at the first
Haut Pas make another double Reverence. The Provincial Kings being arrived at
the uppermost Haut Pas before the Altar, after an humble obeisance, divide
themselves to make way for the Knights-Companions to offer, and bowing to the
said Knights as they pass by, the Knights forthwith raise the point of the
Banner upwards, and (after a single Reverence toward the Altar) present it
upon their knees, to the Prelate of the Order, who forthwith receives it from
them, and delivers it to the two Canons (standing on each side him) and they
deposite it upon Cushens laid before the Altar.

This done, the two Provincial Kings, conduct the foresaid Knights-Companions
back into the Choire, who with usual Reverences retire to their Stations, under
( MS. fol. pen. E. W. G.
not to) their Stalls, and the Provincial Kings to their places, on either side
the Altar.

Next, the two senior Heralds pass down into the Choire, as did the Provincial
Kings, while Garter, taking up the Sword, presents it also to the two next
senior Knights, who proceed up to the Altar with the said two Heralds before
them, in the same order as did the former Knights-Companions, and bearing the
Sword between them, offer the same with the Pomel or Hilt upward, and then
return to their Stations below in the Choire, conducted as before.

In the third place, the two next senior Heralds go down as before, Garter in
the mean time presenting the Helm and Crest, to the two next senior Knights,
who likewise proceed to the Altar, and there offer it in the same manner, and
with like Ceremony, as had been the Banner and Sword. And if there be more
Achievements of defunct Knights to be offered than one, the Knights-Companions
present, by course, two and two, perform the rest, in manner before described;
but the Pursuivants at Arms do no part of this duty, only the Provincial Kings
and Heralds, each in their turns and by couples. When there are the
Achievements of several Knights to be offered, and that the junior Heralds
have done their duty, the Provincial Kings begin again, and so continue the
course, till all the Achievements be offered; the Organs playing while the
Offering lasts.

In the before mentioned order, were the Achievements of the Duke of Espernon,
and Prince Edward offered, at the Grand Feast of St. George, celebrated at
Windesor an. 15. Car. 2. and the Provincial Kings and Heralds, as their turns
came to officiate, took each of the Achievements and presented them to the
Knights-Companions.

The Duke of Espernon's Banner, was offered by the Duke of York and Prince
Rupert, being conducted to the Altar by Clarenceux and Norroy.

His Sword, by the Dukes of Buckingham and Albemarle, attended by York and
Lancaster.

And his Healm and Crest, by the Earl of Oxford and Duke of Richmond, brought
up by Windesor and Richmond.

Prince Edw^rd's Banner, Sword, and Helm were likewise severally offered, by
the very same Knights who offered the Duke of Espernons Achievements, each
pair being conducted to the Altar, by the foresaid Officers of Arms.

Heretofore we find, that Garter has not only begun this Solemnity, and
presented the Banner to the first pair of Knights-Companions, but also
conducted them up to the Offering; for so was the Banner of the MS. fol. penes
W. le N. Cl. fol. 13.
Lord Gray, delivered by Garter to the Lord Loughborow, and Viscount Mountague
an. 5. Eliz. and by him were they brought up to the Altar.

He also performed the like service to the Earl of Penbroke and Lord Clinton,
when they offered the Banner of the MS. fol. 18. b.
Earl of Westmerland, the following year; and to the Lord Admir^l and Earl of
Ormond, an. 34. Eliz. at the Offering of the Banner of MS. fol. penes G. O. Y.
p. 206.
John Count Palatine of the Rhyne. And at the Solemnity celebrated for the Earl
of Derby, to the Lord Howard of Effingham, and Lord Chandos an. 16. Eliz.
Collect. R. C. Cl. f. 29.
Garter himself, and no other Officer of Arms, conducted the Knights-Companions
to the Altar; the like did he an. 30. Eliz. at the Offering of the Hatchments
of the Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Duke of Holstien, Earl of Bedford, Sir Henry Sidney, and the Earl of Rutland.

It was also the usage heretofore, for the Prelate to deliver the offered
Achievements, to some of the Heralds, before appointed to receive them, which
they immediately deposited upon (and sometimes near) the Altar.

In this manner MS. fol. penes W le N Cl. fol. 13.
Clarenceux and Norroy, an. 5 Eliz. (who stood on either side the Prebend)
received the Lord Greys Achievements, and placed them near the Altar.

Clarenceux, and Somerset, received likewise the Achievements of the MS. fol.
18. b.
Earls of Westmerland, Rutland, and the Lord Pagit, from the hands of the
Prelate, and laid them on a Form, set beside the Altar for that purpose.

And an. 34 Eliz. Norroy, and Windesor, assisted to receive all the
Achievements, of MS fol. pene^ G. O. Y. 2^6.
John Count Palatine of the Rhine, the Earls of Shrewsbury, and Warwick, and
Sir Christopher Hatton; which they deposited upon the Altar. But the present
Sovereign, ( Lib. Ca^ol. p. 47.
an. 15 Car. 2.) gave command, that the Achievements should then and after be
laid below before the Altar; judging it indecent to place them, where the
sacred Mysteries of the Body and Blood of our Savior are with great reverence
Consecrated. He also commanded at the Feast held an. 23 Car. 2. that when the
Ceremonies of Offering were ended, the Achievements should be disposed, part on
the South, and other part on the North-side of the Altar, till Service was
finished.

Besides these things already noted, there is nothing further observable, but
what relates to the Achievements themselves, as they are become by this
Ceremony of Offering them in so solemn a manner, parcel of the goods of the
Chapel, and included within the words of the Art. 33. vide etiam Li^ N. page
126.
Statutes of the College, whereby the Sovereign granted to the Dean and
Canons, all Oblations; concerning which, we have already spoken, when we Chap.
21. Sect. 5.
treated of the Offering of Gold and Silver.

Hereupon, because they could not be alienated or sold, they were commonly
deposited, by the Dean and Canons, in the Chapter House: and there Ex R^t.
Pergam.
an. 8 R. 2. upon the taking of an Inventory, of all the Vestments, Ornaments,
etc. of the Chapel; we find among them three Swords, one of the Founder's King
Edward the Third, another of the Earl of Suffolke's, and the third of Sir
Thomas Banister's, as also six Helms. We also find more afterward added, viz.
the Swords of King Richard the Second, of King Henry the Fourth, when he was
Earl of Derby, of John a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, and the Earl of Salisbury.

But the Helms and Swords, Autogr. in Aer^^. Coll. Windesor.
because they were at first forged, (for this very purpose) of an extraordinary
greatness and size, therefore have they been commonly redeemed, that they might
serve again afterward.

And because it belongs to Garter, to provide the Achievements for the new
installed Knights; he usually has compounded with the Dean and Canons, for the
defunct Knights-Atchievements: To which purpose, (among other compositions)
there was an Agreement drawn up in writing, dated the 20 th of May, 1606. Ex
alio Antogr. in codem Aeraer.
between William Segar Garter, and Giles Thompson then Dean of Windsor, William
Wilson, Erasmus Webb and Henry Beaumont, three of the then Canons, to this
effect, Ibid.
That Garter should pay to them or their Successors, when it should happen, for
the Helmets, Crests, Swords, Mantles, and Banners, of the deceased Knights, the
sums following; viz. for those of all Batchellor-Knights, Barons, Earls, and
Dukes, the sum of twenty Shillings; but of Kings, and absolute Princes, being
imbroidered, the sum of three pounds.

We shall conclude this Section, with another kind of Offering, ordained also
to be made in honor of the deceased Knights-Companions, and Registered in King
Henry the Eighth's Body of Statutes; which as it begun not many years before
our Reformation in Religion, so was it of no long continuance, but then took
ending, the words of the Statute are these. Hen. Stat. Art. 12.
That if any Knight-Companion shall decease, the year before (the Celebration
of St. George's Feast) then every Knight being in the Castle of Windesor, at
the Mass of Requiem, shall offer a Taper, armed with a little Escutcheon of the
Arms of the Knight deceased; and if there be more than one deceased, that there
be made for every of them, an Escutcheon of Arms, and a Groat, set night to the
light of the Taper; which Escutcheon and Taper, shall be made at the cost and
charges of the Knights of the said Order.

SECT. IV. Of depositing the deceased Knights Mantles, in the Chapter House.
THere past a Decree, an. 9 Eliz. Ex autogr. Sacramento D. Chapter Wren nuper Ord.
Regist. attestatur, 12. Mar. 1651.
That the Knights-Companions should be bound by their Oath, to take care by
their last Will, that after their decease, all their Ornaments, which they had
received, should be restored, the Robes to the College, the Jewels to the
King that gave them. Hereupon Collect. praef. D. ^br. Wren.
Sir Christopher Hatton sometime before his Death, commanded that his Mantle
should be delivered to the Dean and Canons, and accordingly it was sent to
Windesor after his decease. But the Collect. praef. D. ^br. Wren.
Mantle of Sir Henry Lea, being left to the disposal of others, and not sent to
the College, happened at length, to come into the hands of Brokers, and openly
exposed to sale in Long-lane, to the great dishonor of the Order.

This Decree was in aftertimes but slackly observed; and therefore, (in a
Chapter held at Windesor the 24. of September, an. 4. Car. 1.) the Knights were
admonished, Lib. R. p. 43.
That where the Sovereign should vouchsafe to bestow upon a Knight the Mantle
of the Order, the said Knight should take care at his death to have it sent to
the Chapel [ at Windesor] according as the Statutes do provide.

But this taking little effect, the same Sovereign thought fit to restore to
life and vigor the Law in this particular, by a Decree made in Chapter held
also at Windesor the 18. of April in the 13. year of his Reign, which obliged
all the Knights-Companions receiving the Ensigns of the Order from the
Sovereign, Ibid. p. 120.
to take care (according to the obligation of their Oath) that these (together
with the Book of Statutes) should be restored into the hands of the Sovereign,
after their Death. And a command was therewithal given, That certain Books,
Mantles, and Surcoats then lying at Whitehall, should be delivered to the
Register of the Order, to be laid up at Windesor, in honorable memory of them
to whom they belonged.

In observation of these Decrees, where the Habit or Ensigns of the Order, were
either wholly or in part bestowed by the Sovereign, order was taken (in either
case) to send for them in, after such Knights decease. Accordingly at a Chapter
held the 10. day of October, an. 15 Car. 1. the Palmer's Iourn. pro an. 1639.
p. 36.
Garter and George of the Lord Treasurer Weston, being sent back, was then
presented to the Sovereign (by Lib. R. page 57. and 58.
whom it had been accustomed) and affirmed to be all that the Sovereign had
given the said Earl, whereupon the same was accepted, and delivered to the Dean
and Chapter of Windesor to be preserved. And at the same Chapter it was Ib. p.
62.
ordered that the Earl of Kelley's Robes and Ornaments of the Order, should be
sent for by the Chancellor: as having been given him by the Sovereign; to wit,
the Garter and George immediately after his Election, and the Mantle and
Surcoat, against the Installation of the present Sovereign.

These former Decrees were yet thought needful to be confirmed by the present
Sovereign, and therefore in a Chapter held in the Yellow-Chamber at Whitehall,
the 4. of Febr. 1669. it was decreed, Lib. Carol. p. 79.
That the Mantle of each Knight-Companion ( so also the Book of Statutes)
should be sent to Windesor immediately after their Death; and that the
Chancellor of the Order, should be obliged by Letters to their Heirs and
Executors, to put them in mind of sending them thither.

Nevertheless it is to be understood, that where the Mantle has been provided
at the Knights own charge, there lies no obligation for sending it to Windesor
after his decease. And it appears upon the Death of Philip Earl of Penbroke and
Montgomery, that the Trustees for sail of the late Kings Goods, having sent and
made demand of his Mantle, and Surcoat, his Executors making it appear, that
they were bought with his own money, of Sir Peter Richa^t, by the then
Sovereign's command, signified (not only to him but the rest of the
Knights-Companions) an. 14 Car. 1. they desisted, from further prosecution.

There is a memorable Instance in the return of the Habit and Ensigns of
Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, being sent back in a solemn Embassy from Lib.
R. page 105.
Christina Queen of Sweden, his Daughter and Successor to that Crown.

The Reception of which, having been ordered with considerable State and
Ceremony, will most fitly be here remembered.

Saturday the 18. of April, an. 11 Car. 1. was the day appointed, for the
resigning them up into the Sovereigns hands; on the Afternoon of which day,
John Baron Skiite, Ambassador from the said Queen, came to Whitehall, and was
conducted to the Council Chamber, to retire himself, till he was sent for into
the Chapter.

The Ex Autogr. penes E. W. G.
Chapter was upon this occasion held in the Presence Chamber, where as soon as
they were set, the Sovereign assigned the Earls of Penbroke, and Arnudel,
(attended by Garter and Black Rod) to go for the said Ambassador, who was
conducted to the Chapter, in the order following.

First, the Ambassadors Followers, two and two. The Officers of Arms in their
Coats, two and two. Garter, carrying on a Velvet Cushion, the deceased Kings
Mantle, Surcoat, Hood, Garter, Collar, and great George, and the wearing
George. Earl of Arundel. The Ambassador. Earl of Penbroke.

The Ambassadors Followers, and the Officers of Arms, having proceeded in this
order as far as the Presence Chamber door, there divided themselves on each
side, and made a stand, Garter going before, and the Ambassador between the
said two Knights-Companions entered the Chapter, making the usual Congies in
coming up to the Sovereign. Then Garter kneeling down, held the Ornaments and
Jewels of the Order on the Cushion, whilst the Ambassador made the following
Oration in Latin.

Serenissime, Potentissimeque Rex, Domine clementissime.
NEmini potest esse obscurum, quod ab omni aevo, omnibus omnino Populis and
Nationibus in more and usu positum fuerit, homines ob praeclara facta, variis
premiis atque honoribus afficere; tum ut fortitudinem acuerent, and virtutem
c^nservarent, tum ut robur and disciplinam tuerentur; Qua quidem re procuratum
videmus, ut Equestris etiam dignitas inde, and ex hac occasion originem
ceperit, and postmodum per omnes fere aetates validissimo roboris incremento
aucta, and amplificata fuerit, rit, ac licet in tanta ejusdem copia and
varietate difficile videatur judicare, quae species alteri praevalere debeat,
and quasi palmam praeripere. Siquis tamen paulo altius hoc ipsum ponderaverit,
deprehendet veterum illorum honores dignitates, ac privilegia cum Garterio
Ordine non esse comparanda. Permit mihi Serenissime Rex, ut in Augusta and
Nobili hac corona Ordinis Periscelidis decora accuratius contempler, and quid
mihi insuper in mandatis sit datum humilime referam.

Edwardi tertii incredibilem virtutem atque fortitudinem omnis posteritas in
hunc usque diem est admirata semper, qui cum a vetustissimis Angliae Regibus
Originem traexerit, nulli veterum tum rerum gestarum gloria, tum invictissimi
animi magnitudine tum summae faelicitatis admira^tione videtur esse
postponendus; ab hoc inquam Hero laudatissimo and fortissimo cum Ordo hic
Garterius excogitatus sit, and inventus, quid tanto Instituto potest esse
Nobilius? quid praeclarius? Summa quoque dignitas huic Ordini ex eo aboritur,
quod non modo praecipuae Nobilitatis viri, Potentissimi Duces, ac Principes,
verum etiam Imperatores, Reges eorumque liberi pulcherimo hoc honor semper
fuerint cumulati Magnificentiam dicti Ordinis commendavit tum quod candidatus
egregiis and admirandis Ornamentis investiatur, installetur, and amiciatur, tum
quod ipso die Georgii honorificentissimo, Superiorum and inferiorum concursu
mirifice condecoretur, illustretur. Quemadmodum vero sacra vestra Regia
Majestas, evidentibus rationibus commota, clementissimae meae Reginae parentem,
Invictissimum Heroem hoc ipso Periscelidis splendore cumulandum judicarit ita
exhibitio illa vel hoc nomine long fuit clarissima, quod spectante universo
pene exercitu, inter vehementissimam bellicorum tormentorum displosionem per
vestros deputatos, and quidem in ipsius Dorussiae visceribus facta sit, ad
omnem itaque posteritatis memoriam commendatissimum erit quod licet exiguum tum
temporis extiterit intervallum, inter nostrum and hostilem exercitum adeo ut
convenientius tanto Heroi fuisse nonnullis visum fuerit de corporis defensione,
quam de honoris alicujus accessione cogitare, rejectis tamen omnibus periculis
passus sit, sibi, and tribui honorem condignum and in Ordinis hujus Clarissimi
Societatem se cooptari. Nec facile dixerim utrum huic accessioni plus
dignitatis illatum, ex eundem Ordinem offerente, an vero recipiente. Ita enim
utrarumque vestrum Majestatum dignitas hic elucet, ita aequabili lanci
innititur, ut discrimen non facile attendatur ac licet immensus mihi jam
porrigatur Campus, in lauds utriusque Serenissimae vestrae Regiae Majestatis
expatiandi, cum tamen ita comparatum sit, ut quo quisque laud dignior est, eo
minus patiatur lauds suas celebrari, non velificabor impraesentiarum tantis
Majestatum vestrarum virtutibus, sed ea tantum referam, quae sine summa ingrati
animi nota non possunt praeteriri. Successit Sacra vestra Regia Majestas
parenti suo gloriosissimae recordationis, in tot regnorum administrationem, and
quidem ita successit, ut non solum paternis vestigiis laudabiliter inhaereat,
verum etiam paternarum virtutum dignissimum se ostendat haeredem; pacem, rem
beatissimam, omni studio complectatur, subditis suis and quietem and omnium
rerum affluentiam benignissime procuret, and quid sit quod Serenissimam vestram
Regiam Majestatem infinitis hominibus amabilem magis reddere possit, quam
omnium bonorum de eadem singular judicium? Etenim cum omnibus pateat, eandem
naturali and prope divina quadam propensione in eas virtutes and ornamenta
quibus vita haec humana fulcitur ferri: and ab omnibus iis vitiis quibus
contaminetur, serio abhorrere; cumque vita vestra omnis sit candoris,
integritatis, castitatis and honestatis plenissima, non potest mihi vitio
verti, si oblata hac occasion illud ipsum jam commemorare aperteque dicam
nullum praeter Serenissimam vestram Regiam Majestatem tum extitisse
excellentiorem Regem, and digniorem qui ista amplissimorum and a proavis
fortissimis acceptorum honorum ornamenta tanto Regi tribuere and confer
potuerit. Regis deinde hujus incomparabilis qualitates si^accuratius
contemplati fuerimus, nemo inficiabitur quin omni honorum genere fuerit
dignissimus. Habuit is Patrem and Avum qui indefesso studio ea semper consilia
tractarunt quae non solum ad pacis tranquillitatem, togaeque foelicitatem in
antiquissimis Suecorum and Gothorum Regnis conservandam, verum etiam ad armorum
been gerendorum gloriam, bellicarumque rationum and militaris disciplinae
administrationem fovendam pertinent. His cum Progenitoribus ortus esset,
industria and labor incredibili, atque adeo brevi temporis spatio eo pervenit,
ut non solum illis pax verum etiam long clarior and celebrior fuerit. Cumque
horrendae cujusdam virtutis amore, inter omnes mortales teneretur, talem se in
vita sua exhibuit, ut omnes virtutes numeros quoad ejus ab homine fieri potuit,
explere conatus sit, and tanta quidem constantia iis sudoribus and vigiliis ut
eum a tam laudabili proposito, nec rei magnitudo deterrere, nec ulla voluptas
avocare potuerit ab incunabulis, praeclarissimarum artium and linguarum studio,
ita vehementer invigilavit, ut postquam ad adultiorem aetatem pervenisset, ad
miraculum usque se iis oblectarit, nec honorum and optimorum authorum lectione,
in ipsis Castris atque adeo in bostium suorum quasi conspectu abstinuerit.
Tantus praeterea in hoc Hero fuit amor, and sollicitudo conservandae
Religionis and libertatis in Germannia; ut cum ejusdem Principes in tolerando
quodam servitutis jugo praemerentur, eos non solum adversus hostium ferociam
tutatus est, verum etiam in avitos ducatus, unde expulsi fuerant, magna sua
gloria, magna ipsorum laetitia, magno cum hostium dedecore, per vim fortissime
reduxerit, pristinamque dignitatem reddiderit, quam si iidem jam voluerint
deserere sibi suaeque socordiae inposterum imputabunt, ac licet praeter ipsam
Dei benignitatem aliae etiam possint exhiberi rations quibus Heroes hic innixus
tam arduum opus aggredi voluit, nulla tamen accommodatior and certior
co^stitueretur quam scientia rei Militaris and fortitudo quaedam invicta.
Etenim cum post mortem laudatissimi Parentis triplici bello puta Danico,
Polonico and Muscovitico distineretur, ita se bellicis artibus totum
consecravit, ita mancipavit ut cum summis Imperatoribus non immerito suerit
comparandus. Ad hanc rem promptius expediendum ita eum Deus and natura
finierant, ut visis hostibus vel in summo vitae periculo constitutus, nunquam
trepidarit, nunquam expalluerit, nunquam aufugerit, quin potius exigua Militum
manu saepe hostibus se objecerit, eos sustinuerit, iisdem maximas Clades
intulerit, and Strages horrendas confecerit, atque adeo nobilissimas
provincias, incredibili robore extortus, Regno Suecorum (per se long
amplissimo) gloriosissime adjecerit. Eximia hac Militaris Disciplinae
administr^tione, ita orbi terrarum innotuit, ut and Reges Principesque
complures, infiniti praeterea homines ad eum amandum and colendum sint
inflammati. Non inficiaberis, Serenissime Rex, quin cum ob alias rations, tum
potissimum ob rei bellicae gloriam Ordinis Garterii decora illi tribueris.
Serenissimo Daniae Regi placuit filium suum Uldaricum Gustavo huic Magno de
meliori nota commendare, quo sub illius ductu in Dorussia tyrocinia militaria
addisceret. Serenissimo item Regi Bohemiae commodum valde fuit in castra hujus
Herois pervenisse, ut eo citius provincias sibi ereptas recuperaret. Uladislaus
Rex Poloniae, licet hostis, eam de agnato suo fortitudinis Militaris conceperat
opinionem, ut nisi humanis rebus ereptus fuisset Magnus hic Gustavus, opera
illius uti voluerit, in sopiendis dissidiis inter se, and Magnum Muschoviae
Ducem. Idem vero Muschoviae Dux, cum patre Patriarcha, quem Muschovitae
Sanctissimum appellant, tanti aestimavit Regis nostri bellicas rations, ut eos
haud puduerit, eodem uti Ductore. Quorum quidem Principum benevolentia in Regem
Gustavum tam vehementer apparuit, ut cum iidem accepto nuncio de Lipsensi pugna
immensos triumphos in ejus honorem per Imperium Muschoviticum instituissent, ab
omni aevo tale quid in ejusdem visceribus contigisse, vix, ac ne vix quidem,
sit animadversum. Et quae res alia Christianissimum Galliae Regem Ludovicum
XIII. commovit, ut huic Heroi arctissimo foederis, and amicitiae vinculo
copulaeretur, quo Austriacae Domus, omnibus Regibus ac Principibus potentiam
reformidandam comprimeret, and afflictae Germaniae succurreret, nisi quod eum
fortissimum, and ad tantam Provinciam obeundam accommodatissimum esse, suo
etiam suffragio comprobaret, totique terrarum Orbi declararet? Foedera quae Rex
noster inierat cum praepotentibus Ordinibus Belgii, cum Principibus and Rebus
publicis Germaniae, quid aliud testantur? quam summam in eo extitisse animi
magnitudinem, and robur convictum ut interim silentio involvam Bethlemi
Gaboris, Transylvahiae Helvetiorum, and quorundam Italiae Principum in eundem
propensionem singularem; Magnus ille Praecopiensium Tartarorum Chamus, triginta
hominum millia in usum Regis nostri, se ex finibus suis educturum obtulerat, si
iis uti voluisset. Fando denique exprimi non potest quomodo incomparabilis
hujus Regis fama, per Othomancum Imperium fuerit pervagata. Acquisivit Suecis
ac Gothis, hac ipsa, ut eos and a contemptu aliorum Populorum vindicaverit and
effecerit simul, ut pro fortissimis militibus ab ipsis hostibus agniti, and
celebrati fuerint. Tot itaque and tanta cum fuerint Magni Gustavi Regis
ornamenta, cum nomen ejusdem per infinita terrarum spatia inclaruerit, cum
denique facta illius tot hostibus debellatis ac prostratis, Suethici nominis
gloriam ubique circumtulerint, nonne dignissimus judicabitur, cui hic honos,
hic splendour conferri debuerit? Verum enimvero cum Deo visum sit, invictissimum
hunc Regem, and cujus parem septentrio nunquam vidit, bellatorem,
Triumphatorem, perpetuum rebus humanis eripere, eumque Ordinis Garterii Statuta
jubeant, ut post excessum unius cujusque signa and ornamenta remittantur, in
mandatis idcirco mihi dedit Serenissima mea Regina, ut non solum Legibus
praescriptis satisfacerem, verum etiam moram excusarem. Agnovit abunde
Serenissima sua Regia Majestas eum gente Suecorum universa Serenissimae vestrae
Regiae Majestatis, in deferendis hisce honoribus, affectionem inusitatam, and
benevolentiam singularem nunquam intermittet, and procurare, quae ad vestrum
and Britannicae gentis splendorem amplificandum conducent. Inter alia sacra sua
Regia Majestas exoptat a Deo immortali, ut quemadmodum hic Ordo, ab exiguis
initiis, in maximum dignitatis culmen ascendit, ita etiam per longissima
annorum spacia, foelicissimo and duraturo incremento ad omnem posteritatem,
roboretur, conservetur, propagetur.


When the Ambassador had done speaking, Garter delivered each particular
Ornament to him, which he forthwith presented to the Sovereign, who put them
into the Chancellors hands, and he having received them, in answer to the
Ambassadors Oration, made this other in French.

Le Roy mon Maistre ( Soverain de l' Order de la Jartiere) m'a command de vous
dire, qu'il recoit de vostre main, avec fort grand regret, ces Enseignes de l'
Order. Else renouuellent a sa Majeste, and luy font resouuenir la grand perte
qu'il a faicte, en la person du Roy de Suede, son bon friar. Il esto^^ Prince
don't l'amitie estoit fort chere a sa Majeste comme celuy qui pour la render
plus estroicte, avoit monstre un desir affectione d'estre receu au nombre des
confreres de cet Order. Durant la vie de ce grand Roy, vostre Majeste, sa
Majeste a fait une grand, and digne estime de sa person, a l'esgal de son
merit, and de ces virtues, qui furent vrayement Royales, and depuis sa mort,
sa Majeste a fait le mesme de sa memoire. Et a fin que la posterite peult aussi
prendre cognoissance de l'amitie and affection qui a este enter sa Maejeste,
and ce grand Prince, le Roy a done un commandment expres, qu'aux Archives de
l' Order sa memoire fust conservee au rang des plus grands, and des plus
valereux Princes, qui l'ont devancez, and qui ont rendu par tant de Siecles cet
Order si Auguste.

C'est (Monsieur) le Sommaire de ce que j'avois a vous dire de la part du Roy
mon Maistre le Soverain de l' Order pour ce qui est des aultres confreres, and
principalement de Messeigneurs les Chevaliers icy presents, sa Majeste m'a
done permission de vous dire de leur part, qu'ils regrettent avec le Roy leur
Maistre, la perte d'un si grand Prince comme a este le vostre, and tascheront
pour le dernier debvoir qu'ilz doibvent a sa virtue, de render a sa memoire
autant de respect, and d'honneur qu'ils eussent volontiers rendu a sa person.
Et pour mon particulier, la coustume qui est observee en tells occasions, me
commandoit de dire quelque chose a la louange de ce grand Roy, qui estant
confrere de l' Order est mort victorieux enter les arms. Mais quand je
considere que vous l'avez desja si bien faicte, par vostre belle oraison (qui a
este par tout remplie d'autant de verite que d'eloquence) qu'il me seroit
impossible d'en parler apres sans fair tort a moy mesme, and sans grand
prejudice a une si haulte virtue j'ay pense doncques qu'il seroit convenable
tant pour le Subject, que pour mon devoir, de laisser entierement a la
renommee, ce qui m'est tellement impossible d'exprimer en paroles.


This Speech being ended the Chapter broke up, and the Sovereign departed in
the order he came thither, having first Lib. R. p. 106.
Knighted Sir James Skijtte the Ambassadors Son, Sir John Krue, Sir Gustavus
Banir, and Sir Gabriel Oxensterne, who were of his followers. But the
Ambassador and the two Earls Conductors returned in the same order as they came
to the Council Chamger, and there took leave. And in May following, the said
Sir John Skytte junior (whom I find styled Baron of Buderof, and Colonel of a
Regiment of Scots in Sweden) was sworn a Lord Chamberl. Book of Warrants ab an.
1634. ad annum 1641. page 58.
Gentleman of the Sovereign's Privy-Chamber extraordinary.

After the Chapter was ended, the Sovereign Lib. R. page 106.
commanded the Jewels to be delivered to the Master of his Iewel-house, and the
Robes to be sent to the Dean of Windesor, to be deposited there.

Notwithstanding which Command, yet was not the Collect. Chr. Wren nuper Ord.
Regist.
Mantle brought thither, till the Instalment of the present Sovereign, at which
time, by order in Chapter, and the Sovereign's liberal donation, not only the
Mantle, but the Garter, Collar, and Great George of the foresaid King, (the
value whereof we have Chap. 7. Sect. 1. and 7.
before noted) were Palm. large Iourn. page 21. and 22.
ordered to be committed to the custody of the Dean and Chapter of Windesor,
and accordingly then brought down from the Court (in the Castle) by Ex Collect.
praed.
Mr. Iosee, Mr. Maxwell, and some others belonging to the Sovereign's
Bedchamber, and delivered to them to be laid up in their Treasury, for a
perpetual memory of that renowned King, who died in the field, wearing some of
those Jewels; to the great renown of the Order, and as a true martial Prince
and Companion thereof.

The Diamonds, set in the Garter and George, at the humble request of Doctor
Christopher Wren, the then Register, were Ex ^od. Iourn. loco cit.
Ordered to be viewed and numbered, by Sir James Palmer Deputy Chancellor; which
being done, an Ex Collect. praesat. D. Chr. Wren.
Inventory was made, the 24. of May following, and a Duplicate thereof being
drawn, the one part was signed by the Dean and Prebends, which remained with
the Deputy Chancellor; the other by the Deputy Chancellor, and left in the
Treasury with the Jewels; the number upon the great Garter and George,
amounting to 498 Diamonds.

And in the Ex Collect. praesat. D. Chr. Wren.
Floor of the said Treasury did these Jewels remain (hid there by the said
Register) till about the beginning of March, an. 1645. that Colonel Ex Collect.
praesat. D. Chr. Wren.
Ven, the then Governor of that Castle, took them thence; and it should seem,
they were afterward delivered unto Colonel Whitchcott, who succeeded him in
that Government; for I find, that Mr. John Hunt Treasurer to the Trustees
(appointed by the Long Parliament, for Sale of the late Kings Goods) did
receive them from the hands of the said Colonel Whitchcott.

CHAP. XXVI. OF THE Founder, THE FIRST Knights-Companions, AND THEIR Successors.
SECT. I. Of what Number the Institution consisted.
THE main part of our design, relating to the Institution, Laws, and Ceremonies
of the most Noble Order of the Garter, is now brought to a period; what else we
intend, with the end of our journey, lies now within our prospect, and concerns
the Founder the first Knights-Companions and their Successors. For King Edward
the Third having Instituted the said Order, and set down Rules and Statutes for
the government and regulation thereof, he Lib. N. p. 38.
next resolved to Elect from among the flower of his own Chevalry, 25 noble and
valiant Knights, who, together with himself should make up the number of 26.
(for of so E. 3. Stat. Art. 3.
many does the Order, by his appointment, consist) and indeed that Age
furnished him with large choice of gallant men, made famous by martial
Exploits, performed in the Battles of Sluice, Crescy, and Durham.

The first that he Elected into this Noble Order, was Edward, his eldest Son,
who had already in part deserved, and afterward obtained the title of a
valiant and renowned Prince; and the rest of those accomplished Colleagues were
these that follow, and thus placed in their Stalls.

On the Sovereign's side. On the Prince's side. 2. Lib. N. p. 38.
Henry, Duke of Lancaster. 2. Thomas, Earl of Warwick. 3. Piers, Capitow de la
Bouch. 3. Ralph, Earl of Stafford. 4. William, Earl of Salisbury. 4. Roger,
Earl of March. 5. Sir John Lisle. 5. Sir Bartholomew Burghersh. 6. Sir John
Beauchamp. 6. Sir John Mohun. 7. Sir Hugh Courtney. 7. Sir Thomas Holland. 8.
Sir John Gray. 8. Sir Richard Fitz-Simon. 9. Sir Miles Stapleton. 9. Sir Thomas
Wale. 10. Sir Hugh Wrottesley. 10. Sir Nele Loring. 11. Sir John Chandos. 11.
Sir James Audeley. 12. Sir Otes Holland. 12. Sir Henry Eam. 13. Sir Sanchet
Dabrichcourt. 13. Sir Walter Paveley.

We once intended a full and entire History of the Lives of these Noble
Founders, and to that purpose made a large and chargeable Collection out of the
Records in the Tower of London, and elsewhere, of all that we could find worthy
to be remembered of them: in which we spent most part of the years 1657.1658.
and 1659. But this our design being 20. Febr. an. 14. Car. 2.
afterward represented to the present Sovereign and Knights-Companions, by the
late Chancellor of the Order, through the wrong end of the Perspective, we
thereby received so great discouragemement, as caused us to wave it, and indeed
resolved wholly to lay it aside. Nevertheless, upon other thoughts (here being
a proper occasion) we are content to let in a glimpse, of what may be improved
to a far greater light; and, from that stock of Collections, drawn out some few
things relating to the Founder and first 25 Knights-Companions, particularly
their Honors, Martial Employments, famous Exploits, Matches, Issues, and Death;
therein laying down only matter of Fact, and Materials for History, without
deductions or observations. All which we shall deliver with the plainness there
found, being unwilling to add other Rhetorical flourishes, lest we might withal
cast some blemish upon the native beauty of Truth.

And in this undertaking, the Reader may see what Furniture (though it lie
dispersed) our Public Records will afford for History; and how plentifully our
own may be supplied and improved, if pains were taken therein: for what is
hitherto made public, has been collected, chiefly out of old Annals, and they
filled with few things but such as were very obvious, nay the Annalists
themselves (for the most part residing in Monasteries) too often by ass'd with
Interest, and Affection, to Times and Persons: But on the contrary, in our
public Records lie matter of Fact, in full truth, and therewith the
Chronological part, carried on, even to days of the Month. So that an
industrious Searcher may thence collect considerable matter for new History,
rectify many mistakes in our old, and in both gratify the world with
unshadowed verity.

SECT. II. A short view of the Founder's Wars.
TO begin then with the Founder, the most Noble King Edward the Third; He was
eldest Son of King Edward the Second, and Isabel Daughter to Philip the Fourth,
King of France, whose Sons Lewis, Philip, and Charles, (all Kings of France one
after another) dying without Issue Male, this Prince challenged the Crown of
France, as the next Heir male to it.

He was born in Windesor Castle, the 13. day of November, being Claus. 6. E. 2.
m. 22. Dorso.
Monday next after the Feast of St. Martin, the Bishop in Winter, (and the day
of St. Brice, Bishop, and Disciple of St. Martin) in the year of our Lord God
1312. an Astrological Scheme of whose Nativity, has been long since painted in
Glass, in one of the Windows of the Prebends Lodgings at Windesor, belonging to
the Reverend and Worthy Divine, Doctor Hever, late one of the Canons of that
College. Whence it appears, that he was born at 40 minutes after five in the
morning of the said day, the 6. Degree of the Sign Scorpio Ascending, and the
18. Degree of Leo Culminating. The places of the Planets, as there posited,
follows.

gr.
in 5 in 27 in 21 in 28 18 in 8 ^ in 8 in 26
The Thursday after his birth, he was Christened in the Chapel, then of St.
Edward, in Windesor Castle, by A. Priest Cardinal, by the Title of Sancta
Prisca, and his Godfathers were Ibid.
Richard Bishop of Poictiers, John Bishop of Bath and Wells, William Bishop of
Worcester, Lewis Earl of Eureux, the Tho. Walsingh. sub an. 1312.
Queens Brother, John de Britannia Earl of Richmond, Aymer de Valence Earl of
Penbroke, and Hugh le Despenser.

Within a few days after, the King his Father granted him the 24. Nov. Chart.
6. E. 2. n. 21. and n. 44.
County of Chester, except the Manors of Mekklesfield, and Shotwyke, to hold
to him and his Heirs Kings of England for ever. And likewise the County of
Flint, and Cantred of Englefield, with the Castles of Flint and Rothelan, to
hold as before, except the Manor of Overton, the Lands of Mailor, Seysnoke,
and the Castle and Manor of Holt; after which he was thus styled by the King,
Claus. 7. E. 2. m. 1. Chart. 8. E. 3. m. 2.
Edwardus Comes Cestriae filius noster Charissimus.

So pleasing to his Father (...) the birth of this Prince, that the 16. of
December following, he gave to Pat 6. E. ^. par. 2. m. 5.
John Launge Valet to the Queen, and to Isabel his Wife, and the longer liver
of them, for bringing to him so desirable News, 24 l. per annum, to be paid out
of the Farm of London. But leaving his Infancy, we will now proceed to his
youth, and the occurrences that attended his riper years.

King Edward his Father, having been often summoned to the Court of France, to
do homage for the Dukedom of Aquitaine, and other his Lands held in that
Kingdom, and still delaying, till the French King had seized thereon, it was at
length concluded, that he should give to this Prince that Dukedom, who then
should do the Homage, and enjoy the Lands. Hereupon preparation was made for
his passing into France, and a little before at Langedon Abbey, near Dover, the
King on the 2. of September in the 19. year of his Reign, first gave to him,
his Heirs, and Successors Kings of England, jure haereditario imperpetuum, the
Pat. 19. E. 2 p. 1. m. 25.
Counties of Ponthieu, and Monstroile; and on the 10. of the same month (at
Dover) granted to him the Pat. 19. E. 2 p. 1. m. 25.
Dukedom of Aquitaine, and all the Lands he had, or ought to hold, in the
Kingdom of France, Habendum as before; Claus. de eod. an. m. 28. Dorso.
two days after, this new Duke took shipping at Dover, thence passed into
France, and made his Homage: in which Journey it was likewise thought fit, that
the Queen should accompany him, in regard her Lands in that Kingdom had also
been seized on.

Shortly after his return into England, he was unanimously chosen Claus. 20. E.
2. m. 3. Dors. 20. Oct.
Custos of the Kingdom in his Fathers absence (then fled into Wales, with Hugh
le Despencer the Son, Robert-Baldock and others) by diverse of the Bishops,
Nobility, Barons, and Knights, de assensu totius Comitatus dicti Regni ibidem
existentis, and at Martley, the Ib. 26. Nov.
Great Seal (sent from the King) was delivered to him.

Not long after, his Father ressigned his Crown, upon which, great preparations
were made for this young Prince's Coronation, which was solemnly performed at
Westminster, by William Archbishop of Canterbury, on Claus. 1. E. 3. pars prima
membr. 25. die Kalendas Febr. Hen. Knighton in Hist. Anglic. Script. Col. 2550.
Sunday after the Conversion of St. Paul, being the 1. of Feb. an. 1327.

His first Martial Attempt, but unsuccessful, (for more then what appertains to
his Wars we shall not here discourse off) was the Chroni^. Io. Froisard mil. L.
1. c. 15.
raising an Army to march against the Scots: For Robert Bruce King of Scotland,
having sent him a defiance about Easter next following his Coronation, shortly
after invaded England, Claus. 1. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. dorso.
notwithstanding the Truce between the said King Robert, and King Edward the
Second, was yet on foot, and an agreement for further Treaty of Peace (to be
held in the Marches) on Sunday next before Ascension day then next coming.

The Kings Army was appointed to Rendevouz at Rot. Scotiae 1. E. 3. m. 9.
Newcastle upon Tyne, on Monday next before the Ascension of our Lord, though
Loco supra cit.
Sir John Froissard says it was at York, upon Ascension day, whence about
three weeks after Trinity Sunday, he marched toward the Enemy: but the Claus.
1 E. 3. par. 2. m. 16* dorso.
Scots (having exceedingly wasted the Northern parts, and declined to fight)
slipped from him at Stanhop Park in the Bishopric of Durham, and withdrew
toward their own Country: nor could the King engage them, though he
endeavored it for 24. days together.

I confess the first Actions of Princes are looked upon by all Eyes, and not
seldom, with many Observators, taken as the Radix, whence to calculate their
future, either Successes or Miscarriages. If, at these undertakings, a full Age
entitle them to the sole management of Affairs, we are inclined to think a
judicious Eye may partly discern the strength of their Fortune: But while they
reside within Tutorage, and their designs are carried on under the conduct of
others, the Event of things will manifest a dependency upon the strength or
weakness of the Genius of those persons, who are the chief managers of their
Concerns. And this was fully made good in this Prince, whose Martial
undertakings were very unsuccessful, specially while the Government of the
Kingdom was committed to others (and sometimes afterward, when he was tied up
and hampered by his Allies in Flanders) but he no sooner arrived at full Age,
but his Affairs showed themselves as if disposed by his own Genius; and the
first remarkable experiment was verified even upon the Scots themselves, from
whom before, he had received some affronts and indignities.

For having sent Ambassadors to the Froiss. Chronic. L. 1. C. 26.
Custos, and chief Nobility of Scotland, He demanded the Homage of David Brus
their King (and these were probably Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton, and William
de Denum, for it appears Rot. Pat. 6 E. 3. p. 3. m. 3.
they were employed thither the 14. of December. an. 6 E. 3. Rot. Pat. 6 E. 3. p.
3. m. 3.
touching the Affairs of the King and Kingdom) and the doing of Homage denied.
He forthwith raised an Army, in assistance of John Balioll, Son of John
Balioll, sometime King of Scotland, against David Brus the then King: which
being appointed to meet at Claus. 7 E. 3. m. 19. dorso.
Newcastle upon Tine, on Trinity Sunday, an. 7 E. 3. King Edward entered
Scotland, and wasted the Country as far as Scone, for six months together:
Insomuch that the Scots were forced to fly to their Fastnesses in the Forest of
Gedworth, where they abode for many years, and as the King returned, he
encountered an Army of theirs at Hallidown Hill, which he defeated, and killed
about Hollinsh. Chron. page 350. a.
32000. common Soldiers, 7. Earls, 90. Knights and Bannerets, and 400.
Esquires.

In memory of this great Victory (happening on the Rot. Scot. 7. E. 3. m. 2.
Eve of St. Margaret the Virgin, being the 13. of July) he repaired the Church
and Convent of Nuns, near the place where the Battle was fought, (upon that
occasion destroyed and burnt) and caused an Altar to be therein erected, and
dedicated to that Virgin. He further granted to those Nuns, and their
Successors, 20 l. per annum, out of the Issues of the Town and County of
Berwick, until Lands to that value should be conferred upon them; to the end,
that annually on the Eve and day of St. Margaret for ever, they should
commemorate the goodness of God for his so prosperous success.

On the Holinsh. Chron. page 350. a.
Morrow after this great Victory, the King had the Town and Castle of Berwick
surrendered to him, and on the Ib. a. 8. L. 3.
19. of June, in the following year, did Edward Baliol, King of Scots, make
Homage and Fealty to him at Newcastle, as to his Superior and Chief Lord of the
Realm of Scotland, who then granted to the King, and annexed to the Crown of
England, for ever, the Counties next adjoining to England, namely, Berwick,
Roxbourgh, Peples, and Dunfres, the Towns of Hadington and Gedworth, with the
Castle and Fortress of Silkirke, Etherick, and Gedworth.

By the assistance, which King Edward afforded to Edward Baliol, Ib. p. 351.
he gained the most part of Scotland: nevertheless diverse Castles refused to
surrender, which occasioned the King to make another expedition thither, and
about Allballontide, he arrived at Newcastle upon Tyne, and thence marched into
Scotland, toward the end of November, and at Christmas entered Ethrick Forest:
but the Scots were fled, whereupon having prosecuted his design as far as he
thought good, he returned into England.

The next year, Ib. an. 9 E. 3.
he raised new Forces, and himself from Carlisle, and Edward King of Scots from
Berwick, both entered Scotland on the 12. of July, burning and wasting the
Country on both sides, beyond the Scottish Sea. This Expedition brought the
Earl of Atholl, and diverse of the Scotch Nobility, to a Submission; upon which
the King came back into the Northern parts, where he wintered, and kept his
Christmas at Newcastle.

About Ib. an. 10 E. 3.
Twelfth-tide, he was provided to pass again into Scotland, when Ambassadors
from the Pope and King of France, found him at Berwick, ready to enter that
Kingdom, and by their earnest solicitation (about Candlemas) obtained of both
Kings a Truce till Midlent following: but no Peace ensuing, Edward King of
Scotland, and diverse of the English Nobility (at Whitsontide) entered Scotland
again: and finding St. John's Town slighted by the Scots, they fortified it.
Shortly after this, King Edward followed them thither, and thence passed with
his Army unto Elgen in Murrey, and Innerness. In his return, he took Aberdeen,
and burnt diverse Towns, and destroyed the Country. About which time the Earl of
Cornwall entered Scotland also, and destroyed the Western parts, and met the King
his Brother at St. John's Town, where the King stayed not long, but marched to
Striveling, built the Fortress called the Pile, and returned home. About the
Feast of St. Luke, he marched again with a fresh Army into Scotland, and
repaired Bothuill-Castle, and returned into England before Christmas, leaving
Edward King of Scots, at St. John's Town, settled in the Government of that
Kingdom.

The Affairs of Scotland being thus quieted for some years, gave King Edward
the leisure to look toward France; which Kingdom afterward became the Scene
of all his Martial Glory. For Robert d' Artois, Earl of Beaumont in France,
being discontented at the Sentence wherein Philip King of France had given the
Earldom of Artois from him, to Maud Countess of Burgundy, let fall some
dangerous words, and they being laid hold on, forced him to fly into England,
where he was kindly received by King Edward; who after he had been here
sometime, 23 April. Pat. 11 E. 3. p. 2. m. 5.
afforded him the use of the Castles of Guilford, Wallingford, and Somerton,
whenever he pleased to retire thither for his recreation, and afterward
assigned him 26 Mar. Pat. 12 E. 3. p. 1. m. 18.
800 l. per annum for his support; the one moiety to be received out of the
Revenues of certain Priories Alien, seized into the Kings hands, and the other
moiety, out of his Exchequer.

Soon after his coming over, he advised the King to Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 28.
set on foot his claim to the Crown of France ^ whereto the King was willing
enough to hearken, and to be persuaded by him; but the Affair being of so great
concern, his Council advised him, to take the opinion of his Father-in-Law, the
Earl of Henault, before he attempted any thing therein: Hereupon (a Holinsh.
Chron. p. 353.
Comet with long and terrible streams, ushering in this grand Affair) he
employed thither, with all privacy, Froiss. ut supra.
Henry Burghersh, Bishop of Lincoln, with two Banerets, and two Doctors, to
gain him to his party (with all other persons of note, as they should find
inclinable to assist the King) who laying before the Earl, King Edward's
pretensions to the Crown of France; he not only approved of his design, but
advised the King to contract other Alliances, and gain to his party some of his
neighboring Princes thereabouts.

Encouraged by this advice, and the assurance of his assistance, he by a
Commission 16 Dec. Pat. 10 E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
constituted the said Earl (therein styled, Guilielmus Comes Hanoniae,
Ho^landiae and Selandiae, ac Dominus Frisiae socer noster) his Proctor, to
treat and The PORTRAICTVRES of King EDWARD the 3. with the first 2^ KNIGHTS
COMPANIOS in the HABIT of the ORDER, and SVRCOATS of their ARMS,
agree with such Noblemen, persons of note, and others, as he should think
best, touching both Alliances and Retainers. With this, Commissions with like
power, and under the same date, were likewise sent to Ibid.
William Earl of Iuliers, the Kings Brother-in-Law, to Sir John de Montgomery,
Knight, and to Mr. John Waweyn, Canon of Derlington.

In April following, a like Commission was issued to 19. April Pat. 11. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 11.
Henry Bishop of Lincoln, William Earl of Salisbury, and William Earl of
Huntingdon, and they immediately dispatched into Flanders, where they found
business so well prepared by the Commissioners before named, that by the 24. of
May ensuing, Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 9.10.11.
they had fully engaged diverse of the Nobility and others in Henault, Geldres,
and the Marquisate of Iuliers, to appear in the Kings assistance against the
French, and withal settled the proportion of Men and Arms, each of them were to
furnish the King with in that Service, together with the stipends and wages to
be paid them in lieu thereof. This done, the said Froiss. Chron. Lib. 1. cap.
29.
Bishop went to Gaunt, and there won so much upon the humor of Jacques
Dartuell, that he gained him also to the Kings party.

Within a few days after Ret. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 10.
Renaut the Second Earl of Guildres, and Zuitphen (who had married Leonora, the
Kings Sister) and William Marquess of Iuliers ( Rittersbusius in Tab. Com.
Hollandiae and Seland.
Husband to Ioane Sister to Queen Philippa) entered into the Association, and
next Vlt. Iunii Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 9.
Rupert, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, signed an Agreement at
Frankeford, whereby he obliged himself to assist the King, for the recovery and
maintenance of his Inheritance, against all persons whatsoever, except Lewis
the Emperor, his Uncle (which several Contracts, made by the foresaid
Ambassadors with these Princes, were Ibid.
confirmed by the King under the Great Seal of England, the 26. of August
following.)

Between this Ibid. m. 11.
Emperor and the King, and their Heirs, past also an Union and Confederacy,
which obliged them to use all their power particularly against Philip de Valois
(who carried himself as King of France) and his Successors in that Kingdom, for
the recovery and defense of their Honors, Inheritances, and Possessions.

The 13. of July was Ibid. m. ^.
John Duke of Loraine, Brabant, and Lemburgh retained for the King, and with
the assent of the Emperor, was the Confederation made with 2. Sept. Ib. m. 6.
Lewis his eldest Son, there styled Marquess of Brandenburgh Count Palatine of
the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, and Arch-Chamberlain to the Emperor.

With these, the King retained, for his intended Expedition into France,
several other Noblemen of those Countries, as namely Ibid. m. 9.
Adolph Earl of Monte (who having made Fealty and Homage to the King, he in
reward thereof, settled on him a Pension for life, of 1200 Florens of Gold per
annum, out of his Exchequer) Ibid. m. 6.
Everhard, eldest Son to Thideric Earl of Lymborg; Ibid. m. 6.
Adolph, Earl of Marlia; Ibid. m. 6.
Robert de Touburgh, Lord of Warnich; Ibid. m. 5.
Theodorick, Earl of Lossen and Heuseberg, and Lord of Blatikenburgh; and
Theodorick de Montjoy, Lord of Valkenborgh: besides diverse valiant Knights, and
Commanders of eminent note.

But Philip de Valois was so alarmed at the report of these Alliances, that he
used all endeavors to interrupt the foresaid Ambassadors, in their passage
home, both by Froiss. Chron. lib. 1. cap. 30.
placing a Garrison in the Isle of Cogaunt, and setting out several men of War
to Sea: Of which the King having intelligene, directed his Writ to 20. Iunii
Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 30. and 22. vide Rot. Franc. 11. E. 3. m. 30.
John de Ros, Admiral of the Fleet, from the River of Thames Northward, to fit
up a Convoy of 40 stout Ships well manned, to be at Dort in Holland, on Monday
after Midsommer-day, to secure their return, where they lay ready for their
coming.

And whereas these Ambassadors, in making these Alliances and Retainers, upon
the Kings account, had obliged themselves to pay sundry great sums of money;
the King Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. m. 4.
indempulfied them, their Heirs, and Executors, of all those sums, and other
things whereto they were so engaged.

This great Affair, of strengthening the King with Alliances and Friends in
Germany and Flanders, was again set on foot, and to that purpose, another 3.
Oct. Rot. Alman. 11. E. 3. n. 10.
Commission was issued to the said Bishop of Lincoln, and Earl of Salisbury, to
whom was added Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk, and John Darcy Steward of the
Kings Household, with power to any three of them, to treat thereupon with Lewis
the Emperor. Another Ibid. n. 11.
Commission of the same date, was made out to them, and to Richard de Winkele,
John de Offord, Paul de Monteflorum, John de Montgomery, and John Wauwyn,
impowering them to treat with, and retain all persons, as well Nobles as others,
for the Kings Service.

And as the King did endeavor by these means to gain assistance, for the
recovery of his right to the Crown of France, so did he not neglect all methods
of Peace: among which he thought fit to 7. Oct. Ib. n. 13.
constitute the foresaid Bishop of Lincoln, the Earls of Salisbury and
Suffolk, and John Darcy, his Agents, to treat cum magnifico Principe Domino
Philippo Rege Franciae illustri, or his Deputies, touching his right to the
said Crown; to wit, whether it ought to remain to him, or King Edward: And by
another Commission, they were empowered to treat upon all Controversies and
Demands whatsoever, relating to the Dukedom of Aquitaine, or other parts beyond
Sea, and also of a happy and perpetual peace.

The same day, he Ibid. m. 1.
constituted John Duke of Brabant and Loraine, his Lieutenant, Captain, and
Vicar General in the Kingdom of France: where it is worthy note, that the King
in this Commission (challenging the Crown of France, as devolved to him by
right of succession, and consequently become his lawful Inheritance) did assume
the Title of that Kingdom, and styled himself, Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae
and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae: And by another Commission
bearing even date, made of these Officiary Dignities to the said Duke, he put
France in the first place, thus, Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Franciae and Angliae,
etc. but it was not long e're he voluntarily laid this Title of France aside,
nor did he solemnly assume it again, till the 14. year of his Reign over
England.

By several other Ibid.
Commissions of the same date (wherein the Titles of England and France were so
transposed) did the King constitute into the same Dignities, William Marquess
of Iuliers, William Earl of Henault, his Father-in-Law, and William Bohun Earl
of Northampton; and by another then dated and directed to the Archbishops,
Bishops, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and all other persons in the Kingdom
of France (having therein the Titles of England and France transposed as
before) they are commanded to receive the said Duke, as if it were the King in
his own person, as also the Marquesses and Earls. And further, the said
Marquesses and the Earls were by other Commissions severally constituted the
Kings special Ambassadors, to make known his said Title to all whom it should
concern, to challenge and prosecute his right, to require every unjust
detainor, to render to the King whatsoever he so withheld from him, to displace
and punish such as they should think meet; and lastly to do and execute all
other things, which should be most necessary for the recovery and preservation
of his right.

The King of France had in the beginning of this year sent Forces into Claus.
11. E. 3. p. 2. m. 29. Dorso, vide Hist. Anglic. Script. Coll. 2569.
Gascoigne, and seized upon many of the Kings, Castles and Fortresses; upon
notice hereof the King gave Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 40.
command to arrest 20 Ships in the Port of Southampton, and thereabouts, and to
press men to be ready at Portsmouth, to set forward for Gascoigne on
Whitson-Eve following; for he had raised a great Army to send thither. (It may
not here be forgotten, what is recorded of Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 4.
Reymond Cornely Lord of Abertha a Gascoigner, who made an offer to the King of
France, to fight in defense of King Edward's right to those Countries; for
which 6. Ian. ibid.
he sent him very great and particular thanks.) But withal made several
applications, by his Ambassadors, to the Court of France, for restitution of
what had been seized on, and prevention of a War. His Offers were these.

1. Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 2. m. 28. Dorso.
To marry his eldest Son the Duke of Cornwall to the King of France's Daughter,
without Dowry. 2. The marriage of his Sister, the Countess of Geldres to his
Son, with a great sum of money. 3. The marriage of his Brother the Earl of
Cornwall, with any of the Blood Royal. 4. To make restitution for any damage,
he tendered him as much money as he could in reason demand. 5. He also
proferr'd to take a Voyage to the Holy Land with the King of France, if he
would restore his Lands to him. 6. "To go the Voyage, if he would restore but
half, or some of those Lands. 7. To take the Voyage with him, if he would make
restitution after his return; or lastly, 8. To take the Voyage singly himself,
so that at his return, he would restore him his right.
These Overtures with many others, which the King or his Council could think
off, were offered to the King of France, in order to a Peace, with this general
proposal beside; That if any one could think of any other way tending
thereunto, he would be ready to accept thereof. But all in vain; for, on the
contrary, King Philip excited and maintained the Scots against him, and his
Navy also did great mischiefs at Sea.

Whereupon the Pope perceiving that the War was likely to proceed, sent into
England P. Priest Cardinal of St. Praxid, and B. Deacon Cardinal of St. Mary in
Aquiro, to use their best endeavors, to compose the differences now growing
high between the two Kings. Upon whose mediation with King Edward, though Peace
could not be obtained, yet that things relating to Peace might the better be
effected, a Rot. Franc. 11. E. 3. m. 2. Dorso.
Truce was agreed on, to the Morrow after Candlemas day, an. 12. E. 3. and
thence prorogued to the Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 36. vide Pat. de eod.
an. p. 1. m. 24.
first of March, and lastly, a further enlargement of it to Rot. Alman. 12. E.
3. p. 1. m. 36. vide Pat. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 24.
Midsummer following, in case the King of France should consent to it, and give
Security that it should be observed; but he it seems refusing, the King was
advised to revoke this later cessation (which he did the Ibib. m. 16.
6. of May) and to take a Journey into Flanders, personally to confer with his
Allies, in pursuance of his design against France, and thereupon he took
shipping at the Port of Orewell the 16. of July, and went to Antwerp: But
before he went, upon the Cardinals further importunity, a 21. June Rot. Alman.
12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 5.
Commission issued to I. Archbishop of Canterbury, R. Bishop of Durham, R. de
Vfford Earl of Suffolk, Sir Geoffry le Scrop Knight, and Mr. John Vfford
Archdeacon of Ely, with power to treat and agree, touching all things in
difference between them, in reference to a full and final Peace. And by another
Ibid.
Commission, bearing the same date, the Duke of Brabant, Earl of Hanow and
Gueldres, the Marquess of Iuliers, and Sir William Dunort Lord of Oustrehout,
Knight, are added to them. These Commissions were double, and of two several
Styles; in the one, the King calls Philip de Valoys Consanguineus noster
Franciae, only; and in the other, Excellentissimus Princeps, Dominus Philippus,
Rex Franciae, illustris Consanguineus noster charissimus.

At Antwerp the confederate Princes gave the King a meeting, and here he 22.
July Rot. fact. apud Antuerp. 12. E. 3. m. 7. and 3.
expressly revoked all the powers he had given the forementioned Commissioners,
to treat with Philip de Valois, as King of France. At length it was resolved,
that the Froiss. Chron. lib. 1. cap. 32.
Duke of Iuliers should be sent Ambassador, from the King to the Emperor; which
Embassy obtained a promise to the King, of the Vicar-generalship of the Empire;
whereupon, about the beginning of September he took a Journey to Walsingh. sub
an. 12. E. 2.
Colen, where the Emperor publicly defied the King of France, and constituted
King Edward his Vicar General, who at his return into Flanders, Froiss. lib. 1.
cap. 34.
entered upon the execution of that Office.

In the 13. year of this Kings Reign, at the instance of the foresaid
Cardinals, Primo Iulii Pat. concess. hominib. Augl. and Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 17.
John Archbishop of Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Durham, Henry Bishop of
Lincoln, the Earls of Derby, Salisbury, and Suffolk, and some others, were
empowered to treat with Philip de Valois, or his Deputies, upon the Dignities,
Honors, Lands, and Rights, belonging to King Edward, and all other
controversies whatsoever. The Deputies on the other part, were the Holli^sh.
Chron. p. 355.
Archbishop of Rouen, the Bishops of Langres and Beauvais, and the place for
treaty, Arras; but nothing of Peace being thereby effected, the King prepared
effectually for War; having 16. Febr. Patentes inter Regem Angl. and diversos
Magnates German. de an. 13. E. 3. m. 2.
some time before, made an alliance with Albert and Otho, Dukes of Austria,
Stiria, and Karinthia; and received Homage as King of France, from Reiginald,
Duke of Gueldres and Earl of Zutphen, for which he afterward granted him Ib.
m. 4.
1000 l. sterling per Annum, for his life. He likewise made alliances with
other Princes, who were to furnish him with men, to be employed in his intended
expedition into France: as also with Ib. m. 4.
Lewis the Emperor: after which, he sent a Letter from Antwerp to the Pope,
asserting his claim to the Crown of France, which is to be seen in Sub an. 13.
E. 3.
Thomas Walsingham's History of England.

All things for War being now in readiness, the King (with the assistance of
his Allies) first besieged Cambray (an Imperial City, and then in the hands of
the French) but it being too well fortified and provided, to be suddenly taken,
he raised his Siege, and passed into France, first Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 34.
sending his defiance to Philip de Valois (then at Paris) by the Bishop of
Lincoln. Sir Walter Many was the first, who, after the defiance made, Ibid. c.
36.
entered France with 40. Horse, burnt Mortaigne, took the Castle of Thine,
garrisoned it, and returned to the King at Mechlin.

The King having passed the River Skell, entered France upon Knighton in. Hist.
Angl. Script. Coll. 2574.
St. Matthews Day, and burnt the Country before him. And not long after, at the
request of the Duke of Brabant, to admit of a Treaty of Peace, the King, at
Markoyne, 4. Oct. Pat. concess. hominib. Angl. and Vas^. 13 E. 3. m. ^2.
grants the said Duke power, in his name, to give safe conduct to such persons
as he should think fit, to meet at any place within two or three Leagues from
his Camp, to treat of Peace, the same to continue till Friday following, and
all that day; but nothing was effected.

The Knighton loco cit.
Saturday before St. Lukes Day, the King with his Army passed the River Oyze,
and marching forward till he came between Vyronfoss, and Flamengery, the two
Armies drew near each other, where the Day of Battle was agreed on to be the
Friday after. But in the interim a Froiss. Chron. l. 1. c. 42.
Letter of advice was brought to the French King, from Robert King of Sicily a
famous Astrologer, to dissuade him from fighting, since he had by his Science
found, that if he fought with the King of England, he should be vanquished, and
loose the day. This Letter so prevailed with the King of France, that though he
had the greater power, and that both Armies stood ranged for Battle, yet was
there not a blow struck on the appointed Day. The Monday following,
intelligence was brought to the King, Knighton Hist. Angl. Coli. 2575.
that the French were dispersed, and returning homewards, whereupon he withdrew
his Army, and marched back into Brabant.

At his return to Antwerp, he 15. Nov. Pat. inter Regem and diversos Magnat.
German. 13. E. 3* m. 3.
issued out another Commission, to John Archbishop of Canterbury, R. Bishop of
Durham, H. Bishop of Lincoln, W. Earl of Salisbury, Sir Bartholomew Burghersh,
and Sir Geoffry le Scrop, Knights, and John de Offord Archdeacon of Ely, to
treat of Peace with Philip de Valois, or with Commissioners from him, and a 16.
Dec. Ib. m. 2.
month after this Commission was renewed, upon adding Robert de Vfford, Earl of
Suffolk, to the before-named Commissioners.

Here also, the King was advised to engage the Froiss. l. 1. c. 43.
Flemmings to his further Assistance, who were willing enough (for, by the
means of Jacques D'artuell, he had gained a great influence upon them) but
considering they stood engaged in the Pope's Chamber in two Millions of
Florens, not to make War against the King of France, they proposed, that the
King would quarter the Arms of France with those of England, and call himself
King of France, as he ought of right to do, and then they would take him to be
the rightful King of France, and receive from him a discharge of that
Obligation, and afford him their assistance. To this proposal the King agreed,
and solemnly assumed both the Arms of the Kingdom, and Title of King of France.
He also caused his Great Seal to be changed, and brought it with him at his
return to England (landing at Claus. 14. E. 3. p. 1. m. 42. dorso.
Orewell the 21. of Febr. at 9. a Clock in the Morning) and the first of March
delivered it to Sir John de St. Paul, in a Chamber called the Cage Chamber at
Westminster. The old Great Seal, was then delivered up to him by the said Sir
John, which he gave to William de Kildesby to be kept in his Wardrobe: But,
that the New Seal might be made more public, he caused 21. Febr. Ib. m. 33.
dorso.
Impressions thereof, and of his Privy Seal, to be made and sent to all the
Sheriffs in England, to be published in the several Counties, in regard he
intended at the meeting of the Parliament on the Wednesday next after Midlent
Sunday; to Vide Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. n. 10.
acquaint them with the cause, wherefore he had added to his Style, the title
of King of France.

That day being come, he under his New Great Seal, as King of France, Pat. 14.
E. 3. p. 2. m. 36.
vacated all Papal Processes made at the instance of the French King, against
the Inhabitants of Flanders; and granted to the Earl of Flanders, his Heirs and
Successors for ever, the Towns of Lysle, Doway, Bethune, and Orchies, with the
County of Artois, and City of Tournay, and to their Inhabitants, diverse
Privileges. And by another Instrument of the same date under the said Seal,
with the consent of the Parliament, he granted, Ib. m. 35. and 37.
that the staple of Wools should be settled at Bruges.

A little before his return into England, he wrote a Rot. Franc: 14. E. 3. m. 1.
Letter from Gaunt (which bore Test the 8. of Febr. in the first year of his
Reign over France, and 14. over England) to the Prelates, Peers, and Commons of
France, thereby signifying, that Charles, late King of France, his Mothers
Brother, being dead, that Kingdom was fallen to him by manifest Law; and that
Philip de Valois, Son to the Uncle of the said King, had by force intruded into
it in his Minority, and yet detained it. Lest therefore he should seem to
neglect his own right, he thought good to own the Title of France, and take on
him the defense and Government thereof, and having offered the said Philip
diverse friendly conditions of Peace, to which he refused all condiscention, he
was therefore necessitated to defend himself, and recover his right by force of
Arms; and therefore all such Subjects as would submit to him as true King of
France, by Easter then next ensuing, should be received into his grace and
protection.

Having dispatched his Affairs with the Parliament, which had given him a Rot.
Parl. 14. E. 3. n. 7.
great Supply, to go on with this War, and wherein an Act passed Ib. n. 34.
that he might, with the assent of his Allies, condescend to any reasonable
terms of Peace: And having created the Marquess of Iuliers, n. 35.
Earl of Cambridge, and given him 1000 l. per annum until he were provided for
of so much Land of Inheritance, He got in readiness an Army to go beyond Sea,
and prepared his Navy to transport it, and on the 22. of June (hora diei quasi
prima) set sail from Orewell.

The French King had laid Froiss. l. 1. c. 50.
120. great Ships, beside Genoeses, Normans, and Picards, Manned with 40000.
Men, to intercept his passage; But after a fierce and bloody fight on Midsummer
Eve, the Claus. 14. E. 3. p. 3. m. 6. dorso.
King got the Victory, before Sluice, destroying most of the Enemy, and taking
the greatest part of their Fleet: and on Midsummer day landed at Sluice, and
went forthwith to Gaunt. Of this Signal Victory an account, by Rot. Parl. 14.
E. 3. n. 6.
Letter was sent from the King to the Bishops and Prelates, by the Earl of
Arundel, and Sir William Trussell.

Not long after the Froiss. l. 1. c. ^2.
King held a Council with his Allies at Villenort, where it was resolved, that
the King should besiege Tournay, before which he brought 120000. Men. 27. July.
Thence, he sent a Letter sealed with his Great Seal, to Philip de Valois,
signifying, that he had fairly requested him to render him his lawful right to
the Crown of France, but perceiving he meant to persist in detaining it,
without returning him any answer, He was therefore entered Flanders, as
Sovereign Lord thereof, to pass through that Country, for recovery of his
Inheritance so detained; yet to avoid the effusion of Christian blood, and
determine the right, he challenged him to fight body to body, or else 100.
chosen Soldiers on each side, or if both were refused, then to pitch upon a
day for both Armies to fight near Tournay; But the French King returned no
answer to this Letter.

The Siege continued eleven weeks, wanting three days, in which time, by the
mediation and effectual endeavor of Jane de Valois, the French Kings Sister, a
Treaty was set on foot, Claus. 14. E. 3. p. 2. m. 32. dorso.
John, King of Bohemia, Adolph, Bishop of Liege, Reynel Duke of Loraine, Am
Earl of Savoy, and John Earl of Arminiack, being Commissioners for the French
King, the Dukes of Brabant, and Gueldres, the Marquess of Iuliers, and John of
Henault Lord Beaumont for King Edward; who on the Walsingl. page 136.
25. of September agreed upon a Truce, between both Kings, to endure till
Midsummer following (of which publication was made in England the 6. of
October) and thus both Armies retired. But this was much against the Kings
Will, though not against those of his Allies, who were very desirous to return
home. The Siege being raised, the King went to Gaunt, and thence returned into
England, where he arrived (at the Tower Wharf) on the Claus. 14. E. 3. page 2.
m. 12. dorso.
Feast of St. Andrew about Midnight.

At this Treaty before Tournay, it was among other things agreed, that another
Treaty should be held at Arras, within that year, whither both Kings and the
Pope should send Commissioners; but that meeting produced only another year to
be added to the Truce. The Kings Commissioners were the Frois. lib. 1. cap. 63.
Bishops of Lincoln and Durham, the Earl of Warwick, Sir Robert d' Artois, Sir
John Henault, and Sir Henry of Flanders. This year produced some other
Overtures for the amicable composure of all Controversies, and concluding a
Peace between the two Kings; to which purpose a 9. April R^t. Alman. 1^* E. 3.
m. 27.
Commission issued to R. Bishop of Durham, Hugh Earl of Gloucester, William
Fitz, Warren, Nicholas de Flisco, and William Trussell. Another 24. May Ib. m.
20.
Commission issued to John Duke of Brabant, Reignold Duke of Gueldres and
Zuthphen, William Marquess of Iuliers, and Earl of Cambridge, and William Earl
of Hanaw, and John de Hanaw Lord Beaumont, to treat and agree with Philip de
Valois, upon a Truce, to the Feast of the decollation of St. John Baptist then
coming on, which it seems became so far hopeful, as to 21. Aug. Ib. m. 19. vide
Claus. 15. E. 3. p. 2. m. 38. dorso.
produce a prorogation till the Feast of the 14. Sept. Ib. m. 12.
Exaltation of the Holy Cross, and thence till Ibid. m. 7.
Midsummer in the following year. Another Commission was made forth to Rot.
Alman. 15. E. 3. m. 13.
William Earl of Huntingdon, Bernard Dominus de le Brett, Bartolomew de
Burglersh, John de Offord, Archdeacon of Ely, and Michael de Flisco, to treat
with the (...) Philip de Valois, as well touching the Kingdom and Crown of
France, as diverse other questions and controversies between them, and to
compose the differences by a full Peace, or otherwise a Truce; and one of these
Commissions was to treat, by the advice of John Duke of Brabant, and other the
Kings Allies in ^landers.

While the King lay at the Siege of Tournay, the Frois. lib. 1. cap. 55.
Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 258.
Scots (excited by the French King) invaded England, and passing by Berwick
marched into Northumberland, and thence to D^^^^m, foraging the Country still
as they went, and after returned home. (...) this incursion they recovered all
the Castles formerly lost, except those of Ede^^urgh, Strivling, and
Roxborough, the first of which, within a short time after, was taken by
stratagem. But in the Truce made at Tournay, the Scotch were by a particular
Article included, and so all hostility ceased during that Truce; yet after the
expiration thereof, and some new provocations given the King, he rai^ed an Army
to enter Scotland, but being engaged in the War with France, could not go with
it himself, and therefore Primo Aug. Rot. Scot. 15. E. 3. m. 9.
constituted Edward, King of Scotland his Captain and Lieutenant of his Army:
and in another Ibid.
Commission of the same date, gave him power nevertheless to treat with the
Scots, and to admit them to Peace, and pardon their offenses. In these
Commissions the King styles him, Magnisicus Princeps, Edwardus Rex Scotiae,
fidelis and consanguineus noster char^simus.

The Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 12.
following year he was again constituted the King's Captain and Commander in
chief, of the Army designed against Scotland, for defense of the Kingdom of
England, and destruction of his Scotch Enemies; and further commissionated to
Ibid. m. 9.
raise men in all the Counties beyond Trent, as well within Liberties as
without, for that Expedition. Upon which preparation, a Knighton Hist. Ang.
Scrip. Coll. 2581.
Truce was made for one year; before the ending of which, the Truce concluded
at Vannes in Britagne, between the King and his Adversary of France, took
commencement, being to hold from Michaelm^s 17. E. 3. for three years: And in
the mean time the Bishop of Durham, and others, were appointed by the King to
Rot. Scot. 17. E. 3. m. 4.
treat and conclude with the Scots, touching the manner, form, and conditions
appointed by the said Truce, and the mutual commerce of the Subjects of both
Kingdoms, as also to reform and punish the breakers of the Truce.

The Truce made with the French at Tournay, and enlarged at Arras, gave the
King time to see his Allies in Flanders, aimed chiefly at the accomplishment of
their own designs by his hands, rather than the advancement of his interest in
France by their assistance; and the two fruitless Expeditions, in attempting to
enter that Kingdom through Flanders, showed they would do little for him;
besides, he now judged it a more easy and advantageous passage thither through
Britagne, which he hoped to gain, by laying hold of the occasion offered him,
to protect and assist John Earl of Montsort, Duke of Britagne; whose Title to
that Dukedom, and the occasion of the War between him and Charles de Bloys, are
set down at large by Lib. 1. t. 64.
Sir John Froissard.

This Froiss Chron. lib. 1. cap. 72.
John Montfort being taken Prisoner at Nants, by Charles de Bloys (whom the
French King had assisted with an Army to enter Britagne) was sent to Paris, and
there died in Prison, his Widow ( Pa^. 16. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25.
Ioane of Flanders being of a manlike courage) nevertheless maintained the War,
and, to gain further ai^ and supplies from King Edward, proposed (by H^lli^sh.
Chron. p. ^62.
Sir Emere de Clisson, a Nobleman of Britagne) to marry her Son to one of his
Daughters, which taking effect, the King s^nt Ro^. Alman. 15. E. 3. m. 4. and
7. vide Fr^issard. li. 1. cap. 79.
Sir Walter Many (in November) with 3000 Archers into Britagne, who though they
wandered 40 days at Sea, by distress of weather, Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 81.
yet came timely to her assistance.

The King in the 16. year of his Reign raised a great Army, and, by May 20.
Claus. 16. E. 3. m. 20. dorso.
Proclamation made, appointed his Soldiers in all Counties of England, except
Yorkshire, Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, to be in readiness by
Midsummer following, to go along with him, and Ibid. p. 3. m. 28. dorso.
after directed his Letters to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops,
for public Prayers to be made, and the divine goodness sought to, for a
blessing upon his Armies, which now he designed both against France and
Scotland.

The P. 2. m. 23. dorso.
4. of October following he took shipping at Sandwich, in a Ship called the
George, and sailing toward France met with the French Fleet, where after a
fierce Encounter, they were separated by Tempest; at length he 29. N^v.
Hollensh. Chron. page 364.
landed near Vannes in Britagne, and laid Siege thereto; and here, leaving the
Lord Stafford, he marched to Remes and Nantes, laying Siege to both Towns, as
also to Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 96.
Dynan and took it; after which he returned to Vannes, and then Ibid. cap. 97.
drew off his Forces from Nantes thither: and there the Rot. Pa^l. 17. E. 3. n.
8. vide etiam Claus. de e^d. an p. 1. m. 25. dorso.
Bishop Cardinals of Penestrina and Tusculan, sent from Pope Clement the Sixth,
obtained of him (19. Ian. 1343.) a Truce for Kinghton Col. 2583.
3 years, which the King gave way to, in hope of an honorable Peace. This done,
the King returned into England, and Claus. 16. E. 3. p. 1. m. 31.
set forth a Proclamation, to give public notice of this Truce.

But the Truce expiring, the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 142.
War was again renewed, between Charles de Bloys and the Countess of Montfort,
to whose assistance the King s^nt Sir Thomas Dagworth, from the Siege of
Calais, with a supply of men; and the English having Rochedaren surrendered to
them, Charles de Bloys laid Siege to it, to relief of which, the Countess sent
Sir Ibid. c. 143.
Thomas Dangorne, and Sir John Artwell who ( Hollirsh. Chron. p 376.
20. June 1347.) took Charles de Bloys with the Britagne and Norman Lords, that
were on his part, Prisoners, and raised the Siege; which Froiss. c. 147.
Charles was sent into England, where he remained in custody a long time.

The Claus. 17. E. 3 p. 1. m. 25 dorso.
24. of February, an. 17. E. 3. the King summoned a Parliament to be held die
Lunae proximo post Quindena Paschae, wherein Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, present
at the making of the Truce near Vannes, declared that the King consented
thereto, Rot. Parl. de eod. an. n. 8.^
provided it might be honorable and advantageous for his Allies, and was
content to have the Peace made before the Pope, as before a Friend, but not as
a Judge; otherwise he would pursue his Quarrel. And that as the King did not
undertake this War without the assent of Parliament, so without it he would
conclude no Peace, and therefore it rested, whether it were best for the King
to take this Offer, and send Ambassadors to the Pope instructed for this
Affair, before Midsummer, or not? Hereupon both Lords and Commons answered,
That it was good to pursue the Peace, and to send Ambassadors, as was proposed.

Those who were first sent to the Popes Court upon this Affair, were 20. May
Ro^. Franc. 17. R. 3. m. 1^.
Hugh le Despenser Lord of Glamorgan, Ralph Lord Stafford, William de Norwich,
Dean of Lincoln, Sir William Trussel, and Andrew de Offord, a Civilian. The
Authority given them was to Treat in presence of the Pope, not as a Judge, but
private Person and Friend to both parties, with the Agents of his Cousin the
Lord Philip de Valois, upon the Kings Right to the Crown of France, as also
upon whatsoever Dominions, Dignities, Honors, Lands, Possessions, Places, and
Rights appertained to him, concerning which any controversy had risen between
them, or was like to arise. After this another 19. Aug. Ib.
Commission issued containing the same powers, to Henry of Lancaster Earl of
Derby, Thomas de Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, Robert de Vfford Earl of Suffolk,
Hugh le Despenser Lord of Glamorgon, Ralph de Nevill, Bartholomew de Burghersh,
John le Gray de Ruffyn, Reginald de Cobham, and Thomas de Brodiston, Barons,
William de Norwich Dean of Lincoln, John de Offord Archdeacon of Ely, Robert
Herward Archdeacon of Taunton, and Andrew de Offord Professor of the Civil Law,
or to any 12, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, or 3. of them. But this Treaty had only
the effect of continuing the Truce, yet that so ill kept on the French side,
that the following year it occasioned a 4. Aug. Rot. Franc. 18. E. 3. m. 3.
solemn complaint, sent from the King to the Pope, by John Offord, Dean of
Lincoln, Hugh de Nevill, and Nicholas de Flisco, to require reformation, and
security for the observance of the said Truce, until the time it was to end,
and in case that were not done, then they to surrender it into the Popes hands,
and defy Philip de Valois, as the Kings Enemy.

It seems, the desires of the King met with a dilatory answer, for the Ib. m. 2.
20 of October following, William Bishop of Norwich, John de Offord Dean, and
John Thoresby Canon of Lincoln, Sir Hugh Nevil, and Sir Ralph Spigurnell
Knights, and Nicholas de Flisco were commissionated to declare before the Pope,
in what particulars the Truce had been broken, and to demand reparations: but
after all this, no satisfaction being given to the King, and the Truce
manifestly and notoriously violated, the King gave ^4. April Rot. Franc. 19. E.
4. p. 1. m. 24.
Commission to William de Bohun, Earl of Northampton to defy Philip de Valois,
as a Violator of the Truce, an unjust Usurper of his inheritance in France, and
his Capital Enemy. And 14. June. Ib. m. 10.
shortly after, he set forth a Manifesto touching the dissolution of the Truce,
wherein the causes were declared at large: being the same with the Rot. Ron.
19. E. 3. m. 2. n. 4.
Letters sent from him to the Pope and four Cardinals, the 26. of May
preceding.

This being done, the King with all diligence Froissard Chron. l. 1. c. 121.
provides an Army to enter France the following year, and the Stows Chron. p.
241. b.
5. of July in the 20. year of his Reign, took Shipping at Southampton; but
instead of sailing toward Goscoigne, whether he at first intended, (upon the
advice of Sir Geoffry de Harecourt) he diverted his course, and made toward
Normandy, and landed at Hoges Saint Wast, in the Isle of Constantine not far
from St. Saviors le Vycount, the Cart. and Pat. factae in Franc. 20. E. 3. m.
1.
12. of July after.

Upon his arrival he ordered his Army in Froissard Chron. l. 1. c. 122.
three Battles, the one marched on his right hand along the Seaside, the
second on his left; both which exceedingly enriched themselves with the spoils
of the Country: and himself with the third in the middle. This Battle consisted
of 3000. men at Arms, 6000. Archers, and 10000. Common Soldiers.

The first Town he took was Ib. c. 123.
St. Lo, in Constantine, rich in Drapery, and next Ib. c. 124.
Caen; the plunder of it, and other places, consisting Ib. c. 125.
of Cloth, Vessels of Silver and Gold, Jewels, and more than 60. Knights and
300. Burgesses, made Prisoners, were sent to the Ships, and transported into
England. After this the King marched on, wasting and burning the Country and
entered Lisieux, the Chief City of Normandy, for Wealth and Merchandise, and
plundered it. And hence, he gave Rot: Norman. 20. E. 3. m. 21.
Letters of Protection and safe conduct to the Cardinals of Tusculan, and St.
John, and St. Paul, sent from the Pope to mediate a Peace. From thence he
marched into the Country of Eureux, and spoiled it, and leaving Roan, he passed
to Gaillon, and burnt it, with Vernon, Pont de Lache, and all the Country
thereabouts, and went over the River Seyne to Poissy. Hence (having thus
overrun and wasted Britagne and Normandy) the English Marshalls rode toward
Paris, and burnt St. Germain en Lay, Mountjoy, St. Clou, Pety Bolayne near
Paris and the Bourg la Reyne, which caused the French King to retire to St.
Denis. Sir Godfrey de Harecourt encountered a considerable party of the
Burgesses of Amiens, going to the assistance of the French King, of whom he
killed 1200, and defeated the rest, and took their Carriages and Baggage.

About this time the Rot. Norman. 20. E. 3. m. 21. Dus^.
French King had sent notice to King Edward, that he would give him Battle, the
Thursday, Saturday, Sunday, or Monday after, betwixt St. Germains de Preez, and
Valgirart de la Paris, or between Franconville and Ponthoise; in answer to
which, (from Antes 15. Aug.) the King sent him word, that he was come thither,
to put an end to the War by Battle, but that the said French King had broken
down all the Bridges, so that they could not come at each other. That he had
come to Poissy, and repaired that Bridge, and there stayed three days expecting
him, and that the French Forces might have come on, either on the one side or
the other, at his pleasure. But forasmuch as they did not, he could not then
give him Battle, and therefore now resolved to pass further into the Kingdom,
and there stay till he had ended the War, or advantaged himself, and disabled
his Adversaries: Nevertheless if he would combat him, to save those which he
challenged for his Subjects, upon notice of the Hour, he should find him ready
for the Encounter, and this he principally desired for the benefit of
Christianity, since he had refused to accept of, or propose any reasonable way
for effecting Peace.

This answer was not liked by the French King; therefore the King having stayed
at Froiss. Chron. loco cit.
Poissy, and there kept the Feast of our Lady in August, marched thence into
the Country of Beauvosyn, burning and destroying all before him. One night
having lodged in an Abbey, and next morning after his departure, looking behind
him, he saw it on fire, but he hanged 20 of his Soldiers, that had done the
mischief; because at his first entrance into France, he had caused Proclamation
to be made throughout his Army, that no man, upon pain of death, should violate
a Church, or burn a Religious House.

As he passed by Beauvois, he fired the Suburbs, and went thence to
Granvillers. He also took and fired the Castle of Angers, and the Town of Pork,
and the two Castles; and drawing near to Froiss. lib. 1* cap. 126.
Abbeville, he endeavored to pass the River of Sum, but sounding several
places found no Ford; at length one Gobyn a Grace (a Prisoner) brought him to
Blanch-taque. This Ford was guarded on the other side by 12000 men, commanded
by Sir Godmar du Foy; Ibid. cap. 127.
here the King forced his passage, and defeated Sir Godmar, and after he had
passed his whole Army over, he marched to Crescy in Ponthieu, where he formed
his Army into three Battles, the Ibid. c. 128.
first of which was led by the Prince of Wales, accompanied with diverse of the
English Nobility, the second by the Earl of Northampton, and the third by the
King himself.

And here, before the Battles joined, he created 50 Knights, among whom were
Cart. Pat. Rege existente in Fra. 20. E. 3. m. 21.
Robert de Maule, Guy de Brian, John de Ravensholm, Peter de Brewes, Thomas de
Lancastre, Henry Dengayne, and John the Son of Guy de Beauchamp; to whom the
King gave annual Pensions for their lives, to support these Honors.

The Battle was fought Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 130.
between Bray and Cressy, on Saturday the Ex Lib. Monast. de Lac^ck in Com.
Wilts.
7. of the Calends of September, viz. the 26. of August an. Dom. 1346. and the
Victory fell to King Edward. There were killed on the French part, the King of
Bohemia, the Duke of Lorraine, the Earls of Alanson, Flanders, Harcourt, Almor,
Bloys, Auser, and St. Paul; but the French King fled to Bray Castle with 5
Barons only, and thence to Amiens. On the day after the Battle, there were
Froiss. c. 131.
four times as many slain (coming to the assistance of the French King, but
knew nothing of his defeat) as on the day on which the Battle was fought.

After this Battle, the Ibid. c. 132.
King forthwith carried his Army toward Calais, and sat down before it the
Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2595.
7. day of September, continuing his Siege all the Winter ensuing. The next
Summer the French King came down with an Army of 200000 men to raise the Siege,
and on St^we^ Chron. page 244.
Monday after St. Iame's day, drawing near to the Castle of Guisnes, and
finding the King so strongly entrenched, that he could not attempt him, he, on
the 2. of August, returned; whereupon the Town was surrendered to the King's
mercy, the Knighton loco cit.
4. of August following; and the King having settled his Affairs there, returned
into England the Stowe loco cit.
14. of October.

The Ibid. p. 242.
7. of October an. 20. E. 3. which was within a Month after King Edward had
laid Siege to Calais, David King of Scots invaded England, with Froiss. lib. 1.
cap. 137.
50000 men. The Ibid. c. 138.
Queen being then at York raised an Army to oppose him, and marched toward
Newcastle, near which, on Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2590.
St. Luke's Eve she encountered the Scots, flew 15000 of them, and vanquished
the rest. Their King was taken Prisoner at Ib. Coll. 2591
Meryngton, by John Copland, an Esquire of Northumberland, and (according to
the Kings command signified to 20 Dec. Rot. Scot. 20. E. 3. m. 2.
Thomas Rokely, high Sheriff of Yorkshire, who had received him by Indenture
from Monsieur Ralph Nevill) was delivered by Indenture, dated the Claus. 20. E.
3. p. 2. m. 1. Dorso.
2. of January after, unto John Darcy Constable of the Tower of London, there
to be kept in safe custody. After this Victory, the English entered Scotland,
and took the Castles of Hollenish. page 376.
Roxburgh and Hermitage, and subdued the Counties of Anandale, Galloway, Mers,
Tividale and Ethrick Forest, extending their March as far as Cockburns Peth,
and Sowtray hedge, Tralnilips, and Cross Cave.

Shortly after the defeating of the King of Scots, upon the mediation of the
Cardinal of Naples and Clermont, a 22. Oct. Rot. Norman. 20. E. 3. m. 18.
Commission was made out to William Marquess of Iuliers, William de Bohun Earl
of Northampton, Constable of England, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Marshal
of England, Bartholomew de Burghersh, Richard Talbot Steward of the King's
House, Thomas Bradewardyn Chancellor of London, John de Thoresby, Canon of
Lincoln, and Andrew Offord Canon of York, or any 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, or 3 of them,
to treat of, and conclude with the said Cardinals, upon all Quarrels and
Controversies depending between the King and Sir Philip de Valois, and their
Allies; but this meeting came to nothing.

Nevertheless, after Calais, was taken, the Earls of Lancaster and Huntingdon
were 25 Sept. Rot. Calesis. 21. E. 3. m. 4.
commissionated to treat of a Peace, with the said Sir Philip de Valois, which
upon the interposition and mediation of the foresaid Cardinals, produced a
Truce, to endure from Michaelmas Eve an. 21. E. 3. to the Qninzeme of St. John
Baptist next ensuing.

Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor being dead, about this time Henry Archbishop of
Mentz, Arch-Chancellor of the Empire in Germany, Rudolph and Rupert Counts
Palatine of the Rhyne, and Dukes of Bavaria, Lewis Marquess of Brandenburgh and
Lusatia, and the Dukes of Saxony assembled at Collen, whence they sent
Ambassadors to King Edward, with the offer of Electing him Emperor of Germany;
in return of which he 10. May Claus. 22. E. 3. m. 20. Dorso.
sent to them Sir Hugh Nevil, and Ivo de Glynton Canon of St. Paul's London,
with full information of the Kings intention, which contained a refusal of that
Imperial Dignity, but with Hollinsh. page 412.
great thanks for the honor they designed him.

The Truce made at Calais as aforesaid, now growing toward an end; the King
was prevailed with, upon the Popes Letters, to 15. May Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m.
13.
depute Thomas Fastolf, Arch Deacon of Wells, John Carleton Canon of Wells,
both Doctors of Law, and Friar John de Reppes of the Order of Mount Carmell,
who had Commission to prorogue the Truce, and to treat of a final Peace, the
former of which was concluded on for Ibid. m. 19.
6 weeks in Picardy, Normandy, Artois, Boloigne, and Flanders, and to commence
the 13. of September an. 22. E. 3. But the King well seeing the delay, and
unwillingness of the French to close with him, either for Truce or Peace, drew
down his Forces in October to Claus. 22. E. 3 p. 2. m. 8. Dorso.
Sandwich, intending to pass the Sea; which quickened the French to 18. Nov.
Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m. 10. Dorso.
agree to the prorogation of the Truce, from the 18. of November till the first
of September, an. 23. E. 3. upon which he returned to London.

No sooner was this Truce concluded, but the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 150.
Lord Geoffry Charney attempted to corrupt Sir Amery de Pavy, an Italian, then
Governor of Calais, to betray the Town to him for 20000 Crowns, of which the
King having notice, came privately the night before the delivery was agreed on.
The Lord Geoffry had paid his money, and expected the surrender of the Town,
31. Dec. 1348
when the King issued out, disguised under the Banner of Sir Walter Many, and
fought on foot among the Common Soldiers; and within a while he encountered the
Lord Eustace of Rybemont, a Valiant Knight, who having struck him twice on his
Knees, was at last Mastered by the King, and made his Prisoner.

The encounter being over, and the Froissard c. 1.52.
King desirous to view the Prisoners, caused a great Supper to be prepared for
them, at which time he came in, wearing a Chaplet of Pearls, and passing to Sir
Eustace of Rybemont, took the Chaplet off his own head and placed it upon the
head of Sir Eustace, with the commendation of a valiant Knight, and one that
had performed best in the late Action, and with all forgave him his ransom.

Thomas of Walsingham places this famous exploit to the year 1349. and
consequently to be done in the 23 d year of King Edward the Third. But we
rather judge Sir John Froissard to be in the right, since we find Sir John
Beauchamp made Captain of Calais, the Rot* Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 1.
first of January an. 22. E. 3. which according to Froissard's Account, was the
next day after this defeat of Sir Geoffry Charney: And though the French
Writers affirm, that Sir Aymery de Pavy, discovered the design to the King, yet
Froissard says not, tell the King had otherwise first heard of it, and
therefore not unlike, but there might rest so much suspicion upon Sir Aymery,
as induced the King to appoint a new Governor of the Town, before he went
thence.

It having been agreed on at the last Truce, that Commissioners on both sides
should meet at Boloigne on Sunday, in medio Quadragesimae following, the King
10 Mar. Rot. Franc. 23 E. 3. m. 7.
appointed William Bishop of Norwich, William Bohun Earl of Northampton,
William Clynton Earl of Huntingdon, Regnold de Cobham, Robert de Bourghcher,
and John de Carleton, Doctor of Laws, his Commissioners to Treat of and
conclude a Peace (or prorogation of the Truce) and League of perpetual
friendship, between him and his Adversary of France. But no final Peace could
be agreed on, while Philip de Valois lived, nor after, till King John, his Son
and Successor, was taken Prisoner at the Battle of Poictiers, only several
Froissard Chron. l. 1. c. 154.
Truces were made from time to time, and the last consented to in February an.
28. E. 3. to hold till Midsummer following.

While these Truces were on foot, endeavors were made for the Release of David
King of Scots, the Kings Prisoner, and at length it was agreed, that upon the
coming into England of Rot. Scoti^ 25 E. 3. m. ^.
John, the Son and Heir of the Steward of Scotland, and several other young
Noblemen Hostages for the said King (who when they came, were disposed into the
Castles of York and Notingham) King David should be permitted to go into
Scotland, and upon his return back, the Hostages should be delivered. The Kings
Ibid.
Letters as well of safe conduct to the Hostages, as of power to receive them,
and to take King David's Oath for his return, and the Command for his safe
Custody at Newcastle till the Hostages were come, bear Test the 5. of
September, an. 25. E. 3. to continue unto the Quindena of the Purification next
following, and the 3. of November after, were they renewed to the Feast of St.
Philip and Jacob ensuing.

It seems King David returned back into England about half a year after; for
the 28. of March, an. 26. E. 3. a Rot. Scotiae, 26 E. 3. m. 3.
Command was sent to the Sheriff of Yorkshire to conduct the Hostages to
Berwick, to be there in Quindena Paschae, it being the day set for King David's
return to that Town.

On the same 5. of October, Rot. Scot. 25. E. 3. m. 3.
command was sent to John Coupeland, Sheriff of Northumberland, who had then
the Custody of the said King, to deliver him to the Bishops of Duresm and
Carlisle, William Earl of Northampton, Henry de Percy, and Ralph Nevil, or to
any 4, 3, or 2. of them: and likewise another command issued to them, to
deliver him upon the conditions, and under the form agreed on.

Whilst the foresaid Truce, agreed on in February an. 28 E. 3. was on foot, the
Pope undertook to do what he could, to further the effecting of a Peace, and to
that purpose he sent again to both Kings, to obtain their Authority to bring it
about; but it does not appear, that any thing was done before Midsummer while
it was in being. Nevertheless, we find, that 28 Aug. Rot. Franc. 28 E. 3. m. 3.
whereas in the Treaty between them held at Guynes, among other things, it was
agreed, that Ambassadors from King Edward should be sent to Pope Innocent in
Kal. October. following; the King did accordingly empower William, Bishop of
Norwich, Henry Duke of Lancaster, and some others, his special Ambassadors, to
treat with his Adversary of France, or his Deputies, touching a final Peace
between them; but they returned without effecting any thing, all, but the Stow,
p. 254.
Bishop of Norwich, who died at Avignion, and was there buried.

Toward the latter end of the following Summer, the King having intelligence,
that John the French King was drawing down with an Army toward St. Omars,
Walsing. sub an. 29. E. 3.
in the beginning of November passed over to Calais with Lyonel of Vlster, and
John of Gaunt his two Sons, and a considerable Army, where he arrived the 2.
day of November, and immediately marched against him; but upon notice of his
approach, King John retired, ( Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2610.
breaking down all the Bridges behind him) whom King Edward followed as far as
Heyden, and the Country being wasted by the French, he, for want of Provision
for his Army, returned to Calais, and thence into England.

And whilst in his absence, the Scots had broke out and taken the Ibid.
Town (but not the Castle) of Berwick he immediately marched thither, and (13.
January) recovered the Town, passing further into Scotland, and on the 25. of
the same Month, being then at Roxbrough, King Edward Baliol there made a solemn
resignation of his Crown and Kingdom to him by his Letters Patent; after which,
he marched with his Army to Hadington, burning and wasting the Country on each
side as he went; and having laid it waste, returned into England, and took
Edward Baliol along with him.

The King having notice in the precedent year, that John the French King had
given to Charles Dauphin of Vienvois the Dukedom of Aquitaine, 10. July. Rot.
Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 16.
constituted the Prince of Wales his Lieutenant in that Dukedom, and sent him
with an Army thither, where he 19. Sep.. Claus. 30. E. 3. m 3. Dorso:
fought that memorable Battle at Poictiers, and took John the French King
Prisoner, whom he brought into England in May following.

King John was lodged at the Savoy, and there continued all the Winter, and in
the Spring after was removed, from thence to Hollinsh. p. 390.
Windesor Castle, where he and his youngest Son spent their time in Hawking and
Hunting, and toward Winter returned to the Savoy. And it appears, that the 12.
of December, Rot. Liberarae 32. E. 3. m. 1.
an. 32. E. 3. He was (again settled at this House) under the Custody of Roger
Beauchamp, and several Knights, Esquires, and other Attendants, appointed for
his Guard.

The French King had not been long in England, ere the Pope sent hither Pat.
31. E. 3. p. 2. m. 25.
Talairand, Bishop of Alba (commonly called the Cardinal of Pyergort) and
Nicholas Priest Cardinal, by the Title of St. Vital, to assist at the Treaty of
Peace to be held about Midsummer, an. 31. E. 3. the Kings Letters of safe
conduct for them, and their Train, consisting of 200 Horse, were dated the 3.
of June that year. The Bishop of St. Gean de Maurienne in Savoy came also
hither to the Treaty, having like Letters for himself, and a Train of 30 Horse,
dated the 26. of May preceding; and though a final Peace was not concluded, yet
several Truces were made one upon another, in hopes of it, till Midsummer an.
33. E. 3.

Before this, there had been Rot. Scot. 25. E. 3. m. 3. and Rot. Sooc. 26. E.
3. m. 3.
great endeavors used for the Release of David King of Scots, the Kings
Prisoner, and several addresses made to the King from King Rot. Scot. 28. E. 3.
m. 6.
David himself, as also the Prelates, Peers, and Commons of Scotland, seconded
by the zealous solicitations of Hollinsh. page: 391.
Joan his Queen, Sister to King Edward. But this affair (though often treated
of) came not to an issue, till the Rot. Scot. 31. E. 3. m. 2. dorso.
3. of October. an. 31. E. 3. when, at a meeting of Commissioners on both sides
at Berwick, namely Rot. Scot. 31. E. 3. m. 2. dorso.
John Archbishop of York, Thomas Bishop of Duresme, Gilbert Bishop of Carlisle,
Henry de Percy, Rauf de Nevile, Henry le Scrope, and Thomas Musgrave deputed by
King Edward on the one part, and William Bishop of St. Andrews, Thomas Bishop
of Catness, Patrick Bishop of Brethin, Chancellor of Scotland, Patrick Earl of
March, Robert de Irskin, and William de Levington Knights, Deputies of Robert
Steward Guardian of Scotland, the Prelates, Lords, and Commons of Scotland on
the other party, it was agreed, Ibi^*
that King David should be delivered out of Prison, and ransomed for the sum of
100000 Marks Sterling, to be paid by 10000 Marks annually at Midsummer, the
first payment to begin at Midsummer following. It was also agreed, that the
Truce should be kept and observed in England, Scotland, and the Isle of Man,
until the money was paid, and that Edward de Baliol, and all the Kings Allies
should be comprised in the said Truce. That for payment of the said sum, King
David should leave 20 Hostages (who are named in the conditions set down for
their delivery) that King David, the Peers, Bishops, and Prelates of Scotland,
should be obliged by writing and oath, for payment of the said Ransom, and
observing the Truces: That if there were a failer of payment, they should be
also obliged after the foresaid manner, to render the Body of King David within
three Months after failer, of any term, and he to remain Prisoner till the sum
due at the said term were paid; and for the true payment thereof 20 Hostages
were to be left in England; besides which there were several other conditions
agreed upon, that made up the consideration of his Release.

The Truces between England and France being expired, as aforesaid, without
obtaining Peace, and all endeavors of others becoming ineffectual, the Froiss.
lib. 1. cap. 201.
two Kings themselves began to confer, and fell at length upon such terms, as
it was hoped would produce a Peace; of which an account was sent into France,
but the French determined rather to let their King lie in Prison, than to agree
to them: upon notice of which refusal, the King resolved upon a War, and the
following Winter to enter France, and either make an end of the War, or obtain
Peace and honor at his pleasure. And having designed his Expedition, he next
provided for the security of the Kingdom in his absence, and 10. and 12. Febr.
Rot. Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 40. dorso.
issued out Writs to the Sheriffs of the several Counties, to summon both
Knights and Burgesses to treat with his Council at London, as also with certain
Bishops and Earls in other parts of the Kingdom, how that might best be done.

He next caused all the Froiss. c. ^06.
French Prisoners to be disposed into several safe places: and the French King
having been secured in the Castle of Hereford, under the custody of Claus. 33.
E. 3. m. 2^; dorso.
Roger de Beauchamp, was afterward by the advice of his Council, sent to the
Castle of Somerton in Lincolnshire, on Claus. 33. E. 3. m. 2^; dorso.
Monday the 29. of July, and conducted thither by William Deyncourt, William
Colvill, John Kirketon, John Deyncourt, and Saier de Rocheford, with a strong
Guard of Horse and Foot. Nevertheless upon the ^at. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 28. and
38.
first of March following, upon a spreading rumor that the French were at Sea,
with a design to deliver their King from Imprisonment, command was given that
King John and all the French Prisoners should be removed thence to
Berkhampsted, and John de Buckingham Keeper of the Privy Seal to Thomas the
King's Son, Custos of England, and Ralph Spigurnell were appointed to conduct
them thither. But it seems John de Buckingham went not as was designed, for it
appears by a 8. Mar. Ib. m* 22. dorso.
Writ of assistance, directed to all Mayors, etc. That Thomas de Baddely was
put in his room; nor afterward was either of them employed in this Service,
nor Berkhampsted, but London, the place whither King John was brought, for we
have met with a 14. Mar. Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 38. dorso.
later Writ, whereby William de Ayremynne, John de Buscy, and Thomas de Meaux
were commanded to be at Somerton, on Friday the 20. of March, to bring the said
King to Grantham, and the like Writs were sent to others, to conduct him from
place to place, till he was brought to London, to wit, the 21. of March to
Stanford, the 22. to Higham Ferrars, the 23. to Wooburn Abbey, the 24. to St.
Albans, and the 25. to London.

The King, having raised his Army, Froiss. lib. ^. cap. 205.
first sent over to Calais Henry Duke of Lancaster, and himself presently
followed, taking Shipping at Sandwich, in the Claus. 33. E. 3. m. 9. dorso.
Dertmouth the 28. day of October, inter auroram diei and ortum solis; with him
went the Prince of Wales, and his other Sons Lyonel and Edmund, and many of the
Nobility, and landed that Evening at Calais, circa horam Vesperarum. This Army
(then which never before departed from England, one greater or more gallant)
marched through the very heart of France, and laid all wast before it: for the
French, not daring to encounter the King in all his March, kept themselves
within their fortified Towns, and relinquished the Country to the spoil of this
Army: and to the end, the Reader may observe the course of this Expedition, we
will here set down from Froissard the most notable places it passed through.

From Calais (on the Hollinsh. p. 392. Froiss. l. 1. c. 209.
4. of November) he marched through the Country of Artois, by Arras, and so to
Beauvois thence into Thierach, and so to Reims, to which he laid Seige for 7.
weeks, but provision growing scarce thereabouts, he departed toward Chaalons
in Champaigne, and thence toward Troyes, Tonnerre, Noirs, Mont-royal and so to
Avallon, Ib. c. 210:
where he stayed from Ash Wednesday to Midlent. During this time the young Duke
of Burgoigne sent some Noblemen to the King, who made a Composition with him to
preserve his Country from plundering, for 3. years: after which the King
dislodged his Army, and marched toward Paris, and sat down within two Leagues
of it at Bourg la Reyne.

The King of Sicily was not the only Astrologer that prognosticated of King
Edward's success; but one Ib. c. 211.
Friar John de Rochtaylade (as Froissard calls him) whom Pope Innocent the
Sixth kept Prisoner, had foretold many notable things, which about that time
came to pass, among others (being demanded an account of the War) he affirmed,
that all the misery that had been seen, was not like that to come, and for the
wasting of France, assigned the years 1356, 1357, 1358, and 1359. which happened
right enough: for so great desolation and devastation was made by the Sword and
Famine in those years, that when King Edward entered France an. 1359. he met
with exceeding great scarcity of provision of all kinds, and in all places
where he passed.

While the King lay at Bourg la Reyne, he sent his Heralds to Paris, to demand
Battle of the Duke of Normandy (eldest Son to King John, and then Regent of
France) to which he would not consent; whereupon the King dislodged, and went
to Manto le herry (where he arrived on Holinsh. page 393.
Tuesday before Easter, being the last of March) intending to enter the Country
of Beausse, and stay part of that Summer in Britagne, and about August to
return, and besiege Paris: but the Pope sending into France, the Abbot of
Cluygny, and Simon de Lengres, Provincial of the Friars Preachers, with Hugh de
Geneve Knight, Seigneur d'Auton, the Duke of Normandy dispatched them to King
Edward, to propose a Treaty of Peace, who required things so great, they could
not be yielded to. Howbeit they still followed the King to Chartres, where a
meeting for Commissioners, on both sides, was consented to, and they brought
demands to such moderation, that, (with the Duke of Lancasters effectual
persuasion) the King was content to accept of Peace. But what inclined the King
to hearken thereto (as Ib. l. c. 211.
Froissard tells the story) was this; That while the Commissioners on both
sides were upon Treaty, and the King wholly untractable, there fell in the
Kings Army so great a Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, Rain, Hail, and Stones of
such bigness, that killed both Men and Horses; at which time the King,
beholding the Church of our Lady of Chartres, vowed devoutly to condescend to
Peace. This prodigious storm happened on Easter Monday, which falling that year
on the Stow page 264.
14. of April, near a Month before the conclusion of the Treaty, was from its
dismal effects, called Stow page 264.
Black Monday, which name it retains to this day.

The Treaty was managed between Rot. Cales de Negotiis communibus an. 34 E. 3.
m. 6.
Edward Prince of Wales, and Charles Regent of France, their Proctors and
Agents, in the Rot. Cales de Negotiis communibus an. 34 E. 3. m. 6.
name of both Kings, these two Rot. Franc. 34 E. 3. part unica m. 11. dors.
Princes, and all the Subjects of France. Those deputed on the English part,
were Sir Reginald de Cobham, Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, Sir Francis Hale,
Bannerets, Sir Miles Stapleton, Sir Richard la Vache, and Sir Neel Loring,
Knights, and others of the Council of the King of England. Those other on the
French side were the Ellect of Beauues, his Chancellor Charles Lord Momorency,
Monsieur John le Meingre Marshal of France, Monsieur Aynart de la Tour Lord of
Vivoy, Monsieur Ralph de Ravenal, Monsieur Simon de Bucy, Knights, Monsieur
Stephen de Paris, and Peter de la Charity, his Councillors, with many others of
his Council deputed by King John and Himself.

At first a Truce was agreed on (the Rot. Cales de Nego^. com. an. praed. m. 6.
7. of May, An. Dom. 1360. in the 34. year of King Edward over England) to
continue till Michaelmas following, and thence till Michaelmas an. 35 E. 3.
which upon the return of the King into England, was, by Writs bearing Test the
24. of the same Month, commanded to be published throughout all the Seaports
in England; and by a like Writ, notice was given to the Duke of Lancaster, to
proclaim it in Gascoigne. And the next day ( viz. 8. of May) were the Articles
referring to a final Peace, agreed to on the behalf of both Kings.

This was that Famous Treaty of Renunciation, of both Kings, so much spoken of
by Writers (to which their eldest Sons were parties) in regard the King of
France renounced the Sovereignty of several Territories to King Edward; and he
in like manner renounced his Title to France, and some other Places, all which
we shall here briefly mention.

First it was agreed, Rot. de Tractatu Pac^^ Francia, an. 34 E. 3. m. 10.
that King Edward with what he held in Aquitaine, and Gascoigne, should hold
perpetually to him and his Heirs, in the same manner as the King of France or
his Son, or any of his Ancestors held the same, (to wit, that in Sovereignty,
in Sovereignty, and that in Demain, in Demain) the City, Castle, and County of
The Names of Towns and Countries are here written as in the Record.
Poytiers, with the Fees of Tho^ars, and Land of Belleville, the Cities and
Castles of Xaintes, Again, Pierregort, Lymoges, Caours, Tarbe, Angolesme, and
Rodeis, and the Land and Countries of Poytou, Xaintonge, on this and the
furthest side of the River of Charente, with the Town and Fortress of Rochell,
Agenoys, Pierreguis, Lymosyn, Caorsyn, Tarbe, Bigorre, Gaure, Angolesmoys,
Rovergue, the Counties of Pierregort, Bigorre, Gaure, and Angolesmoys. And that
such Earls or Lords, as had Lands within the forementioned places, should do
their Homages and Services to him.

That King Edward should have in Demain, all that any of his Predecessors
anciently held in the Town of Monstrereul, on the Sea; As also all the County
of Ponthieu (with some few exceptions) the Town and Castles of Calais, the
Towns, Castles, and Lordships of Merk, Sangate, Coloigne, Hames, Wale, and Oye,
with their appurtenances, as likewise all the places lying within the
Jurisdictions and bounds following; that is to say, from Calais to the border
of the River before Gravelinges, and so by the same River round about Langle,
and by the River that runs beyond the Poil, and by the same River that
falls into the great Lake of Guynes to Freton, and thence by the valley about
Calculy Hill, enclosing that Hill, and so to the Sea, with Sangate, and all the
appurtenances, that the King should have the County of Guynes, with all the
Lands, Towns, Fortresses, Places, Men, Homages, Lordships, Woods, Forests, and
Rights thereunto belonging, in as ample manner as the then late Earl of Guynes,
or his Predecessors held the same; and likewise all the Isles adjoining to the
Lands aforesaid, and all other Isles he then held.

That the King of France, and his eldest Son the Regent, should before
Michaelmas 1361. give and deliver to the King of England his Heirs and
Successors, all the Honors, Obediences, Homages, Liegeances, Subjections, Fees,
Services, Recognizances, Rights, and all manner of Jurisdictions high and low,
Resorts and Saveguards, Advowsons and Patronages of Churches, and all Lordships
and Soveraignties, with all the right they had and belonging to them, by any
Cause, Right, Title, or Color, or to the Crown of France, in the said Cities,
Counties, Castles, Towns, Lands, Countries, Isles and Places, and of their
appurtenances and appendencies, without holding any thing to them, their Heirs
or Successors, or Crown of France. And also to give notice to all Archbishops,
Bishops, and Prelates, and all Earls and other Noblemen, and Citizens, by
Letters-Patent in all the said places, to yield obedience to the King of
England, his Heirs and Successors, in the same manner as they had obeyed the
Kings and Crown of France, and thereby also to quit and absolve them of all
their Homages, Fealties, Oaths, Obligations, Subjections, and Promises made to
the Kings and Crown of France. And that the King of England, his Heirs, and
Successors, should have and hold all the forementioned Cities, Counties,
Castles, Lands, Places, and Persons, perpetually and freely in their Lordship,
Sovereignty, Obedience, and Subjection, as the Kings of France had or did hold
them in times past, and all the Countries with their appurtenances in all
Freedoms and Liberties perpetually, as Lords and Sovereigns, and as Neighbors
to the King and Kingdom of France, without any acknowledgment of Sovereign, or
making any Obedience, Homage, Resort, or Subjection, Service, or Recognisance
in time to come, to the Kings or Crowns of France, of the Places or Persons
aforenamed, or any of them.

The Renunciation on the King of England's part, was as to the Name and Right
to the Crown and Kingdom of France, to the Homage, Sovereignty, and Demain of
the Dutchies of Normandy and Thouraine, of the Earldoms of Anjou and Maine, to
the Sovereignty and Homage of the Duchy of Britagne, and Earldom and Country
of Flanders, and all other demands that King Edward made, or might make to the
King of France, for what cause soever, except such things as by the said Treaty
ought to be delivered to him and his Heirs.

It was also agreed, that the King of France should be brought to Calais,
within three weeks after Midsummer following, and should pay for his Ransom
three Millions of Escuts of Gold; two of which should be worth one Noble
English. And that there should be paid to King Edward 600000 Escuts of Gold,
within four Months, accounting from the time of the King of France's arrival at
Calais, and within one year ensuing 400000 Escuts more; and from that year,
every year following, 400000 Escuts, till the said three Millions were paid.
And it after appears in the same Roll, that King Edward had received 400000
Escuts (part of the first 600000) the 24. of October 1360. and for payment of
the other 200000, he gave time till Christmas and Lady Day following.

Furthermore, that certain of the Nobility of France (as well of those who were
made Prisoners at Poictiers as others) should remain Hostages in England for
the King of France, namely, Lewis Earl of Anjou, John Earl of Poictiers, both
Sons to King John, the Duke of Orliens his Brother, the Duke of Burbon, the
Earl of Bloys, or his Brother the Earl of Alanson, or the Lord Peter of Alanson
his Brother, the Earls of St. Pol, Harecourt, Pontieu, Valentynois, Brene,
Vandemont and Forest, the Viscount Beaumont, the Lords of Cousy, Fienles,
Preaux, St. Venaunt, and Garenciers, the Dauphin of Auvergne, the Lords of
Hangest and Montmorency, Sir William of Craon, Sir Lewis of Harecourt, and Sir
John Ligny. And the Names of the Prisoners were these, Lord Philip of France,
the Earls of Eu, Longuevil, Pontieu, Tankarvile, Ieigny, Sanceurre, Dampmartin,
Ventadour, Salebruche, D'auceurre, and Vendosme, the Lords of Craon and
Deruale, the Marshal Dodenham, and the Lord Daubyny.

Besides these, the King of France was obliged to deliver at Calais, within
three Months after he departed thence, in further pledge for the accomplishment
of this Treaty, four Persons of Paris, two of each of the Towns here named, to
wit, St. Omer, Aras, Amyens, Beauves, Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Reyms, Chaalons,
Troies, Chartres, Thoulouse, Lions, Orliens, Compeigne, Rouen, Caen, Tours, and
Bourges, and these to be of the most sufficient and best Burgesses of these
Towns.

It was moreover agreed, Rot. de Tract. Pacis Fr. 34. E. 3. m. 9.
That the King of France, and his Heirs Kings of France, should quit the
Alliances they had with the Scots, and never give to that King, Kingdom, or
Subjects, present or to come, any aid or assistance against the King of
England, his Heirs or Successors, his Realm or Subjects, nor make any alliance
with the Scots, in time to come, against the King and Realm of England. And the
like Article was agreed to by the King of England, in reference to his Alliance
with the Flemmings.

There were diverse other particulars agreed to, on the behalf of both Kings,
and set down in this Treaty of Peace, which we (designing brevity) do omit; but
these are the main and principal to our present purpose.

All things thus finished, King Edward immediately left France, and Rot. Claus.
34. E. 3. m. 30. dorso.
landed at Rye the 18. of May following in the Evening, and thence the next day
came to Westminster. And shortly a Writ 17. Iu^tiRot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 6.
issued to Sir John Beauchamp then Constable of Dover, forthwith to arrest and
fit up a sufficient number of Ships, to carry over King John and his Family to
Calais within the time agreed on, and whither he was conducted the Hollinshed,
page 394.
8. of July after.

The Hollinshed, page 394.
9. of October King Edward followed, where the foresaid Treaty, with some few
alterations, was there ratified and confirmed by Oath of both Kings, and
several Instruments relating to the full accomplishment of the several Articles
thereof, were drawn up and sealed, with the Great Seals of both Kings; all
bearing date at Calais the 24. day of October, an. Dom. 1360.

Here also were the Renunciations, on either side both Rot. de Tract. Pacis
Fran. 34. E. 3 m. 8.
absolute and Ibid. m. 7.
conditional, to all the Towns, Castles, Countries, etc. to the Resort and
Sovereignty, etc. comprehended in the Articles of Peace, drawn up, sworn to,
and sealed, at the same time, but not exchanged; because the King of France was
as yet in Calais, and Prisoner to King Edward, and the Towns, etc. not as yet
delivered. But it was then nevertheless agreed and promised, that they should
be surrendered to the special Deputies on both sides, by Midsummer following, if
it might be; and the Renunciations sent at the Assumption of our Lady next
ensuing, to the Church of the Augustine Friars at Bruges, to be delivered to
those Deputed to receive them. Or if they were not surrendered till Alhollantide
after, then the Renunciations were to be delivered in the said Church, on St.
Andrews day following, at which time and place, both Kings engaged to send
thither, and cause to be delivered to the Deputies on both sides, theirs, and
their eldest Sons Renunciations likewise; but if they were not accordingly
mutually delivered, then not any thing agreed on was to take effect.

But it seems, things were not made ready against Midsummer, the first of the
appointed times for completing these matters, for the 15. of November
following, King Edward Rot: Franc. 35. E. 3. m. 3.
constituted Sir Thomas Vnedale Knight, and Thomas de Dunclent, Licenciate in
the Laws, his Agents (whom he sent to Bruges) with power to make request to the
King of France, for the effectual accomplishment of all things concluded on as
aforesaid, and to require that He and his Son should make the Renunciations and
Transports, according to all the foresaid Agreements made at Calais, and upon
reception of which, he was thereby enabled to give Acquittance in King Edwards
name. But there was another Instrument dated at Calais the said 24. of Oct.
1360. whereby

Rot. praed. de Tract. Pacis Franc. m. 5.
King Edward was obliged to deliver up to the French King on this side
Candlemas, an. 35. E. 3. the Castles and Fortresses, which he held in other
parts of France, than in those, surrendered to him by the French King, viz. (as
they are written in the Record.)

In Champaigne, and in Brie.

Bursant and Ioinville upon the Marn, Bourt in Champaigne, Ochie, Sye upon the
Seine, the Mote de Triesreine, Brugelemens, and all other Fortresses taken in
these Countries.

In Nivernois. Cornallour, Gueillons, Anlesy, Villers, and Mont Epny.

In Anceurrois, and Burgoigne. Regennes, Legny, Malecorne, and the Mote de
Chauloye.

In Aurelenoys and Gastinoys. The New Castle upon Loire and Mereau au Boys, and
all other Fortresses in Orlenois, in Gastinois, in Messien, in Beause, and in
Wenguesin le Francois.

Within a month following, the County of Ponthieu was to be surrendered to King
Edward, or else Hostages.

King Edward was also to deliver up the New Castle in Tynerois, Beaumont, le
Choistif, Nogent, le Rotron, and the Ferte de Ville Nevill, and all other
Fortresses in France, and in the Country of Perch, and of Chartain, and of
Drouais.

And then all the County of Montsort to be surrendered to King Edward, within a
Month after. Or otherwise Hostages.

In Berry and Bourbonoys. The Fortresses of Brisansoys, of St. Torete le
Priague, also Chabries, Espunell, Beamein, Briance Masbres, the Abbey of
Diverlaks, Those, Bruyll, Ameron, Vierson, Mausey, Bourseront, the Roche Tnay,
Blotueres, Villers, Montempny, Beauuoirs, Beau, Ien, Voderon.

In Tourrayne. Lisle, Bouchart, the Roche of Fowsey, Piry, Milieres, Roulet,
Piergu. Veres de Desrubay the Pleyssers Dinone, Langere, Osem, Palnau, and all
other Fortresses in the party of Auvergne, of Bourbonoys, d' Amascon, of Lion,
of Berry, and of Touraine.

And within a Month after, the French King was to deliver up the Country of
Angoulesmois; or Hostages.

In Normandy, Anjou, and Main. The Fortresses de Donefront in Passais, Neuim,
Mirebel upon the Loyre, the Toures de Villers, Saintwast, the Brois Demaine,
Conde upon Noire, and another Fortress thereby called Mess, Tynchebray
Annillers, the new Boure, the Ferte freswel, the Roche Doryvall, the Morle
Racul, the Tower of St. Christopher, Villerais Husron, Honnesfleth, Trisenay,
the Vicount of Plessoys, Buret la Rouche, dire le Port, Ioulein, la Flesche,
Willie, Viez, Passavant, Roussailes.

And within one Month, the French King was to surrender Santes, and the County
of Santoigne; or Hostages.

And all the Fortresses in Pierregort, Coursin, and Agenoys.

For the surrender of all which, the King made forth Commissions to several
persons, bearing date as aforesaid at Calais.

The two Kings then also made a Ibid. m. 6.
League for them, their Heirs, and Successors, of perpetual friendship, and
alliance, to become faithful friends, to assist each other, against all persons
whatsoever, except the Pope and the Emperor; and moreover made a solemn
Renunciation to all Wars against each other, their Heirs, and Successors,
Realms, and Subjects; to both which League and Renunciation, their eldest, and
other Sons signed, and diverse of the Nobility on both sides were sworn.

A Proclamation then also issued from King Edward, directed to Thomas Holland,
Earl of Kent, and all other Captains of Towns, etc. held for the King in
France, to give notice (to all places within their Command) of this Peace and
final accord made as aforesaid.

All things relating to this Peace being thus concluded, and the French
Hostages arrived at Calais, King Edward entertained King John at a great Supper
in the Castle, where the Kings Sons, the Duke of Lancaster, and other of the
chief Nobility of England, served the Kings bare-headed; and when Supper was
ended, both Kings took leave of each other. The Ibid. m. 3.
next morning King John, and his Attendants, went a foot on pilgrimage to our
Lady of Bouloigne, the Prince of Wales and his Brothers accompanied him
thither, where, in the Church of our Lady, they all made their Offerings, and
thence went to the Abbey, and having taken leave of King John, they returned to
Calais the next day: Soon after, King Edward, the Prince, and French Hostages
took shipping for England, where they arrived on the Eve of the Feast of
All Saints.

The Peace thus settled, endured all the life of King John, who took all
possible care to have it entirely preserved, and himself ever after kept good
correspondence with King Edward, to whom he gave all evidence of affection and
love; insomuch, that about the end of the year 1363. he came into England
Bakers Chro.
only upon a visit to King Edward. After his landing, he rode first to Eltham,
and there dined with the King ( Hollinshed. page 396.
24. Ian. 37. E. 3.) and thence that afternoon to the Savoy in the Strand,
where he lodged, and was entertained with all possible kindness; but about the
Hollinshed. page 396.
beginning of March following he fell sick, and dyed the 8. of April, an. 38.
E. 3. for whose death the King Ex verasto Cod. de Episc. and Priorib. Dunelm.
Ecclesiae.
appointed solemn obsequies in diverse places, and conducted his Body out of
England with a Royal magnificence.

About these times, the Reputation of the King grew so great* that several
foreign Kings and Princes came hither to his Court, either to visit him, or
congratulate his Victories, or to obtain his assistance and relief: and these
were the foresaid King John, Peter King of Cyprus, and David King of Scots,
Hollinsh. loco cit.
an. 37. E. 3. as also Pat 38. E. 3. p. 2. m. 37.
Wuldemer King of Denmark, and Albert Duke of Bavaria, his Letters of safe
Conduct being dated the Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 2. m. 7.
6. of Dec. and to continue in force till Mid-summer after.

But Charles King John's Son, and Successor (who had sworn to, and sealed the
Treaty at Chartres) was soon persuaded to violate the Peace, though with great
artifice he dissembled his intentions for some time. For though he readily gave
ear to the Complaints of some of the discontented Earls of Armaignaco and
Comminges and Visc. Cormain. Baker.
Nobility of Gascoigne, who, quitting their Homage to the Prince, fled to
Paris, and complained to him as their Supreme Lord of the Fouage imposed on
that Country by the Prince, pretending that King John had not power to release
them of their Homage to the Crown of France, or deliver over their Country to
the King of England: Yet he forbore laying hold on this occasion, at least for
one year after their complaint. But then, all of a sudden, King Edward, not
suspecting any fraud, but thinking himself sufficiently secured by the Treaty
of Peace made at Britagne, the French King sent him a defiance, and by the time
it was thought to be delivered, Froiss. Lib. 1. cap. 247.
Guy Earl of St. Paul, one of the French Hostages (who Hollinshed, page 401.
had slipped out of the Kingdom, without taking leave, as had also the Duke of
Anjou, and some others of them) and Sir Hugh de Castilion, entered Ponthieu with
an Army, and were received into Abeville, afterward took St. Valery and
Crotoy, and immediately all Ponthieu revolted.

Hereupon the King assembled a Claus. 43. E. 3. m. 18. dorso.
Parliament at Westminster, and about the Walsingham.
end of May, the Lords and Commons declared, Rot. Parl. de eod. an. n. 2.
That whereas the French King had broke the foresaid Peace (in not delivering
the Countries, nor paying the moneys agreed on there) and had usurped the
Resort and Superiority, which ought to appertain to the King of England and his
Heirs, in the Lands surrendered to him by the foresaid agreement, by summoning
the Prince and some of the Nobility of the Kings Allies, to answer certain
Appeals at Paris, and surprised and taken diverse Castles, etc. in Ponthieu and
Gascoigne, and was setting forth a Fleet to invade England, contrary to his
Oath and the form of the Peace; therefore with their whole consent it was
agreed, That the King should resume the name of King of England and France, as
he had done before the Peace, and for the future so call himself in his
Letters, and under his Seals. Hereupon on Monday (being St. Barnaby's day)
there were several new Seals provided, in one of which was inscribed Edwardus
Rex Angliae and Franciae, etc. and in another Edwardus Rex Franciae and
Angliae, etc.

Shortly after, he An. 43. ^. 3. Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 249.
sent an Army under the Command of the Earls of Cambridge and Penbroke into
Aquitain, who landing in Bretagne, past through that Country to Angoulesme,
where the Prince lay with 3000 men, and entered the Country of Piergort, and
overran it. He sent also a Letter to the Rot. Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 2.
Nobility of Gascoigne, wherein he acquainted them with the reasons why he
reassumed the Name and Title to the Kingdom of France, as he used it before
the Treaty of Peace to which he condescended, not without a manifest diminution
of his right.

Walsingh. sub an. 43. E. 3.
John, Duke of Lancaster, and several others of the English Nobility, were sent
with another Army into France about Midsummer, who landed at Calais, of which
the French King receiving advertisement, called back his Forces designed for
the Sea to invade England (to meet with whom, as also to secure Froiss. lib. 1.
cap. 247.
Southampton, the Isle of Wight, and Garnsey, King Edward had set forth a
considerable Fleet) and sent them under the Command of the Duke of Burgoigne,
to oppose the Duke of Lancaster: but upon report of the Hollinsh. page 404.
Earl of Warwick's coming by Sea, to the Duke of Lancaster's assistance, the
French withdrew.

The following year, the Ib. cap. 275.
French King raised two Armies, and sent them into Aquitaine, one under the
Command of the Duke of Anjou, to enter Guyen, by Reol and Bergerac, and the
other under the Duke of Berry, to enter that Country by Lymoges and Quercy, and
both Armies to meet at Angoulisme, to besiege the Prince, then in those parts.

Ib. c. 277.
King Edward, considering the unsetledness of these Countries, raised likewise
two Armies; That for Aquitaine was Commanded by the Duke of Lancaster, of which
we shall make further mention, when we speak of the Prince and the other
designed for Picardie, by Sir Robert Knowles. In relation to which latter
expedition, 6. May. Claus. 44 E. 3. m. 1^. dovso.
Proclamation was sent forth, That all Soldiers designed for Normandy and
other parts of France, under Sir Robert's Command (being Rot. Franc. 44 E. 3.
m. 14.
constituted the Kings Lieutenant in those parts of France) should be at
Southampton, in the Octaves of St. John Baptist following, ready fitted to take
Shiping there with him.

Nor was the King slack in strengthening himself by Allies from abroad, and
therefore 18. May. Pat. 44 E. 3. p. 1. m. 8.
Sir John at Wode, and Mr. Robert de Wykford Archdeacon of Winchester, and
Doctor of Laws, were sent beyond Sea, having power to treat with Wenceslaus
Duke Brabant and Lorraine, Marquess of the Empire, about furnishing the King
with Men and Arms, to serve him in these Wars. He also secured the back Door,
to wit, Scotland, by a Froiss. l. 1. c. 278.
Treaty of Peace for 9. years, in which nevertheless the Scots were at liberty
to serve either English or French, without breaking the Peace, and lastly 4.
Aug. Pat. 44 E. 3. p. 3. m. 1.
confirmed the Treaty with the Earl of Flanders and the Towns of Gaunt, Bruges,
and Ipres.

Sir Robert Knowles with Holinshed p. 405.
12000. Men being landed at Calais, and resting there 7. days, forthwith took
the Field, and, marching through the Country of Froiss. l. 1. c. 278.
Guynes, and Fauconbridge, came to Turwin, and thence into Artois, drawing near
Arras, and so to Vermandois, wasting the Country all the way he went. He thence
marched to the City of Ib. c. 281.
Noyen, and into Champaigne, and turned to Bry and so on the Holinshed. p. 405.
24. of September, to Paris; before which he stayed a day and two Nights. After
this, Froiss. c. 285.
(Sir Bertrand de Guesclin, having defeated a straggling party of his) he
marched to Dorvel Castle in Bretagne: This Army, Walsingham sub an. 44 E. 3.
so long as it submitted to their General prospered, but toward Winter, some
of them growing disobedient, and slighting his Commands, became a prey to the
French, whilst his policy and prudence preserved those safe who stuck to him,
in his march into Bretagne.

This year the Froiss. l. 1. c. 292. but Walsingham places this Action to an.
46. E. 3.
Flemmings set upon part of the Kings Navy, under the Command of Sir Guy de
Bryen at la Bay in Bretagne, but he got the Victory, and took 25. of their
Ships with their Captain Sir John Peterson, and many other Prisoners, whom he
brought with him into England; which caused the King Ib. c. 293.
to set forth a Navy against the Flemmings, but the Towns of Bruges, Ipres, and
Gaunt, hearing of his preparations made such applications to the King, that
they obtained Peace.

The Fortune of the War in Aquitaine at this time standing fair on the English
side, the following Winter the King designed Ib. c. 296.
two fresh Armies to enter France, yet endeavored before (upon the Popes
request, both by Letters and Messages) to lay hold of an honorable Peace, to
which end 19 Febr. Rot. Franc. 46 E. 3. m. 47.
power was given, to treat thereon, to Simon Bishop of London, Guy de Bryene,
Roger de Beauchamp, Bannerets, Sir Arnold Savage Knight, John Appleby Dean of
London, and John de Branketre Treasurer of York; and the Ib. m. 48.
next day he granted Letters of safe conduct for the Ambassadors of France to
come and treat about that Affair. One of the foresaid Armies were designed for
the defense of Froiss. loco cit.
Aquitaine, and the other to land at Calais, whence the Duke of Lancaster and
Earl of Cambridge were appointed to enter France by the Plains of Picardy. But
John Earl of Penbroke ( Rot. Vasc. 46 E. 3. m. 4.
constituted the Kings Lieutenant in Aquitaine) was ordered to go into Poictou,
and, in pursuance of that design, took Sea and arrived at Rochell, the 22. of
June, 1372. where he found the Froiss^c. 297.
Spanish Fleet, who fought him two days, and at last took him Prisoner, the Ib.
c. 298.
Rochellers having refused to assist him: and in that engagement the Ship,
which carried a Ib. c. 299.
great Treasure to pay the English Army, was unfortunately sunk.

The King designing also the relief of Tho^ars, raised an Army of 3000. Men of
Arms, and 1000. Archers, and with the Prince took Shipping at Sandwich, on
Claus. 46 E. 3. m. 12. dorso.
Monday the 30. of August, about nine a Clock, in a Ship called the Grace de
Dieu, directions having been given for making public Prayers in all Churches
for good success in this Voyage; and so sailing toward Rochell, the Froiss. c.
305. Walsing. p. 183.
Winds and Tempests kept him at Sea 9. Weeks, and when he saw he could not
arrive in France by Michaelmas, being the time limited for relief, or
otherwise surrender of the Town (he returned to England, and had the Wind at
will. The consequence of this improsperous Voyage (with the miscarriage of the
Earl of Penbroke) was the loss of all the Country of Poictou, Xantoigne, and
Rochell.

After these misfortunes, a Treaty of Peace was again set on foot, and 8. of
Ian. Rot. Franc. 46 E. 3. m. 2.
Simon Bishop of London, Edmond Earl of March, Richard de Stafford, Roger de
Beauchamp, Rauf de Ferrieres Bannerets, Simon de Molton Doctor of Law, and Io^n
de Branketre Treasurer of York, were constituted the Kings Commissioners for
the management of this Affair; and Ibid. m. 5.
Letters of safe conduct granted (the same day) to the Cardinal of Beauvez (and
other Agents from France) who with the Cardinal of Canterbury were by the Pope
commissionated to be the chief managers of this Treaty.

The Duke of Lancaster ( 16. June Class. 47 ^ 3. m (...)
public Prayers having been made also for his good success) arrived at Calais
(in Ho^ir^h. (...) 408.
July an. 47. E. 3.) with 3000 men of Arms, and 10000 Archers, which he divided
into three Battles, and marched by Land through France to Bourdeux, and there
he arrived about Christmas; in which Voyage, though the French durst not fight
him, and all the way avoided the hazard of a Battle, yet through the scarcity
of Victuals many dyed, not to mention the loss of Walsingh: p. 183
30000 Horse. About the beginning of the following Summer, at the Holinsh. loco
cit.
Pope's instance, a Truce was made by this Duke and the Duke of Anjou, to
continue till the last of August; wherein it was agreed, that in the beginning
of Ibid. p. 409.
September there should meet in Picardy, on the English part, the Duke of
Lancaster and other Commissioners, to treat of Peace with the Duke of Anjou,
and others on the French part, where also the Popes Legate should appear as
Mediator; and in pursuance thereof the Duke of Lancaster took Shipping the 8.
of July, an. 48 E. 3. after whose departure Walsingh. sub an. 48 E. 3.
all Poictou and Aquitaine fell from their Allegiance, except Bourdeux and
Bajon.

In this year the Earl of Cambridge, and the Duke of Bretagne were Rot. Franc.
48 E. 2. m. 6.
constituted the Kings Lieutenants in France, after which, 18 Nov. m. 7.
Commands were sent forth to arrest Ships for their passage thither, to be at
Dertmouth and Plymouth with all speed. But notwithstanding these preparations,
yet they went not till the following Claus. 49 E. 3. m. 46.
Spring, having then in their retinue many of the English Nobility, and for
whose good success 8. May Ibid. m. 36. dorso.
public Prayers were appointed to be made. In this Expedition the Froiss. l.
1. c. 313.
Duke recovered many of his Towns; but being Walsingham sub cod. an.
included in the Truce made by the Duke of Lancaster, he was thereby obliged to
lay down his Arms.

For upon the mediation of the Bishops of Roan and Carpentras, the Pope's
Nuncios, there had been a Rot. Franc. 49 E. 3. m. 2. and 16.
Treaty set on Foot at Bruges in Flanders this Year, managed chiefly by John
Duke of Lancaster, who, with Ibid. m. 24.
Simon Bishop of London, William Earl of Salisbury, Sir John Cobham, Sir Frank
de Hale, Sir Arnold Savage, Mr. John de Shepeye, and Mr. Simon de Molton, were
20 Feb. Ib.
commissionated to carry on that Affair on King Edwards part; and by Philip
Duke of Burgundy, on the behalf of his Brother Charles the French King: which
though it brought not forth a complete Peace, yet in effect it put an end to
the present War, for 27. June Ib. m. 16.
it produced a Truce, to hold for a year, viz. to the last of June, an. 50 E.
3. to give notice of which to the English Subjects, a Proclamation was 15.
July. Claus. 49. E. 3. m. 80. dorso.
set forth. And 12. March Rot. Franc. 50 E. 3. m. 16. and 21.
a quarter of a year before its expiration, at another meeting at the same
place, this Truce was enlarged to the first of April, an. 51 E. 3. and
thereupon another 7. Aug. Claus. 50 E. 3. p. 1. m. 3. dorso. Vide Rot. Vasc. de
eod. an. m. 8. and Rot. Franc. m. 10.
Proclamation issued to make it known. But it appears that the French were
gotten to Sea, Claus. 51 E. 3. m. 16.
sometime before the expiration of this latter Truce, and had done much hurt
upon the Seacoasts.

Of this design of theirs the King had timely intelligence, and therefore he
endeavored to enlarge the Truce, to which end he 20. Febr. Rot. Franc. 51 E.
3. m. 7.
empowred John Bishop of Hereford, Sir John de Cobham of Kent, John Monteacute
Bannerets, and John Shepeye Doctor of the Laws, to Treat with the Earl of
Salebruch, Monsieur Chatillon, and Philebert le Spoit, where the Pope's Legates
were also present as Mediators. But nothing was done thereupon; only the
Holinsh. page 411.
Legate proposed a Marriage between Richard Prince of Wales, and the Lady Mary
Daughter to the French King; which begot a private meeting shortly after at
Montrevile by the Sea, and there Sir Richard Dangle, Sir Richard Stan, and Sir
Geoffry Chaucer, Commissioners for King Edward, with the Lord Coucy, and other
Commissioners for the French King, spent the time chiefly to found one another
intentions, and so departed without any other effect, saving that of Proroguing
the Truce to May day following.

The Rot. Franc. 51 E. 3. m. 3.
26, of April, another Commission was made for the same purpose, to Adam Bishop
of St. David's, John Bishop of Hereford, William Earl of Salisbury, Robert de
Ashton the Kings Chamberlain, Guichard Dangle Banneret, Aubrey de Vere, Hugh de
Segrave Knights, Walter Skirlow Dean of St. Martins le Grand, and the foresaid
John Shepeye, which gave them power to treat and compose all differences, Wars,
and contentions. They thereupon came to Calais, and the Holinshed loco cit.
Lord Coucy, and Sir William Dormer Chancellor of France came to Montrevile;
but by reason of the suspicion the Commissioners had of each other, they could
not agree of an indifferent place to meet at, and so the time limited by the
Truce spinning on, absolutely expired. And in this posture the Affairs relating
to France stood (to wit in open hostility) till the Death of King Edward.

Thus we see, that from the breach of the Treaty, and Entry upon King Edwards
Territories, to the time of his Death, he all along steered against the Tide of
adverse Fortune, and what with Invasions, Revolts, and disastrous accidents
(though no pitched Battle was fought) nothing of his great Conquests remained
to him, but only Calais, and the small Territory adjoining.

But of the strange unsuccessfulness of these subsequent years, there might be
three main causes: First, the loss of so many stout and well disciplined
Soldiers, as, upon their disbanding after the Peace made near Chartres, joined
themselves to the Le grand Compaignie.
Companions, and marched into Spain, Italy, and Germany (to which number may be
added those who perished in the Princes expedition into Spain, of whom scarce
the Knighton Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2629.
fifth man returned) a sort of people so inured to War, and such as had gained
so great experience therein, that the very Common Soldiers among them were men
of good conduct. The French King knew well enough, how much King Edwards power
was weakened, through the want of those men, and that, as to such as might be
raised anew (few of them having been trained up in the former Wars) he thought
he might the better deal with them, in regard that many of his own disbanded
Soldiers, were still within his Kingdom, and lay ready at his service.

A second cause might be, that the King declining in years, and the Prince of
Wales growing daily worse and worse of a lingering sickness, without hope of
Recovery, the French King took the more heart, and began now not to fear,
either them or their Fortunes, which before had proved so terrible to France.
And therefore he supposed if he could make a shift but to keep his Forces on
Foot, against their declining power, he might deal well enough with those who
should succeed them: none of King Edwards other Sons, having given such proof
of their success in martial affairs as to be feared by him, and much less was
any such thing to be expected, when an Infant King was likely to succeed.

Lastly, His supplies of Money from his Subjects, who before had freely enough
opened their Purses to carry on the War, began to fail him: For being tired
out, with the prosecution of it, they complained of Poverty; and thence it
came, that the Forces raised to recover what was lost, were inconsiderable, in
comparison of the former Royal Armies levied for his own and the Princes
expeditions.

During the Minority of this King, His Wife.
there were several Matches proposed for him, though none took, but the last:
and first, his Father designed to marry him to the Lady Rot. Rom^ 12.13. and
14. E. 2. m. 10.
Margaret, Daughter of William Earl of Hanow, Holland, Zeland, and Lord of
Frisia; who, being in the third degree of Consanguinity, a Letter was
dispatched to the Pope, dated the 10. of December, in the 12. year of his
Fathers Reign, for obtaining his Dispensation, because of their nearness of
blood.

Secondly, with the Lady Ibid. m. 7.
Sibilla, Daughter to Robert Earl of Hanow and Zeland, Lord of Frisia, as
appears from a like Letter to the Pope, dated the 2. of November in the
following year.

Thirdly, with the Rot. Vasc. 17. E. 2. m. 5. n. 9.
Daughter of James, King of Arragon, for which affair were commissionated
Alexander Archbishop of Dublin, Edmund Earl of Kent, King Edward the Second's
Brother, and William de Weston Canon of Lincoln, Doctor of Laws: the Commission
bore Test the 30. of March, an. 17. E. 2. It appears by the Kings Pat. 18. E.
2. p. 1. m. 19.
Letters of the 16. of February following, that her name was Iolant, and King
James her Father styled, Claus. 18. E. 2. m. 12. dorso.
Rex Aragoniae, Valenciae, Cors^ae, Comes Barch, and Sanctae Romans Ecclesiae
Vexillarius, Admirallus and Capitaneus Generalis, to whom the King then also
sent Sir Edmund Bacon, Sir Robert Thorpe, Mr. John Heldesley Canon of Chester,
to proceed further in this matter.

Fourthly, with the Lady Alonar, Sister to Alphonsus King of Spain, to which
purpose, Pat. 18. E. 2. p. 2. m. 22.
John Stoner, William de Berne, Lord of Lescune, William de Weston, Canon of
Lincoln, and Peter de Galicano, Canon of Roan, were empowered by a Commission
dated the 6. of April an. 18. E. 2. as also to treat and conclude a marriage
between the said King Alphonsus, and Elianor King Edward's Sister.

Besides these, the King of Portugal sent Ambassadors over hither, to propose a
marriage between this Prince and his Daughter, to whom the King by Letter,
dated the Claus. 19. E. ^ m. 9. dorso.
15. of April an. 19. E. 2. directed thus, Magnifico Principi, Domino Alfonso
Dei gratia Portugaliae and Algarbiae Regi illustri, amico suo charissimo,
acquainting him with the Treaty of marriage begun, between his Son and the King
of Spain's Sister, and that because of neerness of blood, he had dispatched a
Letter to the Pope for his Dispensation; that he had received no account as
then, of the issue of that Affair; that his Son was gone into France, to do
Homage for the Dukedom of Aquitaine, during all which, it was not fit for him
to begin any new Treaty: but if that succeeded not, he would then confer with
his Ambassador in this particular.

But last of all, in the following year, the Queen and Duke having left France,
went to the Earl of Henault's Court, where a Contract past between him, and one
of the Earls Daughters, and, not long after his Coronation, the marriage was
consummate; in reference to which, R. Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, was 8.
Oct. Pat. 1. E. 3. p. 3. m. 15.
constituted the King's Ambassador, to contract either espousals or marriage in
the King's Name, with Philippa that Earls Daughter, who forthwith took his
Journey to Valenciens, and (the Popes Dispensation being gained) she was there
married to King Edward by Proxy.

By this Lady he was Father to 7 Sons, Children:
all (except two that dyed young) men of great renown in that Age; namely,
Edward Prince of Wales and Guyenne, signally famous all over Europe, and
commonly called the Black Prince; William of Hatfield, Lyonell of Antwerp, Duke
of Clarence and Earl of Vlster, John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster and Aquitaine,
King of Castile and Leon, Edmund of Langley, Earl of Cambridge, and Duke of
York, William of Windesor, and Thomas of Woodstock, Earl of Buckingham and Duke
of Gloucester. His Daughters were five, Isabell Wife to Ingelram de Coucy, Earl
of Bedford; Joan married by Proxy to Peter, eldest Son to Alphonsus King of
Castile and Leon, but died in her journey thither; Blanch died young, Mary Wife
to John Montford, Duke of Britagne, and Margaret Wife to John de Hastings, Earl
of Penbroke. Besides these, he had a natural Son named Cod. M9. Miscel. R.
Glover. Somerset. fol 135.
Nicholas, who was Abbot of Westminster, and lies buried in Westminster, before
the Altar of St. Blase.

His Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 267.
Queen fell sick at Windesor Castle, and there dyed before him, viz.
Walsingham, page 179.
on the day of the Assumption of our blessed Lady, an. 43. E. 3. whose Exequies
and Interment he caused to be solemnized with great magnificence.

and Death.
He himself dyed the Ib. page 189.
21. of June, at his Manor of Shene in Surrey, after he had reigned 50 years 4
Months and 28 days, and lies interred on the South side of St. Edward's Chapel
in Westminster Abbey, under a stately Monument, having thereon his Portraicture
at full length.

SECT. III. Some account of the first 25 Knights-Companions.
(1.) Edward Prince of Wales.
THis Noble and Valiant Prince, was born at Ex Chron. Tho. de la Mare.
Woodstock, the 15. of June, An. Dom. 1330. at ten a Clock in the Morning, in
the Scheme of whose Nativity (found among the Collections of that famous
Mathematician Mr. Thomas Allen of Gloucester-Hall in Oxford) the 9. degree of
Virgo ascends, the 3. of Gemini culminates, and the Planets are thus posited.

gr.
in 16 in 12 in 11 in 1 in 19 in 18 in 10 ^ in 22 ^ in 22 in 19
So welcome to his Father was the News of his Birth, that he 4. Febr. Pat. 5.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 33.
granted to Tho. Priour who brought it 40 Marks per annum, out of his Exchequer
for life, until he should setle on him Lands to that annual value. Afterward,
he 16. Apr. Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 1. m. 30.
gave to Ioane de Oxenford, this Prince's Nurse, 10 l. per annum out of his
Exchequer during her life, until he or his Heirs should setle that yearly value
in Lands or Rents upon her. And the Ibid.
next day a yearly Pension of 10 Marks out of his Exchequer also for life, on
Matilda Plumpton Bersatrix, or Rocker, to this young Prince, till Lands of that
value were in like manner provided for her.

Before he was three years old, the King intended to make some considerable
provision for him (though he had Pat. 4. E. 3. p. 2. m. 42. Rot. Liberat. 5. E.
3. m. 8. Claus. 10. E. 3. m. 26. and 12.
before made him an annual allowance for the expenses of his House, and several
Gifts, did by his Charter dated 18. May, in the 7. year of his Reign, Cart. 7.
E. 3. m. 4.
grant to him by the Title of Edward his most dear and eldest Son, the County
of Chester, the Castles of Chester, Beston, Rothelan, and Flynt, and all his
Lands there, as also the Cantred and Land of Englefield with their
appurtenances, to him and his Heirs Kings of England, together with all Knights
Fees, Advowsons, Liberties, Royalties, and all other things belonging to the
said Country, Castles, Lands, and Cantreds, as well in England as in Wales, and
the Marches thereof, as fully and under the same conditions, as himself
received them before he was King: And thence forward he had the Title of Earl
of Chester added to his Style.

But intending to provide yet better for him, the next day he Pat. 7. E. 3. p.
1. m. 13.
gave him all the Corn, as well in Granges, as growing on the Ground, as also
the Arms, Victuals, Cattle, Goods and Chattels in all the said Castles, Lands,
and other places to him before granted, together with the Debts, Arrerages of
Accounts, and other Services due to himself.

In the Parliament held at Westminster, an. 11 E. 3. he was created Duke of
Cornwall, as appears by his Chart. 11. E. 3. n. 55.
Charter of Creation, bearing date the 17. of March the same year, and invested
by the Sword only; and this is the first Precedent for the Creation of the
Title of Duke with us in England. Herewith also, the King settled on him diverse
Manors and Franchises, expressly set down in the said Charter, for the better
support of the State and Honor of Duke; all which, though some lay in other
Counties, were thereby made part of the Duchy of Cornwall. And further, by
Letters Patent dated the same day, he granted to him the Pat. 11. E. 3. p. 1.
m. 19.
Stannaries in Cornwall, together with the Coinage of Tin, and all the issues
and profits thence arising; as also the profits and perquisites of the Courts
of the Stannaries, except only 1000 Marks formerly granted to William Mountague
Earl of Salisbury, and his Heirs, out of the Issues thereof, till Lands were
provided for the said Earl, of that yearly value; and afterward 29. Se^^. Pat.
17. E. 3* p. 2. m. 24.
granted, That all the Castles, Honors, Manors, Lands, and Tenements,
belonging to the Dukedom or Earldom of Cornwall, which were held in Dower or
for term of life or years, whose Reversions belonged to the King, should remain
to this Prince as Duke, still as they fell, and to the eldest Sons of him and
his Heirs, as Dukes of the foresaid Dukedom.

In the Parliament held an. 17. E. 3. the King 12. May Chart. 17. E. 3. m. 24.
n. 27.
created him Prince of Wales, and invested him with a Coronet, a Gold Ring, and
a Silver Rod: and the better to support his State as Prince of Wales, gave him
several Lands, which are all particularly enumerated, in a Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 1.
m. 8.
Writ directed to William de Emeldon, to deliver them unto this Prince or his
Attorney, with this Dignity: The King also 20. Sept. Extract. donat. 17. E. 3.
m. 4.
gave him all Debts and Arrears of Foreign Rents due to himself, for what cause
soever, in North Wales and South Wales, to the time of his being created Prince
of Wales, as also all Victuals, Arms, Horses, Oxen, Cows and other things in
all the Castles and Lands which he held by the King's Grant.

He was constituted Pat. 12. E. 3. p. 2. m. 12.14. E. 3. p. 2. m. 28.16. E. 3.
p. 2. m. 6. and 46. E. 3. p. 2. m. 25.
Custos Angliae diverse times, when the King had occasion to be absent out of
the Kingdom, to which the Title of Locum tenens Regis was sometimes added; and
in his younger years, the King appointed the Pat. concess. hominib. Angl. and
Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 13.
Archbishop of Canterbury to be the chief of his Council, to direct him in all
Affairs; the powers belonging to this Great Officer being recorded in Rot. Pat.
de an. 14. E. 3. pars 2. m. 28.

The first time this Prince entered upon the Stage of War, was at the beginning
of his 16. year of age, at which time he accompanied his Father into France;
where at his landing at Rot. Parl. 20. E. 3. n. 45. m. 4.
Hoges in Normandy, he received the honor of Stows Chron. page 241. b.
Knighthood, from that martial Kings hands. Thence he marched in the body of
the Army with the King toward Cressy, at which Battle (fought an. 20. E. 3.) he
led the Froiss. cap. 130.
Van, and after a fierce encounter with the French, was somewhat distressed from
the Enemies breaking in among his Archers, but the rest of his men timely
advanced to their Assistance; nevertheless notice of his condition being sent
to the King (who commanded the Rear) he asked if the Prince were dead or
wounded, the Messenger said no, but stood in need of his Assistance; well said
the King, Froiss. cap. 130.
return, and bid them send no more to me, so long as my Son lives, for I will
have him this day win his Spurs, since I design him the honor of this
Expedition: and it cannot be denied, but the compleatness of the Victory then
gained, fully conferred it on him, so also did his Fathers acknowledgment; for
after the Battle was ended, he embraced the Prince and kissed him, and said Ibid.
cap. 1^1.
fair Son, God give you resolution to pursue Honor, you are my dear Son, and
have acquitted your self nobly, you are worthy to govern a Kingdom.

The following year, a Truce being agreed on at Calais, was spun on by several
Prorogations, but without effecting any thing of Peace, till an. 29. E. 3. in
which year both Kings provided for War. Hereupon the King 10. July Rot. Vasc.
29. E. 3. m. 6.
constituted this Prince his Lieutenant in the Dukedom of Aquitaine and other
places in France, whither he should happen to march, both for Reformation of
the State of that Dukedom, and other places in France, and the recovery of his
Lands and Right possessed by the Rebels. And by another Commission of the same
date, he Ibid.
gave him power to make Alliances with all persons, of what Nation, Dignity or
Condition soever, to retain men, and pay them Wages and Rewards. A third
Commission Ibid. m. 4.
gave him Power (in the King's stead and name) to receive Homage and Fidelity,
from the Nobility and others within this Dukedom, and the Kingdom of France.

Armed with their Powers and accompanied by the Earls of Ex Lib. Miscellan. R.
Glover, Somerset. fol. 29.
Warwick, Oxford, Salisbury, and Suffolk, and a good Army attending him, he
took Shiping and safely arrived in Gascoigne: for whose passage thither the
King had before assigned Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 12.
Richard de Corte^hale, and Robert de Baildon Sergeants at Arms, to arrest,
array, and equip all the Ships of 20. Tun and Upwards, in all Ports and Places
from the River of Thames unto Lynn, as well within Liberties as without, to
furnish them with men and other necessaries, and to bring them to Southampton
by St. Barniby's Day at the furthes^; as also to Press Mariners for the Voyage
at the Kings Wages; and had given Commission to 27^ May. Ib.
Thomas de Hoggeshaw Lieutenant, to John de Beauchamp Admiral of the Sea
Westward, to carry him over: with power to hear and determine all Crimes and
Transgressions committed on Shipboard, and to punish them according to Maritine
Law, and to do all other things appertaining to the Office of Admiral.

Having entered the River Froissard c. 155. See the Names of all the places they
marched through in Stows Chron. 256. etc.
Garronne, he marched into the South-part of Languedock, and burnt the Great
Town of Carcassone, situate near the Mediterranean Sea, thence passed to
Narbon, burning and wasting the Country; after which, he returned to encounter
the French Forces which marched out of Tolouse, under the Command of the
Marshall Cleremont, and Earl of Armaignac; but upon his approach they retired,
and so in November after 8. Weeks he returned to Bourdeaux with great store of
Pillage and Prisoners.

A more particular account of which Voyage, with the Towns and Castles taken
and destroyed, and several other actions done after the Prince's Return to
Bourdeaux, to the 21. of January following, are reported in Sir John
Wingfield's Letters, Printed in Ib. p. 384.385.
Hollinshead's Chronicle.

Intelligence of the Prince's taking the Field the An. 30. E. 3. Froiss. c. 157.
following Summer, being brought to King John, he resolved to fight him, for
now the Prince (with about Hollinsh. p. 387.
8000. Men) had entered the Country of Berry, as far as Issoudun, Bourges,
Vierzon, and Froissard c. 158.
Remorentin, which two last Towns and their Castles the Prince took by Assault:
and passing into Ib. c. 159.
Anjou, and Touraine, (having wasted all the Country where he past) intended to
return for Bourdeaux.

But after this long and wearisom Voyage, drawing near to Poicters, he was
informed, that the Ibid. c. 62.
French Army was not far from him, (and here the Cardinal of Poicters used
means to have brought both sides to some composition, but the French being high
in their demands, his endeavors took no effect.) The Prince thereupon fitted
himself for fight, and the Battles joining (in the Fields of Ib. c. 64.
Beauuoir and Malpertuse two Leagues from Poictiers. Holinsh.
Beaumont and Malperteus) after some space, they broke the Van of the French
Army, when the main Body, led by the Duke of Normandy coming on, and finding
the other routed, fell into disorder also. This encouraged the Prince to fall
in upon the Rear led by the King, at whose approach, the main Body of the
French Army left the Field, as their Leader himself did, with Charles, Lewis,
and John, the Kings Sons, the Earls of Poicters and Tourayne. King John behaved
himself very valiantly, and maintained the fight for some time, but was at
length taken Prisoner by Froiss. c. 64.
Sir Denis Morbeck a Knight of Arthois (to whom the Prince gave afterward
Ibid. c. 169.
2000. Nobles to support his Estate) whilst the chase continued to the Gates of
Poictiers, and a complete Victory obtained, the particulars whereof are related
by Froissard.

The French Kings Army consisted of Hollinshed Chron. p. 389.
60000. fighting men, whereof there were above 3000. Knights. The Prince had
but Hollinshed Chron. p. 389.
8000. whereof 3000. were Archers, though Froissard in one place says 6000. in
another 4000.

The names of some of the Prisoners of Note, and those that were slain, are
mentioned by In Hist. Angl. Script. Coll. 2613. and 2614. Vide Stow p. 263. and
Holinsh, loc^ cit.
Knighton: in a word, the Flower of France fell here, and so many Noblemen were
there slain, or made Prisoners, that there were but few left to manage the
Affairs of France; the Soldiers had Froiss c. 166.
twice as many Prisoners as themselves were in number, nay diverse of them 4. or
5. Prisoners a piece, all which they put to ransom in the Field, upon promise
to return before Christmas with their Ransoms to Bourdeaux. The spoil was
exceeding rich, so were also the Arms they took, and whatsoever the Booty was,
it remained to him that took it. The Ibid. c. 169.
Prince bought of the Gascoigners for ready money those of the French Nobility,
whom they had taken: And of these, namely Philip Son to King John, the Earl of
Sanceir, and the Lord Craon, he sold to the King 22. Oct. Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 3.
m. 14.
afterward for 20000 l.

This Battle was sought the Rot. de Tract. Pacis Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 9. vide
Claus. 36. E. 3. m. 3. dorso.
19. day of September, an. Dom. 1356. it beginning in the Morning and ending at
Noon; but it was night e're they returned from the Chase.

When it was ended, the Prince (who says Froissard, was therein courageous and
cruel as a Lion, and took great delight in the Fight and Chase) commanded his
Standard to be pitched on a high Bush, as a signal to the dispersed Forces to
retire to him thither; and then sent out the Earl of Warwick, and Sir Reynold
Cobham, to make enquiry after the French King, who in a short time brought him
Prisoner to the Prince. The Froiss. c. 168.
Prince entertained this Noble Prisoner at a Supper, at which himself, with all
respect, served him; nor could be prevailed upon to sit down at the Table.

The next day the Prince dislodged his Army, and marched through Poicton,
Santonge, and at Blaye passed the River Garronne, and so to Bordeaux, where in
one part of the Abbey of St. Andrew he lodged his Royal Prisoner, and in the
other himself; and upon the News of this great Victory and Success, the King
appointed 10. October. Claus. 30. E. 3. m. 3. dors^.
public thanks to be given to God throughout England.

In Holli^sh page 39^.
April following, the Prince took shipping for England, and brought along with
him the French King (and diverse other Prisoners of quality) the Walsingh. page
164.
5. of May he arrived at Plymouth, for whose reception there, John Dabernoun
Sheriff of Devonshire, was 20. March Pat. 31. E. 3. m. 3. dorso.
commanded to make provision of Victuals, and Carriages. and Horses, and attend
him in all parts through that County. The Walsingh. l^co cit.
24. of May, the Prince, in a stately Cavalcade, rode through London, his Royal
Prisoner by his side, on a White Courser, and himself on a Black Hobby, and so
proceeded to Hollinsh. loco cit.
Westminster Hall, where he presented King John to his Father, and from whence
King John was conducted to his Lodging; but within a short time, the Savoy was
furnished for his entertainment.

After some few years, the King ( an. 33. E. 3.) preparing for another
Expedition into France, this Froiss. c. 207.
Prince went along with him (so also his three Brethren) and commanded the Rear
of that Army, which making its way through the Bowels of France, at Bretigny,
near Chartres, a Peace was concluded, in which this Prince (and some other of
the Kings Council) on the Kings part, having treated with the French Lords, on
the part of the Dauphin of Viennois Governor of France, brought all
controversies, touching that Realm. to a happy composure. The King (desirous to
proceed to the effect and accomplishment of that Treaty) gave him another Rot.
Cales de Negorii^ communibus 34. E. 3. m. 6.
Commission, with authority to treat further upon any thing that concerned or
was comprised therein, either in general or special; to demand and receive the
Hostages, Money, Castles, Cities, and Fortresses, and what ever else was to be
delivered to the King, by virtue thereof; with a general Clause, to add and
supply the power granted, if any solemn or substantial thing should be omitted,
through much business or otherwise, or were expedient or advantageous, as to
the premises.

After the confirmation of this Peace, and King Edward in possession of a
considerable part of the Territories, both of his own inheritance, or invested
in him by the said Peace (which he was to enjoy without resort or Sovereignty
to the Crown of France) The Nobility of these Provinces desiring to be governed
by a Prince of their own, rather than by the Kings Lieutenants as before; they
addressed themselves to the King, to confer the Government thereof on this
Prince, and send him thither, where he had so great Possessions and Revenues to
maintain his State and Dignity. Hereupon the King 19. July Rot. Vasc. 36. E. 3.
m. 16.
Created him Prince of Guyenne, and gave him Guyenne and Gascoigne by the name
of a Principality during his life: and also granted to him those other
Countries, Towns, and Castles near adjoining (delivered into the Kings
possession, by virtue of the foresaid Treaty) together with the Government of
them also, retaining nevertheless the Resort and Sovereignty over all, thereby
given and granted to himself.

This done, he forthwith prepared for his Voyage thither, taking along with him
his Froiss. c. 216.
Lady the Princess, with whom, being arrived at Rochel, they were both joyfully
received. Thence he went to Poicters, whither the Ibid. c. 217.
Barons and Knights of Poictou and Santonge repaired, doing him Fealty and
Homage; then he departed for Bordeaux, thither the Nobility and Knights of
Gascoigne came to wait on him: after which he settled English Officers in all
places of his Principality, and there kept his Court with great state and
magnificence.

Immediately after the Election of Pope Urban the Fifth, Ibid.
Peter of Lusignan King of Cyprus and Jerusalem, came to Avignon, and there
engaged John King of France in a Crusade; he thence went to the Emperor at
Prague, and afterward into Flanders and England, whence after he had been
nobly entertained, he returned to King John then at Amiens, and Ibid. c. 218.
thinking he had not yet seen any thing, till he had seen the Prince of Wales,
took a Journey to Poicters, and so to Augoulesme, where the Prince held a Royal
Justs of 40 Knights, and as many Esquires, in honor of the birth of his Son
Edward; and here the King of Cyprus was received with great honor, and nobly
feasted while he stayed.

Not long after, this Noble Prince was induced to re-establish Ibid. cap. 231.
Don Peter King of Castile, who had 39. E. 3. Hollinsb. Chron. p. 397.
made a personal application to him in so great distress, being driven out of
his Kingdom by his Bastard Brother Henry, with the assistance of some part of
the late disbanded Army, called the late Comers, or Companions, under the
command of Sir Bertrand de Guesclin, and some English and Bretagn Forces that
went along with them, commanded by Sir Eustace Dabrichecourt, and other
Knights: Hereupon the Prince first sent his Letters to remand them back, and
after (which strengthened his undertaking) Froiss. c. 233.
he received aid from the King his Father, commanded by John of Gaunt his
Brother.

James Son of Ferdinand, King of Mojorca (whom the King of Aragon had
imprisoned at Barcelona, and there put to death) made also address to the
Prince for assistance in the recovery of his Realm; which the Prince promised
after his return out of Spain (whither he was then engaged) and toward which
he began his Voyage the Ibid. c. 234.
Sunday after Epiphany, an. Dom. 1366.

Upon his Ibid. c. 237.
entry into Castile (with 30000 Horse and Foot) Don Henry prepared to give him
Battle with 86000, the Armies joined between Ibid. c. 238.
Navarr and Naveret, on Saturday the 3. of April, Walsingh page 176.
an. 40. E. 3. and here the Prince got a Victory, which re-established Don
Pedro in his Kingdom: Froiss. c. 239.
thereupon Don Pedro went to Sevill, Ibid. c. 245.
and promised to return the Prince money to pay his Army, but after four Months
stay and expectation, the Prince was constrained to return into Aquitane
without any; so forgetful was Don Pedro of the courtesies he had received from
him. This Victory got the Prince great renown throughout the Empire, and the
repute of being the valiantest Prince in that Age, even worthy to govern all
the World; but in this Voyage he contracted a sickness he never recovered,
which his Physicians and Surgeons judged to be an incurable Dropsy; others,
that he was poisoned.

In an Instrument dated about this time, to wit 8. October 1366. (whereby he
granted to his Brother John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the Village and
Castellaine of Roche sur Ion, to him and his Heirs males) I find him thus
styled: Cod. MS. in Offic. Ducat. Lancastr. sub titulo de partibus
transinarinis.
Edward ainsne filz du Roy de France and d' Engleterre, Prince d' Aquitaine and
de Gales, Duke de Cornwall, Conte de Cestre, Seigneur de Biscaie, and de Castre
de Dordiales, but after he had resigned the Principality of Aquitaine, his
Titles were these only, Ex alio Cod. MS. sub Tit. Com. Cestr. cap. 24.
Edwardus Regis Angliae and Franciae primogenitus Princeps Walliae, Dux
Cornubiae, and Comes Cestriae 6. Feb. 49. E. 3. so an. 47. E. 3. vide Lib.
Miscell. R. Glover Somerset, p. 111.

Some time after his return into Aquitaine, the discontented Gascoigners and
French (taking occasion to rebel upon raising a Subsidy, called Froiss: c. 141.
Fouage, for 5 years, consented to by most of his Subjects, viz. the
Poictouins, and they of Xanctonge Limosin, Rouergue, and Rochell, but other
parts of Guine refused) entered (in a hostile manner) the Princes Territories,
whereupon Sir Hugh Caurel coming out of Aragon to the Prince, was made Captain
of the Companions, whom he had sent for out of Normandy, and ordered to Ibid.
c. 249.
march with them into the Country of the Earl of Armaignac, and the Lord d'
Albret (two of the great Ringleaders of the Rebellion new begun) to wast those
parts. He also had sent before a body Commanded Ibid. c. 245.
by Sir John Chandos to Montauban, and a third under the Command of the Ibid.
c. 250.
Earl of Cambridge, and Penbroke, into Perigort, and which took Bourdeilles
after 11. Weeks Siege.

After this, the Prince Ibid. c. 277.
receiving Intelligence that two Armies under the conduct of the Dukes of Anjou
and Berry, were designed to enter Aquitaine, and besiege him in Angoulesme,
resolved his Enemies should not find him there; and therefore summond in the
Nobility, and appointed a Rendevouz at Cognac, leaving his Princess at
Angoulesme, but taking his young Son Richard with him.

The King of England (having upon this great rupture of the Peace concluded at
Bretigny, resumed his Name and Title to the Crown of France) 19. Iun. Rot.
Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 3.
sent forthwith to the Prince, to give him notice that the Parliament at
Westminster had Ordained, that all his Subjects of what Nation or condition
soever, should maintain his Interest against his Enemies in the Realm of
France, to recover and conquer the same. And likewise directed his Letters to
the Ibid. m. 2.
Nobility of Gascoigne, desiring their assistance herein. The year following,
he sent over John Duke of Lancaster his third Son, to the assistance of this
Prince, and gave him 1. July Rot. Vasc. 44. E. 3. m. 5.
Commission to receive into favor, and wholly pardon, such of his Cities,
Castles, Towns, and Inhabitants, as well in Aquitaine as other parts of France,
as should return to his Obedience, and to do and exercise all powers given in
his said Commission, with the consent of the Prince, if present, and in his
absence, what the King could do in his assistance, if personally there. And
that care might be taken in Civil Affairs, the King (having reserved to himself
the Sovereignty and resort in those Territories) sent a blank 10. June
preceding Ibid.
Commission for the Prince to insert the names of such as he should think fit
to appoint for Judges or Delegate, to hear all Causes as well Criminal as
Civil, upon Appeals from the Princes Courts.

Froiss. c. 279.
The Duke of Lancaster shortly after arrived at Bordeaux, and came to the
Prince at Cognac, but the Duke of Anjou thought better to withdraw his Forces
into Garrisons, than to fall into action. The Duke of Berry took Ibid. c. 280.
Limoges, which the Prince c. 283, 284*
retaking, put the Inhabitants to the Sword, and burnt the Town. But the
Prince's disease growing daily upon him, he was Ibid. c. 287.
advised by his Physicians and Surgeons, to return into England, for the
recovery of his health, which caused him to assemble the Nobility of Aquitaine,
Gascoigne, Poictou, and Santonge, at Bordeux, to whom he communicated his
intentions, and withal that he would leave the Duke of Lancaster in Chief
Command behind him, to whom they did fealty and Homage in the Princes presence,
and kissed his mouth. The Affairs of these Countries being thus Ordered, the
Prince and Princess, their young Son Richard, the Earls of Cambridge, and
Penbroke, took Shipping for England, and arrived at Walsingh. sub an. 44. E. 3.
page 181.
Plymouth about the beginning of January, whence they rode to the King at
Windesor, where after some stay he took his leave and retired to his own House,
and about two years after Rot. Vasc. 461. E. 3. m. 2.
surrendered the Dignity of Prince of Guynne, and his whole right therein, to
his Father King Edward.

While he was yet in Minority, Of his Wife and Children.
there were several matches designed for him, as first, being but a year old,
15. July Pa^. 5. E. 3. par. 2. m. 28.
a Commission was given to John Darcy, and William Trussell Knights, to treat
and agree with Philip King of France, or his Deputies, upon espousals and
Matrimony between this young Prince and King Philips Daughter; but the quarrel
breaking out afterward with that King, there was no further progress made in
his Affair.

The next proposal was for Margaret, one of the Daughters of John Duke of
Brabant and Lorraine, to which purpose a 12. May Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m.
17.
Commission was made out to Henry Bishop of Lincoln, and William de Bohun Earl
of Northampton, to trea^ with the said Duke or his Deputies upon this matter,
and for which, in regard they were both within the third Degree of
Consanguinity, the Popes Dispensations was several times endeavored to be
obtained by Rot. Romans 14. E. 3. m. 2. and 18. E. 3. m. 2. and 19. E. 3. m. 3.
and 4.
Letters sent from the King; but he could not be induced to do any thing
therein.

Another match was proposed with a Daughter of the King of Portugal, and
thereupon the King 8. Nov. Pat. 19. E. 3. part 3. m. 11.
Commissionated Mr. Andrew Offord, Richard de Soham, and Philip de Barton, to
treat of a Marriage, not only between the Prince, but any other of his Sons,
and any one of the Daughters of the said King; That also taking no effect,
there was 6. July. Pat. 21. E. 3. part 2. m. 13.
another Commission issued to Robert de Stratton Canon of Chichester, and
Richard de Soham, to treat with the said King concerning a marriage between the
Prince and his Daughter Leonora.

But none of these which were of others providing took effect, but at length
Walsingham p. 171.
an. 35. E. 3. he married with a Lady of his own choice, namely Joan Countels
of Kent, Sister and Heir to John Plantagenet Earl of Kent, and the Relict of
Sir Thomas Holland (one of the first Founders of this most Noble Order)
commonly called (for her Excellent Beauty) the fair Maid of Kent. And because
the Prince had married her, notwithstanding nearness of Kindred between them,
and of his Christning her eldest Son, it was thought requisite to have a Papal
Absolution from Excommunication, and Dispensation for Marriage; 7. Id. Sept. Ex
Lib. in Offic. Princip. Cantuar. vocat. Islip. fol. 177. b. and 178. a.
both which were obtained from Pope Innocent the Sixth, in the 9. year of his
Popedom.

By her he had two Sons, namely Edward the Eldest, born at Angoulesme, in
Holinsh. page 397. a.
Feb. 1365. ( In Collect suo.
Leland says 1364.) who dyed in Gascoigne, at 7. years of Age; and Richard the
second Son born at Bordeaux, on Twelfth-Day being Wednesday, at three a Clock
in the Afternoon, Walsingh. p. 175.
1366. and had three Kings to his Godfathers, viz. Ex Chron. W. Thorn, Hist.
Angl. Script. Coll. 2142.
of Spain, Navarre, and Portugal.

Besides these he had two Natural Sons, Bakers Chro. p. 143.
John Sounder, and Sir Roger de Clarendon, to the latter of these he gave by
his Will a Silk Bed, with all thereunto belonging; This Roger was after made
one of the Knights of the Chamber to King Richard the Second, to whom the said
King Claus. 14. R. 2. m. 13.
the first of October, 13. R. 2. gave for life 100 l. per annum, out of the
Issues of his Subsidies in the Counties of Bristol, Gloucester, Somerset,
Dorset, and Cornwall.

His Death.
His Disease contracted in Spain grown now uncurable, and he drawing near to his
end, made his Will in the Kings great Chamber at Westminster, the Lib. in
Offic. principal. Cantua^. vocat. Sudbury f. 90. b.
7. of June, an. 50. E. 3. and disposed of his Body to be buried in the
Cathedral Church of the Trinity in Canterbury. And such was his care of those
who had done him service, that he charged his Son Richard by his Will, Lib. in
Offic. principal. Cantua^. vocat. Sudbury f. 90. b.
to continue the payment of those Pensions which he had given them. The
Executors nominated therein were his Lib. in Offic. principal. Cantua^. vocat.
Sudbury f. 90. b.
Brother of Spain the Duke of Lancaster, William Bishop of Winchester, John
Bishop of Bath, William Bishop of St. Asaph, Robert de Walsham his Confessor,
Hugh de Segrave Steward of his Lands, Aleyn de Stokes, and John de Fordham.

The next day after his Will was made (being Walsingh. p. 186.
Trinity Sunday) this Noble Prince (the Flower of Chevalry and delight of the
English Nation) departed the World; his body being imbalmed, was wrapped in Lead
and kept till Michaelmas (the Parliament being then to meet) to be interred
with greater Solemnity, which was performed at Canterbury, near the Shrine of
Thomas Becket, over whose Grave a stately Monument was erected for him, which
yet remains undefaced.

(3) Henry Earl of Lancaster.
THE second Stall on the Sovereign's side, was assigned to Henry then Earl of
Lancaster and Derby, Son to Henry Earl of Lancaster (Brother and Heir of Thomas
Earl of Lancaster Beheaded at Pontefract, on Pat. 16. E. 2. part. 1. m. 25.
Monday before our Lady Day, an. 15. E. 2.) and Maude Daughter and Heir to Sir
Patrick Cadurces (or Chaworth) Knight, Lord of Kidwelly and Ogmore in Wales.

The first considerable Military Honor conferred on him, was that of 7. April
Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 28.
Commander in Chief of all the King's Forces sent into Scotland an. 10. E. 3.
for the Ibid. m. 30.
Truce with the Scots having been upon the request both of the Pope and King of
France, and earnest solicitation of their Ambassadors, several times
prorogued, between the 23. of Nov. an. 9. E. 3. and the Sunday next after
Ascension day following, it then expired; before which, the King had
intelligence of their confederacies abroad, and great preparations for War, and
being engaged to assist and defend Edward Baliol King of Scots, who had done
him Homage for that Kingdom, he thereupon raised an Army for that purpose, and
gave this noble Knight command thereof, by the name of Henry de Lancaster only,
though I find him in Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 22.
another place relative to this employment; called Henry de Lancastre Banneret.
And by another Commission he 10. Apr. Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 28.
gave him power to receive to Faith and Peace, the Scots or their adherents,
and to grant them pardon.

Shortly after, 4. May Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 26.
he a^^ Tho. Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, Henry de Bellomont Earl of Bogham, and
William de Bohun had Commission given them, to treat with Sir Andrew Murrese a
Scotch Knight, about a Truce between the King and his Subjects in Scotland, and
the said Sir Andrew and other the Scots, to hold till Midsummer following.

Toward the latter end of this year, Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 3.
David Bruys (then in France) had obtained that Kings assistance, and gotten
together a great Navy, with which he did much mischief to the Merchants about
the Isle of Wight; besides, he had entered the Isles of Gerusey and Iarsey, and
killed diverse of the Inhabitants. The King therefore 11. Dec. Ib.
gave Commission to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and others, of whom this
Henry was one (himself being then at Botheuill in Scotland, so busied in the
War, that he could not be at the meeting appointed) to treat on his behalf,
with certain Prelates and others, whom he had commanded to meet at London, on
Wednesday after Newyears day following, upon the defense and safety of the
Kingdom, repulsion of the Enemies, and other things relating to the State of
the King and Kingdom; as also seriously and fully to acquaint them with the
King's intensions, to ordain and do all things referring thereunto, and to his
honor, as if he were there personally present.

The following year he was 16. Mar. Chart. 11. ^. 3.
created Earl of Derby, and invested by girding him with the Sword, his Father
yet living; by the Charter of his Creation did the King grant to him and his
Heirs, an Annuity of Honor of 20 l. out of the Farm of the County of Derby; and
to the end he might better maintain the State of an Earl, he also 18. Mar. P^^
11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 27.
granted him an annual Pension of 1000 Marks during his Fathers life, out of
the Customs in London, St. Butolphs, and Kingston upon Hull, until the King
should provide for him 1000 Marks per annum in Lands or Rents; and in case the
issues of the said Customs fell short of that annual sum, then was it provided,
that it should be made up out of the Exchequer, and for more surety out of the
Custody of his Wards.

The Pat. 11. E. 3. p. 3. m. 26.
third of October following, the King granted to him the Manor of Wyghton and
Hundred of Northgreneho, with their appurtenances, in the County of Norfolk, as
also the Manor of Laghton in Morthynges, with its appurtenances, in the County
of York, which Ralph Earl of Eu had lately held, and were then seized into the
Kings hands, to hold also during the life of his Father, at the annual value of
72 l. 7. s. 6 d. q. (at which rate they were extended) in part of satisfaction
of the said annual Pension of 1000 Marks.

But the Letters Patents of the 18. of March, were resigned up to be cancelled
the 24. of October an. 13. E. 3. and the King thereupon, by other Letters
Patent, dated the Pat. 13. E. 3. p. 2. m. 20.
20. of September preceding, granted him (during his said Fathers life) all the
Issues of the small Customs in London, for the payment of 891 Marks 5 s. 9 d.
q. above the extent of the Manors and Hundred aforesaid (both which sums made
up the foresaid annual Pension of 1000 Marks) and in case the small Customs
fell short of 891 Marks 5 s. 9 d. q. then, what they wanted was to be paid him
out of the great Customs of the said City; but if they exceeded that sum, then
the surplusage to be paid into the Exchequer: which Lands and Pension out of
the small Customs, reverting to the King upon the death of this Earls Father,
were 26 Sept. Rot. Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 2. m. 12.
then granted to the Queen, for the support and maintenance of her Children,
until the King should otherwise provide for them.

In the 11. year of King Edward the Third, the King having sent over the Bishop
of Lincoln, and others, into Flanders to make Alliances for him with Flemings,
the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 30.
French King had laid a Garrison in the Isle of Cagaunt, with design to take
these Commissioners in their return home; but they having notice thereof, and
the friendship and assistance of Iacques Dartuel, took their way to Dort in
Holland, and so escaped that snare. And the King resolving to clear that Island
of this Garrison, designed for this Service the Earl of Derby, who raised part
of his men in Staffordshire, a Country where he was exceedingly beloved, in
which his Father had then great Possessions, that after his death descended to
him, and of which for the better conservation of the Peace there, the King made
him high Extract. Donat. 19. E. 3. m. 3.
Sheriff during lif^* These men, levied by the King's Writ, he was 28. June
Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. m. 23.
commanded to have in readiness with h^^self at London, on the Feast of St.
Margaret the Virgin next ensuing.

At the Froiss. c. 31.
arrival of the English in the Haven, they found the Town of Cagaunt well
garrisoned, and therein diverse stout Commanders chosen by the Earl of Flanders
for its defense, well armed, and ready to forbid their Landing, so that with
great difficulty and some loss they got ashore; and here our Earl pressing on,
and fighting for his passage, was struck down to the ground, but relieved by
the Lord Manny.

In fine, the Town (on Holli^sh* Chron. p. 354.
Sunday before the Feast of St. Martin) was taken by the English, and above
3000 Flemmings slain; after which, they plundered and burnt it, and brought
their Prisoners to their Ships, among whom was Sir Guy the Bastard of Flanders,
who after made Fealty to the King, and sided with him in the War.

The Rot. Alman. 13. E. 3. m. 16. Dorso.
16. of February an. 13. E. 3. he was put in Commission with others, to array
men in the County of Leicester, against the Invasion of Enemies; and the Pat.
Concess. h^minib. Angl. and Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 17.
3. of July after made one of the 8 Commissioners to treat with Philip de
Valois, upon all Controversies between the King and him: and also one of the H.
Bishop of Linc. H. Earl of Derb. W. Earl of Salisb. W. de Exon. and Alex. de
Oneby.
5 Commissioners constituted the second of January following, to treat with the
said Philip, as also with the Cardinals of St. Praxide, and St. Mary in Aquiro
upon the same Affair.

The Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m. 29. Dorso.
6. of March an. 14. E. 3. he had Commission given him, to raise men in the
Counties of Derby, Leicester, Staffordshire, and Lancashire, to pass over Sea
with the King or himself, at the Kings next Voyage beyond Sea.

This Earl attended the King in his first Expedition into France, and had
Froiss. cap. 41.
Command in the Battle ready pitched to fight the French near Vyronfoss, as also
at the Ibid. cap. 50.
Battle of Sluice an. 14. E. 3. and the Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m. 8.
10. of August the same year, command issued to Robert de Morley, Admiral of
the Fleet from the Thames toward the North, to send forth 10 Ships to Orewell,
to take in his Troops of Horse, that were to pass over into Flanders after him.

In the 27 July Pat. 15. E. 3. p. 2. ^. 29.
following year He, and Henry de Percy, Ralph de Nevil, and Robert de Dalton
had Commission given them to treat with the Bishops, Earls, and all other
persons, as well Ecclesiastic as Secular, in the Northern parts, touching the
defense of the Kingdom against the Scots; and to solicit them, who had Lands
in those parts, to dwell there, or otherwise to assign other persons there to
remain in their stead.

He was again made the Kings 7. Oct. Rot. Scot. 15. E. 3. m. 4.
Lieutenant in the North parts of England and in Scotland, as also General of
the Army sent against the Scots, who had invaded England; having power given
him to defend the Marches, to march into Scotland, to create Stewards,
Constables, Marshals, and other Officers necessary for the Government of the
Army, and Ibid. m. 5.
three days after had a Commission given him, and power to treat and agree with
the Scots about a Cessation of Arms, to admit such of them as were willing, to
the Kings Peace, to receive their Fealty, to grant them pardon, and restore
their Lands.

The Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 14.
3. of April in the following year, he and R. Bishop of Durham, Hen. Earl of
Derby, Ralph de Nevil, John de Strivelin, Will. de Careswell Governor of
Berwick, Walt. de Creyk, Rob. de Mavers.
6 other, whereof he was to be one, were commissionated to treat with David
Brus, and other Scotchmen his Adherents upon a final Peace or Truce, as also
upon all debates and differences whatsoever between the King and them, and
amicably to compose them. And the same day he had power likewise given him to
grant to Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 14.
Adam Bishop of Brechin, to Patrick Earl of March, Sir William de Douglas, and
Sir Thomas de Caruato, Knights, and William Bullock, and other Scotch Men, as
he should see cause, the the King's special Letters of safe Conduct and
Protection for so long time, as this Earl thought fit, to come into England,
with as many Horse as he should appoint, to treat either of a Truce or Peace
with this Earl, and others deputed thereto by the King.

Having in this expedition undertaken upon certain conditions, the Custody of
the Marches of Scotland, the King 10* October. Extract. donat. 16. E. 3. m 10.
gave him in reward, the 1000. Marks which Io. de Wesenham stood engaged to pay
the King for Wool.

He went over with the King in his Voyage into Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 20. and
23. Claus. de eod. an. p. 2. m. 31.
Bretagne, having under his Command 5. Bannerets, 50. Knights, 144. Esquires,
and 200. Archers on Horseback. The daily Wages allowed him for himself was 8 s.
for each Banneret 4 s. each Knight 2 s. each Esquire 1 s. and each Archer 6 d.
At the Siege of Vannes he was Hollinshed Chron. page 3.264.
constituted one of the Kings Commissioners (the other being the Earls of
Northampton, and Salisbury, the Lord Stafford, Burghershe, Cantelowe, Cobham,
Manneys, and Berkley, and Mr. John Vfford Archdeacon of Ely) where a Truce was
concluded for three years.

The Rot. Vasc. 18. E. 3. m. 9.
24. of March, an. 18. E. 3. The King by his Letters Patent constituted this
Noble Earl, and Richard Earl of Arundel, his Lieutenants in the Dukedom of
Aquitaine, and the Countries adjoining, to govern and defend those Territories,
to demand and receive the possession of the Castles, Places, and Rights,
unjustly detained from him, to recover and retain the same by force of Arms, if
need should be, and to receive such as should return to their Obedience, to the
grace and favor of the King, as also the Homage and Fidelity from whomsoever
in those parts due; and generally to do all things for defense and recovery of
the Kings Rights, and good Government of those Countries and his Subjects, with
Command to the Archbishops, etc. to yield Obedience to them.

And whereas the King upon false suggestions, had been deceived in many of his
Grants and Donations in that Dukedom; He by other Ibid.
Letters Patents of the same date, gave him power to seize into his hands all
the Castles, Lands, Liberties, and Profits, formerly granted by him, and those
that should appear to have been obtained upon untrue suggestions, to retain
without Restitution, but upon true, to restore entirely. A like Ibid.
Commission was given them which extended to the grants made by his Father King
Edward the Second, upon like pretenses, as well as by himself.

They also had a General Commission Ibid.
to treat and conclude with all persons of whatsoever state or condition,
Kingdom or Nation, for the settling of Alliances, and mutual Assistance between
the King and them, to retain men for the Kings Service, and to agree about
Fees, Wages, and Rewards to be paid unto them.

By other Ibid.
Commissions of the same date, these two Earls had power to treat and conclude
with Alphonsus King of Castile, (there styled Alphonsus Rex Castiliae, and
Legionis, Toleti, Galiciae, Siviliae, Cordubiae, Murciae, Gyennii, and
Algarbiae, and Comes Molmae) or his Deputies upon all differences arising
between their Subjects, especially Mariners, and amicably to compose them, as
also of a perpetual League of Friendship between them, etc. their Subjects, and
to afford each other their mutual assistance, with Power to make Substitutes in
their stead.

The said Earls had like Ibid.
Commissions, with the same Power, to treat with the King of Portugal, therein
styled, Alphonsus Rex Portugaliae and Algarbiae. And with the King of Aragon,
styled therein, Petrus Rex Aragoniae, Valenciae, Majorcae, Sardinii, and
Corsicae, Comes Barthon.

Sir Cap. 102.
John Froissard tells us, that some of the Gascoigne Lords came hither about
this time, to acquaint the King, with the weak condition of that Country and
City of Bordeaux, and to desire relief, and that in this Earls company went
also the Earls of Penbroke and Oxford, the Lord Stafford, Sir Walter Manney,
the Lord Frank de la Hall, and diverse others of note, being about 500 Knights
and Esquires, and 2000 Archers, and having landed at Bayon the 6. of June 18.
E. 3.
1344. went thence to Bordeaux.

His first attempt was upon the Froiss. c. 103.
Town of Bergerac, which surrendered to him, and next Ibid. c. 104.
Longo Castle and le Lake, Mandurant he took by assault, so also the Castle of
Mountgyse, Punache, and the Castle de la Lewe, Forsathe, and Pondayre, he won
with little opposition, and the great Town of Beaumont in Layllois. Hollinsh.
Laylloyes after three days, the chief Town appertaining to the Earl of Laylle
(who lived as King in those parts of Gascoigne) was delivered to him after some
dispute.

After this success he marched to Froiss. c. 105.
Bonu, this he assaulted and took, he also took the Castle of Auberoche, and
the Town of Libourne yielded themselves to him. Auberoche being presently after
besieged by 12000 French, this Earl on St. Laurence Eve assaulted the Enemy in
their Tents with 300 Spears and 600 Archers, and took the Earl of Laylle, and 8
other Earls and Viscounts, and 200 Knights, and so many Esquires, and other
Soldiers, that each Englishman had 2 or 3 Prisoners, many of whom they let go
upon their paroll to return to Bergerac or to Bordeaux on a certain day, and
others they carried with them to Bourdeaux; and by this valiant Exploit having
relieved the Castle, he afterward disposed of his Army into Winter Quarters,
and returned into England.

Upon these great successes, the King 1^. May Rot. Vasc. 19. E. 3. m. 6. and
Rot. Fr. E. 3. m. 6.
made him his sole Lieutenant and Captain in the Duchy of Aquitaine, and the
parts adjacent, with power to do and execute all things that belonged to that
Command: and gave command to all Archbishops, Earls, Barons, Viscounts,
Castellans, and other persons throughout that Dukedom, and adjacent Countries,
to yield obedience to him as the Kings Lieutenant.

Ibid.
Five days before, the King gave him Commission with power to treat and
conclude with all persons of whatsoever state or condition, Kingdom or Nation,
for settling firm alliances and mutual assistance between the King and them, as
also to retain men for the King's Service, and to agree about their Fees,
Wages, and other Rewards.

The Claus. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 12.
11* of June following, Command was sent to the Sheriff of London, that
forasmuch as the Earl had shipped most of his Horse at Southampton, and was ready
to depart, to make proclamation, that all the men at Arms, Archers, and others
who were to go with him, should march to Southampton with all possible speed.

Froiss. c. 108.
Immediately after his arrival in Gascoigne he took the Field, and laid Siege
to Bosyll which surrendered to him. The Castle of Rochemyllone being well
fortified, he took by assault, and slew all but those that fled into the
Church: the next day he laid Siege to the Town of Mountsegur, and battered it
with great Engines for 15 days together, and at length it was Ibid. c. 109.
yielded to him upon Composition. After this the strong Castle of c. 108.
Aguillon was yielded up to him, and then he laid Siege to c. 109.
Reole, which surrendered on mercy, but the Castle stood out 11 weeks, and then
also c. 111.
surrendered.

After his taking of Reole, he marched to c. 112.
Mountpesance Castle which he took by Storm, and then he sat down before
Mauleon, and took it by the stratagem of an Ambush: He took also the Ville
Franche in Agenois, with its Castle by assault, after which he marched through
the Country, and took many other Towns and Castles, with little difficulty.

At the end of three days Siege c. 113.
Myremont yielded to him, and some of his Forces took Tonneins.
Thomynes on the River Garonne, and the strong Castle Damasan. Last of all c.
114.
Augoulesme yielded to him after a Months Siege, and thence he retired to his
Winter Quarter at Bordeaux.

This Winter the Duke of Normandy entered c. 118.
Gascoigne, with 100000 men, and shortly after Christmas took the Field; in
this Expedition he regained several places from the English, and sat down
before Aiguillon; but after the 20. E. 3.
Battle at Cressy, being sent for back by the French King, he was constrained
to raise his Siege.

Froiss. c. 136
Shortly after the retreat of the Duke of Normandy, this Earl (the King having
sent to the 6. May Claus. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 11. dorso. vide Rot. Franc. 20. E.
3. p. 2. m. 2.
Prior of the Order of the Friars Preachers in London, to offer up Prayers,
that God would please to protect and defend him, and give his Forces Victory
over his Enemies) with 1200 men at Arms, 2000 Archers, and 3000 Foot passed the
River Garonne toward Xantonge and took Myrembeau.
Myrabel by Storm, as also the Town and Castle of Aunay Holli^sh.
Alaay, and Sargeres and Benon. He likewise took Mortagne on the Sea side in
Poictou by assault, and burnt Lusignen, and took the Town and Castle of
Taillebourge; at length he lay Siege to St. Iean d' Angely, which surrendered to
him upon Conditions, after which he took Maxinent by assault, and won the
Hollinsh. page 375.
Town of Monstrevil Bonnin; he thence marched to Poicters, and that he took by
Assault, where 700 of the Inhabitants were slain, and some Churches spoiled,
and more had been, but that this pious Earl commanded the contrary on pain of
death: Nevertheless they plundered the Town, and left it desolate, and here the
Soldiers got so great Wealth, that nothing was of value but Gold, Silver, and
Feathers for the Troops. From hence he returned to St. Iean d' Angely, and
thence to Bordeaux, and in this Expedition, he gained so great esteem, that he
was reported to be the Noblest Prince that ever rode on Horseback.

Having behaved himself so gallantly and faithfully in prosecuting and
recovering of the King's right in these parts, the first of Febr. an. 21. E. 3.
the King sent for him, back to be near unto himself for the future, upon all
occasions, and to direct and assist in his Martial and other Affairs, whereupon
he returned into England, and because King Edward understood: that the French
King was making great preparations to draw down to Calais about Whitsontide, he
14. May Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 10.
enjoined him speedily to repair to his assistance, in reference to whose
passage, 19. May Ibid. m. 6.
Command was sent to Io. de Montgomery Admiral of the Fleet Westward, to
provide Ships in readiness at Sandwich and Dover, for the Transportation of the
Army he had raised, with all speed; and immediately upon his coming thither,
and consideration had of his victorious Successes and good Services, done the
King in the Dukedom of Aquitain and parts adjoining, the King Primo Iunii Rot.
fact. ap^d Calais 21. E. 3. m. 13.
granted to him and his Heir Males by Charter, the Castle, Town, and Place of
Brageriac (in Diocese. Petragoriensis) with the whole Castellany and all
Jurisdiction high and low, Royal Authority, absolute and mixed, as also the
Coinage of Money there. To which he afterward added a 14. Mar. Rot. Vasc. 23.
E. 3. m. 8.
grant of the Examination of the Assay, with both the Criminal and Civil
punishment of all Offenders for coining Money.

And because this Town and Castle stood upon the Frontiers of the Enemy, the
King 17. Iunii Rot. Cale^y 21. E. 3. m. 16.
granted, that during the War, there should remain in that Garrison 100 men of
Arms, and 200 Foot at the King's pay, subject nevertheless to the Command of
the Steward of Gascoigne, to be drawn out upon occasion by him, leaving
sufficient strength to defend the same.

This Earl having taken diverse Prisoners at the Town of St. John d' Angely, and
reduced it to the obedience of the King, he therefore 3. Oct. Ibid. m. 4.
granted to him all the Lands, Tenements, Vines, and other Goods of those
Prisoners, until their Ransoms were fully paid. And a 8. Oct. Ibid. m. 1.
little after granted unto him and his Heirs for ever, the Houses, Lands, etc.
of Bernard Barram Burgess of that Town, to hold by the Service, of rendering to
the King and his Heirs one Rose annually at Midsummer.

Moreover, on the 10. of November following, he had further Extract. Donat. 21.
E. 3. m. 10.
granted the Castle of Horston with the appurtenances in the County of Derby,
and 40 l. per an. out of the Farm of the Town of Derby, to him and his Heirs
Males, then the same to revert to the King and his Heirs. All these Grants were
made to him upon the account of his good and grateful services formerly
performed.

Upon the Froiss. c. 144.
French King's coming toward Calais (in July before) with design to relieve
it, the King appointed him to keep Newland bridge, for by securing that
passage, the French could not pass on that side, unless through the Marches,
which were not to be attempted without danger. Ibid. c. 145.
His order in keeping this place was much commended by the four French
Commissioners, who passed by it when they came from their King to King Edward,
to demand a place to fight in.

At this time the Hollinsh. page 377.
Pope having sent two Cardinals to the King, they obtained his condescension to
treat with King Philip, whose Commissioners were the Dukes of Burgoigne and
Burbone, the Lord Lewis de Savoy, and the Lord John of Henalt, otherwise called
Lord Beaumont; and on King Edwards part were the Noble Earls of Derby and
Northampton, the Lords Cobham and Mannie: but three days being spent without
coming to any conclusion, the Treaty broke up, and the Cardinal Mediators
departed.

5. Sept. Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 11. dorso.
He was after made choice of by the King, and Ralph Earl of Eu and Guynes,
Constable of France by the French King, to agree upon a Truce, in hopes of a
Peace to hold for 6. Weeks, throughout Picardy, Normandy, Artois, Boulogne, and
Flanders, to commence the 13. of the same September.

The Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 1. Vide Claus. 22. E. 3. p. 2. m. 8. dorso.
25. day of September following, he was constituted the Kings Lieutenant, as
well in the parts of Flanders and Calais, as elsewhere in the Kingdom of
France, and therein power was given him to treat and agree with any of the
Kings Adversaries, or their Adherents, or other persons whatsoever. And after,
by a particular 11. Oct. Ibid. m. 4.
Commission, he and William Bishop of Norwich, the Earls of Suffolk and
Huntington and others, were empowered to Treat and agree with the Earl of
Flanders and his Allies, touching any difference between the King and them; and
it seems their Endeavors took so good effect, that an Agreement was made with
that Earl the Ib. m. 3. dorso.
10. of December following: whereupon he was sent to Denemere, and there
received the said Earls Fealty and Homage.

As to his transactions relating to France, 18. Nov. Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m.
10. dorso.
He with the Bishop of Norwich, the Earl of Suffolk, and Sir Walter Many agreed
to the Prorogation of the Truce from the 18. of November, to the first of
September following.

Upon the Death of his Father, which fell out Pat. de eod. an p. 2. m. 12 and
Escaet 20. E. 3.
an. 19. E. 3. he succeeded him in the Titles of the Earldoms of Lancaster and
Leicester; and, for that a great part of the Lands, sometimes the Earl of
Lincolns, were come to his possession, the King 20^ Aug. Chart. 23. E. 3. m. 3.
Created him also Earl of Lincoln. He had by his Charter of Creation granted
unto him the Creation annuity of 20 l. to be paid him by the Sheriff of
Lincolnshire for the time being, in lieu of the third penny of that County for
ever, as Thomas late Earl of Lincoln his Uncle had, to enjoy whilst he lived.

About 8. days after, the King renewed his Commission for being his Rot. Vasc.
23. E. 3. m. 3.
Captain and Lieutenant in Aquitain, and the parts adjacent, with all Powers
requisite for the better Government of those Dominions, Pat. 23. E. 3. part 2.
m. 6. and 7.
whether he shortly after passed. And by other Letters Patent he Ibid. 18. Oct.
constituted him his Captain and Lieutenant in Poicters, with full power to
exercise all things which appertained to that Command.

But for further increase of Honor, the King 6. Mar. Pat. 25. E. 3. part 1. m.
18.
Created him Duke of Lancaster, and granted, that during life he should have
within that Country his Chancellor and Justice, as well to the Pleas of the
Crown as other Pleas whatsoever, to be held according to Law, and the
Executions of them; and likewise all other Liberties and Royal Jurisdiction to
a County Palatine appertaining, as freely and wholly as the Earl of Chester was
known to enjoy in the County of Chester; the tenths and fifteenths, and all
other payments granted by the Clergy or Canons, and pardons for life and
members to the King, excepted.

The R^t. Franc. 25. E. 3. m. 15.
8. of March ensuing, he was constituted Admiral of the Fleet from the mouth of
the River Thames Westward, and two days after the King Assigned him several
Lieutenants; namely, Reginald de Ferers on the River Thames and Medway, Robert
Ledred Sergeant at Arms within the Cinque Ports, Philip de Wetton, and Walter
de Harewell Sergeants at Arms in the Port of Seford, and in every part and
place thence by the Seacoast to Fowy, Richard Lengles in the Port of Fowy, and
thence to Bristol, and there, and in the Port of Chepstow, and River of Severn,
and Ralph de Lullebrock in all places and Ports, from Chepstow to Chester, and
there; and in all Parts and Maritine places in Wales.

Upon a Rumor that the French had provided an Army and Navy to invade England,
among the Maritine Counties on the South of England, Hants, Wilts, Somerset,
and Dorset, were 14 I^n. Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. m ^.
committed to this Duke to secure and to resist the Enemy. So also was the I^^^
Maritine parts of Lancashire. And because the King had occasion to raise men
for Land Service, he (...)
gave him Commission to array 300. Archers within that Duchy, before the
Quindena of the Holy Trinity then next following, to be ready to march in the
Kings Service.

The Scots also designing to invade England the following year, this Duke had
^0. Oct. R^^. Scot. 27. ^. ^. m 1.
Commission to array all able men in Lancashire, between the Age of 1^ and 60
to march against them, in case they should presume to enter the Kingdom. The
like R^t. S^^t. ^9. ^ 3. m 13.
Commission was given him the 26. of February an. 29. ^. 3.

The R^^. 1. ^^an^. 29. ^ 3. m ^.
14. of September an. 29. E. 3. this noble Duke was constituted Lieutenant for
the King, and John Duke of Bretagne, then under age. And by other I^id.
Letters Patent of the same date, Command was given to Sir Thomas Holland, the
Kings late Lieutenant, to deliver up to him all the Castles, Forts, Cities,
Towns, and other Places, Lands, Tenements, and Rents in the said Dukedom under
his custody, with all the Corn, Victuals, Money, and Issues of the said
Dukedom, as also all Victuals, Engines, Arms, and other Ammunition in the said
Castles, etc. which belonged to the King in Bretagne. The Ibid. 30. E. 3. m 1.
8. of August, an. 30. E. 6. he was by the Kings Letters Patent constituted
Lieutenant and Captain in the Dukedom of Bretagne and parts adjacent, for the
good Government thereof, both for the King and the said John de Montford Duke
of Bretagne then under age, and in the King's custody, from Michaelmas
following for one year.

Cap. 170.
Froissard says, this Duke was in Normandy, and with him the Lord Philip of
Navarre, and the Lord Godfrey of Harecourt, carrying on the War in that
Country, under the Title of the King of Navar, at such time as the Prince was
foraging of Berry, and used all endeavor to have joined his Forces with the
Prince at Poicters; but the passages being so well kept on the River Loire, he
could not pass, and having heard that the Prince had got the Victory there, he
returned into England.

In Holli^s^ page 385.
this Voyage, being 4000 strong, they marched to Lisieux, to Orbe^, to Ponteau,
and relieved that Castle, besieged above two Months; but the Enemy hearing of
the approach of the English, raised their Siege in such have, that they left
behind them their Ensigns and Artillery.

This Duke then marched to Breteuil which he relieved, next to Verneuil in
Perch, took both Castle and Town, and burnt a great part of it. Upon the
information of which, the French King raised a mighty Army, with design to
fight him, but he withdrawing to Laigle, and the King being come within two
Leagues of it, found the Forest so thick and hazardous, that he thought it not
safe to pass further; and in his return took from the Navarrois the Castles of
Tilliers and Breteuil, and so marched forward toward the Prince, then
harrasing Berry.

About the ^^iss c. 175.
middle of May an. 31. E. 3. he took the Field in Bretagne with 1000 men at
Arms and 500 Archers, and laid Siege to Rennes, Ho^^nsh. Ch^on. p. 291.
which though well defended, was at length surrendered; and the Rot. Franc. 31.
E. 3. m. 10.
25. of July his Commission of Lieutenancy, both for the King and Duke of
Bretagne, was renewed for another year, to commence at Michaelmas following; but
the Rot. Franc. 32. E. 3. m. 8.
8. of August before the expiration thereof, Sir Robert Herle and John de
Buckenham Clerk, were appointed to succeed him, being jointly and severally
constituted Captains and Lieutenants both to the King and Duke for the
following year, from Michaelmas then next ensuing. Ibid.
At that time Tho. Douvedale was the Dukes Lieutenant in that Dukedom, to whom
command was given, dated the Ibid.
5. of August preceding, to deliver up all things in his custody there, and
belonging to the King, to such as the King had appointed to receive them; in
like manner as they were formerly delivered up to the Earl by Sir Thomas
Holland, late Captain there.

In the Expedition made by the King into France, in the 33. year of his Reign,
this Duke H^lli^sh. page 392.
was sent before to Calais, with 400 Spears and 2000 Archers, where being
arrived, he took with him those Lords of the Empire, and other Commanders, who
there waited the Kings coming to Calais, and marched to St. Omars, Cambray, and
other places; wasting all the Country as he passed, until he heard of the
arrival of the King, and then returned to Calais.

This Voyage with the King into France, was the last Martial Employment this
Great Duke undertook; and as he had manifested to the World, the wisdom and
valor of a great Commander, and succeeded happily in Martial Affairs, so was
he no Enemy to Peace, but as ready to lay hold of it on fair and honorable
terms, as he was forward to draw his Sword in defense of the Kings honor and
right: And this was most evident at the Treaty of Bretagne near Chartres, where
Froiss. c. 211.
though the King was very unwilling to accept of a Peace, upon terms offered by
the French, yet moved by the persuasive Arguments of this worthy Duke, he
condescended thereunto. It was also upon his Ibid. c. 213.
motion, both to the King and King John of France, that the Truce made at
Rennes between Charles de Bloys, and the Earl of Montfort, which was to expire
the first of May, was enlarged to Midsummer following, in hopes of a final
Peace to be by that time made between them.

His Wife.
He married Brook in Lancaster.
Isabel Daughter of Henry Lord Beaumont, Cousin-german to Queen Isabel, Wife to
King Edward the Second, and by her had two Daughters and Heirs; Mand his eldest
Daughter, was Wife Claus. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
first to Ralph, Son of Ralph Earl of Stafford, and next to Esc. 35. E. 3. n.
122.
William Duke of Bavaria, Earl of Henault, Holand, and Zeland, Lord of
Frisland, styled also Earl of Pat. de eod. an. p. 3. m. 19.
Leicester; and Blanch the youngest, to John of Gaunt created Duke of
Lancaster, an. 36. E. 3.

His Lib. in Offic. principal. Cantuar. vocat. Islip. fol. 172.
Will was made in his Castle at Leicester the 15. of March 1360. in which he is
styled Duke of Lancaster, His Death.
Earl of Derby, Lincoln, and Leicester, Steward of England, Lord of Bergerac
and Beaufort: and by which he appoints his Body to be interred in the
Collegiate Church of our Lady at Leicester, where his Father was buried.

He dyed within few days after, viz. on Esc. 35. E. 3. n. 122.
Tuesday next before Easter an. 35. E. 3. and was buried at Leicester,
according to the appointment of his Will.

(4.) Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick.
THis noble Earl was eldest Son to Guy Earl of Warwick, and Alice Sister and
Rot. Fin. 3. E. 2. m. 7.
Heir of Robert Toney. He was born in Rot. Ioh. Rows.
Warwick Castle, and had to his Godfathers Rot. Ioh. Rows.
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Henry his Brother, and Thomas de Warington Prior of
Kenilworth.

On Claus. 3. E. 3. m. 35.
New Years day, in the second year of King Edward the Third, he was made
Knight, though then within age; and the Claus. 3. E. 3. m. 35.
20. of February following, having made his Homage, had Livery of his Fathers
Lands. In the fifth year of the same King, the Government of the Isles of Pat.
5. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
Gernsey, Sark, and Aureney was conferred on him. About two years after, he
attended Claus. 7. E. 3. m. 16. dorso.
King Edward the Third, in that famous and successful Expedition against the
Scots; and in Hollinsh. Chron p. 351 a.
Christmas Holy Days, an. 8. E. 3. he and the Earl of Oxford were sent with
Edward King of Scots, to secure Carlisle, and defend the West Marches of
England: who, with some Forces raised in Lancashire, Westmerland, and
Cumberland, entered Scotland about Twelvetide, wasted Gallaway, and returned to
Carlisle. He attended the King again into Scotland, Rot. Scot. 9. E. 3. m. 27.
an. 9. E. 3. when King Edward, by Carlisle, and Edward King of Scots, from
Berwick, entered again that Kingdom: after which he was one of those Noblemen to
whose trust the King committed the Walsing. page 118.
Guardianship of the Marches. The following year Hollinsh. page 352.
he and other of the Nobility of England, entered Scotland about Whitsontide,
and passed as far as St. John's Town, which they fortified; and in this Kingdom
he Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 27.
remained all the year.

About the beginning of Hollinsh. page 353.
Sept. an. 11. E. 3. he again entered Scotland with an Army by Berwick, whilst
the Lords Wake and Clifford entered by Carlisle; and within two days both their
Forces united, whereupon they wasted Tividale, Moseteidale, and Nidesdale,
whilst Anthony Lord Lucy wasted Gallaway; but not being able to prosecute their
Voyage, by reason of the great Rains, they returned within twelve days to
Carlisle: and so much to the satisfaction of the King did he behave himself in
this Expedition, that the Pat. 11. E. 3. m. 9.
19. of March following, he made Letters obligatory to him for Pat. 11. E. 3.
m. 9.
500 Marks as a gift, to be paid him at Michaelmas following.

When the King undertook his first Expedition into France, an. 13. E. 3. (by
the way of Flanders) he likewise attended him thither, and had Froiss lib. 1.
cap. 41.
Command of a Wing in the field pitched between Vyronsos and Flamengery, in
which, among others were the Earl of Penbroke, the Lords Berkley, and Moulton.

He went over with the Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m 25.
King into Flanders, when by the way, that memorable Naval fight happened before
Sluice, where the King obtained a signal Victory against the French: and was
Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 63.
one of the Commissioners nominated at the Treaty agreed on at the Siege of
Tournay, to be sent to Arras, in order to a further Treaty; where after 15 days
debate, nothing was agreed on, but the Surrender of the County of Poictou
(seized on by the French King the preceding year) and a prolongation of the
Truce for two years.

An. 16. E. 3. he was one of the Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 39.
Commissioners nominated to treat with the Kings Allies in Brabant and
Flanders, about his designed Expedition into France: in which, he after
attended the King with Claus. 16. E. 3. p. 2. m. 32.
80 men at Arms, 1 Banneret, 18 Knights, 60 Esquires, and 100 Archers on
Horseback; for whose passage a Writ issued to 30. Aug. Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3.
m. 30 dorso.
John de Montgomery, Admiral of the Fleet Westward to provide Ships. At Froiss.
lib. 1. cap. 95.
Nantes in Bretagne (to which the King had laid Siege) he behaved himself so
gallantly upon a Sally made by the Town, that they were forced to retreat with
great loss.

Not long after his return into England, he marched into Tho. Walsing. page 150.
Scotland, with Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, to raise the Siege laid
against Louhmaban Castle, whereof the Earl of Northampton was Governor; and
when he came back, was employed with 19. Aug. Rot. Franc. 17. E. 3. m. 12.
the said Earl of Derby, and some others to the Pope, to treat about King
Edwards right to the Crown of France, which produced nothing but an enlargement
of the Truce. The following year he was constituted 10. Feb. Pat. 18. E. 3. p.
1. m. 18.
Marshall of England during pleasure.

In that great Expedition Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 121.
first designed for Gascoigne, an. 20. E. 3. he was made Admiral of the Fleet;
but the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 121.
King altering his course upon the advice of Sir Godfry de Harecourt, took into
his own Ship the Admirals Colors, and sailed toward Normandy. Where landing
at Hoges, this Earl made the first attempt with ^podig. Neustr. p. 118. n. 30.
one Esquire and six Archers, against 100 Normans, whereof 60 were slain upon
the place, and, by this valiant action, made way for the Kings Army to land.
Upon this he was constituted one of the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 122.
Marshals of the Kings Army, and Sir Godfry de Harecourt the other. And upon
the Kings advance to Cressy, he was one of the Ibid. c. 128.
Commanders under the Prince of Wales, who led the Van of his Army in that
famous battle. He attended the King at the Siege of Calais, with MS.
3 Bannerets, 61 Knights, 160 Esquires, 154 Archers on Horseback: and upon its
surrender, Froiss. c. 128.
he with the Earl of Stafford and Sir Walter Manny had the Keys of the Town
delivered them by the King, and were appointed to take possession of it for
him. And for his great services in this Voyage into France, the King 15. Dec.
Pat. 21. E. 3. p. 3. m. 13.
gave him 1366 l. 11. s. 8 d. and after assigned him Pat. 22. E. 3. p. 2. m. 5.
1000 Marks per annum for life, out of the Customs of London, Lynn, and St.
Botolphs; and these, partly in recompense for his great services, and partly
for wages due for attendance on his person with 100 men at Arms, according to
certain Indentures of Covenants made betwixt them. He was also in that Stow p.
230.
Naval fight against the Spanish Fleet near Winchelsey quarto Calendas
Septembris, an. 24. E. 3. where the English Walsing. page 160.
took 26 of their best Ships, the rest fled or were sunk.

King Edward having received intelligence, that the French King threatened an
Invasion, this Earl was constituted Admiral of the Sea, from the River Thames,
Westward, and 23. Feb. Rot. Franc. 26. E. 3. m. 13.
Philip de Witton made his Lieutenant. The same year he was Ibid. m. 5.
constituted one of the Commissioners assigned for the Arraying all able men,
as well Knights and Esquires, as others within the Counties of Warwick,
Leicester, and Worcester, for defense of the Realm.

The Prince being constituted the King's Lieutenant in Aquitaine, he Rot. Vasc.
29. E. 3. m. 7.
attended him thither: and there Ibid. 30. E. 3. m. 4.
staid with him that year, and the year Ibid. 31. E. 3. m. 16.
after. And that the Town of Vattes in Bretagne might be made defensible, he
had Rot. Franc. 32. E. 3. m. 13.
command to take care of the fortifying it, and to furnish the Magazin with
stores.

In the Battle at Poictiers, the Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 162.
French King and his eldest Son encountered the Battle of the English Marshals,
led by the Earls of Warwick and Suffolk: And after the Victory, the Prince sent
this Ibid. c. 164.
Earl and Sir Reignold Cobham, to discover what was become of the French King,
who after some time espied a Company of Soldiers together, and riding toward
them, found the French King on foot in great danger, between the English and
Gascoigners (for they had taken him from Sir Denis Morbeck, to whom the King
first yielded himself, and in token thereof had given him his right Gauntlet)
there being above 10 Knights and Esquires among them, who challenged him for
their Prisoner; but this Earl entering the throng, commanded the Soldiers to
fall back, and brought King John to the Prince.

In this Battle, the Earl himself took William de Melleun Archbishop of Seinz
Prisoner (for whose Ransom he after received Pat. 37. E. 3. p. 1. m. 25.
8000 l.) and therein behaved himself most valiantly, and got great renown;
having fought so long, that his MS. in Bibl. B^dl. [Cant^ar.] K. 84.123.
hand was galled with the management of his Sword and Poleax.

This Earl was in the Rot. Vasc. 31. E. 3. m. 16.
Gascoigne War, an. 31. E. 3. he also attended the King in his Expedition into
France, an. 33. E. 3. And after the Peace was agreed upon at Bretigny near
Chartres, and the King returned to England, he gave this Earl the Hollinsh.
page 394.
Command of all the Forces he left behind him in Guyenne, or any other place on
that side the Sea.

Froiss. lib. ^. cap. 207.
An. 36. E. 3. he marched in the Retinue of Rot. Franc. 36. E. 3. m. 5.
John Duke of Bretagne: The following year he attended the Ibid. 37. E. 3. m. 4.
Prince of Wales into Gascoigne, and had an allowance of Liberate 37. E. 3. m.
3.
452 l. in recompense of his expenses and loss sustained, by stay of himself
and Men at Arms at Southampton. After he had been a while in Gascoigne he began
his Autogr. pene Rob. Com. Aylesbur.
Travels into other Countries, having a Train of 300 Horse, consisting of
Knights, Esquires, Archers, and Servants. In this Journey he spent Hist. MS.
Ioh. Rows, page 253.
3 years, having made great proof of his Valor in the East Countries against
the Pagans; and in his return for England, brought along with him the King of
Lituania's Son, to whom, being Hist. MS. Ioh. Rows, page 253.
christened in London, this Earl was Godfather, and named him Thomas.

His Commission for 16. Oct. Pat. 40. E. 3. p. 2. m. 16.
Marshal of England was renewed to him an. 40. E. 3. and the following year
Rot. Scot. 41. E. 3. m. 5.
he and the Bishop of Durham, and some others, were empowered to supervise the
Marches of Scotland, and to treat with David de Bruys about the rupture of the
Truce formerly made at Berwick, and several injuries done by the Scots.

His Wife and Children.
He married Dudgales Antiq. of Warwick shire, page 319. a.
Katherine, one of the Daughters of Roger Mortimer Earl of March, who dyed some
few weeks before him. He had by her these Ib. 321. a.
Children; Guy his eldest Son, who died in France; Thomas, who succeeded him in
his Earldom; Ib. 321. a.
Reynburn; William Lord Bergaveny; and Roger. His Daughters were Maud, the Wife
of Roger Lord Clifford; Philippa, of Hugh Earl of Stafford; Alice, of John
Beauchamp of Hach; Ioane, of Ralph Lord Basset of Drayton; Isabel of John Lord
Strange of Blackmere; Margaret, of Guy de Montfort; Agnes, of -- Cokesey;
Julian, and Katherine.

His Death.
This noble Earls last action was in the Isle of Caux, an. 43. E. 3. for
Walsingh. p. 178. n. 20.
passing over to Calais in assistance of the Duke of Lancaster (as is
mentioned) the French having intelligence of his coming, presently withdrew in
great confusion from Chalke-hill where they had pitched their Tents, and upon
his arrival, understanding that the English had only faced the French, and not
fought them, he could not forbear to condemn their slackness, and out of a high
sense and indignation thereof, said, I will go on and fight, before the English
bread which we have eaten be digested; and forthwith past into the Isle of Caux
in Normandy, which he entered with Fire and Sword: but returning to Calais, he
fell sick of the Pestilence (then vulgarly called the Third Mortality) and died
on the Esc. 43. E. 3. p. 1. n. 19.
13. of November. His Body was brought over into England, and interred in the
middle of the Choire of the Collegiate Church at Warwick; the Sculp of whose
Monument is to be seen in the Page 318.
Antiquities of Warwickshire.

(5) Piers Capitow de la Bouch.
We are yet to seek who this person was, notwithstanding there has wanted no
pains in the search. That his name was Peter is most evident from the
Inscription under his Plate, yet remaining in Windesor Chapel, in these very
Syllables, Le Capitow de la Bouch Monsieur Piers: But whether Peter de Greilly
Viscount Benanges, mentioned in the following Pedigree be the same person is
some question.

For first, in all those Records, where he is remembered, the Title of Capitow
de la Bouch is not given him.

Secondly, we cannot trace him beyond the 22. year of the Reign of King Edward
the Third; and the Order of the Garter was not Instituted till the following
year.

Thirdly, John his Son is called Capitan de Bou^h, Rot. Vasc. ^. E. 3. m. 24.
an. 5. E. 3. and so till he died. And if he should prove the person (as some
do take him to be) it is a strange mistake committed in the Engravement of the
Plate, which seems to be as ancient as any of the rest, set up in the Chapel
at Windesor.

Of this John Capitan de Buch, there are many things noted by Sir John
Froissard, relating to both his taking King Edward's side against the French,
and his valiant actions in those Wars: But in regard we doubt of his being one
of the first Knights-Companions of the Garter, we have thought fit (for the
present) to wave the Historical account of him, and entreat the Reader in lieu
of it, to content himself with that of some part of the descent, whereby he may
guess at the greatness, yet unsuccessfulness of our pains, in endeavoring to
ascertain the person.

Johannes de Greilly dominus Benanges, Senescallus totius Aquitaniae. Rot.
Vasc. 6. and 7. E. 1. m. 9. Claramonda filia and haeres Galliardi de Mota
domini de Laudirons. Rot. Vasc. 6. and 7. E. 1. m. 9. Petrus de Greilly miles.
Rot. Vasc. 14. E. 3. m. 2. She by her Will, made her Brother Peter, and John
his Son her Nepheu, the Capitain de Buch her Heirs. Rot. Vasc. 14. E. 3. m. 2.
and 17. E. 3. m. 11. dorso.
Katherina de Greilly Domina Locorum St Blasii and de Laudiron. Rot. Vasc. 14.
E. 3. m. 2. Petrus de Greilly Vicecom: Benangiarum and Castellionis. Rot. Vasc.
14. E. 3. m. 2. and 16. E. 3. m. 13. and 22. E. 3. m. 25. Assalita soror and
haeres Petri de Burdegal. Rot. Vasc. 5. E. 3. m. 24. Petrus de Burdegal.
dominus de Puypaulini. Petrus de Burdegal. dominus de puypaulini and Petrus
Amanenus Captain de Bugh, were Uncles to this John. Rot. Vasc. 5. E. m. 7. he
was heir to them both, and Executor of their Testaments. Rot Vasc. 2. E. 3. m.
4. this John's Will is dated the 6. of March. 1368. Rot. Vasc. 7. R. 2. m. 10.
Johannes de Greilly ac Capitaneus de Buch. Rot. Vasc. 5. E. 3. m. 24.14. E. 3.
m. 2.16. E. 3. m. 13. and 29. E. 3. m. 6. Blanch de Loup. Archambaud de Greilly
Capitalis de Bogio ac Vicecomes Benangiarum and Castillionis, It appears in
this Roll that John his Father used these Titles also.
ac dominus de Podiopaulini, and Castri novi, in Medulco. Rot. Vasc. 7. R. 2.
m. 10.




(6.) Ralph Earl of Stafford.
THis Noble Earl was Son unto Edmund Lord Stafford, first summoned to
Parliament, Glaus. de eod. an. Dorso.
an. 27. E. 1. and Fin. levat. October. Mich. 27. E. 1. War.
Margaret, Esc. 14. R. 2. n. 9.
Daughter to Ralph Lord Basset of Draiton: His Father dyed Esc. 2. E. 2. n. 63.
an. 2. E. 2. and Claus. 17. E. 2 m. 25.
and an. 17. E. 2. being of full age he did his Homage, and had Livery of his
Fathers Lands.

The first military employment that he undertook, was an. 1. E. 3. being Claus.
1. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2. dorso.
summoned to be at Newcastle upon Tine on Monday next before Ascension day, to
go against the Scots.

The Rot. Scot. 10. E. 3. m. 31.
12. of February, an. 10. E. 3. the King sent his Writ directed to him, Philip
Chetwynde, and Philip Somervill, to raise in Staffordshire (Lichfield excepted)
60 Hobelars, and 200 Archers, and to bring them to Berwick upon Tweed, before
the following Octaves of Easter.

In his absence it seems there was some attempts made, to seize upon his Lady,
and carry her away; but making his complaint to the King, he received her under
his protection, and 28. Oct. Ibid. m. 6.
directed his Writ to the Sheriff to protect her, so long as her Lord remained
in his service.

I find this noble Lord was an. 15. E. 3. Extract. Donot. 15. E. 3. m. 6.
Steward of the Kings House, and one of those who went over Froiss. lib. 1.
cap. 91.
into Bretagne Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 36.
an. 16. E. 3. with Robert d' Artous, to the assistance of the Countess of
Montfort. He behaved himself bravely in the Sea Fight near the Isle of Gernsey
with the French and Genoeses, who endeavored to interrupt their passage
thither: but after they had been a while engaged, a violent storm parted the
two Navies, and the English landed safely; the first Town taken by them being
Vannes, and that by Ibid. cap. 92.
assault.

Soon after, this Town was Ibid. cap. 93.
re-taken by Sir Henry de Leon, and the Lord Clisson; but Ibid. cap. 94.
the latter end of the Summer, King Edward landed with an Army, and laid a new
Siege to it, and perceiving the Country was much wasted, he left the Earl of
Arundel, with this Lord, before it, and went to Rennes. c. 95.
It happened that one day upon an assault, this Lord ventured so far, that he was
got between the City Gate and the Bars, and there taken Prisoner, but at
another side of the Town, Sir Henry de Leon and the Lord Clisson, were both
taken Prisoners by the English, and so c. 99.
he was afterward exchanged for the Lord Clisson. In this Expedition he had*
Wages allowed him for Claus. 16. E. 3 p. 2. m. 32.
50 men at Arms; viz. himself, two Bannerets, 16 Knights, 31 Esquires, and 50
Archers on Horseback.

An. 17. E. 3. was a year of much action, for first, this Earl with the Earl of
Lancaster, and other Noblemen, went into T. Walsingh. page 150.
Scotland, to raise the Siege laid by the Scots to the Castle of Louhmaban; and
being returned, was joined in 20. May Rot. Franc. 17. E. 3. m. 12.
Commission with Hugh le Despenser, Lord of Glamorgan, William de Norwich Dean
of Lincoln, Sir William Trussell, and Andrew de Offord, to treat in the Pope's
presence with the Agents of Philip de Valois, concerning the Kings right to the
Crown of France; but we suppose he went not on that Embassy, for the Ibid. m.
12.
19. of August there was another Commission for that Affair, made out to Henry
of Lancaster, Earl of Derby and others, wherein he and Sir William Trussell
were omitted, and they the Ibid. m. 12.
first of July preceding, with Philip de Weston Canon of York, and John Wawayn,
were sent to treat with the Noblemen, Burgomasters, etc. in Flanders, about the
setlement of the Staple of Wool there, and touching the Coining of Gold and
Silver, such as might be current both in England and Flanders; and whatsoever
by any 3 or 2 of them should be agreed on, this Ralph Earl of Stafford being
one, the King promised to ratify. Ibid.
They had another Commission, wherein power was granted them, to treat with the
Princes, Nobles, and People of Almaine, upon Alliances between the King and
them, and to gain their assistance for him.

The following year he went in the Expedition into Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 102.
Gascoigne, with the Earl of Derby; and Ibid. c. 103.
commanded the Party that assaulted Bergerac by Water, who behaved themselves
so valiantly, that through their Valor the Town was forced to surrender to the
Earl. Ib. c. 104.107.109. and 111.
He was very active in this Gascoigne War, and almost in continual Service: and
in c. 112.
sealing the Walls of Mountpesat Castle, Richard Pennenort an English Gentleman
that bare his Banner was slain.

For his Great Services in this War (after his return into England) he was made
Seneschal of Gascoigne, and had the 25. Feb. Rot* Vasc. 19. E. 3. m. 8.
Kings Letter sent to the Prelates and Nobility of that Country, to obey and
submit to his Authority, while he continued in that Office. Within a 1. Mar.
Rot. Franc. de eod. an. p. 1. m. 33.
few days after, the King directed his Writ to Richard Earl of Arundel, Admiral
of the West-parts, to arrest 13. stout Ships, each of 80. Tun Burden at least,
to bring them to Bristol, before the Octaves of Easter, for the passage of this
Lord, his men at Arms, and Archers, into that Country.

After a years enjoyment of this great Office, he became desirous to resign it,
and to that purpose made an address to the King, who 15. May. Rot. Vasc. 20. E.
3. m. 2.
sent directions to the Earl of Derby, to confer with him about his continuance
in it, to which, if he could not be persuaded to consent, then he gave the Earl
power to take his resignation, and substitute some other fit person in his room
to hold it, during the Kings pleasure.

This Spring Stow^ Chron* p. 240.
John de Valois Duke of Normandy, laid Siege to Aiguillon, of which Town this
Lord was Governor, and then within it; and though the Earl of Derby relieved
him, yet had the Duke so strongly entrenched himself, that he could not raise
the Siege, so that it was continued by the Duke, to the Decollation of St. John
Baptist in August; at which time, being called away to assist King Philip his
Father against King Edward, who had entered France with a puissant Army, he
raised his Siege. Upon which, the Lord Stafford sallying out of the Town, fell
upon his Rear, cut off a great part of it, and having joined his to the Kings
Forces, he had given him a Command in the Froiss. l. 1. c. 128.
Van of the Army under the Prince, at the Battle of Cressy. And after the
Victory Ib. c. 132.
was sent with Sir Reignold Cobham, and 3. Heralds, to view the slain, who made
report of 11. great Princes, 80. Bannerets, 1200. Knights, and above 30000.
Common Soldiers.

When Calais was surrendered, he was one of those appointed to take possession
of it for the King: and had Ib. c. 147*
many fair Houses given him in that Town, to place Inhabitants in. Shortly
after the rendition, the Cardinals of Naples and Cleremont, mediated a Peace
between both Kings, whereupon this Lord, with Reignold de Cobham, Io. Darcy,
and Robert de Bourghcher, were 25. Sept. Rot. Cales. 21. E* 3. m. 4.
nominated by the King to treat of a Peace, or Truce, between them, their
Subjects, Allies, and Adherents.

And for his good Services done to the King in France, He 6. Sept. Rot. Pat.
22. E. 3. p. 3. m. 37.
gave him a Pension of 600. Marks for life, out of the Customs of London and
St. Butolphs. The King also bestowed on him as a gift Ib. p. 2. m. 25.
573 l. toward his expenses in his service beyond Sea.

He was with the Froiss. c. 151.
King, in the Encounter with Sir Geoffry Charney at Calais. And went into Stow
p. 247.
Goscoigne with the Earl of Lancaster, and other Lords, to stop the Progress of
the Duke of Normandy made there with his Army.

And growing more and more in the Kings favor, by his meritorious Services, he
advanced him to the Dignity of an 5. Mar. Chart. 25. E. 3. m. 31.
Earl; and for the better support of that Honor, and toward the defraying of
his charge, in attending the King with certain men at Arms, both in Peace and
War, he granted him 5. Mar. Chart. 25. E. 3. m. 31.
a Pension of 1000. Marks per Annum, during life, out of his Customs in London,
till he could settle on him the said annual sum in Lands or Rents.

The next day he was 6. Mar. Rot. Vasc. 25. E. 3. m. 7.
constituted the Kings Lieutenant and Captain in the Dukedom of Aquitaine, and
parts adjacent; and the Ib. m. 7.
3 d. of April following, the King gave him power to appoint a Seneschal of
Gascoigne, and a Constable of Bordeaux; and these to be such persons as he
should think fit, to enjoy those Offices, during the Kings pleasure.

The next year, the King empowered 8. Mar. Rot. Vasc. 26. E. ^. m. 6.
him by a Commission to treat and agree with all persons of what Kingdom,
Nation, or Degree soever, upon a firm friendship and mutual assistance between
the King and them, and to retain them against all men, to agree with them, upon
Fees, Wages, and rewards, to receive security from them, and give the like to
them, and what he did herein, the King obliged himself and his Heirs to observe
and perform.

Being ready to take another Journey into Gascoigne, a Writ 14. May. Rot.
Franc. 26. E. 3. m. 11.
issued to Thomas Beauchamp (Earl of Warwick) Admiral toward the West, to
arrest all Ships of 50. Tuns and upwards, for this Earls passage thither, and
to bring them to Sandwich, by Quindena Trinitatis following; and upon his Entry
into that Country he Stow p. 253. b.
defeated the French that sallied out of the Fortress of Gagent: and among them
was taken seven Knights of the Star.

An. Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 5.
29. E. 3. he went over with the King to Calais, at the latter end of Summer,
and marched along with him in pursuit of King John as far as Heyden. And Rot.
Franc. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 2.
an. 33. E. 3. he attended him in his Voyage into France; which terminated with
the Peace agreed on at Bretigny near Chartres.

Two years after he was designed for Rot. Pat. 35. E. 3. p. 2. m. 7.
Ireland, in the Company of several other persons of Quality upon the Kings
Service. But after this Voyage being much broken with Age, and wasted with
Sickness, he became incapable of public Employments.

This Noble Lord Married Esc. 16. E. 3. n. 36. and Esc. 21. E. 3. n. 59.
Margaret Daughter and Heir of Hugh de Audeley, Earl of Gloucester, and
Margaret his Wife, who died the 7. of September, an. 21. E. 3. and by whom he
had Issue, Claus. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
Ralph his eldest Son, who married Claus. 21. E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
Maud Daughter of Henry de Lancaster Earl of Derby, but died about 21. E. 3.
Esc. 46. E. 3. n. 62.
Hugh, who succeeded him in his Earldom; and Brook in Stafford.
Sir Richard Stafford Knight; Brook in Stafford.
Beatrix, the Wife of Maurice fitz Maurice Earl of Desmond; Brook in Stafford.
Joan, of John Charleton Lord Powes, and Brook in Stafford.
Margaret, of John Stafford, Patron of the Church of Bromhall in Staffordshire.

He died the Esc. 46. E. 3. n. 62.
last of August, an. 46. E. 3. and lies buried at Turnbridge in Kent.

(7.) William Montacute Earl of Salisbury.
THis Earl was Son unto Brook in Salisbury.
William Montacute, first Earl of Salisbury, of that Family, and Brook in
Salisbury.
Katherine, one of the Coheirs of William Lord Grantson.

He was born the Esc. an. 18. E. 3. n. 51.
Morrow after Midsummer day, an. 2. E. 3. for at the Death of his Father (found
to be the Esc. an. 18. E. 3. n. 51.
30. of January, an. 18. E. 3.) he was Esc. an. 18. E. 3. n. 51.
15. years old the Midsummer before.

The Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6.
24. of May, an. 20. E. 3. the Wardship of his body was committed to John de
Somerton, and Thomas Waryn, until Christmas following, and then Ib. p. 2. m. 4.
renewed till Whitsontide, and thence till Michaelmas ensuing: and being within
Age, he Ib. p. 1. m. 11.
attended the King in that memorable expedition into France, an. 20. E. 3. So
also did his younger Brother Ib. m. 6.
John.

He was in the Stows Chron. p. 250.
Sea Fight against the Spaniards, near Winchelsey, an. 24. E. 3. and going into
Gascoigne, in the Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 11.
retinue of the Prince of Wales, an. 29. E. 3. he obtained 8. July. Ib. m. 5.
Letters directed to the Seneschal there, with Command, that he should not be
sued or molested, for any of his own or Ancestors debts, during the space of
two years.

Froiss. c. 207.
An. 33. E. 3. he attended the King in his Royal expedition into France, and
from that time to the 43. of Edward the Third, we find little mention of his
Martial employments; but that year, he went over with Holinsh. page 404.
John Duke of Lancaster, in his Voyage into France, against whom the Duke of
Burgoigne was sent with so great an Army, that the Froiss. l. 1. c. 268.
English were but as a handful to them, and having pitched his Tents near
Calais, within a Mile of the English Army, after 19. days stay he dislodged and
went to St. Omars, not with much honor as some observe. After whose departure
the Duke of Lancaster returned to Calais, and having refreshed his Army for
three days, and marched thence to Froiss. l. 1. c. 269.
St. Omars, and the County of St. Paul, then passed the River Some, and entered
the Countries of Ve xin and Ewe, within the Archbishopric of Roan, thence to
Deep and Harflew, with design to burn the French Fleet which lay there, but
the Earl of St. Paul was entered the Town before, and so secured the Haven.
Whereupon he returned through Ponthieu, where, before Abeville, Sir Hugh de
Chastelon Master of the Crossbows in France, was taken, who with the Earl of
St. Paul had before entered Ponthieu, and took it from the King of England; and
having wasted the Country with Fire and Sword as they past along to Calais,
staid there a while, and then took shipping for England, where he arrived about
the Feast of St. Martin the Bishop in Winter.

This Earl Froiss. l. 1. c. 305.
attended the King, when he took his Voyage to relieve Thouars, an. 46. E. 3.
who directing his course toward Rochel, was not able to land by reason of
contrary Winds and Tempests, but forced to return after nine weeks being tossed
upon the Sea.

The year following, Ibid. c. 308.
he, with William Nevil, and Sir Philip Courtney, was sent to Sea, upon a
rumor that Ievan, Prince of Wales, Son of Prince Aymon, was upon the English
Coast with 6000 men, designing to land. The Earl had 40 Sail of Ships besides
Barges, and 2000 men of Arms, besides Archers, and departing from Cornwall
sailed to Bretagne, and coming to St. Malo, burnt seven great Spanish Ships in
that Haven. Thence they sailed to Breast, and there relieved the Garrison (where
Sir Robert Knolls was besieged by the Constable, Sir Bertrand de Guesclin) with
men and provisions; which having done, they took shipping, with design to keep
the Frontiers of Bretagne and Normandy, about which time the King had recruited
them with 1000 men of Arms, and 2000 Archers. Hereupon he again went to Breast,
with a resolution to fight the French that lay before it; but before he got
thither, the Constable had withdrawn most of his men, to other Sieges, upon a
Composition made with the Garrison, to surrender in case they were not relieved
within 40 days, for performance of which they had taken Hostages. Upon the
Ibid. c. 309.
Earls arrival, he sent to the Constable either to fight, or to return the
Hostages, but he refused both; so the Earl having Victualled the Castle
departed to Sea, and kept the Marches and Frontiers as before.

In the 50. year of King Edward's Reign, he was 16 July Rot. Franc. 50. E. 3.
m. 14.
constituted Admiral of his Fleet, from the River Thames, toward the Western
parts. And the following year, a 2 Ian. Rot. Franc. 51. E. 3. m. 8.
Commission issued to him and some others, to Array all able men from 16 to 60
years of Age in the County of Dorset, to be ready on occasion, to withstand an
Invasion, and defend the Kingdom, there being apprehensions that the French
would land.

The first year of King Richard the Second, the French being on the Sea, this
Earl was assigned to secure the Sea Coasts in the Counties of Southampton and
Dorset; to which purpose, 2 July Pat. 1. R. 2. p. 1. m. 29.
Command was sent to the Knights and Gentry of those Counties, to be assistant
to him* It appears also, that he was this year employed in Rot Franc. 1. R. 2.
m. 17.19. and 21.
Sea service, and an. 2. R. 2. 2 Febr. Rot. Franc. 2. R. 2. m. 9.
constituted Governor of Calais. An. 8. R. 2. he, with diverse others of the
Nobility, had 13 June Claus. 8. R. 2. m. 3. dorso.
Summons to appear at NewCastle upon Tyne, the 14. of July with Horse and Arms,
thence to march against the Scots.

The 19. Aug. Pat. 9. R. 2. m. 36.
custody of the Isle of Wight and Castle of Carbroke, with the whole Demesne
thereunto belonging was granted to him during his life, with all the profits,
liberties, and advantages, as the King enjoyed them, without rendering any thing
therefore; only, that he should maintain the Castle, and undergo all Charges of
the Isle and Castle, as the Governors thereof usually had done.

He design dto marry Ioane Daughter to Edmund Plantagenet, His Wife and
Children.
Earl of Kent, and gained a Contract from her; but Sir Thomas Holland, in his
Lib. in Offic. Princip. Cantuar. vccat. Islip. f. 178.
Petition to Pope Clement the Sixth, alleging a precontract from her with him,
upon which carnal copulation followed, and being after in Foreign parts, this
Earl contracted with her again, and unjustly withheld her from him, thereupon
the Pope gave judgment against the Earl, who complying therewith, married
another noble Lady, namely, Brook in Salisbury.
Elizabeth eldest Daughter, and after one of the three Coheirs of John Lord
Mohun (another of the Founders of this most Noble Order) who outlived her Lord,
and had her Dower 9 Dec. Claus. 21. R. 2. m. 3.
assigned an. 21. R. 2.

By this Lady he had William, his only Son and Heir, unfortunately Brook. loco
cit.
slain at Windesor, an. 6. R. 2. by his own hand, in a Tilting; a place fatal
also to his Father, who at the Hollinsh. p. 366.
Justs held there, an. 18. E. 3. was so sorely bruised, that he dyed soon
after; so that Esc. 21. R. 2. n. 35. Claus. 21. R. 2. m. 8. and 16. And Death.
John Mountacute, his Cousin and Heir, Son and Heir of his Brother John,
succeeded him in his Earldom.

This Earl dyed the Esc. 21. R. 2. n. 35. Wilts.
3. of June an. 20. R. 2. having survived all the first Founders of this most
Noble Order.

(8.) Roger Mortimer Earl of March.
HE was the Son of Brook, in March.
Edmund Mortimer (Son and Heir of Roger Mortimer, first Earl of March) and Esc.
30. E. 3. Buck.
Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter of Bartholomew de Badlesmere, Baron of Leeds,
(who after her Husbands death was married to William Bohun Earl of Northampton)
born Esc. 5. E. 3. n. 79.
toward the latter end of the first years Reign of King Edward the Third.

In the Voyage which this King made into France, in the 20. year of his Reign,
he attended him, being yet under age; but before he went, the King 20 June Rot.
Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
admitted Sir Peter de Grandison, and William de Newenham Clerk, to be his
Guardians, and to prosecute and defend his Suits in any of the King's Courts.

Upon his Rot. Parl. 28. E. 3.
Petition in Parliament, an. 28. E. 3. he obtained a revocation of the Judgment
against his Grandfather (attainted of and executed for Treason, an. 4. E. 3.)
and thereupon was restored in Blood, and to the Earldom of March, and to all
his said Grandfathers Lands, Honors, and Possessions.

The next year he was made 8 Aug. Fines 29. E. 3.
Custos of the Castle of Dover and the Cinque Ports, for life; and afterward
went beyond Sea in the Kings Service, in the Voyage which John of Gaunt made
into France, upon the French Kings drawing down an Army toward Calais.

And in the Kings Expedition into France, ( an. 33. E. 3.) upon which a Peace
ensued, he Froiss. l. 1. c. 207.
attended him with 500 men at Arms, and 1000 Archers.

He married Brook. loco supra citato.
Philippa Daughter of William Mountacute, first Earl of Salisbury, and Sister
to William Earl of Salisbury, one of the first Founders of the Garter, whose
Will bears date the first day of November, an. Dom. 1378. in which she appoints
her body to be buried, in the Conventual Church of the Holy Trinity, in the
Priory of Bistleham, vulgarly called Bysham Mountagu in Berkshire; Ex Codice
M.S. Miscell. Rob. Gloveri. Somerset. f. 150. b.
where an. 1381. she was accordingly interred.

He dyed at Ex Codice M.S. Miscell. Rob. Gloveri. Somerset. f. 150. b.
Rovery in Burgundy the 26. of February Esc. 34. E. 3. n. 86.
an. 34. E. 3. as the King was upon his march in those Countries; and his Ex
Codice praed.
body, afterward brought into England, was buried at Wigmore with his
Ancestors.

(9) Sir John Lisle.
SIR John Lisle, was the Cod. M. S. R. Glover. nuper Somerset. fol. 111. b.
Son of Robert Lord Lisle (first summond to Parliament an. 5. E. 2. by the
Title of Robert de Lisle de Rubemont) and of Cod. M. S. R. Glover. nuper
Somerset. fol. 111. b.
Margaret, the Daughter of -- Peverell.

His Father Robert being disposed to give to him 400 Marks per annum of Land,
to serve the King with 6 men at Arms in his War, the King to gratify the said
Robert, and the better to support his Son, Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 2. m. 9.
granted that the said Robert might give him his Manor of Harwood, with its
appurtenances in Yorkshire, with other Lands to the annual value of 400 Marks,
during his life, but afterward to return to the said Robert and his Heirs: and
some years after, his Brother Robert Claus. 18. E. 3. p. 1. m. 16.
released to him and his Heirs, all his right in the said Manor, and in the
Advowson of the Church there.

Being thus provided for, he attended the King in his first Voyage into France,
by the way of Flanders, an. 13. E. 3. and as Hist. l. 1. c. 41.
Sir John Froissard observes, was in the Battle designed to be fought near
Vironfosse. Two years after he went into Rot. Vasc. 15 E. 3. m. 15.
Aquitaine in the King's Service. And the Rot. Franc. 16. ^. 3. m. 27.
year ensuing, he attended the King in Bretagne, where he was one of the
Froiss. l. 1. c. 94.
Commanders left at the Siege of Nants in Bretagne, while the King foraged the
Country, and laid Siege to Dinant.

For his good services done the King, he granted him a Pension of 26. Aug. Rot.
Pat. 20. E. 3. p. 3. m. 29.
200 l. per annum for his life, to support his Degree of Banneret. This Pension
was first appointed to be paid him out of the Ibid.
Exchequer, until a Provision of Lands or Rents, to that yearly value, were
made for him: but after there was assigned to him out of the Priory of Pat. 20.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 21.
St. Neats, then of Pat. 29. E. 3. p. 1. m. 29.
Stoke nigh Clare, and of Fie, to wit, 120 l. per annum out of the Priory of
Stoke, and 80 l. per annum out of that of Eye. Then 100 Marks was taken out of
the Rent charge upon the Priory of Eye, and laid upon the Issues of the
Counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon. And lastly, it came to be thus settled,
viz. 4 Feb. Ibid.
That he should receive out of the Issues of these two Counties 200 Marks per
annum, and out of the issues of the Counties of Bedford and Bucks, the
remaining sum of 100 Marks per annum. And having given him besides, for like
services, another Pension for life of 40 l. a year out of his Exchequer also,
he (...) 20. E. ^ m. 6.
appointed the payment of it out of the Farm of the Priory of St. Neats, during
the War.

An. 25. E. 3. the King made him Extract. ^ donat. 25. E. 3. m. 2.
Sheriff of the Counties of Cambridge and Huntingdon, and granted him the
Extract. ^ donat. 25. E. 3. m. 2.
Custody of the Castle of Cambridge for life.

He had by Maud his Wife two Sons, Sir Collect. A. V. W.
Robert Lisle Lord of Rougemont and Wilbraham (whose Heir male has now his
dwelling (as I am informed) at Wilbraham in Cambridgshire) and Collect. A. V. W.
Sir William Lisle Lord of Cameldon and Shefford, who died without Issue.

In the Prince's Expedition into Gascoigne, an. 29. E. 3. he Rot. Vasc. 29. E.
3. m. 8.
attended him, and had Command given him in the Stow. p. 256.
main Body of the Army: But in the three days march into the Enemies Country,
he was unfortunately hurt with a Holinsh. p. 384
Quarrel or Bolt shot out of a Cross-bow, of which he dyed the Esc. 20. E. 3.
n. 40.
14. of October in the same year, his Son Robert being then about Esc. 20. E.
3. n. 40.
22 years of age.

(10.) Sir Bartholomew Burghersh.
SIR Bartholomew Burghersh was Son to Bartholomew Lord Burghersh (frequently
distinguished by the Title of Senior) and Elizabeth one of the Daughters and
Coheirs of Theobald de Verdon. His Father was first summoned to Parliament,
an. 1. E. 3. a person of great Council, and Valor, which laid a strong
foundation for his Sons Honor, having been several times constituted Rot. Fin.
20. E. 2. m. 3. Pat. 1. E. 3. p. 3. m. 20. Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 1.22. E. 3. p. 1.
m. 32.23. E. 3. p. 1. m. 17.25. E. 3. p. 3. m. 1.
Constable of Dover, and the Cinque Ports, he was also made Pat. 5. E. 3. m. 7.
Seneschal and Custos of Ponthieu and Monstriell, Rot. Vasc. 11. E. 3. and Rot.
Vasc. 12. E. 3. m. 15.
Admiral toward the West, Pat. 21. E. 3. p. 2. dorso. m. 24.
Chamberlain to the King, Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 3.
Lieutenant of the Tower of London, Pat. 29. E. 3. p. 2. m. 11.
one of the Custos's of England, and frequently emploid in Embassies, and by
Camb. ^rit. ^ 227.
some (through mistake) made one of the first Founders of the Garter. But among
these, enumerated in the preamble to the Statutes, both of Institution, (with
their Exemplars) and those of King Henry the Fifth, he is called Bartholomeus
de Burghersh filius, and Bartholomew de Burghersh le filz. (and so in diverse
places of our public Records) though we have seen some transcripts of these
Statutes, wherein the point has been at the end of the Surname, and filius (so
also le filz) joined to Dom. Johannes de Beauchamp. But this was a plain
mistake of the Transcriber, since this John was never married.

His first martial Service was, when the Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 20.
King went into Bretagne, an. 16. E. 3. Next he went with the Rot. Franc. 20.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 6.
Prince in the Kings Expedition into France, an. 20. E. 3. where he Rot. Franc.
21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 6.
staid with him at the Siege of Calais. And for recompense of his Expenses, in
this Voyage* the King granted him the Rot. Pat. 22. E. 3. p. 2. m. 33.
Custody of all the Lands and Tenements, which had belonged to John de Loueyne
deceased, till his Heir should come of Age, without rendering any thing
therefore.

The 23. year of King Edward, he went along with him into Rot. Vasc. 23. E. 3.
m. 1.
Gascoigne. And again Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 8.
thither with the Prince of Wales, an. 29. E. 3. and had Stow p. 256.
command in the main body of the Princes Army. The following year, as the
Froiss. l. 1. c. 157.
Prince retired from forraging the Country of Berry, and was got near
Romerentyne, this Knight (whom Froissard in several places calls the Lord
Bartholomew Breches, Sir Bartholomew Ib. c. 208.
de Bounes, de Ib. c. 209.
Brennes, and de Ib. c. 219.
Brunes, but such mistakes are too frequent in that Author in this and other
men's names, as also in the names of Places) was set upon by a French
Ambushment, but he and his Troops so gallantly behaved themselves, that they
kept the French in play, till the Prince drew near, upon the sight of whom they
fled to Romerentyne (pursued by the English) and got into the Castle, which the
Prince commanded Sir John Chandos to Summon; but they refusing to yield, after
two desperate but fruitless assaults, the English set it on fire, which caused
them speedily to surrender.

He Ib. c. 207.
attended the King in his expedition into France, an. 33. E. 3. and toward the
end of the year, an. 37. E. 3. Froiss. c. 219.
He and diverse other Knights of the Court were sent to Dover, to wait upon John
King of France, who, coming over to Visit King Edward, landed there the 4. of
January, and was conducted by them to Caenterbury, where having offered a rich
Jewel at the Shrine of Thomas Becket, he after rode to Eltham to the King, and
thence to the Savoy, where he was honorably entertained.

Half a year before this, we find the 22. Iunii. Liberate 37. E. 3. m. 3.
King appointed the Treasurer of his Chamber to give him 200 l. upon the Debt
due to him from the King, for the Count de Vendedour his Prisoner.

He had two Wives, the first was Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 27.
Cecily Daughter and Heir to Richard Weyland, by whom he had diverse Lands in
the Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 27.
Counties of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntingdon, Essex, and Hertford; by
her he had Claus. 43. E. 3. m. 1. Vide Esc. 2. R. 2. n. 12.
Elizabeth his Daughter and Heir, married to Claus. 43. E. 3. m. 1. Vide Esc.
2. R. 2. n. 12.
Edward le Despenser.

His second Wife was Ex Collect. praef. R. Glov. S.
Margaret, Sister to Sir Bartholomew Badlismere, whom he lest a Widow; but she
afterward married Claus. 18. R. 2. m. 21.
William de Burcester, and dyed about the 18. year of King Richard the Second.

The Esc. 43. E. 9. p. 1. n. 14.
5. of April, an. 43. E. 3. he dyed, leaving Elizabeth his Daughter and Heir,
then about 24 years of age.

(11.) Sir John Beauchamp.
HE was a Rot. Io. Row dorso.
younger Son to Guy Earl of Warwick, by Alice his Wife, and Brother to Thomas
Earl of Warwick, one of the Founders of this most Noble Order of the Garter. He
attended King Edward the Third into Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 7.
Flanders in the 12. year of his Reign, and was in the Froiss Chron. l. 1. c.
41.
Battle pitched between Vyronfosse and Flamengery, an. 13. E. 3. So also the
following year in the Ibid. c. 50.
Naval fight at Sluice.

A^. 15. E. 3. I find him styled Claus. 1^. E. 3. p. 1. m. 39.
Banneret; toward the support of which Dignity, he had a considerable Pension
given him.

He attended the King in his Voyage into Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. m. 5.
France, an. 20. E. 3. and, at the Battle of Cressy, Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 1. m. 2.
carried the Kings Standard Royal. The following year, he Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 29.
continued with the King at the Siege of Calais, till it was taken: And an. 22.
E. 3. he was Primo Ian. Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 1.
constituted Captain of that Town. The next year made Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m.
1.
Admiral of the Kings Fleet, from the River of Thames Westward. And having his
Commission again 24 Mar. Rot. Franc. 25. E. 3. m. 11.
renewed for the custody of Calais to commence the first of April, an. 25. E.
3. he marched out of the Town with a Party of Knighton, in Hist. Angl. Script.
Coll. 2602.
200 Archers, and 300 Men at Arms, and forraged the Country for 10 miles round:
where meeting with 2000 Men at Arms, commanded by the Lord Bealren, encountered
them, and slew the said Lord. But fresh Supplies coming in to the assistance of
the French, they overpowr'd the English, and took this noble Knight Prisoner,
who was exchanged within a short time after.

This year the Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 1. m. 45.
Constableship of the Tower of London being resigned to him by John Darcy, who
had a former Grant of it for life, the King confirmed the resignation to him,
and for the Custody thereof, allowed him Liberat^ 26. E. 3. m. 2.
100 l. per annum.

He was again Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 2.
constituted Captain of Calais, an. 29. E. 3. and of the Castle of Guynes, the
Forts of Merk, Colne, Eye, and Sandgate; as also ^ Mar. Ibid. m. 14.
Admiral from the River Thames Westward.

An. 31. E. 3. he had his Commission again Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 18.
renewed for Custody of Calais, Guynes, and those before mentioned Forts.

Two years after, he Rot. Vasc. 33. E. 3. m. 8.
attended the King in his Voyage Royal into France, and, upon the death of
Roger Earl of March, was Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 45.
constituted Constable of Dover-Castle and the Cinque Ports, the Kings Letters
Patent bearing Test Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 45.
primo Martii apud Goillioun in Burgundia. This year he was made Pat. 34. E. 3.
m. 6. p. 1. m. 35.
Constable of the Tower of London, and also Rot. Franc. de ^ad. an. m. 6.
Admiral of the Seas, for the South, North, and West Coast of England

He was a man of eminent esteem with the King, and by his services deserved so
well, that he conferred on him both considerable Pensions, and several gifts,
and from an. 24. E. 3. so long as he lived, received Claus. de iisdem an. dorso.
Summons to Parliament.

The first donation we have met with, was 21 Mar. Pat. 10. E. 3. p. 1. m. 31.
an. 10. E. 3. when the King bestowed on him the Marriage of Margaret, the
Relict of John de Bohun Earl of Hereford.

An. 19. E. 3. the King granted him a Pension of ^6 Oct. Pat. 19. E. 3. p. ^.
m. 12.
30 l. per annum out of his Exchequer, toward his expenses in his service,
(over and above 20 l. per annum formerly given him) till he should have Lands
settled on him to that yearly value.

The 18 Dec. Pa^. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 31.
following year, the King gave him the Manor of Oddingle, which Thomas de
Haukeston held for life, after whose death it was to remain to this Sir John,
and his Heirs for ever.

An. 22. E. 3. he had the 18 Mar. Pat. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 19.
custody of the Lands of Allan la Zouche granted him, till his Heir came to
^ull age, without rendering any thing theretofore.

The King had also given him out of the Exchequer a Pension of Pat. 22. E. 3.
m. 12.
180 l. per annum, to support his Degree of Banneret, beside 20 l. per annum
out of the Customs, until he should have 200 l. per annum in Lands, or Rents
provided of that yearly value for his life. And upon his resignation of several
Letters Pa^ent of Pensions amounting to 280 l. per annum, he had the same
annual sum 17 Mar. Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 3. m. 24.
granted to him out of the Customs of London and St. Botolphs ^or his life also.

The next year, the King Pat. 23. E. 3. m. 24.
granted to him the Bailyweek of Cors in Gloucestershire, till the full age of
the Heir of Edward le Dispenser Knight, Cousin and Heir of Hugh le Dispenser
then deceased.

And lastly there being an Arrear of 50 l. at Michaelmas before he dyed, of the
said 280 l. per annum formerly granted to him out of the Custom^, as aforesaid,
a Writ Claus. 35. E. 3. m. 7.
issued to the Collectors of the Customs of St. Botolphs, to pay the same to
John, the Son of Giles Beauchamp his Executor.

He lived a Batchellor, and dyed the Esc. a. 35. E. 3. n. 34.
2. of Dec. an. 34. E. 3. and was buried on the South side of the Body of the
Cathedral of St. Paul London; a Sculp of whose Monument is yet preserved in the
Page 52.
History of St. Paul's, by William Dugdale Esquire now Norroy King of Arms; which
vulgarly (but falsely) was called Duke Humfry's Tomb.

(12) Sir John Mohun.
HE was Son to John Mohun and Claus. 4. E. 3. m. 9.
Sibyll, the Daughter of John de Segrave, which John his Father dyed before his
Grandfather, in Scotland, an. 4. E. 3. and lies buried at York. Shortly after
his Grandfather, John Lord Mohun Esc. 4 E. 3^ n. 34.
died, at which time he was about Esc. 4. E. 3^ n. 34.
10 years old; the custody of all his said Grandfathers Lands (he being by
Inquisition found to be his Cousin and Heir) as also of his Marriage, was
granted to Pat. de eod. an p. 1. m. 4.
Henry Burghersh, Bishop of Lincoln, till he came of full age; the Claus. 18.
E. 3. p. 1. m. 2.
28. of May an. 18. E. 3. he did homage to the King, whereupon he had Livery of
the said Lands.

In the 16. year of King Edward the Third, he went over in the Kings Service
into Bretagne, with Sir Rot. Fr. 16. E. 3. m. 24.
Bartholomew de Burghersh; as he did also with the said Sir Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 13.
Bartholomew, an. 19. E. 3.

The following year he attended the Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14.
Prince of Wales, when King Edward entered France by Normandy, and Rot. Franc.
de eod. an. p. 2. m. 11. and Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13.
continued in service at the Siege of Calais; and the Rot. Fr. 22. E. 3. m. 19.
following year was again sent into France.

The last Martial service we find him employed in, was Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m.
3.
an. 29. E. 3. when he attended the Prince of Wales into Gascoigne.

An. 16. E. 3. which was soon after he came of age, he was summoned to
Parliament, from whence the summons were Claus. de iisdem an. dorso.
continued till an. 47. E. 3.

He married Ioane, Daughter to Sir Bartholomew Burghersh the elder, Sister to
Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, one of the Founders of this most Noble Order (who
died on Esc. 6. H. 4. n. 33.
Saturday next after the Feast of St. Michael an. 6. H. 4.) and had by her
three Daughters and Coheirs, namely Elizabeth, Wife to William Mountague Earl
of Salisbury, another of the Founders of the Order; Philippa, Wife to Edmond
Duke of York and Albemarle; and Maude, Wife of John Lord Strange of Knoching;
whose Son Richard came to inherit a large Estate after the death of his Aunts,
Elizabeth and Philippa, they dying without Issue.

(13) Sir Hugh Courtney.
THis Hugh Courtney, was el^est Son of Hugh Courtney, second Son of Hugh
Courtney, first Earl of Devonshire of that name (his eldest Son Monast. Angl.
vol. 1. page 789. a.
John having taken on him a religious life, was made Monast. Angl. vol. 1. page
789. a.
Abbot of Tavestock) and Esc. 51. E. 3. n. 6. and Esc. 15. R. 2. n. 10.
Margaret ( Monast. Angl. loco cit.
Daughter of Henry Bohun, Earl of Hereford) his Wife. He was born 11. Call. Apr.
an. 1. E. 3. and commonly called Rot. Fin. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13.
Hugh Courtney junior, in regard his Father was living.

^e Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 13.
attended the Kingin his Expedition into France, an. 20. E. 3. and in the
following year, being among other brave Martialists in the Tornament at Eltham,
he had Compot. Job. Coke Cler. mag. Gardrob. R. in Scacc. penes Remem. Regis.
given him by the King a Hood of White Cloth, embroidered with men in the
postures of dancing, buttoned with large Pearls.

He had a Son named Esc. 51. E. 3. n 6.
Hugh, who married Maud, Daughter to Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, one of the
Founders of the Garter, but had no Issue by her; and she after his death became
Wife to MS. in Bibl. B^^l. K. 84. (inter Cod. Cant.) p. 147. b
Waleran Earl of St. Paul.

He died Esc. 48. E. 3. n. 7.
an. 40. E. 3. and his Son also died; Hugh Courtney second Earl of Devonshire,
Father to the former, and Grandfather to the later, surviving both; after whose
death, Esc. 51. E. 3. n. 6.
Edward, Son to his Brother Edward, Nephew and Heir to his Father, succeeded
him in the Earldom.

(14) Sir Thomas Holland.
HIS Father was Robert Lord Holland of Collect. A.V.W
Holland in Lancashire, first summoned to Parliament Claus. de cod. an.
an. 8. E. 2. and he his second Son by Cod. MS. Miscel. R. Glover Summers.
Maud, Daughter and Heir of Alan la Zouche.

An. 16. E. 3. he, with Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 90.
Sir John Dartuell were sent to Bayon, with 200 men at Arms, and 400 Archers,
to keep the Frontiers; the R^t. Fr. 17. E. 3 m 13.
following year he went again into France. The King having granted to him 40 l.
per annum, for his good service, till Lands of that yearly value were provided
for him, 21. Oct. Claus. 19. E 3. p. 2. m. 10.
appointed it to be paid him out of the Farm Priory of Haylyng, during the War
with his Adversary of France.

The next year he gave his Mother Maud 28. June Pat. 20. E. 3. p. 2. m. 28.
license to infeoffe him of the Manors of Hals, Brackeley, and King sutton, to
hold to him and his Heirs for ever. And shortly after Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1.
m. 3.
he attended the King into Normandy, where he had a command under the Froiss.
c. 122.
Earl of Warwick: At the taking of Caen (in this Expedition) the Ibid. c. 123.
and cap. 124.
Earl of Eu and Guynes, Constable of France, and the Earl of Tankervile (who
defended it for the French) seeing this Knight (whom Froissard notes to have
but one Eye) as having formerly known him in Prusia, Granada, and other places,
called to him, and yielded themselves and 25 Knights his Prisoners. After he
had secured them, he again took Horse and rode into the Streets, where he
preserved the lives of many Ladies, Maidens, and Religious Women. Rot. sact^
apud Cales. 21. E. 3. m. 8.
Afterward the King bought of him the said Earl of Eu, for Rot. sact^ apud
Cales. 21. E. 3. m. 8.
80000 Florens de Scuto, six of which went to a Pound English money.

Not long after, when the Ibid. c. 125.
Army left Poysy, he with Sir Reginald Cobham having command of the Rear, upon
the Townsmens revolt, and killing some few of the English Soldiers that stayed
behind, returned, and burnt the Town, razed the two Castles, and flew most of
the Inhabitants. At the Battle of Ibid. c. 128.
Cressy he had command in the Van, under the Prince of Wales; and was at the
Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 1.
Siege of Calais.

The Pat. 26. E. 3. p. ^. m. 13.
24. of August, an. 26. E. 3. the King granted to him and Ioane his Wife na
annual Pension of 100 Marks out of his Exchequer, toward her support during
her life; but in case her Brother John Earl of Kent died without Issue, and she
enjoyed his Estate, then the payment of the said Pension to cease.

An. 27. E. 3. he was summoned to Parliament: and the next year 18. Mar. Rot
Franc. 28. E. 3. m. 8.
constituted the Kings Lieutenant and Captain in the Dukedom of Bretagne, and
in the parts of Poictou adjoining to that Dukedom, and of all other places
belonging to John Duke of Bretagne then a minor, and under the Guardianship of
the King; and 18. Mar. Rot Franc. 28. E. 3. m. 8.
toward his expenses and the maintenance of his Army while he stayed there, he
had allowed him all the profits and issues of the said Dukedom, without
rendering any account or profit to the King. The 11. of November following, this
Commission was renewed, and thereupon he Ibid. m. 3.
continued in Bretagne all that Winter; and the Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 14.
8. of February following it was again renewed to him, to hold from the Rot.
Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 14.
13. of April then next coming for one whole year; but before half that time
was expired, Henry Duke of Lancaster was constituted the Kings Lieutenant
there, and the said Ibid. m. 6.
Thomas command to surrender to him or to his Deputy, all that was within his
command.

It appears, Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 14.
that his servants, making provision at Totnes in Devonshire, for his, and his
Ladies passage for Bretagne, were robbed of as many of his Goods as were valued
at 200 l. which accident retarding his passage, the King upon his complaint,
26. Mar. Pat. 28. E. 3. p. 1. m. 18. dorso.
sent forth his Writ to John de Stonsord, John de Ferers, Knights, and Roger
Pyperell, to enquire into the matter.

Afterward, he had 18. Nov. Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 5.
granted to him the custody of the Fort and Place of Cruyck in Normandy, part
of the Kings late Conquests, with all the Revenues and Profits thereto
belonging, to hold during pleasure: and a command was given to Donald Aselrig,
Lewis Clifford, and Waelter Mewe, to deliver them up to him or his Lieutenant.

Rot. Fr. 32. E. 3. m. 7.
An. 32. E. 3. he and his Lady went into Normandy, and the ensuing year the 7.
Febr. Rot. Fr. 33. E. 3. m. 19.
custody of the Castle and Fort of St. Saviors le Viscount, and of all the 6.
Oct. Ib. m. 7
Castles, etc. that were Sir Geoffry de Harecourts was committed to him; as
also that of e Barflu in Normandy. And shortly after, Philip of Navarre Earl of
Longueville, Lord of Casell, and this Noble Lord were 28. Oct. Ro^. Franc. 33.
E. 3. p. 2. m. 6.
constituted the Kings Lieutenants and Captains in Normandy, conjunctim and
divisim during pleasure: But the Rot. Fr. 34. E. 3. m. 5.
following year these Dignities were committed to him alone.

He married Ioane, Daughter of Edmund of Woodstock Earl of Kent, Sister and
Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 54.
Heir of John Earl of Kent, in whose right he sat in Claus. 34. E. 3. m. 4.
dorso.
Parliament an. 34. E. 3. as Earl of that County; after whose death Edward
Prince of Wales married her, whose Widow she remained till an. 9. R. 2. and
then Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 54.
died.

By this Lady he had Issue, two Sons; Boork in Kent and Huntingdon
Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and John Holland Earl of Huntingdon and Duke of
Exceter; as also two Daughters, Ioane and Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 1. Esc. 48. E. 3.
n. 14. and Esc. 51. E. n. 6.
Maude, the later was Wife to Hugh Courtney, eldest Son to Sir Hugh Courtney,
one of the Founders of this Order, an. 39. E. 3.

This noble Earl, after the performance of many brave acts in the Kings
Service, died the Esc. 35. E. 3. n. 104.
26. of December, an. 34. E. 3. Thomas his Son and Heir being then much about
the tenth year of his age.

(15) Sir John Gray of Codnore.
HE was Claus. 11. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21. dorso.
eldest Son of Richard Lord Gray of Codnore in Derbyshire (by Claus. 11. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 21. dorso.
Jane his Wife) who had been Rot. Vasc. 6. E. 3. m. 1.
Seneschal of Gascoigne, in the Reign of King Edward the Second.

In that notable and famous Expedition made into Scotland, Rot. Scot. 7. E. 3.
m. 31.
an. 7. E. 3. he had Command, where his valor was so far taken notice of, that
not long after, the King in Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 8. Dorso.
part of recompense thereof, and of his Claus. 9. E. 3. m. 8. Dorso.
great expenses in those Wars, acquitted him of all such debts as he then owed
unto his Exchequer.

Toward the end of the Rot. Scot. 9. E. 3. m. 33.
9. year of E. 3. he went again to the Wars of Scotland (being of the Retinue
of Hugh Andley) and Rot. Scot. 11. E. 3. m. 4.
two years after, in another Expedition then made thither.

An. 12. E. 3. he Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. m. 6.
attended the King into Flanders, and Rot. Alman. 14. E. 3. m. 6.
an. 14. E. 3. went over thither, when by the way, that famous Naval Fight
happened near Sluice. The following year he undertook employment in the Rot. Scot.
15. E. 3. m. 2.
Scottish Wars. An. 18. E. 3. he with Nicholas de Langford and Edward de Chandos
were Rot. Scot. 18. E. 3. m. 9.
assigned to Array all able men in Derbyshire, from 16 to 60 years of age, and
to have them in readiness to march with them, or others whom the King should
appoint, within three days warning against the Scots, then ready to invade this
Kingdom.

The following year, he went in the Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15.
Retinue of Henry Earl of Derby into Gascoigne; and in regard he stayed there
the next year in the Kings Service, his Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. m. 10. Dorso.
Lands in Kent were exempted from finding men for guarding the Seacoasts. With
this Earl he returned to England, and went to Calais in his Retinue, Rot. Fr.
21. E. 3. m. 8.
an. 21. E. 3. and stayed there the Rot. Fr. 22. E. 3. m. 4.
following year.

There being an Invasion threatened by the French an. 26. E. 3. he was Rot. Fr.
26. E. 3. m. 5.
joined in Commission with the Lord Deyncourt, to Array all able persons in
Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire, and to conduct them to such places, as might
stand in need of them, for defense of the Realm.

He went in the Expedition which the foresaid Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 5.
Earl made into Bre^^gne, an. 29. E. 3. And after attended the Rot. Fr. 33. E.
3. m. 6.
King in his Voyage royal into France, an. 33. E. 3. and the same year was Rot.
Fin. 33. E. 3. m. 9.
constituted Governor of the Town and Castle of Rochester for life.

More of his Military Services we find not, before he obtained the Kings
License Pat. 39. E. 3. p. 1. m. 7.
an. 39. E. 3. to go on Pilgrimage. And an. 45. E. 3. being grown Pat. 45. E.
3. p. 1. m. 16.
very aged and not able to endure Travel, he obtained a special Pat. 45. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 16.
Dispensation (wherein his many and great Services performed with much fidelity
and valor, are by the King acknowledged) to exempt him from coming to
Parliaments (to which he had received Summons, from the time of his Fathers
death, which happened Esc. 9. E. 3. n. 45.
an. 9. E. 3.) and Councils; and charging him with setting forth of Soldiers in
the Wars for the future.

He married Collect. W. D. N.
Alice de Insula, by whom he had Collect. W. D. N.
Henry his eldest Son, who married Collect. W. D. N.
Ioane Daughter of Reginald Cobham of Sterborough, but died before his Father,
and John his second Son, who both went in the Rot. Fr. 45. E. 3. m. 13. and 15.
Retinue of John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, in his Expedition into France,
an. 43. E. 3. and Alice, a Daughter, Wife of Collect. R. Glov. Summers.
William, Son of Sir Adam de Everingham, of Laxton in the County of Nottingham.

(16.) Sir Richard Fitz Simon.
WE have met with little concerning this Noble Knight; but that he had command
under Rot. Franc. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15.
Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, in Gascoigne, an. 19. E. 3. The following
year he went with Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 11.
Robert Vfford Earl of Suffolk, when he attended the King in his Expedition
into France, Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14.
An. 21. E. 3. he was employed in the Kings Service beyond Sea; and lastly, he
was in command under the Rot. Franc. 22. E. 3. m. 4.
Prince of Wales, an. 22. E. 3. and in these Expeditions he performed so great
Services, that he was thought worthy to be Elected one of the first Founders of
this most Noble Order.

(17.) Sir Miles Stapleton.
THis Sir Miles Stapleton was Son and Heir to Sir Miles Stapleton, of Bedall in
the County of York Knight.

His first employment in the Wars, was, when King Edward the Third made his
Expedition into Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m. 20.
Bretagne. He also Rot. Franc. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 14.
attended the King in his Voyage Royal into France, Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1.
m. 15.
an. 20. E. 3. and lay at the Seige before Calais. Rot. Franc. 23. E. 3. m. 6.
An. 23. E. 3. about the Month of July he was employed in the Kings Service
beyond Sea; and the like Rot. Franc. 29. E. 3. m. 8.
an. 29. E. 3.

In the 30. year of King Edward the Third, Froissard l. 1. c. 258.
Philip, Brother to the King of Naevarre (taken Prisoner by the French King the
year before) came over into England, and obtained assistance for recovery of
his Lands in Normandy: whereupon the King joined to him this Sir Miles
Stapleton, a man of great integrity and in martial affairs very skillful, as
Froissard Characterizeth him. These two, with 2000. men passed through
Normandy, and, as they marched, took and burnt several Towns and Fortresses,
till they came within 9. Leagues of Paris, and did not retreat, till they had
forced the French to enter into Truce for a Year. For this Expedition the said
Philip of Navarre, was 16. Ian. Rot. Franc. 31. E. 3. m. 2.
constituted the Kings Captain and Lieutenant in the Duchy of Normandy.

In consideration of the 21. June. Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 2. m. 30.
constant fidelity and eminent valor of this Noble Knights, as also his great
service in the Wars, the King 21. June. Pat. 34. E. 3. p. 2. m. 30.
granted to him a Pension of 100 l. per annum out of his Exchequer for life,
until he had that annual value in Lands or Rents provided for him. And shortly
after, Upon information that several injuries and damages had been done to the
French by the English, after and against the Truce taken near Chartres, the
King, desirous that it should be kept without violation, and the infringers
thereof punished: 3. July. Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 5.
constituted him with Sir Nele Loring, and Sir Richard Stafford, his
Commissioners, 3. July. Rot. Franc. 34. E. 3. m. 5.
to inform themselves of the way and manner how these injuries might be
discovered and repaired, and gave them power to arrest and imprison, to seize
and confiscate their Estates, and to punish them according as they deserved.

He married Pat. 2^. E. 3. p. 2. m. 22.
Ioane the Daughter and Heir of Oliver de Ingham, and Ib. m. 21.
Relict of Roger le Strange; and dyed on Esc. 1. R. 2. n. 32.
Wednesday next before the Feast of St. Nicholas, an. 38. E. 3. leaving his Son
Miles, then about 20 years of age. The Custody of his Lands was 21. Feb. 39. E.
3.
granted to the Queen, who 12. May following.
granted it to Bryan Stapleton Knight, John de Boys, and Roger de Boys, till
his said Son came of age; which Grant the King confirmed the same day by his
Letters Patent. He and his Wife were both buried at the House of Collect. Fr.
Thynn Lancast. penes Will. Peirpoint Ar.
Ingham founded by his Mothers Ancestors.

(18.) Sir Thomas Wale.
HE was the Son of Esc. 17. E. 3. n. 40.
Sir Thomas Wale, and Esc. 17. E. 3. n. 40.
Lucy his Wife; which Lucy held the Manor of Wedon-Pinkney, in the County of
Northampton, with its appurtenances, in her Demesne as of Fee of the King in
Capite, as of the Fee Pinkney, by the service of one Knights Fee: and long
before her death she settled the said Manor on this Sir Thomas and his Heirs,
as appears by the Ibid.
Inquisition taken after her death, wherein the said Sir Thomas is found to be
her next Heir, and then about 40 years of age.

He attended the King into Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
Flanders, an. 12. E. 3. and had command under William de Bohun Earl of
Northampton, in the Expedition which the King made into Bretagne, Rot. Fr. 16.
E. 3. m. 36.
an. 16. E. 3. so also beyond Sea in the Kings service, with Richard Earl of
Arundel, Rot. Fr. 18. E. 3. m. 23.
an. 18. E. 3.

We find not that he had any issue by his Wife Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 21. North.
Nichola, who outlived him; but that his three Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 21. North.
Sisters were his Heirs, namely, Esc. 26. E. 3. n. 21. North.
Margaret, the Wife of -- Malorre; Alice, of Thomas Chamberlain; and Julian.

He dyed in Gascoigne, on Ibid.
Tuesday next after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, an. 26. E. 3. being
a Hist. Tho de la Mare, vide Stow, Chron. p. 253.
Knight of great virtue and worthiness: so that, of all the Stalls of the first
Founders, his first became void; into which succeeded Reginald Lord Cobham, of
Sterborough.

(19.) Sir Hugh Wrottesley
SIR Hugh Wrottesley was Son to Ex Autogr. penes Walt. Wrottesley de Wrottesley
in Com. Staff. Baronet. 9. Apr. 1663.
Sir William Wrottesley of Wrottesley in the County of Stafford Knight.

It appears, that Pat. 8. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21.
an. 8. E. 3. he designed a Voyage to the Holy Land, and to that end had
obtained the Pat. 8. E. 3. p. 1. m. 21.
Kings Letters for appointing Peter de Hoe and Thomas de Chency his Attorneys,
during his absence, to prosecute his Suits in any Court of England.

An. 12. E. 3. he went in the Kings Service into Rot. Alman. 12. E. 3. m 3. p.
1.
Flanders, when the King went over thither to confer with his Allies. And at
the Rot. Chart. and Pat. apud Cales. 21. E. 3. m. 5.
Siege of Calais, he had the Kings License to enclose his Wood at Wrottesley,
and make a Park. Rot. Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 3. m. 33.
Two years after, for his good service, he granted to him the Custody of the
Lands and Tenements which were William de Pilate^hall deceased, till his Heirs
came of age, with the marriages of them, without rendering any thing theretofore.

An. 24. E. 3. the King 16. Oct. Pat. 24. E. 3. p. 3. m. 17.
granted him a Pension of 40 l. per annum out of his Exchequer, for his life;
upon the surrender of which Letters Patent, he 20. May Pat. 25. E. 3. p. 2. m.
21.
granted him 40 l. per annum to be thus received, viz. 16 l. 4 s. 4 d. out of
the Farm of the Villages of Mere and Clent, 11 l. 10 s. out of the Farm of the
Village of Swinford, 11 l. out of the Farm of the Village of Kinefare and
Tetenhale, and 1 l. 6 s. 8 d. out of the Farm of the Foresters Fee of Tedesley,
to hold for life, or till he had 40 l. per annum in Lands or Rents, settled on
him for life; yet to be answerable for the overplus being 1 s. 8 d. These last
Letters Patent were 27. Ian. Pat. 1. R. 2. m. 31.
confirmed to him by King Richard the Second, in the first year of his Reign.

He married Esc. 43. E. 3.
Mabill, the Daughter of Sir Philip ap Rees, and Ioane his Wife, by whom he had
issue S. Eardswicks view of Staffordshire.
John, whose heir male in a direct line is Sir Walter Wrottesley of Wrottesley,
in the County of Stafford, Baronet, now living. He also had to his second Wife
Ex ipso Autogr. penes praef. Walt. Wrottesley.
Isabel, Daughter of MS. in Offic. Arm. [ C. 10.] fol. 126.
John Arderne of Aldeford, Aderlegh, and Edds. And dyed the Esc. 4. R. 2. n.
61. Heref.
Monday after the Feast of St. Vincent, an. 4. R. 2.

(20.) Sir Nele Loring.
AT the Naval Fight before Sluice, his Valor was so remarkable, that it gained
him the Honor of Knighthood, to which the King immediately added a Vide Comun.
de Ter. Trin. 15. E. 3. m. 3. dorso, and Pat. 31. E. 3. p. 3. m. 6.
Donation of 20 l. per annum, to him and his Heirs males, for the better
support of that Dignity, till Lands of the like annual value were provided for
him and them: These Letters Patent bear Test at Sluice, Vide Comun. de Ter.
Trin. 15. E. 3. m. 3. dorso, and Pat. 31. E. 3. p. 3. m. 6.
26. of June, in the 14. year of the Kings Reign over England, and his first of
France.

In the Kings Expedition into Rot. F^^^^. E. 3. m. 24.
Bretagne, he attended him thither, and an. 18. E. 3. went beyond Sea in his
Service. In the beginning of the following year, Rot. Romans 19. E. 3. m. 4.
he and Michael Northburgh, Canon of Li^hfeild and Hereford, were sent to the
Pope's Court, with the Kings Letter (dated 23. Feb. an. 19. E. 3.) to obtain a
Dispensation for the marriage of the Prince of Wales, with the Daughter of the
Duke of Brabant. At his return he went with Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 15.
Henry de Lancaster Earl of Derby, into Gascoigne, where he Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 6.
stayed the following year: After which coming over into England, he within a
short time Rot. Fr. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 20.
returned to his Commands in Gascoigne.

An. 29. E. 3. he Rot. Vasc. ^9. E. 3. m. 8.
attended the Prince of Wales in his Expedition into Gascoigne, and being Pat
33. ^. 3. p. 1. m. 20.
specially assigned to attend his person in the Battle at Poictiers, he
performed his duty so well, that he received both Pat 33. ^. 3. p. 1. m. 20.
acknowledgments and rewards from the Prince, for that days service. He was
afterward Prim^ July, Rot. Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 8.
appointed by King Edward, to be one of his Commissioners, for receiving the
possession of all Countries, Cities, Forts, etc. that by the Treaty of Peace
near Chartres were to be delivered to him.

When the Prince of Wales was created Prince of Guyenne, he Rot. Vasc. 36. E.
3. m. 4. and 6.
attended him thither again, and there Rot. Vasc. 39. E. 3. m. 5.
continued four years; whence returning into England he stayed not long, but
Rot. Vasc. 40. E. 3. m. 14.
went back again, and remained there three years. After which, coming into
England, and being again sent into Aquitaine, Rot. Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 4.
Writs were directed to Robert de Ashton, Admiral toward the West, for the
passage of him and Sir John de la Hay, their Soldiers and Retinue; and this
year he was one of those Knights of the Prince's Retinue, sent to meet
Hollinsh. page 402.
Sir Robert Knolls, at his coming out of Bretagne, whom they met at Quercy, and
assisted at the Sieges of Ibid. 403.
Durmel and Domme, both which, though they thought fit to break up, yet
marching further into the Country, they took Gauaches, Freins, Rochmador, and
Ville Franche, upon the marches of Tholouze.

He was an active man, and did King Edward great services, which induced him to
confer many favors on him, in recompense thereof; as first, he 6. Oct. Pat. 9.
E. 3. m. 19.
granted him a Pension of 5 l. a year, during his life, to be paid him by the
Abbess of Burnham, out of the 15 l. per annum she was to pay into the
Exchequer, for the Fee Farm of the Manor of Bollestrade. Next, he 24. Sept.
apud An^werp. Pat. 12. E. 3.
granted him a Pension of 20 Marks per annum for his life, out of his
Exchequer, until Lands of the yearly value of 10 l. should be settled on him.
The following year he Pat. concess. hominib. Ang^. and Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 10.
granted him all the Lands and Tenements belonging to John, the Son of Henry de
Morff, in Alnetheley in Shropshire, which, by forfeiture of the said John
Escheated to the King, to hold to him and his Heirs for ever. Besides these,
the Prince having retained him in his service, as well in Peace as for War,
granted to him for life a Pension of 50 l. per annum, and that it might be more
certainly paid, he after granted to him his Manors of Neuyn and Purchely in
North Wales for life, which the King 30. Apr. Pat. 23. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
confirmed.

Afterward, Henry Earl of Lancaster, the Kings Lieutenant in Aquitaine, for
the good service this Knight had formerly done the King in England, Scotland,
and elsewhere, and also to himself in Gascoigne, by Letters Patent dated the
12. of November an. Dom. 1346. gave him for his life Pedalium Sancti Macharii,
with all the profits thereto belonging; which grant the King 26. Apr. Rot.
Vasc. 22. E. 3. m. 34.
confirmed to him, an. 22. E. 3.

This noble Knight was Son and Heir of Rot Vasc. 43. E. 3. m. 3.
Roger Loring and Coll. A. V. W.
Cassandrae, Daughter of Reginald Perot. He married Coll. W. D. N.
Margaret, Daughter and Heir of Sir Ralph Beauple of Cnubeston, in Devonshire,
by Coll. A. V. W.
Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter and Heir of Alan Bloyho (the relict of Stephen
Tinterne Esquire) by whom he had Issue, two Daughters and Heirs, namely Esc. 9. R.
2. n. 20.
Isabel Wife to Robert Lord Harington; and Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 20.
Margaret Wife to Inscript. Tumuli apud Tuddington.
John Peyvre of Tuddington, in the County of Bedford.

He died Esc. 9. R. 2. n. 20.
an. 9. R. 2. and was buried in the I^iner* Io. Leland. part 6. fol 7^.
Priory of Dunstable, to which he had been a great Benefactor.

(21.) Sir John Chandos.
THE first Martial Action of his, was at St. Quintins; for while King Edward
(in the 13. year of his Reign) lay at siege before Cambray (being the first
Town he sat down before, upon his first entrance into France) the Earl of
Henault made an assault upon St. Froiss. Chron. lib. 1. cap. 38.
Quintins, where this Esquire (so then called by Sir John Froissard) fought
valiantly with John de St. Dager an Esquire of Vermandois, between the Bars and
the Gate, both manifesting great Courage and Gallantry. And in this Expedition,
he was ranged in the Ibid. cap. 41.
third Battle, led by the King, which was pitched between Vironfosse and
Flamengery, to encounter the French.

For his Valor shown in this Expedition, the King bestowed on him the honor of
Knighthood, and at his return to Antwerpe, 15. Nov. Patentes concess. hominib.
Angl. and Vasc. 13. E. 3. m. 10.
granted him 20 Marks per annum out of his Exchequer, to support that Dignity,
till he should settle on him Lands to that yearly value for his life.

When the King led another Army into Flanders, designed also against the
French, he attended him, and fought valiantly in the Naval Engagement before
Froiss. cap. 5.
Sluice.

He was in the Voyage Royal made into Ibid. c. 121.
Normandy, an. 20. E. 3. and in its march at Ibid. c. 125.
Poisy, he and Sir -- Basset, preserved two of the Lord of Poisy's Daughters
from violation, and brought them to the King; who caused them to be safely
conducted to Corbe, whither they desired to go.

At the Battle of Ibid. c. 128.
Cressy he commanded in the Van, led by the Prince of Wales; and when this
Prince was An. 29. E. 3.
constituted the Kings Lieutenant in Aquitaine, he attended him in that
Expedition; and by his command, summoned the Castle of Froiss. c. 158.
Romorentine, which held out a while, but was at length forced to surrender.

Marching on with the Prince, the Battle of Poictiers approached, and on the
Ibid. c. 161.
day before, (a Truce for that day being obtained by the endeavors of the
Cardinal of Piergort) this valiant Knight coasted about to make discovery of
the French Army, as did also the Lord Cleremont, one of the French Marshals;
and as they returned, they met, and observed that both of them bore the same
device, to wit, a Lady in blue, irradiated with the Sunbeams. Cleremont
demanded how long he had born his device, Chandos answered, you bear mine; I
deny that, replied Cleremont; and did not the Truce hinder, I would make it
good. To morrow, said Chandos, you shall find me ready to justify it to be
mine as well as yours, and so they parted.

The next day the Fight begun, during which St. John Ibid. c. 162.
never parted from the Princes side; and when he perceived that the French
Marshals was discomfited, he advised the Prince to advance toward the Kings
Battle, telling him there was all the hazard and the glory; which he
accordingly did. At the end of this famous Battle, when no more French Banners
were left in the field, he prevailed with the Prince to set up his Standard in
a Bush near him, to give a signal to his dispersed Army to rally, while he took
some refreshment.

An. 33. E. 3. he Ibid. c. 207.
attended the King in his Expedition into France, and being at the siege of
Ibid. c. 208.
Rheyms, he and Sir James Audeley, and the Lord Mucident, a Gascoigne, with
their Troops, rode near to Chalons in Champaigne, and drawing near to Chargny,
in Dormois, where was a strong Castle, they gave an assault to it, at which the
Lord Mucident being slain, they in revenge made a resolution to take it ere
they went away, which they did, putting all to the Sword, and demolishing the
Castle. He was constituted Captain and the Kings Lieutenant in the Dukedom of
Normandy, and the parts of France, and had 5. Feb. Rot. Franc. 35. E. 3. m. 18.
power given him to grant Pardons for Treason, Murder, etc. and whatsoever he
did in this case, the King promised to ratify under his Great Seal.

After the Peace near Chartres, Sir John Chandos was Primo July Rot. Vasc. 35.
E. 3. m. 8.
constituted one of King Edward's Commissioners to take possession of the
Duchy of Aquitaine, where Sir James de Bourbon Froiss. c. 214.
delivered him the possession of diverse Lands, Towns, Cities, Castles, and
Fortresses, whereupon he received the Fealty and Homage of all the Nobility and
others.

Shortly after he was 30. July Rot. Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 5.
made Captain and Commander in chief of the Castle and Town of Rochel, and all
the Country of X^ntonge, and a command was therewithal sent to 30. July Rot.
Vasc. 35. E. 3. m. 5.
John de Monte Ferandi, Custos of the said Castle and Town, to deliver them up
to him, with all the Arms, Provisions, and other the King's Stores in his
possession. And the following year, when the Prince of Wales (now created
Prince of Guyenne) took a Voyage thither, he was made Froiss. c. 217.
Constable of Aquitaine, and Sir Guischard d' Angle Marshal.

When the King of Cyprus came into Aquitaine, upon a visit to the Prince, he
was Ibid. c. 218.
sent to receive and conduct him to Angolesme, where the Prince kept his Court:
He also waited on him through Ibid. c. 219.
Xantonge and Poictou, to Rochell, to view the Country, whence he returned to
Angolesme; where having taken leave of the Prince, he yet attended him to the
confines of the Principality.

Froiss. c. 224.
Charles de Bloys, having gained new strength from the King of France, and
entered Bretagne, this Sir John with some few Forces left Aquitaine, and came to
the assistance of John Earl of Montford, who received him with great joy,
having so great an opinion of his Valor and Conduct, that he conceived no
misfortune could fall upon him while he stayed with him. By his advice and
valor (as all acknowledged) the French were defeated, Sir Ibid. c. 226.
Bertrand de Guesclin, taken Prisoner by an English Esquire under Sir John's
Standard, Charles de Bloys there slain, and the Enemy pursued 8 Leagues, even
to the Gates of Rennes. This Battle was fought on Walsingh. p. 174.
Michaelmas day an. 38. E. 3. where were taken two Earls, 27 Lords, and 1500
men at Arms. The news of the Victory being brought to the King (then at Dover)
by a Froiss. c. 227.
Pursuivant of Arms, who had been in the Battle, the King for his good service,
created him a Herald by the name of Windesor (there was also an Herald who had
the addition of Ibid. c. 257.260. and 264.
Chandos given him in honor of this noble Knight, whom he employed in
Aquitaine, upon several occasions.) This good success begat a Treaty, which
settled the Ibid. c. 229.
Earl of Montfort in the Dukedom of Bretagne by the King of France, to whom he
did Homage, as the Dukes before had done.

In the Prince's Voyage to Spain he had command in the Van, led by the Duke of
Lancaster, and immediately before the joining of the Battle, this noble Knight
was created See before page 42.
Banneret; which honor was not only well bestowed, but by his valiant carriage
in the Fight, as well deserved; for Froiss. c. 237.
he and his men happening to encounter Sir Bertrand de Guesclin (who had been
ransomed from his former imprisonme^^ at 100000 Franks) and the Marshal Sir
Arnold Dandrehen, they took them Ibid. c. 238.
both Prisoners, and defeated their Battle.

After his return out of Spain, he obtained leave to reside at St. Savior le
Viscount; but when the French invaded Gascoigne, the Prince sent for him back,
and employed him in the conduct of that War, wherein he behaved himself most
valiantly, and in a word Ibid. 270.
recovered and kept Aquitaine, the particulars of whose famous actions from
hence to his death may be seen in Lib. 1. c. 245.251.256.258.264.265.268. and
270.
Sir John Froissard, out of whom we are loath to cloy our Reader with too much
of transcription, and shall therefore only note, that in this time he was made
Froiss. lib. 1. cap. 263.
Constable of Poictou and Vide Pat. 48. F. 3. p. 1. m. 7.
Marshal of Aquitaine.

He had the 12. May Pat. 34. E. 3. m. 35.
Barony of St. Saviors le Viscount, of Domvers and Dongeville, and the Lands
and Tenements of St. Mary de Monte de Farsellis, and de Romelly, and all the
Lands which were formerly Sir Godfry de Harecourts in Normandy, given him and
his heirs for ever, by King Edward (to whom the said Sir Godfry had sold them,
to be possessed after his death) which being not comprised in the Froiss cap.
213.
Treaty of Peace near Chartres, the Homage for them became due to the King of
France; but there having passed so great Testimonies of affection and respect,
between King Edward and King John, the latter, at the request of King Edward,
before he went from Calais, Froiss cap. 213.
sealed to Sir John Chandos, a confirmation of King Edward's grant to possess
them as his inheritance for ever. Whereupon command was sent to Pat. 34. E. 3.
p. 1. m. 35.
Sir Thomas Holland, then Captain and Custos thereof, forthwith to deliver the
Castles, Baronies, and all the Lands and Tenements to the said John. And
hereupon he was sometimes styled Pat. 35. E. 3. m. 3.
Baro Sancti Salvatoris le Viscount, and at other, Pat. 48. E. 3. par. 1.
Vicecomes Sancti Salvatoris in Normania.

The last martial action of this most famous Knight, and which proved fatal to
him, was Froiss. c. 270.
near to St. Salvin, an Abbey in Poictou, which having been betrayed to the
French by a Monk who hated the Abbot, he endeavored to recover it the Ibid.
last of December in the night, Walsingham p. 181.
an. 44. E. 3. but missing of his design, and intending to return to Poictou,
he encountered a party of the French at Lusach-bridge, where the way being
slippery, he fell down, and as he was rising one Jacques de St. Martyn an
Esquire, struck him under his Eye into the brain with a Glave; for having
Froiss loc. cit.
lost the sight of that Eye five years before, as he was hunting a Heart near
Bordeaux, he saw not the blow come. The French knew him by his Surcoat of Arms,
and endeavored to get his body, but his Uncle Edward Clyfford bestrid him, and
defended it; and other relief coming in, the French men were taken Prisoners.
He was thence carried to Mortymer Fortress, where he lay a day and night
speechless, and then died, and lies there buried.

His death was exceedingly lamented by all, and when the French King heard of
it he was very much troubled, saying, Walsing. loco cit.
there was now no Knight left alive, that was able to make Peace between the
Kings and Kingdoms of France and England; so much was he feared, so highly
esteemed, and so generally beloved.

He was never married, but we find he had three Sisters; Communia Ter. Mich.
an. 3. H. 5.
Elizabeth, who died 9. R. 2. Alionora, the Wife of Roger Colinge; and Margaret.

(22.) Sir James Audeley.
THis noble Knight was Son and Heir of Nicholas Lord Audeley, and of Jane,
Sister and Heir of William the Son of William Martyn, and was born an. Collect.
W. D. N.
7. E. 2.

He was no sooner come of age, but he entered upon Martial Employments, wherein
for several years he became engaged in the Wars against the Scots, and there
did the King so great service, that in recompense thereof, and the great charge
he had been at in supporting himself in those Wars, he forgave him the sum of
Pat. 9. E. 3. p. 2. m. 13.
10000 Marks, which he was engaged to pay Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, by
whose attainder it became forfeited to the King.

An. 16. E. 3. he was made 4. Aug. Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m. 10.
Custos of the Town of Berwick upon Twede during pleasure; and by other Letters
Patent of the same date, constituted the Kings 4. Aug. Rot. Scot. 16. E. 3. m.
10.
Justice of the said Town, and of all other the Kings Lands in the parts of
Scotland, to execute all things appertaining to that Office, according to the
Law and Custom of Scotland.

Not long after, he was engaged to go beyond Sea, in the Kings Service, with
Nicholas Audeley Earl of Gloucester, and thereupon the Kings Letters of
Protection were 4. Sept. Rot. Franc. 16. E. 3. m 25.
obtained for him, to hold till Easter following.

The Ibid. m. 11.
20. of December after, the Kings special Letter was directed to him, to
provide 20. Men at Arms, and 20. Archers, to be sent to Portsmouth by the first
of March ensuing, and thence to pass in the Kings Service with the Earls of
Arundel and Huntingdon.

An. 18. E. 3. he went into Rot Fr. 18. E. 3. m. 19.
Gascoigne with the Earl of Derby, in his Expedition thither. The following
year he received Command, personally Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. m. 4.
to attend the King, and to serve him with his Retinue, for defense of this
Kingdom against the French, at the Kings charge.

And when the King made his Royal Voyage into France, an. 20. E. 3. he Froiss.
Chron. l. 1. c. 121.
attended him thither. He was sent over from the Seige of Calais, with 2 Apr.
Rot. Franc. 21. E. 3. p. 1. m. 17.
Command to raise what Forces he could, and to bring them to Sandwich, by
Ascension-Day, well armed, to pass over to Calais, in regard the French King
was drawing together a vast Army, with intention to raise the Seige.

In the Prince of Wales's Expedition into Gascoigne, an. 29. E. 3. He Rot.
Vasc. 29. E. 3. m. 11.
attended him thither, and at the Battle of Poctiers, gained everlasting Fame.
For immediately before the Battles joined, Froissard l. 1. c. 162.
he acquainted the Prince, that he had served his Father and him faithfully,
and had made a vow, to give the onset, or dye in the attempt, at the first
Battle that the King or any of his Sons should personally be engaged in, and
therefore begged his License, to place himself there, where he might be in the
best capacity to accomplish his Vow; which the Prince giving way to, he put
himself into the Front of the English Army (accompanied with his 4. Esquires, (
viz. Lib. MS. penes W. Flower nuper Norroy R. Armor.
Dutton of Dutton, Delves of Doddington, Fowlehurst of Crew, and Hawkeston of
Wrinehill) who had obliged themselves to stick close to him) and encountered
with Sir Arnold Dandrehen, who commanded in the French Marshalls Battle, and
was sorely wounded by him, but taken Prisoner by others; for this valiant
Knight and his Esquires refused to take Prisoners, but spent their time in
execution: In this Battle he was most dangerously wounded, in the Body and
Face; and at the end of it his 4. Esquires brought him out of the Field, and
laid him under a Hedge, to refresh him, where they took off his Arms and bound
up his Wounds.

His Holinshed p. 263.
valor and stout performances were greatly wondered at by the French
Commanders, as they acknowledged the following night, when they sat at Supper
in Poictiers, and it is reported by Wal^ingham, p. 164.
that by his extraordinary courage he brake through the Enemies Battle, and
made great slaughter among them.

Ib. c. 16^.
As soon as the Prince had sent to find out the French King, he enquired after
this Knight, and being told where he lay wounded, he sent to know if he could
be brought to him, otherwise he would come to visit him: this being told Sir
James, he caused 8. of his Servants to carry him in his Litter to the Prince,
who took him in his Arms and kissed him, acknowledging he ought to honor him, for
by his valor he had gained great renown; and to enable him to pursue martial
affairs, he retained him to be his Knight, with 500. marks Land of Inheritance.

Sir James being departed from the Prince, sent for his Brother Sir Peter
Audeley, with some other of his nearest Relations, and called before them his
4. Esquires, to whom he declared, that seeing the honor he had that day gained
was by his Esquires valor, he gave them the said 500. marks per annum as
freely as the Prince had bestowed them on him.

This generous action the Ibid. c. 169.
Prince being acquainted with, sent for Sir James, who being brought to him in
his Litter, the Prince told him, that he had been informed of his Gift to his
Esquires, and would therefore know, whether he liked his kindness? or why he
gave it away? To whom he gave a particular account of their fidelity and
services, which he thought himself obliged to reward, affirming it was by their
assistance he accomplished his Vow, and had his life preserved, and therefore
humbly desired pardon for doing it without his knowledge. Herewith the Prince
was so well satisfied, that he 3. May Pat. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 14.
afterward gave him 600. Marks per annum more, in like manner as he had done
the former; this grant was 6. Aug. Ibid.
confirmed to him by the King, during life, and for a twelve Month after, to be
received out of the Coynage of the Stanneries in Cornwall, and the Kings Lands
in that County.

This valiant Knight did afterward Rot. Vasc. 33. E. 3. p. 2. m. 8.
attend the King in his Royal expedition into France, an. 33. E. 3. And was in
the action with Froiss. c. 207.
Sir John Chandos, and the Lord Mucident, when the strong Castle of Dormoys was
taken by assault.

When the Prince undertook a voyage into Spain, to restore Don Pedro, he
constituted him Froissard ^^ 239.
Governor of Aquitaine in his absence, and afterward made him Ibid. c. 259.
great Seneschal of Poictou about this time he raised a great Army there, and
marched to Berry, and wasted that Country, and thence passed to Tourayn,
keeping the Field; and then to the Lord of Chauuigny's Country (he being lately
revolted to the French) and destroyed it; afterward he took the Town of Breuse
by assault, and burnt it, and so returned to Poictiers. He was with Sir John
Chandos at the Siege of Ib. c. 258.
Dome, and of the strong Castle of Ib. c. 262.
Roche sur Ion in Anjou, which at length was surrendered, and thence he retired
to fresh Quarters in the County of Fontney.

And here Sir John Froissard puts a period to his life, and faith he was buried
at Poictiers: but he mistakes James the Father for James the Son, who in truth
died in Gascoigne, an. Esc. an. 45. E. 3. n. 1.
43. E. 3. which was near about Froissard, time, after whom his Father lived
many years; having received Summons of Parlialiament, an. 4. E. 3. and thence
to all ensuing Parliaments, to the time of his Death.

This Noble Lord married to his first Wife, Monasticon Angl. Vol. 2.224. b.
Vide Pat. 4. E. 3.
Joan, Daughter to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, by whom he had Collect. W. D.
N.
Nicholas, his Son and Heir, Collect. W. D. N.
Roger, and Rowland, who died without Issue, and two Daughters, Joan the Wife
of John Tochet, and Margaret Wife of Roger Hillary, who upon their elder
Brothers Decease also without Issue, became Heirs to a fair Patrimony, but the
Barony came to John Tochet, Son to the eldest Daughter.

By his second Wife, Esc. 20. E. 3. n. 58. Vide Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 1. m. 1.
Isabel, he had Esc. 20. E. 3. n. 58. Vide Pat. 27. E. 3. p. 1. m. 1.
James, and Thomas, who died without Issue, and Margaret the Wife of Fulk
Fitz-Waren. And having lived to a very great Age, he died Esc. an. 9. R. 2. n.
1. Staff.
the first of April, an. 9. R. 2. leaving Nicholas his Son and Heir, then 50
years of Age, having a little before made his Will at Heligh Castle, by which
he Ex Lib. in Offic. principal. Cantuar. vocat. Courtney. f. 121. b.
appointed his Body to be buried in the Choire of his Abbey of Hilton, before
the high Altar in case he should dye in the Marches, but if in Devonshire, or
Somersetshire, then in the Choir of the Friars Preachers, at Exceter, before
the high Altar.

(23) Sir Otho Holland.
HE was one of the younger Sons of Robert Lord Holland, and Brother of Sir
Thomas Holland, one of the first Founders of this Noble Order.

The Term. Trin. 24. E. 3. rot. 32. Angl.
Earl of Ewe, Constable of France, being Prisoner of War to the said Thomas,
the King bought him of him for a certain sum of Money, and afterward by
Indenture delivered the said Earl to the Custody of the said Sir Otho Holland,
under condition, that the Earl should not go out of England, nor wear Arms
publicly, until he had paid his full Ransom to the King. But it seems Sir Otho
took the Earl with him to Calais, where he went up and down armed; upon which,
information being given to the King, Sir Otho was brought to the Kings Bench
Bar, before the Chancellor, Treasurer, the Earls of Arundel, and Huntingdon,
Sir Bartholomew Burghersh, Mr. Nicholas Northburgh, Clark of the Privy Seal,
William Basset, and other the Kings Justices, and being not able to deny the
premises, he put himself upon the Kings favor, and was thereupon committed to
the Custody of John de Long Marshal of the Kings Bench.

We have met with little else concerning this Knight, save that he went over
into Rot. Fr. 29. E. 3. m. 7.
Bretagne, with his said Brother Thomas, an. 29. E. 3. and had been Claus. 33.
E 3. m. 19. dorso
Governor of Gernsey, Iarsey, Sark, and Aurney. We also find, that a Term.
Trin. 24. E. 3. Rot. 32. Angl.
Fine was acknowledged at Westminster on the morrow after the Purification of
our Lady, an. 33. E. 3. between him and the said Otho Querent, and Robert de
Holland the elder, Knight, and Robert de Holland the younger, Deforcients, of
the Manor of Yokeshale, and the Advowson of the Church there, to the use of
the said Otho for life, and after his death to return to the said Sir Robert
the elder, and Robert the younger, and the Heirs of the said Sir Robert. But he
lived not to enjoy the benefit of it long, for he dyed in Normandy the Esc 34.
E. 3 n. 37.
3. day of September following, being seized also for life of the Manors of
Esc 34. E. 3 n. 37.
Kersey in Suffolk, Taleworth in Surrey, and Chesterfield in Derbyshire, and
these of the gift of his Brother Thomas, and the Lady Ioane his Wife; as also
of the Manor of Esc 34. E. 3 n. 37.
Dalbery in the said County of Derby for life, by the Grant of Robert de
Holland.

(24.) Sir Henry Eam.
ALL we have met with relating to this noble Knight, is only what the following
Instrument (made to him by the Prince of Wales, of an Annuity of 100 marks, and
confirmed by the King) does inform us of: whereby it appears, that he was a
Native of Brabant, and received the Honor of Knighthood from the said Prince's
hands.

Pat. an. 23. Edw. 3. par. 2. m. 24.
Rex omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Inspeximus Literas Patentes dilecti and
fidelis nostri Edwardi, Principis Walliae, Ducis Cornubiae, and Comitis
Cestriae, filii nostri Charissimi in haec verba. Edward eisne filz au Noble Roy
d' Engleterre and de France, Prince de Gales, Duc de Cornwaill, and Count de
Cestre. A tous ceux qui cestes Lettres verront on orront, Saluz. Sachez que
come nostre trescher and bien ame Monsit Henri Eam au temps qil avoit pris de
noz meins l' Order de Chivaler, se of^rist and premist de sa fraunche volunte,
destre entendant a noz services a term de sa vie, and qeu temps qe no^s luy
ferrions sufficialment garnir, d'aler ovesqe nous queu part que nous vourrions,
auessi bien pur la pees, come pur la guerre, and destre arms od nous a noz
volontez country toute gent forpris le Ducs de Brabant son Seigneur lige en la
defense de ses terres propres: Nous acceptantz celles offer and premesse and
voillantz pour son dit service avoir, and qil soit le plus tennz a nous servir
devant null antre, tiel regard fair a luy don't il se purra le mieltz contenir a
l'avenance de son estat, lui avons done un annuele rent de Cent marez a term
de sa vie, a receiure de nostre Manoir de Bradenash en Count de Deveneshire
ches^un an a les terms de Pasques and de Seint Michel per oueles porcions per
les meyns des gardens de mesmes le Manoir qi pur les temps serront les offer
and premesse dussusditz en toutz pointz tenuz and gardez, and volons que a qule
heure, and a quant des foitz son dit paiement soit aderrier en party, ou en
tout a null term assign, il lise au dit Monsir Henri destreindre en le dit
Manoir, and les destresses tenir tanqil soit pleinement paiez de quanqe lui
serra a derriere, come dessus est dit. En Tesmoignance de quel chose, nous
avons fait fair cestes noz Lettres overtez. Done souz nostre Seal a Westminster. le
xviij. jour de Jeneuer, l'an du Regne nostre trescher Seigneur and Piere le Roy
d' Engleterre vintisme primer, and de France octisme. Nos autem concessionem
praedictam ratem habentes and gratam, eam pro nobis and haeredibus nostris
quantum in nobis est praefato Henrico ad totam vitam suam, tenere praesentium
concedimus, and confirmamus, sicut Literae praedictae rationabiliter testantur.
In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium xxviij. die Iunii.

Per ipsum Regem.
(25) Sir Sanchet Dabrichcourt.
Lib. 1. c. 9.
SIR John Froissard takes notice, that Queen Isabel, Wife to King Edward the
Second, being driven out of France, was courteously entertained at the Castle
of Amberticourt in Henault, by a Knight of that name, whose then it was, and
that thereupon the Queen and the Prince brought him, his Lady and Children,
over with them, where they all received advancement in the Court of England.
It Is very probable then, that this Sir Sanchet might be Son to that Knight; and
yet Ralph Brook, York Herald, makes him to be the Son of Eustace Dabrichcourt,
and Elizabeth, Daughter of the Duke of Iuliers, the Relict of the John
Plantagenet, Earl of Kent. But this is a great mistake, and overseen by
Augustine Vincent, Windesor Herald, in his correction of Brook. For it is
clear, Ex Lib. in Offic. principal. ^antuar. v^cat. Islip. f. 166. b.
that, after the death of that Earl, his Widow vowed chastity in the Monastery
of Waverly, where she continued some years, and that on Michaelmas day an. Dom.
1360. which was above 11. years after the Institution of this Order of the
Garter, she was clandestinely married to Eustace de Abrichescourt, by one John
de Ireland, and therefore he could not be Son of these two persons, whose
marriage was so long after the Institution of that Order, whereof he was one of
the first Founders.

We find mention of a Pat. 19. E. 3. p. 2. m. 10.
gift, which King Edward the Third made to this Knight, of all the Chattels
belonging to John Wardedien, who had fled for killing of Robert Poteman, but
nothing else.

(26) Sir Walter Paveley.
THis Sir Walter was Son and Heir of Collect. A. V. W.
Walter Paveley, and Collect. A. V. W.
Maud, Daughter and Heir of Stephen Burghersh: His said Father died, an. 1. E.
3. at which time he was about Collect. A. V. W.
8 years old. He was also Rot. Fin. m. 4.
Cousin and next Heir to Henry Burghersh Bishop of Lincoln.

He went into Bretagne in the Rot. Fr. 16. E. 3. m. 24.
Kings Service, with Sir Bartholomew Burghersh senior, an. 16. E. 3. so also
the Rot. Fr. 17. E 3. m 3. and 15
following year; and again Rot. Fr. 19. E. 3. p. 1. m. 8.
an. 19. E. 3.

The Rot. Fr. 20. E. 3. p. 1. m. 3.
20. of King Edward the Third, he went with him in the Expedition the King made
into France, and therefore had his Lands in Ibid. m. 16. Dorso.
Northamptonshire and Ibid. m. 16. Dorso.
Wiltshire discharged from finding men at Arms, etc. to serve the King in that
Expedition. And the next year it seems he had command abroad under Rot. Fr. 21.
E 3. p. 1. m. 10.
Sir Bartholomew Burghersh le fitz: So also Rot. Fr. 23. E. 3. m. 2.
an. 23. E. 3.

Two years after, the Duke of Lancaster being made Admiral, he Rot. Fr. 25. E.
3. m. 4.
went to Sea in the Fleet: Afterward he went with the Rot. Vasc. 29. E. 3. m.
8.
Prince of Wales into Gascoigne; and Rot. Fr. 32. E. 3. m. 4.
an. 32. E. 3. into Bretagne.

These were the Expeditions this noble Knight made, which sufficiently denote
his being continually employed abroad in the Kings service.

He died Esc. an. 49. E. 3. n. 21.
28. of June an. 49. E. 3. leaving Edward Pavely his Son and Heir.

SECT. IV. A Catalogue of their Successors, with Scutcheons of their Arms.
KNights elected in the following part of the Reign of King Edward the Third,
as the Stalls became void.

27. Richard of Bordeaux, afterward King of England, of that name the Second.
28. Lyonel of Antwerp Earl of Vlster, and Duke of Clarence. 29. John of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster, after created Duke of Aquitaine. 30. Edmund of Langley Earl
of Cambridge, after Duke of York. 31. John de Montford Duke of Bretagne, and
Earl of Richmond. 32. Humfry Bohun Earl of Hereford, and Constable of England.
33. William Bohun Earl of Northampton. 34. John Hastings Earl of Penbroke. 35.
Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. 36. Richard Fitz Alan Earl of Arundel and
Surrey. 37. Robert Vfford, Earl of Suffolk. 38. Hugh Stafford, Earl of
Stafford. 39. Ingleram de Coucy, Earl of Bedford. 40. Guiscard d' Angolesme,
Earl of Huntingdon. 41. Edward Spencer, Lord Spencer. 42. William Latimer, Lord
Latimer. 43. Reynold Cobham, Lord Cobham of Sterborough. 44. John Nevil, Lord
Nevil of Raby.


45. Ralph Basset, Lord Basset of Drayton. 46. Sir Walter Manny, Bannert 47.
Sir William Fitz Waren, Knight. 48. Sir Thomas Vfford, Knight. 49. Sir Thomas
Felton, Knight. 50. Sir Franc Van Hall, Knight. 51. Sir Fulk Fitz Waren,
Knight. 52. Sir Allan Boxhull, Knight. 53. Sir Richard Pemburge, Knight. 54.
Sir Thomas Vtreight, Knight. 55. Sir Thomas Banester, Knight. 56. Sir Richard
de la Vache, Knight. 57. Sir Guy de Bryan, Knight.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Richard the Second.
58. Thomas of Woodstock, Earl of Buckingham, after Duke of Gloucester. 59.
Henry of Lancaster Earl of Derby, afterward King of England, of that Name the
Fourth. 60. William Duke of Gelderland. 61. William of Bavaris, Earl of
Ostrevant, after Earl of Holland, Henault, and Zeland. 62. Thomas Holland Earl
of Kent, after Duke of Surrey. 63. John Holland, Earl of Huntingdon, after Duke
of Exceter. 64. Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham, after Duke of Norfolk. 65.
Edward Earl of Rutland, after Duke of Albemarle. 66. Michael de la Poole, Earl
of Suffolk. 67. William Scrope, Lord Scrope, after Earl of Wiltshire, and Lord
Treasurer of England. 68. William Beauchamp Lord Bergaveny. 69. John Beaumont,
Lord Beaumont. 70. William Willoughby, Lord Willoughby. 71. Richard Gray, Lord
Gray. 72. Sir Nicholas Sarnesfield, Knight. 73. Sir Philip de la Vache, Knight.
74. Sir Robert Knolls, Knight. 75. Sir Simon Burley, Knight. 76. Sir John de
Evereux, Banneret. 77. Sir ^ryan Stapleton, Knight. 78. Sir Richard Burley,
Knight. 79. Sir Peter Courtney, Knight. 80. Sir John Burley, Knight. 81. Sir
John Bourchier, Knight. 82. Sir Thomas Granston, Knight. 83. Sir Lewis
Clifford, Knight. 84. Sir Robert Dunstavill, Knight. 85. Sir Robert de Namur,
Knight.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth.
86. Henry Prince of Wales, after King of England, of that Name the Fifth. 87.
Thomas of Lancaster, Earl of Albemarle, and Duke of Clarence. 88. John Earl of
Kendal and Duke of Bedford, after Regent of France. 89. Humfry, Earl of
Penbroke and Duke of Gloucester. 90. Thomas Beauford, Earl of Dorset, and after
Duke of Exceter. 91. Robert Count Palatine, Duke of Bavaria, after Emperor of
Germany. 92. John Beauford, Earl of Somerset, and Marquess of Dorset. 93.
Thomas Fitz Alan, Earl of Arundel. 94. Edmund Stafford, Earl of Stafford. 95.
Edmund Holland, Earl of Kent. 96. Ralph Nevil, Earl of Westmerland. 97. Gilbert
Roos, Lord Roos. 98. Gilbert Talbot, Lord Talbot. 99. John Lovell, Lord Lovell.
100. Hugh Burnell, Lord Burnell. 101. Thomas Morley, Lord Morley. 102. Edward
Charleton, Lord Powis. 103. Sir John Cornwall, Knight, after Lord Fanhope. 104.
Sir William Arundel, Knight. 105. Sir John Stanly, Knight. 106. Sir Robert de
Vmfrevill, Knight. 107. Sir Thomas Rampston, Knight. 108. Sir Thomas Erpingham,
Knight. 109. Sir John Sulbie, Knight. 110. Sir Sandich de Trane, Knight.
Hitherto we have ranked the Knights of this most Noble Order, as they are
placed in other Catalogues, and according to their greatest Dignities, because
the certain years of their Elections cannot be found: but these that follow,
are marshalled in an exact series of their Elections.

Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.
111. Sir John Dabrichcourt, Knight. 112. Richard Vere, Earl of Oxford. 113.
Thomas Camoys, Lord Camoys. 114. Sir Simon Felbryge, Knight. 115. Sir William
Harington, Knight. 116. John Holland, Earl of Huntingdon. 117. Sigismund
Emperor of Germany. 118. -- Duke of Briga. 119. Sir John Blount, Knight. 120.
Sir John Robessart, Knight. 121. Sir William Philip, Knight, after Lord
Bardolf. 122. John King of Portugal. 123. Ericus King of Denmark. 124. Richard
^^auchamp, Earl of Warwick; after Lieutenant General and Governor in France and
Normandy. 125. Thomas Montacute, Earl of Salisbury. 126. Robert Willoughby,
Lord Willoughby. 127. Henry Fitzhugh, Lord Fitzhugh. 128. Sir John Gray,
Knight, Earl of Tankervile. 129. Hugh Stafford, Lord Bourchier. 130. John
Mowbray, Lord Mowbray, Earl Marshal. 131. William de la Poole, Earl of Suffolk;
after Marquess and Duke of Suffolk: 132. John Clifford, Lord Clifford. 133. Sir
Lewis Robessart Knight, after Lord Bourchier. 134. Sir Here Tank Clux, Knight.
135. Sir Walter Hungerford Knight, after Lord Hungerford, and Lord Treasurer of
England. 136. Philip, Duke of Burgundy.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.
137. John Talbot, Lord Talbot, after Earl of Shrewsbury. 138. Thomas Scales,
Lord Scales. 139. Sir John Fastolf, Knight. 140. Peter, Duke of Conimbero,
third Son of John the First, King of Portugal.




141. Humfrey Stafford, Earl of Stafford, after Created Duke of Buckingham.
142. Sir John Ratclyff, Knight. 143. John Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell. 144.
Richard, Duke of York, the Kings Lieutenant in France and Normandy. 145.
Edward, King of Portugal. 146. Edmund Beaufort, Earl of Moriton, after Earl of
Dorset, and Duke of Somerset. 147. Sir John Gray, Knight. 148. Richard Nevil
Earl of Salisbury, after Lord Chancellor of England. 149. William Nevil, Lord
Fauconbridge, after Earl of Kent. 150. Albert, Emperor of Germany. 151. John
Beaufort, Earl of Somerset, after Duke of Somerset, and Earl of Kendall. 152.
Ralph Butler Lord Sudeley, after Lord Treasurer of England. 153. Henry Duke of
Viseo, fourth Son of John the First King of Portugal. 154. John Beaumont,
Viscount Beaumont, after High Constable of England. 155. Gaston de Foix, Earl
of Longevile, and Benanges, Captan de Buch. 156. John de Foix, Earl of Kendall.
157. John Beauchamp, Lord Beauchamp of Powik, and after Lord Treasurer of
England. 158. Alphonsus, the Fifth King of Portugal. 159. Albro Vasques d'
Almada, Earl of Averence in Normandy. 160. Thomas Hoo, Lord Hoo. 161. Sir
Francis Surien, Knight. 162. Alphonsus, King of Aragon. 163. Casimire the
Fourth, King of Poland. 164. William, Duke of Brunswick. 165. Richard Widvile
Lord Rivers, after Created Earl Rivers. 166. John Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk.
167. Henry Bourchier Viscount Bourchier, after Lord Treasurer of England, and
Earl of Essex. 168. Sir Philip Wentworth, Knight. 169. Sir Edward Hall, Knight.
170. Frederick the Third, Emperor of Germany. 171. John Talbot, Earl of
Shrewsbury. 172. Lionell Wells, Lord Wells. 173. Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley.
174. Edward, Prince of Wales. 175. Iaspar Earl of Penbroke, after Duke of
Bedford. 176. James Butler, Earl of Wiltshire. 177. John Sutton, Lord Dudley.
178. John Bourchier, Lord Berners. 179. Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick. 180.
William Bonvill, Lord Bonvill. 181. John Wenlock, Lord Wenlock. 182. Sir Thomas
Kyriell, Knight.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth.
183. George, Duke of Clarence. 184. Sir William Chamberlayne, Knight. 185.
John Typtoft Earl of Worcester, after High Constable of England. 186. John
Nevel Lord Montague, after Earl of Northumberland, and Marquess Montague. 187.
William Herbert, Lord Herbert, after Earl of Penbroke. 188. William Hastings,
Lord Hastings. 189. John Scrope, Lord Scrope. 190. Sir John Astley, Knight.
191. Ferdinand King of Naples, Son of Alphonsus King of Aragon. 192. Francis
Sfortia, Duke of Milan. 193. James Douglas, Earl of Douglas. 194. Galeard, Lord
Duras. 195. Sir Robert Harcourt, Knight. 196. Anthony Widvile, Lord Scales and
Nucelles, after Earl Rivers. 197. Richard Duke of Gloucester, after King of
England, of that name the Third. 198. -- Lord Mountgryson of Apulia. 199. John
Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk. 200. John de la Poole, Duke of Suffolk. 201. William
Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundell. 202. John Stafford, Earl of Wiltshire. 203. John
Howard, Lord Howard, after Duke of Norfolk. 204. Walter Ferrars, Lord Ferrars
of Chartley. 205. Walter Blount, Lord Mountjoy. 206. Charles, Duke of Burgundy.
207. Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, after Constable of England. 208.
Thomas Fitz-Alan, Lord Matrevers, after Earl of Arundel. 209. Sir William Parr.
210. Frederick, Duke of Vrbin. 211. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. 212.
Edward Prince of Wales. 213. Richard Duke of York, second Son to King Edward
the Fourth. 214. Thomas Gray, Earl of Huntingdon and Marquess Dorset. 215. Sir
Thomas Montgomery, Knight. 216. Ferdinand, King of Castile. 217. Hercules, Duke
of Ferara. 218. John, King of Portugal, Son to Alphonsus the Fifth.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Richard the Third.
219. Sir John Coniers, Knight. 220. Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, after Lord
Treasurer of England, and Duke of Norfolk. 221. Francis Viscount Lovell. 222.
Sir Richard Ratcliff, Knight. 223. Sir Thomas Burgh, Knight, after Lord Burgh.
224. Thomas Stanley, Lord Stanley, after Earl of Derby. 225. Sir Richard
Tunstall, Knight.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.
226. John Vere, Earl of Oxford. 227. Sir Giles d' Aubeny, Knight, after Lord
d' Aubeny. 228. Thomas Fitz-Alan, Earl of Arundel. 229. George Talbot, Earl of
Shrewsbury. 230. John Wells, Viscount Wells. 231. George Stanley, Lord Strange.
232. Sir Edward Wydevile, Knight Banneret. 233. John Dynham, Lord Dynham, Lord
Treasurer of England. 234. Maximilian the First, Emperor of Germany. 235. Sir
John Savage, Knight. 236. Sir William Stanley, Knight, Lord Chamberlain.


237. Sir John Cheney, Knight Baneret. 238. Alphonsus, Duke of Calabria. 239.
Arthur, Prince of Wales. 240. Thomas Gray, Marquess Dorset. 241. Henry Percy,
Earl of Northumberland. 242. Henry Bourchier, Earl of Essex. 243. Sir Charles
Somerset, Knight Baneret, after Earl of Worcester. 244. Robert Willoughby, Lord
Brook. 245. Sir Edward Poynings, Knight. 246. Sir Gilbert Talbot, Knight
Baneret. 247. Sir Richard Poole, Knight. 248. Edward Stafford, Duke of
Buckingham. 249. Henry Duke of York, second Son to King Henry the Seventh,
after King of England, of that name the Eighth. 250. Edward Courtney, Earl of
Devonshire. 251. Sir Richard Guildford, Knight Baneret. 252. Sir Edmund de la
Poole, Earl of Suffolk. 253. Sir Thomas Lovel, Knight Baneret. 254. Sir
Reginald Bray, Knight Baneret. 255. John, King of Denmark. 256. Guido Vbaldo,
Duke of Vrbin. 257. Gerald Fitz Gerald, Earl of Kildare. 258. Henry Stafford,
Lord Stafford, after Earl of Wiltshire. 259. Richard Gray, Earl of Kent. 260.
Sir Rys ap Thomas, Knight Baneret. 261. Philip, King of Castile. 262. Sir
Thomas Brandon, Knight Baneret. 263. Charles, Archduke of Austria, Prince of
Spaines, after Emperor of Germany.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
264. Thomas Darcy, Lord Darcy. 265. Edward Sutton, Lord Dudley. 266. Emanuel,
King of Portugal. 267. Thomas Howard, Lord Howard, eldest Son to Thomas Duke of
Norfolk. 268. Thomas West, Lord la Ware. 269. Sir Henry Marney Knight, after
Lord Marney. 270. George Nevil, Lord Abergaveny. 271. Sir Edward Howard Knight,
second Son to Thomas Duke of Norfolk. 272. Sir Charles Brandon, after Duke of
Suffolk. 273. Julian de Medices, Brother to Pope Leo the Tenth. 274. Edward
Stanley, Lord Mounteagle. 275. Thomas Dacres, Lord Dacres of Gyllesland. 276.
Sir William Sands Knight, after Lord Sands. 277. Henry Courtney, Earl of
Devonshire, and after Marquess of Exceter. 278. Ferdinand, Prince and Infant of
Spain, Archduke of Austria, after Emperor of Germany. 279. Sir Richard
Wingfield, Knight. 280. Sir Thomas Bullen Knight, after Viscount Rochford, and
Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond. 281. Walter d'Euereux, Lord Ferrars of Chartley,
after Viscount Hereford. 282. Arthur Plantaginet; Viscount Lisle. 283. Robert
Radcliff, Viscount Fitz Walter, after Earl of Sussex. 284. William Fitz-Alan,
Earl of Arundel. 285. Thomas Manors, Lord Roos, after Earl of Rutland. 286.
Henry Fitz Roy, after Earl of Nottingham, and Duke of Richmond and Somerset.
287. Ralph Nevil, Earl of Westmerland. 288. William Blount, Lord Montjoy. 289.
Sir William Fitz Williams Knight, after Earl of Southampton. 290. Sir Henry
Guildford, Knight. 291. Francis the French King. 292. John Vere, Earl of
Oxford. 293. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. 294. Anne, Duke of
Montmorency. 295. Philip Chabot, Earl of Newblanche. 296. James, the Fifth King
of Scotland. 297. Sir Nicholas Carew, Knight. 298. Henry Clifford, Earl of
Cumberland. 299. Thomas Cromwell, Lord Cromwell, after Earl of Essex. 300. John
Russell, Lord Russell, after Earl of Bedford. 301. Sir Thomas Cheney, Knight.
302. Sir William Kingston, Knight. 303. Thomas Audley, Lord Audley of Walden,
Lord Chancellor of England. 304. Sir Anthony Brown, Knight. 305. Edward
Seymour, Earl of Hertford, after Duke of Somerset. 306. Henry Howard, Earl of
Surrey. 307. Sir John Gage, Knight. 308. Sir Anthony Wingfield, Knight. 309.
John Sutton Viscount Lisle, after Earl of Warwick, and Duke of Northumberland.
310. William Paulet, Lord St. John of Basing, after Earl of Wiltshire, and
Marquess of Winchester. 311. William Parr, Lord Parr of Kendall, after Earl of
Essex, and Marquess of Northampton. 312. Sir John Wallop, Knight. 313. Henry
Fitz-Alen, Earl of Arundell. 314. Sir Anthony St. Ledger, Knight. 315. Francis
Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. 316. Thomas Wriothesley, Lord Wriothesley, after
Earl of Southampton.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.
317. Henry Gray, Marquess Dorset, after Duke of Suffolk. 318. Edward Stanley,
Earl of Derby. 319. Thomas Seymour, Lord Seymour of Sudely. 320. Sir William
Paget, Knight, after Lord Paget of Beaudesart. 321. Francis Hastings, Earl of
Huntingdon. 322. George Brook, Lord Cobham. 323. Thomas West, Lord La Ware.
324. Sir William Herbert, Knight, after Lord Herbert of Cardiff, and Earl of
Penbroke. 325. Henry, 2. the French King. 326. Edward Fynes, Lord Clynton,
after Earl of Lincoln. 327. Thomas Darcy, Lord Darcy of Chiche. 328. Henry
Nevil, Earl of Westmerland. 329. Sir Andrew Dudley, Knight.
Knights Elected in the Reign of Queen Mary.
330. Philip, Prince of Spain, after King of England. 331. Henry Radclyff, Earl
of Sussex. 332. Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy.


333. William Howard, Lord Howard of Effingham. 334. Anthony Brown, Viscount
Mountague. 335. Sir Edward Hastings, Knight, after Lord Hastings of Loughborow.
336. Thomas Radcliff, Earl of Sussex. 337. William Gray, Lord Gray of Wilton.
338. Sir Robert Rochester, Knight.
Knights Elected in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
339. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk. 340. Henry Manors, Earl of Rutland. 341.
Sir Robert Dudley, Knight, after Earl of Leicester. 342. Adolph, Duke of
Holstein. 343. George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. 344. Henry Carey, Lord
Hunsdon. 345. Thomas Percy, Earl of Northumberland. 346. Ambrose Dudley, Earl
of Warwick. 347. Charles 9. the French King. 348. Francis Russell, Earl of
Bedford. 349. Sir Henry Sidney, Knight. 350. Maximilian, the second Emperor of
Germany. 351. Henry Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon. 352. William Somerset, Earl
of Worcester. 353. Francis, Duke of Montmorency. 354. Walter d'Euereux,
Viscount Hereford, after Earl of Essex. 355. William Cecill, Lord Burghley,
after Lord Treasurer of England. 356. Arthur Gray, Lord Gray of Wilton. 357.
Edmund Bruges, Lord Chandos. 358. Henry Stanley, Earl of Derby. 359. Henry
Herbert, Earl of Penbroke. 360. Henry 3. the French King. 361. Charles Howard,
Lord Howard of Effingham, after Earl of Nottingham. 362. Rodolph, Emperor of
Germany. 363. Frederick, the Second King of Denmark. 364. John Casimire, Count
Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria. 365. Edward Manors, Earl of Rutland.
366. William Brook, Lord Cobham. 367. Henry Scroop, Lord Scroop of Bolton. 368.
Robert d'Euereux, Earl of Essex. 369. Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond. 370. Sir
Christopher Hatton, Knight, after Lord Chancellor of England. 371. Henry
Radcliff, Earl of Sussex. 372. Thomas Sackvile, Lord Buckhurst, after Lord
Treasurer of England, and Earl of Dorset. 373. Henry 4. the French King. 374.
James, the Sixth King of Scotland, after King of England, France, and Ireland.
375. Gilbert Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. 376. George Clifford, Earl of
Cumberland. 377. Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. 378. Edward Somerset,
Earl of Worcester. 379. Thomas Burogh, Lord Burogh of Gainesborough. 380.
Edward Sheffield, Lord Sheffield, after Earl of Mulgrave. 381. Sir Francis
Knolles, Knight. 382. Frederick, Duke of Wirtemberg. 383. Thomas Howard, Lord
Howard of Walden, after Earl of Suffolk, and Lord Treasurer of England. 384.
George Carey, Lord Hunsdon. 385. Charles Blount, Lord Montjoy, after Earl of
Devonshire. 386. Sir Henry Lea, Knight. 387. Robert Radcliff, Earl of Sussex.
388. Henry Brook, Lord Cobham. 389. Thomas Scroop, Lord Scroop of Bolton. 390.
William Stanley, Earl of Derby. 391. Thomas Cecill, Lord Burghley.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King James.
392. Henry, Prince of Wales. 393. Christiern, the Fourth King of Denmark. 394.
Lodowick Stewart, Duke of Lenox, and after Duke of Richmond. 395. Henry
Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton. 396. John Erskin, Earl of Mar. 397. William
Herbert, Earl of Penbroke. 398. Vlrick, Duke of Holstein. 399. Henry Howard,
Earl of Northampton. 400. Robert Cecill, Earl of Salisbury. 401. Thomas Howard,
Viscount Bindon. 402. George Hume, Earl of Dunbarr. 403. Philip Herbert, Earl
of Montgomery. 404. Charles Stewart Duke of York, after Prince of Wales, and
King of England, by the Title of Charles the First. 405. Thomas Howard, Earl of
Arundell and Surrey, after Earl of Norfolk. 406. Robert Carre, Viscount
Rochester, after Earl of Somerset. 407. Frederick Casimire, Count Palatine of
the Rhyne, Prince Elector of the Empire, and after King of Bohemia. 408.
Maurice, van Nassau, Prince of Orange. 409. Thomas Ereskin, Viscount Fenton.
410. William Knolles, Lord Knolles of Grayes, after Viscount Walingford, and
Earl of ^anbury. 411. Francis Manors, Earl of Rutland. 412. Sir George Villers
Knight, after Baron of Whaddon, then Earl and Marquess of Buckingham, and
lastly Earl of Coventry, and Duke of Buckingham. 413. Robert Sidney, Viscount
Lisle, after Earl of Leicester. 414. James Hamilton, Marquess Hamilton, and
Earl of Cambridge. 415. Esme Stewart, Duke of Lenox. 416. Christian, Duke of
Brunswick. 417. William Cecill, Earl of Salisbury. 418. James Hay* ^arl of
Carlisle. 419. Edward Sackvile, Earl of Dorset. 420. Henry Rich, Earl of
Holland. 421. Thomas Howard, Viscount Andover, after Earl of Berkshire.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Charles the First.
422. Claude de Lorraine, Duke of Cheuereuse. 423. Gustavus Adolphus, King of
Sweden. 424. Henry Frederick van Nassau, Prince of Orange. 425. Theophilus
Howard, Earl of Suffolk. 426. William Compton, Earl of Northampton. 427.
Richard Weston, Lord Weston of Neyland, Lord Treasurer of England, and after
Earl of Portland. 428. Robert Barty, Earl of Lindsey.


429. William Cecill, Earl of Exceter. 430. James Hamilton, Marquess Hamilton,
Earl of Cambridge, and Arran. 431. Charles Lodowick Casimire, Count Palatine of
the Rhyne, Prince Elector of the Empire, and Duke of Bavaria. 432. James
Stewart, Duke of Lenox, after Earl of March. 433. Henry D^nvers, Earl of Danby.
434. William Douglas, Earl of Morton. 435. Algernon Percy, Earl of
Northumberland. 436. Charles, Prince of Wales, now King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, of that name the Second, and present Sovereign of the most
Noble Order of the Garter. 437. Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford. 438. James
Stewart Duke of York and Albanie, second Son to King Charles the First. 439.
Rupert Cas^mire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria, after Earl
of Holderness, and Duke of Cumberland. 440. William van Nassau, Prince of
Orange. 441. Bernard de Foix, Duke d'Espernon.
Knights Elected in the Reign of King Charles the Second.
442. Maurice Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria. 443.
James Boteler, Marquess of Ormond, since Earl of Brecknock, and Duke of Ormond.
444. Edward Casimire, Count Palatine of the Rhyne, and Duke of Bavaria. 445.
George Villers, Duke of Buckingham. 446. William Hamilton, Duke of Hamilton.
447. Thomas Wriothesley, Earl of Southampton, after Lord Treasurer of England.
448. William Cavendish, Marquess of New Castle, since Duke of New Castle. 449.
James Graham, Marquess of Montross. 450. James Stanley, Earl of Derby. 451.
George Digby, Earl of Bristoll. 452. Henry Stewart Duke of Gloucester, third
Son to King Charles the First. 453. Henry Charles de la Tremoille, Prince de
Tarente. 454. William Henry van Nassau, Prince of Orange. 455. Frederick
William, Prince Elector of the Empire, Marquess of Brandenburg. 456. John
Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin, Count de Gravil. 457. Sir George Monck, Knight,
after Duke of Albemarle. 458. Sir Edward Mountague, Knight, after Earl of
Sandwich. 459. William Seymour, Marquess of Hertford, after Duke of Somerset.
460. Aubrie de Vere, Earl of Oxford. 461. Charles Stewart, Duke of Richmond and
Lenox. 362. Mountague Barty, Earl of Lindsey. 363. Edward Mountague, Earl of
Manchester. 464. William Wentworth, Earl of Strafford. 465. Christierne, Prince
of Denmark, since King of Denmark. 466. James Scot, Duke of Monmouth and
Bucclugh. 467. James Stewart Duke of Cambridge. 468. Charles, the Eleventh King
of Sweden, Goths, and Vandales. 469. John George, the Second, Duke of Saxony,
Iuliers, Cleves, and Monts, and Prince Elector of the Empire. 470. Christopher
Monck, Duke of Albemarle. 471. John Maitland, Duke of Lauderdale.
To close up all, here follows a Catalogue of the Officers of this most Noble
Order.
Prelates of the Order.
William de Edyngton, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Treasurer, and after Lord
Chancellor of England. William de Wykham, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor
of England. Henry Beaufort, Bishop of Winchester, Priest Cardinal of St.
Eusebius, and Lord Chancellor of England. William de Waynfleet, Bishop of
Winchester, and Lord Chancellor of England. Peter Courtney, Bishop of
Winchester. Thomas Langton, Bishop of Winchester. Richard Fox, Bishop of
Winchester, and Lord Privy Seal. Thomas Wolsey, Bishop of Winchester, Priest
Cardinal of St. Cecily, and Lord Chancellor of England. Stephen Gardener,
Bishop of Winchester. John Poynet, Bishop of Winchester. Stephen Gardener
restored, and made Lord Chancellor of Englan^ John White, Bishop of Winchester.
Robert Honne, Bishop of Winchester. John Watson, Bishop of Winchester. Thomas
Cooper, Bishop of Winchester. William Wy^ham, Bishop of Winchester. William
Day, Bishop of Winchester. Thomas Bilson, Bishop of Winchester. James
Mountague, Bishop of Winchester. Lancelot Andrews, Bishop of Winchester.
Richard Neyle, Bishop of Winchester. Walter Curle, Bishop of Winchester. Brian
Duppa, Bishop of Winchester. ^eorge Morley, Bishop of Winchester.
Chancellors of the Order.
Richard Beauchamp, Bishop of Salisbury, and Dean of Windesor. Lionel
Woodeville, Bishop of Salisbury. Thomas Langton, Bishop of Salisbury. John
Blyth, Bishop of Salisbury. Henry Dean, Bishop of Salisbury. Edmund Audeley,
Bishop of Salisbury. Sir William Cecil, Principal Secretary of State. Sir
William Peter's, Principal Secretary of State. Sir Thomas Smith, Principal
Secretary of State. Sir Francis Walsingham, Principal Secretary of State. Sir
Amyas Paulet, Privy Counselor. Sir John Woollee, Secretary for the Latin
Tongue. Sir Edward Dyer. Sir John Herbert, Principal Secretary of State. Sir
George More. Sir Francis Crane. Sir Thomas Row. Sir James Palmer. Sir Henry de
Vic, Baronet. Seth Ward, Bishop of Salisbury.
Registers of the Order.
^^ John Coringham, Canon of Windesor. John Deepden, Canon of Windesor. James
Goldwell, Canon of Windesor, and Secretary of State. Oliver King, Canon of
Windesor, Secretary to Prince Henry Son of King Henry the Sixth, to King Edward
the Fourth, to King Edward the Fifth, and King Henry the Seventh. Richard Nix,
Canon of Windesor. Christopher Vrswick, Dean of Windesor. Thomas Wolsey, the
Kings Almoner. William Atwater, Canon of Windesor, after Bishop of Lincoln.
Nicholas West, Dean of Windesor. John Ves^y, Dean of Windesor. Richard Sydnor,
Canon of Windesor. Robert Aldridge, Canon of Windesor. Owen Oglethorp, Dean of
Windesor. John Boxall, Dean of Windesor, and Principal Secretary of State.
George Carew, Dean of Windesor. William D^y, Dean of Windesor. Robert Benet,
Dean of Windesor. Giles Tomson, Dean of Windesor, and Bishop of Gloucester.
Anthony Maxey, Dean of Windesor. Marc Antonio de Dominis, Archbishop of
Spalato, Dean of Windesor. Henry Beaumont, Dean of Windesor. Matthew Wren, Dean
of Windesor. Christopher Wren, Dean of Windesor. Brune Ryves, Dean of Windesor.
Garters, Kings of Arms.
Sir William Brugges, Knight. John Smert. Sir John Writh, Knight. Sir Thomas
Wriothesley, Knight. Sir Thomas Wall, Knight. Sir Christopher Barker, Knight.
Sir Gilbert Dethick, Knight. Sir William Dethick, Knight. Sir William Segar,
Knight. Sir John Borough, Knight. Sir Henry St. George, Knight. Sir Edward
Walker, Knight.
Ushers of the Black-Rod.
William Whitehorse. John Cray. Thomas Sye. William Evington, and Edward
Hardgyll. Robert Marleton. Ralph Ashton, and Hugh Dennys. Sir William Compton,
Knight. Henry Norresse, Esquire. Anthony Knyvet, Esquire. Sir Philip Hobby,
Knight. John Norres and William Norres, Esquires. Anthony Wingfeild, Esquire.
Richard Coningsbye and George Pollard, Esquires. James Maxwell, Esquire. Peter
Newton, Esquire. Sir John Ayton, Knight. Sir Edward Carteret, Knight.
APPENDIX.
The Statutes of Institution of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
AD honorem omnipotentis Dei, Sanctae Mariae Virginis gloriosae and Sancti
Georgii Martyris, Dominus noster Supremus Edwardus tertius Rex Angliae, anno
regni sui post conquestum xxiii. Ordinavit, stabilivit, and fundavit quandum
Societatem five Ordinem militarem, infra Castrum suum de Wyndesore, in hunc
modum. Primo scipsum statuit dictae Societatis sive Ordinis Superiorem, filium
suum seniorem Principem Walliae, Ducem Lancastriae, Comitem Warwici, Capitaneum
de Buche, Comitem Staffordiae, Comitem Sarum. Dominum de Mortimer, Dominum
Johannem Lisle, Dominum Bartholomeum Burghersh filium, Dominum Johannem de
Beauchamp, Dominum de Bohun, Dominum Hugonem de Courtenay, Dominum Thomam de
Hollande, Dominum Johannem de Gray, Dominum Richardum de fitz Symond, Dominum
Milonem de Stapulton, Dominum Thomam Wale, Dominum Hugonem de Wirteslay,
Dominum Nelelatum Loryng, Dominum Johannem Chandos, Dominum Jacobum Daudele,
Dominum Otonem de Hollande, Dominum Henricum de Em, Dominum Sauchetum
Dabrichecourt, and Dominum Walterum Pavelay.

I. Concordatum est quod Rex Angliae, qui pro tempore fuerit, inperpetuum erit
Superior hujus Ordinis Sancti Georgii, sive Societatis Garterii. II. Item,
concordatum est, quod nullus eligat^r in socium dicti Ordinis nisi generosae
propaginis existat, and miles, careus opprobrio, quoniam ignobiles aut reprobos
Ordinis institutio non admittit. III. Et xxvi. Commilitones and Consocii hujus
Ordinis praenominati deferent mantella and garteria apud dictum castrum
ordinata quociens ibidem praesentes fuerint, videlicet qualib^t vice qua
capellam intrant Sancti Georgii aut domum Capitularem, pro capitulo celebrando,
aut aliquid statuendo quod ad Ordinem pertinebit. Et simili modo incedent in
vigilia Sancti Georgii, per modum processionis, proficiscentes cum Superiori
Ordinis, aut suo Deputato, de magna camera regia usque ad Capellam, vel domum
capitularem, and eadem serie revertentur. Sedebunt itaque cum Montellis and
Garteriis in dicta vigilia tempore coenae tam illi qui coenare volunt, quam
etiam alii non coenantes, quousque de magna camera praedicta consuctum tempus
fuerit separandi. Sic eciam induti in^^dere debent in crastino versus dictam
Capellam, and abinde revertentes, ac etiam tempore prandii and postea, quosque
Superior, ^ut suus Deputatus sua Ordinis Insignia deposuerit. Sic etiam
proficiscentes ad secundas vesperas and revertentes forte nee non.
nec nec tempore coene and postea, sicut in vigilia induentur; quoad usque
Superior Ordinis tempus esse decreverit separandi. IV. Et ordinati sunt xiii.
Canonici seculares, qui tempore Institutionis suae aut infra annum proximum
teneantur ad sacerdotium promoveri* sic eciam xiii. Vicarii, qui tempore
admissionis suae erunt Sacerdotes, aut saltem tempore proximae collationis
Ordinum extunc sequentis, celebraturi continue pro animabus omnium fidelium
defunctorum. Isti autem praenominati Canonici praesentabuntur per fundatores
Ordinis supra dictos, viz. quilibet fundatorum modernorum Custodi Collegii suum
Canonicum praesentabit. Ita tamen quod si quis Canonicorum moriatur, nec ipse
qui eum ultimo praesentabat nec quispiam alius Sociorum Garterii postea
praesentabunt, sed solus superior Ordinis ad eundem Canonicatum extunc in ante
pro perpetuo praesentabit. Et sic est unanimiter concordatum de
praesentationibus omnium aliorum Canonicorum f. soli superiori.
solo Superior Ordinis reservandis. V. Item concordatum est, quod praedicti
Canonici habeant suam mantellam de panno coloris purpurii, cum una
circumferencia Armorum Sancti Georgii. VI. Item Ordinatum est quod xxvi.
Milites veterani, non habentes unde vivant, ibidem ad honorem f. Dei.
do and beati Georgii competentem habebunt exhibitionem, continue Deo in
orationibus servituri. Et de electionibus eorum veteranorum ordinatum est modo
simili sicut and de praesentationibus Canonicorum praedictorum, sic quod
veteranorum electiones quemadmodum Canonicorum praesentationes soli Superiori
Ordinis reservabuntu^. VII. Item concordatum est, quod dicti Milites veterani
habebunt sua mantella de rubeo cum uno Scuto Armorum Sancti Georgii carente
tantum tam^n Garterio. VIII. Item concordatum est quod si Superior hujus
Ordinis, sive Societatis, fortassis esse non poterit apud solemnizationem
festivitatis Sancti Georgii, Capitulum tenebitur, hora terciarum ad
solemnizandum festivitatem in Crastino, sumptibus Superioris Ordinis. S^d novas
observancias aut Ordinationes non faciet deputatus hujusmodi: Corrigere tamen
and reformare sibi licebit transgressores Statutorum Ordinis quae sequuntur.
IX. Item singulis annis in vigilia Sancti Georgii fit una congregatio omnium
consociorun^ Ordinis Sancti Georgii apud dictum castrum de Wyndesore, sive sint
infra Regnum Angliae, sive extra, dum ^ame^illic commode ve^ire valiant, and
ibidem debent apud servicium ecclesiasticum interesse, and sua mantella tempore
celebrationis divinorum defferent seriatim in suis stallis existentes. Et
quilibet eorum babebit in capella supra Stallum suam galeam and ensem quae in
sui memoriam and ecclesiae tuicionem ibidem pro tempore vitae suae remanebunt,
quemadmodum militaris Ordo nobilis hoc exposcit. Sed in casu quo festivitas
Sancti Georgii contigerit infra quindecim dies proximos post diem Paschae, sit
dicta festivitas Sancti Georgii prorogata usque ad illam diem dominicam quae
semper erit dies quintadecima post diem Paschae, ad finem quod quilibet
sociorum Ordinis illic valeat apud dictam festivitatem rationabiliter
convenire, non equitando per aliquem trium dierum proximo sequentium diem
Paschae. X. Item quod conveniat in dictum locum in vigilia Sancti Georgii hora
tertia, and si qui non veniant hujusmodi tempore assignato Nec.
ne habeant excusationem Superiori Ordinis aut suo Deputato acceptabilem, per
Superiorem Ordinis and Capitulum taliter puniri debent, quod propter hujusmodi
necligentiam, non intrabunt ad Capitulum illa vice, sed foris ad hostium
expectabunt, nec vocem habebunt in aliquo quod in dicto Capitulo fieri
Contigerit.
contigere illa vice. Et siqui ad vesperas ante Principium non veniant, sua
Stalla nullatenus tunc intrabunt, sed in basso, ante Stalla sua, in consueto
Loco Ceroferariorum se constituent, durantibus vesperis supradictis, ad quas
non venerant tempestive. Et paena similis statuitur contra non venientes ante
inchoationem Missae solempuis aut vesperarum in crastino. Et quisquis est qui
ad celebrationem festivitatis non veniat, non habens excusationem Superiori
Ordinis acceptabilem, sibi praecipiatur nomine poenae quod stallum suum non
intrabit festivitate proxima tunc sequente, sed se tenebit ante and
extrastallum, in loco quo supra tempore primarum vesperarum, and tempore
processionis in crastino perante tres cruces processionales transibit, and
redeundo in chorum stabit in loco basso quo supra toto tempore Missae usque ad
Offertorium, novissime oblaturus. Et hujusmodi paenitentiis sic peractis,
incontinenti veniet ante stallum Superioris aut sui Deputati superinde veniam
petiturus. Et deinde dictus. Superior aut suus Deputatus cum ad Stallum suum
and primaevum statum restituet. Quod si a secundo secto Sancti Georgii anno
proximo tunc sequente absque excusatione Superiori acceptabili, aut ejus
Deputato, denuo se absentet existens infra regnum Angliae, extunc Stallum suum
non intrabit, quoadnsque infra dictam capellam apud Altar Sancti Georgii unum
Iocale optulerit valoris xx. marcarum Monetae Anglicanae; Et extunc singulis
annis inantea ipsam mulctam, donec reconciliatus fuerit, duplicabit. XI. Item
quod omnes Consocii Ordinis, ubicunque locorum constituti, deferent Mantella
sua de blodio singulis annis, ab hora primarum vesperarum in vigilia Sancti
Georgii, usque ad secundas vesperas in crastino inclusive, quemadmodum facturi
essent, si cum Superiori Ordinis aut suo Deputato personaliter interessent,
toto tempore hujus festivitatis celebrandae, dum tamen sint in loco ubi
gaudeant propria liberate. XII. Item, concordatum est quod siquis dictae
societatis incedat public sine Garterio, quantocius fuerit exinde ammonitus
aut notatus, custodi and Collegio solvet dimidiam marcam, ficut alii ante
solverunt qui in eadem culpa fuere constituti. XIII. Item, concordatum est,
quod, tempore Offertorii apud altam Missam, semper duo ex sociis qui sunt in
suis stallis oppositi simul ad offerendum incedant. Et si ex eis quenquam
contigerit absentari, socius suus, qui sibi deber^t esse oppositus, solus and
per se ad offerendum transibit. Et notandum quod Superior Ordinis tempore
Processionis in dicta capella transibit retro totam sociorum commitivam, XIV.
Item, concordatum est, quod, in quolibet crastino Sancti Georgii, antequam
socii mutuo separentur aut recedant, celebretur una missa de Requie, pro
animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum, and quod tota societas sit tunc ibidem
integraliter, si non fuerit eorum aliquis rationabiliter praepeditus, vel si
non habeat licentiam Superioris Ordinis aut sui Deputati, antequam ab illic
recedat. XV. Item, concordatum est, quod quilibet sociorum dimittet ibidem suam
clamidem, pro accessibus hujusmodi repentinis, and pro observandis praeceptis
and monitis salutaribus Superioris praedicti. XVI. Item, conventum est, quod si
quenquam ex dicta socictate sive Ordine per dictum Castrum de Wyndesore
i^inerare contigerit, pro honor loci intret, si commode poterit, nec sit ex
justa and rationabili causa praepeditus. Et quod antequam capellam ingrediatur,
omnino clamide se induat, ita quod non nisi clamide indutus intret, and
Canonici per tunc ibidem praesentes sibi venient in obviam, and ipsum in
capellam devote conducent. Et si fortassis ipsum contigerit illic accedere hora
Missae, expectet ad honorem Dei and Sancti Georgii, and audiat ipsam Missam.
Quod si post meridiem veniat, intret modo and forma expressatis, and tunc
expectet donec Canonici semel dixerint Psalmum de Profundis, pro animabus
omnium fidelium defunctorum, and ibidem offerat, Psalmo dicto. Siquis autem ex
dicta societate per medium villae equitaverit and Capellam non intret and
offerat veluti concordatum existit, qualibet vice qua hoc non faciat pedester
transeat, virtute Obedientiae, unum miliare versus dictam capellam, and offeret
unum denarium, ob honorem Sancti Georgii. XVII. Item, concordatum est, quod
Superior Ordinis, incontinenti postquam mors alicujus Sociorum sit sibi
cognita, faciat celebrari pro anima ipsius mortui Mill Missas, and quilibet
Rex foraneus pro anima illius mortui faciet celebrari DCCC. Princeps Walliae
DCC. quilibet Dux DC. quilibet comes CCC. quilibet Baro CC. and quilibet Miles
Bacallarius C. Missas. Et si Superior Ordinis aut alius quispiam hoc fieri non
faciat, infra unum quarterium anni postquam sit certificatus de morte, numerum
missarum in toto ad quas ab initio juxta status sui conditionem tenebatur,
duplicare, and si medieta^ anni sic a retro sit, etiam eodem modo duplicare
debet, and it a de tempore in tempus usque in finem ^nni, and si infra annum
fieri non faciat, annos eodem modo duplicabit. XVIII. Item, concordatum est,
quod quocies aliquis consociorum Ordinis fuerit sublatus de medio, Superior
Ordinis aut suus Deputatus certificato sibi de merito faciat omnes consocios
existentes infra regnum suum Angliae qui accedere poterunt, per suas literas
admoneri, quod, pro eligendo novo Consocio, coram eo conveniant, infra sex
ebdomadas postquam certificati fuerint de morte in loco ydoneo quem Superior ad
hoc duxerit assignando. Quibus omnibus sic congregatis, aut sex eorum ad minus
praeter Superiorem aut suum Deputatum, quilibet eorum qui praesens in electione
fuerit novem de sufficientioribus, quos omni ignominia and opprobrio crediderit
expertes, sive fint de subditis Superioris Ordinis aut alii foranei, sibi non
subjecti, Dum tamen partem dicto Superiori adversantem non faveant aut
defendant, nominabit, viz. tres Comites aut de statu sublimiori, tres Barons,
and tres Milites Bacallarios, and istas denominationes seribet Principalis
Praelatus Ordinis, scilicet Episcopus Vintoniensis qui pro tempore fuerit, and
in sua absencia Decanus Collegii, vel Registrator, and in Eorum absentia.
eos absentibus antiquior Recidenciarius Collegii supradicti, and
denominationes sic factae per omnes Consocios aut sex eorum ad minus ut
praefertur, per eum qui eas scripsit, Superiori Ordinis aut suo Deputato
monstrabunt, qui de nominatis hujusmodi eum praeeleget and admittet cui major
vocum pluralitas suffragatur, and quem sibi ad honorem Ordinis and utilitatem
regni and Regis magis videbitur expedire. Et in casu quo nullus sociorum ad
electionem veniat modo sequenti, veniet puniendus saltem si non justa de causa
fuerit impeditus. Si tamen causam absentiae justam and probabilem allegaverit,
per Superiorem, aut suum Deputatum debet approbari. Quod si causa absen^iae
reperta forsan fuerit minus justa, and accitus ad electionem non veniat, ut
praefertur, concordatum est, quod custodi and Collegio, nomine poenae solvat
unam marcam, and cum proximo fuerit in Capitulo sedebit ante Superiorem Ordinis
aut suum Deputatum, and totam societatem, in medio Capituli super terram,
quousque per Superiorem aut suum Deputatum and societatem fuerit reconciliatus.
XIX. Item, concordatum est, quod in casu quo aliquis Militum dictae societatis
Garterii moriatur, and in ejus locum alius eligatur, quantocius post electionem
electus habebit Garterium, in signum quod est unus sociorum Garterii, and
habebit Mantellum sibi pro suo habitu liberatum, quando in stallum suum
inducetur, and non ante Et in casu quo moriatur priusquam fuerit installatus,
non nominabitur unus fundatorum ex quo non babet plenariam possessionem sui
status, ymmo habebit medietatem Missarum praedictarum, pro eo quod habuit
liberatam Garterii, and penitus nichil magis. Et si talis electus non veniat ad
dictum locum cum omni celeritate accommoda post receptionem Garterii, ut
installetur, and signanter infra annum post ejus electionem, si sit habitans
infra regnum Angliae, and non habeat excusationem Superiori aut suo Deputato
and societati Garterii acceptabilem, electio de eo facta sit prorsus irrita and
inanis, and exinde Superior Ordinis aut suus Deputatus, una cum societate, ad
novam electionem procedat. Et nec ensis nec galea alicujus electi quousque
veniat infra Castrum supra stallum suum figentur, sed exterius ante suum
stallum; ad finem, quod si ipse electus ad Castrum non veniat, ut praefertur,
c^sis suus and galea non indecenter erunt dep^sita de sublimi, sed ut Militaris
honor servet Servetur.
illibatus, removebuntur extra chorum curialiter and honest, and remanebunt
extunc ad opus publicum and usum Collegii supradicti. XX. Item, concordatum
est, quod omnes foranei qui in socictatem dicti Ordinis Garterii elligentur
Elegentur.
per Superiorem Ordinis de sua electione certificentur, and Garterium atque
Mantellum and Statuta Ordinis, sub communi Sigillo, cum omni celeritate
accommoda sumptibus tamen Superioris Ordinis, transmittantur; Et omnia Omnino.
certificentur foran^i infra quatuor menses continuos a tempore electionis de
se factae; Ad finem quod deliberare valiant ex tenore Statutorum, si electioni
hujusmodi voluerint consentire. Et etiam quod omnes hujusmodi foranei, sie
electi, cujuscumque conditionis status aut dignitatis existant, infra spacium
octo mensium post certificatam sibi electionem per Superiorem Ordinis aut suum
Deputatum and receptionem Garterii, mittant unum Procuratorem sufficientem,
secundum quod ^tatui electi hujusmodi videbitur convenire; proviso tamen quod
Procurator hujusmodi, installandus in locum suum, sit Miles, expers omnis
opprobrii, qui tempore sui adventus ex causa hujusmodi secum d^feret ex part
mittentis unum Mantellum Ordinis, de serico blodio, and etiam ensem and galeam,
penes Collegium ipsum remansura, Quod quidem Mantellum ponetur super brachium
dextrum Procuratoris hujusmodi, per Superiorem Ordinis aut suum Deputatum,
tempore installationis suae supradictae, et illud tenebit super dictum brachium
suum ad horas Canonicas proximas post installationem accipiendam, nomine Domini
sive Magistri sui supradicti. Dictus autem Procurator installatus Mantellum
hujusmodi postea non portabit, ne^ debet Capitulum intrare, nec ibidem vocem
habere, virtute cujuscumque potestatis sibi attributae. Et sciendum est quod
hujusmodi favor Installatio nis per Procuratorem solis foraneis exhibetur, qui
quidem non poterunt hac de causa personaliter advenire, adfinem quod sint
participes Missarum and devotarum Orationum Ordinis, quarum mediate Medietate.
carerent, si installati non essent antequam morerentur. XXI. Item, concordatum
est, Quod si aliquis Comes, Baro, aut Miles Bacallarius dicti Ordinis decedat;
Ipse qui successurus est in locum suum, sive sit Comes, sive Baro, aut Miles
Bacallarius, tenebit idem stallum quod tenuit suus Praed^cessor, cujuscunque
suerit dignitatis, necullus eligendus hanc seriem mutabit, praeter Principem
Valliae, qui semper tenebit stallum ex opposito Superiori Ordiuis, postquam
fuerit electus, Ita quod ex casu Comes occupare potest stallum Militis, and e
contra. Et istud est Ordinatum, ut sciatur qui fuerint Primaevi Fundatores
Ordinis. XXII. Item, concordatum est, quod quilibet Sociorum Ordinis, primo
tempore sui ingressus, dabit aliquid certum, secundum eminentiam sui status, in
sustentationem Canonicorum and pauperum Veteranorum Militum, ibidem
commorantium, ac etiam in augmentum elimosinarum, quae inibi perpetuo
Ordinantur; scilicet Superior Ordinis xl marcas. Rex foraneus xx libras;
Princep^ Walliae xx marcas; quilibet Dux x lib. quilibet Comes x marcas;
quilibet Baro, centum solidos, and quilibet Miles Bacallarius v. marcas. Et
ista donaria pia sunt ideo constituta, ut ingrediens hunc Ordinem Militarem per
hoc dignius optineat nomen, titulum, and privilegium unius fundatorum. Dignum
enim and conveniens arbitratur, ut qui aggregatur numero Fundatorum Aliquid
hujus rei seu nominis intuitu.
aliquid hujus rei se nominis in tutu largiatur. Et quousque summae hujusmodi
pecuniarum per quemlibet juxta divisionem istam in primo ejus Introitu.
intractatu sint solutae, nec galea nec ensis ingredientis hujusmodi supra
stallum figentur. Et est sciendum quod Superior Ordinis tenebitur solvere pro
sumptibus introitus cujuslibet Extranei qui eligetur, tempore installationis
suorum Procuratorum. XXIII. Item, Concordatum est, quod quamtocius quo aliquis
societatis sive Ordinis hujus, ex primaevis Fundatoribus moriatur, Scutum ni^em
Armorum suorum factum de Metallo, and galca sua, sint fixa retro tergum in
stallo suo. Et alii Fundatores qui postea succedunt habebunt scu^ae sua and
galeas modo conformi situata; subtus tamen aliqualiter primaevos Fundatores.
Sua etiam Scuta and galeae non erunt Precii ita magni.
precie ita magno, sicut primorum Fundatorum. XXIV. Item quod quilibet
ingrediens promittat and juret personaliter, vel per Procuratorem ydoneum and
sufficientem, nomine suo installandum, de been and fideliter observando pro
viribus statuta Ordinis. Et advertendum est, quod ^ullus, per Procuratorem
installationem recipiet nisi duntaxat Foranei, qui ob hanc causam commode
accedere non poterint in personis. XXV. Item, concordatum est, quod in casu quo
Superior Ordinis sit extra regnum suum Angliae tempore Installationis alicujus
sociorum Garterii, vel forsan peragere non poterit personaliter, quae tunc sibi
ex officio incumbunt, committere possit uni Sociorum ejusdem Ordinis suas vices
Ac.
ad plenariam in hac part potestatem, ea perficiendi and exequendi, quae, si
prefens esset, suo proprio ministerio pertinerent. XXVI. Item, concordatum est,
quod siat commune Sigillum, quod erit in custodia illius quem Superior Ordinis
ad hoc voluerit assignare. XXVII. Item quod quilibet Consociorum praedicti
Ordinis de cetero habeant Statuta Ordinis, fub communi Sigillo supra dicto. Et
quod Originale Statutorum sit cum eodem consignatum, quod infra Thesaurum.
thesauream dicti Collegii imperpetuum remanebit, and post mortem cujuscunque
Consocii Ordinis supradicti teneantur sui executores ipsa Statuta Ordinis
Collegio remittere, and Gardiano Collegii liberare. XXVIII. Item, concordatum
est, quod nullus Militum Ordinis Sancti Georgii and de societate Garterii exeat
Reguum Angliae, absque Scitu.
situ and licencia dicti Superioris. Et est ideo concordatum, quod si aut
aliqua expeditio Militaris contingat, aut aliquid aliud quod ad honorem
Militarem cedere conspicitur, Superior Ordinis, de sua gratia, Consocios
Ordinis hujuscemodi actibus Militaribus ceteris quibuscumq, tenebitur
anteferre. XXIX. Item quod nullus Sociorum Ordinis contra alium Consocium levet
arma, nisi in guerra Domini sui legei, vel in propria justa querela. Et si
contingat quod aliquis Sociorum Ordinis retineatur cum aliquo domino, aut
alicujus domini partem teneat vel querelam, and pars adversa postea forte
desideret aliquem alium sociorum Ordinis ad defensionem suae causae contrariae
secum retinere: nullus talis Socius secundarie desideratus ad hoc consenciat,
sed semetipsum teneatur exensare pro eo quod Consocius suus primitus ex part
adversa retentus fuerit velarmatus; and tenebitur propterea quililibet Sociorum
Ordinis, quando cum aliquo retinetur, excipere and pacisci, quod de omni
servicio guerrae movendae aut exercendae absolutus sit penitus and quietus si
and quatenus aliquis Consociorum suorum societatis Garterii sit perantea cum
adversa part retentus and ibidem armatus. Et si ipse secundarie retentus non
cognovit, Quod aliquis.
aliquis Sociorum suorum Garterii fuerat primitus ex part adversa retentus,
vel armatus, quantocius hoc ad ejus noticiam devenerit, teneatur omne hujusmodi
Servicium penitus relinquere, and seipsum totaliter excusare. XXX. Item, omnes
licenciae Commilitonibus dictae Societatis concedendae terras circuire
volentibus, honoris adipiscendi gratia, per exercitium actuum militarium, and
etiam omnia alia scripta tam Certificatoria quam praeceptiva, quae Ordinem
Concernere.
cosernere videbuntur, per Superiorem Ordinis emanare debent, sub communi
Sigillo, quod remanebit in custodia unius Sociorum Ordinis ad voluntatem
Superioris praedicti. Et si ille qui Sigillum custodit de presencia Superioris
ex cansa rationabili se transferat, dimittet ipsum Sigillum in custodia
alterius Sociorum ejusdem Ordinis, praesentis tamen cum Superiore, quem idem
Superior ad ipsius Sigilli custodiam duxerit assignandum. Ita quod Sigillum
commune nullo unquam tempore sit de praesencia Superioris ablatum, quamdiu ipse
Superior fuerit infra Regnum suum Angliae. Et simili modo in absencia
Superioris Ordinis cum praedicto Sigillo fieri faciet suus Deputatus. XXXI.
Item, concordatum est, si aliquis alius Miles dictae Societatis sive Ordinis,
ductus devotionis spiritu desideret apud dictum Castrum de Wyndesore continue
trabere suam moram, pro necessariis vitae suae and sua habitatione de proprio
peculio faciat ordinari. XXXII. Item, concordatum est, quod in casu quo aliquis
Miles qui non est dictae societatis Garterii, aut persona alia quaevis donare
velit aliquod annum xl.i aut amplius, dicto Collegio, ad participandum
orationum suffragia ibidem fiendarum: nomen Datoris hujusmodi intitulabitur in
Kalendari Benefactorum (ut Canonici and Milites veterani pro eo valiant
inperpetuum) deprecari. XXXIII. Item, concordatum est, quod si aliquis
Canonicorum moriatur, and Superior Ordinis sit extra Regnum suum Angliae,
Gardianus sive Custos Collegii, qui pro tempore fuerit, exinde mittet literas
suas ad Superiorem Ordinis and Superior quem velit ad eundem Canonicatum valeat
praesentare. XXXIV. Item sit unus Registrator Ordinattus per Superiorem and
societatem Ordinis, qu, inter caeteros de Collegio sit scientior, and interesse
debet in quolibet Capitulo Ordinis celebrando, ad registrandum and inactitandum
Electiones singulas, and nomina Electorum, punitiones inflictas, and punitionum
causas, ad dictum Ordinem pertinentia, de Capitulo in Capitulum annuatim. Et
sit dictus Registrator juratus in receptione sui officii de fideliter
registrando, Et quae in Principio ^ujuslibet Capituli in Vigilia Sancti Georgii
annuatim celebrandi, sint omnia Registrata auni proecedentis ibidem public
lecta, coram Superiore and societate Ordinis; Ad finem quod siquid sit male
conceptum and correctione dignum, valeat in formam debitam reformari.
An Exemplar of the Statutes of Institution remaining in the Lord Hattons
Library.
AD honorem Dei, Sanctae Mariae Virginis gloriosae, and Sancti Georgii; Rex
Angliae, Dominus noster Edwardus tertius post conquestum anno regni sui 23.
Ordinavit, stabilivit and fundavit unam Societatem in Castro suo de Windsore
sub forma quae sequitur.

Imprimis, ipsemet constituitur Superior Comitivae, deinde senior ejus filius
princeps Walliae, Dux Lancastriae, Comes Warwici, Piers Capital de la Bouch,
Comes Staffordiae, Comes Sarisburiae, Dominus de Mari-mortuo, Dominus Johannes
Lisle, Dominus Bartholomeus de Bourghier Filius, Dominus Johannes de Beuchampe,
Dominus de Mahune, Dominus Hugo de Courtny, Dominus Thomas de Holande, Dominus
Johannes de Gray, Dominus Ricardus Fitz Simond, Dominus Milo de Stapilton,
Dominus Thomas de Wale, Dominus Hugo de Wrottesly, Dominus Neel de Loring,
Dominus Johannes Chandoyse, Dominus Jacobus Audley, Dom^nus Otho de Holand,
Dominus Henricus Eme, Dominus Sanchett D'abrigecourt, Dominus Walterus de
Pavely.

I. Imprimis, est Statutum and pro perpetuo ordinatum, quod Dominus noster Rex
Angliae praedictus, and haeredes sui Reges Angliae superioritate perfruentur
Comitivae praedictae. II. Item, est decretum quod in praedictum Ordinem and
consortium nullus admittetur, nisi qui praecinctus fuerit irreprobato cingulo
militiae, sanguinisque generositate dotatus ex origin. III. Et xxvi. Milites
proenominati, quotiens praesentes fuerint in castro praedicto, portabunt pro
habitu Mantellos and Garteros ordinatos ad boc ibidem, scilicet quotiesunque
contigerit eos Capellam intrare Sancti Georgii, seu domum Capituli pro Capitulo
celebrando, vel quicquid ali^d faciendo ibidem, quod Ordini pertinebit. Et
consimiliter illi induentur insigniis vigilia Sancti Georgii, egrediendo cum
Superiore, vel cum suo Deputato, de Magna Camera per modum processionis usque
ad Capellam praedictam, seu domum Capitularem, Et ex post facto eodem ordine
revertentes continue sic induti, tam videlicet in Coena, hi qui coenare
decreverunt, quam ceteri non coenantes, usque dum Superior, seu ejus Deputatus,
sumptis speciebus and vino, cunctis decreverit valefacere, consimilem modum in
omnibus observantes, de mane veniendo ad Capitulum, and revertendo ad prandium,
and continue usque dum Superior, seu suus Deputatus, singula compleverit, quae
suo st^tui, pro tunc ex congruo pertinent observari. Ac etiam iterum veniendo
ad secundas vesperas, and revertendo ad coenam, and usque dum completa fuerit
and le void finita. IV. Item ordinati sunt ibidem tredecim Canonici, qui in
suis receptionibus, vel saltem infra annum posterius sacerdotes erunt.
Tredecim, erunt etiam ibidem Vicarii, qui in introitu illorum Sacerdotes fore
obligantur, vel ut in ordinibus proximis ad Sacerdotii gradum valiant
promoveri, qui divina celebrabunt ibidem pro animabus omnium fidelium
defunctorum. Qui quidem Canonici per praedictos fundatores erunt praesentati.
Ita viz. quod unusquisque eorundem suum praesentabit Canonicum Custodi
Collegii, Sic quod postquam aliqua vacaverit posterius praebenda, neque ille
qui prius praesentaverat, nec aliquis alius ex tunc alium ad illam presentabit,
sed solus Superior ex post facto jus habebit quemcunque praesentandi quae ad
hoc decreverit limitandum, and sic de singulis vacaturis earumdem unanimiter
est decretum. V. Item, concordatum est, quod Canonici praefati habebunt
Mantellos murrii coloris, cum una figura rotunda, viz. ^na roundletta de Armis
Sancti Georgii. VI. Item, Ordinati sunt ibidem xxvi. Milites adversitate
fortune ad tantum vexati, quod de propriis minime valiant sustentari, qui in
collegio praedicto conveniens percipient emolumen^um pro suis devotis
effundendis precibus, ad Laudem Dei, and honorem Sancti Georgii, and quod ad
eorum electionem eodem modo ordinatum est per omnia, quo prius refertur de
admissionibus Canonicorum, sic quod omnis posterior electio perpetuo remanebit
penes Ordinis Superiorem. VII. Item, Statutum est, quod singuli Pauperes
Milites praefati suos portabunt Mantellos de color rubro, cum uno Scuto de
Armis Sancti Georgii absque aliquo Gartero in ejus circuitu. VIII. Item,
concordatum est, quod si Superior in solempnitate Sancti Georgii praesens esse
non poterit, per suas Literas, suum faciat Deputatum, qui Capitulum hora tertia
teneat in vigilia, ac in die singula studeat adimplere quae ad festunt
pertinent, pro tempore, sumptibus Superioris; Ita quod interint nulla nova
praesumat affirmare Statuta, immo potestatem plenariam habeat corrigendi and
reformandi singula puncta Capituli quae sequuntur. IX. Item, quolibet anno, in
vigilia Sancti Georgii, convenire habent ex Statuto, apud Castrum de Windsore
omnes Milites praedicti Sancti Georgii, qui viz. infra regnum fuerint, vel
alibi accedere valentes, ad effectum quod ibidem Divina insimul solempnizent,
portando M^ntellos durante servicio interim ordinatim singuli in suis stallis,
super quae unusquisque posita habebit suam galeam, cum Cresta, and gladium
direct subpendentem, quae ibidem statuitur permanere ad tempus suorum
possessorum, unumquodque viz. in signum and honorem ipsa deferentium, and etiam
in signum defensionis Ecclesiae, secundum quod vota deposeunt Ordinis
Militaris. Verumtamen in casu quo festum Sancti Georgii infra quindenam Paschae
contingit evenire, prorogari debet usque in illam diem dominicam quae continue
dies xv. paschae fore computabitur, ut sic unusquisque Ordinis consocius
opportunitatem accedendi habeat ad festum praelibatum, absque hoc quod equitare
arceatur aliquo dierum illorum trium solempnitati Paschae festivae annexorum.
X. Item, quod singuli and uniti simul in vigilia praedicta ac hora and loco
prius deputatis convenire minime postponant. Quod si tempus neglexerint
veniendi and horam, poenam subibunt ex concordia Capituli inferius limitatam,
super quo extat decretum, quod illa vice capitulum non intrabunt, immo
expectabunt for as ad hostium, nullam habituri vocem in Capitulo, euique
valituram, in re expedienda ibidem, illa scilicet vice tantum. Et si ad initium
primarum vesperarum quis illorum negligat accedere, de facto ad tunc Stallum
suum intrare non praesumat, sed expectabit in loco illo Chori, quo Choristae
residere solebant; scilicet coram Stallo proprio, usque ad finent illarum. Et
idem Ordinatum est de negligentibus venire, ante principium altae Missae, and
vesperarum in dei Sancti Georgii. Et siquis non veniat ad festum praedictum,
absque boc, quod causam suae absentiae allegaverit, a Superiore acceptandam,
poenam subibit hanc, viz. Quod proximo festo celebrando stallum suum non
intrabit, sed totaliter tenebit se in imo, quo prius dictum est, de
negligentibus praevenire principium vesperarum and Missae in die. Quod si ita
fuerit negligens, quod ad proximum festum celebrandum minime accesserit, nullam
interim caussam suae tardationis Superiori significans acceptabilem, poena sua
erit, quod stallum suum non intrabit in proximo festo celebrando, immo
residebit in basso modo quo prius statuitur, and, ultra hoc, in processione
tunc fienda, tenebit se totaliter ante tres Cruces ibidem deportandas. Et in
regressu se reponet in loco basso priori usque ad tempus Offertorii, and
offeret solus postremo per se. Ac post has sic peractas poenitentias, se
convertet ad stallum Superioris, seu sui Deputati, ibidem de Commissis
humiliter sibi petens pardonari. Quo facto, quisquis illorum interfuerit ipsum
commendabit ad stallum, Statum pristinum sibi restituendo and gradum. Quod si
ad secundum festum Sancti Georgii, minime accesserit, dummodo in regno
permanserit, nullam interim significans causam sui impedimenti, a Superiore,
vel suo Deputato, merito allocandam, eo facto posterius stallum suum nunquam
intrabit, quoad usque obtulerit altari Sancti Georgii, in Capella praedicta
jocale aliquod valoris xx. Marcarum seu verum valorem ejusdem. Quod si de anno
in annum permanserit sic culpabilis, secundum lapsum temporis, multiplicabit
and sumptus, usque dum de commissis fuerit reconciliatus. XI. Item, cadit sub
Statuto, quod singuli Milites societatis praedictae Mantellos portabunt ordinis
praedicti de. color blodio, omni anno, scilicet a primis vesperis usque post
secundas in festo Sancti Georgii, ubicunque pro tempore illo continget ipsos
residere, ac si praesentes forent pro tunc cum Superiori Ordinis in loco ad boc
specialiter deputato, dummodo sibi una occurrerint temporis opportunitas and
Libertas votiva. XII. Item, Statuitur, quod siquis de Comitiva praedicta
invenietur in aperto absque usu Garterii debito, and consueto, quam cito ^e h^c
sibi veraciter fuerit objectum, noverit se firmiter astrictum per Statuta, ad
persolvendum, hac de causa, Custodi and Collegio, dimidiam marcam, modo quo
consimiliter defectivi solvere consueverunt. XIII. Interim, est decretum, quod
singuli de Comitiva in alta Missa Sancti Georgii se disponant ad offerendum,
unusquisque viz. cum suo socio sibi direct opposito, and hoc ordinatum
secundum quod in suis stallis reponi dinoscuntur, ita quod si cujuscunque
consors absens ab hoc actu fuerit, consocius ex opposito offeret per se, Ita
quod in omni processione fienda ibidem in Capella praedicti Ordinis, Superior
postremus incedat, cunctos subsequendo per se Ordinis consocios. XIV. Item,
concordatum est, quod in Crastino solemnitatis Sancti Georgii, priusquam
Societas praedicta decreverit inter se mutuo valefacere, Decantari facient unam
Missam de Requie, pro animabus suorum Consodalium, qui de hoc seculo
decesserunt, and omnium fidelium defunctorum, in cujus celebratione singuli qui
praesentes pridie extiterint, tenen^ interesse, nisi forte quis causa ad hoc
movente rationabili fuerit per Superiorem in speciali licentiatus, seu
excusabiliter aliunde turbatus. XV. Item, decretum est, quod unusquisque
Sodalium Ordinis saepedicti, relinquet ibidem unum mantellum, ad effectum quod
in singulis subitaneis accessibus and insperatis, illum paratum inveniat, pro
observandis statutis in hac part, singulisque Superioris Iussis and decretis.
XVI. Item concordatum est, quod si quis de societate praedicta itinerando
equitaverit per Castrum praedictum, ob reverentiam Loci se debet disponere ad
intrandum Capellam praefatam, s^mendo sibi primitus suum M^ntellum, sine quo
illam nusquam intrare praesumat. Cui ad obviandum se disponere habent Canonici
residentes, ad ipsum conducendum devotius quo noverint, in capellam praedictam.
Et si intraverit pro tempore altae Missae, expectare tenctur ad finem ejusdem,
ob honorem Dei, and Sancti Georgii. Et si post nonam ipsum contingat introire,
expectabit usque dum Canonici praesentes dixerint de proundis, pro animabus
omnium fidelium defunctorum, and obtulerit ibidem. Quod si quis de Sociis
praedictis per medium equitaverit villae, and recusaverit capellam intrare
praefatam, ad offerendum, mod^ quo praefertur per Statuta, Noverit se sub paena
suae obedientiae f^rmiter astrictum, ad proficiscendum peregre and predester
totieus quotiens, de Castro, unum miliare, usque ad Capellam praedictam, ob
honorem Sancti Georgii, and pro qualibet vice qua sic fecerit and fuerit
defectivus, offerre tenetur unum denarium. XVII. Item, diffinitum est, quod
quam cito ad veram and indubiam Superioris pervenerit notitiam, de decessu
cujuscunque Consortis Comitivae praedictae, ipse faciet celebrari, pro anima
sic defuncti, mill missas; unus Rex extraneus celebrari faciet octingentas
Missas; Princeps septingentas; quilibet Dux, sexcentas; quilibet Comes
trecentas, quilibet Baro, Ducentas; quilibet Miles, Centum. Et si istas non
compleverit intra quarterium anni, seu compleri fecerit, post notitiam mortis
habitam, ut praefertur, duplicabit quarterium integri totius. Et si per
dimidium anni a retro permanserit, de eisdem tenetur ad duplum, ^t praefertur.
Et sic de tempore in tempus usque ad finem anni. Et consimiliter de anno, si ad
tantum permanserit defectivus, and de anno in annum ipsos duplicabit. XVIII.
Item concordatum est, quod siquis decesserit de praefata comitiva, Superior,
seu ejus Deputatus, habita de hoc vera notitia, cunctis sociis Comitivae in
regno existentibus, per suas Literas eisdem super eo directas, facti veritatem
significare tenetur, singulos interim accedere valentes praemuniendo, quatenus
infra sex septimanas post hujusmodi citationem praehabitam in loco idoneo
quocunque quem ad hoc duxerit limitandum, se disponant convenire. Qui quidem
onmes and singuli sic uniti, ita viz. quod ad minus ultra Superiorem, vel suum
Deputatum sint ibi sex alii Ordinis Consocii, novem Mi^itaris Ordinis personas
nominabunt, and q^ilib^t eorum nominabit pro se, juxta videre proprium, qui
praesens pro tun^ fuerit, honorabili^res ac sufficientiores quos noverit
Milites, in suis famis minime violatos, irreprobatos undique and subjec^os
Superiori, seu alios, dummodo partem ejus adversam nascantur non favere, viz.
tres Comites, seu tres alios majoris dignitatis, tres Barons, and tres
Milites. Quas quidem denominationes una cum votis singulorum reportabit, and
seribet Praelatus Ordinis, viz. Episcopus Wintoni^n^^^ existens pro tempore,
seu in absentia sua, Custos Collegii, seu Registrarius deputatus ad hoc, vel
senior Residentiarius Collegii praedicti, in absentiis corundem; Ac
denominationes praedictae and vota per omnes, seu ad minus per sex illorum
facta, ut praefertur, postquam reportaverit and scripserit incontinenter
ostendere tenetur Superiori ordinis, qui ipsum eligere debet Militem, seu
denunciare pro electo, quem pluribus viderit Eligentium vocibus abundare, and
honorabiliorem judicaverit, sibique ac coronae suae, ac regno ex verisimili in
posterum decreverit magis pr^futurum. Et siquis de Comitiv^ praedicta
voluntary se subtraxerit ab electione hujusmodi, absq, hoc, quod causam
habuerit justiorem, puniatur sub f^rma quae subsequitur, causam insuper suae
tardationis justam, si qu^m allegaverit, debite allocando. Quod si nullam
valeat ostendere justam sui impedimenti, seu quod non venerit citationi parendo
prius exhibitae, decretum est, quod tunc solvet Custodi and Collegio unam
maream, ad effectium, quod ipsi orent pro anima socii defunctii, and in proximo
suo advent^ ad Capitulum praedictum, ipse expect^bii super terram in medio
Capituli, coram Superiore, and tota praesente Comitiv^, usque dum per ipsos
fuerit reco^^iliatus. XIX. Item, decretum est, quod cum contigerit aliquem
Militem praesatae Societatis in fata decedere, ac deinde alium per electionem
succedere in locum suum, sic electo transmittetur Garterus, in signum quod ipse
est unus de praedicto consortio Ordinis Garteri; Et quam citius decreverit
possessionem recipere sui Stalli, tunc primo and non ante recipiet Mantellum
Ordinis pro suo habitu. Et in casu quo decefferit priusquam suo habitu indui
videatur, nequaquam tunc nominabitur ut unus fundatorum, eo quod sibi deficiat
plenitudo possessionis suae and status, veruntamen medictatem percipiet
missarum praenominatarum, causa liberati Garteri, sibi sic transmissi, ut
statuitur, absque pluribus. Quod si sic electus post ipsius Garterii
susceptionem, omnem congruam non adhibuerit diligentiam, quatenus installari
vale^t, ita specialiter quod installetur infra annum suae electionis, si fuerit
Miles expectans infra Regnum, si de hoc minime causam assig^are voluerit, a
Superiore, and tota Comitiv^ merito allocandam, eo facto cassa judicabitur
electio illa and vana, in tantum quod liceat eis, ex tunc, ad novam celebrandam
procedere electionem; Et medio tempore, sua galea cum Cresta and gladio
nequaquam figi debent super per stallum sibi limitatum, sed ambo reponi debent,
usque adventum cujusvis sic electi, ad Castellum praedictum, ne si ipsum, ut
praefertur, infra tempus limitatum accedere non contingat, nova facta electione
ipsa insignia militaria devellari judicabitur merito, seu deponi, sed potius
sic in imo posita honestius and secretius de choro exportari, deinde ad opus
Collegii perpetuo permansura. XX. Item, concordatum est, quod omnes Extranci in
hanc electi Comitivam, de suis electionibus certificari debent per Superiorem,
quibus interim transmitti debent, sumptibus Superioris, Garterus cum Mantello,
and Statutis Ordinis, signatis Sigillo ipsius communi, and hoc omni celeritate
congrua, ita quod, ad ultimum, notitian inde habeant infra quatuor menses post
electionem, ad finem, quod visis statutis Ordinis, se avisare valiant, antequam
ipsam recipere decreverint seu refutare. Quam si receperint Extranei praedicti,
cujuscunque dignitatis fuerint, conditionis, seu status, tenentur ad
transmittendum, infra octo menses proxime tunc sequentes, unum sufficientem
Procuratorem, unusquisque juxta statum suae dignitatis, sic ad minus quod sit
Miles irreprobatus, qui nomine suo valeat installari, qui secum adducere
tenetur unum Mantellum sericum de blodio color Ordinis, ex part ipsum
transmittentis, interim galeam cum cresta, and uno gladio, quae continuo
posterius morabuntur in Collegio. Qui quidem Mantellus, tempore installationis
ipsius Procuratoris, nomine Domini seu Magistri sui, per Superiorem reponi
debet super brachium suum dextrum, quem retinere tenetur ibidem usque finem
horae divinae, ex tunc ibidem proxime celebrandae, postquam sic, nomine Domini,
seu M^gistri sui, fuerit installatus, ita quod posterius ipsum non portabit,
neque vocem aliquam habebit in Capitulo, neque illuc intrare praesumet, in
absentia transmittentis ipsum. Et est sciendum, quod tantus favor Extraneis sic
electis ab hoc praestari jubetur, qui in suis personis minime valiant
installari, quo facere valiant per suos Procuratores quatenus ipsi particepes
effici mereantur Missarum and Orationum integrarum Ordinis praelibati, quarum
medietate privarentur, si, priusquam ipsos installari contingat, viam
ingrederentur universae carnis. XXI. Item, statuitur, quod siquis Comes, Baro,
seu quivis Miles in fata decesserit, ipse qui post ipsum venturus est,
cujuscunque conditionis fuerit, seu Status, ipse tenebit eundem Stallum quem
tenuit suus Praedecessor, absque mutatione aliqua, nisi solummodo ratione
Principis, qui Comitivae obtinebit stallum primum ex opposito Superioris, quam
cito electus fuerit ipse. Et sic in casu continget, quod unus Comes succedet
uni Militi in stallum suum, and etiam e converso. Et hoc ideo permittitur sic
fieri, quatenus per hoc, primi Ordinis Fundatores ab aliis valiant discerni.
XXII. Interim Statutum est, quod unusquisque praedictae Societatis, in introitu
suo primo, aliquid administrabit de bonis suis, unusquisque viz. juxta
substantiam suae dignitatis, in relevamen Canonicorum, pauperum Militum, and
eleemosinarum ibidem pro perpetuo ordinatarum, viz. Superior Ordinis 40.
Marcas, unus Rex extraneus 20 l. Princeps 20 Marcas, quilibet Dux 10 l.
quilibet Comes 10 Marcas quilibet Baro 100 solidos, and quilibet Miles, quinque
Marcas solvere statuitur. Et quousque unusquisque illorum juxta statum suum has
persolverit summas, galeae suae cum gladiis nequaquam erigi permittentur supra
stalla sua; pro quo sciendum, quod Superior Ordinis tenetur ad satisfaciendum
in his; pro quolibet Extraneo sic electo, viz. tempore installationis suae per
Procuratorem suum; Et ista Dona pro tanto ordinantur, ut omnes hunc intrantes
Ordinem, digniores reddantur ad habendum sua nomina intitulata ac privilegiata,
velut Fundatores Ordinis praedicti. XXIII. Interim est statutum quod quam cito
aliquis primorum Fundatorum debitum solverit naturae, fieri debet de Metallo
Scutum Armorum suorum, and galeae cum Cresta ejusdem, quae figi statuuntur in
dorso sui stalli, in signum gestantis ipsa. Et consimiliter eorum Successores,
Scuta Armorum suorum cum galeis and crestis fixa habebunt, in dorso stallorum
suorum subtus prima tamen, quae etiam de Metallo erunt, veruntamen ad
differentiam primorum fundatorum, minora erunt. XXIV. Item unusquisque
praefatum Ordinem ingressurus promittere habet personaliter ac jurare, seu per
Procuratorem quem suo nomine, ut praefertur, continget installari, se
observaturum juxta posse fidelius quo valebit, statuta omnia and singula
Ordinis praelibati, Et de caetero nullus installari permittetur per
Procuratorem, nisi fuerit extraneus, qui, ut in propria persona installetur,
accedere non valet tempore limitato. XXV. Item, in casu quo Superior de regno
fuerit absens seu alibi, ita quod commode in persona propria accedere non
valeat, ad perimplendum ea quae ad installationem Militis sic electi
dignoscuntur ex congruo pertinere, sibi licebit vices tunc suas in hac part
committere cuicunque duxerit socio praedictae Comitivae, qui cuncta suo nomine
huic actui pertinentia valebit authoritateque peragere. XXVI. Item concordatum
est, quod ad hunc Ordinem pertinere debeat unum commune Sigillum, in praesentia
Superioris continue permansurum, vel in custodia illius quemcunque ad hoc
duxerit limitandum. XXVII. Item, unusquisque de caetero Ordinis praedicti
habere t^netur penes se Statuta praesentia, signata Sigillo praefato, quorum
Originale pro perpetuo remanere statuitur infra Thesanrariam Collegii
saepedicti, praedicto Sigillo prius debite consignatum. XXVIII. Item, post
decessum cujusque Militis Ordinis Garterii Executores ejus firmiter
astringuntur ad remittendum Collegio praedicto Statuta praefata suis Dominis
and Magistris tradita, prius ut praefertur, Custodi tradenda Collegii pro
tempore existenti. XXIX. Item concordatum est, quod nullus de caetero Miles
Ordinis Sancti Georgii regnum exire presunat, absque Superioris licentia
speciali petita super hoc pariter and obtenta, super quo communiter est
decretum quod si aliquod Militare viagium seu aliud quoddam honorificum, per
Superiorem fieri dispanatur, quod Ordinis militarem famam possit promovere,
Superior, ex sua gratia speciali, ad peragendum dicti Ordinis Commilitones prae
caeteris subditis dignabitur anteferre. XXX. Item, Statutum est, quod nullus
Militum praedictorum contra alium praesumat militare, nisi solum in casu quo a
suis and superioribus Dominis idem and ex jussu legis s^cere arceatur, seu in
propria caus^ justa. Quod si sic eveniat quod aliquis eorudem cum quocunque
Domino, seu cum favente suam partem stipendiis retineatur, ad Arma militaribus,
and ejus pars adversa alium Ordinis Garterii militem optaverit retinere; in
isto casu ipse qui sic secundo fuerit requisitus, eo quod noverit sui Ordinis
Commilitonem praevie praearmari cum adversa part, de requisitione hac ultimate
te^etur excusari; Ac insuper in quibuseunque suis hujus^odi retentionibus ad
Arma obligari satis arcte ad specialiter praeexcipiendum, cum ad hoc primo
fuerint inclinati. Quod si quem de Ordine suo Garteri cum adversa part ipsius
retinentis ipsum praevie contingat retineri, quod tun^ ille secundo sic
retentus, habita hujus rei perfecta notitia, isto non obstante, suas libere
valeat habenas exercere, ac de hujusmodi retentione ad guerram penitus absolvi
eo fact^^ Quod si in hujusmodi ut praefertur, retentione ipsum secundarie sic
retentum non constiterit, de aliquo sui Ordinis consocio cum part retento
adversa, sed posterius si devenerit ad notitiam, incontinenti se noscat
firmiter obligatum ad se excusandum erga dominum seu Magistrum suam* Et ad
querelam suam and quamlibet hujusmodi penitus relinquendum. XXXI. Item quod
omnes and sing^^^ Licentiae literales consortii Militibus de caetero
conced^ndae per Superiorem, ad finem quod mare pertranseant, ut fines visitent
alienos, and exteras nationes, pro honoribus militiae quoquo m^do perquirendis,
ac insuper and Literae mandatoriae, seu alias certificatoriae, quovis modo
Ordini pertinentes cuique transmittendae, prius debite consignentur praedicti
Ordinis communi Sigillo, quod manner statuitur penes aliquem de Ordine, quem ad
hoc Superior viderit assignandum. Quem si ex rationabili causa de praesentia
Superioris recedere contingat, tunc Sigillum post se relinquet, cum illo quem
ad hoc Superior decreverit limitare, ita quod Sigillum praedictum, extra suam
praesentiam, dummodo infra regnum expectaverit, minime relinquatu^. Quod etiam
omnino observandum fore statuitur, ab intento pro Superioris in absentia ejus
Deputato, quoad Sigillum praelibatum. XXXII. Item statuitur, quod siquis Miles
Ordinis praedicti, ob devotionem propositum receperit infra Collegium
praedictum continue permanendi, quod ipse de suis propriis and non Collegii se
disponat interim sustentari. XXXIII. Item siquis Miles alius extraneus ab
ordine ob dovotionem etiam ibidem optaverit residere, juxta decretum Superioris
Ordinis and ipsius Comiti^ae, pro ejusdem more poterit provideri. XXXIV. Item
conceditur ex decreto, quod siquis Miles, vel quaevis alia persona, ab hoc
Ordine, ex devotione tribuere decreverit x l. annui reditus, seu terrarum, vel
magis, ad effectum quod particeps valeat sicri omnium precum devotarum ibidem
fundendarum, pro benefactoribus praecipuis Collegii saepedicti, nomen suum eo
facto inscribi statuitur inter nomina ibidem benefactorum ejusdem, quatenus pro
ipso inter caeteros ab ipsius ministris continue in speciali valeat deprecari.
XXXV. Interim est decretum, quod si aliquis de Canonicis praedicti Collegii in
absentia Superioris decesserit in fata, custos tunc Collegii ejus decessum
Superiori significare tenetur ex statuto, per suas literas, ad effectum, quod
ipse alium, quem ad hoc decreverit limitandum, in locum ipsius valeat
subrogare. XXXVI. Item, deputandus est interim, per Ordinis Superiorem and ejus
Comitivam, unus Registrarius, qui viz. scientior ad hoc fore existimatur
Canonicorum ibidem in Collegio residentium, qui praesens esse poterit in omni
Capitulo Ordinis celebrando, ad fideliter reportandum insuper and registrandum,
electiones fiendas ac nomina electorum, poenas infligendas, and causis
paenarum, reconciliationes punitorum praevie delinquentium, cum singulis
actibus aliis and causis eorundem Ordini pertinentibus, and hoc de Capitulo in
Capitulum, and de anno in annum; super quo praefatus Registrarius, in sua prima
receptione ad officium suum, Iurame^tum tenetur praestare, ad sideliter
registrandum materias ibidem ministrandas, modo quo praefertur. Quae omnia, ut
inactitantur, in principio Capituli proximo sequentis, in vigilia Sancti
Georgii, coram Superiore and tota Comitiva integre debeat recitare, ad
effectum, quod, si quae occurrant corrigenda, pro tunc, juxta rei exigentiam,
digne valiant emendari.
Another Exemplar of the said Statutes, entered in the Black Book of the Order.
I. QVisquis in Anglia Regni solio potietur, is ipse perpetuis ab hinc
temporibus hujus illustrissimi Ordinis Supremus and erit, and appellabitur. II.
Nullus in hanc clarissimam societatem ascribetur nisi qui generis ac militiae
nomine dignus fuerit, ut qui moribus ac fama splendidus, and Eques ante ut
minimum auratus; ignobiles autem and improbi repulsam hic omnino patientur.
Improbitates etenim and probra haec probitatis and honorificae virtutis Ordo
minus admittet, aut sustinebit. III. Commilitones egregii hujus Ordinis and
ornatissimi Collegae viginti sex erunt: qui Trabeas ac Subligaria apud
Windesorum habeant, in usum and splendorem Ordinis apt parata, ut quoties
utendum sit, his illic utantur. Vtendum autem quotiescunq, Divi sui Georgii
Sacellum ingrediuntur, seu domum sue suorumque Sacerdotum consultationi
dedicatam, vel ad conventum ibi celebrandum vel quid aliud agitandum, vel
constituendum, quod Societatis hujus interesse poterit; eodem habitu celebrique
orn^tu, sub vesperi^ vigiliae Divi Georgii, ante meridiano Crastinae diei
solemni, and secundis deinde vesperis, cum Supremo, vel in locum ejus assignato
de magno Regis Cubiculo, ad Sacellum and domum, quam de rebus consulturi
subintrat, ibunt ac redibunt. Trabeis itidem ac subligaribus illic suis induti
considebunt, tam in praudio diei Divi Georgii, quam in Caena vigiliae ejus,
pariter and diei, comedentes simul ac abstemii, neque se illis exuent, donec
ipse Supremus ejusve loco constitutus exuerit, exuendive tempus esse
decreverit. IV. Et quia Militiae decus honor Divino nititur, and quae
geruntur, oratione pia fulciuntur: illis viginti sex Equitibus, totidem infra
Deo dedicandi respondebunt Canonici seculares tredecim, Vicarii totidem; jam
jam Sacerdotes, vel brevi ^^st futuri. Canonici nimirum intra annum
subsequentem, Vicarii vero proximo deinceps Ordinationis tempore. Horum
intererit pro Regis ac Regni ac singulorum in eo conviventium, presertim hujus
Ordinis foelici Statu, proque defunctorum animabus jugiter ac suppliciter
exorare. Praese^tabuntur autem Canonici, per Fundatores Ordinis, ut suum
quisque Canonicum Custodi jam Collegii praesentet. Quod siquis eorum moriatur,
nec ipse qui proxime praesentavit, nec alius quisquam Sociorum Ordinis ultra
praesentabit: sed convenit omnibus unanimiter, ut imposterum omnium
praesentatio Canonicatuum uni Supremo reservetur. V. Omnes Canonici suum
purpurei subrubrive coloris pallium habere debent, insignium Divi Georgii, hoc
est Sanguineae Crucis circulo, dexteris subinde brachiis superinducto. VI. Si
forte Supremus non potuerit interesse solemnitati Divi Georgii, Deputatus ab eo
locum ejus supplebit, and consilium nihilo minus hora tertiarum inibitur,
Crastinaque festivitas de more servabitur, idque sumptibus ipsius Supremi.
Verum ab eo designatus ille, novas interim observationes aut institutiones hand
faciet. Statutorum autem transgressores corrigere, and male sarcta resarcire
licebit. VII. Annis singulis vigilia Divi Georgii fiet una congregatio Sociorum
omnium hujus Ordinis in Castro Windesoriensi, sive tum sint in Anglia ipsi,
sive foris: modo commode valiant advenire; ubi tum divinis intererunt, seriatim
coassidentes, in Sedili quisque suo, Trabeis and caeteris insignibus ornati.
Supra unuscujusque Sedile, Galea atque Ensis cum appendicibus, ad ornatum
Ecclesiae, nobilisque viri condignam memoriam, quoad Superstes erit,
propendebunt; prout Ordo Militaris efflagitat. Si vero festivitas illa Divi
Georgii intra quindecim a Paschate dies obtigerit, deferetur ad quintam decimam
post diem and quae circiter erit Dominicam; Vt nullus Sociorum just causam
absentiae praetendere debeat, nec equitare cogatur sub aliquo trium dierum,
solemn Pascha proxime subsequentium. VIII. Prefatae vigiliae hora tertiarum
simul ibidem aderunt, si qui vero designato tempore non venerint, nec, quod
Supremo vel ejus Vicemgerenti just ac probabiliter excusent, habeant, pro
tempore illo prohibebuntur ab introitu Consilii, neque suffragii conferendi
facultatem habebunt in ullis rebus, quae tum fient, aut statuentur in Consilio.
Sin ad utrarumque vesperarum and solemnis Missae principium non accesserint, a
suis exclusi sedibus, infra stabunt, ubi Ceroferarii solent: donec illa sacra
de more finita fuerint. Quisquis autem ad eam celebritatem non veniet, nec
habet quod jure causari possit, quod and Supremus approbabit, eadem anni
sequentis festivitate Sedili suo deprivatus tempore primarum vesperarum ut
supra, ante id Sedile substabit, dum solemniter in Crastino Chorus procedet,
tres processionarias Cruces antecedet: and reversus in eodem infimo loco
perstabit, usq, ad eam, Missae partem, qua rite offerunt, tumque ipse
novissimus offerre debet. Post bumilem istiusmodi pene tolerantiam e vestigio
veniet ad clarum Sedile Supremi sui, vel in ejus loco constituti, veniam
oraturus. A qui^us Statui priori restitutus, remittetur ad Sedile proprium. Si
vero remanens intra Regnum, altero nibilominus anno supra memorate celebritati
citra excusationem hujuscemodi laudabilem, abesse non formidarit, a Sedili
proprio eousque prohibebitur, donec intra Sacellum ante Altar Divi Georgii
unum Donarium viginti Marcis probatae in Anglia Monetae, valens obtulerit. Et
singulis deinceps annis quoadusque reconciliatus ipse fuerit ea mulcta
geminabitur. IX. Omnes Socii, ubicunque locorum extiterint, quotannis in illa
Divi Georgii festivitate caeruleas suas trabeas ab exordio primarum vigiliae
vesperarum usque ad secundarum dici terminum cum res poscat induentur, perinde
ac si cum ipso Supremo vel ejus Vicemgerente, quoad ea festivitas agitur,
praesentes esse^ i nisi fursitan liberate tunc sua destituti fuerint. X. Si
quis Socius absque nobilitato Subligaculo publicitus incedat, inde notam
incurret, and ammonitus Custodi ac Collegio dimidium Marcae persolvet, sicut
persolvendi mos semper ante fuit. XI. In supremo Sacrificio, quum sit
solemniter offerendum, Socii, quemadmodum in sedibus suis e regione consistunt,
ita bini procedent ad offerendum, si vero quenquam abesse contigerit, Socius
ejus qui sedet ex opposito, solus ad offerendum ibit. XII. Quando solemni more
Processio fiet in Sacello, postremus omnium Supremus incedet. XIII. Postridie
Divi Georgii, priusquam Socii vale sibi dicant invicem, una solemnis Missa
celebrabitur pro defanctis: a qua nemo Sociorum aberit, nisi, necessarium
impedimentum ostendens, Supremo vel ejus Vicemgerente recedendi copiam
impetrarit. XIV. Trabeam suam seu Clamidem Socius unusquisq, Windesori
relinquet: ut ibi paratam semper inveniat, si repent forsan accesserit, aut
aliquid ex salutari monitu praeoeptoque Principis adimplendum acciderit. XV. Si
quisquam e Sociis, iter ingressus, Windesoriense Castrum forte pretervebatur,
ob honorem loci, (nisi legitima causa praepedicrit) divertat illuc. Prius autem
quam aedem introcat, Clamidem induat. Indutum Canonici, qui tune affuerint
obviam venientes, in Chorum reverenter adducent. Si Missae celebratio tunc
instet, ad honorem Dei, Sanctiq, Georgii, venerabundus illam audiat. Sin alias
accesserit, tantisper immoratus, dum Canonici c^m reliquis sacrificiis Psalmum
De profundis, pro desunctis absolverint, ibidem offerat. Quod si quis mediam
urbem transiens haud diverterit in aedem oblaturus, quoties id ita
praetermiserit, ut obedientem se demonstret, unum milliare pedes illuc accedet,
vel unum denarium offeret. XVI. Supremus Ordinis, ubi primum significata sibi
fuerit mors alicujus e Sociis, pro salute animae ejus mill Missas celebrari
faciet, Rex externus, qui de numero fuerit, Octingentas; Princeps Walliae,
Septingentas; Dux unusquisque sexcentas; Marchio, quadringentas quinquaginta;
Comes, Trecentas; Vicecomes, Ducentas quinquaginta; Baro, Ducentas; Eques alius
quisque Centum. Quod si Supremus, aut Eques alius id, intra tres menses
postquam certior fuerit factus, non perfecerit, numerum Missarum ad quas ante
tenebatur conduplicabit. Sin medium annum id ipsum omiserit, rursum congeminari
debet. Et pari forma de tempore in tempus usque ad anni finem. Quod si intra
annum integrum, quod debet, non impleverit, annos eodem modo duplicabit. XVII.
Quoties Sociorum aliquis ab hac vita excesserit, Supremus, aut ab co
designatus, certior inde factus, alios omnes qui tum fuerint intra Regnum
accedere valentes, literis actutum commonebit; ut intra sex bebdomadas post, in
locum ab his sibi statuendum conveniant, ad electionem novi Socii. Quibus
omnibus ita congregatis, vel (adminimum) sex little, ultra Supremum aut ab eo
Deputatum, presentium quisque novem de magis idoncis, ut quos ignomini^
probroque vacare crediderit; seu sint de Supremo subditis, seu quivis exteri
(dummodo non sint ipsi^s adversarii, vel adversariorum ejus fautores, aut
ultronei defensores) nominabit, tres viz. Comites, aut excelsioris Conditionis
homines, tres Barons, and totidem Bachalaureos Equites. Ipsa haec autem nomina
conscribet Ordinis Prelatus, scilicet Wintoniensis tum Episcopus, sin abfuerit
ipse, Collegii Decanus, vel Scriba Ordinis. Quin immo si nullus horum
interfueri^, e residentibus antiquissimus id effectum ibi dabit. In hunc modum
conscriptos qui scripsit ad Supremum, aut ab eo Designatum afferens ostendet;
Is vero de nominatis cum pre^liget, cui plura suffragia consenserint, and quem
sibi Regnoque s^iet aptiorem atque utiliorem fore. Si quis (ut oportuit)
praemonitus, ad electionem tamen non advenerit, punietur: nisi justam absentiae
causam, and Supremo vel ejus locum implenti probat^m preostenderit. Si causam
minus approband^m a^tulerit, nec vocatus tamen adesse curavit, mulctabitur, ut
unam Collegio maream persalvat, and inito proxime Consilio super terram ante
Supremum sen Designatum abipso, totamque societatem in medio sedebit, quousq,
cum ^is rediens in gratiam restitutus fuerit. XVIII. A morte cujusvis Equitum,
electus in came societatem illico praenobilis Sub^ibuli usu donabitur: quo fiet
ut Sociorum unus habeatur. Trabea vero sibi necessaria non pri^s ornabitur,
quam in Sedile suum fuerit introducendus. Sique is ante moriatur quam fuerit in
sede propria collocatus, hand fundatorum unus appellabitur, co quod plenam
status sui possessionem non habuerit. Attamen Missarum de quibus diximus,
medictas illi debebitur, quod ornamentum Subligaris obti^uerat. Siu autem
Electus non celeriter accedat ut Sedile suum occupet, vel saltem intra Annum
non iter arripiat ut illud ipsum adimpleat, modo manserit in Regno, nisi
Supremo, seu gerenti vicem ejus, totique societati, gratam ac sufficientem
excusationem apposuerit, inanis erit illa prior electio, nec quid erit
impedimento, quo minus inde Supremus aut ab co designatus, cum caetera
Societate libere procedat ad novam electionem. Ensis ejus atque Galca non ante
supra Sedile suum affigentur quam venerit ad Arcem; sed ante sedile foris, ob
id nimirum ut dedecori nulla detur occasio, quae sic utique vitari non possit.
si de locis editioribus subito tollerentur. Verum ut Equestris honor servetur
illibatus, extra Chorum, modo, quo poterunt, honestiori removebuntur, ad opus
publicum and militatem Collegii remansura. XIX. Socii de funibus remotis atque
externis eligendi de sui electione per Supremum certiores ficri debent,
cele^rime missis ad eos sub Sigillo communi, illustri Subligaculo, and cae^ulea
Trab^a, cum Statutis Ordinis ipsius, certe Supremi sumptibus. Intra quatuor
autem menses ab electione facta, de hac sunto certiores: ut perpendere possint
e Statutis electionem illam gratam ac ratam, necne velint habere. Tum
hujuscemodi omnes, qualiscunque conditionis and honoris electi, postquam certo
id intellexerint, and grataenter acceperint, prout honor conditionis exigit,
idoneum remittant Procuratorem, qui sibi sedem occupet. Idoneum interpretamur
qui vita famaque sit incorruptus, nec antea notatus, sed irreprehensus. Is
caeruleame serico Trabeam, Ensem atque Galeam, Windesorum secunt afferat, ut
ibidem ea permaneant. Adducta vero Trabea ponetur a Supremo vel Vicem ejus
gerente, super dexterum Procuratoris humerum, quando sub nomine Domini sui in
sedem introducetur; nec inde dimovebit post clari sedilis ingressum, usque dum
Canonicarum horarum celebratio terminetur. Vltravero non gestabit eam, neq,
Consilium introibit, aut suffragium ullum ibi conferet, ullius authoritatis aut
potestatis argumento. Ea sane facultas per Vicarium occupandae sedis, solis est
exteris concedenda: quod illuc hii commode satis baud possent advenire. Fit
autem haec potestas illis ea praesertim de causa quo Missarum orationumque
piarum, quarum alioqui dimidio privarentur, jam mortuiplene participes essent.
XX. Si Comes, Baro, vel Eques Bacchalaureus obierit; qui succedet, sive Comes,
Baro, vel Eques tantum extiterit; eandem omnino sedem quam and praedecessor
obtinebit. Nec eligendus quisquam seriem istam interrumpet, aut demutabit,
praeter unum Walliae Principem, qui sedile Supremi semper e Regione situm
vendicabit. Itaque fieri potest ut Comitis sedem Eques, and hujus e diverso.
Comes occupet jureque teneat. Sic nimirum est institutum, ut qui fuerint
primarii Fundatores Ordinis intelligamus. XXI. Vnusquisque Sociorum in ingressu
Ordinis, dabit in Eleemosynas imperpetuum illie institutaes, and
insustentationem Canonicorum, pauperumque Militum, Supremus scil. Quadraginta
Marcas, Extraneus Rex, viginti libras, Princeps Walliae, viginti Marcas,
quisque Dux, decemlibras, Comes totidem Marcas, Baro centum solidos, and Eques
Bacchala^reus quinque Marcas. Iussa sunt haec ideo donari, ut qui donat, unius
e fundatoribus merito nomen accipiat. Rem dignam etenim and justam
arbitrabantur, ut fundationi huic commodi tantillum adderet, quisquis
privilegii nomen obtinens, numero fundatorum accederet. Nec alicujus Ensis aut
Galea supra sedile suum ante defigetur, quam ista pecunia fuerit rite
persoluta. Externi revera quod debent ob introitum, pendetur id a Supremo.
XXII. Vt primum e primevis Fundatoribus ullus expiraret, Scutum e metallo in
quo notae compingentur Armorum, cum Galea, fixunt extabit, in sedili proprio,
post tergum sedentis. Et qui succedent, Scuta cum Galeis atque armis sumili
modo collocabunt: tamen sub illis primariorum Fundatorum. Neq, etiam ipsorum
haec omnino tam magna fient, quam erunt illa primorum Fundatorum. XXIII.
Ingressurus jam dignitatem hujus insignissimi Ordinis, vel ipsemet
pollicebitur, vel ejus nomine Procurator, and jurabit, quod haec Statuta
fideliter atque integre pro viribus observare vellet. Procuratores autem loco
suo statuendi facultas, solorum (uti diximus) exterorum erit. XXIV. Si quando
Supremus Regnum peregre vel aliter exiens abfuerit, quo tempore Socius aliquis
in sedem suam est solenniter introducendus, ut (quae suae parts sunt)
perficere nonposset, unicuilibet e Sociis potestatem suam ex arbitrio
committat, qui, quidvis exequi perficereq, debeat, quod and Supremus ipse, si
jamjam preseus esset. XXV. Fiet unum Commune Sigillum Ordinis, quodillius, quem
Supremus assignarit, custodiae commendabitur. XXVI. Ordinis Statuta sibi
descripta Sigilloque communi consignata, quisque Sociorum habeat. Originale
vero Statutorum eodem Sigillo munitum permanebit in erario Collegii,
dilige^tissime reconditum. Defuncti nimirum Socii haeredes ex ass, Statuta
quae vivens apud se retinuit, remittent ad Collegium, and Presidi seu Decano
reddenda curabunt. XXVII. Nullus istorum Equitum Regnum exibit, nisi premonito
Supremo, qui exeundi potestatem faciet. Si qua vero Militaris expeditio
contingat, vel quid ejuscemodi, sub quo gloria speratur Equestris, suis hic
istius Ordinis Equitibus clementissimus Rex Supremus beneficus and gratiosus
erit; ut quos in actis isitiusmodi decoris, quibusvis aliis anteferre debeat.
XXVIII. Nullus Equitum hujus Ordinis contra Sociorum ullum Arma movebit, nisi
vel Supremi sui, vel propria causa just compulerit. Sique Sociorum aliquis in
alicujus Domini famulitium acciderit, ejusque parts sibi defendendas
assumpserit; Et postmodum adversarius alium ex eisdem Sociis lateri suo
conjungere cupiat, qui posterior expetitur haud ullo pacto consentiet. Quisquis
itaque Sociorum ab ullo petitur ut sibi militet: initio pacisci debet, quod
eatenus sua conventio nonstabit. Si Sociorum aliquis antea cum adversa part
militare ceperit, sique jam retentus ad militiam ignoravit, quod alter Sociorum
sub adversa part prius ad arma descenderit: Vbi primum id resciverit,
servicium abdicans, illud excuset. XXIX. Omnes Equites hujus Ordinis, qui
terras circumcursare volent, bonoris inveniendi gratia perfacinora Militaria,
Literas in id scriptas habere curabunt: quae quidem and omnes aliae spectantes
ad hunc Ordinem Sigillo Communi consignari debent, quod custodiet unus
Sociorum, quem ex arbitratu Supremus assignabit. Eum quem si causa fecerit
absentem a Supremo, Sigillum illud interea Sociorum alteri relictum ibit, quem
viz. and Supremus ipse nominabit; it a quidem, ut Sigillum id commune nullo
unquam tempore de Supremi praesentia tollatur, quamdiu Supremus intra Regnum
Angliae remanserit. In ejus autem absentia, faciet illud ipsum cum Sigillo,
designatus a Supremo. XXX. Si quis Equitum hujus Societatis, pietatis instinctu
tractus, apud Arcem Windesoriensem commorari velit, suis illic impendiis vivere
debet. XXXI. Si quis etiam alius praeter buju^ Societatis Equites aliquid
annuum, december viz. libras aut eo amplius, Collegio donare voluerit, ut
orationum ibi dicendarum particeps esse, queat; nomen ejus numero benefactorum
ascribatur, ut perpetuo cum eis memoriae commendetur. XXXII. Quando Canonicorum
aliquis moritur, si Supremus intra Regnum non sit, Collegii Custos ad eum
Literas emittet, ut quem voluerit, ad Canonicatum illum nominet. XXXIII. E.
Canonicis, unus, moribus and scientia maxim conveniens, per Supremum ae
Societatem eligetur, qui Consiliis inter eos celebrandis interesse debet; ut
electiones, and electorum nomina, punitiones and causas earum, caeteraque in
Consiliis illis administranda, probe, ae fideliter annotet, and tanquam in
indicem redigat. Cumq, sit admittendus, jurabit quod officium in bisce rebus
suum fideliter exequetur; Principio sane eujusque Consilii vigilia Divi Georgii
quotanuns ineundi, cuncta superioris Anni gesta fideliter annotata coram
Supremo Societateque recitabuntur. Quod si quid haud been sit conceptum, and
correctionis egeat, revocabitur ad incudem, and suae reddetur perfectioni.
In consummatum.
XXXIV. Et quoniam Eleemosyna Orationi conjuncta multum juvat ad salutem Anime,
clarissimis illis Equitibus totidem veterani Milites egeni substituentur, ad
orandum, habituri quidem illic, cum de suo nequeant, unde vivere potuerint.
Horum autem Electio, sicut and anteposita Canonicorum spectabit ad Supremum.
Habebunt item isti Milites sua palliola rubra, Scuto Divi Georgii similiter
assuto.
The Statutes established by King Henry the Fifth.
AL'bonneur de Dieu, Saint Marie la glorieuse Vierge, and Saint George. Si a
le Roy d' Angleterre nostre Seigneur Edouard trosieme apres la Conqueste d'
Angleterre, l'an de son regue vingt and trois, ordonne and estably and fond
une Compagnie en son Chasteau de Windesore, en la maniere qui s'ensuit.

Premierement luy mesme Sounerain, son aisne filz le Prince de Galls, le Duc
de Lancastre, le Comte de Warwyk, le Captain de Bouche, le Comte de Stafford,
le Comte de Salesbury, le Sire de Mortimer, Monsieur Jehan Lisle, Monseigneur
Bartholomeu de Bourghersh le filz, Monsieur Jehan de Beauchamp, le Sire de
Mahun, Monsieur Hugh de Courtenay, Monsieur Thomas de Holand, Monsieur Jehan de
Gray, Monsieur Richard le Filz Simon, Monsieur Miles Stapelton, Monsieur Thomas
Wale, Monsieur Hugh de Wriottesley, Monsieur Neele Loring, Monsieur Jehan
Chandos, Monsieur James d'Audelay, Monsieur de Holland, Monsieur Henry Eme,
Monsieur Sanchet de Prichecourt, Monsieur Walter de Pauely.

I. Il est accord, que le Roy, and ses heirs, Rois d' Angleterre seront pour
tousiours Souerains de la dite Compagnie. II. Item est accord, que null ne soit
eleu Compagnon du dit Order, s'il n'est Gentilbomme de Sang, and Chevalier sans
reproach. III. Item que les xxvi. dessus nommez porteront les Manteaux and les
Gartiers ordonnes au dit lieu, quand ils seront presens audit Chastel, c'est
assavoir a toutes les fois qu'ils entreront dans la Chapelle de Saint George,
ou au Chapitre, pour tenir Chapitre, ou illec fair aucun act appartenant a
l'Ordre. Et semblablement porteront leur manteaux des la veille Saint George,
auec le Souuerain ou son Depute en maniere de procession, de la grande Chamber,
jusqu'a la Chapelle, ou au Chapitre, en retournant en semblable maniere, and
aussi les porteront au souper de la dite Veille, ceux qui souper voudront, and
les autres aussi jusques apres laver. Et le lendemain en venant en ladite
Chapelle and retournant au disner, and apres, tant que le Souerain, ou son
Depute, aura tenu son estat; E^ en venant aux secondes vespres, and en
retournant, and en souper, tant que la Vuide soit faicte. Et que chacun des
xxvi. Compagnons dessus-nommez, chacua a leur entrer dedans le Chaeur, ils
devotement obeiront, premierement a l'autel, en l'bonneur and maniere des gens
de Saint Eglise; and apres au Souuerain, ou a son Estal, en son absence,
devant qu'ils entreront en leur Estals, and pareillement en leur departir
d'icelle. IV. Et seront ordonnez xiii. Chanoines Seculiers, qui seront Prestres
en leur entree, ou dedans l'an prochain ensuivant; Et xiii. Vicaires, aussi
Prestres a leur entree, ou aux prochains Ordres, chantant pour toutes ames
Chrestiennes, lesquels Chanoines seront presentez par les Fondeurs dessus
dicts; C'est assavoir, chacun des Fondeurs, qui a present est, presentera son
Chanoine au Guardien du College; ainsi que si aucun de Chanoines meurt, celuy
qui le presenta ni null autre presentera, mais le Souuerain du dit Order pour
tousiours apres. Et en tell maniere est accord pour tous autres Chanoines. V.
Item est accord, que les Chanoines auront leurs Mante aux de Murrey, avec un
Rondelet des arms de Saint George. VI. Et sont ordonnez xxvi. pa^ures
Chevaliers qui n'ont dequoy viure, pour avoir en celle maison leur soustenance
convenable pour leur bonne priere, a l'honneur de Dieu and de Saint George; Et
de l'election est ordonne des presentemens des Chanoines dessus-nommez, ainsi
que l'election remaindra toujours par devers le dit Souuerain. VII. Item est
accord, que les pouvres Chevaliers auront leurs Manteaux de Rouge, and un
Escusson des arms de Saint George, sans Gartier. VIII. Item est accord, que
si le Souuerain ne peut estre a la Feste, qu'il fasse son Depute par ses
Lettres, pour tenir, en la veille de Saint George, le Chapitre, a l'heure de
Tierce, and le iour de Saint George, pour tenir, aux coustages du Souuerain,
ladite Feste, pour le temps dessusdict, saus autres nouvelles ordonnances,
aiant pouvoir de corriger and radresser les points de Chapitre qui ensuivent;
par ainsi que le Souuerain aura avis que le nombre des Compagnons de l'Ordre
avecques luy requis par les Estatuts, affin que tell election soit vaillable.
Et si en celuy temps y a aucune vuidance des Compagnons, qu'adonques l'election
appartiendra audit Souuerain, and d'icelle sera le dit Depute suffisamment
certify par iceluy Souuerain. Et pareillement que le dit Depute signify au
Souuerain des vuidances si aucunes soient en Angleterre: affin que si pour le
temps de la dite vuidance en la presence du Souuerain n'est trouue le nombre
desdits Compagnons comme dessus est dit, que ledit Depute en soit certify par
le dit Souuerain, and des merits and noms des gens d'armes and d'honneur, qui
selon l'advis du dit Souuerain seront aucunement dignes, a cause de leur
vaillances, d'estre nommez pour estre de ladite Compagnie; and adonques
l'election appartiendra audit Depute selon la form des Estatutz. IX. Item, que
chacun an, la veille de Saint George soit faite vne assemblee de tous les
Compagnons de Saint George dessus nommez, au dit Chastel de Windesore qui sont
dedans la terre, qui venir y pourront, and illec auront leur service de Saint
George, and auront leurs Manteaux durant le service, estant ordonnement en
leurs Estalz, and chacun aura son Heaulme and son Espee par dessus son Estal,
qui a tout leur vivant demourront a la Chapelle illecque en signifiance de
celuy qui les port, and defense de Saint Eglise, comme l'Ordre de Chevalerie
le vent. Mais en cas que la Feste Saint George vienne dedans xv. iours
prochains apres Pasques, soit proroguee jusques au Dimenche, qui a toutesfois
sera le quinziesine iour apres le iour de Pasques, affin que chacun Compagnon
dudit Order puisse estre a la dite Feste sans Chevauchier trois iours prochains
ensuivant le iour de Pasques; par ainsi que le iour de la Feste dessus dite ne
soit ordonne ni assign les xxiv, xxv, xxvime ni le derrain iour d' Avril, ni
sur les iiii. premiers iours de May, a cause de l'impediment du Service divin
ordonne par Saint Eglise, pour doubles Festes de Saint Marc, Philippe, and
Jacob, and de Saint Croix nostre Seigneur Jesu Christ, ul a nuls tells iours
que peuuent venir les Festes de l' Ascension ou Penthecoste, ou aucune autre
Feste solenmelle ordonnee par Saint Eglise, don't les premieres ou secondes
vespres par tells prorogations pourront estre destourbees. X. Item, q^a'ils
viennent audit lieu, la veille de Saint George, a l'heure de Tierce; and s'ils
ne viennent au temps assign, ils auront leur penance selon l'accord du
Chapitre. Et aceorde est, qu'ils n'entreront point au Chapitre a celle fois,
mais se tiendront par dehors a l'huis, and n'auront point de voix en rien qui
sera fait audit Chapitre, a celle fois tant seulement. Et s'ils ne viennent aux
vespres deuement au commencement, ils n'entreront point en leurs Estalz, mais
se tiendront au bas desdits Estalz, aux lieux des Choristes durant les dites
Vespres. Et semblable penance est accordee pour les non-venants par temps
devant la haute Mess and Vespres le iour de Saint George. Et s'ils ne viennent
a la dite feste, sans excusation acceptable par ledit Souuerain, ou son Depute,
sa peine sera qu'il n'entrera en son Estal la prochaine feste apres, mais se
tiendra tout en bas, comme dessus, les premieres vespres, and ira a la
Procession tout devant les trois Croix, and setiendra tout en bas, comme
dessus, toute la Mess, jusqu' a l'offrande, and offrira le derrenier. Et apres
ces penances ainsi faites, il viendra incontinent devant l'Estal du Souuerain,
ou son Depute, and demandera pardon. Et apres, ledit Souuerain, ou son Depute
luy commandera d'aller en son Estal, a son premier estat. Et s'il ne vient a la
second feste, and soit demeurant au Royaume, sans excusation alouable au
Souuerain, ou a son Depute, il n'entrera en son dit Estal deslors en avaunt,
jusques qu'il aura offert unjoyau a l'Autel de Saint George dedans ladite
Chapelle, de la value de xx. Mares; and deslors en avaunt il doublera la peine
chacun au, tant qu'il soit reconcilie. XI. Item, que tous les Compagnons dudit
Order porteront leurs Manteaux du Bleu dudit Order a l'heure des premieres
vespres jusques apres les secondes, en la feste de Saint George chacun au,
quelque part qu'ils soient, en tell maniere comme ils feroient, s'ils estoient
presens en la feste auec ledit Souuerain ou son Depute, par ainsi qu'ils soient
en lieu a leur liberte, non obstant la prorogation de la feste. XII. Item est
accord, que si aucun de ladite Compagnie soit trouue en appert sans Gartier,
qu'il pay, tantost apres la chalange, au Gardien and College, demi Marc;
except quand il est house pour Chevauchier, que adonques il sera tenu porter,
soubz son houseau, en signifiance du Iartier, un fill bleu de soye; and pourveu
aussi que null Chevalier dudit Order doresnavant enter au Chapitre sans Iartier.
XIII. Item est accord, que les Compagnons de Saint George voisent pour offrir
a la haute Mess chacun auec son Compagnon a l'opposite de luy, ordonnement
comme ils sont mis en leurs Estals; Et s'il advient que l'un ne soit a la
journee, son Compagnon, qui est a l'opposite de luy, ira par soy a l'offrande;
Et que le Souuerain, ou son Depute voise derriere toute la Compagnie, tant que
Procession soit faite en allant a ladite Chappelle. XIV. Item est ordonne, que
chacun an, lendemain de la feste Saint George, devant le departement de la
Compagnie, avaunt dite, vne Mess de Requiem sera la chante pour les ames des
Compagnons, qui sont moris, and tous Chrestiens; Et que toute la Compagnie soit
illecque, finon que aucun soit destourbe raisonnablement, ou qu'il ait congie
du Souuerain ou de son Depute, devant son departir. Et quand il advient qu'a
cause des vnidances des Compagnons soient aucuns Heaulmes, Tymbres, and Espees
qui doivent estre offerts, que devant l'offrande des Monnoyes, les Espees
soient offertes premierement, par deux Compagnons, que le Souuerain ou son
Depute vondra nommer; and depuis, le Heaulme, avecques le Tymbre, pareillement,
par deux autres de l'Ordre, par ledit Souuerain, ou son Depute assignez. XV.
Item est accord, que chacun de ladite Compagnie laissera son Minteau illecques
pour tells soudaines ven^es, and pour les point tenir du commandment du
Souuerain. XVI. Item est accord, que si aucun de ladite Compagnie vienne en
cheminant pres le dit Chastel, qu'il voise dedans, pour l'bonneur de ladite
place, s'il pourra bonnement, and s'il ne soit destourbe a just cause, and
qu'il prenne son Manteau avaunt qu'il enter en ladite Chapelle; par ainsi qu'il
n'y enter point sinon qu'il ait son Manteau sur luy. Et illecques les
Chanoines, qui y sont, viendront a luy, pour l'encontrer, and le mener en
ladite Chapelle devotement; Et s'il soit a l'beure de Mess, qu'il demeure la
pour ouir ladite Mess, en bonneur de Dieu, and de Monsieur Saint George, Et si
c'est apres Nonne, d'entrer en la maniere dessus dite, and ouir vng De
profundis des Chanoines, pour les ames de tous Chrestiens, and offrir illec. Et
si aucun des dits Compagnons, chevauche parmy la ville, and ne veulle offrir
comme accord est, que sur son obedience, par chacunes fois qu'il fauldra,
qu'il voise a ladite Chapelle, en l'honneur de Saint George, vne lieue a pied,
and aussi chacunes fois qu'il sa^t donner a l'offrande, XVII. Item est accord,
que au plutost que la mort soit cognue de qui que foit de la Compagnie dessus
dite, que le Souuerain fera chanter, pour l'ame de celuy qui est mort, mill
Messes, vng Roy estranger, buict cens Messes; le Prince, sept cens Messes;
chacun Duc, six cens; chacun Comte, trois cens; chacun Banneret, deux cens; and
chacun Bachelier, cent Messes. Et s'il ne face iceulx dedans un quartier d'an
apres la mort certifiee, qu'il double le quartier de l'entier; Et st demy-an
soit au derriere, soit double, comme dit est. Et ainsi de temps en temps
jusques a la fin de l'an, and s'il n'est accomply en l'an durant, soient les
ans doublez. XVIII. Item est accord, que fi aucun de ladite Compagnie meure,
que ledit Souuerain, ou son Depute, face, apres sa mort a luy certifiee, garnir
tous les Compagnons estans en Angleterre, par ses Lettres, qui pourront venir,
qu'ils soient devant luy, ou que s'il luy plaira assigner lieu convenable
dedans fix semaines apres la certification de la mort dessus dite. Lesquels
tous ainsi assemblez, ou au moins six, outre le Souuerain, ou son Depute dessus
dit, chacun d'iceulx, qui sont venus a l'election, nommerae neuf des plus
suffisans Chevaliers sans reproach qu'il connoist, subjectz du dit Souuerain,
ou aultres, pourveu qu'ils ne tiennent son adverse party; c'est assavoir,
trois Contes, ou de greigneur estat, trois Bannerets, and trois Bacheliers.
Lesquelles nominations escrira le chief Prelate du dit Order, c'est assavoir,
l'Evesque de Winchestre pour le temps estant, ou en son absence le Dean, ou
Registreur, ou le plus avaunt Residencier, en leur absence du dit Colliege; Et
la nomination ainsi faite par tous, ou six au moins, sera, par luy, qui l'aura
escrite, ^eoustree au Souuerain, ou a son Depute, lequel estira celuy des
nommez qui aura le plus de voix, and qui luy semblera le plus honorable au dit
Order, and profitable a sa Couronne, and au Royaume. Et en cas que aucuns de
ladite Compagnie ne vienne a l'election, s'ils ne sont destourbez par just
cause, and ladite cause signifiee dessous leurs seaux d'armes, acceptee par le
Souuerain, ou son Depute; siladite cause ne soit just, ou ne vienne aux
semonces dessus dits, est accord qu'il pay an Gardien and Colliege, pour
chanter pour celuy qui est mort, vng Marc; and a sa prochaine venue au
Chapitre, sera devant le Souuerain, ou son Depute, and la Compagnie sur la
terre, au milieu du Chapitre, tant qu'il soit reconcilie par le Souuerain, ou
son Depute and la Compagnie. XIX. Item est accord, que en cas si aucun des
Chevaliers de ladite Compagnie meure, and vng aultre est eleu, il aura tantost
apres l'Election le Iartier, en signifiaence qu'il est vng des Compagnons du
Iartier, and le M^nteau luy sera deliure pour son habit, quand il sera mis en
son Estal, and non devant. Et en cas qu'il meure devant qu'il ait receu son
habit, il ne sera mie nomme pour vng des Fondeurs, puisqu'il default avoir
pleniere possession de son estat. Mais il aura la moitie des Messes dessus
nommez pour la liuree de son Gartier, and rien oultre cela. Et si iceluy eleu
ue vient en toute bonne haste, apres la reception du Gartier, au dit lien pour
estre estalle, and par especial dedans l'an de son election, s'il soit
Chevalier demourant dedans le Royaume, s'il n'a excusation acceptable au
Souuerain, ou a son Depute and la Compagnie, soit l'election vnidee de celuy,
and voise le Souuerain, ou son Depute, and la Compagnie a nounelle election; Et
ne seront l'Espee ni le Heaulme, mis sur son Estal, devant la venne de l'esleu
dedans le dit Chastel, affin que s'il ne vient comme dessus, que ses dits Espee
and Heaulme ne soient abatus ny devallez, mais honnestement mis bors du Chaeur,
and remaindront a l'usage du dit Colliege. XX. Item est accord, que tous
Estrangiers, qui seront esleuz Compagnons du dit Order, seront certifiez par le
Souuerain de leur election, and que leur Gartier, leur Manteau, and les
Estatutz de l'Ordre, soubs le commun Seel, leur seront envoyez au constages du
dit Souuerain, en toute bonne haste, and au plus tard soient ils certifiez
dedans quatre mois apres l'election, affin qu'ils se peuuent par les dits
Estatutz aviser, s'ils veulent recevoir le dit Iartier, ou non, and que tous
tells Estrangiers de quelque dignite, estat, ou condition qu'ils soient,
envoyent, dedans sept mois apres ladite certification a culz faite par le
Souuerain, and la reception de la Iarretiere, un Procureur suffisant, selon
l'estat de son Seigneur and Maistre, pourveu qu'il soit Chevalier, and sans
reproach, pour estre estalle eu son lieu, qui apportera avecque luy vng Manteau
de soye bleue de l'Ordre, de par celuy qui l'envoyera, and son Heaume, son
Tymbre, and son Espee, pour demourer au Colliege pour toujours; lequel Manteau
par le Souuerain, ou son Depute, au temps que ledit Procureur sera estalle, luy
sera mis sur son bras dextre, a le tenir sur son dit bras, a l'heure divine
prochaine, apres qu'il sera estalle au nom de son dit Seigneur and Maistre,
sans plus le porter en aucun temps, and sons avoir voix en Chapitre, ou y
entrer, en l'absence de celuy qui l'envoyera. Et est asscavoir, que cette
faveur est faite aux Estrangiers, qui ne peuuent bonnement venir en leurs
propres persons, qu'ils peuuent estre estallez par Procureur, affin qu'ils
soient participans ez Messes and Prieres entieres du dit Order, car ilz
failleroient de la moitie, s'ils n'estoient estallez devant la mort. Et
pareillement est ordonne des gens du dit Order esleuz de nouueau estants en la
guerre du Roy, ou ailleurs, de son commandment, de recevoir le benefice du dit
estat en ce qui appartiendra seulement a leur Estallation. XXI. Item est
accord, que si aucun des Contes, Bannerets, ou Bacheliers, meurt, celuy qui
viendra en son lieu, soit il Conte, Banneret, ou Bachelier, tiendra le mesme
Estal que son Predecesseur tenoit, and ne changer a point, for sprins le
Prince, qui tiendra le premier Estal, a l'opposite du Souuerain, si tossed comme
il sera esleu; ainsi que par ce cas, vng Conte tiendra l'Estal d'un Bachelier,
and le Bachelier d'vng Conte: and c'est pour cause de seavoir qui furent les
premiers Fondeurs. XXII. Item est accord, que tous les Compagnons du dit
Order, a leur premiere entree, donneront chascun vng certain prix selon son
estat, en maintenance des Chanoines and poures Chevaliers demourants au dit
lieu, and des aumosnes qui y sont perpetuellement ordonnees illec; C'est
ascavoir, le Souuerain, quarante Marcs; vng Roy estranger, vingt Livers; le
Prince, vingt Marcs; chascun Duc, dix Livers; chascun Conte, dix Marcs; chascun
Banneret, cent Solz; and chascun Bachelier, cincq Marcs. Et ne seront leurs
Heaulmes ny leurs Espees mises sur leurs Estalz, jusques qu'ils auront pay a
leurs entrees les sommes dessus dites, selon l'estat de celuy a qui il
appartient. Et est ascavoir, que le Souuerain sera tenu de payer pour l'entree
de chascun Estrangier esleu a l'estallement de son Procureur. Et ces dons pour
ce sont ordonnez, affin que chascun qui enter en cet Order soit le plus digne
d'avoir le nom, titre, and privilege d'un des Fondeurs du mesme Order. XXIII.
Item est ordonne, que si tossed que l'vng de la Compagnie soit mort, que son Escu
fait de metal de ses Arms, and son Heaulme soient fichez au dos de son Estal;
and les aultres Fondeurs qui viendront apres auront leurs Escus and leurs
Heaulmes en la mesme maniere dessoubs les premiers Fondeurs. Mais leurs Escus
ny leurs Heaulmes ne seront pas si grands comme ceulz des premiers Fondeurs.
XXIV. Item est accord, que chacun entrant au dit Order promette par luy, and
jure par son suffisant Procureur, qui sera estalle au nom de luy, de loyaument
garder and observer les Estatutz du dit Order, a son loyal pouuoir; Et ne sera
null estalle par Procureur s'il n'est Estrangier, qui bennement ne peut venir en
sa propre person pour estre estalle. XXV. Item est accord, qu'en cas que le
Souuerain soit horse du pais, ou qu'il ne pourra en propre person fair ce qui
appartient a l'estallation, qu'il pourra donner pouuoir a l'vng des Compagnons,
pour fair la mesme chose en son nom. XXVI. Item est accord, que vng commun
Seel soit fait, lequel demourra en la guard de celuy que le Souuerain vouldra
nommer and assigner. XXVII. Item, que chascun des Compagnons du dit Order
doresnavant ait les dessus dits Estatutz soubs le commun Seel avaunt dit; and
que l'Original soit seellee auee le dit Seel, and demeure en la Tresorerie du
dit Colliege a tousiours. XXVIII. Item, and apres la mort de chascun Compagnon
du dit Order, ses Executeurs seront tenus de renvoyer les Estatutz du dit Order
au dit Colliege; and les delivrer au Gardien d'iceluy pour le temps estant.
XXIX. Item est accord, que null des Chevaliers de Saint George, de la Compagnie
du Gartier, ne voise horse de la terre, sans le sceu and congie du Souuerain. Et
pour ce est aussi accord, que si aucun voyage se fait, ou autre chose
quelconque, qui appartient a l'honneur de Chevalerie, le Souuerain du dit
Order, de sa grace, preferera les Compagnons du dit Order devant tous aultres.
XXX. Item, que null du dit Order ne soit arm l'vng contre l'aultre, si ce n'est
en la guerre de son Souuerain Seigneur, ou en son droict and just querelle. Et
s'il advient que auscun du dit Order soit retenu auec son Seigneur, ou tenant
sa party and querelc, and la party adverse desire avoir aucun aultre
Compagnon du dit Order avecque luy; Ence cas ne sera tell Compagnon retenu, mais
sera tenu de soy excuser tout oultrement, a cause de ce que son Compagnon est
arm de l'autre cost, and fut retenu devant luy. Et sera chascun Compagnon du
dit Order tenu d'excepter quant il fera sa retenue qu'il soit descharge tout
entierement de son service de guerre, si aucuns des Compagnons sont paravant
retenus ou tenants la party adverse; Et si celuy qui est secondement retenu
aucunement ne cognoist que aucun de ses Compagnons soit devant luy retenu, ou
arm avec sa party adverse; soit tenu l'avant dit Compagnon a la premiere
cognoissance qu'il en pourra avoir, de soy excuser envers son Maistre, and
laisser celle querele. XXXI. Item, que toutes les Licenses des Chevaliers de
l'Ordre qui iront horse pour acquerir honneur, and toutes Certifications, ou
Mandements, a fair touchant le dit Order doresenavant par le Souuerain, seront
faits soubs le commun Seel, lequel remaindra en la guard d'un des Compagnons du
dit Order, a la volonte du dit Souuerain. Et si celuy qui l'aura en guard
depart pour cause raisonnable, horse de la presence du dit Sou^erain,
qu'adonques il laissera le dit Seel en la guard d'un aultre Compagnon du dit
Order, estant present auec le Souuerain, and par son assignement. Ainsi que le
dit Seel ne soit nulle fois bors de la presence du dit Souuerain, tant qu'il
sera dedans le Royaume: Et pareillement en son absence fera son Depute auec le
dit Seel. Et si ainsi est que le dit Souuerain purpose de soy absenter, and
aller horse du Royaume pour cause raisonable, il est ordonne par assent de la
dite Compagnie, qu'il aura vng Signet convenable a l'Ordre du Gartier pour
mettre au dos du commun Seel de l'Ordre, qui sera auecque luy ou qu'il soit,
and sera mis en tous les Acts qui seront faits debors par le dit Souuerain, en
difference de ceulx qui seront faits en Angleterre. XXXII. Item est accord,
qui si aucun Chevalier de la dite Compagnie par devotion veult demourrer en la
dite maison continnellement, qu'il ordonne pour son viure, and pour sa demeure,
du sien propre. XXXIII. Item, si aucun aultre C^evalier qui ne soit mie dela
dite Compagnie y veult demourrer par devotion, soit ordonne pour sa demeure
selon l' accord du dit Souuerain and dela dite Compagnie. XXXIV. Item est
accord, que si aucun Chevalier, ou anltre person venlt donner aucunes terres
ou rentes, pour estre participans de toutes les bonnes Oroisons and prieres qui
seront faites en la dite maison, son nom sera enter, and les Chanoines and
poures Chevaliers prieront pour luy perpetuellement: parainsi que le dit
Gardien and les Chanoines du dit Colliege doresenavant ne prendront sur iceluy
Colliege aucune charge, sans l' advisement du dit Souuerain, ou son Depute and
les Compagnons de l' Order presens a^^^ques eu l' absence du Souuerain. XXXV.
Item est accord, qui si ancun des Chanoines meure, and le dit Souuerain soit
horse du pais, que le Gardien, qui pour le temps sera, envoyera ses Lettres au
dit Souuerain pour vng aultre, que le Souuerain vouldra nommer and y ordonner.
XXXVI. Item sera fait vng Registre, de par le Souuerain and la Compagnie, qui
soit le plus scachant du dit Colliege, pour estre present en chacun Chapitre de
l'Ordre, and en registrer loyaument les Elections, and les noms des esleux, les
peines, and causes des peines, les reconciliations des punis, and tous aultres
acts and leurs causes, appurtinants audit Order, de Chapitre en Chapitre, and
d' an en an. Et soit le dit Registre loyaument sermente de loyaument registrer
a la reception de son office, and que au commencement de chacun Chapitre la
vigille de Saint George, soit le Registre de l' an precedent leu devant le
Souuerain, ou son Depute, and ladite Compagnie, affin qu'il puisse estre
corrigie, si besoin en estoit.
The Statutes established by King Henry the Eighth, recorded in the Black Book
of the Order.
UBI clarissimus, invictissimus, and inter fortunatissimos hujus Mundi
Principes meritissime numeratus, Edoardus Tertius, Angliae Rex and Franciae,
Dominus Hiberniae, etc. Ad honorem Omnipotentis Dei, beatissimae virginis
Mariae, praeclari Martyris Divi Georgii, nobilissimi Regni Anglorum
insignissimi Patroni, and Sancti Edoardi Confessoris, ob stabilitatem atque
incrementum Catholicae fidei, bonorum morum augmentum, and omnigenae virtutis
exercitium, intra Castrum Windesori, viginti sex nobilium ac fortium Equitum
societatem atque ordinem instituit, quem, a praelustri Subligaculo
cognominatum, Divo quoque Georgio nuncupavit, and ad tutamen decus, atque
complementum ejusdem laudabiles Ordinationes ac Statuta condidit, a Collegiis
and coordinatis illis inviolabiliter observanda, in quibus obscura quaedam,
ambigua, and lucidae explanationis atque interpretationis egena extiterunt,
quaedam vero addenda atque amplificanda visa sunt; potentissimus,
invictissimus, atque excellentissimus Princeps Henricus Octavus, auspice Deo,
Rex Angliae and Franciae, Defensor fidei, Dominus Hiberniae, etc. hujus Ordinis
optimo jure Supremus, per eum amorem, quem erga Militiae statum and nunc habet,
and semper babebat, cujus splendorem indies auctum iri ardentissime desiderat,
and ob frequens Sociorum ejusdem Ordinis desiderium, consilium, and assensum;
vicesimo quarto die Aprilis, Anno gratiae Millesimo quingentesimo vicesimo
secundo, Regni vero sui quarto decimo, obscuritates istas quorundam in
quibusdam e Statutis illis Articulorum atque ambiguitates interpretatus est,
and elucidavit, quaedam insuper (ut res ferebat) adjiciens atque amplificans.
Que profecto statuta, Ordinationes, interpretationes, declarationes,
reformationes, and explanationes, cum additamentis, secundum verum ac germanum
sensum a Supremo cum Collegis omnibus ejusdem Ordinis imposterum observari
debent, juxta modum qui subsequitur.

I. Decretum inprimis est, quod Rex, heredes, and Successores ejus, Angliae,
post eun, Reges, erunt imperpetuum praefati Ordinis and amicissime Societatis
Supremi. Ad quos deinceps pro suo cujusque tempore declaratio, interpretatio,
decisio, correctio, solutio, and dispensatio Statutorum, sicubi nodus
extiterit, aut ambiguitas animos indiversum traxerit, omnino spectabunt. II.
Nemo deligetur in Socium hujus Ordinis, nisi qui nomine, Armis, ac sanguine
generosus, and eques irreprebensus existat, nec aliquis collega hujus Ordinis
abhinc eum (dum electio suscipitur) nominabit, quem ex animo nota non vacare
judicat. Generosus autem nomine, Armis, and Sanguine, is intelligitur, qui,
preter Patrent ac Matrem, avos and proavos quoque generosi sanguinis habuerit.
Irreprehensus and sine nota judicatur qui nullum ex tribus hiis sequentibus
incurrisse probatur. Prima nempe species est, si quis Eques condemnatus
heretica pravitate fuerit, minus Catholice senserit, aut publicam eo nomine
penam dederit. Altera, si lose Majestatis convictus fuerit. Tertia, si de bello
fugiat, quod Supremus, vel ab^eo designatus, and authoritatem ejus habens,
gerit, postea quam vexilla protensa sunt and pagna occepit iniri. Qui tam
turpiter illine aufugerit, merito reprehendendus existimari debet, nec in
presentem Ordinem eligendus. Et si continga^ (quod absit) aliquem antea electum
rem posthac tam ignominiosam committere, is, ut commeretur, ab hoc Ordine
deponetur, in proximi Consilii coelebratione, si ita Supremo ac Societati visum
fuerit. III. Quotannis vigilia divi Georgii, hoc est, vicesimo secundo Aprilis,
and si juxta ritum Ecclesiae divina tum Georgio minime celebrentur, omnes
equites hujus Ordinis, ubi fuerint, modo sua liberate gaudeant, Trabea,
Tunica, Humerale and Torque, debito seilicet hujus Ordinis habitu, rite
induentur hora tertia post meridiem, donec officia vespertina cum cena and
Missa post cenam persoluta fuerint. In matutinis itaque diei sequentis solenni
processu, summo sacrificio, secundisque vesperis, immo diem^totum usque dum
Cena cum Missa post cenam finiantur, simili modo incedent. IV. Si vero (caus'a
postulante) prefata solemnitas prorogari debeat, vel Supremus eam prorogandam
esse censeat, ibi Commilitones omnes qui fuerint intra Regnum, vigilia pariter
ac die Sancti Georgii, aderunt in obsequium Supremi, quocunque Regni sui loco
manserit. Ubi tum inservientes eidem Officia Sancti Georgii solemniter
observabunt modo ritus Ecclesiae Sanctae id ita permittat. Quod si mos
Ecclesiae aliud judicat nibilominus eodem tempore Supremo inservituri aderunt,
biis cum eo d^vinis interfuturi, quae tunc celebranda statuuntur, Ceremonias
item alias ad unam impleturi, tam ut consilium ineant praedicta vigilia post
meridiem, ante vesperas, die sequente post matutinas ante Missam, and ^odem
meridie ante secundas vesperas, quam ut habitu suo toto solemniter induti in
sua quisque sede se componant, primas vesperas in vigilia, and in die
Matutinas, ac Missam cum secundis reverenter audi^uri, and postridie Missam
solennem pro defunctis; ad quam venientes trabeis ex more supertegentur, sed
togis subtus ut libebit, ante cujus initium si qua Electio vel res alioquin
ardua peragenda tum instet, ad Consilium se recipient, illic omnia de more
facturi, ac si Windesori forent. Quod si Supremus ad Consilium ingressus
fuerit, and Commilitonum aliquis cum eo minus affuerit, ob eam negligentiam
omne id temporis quo tum Supremus cum aliis intus erit, foris ipse manebit. Si
vero quis eorum ad vesperas in vigilia, matutinas, Missam, aut vesperas in die
tardior accesserit, is, quoad illud divini Officii peractum fuerit; vel stabit
vel genna flectet in eo loco quo Choristae solent. Sin praedicta vigilia cum
die sequente quivis eorum non advenerit, ut Supremo serviat, nec potestatem
praeobtentam aut justam alioquin absentie causam Supremoque placentem obtendere
queat, ille proximo Georgianae solennitatis observandae, sedile suum in
praesentia Supremi non intrabit, nec id etiam Windesori, and december praeterea
libras in Ornamenta Collegii dependet. V. Quicunque Commilitonum ipsorum
praedicta vigilia ac die potestatem adeptus, aut alioquin absuerit domi suae,
vel alibi commoratus intra Ecclesiam aut Sacellum illic ubi tunc divinis
aderit, praecipuum unum sedile ad honorem Supremi faciet adornari, in quo
quidem Ordinis hujus insignia intra praelustre subligaculum illocabit: Deinde
sedem aliam apparabit ab illa Supremi (quoad conjectura pro modo ac forma
Templi colligere potest) ita distantem, vt and Windesori cernitur, vbi propriis
insignibus appensis se pro tempore constituet. Integro tum ex more contegetur
habitu, divinis (ut prius ostensum) interfuturus, quae ritus Ecclesiae servanda
signabit. Ingrediens atque egrediens, and quoties alioqui pretergredietur, tam
summum Altar, in honorem Dei, quam Sedile Regium, ad honorem Supremi, debita
genuflectione reverentiaque consultabit: nisi hic Imperator, Rex, Princeps, aut
Elector extiterit, quibus, ut cordi erit, seeds erigere ceteraque rite peragere
licebit. VI. Si vero annua Georgii solennitas haud prorogetur, sed ipsa vigilia
diesque divi Georgii, prout moris est, observata fuerit Windesori, neque
Supremo liceat aut saltem collibeat illic adesse, tum ubi locorum intra Regnum
suum fuerit; horum Equitum quoslibet assignare poterit ad obsequium sibi
prestandum, and quicquid est Ceremoniarum oportune perimplendum, ac si
Windesori presents essent; id quod qui rite perfecerint, ab ea festivitate,
quae servanda est Windesori, veniunt excusandi. VII. Sique Supremus Georgiana
solennitate haud queat interesse, loco sui deputabit alterum Literis suis ad id
destinatis, qui cum sibi coassistentibus vigilia Concilium inibit, hora
tertiarum, hoc est, hora tertia post meridiem, and reliquam postridie
solennitatem adimplebit, Regiis duntaxat impensis, pro tempore supra nominato.
Novas autem Ordinationes haud instituet, sed delicta corriget, and quicquid
arbitrio Concilii necessarium factu visum fuerit, ipse faciet. VIII. Quotannis
vigilia Divi Georgii, hoc est, vicesimo secundo die Aprilis, convenient omnes
Equites Georgiani intra Castrum Windesori, five in regno seu foris extiterint,
modo commode possint, divinis Georgianis illic interfuturi, and pleno habitu
Ordinis induentur, quamdiu divina celebrantur seriatim in locis considentes.
Habebit autem ipsorum quisque vexillum and Ensem cum Galea atque appendicibus
supra sedile suum confixa, que permanebunt illic quoad vixerit, ad honorem
ejus, and in argumentum quod Catholicae fidei and Sanctae Ecclesiae certus
propugnator ipse sit futurus, vti Equestris Ordo deposcit. Quod si festivitas
illa intra quindecem dies a Paschate, vel die quo abstinetur a Carnibus,
evenerit, quo Supremus ipse volet, prorogabitur, dum^odo dies assignandus
quartus, quintus, aut sextus and vicesimus nec vltimus Aprilis fuerit, neque
ullus e primis quatuor Maii, ne fieret impedimento celebrationi Divinorum ab
Ecclesia constitutae, in honor Divi Marci, Philippi, and Jacobi, and
Inventionis Sanctae Crucis: nee talis item dies quo Festum Ascensionis,
Penthecostes, aut alioqui solenniter institutum primis aut secundis suis
vesperis posset destitui vel interturbari. IX. Quod si qui tempestive (quomodo
praesignatum est) non advenerit, neque satis idoneam absentiae causam habeant,
quam Supremus aut deputatus ab eo probabilem esse judicabit, vel nisi Supremus
absentiam ejus temporis illis condonaret, literis suis ob id ipsum eo
destinatis, in quibus eorum nomina cum causis absentiae contineantur: penas ea
de re luent arbitrio presidis and Concilii tum collecti. Formula Supplicii
talis erit. Non ingredietur quisquis ita dereliquerit concilii suscepti locum,
sed in hostio foris expectabit, neque suffragii in vlla reconferendi facultatem
habebit eo tempore. Sin ad Principium vesperarum non affuerint, ad seeds suas
ingredi non licebit, sed subtus ante seeds suas in locis Choristarum stabunt,
donec illae vesperae sint finitae par poena manebit iis qui ad solennem diei
Missam and posteriores vesperas tempore non accesserint. Siquis autem sine
probabili causa a toto festo abesse praesumpserit, is anno sequente, dum
festivitas agetur, a sede sua probibebitur, and stabit interim, vt praefatum
est, dumque procedens chorus supplicabit, tres cruces, quae feruntur,
antecedet, and subtus deinceps, ut antea, perstabit, vsque dum ad offerendum
Ordo conscendat, vbi hic postremus offeret. Qua peracta penitentia, veniet e
vestigio ad Supremi sedem aut ab eo designati, veniam rogaturus. Tumque
Supremus, aut ab eo Deputatus, remittet eum ad sedem suam, vt antiquum jus ibi
retineat. Si vero deinceps altero festo abesse non formidarit, manens intra
regnum, nec legitimam alioquin excusationem babens, per Supremum aut ab eo
designatum approbandam (vti praenotatum est) ad sedem illam suam haud
introibit, donec apud Supremum Altar Sancto Georgio dicatum, monumentum vnum
argenteum viginti marcarum obtulerit, and deinceps annuatim idem adgeminabit,
vsque dum reconciliari procurarit. X. Quisquis Equitum istorum palam foris
incedens subligar suum tybiae non circumligarit, vbi primum deprehensus fuerit
per quemvis quinque Officialium Ordinis, aut Rectorum Collegii, duos aureos
illico monitori dependet; nisi cum ad Equum ocreis indutus se accinxerit. Tunc
enim sat erit si filum caerulei coloris e serico subter ocream ad subligaris
indicium habeat: par omnino supplicium infligetur ei qui citra subligar
objunctum tibiae Concilii domum introibit. Quisquis autem Officialium aut
Decanus delictum istiusmodi compererit, ad cum ipsum precium pene pertinebit.
XI. Quoties Equites isti de more trabeis induentur, Supremum bini precedent, eo
ipso ordine quo e regione consident. Si quis illinc abfuerit, Socius qui e
Regione sedet, solus incedet. Id quod observari oportet tam in processu ad
supplicandum, quam temporibus and ^ocis aliis. At quum sit offerendum, Supremus
aut ab eo designatus, primus omnium ascendet, and ceteri deinceps, Officiales
autem eundo Ordinem suum usualem observabunt in omni processu, tam intra
Sacellum and Concilium, quam in quibusiis locis aliis. Nimirum Equites cum sit
epulandum, omnes insimul ex vna part mensae recumbent, eo Ordine quem and in
Templo sedentes aut stantes habent, and no^ secundum natalitiae dignitatis
gradum ant honoris, nisi filii Regum sint, Regum fratres, Principes, aut Duces
externi, qui loca sortientur ex dignitate sui praeclari Status. Et consurgentes
codem Ordine constabunt, quo and ante sedebant. XII. Postridie festivitatis, ad
honorem Divi Georgii, Windesori servatae, Commilitones, antequam in discessu
valedicant, in hostio Concilii Trabeas quibus volent indumentis aliis
superinduent, and deinde Missam pro defanctis solenniter in sacello
percantandam audient, pro defunctis inquam omnibus Christianis, sed praesertim
illis, qui antea fuerant hujus Ordinis, simul omnes interesse debent, nisi
forsan aliquis probabilem absentiae causam habeat, vel a Supremo aut ejus
Deputato potestatem abeundi praeobtinuerit. Et cum contingat per mortem
alienjus ipsorum, ut vexillum, gladius, and Galea cum appendicibus veniant
offerenda, ante pecuniam offerri debent. Ordo nimirum offerendi talis erit, vt
vexillum inprimis a duobus Commilitonibus per Supremum, aut ab eo designatum,
assignandis offeratur, mox Ensis similiter a duobus aliis. Postremo Galea, cum
annexis similiter, a duobus. Siquis autem anno praecedente obierat, quotquot
Equitum Windesori aderunt, in ea Missa pro defunctis singulatim cereum unum
offerent, cum Scutello, in quo pingentur insignia desuncti. Si plures uno
mortui fuerint suum cuique Scutellum affigetur, habens argenteam laminam
quatuor denariorum prope lumen appositum. Qui quidem cerei cum Scutellis sumptu
ips^rum Equitum conficientur. XIII. Decretum est insuper ut in hoc
Windesoriensi Collegio sit inperpetuum Decanus unus, cum duodecim Canonicis
Secularibus, ^uos Sacerdotes oportebit esse cum ingrediuntur, vel (ut multum)
intra annum sequentem. Erunt preterea tredecim Sacerdotes alii, quorum pars una
Canonici minores, altera Vicarii vocabuntur. Qui si Sacerdotes in ingressu non
fuerint, citra omnem excusationem, intra annum erum. Erunt itidem Clerici
tredecim totidemque Choristae, qui cum Canonicis minoribus and Vicariis, de
quibus ante diximus, quotidie in choro ministrabunt, canentes and orantes, ut
tempus and res ipsa postulabunt. Nimirum omnes tam Majores quam minores
Canonici, Vicarii, Clerici, and Choristae, precari tenebuntur, ut Supremus cum
cunctis Commilitonibus hujus Ordinis vivat, valeat, and omnia ^aelicit^r agat,
utque defunctorum Equitum animae in pace requiescant. Praesentatio vero
Canonicorum ubi contigerit, ad Supremum solummodo spectabit. Cumque
Commilitonum aliquis Windesorum veniens intra chorum ad sedem suam ex more se
receperit, Canonici reliquusque Chorus stabunt in suis infra sedibus, ubi in
festis Divi Georgii solent. Dum absint Equites, been licebit Canonicis and
ceteris e choro Sacerdotibus, superiores seeds occupare. XIV. Vnisquisque
Socius hujus Ordinis Trabeam unam relinquet intra Collegium Windesori, ob
diversas occasiones quae possent obvenire, viz. ut observare queant atque
adimplere si quas Ordinationes praecepta and mandata Supremus excogitarit, and
excogitata proposuerit in Concilio: qui consensu sex Commilitonum praesentium
p^terit, quando and ubi libebit, concilium instituere in causas singulas quae
sibi visae fuerint. XV. Quinque Ministri Officiales ad hunc Ordinem speciatim
attinentes ^runt; Praelatus, viz. Cancellarius, Scriba, Rex Armorum, cui est a
Subligari cognomen additum, and Hostiarius, qui a Nigella virga, quam gestabit,
agnomen habebit; qui cum recipiendi sint Sacramento obvincientur, quod, velut a
secretis, fideles ac taciturni erunt, in omnibus quae spectabunt ad hunc
Ordinem negotiis. Horum Iuramenta requirentur expressius in Libello, qui
Ordinationum inscribitur. XVI. Stabilientur ibidem Pauperculi tredecim Equites,
qui minus alioquin habent unde vivant, habituri victum competentem and
vestitum. Qui solum ad hoc obligabuntur ut in honorem Dei, beatae Mariae, Divi
Georgii, omniumque Sanctorum, and pro salute animarum, quotidianas ibi preces
fund^nt. Horum impensae necess^riae cum privilegiis eorum infra describentur,
post praedictas Ordinationes. Sane Electio ipsorum, ut and prefatae
Canonicorum, omnino referetur ad Supremum. Haebebunt Equites ipsi pauperculi
Colobea coccinea rubrive coloris cum Scutello Divi Georgii super humerum, sed
sine subligari quocunque. XVII. Si quis Sociorum hujus Ordinis intra duo
paessuum Millia Castello appropinquet, illud ipsum introibit, ad honorem loci,
modo possit, nec alium justum habeat impedimentum. Introiturus autem sacellum
induetur antea Trabea sine qua non licebit ullo pacto introire. Introeuntem
Ganonici praesentes accipient, and reverenter in Sacellum adducent. Quod si
celebrandae Missae tempus extiterit, eandem ipse audiet, ad honorem Dei,
Sanctique Georgii; sin post meridiem, aut alias advenerit, chorum (ut praefatum
est) introibit, ubi Canonici, cum ceteris, Psalmum pro defunctis absolvent, dum
ipse offeret and ad sedem sese suam recipit. Quod si quisquis illorum
pertranseat oppidum, nec ingrediatur, ut offerat, uti praefixum est, tum sub
obedientiae vinculo, quoties ita deliquerit, a Sacello ad e^m locum pedester
ibit, and Statherem offeret. Distantia certe non amplior intelligitur quam
duorum duntaxat milliarium, ut ostensum antea. XVIII. Vbi primum mors alicujus
horum Equi^um certo significata fuerit, mox Supremus unum Missarum mill animae
defuncti celebrari efficiet. Rex externus, octies centum; Princeps, septies
centum; Dux unusquisque sexcentas; Marchio, quadriugentas and quinquaginta;
Comes, trecentas; Vicecomes, Ducentas quinquaginta; seu Baro, seu Baronettus,
Ducentas; Bacchalaureus Eques, Centum. Siquis autem, post mortem ^andem Regiis
Literis indicatam, a^te tres menses exactos non id ipsum perfici curavit;
quartam partem praedictae summae geminabit; si non ante medium anni
praeteritum, missas adduplicabit; sicque deinceps in finem anni. Quod si intra
annum minus absolverit, in hanc formam annos adgeminabit. XIX. Vbi primum
Supremus, aut ab eo designatus, certior factus fuerit de morte istiusmodi,
illico literas emittet ad Commilitones omnes hujus Ordinis, qui fuerint intra
regnum Angliae, ut omnino secum assint in loco congruo sibique viso, ante sex
hebdomadas post significationem hanc ad se factam. Qui quidem omnes ita
congregati, vel (ut minimum) sex little, cum Supremo, aut ipsius Deputato,
Ordine quisque suo, nominabunt novem e dignissimis atque electissimis
Equitibus, qui Supremo fuerint subditi, vel ei nullatenus adversarii; tres viz.
primos, Duces, Marchiones, aut Comites, vel hiis Condition Superiores; tres
alios Barons aut Baneretos; tres sane postremos Bachalaureos Equites.
Nomenclaturas hasce summus Praelatus, Episcopus scilicet Wintoniensis, si
Praesens fuerit: sin abfuerit, Cancellarius, Decanus, Scriba, vel maxim Senex
e residentibus conscribet: and conscriptas Supremo, vel ejus Gerenti vices, qua
oportet reverentia commonstrabit. Is vero deinceps illum pronuntiabit electum
qui pluribus suffragiis adnitatur, seu quem Supremus ipse digniorem,
honorabiliorem, utiliorem, Regnoque suo and Coronae magis idoneum esse
judicabit. Si quis autem Equitum hujus Ordinis admonitus haud affuerit, nisi
justam absentiae causam habeat, quam and sub Sigillo insignium suorum
significatum iverit, ^deo justam inquam and rationabilem, ut Supremus eam, vel
ab eo designatus, approbarit, and talem esse judi^^rit, ut approbari debeat,
poenas dabit. Nam si minus justam aut idoneam esse causam, Supremus aut
Deputatus existimabit, Decano ac Collegio persolvet viginti solidos legalis
monetae, quos in celebrationes pro defuncto oportebit impendi. Itaque cum
proxime venerit ad Concilium, ibidem in medio coetu coram Supremo procumbet,
donec per Supremum aut Deputatum, and reliquum omne Sodalitium reconciliatus
fuerit. XX. Quando post mortem alicujus istorum Equitum alter in defuncti locum
surrogatur, e vestigio qui eligitur ornatu Subfibuli decorabitur, in planum
argumentum quod dehinc illius Ordinis Equestris sit unus habendus. Deinde cum
ad id facta Commissio in Concilio Windesori lecta fuerit, coram Supremo, vel
ipsius vicem gerente, caeterisque ea de c^usa congregatis, Trabea cum Humerali
inferetur. Mox ipse deducetur medius duobus Equitibus aliis ejusdem Ordinis,
quos Officiales antecedent, and alii Nobiles atque obsequiosi stipabunt,
Trabeam autem gestabit ante eum Commilitonum unus, vel Garterus Rex Armorum,
donec veniat ad locum sedis occupandae. Infra quam accepto Iuramento, indutus
Trabea revertetur ad'Concilium, ubi de manu Supremi, vel ejus Deputati, Torque
coornabitur. Sicque pleno insignitus habitu cum caeteris incedet, sedebit,
stabit. Ceterum magni Principes externi been poterunt (uti jam ante
consueverunt compendii causa) ^mictum integrum intra concilium indui. Quod si
quis ante mori^tur quam habitum hunc acceperit, minime fundatorum (...)
denominabitur, eo quod plenam status sui possess^one^^ hand obtinuerat. Habebit
autem Miffarum medietatem, quia Subligaris ornamentum ante susceperat, and
nihil supra. Electus vero, Subligaculoque donatus (quod in se est) festinabit
ad locum, ut in sedem sibi debitam introducatur. Si intra a^^^m minus
advenerit, and in Regno m^userit, nec excusationem aliquam condignam, and a
Supremo vel ejus Deputato, probandam habuerit: ejus electio praedicta non
valebit, sed irrita manebi^; and Supremus aut ab eo designatus c^m reliquo
Commilitonum c^tu novam electionem incboabit. Quapropter vexillum, ensis, and
Galea, cum appendicibus ejus, ut prius electi, non appendentur Sedili suo intra
Castellum, usque dum eo venerit, e^ propter quod si non advenerit, Ornamenta
praedicta ^anquam non citra dedecus baud deponantur, sed extra chorum honest
deponantur, ad utilitatem and emolumentum Ordinis and Collegii remansura.

XXI. Exteri quique, ad praeclaram hanc Societatem admissi, certiores inde
fieri debent per Supremi literas, quae festinanter ad eos dirigentur, cum
statutis sub Sigillo communi Ordinis, Supremi nim^^um impensis, ut multum intra
quatuor menses ab electione certi fient, ut iidem Principes perlectis illisce
literis deliberare quea^t, Ordinem illum nec ne suscipere libeat, aut expediat,
nisi forsan idem Supremus, interea temporis, per res alioqui graves atque
arduas impedimentum habeat. Tunc enim pote^^ ^st^m electionis hujus
significationem in aliud ^^^pus ex sententia prorogare. At ubi significatio
certa facta, and ei ad quem missa fuerit grata atque accepta intelligitur; ibi
Supremus, per Oratores suos, amictum integrum cum ^ubligari and Torque
destinabit ad eundem. Ips^^^o sic electi and donati, cujuscunque Conditionis
status aut honoris extiterint, intra septem menses postqu^m praefata
susceperint insignia, and illud ipsum quod agitur sibi perquam gratum fore
significatum iverint, Procuratorem remittent idoneum, Majestati ^ive honori sui
Domini been respondentem, ut debitam eidem suo Domino sedem praeoccupet, eiq^
^^^^dere incipiat. Praefixum est sane ut Eques om^ino fit irreprebensus* nec
illaudatus, qui Trabeam secum afferet ostream cerulei Coloris, a Domino suo cum
Vexillo, Ense, Galea, and appendicibus, ut suis in locis intra Collegium
quamdiu Dominus ille suu^ superstes fuerit, honorifice remaneant. Trabea vero
sic allata quando vice Domini sui in sedem illius est introducendus, per
Supremum, aut ab eo designatum, in brachi^m illi dexterum imponetur: Inde per
duos Equites ejusdem Ordinis ab hostio Concilii deducetur, ad sedile Domini,
infra quod persistens, nomine praefati sui Domini, Sacramento vincietur and
paulo mox in sedem illam introducetur, in qua sedens, stans, aut procumbens
quanto tempore divina celebrantur, Trabeam illam super eadem dextera gestabit.
Quam nunquam gestare debet, nec ull^^^n concilio suffragium conferet, aut
absente Domino suo illuc introibit. Sin autem intra septem hos menses
Procuratorem s^^m non miserit (ut praef^^^^ est) neque sufficientem
excusationem Supremo illiusve Deputato, satis acceptabilem habeat: tunc illius
electio praemissa evacuabitur; nist forsan Eques ille prae magnis ^rduisque
rebus ali^^ irretitus esse comprobetur. In boc enim articulo, intra unum adhuc
mensem post, ad Supremum, aut ab eo designatum, excusationem emittere licebit.
Sin itaque talia causari posset impedimenta quae Supremus aut ab eo Deputatu^
honesta, laudabilia, necessariave judicabit, quatuor ultra Mensium mora concedi
poterit. Intra quos si minus advenerit, ejus vici^ electio omnino vacabit.
Caeterum hic est animadvertendum quod iste favor est Extraneis exhibendus qui
non possunt ipsi adventare, sed necesse habent Procuratores suos mittere, ut
seeds ipsorum vice possideant. Idque i^primis est ea de causa constitutum, ut
Missarum and Orationum aliarum, quae defunctis Ordinantur, plene participes
evadant. Media namque part privarentur, si non ante mortem suain in suas seeds
introducti forent. Sed nec extranei solum eo privilegio congaudebunt, verum
illi etiam qui d^m eliguntur extra Regnum sunt Regis jussu belligerantes,
aliisve negotiis intenti: Hii quantum ad sedis sue possessionem captandam,
fimile cum extraneis privilegium vendicabunt. XXII. Si qui^ Ducum, Marchionum,
Comitum, Vicecomitum, Baronum, Bannere^torum.
Barenetorum, aut Bacchalaureorum hujus Ordinis, obierit, qui succedet ei,
cujusvis harum Conditionum extiterit, came duntaxat sedem obtinebit, quam
Praedecessor s^us ante possederat, nec demutabit illam citra peculiarem Supremi
concessionem, nisi forsan Imperatorum aut Regum aliquis, vel Princeps Regni
fuerit, quorum unusquisque juxta sublimitatem suam, sedem Supremo proximam
accipiet. Quo pacto Dux aut Comes interim in sedem Bacchalaurei reponi poterit,
atque diverso; ad Argumentum manifestum formae per primores ibi fundatores
inchoatae sinceriter observatae. XXIII. Et si quando seeds ulla vacarit,
Supremus been poterit ad eam quemlibet horum Equitum ex arbitrio promovere,
superior autem esse debet ea sede, quam ante tenuerat. Nimirum semel in vita
sua poterit Supremus generalem omnium sedium translationem ex sententia
perficere, solis Caesarum, Regum, Principum, and Ducum sedibus exceptis, quae
permanebunt immutabiles; nisi fortasse superius ulli sedile contingat. In ea
profecto translatione generali, longitudo durationis in hoc Ordine, decus ac
clari^udo gestorum, laus Equitum, and praestantia meritorum perpendi ac
considerari debet, ut honos virtuti respondeat. Omnes autem Equites isti
quoties Trabeis ornati sedebunt, stabunt, aut simul incedent, ordinem illum
observabut^^, quem per seeds suas in choro tenent, neque tamen generis aut
nobilitatis rationem ullam habebunt, nifi quatenus ante monstratum est XXIV.
Equites singuli, quando ad ordinem hunc illustrem admittentur, certam pecuniae
summam Collegio numerabunt, in usum Canonicorum Deo servientium and
pauperculorum Militum, ibi commorantium; Supremus certe quadraginta Marcas
legalis monetae Angliae, Rex externus, viginti Libras; Princeps, viginti
marcas; Dux, december libras; Marchio, oct^ libras, sex solidos, and octo
denarios; Comes, december Marcas; Vicecomes, quinque Libras, sedecem solidos, and
octo denarios; Baro seu Bannerettus.
Baronettus, quinque Libras; Bachalaureus Eques, quinque marcas. Eleemosinae
vero hujus Statutum esto perpetuum. Vexilla sane, Enses, and Galeae, cum
annexis non ante propendebunt in locis suis, quam praefixas, suam quisque pro
status honor summas persolverint. Quod ad Externos attinet, pro hiis Supremus
respondere constituit. Et haec munera atque Eleemosinae propter id ita
conceduntur, ut Eques unusquisque qui deveniet in hunc Ordinem tanto dignior
inveniatur, ut qui titulo, nomine, ac privilegio Fundatorum hujus Ordinis
exornetur. XXV. Eques unusquisque istius Ordinis, intra annum primum sedis
acceptae, faciet post tergum ubi sedem habet, laminam cujus voluerit metalli,
in qua cum scuto ac caeteris annexis sua compingentur insignia: Et omnes
deinceps successuri similiter efficient, nisi quod sua lamina curtior and
minutior esse debet, quam quae primorum Fundatorum; exterorum laminis cum rebus
aliis istiusmodi duntaxat exceptis, quae, quales ac quantae voluerint, fieri
poterunt. XXVI. Nullus horum Sodalium per Procuratorem est admittendus atque in
sedem introducendus, nisi duntaxat Extraneus, qui nequit ipse interesse, vel
qui negotiis Regiis occupatus ac retentus fuerit, aut cui denique Supremus id
vel perceperit vel permiserit, uti praetactum est. XXVII. Vnusquisque in
ingressu suo fideliter and sub juramento promittet se velle conservare hos
Articulos qui sequuntur. Primum, jurabit quod quamdiu vixerit, and istius
Ordinis unus esse perduraverit, pro viribus adjuvabit Supremi and sustentabit
honorem, jura tuebitur, and querelas ejus omnino defendet and prosequetur.

Deinde quod omni conatu hunc Ordinem, in quem ascitus est, juvare, augere,
atque ornare parabit. Sique aliquid contra tentatum, aut excogitatum iri
senserit, pro virili resistet and defendet.

Preterea singula Statuta, and Statutorum Articulos sideliter adimplebit. Pro
hiis inquam omnibus sinceriter explendis generale juramentum in admissione sua
praestabit, per sacrosancta Evangelia, Supremo vel ejus gerenti vicem, quod
etiam tam been sit observaturus quod si punctim atque articulatim tum sibi
perlegerentur, and juramento quidem tanget atque exosculabitur oblatam sibi
crucem.

Quo facto in hunc modum electus Eques praenobile subligar perquam reverenter
accipiet, quod in sinistram ejus Tybiam Supremus, aut ab eo designatus inducet,
ista verba dicens, Domine, amicissimi Socii hujus Ordinis a Subligaculo
nominati te nunc in amicum sibi fratrem, ac collegam, admiserunt. In cujus rei
fidele signaculum, Bannerettus.
hoc and tibi Subligar impartiunt ac condonant, quod det Deus ut merito
suscipiens, rite conteras, ad Dei gloriam, ad honorem praeclari hujus Ordinis
and tui.

XXVIII. Quod si Supremus Regnum exierit, aut alia de causa nequeat interesse,
quatenus hoc ipsum ipse perficiat, duos aut eo plures hujus Ordinis Equites
sufficere been poterit: quibus plenam in istiusmodi introductione sui
potestatem atque authoritatem committat, ut eam suo nomine exerceant. XXIX.
Commune Sigillum pariter ac signaculum Ordinis insignibus exornata fieri
debent, and in custodia Cancellarii Ordinis, vel ejus Equitis ac Commilitonis,
quem Supremus nominare voluerit remanebunt. Si vero qui Custos est assignatus
viginti Milliaria vel eo amplius abierit a Supremo quacunque de causa, Sigilla
Supremo tradet, ante recessum, vel ejusmodi Commilitoni aliive personae, quam
Supremus ad id eodem tempore designabit; eam ob rem certe, quo Sigilla
praedicta minus absint a Supremo, quamdiu manet intra Regnum. Sin foris esse
contigerit, signaculum solum sufficient interim ad acta quaeque consignanda, and
degerenda, quae spectabunt ad hunc Ordinem. XXX. Commilitones hujus Ordinis
semper imposterum apud se Statuta retinebunt, collata prius cum Originali per
Scribam Ordinis, and Communi Sigillo signata. Si vero quis little insignia
quaevis appingi disponique voluerit in eo Libello, Regi Armorum reddetur, ut is
quod sua interest apt riteque perficiat. Originale quoque in Aerario Collegii
perpetuo remansurum Sigillo communi consignabitur. XXXI. Post obitum cujusque
Sociorum hujus Ordinis, haeredes ex ass (quos and Executores appellant)
obligabuntur ad reportanda intra tres menses Statuta praesentis Ordinis, quae
donata sunt ei per Supremum aut ipsius impendio. Reportabuntur autem ad Decanum
Collegii vel Scribam, aut alioqui praecipuum ejus loci Officialem. XXXII.
Nullus Eques hujus Ordinis Divo Georgio dedicati Supremi sui Regnum, terram,
aut Dominium exibit, nisi prius exeundi impetrata copia. Quapropter unanimi
consensu decretum est, quod si gerendarum rerum illustrium iter ullum appetat,
unde Militaris honor and Equestris gloria sperari possit, Supremus, ex sua
gratia singularique favore, quem erga Commilitones hujus Ordinis in pectore
semper habebit, illos istiusmodi stratagemmatis, honorificisque negotiis aliis
viris omnibus anteponet. XXXIII. Horum Equitum nemo contra ullum suum
Commilitonem Arma induet, nisi fortasse propugnandum Supremi jus impendeat, aut
ipsius alioqui justam causam defendi oporteat. Sin autem acciderit aliquem
hujus Ordinis a quoquo Principe, seu Duce, teneri, and Adversarius illius alium
ejusdem Ordinis ad parem sui defensionem habere postea desideret: is qui
posterior exoptatur, omnino sic retineri detrectabit, nec aliam excusationem
obtendet, quam quod collega ^^us antea rete^tus in adversa part depugnet.
Horum etiam unusquisque quando incipit ab aliquo teneri, hac solummodo
condition se teneri velle promittet, si nullus Commilitonum antea retentus in
adversaria part fuerit, alioquise in eo vinculo minime permansurum. Sin antea
retentus fuerit quam impedimentum hujusmodi resciverit, postea tamen ubi primum
intellexerit, unum aut alterum e Sociis suis in adversa part militare, and ad
militandum ibi prius obvinctum, proponet excusationem suam apud eum Dominum qui
se conduxerat quod ultra ipsi militare non potuerit, ejusve causam defendere.
XXXIV. Omnes facultates Equitibus concessae and Regnum exeant, ad inquirendum
honorem, and gloriam procurandam, omnes Literae, mandata, caeteraque scripta ad
hunc Ordinem attinentia, altero Sigillorum imperpetuum consignari debent. XXXV.
Si quis horum Commilitonum, pietate ac Religione permotus, sedem sibi deligere
volet intra Castellum Windesori, Domus in qu^ poterit immorari signabitur a
Supremo; victus autem illius suis sumptibus atque impensis propriis
providebitur. XXXVI. Si quisquam Eques ali^s quam sit hujus Ordinis causa
Devotionis animum habuerit ibi commorandi, seeds ex arbitrio Supremi eidem
assignabitur, consensu Commilitonum antecedente. XXXVII. Si quis horum Equitum,
aut alius quisquam, terras, haereditates, redditus, aut proventus impartire,
donareve volet, ut precum illarum quae dicuntur ibidem particeps habeatur: ejus
nomen in Registrum ascribetur, and Canonici caeterique Ministri cum Militibus
pauperculis, semper in futurum pro eo deprecabuntur. Decanus autem aut Custos
and Canonici nunquam Collegio novum pondus aut curam imponent, citra Supremi
consensum, aut ab ipso designati, and ceterorum Commilitonum in suscepto
tentoque manifesto Concilio. XXXVIII. De^ique, quo Discrimen Equitum hujus
Ordinis, a caeteris cui non sunt ^jusdem, tanto clarius eluceat: Supremus, ex
consens^^ Commilitonum omnium, vult, Ordin^t, and instituit, ut abbinc
imperpetuum, quicu^que fuerit Eques istius Ordinis circum cervicem utatur ^ureo
Torque triginta unciarum Trojani Ponderis, nihil supra. Conficietur autem ille
Torques e laminis in formam Subligaris, una laminarum duas intus rosas habebit,
alteram rubram, superiorem alb^m, altera inferiorem albam, and superiorem
rubram. In fine vero Torquis illius pendebit Imago Divi Georgii. Quo Supremus
and omnes Ordinis hujus Equites uti tenebuntur, praesertim in maximis and
praecipuis Anni solennitatibus. Aliis autem diebus Cathenula utantur Aurea,
quae Divi Georgii gestabit imaginem in fine: nisi ger^tur bellum, aut gerendum
ingruat, aegritudo urgeat, aut longum iter ineundum sit. Tunc etenim sufficiat
uti Fibula serica, quae Divi Georgii duntaxat imaginem in fine pendul^m
habebit. Si vero Torques resarciendus sit, tradi poterit ^^rifici, ut
emendetur. Nec debet ille Torques stipari gemmis aut ditari, nisi forsan id
Imagini fiat, quae been poterit, ex arbitratu illius Equitis, gemmis aut aliter
exornari. Cavendum autem ne Torques hujusmodi vendatur, mutuo tradatur, aut
alienetur ullo modo, seu donetur, ex ulla causa vel necessitudine, sed ad
cohonest amentum Ordinis and Equitis Ordinati conservari debet.
Here follow the same Statutes as they were put into English shortly after
their Establishment; wherein some of the Articles are transposed, and the 18.
Article wholly changed. But in all the Copies of them given forth since the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, King Henry's Title of Supreme head of the
Church of England in Earth under Christ, is omitted, and some few words (noted
with an Asterisk) altered to those inserted at the foot of the Page, whither
the Asterisk directs.

The Statutes and Ordinances of the most Noble Order of Saint George, named the
Gartier, Reformed, explained, declared, and renewed by the most High, most
excellent, and most puissant Prince Henry the viii. by the Grace of God King
of England and of France, Defensor of the Faith, Lord of Irland, etc.
WHereas the most famous, most happiest, and victorious Prince, Edward, the
third of that name, his Noble Progenitour sometime King of England and of
France, and Lord of Irland etc. To the onno^re of almighti God, and of the
blessed and immaculate Virgyn Marie, and the blessid Martyr Saint George,
Patron of the right noble Roialme of England; and of Saint Edward, King and
Confessau^; To the exaltation of the holy Faith Catholic Drdeyned,
Established, created, and founded, within the Castle of Wyndesore, a company of
xxvi. Noble and Worthi Knights, for to be of the said most Noble Drdre of
Saint George, named the Gartier, and for the honorable continuance,
augmentation, and interteyning of the same.

The seid most victorious King did devyse and institute diverse honorable
Estatuts, and laudable Ordinances for to be observed and kept by the cobrethern
and confreres Knights and Compaynons of the said most Noble Order; among the
which Estatutis been certain doubtis and ambiguities, which to be more plainly
declared, interpreted, and extended, it is thought right necessary and
expedient. And that certain other new Ordinances and Articles be to the said
Statutes added and adjoined. Wherefore the said most excellent and victorious
Prince Henry the viii. King of England and of France Defensor of the Faith and
Lord of Irland, and Soveragne of the said most Noble Order, and for the right
singular love, good zeal, ardent and intier affection, that his royal Majesty
has and bearith to the said most Noble Order, and to the estate of Chivalrie
and Knyghthod: And for the honorabl^ contynuance and increasing of the same:
And also at the humble request and instante destre of the Knyghts and
Companyons of the said Noble Order, And by their advyse, council, and assent,
the xxiii. day of April, in the year of grace M.D.XXII. and of his most noble
reigh the viii. year, made interpretacion and declaracion of the Obscurities,
doubtis, and ambiguities of the said Estatutes, Ordinances, Interpretacions,
declaracions, reformacions, with their additions aforesaid, after the ^rew
intencion of them, shall be from hensforth observed, kept, and ensued, by the
Soverayne and the Knights Confreres and Companyons of the said Noble Order, in
manner and form followyng.

I. First, It is Ordened and accorded, that the King, and his Heirs and
Successors Kings of England, shall be for evermore Soveraynes of the said
most Noble Order, and amiable Company of Saint George, named the Gartier, to
the which Soverayn, and to his Heirs and Successors shall apperteine the
declaracion, solucion, determinacion, interpretacion, Reformacion, and
disposition of all causes concerning and towchyng any thing of obscurity or
dowbte contained in the Statutes of the said most Noble Order. II. Item, it is
accorded that none shall be elected and chosen for to be Fellow or Companion of
the said most Noble Order, except that he be a Gentilman of blood, and that
he be a Knight, and without roproche. And that the Knights of the said Noble
Order from hensforth shall not name any person in their Election to be Fellow or
Companyon of the said Noble Order, in whom they shall think or extiem in
their conscience to have spotte of Repr^che: And as towchyng the declaration of
a Gentilman of blood, it is declared and determined, that he shall be decended
of three decentis of Noblesse, that is to say, of name and of arms, both of
his Father's side, and also of his Mother's side, and as towchyng or concerning
any manner of reproach, forasmoche as there be diverse and many sundri p^yntis of
reproach, there shall be here declared but three poyntis of them oonly, as is
declared in manner and form folowying. The first point of Reproach is, that
if any Knight, (os God defend) be convaynqued, or attaynted of error against
the Christian Faith Catholic, or had for any such Offense suffered any pain or
punicion public.

The second point of Reproach is, that if any Knight (as God defend) had been
ararayned, convicted, or attainted or High Treason.

The third point of Reproache is, that if any Knight depart, or flee away from
battle, or journei, being with his Soverayne Lord, his Lieutenant or Deputy,
or other Capetayne, bavyng the Kyng's power Royal and au^toritie; and whereas
Banners, Estandatz, or Pennons have been displaied, and that they preceded to
fight, he that then renioufly and cowardly flies or departith away from thens,
ought to be estieme^ and judged to have reproach, and never worthi to be elect
Knight, or Fellow of the said Company. And if it fortune, that any Knight of the
said Company (as God forbid) do commytte any such reproach, that then he
shall be departed and disgraded of the said Order, at the next Chapter
ensuyng, if it so shall please the Soverayne and the Company.

III. Item that every year, upon the vigil^ of Saint George, that is to say,
the xxii. day of the month of April, on what day soever it fall on, and though
no service of Saint George be celebrate or done, all the Knyghtis of the said
Company, being in any place or places of their liverties, in what places soever
it be, shall ve bound for to were the bole habit of the said Order. That is to
wit, Robe, Mantell, Hudde, and Collar, from the owre of the first Evensonge at
the owre of tierce, that is, at three of the Clock at afternone, until the
said Evensonge and other devyne service, ^ouper, and voydance, be done and
accomplished; And lyke^yse on the morrow, on Saint George's day at mattens,
procession, Morning Service.
mas^, and the second Evensonge, and all the said day, untyll that souper and
voydance be done, as is a^oresaid. IV. Item, that if for any causes, it should
please the said Soverayn to pror^ge the said Feast and solemnytie of Saint
George, or that the said Feast should be prolonged and proroged, to another day,
that all the Knightis of the said Order, that shall be within the Realm of
England, shall gyve their attendance the even and the day of Saint George, on
the parson of of the said Soverayne, and shall find themselffes in his
company, in what place soever he be within the said Realm of England; and they
so gyveyng their attendance upon his said parsone, the said even and day,
shall observe and keep the servyce of Saint George, is the Ordenance and
commandment of holy Church does suffer and permit it. And if th'ordenaunce
of the Church does not permit it, in this behalffe, they be bound to tarry
with the Soverayne, and hear such servyce as shall be than limited and ordened
by the holy Church to be done and celebrated the said even and day of Saint
George, in observyng and keeping, during the said days, of all other
ceremonies, as well in going to the Chapter upon the^ said even, before Evensong
at afternone, and the said day of Saint George at afternone, before the last
Evensong; As also in weryng their hole habit, and every Knight being in his
own Stall, in keeping the Devine Servyce from the time of the first Evensonge
of the said even, maten^, and Divine Service.
Mass, unto the last Evensong of the said day, and the morrow after ensuyng,
before the Divine Service.
Mass of Requiem, they shall take their Mantells, upon such Gowns as shall
please them, and shall enter into the Chapter, if there be any election or
other great affairs, before the said Divine Service.
Mass of Requiem in usyng such Ceremonies to this accustomed, as though they
were present in the said Castle of Wyndesore. And in case that the said
Soverayne be come and entered into the said Chapter, and that some of the seid
Felows of the said Order be not entered, or come with him and s^ulde tarry
behind, in case they that have not gyven and done dew attendancce upon him,
shall abide without the doors of the said Chapter, without entryng in to it,
during all the time that the said Soverayne and other Knights shall be in the
said Chapter for that time. And if so be that any of the abovenamed Knights
come to late to the first Evensong of the said even, or Mattens, Divine Service.
Mass, or last Evensong, the said day of Saint George, he shall have for
penance, that during the time and space of such devyne ser^yce, he shall knele
or stand before his Stall, in the Place of the Oueresters; and if he come not
to gyve attendance upon the parson of the said Soverayne, the said Even and day
of Saint George. as is aforesaid; And that he have no ^ycence or other
Reasonable excuse, and that it be acceptable to the said Soverayne for his
absence in this case; the said Knight, that so shall have done, for his
penance, shall not come in his Stall at the next Feast ensuyng in the presence
of the Soverayne, nor in his said Stall in the said College of Wyndesore. And
farthermore shall pay xl. for to be converted and bestowed to the use of the
Ornaments of the said Collage. V. Item if it chaunsed that any of the Knights
of the said Order, by leave or licens or otherwise, were in his house or in any
orber place, at his liberty and fraunchise, the said even and day of Saint
George, be shall be bound to cause to be prepared a Capital Stall, in the
Church or Chapel, in the which he shall hear devine Service. In the Capital
Stall shall be set and elevated the Order of Saint George, named the Gartier,
being within a Garter; and his propre arms within the Garter, also shall be set
at a Stall, that shall be asmoche in distance, after the proportion and
quantite of the said Church or Chapel, from the Stall of the said Soverayn, as
is his Stall in the Castle of Wyndesore, and shall were his said habit hole,
and shall hear the devyne service, such as by the holy Church is ordened and
limited for the said day, as well the first evensong, Mattens, Divine Service.
Mass, as the latter evensonge. In doing by him first Reverence to the Altar
in the honor of God, and after to the Stall where is fired or set up the Arms
of the said Order, as well and as often at his coming in as at his going owte
of the said Church or Chapel; And also as often as he shall pass before the
said Arms, allwey except the Emperors, Kings, Princes, Electors, The which
may in this case so ordeyne their Seats and Stalles as yt s^all seem them
beast, and at their pleasure. VI. Item if yt were so that without any
prorogacion the said Feast and Solempnyte of Saint George were kept and
celebrated the said Castle or Wyndesore, and if it were not the pleasure of
the seid Soverayne for to be present, or that conveniently he may not be there
in parson, the said day and Feast, at his said Castle of Wyndesore, That in
this case, in what place that his pleasure shall be teyng within this his
Realm of England, his Majesty may appoynte and command such Knights of
the seid Order, as best shall seem him, there for to keep Company and geve
attendance upon the parson, and to keep all and like Ceremonies as though they
were at the said Castle of Wyndesore; And they doing the things abovesaid
shall be excused for their absence of the Feast of Saint George holden at the
said Castle of Wyndesore for that year. VII. Item, it is agreed, that if the
Sovereign cannot be at Saint George's Feas^, that he shall make his Deputy, by
his Letter^, for to keep the C^apter upon Saint Georg^'s Even, at the owre of
tierce, the which is at three of the Clock at after none, and on Saint
George's day for to keep the said Feast, at the costs of the said Soverayne,
for the space abovesaid, without any new Ordenance to be made, havyng power to
correct and redress all points of the said Chapter, as for then shall seem
necessary. VIII. Item, that every one on Saint Georges Even, that is to wit,
the xxii. day of April, a gatheryng together shall be made of all the Knights
of Saint George within the Castle of Wyndesore, That is to wit, of all them
that shall be within this Realm, of England, or without, that conveniently
may come. And there they shall have the service of Saint George, and also shall
were their hole habit of the said Order, during the seid servyce, being
ordinarily in their Stalls; And every of them shall have his Banner, Sword,
with his Helm, and Creste above his Stall, the which during his lyff shall
abide in the said Chapel, for his honor, and in sign and knowledge, that he
beres them in defense of holy Church, as the Order of Knyghthod requires. But
in case that the seid Feast of Saint George happen to fall within xv. days
after the Feast of Easter, or upon any Fyshe-daye, or Fasting day, then it
shall be proroged and prolonged at the Soverayne's pleasure, as above is seid,
if so be that the day of the seid Feast be not assigned ne ordenyd to be kept
the xxiv. xxv. xxvi. nor the last day of April, nor upon the four first days
of May, for by cause of the impediment or let of devyne servyce ordened by holy
Church for the double Feasts of Saint Mark, Philipp and Jacob, and the
Invention of the Holy Cross of our Lord Jesu Christ, nor at such days as
shall fall the Assencion, or the Feast of Penthecoste, or any other Feast of
Solempnite, as is ordened in holy Church, whereby the first or second
Evensonge by such Prorogacions might be let and distorbed* IX. Item that
all the Knyghtis of the said Order shall come yearly in the said place of the
said Castle of Wyndesore on Saint George's Even at th'owre of tierce, the
which is at three of the Clock at afternoon, as it is aboveseid. And if they
come not at the time assigned without havyng a just and reasonable excuse,
that may be acceptable to the said Soverayne or to his Deputy, or otherwise
pardoned by the seid Soverayne of their absence by special Letters of excuse,
in the which Letters their names and causes shall be written, or otherwise
shall have their penance after th'ordenance and agreement of the said Chaptre.
And the said Ordenaunce is such that they shall not enter into the Chaptre for
that time, but shall bide without the door. And shall have no voice in any
thing that is done in the said Chaptre, at that time alonly. And if they come
not to Evensonge, before the beginning of the said Evensonge, they shall not
enter into their Stalles but shall bide below affore the said Stallis in the
Queristers places during the said Evensonge. And like penance is ordened for
them that come not to the high Morning Service.
mass betyme and at Evensonge on Saint George's day. And if there be any that
come not to the Feast, and have not a reasonable excuse toward the Soverayne
or his Deputye, as it is above declared, his penance shall be that he shall
not enter within his Stall the next Feast after, but shall bide below as it is
said at the first Evensong, and shall goo in the procession before all the
Queri^ters.
three Crosse^. And shall sit below as affore is said all the Service.
mass time untyl the Offryng. And he shall offer last. And after his penance
so done, incontinent he shall come before the Soverayne^ Stall or his Deputy,
and there he shall ask pardon. And after that the Soverayne or his Deputy
shall command him to go unto his Stall in his first estate, and if he come
not at the second Feast, and be dwelling within the ^ealm, without having any
excusation alowable to the Soverayne or to his Deputy, as is abovesaid, he
shall not enter in his Stall from the^^forth, until the time that he have gyven
and offered a ^ewell unto Saint George's Altar within the said Chapel of
the value of xx marks of Sylver of Troy, and fro thens forward he shall
double every year the Penalty, unto the time ^e be reconsciled. X. Item it is
agreed, that if any Knight of the said Company be found in apperte without
his Garter, That he pay anon after that the challenge he made to him by any of
the five Officers of The Order or of the Warden of the Seid College, a mark of
Money. Except he be voted for to ride, that then it shall suffice to were under
his vote a blew ^i^ande of Sylke, in signyfying of the Carter, and also
provided that no Knight of the said Order from hensforthe do enter into the
Chaptre without his Garter upon the pain abovesaid. And whosoever of the said
Officers or Warden shall make the first challenge shall have the penaltye for
his labor. XI. Item it is agreed, that the Knyghts of the Order of St. George,
alwey and as often as they shall were their mantels, they shall goo before
there Soverayne every of them with his Fellow, that is for aneynst him,
ordinarily as they ^e set in their Stalles: And if it should happen that any
of them were not there present, his fellow for aneynst him shall goo alone. The
which Order shall be kept and observed as well in going in procession as
ellis where in other places. But at the Offryng the Souerayn or his Deputy
shall goo before all the Company, and the ordinary Officers of the said Order
shall goo as they have been accustomed, when any procession shall be done in
the Chapter, Chapel, or ellis where. And for the order of the said Knightis
for to sit at the Table, for to take their reseccion by it, at Diner at or
Souper, they shall sit all along on one side after there Stalls, and not after
their state, except Children and Brethren of Kings, Princes, and Dukes that
be Strangers, the which shall keep their places and romes after their astate;
and at their voiding and ^^ing out shall abide and goo in order so as they sat
at the Table. XII. Item it is agreed, that every one of them, at the Cas^ell of
Windesore on the morrow after the Feast of Saint George, before the departing
of the Company, that the said Knights, upon such Gowns as shall please them
at the Chapter door, shall take their Mantels and shall goo into the said
Chaptre, and after that shall goo and here a Divine Service.
mass of Requiem, the which shall be solempnely song for the souls of all the
Fellows of the said Order, which be departed and deceassed, and for all
Christen sowiles, and that all the Company be there present, without any of
them be let by a reasonable cause, or have lysence of the Soberayne or his
Deputy before the departing. And when it happens that for any cause of the
voydyng of any of the said Fellowship, there shall be certain Banners,
Swordis, Helmets, and Crestes, the which ought to be offered up before the
offering of any Sylver; the said Hachements ought to be offered, first the
Banner, by two of the said Fellowship such as the Soverayne or his Deputy
shall appoynte or name, and after that the Sword shall be offered by two
other, and likewise his Helmet and Crest by two other Knights of the said
Order, assigned by the Soverayne or his Deputy, and if any Knight of the seid
Order should decease the year before, then every Knight being in the said Castle
of Wyndesore, at the said Divine Service.
mass of Requiem, shall offer a Taper armed with a little Scuchion of the arms
of the Knight departed. And if there were more then one deceassed, that then be
made for every of them a Scuchion of Arms and a grote set nigh to the light of
the tapre, the which Scuchions and tapers wall be made at the cost and charge
of the Knyghts of the said Order. XIII. Item, it is agreed, that all strangers,
that shall be elect Felows of the seid Order, shall be certifyed by Letters of
the Soverayne of their election. The which letters of Certification, with the
Statutes of the said Order, under the common Seal shall be sent unto them at
the cost and charges of the said Soverayne, in all diligence, and at the
fardest they shall be certifyed of this within four months after the said
Election, to the end that the seid Elect may advyse them by the said Statutis,
if they will receyve the said Order, or no. But if the said Soverayne have
great and high lettes and busynes, that then he may defer the certification
of the said Election at his good pleasure, unto time of opportunite and
convenient. After that the Certification have been delivered, and that the
Soverayn shall be certefied, that the said Elect will receyve the said Order;
Then the Soverayne shall send unto the said Elect, by his Ambassadors, his
hole habit, with the Garter and Collar. And that all such strangers, of what
estate, dignytie, or condition that they be of, shall send within vii.
months after the reception of the said Gartier, Collar and Habit, and that he
have certified the Soverayn to have re^^yved those things, a sufficient Deputy
or attorney after th'astate of his Lord and Master, so be that he be a Knight
without Reproach, to be stalled in his place, the which shall bring with him a
Mantell of blew Welbett of the order of that which he shall send him, and also
his Banner, Sword, Helm, and Crest, for to be and abide within the seid
College during his lyff. And that the Mantell in the time that the seid Deputy
or Attorney shall be stalled, by the said Soverayn or his Deputy, put upon his
right arm for to hold the said mantyll upon his arm, and shall be
accompanied and led by two of the Knights of the said Order, from the door
of the Chaptre unto the stall, and there boyeng shall make hi^ oath, and shall
be stalled for and in the name of his said Lord and Master, and the said
Mantell abovesaid, the said Attorney or Deputy shall bear it upon his right
arm during the devyne service, being set in the stall of his seid Master and
Lord, without beryng of it at any time after. And to have no manner of voice
in the Chaptre, or to come in it, in th'absence of him that has sent him. And
if he send not his said Attorney within vii. months abovesaid, without
^avying a reasonable excuse which shall be acceptable to the Soverayne or his
Deputy, the election shall be void of him. Except so be that the seid Knight
be let and destorbed by great affaire^. Then he may send his excuse to the
said Soverayne, or to his Deputy, within a month after, and after his excuse
is, as the Soverayne or his Deputy will allow it or accept it, that then the
said Soverayn or his Deputy may geve on to him four months more of respite,
and if he came not or sent not his Attorney before that the time of the four
months he fynished, that then in this case the election shall be h^le void
from him for that time. And it is to be known, that this favor is done and
showed to the strangyers, the which may not well come in their proper parsons,
that they might be stalled by Attourneys. To the end that they may be part
takers of the Divine Service.
masses, and all the prayers of the seid Order, for they should fail of the
half if they were not stalled before their death. And likewise it is ordened
for them that be new chosen and elect of the said Order, being in the Kings
Wars by his commandment, for to enjoye of the benefytes of the said
statutes, to that that shall appertain allonly to their stallacion. XIV. Item
there is also ordened a Dean and Warden with xii. Canons seculers, the which
shall be pristz at their entryng in, or else within a year next foloshyng; and
also viil. Peticanons, and xiii. Vicars, also prestes at their entryng in, or
else at the g^vyng of the next Orders, or at the ^urdest within a year after
their presentacion. Also xiii. Clerks, and xiii. Queristes, for to (...) and
pray unto God for the prosperity of the Soverayne and all the Knights of the
said Order lyhyng, and also for the sowles of all the Knyghts of the said Order
departed, and for all Christian sowles, and the presentacion of the said Cannons
that belong all^ey to the Soverayne of the said Order. And the said Canons
when any Knight of the said Order is there present, within the quyer of the
seid Chapel, shall sit in the lowermost seats, where they be wont to sit
at the Feasts of St. George. And in th'absence of the said Knights the said
Canons may sit in the high seats next unto the stalles of the said Knights.
XV. Item there be ordenyd v. Officers appertaynyng to the said Order, That is
to wit, Prelate, Chaunceler, Register, and King of Arms, named Gartier, and
an huyssher at Arms, named the Black Rod. The which shall he receyved and
sworn to be of the Council of the said Order, the secrets with alsoo their
chargies and privileges shall expressly be declared in the Book of the
Ordenaunces of the said Officers. XVI. Item it is also ordened, that xiii. pore
Knights, that have not where withal to lyhe, for to have in that place their
lyvyng and sustentation conveniently, for their good prayers in the honor of
God and Saint George, of the which the charges and privileges hereafter shall
be declared following the Ordynances of the Officers, and of their election is
ordened as of the presentacion of the Canons, so that alwey the Election shall
abide to the said Soverayne. And it is agreed, that the pour Knights shall
have their Mantells of Scarlett, and a scuchion of the arms of Saint George
without a Garter. XVII. Item it is agreed, that every Knight of the said
Company shall leave his Mantyll within the said College, for any sudden
chaunses that might happen for to keep, hold, and observe all such
Ordinances, Precepts, and commandments, which may be advysed in Chaptre by
the said Soverayne. The which Soverayne by the consent and agreement of vi.
Knights of the said Order may, at all times and places, at his pleasure,
sommon and make to be kept Chaptre, for all such causes, as it shall please
to the said Soverayne to name towching the said Order. XVIII. Item, it is
agreed, that if it fortune, that any of the said Company should come within ii.
mile of the Castle, that he shall goo in, if he may, for the honor o^ the
place, if he be not busyed or let by some just cause, and that he take his
Mantell before he enter within the said Chapel. And alsoo that he enter not
in, but he have his Mantyll upon tym. And the Canons there being present for
that time shall come to receyve him, and devotly shall bring him into the said
Chapel; and if it be in time of Divine Service.
Mass, he shall tarry and he^re Divine Service.
Mass in the honor of God and of St. George; and if it be at afternone, he
shall come in in manner abovesaid: And there shall be said by the Canons De
profundi^, for all Christian sowles, and there shall offer and return unto his
stall. And if any of the said Company ride thorowgh the Lowne, and will not
offer as it is agreed, that, upon his obedience for every time that he fails,
he shall goo one mile on foot from the said Chapel, unto the said place, in
honor of Saint George; And also for every time that he shall so fail, he shall
gyve a grote for his Offrynge. The which distaunce, for to com nygh unto the
seid Castle, is two miles allonly and no more. XIX. Item it is accorded, the
xxxii. year of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the Eight, by the grace of God
King of England and of France, Defensor of the Faith, Lord of Irland, etc.
upon Saint George's day, the xxiii. day of April, at a Chapter holden at the
Paleys of Westminster, by the Sovereign and the Companyons of the said Noble
Order then there assembled; That as soon as the death of any of the Company of
the said Order shall be certeynly known, every of the rest, being no
strangiers, shall according to the rates of their Degrees hereafter specified,
immediately upon a demand to be made for the same by the Register, and the
Dean, or one of them, to be by one of them employed in Aulmes deeds, as in
mendyng of High ways, or such other works of charity, as the Kings Majesty
from time to time shall lymite and appoynte, the several somes of Money
^n^yng: Furst the Souveraign viii l. vi ^. viii d. A King of another Realm, vi
l. xiii ^. iv d. The Prince, v l. xvi s. viii d. A Duke, v l. A Marquess, iii
l. xv s. An Erie, l s. A Visconte, xli s. viii d. A Baron, xxxiii s. iv d. A
Bacheler Knight, xvi s. viii d. Of all which somes thus to be receyvyd, the
said Dean and Regester, or either of them, shall yearly at the Chapter present
his account to the Kings Majesty with ^is true and just declaration of the
dysbursyng again and defraying of the same. In that cause the party, whose
Porcyen shall apere to be unpayde, shall in the name of a Pain add unto his
former duty another third part of the same, and so for every year that he
shall be behind, to pay a thredde part more than he should pay, if he should
satisfye his ordinary according to the rate before expressed. And if the Dean
or Register or any of them shall not at every such Chapter present the
Certificate of the Receipts and Payments in form afores^id, whereby the same
may apere to the Souverayn and Companyons of the Order then pre^ent, or at the
leest he in whom the defawlt shall rest, shall in the name of a pain content
and pay immemediatl^, to be employed abowte like purpose as before the some of
x^. for every such defaulte. XX. Item it is agreed, that if any of the said
Company die, that the Soverayne or his Deputy after that they shall have
certification of his death, shall be bound for to send and gyve knowledge by
there Letters to all the Fellowship of the said Order being within England, for
to come and be with the said Soverayne or his Deputy in what place soever it
be, where it shall please him to assign convenyently within vi. wekys after
the certification of the death or decease of the said Knight. The which allsoo
assembled or at the lest vi. with the Soverayne or his Deputy abovesaid, every
of them that there shall be present come to the election shall name ix. of the
worthiest and sufficient Knights without Reprosse that he shall know
subjectes to the said Soverayne or others, so be that they hold no contrary
party or be against him. That is to wit, three Dukes iii. Marquess, Earls, or
of greater astate, iii. Barons, or banerettis, and iii. Bachelors. The which
denominations the chief prelate of the said Order shall write, Chat is to wit
the Bishop of Wynchester for the time being; or in his absence the Chaunceler,
or the Dean or Register or the most ancient Recidencer of the said College
in their absence; and the denomination so done by all, or vi. at the leest, by
him that have written shall be showed to the seid Soverayne, or to his
Deputy, that then shall chose of them that be named, be that shall have the
most voices, and also he that the Soverayne shall exteme to be most honorable
to the said Order, and most profitable to his Crown and to his Realm. And
if there be any Knight of the said Order that does fail for to come to the
said Election, if he be not let by a just cause; and that the said cause of
his excuse showed under his seal of arms be found by the Soverayne or his
Deputy to be just and reasonable, then his excuse to be accepted and allowed,
and that if his cause be not just, and that he come not to the seremonies
abovenamed, it is agreed that he shall pay to the Warden of the College for to
sing for him that is departed xx s. sterling, and at his next coming to the
Chaptre, he shall be before the Soverayne or his Deputy and the company, and
shall knele upon the ground in the mids of the Chaptre, untyll the time that
he be reconsiled by the Soverayne or his Deputy, and the said Company. XXI.
Item it is agreed, that if any Knight of the said Company should depart, and
another is chosen and elect, he shall have sone after his election the Garter,
in signyfyeng that he is one of the Knights and Fellows of the Order of the
Garter, and his Robe and Node shall be delivered him in the Chapter-howse
incontinently, after that his Commission has been red before the Soverayne or
his Deputy and the Company; and after that shall be led by two Knights of the
said Order accompaned with the other noblemen, And the Officers of the Order
shall also be present, and his Mantell shall be borne before him by one of the
Knyghtis of the said Order, or by the King at Arms of the Order. The which
Mantell shall be delyvered to him for his habit, after that he shall have made
his oath before his Stall and not before. And this done he shall return unto
the Chapter house, where he shall reseyve by the Soverayne or his Deputy, The
coler, and so he shall have the full possession of his habit holely, except
great Princes strangers, the which may receyve their habit holely within the
Chapter house, as it has been used and accustomed in times past, for the
shortenyng of time. And if he die before he have Receyved his habit, he shall
not be named one of the Founders, seeing that he lacks to have full possession
of his astate. But he shall have the one half of the Divine Service.
Masses abovenamed, for the delyverance of the Garter, and none other thing
above it. And if he so chosen come not in all good diligence after the
recepcion of the said Garter in the said place for to be stalled, and in
specially within the year of his Election, if he be a Knight dwelling within
the Realm, and has none excuse reasonable, allowable, and acceptable to the
said Soverayn or to his Deputy, and the Company, Then the Election shall be
void of him, and the Soverayne or his Deputy and the Company shall goo and
make another new election, and neither the Banner, the Sword, nor the Helmet,
nor Crest of him so chosen be put upon his Stall within the Castle before his
coming. To the end that if he come not, his said Hachementis, as Banner,
Sword, Helmet, be not taken down nor abaled, but honestly put out of the
Q^yer, and the reast of other things shall abide to the profitt and use of the
said Order. XXII. Item it is agreed, that if any of the Dukes, Marquis, Earls,
Vizcontes, Barons, Banerettis, or Bachelors die, That he that shall come after,
and succeed in his place and rome, be he Duke, Merques, Earl, Vizcounte, Baron,
Baneret, Bacheler, or any of the astates abovenamed, he shall have the selffe
same stalle that his Predecessor had, and shall not change it without he have
especial lycense or Warrant of the said Soverayne, allweyes all Emperors,
Kings, and Princes be excepted, the which shall keep and hold their Stalles
after their astate, and very next unto the Soverayne. And then by this mean a
Duke shall take the stall of a Bacheler, and a Bacheler the stall of a Duke, in
sign and knowledge of the first Founders. XXIII. Item, if there be any place or
stall void, the Soverayn at his pleasure may a^vance and translate, by his
special license, any Knight of the said Company, in the said stall, so be it
that it be more hyer then the stall that he was in before. Also the Soverayne
ouys in his lyffe may, if it please him, make a general translation of all the
states at his pleasure, except of Emperors, Kings, Princes, and D^kes. The
which allwey shall keep there places and stalles, if not that they be translated
in more hyer rome and stall, in the which translacion the long contynuance in
the Order, and the praises, worthynes, and merits of the Knights ought to be
considered and remembered. The which Knights from hensforth in going and
syttyng at all times, that they shall were their Mantels, shall keep their
places after the Order of their stallis, and not after their astatis, as is
aforesaid. XXIV. Item it is agreed, that all the Felowis abovesaid at their
first coming in shall gyve every of them a certain sum, after their astate,
for the entertaynyng and mayntenance of the Canons and Poor Knights dwelling
in the seid place, and for the alms deeds that is there perpetualli ordenyd.
That is to wytt, the Soverayne xl. marks, a stranger King xxl. The Prince xx
marks, every Duke xl. every Marquis viii l. vi s. viii d. every Earl x.
marks, every Vizcounte exvi s. viii d. every Baron and Baneret c s. every
Bacheler v. marks, and their Baners, Helmetts, Crestis, and Swordis shall not
be set over their stalles, untyll the time that they have paid at their
entryng the foresaid sommes, every one after his astate and degree whereof he
is. And it is to wit that the Soverayne is bound to pay for every stranger
that shall be chosen and elect, when he shall be stalled in his propre parson,
or by procurement, or attornay, and these gifts be gieven to th'entent that
every one of them that shall enter into the Order be more worthy to have the
name, title, and privilege, of one of the Founders of the said Order. XXV. Item
it is agreed, that every Knight within the year of his stallation shall cause
to be made a Scouchon of his arms, and hachementis in a plate of metal such
as shall please him, and that it be merly set upon the back of his stall. And
the other that shall come after shall have their Scochons and Hachements in
like manner; but their Plats of metal nor there hachements shall not be so
large nor so greatte as they of the first Founders were, except strangers,
which may use their plates and fashions at their pleasure. XXVI. Item it is
aggreed, that no Knight chosen and elect for to be Fellow of of the said Noble
Order shall not be stalled by procurement or attorney, except he be a
stranger, and may not well come hither in his propre parson for to be stalled,
or other that is busied without the Realm for the affairs of the Soverayn,
or by his commandment and license as it is above declared. XXVII. Item that
every Knight, entryng in the said Order, shall promise and swear faithfully to
observe and keep the poyntis and articles that here follows, That is to wit,
that to his true power he shall help, during his lyffe, and during the time
that he shall be Fellow of the said Order, for to keep, defend, and sustain
the honor, quarrelles, rightes, and lordshippes of the Soverayne of the said
Order. Item that with all his power he shall enforce hymselffe, and take pain
honorably to entertayne and augment the said Order. And if it happen him for to
know any thing that were ymagyned or procured to the contrary of the defense
and resistance of this, with all his true power he shall put himself in more
gretter endevorment.

Item that well and trewly he shall accomplish and entertayne all the Statuts,
poyntis, and ordynances of the said Order, and of all this shall make a
general oath, all and so as though it were read unto him fro point to point,
and article to article, and shall make the said oath to the Soverayne of the
said Order or his Deputy, in sweryng and promisyng upon the holy Gospellis for
to keep them and entertayne them, withowte any fraud or delacion. And upon
this he shall towche the Book and kiss the Cross.

Item this done the said Knight so chosen with dew reverence shall receyve the
Garter, the which the Soverayne or his Deputy shall put it about his lift
leg in saying these words, Sir, the loving Company of the order of the Garter
has receyved you their Brother, lover, and Fellow, and in token and knowledge
of this they gyve you and present you this present Garter. The which God will
that you receyve and were from hensforth to his praise and pleasure, and to
th'exaltacion and honor of the said Noble Order and of your self.

XXVIII. Item it is agreed, that in case that the Soverayne be out of the
Contre, to the which he can not in propre parson do that shall appertain to
the stallation, he may gyve power and auctorite, by his Letters of Commission,
to two of the Felows, or to dyverse for to exercise it in his name. XXIX. Item
it is agreed that a common Seal, a signet of the arms of the Order, be made,
the which shall rest in the custodi and keeping of the Chanceler of the order,
or of such a Knight and Fellow of the said Order, as shall please the Soverayne
to name and assign; and if he that shall have the Seals in keeping or custodi
should depart or goo forth for any cause, xx miles far from the Soverayne,
then he shall deliver the said Seals to the Soverayne, or to such Knight of
the Order, or to any other parsone, that it shall please the said Soverayne for
to ordeyne and appoynte. To the intent that at no time the said Seals be out
of the presence of the seid Soverayne, he being within his Realm. And if he be
owte of his Realm, The signet shall suffice for to seal all such acts and
wrytynges, touching the said Order, that there may be concluded and made. XXX.
Item it is agreed, that every Fellow of the said Order from hensforth shall have
the Statutes of the said Order, first collected and oversene by the Register,
and after that sealed with the common Seal afforesaid. And if the Knight will
have any arms devysed, or cognysance made within the Book of the said Statuts,
then the said Book shall be delyvered to the King at Arms of the Order, for
trewly to ordain of it as it shall appertain. And the original to be
likewise signed and sealed, the which shall shall abide in the Treasory of the
said College for evermore. XXXI. Item it is agreed, that after the death of any
of the Knights of the said Company, his Executours shall be bound for to
send again, and to delyver the Statutes of the said Order, within three
months after, if so be that the Statutes has been delivered unto him by the
Soverayne, or to his charge. The which Statutes shall be delivered again to the
Warden or Register of the said College, or to one of the principal Officers
for the time being. XXXII. Item it is agreed, that none of the Knights of
Saint George, of the said Company of the Garter, shall not goo out of the
Country nor Dominion of the Soverayne, without havyng leave and lisence of the
Soverayne: And therefore it is agreed, that if any viage be made, or any other
noble act appertaynyng to the honor of Knyghthod, The said Soverayne, of his
grace, for the great love, favor, and confidence that he hears toward the
Knights of the said Order, will prefarre, advance, and present the said
Fellows and Knights of the Order of Saint George before all other. XXXIII.
Item that none of the Knights of the said Order shall not arm themselves the
one against the other, but in the Wars of his Soverayne Lord, in his right
and just quarrel, and if it should happen, that any of the said Order were
retained with any Lord, and holdyng his party and quarrel, and the adversari
party destreth alsoo to have another Fellow of the said Order with him: In
this case, such a Knight and Fellow shall not be retained, but may excuse him
from all such things, because his Fellow is armed against him on the other
side, and was retained before him, and every Knight of the said Order shall be
bound to except when he shall be retained, that he may be holely dyschargyd
from his servyce of War, if any of the Felowshipp before him retained or
holdyng the contrary and adversari party. And if he that is the second
retained know that any of his Fellows he retained before him, and armed with
his adversari party, Then be that is second retained, at the first knowledge
that be shall have thereof, shall be bound to excuse him toward his Master,
and leave that quarrel. XXXIV. Item that all the lycencis gyven to the Knights
of the said Order, that goo out of the Realm for to seek and obtain honor,
and all certifications, or sendynge letters and writings concerning the said
Order, from hensforth, shall be sealled with one of the Seals of the said
Order. XXXV. Item it is agreed that if any Knight of the said Order, for his
devocion, will dwell within the said Castle contynually, There shall be
orden^d for him a dwelling place convenient, by the assignment of the
Soverayne, and he of his propre goods and at his costs and chargies shall
provyde for his lyveyng. XXXVI. Item if any other Knight, not being of the said
Order, has any will to dwell there for his devocion, there shall be ordened
for him a dwelling place, after the will and pleasure of the said Soverayne,
and with the consentement of the said Company. XXXVII. Item it is ordened, that
if any Knight, or other parson, will gyve any Lands, heritage, or rentes, for
to be participant of all the good oraysons and prayers that shall be said in
the said place, also his name shall be Registered, and the Canons and pore
Knyghts shall pray perpetually unto God for him, and also the said Deane,
Warden, and Canons of the said College from hensforth shall not take any manner
of charge upon the said College, without the advyse and consentment of the
said Soverayne, or his Deputy, and the Fellowship of the said Order, in
presence, and by them concented and agreed in plain Chapter. XXXVIII. Item for
to have better knowledge of the Knyghts that shall be of the said Order, the
Soverayne of it willyth and ordeneth by the Wills and consentment of all the
hole Company, that from hensforth, that every Knight of the said Order shall
have and were apertly and openly a Collar of gold about his neck, wayng
thyrty ounces of Troy weight and not above, the which Collar shall be made by
pieces in fasshion of Garters, in the mids of which Garters shall be a double
Rose, the one Rose of Red, and the other within White, and the other Rose
White, and the other Rose within read, and at the end of the said Collar shall
be put and fastened the Image of Saint George. The which Collar the said
Soverayn, his Successors, and amiable Company of the said Order shall be
bound to were, and in especial, in principal and solemyne Feasts of the
year, and in other days of the year shall be holden to were a small Chain of
Gold with the Image of Saint George dependyng at the end of the said Chain,
except in time of War, sickness, long viage; Then it shall suffice him to
were alonely a lase of sylke with the said Image of Saint George. And if the
said Collar have any need of reparacion, it may be put in the hands of the
Goldesmyth and workman unto the time that it be repared, the which Collar
also may not be made more richer with stones or other things, reserving the
said Image: The which may be garnished and enryched at the pleasure of the
said Knight: Also the said Collar may not be sold, engaged, aliened, nor
gyven, for any need, cause, or necessity whatsoever it be.
The Constitutions relating to the Officers of the Order. Lib. N. p. 232.
CAP. I.
HOrum primus erat Praelatus Ordines. Quisquis autem Praesul Wintoniensis, ac
Southamptoniae Comes etc. eo tempore fuerit, is and Praelatus esse debet. Qui
cum praesens sit, denominationes electionum Equestrium apposite conscribet, Et
quod reliquum fuerit, ibi defungetur Officio. Id quod illo absente
Cancellarius, Decanus, aut Scriba (quemadmodum est praeostensum) explebit.

Quoties Supremo ipsi visum fuerit solennitatom Divi Georgii servare Windesori,
tenebitur and Praelatus simul adesse, ut Divina celebret. Quod si volens
praetermiserit, viginti marcas ea de causa Collegio persolvet, nisi
rationabilem and justam absentiam, and Supremo ac Sodalitio been probabilem
causari posset, quae conferentur ad reparationes inibi faciendas.

Item Praelatus habitum superinduet, cujus exterior facies subrubri coloris e
serico villoso, interior autem albi serici, quod Taffeta vocant, circumpositis
(ut Supremo videbitur) sumptuosis insignibus and scuto super humerum, quod
Ordinis intra praelustre subligar habebit insignia. Fibula vestimenti, quae de
pectore propendebit, partim aurei fili, partim cerulei serici debet esse.

Eodem habitu tenebitur uti singulis vigiliis festivisque diebus Divi Georgii,
ubi modo liber extiterit. Alias item, ut dum celebre concilium, quod and
Parliamentum, agitatur maxim, vel in aliis festivitatibus, ad libitum uti
poterit. Qui propter honorem and Praelationem hujus Ordinis summum inter
Episcopos nostros ubique locum vendicabit, Archiepiscopis duntaxa^ concedens,
quibus sedium suarum praeeminentia constabit, utque tanto magis honoretur,
poterit idem Praelatus illustre Subligaculum suis semper insignibus
circumponere. Et quoties proceditur, poterit habitu praedicto tectus Supremum
antecedere, Cancellarium Ordinis sibi sinistrum habens. Habebit etiam intra
Castrum nostrum Windesori sibi locum designatum ad manendum, quoties illuc
accesserit. Cumque illuc advenerit vel ad alium quemcunque locum ex jussu
Supremi, ut Divi Georgii festivitatem observet, vel ut acta conscribat, aliave
quaecunque peragat, quae spectabunt ad hunc Ordinem, intra Atrium nostrum pro
se sibique ministrantibus habebit ad victum, quae per nostrum praeceptum
Comites in Aula residentes habere solent.

CAP. II.
Officium Cancellarii, quoniam praenobile est, ac permagnae Curae, exigitur in
id administrandum vir praeclari nominis, tantoque dignus honor. Quamobrem
Supremus vult and instituit, quod nemo provehatur ad id Officium, nisi vel
Praelatus Ecclesiae fuerit, velut Archiepiscopus, Antistes, aut notabilis
alioqui dignitatis: vel si vir laicus, Eques omnino non ignoti sanguinis,
expertus, doctus, and bona fama notus. Ad hunc spectabit Concilii suscipiendi
manifestatio, ac declaratio, sub ea forma quam Supremus and Sodales Ordinis
praeconceperint, omni tempore quo conveniet aut oportebit, ad honorem,
utilitatem, atque incrementum ejusdem Ordinis. Idem quotannis solennitate Divi
Georgii in Concilio proponet, atque enarrabit acta egregia laudeque digna
ipsorum Equitum hujus Ordinis, quotquot ita meriti sunt: qui vero contr^
commeruerunt and illorum quoque probra, siqua fuerint, recensebit, ^t Scriba
tanto facilius ea sub scriptis redigat in memoriam nunquam desituram. Habebit
hic itaque, scilicet cum Praelato intra Castrum nostrum Windesori mansionem,
scilicet habitum, and omnino similem victus assignationem. Cancellarius apud se
commune Sigillum Ordinis, cum Signaculo, servabit, ad Statuta, Commissiones,
facultates, certificationes, mandata, suffragiorum literas, aliasque causas ad
praedictum Ordinem attinentes, suo quasque tempore consignandas. Si vero,
legitimam ac rationabilem causam babens, ultra december milliaria recesserit a
Supremo, relinquet interim ea Sigilla, prout Supremus assignabit in custodia
unius e Sodalibus, qui commorabitur in Aula cum Supremo. Habebit hic ipse
Cancellarius annuum stipendium, Officii sui nomine, Centum libras Legalis
Monetae Angliae, vel in feodis, Officiis, aliisve promotionibus tantundem, hiis
de quibus ante diximus nihil hic obstantibus.

CAP. III.
Erit insuper hujus Ordinis unus Scriba, qui si vir Ecclesiasticus extiterit,
Literatus erit, and Theologiae vel alterius Iuris, Can^nici aut Civilis
Professor, habens itaque dignitatem aliquam in Ecclesia Cathedrali, quem
Supremus etiam ad Prebendam intra Sacellum suum Windesori curabit sublimandum,
and veluti decebit eo nomine promovebit. Si vero Secularis aut Laicus ipse
fuerit, vir honestus atque insignis erit, and Eques, experientiae doctrinaeque
nomine commendatus. Qui stipendium habebit annuum quinquaginta libras monetae
legalis Angliae, ^el in feodis, Officiis, aut emolumentis aliis tantundem.
Quoties item Eques aliquis in hunc Ordinem ascitus ad sedem suam introducatur,
ab eodem Equite, Scriba recipiet tredecem solidos cum quatuor denariis and
habitum -- Oportebit autem hunc Scribam duos conficere Libellos, sive Indices,
aut potius Annals, e Pargameno, in quibus Ordinationes and Statuta caeteraeque
caus^ spectantes ad Ordinem conscribentur. Quorum alter Windesori recondetur in
Aerario, ubi perpetuo manebit: alter vero in custodia Scribe, quem ubilibet
Supremo, si quando poscat, sit ostensurus. Prior appellabitur Index
Windesoriensis, p^sterior Aulae Registrum. Hujus intererit Electiones factas,
and Elect^rum nomina, stratagemmata, res gestas, and acta notatu fideque digna
tam Supremi, quam Commilitonum Ordinis, prout per seipsum suaque scrutandi
diligentia, vel per industriam Regis Armorum intelligere poterit, and habere
comperta describere and redigere in memori^m. Primitus, ut singulis anuis
accident, annotabit, and scriptis commendabit, q^^^ in eo quod proxime
suscipietur concilio legentur Equitibus ibi congregatis, ut si quicquam
correctionis aut emendationis indigeat, ibi corrigatur, similiter iterum in
altero concilio, and deinde venuste conscribenda curabit in praedictis libris
aut annalibus ad perpetuam sui memoriam.

CAP. IV.
Hiis accedet Rex Armorum unus, qui Garterus Rex Armorum Angliae vocitabitur,
quem Supremus and Commilitones, ob dignitatem Ordinis, virum generosi
sanguinis, honesti nominis insignia gerentem, intra regnum Angliae natum, and
caeteris Armorum Officialibus, qui nobili Coronae Angliae subjecti sunt,
superiorem esse volunt. Habebit hic a Supremo stipendium annuum quadraginta
libras monetae legalis Angliae; praeterea unusquisque Sociorum pro sui status
honor singulis annis donabit eidem, Dux, quatuor libras; Marchio quinque
marcas; Comes, quatuor marcas; Baro, quadraginta solidos; and Eques
Bachalaureus, viginti sex solidos atque octo denarios, ut tanto honorificentius
ad decus Ordinis vitam agat, and Officium administret. Quoties autem Creatio
Principis, Ducis, Marchionis, Comitis, Vicecomitis, aut Baronis obtinget, idem
Garterus vestes ejus vendicabit quibus utetur priusquam togam illius dignitatis
and praeclari status accipiat.

Ad eundem spectabit correctio Armorum atque insignium quorumcunque, quae
usurpantur and gestantus injuste authoritas insuper and potestas Arma bujusmodi
atque insignia concedendi talibus qui per Acta sortia ac laudabilia,
virtutesque and status, honores merebuntur juxta antiquam consuetudinem,
Literasque Patentes super ea re faciendi. Is ubique quando Supremus solenniter
incedet, E^sem ejus proximus antecedet, nemine intercedente; nisi forsan
Constabularius and Mareschallus, qui virgas illas ad Officium suum attinentes
ipsi gestabunt. Per eum quoque vel ab eo designatum juramentum ministrabitur
omnibus Armorum Officialibus, Supremo Subjectis, recepturum ob id quod
consuetum est.

Habebit itidem habitum Scribae similem, and Baronis Ferculum in Aula, cui post
Decanum Sacelli nostri mensa ponetur, and ferculum i^feretur, caeteraque sui
victius, ut mos fuit, and domum cubandi Windesori intra Castrum nostrum
accepturus. Cumque solennitas Divi Georgii celebretur, and Supremus assit, idem
Garterus portabit albam virgam, cujus ambo fines deanrabuntur, and vexillum
modicum insignium Ordinis supra.

Quando Dominus etiam ingredietur Cubiculum nostri Parliamenti, ipse locum ei
designabit juxt a dignitatis and clari status honorem ex antiquo more
recepturus, ob id uti Domino illi visum fuerit. Et quotienscunque, mittetur aut
legabitur in Supremi negotiis, quinque Equ^s habens recipiet pro laboribus
accipiendis, singulis quibusque diebus december solidos.

Idem Garterus, Rex Armorum, diligenter ac sedulo perquiret acta fortia ac
fortunata praeclaraque gesta tam Supremi, quam Commilitonum hujus Ordinis, quae
fidelit^r ac vere ref^ret Scribae, quatinus in seripta per ^um aeternamque
memoriam opportune redigi possent.

Hic Garterus etiam perferet, aut curabit perferendas omnes Literas, quae
spectabunt ad Confratres and Sodales hujus Ordinis: and significatum ibit
Supremo vel Scribae mortem cujusl^^^t Equitis ijtius Ordinis, ut literae
suffragiorum conficiantur ac deportentur, quemadmodum oportet, deferet and
deferri faciet Electiones eorum qui nominati fuerint, and ipsorum responsa
reportabit. Denique faciet, aut sieri procurabit, quicquid spectans ad hunc
Ordinem Supremus vel Praelatus, aut Cancellarius (qui praecipui sunt
Officiales) faciendum injunxerit.

CAP. V.
Postremo debet esse unus Hostiarius, quem Supremus ac Commilitones volunt esse
generosum, Armis ac Sanguine clarum, and in ditione ipsius Supremi progenitum,
is qui pro dignitate Ordinis atque hon^re omnium Hostiariorum ipsius Regni
summus erit. Habebit itaque curam and custodiam and custodiae praeheminentiam
penetralium nostrorum, Domus ubi Concilium agitatur, and omnium hostiorum ubi
concilium inibitur, tam in sublimi Curii quae Parliamentum appellitatur, quam
in quibusque locis aliis, Cujus Annuum stipendium erit Triginta Librarum. Quod
si jussu Supremi ac Commilitonum, quem bujus Ordinis Equitem nigra virga
tetegerit, and reum egerit sceleris admiss^, propter quod sit abdieandus ab ho^
Ordine, quinque libras eo facto percipiet: si levioris offensae causa quem
admonuerit, ex praecepto Regis and Concilii, vendicabit ab eodem ca de causa
viginti solidos. Et quandocunque quis Electus in sedem introducitur, december
solidos accipiet; intra Castrum nostrum Windesori cubandi l^cum sibi selectum,
ejusdem Castri and duorum saltuum coadjacentium custodiam habebit. Habebit
etiam habitum S^ribae and Garteri Regis Armorum, scilicet, fercula Baronum and
reliquum victum attinentem in Aula. Qui si non fuerit Eques in ingressu, tum
fieri debet. Vbicunque vero singulis annis Supremus extiterit in Festo Divi
Georgii, die vel festivitate sequente, ante eundem Supremum aut Deputatum,
virgam nigellam aut ipse deferet, vel alius ab eo sufficienter assignatus. Et
supra virgam Leo stabit, Anglorum insigne. Virga nimirum loco clavae
gestabitur, cujus and authoritatem habebit, hiis modo deserviens qui
deliquerint and in Ordinationes ac Statuta peccarint.

Hii tres hujus Ordinis Officiales, Scriba videlicet, Garterus Rex Armorum, and
Hostiarius ab atra virga nuncupatus, ipsi cum suis ta^rebus quam ministris in
suis Officiis permanentes, sub perpetua Supremi protectione ac propugnaculo
secure durabunt. Vnde si quaevis injuria seu violentia ipsis inferatur, vel ab
eis qui Supremo subjecti sunt, vel exterius, quoties causas suas arbitrio
Supremi submittent, ipse cum Sodalibus exhibebit eis justitiam, aut exhibendam
ex aequo and congruo procurabit. Si vero pars adversae causam suam Supremo
submittere detrectabit, ipse cum Commilitonibus eum erga Officiales hos animum
habebit, ut ipsorum causam quoad justum atque aequum erit cum debito favore
tueri velit.

Intra Chorum praedicti Sacelli, dum solennia peraguntur, ante Sedem Regiam
praeterea statuentur Sedilia duo, unum ante alterum, in quorum altero sedebunt
Praelatus and Cancellarius Ordinis; in altero, Scriba, Rex Armorum and
Hostiarius.

The Names of the first Founders, and other Knights-Companions, who succeeded
in their Stalls, after the ancient manner; as they are exemplified in two
TABLES remaining in the Chapter House at Windesor.
TAB. I.
1. Le tres noble Roy Edward tiers, and premier Fondeur.
APres luy vint le Roy Richard, filz, Edward le Prince de Galls. Apres luy
^int le tres-noble Roy Henry, filz de Johan Duc de Lancastre. Apres luy vint le
noble Prince and vaillant, le Roy Henry 5. Heritier and Regent de France, and
Conquereur de Normandy. Apres luy vint son filz Henry de Windesore le 6.
courronne a Paris Roy de France. Apres luy and en son temps, entra en son droit
tiltre, le tres noble Roy Edward 4. la fleur de Chivallerie. [ Note that all
put within Vneus's at the end of each Stall, is added in the Tables by a later
hand.
Apres luy vint le Roy Richard le 3. Apres luy vint le tres-noble Roy Henry le
7.]

2. Le Duc de Lancastre, Henry, and Premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Seigneur Despenser, Edward; Apres luy vint le Conte de
Stafford, Hugh; Apres luy vint Mons^eur Nichol Sarnesfeld; Apres luy vint
Monsieur William D'arundell; Apres luy vint le Roy de Portugal, Jehan; Apres
luy vint le Roy de Portugal Edward, Apres luy vint le Duc de Gloucestre,
Humfrey; Apres luy vint le Roy de Portugal, Alfons'^ [Apres luy vint son Filz
le Roy de Portugal.]

3. Le Captou de Buch, Piere, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Derby, qui apres fuit Roy D'angleterre Henry le 4.
Apres luy vint Messire Philipp la Vache. Apres luy vint Messire Gilbert Sire le
Talbot. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan Gray. Apres luy vint le Conte Mareschalle
Jehan. Apres luy vint le Duk D'York, Richard. Apres luy vint le Conte de
Warwick, Richard. [Apres luy vint le Noble Prince Charlois Duc de Burgoyne.
Apres luy vint le Roy Don Ferdinando le la grant Cecile and de Naples, par l'
ordonnance du Soverein and la Compagnie.]

4. Le Conte de Saresbury William, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte d' Arundell, Thomas. Apres luy vint le Conte de
Huntington, qui apres fut fait Duc D'Excestre. Apres luy vint le Duc de
Norfolk, Jehan. Apres luy vint le Conte de Worcestre, Jehan, Grant Conestable
D'Angleterre. Apres luy vint le Duc de Norfolk Iehan. [ Apres luy vint le
Marquis Dorset, Thomas, tilz de la Royne Elizabeth.]

5. Monsieur Jehan de Lis^e, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Messire Richard la Vache; Apres luy vint Messire Edward, Sire
de Powys. Apres luy vint Her Tangke Clux. Apres luy vint Messire le Duc de
Glouces^re Freire au Roy Edward quart. [Apres luy vint le Count de Ox. Jehan.]

6. Monsieur Johan Beauchampe, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Duc le Clarence, Leonel-Apres luy vint le Seire de Basset,
Rauf. Apres luy vint le Duc de Gheldren Will. Apres luy vint le Conte de
Stafford. Apres luy vint le Conte de Kent, Edmund. Apres luy Messire Robert
Doumfravile. Apres luy vint le Conte de Sarisbury Richard. Apres luy vint
Monsieur de Montague, Jehan, apres Conte de Northumberland. [Apres luy vint le
Count D'Arundell William.]

7. Monsieur Hugh Courtenay, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Northamton, William. Apres luy le Duc de Eborum,
Conte de Cantebrigie, Edmund. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan, filz du Roy Henry
4. Duc de Bethford, Regent de France. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Gray, de
Ruthyn. Apres luy vint le Conte de Somerset, Jehan, apres Duc de Somerset.
Apres luy vint Dom. Alver Dalmadaa Conte D'everence, Captain de Portugal.
Apres luy vint le Viscount Bourschier, Henry, apres Conte D'Essex. [Apres luy
vint Count de Arundell Thomas.]

8. Monsieur Johan Gray, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Wautier Manny. Apres luy vint Monsieur Guichard
D'anguillem. Apres luy vint le Duc de Gloucestre, Count de Buckingham, Thomas.
Apres luy vint le Conte Palatyn Duc de Bavayre, Robert. Apres luy vint le Roy
D'anmarch. Apres luy vint Messire Antony de Wideville, Sieur de Scales and de
Neucelles, freire de la Royne Elizabeth. [Apres luy Messire Jehan Conyers
Baneret. Apres luy le Conte de Surry Thomas.]

9. Monsieur Miles de Stapelton, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Hereford, Humfrey. Apres luy vint le Conte de
Warwick, le filz Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Erpengham. Apres luy
vint le Conte de Stafford, Humfray, apres Duc de Buckingham. Apres luy vint
Monsieur de Scroup, Johan.

10. Monsieur Hugh de Wrotellegh, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas de Felton* Apres luy vint le Sire de
Willoughby, William. Apres luy vint Monsieur William Harington. Apres luy vint
Messire Rauf Boteller, Seigneur de Sudley. [Apres luy vint Messire Thomas
Seigueur Mautravers.]

11. Monsieur Jehan Chaundos, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Guy de Briene. Apres luy vint le Conte de Ostervant,
William, qui apres fuit remue a l'autre part a lestal d^ Duc de Bretaigne,
Jehan. Apres luy vint Monsieur Humfry, filz du Roy, Henry Duc de Gloucestre,
qui apres fut remue a Pestal du Roy de Portugal, Edward Jehan. Apres luy vint
le Capitan de la Bouche, Conte de Longeville. Apres luy vint Monsieur J^han
Sire a^ Dudley. Apres luy Seigneur William Stanley. [Apres luy le Count de
Northumberland Henry. Apres luy le Conte de Shrewesbury George.]

12. Monsieur Otes Holand, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Frank van Halle. Apres luy vint Messire William Beauchamp.
Apres luy vint le Seigneur de Morley, Thomas. Apres luy vint le Sire de
Willoughby, Robert. [Apres luy vint Messire Walter Blount, Sire de Mountjoye.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Urbyne.]

13. Monsieur Sanchete D' abrichecourt, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur William Fitz Waryn. Apres l^y vint le Sire Latimer,
William. Apres luy vint Monsieur Symond de Burley. Apres luy vint Monsieur
Jehan Devros. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Beaumont Jehan. Apres luy vint le
Conte de Somerset, Jehan. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan de Cornvaile. Apres luy
vint Monsieur Thomas Hoo. Apres luy vint le Sire de Stanley, Thomas. Apres luy
vint Messire Johan Asteley.

TAB. II.
1. Le Prince Edward, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint son filz Richard, Prince de Gales. Apres luy vint Jehan Duc de
Lancastre, par l' ordonnance du Soverain and la Compagnie. Apres luy vint
Monsieur Philipp la Vache, qui apres fut rem^e a l' estal du Conte Derby, par
le Soverain and la Compagnie. Apres luy vint le Prince Henry, filz du Roy
Henry. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan D'abrichecourt. Apres luy vint Sigismund,
Empereur. Apres luy vint le Prince Edward, filz du Roy Edward le quart. [Apres
luy vint le primier filz du tres-noble Roy Henry le 7.]

2. Le Conte de Warwick, Thomas, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Pembroke, Jehan. Apres luy vint le Duc de Bretaign,
Jehan. Apres luy vint le Duc de Holand. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan
Robessart. Apres luy vint George Duc de Clarence, freire puisne du Roy Edward
4. [Apres luy le Duc de Bedford, Jasper. Apres luy le Roy de Grande Cecile,
Alphons.]

3. Le Conte de Stafford Rauf, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Alain Bukeshull. Apres luy vint Monsieur Brian de
Stapelton. Apres luy vint Monsieur William Scroop. Apres luy vint le Conte de
Westmerland, Rauf. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan de Fastolf. Apres luy vint le
Roy Dom de Fernando de la grante Cecile and de Naples, qui apres fit remue a
l'estal du noble Prince Charlois Duc de Bourgonge. [Apres luy vint le Duc de
Ferrare, Hercules.]

4. Le Conte de March Roger, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Ufford. Apres luy vint Monsieur Richard
Pembruge. Apres luy vint le Conte de Suffolk, William. Apres luy vint Monsieur
Richard de Burly. Apres luy Monsieur Edward, filz, de Duc de York. Apres luy
vint le Conte de Oxenford, Richard. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Blount. Apres
luy vint Monsieur William Philippe, Seigneur de Bardolf. Apres luy vint Messire
Jehan Beauchamp. [Apres luy vint le Duc D' York Richard, filz du Roy Edward le
quart. Apres luy le Duc de Bokyngham.]

5. Monsieur Bartholomew Bourgherst, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Sire de Neufville, Jehan. Apres luy vint Monsieur Pierre
Courtenay. Apres luy vint le Sire Lovell Johan. Apres luy vint le Sire Fitzhugh
Henry. Apres luy vint le Sire de Scalles, Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur de
Hasting, William. [Apres luy le Conte de Derby Sire de Stanley Thomas.]

6. Monsieur de Mohun, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Kent, Thomas. Apres luy vint le Conte de Dorset,
Thomas, Duc de Excestre. Apres luy vint Dom Petre filz du Roy de Portugal, Duc
de Quymbre. Apres luy vint Johan Bourscher. Sire de Berneres. [Apres luy vint
Duc de Bukyngham Henry. Apres luy le Sire de Strange, George.]

7. Monsieur Thomas Hollande, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Duc de Lancastre, Jehan, qui apres fut remue a l'estal du
Prince Richard, par le Soverain and la Compagnie: Et en son lien vint Messire
Johan de Burle. Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Moubray, Conte de Notyngham.
Apres luy vint Thomas de Lancastre filz an Roy Henry 4. Apres luy vint le Conte
de Suffolk William del Pool, apres Marquis and Duc de Suffolk. [Apres luy
vint son filz Jehan Duc de Suffolk. Apres luy le Sire de Dynham, John.]

8. Monsieur Richard Fitz Symond, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Suffolk, Robert. Apres luy vint Monsieur Robert
Namurs. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Bourgscher. Apres luy vint Monsieur
Thomas Rammiston. Apres luy vint Monsieur Sire Burnell. Apres luy vint Monsieur
Lowes Robessart Sire de Bourgscher. Apres luy vint le Conte Jehan D'arundelle.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Morteigne, Edmund, qui apres fut Marquis de Dorset,
and Duc de Somerset. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Herbert, William. [Apres luy
vint Jehan de Buckyngham Conte de Wiltshire. Apres luy vint le Conte de
Northumberland, Henry. Apres luy le Viscount Lovell Frauncois. Apres luy
Messire Edward VVodevile. Apres luy le Viscount VVellis, Jehan.]

9. Monsieur Thomas Wale, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Reynard de Cobeham. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan
Sully. Apres luy vint le Conte de Warrewyk Richard. Apres luy vint le Sire de
Faucunberge, apres Conte de Kente. Apres luy vint le Conte de Douglas. [Apres
luy vint le Sire de Broke, Robert.]

10. Monsieur Neel Loringee and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint le Conte D'Arundell, Richard. Apres luy vint Sire de Gray.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Hugh Stafford, Sire de Bourgscher. Apres luy vint le
Sire de Hungerford, Wauter. Apres luy vint le Sire de Riviers, Richard, apres
Conte de Riviers, and Pier de Roigne Eliz. Apres luy vint Messire Jehan le
Seigneur Howard. [Apres luy Messire Thomas de Borough. Apres luy Messire
Charles Somerset Baneret.]

11. Monsieur James D'audele, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Grantson. Apres luy vint Monsieur de Roos.
Apres luy vint le Sire Camus, Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur Jehan Sire de
Clifford. Apres luy vint le Sire de Talbot, Johan, apres Conte de Cherosbery.
Apres luy vint son filz, Johan Conte de Cherovsbury. Apres luy vint le Sire de
Wenloke. Apres luy vint Messire, William Parr. [Apres luy Messire Richard
Dunstall. Apres luy Messire Edw. Poynings.]

12. Monsieur Henry Em, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Ughtrede. Apres luy vint le Conte de Bethford.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Lewis Clifford. Apres luy vint M^nsieur Johan Stanley.
Apres luy vint le Conte de Sarisbury, Thomas. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan de
Radcliff. Apres luy vint le Viscount de Beaumont, Jehan. Apres luy vint
Monsieur Robert Harecourt. [Apres luy vint Monsieur Walter Deveros Sire de
Ferres. Apres luy vint Monsieur Johan Cheny Baneret.]

13. Monsieur Walter Pavely, and premier Fondeur.
Apres luy vint Monsieur Thomas Banestre. Apres luy vin^ Monsieur Sandich de
Trane. Apres luy vint Monsieur Symund Felbrigger. Apres luy vint Henry filz du
Roy de Portingall, Duc de Vison. Apres luy vint le Sire de Duras. Apres luy
vint Messire Thomas Montgomery. [Apres luy vint Messire Gylbert Talbot Baneret.]

NUMBER I. King Edward the Third's Letters Patent for founding St. George's
Chapel in Windesor Castle. Pat. an. 22. E. 3. par. 2. m. 6.
EDwardus,etc. Vniversis praesentes Literas inspecturis, salutem.
Magnificenciam decet Regiam in piis semper actibus delectari, ut cum ante
tribunal steterit summi Regis, apud quem non est acceptio personarum, sed
unusquisque prout gessit in corpore recipiet, sive bonum fuerit sive malum,
inter bonos a dextris assistere valeat and non piger vel inutilis cum reprobis
judicari. Nos quidem varia vitae nostrae studia and exilia merita nostra cum
amaritudine recolentes solicit, divinaque nobis praestita beneficia, gratias
and honores, quibus prae caeteris misericorditer Altissimus nos praevenit,
merito contemplantes de bonis nobis a Deo collatis and supra modum multociens
inaniter dispensatis graviter suspiramus, nec aliud nobis restat, nisi ad
Christrum and matrem ejus Virginem gloriosam, quae nobis nunquam patrocinari
destitit, sed in variis periculis constitutos suis beatis precibus protexit
hactenus, and adjuvit feliciter, convertere totaliter mentem nostram, and sibi
pro gratiis, gratias reddere and pro delictis veniam postulare. Et quia bona
est negotiatio per quam transitoria declinantur and aeterna faelici commercio
subrogantur, Capellam quandam aptae pulchritudinis octo Canonicorum secularium
in Castro nostro de Wyndesore in qua Aqua sacri Baptismatis abluti fuimus
situatam, in honor Beati Edwardi Confessoris per progenitores nostros
nobiliter inchoatam, quibus pro ipsorum sustentatione quandam summam pecuniae
pro eorum voluntate and de proprio thesauro in Elemosinam tribuerunt, in
honorem Omnipotentis Dei, and suae Genitricis Mariae Virginis gloriosae,
Sanctorumque Georgii Martyris and Edwardi Confessoris, nostris Regiis sumptibus
fecimus consummari. Summis desideriis affectantes and efficacem operam
adhibentes, ut praedicti Canonici inibi Domino servituri tam reddituum
incremento, quam aliorum Canonicorum and Ministrorum ac servientium numero
augeantur; Et ut in Capella praedicta cultu latiori Divini Nominis gloria
exaltetur, praedictis oct^ Canonicis unum Custodem, praesidentem eisdem, and
quindecim adhuc alios Canonicos, viginti and quatuor Milites pauperes, de se
impotentes, seu vergentes ad inopiam, and de bonis dictae Capellae perpetuo
sustentandos, and alios dictae Capellae Ministros sub ipsius Custodis imperio
Christa perpetuo famulantes superaddere, and ibidem tam Canonicos and Milites
quam alios dictae Capellae Ministros ut praemittitur recipi fa^ere dignum
ducimus, firmiter statuimus, and inviolabiter ordinamus, and auctoriate nostra
Regia, quantum in nobis est, perpetuo stabilimus. Volentes quod dicti Canonici
and Ministri divina Offi^ia celebrent pro nobis, and progenitoribus, and
successoribus nostris, in partem satisfactionis eorum de quibus in extremo
judicio rationem erimus reddituri, celebraturi imperpetuum secundum formam
Ordinationis nostrae inde before faciendae, quibus jura patronatus and
advocationes Ecclesiarum de Wyrardesbury Lincolniae, Southtanton, Exon, and
Uttoxhatre Coventriae and Lichfeldiae Diocesis, quas nuper acquisivimus ex hac
causa, pro nobis and haeredibus nostris dedimus and concessimus, damus and
concedimus. Habend' and tenend' ipsis and successoribus suis in liberam, puram,
and perpetuam Elemosinam ab omni exactione seculari, liberos, penitos and
quietos imperpetuum. Concessimus etiam eisdem, pro nobis, and haeredibus
nostris, and licentiam dedimus, quod iidem Custos and Canonici dictas Ecclesias
appropriare, and eas sie appropriatas in proprios usus tenere possent, sibi and
successoribus suis imperpetuum. Statuto de terris and tenementis ad manum
mortuam non ponendis, edito non obstante. Volumus etiam dictis Custodi, and
Canonicis, Militibus and aliis dictae Capellae Ministris inibi servit^ris
tantum de thesauro nostro Annis singulis elargiri, quod, cum Emolumento de
praedictis Ecclesiis proveniente, ad eorum victum and supportationem onerum
sibi incumbentium juxta condecentiam status sui interim videbitur sufficiens,
and honestum quousque de bonis immobilibus, terris, beneficiis seu redditibus
ad sufficientiam congruam and honorem nostrum, usque ad summam mill librarum
annuatim per nos contigerit provideri. Quae omni^ promittimus and pollicemur
pro nobis and haeredibus nostris nos efficaciter impleturos. In cujus rei
testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud
Westmonasterium sexto die Augusti, Anno Regni nostri Angliae vicesuno secundo,
Regni vero nostri Franciae nono.

N. II. A Bull impowring the Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of Winchester
to Institute the College of Windesor. Ex ipso Autogr. in Aerar. Colleg.
Windesor.
CLemens Episcopus Servus servorum Dei, venerabilibus fratribus Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi and Episcopo Wintoniensi, salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem.
Eximiae devotionis affectus, quem charissimus in Christo Filius noster Edwardus
Rex Angliae illustris, ad nos and Romanam Ecclesiam gerit, promeretur, ut
petitionibus ejus, quantum cum Deo possumus, in his praesertim quae Divini
cultus augmentum and animarum salutem recipient, favorabiliter annuamus.
Petitio siquidem pro part dicti Regis, nobis nuper exhibita continebat, quod
ipse R^x Zelo piae devotionis accensus, cupiens terrena in coelestia, and
transitoria in aeterna faelici commercio commutare, in Capella Castri. de
Windesore ejusdem Regis, Sarisburiensis doiceseos, fundata ^d ^andem Beatae
Mariae Virginis and S. Georgii martyris ac Edwardi Regis and Confessoris
bonorem, and divini cultus augmentum, ac pro sua, and aliorum fidelium animarum
salute, unum Collegium Canonicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, nec non Militum
Regni Angliae, ad inopiam vergentium, ac Ministrorum qui in eadem Capella
perpetuo Domino famulentur; and certum numerum ipsorum ordinare and canonice
fundare, ac de bo^is suis propriis sufficienter dotare proponit. Quare pro
part ipsius Regis, fuit nobis humiliter supplicatum, ut vobis ordinandi ac
statuendi, Authoritate nostra hujusmodi Collegium, and alia ad hoc pertinentia,
ac etiam opportunam facultatem de benignitate Apostolica concedere dignaremur.
Nos itaque ipsius Regis pium in hac part propositum in Domino commendantes, ac
plenam de vestra circumspectione in Domino fiduciam obtinentes, hujusmodi dicti
Regis supplicationibus inclinati, ordinandi, ac statuendi, and deputandi, hac
vice, authoritate Apostolica, in dicta Capella, per dictum Regem, dote
praedicta prius ut praemittitur assignata, prout vobis hoc secundum Deum
expedire videbitur, super quo vestram conscientiam, oneramus, certum numerum
Canonicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, Militum ac Ministrorum praedictorum
inibi, ut praemittitur, Domino famulantium perpetuo observandum; De quibus
quidem Canonicis seu Presbyteris unus per vos authoritate eadem deputetur qui
Custos eorum perpetuo nuncupetur, eisque inibi praesideat; alios etiam
Canonicos, Presbyteros, ac Clericos, Milites, and Ministros ejusdem Collegii
and Capellae, ac singulos ipsorum, ac bona eorundem regat pariter and gubernet;
statuendi and ordinandi authoritate eadem Ordinationes congruas and honestas
juxta quas Custos, Canonici, Presbyteri Clerici, Milites, and Ministri Collegii
praedicti and ipsorum singuli vivere debeant, eaque teneantur perpetuo firmiter
observare, Parochialis Ecclesiae and ^ujuslibet alt^rius in praemissis omnibus,
nec non patronatus Can^nicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, Militum and
Ministrorum, ac Capellae praedictae, postquam ipsi deputati and ordinati inibi
fuerint ut praefertur, eidem Regi ejusque haeredibus and successoribus, juribus
semper salvis ac perpetuo reservatis quibuscunque Apostolicis statutis, and
consuetudinibus contrariis nequaquam obstantibus; vobis and cuilibet vestrum
authoritate praedicta, de s^^ci^li gratia, plenam and liberam concedimus
fa^ultatem. Dat. Avinionae pridie Kalendas Decembris Pontificatus nostri anno
nono.

N. III. A Bull exempting the College of Windesor from the Jurisdiction of
Archbishops, etc. Ex ipso Autogr. ibidem.
CLemens Episcopus servus servorum Dei venerabilibus fratribus Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi and Episcopo Wyntoniensi salutem and Apostolicam benedictionem. Ad
ea libenter intendimus per quae personae Ecclesiasticae liberius in
tranquillitate pacis valiant Domino famulari. Nuper siquidem vobis ad
charissimi in Christo filii nostri Edwardi Regis Angliae illustris,
supplicationis instantiam ordinandi and statuendi authoritate Apostolica in
Capella Regis e^usdem in Castro de Wyndesore Sarum Dioceseos fundata Collegium
and certum numerum Canonicorum, Presbyterorum, Clericorum, Militum, ad inopiam
vergentium and Ministrorum inibi Domino perpetuo famulantiu^, quorum unus eis
praefideat, qui Custos perpetuo nuncupetur, nec non ordinationes congruas and
honestas, juxta quas Collegium, Custos, Canonici, Presbyteri, Clerici, Milites
and Ministri praedicti vivere debeant faciendi, sufficienti dote per dictum
Regem de bonis propriis cisdem Capellae and Collegio ad vestrum seu vestrum
alterius arbitrium primitus assignata, plenam and liberam per nostras certi
tenoris literas concessimus facultatem prout in ipsis Literis before
continetur. Nos itaque volentes Capellam ac Collegium hujusmodi uberiori gratia
prosequi and favore ipsius Regis supplicationib^s inclinati, eximendi perpetuo
authoritate ^adem, juxta modificationem inferius annotatam, Capellam,
Collegium, Canonicos, Presbyteros, Clericos, Milites and Ministros praedictos,
postquam ipsi in eadem Capella recepti and sufficienter dotati fuerint, ut
praefertur, ab omni ordinaria jurisdictione, Dominio, and superioritate
qualibet Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Archiadiaconorum and aliorum
quorumlibet Iudicum and Officialium ipsorum Ecclesiasticorum, illaque omnia ad
jus and proprietatem beati Petri, and sub protectione Sedis Apostolicae and
nostra suscipiendi and nihilominus concedendi hac vice authoritate praedicta,
ut Custos dictae Capellae qui pro tempore fuerit habeat perpetuo Iurisdictionem
Ecclesiasticam in Capellam Collegium, Canonicos, Presbyteros, Clericos,
Milites, and Ministros praedictios, and eorum Successores, and sing^los ipsorum
and curam animarum etiam eorundem constitutionibus Apostolicis and Statutis ac
consuetudinibus Provincialibus and Synodalibus and aliis quibuscunque
contrariis nequaquam obstantibus, vobis and vestrum cuilibet auctoritate eadem
plenam and liberam concedimus facultatem. Volumus autem quod Custos dictae
Capellae qui pro tempore fuerit curam animarum praedictarum a loci Diosesano
recipere teneatur, and in hiis quae ad ipsam curam pertinent perpetuo ei
subditus sit, ad judicium vero perceptarum exemptionis and libertatis
praedictarum. Volumus quod ipsi Custos and Collegium unam Marcam sterlingorum
in Festo Sancti Georgii, in cujus honor dicta Capella fundata existit, Camerae
Apostolicae annis singulis solvere teneantur. Nos enim irritum and inane
decernimus, siquid contra praemissa a quoquam quavis autoritate scienter vel
ignoranter contigerit attemptari. Datae Avinionae ii. Idus Februarii
Pontisicatus nostri Anno nono.

N. IV. A Patent for Institution of the Chancellor's Office. Pa^ de an. 15. E.
4. par. 3. m. 18.
Edward per la grace de Dieu, Roy D'angliterre and de France and Signieur
Hirlande; a touts ceulx qui ces presents verront ou orront, Salutz. Come enter
le Offices de nostre Order de la Gartier, Il ny ait null Office de Chauncelleir
per les primer Estatuts d' icelleux Order, le quell Office est bien licite and
necessary ou dit Order; Volons and Ordonnons, que pur l' axaltation and bien
dudit Order en Icelleux aura ung Officer nomme Chauncelleir. Et pur tant, que
l' Office est grande, and de grande charge, and requiert avoir ung notable
person, volons, que null ne soit in Icelleux Office, s'il n'est in dignite
ecclesiastique, Come Evesque. Considerans en oultre que la Chapel de Saint
George en nostre Castle Royal de Windesore, ou le Order est found and
essise, and establie dedens le diocese de Salisbury, Et nous aians regart aux
vertux, prudence and diligence de Reverent Pere en dieu, nostre chier, and bien
ame Cousyn Rychart Beauchamp, a present Evesque du dit diocese de Salisbury,
qui pur l' amor du dit order s'emplere de jour en jour vaquier and attendre a
l'avauncement and bone profection de la belle ouvre per nos commences au dit
Castle de Windesore, sur la largeur de la dit Chapel avons Icelleux Reverent
pere in Dieu, Ordonne and establie, Ordonnons and establissous pur la term de
sa vie Chauncellier de la dit nostre Order de la Gartier. Et apres sa vie,
volons and ordonnons que ses Successors Evesques de Salisbury a touts jours
aient and occupent le dit Office de Chauncellier tant ainsi, que cest nostre
concession per l'advis de Confreres Chivalers du dit Order sit mis in execution
sans prejudice de L'evesque de Winchester ense que touchant le dit Order per
les primers Estatuts len en doibt appertenir. Et ausi, volons and ordonnons,
que le dessusdit Chauncelleir and les Successors Evesques du dit Salisbury
ouront en guard le Grand Seal de la dessusdit nostre Order de Gartier, du
quell Seal, Ils ne poureunt Seelere nulles Lettres, se non per le form and la
maniere, Come Il est Ordonne per les estatuts dut dit Order, ou per
commandment especial de nous and nous Successors Souverains du dit Order.
In testmoigne de quel chose cestes nostres Lettres avons nous faictes Patentes.
Testmoigne nous mesmes a Westminster, x. jour Octobre, L'an de nostre Reign
quinsiesme.

N. V. The Letters for Institution of the Office of Garter. Ex Autogr. in
Biblioth. Hatton.
A Tous ceulx qui ces presents Lettrez verront ou orront, Nous Humfrey Duc de
Glocestre, Richard de Beauchamp, Conte de Warwick, Robert Seigneur de Willuby;
Henry Seigneur fitz Hugh. Loys de Robessart, Seigneur de Bourchier; Johan
Cornwaylle. Thomas Herpingham, Gualtier Hungerford, Jehan de Robessart, Simon
Felberg, Guillime Philippe, Hartoulx Clux, Chiviliers, party du nombre de la
Compaignie des Confreres de la Noble Order du Jartier, fondee en l' onneur
Dieu, nostre Dame, and de Monsieur Saint George, dedens la sointe Chapelle du
glorieux Saint dessusdit assise ou Chastell Royal de Windesore, Salute. Comme
ja pieca tres-excellent Prince de Noble memoyrie le Roy Henry le quint nostre
Sovereign Seigneur, qui Dieu absoille, en son vivant par bonne and meure
deliberation contemplant a la Noble contemplacion de la dit Noble Order, come
Soverain d'icelle, ou plain Chapitre de la dite Compaigne and confraternite,
per l'advys and consentement de tous les Confreres, and present Reverend Pere
en dieu Henry, Evesque de Wincestre, Prelat de la dit Noble Order, voulut,
ordonna, and constitua en accroyssant le nom de la dit Noble Order, and pour
estre entendant au service de ladit Compaigne les confreres dicelle and de
toute gentillesse ung servant d'armes. Lequel pour la dignite de le dit Order
voult q'uil feust Soverain dedans l'Office d'armes, sur toutes les autres
Servans d'Armes du tres-noble Royaume d' Angleterre. Et en confirmant la dit
Order fut nomme Jartier, Roy D'armes des Angloys. Apres le quel honorable
propos fait and accomply, le dit Servant d'Armes nomme Jartier, Impose ou nom
de la dit Order a pleu a nostre createur mettre horse de ceste mortelle vie,
nostre Sovereign Seigneur, avaunt que ordonnance de sustenance feust ordonne ad
serviteur Jartier, pour la supportation de son petit estate. Quelles chooses
considerees, and veu l'entente de nostre dit Sovereign Seigneur en L'ordre
tant fructieuse and glorieuse en virtue and honneur, desirans pour honneur and
Reverence de la dit Noble Order au dit Serviteur estre pourveu de raisonable
substance parentre nous, pour meulx maintenir son petit Estate, parquoy Il en
puisse plus honorablement soy contenir a l'onneur du service de la dit Noble
Order, Iusques au temps que nostre dit Sovereign Seigneur le Roy Henry le vi.
qui a present est Ieune, s^it a parfait aage, and que par son noble advys and
Conseil a celuy temps soyt plus largement ordonne de present d'ung commun
assentement nous dessusdiz, present le dit Reverend Pere en Dieu and Prelat de
la dit Order, l'Evesque de Wincestre, confyans es honneurs and gentillesses des
compaignons confreres absens, on dedens le Chapitre de ladite confraternite,
luy avons assign and ordonne a avoir and percevoir de chescun de nous
annuelment, a chescune Feste de Saint George, certain pension selon la form
and maniere que cy apres sensuyt. Cest assavoir, du dit Reverend Pere en Dieu
and Prelat de la dit Order, la sum de v. marcz par ann; and de chescun Duc
Compaignion and Confrere vi. Nobles par ann; and de chescun Baron ou Banneret
Compaignon and Confrere quatre Nobles; and de chescun Bachellier, Chivailler,
Compaignion and Confrere deux Nobles par ann; Desquells Pensions et Sommes
dessusditz au commencement pour la premier annee a la faisans de cestes l'avons
content, and voulons, and luy accordons annuellement ^us and par la form and
maniere que dit est, jusques au temps que nostre dit Souveraign Seigneur comme
dit est, soit a parfait aage, pryant and requerant tous and chescun les
Compaignons Confreres de la dit Noble Order, absens au faict de ceste
ordannance, que benignement and pour bonneur de la dit Order a cese vueillent
consentir, and Icelle Ordonnance a lover, Et pour ceste present annee,
chescune selon est at luy destribuer selon la form dessusdit. Et pour
aprovance que selon nostre intencion ces presents procederont selon la voye de
bonneur and gentillesse les avons saites seeller du seel de la dit Noble Order.
Done au licu de Wyndesore au Chapitre de la dit Confraternite, en la feste de
Monsieur Saint George, Lan de Grace Mill CCCC. XXII.

N. VI. The Oath taken by the Prelate and Chancellor of the Order. Iuramentum
Praelati and Cancellarii Ordinis, quod Scriba eisdem exhibebit, in praesentia
Supremi, aut ab eo Deputati. Ex Libro Nigro, p. 313.
JVrabis, quod sicubi sufficienter fueris praemonitus, ipsemet Conciliis
celebrandis intereris; quod nullo duceris affectu, favore, vel odio, sed nec
timore; quo minus in rebus omnibus quas tibi Supremus injunget, quod vere
habet, sinceriter enarres.

Quod quoties praesens aderis, nominationes Equitum creandorum veraciter
accipies; and accepta, Supremo praesentabis.

Iurabis itaque, quod cum ad consilium voceris, and a secretis ibi fueris, been
fidelis, ac taciturnus eris, nec ulla perflues, si quid secret tenendum audias.

Quodqne servabis ac sustentabis honores hujus Ordinis, atque omnium qui in eo
sunt, and si datum fuerit ut possis, pro viribus augmentabis.

Si vero quid excogitatum aut intentatum contra fuerit, si qua resciscere
potueris aut intelligere, pro viribus obstabis, and revelatum, ubi oporteat, e
vestigio curabis, ut suppetie quantocius ferantur, etc.

Persimile Iuramentum Decani, quando admittitur, and Scribae erit, quorum id
alter exhibebit alteri Sin alter abfuerit, Caduciator Regius eo fungetur munere.
N. VII. The Oath taken by Garter Principal King of Arms. Iuramentum Garteri
praecipui Regis Armorum, Scriba id coram Supremo Sociisque praesentibus
exhibente. Ex lib. N. p. 314.
IVrabis quod obedies Supremo inprimis Deinde caeteris hujus eminentissimi
Ordinis Equitibus, and Officia in eo gerentibus, in hiis praesertim rebus quae
ad te spectabunt, nec rationi pugnabunt.

Et quoniam ad Consilium admissus t^nqu^m a Secretis eris, Iurabis quod sidelis
ac taciturnus eris, nihil illinc effutiens.

Iurabis itidem, quod si quis Equitum hujus illustrissimi Ordinis ab h^c luce
subtractus suerit, Supremo significatum id illico cu^^^is, and mox aliis
superviventibus.

Quod omnia fidei tuae curae^, credit^, and qu^cunque mandata atque internuncia
been a^ ^ideliter exequeris and perimplebis.

Iurabis item, quod diligenter inquires de praeclaris ac nobilibus Actis
uniuscujus^, Equitis hujus insignissimi Ordinis, and intellecta Scribae
veraciter ^xpon^^, ut ipse describens non minori diligentla reponat, dignaeque
memoriae commendet.

Denique, Iurabis in summa quod officium tuum fideliter exercebis in omnibus,
quae tua intererunt, sicut and tu Dei ac Sancti hujus Evangelium sperabis
auxilium.

N. VIII. The Oath taken by the GentlemanVsher, named the Black-Rod. Ex MS. 4.
penes Guil. le Neve. Eq. Aur. nuper Clarenc. R. Armor.
YOu being chosen and named by the King's Majesty to be Gentleman Usher of the
Black-Rod, shall promise and swear by the holy Evangelists, by you bodily
touched, truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the points of the
Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in them contained, as to you
belongs and appertains, as God help you and this holy Evangely.

N. IX. A Warrant for providing and delivering the Liveries of the Prelate and
Chancellor. Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles R.

OUR Will and Pleasure is, that you provide and deliver to the right reverend
Father in God, the Bishop of Winchester, Paelate of our Order of the Garter,
and to Sir Richard Fanshaw Knight, our deputed Chancellor of our said Order,
for their Livery for the same, and to each of them one Robe of Purple Velvet,
containing 18 yards, and 10 yards of white Taffaty for lining thereof; as also
two Scutcheons of St. George, within two Garters wrought with Letters and
Purles of Damask, Gold, and Pearls, with Laces, Buttons, and Tassels of Purple
Silk and Venice Gold, together with a Purse of blue Velvet richly embroidered,
according to the usual form, with Strings and Tassels to the later, for
carrying the Seals of our said Order. And for so doing these our Letters shall
be your sufficient discharge.

Given under the Signet of our said Order at our Court at Whitehall, the 19.
day of February in the 13. year of our Reign 1660. To our right trusty and
right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor Edward Earl of Sandwich, Master of our
Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his Deputy.



X. A Warrant for providing and delivering the Liveries of the Register,
Garter, and Black Rod. Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles R.

OUR Will and Pleasure is, that you forthwith prepare and deliver to our trusty
and well-beloved Doctor Bruyn Reeves, Dean of Windesor, and Register of our
Noble Order of the Garter, To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker
Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, And to our trusty and well-beloved
Servant John Eyton Esquire, Usher of the Black Rod, for their Liveries, and to
every of them eighteen yards of Scarlet Satin for one Robe, and ten yards of
white Taffata for lining of the same, with an Escotcheon of St. George, placed
on the left shoulder, as also Laces, Buttons, and Tassels of Scarlet Silk, and
Venice Gold: and for so doing, these shall be your sufficient Warrant and
Discharge.

Given under our Signet of our said Order, at our Court at Whitehall the 20.
day of February in the 13. Year of our Reign, 1660. To our right trusty and
right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, Edward Earl of Sandwich Master of our
Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his Deputy.



XI. Letters Patent for assigning 1200 l. per annum to the use of the Order.
Pat. 12. Car. 1. pars 25.
CArolus Dei gratia Angliae, Scociae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem. Cum
juxta Praedecessorum and Progenitorum nostrorum Regalium morem, Clarissimi and
Nobilissimi Ordinis Garterii Fundatores and ad honorem ejusdem Ordinis magis
augendum and ampliandum, Annuitatem sive annualem pensionem Mill and
ducentarum librarum per annum, ad usum and servicium dicti Ordinis, per manus
Cancellarii nostri haeredum and successorum nostrorum dicti Ordinis pro tempore
existente recipiendam, and de tempore in tempus, ut inferius in hiis
praesentibus mentionatur expendendam, stabilire and assignare decrevimus.
Sciatis, quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris, volumus, ac per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus
nostris declaramus, ordinamus, appunctuamus, and assignamus, quod praedicta
Annuitas, annualis pensio, vel summa Mill and ducentarum librarum legalis
monetae Angliae, modo and forma inferius limitatis, dilecto and fideli nostro
Thomae Row Militi, modo Cancellario dicti Ordinis Garterii nostri, nec non
Cancellario ejusdem Ordinis pro tempore existente annuatim soluta fuerit de
Custumis and Subsidiis aut monetis in loco Custumos, Subsidia and Impositiones
recipi appunctuato vel appunctuando, de and pro omnibus and omnimodis vinis
quibus^unque ad Portum Civitatis London de tempore in tempus adducendis, per
manus Firmariorum sive Collectorum nostrorum, baeredum and successorum
nostrorum eorundem Custumorum, Subsidiorum, Monetarum, and Impositionum pro
tempore existente ad festa Annunciacionis beatae Mariae Virginis, and Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli, per equales portiones singulis annis imperpetuum
solvenda: Prima solutione inde incipienda, and fienda ad festa Annunciacionis
beatae Mariae Virginis proxime sequentia post datum presentium. Quare volumus,
ac pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, firmiter praecipimus, and
mandamus praefatis Firmariis, and Collectoribus nostris, haeredum and
successorum nostrorum pro tempore existente, praedictorum Custumorum, and
Subsidiorum, aut Monetae in loco Custumos, Subsidia, and Impositiones recipi
appunctuato vel appunctuando, de aut pro omnibus and omnimodis praedictis vinis
quibuscunque ad praedictum Portum Civitatis London, de tempore in tempus ut
praefertur adducendis: Quod ipsi and eorum aliquis, vel aliqui de Redditibus,
Reventionibus, Proficuis, and denariorum summis de eisdem Custumis and
Subsidiis and caeteris praemissis infra Portum Civitatis London emergentibus
and provenientibus ac in manibus suis de tempore in tempus remanere
contingentibus, praedictam annuitatem, sive annualem pensionem, vel summam
Mill and ducentarum librarum boite and legalis Monetae Angliae per annum
praesato Thomae Row Militi, Cancellario dicti Ordinis nostri Garterii modo
existenti: nec nen Cancellario ejusdem Ordinis qui pro tempore fuerit pro and
durante termino quo in eodem Officio Cancellarii dicti Ordinis praemanserit, in
forma praedicta, solvent, aut solvi facicut, secundum veram intentionem barum
literarum nostrarum patentium, absque ulteriori warranto a nabis, baeredibus,
vel successori^us nostris, in ea part procurando, aut obtinendo. Et bae
Literae nostrae Patentes, vel Irrotulamentum earundem, erunt amu^atim, and de
tempore in tempus, tam prefatis Firmariis and Collectoribus quam omnibus aliis
Officiariis, and Ministris nostris, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, quibus
pertinebit, sufficiens Warrantum and exoneratio in hac part. Et ulterius
volumus, ac per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successaribus nostris,
firmiter injungendo, praecipimus and mandamus ta Thesaurario, Cancellario,
Sub-Thesaurario and Baronibus S^accarii nostri, baeredum and successorum
nostrorum quam omnibus aliis Officiariis and Ministris nostris haeredum and
successorum nostrorum ejusdem Scaccarii pro tempore existente, Quod ipsi, and
little quilibet, super solam demonstrati^^^ harum literarum nostrarum patentium,
vel Irrotulamenti earundem, plenam, Integram, debitamque allocationem, and
exonerationem manifestam de omnibus and singulis denariorum summis, quae
praedicti Firmarii vel Collectores nostri haeredum vel successorum nostrorum
praedictorum Custumorum and Subsidiorum ac caeterorum praemissorum, praefato
Thomae Row modo Cancellario dicti Ordinis Garterii, n^^ non Cancellario
ejusdem Ordinis qui pro tempore fuerit, s^cundum veram intentionem praesentium
aliquo tempore imposterum solvent, eisdem Firmariis, and Collectoribus and
eorum cuilibet respective, pro tempore existente, super Compot^ sua in
Scaccario nostro, haeredum, vel successorum ^ostrorum vel alibi reddenda
facient, and de tempore in tempus fieri causabunt; Et hae literae n^strae
patentes, vel irrotulamentum carundem erunt, tam praesato Thesaurario,
Cancellario, Sub-thesaurario and Baronibus Scaccarii nostri praedicti, quam
omnibus aliis Officiariis and Ministris nostris, haeredum and successorum
nostrorum ejusdem Scaccarii pro tempore existente, sufficiens Warrantum and
exoneratio in hac part. Ac insuper volumus, ac per praesentes, intentiouem and
beneplacitum nostrum, pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris,
declaramus: Quod praefatus Thomas Row, modo Cancellarius praedicti Ordinis
Garterii nostri, nec n^n Cancellarius dicti Ordinis qui imposterum pro tempore
fuerit, praedictam annuitatem sive annualem pensionem vel summam Mill and
ducentarum librarum per annum impendet, and de tempore in tempus impendi faciet
and causabit aed annualia and Ordinaria f^od^, pensiones and solutiones
quibusdam personis solubilia, and solvenda, juxta Constitutiones, per Supremum
dicti Ordinis and Milites ejusdem in eorum pleno Capituio, ordinandas. Magnoque
Sigillo ejusdem Ordinis firmandas. Ac in casibus extraordinariis, per Warrantum
speciale Supremi Ordinis, manu s^gnandum, and Sigillo dicti Ordinis
sigillandum, Eaedemque solutiones per praedictum Cancellarium Ordinis praedicti
pro tempore existente faciendae sine s^od^ aut vadiis in ea part capiendis:
Qu^dque ^raefatus Thomas Row, m^do Cancellarius dicti Ordinis, and
Cancellarius ^^^s^^m Ordinis qui pro tempore fuerit, de praedicta ^^^uit^te,
annuali pensione, vel summa M^^le and ducemarum lib^arum de tempore in tempus
sic ut p^ae^^^tur ^^^ipienda and expend^nd^^^ festo Sancti Georgii vicesimo
tertio die Apidis (...) existente, aut in die per prorogati^em pro c^dem F^sto
appunctuando verum a^ debitum C^mp^^um per dictum Cancellarium subscribendum
annuatim faciet and reddet. Qui quidem Compotus annuatim sic reddendus inf^a
quatuor dierum spacium postea, p^r totum Capitulum aut per tres vel plures
Milites dicti Ordinis examinatus fuerit, ac post hujusmodi examinationem and
approbationem ejusdem per subs^riptionem nominum little ^idem Compoto
allocabitu^, quarum praedi^^o Cancellario dicti Ordinis pro tempore existente
haeredibus, Execu^oribus, and Administratoribus suis plenari^ su^rit exoneratio
in hae part. Cum tam^n acciderit quod praesati Fi^ma^ii praedictorum
Custu^^^um, Subsidi^rum, ac caeterorum praemiss^rum, pro tempore existente, ad
occasi^n^s nostr^s necessarias accommodandas, Redditus l^^e firmarias suas pro
praemissis, aut part (...) solubiles, pro quod^m (...) ^enturo, prae manibus
solveren^: (...) quod praedicta annualis pensi^ Mill and ducentarum librarum
totaliter per ipsos secundum veram intentionem praesentium solvi non poterit;
Tune volumus ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris
beneplacitum nostrum d^cl^ramus per praesentes: Quod imerim, ac in hujusmodi
casibus, Thesaurarius Angliae sums nostri, haeredum vel successorum
nostrorum, pro tempore existente, dictam pensionem, de aliquibus aliis
Custumis, Subsidiis, and Impositionibus, nobis and haeredibus and successoribus
nostris, pro b^nis and Merchandizis in Regnum Angliae importandis, and de eodem
exportan^is solubili^us, prae^^to Cancellario dicti Ordinis pro tempore
existente, secundum tenorem and veram intentionem praes^ntium solvi ordinabit,
faciet, and causabit. Et hae Literae nostrae Patentes vel Irrotulamentum
aerundem praesato Th^saurario nostro, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, pro
tempore existente, plena exoncratio and warrantum sucrit in ea part: Eo quod,
expressa mentio de ver^ valor annio, aut de certitudine praemissorum, vel
little alicujus, aut de aliis donis, sieve Concessionibus per nos seu per aliquem
Progenitorum sive Praedecessorum nostrorum, praefato Thomae Row, ante haec
tempora factis, in praesentibus minime facta existit, aut aliquo Statuto, Ac^u,
Ordinatione, Provisione, Proclamatione sive Restrictione in constrarium inde
antehac habito, facto, edita, ordinata sive provisa, aut aliqua alia re causa,
vel materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium, has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes, Test mei^so apud Westmonasterium
vicesimo tertio die Januarii, Anno regni nostri tertio d^cimo.

N. XII. A Commission for payment of Fees, Pensions, Salaries, etc. relating to
the Order. Sir Tho. Rowe's Iournal, p. 40.
Charles by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To our trusty and well-beloved
Servant Sir Thomas Row Knight, and Chancellor of our said most Noble Order.
Whereas in augmentation of the honor of our Order, and for the expenses
thereunto belonging, we have of our own Royal bounty settled, given, and granted
by our Letters Patents, bearing date at Westminster, on the 23. day of January,
in the 13. year of our Reign, one yearly Pension and Revenue of 1200 l. unto
and upon our Order, to be received and disbursed by you, our present
Chancellor, and your Successors in the same Office, according to such rules
and limitations, as in our said Letters Patents more at large do and may
appear: We do by this our Commission signify our Will and Pleasure, and
declare, and give unto you our Chancellor full power and authority to pay, or
cause to be paid out of the said Revenue of 1200 l. in your receipt, all and
every the annual and ordinary Fees, Pensions, Salaries, and other Payments,
usually paid to any of our Officers, Alms-Knights, or others, who do their
yearly duty and service any way unto our said Noble Order appertaining, either
by Charter, Grant, or Assignation under our Privy Seal, or Signet, or by any
other lawful way whatsoever, taking and receiving from them, and every one of
them, an acquittance, and receipt under their hands for your discharge; which
shall be good and available in Law, to be pleaded against us, our Heirs, and
Successors for the same. And in particular, we do by this our Commission give
you full power and order to pay, or cause to be paid unto your self, as our
Chancellor for the time being, the sum of 100 l. yearly: and to the Register of
our Order for the time being 50 l. yearly: and to Garter, our Principal King at
Arms, for the time being 50 l. yearly; and to our Usher called the Black Rod,
for the time being 30 l. yearly: and to every one of our Poor or Alms-Knights,
being 13. at our Castle of Windefore, for the time being, yearly 18 l. 5 s. in
manner and form following. That is to say, every of the said Pensions quarterly
upon the Feasts of St. John Baptist, St. Michael the Archangel, the Nativity of
our Lord, and the Annuntiation of our blessed Lady the Virgin Mary, by even and
equal portions and payments. The first payment whererof to begin at and upon
the Feast of St. John Baptist, next and immediately ensuing after the date
hereof, in full discharge of any, and all the said Fees or Pensions to them
formerly by us given or paid. As also to pay or cause to be paid any other
annual and usual charge, to any other inferior Officer or Servant, for their
service or attendance, And this our Commission shall be to you a sufficient
Warrant, to pay any, and all the said annual and ordinary Fees, Pensions,
Payments, and other Charges, whether named, or not named, having been usually
due, and paid, whatsoever, upon account thereof to be made and given, and
Acquittances produced as aforesaid for the Receipts, to be presented and shown
to us, or to so many of the Knights of our most Noble Order, as we have or
shall depute in Chapter to take, liquid and allow your said Disbursments
according to the tenor hereof, under their hands in writing, and according to
the directions, and limitations in our said Letters Patents, and order and
provision therein made, and had for your discharge: which said allowances shall
also be a sufficient discharge against us, our Heirs, and Successorss, to be
pleaded in any of our Courts of Record within our Highness Dominions. Given
under the Seal of our said most Noble Order, the 3. of May at our Court at
Whitehall, in the 14. Year of our Reign, 1638.

N. XIII. A Letter of Summons for Electing a Knight, upon the death of the Lord
Fitzhugh. Registrum Chartaceum, f. 12. b.
De par le Roy, Souverain de l'ordre du Iarretier.
TRescher and foiall etc. Pour ce que le Sire Fitzhugh Henry, n'agairs un de
nos Compaignons de lordre de Jarter, est, la xi. jour de Januere darreine pass
a Dieu command que Dieux assoile, nous vous certifions clerement selonc la
tenure de lez estatuz pour fair vostre devoir dex messez par la morte du quele
en ycell est un place vacant, a le quel il coviente par lez ditz estatuz
eslier un autre compaignon en son lieu, deius sys semaines appres la
certification de la morte suisdite que nous au present ne purrons bonement
parformer, au cause reasonable que nous destourba; Et pour taunte nous volons
and vous chargeons que sur lez peines de les estatuz suisditz saunz, excusacion
soies ou nous a Wyndefore en vostre propre person la veille de Seint George
procheine venante, a le Chapitre a le our de tierce, pur accomplere ceo
q'appartindra a lez estatuz suisditz en cez casez, si non que vous nous
signifiez le jour and lieu suisdit clerement de soubz vostre seal de vous armez
cause jouste de vostre destourbier digne destre alloue, etc. Don, etc.

NUMBER. XIV. Another upon the death of Sir Robert Dumphreville. Ex eodem Registro.
De par le Roy, Souverain de l'ordre de Iarretier.
TReschier and bien ame. Pour ce que feu Sire Robert Dumphreville, que Dieux
absoille, en son vivant un de noz compaignons de l'ordre Jarretier a la de vie
a trespass le darrain jour de Januer darrain pass, and que selon lez estatuz du
dit Order sommes tenuz en advertir ung chescun dez Compaignons, vous certifions
son dit trespass, ad fin que facies vostre devoir des messes, and prieres les
quelles estes tenuz fair, dire, and celebrer, pour le salut de son ame. Par le
mort du quel est un place vacant, and convient selon les ditz estatuz aultre
eslier en son lieu, dedans sys sepmaines apres la certification du dit trespass,
si bonnement fair se peut, vel que bonnement au present fair ne pourrons: Si
voulons and vous mandons sur lez peines contenues es diz estatuz, qe soies ovec
nous la vaigle Seint George, a l'eure de tierce prochein, venant pour fair and
accomplir en ce que dit est come per les ditz estatuz appertendra. Et si estre
ny poves, nous signifies soubz vostre seell la cause de vostre empechement, par
quoy vostre excusation puissions congnoistre and l'avoir agreeable, s'ainsi est
quelle soit digne destre accept, and ny faites fault. Treschier and bien ame,
etc.

NUMBER. XV. A Dispensation for Installation of the Duke of York and Prince
Rupert; till Windesor Castle should return to the Sovereign's possession. Ex
ipso Autogr. penes praef. Ia^. Palmer.
Charles R.

CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, Fancee, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the
Garter. To all and singular unto whom these our Letters Patent shall come
greeting. Whereas by the Statutes of our said most Noble Order, all Knights
elected to be Companions of the same are (according to usual form and Ceremony)
to be installed at the Stalls of the Order, in the Chapel of our Royal Castle
of Windesor, before they can be admitted to have their Stalls, Places, and
Votes amongst the rest of the Companions there. And whereas our dearly beloved
Son James Duke of York, and our entirely beloved Nephew, Prince Rupert, Count
Palatine of the Rheyne, Duke of Bavaria and Cumberland, and Earl of Holderness,
were in a Chapter held at York, the twentieth day of April in the eighteenth
year of our Reign, elected and chosen Companions of our said most Noble Order
but, by reason of the succeeding distractions and R^^ellions in this our
Kingdom, their Installations at our said Castle of Windesor, could not
according to the Statutes aforesaid be celebrated and performed, by reason the
same has been ever sithence, and still is in the possession of the Rebels.
Know ye, that we as Sovereign of the said most Noble Order (unto whom the power
of dispensing with any of the said Statutes is reserved) have thought fit to
dispense in regard the not performance of the Statutes has not been by the
default of these elected Knights) and by these presents do accordingly dispense
with the Installations of our aforesaid Son and Nephew, both for time and
place; when and where those Installations are and ought to be made, willing and
ordaining that they and either of them, shall by virtue of this our
Dispensation, at all times hereafter, be held, reputed, and taken to be
Companions of our said most Noble Order; And shall have, possess, and enjoy all
manner of Titles, places, preheminencies, Votes, Ornaments, and Privileges of
the same, as if they or either of them had been formally and actually installed
at our said Castle of Windesor; any Law, Statute, or Ordin^^ce made to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and we do h^r^by
declare, that our said most dear Son, and our entirely beloved Nephew, shall
(notwithstanding these our Letters of Dispensation) first take the Oath usually
taken by the Knights at th^^r Installation, and hereafter act and perform all
such Rights and Ceremonies as are accustomed at the Installations of the
Companions of our said most Noble Order of the Garter, when it shall be thought
fit, and p^ssible for them to perform the same at our Castle of Windesor
aforesaid. And that this our Dispensation made upon such most weighty and
urgent necessities shall not be drawn into consequence or example in time to
come. Given under the Great Seal of our Order, and our hand first superscribed
thereunto, at our Palace at Oxford, this seventeenth of January, in the
twentieth year of our Reign, 1644.

NUMBER. XVI. A Dispensation for want of a full number of Knights to constitute a
Chapter of Election; and their entering the Chapter without Mantles. Palmer's
large Iournal.
Charles R.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, etc. Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, To all the Knights and Companions of our most Noble Order, Greeting:
Whereas we have determined upon the death of diverse of our Knights, and vacancy
of their Stalls, to h^ld a Chapter of Election here in our city of York, and
because there are not now attending on our person a sufficient number of 6
Knights, and being now in our Army they have not their Mantles ready (in which
case by the ancient Statutes of our Order there could be no Election, nor any
Knight ought to enter into the Chapter so without our Royal Dispensation) We of
our supreme power and authority, as Sovereign of our Order, do by these our
Letters dispense with both the said Statutes of want of Number, and entering the
Chapter without Mantles; and do hereby give leave to all our Knights attending
our presence, to hold a Chapter of Election, by giving their Votes according to
Custom in other Scruteni^s. Given under the Great Seal of our Order the 12. of
September in the sixteenth year of our Reign 1640.

NUMBER. XVII. A Dispensation for the not appearing of the Knights with their
Robes at the three Chapters held before the 15. of April 1661. and want of a
competent and usual Number of Knights. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.

WHereas by the ancient and evermore observed Statutes of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, it is expressly provided, that no less than the Number of six
Knights or Companions of the same, besides the Sovereign or his Lieutenant,
should make up a complete Chapter, and that none of the said Knights and
Companions should enter into the said Chapter without having on their long
Mantles, or upper Robes of the Order; We having designed the 15.16. and 17.
days of April next for the Instalment of diverse Elect Knights in the place of
the deceased, and for the celebration of the Feast of St. George, at our Castle
of Windesor, upon which occasion, and for the resolving upon sundry
preparatories to the same, being to deliberate with the ancient Knights of the
Order, who are neither in number sufficient to make up a Chapter, or all of
them provided with Robes by reason of the late troubles; to supply both defects
both in the present and other subsequent Chapters, which we may have occasion
to assemble before the said Instalment and Festival: We as Sovereign of the
said Order, have and do dispense with the Statutes of it, as to those
particulars, and are graciously pleased, that, those two defects
notwithstanding, the aforesaid present and ensuing Chapters shall be as legal,
and of as much force and validity as if the number of the Companions required
by the Statutes were full and complete, and the Companions that do or are to
compose them, had their Mantles or upper Robes on them. Given under our Signet
of the Order, at Whitehall the 29. day of March 1661.

NUMBER. XVIII. A Letter signifying Election, and a Summons to receive Investiture
with the Garter and George. MS. penes W. le N. Cl.
RIght trusty and well beloved, we greet you well: Ascertaining you, that in
consideration as well of your approved truth, and fidelity, as also of your
courageous and valiant acts of Knighthood, with other your probable merits
experientially known in sundry parties and behalf: We with the Companions of
the Noble Order of the Garter, assembled at Election holden this day, within
this our Manor of Greenwich, have elected and chosen you amongst others to be
one of the Companions of the said Order, as your said merits condignly require.
And therefore we will that with convenient diligence upon the sight thereof, ye
address you unto our presence, to receive such things as to the said Order
appertains. Given under our Signet at the Manor of Greenwich the 24. day of
April.

NUMBER. XIX. A Letter signifying Election, sent with the Garter and George. MS.
4. penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey, p. 131. b.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, giving you to understand,
that in consideration as well of your approved fidelity, in the service of Us
and our Realm at all times showed, and for the increase of Honor and Virtue in
you, We with the Companions of our Noble Order of the Garter assembled at the
Election holden the 24. day of April last past, within our Palace at
Westminster, have Elected and Chosen you among others to be one of the
Companions of our said Order, as your merits condignly do require; Wherefore we
have sent unto you by our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick,
Knight, Garter, King of Arms, Our said Order of the Garter, the same to use as
to this Election of you appertains: wishing that God may increase you in
virtue and honor, as amply as any other that has been Elected and placed in
the same.

Yeoven under the Signet of our said Order at our Honor at Greenwich, the 5. of
May in the 26. year of our Reign. To our right Trusty and Well-beloved, the
Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight and Companion of our most
Noble Order of the Garter.



NUMBER. XX. A Letter signifying Election, when the present Sovereign was beyond
the Seas. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.

CHARLES the Second by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of
the Garter. To our right trusty and entirely beloved Cousin and Councellor
James Marquess of Ormond, our Lieutenant in the Kingdom of Ireland Greeting.
Whereas our Royal Progenitors, the Kings of England, have in all times since
the institution of the most Noble Order of St. George, called the Garter, by
our most noble and victorious Auncester King Edward the Third, elected and
chosen into the Fellowship thereof such Princes and other eminent persons, as
well Strangers, as of their own Subjects, as have for nobility and greatness of
their births, accompanied with heroic virtues, especially in martial actions,
been thought worthy of the same, We therefore considering that since the late
horrid Rebellion in that our Kingdom, many of the Companions thereof are dead,
and that some others, contrary to their honor and Oaths, have deserted their
allegiance, and are no more worthy to be esteemed Companions of so noble an
Order, and finding how necessary it is for ou^ service, and the honor of the
said Order, to elect others in their places vacant, who for their birth,
courage, and fidelity, may be fit to be admitted thereunto. Know you therefore
that we duly weighing the eminence of your birth and Family, and above all the
great and most extraordinary services done by you for many years past, and
still continued in the condition of our Lieutenant in that our Kingdom,
together with your singular courage and fidelity, have thought it fit by our
power, as Sovereign of the said Order (dispencing with the usual Ceremonies) to
elect and choose you our said right trusty and entirely beloved Cousin James
Marquess of Ormond, to be Fellow and Companion of the said most Noble Order of
the Garter, and do herewith send unto you the George and Ribband, part of the
Ensigns thereof, by our trusty and well-beloved Servant Henry Seymour Esquire one
of our Bedchamber (in regard Sir Edward Walker Knight Garter, Principal King
of Arms, the proper Officer, is otherways employed in our service) the which we
do hereby will and authorize you to wear. And because it is not possible at
present to have all other Ceremonies and Additions incident to the same fully
perfected, We do further will and authorize you to wear and use the Garter or
Ribband on your left Leg, the Glory or Star of Silver with St. George's Cross
embroidered within a Garter, upon your Cloak and upper Garments, as likewise
the Great Collar of the Order upon such days as are accustomed to use the
Garter about your arms, and to style your self Knight and Companion of the said
most Noble Order of the Garter, in as ample manner as if you had been installed
in our Castle of Windesor; where (when it shall please God to restore us to the
possession thereof) you shall formally be invested, and receive the habit and
all other the above recited Ornaments of the said most Noble Order. And We no
way doubt, but as you have hitherto with singular courage, fidelity, and
ability, served us, so you will still continue to do the same, as becomes a
Knight and Companion of so Noble an Order. Given at the Castle of St. Germans
en lay, this eighteenth day of September, in the first Year of our Reign.

NUMBER. XXI. A Letter signifying Election, sent to Sir John Falstolf. Registrum
Chart. fol. 14.
De par le Roy Souverain de l'Ordre de la Iartier.
NOstre ame and feal, nous vous saluons. Et come apres le trespassement de
nostre treschier and feal Cousin le Conte de Westmerlande, don't dieux ait
l'ame, que estoit un de noz Compaignons de l'Ordre de la Jartier, Nous eussions
ordonne que noveielle election fust fait pur avoire un autre Compaignon en son
lieu, come la manner si est, and que le contenu dez estatuz du dit Order le
port, vons signifions que a la darrain feste de Seint George, en nostre
Chapitre du dit Order, tenuz a Wyndesore le xxii. jour d' Avryll, darrain
pass, veille de la dite feste, nostre Compaignie du dit Order esteauniz
adonques au dit Chapitre; Considerant tant lez house, leaux, and honourables
services que avez de pieca faiz en service de nostre tres redounte Seigneur and
Pier, que dieux assoille, and que faitez continuelement en nostre, come
pluseurs autres deserts d'onnour, que dieux a souffert estre en vous, en
tollerant tousjours, comme bon and feal subjet, lez pains and travaulx de
guerre pour nostre bon droit, and just querelle susteiner, vous a esl^u un de
noz Compaignons du dit Order en lieu de nostre dit Cousin, esperant, que dieux
vous done tousjours grace and valeur de fair toudis de bien en m^ulx, vostre
devoire; pourquoy a la delivrance de cestez nouz avons chargie par noz lettres
noz treschiers and feaulx Cosins lez Countez de Salisbirs, de Warwyke, and de
Soulfolk, qui s^nt noz Compaignons du dit Order, ou l'un d'eulx de qui vous
serrez plus pres, quil vous monstrent, and delivrent lez estatuz du dit Order,
Et yceulx par vouz receux preugnent vostre serement en tell cas acoustume a
fair, que bien and lealment tendres and ferez, si avaunte que Dieux vous
donnera puissance, tout le contenu es diz estatuz, en vous baillant l'ordre de
la Jartier. La quelle chose faite, volonz que vouz ordonnez en tout haste
resonnablement possible vostre Heaulme and Espee, and un honorable Chivalier
sanz reproach en lieu de vous, pour prendre vostre estalle come voz veirez que
les ditz estatuz du dit Order le requirent. Et en cas que le dit Order ne
vondrez acceptier pour aucun cause a vouz semblant raisonable, le nous
certifiez dedeinz deux mois apres la doubt de cestez, and en ceo nais point de
fault. Done a Leicestre, soubz le Seall du dit Order le viii. jour de May.

NUMBER. XXII. A Commission to take Sir John Falstolfs Oath, at his Investiture
with the Garter. Ibidem. De par le Roy Souveraine de l'Ordre de la Iartier.
TRes^biers and feaulx Cosins, Nous vous saluons sovent, and pour ce que a la
feste de Seinte George darraine, tenuz en nostre Chastell de Wyndesore, nostre
Compaignie de l'Ordre de la Jartier faisant alorsque Chapitre la veille de la
dit Feste, a eslieu nostre chier and feall John Falstolt Chivalier un de nouz
Compaignons du dit Order, en lieu de nostre treschier Cousin le Count de
Westmerland, don't dieux ait l'ame, nous vous envoions lez estatuz de cellui
Order enseallez du selle du dit Order, pour lez presenter, and bailler au dit
Monsieur John Falstolf. Si voulons and vous mandons, que vous, ou l'un de vous,
a qui primerement cez presentez serront monstrez, ou exibecs, presentez, and
bailles audit John Falstolf lez ditz estatuz pour lez voier, and visiter, and
savoir que sont t^nuz de fair ceux qui sont de dit Order. Et en cas q'il
accepta le dit Order Ressaivez son serement en tell cas accustume a fair en luy
baillant l'Ordre du Jartier, en le manner accustume. Treschiers and fealx
Cosins, dieu^x soit guard de vous.

Done a Leicestre soubz le Seel du dit Order, le viii. jour de May. A nos
treschiers and feaulx Cousins, lez Countez de Warwyk, de Sarisbury, and de
Sulfolk, nouz Compaignons de la Jartier, and a un cheseun d'eulx.



NUMBER. XXIII. A Warrant for allowance of Garter's Charges, when sent to signify
an Election. MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 59.
THese shall be to require you, of such her Majesty's. Treasure as remains in
your hands, to pay or cause to be paid, to Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, King of
Arms, being sent by her Majesty's Commandment, to our very good Lords the Earl
of Rutland in the County of Lincoln, and to the Lord Scroop in the County of
Cumberland, to signify unto them the Electi^n made of them into the Order of
Knights of the Garter, for his pains and charges in that voyage expended, the
sum of Twenty pounds* and this shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge
in that behalf.

At the Court at Richmond the 10. of June 1584. T. Bromley. Chapter Howard. Chr.
Hatton. W. Burghley. James Crofts. Fran. Wal^ingham. Ed. Clynton.

To our very loving Friend, Sir Thomas Heneage, Knight, Treasurer of of her
Majesty's Chamber.



NUMBER. XXIV. A Commission to the Sovereigns Lieutenant, to Install an
Elect-Knight. Registr. Chartac. fol. 64.
Henry R.

HEnry the Eighth, by the Grace of God King of England, and of France, Defensor
of the Faith, and Lord of Irland, Souverain of the most Noble Order of the
Gartier; To our right trusty and right entirely well-beloved Cousin, the Duke
of Northfolk, our Lieutenant at our Fest of the glorious Martyr Saint George,
Patron of the said Noble Order, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosins
the Marquess Dorset, the Marquess of Exeter, The Earl of Northumberland, and
our trusty and well-beloved the Vicounte Lisle, the Vicount Fitz-water, and the
Vicount Rochford, the Lord Ferrers, Lord Bergaveny, and the Lord Dakers,
Companions of the said Noble Order, Greeting. For as much as we with you, and
other Companions have elected our right trusty, and right entirely beloved Son
Henry, Duke of Richmont and of Somerset, and Earl of Nottingham, our right
trusty and right well-beloved Cousins, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of
Westmerland, and the Earl of Rutland, Companions of the said Noble Order: We
therefore will and auctorise you, by these presents, that ye the said Duke of
Norfolk, with the assistance of such other as our said Noble Order be
aforenamed, shall not only accept, and admit the said Duke and Earls into the
said Order, and receve their Oaths, and install them, but also further do
therein, as to the laudable Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order
apperteigneth. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant, and
discharge in this behalf, at all times hereafter. Yeven under the Seal of our
said Gartier, at our Palais of Brydewell, the xviii. day of June in the xvii.
year of our Reign.

NUMBER. XXV. Another. Ex Collect. Iohannis Vincent, Genesis
Elizabeth R.

ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defendor
of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To our right
trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor the Earl of Penbroke, one
of the Companions and Knights of the said Order, by us assigned and deputed to
be our Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr St. George, Patron of the
sa^d Order, to be kept within our said Castle of Windesor, the 4. of June next
ensuing, and others the Companions of the said Order that then shall be
present, Greeting: Whereas we with others the Companions of the said Noble
Order assembled, at a Chapitre holden at our Palace of Westminster the xxiv.
day of April last, have elected and chosen, among others, our right trusty and
right entirely beloved Cosen the Duke of Norfolk, our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cosen and Councellor, the Marquess of Northampton, our right
trusty and right well-beloved Cosen the Earl of Rutland, and our trusty and
right well-beloved the Lord Robert Dudley, Master of our Horse, to be Knights
and Companions of the said Order: We will, and by these presents authorize you,
not only to accept and admit them into the said Order, and receive their
Oaths, and install them accordingly, but also further to do therein as to the
Statutes and laudable Custom and usage of the said Noble Order appertains.
And these our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in this
behalf. Yeven under the Seal of our said Garter, the first of June, in the
first year of our Reign.

NUMBER. XXVI. A Commission to other Knights-Companions, for the Installation of
an Elect-Knight. Regist. Chartac. fol. 61. b.
Henry R.

HENRY the Eighth; by the Grace of God, King of England and of France, Defensor
of the Faith, and Lord of Irland, Soverain of our Noble Order of the Gartier.
To our right trusty, and right entirely beloved Cousin, the Marquess Dorset;
And also to our right trusty, and right well-beloved Cosins, The Earl of Devon,
and the Earl of Kent, Companions of our said Noble Order, Greeting. Forasm^che
as we with you, and other Knights and Companions of our said Noble Order
assembled at the Chapitre holden at our Manoir of Grenewich, the xiii. day of
July last passed, have elected, and chosen Walter Devereux, Lord Ferrers, to be
Knight and Companion of the said Order: We therefore will, and, by virtue of
these presents, auctorise you not only to accept and admit the said Walter
Devereux, Lord Ferrers, into the said Order, and receive his Oath, and install
him, but also further to do therein as to the Statutes and laudable usages of
the said Noble Order it appertains: And these our Letters shall be your
sufficient warrant and discharge in that behalf. Yeven undre our Seal of our
said Gartier, at our Castle of Windesore, the xxi. day of August, the xv. year
of our Reign.

NUMBER. XXVII. Another. Ex Collect. I. V.
Elizabeth R.

ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and
Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To our right trustly and right
well-beloved C^zen and Counselor, Francis Earl of B^dford, and to our right
trusty and right well-beloved Anthony Viscount Mountague, Companions ^f our
Noble Order of the Garter: Foras^u^h as we for diverse reasonable causes cannot
be present at our Castle of Windesor on the 19. of June next ensuing, where we
have determined to have installed our right trusty and right well-beloved
Cozens William Earl of Worcester, and Henry Earl of Huntingdon, as Knights of
ou^ said Order of the Garter: We theref^re, by these presents, name,
constitute, appoint, and ordain you to be our Deputies, giving you full power
and authority, to admit and install our said Cozens of Worcester and
Huntingdon, and to do and accomplish every thing which thereunto belongs, and
has been accustomed, for the due admittance and installing of the said Earls
of Worcester and Huntingdon; willing and commanding, by the tenor hereof, all
and every the Companions and Officers of the said Order, to be to you in the
executing of this our authority obeying and attending, as shall appertain.
Given under the Seal of our sa^d Order, at our honor of Hampton Court the 12.
of June 1570. in the 12. year of our Reign.

NUMBER. XXVIII. Another. Ex ipso Autogr. Aerar. Coll. Wind.
Charles R.

CHARLES by the Grace of God King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To
our right trusty and right well well-beloved Cosens and Counselors, William
Earl of Salisbury, and Henry Earl of Holland, Knights and Companions of our
said Order, Greeting. Whereas we with you and others the Knights and Companions
of our said Order assembled, in a Chapter holden at our Palace of Westminster,
the 24. day of April (being the morrow after the day of St. George last past)
did elect and choose our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen Algernon
Earl of Northumberland, to be a Knight and Companion of our said Order; And
whereas we have appointed the 13. day of this present Month of May for the time
of his Installation at Windesor; We do therefore let you know, that we have
named and assigned you the said Earls of Salisbury and Holland, and by these
presents do name, assign, and appoint you two to be Commissioners for the
In^tallation of our said Cousin the Earl of Northumberland as aforesaid, And
accordingly we do hereby give unto you full power and authority, not only to
accept and admit him into our said Order, and to take his Oath, but also to do
and accomplish whatsoever else is needful to be done for his full Installation,
according to the Statutes, Rules, and Customs of our said Order. For which
purpose it is our pleasure, that you make your repair to our Castle of
Windesor, so as you may be there on Wednesday at night, being the 13. of this
present May, to the end that you may then proceed to the said Installation,
according to this our Commission. Given under the Seal of our said Order at our
Palace of Westminster, the 11. day of May 1635. and in the 11. year of our
Reign.

NUMBER. XXIX. Another. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
PHilip and Mary, etc. To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen the
Earl of Huntington, and to our right trusty and well-beloved the Lord Clynton,
Companions and Knights of the Noble Order of the Garter, Greeting, Forasmuch as
we with other Companions of the said Noble Order assembled, at a Chapter holden
at our Honor of Hampton Court, the 24. of April last past, have elected and
chosen our right trusty and right well-beloved the Viscount Mountague, to be
Knight and Companion of the said Noble Order; We therefore will, and, by the
presents, authorize and license you, not only to accept and admit the said
Viscount Mountague into the said Order, and to receive his Oath and install him
accordingly, but also further to do therein, as to the Statutes and laudable
Customs of the said Noble Order appertains: And these our Letters shall be
your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Yeoven under the Seal of
our said Order, the 12. of October, the 2. and 3. year of our Raigns.

NUMBER. XXX. A Letter of Summons to the Commissioners appointed for Installation.
Ex Collect. I. V.
By the Queen.

RIght trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, and whereas we have
appointed you, together with our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen and
Councellor the Earl of Lincoln, to be in Commission for the Installation, in
our Castle of Windesor, of our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosens Henry
Earl of Derby, and Henry Earl of Penbroke, being lately chosen Knights of our
Order of the Garter: We have thought it good not only to give you knowledge
hereof by these our Letters, but also to require you to make your repair to our
said Castle of Windesor, so as you may be there on Wednesday the 19. day of
this Month, to the end that upon Thursday the 20. day of this present Month
of May, they may proceed to their Installations accordingly.

Yeven under our Signet at our Palais of Westminster, the 17. day of May in the
16. year of our Reign. To our right trusty and well-beloved, the Viscount
Mountague, one of the Companions of our Order.

[The like Letter (mutatis mutandis) was, under the same date, directed to the
Earl of Lincoln, joined in Commission with him.]



NUMBER. XXXI. A Letter of Summons to an Elect-Knight for his repair to Windesor
to be Installed. Ex ipso Autogr.
Charles R.

RIght trusty and well-beloved Cosen, We greet you well. Whereas in
consideration of your approved fidelity, and extraordinary services performed
by you for us, We lately elected and chose you to be one of the Companions of
our most Noble Order of the Garter, and in token thereof did send unto you the
George and Ribband, part of the Ensigns of our said Order, and having at a
Chapter held at White Hall the 14. day of January last past, appointed to
celebrate the Feast of St. George at our Castle of Windesor, upon the 15.16.
and 17. days of April next ensuing: We do hereby require you to make your
repair to our Castle of Windesor, so as you be there on Monday the 15. of April
next, by Noon, that in the Afternoon of the said day you may proceed to your
Installation, according to the Statutes of the said Order.

Given under our Signet of our Order at Whitehall, the 19. of February 1660.
and in the thirteenth year of our Reign. To our right trusty and entirely
beloved Cousin and Councellor the Marquess of Ormond, Steward of our Household.



NUMBER. XXXII. A Warrant for the Livery of the Order. Ex Lib. N. p. 317. sub
finem.
Henry R.

HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, ac Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, Defensor
Fidei, and Supremus Ordinis Diui Georgii, fideli and benedilecto nobis a
Conciliis Domino N. magni vestiarii nostri Custodi, salutem. Vbi nos cum aliis
ejusdem Ordinis elegimus, benefidelem, ac praedilectum Consiliarium nostrum N.
in Societatem hanc nostram praeclarissimam: Nos ideo volumus and praecipimus,
ut huic Tabellioni virgas octodecim subrubri ostri de more tradas, cum tanto
albo serico, quanto vestimentum inde conficiendum infulciri poterit, pro
liverata (quam vocant) sua quando in sedem suam introducendus Windesorum
adveniet, mense ac die constitutis, quemadmodum and Equites ante solebant
habere. Et hae nostrae Literae tibi tutelares erunt semper imposterum N. sub
Sigillo nostro, mense ac die, etc.

NUMBER. XXXIII. Another. Ex MS. in Bibl. Cotton. [sub effigy Iulii F. 11.]
By the King.

WE will and command you to deliver, or cause to be delivered to our trusty and
well-beloved Councellor Sir John Wallop Knight, which is now elect one of the
Companions of the Noble Order of the Garter, for the Livery of the same Order
18 yards of Crimson Velvet, for one Gown, Hood, and Tippet, and 10 yards of
white Sarcenet for lining the same: And these our Letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf.

Yeoven, etc. To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Ralph Sadler Knight, Master of
our great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. XXXIV. A Warrant for providing and delivering of Mantles. Ex ipso
Autographo.
Charles R.

WHereas we have appointed the 15.16. and 17. days of April next ensuing
hereof, for the solemnization of the noble Feast of St. George, and Instalment
of Knights-Companions already elected at our Castle of Windesor, Our will and
pleasure is, that you provide to be delivered for that Solemnity xvii upper
Robes, and xvii under Robes of special good Velvets, That is to say, every
upper Robe to contain the number of xviii yards of blew Velvet, and every under
Robe the number of x yards of Crimson Velvet, and special good white Taffety,
to the value of CCLXXII yards for lining of the same, allowing to every upper
and under Robe xvi yards; as also xvii Garters of Velvet, wrought with Letters
and Purles of Venice Gold and Pearls, to place on the left shoulder of every
one of the said upper Robes, with xvii pair of large string Buttons, and
Tassels of blew Silk and Venice Gold: And for so doing this shall be your
Warrant, requiring you further to certify us as s^on as you may what number of
the premises we may depend upon to be ready by the time prefixed.

Given, etc. To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen, and Councellor
Edward Earl of Sandwich, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his
Deputy.



NUMBER. XXXV. A Warrant for providing and delivering of Collars. Ex ipso
Autographo.
Charles R.

WHereas we have appointed the 15.16. and 17. days of April next ensuing the
date hereof, for the solemnization of the Noble Feast of St. George, and
Instalment of Knights, at our Castle of Windesor, Our will and pleasure is,
that you provide to be delivered for that Solemnity, as we shall hereafter
direct, Collars of Gold to the number of xvii. every of them containing xxvi
Garters with white and red Roses enamelled in the midst of every one of them,
and xxvi Knots, each Collar weighing xxx Ounces Troy weight, as also for each a
rich George on horseback, with a Dragon to be fastened and pend^nt thereto, and
the same number of Garters of the Order to a proportionable value: And for so
doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant, requiring you further to certify
us, as soon as you may, what number of the premises we may depend upon to be
ready by the time prefixed.

Given under our Signet of the Order at our Court at Whitehall the 19. of
February in the 13. year of our Reign. To our trusty and well-beloved Sir
Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of our Jewel-house.



NUMBER. XXXVI. The ancient Forms of Admonition used at the Investiture of Knights
Subjects, with the Garter, Surcoat, Mantle, and Collar. MS. penes G.O.Y. p. 44.
LA Sovereign and L'amyable Compaignie dez Chivaliers de L'ordre de la
Jarretiere, vous out receu and choysi pour leur Amy, friar, and Compaignion. Et
en sign and cognoissance de ce vous presentent and donnent ceste Jarretiere,
la quelle Dieu le veille que vous recevez and portez d'oresenavant, a louange
and plaisir, and a l'exaltation and honneur du dit Noble Order and de vous.

Prenez cest habillement a l'accroissement de vostre honneur and Ensign que
vouz avez receu cest Order. Et par ce considerez que non seulement de vous
valliantement and hardiment Combatre, mais aussi sanz poeur despandre vostre
sang a la defense de la foy Chrestienne, la Liberte de la Saint Eglise, de
Justice, and de ceulx qui sont oppresses and en necessite.

Prenez ce Manteau de ceste tres-noble Order, en augmentation de vostre
honneur, lequel Manteau estant garni d'ung Escu, avec une Croix rouge, vous
admoneste, que estant arm de beaux vertuz vous povez passer parmy voz Enemies
and les Confoundre. Si que apres avoir valiantment guerroye en ce monde, au
regard de voz dignez and Nobles acts, vous povez parvenire a les Eternelles
and Triumphantz joys Coelestes.

Vous Porteres ce Collier avec L'image de St. George, a l'accroissement de
vostre honneur, and de ce tres-noble Order, Ensign de passer toutes chooses
prosperes ou adverses, si que les ayant valliantment vaincuz, vous povez en
ceste vie obtenir l'honneur and renom de Noble and preux Chivalier; Et apres
recevoir l'eternel guerdon de voz victorieulx travaulx.

NUMBER. XXXVII. The forms of Admonition used at the Investiture of Strangers.
Lib. N. p. 310.
AD laudem atque honorem Omnipotentis Dei, intemeratae Matris ejus, and Sancti
Georgii Martyris, cinge tibiam tuam hoc insigni Subligaculo, id circumferens in
augmentum honoris tui, and in signum and memoriam illustrissimi Ordinis,
nusquam oblivioni daturus, aut omissurus quod eo moneris; ut valeas, inquam,
and velis in justo bello, quod solum inibis, stare firmiter, agere fortiter,
and feliciter omnino vincere.

Capito vestem hanc purpuream, ad incrementum honoris, and in signaculum
Ordinis accepti: qua munitus non vereberis pro fide Christi, liberate
Ecclesiae, pro jure, and oppressorum atque indigentium necessaria tuitione,
sanguinem etia^ fundere, nedum fortiter ac strenue dimicare.

Accipe Clamidem hanc coelici coloris, in signum Clarissimi hujus Ordinis, and
in augmentum etiam honoris tui, rubeo clypeo Dominicoe Crucis, uti cernis,
insignitam: ut cujus virtute semper ac vigore protectus per hosts tutus abeas,
eos ubique superare valeas, and pro clarissimis denique meritis, post egregiam
hanc hujus temporis miliciam, ad aeterna vereque triumphalia gandia pertingas.

Torquem hunc in Collo deferes, ad augmentum honoris, and in signum quoque
Clarissimi Ordinis a te suscepti, cum imagine sanctissimi Martyris, and Christi
Militis, Georgii: Cujus praesidio suffultus Mundi hujus tam prospera quam
adversa sic pertranseas, ut animae pariter ac corporis hostibus hoc strenue
devictis, no^ temporariae modo militiae gloriam, sed and perennis victoriae
palmam denique recipere valeas. Amen.

NUMBER. XXXVIII. The Oath taken by a Knight at his Installation, in the Reign of
King Edward the Fourth. Lib. N. page 312.
EGo N. nominatus atque Electus unus egregiorum Equitum illustrissimi Ordinis
hujus Militaris, promitto, and per Sacro-sancta Evangelia Dei, quae tango hic
manifest, juro, quod omnia Ordinis istius Statuta and Articulos in hiis
contentos, quatenus ad me speciabunt, inviolabiliter observabo. Nec non
Collegii Sanctissimae Virginis, and Divi Martyris Georgii, in quo praenobilis
Ordo fundatus est, pro virili libertates and jura propugnabo.

The same Oath we find put into English, and entered at the end of the Regist.
Chartaceum, under the 2. year of Hen. 8.
IN chosen and named to be one of the honorable Company of the Order of the
Garter, promise and swear by the holy Evangelists by me bodily touched, truly
and faithfully to observe and keep all the points of the Statutes of the said
Order, and every Article in them contained, as far as to me belongs and
appertains. And all the liberties and Franchises belonging of right to this
College of our Lady and S. George I shall defend to my power, as God help me
and these holy Evangelists.

NUMBER. XXXIX. The same Oath, as it was pronounced by the the Register.
YOU being chosen to be one of the Companions of the most honorable Order of
the Garter, shall promise, and, by these holy Evangelists by you manifestly
touched, swear, truly and faithfully to observe and keep all the Statutes of
the said Order, and every Article in the same contained, for so much as to you
belongs and appertains: And further that you shall help to defend and
maintain, so much as in you lies, the rights and liberties of the College of
our blessed Lady and St. George the Martyr, wherein the honorable Order of the
Garter is founded.

NUMBER. XL. The Oath formerly taken by the Prince of Wales. Ex Lib. Nig. page 312.
EGO, N. Princeps Gualliae, Dux Cornubiae, and Comes Cestriae, primogenitus
Excelentissimi atque invictissimi Dei gratia Regis Angliae and Franciae, Domini
Hiberniae, and hujus Ordinis merito Supremi, jam nominatus atque elecius ad
eundem Ordinem venerandum, Promitto and do fidem, quod vere and fideliter pro
viribus observabo cuncta Ordinis illius Statuta, and Statutorum, Articulos,
quatenus ullo modo me contingent, juxta vim, formam, and effectum corundem, nec
non Collegii, in quo is Ordo fundatur, jura tuebor.

NUMBER. XLI. The Oath taken in King Henry the Eighth's Reign. Ex veteri Codici
MS. penes G.O.Y. f. 70. b.
YE shall swear, that to your power ye shall help, keep, defend, and su^tain,
during your life, and during the time that you shall be Companion of the Order
of the Garter, the honor, quarrels, rights, and Dominions of the King our
Sovereign Lord, Sovereign of the said Order, you shall enforce you, and do all
your diligence to entertain and augment the said Noble Order, and in case you
shall have knowledge of any thing to be imagined or procured to the contrary,
with all your true power you shall resist thereunto, Also you shall well and
truly accomplish, and keep, and entertain all the Statutes, points, articles,
and Ordinances of the said Order, as if they were read unto you from point to
point; so help you God, and Hollydome, and by these Evangelists by you
corporally touched.

NUMBER. XLII. The Oath used in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth. Ex Libro Nig.
page 303.
YOU, being chosen to be one of the honorable Company of the Order of the
Garter, shall promise and swear by the holy Evangelists by you bodily touched,
to be faithful and true to the Kings Majesty, and to observe and keep all the
points of the Statutes of the said Order, and every Article in them contained,
the same being agreeable, and not repugnant to the Kings Highness, and other
goodly proceedings, as far as unto you belongs and appertains, as God help
you and the holy Evangelists.

NUMBER. XLIII. The Form of the Oath settled in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.
QVum jam electus es in honoratissimam societatem nobilissimi ordinis Garteri,
t^ promittes and jurabis, per sacrosancta d^i Evangelia, per te nunc tacta,
quod s^ienter and voluntary non violabis aliquod praedicti ordinis statutum,
aut aliquos articulos in cis contentos, praesertim si non scientes sint, and
non repugnent Dei omnipotentis and hujus regni legibus, quatenus personam tuam
concernunt, seu ad te pertinent, sicut te deus adjuvet, per Jesum Christum, hoc
sacrosancto Dei Evangelio annuntiatum.

The same in English.
YOU being chosen to be one of the honorable Company of this most Noble Order
of the Garter, shall promise and swear by the holy Evangelists, by you here
touched, that wittingly or willingly you shall not break any Statute of the
said Order, or any Articles in them contained; the same being agreeable and not
repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God, and the Laws of this Realm, as far forth
as to you belongs and appertains: So God help you and his holy Word.

NUMBER. XLIV. Letter to obtain License for Installing a Knight-Subject by his
Proxy. Ex Lib. Nigro, p. 60.
JOannes Dux Bedfordiae, cum caeteris in celebritate Georgiana jam proxime
conjunctis, Regiae Majestati vestrae salutem and obedientiam. Quoniam,
invictissime princeps and metuendissime Domine, vestrae Celsitudinis ea
magnanimitas est in suscipiendis Bellis, and in gerendis faelicitas, ut ipsorum
jam fama per orbem undique volitet, nos id vestrae Majestati gratulamur, Deo
gratias nunc immensas agentes, qui quicquid est boni ac faelicis eventus, solus
concedit. Vbi vero Regia Majestas vestra, quia bella durant, strenuos quosdam
Equites ex hiis qui vobiscum modo militant in socios Clarissimi vestri Ordinis
assumere d^crevit, ex consensu Commilitonum aliorum qui nunc isthic assunt,
idque nobis significare non refugit; nos isthac ipsa voluntate vestra and
Commilitonum assensu subnixi, and quia nolumus ut quisquam per nos aut in Curia
nostra privetur co fructu qui percipi possit, saltem dum spectet ad salutem
Animae, si subito contingeret obire, (quod fere fit hiis qui variis belli
^asibus agitantur) Dominum Joannem Gray, Dominum Johannem Robertsak, and
Dominum Boucer virtute Literarum in quibus procuratores sibi nominarunt, in
seeds suas Windesori permisimus introduci: ne si per bellorum infortunia,
quibus eos isthic quotidie videmus objectos, ante plenam possessionem
interirent, Missarum suffragiis destituerentur, sicut quosdam nuper (id quod
dolemus) nimia mora praeventos intelleximus. Rursum quia de tali procuratorio
minus cantum in Statutis esse perpendimus, in eo facto non parum haesitavimus,
verum nimio favore potius quam arcie severeque Statutorum observationi
condonatum iri sperantes, libenter in partem pientiorem (uti est visa)
concessimus. In quo tamen vestrae nos gratiae correctionique submittimus, si
quid in hac ipsa re delinquimus, modo (quo possumus) humilimo supplicantes, ut
prudentissima Majestas vestra omnem abhinc scrupulum e Statutis auferat^ and
absolute pronunciet, quid hic posthac fieri oporteat. Vt Equities videlicet
vestri cum celsitudine vestra, vel in bellis vel alibi missu vestro commorati
(meritis exigentibus) codem privilegio, quod exteris in electione receptioneque
sui per Procuratores est concessum, congaudere possent, vestro tamen in omnibus
Iudicio semper salvo, serenitatem autem vestram cum insigni victoria celebrique
triumpho and plena conservatae multitudinis and Commilitii gloria reducat in
Regnum; and ibi diuturnae pacis bono perfrui concedat ille Rex Regum Christus
Jhesus, qui Capitales hosts nostros sub vexillo Crucis edomuit, and moriendo
devicit. Windesori ab Arce vestra, Kalendis Maii.

NUMBER. XLV. A larger Letter to the same purpose. Registrum Chartac. fol. 6. b.
VIctoriosissime Princeps, and metuendissime Domine, Humilima Recommendatione
praemissa, de magnificis vestris Regalibus, guerrarum victoriosis eventibus
gratiosis, corundem auctori, qui suo sub munimine vobis totiens contulit
felicius triumphare, obsequiosa mente, gratiarum referimus actiones vestrae
Regiaae celsitudini; insuper omnimodas reddentes odas debitas, and eo magis,
quo valemus, quod nostro minimo bumilimoque motivo de Militibus per vestram
Regiam pietatem durantibus, vestris bellicis exercitiis creandis interim in
Milites Societatis Ordinis Garterii, and per Procuratores more exterorum
installandis Aures vestrae magnificentiae Regalis dirigere voluistis, ad tantam
exauditionis gratiam, ut Regiam vestram benevolentiam ad hoc and unanimum
assensum Commilitonum Ordinis vestro lateri Regio quam strenue assistentium,
nobis, licet indignis, significare decrevistis, Ad effectum quod concors
assensus ille nostro motivo mediante vim futuris temporibus statuti contineret,
super cujus significationis gratia, and virtute assensus, Dominum Willielmum
Philipp, per procuratorem suum sufficienter constitutum installavimus, Dominos
vero Johannem Gray, Johannem Robofarde, virtute Literarum suarum missivarum, in
quibus suos solummodo nominarunt Procuratores, Dominum de Boucer, virtute
Literae cujusdam deprecatoriae per Dominam Comitissam de Stafforde, Deputato
transmisso, promisimus installari, eo potius quod de sufficientia procuratorii
hujusmodi in Statutis express non cavetur, ac praecavere volentes, ne per
dubiosa infortunia guerrarum, quibus ipsos in vestra Regali praesentia indies
exponi perpendimus, de tam meritoriis suffragiis huic annexis, prae defectu
plenitudinis sui juris, relicti, prae nostra vacillatione sub dubio, privari
possent, seu verius eisdem carere, quod absit, prout jam tarde contigit, quod
dolenter referimus, prae nimia mora praepotentis viri ante plenitudinem morte
praeventi. Pie sperantes nobis potius de vestro favore nimio pardonari, quam de
severa, and stricta observatione Statutorum in hac part laudari ex condigno,
pensatis circumstantiis ac animis praesumentium super quo tamen humilius
inclinati quo minus perite egimus, veniam petimus, omnimode vestrae Regiae
correctioni nos penitus submittentes, supplicantes devotius quo valemus
quatenus omnimodum incertitudinis scrupulum in praemissis Regia celsitudo
dignetur de cetero cautius abolere, ac nostri praetextu motivi statuere, ut
finguli subditi vestri Milites, activis suis meritis exigentibus, in hanc
eligendi commitivam, qui vel in vestra praesentia Regali seu alibi extra
Regnum, dummodo ex mandato inibi militaverint Regali, pro perpetuo gaudere
valiant privilegio nobili exterorum, Regali vestro judicio meliori in omnibus
semper salvo. Et serenitatem Regiae celsitudinis cum Corona victoriae, servata
strenua procerum multitudine, cum bono pacis faeliciter, reducat ad Regnum
invictissimus Rex ille, qui in suo sanguine nostros dignatus est inimicos
mortales sub vexillo Crucis moriendo devincere.

NUMBER. XLVI. Sir John Grey's Letter Missive to Sir John Lisle his Proctor.
Registrum Chartac. fol. 6. A mon trescher and bien ame Monsieur Jehan Lisle.
WOrchipful Sir, I great you well, desiryng to here, etc. And wete ye, that the
King of his gracious Lordshippe, God yield him, hase chosen me, to be onne of
his Brethrene, of the Knights of the Gartier; And I hase chosen you, to be
mine Attorney, to take my Stalle, in my name, what time that my Lord of
Bedforde, etc. And I pray you, that ye will do so moshe for me, at this time;
as I may do thing to your plesaunz in time coming, etc.

Written before Roone, the xi. day of November. John Gray.

NUMBER. XLVII. The Countess of Bristol's Deprecatory Letter. Ex ipso Autogr.
SIR,
PResuming from what I have been told of former times, that my Husband the Earl
of Bristol, with many others, being by his Majesty's appointment to be
installed Knights of the Garter, at Windsor, the next month, he may receive
that honor by Proxy, at my request and nomination on his behalf, because
himself is at present beyond the Seas, my desire to you hereby is, that,
acquainting his Majesty herewith, you would be pleased, with his Sovereign
permission and approbation, to appear and act at that Solemnity in quality of
my Lord's Proxy, according to the accustomed forms in such cases, wherein I
assure my self you will perform a very acceptable service to my Lord, and
therein oblige very much,

Your affectionate friend to command, A. Bristoll.
Queens-street, March the 13. 1660. Superscribed, For Sir Richard Fansha^e
Knight these. dd.
NUMBER. XLVIII. The Sovereign's Nomination of a Proxy thereupon. Ex ipso
Autographo.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, To our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Richard Fanshawe, Knight,
Greeting; Whereas we have appointed our right trusty and right well-beloved
Cousin George Earl of Bristol, lately elected into our said most Noble Order,
to be installed (together with others) at the approaching solemnization of the
Noble Feast of Saint George, in our Castle at Windesor, on the 15.16. and 17.
days of April next ensuing the date hereof. And whereas the said Earl cannot be
there personally present, being detained in Foreign parts upon our special
service (in which case he is privileged alike with Foreigners by ancient
Statute of our said Order, to receive his installation by Proxy) Know ye, that
we of our particular grace and favor to you our said Servant, and finding in
you all the statutable qualifications requir^d for such a Deputation, have
nominated and appointed, and by these presents (at the request and nomination
of the Countess of Bristol, in the behalf of the Earl her Husband) do nominate,
appoint, and authorize you the said Richard Fanshawe, for and in the name of
the said Earl, to possess his Seat in our College at Windesor, and to take the
Oath in such case accustomed, and to do and perform all other things which the
Statutes require, and we do further by these presents will, authorize, and
require all persons whom it may concern, as well Knights as Officers, not only
to admit this Proxy or Deputy of the said Earl, but also to do and perform in
his regard all other things which shall appear requisite according to the
Statutes and laudable Customs of our said most Noble Order. For all which these
our Letters shall be to you and them sufficient Warrant on that behalf. Given
under the Seal of our Order, at our Court at Whitehall, the sixteenth day of
March 1661. and in the 13. Year of our Reign.

NUMBER. XLIX. Sir William Philipp's Letters of Procuration, to Sir Andrew Butrely
and Sir John Henington. Ex Libro Nigro, page 62.
OMnibus praesentes Literas inspeciuris aut audituris, Gulielmus Phyllipp Eques
insignitus, salutem. Noveritis, quod ubi supremo nostro Ordinisque nostri
Galliae pariter atque Angliae Regi, complacuit ad id honoris ae gloriae me
provehere velle, ut in samigeratissimam Soc^etatem illam me unum intromitteret,
and insup^r ex abundantia suae gratiae, secum reput^ns quemadmodum in his
transmarinis and bellicis rebus suo secum jussu distineor, potestatem mihi
f^^eret sedis occupandae, caeterosque ritus peragendi per idon^eum
procuratorem, Equitem (ut minus) auratum, insignibus donatum, and boni atque
irreprehensi nominis: Ob id ego prudentia ac virtute dilectissimorum mihi,
Domini Andreae Butreley, and Domini Johannis Henington, in quibus (ni sallor)
quod ad strenuissimos Equites attineat nil desideres: cos vel eorum (ut res
feret) alterum, in vicem meam statuo and deputo, and quicquid in me facultatis
est, erga istam mei causam tribuo. Quibus tamquam mihimet ipsi impero, ut pro
me, ac nomine m^o Locum in Choro ac Concili^ mihi praenotatum ingrediantur
Wyndesori, intra regale Castrum, ubi Claritas Ordinis sundata relucet, Clamidem
meam, Galeam atq, Ensem suscepturis, illic Offerant, ut ex more pr^pendeant;
pendeant; causas absentiae commonstrent, omnem legitimum atque honestum
jusjurandum quod postulabitur ultro prestent, and summatim omnia vice mea sic
exhibeant ac compleant, atque si praesens ipse forem. In cujus rei testimonium
Sigillum meum ab Armis hic affixi. In obsidione Rothomagi, Novembris xi.

NUMBER. L. Sir John Fastolfs Deputation to Sir Henry Inghouse, and Sir William
Breton. Fr. Regr. fol. 14. b.
A tous ceulx, qui ces Lettres verront on orront, Johan Fastolf Chivaler salut.
Savoir venilles que come il ait pleu a nostre Soverain Seigneur le Roy de
France and D'engleterre, come Soverain and primer de L'ordre Monsteur Seint
George, de la Compaignie du Jartier, me fair tant de honnure que de me
vueiller eslier and resseiver en un dez Compaignons du dit Order du Jartier,
and en oultre de sa treshabundante grace considerant que je suis ocupie, pour
le present, en son tres-honourable service perdeca, m' a done conge d'estre
enstaille, and d'avoire touz aultres chooses que en cas appertiennent fetes and
fournes par procureur; mais tontevoies qe ce soit per Chivalier de nom and
d'armes, and saunz reproach, pour ce est il, que singulierment confiant es sens
and tresages discrecions and preudommie dez treshonnoures Seigneurs, and mes
treschiers and grauns amys messieur Henry Inghouse and Guillaume Breton
Chivalers, esquelx a ce que je tiens riens ne fault que aux vaillans Chivalers
doit appertenir, ay faite, ordeine, constitue, and depute, and par ces
presents face, ordonne, constitue, and depute lez ditz Messieurs Henry and
Guillaume, and checun deux par luy mesmes, vrais, certains, and especiaulx
procureurs, and a eux, ou L'un d' eux ay done, and done povoir general and
especial mandement es meilleurs form and maniere que je say ou puis, pour and
en nomme de moy demander, receveir, and obtenir L'estall en le chore, and lien
en le Chapitre, en la Chapelle ou Collage du Roy nostre dit Seigneur, dedeins
son Chastell de Wyndesore, ou quel est le dit Order found, and establez,
vacanis, and qui pour moy y sont ou serront assignez, and y offrir mou manteau,
moit healme, and mon espee, and les y attacher selanc la constume and maniere
du dit Order, les causes aussy de m'absence declarer, and tout serement licite
and honneste, que de Constume y serra a requise, en lame de moy fair and
donner, and generelment tout ce fair, excercer, and expedier, que es chooses
desuisditz serra aucunment necessaire and besoignable, and ma person de tout
representier, si comme je y feusse mesmes en person. En testimoigne de la
quelle chose jay seelle ces presentz du Seel de mez armez, and sign de ma
maine, Done a Lancone iii. jour de Feverier.

J. Fastolf.
NUMBER. LI. A Commission for Installation of Sir John Fastolf by Sir Henry
Inghous his Proctor. Ex Regist. Chartac. fol. 14. b.
HEnry par la grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre and de France, Seigneur D'yrlande
and Souverain de L'ordre du Jartier, a nostre bien ame Johan Robessart
Chivaler, lun de noz Compaignons du dit Order, Salut. Come par le trespass de
fieu nostre tres-chier and ame cosyn, le Count de Westmerlaunde, dount dieux
ait l'ame, en son vivant l'un de noz Compaignons du dit Order, au Chapitre
tenuz en nostre Collage and Chapelle de nostre Castle de Wyndesore, le xxii.
jour d' Aurel derreine pass veille de la Feste Monsieur Seint George, nostre
ame John Fastolf Chivaler, pour consideration dez servicez q'il avoit faitz le
temps pass a fieu nostre tres-redoute Seigneur and Pere le Roy, que dieux
assoile and depuis a nous comme uncore fait de jour en aultre pour reduire and
mettre en nous mains nostre Royaume de France, and aultres noz Seigneuries de
par de la, en regard aux grauns sens, vaillance, and preudommie darmez qui
sont en sa person par lez Compaignons du dit Order tenans lors le dit
Chapitre, saunz quelque contradiction and dun commun accord ait estre choisy
and eslieu ou lieu de fieu nostre dit Cosyn un dez Compaignons de dit Order,
and de present soit tielment occupy en fait de noz guerres quil ne puist
pardeca venir, ne repairer, pour en sa person entrer en sa possession, ains
par nostre conge and license ait faite and constittue son procureur nostre ame
Henry Inghous Chivaler pour and en nomme de luy en resseivoir la possession,
confians a plain de voz sens, preudommie, loyaulte, and bonne diligence, vous
mandons en commettant par ces presents que si tossed que par le dit Inghous,
serres devement requis, and vous apperra du povoir a luy done par le dit
Fastolf, vouz transportez en nostre dit Chastel de Wyndesore, and en noz
College and Chapelle de iceluy and pour and en nom du dit Fastolf mettez illec
de par nous en possession le dit Henry Inghous son procureur, en la maniere
accustumee, avec dez beneficez, honneures, prerogatives, Franchisez, and
libertez ad ce appartenantz, en luy assignant l'estal en cuer and lieu en
Chapitre, tielz que nostre dit Cousin en son viuant lez soloient tenir and
ocupier, Receyuez aussi son mantel and sez heaume and espee, mettoiz es lieux
ou souloyent estre ceux de nostre dit Cousin en son viuant, Adjoustees en ce
lez solempnitez de ce fair, vous donnous plain povoir, auctorite, and
maundement especial, mandous a tous lez compaignons du dit Order que dez ditz
estal, lieux, honneur, franchisez, prerogatives, and libertez, facent,
sueffrent, and laissent joier le dit Fastolf plainement and paisiblement, ainsi
and par lae maniere que lez ditz estatuz le contiennent and portent, sanz aucun
contredit on difficulte. Done en nostre Chastell de Walingesorde, soubz le
seel du dit Order le xxv. jour de Fevrier L'an de grace mil quatre cens vingt
and six, and de nostre Reign le cinquiesme.

NUMBER. LII. Another Commission for Installation of the Earl of Worcester, and
other Knights-Subjects by their Proctors. Ex lib. vocat. Denton. fol. 100. b.
Edward par la grace de Dieu Roy D'engleterre and de France, Signeur d'Irlande,
and Soverayn de L'Ordre de Gartier, a nostre treschier and tresamey Cousin
Henry Count D'Essex, and a nous treschiers and bien aims, Johan Sire de
Berners, and Johan Sire de Wenlok, nous confreres de mesme L'ordre, ayons enter
les aultres esten nostre treschier and tresayme Cousin Johan Count de
Worcestre and nos treschiers and chiers and bien aims William Sire de
Hastinges, nostre Chamberlayn, John Sire de Montacu, William Sire de Herbert,
and Missieur Johan Astley Chevalier, and nous confreres de la dict Order, and
soit ainxi que en les estatus en cedit nostre Royaulme seront establis
personelement dedeins certain temps apres la reception de la Gartier, coment
plus au plain est declarez en icelles estatutz, seavoer faisons, que pour
aulcunes considerations nous a ce specialement moynantes, and mesmement que
nostre dict Cousyn de Worcestre and les aultres Signeurs and Chevaliers
dessusdits sont de present, and seront encores, tellement occupez entour nostre
person and nostre service pour le bien de nous and de nostre dit Royaulme
quils ne puissent estre enstallez personellement au temps que vouldrions a nous
ordonnes and deputes, ordonnons and deputons par ces presents vous jointment
and severallement and ace donnons plain pouver and auctorite, de admitter,
recevoir, and establir en toute bonne haste que fair ce pourra iceluy nostre
cousin de Worcestre and les Seigneurs and Chevaliers dessusdits, and chescun d'
eulx, par leur procureur ou procureurs par eulx en ceste party constitues and
deputes en les estalles a chescun deulx en nostre College de Seinct George,
dedens nostre Chasteau de Windesore, assigns ainsi and par tell maniere, que
ung and chascun d' eulx y fussent adoncquez presentez en leur propres
persons; aulcunes ordenances ou estatus faitz ou ordonnes au contraire nox
obstantz. En tesmoing de la quelle chose nous avons fait fair cestes nous
Lettres soubs le Seel de la dict Order Patents, Done a nostre Cite de Lincoln
le 21. Iour de Mars, L'au de nostre Reign le secund.

NUMBER. LIII. Another for the Installation of the Earl of Warwick. Ex Collect.
Iohanuis Vincent.
Elizabeth R.

ELIZABETH by the Grace of God Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To our
trusty and right entirely beloved Cosen and Counselor the Duke of Norfolk,
one of the Companions and Knights of the said Order, by us assigned and deputed
to be our Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr Saint George, Patron
of the said Order, to be kept within our Castle of Windesor, the xxii. of May
next coming, and others the Companions of the said Order that then shall be
present, Greeting. Whereas, We with others the Companions of the said Noble
Order assembled, at a Chapter holden at our Palleys of Westminster the xxiv. of
Apprell last, have elected and chosen, among other, our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cosen the Earl of Warwike to be Knight and Companyon of our said
Order, and forasmuch as our said well-beloved Cosen, for diverse services which
by him is to be done for us in our affairs beyond the Seas, cannot conveniently
repair unto our Castle of Windesore personally to be installed, in the
Collegiate Chapel of that Order, and to perform other Ceremonies, whereunto by
the Statutes of the said Order he is bounden, and for that cause has by our
special license appointed our trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Sidney Knight
sufficiently authorized, as his deputy and procurer, to be installed in his
name, and to receive his Oath, and to perform all other such things and
Ceremonies for him, as by the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order be
requisite, We therefore in consideration of the premises will and by these
presents give unto you full power, license, and authority, not only to accept
and admit the said Sir Henry Sidney to be Deputy and procurer for our said
well-beloved Cosen the said Earl of Warwick, and to install him in the behalf
of the said Earl, but also further to do therein as to the Statutes and
laudable usages of the said Noble Order in this case appertains: And these
our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf.
Yeven under the Seal of our said Order at our Palleys of Westminster the 20.
day of May in the fifth Year of our Reign.

NUMBER. LIVE. A Letter giving notice to the Sovereign's Commissioners of the day
of Installation of a Knight-Subject by his Proxy. Ibidem.
By the Queen.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cosen, we greet you well, And whereas we
have appointed you, together with our right trusty and well-beloved Counselor
the Lord Hastinges of Loughborow, our Lord Chamberlen, to be in Commission for
the stallment, in our Castle of Windesore, of our right trusty and
well-beloved the Lord Gray of Wilton, being lately chosen to be of the
Fellowship, and a Companion of our Noble Order of the Garter. And forasmuch as
the same Lord Gray is presently Prisoner with the French King, and therefore
cannot be installed in his own person, Our pleasure is, that he shall be
installed by Sir Humfry Radclysse, Knight, whom we have appointed to be his
Deputy in that behalf. And therefore have thought good not only to give you
knowledge thereof by these our Letters, but also to require you to make your
repair to our said Castle of Windesore, so as you may be there by Tuesday at
night being the 19. of this present month, to the end that upon Wednesday
next, being the xx. of this same month, he may proceed to the said
Installation accordingly.

Yeven under the Seal of our said Order at our Manor of Greenwich, the xvi. of
April, the fourth and fifth years of our Reigns. To our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cosen Th'Erle of Huntington, Compaignion and Knight of our Noble
Order of the Garter.



NUMBER. LV. The Oath given to Sir John Robesart's Proxy. Ex Regist. Chartac. fol.
5. a.
MOY Thomas Bar, Chivaler, procureur a mon Master, Sire John Robesart,
eslieux d'estre de l'honourable compaignie du Garter, promete and jure, en
lalme, and en nomme de mon dite Master, de loialment garder, and observer les
points queconquez, de lez estatutz, du dite Order, en cea, que a luy
pertiendra, selonc le form, and effect dez estatuz susditz, and selonc son
loial povoir.

NUMBER. LVI. The Oath given to the Lord Scroope's Proxy. Ex Collect. I. V.
YOU being Deputy and Procurer for the Lord Scroope of Bolton, named and chosen
to be one of the Companions of the most honorable Order of the Garter, shall
in the said Lords name promise and swear by the holy Evangelists by you here
touched, that the said Lord, wittingly and willingly, shall not break any
Statutes of the said Order, or any Article in them contained, the same being
agreeable, and not repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God, and the Laws of this
Realm, as for forth as unto him belongs and appertains, As God you help and
his holy Word.

NUMBER. LVII. The Certificate of Election to the French King Henry the Second.
MS. quart. penes W. le N. f. 109. b.
TReshault and trespuissant Prince, trescher and tresayme bon friar and Cousin,
tant and si affectueusement que fair pouvons, a vous nous recommendons. Comme
par la tresgrande noblesse, prouesse, and aultres grandes vertus and merits de
vostre tresnoble person tant approuves, que justement la fame en est par tout
cognue, and oultre ce pour tant plus augmenter and fair accroistre, la bonne
and fraternelle amity and consederation d'entre vous and nous, nos Royaumes
and Subjects, avons assemble en deue Collegialle and ancienne maniere avec les
Chevaliers de nostre Order du Jarretiere, an Chapitre tenu and celebre en
nostre manoir de Greenwich, le xxiv. jour D'avril derniere pass, avons tous
ensemble and d'un Commun and unanime consentiment and vouloir esleu, choisi,
and nomme vostre tresnoble person au nombre de nostre dit amiable Compagnie,
and Order du Jarretiere, de la quelle Election il nous a semble bon, vous
advertir par cestes, vous priant trescordiallement, treshault and trespuissant
Prince, trescher and tresame, bon friar and Cousin, de fair cest boneur a nous
and toute la dite Compaignie, de consentir a la dite Election, en acceptant
pour l'amour de nous, and comme par ce vous nous feres chose tres-agreable;
ainsi nous estimerons nostre dit Order d'autant plus garni and decore, come
entendres plus amplement par nos Ambassadeurs, qui pour ceste cause sont prests
a partir par devers vous. Parquoy nous ne vous tiendrons ny plus long propos,
Ains prions le Createur (treshaut and trespuissant Prince, trescher and
tresaime bon friar and Cousin) vous avoir en sa tressainte and digne guard.
Excript a nostre Manoir de Greenwich, le -- jour de May 1551.

NUMBER. LVIII. A Credential Letter sent to Emanuel Duke of Savoy, with the Habit
and Ensigns of the Order. Ex MS. 4. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 110.
TResbault and tresexcellent Prince, trescher and bien aim Cousin, a vous bien
affectucusement nous nous recommendons. Comme sur l'advertissement que nous
vous feismes de vostre Election icy au nombre and amiable Compaignie de nos
confreres Chevaliers, and Compaignons, de nostre Order de la Jarretiere; vous
avez signify depuis vostre bonne and pronte acceptance, and singulier
contentement de la dite Election, si desirant affectueusement, qu'elle pregne
son den effect, Nous avons prontement a ce despeche devers vous nostre tresseal
and bien aim le Sieur de Clinton and Say, Chevalier and Compagnon du dit
Order, and nostre seal and bien aim Gartiere, Roy d' Arms de l'Ordre; avec
ample pouvoir and Commission non seullement pour vous presenter, bailler, and
donner de par nous la Jarretiete, manteau and aultres ensigns appartenantes au
dit Order, mais aussi fair tout aultre chose en tell cas accoustume and
requise, come ferious si nous y fussions en person, vous priant, trescher and
bien aim cousin, de les accepter d' aussi bonne vouloir que desirons
l'accroissement, par ce, de vostre honneur and renom: Et oultre ce d'adjouster
soy a tout ce que nos dits commissaires vous diront and feront, en nostre
endroit, touchant leur Commission, ainsi que feries a nous mesmes: Que sera la
fin de cestes pour la present, and ainsi treshault and excellent Prince,
trescher and bien aim cousin, Dien vous ait en sa digne tuition. Escript a
nostre Palaice de Westminster le 17. jour de Octobre, 1554.

NUMBER. LIX. Another to Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg. Ex Eq. aurat.
Anglo-Wirtemb. p. 120.
QVandoquidem, mi Domine Consanguinee (intelligit serenissimus Rex Angliae
Ducem illustrissimam Wirtembergiae, Fredericum) liquido nobis constat, quod, ut
optimam affectionem erga Regnum hoc a T E semper ostensam, demortua Regina p.
m. dilecta nostra soror agnosceret, ac vicissim suam in te benevolentiam
peramicam contestaretur: elegerat te ac nominarat, ut Equestris Ordinis
Garterii, sive Cruralis fasciae consors esses: quod tamen ob cousas aliquas in
actum deducere distulit ac procrastinata est: Nos autem obligationi promptae
tue voluntati successimus, and ejus per Legatum tuum, nuper adeo binc
profectum, certum testimonium and confirmationem accepimus; eam nobis
conservare, ac praedictae nostrae dilectae sororis amicitiae, laudabilique erga
te proposito satisfacere desideramus. Quod ut effectum jam modo suum obtineret,
bunc ipsum in sinem praesentem Baeronem Spencerum ad te Legatum elegimus, qui
praeter amicam nostram salutationem, nostrum quoque Garterium Ordinem tibi
adferat ac tradat. Quamobrem hisee rogamus, ut eum ab illo acciptas,
firmiterque credas bunc ipsum Ordinem unum esse de praecipuis signis ac
Testimoniis, quodeunque nos externo Principi, ad nostram in ipsum amicissinam
declarandam voluntatem, and de ipso existimationem, in qua merita ipsins and
virtutes babeamus, tribuere possinmus: Ita ut bac ratione re ipsa and ipso
facto quotiescunque se offeret occasio, qua nobis tibi commodandi grataque
faciendi facultas erit, been nos affectos, promptos, ac paratos sis inventurus
and experturus. Sicut idem sane praenominato Spencero pluribus and latiu tibi
coram significandi dedimus mandatum. Qua de causa fidem huic ut habeas, oramus,
certoque de nobis tibi persuadeas id, quod interim sumus and manchimus semper.
Date Wincestre, 18. Sept. 1603.

NUMBER. LX. Another to Maurice Prince of Orange. Ex Continuat. Thuani page 331.
Edit. Francof. an. 1628.
MI cognate, virtutum tuarum fama, and egregia fortitudinis documenta, quae tum
in Provinciarum Unitarum Belgii, jampridem firmo faedere regnis nostris
junctarum, tum in religionis, quae nobis cum Provinciis illis communis est,
defensione edidisti, jamdudum in nobis desiderium inveniendi occasionem qua
quanti te fecimus testaremur, excitarunt, convocatis igitur Equitibus and
fratribus Ordinis aureae Periscelidis, and in little numerum allecto cognato and
futuro genero nostro, Electore Palatino, visium est ex consensu totius
Collegii, ut te ipsi socium adjungeremus hac Electione ex voto nostro facta,
tibi more majorum nostrorum insignia Ordinis mittimus, and Winwodo Equiti ac
Legato nostro mandavimus ut ea tibi exhibeat, iisque te amiciat: Insuper
Gartero, fecialium nostrorum principi, negotium dedimus, ut, quod sui muneris
est, exequatur. Habe hoc a nobis sinceri affectus testimonium: quem deinceps,
quoties oceasio se dabit, pluribus aliis argumentis declarare parati sumus, Ex
Arce nostra Westmonasteriensi 9. kal. Jan. 1612.

NUMBER. LXI. Another to Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburgh, with the
Garter and George. Ex Collect. E.W.G.
MON Friar, l'asseurance, que j'ay de voustre Amity par pleusieurs
tesmoignages, que vous m'en avez donnez m'oblige a rechercher tous les moyens
qui seront capables de l'entretenir, and de la conserver; Et pour ce sujet j'ay
trouve a propos, comme Souverain du tresancien and tres-noble Order de la
Jartiere, de vous eslire l'un des Chevaliers, paers, and Compagnons du dit
Order, estimant par la de fair une plus estroite Amity avec vous, and
d'augmenter le bien and la prosperity de cette tres-noble societe, laquelle par
plusieurs siecles a eu non seulement les Roys D'angleterre nos predecesseurs
pour Souverains, mais aussi l'honneur d'avoir plusieurs Empereurs, Roys, and
Princes Estrangers pour Compagnons: Comme aussi de vous donner par la une
marque evidente de mon affection, and de la haute estime que j'ay de vos
merits, and de vostre person, and pour confirmation de la dite Election je
vous envoye par le Sieur Chevalier de Walker Iartiere, Roy d'Armes, la Medaille
dite le George, la Jartiere and l' Estoille, pour les Porter a la maniere
accoustumee: Assavoir la Medaille antour du Corpse, la Jartiere a la Iambe
gauche, and l' Estoille sur le Cost gauche de la Casaque ou du Manteau. Le dit
Sieur de Walker vous asseurera de ma part, que je desire avec passion de vous
tesmoigner, que je suis,

Mon friar, Vostre bien affectionne friar and Cousin. C. R.
A Paris le 23. de Januier 1654. A Mon friar Monsieur le Marquis de Brandeburg
P. Electeur du Saint Empire.



NUMBER. LXII. A Commission for delivery of the Habit and Ensigns of the Order, to
Charles Duke of Burgundy. Ex amplo Codice MS. penes praef. Iohannem Vincent,
fol. 175.
EDward, par la Grace de Dieu, Roy D'angleterre and de France, and Seigneur
d'Irlande, Souverain de L'Ordre de la Jarretiere, A tous ceulx qui ces
presents lettres verront, salut: Comme treshault and puissant Prince, nostre
tresame friar, Charles, Duc de Bourgoigne, pour les glorieuses merits de ses
vertuz, haultesse, and Noblesse, don't la Renommee s'est par tout Respandue, a
este nadguaires par nous and noz confreres Chevaliers, and Compaignons du dit
Order, en nostre Palais de Westmonstier assemblez, esleu Chevalier and
Compaignon d'icelluy Order, en lieu lors vacant, si comme par nous aultres
lettres a nostre dit friar adresses en signifiant la dite eslection est contenu
plus a plain, voulans and desirans tresaffectueusement la dit eslection sortir
son deu effect, and perfection, scavoir faisons que nous confians es feaultez,
discretions, and diligences de nostre feal and bien ame Messir Galliard,
Seigneur de Duras, Chevalier and Compaignon dudit Order, Et de noz feaulx and
bien amez conseillers Messire Jehan Scott, Chevalier, controleur de nostre
hostel, Thomas Vahan, Tresorier de nostre Chamber, Maistre Jehan Russell
Docteur es Descretz, archidiacre de Barkshire, and Jarretiere, Roy D'armes, les
cinq, quatre, trois, ou deulx, don't le dit Seigneur de Duras soit tousjours
l'un, avons ordonne commis and depute, Ordonnous, Commettons, and Deputons, par
ces presents, noz Ambassadeurs Procureurs and Messagers especiaulx, and leur
donnons povoir, auctorite and mandement especial, d'eulx transporter par devers
nostre dit friar, and de luy presenter, bailler, and donner de par nous la
Iarretiere, le mantell, and autres enseignes par nous presentement a luy
envoyes, avec toutes les ceremonies and solempnitez deues and acoustumees
d'estre presentez, baillez, on donnez en tell cas, Et oultre de Recevoir de
nostre dit friar le serment, selon la form and maniere de estatuz du dit
Order, Et autres chooses fair and exercer and expedier, que a eulx sembleront
estre necessaires en ceste party, tout ainsi que fair deurions and pourrions,
si y estions en nostre person, En tesmoign de ce, a ces presents noz lettres
nous avons fait mettre le Seau du dit Order du Jatretier, Done en nostre
Palais de Westmonstier le x. jour de Januier l'an M. CCCC. LXIX.

NUMBER. LXIII. Another for delivery of them to Ferdinand Archduke of Austria. Ex
MS. fol. penes E. W. G. f. 18.
HEnry le huitiesme, par la grace de Dieu, Roy D'angleterre, and de France,
Defenseur de la Foy, Seigneur D'irlande, Souverain de la tres-noble Order de
Saint George, nomme la Jarretiere, A tous ceulx, qui ces presents Lettres
verront, Salut. Comme treshault, excellent and puissant Prince, nostre tresame
Cousin and bon Nepueu, Dom. Fernando, Infant de Castille, Archiduc D'austrich,
Conte de Tyrol, etc. Lieutenant du Saint Empire, pour les grans merits de ses
vertus, hautesse, and noblesse, don't la renommee, s'est par tout espandue, a
este naguerres par nous and noz Confreres Chevaliers and Compaignons du dit
Noble Order, en nostre Manoir de Richemont assambles, esleu Chevalier and
Compaignon d'icelluy Order de Saint George, en lieu vacant, voulans and
desirans tresaffecteussement la dit eslection sortir son deu effect and
perfection; Savoir faisons, que nous confians es feaultes, descrecions, and
diligence de nostre feal and bien ame Messire Henry, Seigneur de Morley, and
aussi de noz feaulx and bien amez Maistre Edward Lee, Docteur en Theology,
Archidiacre de Colchester, nostre Aulmonier, Messire Guillaume Husey,
Chevalier, and Messire Thomas Wriothesley, Jarretiere, nostre Principal Roy
D'armes, nostres Conseillours, les quatre, troys, ou deux, don't le dit Seigneur
de Morley soit tousjours l'ung, avons ordonne, commys, and Depute, Ordonnons,
commettons, and deputons, par ces presents, noz Ambassadeurs, procureurs, and
messaigers especiaulx, and leur donnons povoir, autorite and mandement
especial, d'eulx transporter par devers nostre dit Cousin and bon Nepuen, and
de luy presenter, bayller, and donner, de par nous, la Iarretiere, l'habit, and
aultres Enseignes par nous presentement a luy envoyees, avec toutes les
solempnitez and Ceremonies deuez and accustumez d'estre presentees, baillees,
ou donnees, en tell cas; Et oultre de recevoir, de nostre dit Cousin and bon
Nepueu, le serment, selon la form and maniere dez Estatuz du dit Noble Order,
and aultres chooses fair exercer and expedier, que a eux sembleront estre
necessaires en cest party, tout and ainsy que fair deurions ou p^^rrions, si
y estions en nostre person. En tesmoigne de ce, a ces presents noz lettres,
signees de nostre main, nous avons faict meter le Seau du dit Noble Order de
Saint George nomme la Jarretiere.

Done en nostre Chasteau de Wyndesore, le xviii. jour d' Aoust, L'an de Grace
M. D. XXIII. Et le xv. An de nostre Regne. Pexsall.

NUMBER. LXIV. Another for their delivery to Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect.
Gul. le N. Cl.
PHilippe and Marie par la grace de Dicu Roy and Royne d' Angleterre, France,
Naples, Jerusalem, and Irlande, Defenseurs de la Foy, Prince and Princess d'
Espagne, and Sicille, Archiduc and Archiduchesse d' Austriche, Duc and Duchess
de Millain, Burgoigne, Brabant, Conte and Contesse de Flanders, Hasburg, and
Tyroll, etc. A tous ceulx qui ces presents Lettres verront, Salut. Comme
treshault and tresexcellent Prince Emanuel Philibert, Duc de Savoy, Chablais,
and Auguste, Prince and Vicar perpetuel du Saint Empire, Marquis en Italy,
Prince de Piemont, Conte de Geneve, etc. Lieutenant and Capitain General pour
nostre trescher pere L'empereur, pour ses grandes merits and prouesses,
noblesse, and autres vertus, don't la renommee s'est par tout divulgee and
esparse, eut este naguieres par nous and nos confreres Chevaliers and
Compagnons, de nostre Order de la Jarretiere, en nostre Chasteau de Windesor
assemblees, esleu Chevalier and Compagnon d'icelluy Order en lien la vacant,
comme par nos aultres lettres, a nostre dit Cousin addressees, en signifiant
son Election est contenu plus a plain, voulans and desirans affectueusement la
Election sortir son deu effect and perfection, Seavoir faisons, que nous,
confians es fialtie, discretion, and diligence de nostre trefeal and bien aim
le Seigueur de Clinton and Say, Chevalier and Compagnon de nostre Order, and
de nostre feal and bien aim Jarretiere, Roy d'armes d'icelluy Order, avons
Ordonne, Commis, and depute, Ordonnons, Commettons, and deputons, par ces
presents, nos Ambassadeurs, procureurs, and Messagiers especiaulx, and leur
donnons pouvoir authorite and mandement especial, d'eulx transporter au aim
nostre Cousin, and a luy presenter, bailler, and donner de par nous la
Iarretiere, and le manteau, and aultres enseignes par nous presentement a luy
envoyees, avecque toutes les Ceremonies and solempnities, deues, and
accoustumes d'estre presentees, baillees and donnees en tell cas, and oultre de
recevoir, de nostre Cousin, le Sacrement, selon la form et maniere dez estatutz
du dit Order, and toute aultre chose fair and expedier que a eulx sembleront
necessaires en cest endroict, tout ainsi que fair deburious and pourrious, si
y estions en nos persons propres. En temoign de ce, avons souscript de nostre
main propre ces presents lettres, and y faict mettre le Seel du dit Order de
la Jarretiere; Done ou nostre Palais de Westminster le xvii. jour de Octobre
1554.

NUMBER. LXV. Another for their delivery to the French King, Charles the Ninth. Ex
ipso Autogr.
ELizabeth par la grace de dieu, Royne d' Angleterre, France, and Irlande,
Defenseur de la foy, etc. a tout ceulx, qui ces patentes Lettres verront,
Salut. Come treshault, tresexcellent, trespuissant Prince, nostre trescher and
tresame friar, and Cousin, le Roy tresebrestien Charles de France, tant pour
ses tresgrandes noblesse, dons, and vertus singuliers, don't Dieu l'a orne, and
la renommee s'en est par tout divulguee, and esparse, and que pour tant plus
augmenter, and establir la bonne amity, and intelligence qui est enter nous,
and nostre dit bon friar, ait este naguieres par nous and nos confreres
Chevaliers and Compagnons de nostre Order de Jarretiere, en nostre Chastean de
Windsore assembles, eleu Chevalier and Compagnon d'iceluy Order, en lieu la
vacant, voulant and desirant affectueusement la ditte election sortir son deu
effect and perfection; scavoir faisons que nous confians es feaultes,
discretions, and diligences de nostre trescher and bien aim Cousin, le Sieur
de Hunsdon, Chevalier, and Compagnon de nostre Order, and de nos feaulx and
bien aims Messieurs, Thomas Smith, Chevalier, nostre Ambassadeur resiant
aupres nostre dit bon friar, and Messieur Gilbert Dethick, Chevalier, Roy
D'armes d'iceluy Order, les avons ordonne, commis, and depute, ordonnons,
commettons, and deputons, par ces presents nos ambassadeurs, procureurs, and
messagiers expeciaulx, and leur donnons pouvoir, authorite, and mandement
especial d'eulx trouver, devers nostre dit bon friar, and de luy presenter and
donner, de par nous, la Jarretiere, and le manteau, and autres enseignes par
nous presentement a luy envoyees, avecques toutes les Ceremonies, and
solemnites deues, and accoustumieres d'estre presentees, baillees, and donnees
en tell cas, and oultre ce, fair, and expedier, toutes aultres chooses, que a
eulx sembleront necessaires en cest endroit, tout ainsi que fair deburious,
and pourrions, si y estions e^nostre propre person. En tesmoing de ce, avons
sousescript de nostre main propre ces presents, and y fait mettre le Scel du
dit Order de la Jarretiere; Done a nostre maison de Richmond le xxviii. jour
de May, l'an de grace, mil cinq cens, soixante and quatre, and de nostre regne
le sixiesme.

NUMBER. LXVI. Another for their delivery to Maximilian the Emperor. Ex Collect.
Gul. le N. Cl.
ELizabetha, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina fidei
Defensor, etc. Omnibus ad quos presents Litterae sint perventurae, salutem.
Cum invictissimus and potentissimus Princeps, frater and consanguineus noster,
Clarissimus Maximilianus, Romanorum Imperator, etc. non solum ob dignitatis
suae fastigium, dotesque ac virtutes animi heroicas, quibus illum ita cumulate
ornavit ac illustravit Deus Optimus Maximus, ut earum per universum Orbem fama
dimanaverit, verum etiam ut amicitiae ac intelligentiae arctioris vinculum
inter nos firmetur ac stabiliatur, Ex nostro nostrorumque Confratrum, Equitum
ac sociorum Ordinis Garterii assensu and consensu, nuper in dictum Ordinem
nostrum Garterii elecctus and susceptus fuerit; Vt hanc electionem, prout par
est, absolvamus, and ad effectum perducamus, notum facimus, quod prudentiae and
dexteritari pernobilis and perdilecti consanguinei nostri Thomae, Comitis
Suffexiae, etc. unins Equitum Sociorum dicti nostri Ordinis, ac dilecti nostri
Gilberti Dethick, Militis, and Regis Armorum, plurimum confidentes, illos
Legatos, Procuratores, and nuncios nostros speciales ordinavimus, deputavimus,
and constituimus, prout per praesentes Ordinamus, Deputamus, and Constituimus,
iisque potestatem, authoritatem, ac mandatum speciale damus, non solum sese
versus dictum Imperatorem conferendi, and illi nostro nomine praesentandi
Garterium, pallium, aliaque insignia quae in praesentia illi a nobis mittuntur,
verum etiam omnes Ceremonias ac Solennitates peragendi, quae, in hac part, ex
usu and consuetudine fieri and peragi solent, omniaque reliqua expediendi, quae
ad hoc negotium spectant, quaeq, illis videbuntur necessaria, haud minus ac si
nos ipsi praesentes facere and expedire vellemus. In cujus rei testimonium has
literas fieri fecimus patentes, nec non illas manu nostra subscriptas, Sigillo
dicti Ordinis communiri jussimus. Datum in Regia nostra Westmonasteriensi xx.
die Maii Anno Domini 1567. regnorum vero nostrorum nono.

ELIZABETHA.
NUMBER. LXVII. Another for Delivery of them to Frederick the Second, King of
Denmark. Ex Autogr. in Bibliot. Hatton.
ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, fidei Defensor,
etc. universis and singulis praesentes has literas nostras visuris,
inspectaturis, and audituris, salutem. Cum serenissimus Princeps, frater and
consanguineus noster charissimus Fredericus, Dei gratia Daniae, Norwegiae,
Gothorum, Vandalorumque Rex, etc. plurimarum Heroicarum Virtutum splendore and
gratia nobilitatus, Orbem Christianum fama nominis sui impleverit, eaque jam
ante annos aliquot animum nostrum accenderit, ut eam amicitiam in persona ejus
melioribus quibus potuimus officiis cultiorem redderemus, quam haereditario
quodam jure sanctissimae memoriae nobilissimi Majores and Antecessores nostri
nobis commendarunt, nullis autem officiis erga tam charum Principem
satisfacientes nobis, eum nuper elegerimus, conspirantibus omnibus omnium
Commilitonum suffragiis, in illustrissimi Ordinis Garterii nobilissimam
societatem, quo arctiori benevolentie vinculo, si fieri posset, eum in dies
singulos nobis magis magisque conjungeremus, utpote Principem vere Christianum,
in cujus amicitia vel maxim cupimus conquiescere, summoque desiderio aventes
ut quod non nisi auspicatissime incaepimus, ad optatum finem perducatur;
Sciatis, quod nos, de fidelitate, prudentia and diligentia praenobilis viri
plurimum nobis chari, Domini Peregrini, Domini de Willoughby, and Ersby, and
spectabilis Viri Gilberti Dethick Equitis, Regis Armorum Ordinis, plurimum
confidentes, ipsos nostros veros, and indubitatos Ambasciatores, Procuratores,
and Oratores speciales, assignavimus, fecimus, and constituimus, assignamus,
facimus, and constituimus, per praesentes, dantes eis potestatem, authoritatem
and mandatum speciale ad praefatum Fratrem and Consanguineum nostrum
charissimum proficiscendi, eique deferendi and donandi, nostro nomine, and pro
nobis, Subligaculum, and Trabeam, and reliqua Insignia Illustrissimi Ordinis
nostri Garterii, per nos ad praesens ad illum transmissa, caeteraque peragendi
quam officiosissime, and religiosissime poterunt, quae ad honoratissimi illius
Ordinis decus and ornamentum quoquo modo putabunt pertinere, haud aliter atque
ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium bas Literas
nostras manu nostra subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis Garterii communiri
fecimus. Datae e Regia nostra Grenewici 27. die Mensis Junii, anno salutis
Humanae supra millesimum quingentesimum, octuagesimo secundo, regni vero nostri
vicesimo quarto.

ELIZABETHA.
NUMBER. LXVIII. Another for delivery of them to Henry the Third of France. MS. 4.
penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey. p. 63. b.
ELizabeth, by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To all those to whom these presents shall come,
Greeting. Forasmuch as the right high, right excellent, and right mighty
Prince, our right dear and right well-beloved Brother, and Cozen, the most
Christian King, Henry of France, as well for his right great Nobility, gifts
and virtues singular, wherewith God had endued him, the renown whereof is
dispersed and divulged throughout, and that the more to augment and establish
the good amity and intelligence which is between us and our said good Brother,
he has been not long since by us and our fellow Brethren the Knights and
Companions of our Order of the Garter, in our Castle of Windesore assembled,
chosen Knight and Companion of the same Order, in place there vacant, We
willing and desiring affectiously the same Election to take its due effect and
perfection, give to understand, that We, trusting in the fidelities,
discretions, and diligence of our right dear and well-beloved Cozen, the Earl
of Darby, Knight and Companion of our said Order, and of our faithful and
well-beloved, Sir Edward Stafford Knight, our Ambassador resident with our said
good Brother, have ordained, committed, and deputed, and do ordain, commit, and
depute them by these presents our Ambassadors, Procurators, and Messengers
especial. And we give them power, authority, and especial charge to go unto our
said good Brother, and to present and give him from us the Garter, the Mantle,
and other Ensigns by us presently sent unto him, with all the Ceremonies and
Solemnities due and accustomed to be presented, given, and delivered in such
case: And furthermore to do and dispatch all other things, which unto them
shall be thought necessary in that behalf, even so as we our selves ought and
might do, if we were there in our own proper person; In witness whereof we have
subscribed these presents with our own proper hand, and thereunto caused the
Seal of our said Order of the Garter to be put. Dated at our Manor of
Greenwich, the xx. day of January, the year of our Lord 1584. and of our Reign
the 27.

ELIZABETH.
NUMBER. LXIX. Another for Delivery of them to Henry the Fourth of France. Ex
Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ELizabeth, par la grace de Dieu Royne d' Angleterre, France, and Irlande,
Defenseur de la Foy, etc. A tous ceux qui ces presents verront, salut. Comme le
treshault, tresexcellent, and trespuissant Prince, nostre treseber and tresame
friar, and Cousin, le Roy tresebrestien Henry de France and de Navarre, tant
pour sa treshaulte noblesse, dons, and vertus singuliers, don't Dieu l'a orne
and l'a renomme, s'en est par tout divulguee and esparse, que pour tant plus
augmenter and establir la bonne amity and intelligence, qui est enter nous,
and nostre dit bon friar, ait este n'aguares par nous and nos Confreres and
Compagnons de nostre Order de la Jartiere, en nostre Chasteau de Windsore
assembles, este^ Chevalier, and Compagnon d'icelluy Order, en lieu la vacant,
voulans and desirans affectucusement la dite Election sortir son deu effect and
perfection, S^^voir faisons, que Nous confians es feautes, dis^retions and
diligences de nostre tres^her and bien aim Cousin, le Comie de Shrewsbury,
Chevalier and Compagnon de nostre dit Order, and de nostre feal and bien aim
Guillaume Dethick Iartier, nostre premier Roy d' Arms, etc. d'icelluy Order,
les avons Ordonne Commis and Depute, Ordonnons, Commettons, and Deputons par
ces presents, Nos Ambassadeurs, procureurs, and messagiers especials, and leur
donnons pouvoir authorite and mandement especial, d'eux trouver verse nostre dit
bon friar, and de luy presenter and donner, de par nous, la Jarreti^re, Robe,
Manteau, and Collier, and les autres ens^ignes par nous presentement a luy
envoyees, avecques toutes les Ceremonies and Solennites deues and accoustumees
d'^stre presentees, baillees, and donnees en tell cas. Et oultre ce, fair and
expedier toutes autres chooses que a iccux sembleront necessaires en ^^st
endroit, tout ainsi que fair deburions and pourrions, si y estions en nostre
propre person; En tesmoign de ce, avons soubseserit de nostre propre main ces
presents, and y fait mettre le Seel du dit Order de la Jartiere. Done a
nostre maison de Greenwich, le 6. jour de Septembre, L'an de grace Mil cinque
cens quatre vingts and seize, and de nostre Reign, le trente huiti^sme.

ELIZABETH.
NUMBER. LXX. Another for their Delivery to Christian the Fourth, King of Denmark.
Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
JAcobus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc. Vniversis and singulis, Patentes hasce litteras nostras lecturis
and inspecturis, salutem. Cum multae justissime sint causae, cur nos
serenissimo Principi, fratri, and consanguinco nostro charissimo, Christiano,
Dei gratia, Daniae, Norvegiae, Gothorum, Vandalorumque Regi, Omnia benevolentie
atque amicitiae Officia praestare, atque honores (quantum in nobis est) maximos
atque amplissimos tribuere debeamus; and ob cas causas (more institutoque
Majorum qui maximis principibus and nobilissimis, atque exemia virtute
praeditis hominibus, hunc honorem semper habuerunt) Regem illum propinquitate
atque amicitia nobis conjunctissimum in little numerum asciverimus, totiusque
societatis consensu elegerimus, qui celeberrimo atque illustrissimo Garterii
(ut appellatur) Ordine apud nos honorantur; ideirco notum atq, testatum omnibus
esse volumus, nos pro fide, prudentia and diligentia Nobilissimi viri, Cognati
nostri, Rogeri Comitis Rutlandiae, itemque spectabilis viri Gulielmi Segar,
armigeri, Regis Armorum Ordinis, nobis spectata atque explorata, illos
assignasse, fecisse, and constituisse, perque hasce litteras assignare, facere,
and constituere, certos and indubitatos Ambasciatores, procuratores, and
Oratores nostros, iisque potestatem, autboritatem and speciale mandatum dedisse
ad praefatum Regem, fratrem, and consanguineum nostrum proficiscendi, e^que
nostro nomine and pro nobis Subligaculum and Trabeam, and reliqua illustrissimi
Ordinis nostri Garterii insignia, hoc tempore a nobis ad illum transmissa,
deferendi, tradendi, atque donandi, ad omnia denique (quam poterunt
officiosissime ac religiosissime) praestanda and peragenda, quae ad
honoratissimi illius Ordinis decus and Ornamentum, spectare videbuntur, perinde
atque ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium, hasce
litteras nostras Patentes, propria manu nostra subscriptas, Sigillo praedicti
Ordinis nostri communiri fecimus. Datae e Regia nostra Grenevicensi die 23.
Junii, Anno Christi 1603.

JACOBUS.
NUMBER. LXXI. Another for delivery of them to Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg. Ex
Lib. Collect. Tho. Row Eq. Aur. Ord. Canc. f. 206.
JAcobus Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, fidei
Defensor, etc. Vniversis and singulis praesentes has literas nostras visuris,
inspecturis, vel audituris, salutem. Cum illustrissimus Princeps, ac Dominus,
Dominus Fredericus Dux Wirtembergensis, and Tekensis, Comes Montis belegardi,
Dominus in Haydenheim, Consanguineus, and Affinis noster charissimus,
plurimarum Heroicarum virtutum splendore, and gratia Nobilitatus, Orbem
Christianum fama nominis sui impleverit, eaque jam ante aliquot annos animum
nostrum accenderit, ut eam amicitiam in persona ejus, melioribus quibus
potuimus Officiis, cultiorem redderemus, quam haereditario quodam jure
Sanctissimae memoriae Nobilissimi Majores and antecessores nostri nobis
commendarunt, Nullis autem Officiis erga tam charum Principem satisfacientes
nobis, cum nuper elegerimus (conspirantibus omnibus omnium susfragiis) in
illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii Nobilissimam Societatem quo arctiori
benevolentiae vinculo (si fieri posset) eum in dies singulos nobis magis
magisque conjungeremus, utpote Principem vere Christianum, in cujus amicitiae
vel maxim cupimus conquiescere, summoque desiderio aventes, ut quod non nisi
auspicatissime incepimus ad optatum finem perducatur. Sciatis, quod nos de
fidelitate, prudentia, and diligentia praenobilis viri, plurimum nobis chari,
Domini Roberti Spencer de Wormleiton, and spectabilis viri Gulielmi Dethick
Equitis, Garteri, Regis Armorum Ordinis, plurimum confidentes, ipsos nostros
veros and indubitatos Legatos, Procuratores, and Oratores speciales
assignavimus, fecimus, and constituimus, assignamus, facimus, and constituimus
per praesentes, dantes eis potestatem, authoritatem, and mandatum speciale, ad
praefatum consanguineum nostrum charissimum proficiscendi, eiq, deferendi, and
donandi, nostro nomine and pro nobis, Subligaculum and Trabeam, and reliqua
vestimenta, insigniaque illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii, per nos ad
praesens ad illum transmissa, caeteraque peragendi, quam officiosissime
religiosissimeque poterunt, quae ad honoratissimi illius Ordinis decus, and
ornamentum quoquo modo putabunt pertinere, baud aliter ac si ipsi faceremus, si
praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium has litteras nostras, manu nostra
subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis nostri Garterii communiri fecimus. Datae
Manerio nostro de Woodstock, decimo octavo die Mensis Septembris, Anno regni
nostri Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae primo, and Scotiae 37. 1603.

JACOBUS.
NUMBER. LXXII. Another for their delivery to Maurice, Prince of Aurange. MS. in
Bibl. Hatton. f. 227. b.
JAcobus etc, Cum uibil magis Officium Regale deceat, quam viris virtutes and
fortitudinis fama illustrissimis honores maximos and amplissimos tribuere;
Quorum in numero, singulari virtute emicuit, hac nostre, aetate, illustrissimus
consanguineus noster, Mauritius, Princeps Auriaci, Comes Nassoviae, etc. Nos
more institutoque Majorum, qui tantis viris, quae apud ipsos charissima sunt
honoris Monumenta, communicare soliti sunt, praedictum principem Mauritium cum
amicitia nobis conjunctissimum, tum propter merita sua dilectissimum, in eorum
numerum ascripsimus, totiusque societatis consensu elegimus, qui celeberimo
atque illustrissimo Garterii (ut appellatur) Ordine apud nos honorautur.
^dcirco notum atque testatum omnibus esse volumus, nos pro fide, prudentia, and
diligentia nobilissimi Radolphi Winwood, Equitis Aurati, nostrique apud
foederatas Belgii Provincias Legati; Itemque spectabilis viri Gulielmi Seagar,
Garterii, nomine, Principalis apud nos Armorum Regis, a nobis spectata, atque
explorata, illos assignasse, fecisse, and constituisse, perque, has literas
assignare, facere, and constituere certos and indubitatos Ambasciatores,
Procuratores, and Oratores nostros, iisque potestatem, authoritatem, and
speciale mandatum dedisse, ad praefatum principem Consanguineum nostrum
proficiscendi, eique nostro nomine, and pro nobis, quedam Garterii insignia
(caeteris suo tempore postea praestandis) hoc tempore a nobis ad illum
transmissa deferendi atque donandi, ad omnia denique, quam poterunt
officiosissime, and religiosissime and peragenda, quae ad honoratissimi illius
Ordinis decus and Ornamentum spectare videbuntur, perinde atque ipsi faceremus,
si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei, etc. Date e Palatio nostro
Westmonasteriensi, vicesimo quarto die Decembris, Anno Domini 1612.

NUMBER. LXXIII. Another for their Delivery to Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden.
Ex Lib. Collect. praef. Tho. Row. fol. 207.
CArolus, Dei gratia, Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, fidei
Defensor, etc. Vniversis and singulis hasce literas nostras Lecturis aut
inspecturis, salutem. Cum serenissimus ac potentissimus Princeps, frater, and
consanguineus noster charissimus Gustavus Adolphus, Dei gratia, Suecorum,
Gottorum, Vandalorumq, Rex, virtutis suae, ac nobilitatis splendore, rerumque
gestarum gloria ac nominis sui fama Orbem Christianum impleverit: ad nostrum
officium pertinere putavintus, illi non solum omnia benevolentiae, atque
amicitiae officia, tanquam principi nobis conjunctissimo, and amicissimo
praestare, sed etiam honores (quantum in nobis est) maximos atque amplissimos
tribuere, eosque inprimis quibus militaris in summo duce virtus solet decorari;
pro more igitur and instituto Majorum nostrorum Regumi Angliae, qui maximis
Principibus, and eximia virtute ac nobilitate praeditis hominibus hunc honorem
habuerunt, Nos Regem illum, communibus omnium Sociorum suffragiis, in
celeberrimi Ordinis Garterii (ut vocatur) collegium elegimus. Et proinde notum
and testatum omnibus esse volumus, Nos pro fidelitate, prudentia and diligentia
nobilissimi viri de Conclavi nostro, Jacobi Spenei de Wormston, Equitis aurati,
and spectabilium virorum Petri Young armigeri, unius ex nobilibus nobis in
cubiculo praesentiae nostrae ministrantibus, and Henrici Saint Georgii,
Armigeri, unius ex Heraldis nostris ad Arma, nobis spectata atque explorata,
illos assignasse, fecisse, and constituisse, perque hasce Literas assignare,
facere, and constituere, certos and indubitatos Legatos, Oratores, and
Procuratores nostros, iisque potestatem, authoritatem, and speciale mandatum
dedisse, ad praefatum Regem, fratrem, and consanguineum nostrum proficiscendi,
eique nomine nostro, and pro nobis, Subligaculum, and Trabeam, and reliqua
illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii insignia, jam a nobis ad illum
transmissa, deferendi, tradendi, atque donandi, ad omnia denique (quam poterunt
officiocissime ac religiocissime) praestanda and peragenda, quae ad
honoratissimi illius Ordinis decus, and Ornamentum pertinere videbuntur:
perinde atque, ipsi faceremus, si praesentes essemus. In cujus rei testimonium
hasce Literas nostras Patentes, propria manu nostra subscriptas, Sigillo dicti
Ordinis nostri Garterii communiri fecimus. Datae e Palatio nostro
Westmonasteriensi, vicesimo quarto die Junii, Anno Domini 1627. Stilo Angliae.

NUMBER. LXXIV. Another for Delivery of them to Charles Prince Elector. Ibidem,
fol. 213.
CArolus, Dei gratia Magnae Britanhiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, fidei
Defensor, Periscelidis Ordinisque Georgiani Supremus, etc. universis and
singulis hasce literas nostras lecturis, aut inspecturis salutem. Cum nos
omnesque and singuli, illustrissimi Ordinis Garterii Socii, Equites, decimo
octavo die Aprilis, Anno regni nostri nono, apud Palatium nostrum Albae Aulae
Westmonasterii Capitulariter congregati, charissinum nostrum Nepotem, unicae,
and dilectissimae Sororis nostrae modo filium natu maximum, Carolum Principeur
Imperii Electorem, Comitem Palatinumque non solum propter Regii nostri
Sanguinis communionem, and propinquitatem, sed etiam ad fovendas, and
excitandas ineuntis aetatis virtutes, mirifice, cum admiratione, and spe totius
Orbis Christiani pullulantes, tam in sui Principatus administratione, quam in
rei militaris scientia more, and instituto majorum nostrorum Regum Angliae
(quibus solenne fuit nobilissimos quosque, and summa virtute praeditos
Principes, hoc honor decorare) communibus suffragiis, in celeberrimum nostri
Ordinis Garterii Collegium and Societatem co-optavimus, and elegimus; Proinde
notum esse volumus, Nos pro fidelitate, prudentia, and diligentia,
spectatissimi viri Gulielmi Boswell armigeri, procuratoris nostri Regiorum in
Belgia negotiorum, assidue vigilantissimi; Nec non Johannis Philipoti Armigeri,
Sommerset, unius ex Heraldis nostris, in bisce mysteriis eruditi (jam vice and
munere Garterii Armorum Regis, propter ejus debilitatem and invalitudinem
fungentis) n^bis cognita, and explorata, illos assignasse, fecisse, and
constituisse, perque hasce literas assignare, facere, and constituere certos,
and indubitatos Legatos, Oratores, and Procuratores nostros; iisque potestatem,
auctoritatem, and speciale mandatum dedisse, ad praefatum Principem, and
Nepotem nostrum proficiscendi, eique nostro nomine, and pro nobis Periscelidem,
and inauratam gemmisque distinctam Sancti Georgii imaginem, and symbolum, duo
praecipua illustrissimi Ordinis nostri Garterii insignia, jam a nobis ad illum
transmissa deferendi, tradendi, donandi, and induendi, modo and forma
institutioni illius Ordinis maxim congruentibus, and ad omnia denique quam
poterunt officiosissime, and religiosissime praestanda, and peragena, quae ad
honoratissimi illius Ordinis decus and Ornamentum in hac part pertinere
videbuntur. In cujus rei testimonium hasce literas nostras Patentes, propria
manu nostra subscriptas, Sigillo dicti Ordinis Garterii communiri fecimus.
Datae apud Palatium tostrum in Civitate nostra Eboracensi, vicesimo octavo die
Mensis Maii, Anno regni nostri Magnae Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae nono,
Annoque Domini 1633.

NUMBER. LXXV. Another for their Delivery to Charles King of Sweden. Ex ipso
Autogr.
CArolus Secundus, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex,
fidei Defensor, atque Praenobilis Georgiani Ordinis, vulgo a Periscelide
Nuncupati, Supremus Magister, Omnibus ad quos praesentes hae literae
pervenerint, Salutem. Cum Serenissimus ac Potentissimus Princeps ac Dominus,
Carolus, eadem gratia Suecorum, Gothorum, Vandalorumque Rex, and Princeps
haereditarius, Magnus Princeps Finlandiae, Dux Schoniae, Esthoniae, Livoniae,
Careliae, Bremae, Verdae, Stetini, Pomeraniae, Cassubiae and Vandaliae,
Princeps Rugiae, Dominus Ingriae and Wismariae, nec non Comes Palatinus Rheni,
Bavariae, Juliae, Cliviae, and Montium Dux, Frater, Consanguineus, ac Amicus
noster Charissimus: tam propter natalium splendorem and eximias ill^s, quae in
eo conspiciuntur supra aetatem, virtutes, quam propter habita ad praeclara
Regiorum suorum Antecessorum facinora, speciatim quae a serenissimo and
potentissimo Principe Domino Gustavo Adolpho nuper Suecorum Rege sunt gesta, a
quibus non parum honoris praefato Nostro Georgiano Ordini accessit, utpote qui
ejus erat Commilito, ut denique sanctior illa amicitia quae inter Regios
utrinque Nostros Praedecessores faeliciter intercessit, magis excolatur atque
indies firmior reddatur, in praefatum Nostrum Ordinem fuerit in pleno ejus
Capitulo electus and cooptatus. Omnibus quae illud impertiendum and
notificandum Nostrarum duximus esse partium. Hac de causa, atque ad magis
honorificam ejusdem rei declarationem, nec non ut quae adhuc restant ad
consummandum hoc tam gratum opus perimpleantur, ejusdem Ordinis integrum
habilum, Ornatum, and Insignia per manus perdilecti and perquam fidelis
Consanguinei and Consiliarii Nostri Caroli Comitis Carliolensis, Vice-Comitis
Howard de Morpeth, Baronis Dacre de Gillesland, locum-tenentis Nostri Generalis
in Comitatibus Westmorlandiae and Cumbriae, Nostrique jam ad praefatum
Serenissimum and Potentissimum Principem, Dominum Carolum, Suecorum, etc. Regem
Legati Extraordinarii; Et spectabilis Viri, Domini Henrici St. George, e
primariis officialibus Nostris ad Arma unius, vulgo Richmond Herald curavimus
transferenda; Dantes and Concedentes eisdem Nostris in hac part
Plenipotentiariis, plen^m and omnimodam facultatem and Mandatum speciale, ut ad
praefatum Serenissimum and Potentissimum Regem Suecorum, etc. Fratrem
Consanguineum, and Amicum Nostrum, se conferant ei supramemorata Insignia,
Ornatum habitumque Nostri praefati Ordinis, a nobis and ex Nostra part,
peramanter offerant. Illis ipsum induant, jusjurandum in verba Statutorum dicti
Ordinis ab eo accipiant, caeteraq, praestent omnia quae ad Nostrum Ordinisque
d^cus in similibus inaugurationis solennibus fieri assolent, and adeo rit^ and
honorifice exequenda magis inservire judicabunt, non secus atque nosipsi
mandare aut perficere possemus, dato quod illic coram adessemus. Dabantur in
Palatio Nostro Albae-Aulae apud Westmonasterium, Vicessimo nono die Mensis
Novembris; Annoque Domini 1668.

NUMBER. LXXVI. A Warrant for delivery of the Duke of Savoy's Habit to Garter. Ex
Cod. MS. in Offic. mag. Guardrob. Reges voc. War. Dormant tempore Hen. 8. etc.
p. 17.
WE will and command you, to deliver to Sir Gilbert Dethick, Principal King at
Arms, for the Livery of the Order of the Garter, to be carried by him to our
dear and well-beloved Cosen the Duke of Savoy, newly elected and chosen to be
one of the Companions of the said Order, One Mantle of Blue Velvet, lined with
white Taffata, and one Kirtle, lined with white Sar^^net, with one Robe^ lace
of Silk, and Gold, and Silk Riband for the said Robes, and as much Crymson
Velvet as will cover one Book of the Order of the said Garter, with Silk Lace
to the said Book, one Case to be made, covered with Crimson Velvet, garnished
with passamain Lace of Gold, lined with Crimson Satin, and quilts of the same
Satin, for the carriage of one rich Collar of Gold, of the Order of the
Garter, one pair of trussing Sheets, two great Coffers covered double with Hide
Leather, double lined, and bound with Plates, with great Girths of Leather to
them, one Pack-Saddle, with all things necessary to the same, for carriage of
the said Robes. And these our Letters, etc.

Given at our Palace at Westminster the 19. day of October in the first and
second years of our Reign. To our trusty Sir Edward Waldgrave Master of our
Great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. LXXVII. A Warrant for the Delivery of the Habit of Frederick the Second
King of Denmark. Ex Codice MS. in Offic. Mag. Gardrob. Regis vocat. Lib. quart.
War. particular. p. 446.
Elizabeth R.

WE will and command you to deliver to the Lord Willoughby, for the Livery of
the Garter for the King of Denmark, 20 yards of Purple Velvet for his Robe, and
18 yards of Crimson Velvet for his Kirtle, and also 26 yards of White Sarcenet
for lining of them. Item, a Scutcheon richly embroidered with Damask Gold and
Purls, one Lace for the same Robe of Silk and Gold, with Buttons and Tassels of
Silk and Gold.

NUMBER. LXXVIII. A Warrant for Delivery of the Habit and Hatchments of the French
King, Henry the Third. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Elizabeth R.

WE will and command you immediately upon the sight hereof, to deliver, or
cause to be delivered, for the several uses hereafter ensuing, the parcels
following; that is to say, first, for a Livery of the honorable Order of the
Garter, for our dear Brother, Henry the French King, one Kirtle, Hood, and
Tippet, containing 18 yards of Velvet Crimson, one Mantle containing 20 yards
of Velvet Purple, and twenty six yards of Taffata White, to line them, one
Cushen of Velvet Purple, with Fringes, Buttons, and Tassels of Gold, and Purple
Silk, with a Pillow of Fustian stuffed with Down, one double Banner containing
16 yards of Velvet Crimson, and Blue, embroidered on both sides with the Arms
of France and Poland, with Cloth of Gold, Cloth of Silver, Venice Gold, Silver
and Silk, one Banner Staff painted in Oil Color, one Helm of Steel, all gilt,
and Mantles to the same Helm, containing two yards and a half of Cloth of Gold,
lined with one yard and an half of Satin, white, two knopps of Wood gilt with
burnished Gold, for the same Mantle, with silk Tassels to them, a Crown of
Wood, with the Cr^st carved, and gilt with burnished gold. A Sword having the
Pomel, and Hilts all gilt; one Scabbard for the same with a gilt Chape, and a
Girdle, both being covered with Cloth of G^ld, containing one yard, one Book of
the Statutes of the Order aforesaid illumined, covered with Velvet Crimson, and
edged with gold Lace, three great Escocheons, whereof one of our Arms, another
of the French Kings Arms, both within the Garter, under Crowns Imperial
painted, and gilded with fine Gold in Oil, upon fine Holland Cloth set in
Frames of Wanscot, likewise painted and gilt, and the third of the Arms of our
right trusty, and right well-belov^d Cousin, and Counselor the Earl of Derby,
likewise painted and gilt in like Holland Cloth, and set in a like Frame, all
placed in the Chapel, wherein the said King was installed, one Plate of the
said Kings Arms, engraven in Copper, gilt, and enameled, fixed within his
Stall, within our Chapel, at Windsor. And that ye content, and pay, as well
for the making, imbroidering and painting of the premises, as also for the
carrying of the H^tchments of the said King, to our Castle at Windsor, and also
that you deliver two Trunks for the Carriage of the Parcels aforesaid into
France, etc. And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant, and
discharge for d^livery of all the premises.

Given under our Signet, at our Manor of Greenwich the 22. day of April, in
the 27. year of our Reign, Anno 1582. To our trusty and well-beloved Servant,
John Fortescue Esquire, Master of our great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. LXXIX. A Warrant for Delivery of the Habit of Christierne the Fourth King
of Denmark. Ex Collect. E.W.G.
James R.

WE will and command you to deliver, or cause to be delivered, to our most dear
and well-beloved Brother the King of Denmark one Robe of Purple Velvet of our
Noble Order of the Garter, and one Kirtle, Hood, and Surcoat of Crimson Velvet
of our said Order lined with White Taffata, bordered with Fustian, and sewed
with Silk, with a long String, Button, and Tassel to the same, in such manner
and form as to the said Robes belongs, and also one Garter to set upon the
shoulder of the same Robe, richly embroidered upon Blue Velvet, with sundry
sorts of Pearls, Purls, Plates, Venice Twists, and Silk; And these our Letters
signed with our own hand, shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in
this behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Honor of Hampton Court, the xxviii. day of
September in the fourth year of our Reign, of England, France, and Ireland, and
of Scotland the fortieth. To our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Roger
Aston Knight Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. LXXX. A Warrant for Delivery of the Ensigns of the Order to be sent to
the Emperor Maximilian the Second. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Elizabeth R. By the Queen.

RIght trusty, and right well-beloved Cousin, we greet you well. And whereas we
have now resolved to send forthwith our right trusty and right well-beloved
Cousin the Earl of Sussex, unto our good Brother and Cousin the Emperor, and
have also appointed Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, Principal King at
Arms, to attend upon our said Cousin of Sussex, in the presenting unto the said
Emperor the Robes of our Order of the Garter, and such other things as belong
thereunto. We will and command you to deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto
the said Garter, all such things, as you have by our Order given heretofore
unto you, caused to be prepared for this purpose, that is to say, the great
Collar of Gold, with the little George, the Garter, the great George with the
little Chain, and all other things that you have made ready to be sent in this
Journey. And these our Letters with a Bill of the said Garter's, testifying the
receipt of the same, shall be your sufficient Warrant in this behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the xx. of May, the ninth
year of our Reign 1567. To our right trusty, and right well-beloved Cousin and
Councellor, the Marquess of Winchester, our high Treasurer of England.



NUMBER. LXXXI. A Warrant for Delivery of the Collar and George to Edward Prince
Palatine. Ex lib. vocat. The Book of Warrants in the Iewel-house.
Charles R.

OUR will and pleasure is, that you deliver to the use of our entirely beloved
Cousin Edward Prince Palatine one of the Companions of our most Noble Order of
the Garter, one Collar of Gold, containing 26 Garters with Red Roses enamelled
in the midst of them and 26 Knots, the Collar weighing 30 Ounces Troy weight;
As also one rich George on horseback, with a Dragon to be fastened and pendant
thereto, And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Given under the Signet of our said Order at our Court at Whitehall,Z this 17.
of June, in the 13. year of our Reign. By his Majesty's the Sovereign's special
command. De Vic.
To our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Sir Gilbert Talbot Master of our
Jewel-house.



NUMBER. LXXXII. A Warrant for the Delivery of the Collar, George, and Garter for
Charles King of Sweden. Ex eod. Lib.
Charles R.

WHereas we have named and appointed our right trusty and right well-beloved
Cousin and Counselor Charles Earl of Carlisle our Ambassador extraordinary to
our good Brother the King of Sweden, and our trusty and well-beloved Henry St.
George Esquire one of our Officers at Arms, to invest our said good Brother, lately
Elected Knight of our most Noble Order of the Garter, with the whole Habit,
Ensigns, and Ornaments of the same. These are to will and require you to
deliver unto our said Cousin, and our said Officer at Arms, or to either of
them the great Collar, George, and Garter, and what other things you may have
provided on our former Warrant for that occasion, And this with a Note under
their or either of their bands, mentioning the particulars to be delivered by
you, and acknowledging the Receipt of them, shall be your sufficient discharge.

Given under our Signet Manual the 29. of November, 1668. By the Sovereign's
special command. De Vic.
To our trusty and well-beloved. Sir Gilbert Talbot Master of our Jewel-house,
and our other Officers of the same.



NUMBER. LXXXIII. A Warrant for Delivery of the Collar, George, and Garter, for
John George Duke of Saxony. Ex Libro praed.
Charles R.

WHereas we have named and appointed our trusty and well-beloved Sir Thomas
Higgons Knight, our Envoye extraordinary into Germany and Tho. St. George
Esquire, one of our Officers at Arms, to carry to and invest our dear Cousin
the Elector of Saxony, late Elected Knight of our most Noble Order of the
Garter, with the whole Habit, Ensigns, and Ornaments of the same, These are to
will and require you to deliver unto the said Sir Thomas Higgons, and Tho. St.
George, or to eitehr of them, the great Collar, George, and Garter, and what
ever other things you may have provided on our former Warrants for that
occasion; And this with a Note under their or either of their bands, mentioning
all the particulars so delivered by you, and acknowledging the Receipt of them,
shall be your sufficient discharge.

Given under our Signet manual this 29. of November, 1668. By the Sovereign's
special command. De Vic.
To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Gilbert Talbot Master of our Jewel-house,
and our other Officers of the same.



NUMBER. LXXXIV. A Receipt given to the Iewel-house upon delivery of the Ensigns
of the Order for Charles King of Sweden. Ex Lib. vocat. The Day-Book in the
Iewel-house, p. 321.
December. 31. 1668. Delivered unto Henry St. George Esquire one of his Majesty's.
Officers at Arms, by virtue of his Majesty's Sign Manual, bearing date the 29.
of November last past, viz.

Imprimis, 1 Onix George of the Order set round with 38 large Rose Diamonds,
and 4 smaller Rose Diamonds on a Loop to the said George. Also one Garter of
the Order set with 202 Rose Diamonds in the Letters, 6 between the words, and
24 about 4 Ilot boles. Also on the Buckle of the said Garter 11 great Rose
Diamonds, and 10 small ones, and on the Tabb 3 large Rose Diamonds, and 23
smaller, Also one Collar and George of the Order, Gold enamelled, weight 30
ounces 10 penny weight 6 grains, with three Cases of Crimson Velvet, fringed
with Gold Lace. All which is acknowledged to be received by me

Hen. St. George.
NUMBER. LXXXV. Another Receipt given for the Ensigns of the Order sent to John
George Duke of Saxony. Ex Lib. vocat. The Day-Book in the Iewel-house, p. 324.
FEbr. 26. 1668. Delivered to Sir Thomas Higgons according to his Majesty's
Warrant, bearing date the 29. of November. 1668.

Imprimis, One Collar of the Order of the Garter, consisting of 21 Roses, and
21 Knots, poize 30 ounces 16 penny weight, As also one rich Aggot George set
about with 32 rich Diamonds, and three Sparks in the Ring, Also a rich Diamond
Garter, all the Letters of Diamonds, and at the Buckles end 9 fair Faucet
Diamonds, and at the Loop end 9 very fair Faucet Diamonds, and -8 smaller
Diamonds. Also one enamelled George, poize one Ounce. All these I have received
out of his Majesty's Iewel-house, with Cases to them,

Tho. Higgons.
NUMBER. LXXXVI. A Warrant to provide Necessaries for Transportation of the King
of Sweden's Robes. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
THese are to pray and require your Lordship, that you cause to be provided
with all speed, these Necessaries following for the Transportation of the King
of Swedens R^bes, and other things belonging to the Order of the Garter;
namely, one pair of fine Holland Sheets of two breadths and a half, and three
else long; Two Trunks for the packing up, and transportation of the Robes,
Collar, and Georges, and two Sweet Bags of Taffaty, to lay amongst the said
Robes: for the doing whereof this shall be your Lordships Warrant.

Whitehall this 27. of April, 1627. To the Right Honorable the Earl of
Denbeigb, Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. LXXXVII. A Warrant to provide several particulars for the Investiture of
the Duke of Saxony. Book of Warrants in the Great Wardrobe, commencing at
Michaelmas 1667. fol. 25.
THese are to signify unto your Lordship, That it is his Majesty's express
pleasure, That you do provide or cause to be provided in part of the Habit of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, which his Majesty is now sending unto the
Elector of Saxony Knight Elect of the said Order, and toward the furnishing of
the Officer of Arms, who is to go upon that Employment both with a Robe for
himself, and such other necessaries as are to be used for his Majesty's honor
and service on that occasion, the following particulars.

One Black Velvet Cap and Feather, such and of the same fashion as the Knights
of the Order do wear on St. George's day, when the Feast is kept and solemnized.

One Girdle and Hangers of Crimson Velvet. One large Cushen of Blue and Purple
Velvet, with Buttons, Fringe, and Tassels of the like colored Silk and Gold.

Fine Holland Sheets to fold the Habit in

Two Trunks to carry them.

One Mantle for Garter or the Officer of Arms that goes in his place, to
officiate upon that occasion. The said Mantle to be made up of 18 yards of
Scarlet Satin, and 10 yards of White Deux Caps Taffaty to line the same, and
to have an embroidered Scutcheon on the left shoulder, and Laces and Tassels of
Silk and Gold, alike in every respect unto that Mantle which Garter wears upon
St. George's day, and at the Chapters of the Order.

One Scutcheon with the King's Arms in a quarter of the Order, and a handsome
gilded Border or Frame.

Two other Scutcheons without arms, having only the Garter about them, to put
in them the Elector of Saxony's arms, in a handsome gilded Frame. And these
shall be your sufficient Warrant,

dated at Whitehall this 17. of July 1668. E. Manchester.
To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Sandwich, Master of his Majesty's Great
Wardrobe, and to the Officers of the same.



NUMBER. LXXXVIII. A Warrant for the Habit of the Order, and other Necessaries, to
be used at the Investiture of Charles King of Sweden. Ibidem, fol. 29. b.
Charles R.

OUR will and pleasure is, That you prepare or cause to be prepared for the
King of Sweden now Knight Elect of our Order of the Garter, the whole Habit of
our said Order, together with a Mantle for the Officer of Arms, whom we shall
appoint to go therewith, and all other Necessaries as you had them specified in
a Warrant lately directed unto you for the Habit to be sent to the Elector of
Saxony, and besides one yard and half of sky color Velvet, wherewith to cover
two Statute Books of the Order, And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Given under our Sign manual this 30. of August, 1668. By the Sovereign's
special Command. De Vic Chancellor of the Garter.
To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cosen and Councellor, Edward Earl
of Sandwich, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his Deputy.



NUMBER. LXXXIX. A Warrant for allowance of Diet and Reward to Garter, in a
Legation with the Habit and Ensigns of the Order. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
By the King.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, willing and commanding you, that
of such our Treasure, as remains in your custody to our use, ye deliver to
our trusty and well-beloved Servant, Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter,
Principal King at Arms, attending by our commandment upon our right trusty, and
right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor, the Lord Marquess of Northampton, in
his Embassage to our good Brother, the French King, ten shillings by the day
for his Diet, and also by way of our Reward ten shillings by the day, amounting
in the whole to twenty shillings by the day, and to allow him for the Posting
and Transportation both outward and homeward, as well of himself and his train,
as also of certain Robes of our Order, and other things necessary for that
Voyage, such sums of Money as by his Bill subscribed with his own hand, he
shall signify unto you to have employed in that behalf, as also further to
allow him, for the Diet of Chester Herald after the old rate, that is to say
five shillings by the day, and five shillings in reward by the day, and for the
Diet of Rougedragon Pursuivant two shillings and six pence by the day, and two
shillings six pence in reward also by the day, and also for their posting
Moneys, according to the tenor aforesaid, beginning the 28. of April last past,
until the return of our said right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and
Councellor. And these our Letters shall be your Warrant sufficient in that
behalf.

Given under our Signet, at our Manor of Greenwich, the eleventh of May in the
fifth year of our Reign. E. Somerset. W. North. J. Bedford. J. Warwick. E.
Clinton. Jo. Gate.

To our trusty and well-beloved Councellor, Sir William Cavendishe, Knight,
Treasurer of our Chamber.



NUMBER. XC. Another. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
Elizabeth R.

ELizabeth, by the Grace of God Queen of England, etc. To the Treasurer and
Chamberlains of our Exchequer greeting. We will and command you, of such
Treasure as i^ or shall come into the Receipt of our said Exchequer, to deliver
or cause to be delivered, to our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert
Dethick Knight, alias Garter, Principal King of Arms, attending by our
commandment upon our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, the Earl of
Sussex in his Embassy, now to our good Brother the Emperor, the sum of 10 s. by
the day for his Diet, and also by way of our Reward other 10 s. by the day,
amounting in the whole to 20 s. by the day; the said allowance of 20 s. by the
day to begin 7 days before his arrival at the Sea side, when he shall pass over
the Seas in his Journey, and so to continue until his return unto our presence,
upon the end of his Voyage. Willing you further, for his better furniture in
this Journey, to advance unto him beforehand his said Dyets and Rewards after
the rate of 20 s. by the day, for two Months. And also to allow unto him upon
his return, for the posting and transportation both outward and homeward, of
himself and his men, and for certain Robes of our Order, and other things
necessary for his Voyage, such sums of Money as by his Bill subscribed with his
own hand, he shall signify unto you to have been by him disbursed in that
behalf, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in
that behalf.

Yeven under our Privy Seal at our Manor of Richmond, the 14. day of June in
the ninth year of our Reign. To the Treasurer and Chamberlains of our Exchequer.



NUMBER. XCI. Another for like Allowances to Garter and Somerset. Ex Collect. A.
V. W.
ORder is taken this present -- of -- Anno 1582. that of such the Queens
Majesty's Treasure as remains in your custody, you shall make payment unto
Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter, Principal King of Arms, and to Somerset
Herald of Arms, the sum of Clix l. in full payment of a Bill of CCiv l. signed
by them for their Dyets, Rewards, Transportations, and Posting Charges, going
with the Lord Willughby of Eresby, to Frederick the Second, King of Denmark,
and in their return again, according to a Privy Seal granted unto them for the
said Allowances. Dated at Grenewich the 28. day of June, Anno 24. of the the
Queens Majesty's Reign. And these shall be your sufficient Warrant for the
payment thereof, Written the said day and year.

To our loving Friends Mr. Stoneley, and the four Tellers of the Queens
Majesty's Receipt.



NUMBER. XCII. A Privy Seal for like Allowances to Clarenceux and Somerset. Ex
Collect. A. V. W.
Elizabeth R.

ELizabeth, etc. To the Treasurer and Chamberlains of our Exchequer greeting,
Whereas we have appointed our well-beloved Servants Robert Cook, alias
Clarenceux, one of the Kings at Arms, and Robert Glover, alias Somerset, one of
our Heralds at Arms, to pass at this present into France with our right trusty
and right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Derby, by us sent in special
Ambassade to our good Brother and Cousin the French King, for certain our
affairs of importance, and have been contented to allow unto the said
Clarenceux for his Dyets, ten shillings by the day, and ten shillings more by
the day in Reward. And to the said Somerset five shillings by the day for his
Dyets, and five shillings more by the day in Reward. We will and command you of
our Treasury at the Receipt of our said Exchequer, not only to pay or cause to
be paid unto the said Clarenceux and Somerset, and to either of them, or their
assigns, their said several Dyets and Rewards, from the 17. day of January in
this present 27. year of our Reign, until they return to our presence, but also
to advance unto them presently impressed out of their said several Dyets and
Rewards beforehand, the sum of one hundred pounds, viz. to Clarenceux one
hundred Marks, and to Somerset xxxiii l. vis. viii d. And further to pay unto
them hereafter, all such sums of Money as they shall signify unto you, by
their several Bills subscribed with their several hands, to have been by them
severally disbursed for the Charges of their posting and transportation in this
their Journey, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and
discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy Seal, at our Manor of
Grenewiche, the 28. day of January, in the seven and twentieth year of our
Reign.

NUMBER. XCIII. A Warrant for like Allowances to Garter. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
James R.

JAmes by the Grace of God, etc. To our Commissioners for the Office of High
Treasurer of England, Greeting, Whereas We do send over to Prince Maurice of
Nassau, our Servant William Segar Esquire Garter King of Arms, to carry the George
and Garter to the said Prince: We have assigned to him for his Charges, an
allowance of 30 s. by the day, whereof we will and command you of our Treasure
in the Receipt of our Exchequer, to pay or cause to be paid to the said Garter
o^ his Assigns, the said allowance of 30 s. by the day to begin from the 24.
day of this Month of December, and to continue to the day of his return to our
presence. And our further pleasure is, that you advance unto him by way of
impressed, the sum of fifty pounds, to be defalked upon his said entertainment.
And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this
behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster the 26. day of
December, in the 10. year of our Reign, of England, France, and Ireland, and of
Scotland the six and fortieth.

NUMBER. XCIV. Another. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ORder is taken this 15. of May 1627. by virtue of his Majesty's Letters of
Privy Seal, dated the 8. of the same, that you deliver and pay of such his
Majesty's Treasure, as remains in your charge, unto Sir William Seagar
Knight, alias Garter, Principal King of Arms, employed by his Majesty's
Commandment for the carrying over the Order of the Garter to his Majesty's
entirely beloved Cousin, Henry Prince of Orange, the sum of threescore pounds
by advance, upon his allowance of xv s. per diem for his Diet, and xv s. per
diem by way of Reward, to be afterward defalked upon his said Diet and Reward,
And these together with his acquittance, shall be your discharge herein.

Marlburgh. Rich. Weston.

NUMBER. XCV. A Privy Seal for Allowances of Entertainment and extraordinary
expenses to Richmond Herald. Ex ipso Autographo.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Commissioners of our Treasury now
being, and to the Treasurer, under Treasurer, and Commissioners of our Treasury
for the time being, Greeting. Whereas we have appointed our trusty and
well-beloved Henry St. George Esquire Richmond Herald, to attend our right trusty
and right well-beloved Cousin and Councellor Charles Earl of Carlitle, our
Ambassador extraordinary into Sweden, there to perform the Ceremonies at the
delivering of the Garter unto our good Brother the King of Sweden. And have
also thought fit to allow unto him 30 s. by the day for his entertainment
during the service, to commence from the day of the said Earl of Carlitle's
departure from and be continued till his return into our presence inclusive.
Our will and pleasure therefore ^s, and we do hereby authorize and require you,
out of such our Treasury as now is, on which hereafter shall be and remain in
the Receipt of our Exchequer, to pay or cause to be paid unto the said Henry
St. George, or his Assigns, the said allowance of 30 s. by the day, advancing
unto him the sum of 250 l. to be accounted and adjusted at his return,
according to the rate of 30 s. by the day. And you are also to pay unto him or
his Assigns, such extraordinary expenses in that service as one of our
Principal Secretaries of State shall approve of, And these our Letters shall be
your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy
Seal at our Palace of Westminster the 30. day of November i^ the xx. year of
our Reign.

NUMBER. XCVI. A Privy Seal for Allowances of constant entertainment, and
extraordinary expenses to Somerset Herald. Ex ipso Autogr.
CHarles the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Commissioners of our Treasury,
Treasurer, and under-Treasurer of our Exchequer now and for the time being,
Greeting. Whereas we have employed our trusty and well-beloved Sir Thomas
Higgons Knight, to go in quality of our Envoy Extraordinary to the Elector of
Saxony, and to carry with him the Order of the Garter to that Prince, Our will
and pleasure therefore is, and we do hereby require and authorize you, out of
such our Treasure as now is or hereafter shall be remaining in the Receipt of
our Exchequer, to pay or cause to be paid unto the said Sir Thomas Higgons or
his Assigns, the sum of three pounds by the day of lawful Money of England, for
his entertainment in the service aforesaid, to commence from the day of his
departure from our presence, and that you advance and pay unto him the said Sir
Thomas Higgons or his Assigns, in part and upon account of the said Allowance,
the sum of 300 l. of like lawful English Money. And our further will and
pleasure is, and we do hereby likewise authorize and require you, out of such
our Treasure as aforesaid, to pay or cause to be paid unto Thomas St. George
Esquire, Somerset Herald at Arms, whom we have also employed to attend the
performance of the Ceremony to be used in this service, the sum of 30 s. by the
day, for his constant entertainment in our said service, to commence from the
day of his departure from our presence. And that you also advance and pay unto
the said Thomas St. George, or his Assigns, in part of the said allowance of 30
s. by the day, the sum of 150 l. of lawful Money of England, which said several
sums of 3 l. by the day, and 30 s. by the day, are to be continued unto them
unto the day of their return unto our presence respectively, and to be received
without account, impress, or other charge, to be set upon the said Sir Thomas
Higgons, and Thomas St. George, or either of them their Executors,
Administrators, or Assigns for the same. And we also direct, that such further
allowance be made unto the said Sir Thomas Higgons, for his extraordinary
expense in this our service, as you our Commissioners of our Treasury now
being, or our Treasurer, under-Treasurer, and Commissioners of our Treasury for
the time being shall think fit, and that such allowance be likewise made, for
the extraordinary expense of the said Thomas St. George in our service, as
shall be thought fit and approved by one of our Principal Secretaries of State,
And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this
behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster the fifteenth
day of August, in the 20. year of our Reign.

NUMBER. XCVII. A Warrant for Posthorses, etc. for Garter's use. Ex Collect. W.
le N. Cl.
WHereas the Bearer hereof, William Seagar, Garter, Principal King at Arms, is
upon some special occasions, concerning his Majesty's service, to make his
speedy repair into the Low Countries, and in his Journey to the Sea side, shall
have need of Posthorses, for himself and others employed in that service, and
when they come to the Port of their embarquing, shipping, for transportation;
These are therefore in his Majesty's name, to will and command you, and every
of you, to whom it may appertain, to see the said William Seagar, furnished
from place to place with six able and sufficient Posthorses, And likewise also
to give your assistance for getting of convenient shipping for their
transportation, and to suffer them quietly to imbarque together, with such
Trunks, and other necessaries as they shall have use of, without let,
hindrance, or other molestation; hereof you may not fail, as you will answer
the contrary; From the Court at Whitehall this 30. of December 1612.

J. Northampton. J. Suffolk. E. Worcester. E. Wotten. Ju^. Caesar. E. Zouch. C.
Edmonds.

To all Mayors, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Vice-Admirals, Customers,
Comptrollers, Searchers, Officers of the Ports, Post-masters, Bailiffs,
Constables, Headboroughs, and all other his Majesty's Officers and loving
Subjects to whom it may appertain.



NUMBER. XCVIII. A Warrant for Posthorses, for Somerset Herald. Ex Collect. A. V.
W.
WHereas there is appointed to attend on the Earl of Derby, for her Majesty's
service into France, Robert Glover, alias Somerset, one of the Heralds of Arms,
who is to repair with all diligence unto the Port of Dover, there to embarque
with the said Earl of Derby: These are to will and require you, and in her
Majesty's name, strictly to charge and command you, and every of you, to whom
it shall appertain, to see him provided of four good and able Posthorses, for
himself, his Servants, and C^rriages, with a Guide from place to place unto
Dover aforesaid, and at his return likewise from thence to the Court, as also
of all such other things necessary, as he shall require at your hands, for the
better accomplishing of his Voyage, at prices reasonable, and accustomed in her
Majesty's like services. Whereof fail you not, as you will answer to the
contrary at your perils.

From the Court at Grenewich the 20. of January, 1584. To all Mayors, Sheriffs,
Justices of Peace, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and to all other her
Majesty's Officers and loving Subjects, to whom it may appertain, and to every
of them.



NUMBER. CI. Instructions given to the Sovereign's Ambassadors, sent with the
Habit and Ensigns of the Order to Iulianus de Medicis, Brother to Pope Leo the
Tenth. Ex Collect. Iac. Waraei Eq. Aur.
FIrst, the due recommendation and presentation of the Kings Letters, with a
brief Oration to be made touching the land of the said Order of the King
Sovereign of the same, and also of the virtues and notable deeds of N. that
shall receive it.

And after the proposition so said, to present their Commission and cause it
openly to be read, where they shall require him to make his Oath, as follows.

Ego Julianus Dei gratia, etc. honorificentissimi ac approbatissimi Ordinis
Garterii Miles, and Confrater electus, Iuro ad haec Sancta Dei Evangelia per me
corporaliter tacta, quod omnia and singula Statuta, Leges, and Ordinationes
ipsius dignissimi Ordinis been, sincere, and invi^labiliter observabo, ita me
Deus adjuvet and haec Sancta Dei Evangelia.

Which Oath given, Sir E. P. shall deliver the Garter unto him, and cause the
same in good and honorable manner to be put about his Leg, the said Doctor so
saying audibly these words following.

Ad lauden and honorem summi atque Omnipotentis Dei, intemeratae Virginis and
Matris suae Mariae ac gloriosissimi Martyris Georgii hujus Ordinis Patroni,
circumcinge tibiam tuam hoc Garterio, ut possis in isto bello firmiter stare
and fortiter vincere in signum Ordinis, and augmentum tui honoris.

Which thing so done, the said Sir E. P. shall deliver unto the said I. the
Gown of Purple Color, and cause him to apparel himself with the same, the said
Doctor so saying these words following, at the doing over of the same.

Accipe vestem hanc purpuream, qua semper munitus non verearis pro fide
Christiana, liberate Ecclesiae, and oppressorum tuitoine fortiter dimicare and
sanguinem effundere, in signum Ordinis, and augmentum tui honoris.

And then following, the said Sir E. P. shall cause the said I to do upon him
the Mantle of Blue Velvet, garnished with the Scute and Cross of Saint George,
and the Doctor so saying these words.

Accipe Clamidem coelestis coloris Clipeo Crucis Christi insignitam, cujus
virtute atque vigore semper protectus hosts super are and praeclarissimis tuis
meritis gaudia tandem coelestia promereri valeas, in signum Ordinis, and
augmentum tui honoris.

And when the said I shall be so apparelled with the Ornaments aforesaid, the
said Sir E. P. shall put the Image of Saint George about his neck, the Doctor
so saying these words.

Imaginem gloriossimi Martyris Georgii hujus Ordinis Patroni, in collo tuo
deferas, cujus fultus praesidio hujus Mundi prospera and adversa sic
pertrauseas, ut bostibus Corporis and animae devictis non modo temporalis
militae gloriam, sed peremis victoriae palmam recipere valeas, in signum
Ordinis, and augmentum tui honoris.

NUMBER. CII. Instructions to the Sovereign's Amabassadors, sent upon a like
Embassy to James the Fifth King of Scots. Ex. Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton.
THE said Lord William shall within five or six days next after he has been
with the said King of Scots, for his first Ambassade, and resort to Court
there, and in most reverend fashion deliver unto the King of Scots the Letter
missive of Certification of his Election into the Noble Order of the Garter,
from the King our Sovereign Lord his Highness, with due commendations from his
Highness. The Letter read, and be consenting to the reception of the said
Order, then incontinent the Book of Statutes to be delivered unto him, and a
day appointed as well for to have his consentment on the Articles of the said
Statutes, and in the mean time his Oath to be prepared by his consent and
advice. On which day being at the least Sunday, and he agreeing to receive the
same honorable Order, he must be in a place convenient.

First they shall present their Commission unto the said King, and cause the
said audibly and distinctly to be read, and so followingly shall in good and
reverent manner require him to make his corporal Oath, for the inviolable
observing of the same, like as by the tenure of the Statutes every Knight of
that Order is bound to do in form following.

The Oath.
We James by the grace of God King of Scots, promise and swear by our Faith,
and Honor, and holy Evengelist by us presently touched, that we shall
accomplish and keep truly unto our powwer, all the Statutes, Points, and
Ordinances of the right Noble Order of Saint George named the Garter, from
point to point, and from Article to Article, as is contained and declared in
the Book thereof to us delivered; the which we have accepted and do accept, as
if that we read them now presently [Note, if he will make any exceptions they
must be here rehearsed] the which Articles we promised now again to keep, hold
and entertain, without breaking: So God help us, and all the Saints. Yeoven,
etc.

Which Oath given, the Lord William shall put the Garter, in due and reverent
manner about his left Leg, and in this doing, Garter shall say.

Sir, the Sovereign and honorable Company of the Order of the Garter have
received you as their Brother and Companion, and in knowledge and token
thereof, they give and present you this Garter, the which God give you grace to
wear to his land and praise, to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, and the
glorious Martyr Saint George, Patron of that Noble Order, and to the
augmentation of your honor.

Which thing so done, the said Lord William shall deliver unto him the Gown of
Crimson, and cause him to apparel himself with the same, the said Garter saying
these words following, at the doing on the same.

Ye take this Garment, wherein God give you grace strongly to stand in the true
Faith of Christ, and depressing the Enemies of Saints, in token of the said
Order, and to the augmenting of this Order, and your honor.

And then lovingly the said Lord William shall cause the said King to put on
the Mantle of Blue Velvet, garnished with the Arms of St. George, environed
with a Garter, the said Garter saying as follows.

[ Note the Hood to be put on the right shoulder]

Take ye this Mantle of heavenly color, with the shield of the Cross of Christ
garnished, by whose strength and virtue ye always be defended, and by virtue of
it you may overcome all your Enemies, and so through your most noble desert,
may worthily come to the joys everlasting, in token of the said Order, and
increase of your honor.

And when the said King shall be so apparelled with the adornments aforesaid,
the said Lord William shall put the Collar of the Order, with the Image of
Saint George about his neck, the said Garter saying.

Take ye and bear this Collar, with the Image of the most glorious Martyr Saint
George, Patron of this Order, about your neck, by the help whereof you may the
better pass through both the prosperity and adversity of this world, so that
your Enemies both of body and soul may be overcome, ye then may receive not
only glory of temporal Chivalry, but also the rejoicing of everlasting victory,
in sign and token of this Order, and increase of your honor.

Which things thus fully ended, the King to go to some solemn Church, and there
to bear a solemn Mass, and so to return, an so to his Lodging, where if he dine
abroad, to wear the said whole Habit, during the dinner time, and after to do
this pleasure.

Then Garter to remember to purchase and solicit a Certification of the
Reception of the said Order by him, and also his Oath, both under the said
Kings Seal. Also to advertise him the manner of the coming of his Procurator
for his Installation within seven Months; he to bring with him a Procuration
under the Kings Seal for his Installation, with all other things necessary, as
the said Garter knows by his old Presidents in such case accustomed.

All these things thus duly and in reverent order done, with other the Kings
Affairs there, the said Lord William and the said Garter to return to the Kings
Highness.

NUMBER. CIII. A Letter signifying Election, to Edward Count Palantine of the
Rhine. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.

CHarles the Second by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland Defender of the Faith, and. and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of
the Garter. To our right dear and entirely beloved Cousin Edward Count Palatine
of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, etc. Greeting. Whereas our Royal Progenitors,
the Kings of England, have in all times, since the Institution of the most
Noble Order of Saint George, called the Garter, by our most Noble and
Victorious Ancestor King Edward the Third, elected and chosen into the
Fellowship thereof, such Princes and other eminent persons, as well Strangers
as their own Subjects, as have for the greatness of their Births, and other
Heroic virtues, especially in martial actions, been thought worthy of the
same; We therefore considering, that since the late horrid Rebellion, in that
our Kingdom, that many of the Companions thereof are dead, and that others
contrary to their Honor and Oaths, have deserted their All^giance, and are no
more worthy to be esteemmed Companions of so Noble an Order; an^ finding how
necessary it is for our honor and s^^vice, to elect others in the places
vacant, w^o for their birth, courage, fidelity, and affection^^ us, may be
worthy to be admitted thereunt^; have therefore thought fit by our power, as
Sovereign of the said Order (dispensing with the usual Ceremonies) to elect and
choose you our said right dear and entirely beloved Cousin Edward Count Palati^e
of the Rhyne and Du^^ of Bavaria, to be Fellow and Companion of the said most
Noble Order of the Garter, and do herewith send unto you the George and
Ribband, part of the Ensigns thereof, by our trusty and well-beloved Servant
Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, which Ensigns we do
hereby will and authorize you t^ wear, assuring you when it may conveniently be
done, you shall have all other Ceremonies and additions incident to the same,
fully perfected, And we no way doubt but that you by your Noble Virtues,
Courage, and endeavors in milit^ry actions, and your affection and fidelity to
us will show your self worthy thereof, and that you will faithfully, and with
honor serve and assi^^ us in all our just and warlike enterprises, a^ becomes a
Companion of so Noble an Order. Given at the Castle of Saint Germain's en lay,
(...) 19. day of Semptember, in the first year of (...) Reign, 1649.

NUMBER. CIV. A Letter authorizing Edward Coun^ Palatine of the Rhyne, to use the
Ensigns, and style himself Knight of the Garter, as if he had been installed.
Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.

CHarles the Second by the grace of God, and^. and Sovereign of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, To our right dear and entirely beloved Cousin, Edward
Count Palatine of the Rhyne, Duke of Bavaria, Greetings; We havi^^ duly
considered the eminence of your birth, your near relation to us in blood, and
the great hope^ and expectation that we have of your courage* affection, and
inclination to serve and assist us, were pleased upon Sunday the 19. of
September past, to send unto you the George and Ribband, part of the Ensigns of
the said most Noble Order of the Garter, by our trusty and well-beloved Servant
Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms, together with our
Letters, declaring that we had chosen you Fellow and Companion of the said most
Noble Order, and authorizing you to wear the same. And having since duly
considered, that it is not possible at present to have all other the additions
and Ceremonies fully perfected; we have, as Sovereign of the said Order,
thought it fit t^ dispense with the same, and do therefore hereby further will
and authorize you, to wear and use the Garter or Ribband on your left Leg, the
Glory or Star of Silver, embroidered with St. George's Cross within a Garter,
upon your Cloak and upper Garments, as likewise the great Collar of the Order
upon such days us are accustomed; to use the Garter about your Arms, and to
style your self Knight and Companion of the said most Noble Order of the
Garter, as fully as if you had been installed in our Castle of Windesore, where
(when it shall please God to restore us to the possession thereof) you shall
formally be invested and recieve the Habit, and all other the above recited
Ornaments of the said most Noble Order. Given at our Court in the Castle
Elizabeth, in our Island of Jersey, this sixteenth of October, in the first
year of our Reign 1649.

NUMBER. CV. A Letter signifying Election, etc. sent to Count Marchin. Ex praef.
Collect.
Charles R.

CHarles by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of St. George
called the Garter. To our right trusty and right well-beloved John Gaspar
Ferdinand de Marchin Earl of Graville, Marquess of Clairmont d' Antrague, Baron
of Dunes, Marchin, Mezers and Modane, Captain General for the service of his
Catholic Majesty, and Lieutenant General of all our Forces both by Sea and
Land in all our Dominious, Greeting. Whereas our Royal Progenitors and
Predecessors Kings of England, have in all times since the Institution of the
said most Noble Order, by our most victorious Ancestor King Edward the Third,
elected and chosen into the Fellowship thereof many Emperors, Kings, and
Sovereign Princess, and other eminent and illustrious persons, as well
Strangers as their own Subjects, who for the nobleness of their Extraction,
accompanied with heroic virtues (especially in Military Enterprises) have been
held worthy and capable thereof. Whereupon we having duly considered the
nobleness of your Birth and Extraction, with the eminent and famous actions
performed by you, in the several Military Commands you have for years been
employed, together with your great zeal and affection to engage your self in
our service and cause, for the recovery of our just rights, have thereupon held
it fit and agreeable by some signal testimony of our favor, to evidence the
great value and esteem that we have both of your person, merit, and affection.
To which end, these are to certify you, that we by our power, as Sovereign of
the said most Noble Order (and by the consent of all the Companions thereof
here present) have elected and chosen, and do elect and choose you our said
right trusty and right well-beloved John Gaspar Ferdinand de Marchin, Earl of
Graville, etc. Fellow, Peer, and Companion of the said most Noble Order, and do
herewith invest you with the Garter and George, the most peculiar Ensigns of
the same. And because at this time some other Additions and Ceremonies incident
thereunto cannot be fully performed, we do hereby for the present, by our
Sovereign power dispense therewith, and do will and authorize you at all times
hence forward, to wear the Garter about your left Leg, the Image of St. George
hanging about your Neck, the Star or Glory of Silver with St. George's Cross
embroidered within a Garter upon your Cloak or upper Garment, as likewise to
use the Garter about your Arms, and to style your self Knight and Companion of
the said most Noble Order, in as ample manner as if you had been formally
installed in our castle of Windesor, the proper place for that Solemnity; we no
way doubting, but that by your future, as well as precedent, actions you will
fully declare your self to be highly worthy of the honor of being Knight and
Companion of so Noble an Order: And these our Letters of Election and
dispensation shall be to you for the same your sufficient and full authority.
Given under our Signet at our Court in the City of Antwerp, this twenty sixth
day of February 1658. in the tenth year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CVI. A Warrant to Garter, for delivery of the Garter and George to
William Prince of Orange. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.

TRusty and well-beloved, we greet you well, Whereas we have made choice of our
most dear Nephew the Prince of Orange, to be a C^mpanion of the most Noble
Order of the Garter; we do hereby authorize you, according to your Office, to
deliver unto our said most dear Nephew the said Order, and our Letters, with
such Ceremony as is usual, and as may be performed in the place where he is:
And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Given at the Palace Royal in Paris the 25. day of April, 1653, in the fifth
year of our Reign. To our truly and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker, Knight,
Garter King of Arms.



NUMBER. CVII. The Sovereign's Letter sent with the Garter and George to the
Prince Elector of Brandenburgh. Ex eod. Collect.
MON Friar, L'asseurance que j'ay de vestre Amity, par plusieurs tesmoignages
que vous m'en avez donnez m'oblige a rechercher tous les moyens qui seront
capables de l'entretenir and de la conserver. Et pour ce sujet j'ay trouve a
propos, comme Souverains du tresancien and tresnoble Order de la Jartiere, de
vous eslire l'un des Chevaliers, Paers, and Compagnons du dit Order, estimant
par la de fair une plus estroite Amity avec vous, and d' augmenter le bien
and la prosperity de cette tresnoble Societe, laquelle par plusieurs siecles a
cu non seulement les Roys d' Angleterre, nos Predecesseurs pour Souverains,
mais aussi l' bouneur d' avoir plusieurs Empereurs, Roys and Princes Estrangers
pour Compagnons, comme aussi de vous donner par la une Marque evidente de mon
affection, and de la baute esteem que j'ay de vos merits, and de vostre
person; Et pour confirmation de la dite Election je vous envoye par le Sieur
Chevalier de Walker, Jartiere Roy d' Arms, la Medaile dite le George, la
Jartiere and l' Estoille pour les porter a la maniere accoustumee: assavoir la
Medaile autour du Corpse, la Jartiere a la Iambe gauche, and l' Estoille sur le
cost gauche de la Casaque ou du Manteau. Le dit Sieur de Walker vous asseurera
de m^ part que je desire avec passion de vons tesmoigner que je suis,

Mon friar Vostre bien affectionne Friar and Cousin, Ca^olus R.
A Paris le 23. de Januier 1654. A mon Friar Monsieur le Marquis de
Brandenburg, P. Electeur du Saint Empire.



NUMBER. CVIII. A Warrant to Garter to deliver the Garter and George to the Prince
Elector of Brandenburgh. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.

TRusty and well-beloved we greet you well. Whereas we have made choice of our
good Brother the Marquess of Brande^^urgh to be one of the Knights, Peers, and
Companions of the most Noble Order of the Garter; These are to require you to
repair with what convenient baste you can to the Court of the said Marquess,
and there to deliver unto him our Letters signifying our said Election (which
we herewith send you) together with the Garter, and other Ensigns of the said
Order. And that you perform the same with such Ceremony as is usual, and as
that place can afford: And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

Given at the Palace Royal in Paris the 23. day of January 1654. in the fifth
year of our Reign. To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Edward Walker Knight,
Garter, King at Arms.



NUMBER. CIX. A Warrant for delivery of the Collar for the Prince Elector of
Brandenburgh. Ex Libro vocat. The Book of Warrants in the Iewel-house.
Charles R.

OUR will and pleasure is, that you forthwith deliver unto our trusty and
well-beloved* Servant Sir Edward Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms,
one great Collar of our Order of the Garter, with a George appendant thereat,
to be by him sent and delivered unto the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh,
formerly elected a Companion of our most Noble Order of the Garter: And for
your so doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge.

Given at our Court at Whitehall the 25. of February 1662. Ex mandato. De Vic
Cancel.
To our trusty and wellbeloved Servant Sir Gilbert Talbot Knight, Master of our
Jewel-house, and to the Officers thereof.



NUMBER. CX. A Warrant for Garter to send the Habit to the Elector of
Brandenburgh. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.

TRusty, etc. Whereas we have formerly elected our good Brother and Cousin the
Elector of Brandenburgh, to be Knight and Companion of our most Noble Order of
the Garter, and have by you sent him our Letters, together with the Garter and
Image of St. George, authorizing you to deliver the same. And now seeing by our
happy Restoration, we have had the opportunity together with the Companions of
our said Order, to perform the Ceremonies of Installation, and to solemnize the
Feast of St. George in our Castle of Windesor, the proper place for doing
thereof, and have now two years past ordered you to place the Achievements of
the said Elector of Brandenburgh, over his Stall in the Chapel of our said
Castle, and did then in respect of the shortness of our time, and other
important affairs, dispense with the formal Installation of the said Elector
and other Princes, with Declaration that it should not hereafte^ be brought
into example* We therefore intending to complete our favor, have caused the
full Habit of our said Order to be delivered unto you, together with the great
Collar of the Order; all which We do hereby will and authorize you, to send and
convey, together with our Letters unto the said Elector of Brandenburgh, We at
this time dispencing with the sending an Ambassador and your self Garter King
of Arms, to deliver the same according to former Precedents. And for your so
doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given, etc. the 8. of April, 1663. To our trusty and well-beloved Sir Edward
Walker Knight, Garter, Principal King of Arms.



NUMBER. CXI. Sir Edward Walker's Letter to Prince Maurice of Nassau, sent with
the Habit for the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
Monseigneur,
J'AY receu avec les Lettres de sa Majeste le Roy mou Maistre tout l' habit du
tresnoble Order de la Jartiere, pour son Altesse le Prince Electeur de
Brandenburgh, avec Order, de les envoyer a vostre Altesse, que par vos moyens
soient adresser a son Altesse Electoral a contient une just au corpse de velour
cramoisi, une manteau de velour bleu, le grand Collier du tresnoble Order d'or,
avec l'image de St. George emmaillee pesante 30 onces, and un bonnet de velour
noir. Comment on se doit porter le Papier donra plus de satisfaction a son
Altesse Electoral, Quoy que l' Habit n'est jamais port si non qu' a la Feste
de St. George, mais le grand Collier s'est port par le Souverain and
Compagnons, pendant les Prieres d^e matin sur tous les jours mentionez dans le
papier pour le liver des Statutes de l'Ordre, quand ils seront reformez. Ie
tas^herai avec tout soin de les envoyer en attendant j'ay envoye tout Phabit a
mon cher amiss le Chevalier Guillaume Davidson de les envoyer a vostre Altesse
de qui vous receurez cela, and la lettre de sa Majeste and je n'en doubt point
bien tossed tout le rest and puis je pry bumblement vostre Altesse de les
adresser a son Altesse Electoral, avec les tresbumbles and obeissantes services
de luy, qui s'era toute sa vie, de sou serenissime Altesse Electoral and de
vostre

Monseigneur le tres-humble and tres-obeissant Serviteur, Ed. Walker, Garter.
De Londres le x. jour d' Avril, 1663.
NUMBER. CXII. Prince Maurice of Nassau his Letter to Sir Edward Walker, upon the
Receipt of the Habit for the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh. Ex eod. Collect.
Monsieur,
J'AY receu la vostre du 10/20 d' Avril, que m'avez fait l' bonneur de
m'escrire dans la quelle vous me donnez advertissement, que vous envoyeres tout
l' Habit du tresnoble Order de la Jartiere a Monsieur Baronet Davison, lequel
habit je viens de recevoit de luy a ce momment, Ie suis assez persuade, qui n'a
pas tenu a vous, de ne l' avoir pas envoye plus tossed j'ay ne pas manque
d'envoyer la vostre aussy bien, que celle de sa Majeste a son Altesse
Electorale de Brandenbourg, and ne manqueray pas non plus, d'envoyer le subdit
habit avec la premiere occasion a subdite son Altesse, je suis asseure que tout
cecy sera tresagreable a son Altesse Electorale, and qu'elle en sera fort
rejouye de le tenir, d'autant qu'elle la defire long temps, Quant a moy, je
vous remercie de la peine prise, and vous asseure, que je seray a jamais,

Monsieur, Vostre tres-humble Serviteur, Maurice P. de Nassau.
A lae Hay ce 10. de Juin 1663. A Monsieur Monsieur E. Walker Iartiere Premier
Roy d'Arms, a Londres.



NUMBER. CXIII. A Letter to the Sovereign from the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh,
acknowledging his Receipt of the Habit of the Order. Ex ipso Autographo.
Monseigneur mon tres-honore Cousin,
A Yant tousjours estime comme je dois, l' bonneur que vostre Majeste m'a fait
autrefois de me recevoir dans la Societe de son Order de la Jartiere, Ie ne
scaurois reconnoistre, qu'avec un respect extreme, le present de l'habit tout
entier de cet Order, qu'il luy a plu de fair addresser a m^ Cousin Monsieur le
Prince de Nassau, and par^equel Elle a vouln achever entierement les
obligations infinies que je luy ay d'estre du nombre d'une si illustre
compagnie. Ie suis en impatience de recevoir cette chere marque d'affection and
de bien veillance de vostre Majeste la suppliant de croire, que j'en conserver
ay e^^^^ellement la memoir^, and que je n' auray de plus forte passion au
monde, que de confirmer de plus en plus la confiance don't Elle me done
tousjours tant de nouveaux tesmoignages, and de saire voir en toutes sorts d'
occasions combien je suis

Monseigneur mon tres-honore Cousin, De vostre Majeste Le tres-humble and
obeissant Serviteur Frederick-Guillaume Electeur de Brandenbourg.
De Konigsberg ce 4. Iuin, l'an 1663. A sa Majeste le Roy de la grande Bretagne.



NUMBER. CXIV. A Certificate from Charles Duke o^ Burgundy, of his receiving the
Order of the Garter. Ex amplo Cod. penes Iohannem Vincent, genesis fol. 175.
CHarles, par la grace de Dien, Due de Bourgoigne, de Lantrin, de Braban, de
Lembrogh, and de Lucembourg, Conte de Flandres, d' Artois, and de Bourgoigne,
Palatine de Henault, de Hollande, de Zellande, and Namur, Marquis du Saint
Empire, Seigneur de Frieze, de Sallins, and de Mallins, Certifions and faisons
seavoir a tous, que par les mains de Messire Galliard, Seigneur de Duras
Chevalier, Thomas Vaghan, Tresorier de la Chamber, Maistre Jehan Russel,
Docteur en decret, Archediacre de Berkeshire, and Jarretiere Roy d' Arms,
conseillers and Ambassadeurs de tres-bault, and tres-puissant Prince, nostre
tres-bonnoure friar le Roy d' Angleterre, Souverain de l' Order de la
Jarretiere, pour ce envoyes devers nous, nous avons aujourdbuy receu son dit
Order de la Jarretiere, ensemble le Manteau, and autres Ornemens, and chooses,
au dit Order appartenans, and accoustumes. Et avec ce, avons en leurs mains
fait le serment a ce requis, and pertinant, selon les estatuz d' icelluy Order,
le tout soubz les conditions, and modifications sur ce advisees, and faictes,
enter luy and nous, Done en nostre ville de Gand, sonbz nostre grant Seel, le
4. jour de Fe^rier, l'an de grace, Mil cccc. lxix.

Par Monseigneur le Due.
NUMBER. CXV. Another from Ferdinand Prince of Spain. MS. penes E. W. G. f. 16. b.
FErdinand, par la grace Dieu, Prince and Infant des Espaignes, Archidue d'
Austrice, Due de Bourgoingne, d' Estier, de Carnite, de Carmole, etc.
Certifions, and faisons scavoir a tous, que par les mains de Messire Henry
Seigneur de Morley, Maistre Edoward Lee, Docteur en Theology, Archediacre de
Colchester, Aulmosiner, Messire Guillame Huysey Chevalier, and de Messire
Thomas Wriothesley, Chevalier, dit Jarretier, Principal Roy d' Arms des
Angloys, Ambassadeurs, and Conseilliers de tres-hault, tres-excellent and
tres-puissant Prince, nostre tres-honoreable Seigneur, and Oncle, le Roy d'
Angleterre, etc. Desenseur de la Foy, Seigneur d' Irlande, and Souverain de le
tresnoble Order de Saint George, nommee la Jarretiere, pour ce envoyez devers
nous; Avons ce jourdbuy viii. de Decembre, jour de nostre Dame, receu son dit
Order de Saint George, nomme la Jarretiere, ensamble les Jarretiere, Manteau,
Habit, Colier, and aultres ournemens, au dit Order appertenans, and
accoustumez. Et avec ce, avons en leurs mains, faict le serment, a ce requis
and partinent, selon les Statutz d' icelluy Order de Saint George, le tout
soubz les conditions, and modifications sur ce auiseez, and faictes enter le
dit Seigneur le Roy and nous, C'est assavoir, de porter les Colier, and
Jarretiere, aucunes foys en l'an a nostre plaisir. Item, quant serons en
quelque lieu, ou place, non convenable, Ou que n'aurons loysir d'ouyr matynes
le jour de Saint George, les pourrons par ung Prestre fair dire, en nostre
presence. Et si pour aucun bien grant affair, ou empesebement, que nous
pourroit survenir, nous estions occupe le dit jour Saint George, En ce cas, ne
serons tenu porter le dit habiz, si non durant le service divin, Lequel
aschene, poutrons incontinent oster and devestir iceulx, sans attendre jusques
apres le disner and souper. Toutefoys, si pour les canses dissusdites, ne
pourrous porter, le susdits habitz, le dit jour Saint George entier, Lors
voulons and promettons les porter a ung aultre jour solempnel dedens Pan. Done
en la ville de Newremberg, soubz nostre Nom, and Seel, le dit viii. jour de
Decembre, l'an de grace, Mil, Cing; Ceus, ving, troys.

NUMBER. CXVI. Another from the French King Francis the First. Ex Orig. penes
Camer. Scacchar.
FRancoys, par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France, Seigneur de Genues, Souverain
du tresdigne Order de Monseigneur Saint Michel. A tous ceulx qui ces presents
lettres verront, salut: Comme Messire Arthur Plantaginet, Viconte de Lisle,
Chevalier du tresdigne Order Monseigneur Saint George (Maistre Jean Taillour,
Doctent ez loix, Archediacre de Boukingham, Vice-chancellier d' Angleterre,
Messire Nicolas Carew grant Eseuyer d' Angleterre, Messire Anthony Brown
Chevalier, and Messire Thomas Wriothesley Iartier, Chevalier, Primier Roy d'
Arms du dit Order, Ambassadeurs commis and deleguez de la part de tres-bault,
and tres-puissant Prince, Henry par la mesme grace, Roy d' Angleterre, Seigneur
d' Hibernie, and Defenseur de la Foy, nostre trescher, and tresame friar,
Cousin, perpetuel allye, confedere and bon compere, Nous ayent exhibe
andpresente certaines Lettres Patentes, dattees du xxii. jour d' Octobre Mil,
Cinque Cens, vingt and Sept, Signees Sampson: and seellees en cyre Rouge, du
Seau du College d' icelluy tresdigne Order de Saint George, dit de la Jartiere,
par la teneur desquelles que avons fait lire pardeuant nous and les Chevaliers
de nostre Order Saint Michel estans les nous apparissoit les dessusdits
Ambassadeurs avoir plain povoir, faculte and puissance de nous signifier, and
presenter de la part de nostre dit trescher friar and Cousin, Souverain
d'icelluy tresdigne Order Saint George. (Et aussi de Pamiable association d'
icelluy l' ellection, uniquement faicte de nous, par iceulx Souverain and
Chevaliers d'icelluy tresdigne Order) Et de nous prier and requerir icelle
ellection accepter, and prendre le Manteau, Collier, and autres insignes de
Chevalerie, du dit tresdigne Order, and fair le serement selon les Articles
contenuz au livre des statuz du dit Order, and que ont acoustume de jurer and
promettre les Chevaliers d'icelluy. Et si la form des dits sermens, ne nous
estoit agreeable, leur estoit done povoir de nous dispenser de fair les dits
sermens, on party d' iceulx, telz qu'il appartiendroit, soy contentant de
nostre simple foy and parolle. Savoir faisons, que nous ayans esgarde and
consideration a la tres-cordialle, and tresentiere amor, alliance
indissoluble, and confederation perpetuelle, qui est enter nostre dit trescher
and tresame Friar, Cousin, Allye perpetuel, and bon compere and nous, Et que de
sa part il a accept l' election par nous, and noz freres faicte de sa persom^e
au tresdigne Order Saint Michel, du quel nous sommes Souverain, Avons pour ces
causes, and autres a ce nous mouvans accept, and acceptons Icelluy tresdigne
Order de Saint George, dit la Jartiere (and ce fait nous sommes revestuz, and
affublez des Manteau and autress Insignes du dit Order a nouz presentez and
livrez par les dessusdits Ambassadeurs) Et apres les remercyemens en telz cas
requiz, avons fait le serement en la form, and maniere qui sensuyt. Nous
Francoys par la grace de Dieu Roy de France, Seigneur de Gennes and Souverain
de l' Order Saint Michel, promettons en parolle de Roy, de garder, observer,
and a nostre povoir, entretenir les Statuz, and Ordonnances du tresdigne Order
Saint George, nomme de la Jartiere; En ce qu'ilz, sont compatibles non
contraires, ne desrogans a ceulx de nostre dit tresdigne Order de Saint
Michel, and pareillement des Ordres, que par cy devant pourroins avoir prins
des autres Princes. En tesmoing de ce nous avons fait mettre, le Seau du dit
Order aux presents signees de nostre main. Done a Paris x. jour de Novembre,
l'an de grace Mil, Cinque Cens vingt and sept, and de nostre Regne le treziesme.

NUMBER. CXVII. Another from Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect. Ed. Byshe
Clarenceux.
JE Francois Roffier Savoysey, Secretaire de tresbault, puissant, and excellent
Seigneur, and Prince, Monseigneur Emanuel Philibert, par la grace de Dieu, Due
de Savoy Re. general. and Lieutenant de l' Empereur, atteste, fait foy, and
certify, Comme Monsieur de Clinton and Say, Chevalier de l' Order, d'
Angleterre, qu' on did de la Jarretiere, and de Compaignie le Sieur Jarretiere
Roy d' Arms du dit Order, Ambassadeurs, Commissioneurs, and Procureurs
speciaulx du Roy, and de la Royne d' Angleterre, ont ce jourdbuy present,
baille, and done, de par leurs Majestes, la Jarretiere, and le Manteau, and
autres Enseignes and correspondants a mon dit Seigneur le Duc de Savoy, avec
toutes les Ceremoinies and Solempnites deues and accoustumes. Et de plus ont
receu du dit Seigneur Duc, le serment, jouxte la form, and maniere des
Statuts, du dit Order, and des Lettres de pouvoir, qu'ils ont apporte,
soubs-escriptes des mains propres d'iceulx Roy and Royne d' Angleterre,
seellees du Seel du dit Order de la Jarretiere, Donnees en leur Palais de
Westminstre, le dix septiesme d' Octobre 1554. lesquelles Lettres leaves Pay par
Commandment de^mon dit Seigneur, and Maistre a haulte voix, and a louange
public, quant faicte s'est la susdite presentation, and le dit serment,
presents a ce assistants and appelles haults and puissants Seigneurs le Prince
d' Oranges, les Contes de Lalaing, and d' Aremberg, and le Seigneur de Bossu,
eulx trois des Chevaliers de l' Order de la Toyson, les Seigneurs Antoine
Doria, Marquis de Saint Estienne de Lavanto, du Conseit de l' Empereur, and
general Captain des ses Galleres, and Antoine de Drungua, and pleusieurs
aultres tesmoinge, fait au Camp and au -- d' auxy dans la Chamber de mon dit
Seigneur le duc, le sixiesme jour de Novembre l' an de grace prins a la
nativite Mil, Cinque Cens, Cinquante quatre.

Roffier.
NUMBER. CXVIII. Another from the French King Henry the Third. MS. penes Arthur.
Com. Anglesey, p. 4.
HEnry by the grace of God, King of France, and Poland, to all those to whom
these Presents shall come, Greeting. We give you to understand, that forasmuch
as it has seemed good to the Queen of England, our right dear and right
well-beloved good Sister and Cousin, C^ief and Sovereign of the Order of the
Garter, and to the Fellow-Brethren, Knights, and Companions of the same Order,
for the confirmation of the mutual and brotherly amity between us and our said
good Sister, to choose and associate us into the Company of Knights of the same
Order, and for that effect has deputed toward us our dear and well-beloved
Cousin the Earl of Derby, Knight, and Companion of the same Order, to whom, and
Sir Edward Stafford Knight her Ambassador resident with us, she has given
power by her Letters Patents of the 20. day of January last past, to present
and give unto us, on her behalf, the Garter, the Mantel, and other Ensigns of
the same Order, which she has sent us, which they have done with the
Ceremonies and Solemnities in such case requisite and accustomed: For these
causes, liking the said Election and Association, We have accepted and do
accept the said Order of the Garter with honor, and do promise to keep the
Statutes thereof, which also have been given us in writing upon the same
assurance, that the said Lady the Queen our good Sister has them given Us, and
the Declaration and Protestation which we have made, that we be not constrained
and bound unto things contrary and derogatory to our Religion Catholic,
Greatness, and Majesty Royal, and to the Statutes and Ordinances of our two
Orders of the blessed Holy Spirit and of St. Michael, as it is contained in the
Act of our Oath, which thereof we have made and given. In witness whereof, we
have signed these presents with our hand, and thereunto caused to be put our
Seal. Given at Paris the 12. day of March in the year of our Lord 1585. and of
our Reign the 11.

Henry.
NUMBER. CXIX. Another from Gusta^us Adolphus King of Sweden. Sir Tho. Rowe's
Iournal, p. 208.
GUstavus Adolphus Dei gratia Suecorum, Gothorum, and Vandalorum Rex, Magnus
Princeps Finlandiae, Dux Esthoniae and Careliae, Ingraeque Dominus, etc.
Omnibus hasce literas lecturis vel audituris, Salutem. Quandoquidem complacuit
seremissimo, ac potentissimo Principi Domino Carolo, Dei gratia Magnae
Britanniae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensori, fratri,
consanguineo, and amico nostro charissimo, nobilissimi Ordinis Aureae
Periscelidis Magistro, reliquoque inclyto caetui Equitum ac Commilitonum
illustrissmi bujus Ordinis in expressissimam amoris tesseram, ac mutuam inter
nos initam amicitiam arctioribus necessitudinis vinculis, devinciendaem and
confirmandam, Nos etiam eligere, and associare in Collegium Equitum bujus
Ordinis, atque in hunc finem Oratores, Procuratores, and indubitatos Legatos
suos constituere atque ablegare ad nos, Nobilissimum virum de conclavi suo
Dominum Jacohum Spens de Wormeston, Equitem auraetum and spectabiles viros
Petrum Young Armigerum, ex Nobilibus in Cubiculo presentiae suae ministrantibus
unum, and Henricum Saintgeorgium Armigerum, ex Heraldis suis ad Arma unum,
plenaria ipsis potestate concess^ ac diplomate suo abunde ipsis fide adstructa
and munita publico Sigillo Ordinis, dato vigesima quart^ Junii jam elapsi,
deferendi, donandi, atque tradendi nobis ipsum auream Periscelidem, Torquem
rosatum, Sancti Georgii Imagunculas, reliquasque vestes trabeatas in solenni
harum Ceremoniarum, celebratione debite requisitas, and a sua serenitate ad nos
transmissas. Idcirco haec omnia ab ipsis rite administrata and peracta
agnoscimus and fatemur, ac praesentium Literarum tenore omnibus testatum
volumus, nostri electionem and assumptionem in ^ujus Collegit sodalitium nobis
gratissima fuisse, ac fore; Nos^* Insignia Ordinis decenti cum honor
suscepisse, ac sancte in l^ges, ac Statuta ejus per procuratores nostros, loco
ac tempore prae^^itulis, juraturos, ea ipsa cautione, quae a suae serenitatis
deputatis nobis scripto exhibita fuit, videlicet, Nos religio^e observaturos
Articulos hujus Ordinis in omnibus quae Religioni a nobis professae, dignitati,
ac Majestati nostrae Regiae nullatenus derogarent, aut aliis Articulis, and
ordinibus quos antebac suscepimus adversarentur; atque hanc ipsissimam
juramenti nostri sormulam esse cupimus, quando solennis contestatio per
procuratores nostros nostro nomine futura est, and quando ejus exemplar in acta
referri contigerit. In cujus rei testimonium praesentes propria nostra manu
subscriptas Sigilli Regii appositione communiri jussimus. Actum in Castris
nostris ad Wormdit, die sexta Mensis Octobris, Anno supra Millesimum
sexcentisimo vigesimo septimo.

Gustavus Adolphus.
NUMBER. CXX. Another from Charles King of Sweden. Ex ipso Autographo.
CArolus Dei Gratia Succorum, Gothorum, Vandalorumque Rex and Princeps
haereditarius, Magnus Princeps Finlandiae, Dux Scaviae, Esthoniae, Livoniae,
Careliae, Bremae, Verdae, Stetini Pomeraniae, Cassubiae, and Vandaliae,
Princeps Rugiae, Dominus Ingriae and Vismariae nec non Comes Palatinus Rhe^i,
Bavariae, Juliaci, Cliviae, and Montium Dux*

Omnibus hasce lecturis vel audituris salutem, Quandoquidem complacuit
serenissimo ac potentissimo Principi, Consanguineo, Amico and Faederato nostro
charissimo Domino Carolo, ejus nominis secundo, cadem gratia Magnae Britanniae,
Franciae and Hiberniae Regi, Fidei Defensori, and Nobilissimi Ordinis Aureae
Periscelidis Magistro, reliquoque inclyto caetui Equitum ac Commilitonum,
illustrissimi hujus Ordinis in expressissimam Amoris Tesseram and mutuam inter
nos initam amicitiam arctioribus necessitudinis vinculis devinciendam and
confirmandam, Nos etiam eligere and associare in collegium Equitum hujus
Ordinis; atque in hunc finem Oratores and indubitatos Procuratores suos
constituere and oblegare Legatum suum extraordinarium Conciliarumque suum
Illustrem nobis sincere dilectum Dominum Carolum Comitem Carliolensem,
Vice-Comitem Howard de Morpeth, Baronem Dacre de Gilisland, loeum tenentem
generalem in Comitatibus Westmorlandiae and Cumbriae, and spectabilem virum
Dominum Henricum St. George e primariis officialibus suis ad Arma unum, vulgo
Richmond Herald, plenaria ipsis potestate concessa ac fide ipsis abunde
astructa, Diplomate publico Sigillo Ordinis, datoque in Palatio Alb-aulae apud
Westmonasterium vicesimo nono die Mensis Novembris Anno Domini nuper praeterito
Millesimo, sexcentesimo, sexagesimo octavo deferendi, donandi atque tradendi
Nobis ipsam auream Periscelidem, torquem rosatum Sancti Georgii imagunculas,
reliquasque vestes trabeatas in solenni harum ceremoniarum celebratione debite
requisitas and a Majestate sua ad nos transmissas; ldcirco haec omnia ab ipsis
rite administrata and peracta agnoscimus and fatemur, ac praesentium literarum
tenore omnibus testatum volumus nosti Electionem and Assumptionem in hujus
Collegii sodalitium Nobis gratissimum fuisse ac fore; Nosque insignia Ordinis
decenti cum honor suscepisse, ac sancte in Leges and Statuta ejus per
procuratores nostros loco ac tempore praestitutis juraturos ea videlicet
cautione, Nos religiose observaturos articulos hujus Ordinis in omnibus quae
Religioni a nobis professae dignitati, ac Majestati nostrae Regiae nullatenus
derogarent aut aliis Articulis and Ordinibus quos antehac suscepimus
adversarenturs Quam ipsissimam juramenti nostri formulam esse cupimus, quando
solennis contestatio per Procuratores Nostros Nostro Nomine futura, and quando
ejus exemplar in acta referri contigerit. In cujus rei testimonium hasce
honoratissimae and charissimae Matris nostrae, nec non caeterorum nostrorum
Tutorum Regnique Nostri Administratorum manibus subscriptas, Sigilloque Nostro
Regio communiri jussimus. Dabantur in Arce nostra Holmenfi die 17. Augusti,
Anno Millesimo sexcessimo sexagesimo nono.

Hedeuig Ellenora R. S. Petrus Brahe Comes in Wissingsborg R. S. Drotzetus.
Vander Linde loco R. S. Mariscal. Gustaff Otto Steenbook R. S. Archithalass.
Magnus Gabriell de la Gardie R. S. Cancellar. Johan Gabriell Steenbook, loco R.
S. Thesaurarius.
NUMBER. CXXL Letters of Procuration to Peregrine Lord Willoughby of Ersby, from
Frederick the Second King of Denmark. MS. quarto penes W. le N.Cl. f. 25. b.
NOS Eridericus secundus, Dei gratia Daniae, Norwegiae, Vandalorum, Gothorumque
Rex; Dux Slesvici, Holsatiae, Stormariae, ac Dietmarsiae; Comes in Oldenburg,
and Delmenhorst; Omnibus and singulis, ad quos hae praesentes Literae
pervenerint, salutem: Cum placuerit serenissimae Principi, ac Dominae, Dominae
Elizabethae, dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Reginae, Fidei
defensatrici, etc. Charissimae consanguineae, sorori, and confederatae nostrae,
supremae Principi, nobilissimae, and antiquissimae Societatis Militaris, quam
Garterii Ordinem appellant: una cum caeteris omnibus, laudatissimi illius
Collegii fratribus, and Commilitonibus, Nos in eundem numerum ascribere and
cooptare, atque ad magis honorificam ^jusdem rei declarationem, mittere ad nos
plenum habitum, and ornatum praedicti Nobilissimi Ordinis, per Clarissimum
Dominum, Peregrinum, Baronem de Willoughby and Etesby, and celeberrimum virum,
Gilbertum Dethick, Equitem auratum, Regem Armorum hujus Ordinis, Serenitatis
suae Legatos, and vicarios in ea pate: quorum de manibus, nos eundem Ordinem,
non minus grato mimo, quam est nobis, a serenitate sua delatus accepimus:
Cumque antiquissima ejusdem Ordinis Statuta ac Decreta, postulent, ut in
propria persona installemur, sive in aliqua sede nobis destinata collocemur in
Collegiato Sacello ejusdem Ordinis, intra Castellum Windesorianum: quo quidem,
cum commode, proficisci non possimus, ratione Regalis Majestatis, ad quam summo
beneficio divini numinis evecti sumus, elegimus and substituimus praefatum
nobilissimum, and nobis imprimis dilectum virum, Dominum Peregrinum, Baronem de
Willoughby and Eresby, Procuratorem nostrum, qui suppleret vices nostras in
illa part, eaque perageret, quae ad honoratissimi illius Ordinis, Decus and
Ornamentum, quoquo modo videbuntur pertinere, haud aliter, atque ipsi
faceremus, si presents essemus. Et quodcunque idem nobilissimus vir, ibi in
hoc genere, nostra causa praestiterit, tenemus and approbamus, ut ratum and
Legitimum per praesentes, non minus, ac si nos ipsi in propria persona
praestitissemus. Salva tamen declaratione nostra quae ejus Reginae serenitatis
Legatis, quorum supra mentio est facta, in illa tractatione, sub manu, and
Sigillo nostro tradita est. In cujus rei majorem fidem, and testimonium
evidentius, Literas hasce nostras patentes, and subscriptione, and Sigillo
nostro firmavimus. Datae in Castro nostro Croneburga, die decimo nono Mensis
Augusti, Anno ab incarnatione Domini, ac Redemptoris nostri Jesu Christi, supra
Millesimum quingentesimum octuagesimo secundo.

NUMBER. CXXII. John Count Palatine of the Rhyne, his Letters of Procuration to
Sir Philip Sidney. Ex eod. MS. f. 124.
JEan Casimire, par la grace de Dieu, Conte Palatin de Rhin; Duc de Baviere,
etc. A touls ceulx, qui ces presents Lettres verront, Salut: Comme la
treshaulte, trespuissante, and tresexcellente Princess, Elizabeth, Royne d'
Angleterre, France, and Irlande, Sovereign du tresnoble Order de la
Jarretiere, de sa grace and faveur speciale, par l'advis, and consentement de
Confreres Chevalliers, and Compaguons, du dit tresnoble Order, nous a eslue
Chevalier, and Compagnon d'iceluy Order, en son Palais a Wesltminster,
l'huitiesme jour de ce present mois de Feburier; Nous voulans, and desirans
tresaffectueusement la dicte Election sortir so^ deu effect, and que tout ce
soit faict, touchant les Ceremoines de nostre Installation a Windesore, a quoy
nous sommes tenus, par les Ordennances, and Chapitres du dit Order. Et
neantmoins, par les grandes occupations, and affairs, qu' avons presentment
n'y puissions bonnenment comparoitre en person, Comme toutes fois, nous
vouldrions, and desirons; pour ce est il, que nous confians en la feaute,
discretion, diligence and grand preudhommie de nostre bien aim Messire,
Philippe Sidney Chevalier, lequel avons aim de long temps and aymons, avons
ordonne, commis, and depute, Ordonnous, Commettons, and Deputons, par ces
presents, nostre Procureur, and Depute especial, pour de par Nous, and en
nostre Nom comparoir a Windsore, a la prochaine assemblee des Chevaliers du
dict Order, and a y estre installe, tenir lien pour nous, fair des offrandes
and solempnites deues, and accoustumees en tell c^s. Et en oultre de fair a la
dite Souvereigne, le Serment selon la form, and maniere des Statuts du dit
Order, and to^s aultres chooses accomplir, exercer, and expedier, que a luy
semblera estre necessaires en ceste party, tout ainsi que fair deurions, and
pourrions, si present y estions en nostre person; Promettons tenir ferme, and
agreeable tout ce qu'il fera, ou dira, touchant nostre Installation. En
Tesmoignage de quoy a ces presents Lettres, avons faict mettre nostre Seau le
xii. jour de Feburier, l'Annee de Grace 1579.

NUMBER. CXXIII. Letters of Procuration to the Sieur de Chattes from the French
King Henry the Fourth. Ex Collect. W. le N. cl.
HEnry, par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France, and de Navarre, a nostre cher, and
bien aim, le Sieur de Chattes, Commander de L'Ormetau, Conseilleur en nostre
Conseil d'Estat, Captain de Ci^quante hommes d'Armes de nos Ordonnances;
Gouverneur de nostre Ville de Dieppe, and l'un de nos Lieutenants Generals au
Government de Normandy, Salut: Comme par les Stat^* de l'Ordre de la
Jartiere, anquel de l'an mil, (...) cens qu^tre vingt seize, nous avons este
associes par la Royne d' Angleterre, nostre treschere, and tresamie, honne
Soeur, and Cousin, It soit port que Estrangers Chevaliers du dit Order debuent
envoyer, apres la reception de la dicte Jartiere, and du Collier, and Habit que
leur est envoie, par la Souverain du dit Order, and qu'ils auront certify
avoir le dit Jartiere, Collier, and Habit, un sufficient Depu^e and Procureur,
selon l'estat de son Seigneur, and Maistre, moyenn^ns, qu'il soit Chevalier
sans reproach, pour estre mi^ en sa place; and y estant fair son serment, and
y estre admis, par and au nom de son dit Seigneur, and Maistre: Scavoir vous
faisons, que nous desirans, pour le respect, ^ue nous portons a la Royne,
nostre dicte Soeur and Cousine, and l'estime que nous faisons du dict Order,
satisfaire, qu'a nous, est, au contenu des dits Statutes, en ce que touch la
dite prise de possesion, and prestation de serment and recognoissance, que pou^
cest effect nous ne pourrons saire melleur, ou plus convenable election, que de
vostre person pour les bonnes, and louables qualities qui sont en vons, and
les tesmoignages que vous avez rendus, en diverse occasions, de vostre affection
au bien, and avantage de nos affairs and service, vous avons Commis, and
Depute, Commettons, and Deputons par ces presents signees de nostre main, pour
vous trausporter en Angleterre, and vous trouver a la prochain ceremony, qui
se fera du dicti Order, pour prendre possession de nostre place en iceluy,
selon la form ordinaire, and si besoigne est, fair le serment en nostre Nom,
ainsi que l'ou a accoustume de fair, gardant au surplus les solemnites en tell
cas requises and generalment fair tout ce, que vous adviseres necessaire pour
l'effect dessus, ores qu'il y eust chose qui requist mandement plus special
qu'il n'est contenu en ces dits presents, par lesquelles de ce fair, vous
avons done, and donno^s plain pouvoir, puissance, authorite, commission, and
mandement special, Cartel est nostre plaisir.

Done a Paris le vingtiesme jour de Avrill, l'an de grace mil six cent, and de
nostre Reign, le onziesme. Henry.
Duneuville
NUMBER. CXXIV. A Precedent of a Commission for Installation of an Elect-Knight.
Ex lib. Nig. p. 315.
HENRICUS Dei gratia, invictissimus Rex Angliae and Franciae Fidei Defensor,
Dominus Hiberniae, and Ordinis Divi Georgii supremus, fidelibus ac praedilectis
Cognatis nostris, N. S. D. P.

Quoniam intelligimus, quod illustrissimus, ac potentissimus Princeps, N. vel
Dominus aut vir inclytus N: quem nuper in Socium nostri Ordinis elegimus, non
possit ipse commode advenire, ut in ^ollegio nostro, de more, in sedem suam
introducatur, and alias ibi Ceremonias rite perimpleat, juxta quod ex Statutis
ipsis obligatur, and ob id virum been nobilem ac honorandum N. misit, ut sedem
nomine suo possideat, juramentum praestet, caeteraque perficiat, quae Statuta
requirunt. Nos ideo no^iscum ista reputantes, Volumus and virtute praesentium,
eam vobis authoritatem addimus, ut hunc procuratorem ejus, ac deputatum non
solum admittere, sed and caetera quaeque facere valeates quae ad Statuta,
consuetudinesque laudabiles attinere videbuntur. Et hae literae nostrae vos
tuebuntur. Sub Sigillo nostri Ordinis. N. die Mensis N. Anno regni nostri N.

NUMBER. CXXV. A Commission for the Installation of Guido Vbaldus Duke of Vrbin.
Ex Collect. W. D. N.
HEnry, by the grace of God, King of England and of France, and Lord of
Ireland, Sovereign of the Noble Order of the Garter. To our right trusty and
right well-beloved Cousins, the Marquess of Dorset, The Earl of Surrey our
Treasurer of England, and the Earl of Shrewsbury, Steward of our Household,
Companions of the said Order, greeting. Forasmuch as we understand, that the
right noble Prince Gwe de Ubaldis Duke of Urbin, who was heretofore elected to
be one of the Companions of the said Noble Order, cannot conveniently repair
into this our Realm, personally to be installed in the Collegial Church of that
Order, and to perform other Ceremonies, whereunto by the Statutz of the said
Order he is bound; But for that intent and purpose, has sent a right honorable
personage Balthazar de Castilione, Knight, sufficiently authorized as his
Proctor, to be installed in his name, and to perform all other things for him,
to the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order requisite, and appertaining.
We therefore in consideration of the premises will, and by these presents give
unto you license, full power and authority, not only to accept, and admit the
said Balthazar, as Proctor for the same Duke, and to receive his Oath, and
install him in the lieu and place, and for the said Duke, but also farther to
do therein, as to the Statutes and laudable usages of the said Order it
appertains, and this our writing shall be to you, and every of you sufficient
discharge in that behalf. Given under the Seal of the said Noble Order of the
Garter, at our Manor of Grenewiche, the vii. day of Novembre, the xxii year of
our Reign.

NUMBER. CXXVI. Another for the Installation of Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect.
A. V. W.
PHilip and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of England, France,
Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, Princes of Spain and
Cicily; Archdukes of Austria; Dukes of Millayne, Burgundy, and Braband; Counts
of Haspurge, Flaunders, and Tyroll, and Sovereigns of the Noble Order of the
Garter: To our right trusty and well-beloved, the Lord Clynton, and the Lord
Paget, Knights and Companions of the said Noble Order, Greeting. Forasmuch as
we understand, that the right high and mighty Prince, and our entirely beloved
Cousin, Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy, and Prince of Piemont, etc. and our
right trusty and well-beloved Counselor, the Lord William Howard of Effingham,
high Admiral of England, were heretofore elected to be Knights and Companions
of the said Noble Order of the Garter, which Emanuel Duke of Savoy, Prince of
Piemont, etc. cannot conveniently repair unto our Castle of Windesore,
personally to be installed in the Collegiate Chapel of that Order, and to
perform other Ceremonies whereunto by the Statutes of the said Order he is
bounden; and for that cause has sent a right noble personage Johan Thomas
L'angusto des Contes de Stropiane sufficiently authorized as his Deputy and
Proctor, to be installed in his name, and to receive his Oath, and to perform
all other such things and Ceremonies for him, as to the Statutes and Ordinances
of the said Order be requisite, and appertain. We therefore in consideration of
the premises, will, and by these presents give unto you, full power, license,
and authority, not only to accept and admit the said Johan Thomas L'angusto des
Contes de Stropiane, to be Deputy and Proctor for our said entirely beloved
Cousin, the said Duke of Savoy, Prince of Piemont, etc. and to install him in
the lieu of the said Duke, but also further to do therein, as to the Statutes
and laudable usages of the said Noble Order, as touching a Proctor it
appertains. And in semblable wise we will, authorize, and license you to
admit, accept, and install, our said right trusty and right well-beloved
Counselor, the Lord William Howard of Essingham, high Admiral of England; and
further to do for his installing as to the Statutes of the said Noble Order it
belongs: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge
in this behalf. Given under the Seal of our Garter, at our Palace of
Westminster the 29. day of January in the first and second year of our Reign,
1554.

NUMBER. CXXVII. Another for the Installation of the French King Charles the
Ninth. Ex eod. Collect.
ELizabeth, by the grace of God, etc. To our right trusty, and right
well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Sussex, our right trusty and right well-beloved
Cousin and Counselor the Earl of Leicester, Master of our Horse; our right
trusty and well-beloved the Viscount Mountague; with our right trusty and
well-beloved the Lord Clynton, our high Admiral of England, Knights and
Companions of our Noble Order of the Garter, Greeting. Forasmuch as We, with
other the Companions of the said Noble Order assembled, did lately elect and
choose our dearest and most entirely beloved Brother, the French King, to be
Knight and Companion of our said Noble Order; and forasmuch as our said dear
Brother cannot, for diverse causes, conveniently repair to our collegiate
Chapel, within our Castle of Windesore; and for that cause has (...) a right
noble personage, the Lord Rambouilliet one of his ordinary Chamberlains, Knight
of the Order of Saint Michaell, and Captain of fifty ordinary men of Arms;
sufficiently authorized as his Deputy and Procurer, to be installed in his
name, and to receive his Oath, and to perform all other such things and
Ceremonies for him, as to the Statutes and Ordinances of the said Order be
requisite and appertains. We therefore, in consideration of the premises,
will, and by these presents give unto you full power and authority, not only to
accept and admit the said Procurer; but also further to do therein as to the
Statutes and laudable usages of the said Noble Order, as touching a Procurer it
does appertain, And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and
discharge in this behalf.

Given under the Seal of our Order, at our Palace of Westminster, the 14. day
of January in the 8. year of our Reign.
NUMBER. CXXVIII. Letters of notice to the Commissioners appointed to Install the
Duke of Holstein by his Proxy. Collect. A. V. W.
By the Queen.

RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well; and whereas we have
appointed you, together with our right trusty, and well-beloved, the Lord
Hastings of Loughborow, to be in Commission for the Instalment, in our Castle
of Windesor, of our dearest and most entirely beloved Cousin, the Duke of
Holstein by his Procurer, the Viscount Hereford, being lately chosen to be one
of the Fellowship and Companions of our Order of the Garter; We have thought it
good, not only to give you knowledge hereof by these our Letters, but also to
require you to make your repair to our said Castle of Windesor, so as you may
be there on Saturday, the 14. day of this month, to the end that upon Sunday
next the 15. day of this present Month of December, he may proceed to the
Installation of him by his Procurer accordingly.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the 12. day of December,
in the third Year of our Reign. To our right trusty and well-beloved the Lord
Pagit of Beaudesert, one of the Companious of our Order.

The like Letter was directed to the Lord Loughborow, the other Commissioner
appointed for this Installation.



NUMBER. CXXIX. Letters of notice to the Commissioners for Installation of the
French King Charles the Ninth. Ex eod. Collect.
By the Queen.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, we greet you well. And whereas, we
have appointed you, with others the Companions of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, to be in Commission for the Installation in our Castle of Windesor, of
our dearest and most entirely beloved Brother the French King, by his Procurer
the Lord Rambouillet, being lately chosen to be one of the Fellowship, and
Companions of our Order of the Garter; We have thought it good, not only to
give you knowledge hereof by these our Letters, but also to require you to make
your repair to our said Castle of Windesor, so as you may be there on Tuesday
next the 15. day of this present Month of January, to the end, that on
Wednesday he may proceed to his Installation accordingly.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster the -- day of January in
the eight year of our Reign. To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin
the Earl of Sussex, one of the Companions of our Order.

The like Letter to the Earl of Leicester. Viscount Mountague. and Lord Clinton.



NUMBER. CXXX. A Warrant for materials for the Banner of the French King Henry the
Second. Ex Collect. E. W. G.
By the King. Edward.

WE will and command you, that unto our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir
Gilbert Dethick Knight, alias Garter King at Arms, ye deliver or cause to be
delivered, upon sight hereof, without delay, three yards of Cloth of Gold, two
yards of Cloth of Gold Tissue, and 16 yards of Blue Velvet, which shall be for
the Banner, for the Mantles of the Helmet, and the lyning of the same, for the
Installation of Henry the French King, and that you content and pay for the
Stuff, workmanship, and the embroidering of the said Banner. And these our
Letters, etc.

Given under our Signet at our Manor of Greenwich, the 10. of May in the fifth
year of our Reign. To our trusty and well-beloved Counselor Sir Rauf Sadleyere
Knight, Master of our Great Wardrobe, or to his Deputy there.



NUMBER. CXXXI. A Warrant to deliver Garter money to provide the Achievements of
the said King. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
THE King's Majesty's pleasure is, that of such his Treasure as remains in your
custody, to his Majesty's use, ye deliver unto Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight,
alias Garter, King at Arms, for the provision of an Helm, garnished with fine
Gold, a Crown of Copper gilt, an arming Sword, and Girdle to the same, and a
Plate of metal, with the Arms of the French King engraven; which are for the
Installation of the King's Majesty's good Brother, Henry the French King, the
sum of twenty pounds; and these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant in
that behalf. From Greenwiche the 11. of May 1551.

Your loving friends E. Somerset. J. Bedford. E. Clinton. W. Herbert. W. Cecil.
J. Warwick. W. Northt. W. Paget. J. Gate.
NUMBER. CXXXII. A Warrant for the delivery of the Duke of Chevereux his
Achievements to Garter. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.

WE will and command you, forthwith to deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto
our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir William Seagar Knight, Garter,
Principal King of Arms, for the installation of our well-beloved Cousin the
Duke of Chevereux, these particulars hereafter mentioned; that is to say, one
Helmet of Steel gilt with fine Gold, his Highness Crest carved, and gilt, a
pair of Mantles of Cloth of Gold lined with White Satin, and spotted with
Ermines, two Knobs and Tassels of Silk and Gold, a Sword, the Hilts, Pomell,
and Chape gilt, the Scabbard and Girdle, Cloth of Gold, a great Banner of his
Highness Arms, w^^^ght in Metal and in Oil, a Cushen of Crimson Velvet fringed,
and Tassels of Silk, one Dozen of Scutcheons on Paper in Metal, of his
Highness Arms, within a Garter, a Staff for the great Banner painted in Oil, a
Plate of Copper gilt, graven, and enamelled with his Highness Arms, to be set
upon his Highness Stall at Windesore; and this our Letter shall be your
sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf, Given under our Signet, etc.

NUMBER. CXXXIII. Another for the Achievements of Gustavus Adolphus King of
Sweden. Ex eod. Collect.
Charles R.

THese are to will and command you to provide and deliver, or cause to be
provided and delivered, to the use of the high and mighty Prince, Gustavus King
of Sweden, against his Installation, these parcels following; viz. A great
embroidered Banner of his Arms, of colored Velvet, enriched with Cloth of
Gold, and Cloth of Silver, and Twist of Venice Gold, Plates, and Purle, two
yards and half of rich Cloth of Tissiue for Mantles for his Helm, Scabbard, and
Girdle, two yards of Cloth of Silver to line those Mantles; two yards and half
of Purple Velvet for a Cushen with Fringe, and Tassels of Purple Silk and Gold,
to bear his Robes upon, two Tassels also, with Knobs gilt, to hang at the ends
of the Mantles; an arming Sword gilt, an open Helmet, with a royal Crown, and
an Orb* and Cross on the top thereof gilt, with his Crest; a Book of Statutes
of the Order, and a Plate of his Arms, and Style to be set up in his Stall at
Windesore: And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge
in this behalf.

NUMBER. CXXXIV. A Warrant for delivery of materials for the Achievements of the
French King Charles the Ninth. Ex lib. War. Dorm. in magno Gardrob. Regis,
tempore Eliz. Reg. p. 364.
Elizabeth R.

WE will and command you, to deliver to our well-beloved Servant David Smith,
our Embroiderer, as much Blue Velvet, Cloth of Gold yellow with works, and
Purple Cloth of Gold tissued with Silver, as shall suffice for the making and
furnishing of one great double Banner, to be richly embroidered on both sides
with the Arms of France, together with the Mantle, Helmet, Crest, Sword, and
Scabbard, suitable to the same Banner, for the installing of our right
well-beloved Brother, Charles the Ninth French King; and that ye pay unto the
said David Smith, as well for his workmanship, in the embroidering of the
premises, as also for all such Fringe of Silk and Gold, with Buttons and
Tassels of like Silk and Gold, and for Venice Gold and Silk for the
embroidering of the premises.

Given at Westminster the last day of November, in the eighth year of our
Reign. To our well-beloved I. Fortescue, Esquire Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. CXXXV. Another for the Achievements of the French King Henry the Third.
Ex lib. War. particul. in praed. Gardrob. tempore Eliz. Reg. p. 179.
Elizabeth R.

DEliver to our well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick, alias Garter King at
Arms, as much Blue Velvet, Cloth of Gold yellow with works, and Purple Cloth of
Gold, tissued with Silver, as shall serve to make one large Banner, richly
embroidered on both sides, with the Arms of France, to make Mantlets, and cover
the Scabbard, also the Helmet, Crest, Sword, and other Furniture of the same;
and that ye pay for the embroidering of the same Banner, for Purls of Damask
Gold, and for Venice Gold Fringe, and Passamain Lace of Gold with Silk and all
other necessaries, for the installing of the French King. Item, one Standard of
Crimson and Blue Taffaty painted and gilded, with our Arms, and Cognizance,
with Gold and Silver laid in Oil, and for Silk Fringe for the same.

Given at Westminster the 12. of June, in the 14. year of our Reign. To our
trusty I. Fortescue Esquire Master of our Great Wardrobe.



NUMBER. CXXXVI. A Warrant for the delivery of the Achievements for the Prince of
Denmark. Ex Collect. E.W.G.
Charles R.

OUR will and pleasure is, that you forthwith deliver, or cause to be
delivered, unto our trusty and well-beloved servant Sir Edward Walker Knight,
Garter Principal King of Arms, or by his order, the several particulars
herewith sent and signed by him, to be used and made up into Hatchments for the
Installation of the Prince of Denmark, lately elected a Companion of our most
Noble Order of the Garter, and after that you cause payment to be made for the
painting and making thereof, according to former precedents; and for your so
doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge.

Given, etc. the 12. of February 1662. To our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, Edward Earl of Sandwich, Master of our
Great Wardrobe, or to his Deputy there.



NUMBER. CXXXVII. A Warrant for delivery of Materials to Garter, for the
Achievements of Charles King of Sweden, and the Prince Elector of Saxony.
Book of Warrants in the Great Wardrobe, commencing at Michaelmas, 1667. fol.
95.
Charles R.

OUR will and pleasure is, and we do hereby require you, forthwith to cause to
be provided and delivered unto our trusty and well-beloved servant Sir Edward
Walker Knight, Garter Principal King of Arms, or to such person as he shall
appoint to receive the same, the several parcels of Cloth of Gold, Satin,
Damask and Taffaty, and other Necessaries mentioned in the Bills herewith sent,
and signed by the said Garter, to be made up into Banners and Achievements to
be hung up in our Chapel at Windesor, against our next Feast of the Order,
which we intend to hold there in April next, over the Stalls of Charles King of
Sweden, and the Prince Elector of Saxony, who are by their Proxies to be
installed there; and that you cause payment to be made for the same
accordingly, and for your so doing, this shall be your sufficient Warrant.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 28. day of February 1669. By the
Sovereign's special command. De Vic. Canc.
To our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, Edward Earl
of Sandwich Master of our Great Wardrobe, or in his absence to his Deputy.



Ibid. fol. 95. b. Necessaries to be provided and delivered out of his
Majesty's Great Wardrobe, in pursuance of his Majesty's Warrant of the 28. of
February, for the Installation of Charles King of Sweden by his Proxy at
Windesor, in April next 1670.
An embroidered Banner upon Satin and Cloth of Gold, according to his Colors.

A Fringe of Blue Silk and Gold for the same.

Two yards of Fustian for the Socket of the Banner.

A Crest carved and gilt.

A Staff for the Banner.

Two yards and a half of Cloth of Gold for the Mantles.

Two yards of Cloth of Silver to line the Mantles.

Two large Tassels of Blue Silk and Gold.

Two Knobs gilt with Gold.

An Helmet of Steel gilt.

A Sword with a Cross Hilt gil^.

A Plate of his Arms and Style.

Three Scutcheons of his Arms, painted on Paper in Metal, and his Style
underneath.

Ed. Walker, Garter.
1. Mar. 1669.
Necessaries to be provided and delivered out of his Majesty's Great Wardrobe,
in pursuance of his Majesty's Warrant of the 28. of February, for the
Installation of the Prince Elector of Saxony by his Proxy at Windsor in April
next 1670.
Four Else of rich Taffaty for the great Banner.

Eight yards of Silk Fringe, according to the Colors.

Three yards of Fustian for the Socquets for the Banner.

A Crest carved and gilt.

Two yards and a half of Cloth of Gold for the Mantles.

Two yards of White Satin to line the Mantles.

Two large Tassels of Silk and Gold.

Two Knobs gilt with Gold.

A Helmet of Steel gilt.

A Sword with a cross Hilt gilt.

A Plate of his Arms and Style.

Three Scutcheons of his Arms, painted on Paper in Metal, with his Style
underneath.

Ed. Walker, Garter.
1. Mar. 1669.
NUMBER. CXXXVIII. A President of an Emperor's Oath. Ex lib. Nig. p. 311.
NOS, N. summa Dei ^^nignitate ac gratia Caesar semper Augustus, aut Rex N.
promittimus in verba Regio, and fidem damus, sub honor nostro, Sacrosanctis
Evangeliis per nos impraesentiarum tactis: quod fideliter ac vere pro viribus
observabimus Statuta Clarissimi Ordinis Milit^ris in Anglia Divo Georgio
nuncupati, qui and de praenobili atque insigni Subligaculo nomen accepit, idque
de Articulo in Articulum, prout seriatim in libello ad nos misso continentur,
saltem quatenus observari possunt ac debent, and dummodo contrarii non fuerint
aut derogantes hiis in quos jam ante nomen dedimus ac juravimus, and
conditionibus aliis, de quibus praeconventum est, semper salvis.

NUMBER. CXXXIX. A President of an Emperor's or King's Proctor's Oath. Ex lib.
Nig. page 311. and 312.
EGO, N. Eques, and Procurator serenissimi atque invictissimi Principis ac
Domini mei, Domini N. Caesaris. semper Augusti vel Regis N. nominati atque
electi ad insignem atque honorandam societatem Ordinis a praenobili Subligaculo
nuncupati: vice ac nomine praedicti Domini mei, veraci animo ac fide, promitto
ac juro eundem illustrissimum been and fideliter adimpleturum ac servaturum,
omnia and singula Statuta, Ordinationes, and decreta Ordinis illius, juxta vim,
formam, atque effectum, ad ipsum quoquo modo perti^entia: Salvis conditionibus
inter eum and Ordinis Supremum praeacceptis.

NUMBER. CXL. A President of an Oath of a Proctor for a Prince, Duke, etc. Lib. N.
p. 312.
EGO, N. Eques ac Procurator Inclyti Principis, Archiducis, Ducis, Marchionis,
Comitis, Vice-Comitis, Baronis, Domini, vel (ut minimum) Equites Aurati N. ad
praeclarissimam Ordinis Divi Georgii Societatem jam nuper nominati atque
electi, vice ac nomine ipsius Domini mei, veraci animo integraque fide
promitto, and juro, praefatum Dominum meum Statuta hujus Ordinis, and singulos
ipsorum Articulos been and fideliter observaturum ac perimpleturum, juxta vim,
formam, atque effectum eorundem: Saltem, quatenus Supremi dispensatio
moderabitur and declarabit.

NUMBER. CXLI. The Oath of Philip King of Castile. Ex Lib. N. p. 184.
NOs Philippus Dei gratia Rex Castiliae, Legionum, and Granado, Archidux
Ostrichiae, and Dux Burgundiae, promittimus, and sub fide nostra ac honor
Regio, per haec sancta Evangelia Dei, Canonem Missae, and hanc veram Dominicae
Crucem portionem, quae coram hic statuuntur, and manibus hisce nostris modo
tangimus, juramus: quod omnia praesentis Ordinis Statuta, juxta qu^d
continentur in libell^ nuper ad nos misso, atque a nobis accepto, perinde ac si
quisque Articulorum hic nobis recitaretur observabimus, and de Articulo in
Articulum adimplebimus, tam fideliter ac prompte quam nos Dei ipsius and
Sanctorum ejus auxilium exoptamus.

NUMBER. CXLII. The Oath of Ferdinand Prince of Spain, etc. MS. penes E. W. G.
fol. 17. b.
NOus Ferdinando, par la grace de Dieu, Prince and Infant d' Espaigne,
Archeduc d' Austriche, Duc de Bourgoingne, de Stier, de Carinthe, de Carniolle,
etc. Promettons and Iurons sur nostre foy, and bonneur, and les Saintz
Evangilles, par nous manuellement touchez, que nous accomplirons, and
entretiendrons loyaulement, a nostre ponoyr, tous les Statutz, Pointz, and
Ordonnances de le tres noble Order de Saint George, nomme la Jarretiere, de
point en point, and de Article en Article, selon qu'il est contenu and declaire
dedens le livre, qui nous a este baille, lequel avons accept, and acceptons,
aussi bien que si nous lisions tout au long a ceste heure present chascun
Article; Except de point porter les Collier and Jarretier sinon aulcunes foys
l' an a nostre plaisir. Item, quant serons en quelque lieu ou place non
convenable, ou que nous n'ayons loysir d'ouir Matines le jour Saint George, les
pourrons par vng prestre fair dire en nostre presence. Et si pour ancun bien
grant affair ou empeschement qu'il nous pourroit survenir, estions ^ccupe le
dit jour Saint George, E^ ce cas ne Jerons tenu porter les dit Collier,
Jarretier, and aultres habitz, y pertinans si non durant le divin service,
lequel acheve, pourrons incontinent o^ter and devestir iceulx sans attendere
jusques apres le disner and souper, toutes^oys si pour les causes dessusdictes
ne pouyons porter le susdit habit le dit jour Saint George entier, lors voulons
and prometctons les porter en vng aultre jour solempnel dedens l'an; lesquelz
Articles pr^metctons derechef tenir and garder entierement sans enfrayndre;
Ainsi nous aid Dieu and tous les Saintz; Done en la ville de Neurenberghe,
soubz noz nom and seel le viii. jour de Decembre, l'an de grace Mill Cinque
Cens Vingt and Troys.

NUMBER. CXLIV. The Oath of Emanuel Duke of Savoy. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
NOus Emanuel Philibert, par la grace de Dieu Duc de Savoy, Chamblaye, and
August, Prince and Vicaire perpetuel du saint Empire, Marquis en Italy, Prince
de Piedmont, Conte de Genevet, Genevoye, Bargias, Vaudemont, etc. Lieutenant
and Capitain general pour l'Empereur, promettons, and jurons par nostre foy and
bonneur, and les Saints Evangiles par nous manuellement touchez, que nous
accomplirons, entretiendrons, and observerons loyaument tous les Estatuts,
Points, and Ordonnances du tres noble Order de la Jarretiere en Engleterre, and
ce de point en point, and d'article en article, selon ce qui est contenu au
livre qui nous a este envoye, ou pour le moins si avaunt que les dits Estatuts
puissent bonnement estre observes and gardes de nous, and qu'ils ne soyent
contraires a ce en quoy auparavant nous nous avons oblige par nostre foy and
serment, and pourveu aussi que ne soyons point tenus de partir la dite
Jartiere, Phabit, and autres enseignes du dit Order, si non quand nous verrons
and aurons la commodite de le fair, and non autrement, lesquels articles nous
promettons derechef garder and tenir entierement comme avaunt est dict, ainsi
que nous aid Dieu, and tous les Saints.

Done au Camp de l'Empereur, and fait dans l'Eglise, dissus le sixieme jour de
Novembre, l'an mil cinq cens cinquante and quatre. Emanuel. Rossier.

NUMBER. CXLV. The Oath taken by the Proctor to the French King Francis the First.
Ad Calcem Regist. Chartac.
JE Adrien Tercelin, Chivalier, Seignieur de Brosse, Posse, and Cafferte,
Bailly Cappitaine de Gisors, l'un des Chamberlans de tresbault and trespuissant
Prince, Francoys, par la grace de Dieu, treschrestien Roy de France, premier de
ce nom; comme Procureur, and ayaut pouoir expres de la part de mon dit
Seignieur, prometcts, and jure sur sa parole, and sur son honneur, qu'il
observera, gardera, and entretiendra les Statutz du tresnoble Order de mon
Seignieur, Saint George en ce, qu'ilz ne sont contraires, ne derogans aux
Statutz du tresnoble Order de Monseignieur Saint Michel, and autres Ordres, que
mon dit Seignieur Roy aye cy-devant prins a d'autres Princes.

A. Tercelin.

NUMBER. CXLVI. The Oath of the French King Charles the Ninth. MS. penes G. O. Y.
page 221.
NOus promettons and jurons en parole de Roy, que nous observerons, garderons,
and maintiendrons les estatuts and ordonnances, de l'Ordre de la Jarretiere en
tout ce, and si avaunt qu'elles ne soyent contraires ne derogatoires a nostre
grandeur Royale aux estatuts de nostre Order de Monsieur Saint Michell, ni
aucun aultre serment que nous avons faict auparavant.

NUMBER. CXLVII. The Oath of the Emperor Maximilian. MS. quar^o penes W. le N. Cl.
f. 99. b.
NOus promettons and jurons en parole d' Empereur, que nous observerons,
garderons, and maintiendrons les Statuts and Ordonnances de l'Ordre de la
Jarretiere en tout ce, and si avaunt qu'ils ne sont contraires, ni derogatoires
a nostre grandeur and Majest^ Imperialle, ni aux Statuts d'ancun autre Order ou
serment que nous avons prins auparavant.

NUMBER. CXLVIII. The Oath of his Proctor. MS. fol. penes E. W. G.
EGo N. Procurator Serenissimi and Invinctissimi Principis ac Domini mei
Maximiliani Caesaris, and semper Augusti, electi, and nominati ad honorabilem
societatem Ordinis Garterii, vice, nomine, fide, and in animo praedicti Domini
mei, promitto and juro, supra Sacrosancta Evangelia per me manualiter tacta,
eundem illustrissimum Principem ac Dominum meum been and fideliter adimpleturum
and observaturum omnia and singula Statuta and Ordinationes praedicti Ordinis
secundum vim, formam, and effectum, ipsum quovismodo concernentia and
spectantia.

NUMBER. CXLIX. The Oath taken by the French King Henry the Third. MS. quarto
penes W. le N. Cl.
NOus Henry, par la grace de Dieu Roy de France and de Polongne, Iurons,
Vouons, and Promettons solennellement sur nostre honneur en parole de Roy, Que
nous observerons, garderons, and maintiendrons les Statuts and Ordonnances du
tresnoble Order Monsieur Saint George, nomine la Jarretiere, en ce qu'ils ne se
trouveront contraires a nostre Religion Catholic, grandeur and Majeste
royalle, ni aux Statuts and Ordonnances de nos d^ux Ordres, du Benoist Saint
Esprit, and de Monsieur Saint Michel, En tesmoing de quoy avons sign la
present de nostre propre main, and icelle faict seeller de nostre Seel du
Secret.

A Paris, le dernier jour de Fevrier, l'an mil cinq cens quatre vingts cinq.
Henry.

NUMBER. CL. The Oath of the French King Henry the Fourth. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
NOus Henry, par la Grace de Dieu, Roy de France and de Navarre, Iurons,
Vouons, and Promettons solennellement sur nostre honneur en parole de Roy, Que
nous observerons, garderons, and maintiendrons les Statuts and Ordonnances du
tresnoble Order Monsieur Saint George, nomine la Jarretiere, en ce qu'ils ne se
trouveront contraires a nostre Religion Catholic, grandeur and Majeste
royalle, ny aux Statuts and Ordonnances de nos deux Ordres, du Benoist Saint
Esprit, and de Monsieur Saint Michel, En Tesmoing de quoy nous avons sign la
present de nostre propre main, and icelle faict seeler de nostre Seel du
secret.

A Rouen le -- jour d' Octobre, l'an mil cinq cens quatre vingts and seize.
Henry.

NUMBER. CLI. The Oath taken by the Proctor to the French King Henry the Fourth.
Ex eod. Collect.
JE le Sieur de Chastes, Chevalier de l'Ordre de Saint Jean de Jerusalem,
Conseilleur de Roy en son Conseil d'Estat, Captain de Cinquante hommes
d'Armes de ses Ordonances, and l'un de ses Lieutenants generaux en Normandy,
Vice Admiral de France, and Gouverneur de la Ville de Dieppe, Procureur pour le
Roy treschrestien, Henry quatriesme Roy de France and de Navarre, Chevalier du
tresnoble Order de la Jarretiere, promets au nom, and sur l'honneur de mon dit
Roy and Seigneur qu'il observera, gardera, and maintiendra les Statuts and
Ordonnances du dit Order, selon la form cy devant juree par sa Majeste, and
sous les conditions acceptees enter sa dite Majeste, and la Royne Souveraine du
dit Order.

M. Chastes.

NUMBER. CLII. The Oath of Frederick the Second King of Denmark. Ex lib. MS. in
Bibl. Hatton.
NOs Fridericus summa Dei benignitate Daniae, etc. Rex, promittimus verbo
regi^, and fidem damus, sub honor nostro, sacrosanctis Evangeliis per nos
impraesentiarum tactis, quod fideliter ac vere pro viribus observabimus stainta
clarissimi Ordinis militaris in Anglia, qui de praenobili atque insigni
Subligaculo nomen accepit, de Articulo in Articulum prout seriatim in libello
Statutorum ejusdem praenobilissimi Ordinis continentur, saltem quatenus
observari possunt ac debent, and dummodo contrarii non fuerint aut derogantes
hiis in quos jam ante nomen dedimus ac juravimus, and conditionibus aliis, de
quibus praeconventum est, semper salvis.

NUMBER. CLIII. The Oath taken by his Proctor. MS. penes W. le N. Cl. fol. 126. b.
I Sir Peregrine Bertie, Knight, Lord Willougby of Eresby, Deputy, and
Procurator for the right high, right Excellent, and mighty Prince, Frederick
King of Denmark, named and chosen to be one of the Companions of the most
honorable Order of the Garter, do, in the said high and mighty Princes name and
stead, truly and faithfully promise and swear, that the said high and mighty
Prince will well and faithfully fulfill and keep all and singular the Statutes,
Ordinances, and Decrees of that honorable Order, according to their true force,
effect, and meaning, so far forth as they concern him, and shall be agreeable
with the Word of God.

NUMBER. CLIV. The Oath of the Proctor to Christian the Fourth King of Denmark. Ex
ipso Autogr.
EGo Henricus Ramelius, Serenissimi ac Potentissimi Principis Domini Christiani
Quarti, Daniae, Norvegiae, Vandalorum, Gothorumque, Regis, Ducis Slesvici,
Holsatiae, Stormariae, and Dithmarsiae, Comitis in Oldenburg, and Delmenhurst,
nominati atque electi ad insignem atque, honorandam societatem Ordinis a
praenobili Subligaculo nuncupati Domini mei Clementissimi, Legatus, ejusdemque,
Serenissimi Regis and inclyti Regni Senatorii Ordinis Consiliarius, in
Wusterwitz and Beckeskow Dominus haereditarius, jussu, vice, ac nomine
praedicti Domini mei, veraci animo ac fide promitt^, and in Majestatis ipsius
animam juro, eundem Serenissimum Regem been ac fideliter adimpleturum ac
serva^urum omnia and singula Statuta, Ordinationes, and Decreta Ordinis illius,
juxta vim, formam, atque effectum, ad ipsum quoquo modo pertinentia: salvis
pactis and faderibus, quibus ante hoc tempu^ Majestas ipsius obstricta tenetur.

NUMBER. CLV. The Oath taken by Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg. Erchard. Cellius in
Eq. Aur. Anglo. Wirtemb. page 153.
NOs Fredericus Dei gratia Dux Wurtembergicus, and Teccius, Comes
Montispelegardi, Dn. in Heidenheim, etc. Sacri Romani Imperii Princeps,
pollicemur sub fide nostra principali, Statuta and Ordinationes Nobilissimi
Ordinis Garterii, nos sedulo observaturos, quatenus illa sacri Romani Imperii
constitutionibus, and fidei nostrae, quam Imperatori Romano, eidemque Imperio
debemus: nec non promissionibus, aliis Ordinibus and amicis nostris antehac
factis, non adversantur and repugnant: Et tali quidem modo, ut Supremus, si
necesse fuerit, fidelitatem, socii vero candidum amicum ex nostra affectione
and opera experiri queant. In cujus rei testimonium hasce literas propria manu
subscripsimus, and Sigilli nostri majoris appensione munire curavimus. Datum in
sede nostra Ducali Studtgardiae 8. Iduum Novembris, Anno a partu Virgineo 1603.

NUMBER. CLVI. An Attestation granted by the Sovereign, of the Installation of the
French King Henry the Fourth. Ex Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ELizabeth par la grace de Dieu, Roine d' Angleterre, France, and Irelande,
Defenseur de la foy, etc. Sovereign du tresnoble Order de la Jarretiere, A tous
presents and a venir salut. Scavoir faisons que ayant este le Roy treschrestien
Henry quatriesme Roy de France and de Navarre, nostre trescher and tresame bon
Friar and Cousin esleu and associe en nostre dit Order des l'an mil cinq cens
nonante six, and en consequence de la dite Election prins and receu la
Jarretiere, Collier, and autres Habits d'iceluy, and fait le Serment accoustume
de fair par les Chevaliers and Compaignons du dit Order pour observation des
Statuts and Ordonnances d'iceluy par les quelles sont tenus enter autres chooses
les Chevaliers Estrangers associes au dit Order d'envoyer apres la reception de
la dite Jarretiere, Collier, and Habit un suffisant Depute ou Procureur selon
leur Estat ou Chasteau de Windesor pour y estre ^is and receu en leur place en
la Chapel Collegial de Saint George avec les Ceremonies and Solemnites y
appertenants: Iceluy Roy treschrestien voulant satisfaire aux Statuts du dit
Order, and nommement au sus mencionne, and monstrer par le respect qu'il nous
port, and l'estime que du dit Order il fait, averoit envoye devers nous le
Seigneur de Chastes, Chevalier de l' Order de Saint Jean, Commandeur de l'
Ormetau, Conseilleur en son Conseil d'Estate, Captain de Cinquante hommes
d'Armes de ses Ordonances, Go^verneur de sa Ville de Dieppe, and l'un de ses
Lieutenants generals en Jon Gouvernement de Normandy, avec pouvoir and
Lettres Procuratoires signees de sa main a l'effect que dess^s en virtue duquel
pouvoir a luy commis, le dit Seigneur de Chastes fust par nostre Commandment
conduit au dit Chasteau de Windsore, le 26. jour du mois d' Avril dernier pass
par nos treschers and feaulx Cousins Charles Conte de Nottingham; Baron de
Effinham Conseilleur en nostre Conseil Privy, and Admiral d' Angleterre,
Gilbert Conte de Shrewsbury, Baron Talbot, etc. Henry Conte de Northumberland,
Baron Percy, etc. Thomas Howard Baron de Walden, Chevaliers and Compagnons du
dit Order, a ce par nous commis, par pouvoir sous le Seel de nostre dit Order,
and le jour ensuivant, ascavoir le 27. du dit mois, fust men par les dits
Chevaliers and Compagnons en la dite Chapel de Saint George au dit lieu de
Windsore, and alloque en siege competent, au re^g and honneur de nostre dit
Friar le Roy tres Chrestien mis en possession de place, vestu de Manteau de l'
Order, and assies au nom du dit Roy au reng a luy appertenant. Toutes
lesquelles Ceremonies and aultres Solemnites requises le dit Seigneur de
Chastes executa selon les Statuts de nostre dit Order, and mesmes fist au nom
du Roy le Serment accoustume de fair, and en bailla Attestation sign de sa
main, le tout en due form convenable, and en presence de Chevaliers and
Compagnons d'iceluy Order dessus nommez, qui nous en ont faict report, don't a
la Requisition du dit Seigneur de Chastes, Nous avons, voulons bailler la
present Attestation signee de nostre main, and seellee du Seel de nostre dit
Order. Done a Greenwich le 3. jour de May, 1600. de nostre Reign l'an 42.

NUMBER. CLVII. A Report concerning Installation-Fees. Lib. Carol. page 84.
Albae-Basilicae 5. die Martii, 1669.
QVoniam Supremae vestrae Majestati Illustrissimi Ordinis Periscelidis Supremo
Capitulo 4. Febr. proxime elapsi Albaulae celebrato, statum atque perpetuum
trium aut plurium Nobilissimorum Commilitonum conventum constituere visum
fuerit; qui omnia Illustrissimi Ordinis negotia cognoscerent, and ad Supremam
vestram Majestatem renuntiarent: Cumque Decanus Windesoriensis Feodorum
Schedulam a Suprema vestra Majestate pro externis Principibus, nec non omnibus
subditis Commilitonibus quam primum ^naugurati fuerint, solvendorum tunc
temporis exhibuerit, cujus quidem schedulae aequitatem licet Capitulum
approbasset, cum tamen controversia aliqua orta fuisset de Installationis
Feodis quae Canonicis, Pauperibus Militibus, and Ecclesiae Windesoriensi solvi
debent, totius hujus causae cognitio praedicto Deputato Commilitonum conventui
demandata erat. Ideoque Henrico de Vic Equite Cancellario: Doctore Ryves Decano
Windesoriensi Scriba; and Edvardo Walker Equite, Gartero, Conventui
assistentibus, Scriba Ordinis, hujus totius causae narrationem datam 16. die
Maii, 1663. tunc temporis exhibuit, cui quatuor Commilitones Deputati nomina
sua subscripserant, e quorum numero fuerunt duo nostrum qui nomina nostra infra
apposuimus. Qua narratione plenissimis Decani and Garteri rationibus atque
testimoniis privato Sigillo munitis comprobatum reperimus, Feoda illae pro
Installatione Principum externorum quae narratione ista exprimuntur. Illorum
decessoribus ab omni memoria soluta fuisse; neque feoda illa superare quae
subditi Duces aut Prioribus temporibus, aut nuperrimis solverunt. Quoniam vero
Schedula superiori Capitulo exhibita a Feodis per Supremum solvendis initium
sumat, nullo tamen modo probari possit ullum unquam Supremum Feoda pro
Installatione sua solvisse and aperte constet paucissimos admodum fuisse
Illustrissimi Ordinis Supremos, qui inaugurati Installationis Feoda antea non
solverant, nos narratione nostra Feodorum istorum nullam mentionem fecimus.
Quod ad Feoda illa attinet, quae ab extero Rege solvenda sunt, illa Feodis
istis quae a Suprema vestra Majestate, Anno 1638. tunc temporis Walliae
Principe soluta fuerunt, omnino respondere pro comperto habemus; Installationis
quoque Feoda Canonicis, and Ecclesiae Windesoriensi solvenda, pro multis
externis Regibus a Supremo soluta fuisse, Garterus pro certo affirmavit.
Canonicorum etiam and Ecclesiae Windesoriensis Feoda ab omnibus Illustrissimi
Ordinis Commilitonibus cujuscunque fuerint gradus, seu Duces, Marchiones,
Comites, Vice-comites, Barons, seu Milites, solvi debere, Scriba Ordinis
plenissimis testimoniis confirmavit. Garterus insuper affirmavit Feoda pro
omnibus gradibus jam memoratis Ecclesiae Windesoriensi folvenda illis etiam per
omnia respondere, quae Elizabethae Reginae, Jacobi Regis, and Caroli Primi
Beatissimae memoriae temporibus, nec non jam a foelicissimo Regiae vestrae
Majestatis reditu, a quam plurimis Honoratissimis Ordinis Commilitonibus soluta
fuere. Haec omnia una cum Schedulis annexis ad Supremae vestrae Majestatis
arbitrium humillime referimus, ita and omnia haec vestrae Majestatis
authoritate approbata Illustrissimi Ordinis Registro inseri possint. Quoniam
vero Garterus eodem Capitulo Schedulam Feodorum, tam Decano and Ecclesiae
Windesoriensi quam si^i, Nigrivirgifero, Officiariis Armorum, and quam plurimis
aliis Regiae vestrae Majestratis Administris solvendorum exhibuerat. Quibus
Feodorum nomine gratificari soleat, quae habita ratione graduum atque
dignitatum quibus Commilitones insigniti sunt, ad normam illorum Feodorum
exiguntur quae Suprema vestra Majestas tunc Walliae Princeps solvebat, nobis
omnino consentaneum videtur, ut sola Feoda Gartero, Nigrivirgifero, and
Officiariis Armorum solvenda approbentur, atque Illustrissimi Ordinis Registro
inserantur: Vt reliqua qua vera Regiae vestrae Majestatis Administrorum Feoda
Garteri billi^ inserta ipsu^ Sigillo muniantur, and a quolibet Commilitone quam
primum inauguratus fuerit, exigantur, utque a Gartero c^ilibet Officiario
secundum gradum suum, prout antiquitus obtiu^it solvantur. Humilime insuper
petimus ut (si supremae vestrae Majestati ita videbitur) Cancellarius in
mandatis habeat, ut Literae Ordinis mandatoriae scribantur, quibus
Installationis Feoda a quam plurimis Commilitonibus debita exigantur, and
defunctorum Commilitonum Haeredes atque Executores Mantella atque Illustrissimi
Ordinis Statuta Ecclesiae Windesoriensi reddere moneantur, quoniam autem
quamplurimi Pauperes Milites Absentiae veniam per annos integros a Suprema
vestra Majestate impetraverunt, humilime p^timus ut Regia vestra Majestas nulli
imposterum absentiam indulgere^, utque omnes Pauperes Milites sub Statutorum
Regimine hac in re arcte teneantur.

Ormondiensis. Sandovicensis. Mancestrensis.
NUMBER. CLVIII. A Commission for Prorogation of the Grand Feast of St. George.
Sir Tho. Rows Iournal, page 4.
Charles R.

CHarles by the grace of God, King of great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, To
all the Knights and Companions of Our said Order Greeting. Whereas upon some
special reasons we were moved to Prorogue the Celebration of the Feast of St.
George, from the 22.23. and 24. days of April last (being the usual days of
that Solemnity) to the 8.9. and 10. days of July following. And again from
thence to the 26.27. and 28. of September, and from that time unto the 13.14.
and 15. of December. Now forasmuch as by reason of our other great and
important Affairs, we cannot conveniently attend the Celebration of the said
Feast at the said last appointed days. And considering also the Contagion and
Sickness, dispersed into several places of this Our Kingdom, which by
assembling of People, may be most dangerous, both to Our self, and Our loving
Subjects. We do therefore by these presents prorogue the P^^rogation, and
keeping of the said Feast, from the said 13.14. and 15. days of this present
December aforesaid, until and unto the 17.18. and 19. of April next: willing,
and by the tenor hereof commanding all, and every the Knights and Companions of
Our said Order, and Officers of the same, to attend Our Person upon the said
days, to perform what to them, and every of them shall belong and appertain for
the accustomed Celebration of the Feast of Our most Noble Order. Given under
the Seal of the said Order at Our Honor of Hampton Court, the 11. day of
December, in the 12. year of Our Reign, An. Salutis, 1636.

NUMBER. CLIX. A Letter of Notice to the Sovereign's Lieutenant to prepare to be
at the Grand Feast held by Prorogation. Ex veteri Codice MS. penes W. le N. Cl.
fol. 52.
Henry R.

Right trusty and right welbeloved Cousin We great you well. And for asm^che
as the Fest of the glorious Martyr Saint George falls this year within xv.
days after Ester, by reason whereof We have according to the Statutes of the
noble Order of the Garter differred the solennenifacion of the same unto the
xxiiii. day of May next coming, on wyche day we have appointed the said Fest to
be kept, and also deputed you to be our Lieutenant at the same. We therefore
woll and desire you to prepare and dispose your self so to be accordingly.
Yeven under our Signet at our University of Cambridge the xxv. day of April.

NUMBER. CLX. A Letter of Notice to a Knight-Companion to be present at the Grand
Feast held by Prorogation. Ex Collect. praef. W. le N. Cl.
Mary R.

RIght trusty, etc. And having deferred the keeping of the Feast of the
Glorious Martyr St. George, Patron of our most Noble Order of the Garter, until
the coming of our most dear Cousin the Prince of Spain, To the intent the said
Feast might be also honored with the Installation of our said dearest Cousin;
We let you wit, that we have now resolved to hold and celebrate the same Feast
within our Cas^le of Windsor upon Sunday, the 5. of August next ensuing*
Requiring you therefore to put your self in order to make your repair thither
for that purpose before the same day, so as you may be present at the
Celebration of that Feast, and all the accustomed Ceremonies thereof. Wherefore
we pray you not to fail. Yeven under the Seal of our Order, etc.

NUMBER. CLXI. A Letter from the Chancellor giving a Knight-Companion notice of
the Prorogation of the Grand Feast. Ex Lib. Collect. W. le N. Cl. fol. 46.
Right Honorable,
WHereas his Majesty, Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, for
sundry causes, but especially for the late Death of the high and mighty King,
his most dear and most entirely beloved Father, which brings unto him cause
of grief infinitely more then of triumph, has not thought meet to keep the
Feast of St. George for this year on the days accustomed for the same, that is
to say, on the 22.23. and 24. days of this month of April. His Majesty
therefore, under the Seal of the said Order, remaining in my Custody, has
prorogued the keeping of the said Feast for this year, unto the 16.17. and 18.
days of August next: Commanding all the Knights and Companions of the said
Noble Order and Officers of the same, then to attend his person, wherein, his
Majesty's Pleasure, it is my due to make known to your Lordship, which being by
these performed, I most humbly rest

Your Lordships most ready to do you service, George More.
7. April 1625. To the right Honorable the Earl of Arundel and Surry, Earl
Marshal of England, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.



NUMBER. CLXII. Another. Rows Iournal, page 5.
May it please your Lordship,
THe King's Majesty, Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having
formerly prorogued the Celebration of the Feast of Saint George for this year,
from the usual days, upon which it should have been solemnized, unto the 8.9.
and 10. of July following; and by reason of the Contagion spread in many parts
of his Kingdom, from those days, to the 26.27. and 28. of September, and then
also, upon special consideration unto the 13.14. and 15. of December, by
Several Commissions under the Seal of his Order, now remaining in my Custody.
His Majesty for diverse and important Causes, and to avoid the danger of the
concourse of much people, during the Infection, finding it not convenient, to
celebrate the Feast at that designed time, has adjourned the Prorogation
thereof, by a new Commission, to me delivered, unto the 17.18. and 19. days of
April next. And thereby given Commandment, to all the Knights and Companions,
and Officers of his Order, that they should attend his Royal person upon these
last appointed days. Wherefore in discharge of my duty, I do signify unto your
Lordship his Majesty's pleasure; praying your Lordship, that you will be
pleased, to take knowledge herein of the Sovereign's Order, humbly resting,

Your Lordships In all due Observance and Obedience, Tho. Row.
Cranford 12. Dec. 1636. To the Right Honorable James Marquess Hamilton, Knight
and Companion of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and my most Honored Lord.



NUMBER. CLXIII. Another to the Register of the Order. Ibidem, page 3.
Reverend Sir,
THE King's Majesty, Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter, having
formerly prorogued the Celebration of the Feast of St. George, for this
presents Year, from the usual days upon which, it should have been solemnized,
by several Commissions under the Seal of his Order, now remaining in my
Custody: and finding it inconvenient for diverse important causes, specially by
reason of the Contagion, spread in diverse places of his Kingdom, to hold the
Feast, at any of those designed times. His Majesty has pleased by a new
Commission, to me delivered, to prorogue the last Prorogation, unto the 17.18.
and 19. of April next: And thereby given Commandment to all the Knights and
Companions, and to the Officers of his Order, that they should attend his Royal
person, upon those last appointed days. Wherefore in discharge of the duty of
my place, I do signify unto you his Majesty's pleasure, desiring that you will
take knowledge herein of his Royal Order.

Your affectionate Friend to do you service, Tho. Row.
Cranford 12. Dec. 1636. To the Reverend and my Worthy Friend, Doctor Wrenn,
Dean of Windsor, and Register of the most Honorable Order of the Garter

One Duplicate of this was sent to Sir John Boroughs Knight Garter, another to
James Maxwell Esquire Black-Rod.



NUMBER. CLXIV. Letters of Dispensation for attending at the Grand Feast. Ex
Collect. A. V. W.
By the Queen

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well:
and forasmuch as you are as well Governor of our Town of Barwick, as also
Warden of our East Marshes, for and anyenst Scotland, and may not conveniently
be spared from thence, for certain Affairs there by you to be done, whereby you
cannot make your repair hither, to celebrate with us the Feast of St. George,
and have thought good upon that respect, to excuse your absence from the said
Feast, and do by these presents dispense with you for the same. And therefore
these our Letters shall be your sufficient discharge in that behalf. Yeven
under the Signet of our said Order at our Palace of Westminster the -- day of
April, in the seventh year of our Reign, 1565.

NUMBER. CLXV. Another. Ex eod. Collect.
By the Queen.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, We greet you well, and forasmuch
as you are President of our Council established in the City of York, and by
reason of your charge and attendance there for our service, you cannot
conveniently be present with us to solemnize the Feast of our most Noble Order
of the Garter the Even of Vigil of St. George next ensuing. We let you
understand, that we are pleased and content to accept your reasonable excuse in
this behalf: And by these presents do pardon you for your absence from the said
Feast at this present, any Statute of our said Order to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Yeoven under our Signet of our Order, at our Palace of Westminster the -- day
of April 1575. in the 17. year of our Reign. To our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cousin Henry Earl of Huntington, President of our Council in the
City of York, Knight and Companion of our most Noble Order of the Garter.



NUMBER. CLXVI. Another. Ex Lib. Collect. W. le N. Cl. f. 54.
Charles R.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin We greet you well: Forasmuch as you
by reason of your indisposition of health, cannot be present to attend our
person on the days by prorogation for this year appointed for celebrating the
Feast of our most Noble Order of the Garter (that is to say the 26.27. and 28.
days of this month of April) We let you understand that We are pleased to
excuse your absence, and by these presents do pardon, remit and dispense with
any fault you may incur thereby. And do give you license to be absent at those
days from the said Feast for this year, any Article or Statute of our said
Order to the contrary notwithstanding.

Given under the Seal of our said Order, at our Palace of Westminster, the 23.
day of April, in the second year of the Reign of Great Britain, etc. To our
right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin Thomas Earl of Arundel and Surrey,
Earl Marshal of England, and Knight and Companion of our most Noble Order of
the Garter.



NUMBER. CLXVII. Another. Inter Praesident. Tho. Row Eq. Aur. nuper hujus Ordinis
Cancellar.
Charles R.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin, We greet you well: Whereas we have
for diverse causes, prorogued the celebration of the Feast of St. George for
this present year, to the 17.18. and 19. days of April next following, whereof
according to the Customs and Rules of our most Noble Order of the Garter, you
have had notice and summons, for your attendance upon those days from our
Chancellor; notwithstanding we are pleased to excuse your absence, and by these
presents do dispense therewith, and pardon and remit any default you may
thereby inincur, and do give you license to be absent at those days, from the
said Feast for this pr^sent year (observing in your own House the Solemnities
appointed by the Canons of the Order) any Statute or Article thereof to the
contrary notwithstanding: Given under the Signet of our Order at our Palace of
Westminster, the 24. day of February in the 12. year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXVIII. A Warrant for a Privy Seal to pay Garter for Scutcheons used on
Saint George's day. Ex Autogr. pen. Johan. Vincent genesis
TRusty and well-beloved, We greet you well, and will and command you, that
under our Privy Seal being in your Custody, ye cause our Letters to be made
forth unto the Treasurer and Chamberlains of our Exchequer in form following,
We will and command you, that unto our trusty and well-beloved Servant Garter
Principal King of Arms, ye pay or cause to be paid in ready money upon the
sight hereof without delay, the sum of 6 l. 1 s. 8 d. for 23 Scutcheons by him
provided for the Knights of our Order, on Saint George's day last, in the first
and second years of our Reign, whereof 4. for Princes at 6 s. 8 d. the piece,
and the rest at 5 s. the piece, and also that ye content and pay more unto the
said Garter the sum of 6 l. 11 s. 8 d. for 25. Scutcheons by him provided, and
set up at our Manor of St. James in the second and third years of our Reign
for the furniture of the Stalls in our said Chapel, at the rate aforesaid: and
these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge.

NUMBER. CLXIX. A Privy Seal to pay Garter 7 l. per annum for Scutcheons of Arms
set up on St. George's Eve. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
ELizabeth by the grace of God, Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Defender
of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer and Chamberlains of our Exchequer greeting.
We will and command you forthwith upon the sight hereof, of such our Treasure
as remains in your Custody, you content and pay, or cause to be contented,
and paid to our trusty and well-beloved Servant Sir Gilbert Dethick Knight,
alias Garter, principal King of Arms, the sum of 21 l. for Scutcheons of Arms
of the Knights of our Order set up in our Chapel within our Palace of
Westminster, as well on St. George's Even, in the year of our Lord God 1579. as
on St. George's Even in the year of our Lord God 1580. and also on St. George's
Even last past; and also henceforth during his life to allow him yearly 7 l. to
be paid on St. George's day accordingly. And these our Letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant and discharge in that behalf. Given under our Privy Seal at
our Manor of Greenwich, the 7. day of July, in the 23. year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXX. Another. Ex Autogr. penes Will. Knight.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer and Under-Treasurer of our
Exchequer for the time being, and that hereafter shall be, Greeting. Whereas
our late dear Father King James of happy memory deceased, by Warrant under his
Privy Seal, bearing date the second day of July, in the sixth year of his Reign
of England, etc. did give order for the payment unto William Seagar, alias
Garter, Knight, now principal King of Arms, and to any other principal King of
Arms, for the time being, upon every Saint George Even, of the sum of seven
pounds, for Escotcheons of Arms of the Knights of the Order of the Garter, to
be set up in the Chapel at Whitehall, or any other place where the said Feast
should happen to be solemnized on every St. George's Even and Day, as by the
said Warrant more at large appears: We minding the continuance of the said
yearly allowance, do hereby will and command you to cause payment to be made
out of such our Treasure as now is, or hereafter shall be in the receipt of our
said Exchequer of the said yearly allowance of seven pounds unto the said Sir
William Seager alias Garter, Knight, now our principal King of Arms, and to any
other our principal King of Arms for the time being upon every St. George's
Even for the Scutchions of Arms of the Knights of our Order of the Garter, to
be by him or them set up in our Chapel at Whitehall, or any other place where
the said Feast shall happen to be solemnized every St. George's Even and day;
And to continue the payment thereof yearly until you shall receive other
directions from us to the contrary. The first payment thereof to begin and
commence from the time of the last payment thereof unto the said Sir William
Seager alias Garter, our principal King of Arms; And these our Letters shall be
your sufficient Warrant and discharge in this behalf. Given under our Privy
Seal at our Palace of Westminster, the seventh day of February, in the second
year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXXI. Commissional Letters for collecting the Contributions toward
furnishing the Altar in the Chapel at Windesor. Ex lib. vocat. Frith's Regist.
p. 139.
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter; To
all and singular, whom these may concern, greeting. Whereas, We with the
Knights and Companions of our said Order, in contemplation of the great want of
such sacred Furniture, for our Royal Chapel of St. George within our Castle of
Windesor, as may be suitable to the honor and devotion of the said Order, have
at sundry Chapters there holden, advised and decreed, that a joint contribution
should be made, for provision of the same; And particularly, at a Chapter
(together with the Solemnity of the Feast of St. George) holden upon the 6. of
this present October, We did again declare and constitute, that We our selves
would begin, and that every Lord, which is now of our Realm, a Companion of the
said Order, or was at the making of our first Decree, viz. Nov. 24. 1625.
should give and confer toward the same, as to him should be thought meet;
Provided that it be not under xxl. Now know ye, that We have, and do by these
presents, give Authority and Command, to our Dean and Canons of our said free
Chapel, that they forthwith by any one of themselves, or by their lawful
Deputy, under their Common Seal, do ask and receive, as well of our own
Officers for our Self, as of every Lord and Companions of the Order, that now
is, of our Realm, and of the Heirs, Executors, and Administrator, of any that
are deceased, since the time last above mentioned, the said gift and
contribution. And that thereof they be accountable unto Us, at our next
Chapter, to be holden for the said Order, or at the next Session of the Lords
Commissioners for the said Order, which of the two shall first happen. Given
under the Seal of our said Order, the seventh day of October, in the sixth Year
of our Reign of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. 1630.

NUMBER. CLXXII. The Sovereign's Letter to the Dean and Canons of Windesor, for
making use of their Lodgings at Saint George's Feast, an. 7. H. 5. Ex Lib.
vocat. Denton. fol. 69.
TReschers and bien aims, Nous vous solvons souuent, Et pour ce que grant
multitude de gens tant estrongers, que aultres qui seront a nostre Chasteau de
Windesore, a ceste prochaine solempnite, la feste de Saint George; and a cause
de la Venue de l' Empereur, and du Due de Holand. Nous desirons, and voulons
que leurs gens, and aultres estans de nostre Compengnie ayent la plus grand
favor, and aise que fair se pourra en aucune maniere touchant leur Logemens
dedens mesme nostre dit Chasteau; Pour laquelle cause vous envoyons
presentement nostre bien aim Escuier and Huisser de Chamber le porteur de
cestes verse nostre dit Chasteau, pour yenor donner contre nostre venue. Si vous
prions, que vous ve^illies bonnement souffrir nostre dit Huissier survoyer lez
Logemens de vous maisons dedens nostre College, and de y logier autant de
persons come fair se pourra bonestement a ceste foys: tout seullement pour
la cause dessus dit. Et ce faisons vous nous faites ^ng singulier plesir. Et
n'est pas nostre intention ne vouloir que par color de ce. Vous en soyes
ainsi chargies plus avaunt. Et nostre Signeur soit guard de vous. Done soubz
nostre Signet a Lambeth, le 18. jour de May, l'an de nostre Reign septieme.

NUMBER. CLXXIII. A Letter from the Sovereign, to excuse the absence of some of
the Knights-Companions from the Grand Feast. Lib. N^ag. 174.
SVpremus honorando ac pervenerando Patri suo Thomae Comiti Derb. salvere, ac
been valere. Quoniam ob multa variaque negotia quae nostri oneris sunt
perdelectus Cognatus noster Comes Salopiae, and fideles ac been meriti nobis a
Consiliis Dominus Reginaldus Bray, Dom. Tho. Lovell, Dom. Carolus Somerset,
Dom. Richardus Goulford, and Dominus Gilbertus Talbot Socii clarissimi nostri
Ordinis non possunt ipsi in Festo Divi Georgii septimo Maii celebrando
interesse, sed venia nostra donandi si^t arduis illisce rebus impediti; Nos
igitur biis nostris scriptis certiorem tuam nobilitatem facimus; Vt has
excusationes rationi consona^ acceptes, de nulla Statutorum vi dubitaturus, and
si contra denotare videatur, cum penes nos sit, ut ipsaemet leges jure regantur
Richmondiae 29. Aprilis.

NUMBER. CLXXIV. Another. Ex Collect. A. V. W.
Elizabeth.

RIght trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you
well. Forasmuch as our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousins and
Counselors the Earls of Arundel and Derby, etc. Companions of the most Noble
Order of the Garter, cannot for certain employments, by our Commandment attend
at the Feast of the glorious Martyr St. George, to be holden and kept within
our Castle of Windsor, the 22. day of May next coming, and they being by Us
dispensed with, and pardoned for their absence at that time, like as we have
thought good to advertize you thereof; so We will you to accept their
reasonable excuses in this behalf accordingly: any Statute of the said Order
made to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under the Signet of our said Order,
at our Palace at Westminster the 20. of May, in the fifth year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXXV. Another. Ms. penes Arthur. Com. Anglesey, fol. 122. b.
Elizabeth.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well.
And forasmuch as our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and counselor
the Marquess of Winchester, and the Earl of Derby, and our right trusty and
right entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor the Duke of Norfolk, our right
trusty and well-beloved Counselor the Lord Clynton our high Admiral of
England, our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor the
Marquess of Northampton, our right trusty and well-beloved Counselor the Lord
Howard of Effingham, Lord Chamberlain of our Household, our right trusty and
right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Shrewsbury, our right trusty and
well-beloved the Lord Hastinges of Loughborough; our right trusty and right
well-beloved Cousin and Counselor the Earl of Leicester, our right trusty and
right well-beloved Cousin the Earl of Warwick, our trusty and well-beloved the
Lord Hunsdone, our trusty and well-beloved Sir Henry Sidney, Companions of our
Noble Order of the Garter, cannot for certain causes to be executed and done by
our Commandment, be at the Feast of the Glorious Martyr St. George, to be
holden and kept within our Castle of Windsore, the xvii. day of June next
coming, but be by Us pardoned of their absence from the said Feast, like as we
have thought good to advertize you thereof; so We will you to accept their
reasonable excuse in this behalf accordingly, any Statutes of the said Order
made to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under our Seal of our said Order at
our Honor at Hampton Court the -- day of June, in the xii. Year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXXVI. A Commission for holding the Grand Feast. Regist. Chartac. fol.
13. b.
HEnry par la grace de Dieu, Roy d' Angleterre, and de France, Souvrain de la
Compagnie de l' Order du Gartier, A tous nos Compagnons du dit Order, Salut.
Comme pour certeines causes que nous movent, ne pourrons estre personnelement a
la Feste de Saint George, prouchein venant, a nostre Chastell de Wyndesore, and
par les Estatutz du dit Order, nous est loisible pour commetter, and deputer
autre person pour nous, pour tenir lez Chapitres, corriger, and redresser
fair les Eleccions, and de lez approuver, and de fair toutes autres chooses,
comme il appertendra, solone la form and teneure dez ditz Estatutz. Pour ce
est il, que nous avons commis, and depute, commettons, and deputons par cez
presents, nostre trescher, and tresame Oncle, Jean Regent nostre Royaume de
France, Duc de Bedford, pour fair les ditz chooses avec leures circumstances,
and dependences quelconques. Mandons and commandons a nous dis Compaignons, que
en ce faisant lui obeissent, and entendent diligentment comme a l'ordre
appartent pour cest fois. Done a Leycestre la premier jour d' Avril, l'an de
nostre Regne quart.

NUMBER. CLXXVII. Another. Ibid. fol. 62. b.
Henry R.

HEnry the viii. by the grace of God, King of England, and of France, Defensour
of the Faith, and Lord of Irland. To our right trusty and right entirely
beloved Cousin, the Marquess Dorcet, Greeting. Forasmuch as we for diverse great
and urgent causes, may not be present at the Fest of the glorious Martyr St.
George, Patron of our noble Order of the Gartier, to be holdyn, solempnised
and kept in our Castle of Windesore, the viii. day of May next coming. We
therefore by these presents name, constitute, appoint, and ordain you to be
our Lieutenant at the said Feast. Giving unto you full power and auctorite to
do and accomplische every thing at the same, which to our Lieutenant there in
such case belongith, and has been accustumed; Willing and Commanding by the
tenor hereof all and every the Companions and Officers of our said Order, to
be to you in the executing of this our auctorite obeying and attending as
schall apperteyne. Yeven under the Seal of our said Garter at our Manoir of
Beaulieu, the xxv. day of April, the xvi. year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXXVIII. Another. Lib. N. page 249.
Henry R.

HEnricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, Princeps Gualliae, and Dominus
Hiberniae, Fedei Defensor, atque Illustrissimi bujus Ordinis ipse Supremus,
unice nobis dilecto, fide probatissimo, and Officio erga nos suo jam undique
notissimo Cognato nostro Duci Norf. salutem ac foelicitatem. Nunc quoniam per
multa charissime, nos istinc negotia detinent (ut quod optamus) gloriossimi
Martyris Patroni nostri festivitatem praesentia nostra non possumus honorare,
tuam propterea nobilitatem ad illud ipsum nomine nostro praestandum nominamus
atque instituimus eam tibi dantes authoritatem quae supplenti vices nostras
unquam alias assuevit, jubentes and itidem ut Sociorum quisquis atque
Officialium tibi, dum mandatum hoc nostrum facessis, obediant, and quantum res
ipsa postulabit, ex nutu tuo jussuque pendeat, Windesori sub Ordinis Sigillo,
undecimo Junii, and nostri Regui decimo septimo.

NUMBER. CLXXIX. A Letter of Notice to the Assistants of the Sovereign's
Lieutenant, to be at the Feast. Collect. A. V. W.
By the Queen.

RIght trusty and right well-beloved, We greet you well. Where we by our
Commission under the Seal of our most Noble Order of the Garter, have assigned
and appointed our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin and Counselor the
Earl of Arundel, Lord Steward of our Household, and one of the Companions of the
said Noble Order, to be our Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr St.
George, to be kept within our Castle of Windesor the 18. day of May next
coming, for the doing of all things there, as to Our Lieutenant appertains.
And have appointed you, with our right trusty and right well-beloved the Lord
Paget of Beaudesert, to be Assistants at the said Feast. We have thought good,
not only to give you knowledge thereof by these Our Letters, but also require
you to make your repair to Our said Castle of Windesor; so as you may be there
at the said Feast accordingly. Given under the Signet of Our said Order at Our
Manor of Greenwich, the second day of May, in the third year of Our Reign.

To Our right trusty and right well-beloved, the Viscount Mountague, one of the
Companions of Our Order.

The like Letter, and of the same Date was sent to the Lord Paget, the other
Assistant.

NUMBER. CLXXX. An Order for the fashion and materials of the Sovereign and
Knights-Companions Under Habit. Collect. E. W. G.
Charles R.

IT being most certain, that nothing can be more conducing to the keeping up of
that Luster and Dignity, of our most Noble Order of the Garter, wherein it is
at this present, then those very means by which it has attained unto it
constancy and immtability. For these reasons, having at a Chapter held at our
Castle of Windesor, the 16. of April last past, resolved upon a review and
examination of its Statutes, to see if possibly length of time, and change of
Customs, might have introduced any thing in them, which might make them swerve
from the ancient Rules, so far as they were not unconsistent with the present
Vsance. We have thought it not unworthy our care, to descend unto the
particulars of its Clothing: And thereupon having found, that in what concerns
the Vnder-Habits, used by the Companions at the solemnizing of Instalments, or
the Celebration of St. George's Feast, they followed too much the modern
fashion, never constant and less comporting with the decency, gravity, and
stateliness of the upper Robes of the Order. It was resolved in that Chapter,
and accordingly we ordain and enjoin, That from this time forwards the
Companions shall be obliged, to a certain and immutable form and fashion, as
well for their Under-Habits as their Upper-Robes, to be used on th^se solemn
Days and Occasions, that is to say, to the old Trunk-hose or Round-Breeches,
whereof the Stuff or Material shall be some such Cloth of Silver, as we shall
choose and appoint, wherein as we shall be to them an example, so we do expect
they will follow us in using the same, and no other. Given under the Signet of
our said Order, this -- day of May, 1661.

NUMBER. CLXXXI. A Dispensation for a Knights attendance at the Grand Feast,
during life. Ex ipso Autogr. in Bibl. Hatton.
Henry R.

HEnry the Eighth by the grace of God, King of England and of France, Defender
of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, and Sovereign of the Noble Order of the
Garter, To the Lieutenant at the Feast of the glorious Martyr Saint George,
Patron of the Noble Order of the Garter, and other Knights and Companions of
the same Order, for the time being, to be assembled at any time hereafter at
our Castle at Windesor, and to other our Officers, Ministers, and Subjects
these our Letters hearing or seeing, Greeting. We let you weet, that We of our
special grace, and for certain urgent and great causes, and special
considerations concerning the old service done unto us, by our right trusty and
well-beloved Counselor the Lord Darcy, one of the Knights and Companions of
the said Noble Order of the Garter, and of his great age and debility, have
pardoned and licensed him by these presents at all time from henceforth, during
his life, to be absent from the said Feast of St. George, and not to give
attendance in any place, Chapter, or other Feast to be holden of the said Noble
Order, and that he to sustain no damage by any mean for his said absence any
Act, Decree, Ordinance, Oath, or Statute of the said Noble Order of the Garter,
now being made, or hereafter to be made to the contrary notwithstanding. Given
under the Seal of the Gartier of the said Noble Order, the eight and twentieth
day of October, the six and twentieth year of our Reign.

NUMBER. CLXXXII. Another. Inter Praecident. Tho. Rome Eq. Aur. nuper Cancel.
Charles R.

CHarles by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, and Sovereign of the most Noble Order of the Garter. To
our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin Ferdinand, Earl of Derby, Knight
and Companion of our said most Noble Order, Greeting. For as much as we are
informed by our Chancellor of our Order, upon signification to him made under
your Seal of Arms, of your indisposition of health, and of your petition to
have license to forbear your attendance upon our person on the 22.23. and 24.
of May next, being the days appointed by Prorogation for the Celebration of the
Feast, of our most Noble Order of the Garter. We give you to understand, that
we are pleased to excuse your absence, and by these presents, do pardon, remit,
and dispense with any default you may thereby incur. And we do further, in
respect of your age, and weakness unable to travel, signified unto us in your
said Petition, by these presents, dispense with your attendance on our person
upon the said Feast days, during your natural life, observing in your own house
the Rites and Solemnities appointed by the Canons of the Order upon the usual
days of Celebration, being the 22.23. and 24. of April, or at such times as
shall be hereafter appointed by Prorogation, any Statute, or Article of our
said Order to the contrary notwithstanding. Given under the Seal of our said
Order, at our Court at Whitehall, the 9. day of April, in the 14. year of our
Reign.

NUMBER. CLXXXIII. A Warrant to Garter to take down the Achievements of John
Dudley, Duke of Northumberland. Collect. W. le N. Cl.
By the Queen.

Trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well, letting you wit, That where the
Hatchments of the late Duke of Northumberland att^inted of High Treason, and
put to Execution for his offense, do remain yet within our Chapel of Windesor,
untaken down. Our pleasure is, in respect of his said Offense, through the
which his Hatchments deserve not to be in so honorable a place, among the rest
of the Knights of our Order; you shall repair to Windesor immediately upon the
Receipt of these Our Letters, and in your presence, cause the said Hatchments
of the said late Duke to be taken down, in such sort as others in like cases
have been, whereof fail you not. Given under our Signet of our Order, etc.

NUMBER. CLXXXIV. A Publication of the Degrading of Edward, Duke of Buckingham. Ex
Collect. A. V. W.
BE it known unto all men, That whereas Edward, late Duke of Buckingham,
Knight, and Companion of the Noble Order of Saint George, named the Garter,
has lately done and committed High Treason against the King, Sovereign of the
said Order of the Garter, in compassing and imagining the destruction of the
most Noble person of our said Sovereign Lord the King, contrary to his Oath,
Duty, and Allegiance; for which High Treason, the said Edward has been
indicted, arraigned, convicted, and attainted, and for the which detestable
Offense and High Treason, the said Edward has deserved to be disgraded of the
said Noble Order, and expelled out of the said Company, and not worthy that his
Arms, Ensigns, and Achievements should remain amongst other Noble Ensigns and
Achievements, of other noble, virtuous, and approved Knights of the said Noble
Order, nor to have the benefits of the said Noble Order. Wherefore our
Sovereign Lord the King, Sovereign of the said Noble Order of St. George, named
the Garter, by the advice of other Knights of the said Noble Order, for his
said Offenses, and committing of the said High Treason, wills and commands,
that the said Edward, late Duke of Buckingham, be disgraded of the said Noble
Order, and his Arms, and Ensigns, and Achievements clearly expelled, and put
from amongst the Arms, Ensigns, and Achievements of the other Noble Knights of
the said Order; to the intent that all other Noble men, thereby may take
Example, hereafter not to commit any such heinous and detestable Treason and
Offense as God forbid they should.

God save the King
NUMBER. CLXXXV. The Sovereign's Letters for celebrating Masses, upon the Death of
the Lord Fitzhugh, an. 3. H. 6. Lib. N. page 81. and 82.
Exteris and aliis hujus Clarissimi Ordinis Sodalibus, extra Regnum
Commorantibus and eorum cuilibet, Supremus Salutem.

QUoniam, Charissime mi Cognate, N. Henricus Dominus Fitzhugh, nuper unus e
Commilitonibus nostris excessit ex h^c vita, cuj^s anime propitius esto Deus:
Nos id proprerea nunciam^s, ut vestram commiserationem minime lateat, Missas ex
praecepto Statuti pro defuncto celebrandas, caeteraque complenda, qu^e vestra
in h^c part sole^ imeresse. Vestram vero nobilitatem beata Trinitas servet and
angeat. Sub Sigillo nostri Ordinis Windesori, etc.

Manentibus, intra Regnum, sed absentibus ab hac Festivitate Georgiana, and
eorum cuilibet Rex S. P. D.
RICHARDO N. Cognato nostro perdilecto Saluiem. Quoniam Henricus Fitzhugh,
nuper unus e Sociis nostri Ordinis, sexto Januarii proximo defunctus est.
(Cujus animae misereatur Omnipotens.) Nos vestrae Nobilitati significamus, ut
juxta tenorem Statutorum Missas defuncto curetis celebrandas. Scitis autem binc
Windesori vacare sedem, quam oporteat intra sex bebdomad^^ ab altero possideri.
Caeterum quia nos aliis jam negotiis impediti, non possumus huic infiftere,
mandamus, ut proxima Divi Georgii Vigilia, vos ipsi bora tertiarum nobiscum
Windesori fitis, ad perimplendum quod ista res expostulat, nisi justa forsan
causa faciat, quo minus f^^ri possit, que ^criptis ad nos, eisdem die and bora
mitti debet, sub Sigillo vestro ab Armis.

NUMBER. CLXXXVI. Another Letter sent upon the Death of Sir Robert Vmfrevil, an.
4. H. 6. Registr. Chartac. fol. 12. b.
De par le Roy Souverain de l'Ordre du Iarretier.
TRescher and tresame Oncle, Pour ce, que apres le trespass d'ancun des
Compaignons de l' Order du Jarretier, le Souverain par les Estatus du dit
Order, le doit signifier and fair savoir a tous les Compaignons, on qu'ilz
soyent, Nous come premier, and Souverain d'icelui, vous signifions, que feu
nostre trescher, and bien ame Sir Robert Dumfreville, que Dieu absoille en son
vivant un des Compaignons du dit Order, est all de vie a trespass, si faites
vostre devoir, and diligence des Messes and Prieres, que selone les diz Estatus
estes tenu fair dire and celebrer pour le repos and salut de son ame, and ny
faites aucun fault, trescher and tresame Oncle, nostre Seigneur. Dieu vous ait
en sa seinte Guard.

De par le Roy Souverain de l'Ordre du Iarretiere.
TRescher and bien ame; Pour ce, que Sir Robert Dumfreville, que Dien absoille,
en sou vivant, un de noz Compaignons de l'Ordre du Jarretier, est all de vie a
trespass le darrain jour de Januer, darrain pass, and que selon l^z Estat^z du
dit Order, sommes tenus en advertir ung chescun dez Compaignons, vous
certifions son dit trespass, ^dsin que facies vostre devoir des Messes and
Prieres, les^^elles estes tenuz fair dire and celebrer (...) le (...) de s^^
(...), par le (...) du quel est ^^ place vacant, and convient selou les ditz
Estatuz (...) en son lie^ de^^ns sys sepmaines apres la certification du dit
trespass, si bonnement fair se puet, que bonnement au present fair ne
pourrons: si voulons, and vous mandons, sur lez peines contenues es ditz
Estatutz que soies avec nous la vaigle Seint George, a l'be^re de tierce
procbein venant, pour fair and acomplir en ce que dit est, come per les ditz
Estatutz appertiendra. Et se estre ny poves nous signifies soubz vostre Seel la
cause de vostre empechement, par quoy vostre Excusacion puissio^s cognoistre,
and l'avoir agreables, si ainsi est quelle soit digne d'estre accept, and ny
faites feaulte, Trescher and bien ame, etc.

NUMBER. CLXXXVII. Another sent upon the Death of King Henry the Seventh, and
Philip King of Castile. MS. entitled Henry the Seventh's Proceedings, penes W.
le N. Cl. p. 49.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, to call unto his infinite mercy the
late King our Fader of most famous memory, whose soul God pardonn^, late
Soverain of the Noble Order of the Garter, and also the King of Castile, each
Companion of the same Noble Order. We therefore advise you thereof, to the
intent, that you may cause such Driso^s and Suffrages, to be said and done for
their souls health, as by the ancient Statutes and Ordinances of the said
Noble Order, you be bound to do in that behalf. Given under the Seal of the
same Noble Order, etc.

NUMBER. CLXXXVIII. A Certificate that the Masses were accordingly Celebrated.
Lib. N. page 318.
NOverint universiper praesentes Literas, Nos Priorem and Conventum Ordinis
Fratrum N. Mandato, ac munere praeclaro Illustrissimi Domini nostri Regis
HENRICI OCTAVI, nostri, omniumque Christi Pauperum benefactoris precipui,
quadringentas Missas, quinque Ceriis in Exequiis, and Missa aliis solemniore
honorifice accensis pro anima piae Memoriae Magnifici Domini N. nuper defuncti
celebrasse.

NUMBER. CLXXXIX. An Order for reviving the Decree for payment of Obit Moneys.
Lib. R. page 86.
Carolus R.

In h^c Capitulo, Supremus per D. Comitem Portlandiae monetur cujusdam
Sanctionis, sub Rege Henrico Octavo, latae and in Statuta, (singulorum jure
jurando firmata) relate, qua decretum fuit, ut defuncto ex Commilitonibus
ordinis aliquo, certam quandam pecuniarum summam tam Supremus ipse, quam
superstites Commilitones singuli solverent, per Decanum Windesoriensem
colligendam, atque in pios usus erogandam, prout visum erit Supremo, and
Commilitonibus in Capitulo. Hanc vero sanctionem, quantumvis in se honorificam,
usuque confirmatam sub Edvardo Rege sexto, subque Maria, and Elizabetha Reginis
nuper, tamen per aliquot retro annos minus observatam, Supremus jussit public
recitari. Pellegente igitur Scriba apparet, post obitum cujusque Commilitonis
ipsi Supremo incumbere summam 8 l. 6 s. 8 d. Regi extero, 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.
Principi, 5 l. 16. s. 8 d. Duci, 5 l. Marchioni, 3 l. 15 s. Comiti, 2 l. 10 s.
Vice-Comiti, 2 l. 1 s. 8 d. Baroni, 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. Equiti, 16 s. 8 d. addita
insuper poena tertiae quoque partis in annos singulos cumulande, quantisper
sortem principalem non solverint. Suprema itaque Majestas, cum assensu
Commilitonum omnium praesentium, ordinavit atque decrevit sanctionem hanc
honorificentiae, pietatisque refertissimam, and singulorum juramentis in
introitu Ordinis firmatam, restitui oportere, and in perpetuum dehinc usum,
atque observationem revocari, idque sub poena statuta, non solum Commilitonibus
ni solvant, sed and Decano quoque Windesoriensi nisi Officium suum praestet.
Ordiri autem jussit a 5. Commilitonibus defunctis, quorum Insignia beri
obtulerant, caeterum quod ad exteros Principes attinet, Supremus significavit,
quod si summas istas ipsi (pro se quisque) non exolvant, e^edem, and nunc, and
in posterum, semper ab ipso Supremo solventur. Subscribitur porro huic decreto
in haec verba.

Ad Mandatum D. Supremi.

Decano Windesoriensi incumbit pecunias vi hujus Sanctionis solvendas
postulare, and receptarum rationem reddere in proximo Capitulo.


F^. Crane Cancel.


-- Deus nobis haec Otia fecit.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. margent, read G. Pancirol. Lib. 1. p. 270. p. 36. line 18. r. Burgos.
p. 44. marg. (a) r. Hen. 2. p. 53. l. 31. r. Regular. p 54. l. 29. r. foial and
loial. marg. (n) r. Pantal. l. 4. p. 97. p. 61. l. 13. r. Lusignan. p. 67. l.
18. r. Regular. p. 71. l. 21. r. Scapular. so p 72. l. 32. p. 73. l. 40. r. for
such. p. 84. l 47. dele [ the] p. 96. l. 31. r. Iusts. p. 103. l. 20. r. Beloy.
p. 106. l. 43. dele [ the] p. 110. l. 43. r. Trunks. p. 136. l. 56. r. second
Arch. p. 149. l. 37. r. H. 4. p. 160. l. 20. r King in. p. 170. l. 29. r.
Goldclif. p. 175. l. 57. r. and C^nons. p. 176. l. 5. r. appear. p. 188. l. 48.
dele [ Sancti] p. 189. l. 48. r. nine. p. 191. l. 28. r. H. 6. p. 206. l. 29.
r. Robessart. p. 212. marg. l 6. r. honoris. p. 218. l. 9. r. further mention
is made of these Liveries an. 16. E. 4. p. 224. l. 15. r. d'Espernon. p. 238.
l. 58. r. enjoyed. p. 241. l. 33. r ye^. p. 253. l. 45. r. purple colored
Ribband. p. 25^. l 7. r. Lanarick. p. 268. l. 10 r. were not p. 250. l. 13. r.
Exceter. p. 302. l. 26. r. appertained. p. 314. l. 24. r. case of. p. 316. in
marg. (b) r. Number. XXXIII. p. 326. l. 35. r. 23. Car. 2. p. 353. l. 7. r.
Bourchi^r. p. 367. l. 17. ^. whereon. l. 42. r. receive his. p. 401. in marg.
(p) r. effigy. p. 407. l. 29. r. Vr^ine. p. 412. l. 56. r. Not long. p. 4^4.
l. 5. r. Rockets. p. 429. l. 41. r. Horse. l. ult. r. haut pas. p. 438. l. 18.
r. Sieur. l 29. r. Gomyns. p. 446. l. 8. r. Carteret. p. 451. l. 55. r. left
arms. p. 457. in marg. (z) Lib. Carol. p. 463. marg. l. 4. r. ^^. 8. p. 473. l.
7. r. either solemn. l. 8. dele [ either] p. 505. l. 17. r. future. p. 512. in
marg. (*) r. Art. 11. p. 513. marg. dele [ See Cha. 21. Sect. 3. sub finem] p.
535. l. 27. r. Place. p. 541. l. 5. r. dispensed. l. 6. r. penalty. p. 543. l.
5. r. come. p. 575. l. 9. r. but without. Ib. dele [ but] p. 576. l. 19. r. by.
p. 585. l 50. r. the Law. p. 592. l. 40. and 51. r. Style. p. 595. r. to. p.
601. l. 41. dele [ to] p. 616. l. 11. r. the Sovereigns Style p. 624. l. 14. r.
their. p. 651. l. 56. r. Ane. p. 653. l. 30. r. Rennes. p. 656. l. 37. r. of
his. p. 660. l. 50. r. Elect. p. 663. l. 43. r. Orle^is. p. 665. l. 21. r.
Bretigny and l. 30. dele [ there] in marg. (x) r. Armaignac. p. 666. l. 16. r.
Duke of. p. 667. l. 1. r. 10000. p. 670. l. 27. r. t^ Matilda. p. 678. l. 4. r.
with the. p. 679. l. 19. r. Manny. p. 681. l. 31. r. Heirs. p. 683. l. 17. r.
E. 3. p. 687. l. 45. r. E. 3. p. 693. l. 12. and 21. r. Neots. and l. 29.
third. p. 695. l. 30. r. therefore. p. 696. l. 50. r. of the Priory. p. 697. l.
19. r. an: and l. 33. r. had. p. 699. Lult. r. Fee of. p. 700. l. 29. r.
therefore. p. 701. l. 44. r. Pedagium. p. 702. l. 38. r. Sir. l. 39. r.
Marshalls Battle. p. 705. l. 10. r. in the. p. 707. l. 16. r. aussi. l. 47.
dele [ the].

To the end the faults escaped in any of the three pages next following each
Letter of the Alphabet, carried on at the foot of the Appendix, may with more
ease be corrected, there are here added the Figures of 2.3. and 4. to point out
the page exactly.

[b] Column 1. l. 8. r. annuum. l. 57. r. quotiescunque. [b] 3. Col. 1. l. 28.
r. profundis. [c] Col. 1. l. 12. r. legio. [c] 2. Col. 1. l. 25. r. sub. [c] 3.
col. 1. r. a Supremo. l. 40. r. Sacrificis. [d] col. 2. l. 55. r. comme des.
[d] 2. col. 1. l. 55. r. pour les. [e] col. 1. l. 47. r. legis. col. 2. l. 6.
r. que. [e] 4. col. 1. l. 1. r. unusquisque. col. 2. l. 1. r. curarit. [f] 3.
col. 1. l. 13. r. u^ Regnum. [h] 4. col. 1. l. 12. r. Ordinis. [k] 2. col. 1.
l. 20. r. Christum. [p] 4. col. 2. l. 16. r. ou. [q] 4. col. ^. l. 44. r. eum.
col. 2. l. 26. r. virtutis. [r] col. 2. l. 52. r. per agenda. [r] 2. col. 1. l.
33. r. Omnibusque. and [r] 4. col. 2. l. 41. r. either. [u] 3. col. 1. l. 54.
r. Carniole. col. 2. l. 45. r. Scaccar. [x] 2. col. 2. l. ult. r.
quingentessimo. [x] 4. col. 1. l. 13. r. valeatis. l. 35. r. Collegiat. [y] 4.
col. 2. l. 6. r. verbo. l. 43. Equitis. [z] col. 1. l. 52. and 53. r.
promertons. col. 2. l. 5. r. Chablaye. [z] 2. col. 1. l. ult. r. nomme: sic
col. 2. l. 20. [aa] 3. col. 2. l. 21. r. Out. [bb] col. 1. l. 45. r.
estrangers. [bb] 3. col. 1. l. 47. r. immutability.


