Real Thankfulness: OR, A SERMON PREACHED In PAVLS Church LONDON, Upon the
second day of November, 1645. At a Public Thanksgiving for the taking in of
the Towns and Castles of Caermarthen and Mounmouth in Wales, it being the first
Lord's Day after the inauguration of the Right Honorable Thomas Adams now Lord
Major of that famous City. By Simeon Ash Preacher at Basingshaw, London, and
one of the Assembly of Divines.

PSALM. 50. 14. Offer to God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high.
PSALM. 50. 23. Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders
his conversation aright, will I show the salvation of God. LONDON, Printed by
G. Miller for Edward Brewster at the Sign of the Bible on Ludgate Hill near
Fleet-bridge, M. DC. XLV.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS ADAMS Lord Major of the famous City of LONDON,
together with the right worshipful the Aldermen and Sheriffs thereof.
Right Honorable,
WHen I prepared this Sermon to attend your commands, it was very far from my
purpose or thoughts, to make it more public then in the Pulpit. And although I
find in my self an utter averseness (in many regards) to appear in print; yet
your Lordships earnest desire (which I account a command) set on by the
solicitations of some others, has conquered my unwillingnes, to transcribe
this Sermon for the Press.

I presume upon this Dedication, not only because the Sermon was preached, and
is printed at your command, but also that I might hereby make an open,
grateful acknowledgement of your love diverse ways expressed toward me.

My Sermon is for substance the self same, which you heard, I know not any one
particular head, which I have either added or diminished, only some phrases are
changed (for my memory could not reach the same expressions) and the words of
Scripture-quotations are given in more largely, then when I preached. My
subject is seasonable for these times, wherein the Lord has been pleased to
give us in this City occasion to celebrate many days of Thanksgiving. The
practice of our praises, is that which God expects, and I persuade.

Unto how many in our Assemblies (when we meet to sing praises) may our God
say, Quid verba audio, cum facta video? This people draws nigh to me with
their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me. Loquere, ut te videam. Let your lives answer your language. When shall your
works witness your thankfulness? My Lord, I have often heard you use these
words, Quid retribuam Domino? Give me leave to be your Lordships remembrancer;
your obligations to the Lord are now much increased, and with them God has
added opportunities of more puhlike service to himself. Divine providence has
set you in a place of Honor, Authority and Trust, wherein much is expected
from you: Magistratus virum indicat. A man is that in truth, which he is when
tried. The world will judge of you for the future according to this years
service. You be likely to meet with many temptations, to draw you aside both to
the right hand and to the left: but I beseech you remember, whose you are, and
unto whom you must give a strict account of all your ways. Advance God in your
hearts, design the welfare of Sion, consult most with them, who counsel from
God and for God according to his Word, and I beseech you all, often, and
seriously mind your selves, and remember others of the solemn National
Covenant, that the Almighty may not be further provoked by the neglect and
violation of it. For the Sword under which we smart and bleed, does avenge the
quarrel of Gods Covenant, Lev. 26. 25. Therefore let every one thus speak unto
the Lord, Praise waits for thee o God in Sion, and unto thee shall the vow be
performed, Psalm. 65. 1. I will sing praise unto thy Name for ever, that I may
daily perform my vows, Ps. 61. 8. Right honorable and right worshipful, the
Lord has conjoined you as brethren, in the great work of the Government of
this renowned City, I pray God you may be of one mind, soul and way, for the
true welfare thereof, and for the encouragement of all such in it, who
sincerely seek to set up the holy government of Jesus Christ, in whom I am

Your humble Servant, SIMEON ASH,

Thanksgiving realiz'd.
PSALM. 105. 45. That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws.
THis Psalm is Eucharisticall, and this day is a day of Thanksgiving, therefore
the subject of the Psalm, and the service of the day, do well suit. In the
Psalm the high exercise of praising God is, First, commanded and partly
directed, in the four first verses, O give thanks unto the Lord, etc.

Secondly, Persuaded, in the remaining part of the Psalm.

The arguments used to press Gods people unto this Angelical employment, are
considerable under two heads.

1. The quality and variety of divine administrations for their comfort,
Remember his mavelous works, that he has done, his wonders, v. 5. etc. And
that this might be the more prevailing upon their hearts, a large Catalogue of
kindenesses conferred, is given in, wherein we have an enumeration of glorious,
remarkable providence, in almost forty verses together.

2. The end which the Lord propounded and aimed at, in all these many and
memorable dispensations. And this is held forth in my Text, That they might
observe his statutes, and keep his laws. Whereas the life of thanksgiving, lies
in thankesliving, in a well-ordered obedience to the God of our Salvations, the
God of our mercies. This is the subject matter of my Text. Wherein are
considerable.

1. The titles, whereby the rule of man's obedience is expressed, Statutes, Laws.

2. The terms whereby the regularity of deserved obedience, is suggested,
Observe, Keep.

3. The way or means whereby this regular obedience, is promoted, viz. All the
wonderful works of the most High, for his servants, and against their enemies.
For the Psalmist having particularized a great number of them, he concludes in
the Text. That, or (as the old Translation renders it) to the intent, they
might observe his statutes, and keep his laws. If any should enquire (upon the
perusal of these famous providence) the reason, wherefore the Lord wrought
wonders so many, so great for Israel: the Text gives an account, That they
might observe his statutes and keep his laws.

From the division of my Text, I proceed to the explication of the several
words used in it: wherein I will be but brief, though something must
necessarily be spoken, to make the fairer way, unto that which afterward must
from thence be observed and improved.

You heard before of the two titles given in this Text unto the rule of man's
obedience. The first is, Statutes. I find the original word translated, 1. A
decree, Psalm 148. 6. He has made a (...) Job 38. 33. Jer 31. 35, 36. and 33.
25.
decree which shall not pass. As all the motions of creatures inferior to man
are bounded by the decrees of Gods dominion (which are often called the
ordinances of Heaven) So all man's operations should be ordered and limited by
his Commandments.

2. A Portion, Prove. 31. 15. She gives a portion to her Maidens. And truly
Gods commands are a good portion to his people, I have esteemed the words of
his mouth (says Job) more then my necessary food, Job 23. 12. And, Thy
testimonies (says David) are my heritage for ever, Psalm. 119. 111. Unto a
gracious heart, Gods work is wages, and employment is preferment.

The second word, is, Laws. The original word is most ordinarily (...)
used to signify the moral law, the Decalogue, that constant standard, or
standing law, by which all Nations, in all ages of the world, have been, and
shall be bound to order their conversations before God.

Thus much of the words used, to express Gods revealed will to guide man's
course: It follows, that I explain those words, which suggest man's regular
respect thereunto.

The first is, Observe, which imports, 1. either to mind or reserve (...)
in memory. As old Jacob is said to observe the sayings (the dreams) of Joseph,
Genesis 37. 11.

2. Or to preserve in safety. In this sense, the same Jacob used the word, in
his prayer or vow, Genesis 28. 20. If God will be with me, and keep me in this way
that I go, etc.

And this sense answers the true meaning of the next word, (...)
Keep, which properly signifies to keep with care and vigilancie, as ammunition
is preserved from fire, and false hands, when an enemy is expected, Nahum 2. 1.
He that dasheth in pieces is come up before thy face, keep the munition, watch
the way.

Now these notions from the original, are not vain, they are both profitable,
and such as answer the more open language of the holy Ghost elsewhere. The laws
of the Lord should be treasured up in the cabinet of man's heart and memory,
Prove. 3. 1. My son, forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my
Commandments.

And all the precepts of God, should be secured from violence, that no breach
be made upon them, Keep my Commandments and live, and my Law, as the apple of
thine eye, Prove. 7. 2.

These things I only touch, as I pass forward to that point, on which I
purpose to pitch, both because it is the main intended in the Text, and also
being most seasonable for the service of the day.

More short. The end of Gods bounty, is man's duty.

Or thus, in reference to the instances of the Psalm, and the experiences of
our times. Therefore the Lord takes vengeance upon his adversaries, and
therefore the Lord works the deliverance of his servants, that they might
observe his statutes and keep his laws.

My beloved! Who can number up in order, the great things, which our God has
done for us, now of late, as heretofore? Our friends have been relieved, our
foes have been routed, our prayers have been heard, our hopes revived, our
forces prospered, our enemies discomfited. I pray you, fill your thoughts with
the particulars, which this day have been mentioned, and upon other occasions
specified: And then add unto the remembrance of all, this Doctrine which now I
am to deal in. That Gods end and aim in all, is this, That we might observe his
statutes, and keep his Laws.

In the handling of this weighty point, well worth our serious considerations,
I shall according to my accustomed plainness endeavor two things.

1. The explanation of the truth, that it may be rightly understood.

2, The application of it, that it may be fruitfully improved.

I begin with the former, wherein I will be but short, lest I should want time
to speak unto the later, which I chiefly intend, it being of greatest and most
seasonable concernment.

And here by way of caution, to prevent mistake in this matter under hand, I
wish that these four things may be observed.

1. Man's obedience is the end of Gods gracious providence in regard of his
precept, though not always in regard of his secret, eternal purpose. I well
remember the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 92. 7. When the wicked do spring as
the grass, and the workers of iniquity do prosper, it is that they shall be
destroyed for ever. But here I speak not of Gods end in regard of his
everlasting, righteous decree, which he is pleased to keep close within his own
bosom.

As for the end of his command, revealing his pleasure to the children of men:
the words of Moses that man of God are plain and pregnant to our purpose, Deuteronomy.
10. 12, 13. where after an enumeration of various, mavelous favors
vouchsafed unto Israel, he speaks thus, And now, O Israel, what does the Lord
thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes.

2. It is the end of God, in (the forementioned) intention, though too too
seldom in execution, God having engaged man to obedience by his bounties, he
expects an obedientiall improvement, though his Majesty's expectations are
commonly disappointed. The Lords sad complaint of his vineyard, Isa. 5.
expresses this fully, What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I
have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? ver. 4. He looked for judgment, but,
behold oppression, for righteousness, but behold a cry, ver. 7. And our God
has very much occasion of the like lamentation, in this Land, yea in this City
at this day, notwithstanding the admirable deliverances, and victories wrought
for us. Alas, alas, how few, how very few do any where answer the expectations
of his highness, in reformation of their ways, and in obedience unto his holy
Laws.

3. Although man's observation of Gods statutes, be one end, yet is it not the
only end of his manifold favors. For amongst many other aims, which are
always in his majesty's eye, such is his fatherly indulgence unto his people,
that he does give out cordials on purpose to cheer their drooping spirits, and
to facilitate their passage through the wilderness of this world, Let the Lord
be magnified, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm, 35.
27. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people: for the rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous,
lest the righteous put forth their hands unto iniquity, Psalm. 125. 2, 3.

4. Man's serviceable subjection unto divine injunctions, is not Gods last and
chiefest end, in all his glorious dispensations. The ultimate, the supreme end
of all Gods purposes and providence, is his own honor, He does all things for
himself, Prove. 16 4. In them who are not obedientially conquered by his
kindenesses, he will be glorified. Proud, hard-hearted Pharaoh stubbornly
withstood all the assaults of God, made upon himself and his people, both by
plagues and deliverances, yet God says, Exodus 14. 4. I will be honored upon
Pharaoh and upon his host. And those who are made obedientially fruitful, by
the showers and Sunshine of divine indulgence: they being filled with the
fruits of righteousness, are by Jesus Christ to the glory and praise of God,
Phil. 1. 11. So that all administrations do at last determine and center in
the honor of the most high God, who is the author and orderer of them.

Yea beyond the duties of obedience, the welfare and happiness of them who are
sincerely obedient, both here and hereafter is ordained and intended by God
himself, as an end subordinate unto his own eternal praise, Oh that there was
such an heart in them (says the Lord) that they would keep all my commandments
always, that it might be well with them, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. And the Apostle, having
provoked the believing Romans unto the work of sanctification, adds these
words, Ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life, Romans 6.
22.

Having premised these cautions, these propositions to prevent
misapprehensions, and that the meaning of my Text and Doctrine might be truly
understood, I proceed unto the Application thereof, which is the second thing
promised in the prosecution of the point.

The improvement of this seasonable instruction (thus far unfolded)

1. Information. 2. Reprehension. 3. Exhortation.
The two former sorts of Uses I shall dispatch quickly, but I shall crave leave
to enlarge the last, because most profitable, and most pertinent unto this
Congregation, and most conducing to promote the realizing of those praises,
which this day we present unto our God.

Hence it naturally and necessarily follows, That the disobedience Information
of those persons is most abominable and inexcusable, who have been under the
most, and best administrations of the Almighty.

Such offenders do not only violate the Laws of Sovereignty, but of Amity.
Their neglects, their miscarriages, are not only undutifulnesses, but
unthankfulnesses and unkindnesses.

It is here considerable how the holy Ghost does ordinarily cast this
circumstance, as a loading aggravation upon the sins both of Nations and
persons, to break their hearts in the deepest humiliation, and to justify God
in his sharpest corrections. Thus Samuel 1 Samuel 12. 6.
sets upon unsubdued Israel, 1 Samuel 12. 6. And Samuel said 7.
unto the people, It is the Lord that advanced Moses and Aaron, and that
brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt. Now therefore stand still
that I may reason with you before the Lord of 8.
all the righteous acts of the Lord, which he did to you and to your fathers.
When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the Lord, then the
Lord sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and
made them dwell 11.
in this place, etc. And the Lord sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and
Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies, on every side, and
ye dwelled safe. Here is the commemoration of mercies. Now follows the sin
thereby aggravated. And 12.
when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye
said unto me, Nay, but a king shall reign over us, when the Lord your God was
your king. Beloved, I may not spend time in paralleling these passages, with
Gods providence toward this poor Kingdom, and this Kingdoms miscarriages
toward the Lord. Do it your selves, I pray you, and I doubt not, but the
serious doing of it, will be advantageous both in the advancing of our God, and
in the abasing of our selves before him. Englands deliverances and mercies.
Londons deliverances and mercies have been more and greater then of other
Kingdoms and Cities; therefore Englands sins, and Londons sins are more
heinous, horrid, high provocations of the most high God.

And as the evils of a people are thus aggravated by the Lord; so are the
offenses of particular persons also. In this manner Samuel greatens the
disobedience of King Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 16. 1 Samuel 25. 16. 17.
Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee, what the Lord said
unto me this night. When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast not thou
made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee King over
Israel? And the Lord sent 18.
thee on a journey, and said, Go, and utterly destroy the sinners, the
Amalekites, and fight against them, till they be consumed. Wherefore then
did thou not obey the voice of the Lord, but 19.
did fly upon the spoil, and did evil in the sight of the Lord?

I will not gloss upon this Scripture, which might truly be applied unto many
of the richest and chiefest rank in this City: but I humbly beseech you to
remember from what low and little beginnings, the Lord has advanced many of
you; and then reflecting upon your lives; consider what account you can give
unto his Majesty, for your obedience (or for your disobedience rather) to his
holy Commandments. Yea, this course God has been wont to take with his own
dearest servants, to work them unto true repentance. David's scandalous falls are
well known (I might say they are ill known by too many, who thence take
encouragement to offend) and I believe you are not ignorant of that course,
which his God took by Nathans ministry, to present his sins as very sinful in
his own sight, 2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed
thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, And I 2 Samuel 12.
gave thee thy Masters house, and I gave thee the house of Israel 7.
and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I would moreover 8.
have given unto thee, such and such things. Wherefore have thou despised the
commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? 9.
etc. Herein, herein, lies the aggravation. Wherefore have thou? Thou so
preserved, thou so preferred. How can thou answer this?

Give me leave to touch one instance more, which I do the rather add, because
it concerns men of mine own cloth and calling, that you may be convinced: We
Ministers desire to aggravate our own faults, by the self-same circumstances,
whereby we greaten yours. Eli his sinful indulgence to his wicked sons is
notorious; now mark how a Messenger from the Lord paints out this his
provocation, in black colors, 1 Samuel 2. 27. Thus 1 Samuel 2. 27. 28.
says the Lord, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father, when they
were in Egypt in Pharaohs house? And did I choose 29.
him out of all the Tribes of Israel to be my Priest, to offer upon mine Altar,
to burnincense before me? And did I give unto the house of thy father, all the
offerings made by fire of the children of Israel? Wherefore kick ye at my
sacrifice, etc. And honor thy sons above me? We, who are the Ministers of
the Lord should look upon our aberrations, as the more loathsome, because God
has honored us with an high and holy employment in special attendance upon
himself.

I might much enlarge this meditation, by acquainting you, that guilt under
this notion, is most grievous unto a truly gracious repenting heart. It was
this that cut good David to the quick, when he cried out, Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, Ps. 51. 4.

But I must leave this Use, because not so fully suitable unto the peculiar
service of this day.

The next Use follows, which is for the just reproof of two sorts Reprehension
of persons, whose practices do point blank oppose this purpose of God, in
conferring favors, which my Text makes report of.

First, who in handling this doctrine, can hold his hand off them, who are the
less obedient and the more dissolute in their lives, because of Gods
long-sufferance and loving kindness. This sticks, as a black brand upon King
Rehoboam, 2 Chro. 12. 1. It came to pass that when Rehoboam had established
the kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the Law of the Lord.

It may be truly said of many, that they had not been so bad and base in their
lives, if God had not bin so bountiful to them in his bestowings. Herein men
discover their egregious folly, which can no way be excused, Do ye thus requite
the Lord, ye foolish people and u^wise? is not he thy father that has bought
thee? has he not made thee, and established thee? Remember the days of old,
etc. De. 32. 6, 7

Yea, herein appears the vile malignity of our natures, the inbred poisonous
disposition of our unhallowed hearts, which Spider-like suck venom out of
those sweet flowers, from whence the little laborious Be draws wax and honey.

I have three things to say unto such persons, which I heartily wish may tend
unto their humiliation and amendment.

1. That this heinous abuse of Gods bounties, is a sad sign of an unregenerate
estate. Let favor be showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn
righteousness, in the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, Isa. 26 10.
I have heard the Hypocrite sometimes compared to a Top, which goes no longer
then it is lashed. The expressions of the Psalmist concerning such unfound
hearts, are here notable, Psalm. 73. 34. When he slew them, then they sought
him, and they returned, and they enquired early after God, etc. Nevertheless
they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their
tongues, for their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in
his Covenant.

2. That in this particular, idolaters express more respects unto their vain,
dumb, idle Idols, then these people do unto the only, true, living,
world-governing God, God blessed for ever. For observe how the Prophet Hosea,
brings in the idolatrous, reasoning for their Idol-worship, Hos. 2. 5. I will
go after my lovers, that give me my bread and my water, my wool, and my flax,
mine oil, and my drink. In which respect, we may take up against these
malefactors, the patheticall complaint of the Lord, Jer. 2. 9. I will yet
plead with you (says the Lord.) For pass over the Isles of Chittim and see,
send unto Kedar and consider Jer. 2. 9. 10. 11.
diligently, and see if there be any such thing. Has a Nation changed their
gods which are yet no gods? but my people has changed their glory for that
which does not profit. Be astonished, o ye heavens, at this, and be horribly
afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord, etc.

3. That this carriage is no better then brutish, Jesurun (says Moses) waxed
fat and kicked, thou art waxed fat, thou art grown thick, thou art covered with
fatness. Then he forsook God which made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of
his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. The Metaphor is taken from the foolish Ass, which
being kept low, will come to the Masters hand, but being put into a full
pasture, waxes wanton, and either runs away from his feeder, or else turns
heels, and strikes him.

And the zealous Prophet Jeremiah does with much sharpness speak in like
manner unto these beastly kind of men, When I fed Jer. 5 7.
them to the full, then they committed adultery, and assembled themselves by
troops in the Harlots houses. They were, as fed 8.
horses in the morning, every one neighing after his neighbors wife. Shall I
not visit for these things (says the Lord) and shall not my soul be avenged on
such a Nation, as this? 9.


The Lord awaken the sleeping consciences of such, whom this quick reproof does
reach, that they may be the better for it through his rich grace in Jesus
Christ.

The second sort to be blamed I shall touch with a more gentle (viz.) all those
whose ends and aims, in seeking, and Reproof.
in bestowing favors, are directly contrary unto the command and practice of
our blessed God. I here point at offenders, in the same kind, under a double
head.

1. Such who in the pursuit of outward advantages and accommodations for
themselves, do only intend the gratifying of the flesh, the satisfying of their
own hellish lusts. The Apostle James checketh these men, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask
amiss, that ye may consume upon your lusts. And there is a smart rebuke of
Baruch, wrapped up in that Question, which the Prophet Jeremiah propounds to
him, Jer. 45. 5. Seek thou great things for thy self? Those must take this
home to themselves, who mind nothing so much, as sloth, sensuality, pride,
luxury, revenge, and the like, in coveting and hunting after vast estates,
places of honor and command in the world.

2. Those who in conferring places of profit, authority, employment and trust
upon others, do principally (if not only) aim at the making of a party, the
strengthening of a faction, against the government and ways of Jesus Christ. I
will make no instances, but leave it to your wisdom and consciences to make
application and improvement of this general Item.

If there be any, whose purses, power, votes, vigor, are to fill offices with
men, whose minds, hearts, hands are against the power of godliness, the
purity of Gospel Ordinances, the progress of our Church-Reformation, I wish
they would consider, that they are not herein acted by the Spirit of God. I
will not make any application of Balacks promise to promote Balaam, Numb. 22.
if he would endeavor to discomfit Israel, lest I should seem over-tart.
Neither would I be thus interpreted in that I have spoken, as though I purposed
to strike secretly, any who labor in the sincerity and simplicity of their
spirits, to make Jesus Christ glorious in the world. Let my tongue rather
cleave to the rooff of my mouth for ever, then that I dare to utter one word
wittingly and wilfully against the honor of our Lord Christ Jesus.

Now I come to the last Use, which is to persuade us all Exhortation
branches.

First, We are hence to be moved to praise God for this his

This inference is made to my hand, in the words immediately following the
Text, Praise ye the Lord. Now to quicken our hearts unto the admiration and
adoration of God, in this regard, let these following short meditations, be
seriously considered.

1. That man's obedience makes no whit at all unto Gods advantage, Can a man be
profitable to God? Is it any gain to him, that thou makedst thy ways perfect?
Job 22. 2, 3. If thou be righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he
at thine hand? Job 35. 7. These interrogations carry along with them vehement
negations. That it is not possible to profit God in the least measure, by our
best obedientiall endeavors.

Men hire servants, because their work tends to enrich them. But in references
to the Almighty, Alsufficient God, all must say, When we have done all those
things, that are commanded, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17. 10. My
well-doing (says David, though a man according to Gods own heart) does not
extend unto thee, Psalm. 16. 2. For unto that, which is infinite and perfect, no
possible addition can be made.

2. That man's disobedience does not in any degree prejudice God, If thou
sinnest, what do thou against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied,
what do thou unto him? Job 35. 6. The Sun is not obscured by man's refusing to
behold it, or to commend the light of it.

The self-same beauties, perfections, happiness, which the Lord enjoyed in
himself from eternity, he shall possess for ever, though no creature should
serviceably attend upon him.

Amongst men it is otherwise, for a stock cannot be traded, a trade cannot be
managed, many necessary works would be undone, if we had not the assistance of
servants. The Crown needs the Plow, the chiefest could not subsist, but by the
support of the meanest. The feet uphold the head, and the whole body.

3. That Gods rich, mere mercy did move him, to make manifest his mind unto
man, that man might understand what carriage would content his blessed
Majesty, and in this regard (if God had not added any further motive to
obedience) we are obliged to honor his highness, He shows his Word unto
Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with
any Nation, and as for his judgments they have not known them. Praise ye the
Lord, Psalm. 147. 19, 20.

What if the Lord had left us all in our natural darkness, as Heathens
unacquainted with his Commandments, yet should we not have had any occasion to
except against his Majesty.

But how great is our engagement to our God, who having given some light of
knowledge, does liberally give in favors, to move the obedientiall improvement
thereof?

4. Suppose that the Lord suspending all ways of love and liberality toward
us, should only by threats and blows, have endeavored our obedience, yet in
that respect there would have been cause of thankfulness, for it is much
better to be beaten to Gods work, then to neglect it. David was of this mind,
Psalm 119. 67, 68. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I kept
thy Word. Thou art good, and do good. And verse. 71. It is good for me that I
have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes.

Therefore the ways of fairness and fatherly indulgence, whereby God seeks to
conform our hearts and lives unto his Commandments, should endear him to our
hearts, and draw forth our souls in thanksgiving.

5. The work and worship of the Almighty, which we take in hand, is always
more or less defiled; Gods excellencies are much obscured, his name sundry
ways dishonored, by our imperfections which ever attend our best performances.
There is iniquity in our holy offerings, All our righteousnesses are like
unsightly rags. Isa. 6. 6.
when good Nehemiah reviewed his famous services for God and his house, upon
the discovery of his sinfulnesses, he cries out, Neh. 13. 22. Lord, pardon me
according to thy great mercies.

Now all this God knows, yea he fore-knew all our future aberrations, when he
showered down favors, to move our obedience, Thou have set our iniquities
before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance, Psalm. 90. 8. And
David testifies, Psalm. 139. 2. That God knows his thoughts afar off. Is it
not therefore to be very much admired, that the Lord should by renewed and
multiplied favors labor to prevail with our hearts, To observe his statutes,
and to keep his laws?

6. Lastly, (as though all that I have spoken were too little) the Lord has
herein further manifested and magnified his unsearchable grace, that he has
undertaken abundantly to recompense all our obedience, In keeping of his
Commandments there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11.

Every self-knowing Christian, who is wont with any seriousness, to compare
his returns to God, with his receipts from God, will freely acknowledge that he
is always infinitely behind hand with his Majesty: therefore considering his
former favorable providence, to persuade obedience, together with future
precious promises, to crown obedience, we have all reason to call upon our
selves, Praise we the Lord: and to say unto one another, Praise ye the Lord.

The second branch of my Exhortation follows, which I have

To persuade your conscientious care to improve all Gods favorable providence
unto the promoting and bettering of obedience, according to his purpose and
appointment, I beseech you Romans 12. 1.
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies, a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.

If my Exhortation upon this ground be not reasonable, lay it aside, I speak as
unto wise men, judge ye what I say. Beloved, I am very serious in this my
message, being not only seasonable, but of exceeding great concernment, and
shall be very unwilling to go off with a denial unto this my reasonable
request, which I make in the Name of God for your good.

Manifold examples might be produced to press this Exhortation. Motive 1.
That double, that treble resolution of Israel, raised from this consideration,
is notable, God forbid, that we should Josh. 24. 14, 16 verse, 17.
forsake the Lord, for the Lord our God he it is that brought us up, and our
Fathers out of Egypt, from the land of bondage, and 18.
which did those great signs in our sight, etc. Therefore we will also serve
the Lord.

And again, when Joshua seemed by his words to suspect their 21.
sincerity, The people said unto Joshua. Nay, but we will serve the Lord.

And yet once more, Joshua putting them to it unto purpose, The people said
unto Joshua, The Lord our God will we serve, 24.
and his voice will we obey.

But I will come lower, then Israel professing dependence upon God. The very
Heathens, wicked ones, moved only by moral principles, will requite
kindenesses in respect to the law of retaliation, If you do good to them, which
do good to you, what thank have ye? for sinners also do the same. And yet in
reference unto God, I now request no more. Do but Christianly endeavor to
answer Gods kindenesses with an obedientiall carriage, and I call for no more.

I remember, when cruel Saul, plotting and practicing David's death, was yet by
David's forbearance to slay him (having power and opportunity) so overcome, that
he brake forth into these words, My son David, I will no more do thee harm,
because my soul was precious in thine eyes this day, 1 Samuel 26. 21. Gods
long-sufferance and loving kindness to usward, does wonderfully exceed all
that David either did or could express toward Saul: He has not only
withdrawn his own revenging hand, though we have infinite times provoked him
to his face, but he has also held the bloody hands of cruel men, who have
desired our death: yea, we do not only enjoy safety, but rich supplies of
comforts from our God. How much rather therefore should we resolve no more to
dishonor God by our disobedience, but to observe his statutes, and to keep his
laws.

2. This grateful obedience, the Lord will graciously accept, as a full
contenting recompense for all his bounties. When Moses had numbered up
multitudes of blessings bestowed upon Israel, he adds, Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13. And
now, o Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to walk in all
his ways, to keep his Commandments? As if he had said, this is all, he will be
satisfied with this, he looks for no more. O beloved, how deeply are we
indebted unto the most high God, and yet such is his indulgence, that upon
sincere observation of his laws (which by virtue of our being reasonable
creatures, we are bound to yield) he will cast a quietus est, a full
acquittance into our bosoms.

But if this consideration cannot prevail with you, yet I pray you consider on
the other hand, how unkindely the Lord takes their disobedience, toward whom
he abounds in benefits. How patheticall is that complaint of God himself
against his Israel, breathed forth by the Evangelicall Prophet, Hear o heavens,
and Isa. 1. 2.
give ear o earth, for the Lord has spoken, I have nourished 3.
and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me. The 4
Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know,
my people does not consider. Ah sinful Nation. In reference unto this
lamentation, which the Lord makes over stubborn, unthankful ones, I will only
say thus much; Have you not yet offended your God enough, but will you proceed
to grieve him still.

3. This practicing of Gods praises will be many ways beneficial to our
selves.

1. It will render us wise, in the account of all such, who with any
seriousness consider our great obligations unto God. Keep therefore and do
them, for this is your wisdom and understanding, in the sight of the Nations
which shall hear of these statutes, and say, Surely this great Nation is a wise
and understanding people. For what Nation is so great, who has God so nigh
unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon him for?
Deuteronomy. 4. 6, 7. Is it not wisdom to observe him, who secures our persons and
comforts, whose ever-waking and all working providence is for our good in every
kind? And how can man more manifest his wisdom, then by making Gods ends, his
aim in every thing? Now Gods end in the administrations of his love is, That
we may observe his statutes, and keep his laws.

2. This obedientiall improvement of Gods goodness, will evidence the
uprightness of our hearts. Mark David's argument which he pleads before the
all-knowing God, Psalm. 26. O Lord, I have walked in mine integrity, ver. 1. For
thy loving kindness is before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth,
verse. 3. Threats and blows drive hypocrites to duty, but cords of love draw the
gracious heart unto exact walking with his God.

3. When former favors produce better obedience, then may we boldly expect the
multiplication of future mercies. Moses having, Deuteronomy. 29. specified some of
Isreal's rich receipts from Gods good hand, from verse. 2. to the 9th, he thus
concludes, Keep therefore the words of this Commandment, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do. The self-seeking husbandman will cast precious
seed with a liberal hand into a fruitful soil, which is wont to return an
answerable crop. God has the end of his bounties, in our obedience. And his
promises to follow Deuteronomy. 28. 1-14 Lev 26. 1-12
and to fill them who are obedient, with blessings of all sorts, are manifold
in the holy Scriptures.

4. Many and heavy are the judgments threatened against them who continue
stubbornly disobedient, notwithstanding the sweet assaults made upon them, by
Gods gracious administrations. That commination in Deuteronomy. 28. 47, 48. has often
affected and affrighted my heart, in reference to this trembling Kingdom,
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with gladness
of heart, for the abundance of all things (mark that, for the abundance of all
things) therefore shall thou serve thine enemies, which the Lord shall send
upon thee, in hunger and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in the want of all
things, and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he has destroyed
thee. When Samuel had pressed the bettering of obedience, by Gods remarkable
works (which is the very exhortation, which I have now under hand) he sets it
on by the self-same Argument, 1 Samuel 12. 24, 25. Fear the Lord, and serve him
in truth, with all your heart; for consider how great things he has done for
you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King. Beloved, we know to our sorrow, that both our King and his Kingdoms are
in a wasting condition. God forbid, O God forbid, that our continued
disobedience should work our utter consumption and desolation.

This which I have said is sad, and I have made mine own heart say by saying
it; yet that is much more lamentable, which the Apostle Paul reports concerning
Gods judgment upon poor, purblinde Heathens, for their ingratitude, in not
living up to their light, to their receipts, Romans 1. 21. Because when they knew
God (it is meant of knowledge attained by Gods works) they glorified him not as
God, neither were thankful, etc. Wherefore God gave them up unto
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own
bodies between themselves, verse. 24. The penalty inflicted upon the immortal
soul is the more heavy, because of the souls excellency. And mere torment upon
the well-awakened soul is not comparably so grievous, as it is servitude to
sinful lusts. Now this, this judgment of judgments is incurred, by not
answering obedientially our receipts from God. And let none think to put this
off, by saying, This concerned Heathens, but we are Christians: for consider, I
beseech you, whether the danger be not hereby increased? Is our light greater?
Have Gods works amongst us held forth more grace and glory? Then questionless
our disobedience will expose us to as great, or greater judgments.

I have done with the Arguments prepared to enforce my Exhortation: and I hope
they have so far prevailed with you, (at least with some of you) as to move
resolutions, to make an obedientiall improvement of your experiences. I now
proceed to acquaint you with some few rules to direct this your obedience, your
real thankfulness unto God, with which I shall conclude. And for brevity
sake, I will only mention such, as issue naturally and necessarily from my Text
and Doctrine.

1. Therefore God should rather be obeyed, then any man whatsoever. I am far
from dissuading dutiful observance unto lawful Superiors of any quality or
degree: but I propound the Question of the Apostles, Whether it be better to
obey God or men, judge ye, Act 4. 19. and 5. 29.

Let him, who does most and greatest favors for us, receive the largest and
frequentest respects from us. Give the chiefest attendance unto the best
benefactour. Now who, or what is he, that shall dare to stand in competition
with God? No doubt but Joseph, Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, had so
much ingenuity, as to acknowledge with gratitude their obligations unto their
Superiors, yet being acted by their stronger, higher engagements unto God,
they refused to gratify them in things displeasing unto his Majesty. And I
shall not need to tell you how far the bestowings of God in quantity, quality
and variety, do transcend all that kindness, which either has been
received, or can be expected from any humane hand.

2. Therefore we should obey God with our All. Both riches and honors come of
thee, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. All
things come of thee, 1 Chro. 29. 12, 14. Is it not reasonable that all which is
received from the Lord, should be employed for the Lord? You Merchants expect
thus much in justice and equity from your factours beyond seas, that whatsoever
commodities you convey unto them, should be disposed of to your advantage. Now
I pray you turn the Tables, and deal you with God, as you require men should
deal with you. Who does not acknowledge strength in the Apostles argument? 1
Cor. 6. 20. Glorify God both in your body and in your spirit, which are Gods.
Therefore if we grant the premises, it will be our weakness to deny the
Conclusion.

Consider what I say. If any of you enjoy any wisdom, strength, authority,
estates, parts, interests, opportunities, which you received not from the Lord,
then refuse to lay them forth for the Lord. But let me appeal unto every
individual soul here present, in the Apostles words, What have thou which thou
did not receive? 1 Cor. 4. 7. The inference therefore comes with force upon
you, Thou shall love (and consequently thou shall obey) the Lord thy God with
all thy soul, with all thy thought, with all thy might, Cum omni valde tuo. O
it is an unequal and unreasonable thing, to make any deeds of reservation in
our dealings with our God, the God of all grace and of all consolations
whatsoever.

3. Therefore our obedience unto God, should be tendered speedily. For is not
the Lord so far beforehand with us in his favors, that (...), at this very
instant, we are engaged obsequiously to submit unto his government? Joshua
having particularized to Israel ancient providence, whereby God had expressed
his care and kindness toward them and their forefathers, he calls for
service without delay, Josh. 24. 14. Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve
him. Do not any of you dare to put off God one day longer with
procrastinations. A father said, that cras, cras, was corvina vox. Delays will
breed guilt, and bring danger. Let us call to mind how much we were in Gods
debt, how far in arrears, before we began to pay one penny (as it were) in any
humble, holy, hearty performance. Therefore let us now, now obedientially
remember our Creator, our Protector, our Benefactour, our God blessed for
ever, To day, while it is called to day, do not harden your hearts.

4. Therefore in all ways of holy obedience, we should walk humbly with our
God. Well may this alone abase our hearts, that the excellencies of the Lord,
and the worth of his service, should not be sufficient to work us unto
dutifulness, without a daily addition of fresh favors from his Majesty. But
when we compare our unanswerablenesse to Gods purposes, expectations,
deservings, it is strange that there should be the least conceitednesse in us,
in regard of any work at any time discharged. If ever man had occasion to glory
in his labors, and adventures for Christ, the Apostle Paul (I think) might be
the man. But he professes, Act. 20. 19. That he served the Lord in all
humility of mind. Now it is most apparent, that besides other means whereby he
attained and maintained this sweet, humble frame of spirit, this was one, viz.
That he had much in his eye, his rich receipts from Christ, which he was no way
able to requite. And I am confident, that by a serious, wise paralleling that
which God does for us, with that which we do for him, in regard of quantity,
quality, variety and constancy, the swelling of our hearts will be much abated.

5. Therefore all our services for God should be the warm breathings of flaming
love. All the undertakings of St Paul for Christ, seemed to be sparks arising
out of this fire. He speaking of labors, losses, hazards, gives in this as the
reason of all, 2 Cor. 5. 14. For the love of Christ constrains. And when
David had endeared his God to his heart, by meditating upon his mercies, Psalm.
116. 1. I love the Lord, because he has heard my supplication, etc. From
thence did issue obedientiall resolutions, I will call upon the Lord. I will
walk before the Lord in the land of the living. Although God allows the use
of other arguments to quicken obedience, yet this of love should have the
preeminence.

6. Therefore we should serve the Lord in truth, because he has done great
things for us, 1 Sa. 13. 24. This truth is opposed to seemingnes and falsehood.
God does not feed us with fair words. We do not only hear of his bounties, but
we see, touch, taste, enjoy the comforts of his good providence. Let us answer
our God with realities, If any man only seem to be religious, his religion is
vain, Jam. 1. As for those who content themselves with shows of godliness,
denying the power thereof, they are abhorred by the Lord. Be not deceived, for
God will not be mocked, According as every man sowes, so shall he reap. If you
sow the wind, you shall reap the east-winde. Be you well assured, that Court
complements, frothy flatteries, empty shows will not take with God. Those who
pay in good coin, will not be repaied with that which is counterfeit. Let us,
not therefore dream of requiting Gods real favors with mere formalities, Let
us not only love in word and tongue, but in deed and in truth. 1 John 3. 18.


7. Therefore fear the Lord and serve him in sincerity. This sincerity is
opposed unto selfishnesse. Whereas the hypocrite centers Josh. 24. 14.
proudly in himself, makes himself his last end, his God. Did ye not eat for
your selves? Did ye not drink for your selves? Did ye Zech. 7. 5, 6.
at all fast unto me, even unto me? says the Lord. The practice of God,
intending and effecting our good, as truly, as his own glory, may well prevail
with us, to mind his praise in that which we undertake. His gracious
providence are for our comfort, his holy Commandments are for our good,
therefore let not us sit down satisfied in serving our own turn by our
services, but let us move forward, not resting till we come to this center,
Gods honor. Whatsoever we do, whether in our general or particular callings,
in commanding, obeying, in private or public, Let all be done unto the glory
of God, 1 Cor. 10. 31.

8. Therefore we should observe Gods statutes, and keep his laws continually.
This the Lord desires, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that there were such an heart in them,
that they would keep my Commandments always. And this his Majesty well
deserves, For he daily loadeth us with his benefits, Psalm. 68. 19. His
unweariednesse in following us with favors, should move us to follow him
unweariedly in the ways of well doing. If in the whole course of your lives,
you can find one day, or one hour, wherein God does not, in one kind or
other, do you good, then on that day, in that hour suspend the serving of his
highness. We (such is the sinfulness of our sinning hearts) do every moment
of our lives, give the most high God most just occasion to resolve to favor us
no more: but the Lord (so admirable is his goodness) does every minute of
time, afresh engage us unto his obedience. Therefore be not weary of
well-doing, but rather, be always abounding in the work of the Lord. God
forbid, that it should be truly said of any of us, That we began in the Spirit,
and did end in the flesh.

All these eight rules, necessary truths, and naturally deduced from my
doctrine, do concern every one in this great Congregation without any
exception. I cannot imagine, from what seeming pretense any should dare to
plead exemption from these directions; and I pray God, that no one of you may
depart this Assembly, without some obedientiall bents and resolutions upon your
spirits. But all my Sermon, all my counsel does most concern them; for whom
the Lord has done most, in ways most remarkable and glorious. No City in the
world has been more magnified by divine providence, then this wherein we are.
No people on earth has been more enriched with temporal and spiritual
provisions together, then our selves. Our God grant that our improvements
obedientiall, may prove in some good measure answerable.

Notwithstanding, by virtue of the equity of my doctrine, the Lord expects to
be best served, to be most advanced, by them whom he has most enriched, whom
he has most advanced. And therefore give me leave to tell you, Right
Honorable, the Lord Major, and Right worshipful, the Aldermen of this famous
City, that God deserves and expects more from you, then from your brethren.
For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required, and to whom
men have committed much, of him they will ask the more, Luke 12. 48. As you are
bound to be exemplary in exact endeavors, To observe Gods statutes, and to
keep his laws: So is it your duty (in a special manner) to take care that all
others under your command be conformed to the Commandments of your God,
Magistratus est custos utriusque tabulae.

Right Honorable, your Lordship has for diverse years been acquainted with my
plain Ministry, and I cannot say that I have lost any place in your affections
by my plainness, therefore I will take the boldness to direct my self in
faithfulness unto you.

1. Do not you dare through indulgence to spare the punishing of them, who do
dare to cast Gods Commandments behind their backs. Could you hold your hands,
and connive at such, who should go about to slight the works, which are raised
and maintained for the safety of this City? You heard in the opening of my
Text, That God would have his laws preserved from violence, as the means of our
preservation. I once heard a plain dealing Preacher, compare a remiss
Magistrate unto the sign George on Horseback, who stands all the year with
his hand on the Sword, but never strikes. My Lord, You have not received the
Sword in vain, Romans 13. 4. Although I would not sharpen the edge of authority
unto undue severity; yet would I whet mine own knife to lance and let out the
impostumated matter in my friends flesh. I grant your Lordship must be
cautious, as courageous, and therefore you have good reason to make Solomon's
prayer, 1 King. 3. 9. Give thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy
people, that I may discern between good and bad. But I beseech you remember
withal, That foolish pity spoils the City. Let not common drunkards, profane
cursers and swearers, brutish wantons, and such like wicked ones, escape that
penalty, which the Law has appointed for them. Phineas executed judgment, and
it was counted unto him for righteousness, Psalm. 106. 30, 31.

2. I call for your zeal against Popery, that abomination, which brings
desolation. Let your zeal move often inquisitions, whether in some corners of
this City, there be not Idolatry in the use of the Mass, lest through neglect
of search, that abomination be suffered. But I move that in a special manner,
search may be made after Jesuits, those unsufferable incendiaries, who blow
the coal of contention amongst brethren, who have caused, and do continue the
unhappy breach betwixt our King and Parliament, our Sovereign and his Subjects.
I have heard a Story of a man, who passing by a tree, which Nature was
cleaving, did thrust in his hand to increase the breach; whereupon providence
suddenly closing the breach, did there hold the man by the hand, as an act of
revenge. Though I dare not assert the truth of this Story, yet I make this
moral. Doubtless there are Jesuiticall spirits, who haunt these coasts, who
walk in this City, and it is suspected by many, that they have a special hand
in some of the pamphlets published, to increase the flames of unbrotherly
divisions: I heartily wish that they might be apprehended by some good hand to
be made exemplary. It Is reported that the Pythagoreans did set a note of infamy
upon the number of two, because it was the first, which dared to depart from
Unity. Solomon says, He that sows discord among brethren, is an abomination
to the Lord, Prove. 6. 16. 19. And this reaches more then Jesuits in this
Kingdom, yea in this City: For how many make it their business to make
breaches, not only among private brethren, but also between the two Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, notwithstanding the solemn brotherly Covenant. Now I
beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary
to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. For they that are such,
serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, To. 16. 17, 18. I humbly move cautiousnesse in
regard of Malignants, that those mischief-workers, who now (as report speaks)
are moving homeward, may not inconsiderately, upon too easy terms be
entertained and trusted. It is my daily prayer, that God would convert and
pardon those who express the most malignity against the work of Reformation so
happily begun amongst us: and my soul says, God forbid, that any who are
sincerely changed, should by our sournesse, be sent back again into our enemies
quarters. Notwithstanding I must tell you, Abundans cautela non nocet. When
Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayed to join himself to the Disciples, but
they were all afraid of him, Act. 9. 26. Fals-hearted ones amongst our selves,
may do us much more wrong, then known adversaries at a distance. And is it not
a just ground of complaint made by our friends, when foes who have forsaken
City and Parliament, shall make their peace at such easy rates, that they
suffer less in their outward estates upon their return, then approved friends
have done, if their Assessements and voluntary contributions be considered? I
undertake not to direct in this case, but I entreat God, to make the Parliament
and City wise and circumspect in this particular.

4 I most earnestly importune your care, for the better and stricter
observation of the Sabbath, and I heartily commend worthy Nehemiah, as your
pattern of imitation in this practice. The ways and courses whereby he
witnessed his holy zeal in this kind, lie open in the History, I shall not
need to specify them. I beseech your Lordship to see to the suppression of
buying, selling and sporting upon the Lords day. I have often thought upon a
speech of that famous servant of Christ, and Minister in this City, learned,
humble, holy, public hearted Dr Staughton, which I had from him in private
conference in those times, when the Sabbath, and the observation thereof, was
decried by the Prelates and profane sort of men. His speech was this, Should
any man give up a Castle of such concernment to this Kingdom, as the fourth
Commandment is to the safety of Christian Religion, he would deserve to die
many deaths. As you love the Lord, and the life of Religion, regard the
Sabbath, and let your heart and hand be against those doctrines and practices,
which tend to the profanation of it.

5. I entirely Petition your utmost toward the compounding of our miserable
divisions about Church affairs. There are not only Congregations of
Anabaptists, Antinomians and Brownists in this City connived at; but (as it is
commonly and credibly reported) also companies of men, who deny the Deity of
Christ, and divine authority of the Scriptures. I remember that when Gallio was
Deputy of Achaia, there was insurrection made in Corinth against Paul, and
there were woeful confusions in the City, but it is added, Act. 18. 17. And
Gallio cared for none of those things. God forbid, that either your Lordship,
or any other Magistrate in this City should be thus regardlesse of our present
distractions. When there was a great breach made in the ground by an
earthquake at Rome, and notice was given, that the gods would not be pacified,
except something of special worth was cast into the breach, Marcus Curtius did
cast himself in, in love to his Country. And I believe that there are very
many amongst our selves in this City, both Ministers and others, who could be
content to sacrifice their lives in this service, to reconcile dissenting
brethren. For alas, alas, Do not divisions threaten dissolution? A Kingdom
divided cannot stand. My soul desires that London may, in ways of truth and
holiness, be like Jerusalem, A City compact together; or (as others render the
phrase) A City that is joined to it self together, Psalm. 1 22. 3.

For the effecting whereof, I make it my last request, that with all your might
(as God may be pleased to give opportunity) you would promote the speedy
settling and exercise of Church Government. Were the Church blessed with the use
of that Discipline, which is according to the mind of Christ, in this posture,
it would be terrible as an Army with banners, Cant. 6. 10. By this means
profaneness would be crushed, superstition suppressed, errors checked,
Malignancy discountenanced, the Sabbath better observed, holy Ordinances more
purely administered, and our breaches well healed. Here are motives enough to
move every right bred son of Sion, to set head, heart and hand unto this work.
Conscientious, zealous care in this kind, will contribute very much to your
honor here, and your comfort hereafter. Good Nehemiah thus pleads for himself
before the Lord, having been industrious in this service, Remember me, o my
God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds (my kindenesses) that I
have done for the house of my God, and for the offices thereof, Nehem. 13. 14.
Now in this case, the counsel of Gods faithful Ministers, is to be
considered. The words of Artaxerxes are notable, Ezr. 7. 21. Whatsoever Ezra
the Priest, the Scribe of the Law of the God of heaven shall require of you,
let it be done speedily. Some (it may be) will catch at this sentence, and say,
This discovers the drift of Presbyterian spirits; you desire to exercise
dominion over your brethrens consciences, and therefore would have all things
managed according to your mind? But I must take the boldness to answer, That
this is a notorious slander. For we petition nothing, but that which in our
consciences is according to the mind of Jesus Christ, and profess our selves
willing with the least and lowest of Saints, to submit unto the Scepter of our
Lord and Savior, not requesting favor in any thing, repugnant unto the holy
Scripture.

This is that advice, which in faithfulness, and with humility I present unto
your Lordships consideration; and I do it with the more confidence, because in
all particulars it speaks the language of our solemn National League and
Covenant, which should never be forgotten. And now to conclude all. I beseech
you all (both right Worshipful Aldermen, and right worthy Citizens) to
consider seriously how far my counsel directed to the Lord Major concerns
you every one. O that God would give you all with one heart to say unto his
Lordship (as it was once spoken to Ezra, to quicken a work of Reformation)
Arise, for this matter belongs unto thee, we also will be with thee. Be of
good courage, and do it, Ezr. 10. 4 For my part, I shall use no more words,
but those of David to Solomon (relating to Templework) 1 Chronicles. 22. 16. Arise
therefore and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.

FINIS.

