THE ASSOCIATION, AGREEMENT, AND PROTESTATION, OF THE COUNTIES of SOMERSET,

Printed by His Majesty's Command, at the Desire of the Lords and Commons of
Parliament Assembled at OXFORD,

By LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1644.

The Association, Agreement, and PROTESTATION, etc.
1 THat whereas by the Articles of Association of the Counties of Cornwall and
Devon, it is provided, that a Protestation should be taken by all men of those
Counties above the age of sixteen years, with a subscription thereunto
according to the form agreed on and expressed in those Articles, before the
Minister of the Parish, or some other Person or Persons to be appointed in each
Parish by the Justices of the Peace of each County, or any two of them; and all
Persons refusing to be forthwith certified to the Justices of Peace, and
secured as Enemies to the peace of the Kingdom: In like manner there is a
Protestation here set down agreeable with the former, extending as well to the
Counties of Somerset, and Dorset, as to those of Devon and Cornwall, and by the
Lords and Commons of Parliament assembled at Oxford, recommended to be also
taken by the men of Somerset and Dorset, if they think fit.

2 That his Highness Prince Maurice, or such other person as for the time being
shall be Commander in chief of the Forces in these four Counties, be moved,
that there be two Commissioners of each County to take the Musters of the said
Army, and that the Treasurers give an account monthly to the Committees of
each County, of their disbursments, and that concerning the Musters, such other
things may be observed as are expressed in His Majesty's Proclamation, and
Votes passed at Oxford 1643. concerning Musters.

3 That there be strict and continual search in every parish for all Soldiers
within these Counties, that have at any time bin in pay since these Wars, and
that they be forthwith sent to recruit the Army, and such as shall refuse be
sent to the Provost-Marshall-Generall. And no Soldier depart from his Colors
without License, according to His Majesty's Proclamation and Articles, and
offenders to be proceeded against according to their merits, and as many more
be raised in each County as may recruite the Companies, and that every
Foot-Company consist of one hundred, and every Troop of Horse and Dragooners of
sixty, and if any Foot-company have less then fifty, and of Horse and
Dragooners less then thirty, then if such Company be not recruited to these
last numbers, or more, within a month after the Muster, the Officers pay to be
detained, and after that, the Company paid and reduced, and the same rule to be
held for Pioners, as for Foot-companies.

4 That there be account taken of the Captains, and other Officers, that have
had any charg of Arms, how the same have bin disposed, and that by warrant
from the Commissioners, there be a general search for Arms through all the
four Counties; that his Majesty's Proclamation to this purpose be also pursued;
and that the Constables of each parish repair to every house within the same,
and take veiw of them, and give in their account to the High-Constables, who
are to bring it to the Commissioners.

5 That the Army be governed according to His Majesty's Articles, and that all
persons of what condition soever, be held infamous and enemies to the public
peace, that shall raise, or cause any mutinies, or disobedience thereunto, and
suffer all severity according to His Majesty's Articles.

6 That for the better encouragement of Soldiers to undertake this service,
where any person of those four Counties shall happen to be slain in the
present war, fighting on His Majesty's behalf, or dye in that service, upon
whose death any estate, or estates in Lands, or Tenements, or Hereditaments are
determinable in cases where the person or persons are living who held those
estates, other estates of the same Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, shall be
granted again to him or them, to be determinable upon some other life or lives,
as near the age as may be of the person or persons deceased, under the like
Rents, Conditions, and Covenants, as were to be performed for the former
estates. And where the person slain, or so dying, held the estate, or estates
determinable upon his own death, in such case an estate of equal value shall
be granted to his Widow, Child, or Children in the same Lands etc. upon such
conditions as aforesaid, and the refusers to perform such grant to loose the
double value thereof, the one half to His Majesty, and the other to the party
or parties, who by this Article is, or are to have that estate, and to be
imprisoned until payment. And for those persons of each of the said four
Associated Counties, that shall happen to be maimed fighting for His Majesty in
this present war, and shall not have wherewith all to relieve themselves,
special care shall be taken by the Justices of Peace of those Counties, that
they have some competent allowance out of the common Treasury of the County
where they last dwelt, according to the provisions heretofore made for may med
Soldiers.

7 That the Counties of Somerset, Dorset, Devon, and Cornwall being Assotiated
together, shall raise an Army for the defense and safety of those Counties, and
the rest of the Kingdom, by these proportions following, viz. Devon to raise
13500. men Cornwall 4500. men, Somerset 9000. men, and Dorset 3000. men, and
after that proportion for a greater and a lesser number, and all charges
concerning the same Army, shall be borne and discharged by those four Counties
according to the same proportion.

8 That the number of ten thousand men, viz. 8000. Foot, 1500. Horse, and 500.
Dragooners, will be fit to be forthwith raised, by the Counties of Somerset,
Derset, Devon, and Cornwall, according to the proportions already Voted, over
and besides the Soldiers of those several Counties, now in Garrison in the
same Counties, and the Trained-bands which are to be raised for their defense.

9 That payment shall be made to this Army out of those associated Counties for
three months next after the same shall be raised, according to the same
proportion.

10 That His Majesty be moved that toward payment of this Army, providing of
Arms, the Train of Artillery, and other necessaries for the same, there may
be allowed the weekly Contributions of those several Counties, the Fines to be
raised by compounding with Delinquents, Monyes to be raised by sequestring of
Delinquents Estates, with the Fines of those who have, or shall refuse to
attend the Sheriffs of those respective Counties upon their Warrants, since
the present Rebellion, to raise the Posse Comitatus in those Counties. And that
His Majesty's Commissioners may Authorize that disposition, and the Delinquents
Estates in those Counties be seized and disposed of by the Commissioners of
each County, to the same purpose respectively, and no Commanders of the Army
intermeddle with it, without their Authority: nevertheless the Moneys assigned
out of the County of Somerset, to the Lord Hoptons Army, and the Garrison of
Bristoll shall continue without any alteration, until His Majesty shall settle
some other course for payment of the same, and regard to be had of the County
of Somerset by the other Associated Counties, during the continuance of such
payment for a proportionable abatement.

11 That no Sequestration be made after composition made and paid, but by Order
of the general Sessions of the Peace, or other General meeting of the
Commissioners, by common consent there, unless for new offenses.

12 That the weekly payments in all the four Counties be raised with all
diligence, and Arrearages Collected and accounted for, until the Towns of
Plymouth, Poole, Lyme, and Wareham be reduced. And that Committees be appointed
in each County respectively, to take the accounts of all Receivers of the
weekly payments, which are to be the same that take the Treasurers accounts.

13 That there be provided 1000 Barrells of Powder, and 10000 Fire-Armes, at
the charge of those four Counties, according to the proportions before
expressed.

14 That the said Army, to be raised by the said four associated Counties,
shall not be removed out of those Counties, until the Towns of Plymouth,
Poole, Lyme, and Wareham, and such other places of those four Counties, that
shall hereafter rise in Rebellion, (if any do) be reduced to their due
Obedience to His Majesty, unless in case of necessity, as His Majesty by the
advice of the Council of War of that Army shall think fit.

15 That in regard by this Association, the Counties of Somerset, Dorset,
Devon, and Cornwall, make themselves but as one entire body, therefore as well
the charges of the Garrisons within those Counties, as of the Forces thus to be
raised shall be cast together, and from the time of this Association, which
shall be accounted from the first of May 1644, until God shall bless this
Kingdom with a happy Peace, each County shall bear its proportionable part of
the charg, according to the proportions aforesaid.

16 That His Majesty be moved, that several Commissions be granted to certain
Persons of each of those Counties, to authorize an Impresse of Soldiers for
this present Service.

17 That if any Minister shall refuse, or Wilfully neglect the solemn
Celebration of the Fast appointed by His Majesty on the second Friday of every
Month, or shall not read the Service and prayers appointed for that Fast, and
being called before a Justice of Peace shall not promise and protest his future
conformity, he be forthwith secured, and his Estate sequestered; and the like
course to be taken with such Ministers as absent themselves that day from their
Cures, unless upon sickness or other cause allowed by two Commissioners or
Justices of Peace; and the like order to be taken with such as shall not read
such books, or writings as shall be appointed by His Majesty to be read in
Churches and Chappells; and the Constables and Churchwardens are to certify
their defaults to the next Justices.

18 That there be copies of this Protestation delivered out by the Sheriff at
the Sessions of the Peace of each County, to the Constables of each Hundred
respectively, and the Hundred Constables do immediately deliver out several
copies to all the Petty-Constables, which are by the Minister of every Parish
Church and Chapel, to be published the next Sunday following after the
receipt; and such persons as shall take the same, are to subscribe their names
thereunto, before the said Minister, Constable, or Churchwardens, or two of
them; and the Ministers and Constables are to give the list, or certificate of
their names that take it, and of them that refuse, to the Constables of the
Hundred, who are to deliver the same to the Commissioners at the next general
meeting, after the taking, or refusal thereof.

THE PROTESTATION.
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest, with
my utmost power to maintain and defend the true reformed Protestant Religion,
established by Law in this Kingdom, against all Popery, Popish, and other
Innovations of Sectaries, and Schismatics; As also His Majesty's Person and
Rights, against all Forces whatsoever; And in like manner the Laws, Liberties,
and Privileges of Parliament, and of this Kingdom. And I shall to the utmost
of my Power preserve and defend the Peace of the four Counties of Somerset,
Dorset, Cornwall, and Devon, and all persons that shall unite themselves by
this our Protestation, in the due performance thereof, and to my power assist
His Majesty's Armies, for reducing the Towns of Plymouth, Poole, Lyme, and
Wareham, and resistance of all Forces of Scots, Invaders, and others, levied
under pretense of any authority of the Two Houses of Parliament, without His
Majesty's consent.

That if the County of Wilts, and City of Bristoll will enter into this
Association, they shall be received with all cheerfullnes.

That His Majesty be moved for a confirmation of the present Union, and
Articles.

FINIS.

