THE Asses Complaint against Balaam; Or the Cry of the COUNTRY AGAINST Ignorant
and Scandalous Ministers.
To the Reverend Bishops.
YE mitred Members of the House of Peers,
The Kings Churchwardens, and Gods Overseers,
Fathers in Christ, we your poor Children cry
Oh give us Bread of Life, or else we die.
For we are burd'ned with our old Sir John's,
Who when we ask for Bread do give us stones;
And only cant a Homily or two,
Which Daws and Parrots may be taught to do;
Drunkards Cannonicall, Unhallowed Bears,
That name God oftener in their oaths then Prayers.
Into what darkness will our Church be hurld
If such as these be called The light oth' World?
These that have naught to prove themselves devout
Save only this, That Cromwell turned them out.
Mistake us not, we do not mean those loyal
And learned souls, who in the fiery trial
Sufferd for King and conscience sake, let such
Have double honor, we shall nere think much;
But this our tender conscience disapproves,
That Ravens should return as well as Doves;
And croak in Pulpits once again to bring
A second Judgment on our Church and King.
Though England does not fear another loss,
'Cause God has burnd his Rods at Charing cross;
Yet Clergy sins may call him to the Door
Even him who whipped and scourged them out before.
Oh therefore ye that read the sacred Laws
Eject their Persons, and disown their cause:
God, and the King have both condemud this crew,
Then let them not be patronized by you.
It Is not their Cassocks, not their Surplices
We quarrel at, there is no hurt in these;
We owh their Decency, yet every Fool
Cannot be called a Monk that wears a Cowle;
Were grace, and learning wanting (by your leaves)
We would not pin our faith on your Lawn sleeves;
It Is Aarons breastplate, and those sacred words
Become a Churchman best, THAT THAT my Lords
Which pious Baxter makes his livery,
Would all our Curates were but such as he!
Pardon my Lords, we do not make this stir
To vindicate the factious Presbyter;
We hate his ways, and equally disown
The zealous Rebel, as the Idle Droan;
And beg as often to be delivered from
The Kirk of Scotland, as the Sea of Rome;
We pray for Bishops too, Oh may ye stand
To heal the sad distractions of the Land;
Then give us Priests loyal and painful too,
To give to Caefar, and to us our due.
God save King Charles our Christian faiths Defender,
And bring Religion to its wonted Splendor.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Loyal and Orthodox Reader, Judge charitably, I am ne'ther Presbyterian, nor
Phanatick, but as true a Son of the Church of England as thy self; for thy
further satisfaction, I shall (God willing) present thee with an other paper,
to clear my honesrintention in this.

Lewis Griffin.

