THE ASSOCIATION, AGREEMENT AND PROTESTATION, OF THE COUNTIES OF CORNWALL, AND
DEVON. January 5. 1643.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command At OXFORD January 18. By Leonard Lichfield
Printer to the University. 1643.

THE Articles of the Associations, etc.
1.THat a Protestation be taken by all men within the two Counties, above the
age of Sixteen years, and Subscription thereunto, according to the form
agreed on, before the Minister of the Parish, or some other Person as shall be
appointed in each Parish by the Justices of Peace of each County, or two of
them. The same being first taken by all the Commissioners at this meeting; and
all Persons refusing be forthwith certified to the Justices of the Peace; and
be secured as Enemies to the Peace of the Kingdom. And this to be done with all
speed, and account given before the twentieth of February.

2. That his Highness be moved, That there be two Commissioners of each County
to take the Musters of the Army, and that the Treasurer give an account monthly
to the Committees of each County, of his disbursments.

3. That there be strict continual search for all Soldiers, that have at any
time been in Pay since these Wars, in every Parish; and that they be
forthwith sent to recruit the Army: and such as shall refuse, that they be sent
to the Provost-Marshall-Generall. And that no Soldier depart from his Colors
without license, according to His Majesty's Proclamation and Articles; and
Offenders to be proceeded with according to their merits; and that as many more
be raised in each County, as may recruite the Companies; and that every Foot
Company consist of one Hundred; and every Troop of Horse and Dragooners, of
threescore. And if any Foot Company have less then fifty, and of Horse and
Dragooners, less then thirty; then if such Company be not recruited to these
last numbers, or more, within a month after the Muster, the Officers pay to be
detained: and after that, the Company paid and reduced; and the same rule to be
held for Pioners, as for Foot Companies. And herein his Highness directions
are to be desired, and that the Committees may be informed of the present
number of the Army; and what the present weekly Charge of it comes to.

4. That there be account taken of the Captains and other Officers, that have
had any charge of Arms, how the same have been disposed; and that by warrant
from the Commissioners, there be a general search for Arms through both
Counties. And that the Constables of each Parish repair to every house within
the same, and take view of them; and give in their account to the high
Constables: who are to bring it to the Commissioners.

That the weekly payments in both Counties, be raised with all diligence, and
Arrears collected and accounted for, until Plymouth be reduced. And that
Committees be appointed in each County respectively, to take the accounts of
all Receivers of the weekly payments: which are to be the same that take the
Treasurers accounts.

5. That the Commissioners of Devon, as has been done in Cornwall, proceed
against such as have failed to attend the Sheriff upon warrant for the Posse
Comitatus: and that the Fines may be employed for the present supply of His
Majesty's Army, with Arms, and Ammunition for a present Magazine of Arms,
Ammunition, and Tools, in each County: wherein His Majesty's Pleasure is to be
desired.

6. That there be an humble Remonstrance of the estate of both Counties to His
Majesty: and of the necessity, that all Monyes coming of Delinquents Estates,
Fines, and Compositions, may be employed to the use of the Army and Garrisons,
and payment of the Debts contracted for His Majesty's Service, and by His
former Proclamations to be secured: and that His Majesty's Commissions may
authorize that disposition, and that the Delinquents Estates in both Counties,
be seized and disposed of, by the Commissioners of each County, to the same
purpose respectively; and no Commanders of the Army intermeddle with it,
without their Authority.

7. That no Sequestration be made after Composition made and paid, but by Order
at the General Sessions of the Peace, or other general meeting of the
Commissioners by common Consent there: unless for new offenses.

8. That the Army be governed according to His Majesty's Articles, and that all
Persons of what condition soever, be held infamous and Enemies to the public
Peace, that shall raise, or cause any Mutinies, or disobedience thereunto: and
suffer all severity, according to His Majesty's Articles.

9. That all such Persons as have been or shall be slain in the present War,
or dye in the service, by whose life any other Person held any Lands or Rents;
the Party to whom the Right to grant such Land or Rent belongs unto, shall be
bound to grant an Estate for a life, instead of the Person so killed or dying,
under the Rents and Covenants as was formerly held; unto such Person and
Persons, as was entitled to hold the same, and at his nomination. And the
refusers to loose the double value of the Estate; one half to His Majesty, the
other to the Party: and to be imprisoned till payment.

10. That if either or both Counties of Somerset and Dorset, will enter into
this Union and Association; they shall be received with all cheerfulness.

11. That if any Minister shall refuse, or wilfully neglect the solemn
Celebration of the Fast appointed by His Majesty on the second Friday of the
Month; or shall not read the Service and Prayers appointed for that Fast; and
being called before a Justice of Peace, shall not promise and protest his
future conformity; he be forthwith secured, and his Estate sequestered. And the
like course to be taken with such Ministers, as absent themselves that day:
unless upon sickness or other cause, allowed by two Commissioners or Justices
of Peace. And the like order to be taken with such as shall not read such
Books as shall be appointed to be read by His Majesty. And the Constables and
Churchwardens, are to certify their defaults, to the next Justices.

12. That His Majesty be moved for a Confirmation of the present Union and
Articles.

13. That there be provided a Thousand Barrells of Powder, and ten Thousand
Fire-Armes at the charge of both Counties, whereof Cornwall to be a Fourth,
and Devon three parts, according to the proportion of the grand Subsidy.

14. That the Army shall be recruited, and increased to the number of Eighteen
Thousand Horse and Foot: to be raised proportionably in both Counties.

15. That His Highness be entreated that a Commission be granted to authorize
an impresse of Soldiers, for the present service.

16. That on the first Wednesday of the next Month, and every Month following,
the Committee now appointed for Cornwall, which are Sir Samuel Cosewarth,
Richard Prideaux, Walter Langdon, Nevill Bligh, and Renatus Bellat, Esquires;
and of Devon, Arthur Basset Esquire, William Tothill, John Mere, Gilbert Pard,
and Thomas Mediford, Esquires, do meet first at Exeter, and continually
afterward where the Cornish Committee appoint to take the monthly Accounts of
the Receivers of the Weekly Rates, and Treasurer of the Army, and what else
concerns these Articles. And in case of impediment, the Commissioners of Oier
and Terminer in each County respectively, name other Committees, or supply the
place of any one himself.

17. That there be Copies of this Protestation delivered out by the Sheriff,
at the Sessions of each County, to the Constables of each Hundred respectively,
and that the said Hundred Constables, do immediately deliver out several Copies
to all the Petty Constables, which are by the Minister of every Parish Church
and Chapel, to be published the next Sunday following after the receipt: and
then every man present to take the same, and subscribe his name thereunto,
before the said Minister, Constable, or Churchwardens, or two of them: and
such of his Parish as shall not be present at the time, do take the same
within ten days following. And the Ministers and Constables are to give in
the List or Certificate of their names that take it, and of them that are
absent or refuse, to the Constables of the Hundred: who are to deliver the same
to the Commissioners, at their next general meeting, after the Twentieth of
February next.

Whereas a few Malevolent and Ambitious persons, in the name of two Houses of
Parliament, have by Treasonable practices imbroyled this Kingdom in a
Civill-Warre, pursued His Majesty's Person, murdered His good Subjects; some,
barbarously by the common Hangman, against Law and Justice: others, by Hostile
assaults: brought a general devastation upon the whole Kingdom; taking away
all liberty from the Members of both Houses; by awing, terrifying, and
assaulting them with Tumults and Armies; usurping the Royal power,
Counterfeiting a Great Seal: and to show their horrid intentions against the
King, Kingdom, and Government, finding their Acts not likely to protect them
from the punishment due to their merits, have unnaturally invited and brought
in the Scots to invade this Kingdom: and in these distractions, to make a
total conquest of this Nation. For resistance whereof, and preserving the
Common-Peace, the inhabitants of Cornwall and Devon have united themselves;
and for continuance of which union, this ensuing Protestation is to be taken.

The Protestation.
I A. B. do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest, with
my utmost power, to maintain and defend the true Reformed Protestant Religion,
established by Law in this Kingdom, against all Popery, Popish, and other
innovations of Sectaries and Schismatics; as also His Majesty's Person and
Rights, against all forces whatsoever; and in like manner, the Laws,
Liberties, and Privileges of Parliament, and of this Kingdom. And I shall, to
the utmost of my power, preserve and defend the Peace of the two Counties of
Cornwall and Devon; and all Persons that shall unite themselves by this our
Protestation, in the due performance thereof. And to my power assist His
Majesty's Armies, for reducing the Town of Plymouth; and resistance of all
Forces of Scots, invaders, and others, levied under pretense of any authority
of two Houses of Parliament, or otherwise, without His MAJESTY'S personal
consent.

In regard of the restless endeavors of the Contrivers of the present
distractions, who after the unnatural divisions they have wrought, and move
misery by calling in the Scots, to make the desolation of this Nation
irrecoverable: and it being the duty of all good Subjects and lovers of their
Country, in such times to unite themselves, that they may the better resist the
disturbers of the public Peace.

We of the Counties of Cornwall and Devon, (by reason of situation and
alliance of families, nearly concerned, in each others condition) for the
preservation of the Peace already obtained among us, and for a farther increase
and security of it; do associate and unite our selves (according to our duty
to God, His Majesty, and our Country) for the common defense of these Counties,
against all forces that oppose His Majesty's Army, or Commissioners, authorized
under His Great Seal of England: and against all Towns, Castles, and Forts,
that shall resist His Majesty's said Army or Commissioners.

And we do promise in the presence of Almighty God, that we will not break
this union, nor desist from following all just, necessary, and Honorable
ways, to the utmost of our power, for perfecting and securing the said Peace,
and the reducing all Places, Persons, Towns, Castles, and Forts, within the
said Counties, to His Majesty's obedience, and particularly the Town of
Plymouth.

And in case either of the said Counties be invaded by Sea or Land, we do bind
our selves to mutual defense of each other, against all persons raised without
His Majesty's personal consent: and to resist all such power, with all the
strength each County can raise for the others defense.

FINIS.

