VOTA, NON BELLA.

NeVV-CastLe's Hearty GratVLatIon TO HER SaCreD Sovereign KIng CharLes The
SeConD; ON HIs noVV-GLorIoVs RestaVratIon To HIs BIrth-rIght-PoVVer.

By RALPH ASTELL, M. A.

Gateshead, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, 1660.

VOTA, NON BELLA, etc.
OH Thou, the High and Lofty Holy-One,
Who in that dazzling light have set thy Throne,
To which no Eagle-eye approach can make,
Nor Jacobs-Staff it is altitude can take,
Bow, bow the Heavens, and come down and dwell
Amid'st the Praises of thine Israel.
My Loyal Fancy with thy Beamlings fill,
And sparkle Daylight from my Nighted Quill
Through all the Cranies of our Hemi-sphere,
And with thy smiles kiss up each dewy Tear!
Re-briske the Spirits which are almost spent,
And Cure us by our Wound, a Parl'ament!
MAy I presume amongst the glistring Train
Of Britain's fairest Nymphs (Dread Sovereign!)
On humble Knee to kiss Your Royal Hand,
And Joy You welcome to Your Native Land?
The Southern Ladies now (I know) will dress
Themselves in all their pretty gaudinesse;
Richly perfumed with breath of Maia's flowr's,
Caught from their sweet Lungs after dewy showers:
And crowd the Treasures of the bi-fork'd Hill
Into th'Alembique of some Golden Quill;
Then, raptured with a Sacred Fire, from thence
Drop in Your Princely Ears Loves Quintessence
In Highborn Strains of Poetry, which shall
Immertallize Your Great Memorial.
Nay, Phoenix-like (methinks) I see them bring
Arabian Spices on their nimble Wing,
And build a Pile; which on Your New-birth-day
Kindly aspected by Your Solar Ray,
Becomes a Royal Bon-fire, in whose flashes
They gloriously expire; yet 'midst those Ashes
A Seed is couched, which, influenced by You,
A self-born Phoenix yearly does renew.
Whilst I, black Northern Lass, from Kedar's Tents
Approach Your Court with no such Fragrant Scents:
Nor can I Greet You in a Golden Strain,
Whose finest Metal runs through a Cole Vein,
My dangling tresses of a deep-dark brown,
By ruffling Boreas tufted up and down,
With Musk nor Amber do em-breath the Air,
Like our young Gallants in their Curled Hair,
Befring'd with Atoms Aromaticall;
Save Coal dust-powder, I have none at all.
Yet (Royal SIR!) daign me this only Grace,
To be a Black-patch on some Beauties Face;
And so (perhaps) like darker foil, I may
Cause sparkling Diamonds shine with brighter ray.
Venus her self is proud of her brown Mole;
I have my spot too, it is a good round Cole:
This sets me off, and makes me Penny-fair;
White Swans are common, but a Black one Rare.
And such a Bird upon Tyne's Banks shall sing
In Loyal Notes, God save Great CHARL'S our KING!
Heaven fix his Crown! may He successful prove,
And sit Enthroned in His Peoples love!
May our Latonian Lamps still happy shine,
And never meet in the Ecliptic Line!
May CHARES, our Sun (who from the Eld of days,
And King of Kings derives His Sovereign Rays;
Even from the Sacred Fount of Orient Light)
Scatter the Juncto of the black-brow'd Night
With His Majestique Presence, and cashier
The Foggy Mists out of our Hemi-sphere!
May He tran-spierce with Justice-darting Eyes
The Murders, Rapines, Treasons, Blasphemies,
That have been Acted on Great Britain's Stage,
By the Scene-servers of this Masqued Age:
Whilst they re-guild each weather-beaten Front,
That has true Loyalty enstamp'd upon it!
May He not cease Benignly to aspect
The Parl'ament; our Moon, that does reflect
No self (but borrowed) Luster; whether she
Be in her Apo-or her Peri-ge!
May she (kind Heavens!) still in the Full appear,
But never Act beyond her proper Sphere!
Or justle Phoebus, or with her long Train
Presume hereafter to mount CHARLES's Wain!
And let that Tongue never coin a sound again,
That will not play the Clerk, and say, Amen.
For though (by reason of a duskie slough
That over-casts the surface of my Brow)
I cannot show so smooth a white-skinn'd hue
As other Madame, yet my Heart's as true;
Who, could they through those secret Chambers glance,
Might-thence take Copies of Allegiance.
Nay, he that runs may Read how with my blood
To Faith's Defender I still faithful stood.
Scotland can witness (to her cost) that I
Mis-kenn'd her double-faced Mercury;
When as the Brotherhood with reverend paws
Was called in, t'uphold the Dying Cause.
Her numerous Army, which about me lay
With Bag and Baggage to divide the Prey,
Never scar-crow'd me: but stoutly I did stand
Even with a handful (till the utmost Sand)
To vindicate my Trust: and when my Wall
Earth-quak'd with Powder, on the ground did sprawl,
My Loyalty never shook; for well I knew,
Who then expired, straight way to Heaven flew,
Each with his Tombstone, that some Angel might
Their Epitaphs to Everlasting write.
Eft-soon (like Job) upon a Dunghill I
Was set, uncas'd of all my bravery:
Yet I embraced it with a cheerful smile,
And thought my self Enthroned all the while;
Triumphing in my change of Rags, which were
A Badge of Honor to a Cavalier.
On my first Love my Eye was ever bent,
Though churlish Keepers did my hand prevent;
Forcing my Purse (not Heart) strings to dilate,
And tribute pay to their Vtopian State.
Our Holy Mother, shouldered out of door
By graceless Sons (who called her Romish Whore,
Of all her-Sacred Ornaments be-strip'd her,
And (fie for shame!) from post to pillar whipped her,
With Scorpion-tagged points, which pierced so deep,
That through each Pore her bleeding soul did weep)
I reverenced, as I was wont to do;
Nay, bowed may Knee, and Asked her Blessing too:
Which out of fashion with their duties grew,
Who left the Old-way to seek out a New.
But it is not strange, our Mother they despite,
Since they [Our Father] have forgotten quite.
I grieved to think, her Seamless Coat was rent,
And our good Shepherds into corners sent.
Grave, Learned Fathers (such my Eyes have seen
Called fore some Gifted Brethren of Nineteen,
To be new Chatechiz'd about their Graces,
Or else to quit their more-examin'd Places)
Once graced my Pulpits, whence my ravished Ear
The lively Oracles might freely Hear:
But they were silenced, or else whispered small,
When Jeroboam's Priests began to bawle;
Crossing my Worship with an Harp-set Note,
Which of their Masters they had got by Rote.
Brave Oliver! still sat upon their Lip,
With his Encomiums their Tongues they tip:
But will not learn ('till forced to it by the Rod)
How to Pronounce, CHARLES by the Grace of God.
I must confess, it is but my usual fate,
To have like Minister, like Magistrate:
Whose Rampant Zeal has made me Couchant lie,
Scarce suffering me to look with half an Eye
(For many years) toward the Royal Race;
Till that good MONCK unvailed his lucky Face.
A Face! which, when it bo-pee'd through his hood,
Gave us some glimpses of our future good:
Our day 'gan break, which long had hid 'its Head,
And Lambert's shaddow's on a sudden fled.
'Twixt hope and fear with looks distract we sit,
Not knowing well how this great Change may hit:
Sometimes our Spirits frisk, and do presage,
That GEORGE will bring again the Golden Age:
When straight surprised with a Counter-blast,
The Scene is changed, and we droop as fast.
Our Leaves (like Heliotropes) we spread or close,
As GEORGE his Cloud, or light-some Pillar shows.
But, once full-Orbed with a Sovereign ray,
Our Night was turned into a Glorious Day.
The Freeborn People (never till then made free)
Shook off their Slave-ships, and cried Jubilee.
Knights of the Noble Garter (then) all were;
For on his breast each man a GEORGE did bear.
The Imperial City (which of late has bin
A Cage for unclean birds to nestle in;
As Scriech-Owles, Harpyes, Cormorants, and those
Bloodthirsty Vultures, Nol for Judges chose
Of his accursed Slaughterhouse) was then
A general Rendezvous of honest men.
How was she ravished, when her dazzled Eye
Saw CHARLES and Phoebus both in Gemini!
Thrice-happy City! whose first stone ('it is said)
In the ascendent Twins was fairly laid:
Now more than happy! since in the same Sign
Heaven fixed the Head-stone of the STVART's Line.
(A tried and precious stone, all wonder-wrought,
Though by pretending builders set at naught)
Whilst that three Kingdoms joined in Consort, cry
Grace, Grace unto it: oh, sweet Harmony!
You Sister-Nymphs, who play your learned prancks
On Grant and Isis flow'r-enamel'd Banks!
Who with your speaking Eyes can complement
The scaly Fry out of their Element;
And cause the Streams smooth gliding to advance,
And take the murmuring Pebbles out to dance
To your sweet Lyrick touch! who can in-voice
The trembling Leaves, and make the Trees rejoice:
Recant your fawning Protectorian Notes,
And to an higher Key skrew up your Throats,
Your warbling Tongues re-tune, let her be shent
Who to that bloody Tyrant durst present
Her [Olive Branch of Peace:] may that foul crime
Hereafter never attaint her Nobler Rhyme!
Our CHARLES is born again! your Fancies searse,
And once more measure His Genethliack Verse.
Twelve-times Hyperion at each Sign has hoasted
(Whilst through the Zodiac his Chariot posted)
Since that Great Britain traveled in pain,
To be Delivered of a Sovereign.
The starred Peers, with some of Royal Kin,
And Loyal Gentry often were Called-in
To her hard Labor, but in vain did play
The active Midwives before the appointed day.
For the Great Dragon (known by his Red Nose)
With force and cunning did the work oppose;
Still ready to devour, a-front he stood,
And from his mouth cast out a purple flood,
Whose raging and impetuous stream bore down
Law's and Relion's Bancks in every Town;
Ingulphing their Estates, Lives, Liberties,
Who were engaged in the Enterprise.
'Twas Treason for to cast a pitying Eye
On her in this her great extremity;
Her throws grew sharp, her bones seemed out of joint,
She faints and swounds, each minute at deaths point,
She sweats and shricks, her body's on the Rack,
Yet who so hardy, as to hold her Back?
Slingsby miscarri'd, Hewit lost his head,
'Cause he stood by her in the time of need.
As big as she can tumble, then she cries,
Help, help (good Neighbors) with your quick supplies!
I Am almost spent, yet do not give me over;
Were I once laid, my strength would soon recover.
Kind Cheshire quickly heard her piteous moan,
(Enough to melt an heart hewed out of stone
Into a fount of Tears) nor does she spare
Her dearest blood to Usher in the Heir.
She knocks up Booth, who with his Loyal band,
Is ready straight to lend his helping hand:
But, whilst that others do too tardy rise,
(Wiping the slumber from their half-shut Eyes)
They are surprised, and he forced to fly,
And leave poor Britain in the Straw to lie.
And thus she lay! affrighted and forlorn;
No hopes at all a Savior would be born:
Till Heaven employed that Noble Instrument,
And from the North St. GEORGE on-Horse-back sent
T'obstetricate; whose Journey scarce was don,
When she began to Travel with a Son;
The happy issue of her Prayers and Tears,
Which had besieged the Almighty's Ears.
GEORGE made no vaunts, yet gave encouragement;
Gentle and rough, still in a Mist he went;
Till all was ready for a work so great,
Then stepped in GEORGE, and did the Noble feat;
Brought her to Bed, which none before could do;
Nay, saved the Darling, and the Mother too:
Whose sudden joy made her (by a sweet fate)
The Act of Amnesty to antedate.
Whole Volleys (straight) of Acclamations pierce
The Ecchoing Air, another Universe
Crowds London's streets, to see this strange new thing,
The Real Presence of their twice-born KING.
The Bells, in-soul'd by some Intelligence,
Awaited then no Ringers to commence
The welcome Changes, but their Clappers ply,
Returning Thanks for her Delivery.
Th'Angelick Quire dismounted roundly (then)
And in their Anthems bare a Part with Men.
Of all the Set, the Organs mourned that day,
Their Pipes were stopped so hard, they could not play.
The People, tickled with the Noble Sounds,
Could scantly keep their souls i'th'bodie's bounds;
Some tossed their Caps, which in mixed dances hover
Above their heads; no need to bid, Uncover.
On flexed Knees some for His health did Pray,
Whilst in full Bowls some drink their own away.
Some clap their hands, who in the tyding throngs
Puffing and sweltring, had quite lost their tongues.
Some 'bout the crackling Bonfires shout and sing,
And pretty Babes lisp'd out, A King! A King!
Oh! what a goodly sight! what wondering Eyes!
What leaping Hearts; to see our Sun arise
In His full strength, and lift His beaming Head
From off the Pillow of His Seagreen bed!
Phospher'd by GEORGE, be-Duk'd on either hand;
Before, behind the Glory of the Land,
Like Planets moving in their glistring Spheres,
Whilst CHARLES, like Phoebus, in the mids appears,
In bloudless Triumph Riding to His Throne:
For HE makes Conquest of our Hearts alone.
Then I, (who whilom scarce a CHARLES durst name,
Enforced to shroud the Loyall-mounting Flame
In Ashie Weeds) brake forth in vari'd Joy,
Descanting boldly on, Vive Le ROY.
St. GEORGE no more shall (now) a Romance be,
But our best Story (MONCK!) made good in Thee:
Thou have out-vy'd him, may thy Sword never fail,
That did (unsheathed) dis-Rumpe the Dragon's tail;
Whose fi'ry swinge, as round-about it went,
Our brightest Stars struck from the Firmament.
Oh, for a Virgil now! whose Skillful Quill
With new Georgicks might our Country fill:
Whilst I oppressed with CHARLES his crouding glory,
Leave After-ages for to write His Story!
And now (Great Monarch!) lest my longer stay
Should fright the Ladies at Your Court away,
(Whose dainty stomachs will, I know, disdain
The poor provision of my courser brain)
Unto my smutchy Cell I will retire,
And what I cannot utter, there admire.
I Will sit me down, and wonder how You made
(O're-come at Worster, not to say, Betrayed
By such, who sold the Anointed of the Lord)
Your blessed escape from Cromwell's thirsty Sword,
That cursed Nimrodean Hunter! whose keen Pack
Of quick-nos'd Bloud-hounds traversed every track,
Beat every Bush, through this and the other Wood,
To find Your steps, and suck Your Sacred Blood;
Yet lost their game: Amazed then I Will stand,
To think, how in the hollow of his hand
God hid Your Royal Self, and let none see,
When You took Sanctuary in a Tree.
My weeping Eye Your Flittings shall review,
And in Your exile go along with You.
I Will draw an abstract of Your many dangers,
By Your own Country men, false Friends and Strangers,
Of Robbers, Waters, and the fearful Deep,
In City, Wilderness, awake, asleep.
Then, on the Counter-part my Rapted Soul,
With Pencill dipped in some Castalian Bowl,
Shall-limne a Land-scape of God's gracious Care,
His Love and Mercies, Various, Rich and Rare.
Both in Your Banishment and Restoration
To Your returning People of this Nation,
You were be-miracled, and may be said,
In Hieroglyphics to be all arrai'd.
From You our happy Era shall commence,
Who were the Masterpiece of Providence.
OH, let us not (good Lord!) let us no more,
Instead of one just Monarch serve Five-score
Usurping Kinglings! keep us all entire,
Rendering the Son what we denied the Sire.
Restore in CHARLES our Church, Laws, Liberties,
And make our Hearts a willing Sacrifice!
Let us no more Revolt, but have a care,
How we conspire against the Lawful Heir!
That blessed with Peace and Plenty, we may sing,
Glory to God on High for Our Good KING!
Te^^astichon.
Vltima magnarum Prognostica Linea rerum,
Qua CAROLI Primi finitur Regis Imago,
In Facie Reducis legitur perfecta Secundi;
Nato Vota dabunt, Patri quae Bella negarunt.
FINIS.

