A LETTER FROM HIS MAJESTY'S Quarters at Newcastle.

Containing the substance of the KINGS Answer to the Scots Commissioners, and
His MAJESTY'S desires to come to LONDON to Treat with the Parliament, And how
M. Murry and diverse Malignants are received at Court;

With the proceedings of the Scots Forces in the North.

And another Letter from Edinburgh in Scotland of Montrosses being Shipped away,
and the particulars thereof; And General Middletons marching against the
Gourdons.

These Letters are Printed and published according to ORDER.



London, Printed by E. G. 1646.

SIR,
THE Commissioners are all gone into Scotland, not only those who were sent
from thence to the King, to Treat with His Majesty last, who are returned much
discontented; but there are also gone home, the Committee that were appointed
to stay with the Army, and the Kings Secretary; they are all of any power gone
into Scotland, except only the General himself, whose Excellency is left
here to Govern and Order the Soldiers, who are promised content from the
Kingdom; They went away from hence on Monday and Tuesday last, and this
present Thursday is their general meeting day at Edinburgh, as was appointed
by the Committee of Estates; The Commissioners, and the Ministers often Treated
with the King, and His Majesty's last Answer to the Commissioners before they
went away from hence was in effect the same, which the Commissioners of both
Kingdoms received, after the delivery of the Propositions here to His Majesty.
His Majesty does not so refuse the taking of the Covenant, or the passing of
the Propositions as to givea positive denial that He will not pass the one
or Sign the other, though in effect little better) The substance of His
Majesty's Answer to the Scots Commissioners was thus.

That He is very sensible of the sad condition of His Kingdoms, and the
miseries of Wars, none more then Himself, that He has propounded ways for
remedy thereof already, that He hopes there will a hearing be granted to Him,
And to Treat with Him for the speedy settling of the Kingdoms. And to the end
that there may be the better accommodation for His Majesty and likewise for His
subjects (with whom He is to treat) He desires that He may reside in some
convenient place, either in, or near London or Westminster, where His Majesty
says He desires that there may be a full hearing. But (after God knows how
long a Treaty, and what effects) His Majesty then promises, (which He says He
doubts not of) to give satisfaction: and this is all the Answer which they
could have to carry to Edinburgh, (what use will be made of this God knows) We
are very sorry here that the Country is still burdened with the Armies lying
upon us, And fear that We shall not yet be eased, because that some have
already taken in Hay and other provisions, which they fear will be for winter
quarters, others build them stables, which (with other observations of the
Country people) are a great and heavy burden to the minds of many, who seeing
the freedom of other Countries are greeved that themselves (who have been the
longest sufferers) should be farthest from being freed.

There are many Malignants hereabouts, this Town is full of them, Mr. Murry of
the Bedchamber, His Majesty's old Agent, whom you had prisoner at London, and
other such dangerous ones as he, are hear, and have often recourse to His
Majesty; if some stricter course (then has yet been) be not taken you may
easily judge what these things may come to; the well affected of both Kingdoms
cannot but be much troubled at it; The Scots have often made Proclamation
against malignants coming hither, but that prevalies not; they come, and are
daily admitted and are received by His Majesty, I pray God they do not stir up
a new War. I write to you of these things with a bleeding and sad heart;
rather desiring a Reformation of them, then rejoicing in them, the thought
whereof cannot choose but much sad the spirits of all honest men; you may be
sure that Malignants coming daily to Court, act no good for the Kingdoms, for
they care not what ruin is brought upon us, so that they advance their own
ends.

For certain James Graham (sometimes Earl of Montrosse) is gone out of
Scotland, but (by reason that he had notice of the Parliaments Ships riding
near to the port, where he had intended to take Shipping) he refused to
pass in the Ship appointed for him to go in, and passed over privately in a
Vessel elsewhere; which was done so privately that few or none of his own
Officers (as it is said) knew of his going, though they came with him to go
over the Seas also: It is supposed by some, that he is gone to Denmark,
others think he is gone to Norway, some that he will only cross over and
then pass to some other place by Land. But for your further satisfaction from
those parts, I have sent you the Copy of a Letter that came hither from
Edinburgh this day: and I subscribe my self,

Sir Yours to serve you to my power, E. A.
Newcastle the 17 of Sep. 1646.
THE Copy of a Letter from Edinburgh in Scotland, concerning the assembling of
the Estates; and Montrosses going away from thence: as also General Major
Middletons going against the Gordons.
Honored Sir,
James Graham (commonly called the Earl of Montrosse) I can assure you is now
gone out of this Kingdom, he shipped two of his best Horses, which were his
own charging Horses; and with them he also sent twentyfoure Gentlemen of his
Officers and friends, aboard a Ship of James Gibsons, to be transported. And
some of the Parliaments Ships lie in wait, expecting that Montrosse will lanch
with them, but he having some discovery made to him thereof, left them to pass
without him; himself went privately away, and shipped himself in a Frigot
that same night, as is supposed to Birien. Upon Thursday next there is a
meeting of Estates to be here, and our Lords and other Commissioners and
Gentlemen are to come from Newcastle, what it produces, you shall hear by the
next. There is no word come from Major General Middleton, since he went to the
North; but we have advertisements that he will first go and curb some of the
Gordons in the North, who hold out some houses against the Estates, and have
not yet submitted, by which means they are a great trouble to their
Neighbors; but we hope that he will not be long in reducing them thus in have
I remain;

Edinburgh the 15. of September, 1646. Your most humble Servant, S. E.

FINIS.

