THE COMPLETE B^^^
This vain gay thing sets up for man.
But see with fate attends him,
The powd'ring Barber first began.
The Barber Surgeon ends him.


AN ESSAY In Defense of the FEMALE SEX. In which are inserted the CHARACTERS OF
A Pedant, A Squire, A Beau, A Vertuoso, A Poetaster, A City-Critick, etc.


In a Letter to a Lady.

Written by a Lady.

Since each is fond of his own ugly Face;
Why should you when we hold it break the Glass?
Prol. to Sir F. Flutter. LONDON, Printed for A. Roper and E. Wilkinson at the
Black Boy, and R. Clavel at the Peacock, in Fleetstreet, 1696.

To Her Royal Highness the Princess Anne of Denmark.
MADAM,
IF in adventuring to lay this little Piece at your Highnesses Feet, and humbly
beg your Royal Protection of it, I have presumed too far, be pleased to impute
it to your own, most gracious Goodness, the knowledge of which encouraged me.
Our Sex are by Nature tender of their own Offspring, and may be allowed to
have more fondness for those of the Brain, then any other; because they are so
few, and meet with so many Enemies at their first appearance in the World. I
hope therefore to find pardon, if like an indulgent Parent, I have endeavored
to advance my first Born, by entering it very early into your Highnesses
Service.

I have not presumed to approach your Highness out of any Confidence in the
merits of this Essay, but of the Cause which it pleads, wherein the Honor of
the whole Sex seemed to exact of me no less a Patronage than that of the Best,
as well as Greatest among 'em, whom they are all ambitious to see at their
head. I have only endeavored to reduce the Sexes to a Level, and by Arguments
to raise Ours to an Equallity at most with the Men: But your Highness by
Illustrious Example daily convinces the World of our Superiority, and we see
with wonder, Virtues in you, Madam, greater than your Birth. In this I am
peculiarly happy, that I am exempted from the common Task of other Dedicators,
who lie under an Obligation to publishing to the World those Excellencies of
their Patrons, which perhaps appear no where but in their Epistles. In me it
were as great folly, to pretend to make known the Illustrious Quallities of
your Highness, as it would be to go about to demonstrate by Argument, that the
Sun shined, to a Crowd that are warmed by the Influence of it.

I had attempted the Character of a consummate Woman, could I, though but faintly
have shaddow'd the inimitable Graces of you Highness; but the impossibillity of
that Task forced me to desist. It were easy here to lanch into those glorious
particulars, which affirmed of any other than your Royal Highness, would have
been extravagance of Flattery; but to you Injustice, and in me the highest
presumption, to attempt with my feeble Hand those Perfections, which the ablest
must fall infinitely short of. The luster of your Royal Virtues, Madam, like
the Sun, gives us warmth and light, and while at a modest distance we admire
it, improves our sight, which too bold a view confounds, yet the meanest and
most ignorant see those Glories, which the most exquisite Artist can never
express. The World therefore will rather justify than comdemn my conduct, if I
do not wrong so bright an Original with a dark obscure Copy.

Madam, Though the world may condemn my performance, it must applaud my choice in
this Address, and own that had I known as well how to Argue, as to Instance, I
must infallibly have Triumphed over all Opposition. It may be easy to evade,
or bastle the force of my Arguments, but it is impossible without the utmost
Stupidity, and Injustice to deny the manifest Advantages of those Illustrious
Graces, which raise your Highness so far above theirs as well as your own Sex.
In this I have imitated the conduct of prudent Generals, who, when they doubt
the sufficiency of their strength, retire to some strong Fort, and rest secure
under the Protection of it.

There is yet another Reason, Madam, which though the least justifiable, was
nevertheless most prevalent with me to devote this Essay to your Highness. My
Ambition to show the profound Respects I have always had for your Highness,
would not suffer me to let slip any occasion of expressing it, even tho I blush
for the means of it. Thus I find my self reduced by my Zeal, to the condition
of poor Tenants, who must expose their Poverty, to show their Affection to
their Lord in a worthless Present. I am sensible of the rashness of my Ambition
in aspiring to the Patronage of Your Highness, and the need I have of an
Apology; but were I able to make one as I ought, I should have taken care to
have had less occasion for it. Yet I doubt not from Your Goodness that
Indulgence, which I cannot expect from Your Justice, nor but that you will
(like Heaven, whose more immediate Images Princes are) accept my unprofitable
Service, for the sincerity with which it is tendered. If my unfeigned
Submission may procure pardon for my Presumption, that Your Happiness may equal
Your illustrious Virtues, and Your Royal Person be as far out of the reach of
Fortune, as your Fame and Honor of Detraction, shall ever be the prayers of

Madam, Your Royal Highness's most Humble, most Obedient, and most Devoted
Servant
PREFACE.
PRefaces to most Books, are like Prolocutors to Puppet-Shows, they come first
to tell you what Figures are to be presented, and what Tricks they are to play.
According therefore to ancient and laudable Custom, I have thought fit to let
you know by way of Preface, or Advertisement, (call it which you please) that
here are many fine Figures within to be seen, as well worth your curiosity, as
any in Smithfield at Bartholomew Tide. I will not deny, Reader, but that you
may have seen some of 'em there already; to those that have, I have little more
to say, than that if they have a mind to see them again in Effigy, they may do
it here. What is it you would have? Here are St. George's, Batemans, John
Dories, Punchinello's, and the Creation of the World, or what is as good; here is
the German Artist too, or one that can show more Tricks than he: If all this
will not invite you, you are grown more squeamish of late, Gentlemen, than you
used to be, and the poor Bookseller will make but an indifferent Market of you.
Well, let the worst come to the worst, it is but shifting the scene to
Smithfield, and making an Interest in half a dozen Vizor-Masks to be sure of
your Company: But he, good Man, is desirous to please you at first hand, and
therefore has put a fine Picture in the front to invite you in, so like some of
you (as he protests) that you ought never look in a Glass again, if it offends
you. For my part, I declare, he has acted clear against my Opinion in this
case, and so he has been told; for many a poor Man has lost the showing of his
Monster, by gratifying the curiosity of the gaping Crowd with too exact a
picture without doors. Besides, there is an unlucky Rogue of a left handed
Barber, that looks like an ill Omen in the beginning. He was told too, that if
he would please most of you, he ought to take example by your Glasses and
flatter you. Yet he continued obstinate and unmovable to all these weighty
Reasons, and is so fondly bent for his Picture, that he resolved against all
advice to have it. Nay, and he would have Rhimes underneath it too, which, he
says, weigh more with you, than all the Reason in the world. I thought fit to
let you know this, that the Bookseller might not lose the credit of his Fancy,
if it takes with you, as he is persuaded it will. For you must know, I am a
great lover of strict Justice, and therefore would by no means Rob, or Defraud
him of the Glory of his Invention, or by any sinister way sullie, or diminish
the Honor, or Reputation of his Parts and Ingenuity. For the same Reason
likewise I must acquaint you, that the Rhimes are none of mine neither; and now
my Hand is in, I don't much care if I tell you, that I am not very good at that
ingenious Recreation, called Crambo, from which some rise to be very
considerable Rhimers. This now is more then I was obliged to tell you, and
therefore I hope no body will deny, but that I deal ingenuously at least with
you.

This one would think were Preface sufficient; but there are some Men so
impertinently curious, that they must needs have a Reason for every thing, that
is done in the World, though it were in their favor (for which perhaps it were
hard to give a good one) when it were their Interest to be satisfied, and
thankful without further enquiry. To comply therefore in some measure with the
humor of these People, if any such think fit to peruse this Book, I must tell
'em very freely, that I was so far from aiming to oblige, or disoblige 'em by
it, that it was never intended for their View. It was occasioned by a private
Conversation, between some Gentlemen and Ladies, and written at the request,
and for the Diversion of one Lady more particularly, by whom with my consent it
was communicated to two or three more of both Sexes, my Friends likewise.

By them I was with abundance of Complements importuned to make it public; now
though I do with good Reason attribute much more, of what was said to me upon
this Occasion, to their good Breeding and Friendship, than to their real
Opinions of my Performance; yet I have so much satisfaction in their Sincerity,
and Friendship as to be confident they would not suffer, much less persuade me
to expose to the world any thing, of which they doubted so far, as to think it
would not be tollerably acceptable. Nor have I less assurance of their Judgment
and Skill in things of this nature, beside that I have been informed by some of
'em, that it has been seen, and favorably received by some Gentlemen, whom the
world thinks no incompetent Judges. After all this Encouragement, I suppose, I
shall not be thought vain, if, as I pretend not to the applause, so I fear not
the contempt of the world: Yet I presume not so far upon the Merits of what I
have written, as to make my Name public with it. I have elsewhere held, that
Vanity was almost the universal mover of all our Actions, and consequently of
mine, as well as of others; yet it is not strong enough in me, to induce me to
bring my Name upon the public stage of the World.

There are many Reasons, that oblige me to this cautious, reserved way of
procedure; though I might otherwise be very ambitious of appearing in the desence
of my Sex, could I persuade my self, that I was able to write any thing suitable
to the dignity of the Subject, which I am not vain enough to think. This indeed
is one Reason, because I am sensible it might have been much better defended by
abler Pens, such as many among our own Sex are; though I believe scarce thus
much would have been expected from me, by those that know me. There is likewise
another Reason, which was yet more prevalent with me, and with those few
Friends whom I consulted about it, which is this; There are a sort of Men, that
upon all occasions think themselves more concerned, and more thought of than
they are, and that, like Men that are deaf, or have any other notorious Defect,
can see no body whisper, or laugh, but they think it is at themselves. These Men
are apt to think, that every ridiculous description they meet with, was
intended more particularly for some one or other of them; as indeed it is hard
to paint any thing complete in their several Kinds, without hitting many of
their particular Features, even without drawing from them. The knowledge of
this, with the consideration of the tenderness of Reputation in our Sex, (which
as our delicatest Fruits and finest Flowers are most obnoxious to the injuries
of Weather, is submitted to every infectious Blast of malicious Breath) made me
very cautious, how I exposed mine to such poisonous Vapors. I was not
ignorant, how liberal some Men are of their Scandal, whenever provoked,
especially by a Woman; and how ready the same Men are to be so, tho upon never
so mistaken Grounds. This made me resolve to keep 'em in Ignorance of my Name,
and if they have a mind to find me out, let 'em catch me (if they can) as
Children at Blindmans Buff do one another, Hoodwinkt; and I am of Opinion I
have room enough to put 'em out of Breath before they come near me.

The Event has in Effect proved my suspicio^s Prophetic; for there are (as I
am informed) already some, so forward to interest themselves against me, that
they take Characters upon themselves, before they see 'em; and, for fear they
should want some Body to throw their Dirt at, with equal Ignorance, and
Injustice Father this Piece upon the Gentleman, who was so kind as to take care
of the Publication of it, only to excuse me from appearing. This made me once
resolve to oppose my Innocence to their Clamor, and perfix my Name, which I
thought I was bound to do in Justice to him. In this Resolution I had
persisted, had not the very same Gentleman generously persuaded, and overruled
me to the contrary, representing how weak a defense Innocence is against
Calumny, how open the Ears of all the World are, and how greedily they suck in
any thing to ^he prejudice of a Woman; and that (to use his own Expression) the
scandal of such Men, was like Dirt thrown by Children, and Fools at random, and
without Provocation, it would dawb filthily at first, though it were easily
washed off again: Adding, that he desired me not to be under any concern for
him; for he valued the Malice of such men, as little, as their Friendship, the
one was as feeble, as the other false.

I suppose I need make no Apology to my own Sex for the meaness of this
desence; the bare intention of serving 'em will (I hope be accepted, and of
Men, the Candid and Ingenuous I am sure will not quarrel with me for any thing
in this little Book; since there is nothing in it, which was not drawn from the
strictest Reason I was Mistress of, and the best Observations I was able to
make, except a start or two only concerning the Salique Law, and the Amazons,
which, if they divert not the Reader, cannot offend him.

I shall not trouble the Reader with any account of the Method I have observed,
he will easily discover that in reading the Piece it self. I shall only take
notice to him of one thing, which with a little attention to what he reads he
will readily find to be true, that is, that the Characters were not written out
of any Wanton Humor, or Malicious Design to characterize any Particular
Persons, but to illustrate what I have said upon the several Heads, under which
they are ranged, and represent not single Men, but so many Clans, or Divisions
of Men, that play the Fool seriously in the World. If any Individual seem to be
more peculiarly marked, it is because he is perhaps more notorious to the World,
by some one or more Articles of the General Character here given I am sure that
there is no Man, who is but moderately Accquainted with the World, especially
this Town, but may find half a Dozen, or more Originals for every Picture.
After all, if any Man have so little Wit, as to appropriate any of these
Characters to himself, He takes a liberty I have hitherto never given him, but
shall do it now in the Words of a Great Man, If any Fool finds the Cap fit him,
let him put it on.

There are some Men, (I hear) who will not allow this Piece to be written by a
Woman; did I know what Estimate to make of their Judgments, I might perhaps
have a higher Opinion of this Triffle, than I ever yet had. For I little
thought while I was writing this, that any Man (especially an Ingenious Man)
should have the scandal of being the reputed Author. For he must think it
scandalous to be made to Father a Woman's Productions unlawfully. But these
Gentlemen, I suppose, believe there is more Wit, than they will find in this
Piece, upon the Credit of the Bookseller, whose Interest it is to flatter it.
But were it as well written as I could wish it, or as the Subject would bear,
and deserves; I see no reason why our Sex should be robbed of the Honor of it;
Since there have been Women in all Ages, whose Writings might vie with those of
the greatest Men, as the Present Age as well as past can testify. I shall not
trouble the Reader with their names, because I would not be thought so vain, as
to rank my self among 'em; and their names are already too well known, and
celebrated to receive any additional Luster from so weak Encomiums as mine. I
pretend not to imitate, much less to Rival those Illustrious Ladies, who have
done so much Honor to their Sex, and are unanswerable Proofs of, what I
contend for. I only wish, that some Ladies now living among us (whose names I
forbear to mention in regard to their Modesty) would exert themselves, and give
us more recent Instances, who are both by Nature and Education sufficiently
qualified to do it, which I pretend not to. I freely own to the Reader, that I
know no other Tongue besides my Native, except French, in which I am but very
moderately skilled. I plead not this to excuse the meaness of my Performance;
because I know, I may reasonably be asked, why I was so forward to write; For
that I have already given my reasons above, if they will not satisfy the
Reader, he must endeavor to please himself with better, for I am very little
solicitous about the matter. I shall only add, that for my Good Will I hope the
Favor of my own Sex, which will satisfy my Ambition.

To the Most Ingenious Mrs. -- or her Admirable Defense of Her Sex.
LOng have we sung the Famed Orinda's praise,
And owned Astrea's Title to the Bays,
We to their Wit have paid the Tribute due,
But should be Bankrupt, before just to you.
Sweet flowing Numbers, and fine Thoughts they writ;
But you Eternal Truths, as well as Wit.
In them the Force of Harmony we find,
In you the Strength, and Vigor of the Mind.
Dark Clouds of Prejudice obscured their Verse,
You with Victorious Prose those Clouds disperse;
Those Foggs, which would not to their Flame submit,
Vanish before your Rising Sun of Wit.
Like Stars, they only in Themselves were bright,
The whole Sex shines by your reflected Light.
Our Sex have long through Usurpation reigned,
And by their Tyranny their Rule maintained.
Till wanton grown with Arbitrary Sway
Deposed by you They practice to obey,
Proudly submitting, when such Graces meet,
Beauty by Nature, and by conquest Wit.
For Wit they had on their own Sex entailed,
Till for your self, and Sex you thus prevailed.
Thrice happy Sex! Whose Foes such Power disarms,
And gives fresh Luster to your native Charms,
Whose Nervous Sense couched in close Method lies,
Clear as her Soul, and piercing as her Eyes,
If any yet so stupid should appear,
As still to doubt, what she has made so clear,
Her Beautie's Arguments they would allow,
And to Her Eyes their full Conversion owe.
And by Experiment the World convince.
The Force of Reason's less, than that of Sense.
Your Sex you with such Charming Grace defend,
While that you vindicate, you Ours amend:
We in your Glass may see each foul defect.
And may not only see, but may correct.
In vain old Greece her Sages would compare,
They taught what Men should be, you what they are
With doubtful Notiones they Mankind perplexed,
And with unpracticable Precept vexed.
In vain they strove wild Passions to reclaim,
Uncertain what they were, or whence they came.
But you, who have found out their certain Source,
May with a happier Hand divert their Course.
Themselves so little did those Sages know,
That to their Failings We their Learning owe.
Their Vanity first caused 'em to aspire,
And with feirce Wranglings set all Greece on Fire:
Thus into sects they split the Grecian youth,
Contending more for Victory than Truth.
Your Speculations nobler Ends pursue,
They aim not to be Popular, but true.
You with strict Justice in an equal Light,
Expose both Wit and Folly to our Sight.
Yet as the Be secure on Poison feeds,
Extracting Honey from the rankest Weeds:
So safely you in Fools Instructours find,
And Wisdom in the Follies of mankind.
With purer Waves henceforth shall Satyr flow,
And we this change to your chaste Labors owe;
Satyr before from a Polluted Source
Brought Native Filth, augmented in its course.
No longer muddy shall those Steams appear,
Which you have purged, and made so sweet, and clear.
Well may your Wit to us a wonder seem,
So strong's the Current, yet so ^lear the stream,
Deep, but not Dull, thro` each transparent Line
We see the Gems, which at the Bottom shine,
To your Correction freely we submit,
Who teach us Modesty, as well as Wit.
Our Sex with Blushes must your Conquest own,
While yours prepare the Garlands you have won.
Your Fame secure long as your Sex shall last,
Nor Time, nor Envy shall your Laurels blast.
James Drake

The Reader is desired to excuse, and correct all Li^eral Escapes, and to amend
the following thus.
Errata.
PAge 4. l. 10. for Engenia, read Eugenia. p. 10, l. 22. for that, read the, p.
28. l. 16. for Mummy, read Mummy. p. 29. l. 13. for change read chance. p. 32.
l. 4. for Repetition, read Repetition. p. 53. l. 4. for Essay, read Esop. p.
53. l. 13. for Messieurs, read Sieurs. p 60 l. 2. read upon us. p. 84. l. 1.
for and these, read th^se. p. 103. l. 23. for little read little. p. 111. l.
12. for ocsicaons, read occasions p. 113. l. for Master, read Mastery. p. 126.
l. 20. for as well, read as well as. p. 143. l. 9. for inspire, read inspires.

AN ESSAY In Defense of the Female Sex, etc.
THE Conversation we had 'tother day, makes me, Dear Madam, but more sensible
of the unreasonableness of your desire; which obliges me to inform you further
upon a Subject, wherein I have more need of your instruction. The strength of
Judgment, sprightly Fancy, and admirable Address, you showed upon that
Occasion, speak you so perfect a Mistress of that Argument (as I doubt not but
you are of any other that you please to engage in) that whoever, would speak or
write well on it, ought first to be your Scholar. Yet to let you see how
absolutely you may command me, I had rather be your Echo, than be silent when
You bid me speak, and beg your excuse rather for my Failures, than want of
Complacence. I know You will not accuse me for a Plagiary if I return You
nothing, but what I have gleaned from You, when You consider, that I pretend
not to make a Present, but to pay the Interest only of a Debt. Nor can You tax
me with Vanity, since no Importunity of a Person less loved, or valued by me
than your self could have extorted thus much from me. This Consideration leaves
me no room to doubt but that you will with your usual Candor pardon those
Defects, and correct those Errors, which proceed only from an over forward Zeal
to oblige You, though to my own Disadvantage.

The defense of our Sex against so many and so great Wits as have so strongly
at ack'd it, may justly seem a Task too difficult for a Woman man to attempt.
Not that I can, or ought to yield, that we are by Nature less enabled for such
an Enterpize, than Men are; which I hope at least to show plausible Reasons
for, before I have done: But because through the Usurpation of Men, and the
Tyranny of Custom (here in England especially) there are at most but few, who
are by Education, and acquired Wit, or Letters sufficiently quallified for such
an Undertaking. For my own part I shall readily own, that as few as there are,
there may be and are abundance, who in their daily Conversations approve
themselves much more able, and sufficient Assertors of our Cause, than my self;
and I am sorry that either their Business, their other Diversions, or too great
Indulgence of their Ease, hinder them from doing public Justice to their Sex.
The Men by Interest or Inclination are so generally engaged against us, that it
is not to be expected, that any one Man of Wit should arise so generous as to
engage in our Quarrel, and be the Champion of our Sex against the Injuries and
Oppressions of his own. Those Romantic days are over, and there is not so much
as a Don Quixot of the Quill left to succor the distressed Damsels. It Is true,
a Feint of something of this Nature was made three or four Years since by one;
but how much soever his Engenia may be obliged to him, I am of Opinion the rest
of her Sex are but little beholding to him. For as you rightly observed, Madam,
he has taken more care to give an Edge to his Satyr, than force to his Apology;
he has played a sham Prize, and receives more thrusts than he makes; and like a
false Renegade fights under our Colors only for a fairer Opportunity of
betraying us. But what could be expected else from a Beau? An Annimal that can
no more commend in earnest a Woman's Wit, than a Man's Person, and that
compliments ours, only to show his own good Breeding and Parts. He levels his
Scandal at the whole Sex, and thinks us sufficiently fortified, if out of the
Story of Two Thousand Years he has been able to pick up a few Examples of Women
illustrious for their Wit, Learning or Virtue, and Men infamous for the
contrary; though I think the most inveterate of our Enemies would have spared
him that labor, by granting that all Ages have produced Persons famous or
infamous of both Sexes; or they must throw up all pretense to Modesty, or
Reason.

I have neither Learning, nor Inclination to make a Precedent, or indeed any
use of Mr. W's. labored Common Place Book; and shall leave Pedants and
Schoolboys to rake and tumble the Rubbish of Antiquity, and muster all the
Heroes and Heroins they can find to furnish matter for some wretched Harangue,
or stuff a miserable Declamation with instead of Sense or Argument.

I shall not enter into any dispute, Some advantages to be allowed to the
disparity of Education.
whether Men, or Women be generally more ingenious, or learned; that Point must
be given up to the advantages Men have over us by their Education, Freedom of
Converse, and variety of Business and Company. But when any Comparison is made
between 'em, great allowances must be made for the disparity of those
Circumstances. Neither shall I contest about the pre-eminence of our Virtues; I
know there are too many Vicious, and I hope there are a great many Virtuous of
both Sexes. Yet this I may say, that whatever Vices are found amongst us, have
in general both their source, and encouragement from them.

The Question I shall at present handle is, whether the time an ingenious
Gentleman spends in the Company of Women, may justly be said to be misemploy'd,
or not? I put the question in general terms; because whoever holds the
affirmative must maintain it so, or the Sex is no way concerned to oppose him.
On the other side I shall not maintain the Negative, but with some Restrictions
and Limitations; because I will not be bound to justify those Women, whose
Vices and ill Conduct expose them deservedly to the Censure of the other Sex,
as well as of their own. The Question being thus stated, let us consider the
end and purposes, for which Conversation was at first instituted, and is yet
desirable; and then we shall see, whether they may not all be found in the
Company of Women. These Ends, I take it, are the same with those we aim at in
all our other Actions, in general only two, Profit or Pleasure. These are
divided into those of the Mind, and those of the Body. Of the latter I shall
take no further Notice, as having no Relation to the present Subject; but shall
confine my self wholly to the Mind, the Profit of which is the Improvement of
the Understanding, and the Pleasure is the Diversion, and Relaxa^ion of its
Cares and Passions. Now if either of these Ends be attainable by the Society of
Women, I have gained my Point. However, I hope to make it appear, that they are
not only both to be met with in the Conversation of Women, but one of them more
generally, and in greater measure than in Men's.

Our Company is generally by our Adversaries represented as unprofitable and
irksome to Men of Sense, and by some of the more vehement Sticklers against us,
as Criminal. These Imputations as they are unjust, especially the latter, so
they savor strongly of the Malice, Arrogance and Sottishness of those, that
most frequently urge 'em; who are commonly either conceited Fops, whose success
in their Pretenses to the favor of our Sex has been no greater than their
Merit, and fallen very far short of their Vanity and Presumption, or a sort of
morose, ill-bred, unthinking Fellows, who appear to be Men only by their Habit
and Beards, and are scarce distinguishable from Brutes but by their Figure and
Risibility. But I shall wave these Reflections at present, however just, and
come closer to our Argument. If Women are not quallified for the Conversation
of ingenious Men, or, to go yet further, their friendship, it must be because
they want some one condition, or more, necessarily requisite to either. The
necessary Conditions of these are Sense, and good nature, to which must be
added, for Friendship, Fidelity and Integrity. Now if any of these be wanting
to our Sex, it must be either because Nature has not been so liberal as to
bestow 'em upon us; or because due care has not been taken to cultivate those
Gifts to a competent measure in us.

The first of these Causes is that, which is most generally urged against us,
whether it be in Raillery, or Spite. I might easily cut this part of the
Controversy short by an irrefragable Argument, which is, that the express
intent, and reason for which Woman was created, was to be a Companion, and help
meet to Man; and that consequently those, that deny 'em to be so, must argue a
Mistake in Providence, and think themselves wiser than their Creator. But these
Gentlemen are generally such passionate Admirers of themselves, and have such a
profound value and reverence for their own Parts, that they are ready at any
time to sacrifice their Religion to the Reputation of their Wit, and rather
than lose their point, deny the truth of the History. There are others, that
though they allow the Story yet affirm, that the propagation, and continuance
of Mankind, was the only Reason for which we were made; as if the Wisdom that
first made Man, could not without trouble have continued that Species by the
same or any other Method, had not this been most conducive to his happiness,
which was the gracious and only end of his Creation. But these superficial
Gentlemen wear their Understandings like their Clothes, always set and formal,
and would no more Talk than Dress out of Fashion; Beau's that, rather than any
part of their outward Figure should be damaged, would wipe the dirt of their
shoes with their Handkercher, and that value themselves infinitely more upon
modish Nonsense, than upon the best Sense against the Fashion. But since I do
not intend to make this a religious Argument, I shall leave all further
Considerations of this Nature to the Divines, whose more immediate Business and
Study it is to assert the Wisdom of Providence in the Order, and distribution
of this World, against all that shall oppose it.

To proceed therefore if we be naturally defective, No distinction of Sexes in
Souls.
the Defect must be either in Soul or Body. In the Soul it cannot be, if what I
have heard some learned Men maintain, be true, that all Souls are equal, and
alike, and that consequently there is no such distinction, as Male and Female
Souls; that there are no innate Idea's, but that all the Notions we have, are
derived from our External Senses, either immediately, or by Reflection. These
Metaphysical Speculations, I must own Madam, require much more Learning and a
stronger Head, than I can pretend to be Mistress of, to be considered as they
ought: Yet so bold I may be, as to undertake the defense of these Opinions,
when any of our jingling Opponents think fit to refute 'em.

Neither can it be in the Body, No advantage in the Organization of their
Bodies.
(if I may credit the Report of learned Physicians) for there is no difference
in the Organization of those Parts, which have any relation to, or influence
over the Minds; but the Brain, and all other Parts (which I am not Anatomist
enough to name) are contrived as well for the plentiful conveyance of Spirits,
which are held to be the immediate Instruments of Sensation, in Women, as Men.
I see therefore no natural Impediment in the structure of our Bodies; nor does
Experience, or Observation argue any: We use all our Natural Faculties, as well
as Men, nay and our Rational too, deducting only for the advantages before
mentioned.

Let us appeal yet further to Experience, Confirmed from Experience of Brutes.
and observe those Creatures that deviate least from simple Nature, and see if
we can find any difference in Sense, or understanding between Males and
Females. In these we may see Nature plainest, who lie under no constraint of
Custom or Laws, but those of Passion or Appetite, which are Natures, and know
no difference of Education, nor receive any Bias by prejudice. We see great
distance in Degrees of Understanding, Wit, Cunning and Docility (call them what
you please) between the several Species of Brutes. An Ape, a Dog, a Fox, are by
daily Observation found to be more Docile, and more Subtle than an Ox, a Swine,
or a Sheep. But a She Ape is as full of, and as ready at Imitation as a He: a
Bitch will learn as many Tricks in as short a time as a Dog, a Female Fox has
as many Wiles as a Male. A thousand instances of this kind might be produced;
but I think these are so plain, that to instance more were a superfluous
labor; I shall only once more take notice, that in Brutes and other Animals
there is no difference betwixt Male and Female in point of Sagacity,
notwithstanding there is the same distinction of Sexes, that is between Men and
Women. I have read, that some Philosophers have held Brutes to be no more than
mere Machines, a sort of Divine Clock-work, that Act only by the force of nice
unseen Springs without Sensation, and cry out without feeling Pain, Eat without
Hunger, Drink without Thirst, fawn upon their Keepers without seeing 'em, hunt
Hares without Smelling, etc. Here Madam is cover for our Antagonists against
the last Argument so thick, that there is no beating 'em out. For my part, I
shall not envy 'em their refuge, let 'em lie like the wild Irish secure within
their Boggs; the field is at least ours, so long as they keep to their
Fastnesses. But to quit this Topic, I shall only add, that if the learnedest
He of 'em all can convince me of the truth of this Opinion, He will very much
stagger my Faith; for hitherto I have been able to observe no difference
between our Knowledge and theirs, but a gradual one; and depend upon Revelation
alone, that our Souls are Immortal, and theirs not.

But if an Argument from Brutes and other Animals shall not be allowed as
conclusive, Experience of Mankind.
(though I cannot see, why such an Inference should not be valid, since the
parity of Reason is the same on both sides in this Case.) I shall desire those,
that hold against us to observe the Country People, I mean the inferior sort
of them, such as not having Stocks to follow Husbandry upon their own Score,
subsist upon their daily Labor. For amongst these, though not so equal as that
of Brutes, yet the Condition of the two Sexes is more level, than amongst
Gentlemen, City Traders, or rich Yeomen. Examine them in their several
Businesses, and their Capacities will appear equal; but talk to them of things
indifferent, and out of the Road of their constant Employment, and the Balance
will fall on our side, the Women will be found the more ready and polite. Let
us look a little further, and view our Sex in a state of more improvement,
amongst our Neighbors the Dutch. There we shall find them managing not only
the Domestic Affairs of the Family, but making, and receiving all Payments as
well great as small, keeping the Books, ballancing the Accounts, and doing all
the Business, even the nicest of Merchants, with as much Dexterity and
Exactness as their, or our Men can do. And I have often heard some of our
considerable Merchants blame the conduct of our Countrymen in this point; that
they breed our Women so ignorant of Business; whereas were they taught
Arithmetic, and other Arts which require not much bodily strength, they might
supply the places of abundance of lusty Men now employed in sedentary Business;
which would be a mighty profit to the Nation by sending those Men to
Employments, where hands and Strength are more required, especially at this
time when we are in such want of People. Beside that it might prevent the ruin
of many Families, which is often occasioned by the Death of Merchants in full
Business, and leaving their Accounts perplexed, and embroiled to a Widow and
Orphans, who understanding nothing of the Husband or Father's Business
occasions the Rending, and oftentimes the utter Confounding a fair Estate;
which might be prevented, did the Wife but understand Merchants Accounts, and
were made acquainted with the Books.

I have yet another Argument from Nature, which is, that the very Make and
Temper of our Bodies show that we were never designed for Fatigue; and the
Vivacity of our Wits, and Readiness of our Invention (which are confessed even
by our Adversaries) demonstrate that we were chiefly intended for Thought and
the Exercise of the Mind. Whereas on the contrary it is apparent from the
strength and size of their Limbs, the Vigor and Hardiness of their
Constitutions, that Men were purposely framed and contrived for Action, and
Labor. And herein the Wisdom and Contrivance of Providence is abundantly
manifested; for as the one Sex is fortified with Courage and Ability to undergo
the necessary Drudgery of providing Materials for the sustenance of Life in
both; so the other is furnished with Ingenuity and Prudence for the orderly
management and distribution of it, for the Relief and Comfort of a Family; and
is over and above enriched with a peculiar Tenderness and Care requisite to the
Cherishing their poor helpless Offspring. I know our Opposers usually miscall
our quickness of Thought, Fancy and Flash, and christen their own heaviness by
the specious Names of Judgment and Solidity; but it is easy to retort upon 'em
the reproachful Ones of Dullness and Stupidity with more Justice. I shall
pursue this Point no further, but continue firm in my Persuasion, that Nature
has not been so Niggardly to us, as our Adversaries would insinuate, till I see
better cause to the contrary, then I have hitherto at any time done. Yet I am
ready to yield to Conviction, whoever offers it; which I don't suddenly expect.

It remains then for us to enquire, whether the Bounty of Nature be wholly
neglected, or stifled by us, or so far as to make us unworthy the Company of
Men? Or whether our Education (as bad as it is) be not sufficient to make us a
useful, nay a necessary part of Society for the greatest part of Mankind. This
cause is seldom indeed urged against us by the Men, though it be the only one,
that gives 'em any advantage over us in understanding. But it does not serve
their Pride, there is no Honor to be gained by it: For a Man ought no more to
value himself upon being Wiser than a Woman, if he owe his Advantage to a
better Education, and greater means of Information, then he ought to boast of
his Courage, for beating a Man, when his Hands were bound. Nay it would be so
far from Honorable to contend for preference upon this Score, that they would
thereby at once argue themselves guilty both of Tyranny, and of Fear: I think I
need not have mentioned the latter; (...)
for none can be Tyrants but Cowards. For nothing makes one Party slavishly
depress another, but their fear that they may at one time or other become
Strong or Courageous enough to make themselves equal to, if not superior to
their Masters. This is our Case; for Men being sensible as well of the
Abilities of Mind in our Sex, as of the strength of Body in their own, began to
grow Jealous, that we, who in the Infancy of the World were their Equals and
Partners in Dominion, might in process of Time, by Subtlety and Stratagem,
become their Superiors; and therefore began in good time to make use of Force
(the Origin of Power) to compel us to a Subjection, Nature never meant; and
made use of Natures liberality to them to take the benefit of her kindness from
us. From that time they have endeavored to train us up altogether to Ease and
Ignorance; as Conquerors use to do to those, they reduce by Force, that so they
may disarm 'em, both of Courage and Wit; and consequently make them tamely give
up their Liberty, and abjectly submit their Necks to a slavish Yoke. As the
World grew more Populous, and Men's Necessities whetted their Inventions, so it
increased their Jealousy, and sharpened their Tyranny over us, till by degrees,
it came to that height of Severity, I may say Cruelty, it is now at in all the
Eastern parts of the World, where the Women, like our Negroes in our Western
Plantations, are born slaves, and live Prisoners all their Lives. Nay, so far
has this barbarous Humor prevailed, and spread it self, that in some parts of
Europe, which pretend to be most refined and civilized, in spite of
Christianity, and the Zeal for Religion which they so much affect, our
Condition is not very much better. And even in France, a Country that treats
our Sex with more Respect than most do, Original of the Salique Law.
We are by the Salique Law excluded from Sovereign Power. The French are an
ingenious People, and the Contrivers of that Law knew well enough, that We were
no less capable of Reigning, and Governing well, than themselves; but they were
suspicious, that if the Regal Power should fall often into the hands of Women,
they would favor their own Sex, and might in time restore 'em to their
Primitive Liberty and Equality with the Men, and so break the neck of that
unreasonable Authority they so much affect over us; and therefore made this Law
to prevent it. The Historians indeed tell us other Reasons, but they cannot
agree among themselves, and as Men are Parties against us, and therefore their
Evidence may justly be rejected. To say the truth Madam, I cannot tell how to
prove all this from Ancient Records; for if any Histories were anciently
written by Women, Time, and the Malice of Men have effectually conspired to
suppress 'em; and it is not reasonable to think that Men should transmit, or
suffer to be transmitted to Posterity, any thing that might show the weakness
and illegallity of their Title to a Power they still exercise so arbitrarily,
and are so fond of. But since daily Experience shows, and their own Histories
tell us, how earnestly they endeavor, and what they act, and suffer to put the
same Trick upon one another, it is natural to suppose they took the same
measures with us at first, which now they have effected, like the Rebels in our
last Civil Wars, when they had brought the Royal Party under, they fall
together by the Ears about the Dividend. Amazons; why they rejected the Society
of Men.
The Sacred History takes no notice of any such Authority they had before the
Flood, and their Own confess that whole Nations have rejected it since, and not
suffered a Man to live amongst them, which could be for no other Reason, than
their Tyranny. For upon less provocation the Women would never have been so
foolish, as to deprive themselves of the benefit of that Ease* and Security,
which a good agreement with their Men might have afforded 'em. It Is true the
same Histories tell us, that there were whole Countries where were none but
Men, which bordered upon 'em. But this makes still for us; for it shows that
the Conditions of their Society were not so easy, as to engage their Women to
stay amongst 'em; but as liberty presented it self, they withdrew and retired
to the Amazons: But since our Sex can hardly boast of so great Privileges, and
so easy a Servitude any where as in England, I cut this ungrateful Digression
short in acknowledgment; though Fetters of Gold are still Fetters, and the
softest Lining can never make 'em so easy, as Liberty.

You will excuse, I know Madam, this short, but necessary Digression. I call it
necessary, because it shows a probable Reason, why We are at this time in such
subjection to them, without lessening the Opinion of our Sense, or Natural
Capacities either at present, or for the time past; beside that it briefly lays
open without any Scandal to our Sex, why our Improvements are at present so
disproportioned to those of Men. I would not have any of our little, unthinking
Adversaries triumph at my allowing a disproportion between the Improvements of
our Sex and theirs; and I am sure those of 'em that are ingenious Men, will see
no reason for it from what I have said.

After having granted so great a disparity as I have already done in the
customary Education, and advantageous Liberties of the Sexes, 'twere Nonsense
to maintain, that our Society is generally and upon all accounts as Beneficial,
Improving and Entertaining, as that of Men. He must be a very shallow Fellow,
that resorts to, and frequents us in hopes by our means to make himself
considerable as a Scholar, a Mathematician, a Philosopher, or a Statesman.
These Arts and Sciences are the result only of much Study and great Experience;
and without one at least of 'em are no more to be acquired by the Company of
Men, however celebrated for any or all of them, than by ours. But there are
other Quallifications, which are as indispensably necessary to a Gentleman, or
any Man that would appear to Advantage in the World, which are attainable only
by Company, and Conversation, and chiefly by ours. Nor can the greatest part of
Mankind, of what Quallity soever, boast much of the use they make, or the
benefit they reap from these acknowledged Advantages. So that Scholars only,
and some few of the more thinking Gentlemen, and Men of Business have any just
claim to 'em. And of these the first generally fall short enough some other way
to make the Balance even. Character of a Pedant.
For Scholars, though by their acquaintance with Books, and conversing much
with Old Authors, they may know perfectly the Sense of the Learned Dead, and be
perfect Masters of the Wisdom, be thoroughly informed of the State, and nicely
skilled in the Policies of Ages long since past, yet by their retired and
unactive Life, their neglect of Business, and constant Conversation with
Antiquity, they are such Strangers to, and so ignorant of the Domestic Affairs
and manners of their own Country and Times, that they appear like the Ghosts of
Old Romans raised by Magic. Talk to them of the Assyrian, or Perssian
Monarchies, the Grecians or Roman Commonwealths. They answer like Oracles,
they are such finished Statemen, that we should scarce take 'em to have been
less than Confifidents of Semiramis, Tutours to Cyrus the great, old Cronies of
Solon and Lycurgus, or Privy Councillors at least to the Twelve Coesars
successively; but engage them in a Discourse that concerns the present Times,
and their Native Country, and they heardly speak the Language of it, and know
so little of the affairs of it, that as much might reasonably be expected from
an animated Egyptian Mummy. They are very much disturbed to see a Fold or a
Plait amiss in the Picture of an Old Roman Gown, yet take no notice that their
own are thredbare out at the Elbows, or Ragged, and suffer more if Priscian's
Head be broken then if it were their own. They are excellent Guides, and can
direct you to every Ally, and turning in old Rome; yet lose their way at home
in their own Parish. They are mighty admirers of the Wit and Eloquence of the
Ancients; yet had they lived in the time of Cicero, and Coesar would have
treated them with as much supercilious Pride, and disrespect as they do now
with Reverence. They are great hunters of ancient Manuscripts, and have in
great Veneration any thing, that has escaped the Teeth of Time and Rats, and if
Age have obliterated the Characters, it is the more valuable for not being
legible. But if by chance they can pick out one Word, they rate it higher then
the whole Author in Print, and would give more for one Proverb of Solomon's
under his own Hand, then for all his Wisdom. These Superstitious, bigoted
Idolaters of time past, are Children in their understanding all their lives;
for they hang so incessantly upon the leading Strings of Authority, that their
Judgments like the Limbs of some Indian Penitents, become altogether crampt and
motionless for waut of use.

But as these Men, will hardly be reckoned much superior to us upon the
account of their Learning or Improvements, so neither will I suppose another
sort diametrically opposite to these in their Humors and Opinions: Character of
a Country Squire.
I mean those whose Ancestors have been wise and provident, and raised Estates
by their Ingenuity and Industry, and given all their Posterity after 'em Means,
and Leisure to be Fools. These are generally sent to School in their Minority,
and were they kept there till they came to Years of Discretion, might most of
'em stay, till they could tuck their Beards into their Girdles before they left
carrying a Satchel. In conformity to Custom, and the Fashion, they are sent
early to serve an Apprenticeship to Letters, and for eight or nine years are
whipped up and down through two or three Counties from School to School; when
being arrived a Sixteen, or Seventeen Years of Age, and having made the usual
Tour of Latin, and Greek Authors, they are called Home to be made Gentlemen. As
soon as the young Squire has got out of the House of Bondage, shaken off the
awe of Birch, and begins to feel himself at Liberty, he considers that he is
now Learned enough, (and it is ten to one but his Friends are wise enough to be
of his Opinion) and thinks it high time to shake off the barbarous Acquaintance
he contracted, with those crabbed, vexatious, obscure Fellows, that gave him so
much trouble and smart at School, Companions by no means fit for a Gentleman,
that writ only to torment and perplex poor Boys, and exercise the tyranny of
Pedants and Schoolmasters. These prudent resolutions taken, his Conversation
for some years succeeding is wholly taken up by his Horses, Dogs and Hawks
(especially if his Residence be in the Country) and the more senseless Animals
that tend 'em. His Groom, his Huntsman, and his Falconer are his Tutors, and
his walk is from the Stable to the Dog-kennel, and the reverse of it. His
diversion is drudgery, and he is in highest satisfaction when he is most tired.
He wearies you in the Morning with his Sport, in the Afternoon with the noisie
Repetion and Drink, and the whole Day with Fatigue and Confusion. His
Entertainment is stale Beer, and the History of his Dogs and Horses, in which
he gives you the Pedigree of every one with all the exactness of a Herald; and
if you be very much in his good Graces, it is odds, but he makes you the
Compliment of a Puppy of one of his favorite Bitches, which you must take with
abundance of Acknowledgments of his Civillity, or else he takes you for a
stupid, as well as an ill bred Fellow. He is very constant at all Clubs and
Meetings of the Country Gentlemen, where he will suffer nothing to be talked or
heard of but his Jades, his Curs, and his Kites. Upon these he rings perpetual
Changes, and trespasses as much upon the patience of the Company in the Tavern,
as upon their Enclosures in the Field, and is least impertinent, when most
drunk.

His grand Business is to make an Assignation for a Horse Race; or a Hunting
Match, and nothing discomposes him so much as a Disappointment. Thus
accomplished, and finished for a Gentleman, he enters the Civil Lists, and
holds the Scale of Justice with as much Blindness as she is said to do. From
hence forward his Worship becomes as formidable to the Alehouses, as he was
before Familiar; he sizes an Ale Pot, and takes the dimensions of Bread with
great Dexterity and Sagacity. He is the terror of all the Deer, and Poultry
Stealers in the Neighborhood, and is so implacable a Persecutor of Poachers,
that he keeps a Register of all the Dogs and Guns in the Hundred, and is the
Scare-Beggar of the Parish. Short Pots, and unjustifiable Dogs and Nets,
furnish him with sufficient matter for Presentiments, to carry him once a
Quarter to the Sessions; where he says little, Eats and Drinks much, and after
Dinner, Hunts over the last Chase, and so rides Worshipfully Drunk home again.
At home he Exercises his Authority in granting his Letters, Pattents to
Petitioners for erecting Shovel Board, Tables and Ginger Bread Stalls. If he
happen to live near any little Borough or Corporation that sends Burgesses to
Parliament, he may become ambitious and sue for the Honor of being made their
Representative. Henceforward he grows Popular, bows to, and treats the Mob all
round him; and whether there be any in his Discourse or not, there is good
Sense in his Kitchen and his Cellar, which is more agreeable and edifying. If
he be so happy as to out-tap his Competitour, and Drink his Neighbors into an
Opinion of his Sobriety, he is chosen, and up he comes to that Honorable
Assembly, where he shows his Wisdom best by his Silence, and serves his Country
most in his absence.

I give you these two Characters, Madam, as irreconcilable as Water and Oil,
to show that Men may and do often Baffle and Frustrate the Effects of a liberal
Education, as well by Industry as Negligence. It Is hard to say, which of these
two is the more Sottish; the first is such an Admirer of Le^ters, that he
thinks it a disparagement to his Learning to talk what other Men understand,
and will scarce believe that two, and two, make four, under a Demonstration
from Euclid, or a Quotation of Aristotle: The latter has such a fear of
Pedantry always before his Eyes, that he thinks it a Scandal to his good
Breeding, and Gentility to talk Sense, or write true English; and has such a
contemptible Notion of his past Education, that he thinks the Roman Poets good
for nothing but to teach Boys to cap Verses. For my Part I think the Learned,
and Unlearned Blockhead pretty equal; for it is all one to me, whether a Man
talk Nonsense, or Unintelligible Sense, I am diverted and edified alike by
either; the one enjoys himself less, but suffers his Friends to do it more; the
other enjoys himself and his own Humor enough, but will let no body else do it
in his Company. Thus, Madam, I have set them before You, and shall leave you to
determine a Point, which I cannot.

There are others that deserve to be brought into the Company of these upon
like Honorable Reasons; The Education of the F^m the Sex not so deficient as
commonly thought.
but I keep them in reserve for a proper place, where I may perhaps take the
Pains to draw their Pictures to the Life at full length. Let us now return to
our Argument, from which we have had a long breathing while. Let us look into
the manner of our Education, and see wherein it falls short of the Men's, and
how the defects of it may be, and are generally supplied. In our tender years
they are the same, for after Children can Talk, they are promiscuously taught
to Read and Write by the same Persons, and at the same time both Boys and
Girls. When these are acquired, which is generally about the Age of Six or
Seven Years, they begin to be separated, and the Boys are sent to the Grammar
School, and the Girls to Boarding Schools, or other places, to learn Needle
Work, Dancing, Singing, Music, Drawing, Painting, and other Accomplishments,
according to the Humor and Ability of the Parents, or Inclination of the
Children. Of all these, Reading and Writing are the main Instruments of
Conversation; though Music and Painting may be allowed to contribute something
toward it, as they give us an insight into two Arts, that makes up a great
Part of the Pleasures and Diversions of Mankind. Here then lies the main
Defect, that we are taught only our Mother Tongue, or perhaps French, which is
now very fashionable, and almost as Familiar amongst Women of Quality as Men;
whereas the other Sex by means of a more extensive Education to the knowledge
of the Roman and Greek Languages, have a vaster Field for their Imaginations to
rove in, and their Capacities thereby enlarged. To see whether this be strictly
true or not. I mean in what relates to our debate, I will for once suppose,
that we are instructed only in our own Tongue, and then enquire whether the
disadvantage be so great as it is commonly imagined. You know very well, Madam,
that for Conversation, it is not requisite we should be Philologers,
Rhetoricians, Philosophers, Historians or Poets; but only that we should think
pertinently and express our thoughts properly, on such matters as are the
proper Subjects for a mixed Conversation. The Italians, a People as delicate in
their Conversation as any in the World, have a Maxim that our selves, our
Neighbors, Religion, or Business ought never to be the Subject. There are very
substantial Reasons, (...)
to be given for these Restrictions for Men are very apt to be vain, and
impertinent, when they talk of themselves, besides that others are very
jealous, and apt to suspect, that all the good things said, are intended as so
many arguments of preference to them. When they speak of their Neighbors, they
are apt out of a Principle of Emulation and Envy, natural to all the race of
Adam to lessen, and tarnish their Fame, whether by open Scandal, and Defamatory
Stories, and Tales, or by malicious Insinuations, invidious Circumstances,
sinister and covert Reflections. This humor springs from an over fondness of
our selves, and a mistaken conceit that another loss is an addition to our own
Reputation, as if like two Buckets, one must necessarily rise as the other goes
down. This is the basest and most ungenerous of all our natural Failures, and
ought to be corrected as much as possible every where; but more especially in
Italy, where Resentments are carried so high, and Revenges prosecuted with so
much Heat, and Animosity. Religion is likewise very tender there, as in all
other places, where the Priests have so much Power and Authority. But even
here, where our differences and Disputes have made it more tame, and used it to
rough handling, it ought carefully to be avoided; for nothing raises unfriendly
warmths among Company more than a religious Argument, which therefore ought to
be banished all Society intended only for Conversation and Diversion. Business
is too dry and barren to give any Spirit to Conversation, or Pleasure to a
Company, and is therefore rather to be reckoned among the Encumbrances than
Comforts of Life, however necessary. Besides these, Points of Learning,
abstruse Speculations, and nice Politics, ought, in my opinion, to be
excluded; because being things that require much Reading and Consideration,
they are not fit to be canvas'd ex tempore in mixed Company, of which it is
probable the greatest part will have little to say to 'em, and will scarce be
content to be silent Hearers only; besides that they are not in their nature
gay enough to awaken the good Humor, or raise the Mirth of the Company. Nor
need any one to fear, that by these limitations Conversation should be
restrained to too narrow a compass, there are subjects enough that are in
themselves neither insipid, nor offensive; such as Love, Honor, Gallantry,
Morality, News, Raillery, and a numberless train of other Things copious and
diverting. Now I cannot see the necessity of any other Tongue beside our own to
enable us to talk plausibly, or judiciously upon any of these Topics: Nay, I
am very confident that it is possible for an ingenious Person to make a very
considerable progress in most parts of Learning, by the help of English only.
Great Improvements to be made by the help of English Books only.
For the only reason I can conceive of learning Languages, is to arrive at the
Sense, Wit or Arts, that have been communicated to the World in 'em. Now of
those that have taken the pains to make themselves Masters of those Treasures,
many have been so generous as to impart a share of 'em to the Public, by
Translations for the use of the Unlearned; and I flatter my self sometimes,
that several of these were more particularly undertaken by Ingenious, good
Natured Men in Kindness and Compassion to our Sex. But whatever the Motives
were, the obliging Humor has so far prevailed, that scarce any thing either
Ancient or Modern that might be of general use either for Pleasure, or
Instruction is left untouched, and most of them are made entirely free of our
Tongue. I am no Judge either of the Accuracy, or Elegance of such Performances;
but if I may credit the report of Learned and Ingenious Gentlemen, (whose
Judgment or Sincerity I have no reason to question) many of those excellent
Authors have lost nothing by the change of Soil. I can see and admire the Wit
and Fancy of Ovid in the Translation of his Epistles, and Elegies, the softness
and Passion of Tibullus, the Impetuosity and Fire of Juvenal, the Gayety,
Spirit and Judgment of Horace; who, though he may appear very different from
himself through the diversity, and inequality of the Hands concerned in making
him speak English, yet may easily be guessed at from the several excellent
Pieces rendered by the Earl of Roscommon, Mr. Cowley, Mr. Dryden, Mr. Congreve,
Mr. Brown and other ingenious Gentlemen, who have obliged the Nation with their
excellent Versions of some parts of him. Nor is it possible to be insensible of
the sweetness and Majesty of Virgil, after having read those little but Divine
Samples already made Public in English by Mr. Dryden, which gives us so much
Impatience to see the whole Work entire by that admirable Hand. I have heard
some ingenious Gentlemen say, That it was impossible to do Justice in our
Tongue to these two last Celebrated Roman Poets, and and I have known others,
of whose Judgments I have as high an Opinion, affirm the contrary; my ignorance
of Latin disables me from determining whether we are in the right, but the
Beauty of what I have already seen by the means of those Gentlemen, has so far
prejudiced me in favor of the latter; that might I have 'em entire from the
same hands, I think I should scarce envy those who can taste the pleasure of the
Originals. Nor is it to the Poets only, that we stand indebted for the Treasure
of Antiquity, we have no less Engagements to those, who have successfully
labored in Prose, and have mads us familiar with Plutarch, Seneca, Cicero, and
in general with all the famous Philosophers, Orators and Historians, from whom
we may at once learn both the Opinions and Practices of their Times. Assisted
by these helps, it is impossible for any Woman to be ignorant that is but
desirous to be otherwise, though she know no part of Speech out of her Mother
Tongue. But these are neither the only, nor the greatest Advantages we have;
all that is excellent in France, Italy, or any of our neighboring Nations is
now become our own; to one of whom, I may be bold to say, we are beholding for
more, and greater Improvements of Conversation, than to all Antiquity, and the
learned Languages together. The name of Learning unjustly restrained to the
knowledge of Latin and Greek only.
Nor can I imagine for what good Reason a Man skilled in Latin and Greek, and
versed in the Authors of Ancient Times shall be called Learned; yet another who
perfectly understands Italian, French, Spanish, High Dutch, and the rest of the
European Languages, is acquainted with the Modern History of all those
Countries, knows their Policies, has dived into all the Intrigues of the
several Courts, and can tell their mutual Dispositions, Obligations and Ties of
Interest one to another, shall after all this be thought Unlearned for want of
those two Languages. Nay, though he be never so well versed in the Modern
Philosophy, Astornomy, Geometry and Algebra, he shall notwithstanding never be
allowed that honourble Title. I can see but one apparent Reason for this unfair
Procedure; which is, that when about an Age and an half ago, all the poor
Remains of Learning then in Being, were in the hands of the Schoolmen; they
would suffer none to pass Muster, that were not deeply engaged in those
intricare, vexatious and unintelligble Trifles, for which themselves contended
with so much Noise and Heat; or at least were not acquainted with Plato and
Aristotle, and their Commentators; from whence the Sophistry and Subtleties of
the Schools at that time were drawn. This Usurpation was maintained by their
Successors, the Divines, who to this day pretend almost to the Monopoly of
Learning; and though some generous Spirits have in good measure broke the neck
of this Arbitrary, Tyrannical Authority; yet cannot they prevail to extend the
name of Learning beyond the Studies, in which the Divines are more particularly
conversant. Thus you shall have 'em allow a Man to be a wise Man, a good
Naturalist, a good Mathematician, Politician, or Poet, but not a Scholar, a
learned Man, that is no Philologer. For my part I think these Gentlemen have
just inverted the use of the Term, and given that to the knowledge of words,
which belongs more properly to Things. I take Nature to be the great Book of
Universal Learning, which he that reads best in all or any of its Parts, is the
greatest Scholar, the most learned Man; and it is as ridiculous for a Man to
count himself more learned than another, if he have no greater extent of
knowledge of things, because he is more versed in Languages; as it would be for
an Old Fellow to tell a Young One, his Eyes were better than his, because he
Reads with Spectacles, the other without.

Thus, English Books the best helps to Conversation.
Madam, you see we may come in Time to put in for Learning, if we have a mind,
without falling under the Correction of Pedants. But I will let Learning alone
at present, because I have already banished it (though not out of disrespect)
from mixed Conversation; to which we will return, and of which the greatest
Magazines and Supports are still in Reserve. I mean the many excellent Authors
of our own Country, whose Works it were endless to recount. Where is Love,
Honor and Bravery more lively represented than in our Tragedies, who has given
us Nobler, or juster Pictures of Nature than Mr. Shakespeare? Where is there a
tenderer Passion, than in the Maids Tragedy? Whose Grief is more awful and
commanding than Mr. Otways? Whose Descriptions more Beautiful, or Thoughts
more Gallant than Mr. Drydens? When I see any of their Plays acted, my Passions
move by their Direction, my Indignation, my Compassion, my my Grief are all at
their Beck. Nor is our Comedy at all inferior to our Tragedy; for, not to
mention those already named for the other part of the Stage, who are all
excellent in this too, Sir George Etherege and Sir Charles Sedley for neat
Raillery and Gallantry are without Rivals, Mr. Wicherley for strong Wit,
pointed Satyr, sound and useful Observations is beyond Imitation; Mr. Congreve
for sprightly, gentile, easy Wit falls short of no Man. These are the Masters
of the Stage; but there are others who though of an inferior Class, yet
deserve Commendation, were that at present my Business. Nay, even the worst of
'em afford us some diversion; for I find a sort of foolish Pleasure, and can
laugh at Mr. D -- y's Farce, as I do at the Tricks, and Impertinencies of a
Monkey; and was pleased to see the humor and delight of the Author in Mr. H --
n's Eating, and Drinking Play which I fancied was written in a Victualling
House. In short, were it not for the too great frequency of loose Expressions,
and wanton Images, I should take our Theaters for the best Schools in the World
of Wit, Humanity, and Manners; which they might easily become by retrenching
that too great Liberty. Neither have the Poets only, but the Critics too
Endeavored to complete us; Mr. Dennis and Mr. Rimer have by their Ingenious,
and judicious labors taught us to admire the Beauties as we ought, and to know
the faults of the former. Nor are we less beholding to these for forming our
Judgments, than to those for raising our Fancies.

These are the Sources from whence we draw our gayer part of Conversation; I
don't mean in exclusion to the other parts of Poetry, in most of which (as I
have heard good Judges say) we equal at least the Ancients, and far surpass all
the Moderns. I honor the Names, and admire the Writings of Denham, Suckling
and D'avenant, I am ravished with the Fancy of Cowley, and the Gallantry of
Waller. I reverence the Fairy Queen, am raised, and elevated with Paradise
Lost, Prince Arthur composes and reduces me to a State of Yawning indifference,
and Mr. W -- stl -- y's Heroicks lull me to Sleep. Thus all Ranks and Degrees
of Poets have their use, and may be serviceable to some body or other from the
Prince to the Pastry Cook, or Past-beard Box-maker. I should mention our
Satyrists, but it would be endless to descend to every particular, of these Mr.
Oldham is admirable, and to go no further, the inimitable Mr. Butler will be an
everlasting Testimony, of the Wit of his Age, and Nation, and bid eternal
defiance to the Wits of all Countries, and future Ages to follow him in a Path
before untrack'd. Our Prose Writers, that are eminent for a gay Style and
Jovial Argument, are so many, that it would swell this Letter too much to name
'em, so that I shall only take notice, that whoever can read without Pleasure,
or Laughter, The contempt of the Clergy, and the following Letters and
Dialogaes by the same Author, or the facetious Dialogues of Mr. Brown must be
more Splenetick than Heraclitus, or more stupid, than the Ass he laughed at.

Nor are we less provided for the serious Part; Morality has generally been the
Province of our Clergy who have treated of all parts of it very largely with so
much Piety, Solidity, and Eloquence, that as I think I may venture to say, they
have written more upon it than the Clergy of all the rest of the World; so I
believe no Body will deny that they have written better. Yet I could wish, that
our Ingenious Gentlemen would employ their Pens oftener on these Subjects;
because the severity of the other's Profession obliges 'em to write with an
Air, and in a Style less agreeable, and inviting to Young People, Not that we
are without many excellent Pieces of Morality, Humanity and Civil Prudence
written by, and like Gentlemen. But it is the Excellence of 'em, and the
ability of our Gentlemen, which appears in the Spirit, Wit, and curious
observations in those Pieces, which make me desire more of the same Nature, Who
can read the Essays of that Wonderful Man my Lord Bacon, or the no less to be
admired Sir Walter Raleigh's, or Mr. Osborns advice to a Son, the Advice to a
Daughter, Sir William Temple's, or Sir George Machenzie's Essays, Sir Roger
L'Estrange's Essay (to which last we are likewise obliged for an incomparable
Version of Seneca) and abundance of others, without wishing for more from the
same or the like hands? Our Neighbors the French, have written a great deal of
this kind, of the best of which we have the benefit in English; but more
particularly the Messieurs, Montagne, Rochefaucaut, and St. Evremont deserve to
be immortal in all Languages. I need not mention any more, it is apparent from
these that Women want not the means of being Wise and Prudent without more
Tongues than one; nay, and Learned too, if they have any Ambition to be so.

The numberless Treatises of Antiquities, Philosophy, Mathematics Natural, and
other History (in which I cannot pass silently by, that learned One of Sir
Walter Raleigh, which the World he writ of cannot match) written originally in,
or translated to our Tongue are sufficient to lead us a great way into any
Science our Curiousity shall prompt us to. The greatest difficulty we struggled
with, was the want of a good Art of Reasoning, which we had not, that I know
of, till that defect was supplied by the greatest Master of that Art Mr. Lock,
whose Essay on Human Understanding makes large amends for the want of all
others in that kind

Thus Madam I have endeavored to obviate all our Adversarie's Objections, by
touching upon as great a Variety of things relating to the Subject as I
conveniently could. Yet I hope I have troubled you with nothing but what was
necessary to make my way clear, and plain before me; and I am apt to think I
have made it appear, that nothing but disencouragement or an Idle Uncurious
Humor can hinder us from Rivalling most Men in the knowledge of great Variety
of things, without the help of more Tongues than our Own; which the Men so
often reproachfully tell us is enough. This Idleness is but too frequently to
be found among us, but it is a Fault equally common to both Sexes. Those that
have means to play the Fool all their lives, seldom care for the trouble of
being made wise. We are naturally Lovers of our Ease, and have great
apprehensions of the difficulty of things untried; Especially in matters of
Learning, the common Methods of acquiring which are so unpleasant, and uneasy.
I doubt not but abundance of noble Wits are stiffled in both Sexes, for want
but of suspecting what they were able to do, and with how much facility.
Experience shows us every day Blockheads, that arrive at a moderate, nay
sometimes a great Reputation by their Confidence, and brisk attempts which they
maintain by their Diligence; while great Numbers of Men naturally more
Ingenious lie neglected by, for want of Industry to improve, or Courage to
exert themselves. No Man certainly but wishes he had the Reputation in, and
were Respected and Esteemed by the World as he sees some Men are for the Fruits
of their Pens; but they are loath to be at the pains of an Attempt, or doubt
their sufficience to perform; or what I believe is most general, never to
enquire so far into themselves, and their own Abilities, as to bring such a
thought into their Heads. This last I fancy is the true Reason, why our Sex,
who are commonly charged with talking too much, are Guilty of Writing so
little. I wish they would shake of this lazy Despondence, and let the noble
examples of the deservedly celebrated Mrs. Philips, and the incomparable Mrs.
Behn rouse their Courages, and show Mankind the great injustice of their
Contempt. I am confident they would find no such need of the assistance of
Languages as is generally imagined. Ignorance of Latin etc. no disadvantage.
Those that have of their own need not graft upon Foreign Stocks. I have often
thought that the not teaching Women Latin and Greek, was an advantage to them,
if it were rightly considered, and might be improved to a great height. For
Girls after they can Read and Write (if they be of any Fashion) are taught
such things as take not up their whole time, and not being suffered to run
about at liberty as Boys, are furnished among other toys with Books, such as
Romances, Novels, Plays and Poems; which though they read carelessly only for
Diversion, yet unawares to them, give 'em very early a considerable Command
both of Words and Sense; which are further improved by their making and
receiving Visits with their Mothers, which gives them betimes the opportunity
of imitating, conversing with, and knowing the manner, and address of elder
Persons. These I take to be the true Reasons why a Girl of Fifteen is reckoned
as ripe as a Boy of One and Twenty, and not any natural forwardness of Maturity
as some People would have it. These advantages the Education of Boys deprives
them of, who drudge away the Vigor of their Memories at Words, useless ever
after to most of them, and at Seventeen or Eighteen are to begin their Alphabet
of Sense, and are but where the Girls were at Nine or Ten. Yet because they
have learnt Latin and Greek, reject with Scorn all English Books their best
helps, and lay aside their Latin ones, as if they were already Masters of all
that Learning, and so hoist Sail for the wide World without a Compass to Steer
by. Thus I have fairly stated the difference between us, and can find no such
disparity in Nature or Education as they contend for; but we have a sort of
ungenerous Adversaries, that deal more in Scandal than Argument, and when they
cannot hurt us with their Weapons, endeavor to annoy us with stink Pots. Let us
see therefore, Madam, whether we cannot beat them from their Ammunition, and
turn their own Artillery upon them; for I firmly believe there is nothing,
which they charge upon us, but may with more Justice be retorted upon
themselves.

They tax us with a long List of Faults, and Imperfections, and seem to have
taken a Catalogue of their own Follies and Vices, not with design to correct
them, but to shift of the Imputation to us. There is no doubt, but particular
Women may be found upon whom every charge may be justified; but our Sex is not
answerable for them, till they prove there are no such Men, which will not be
before Doomsday. However, like ill Neighbors they bring the Dirt out of their
own Homes not out of Neatness, but out of Envy to their Neighbors, at whose
Doors they lay it. But let them remove their Follies as often as they please,
they are still as constant to them, as the Needle to the North Pole, they point
them out which way soever they move. Let us see what these Qualities are, they
so liberally bestow upon, and after see how they fit the Donours, and survey
'em in their proper Figures and Colors. The most familiar of these are Vanity,
Impertinence, Enviousness, Dissimulation, Inconstancy, etc.

To begin with Vanity, Vanity.
it is a Failing the greatest Part of Mankind are tinctured with, more or less.
For all Men are apt to flatter themselves with a Fancy, that they have some one
or more good Quallities, or extraordinary Gifts, that raise 'em above the
ordinary Level of Men; and therefore hug and cherish, what they think valuable
and singular in 'em. It is never commendable, sometimes pardonable, when the
excellencies are real, and it is moderate so much must be allowed to humane
frailty. It is ridiculous and intolerable when it is extravagant, misplaced,
or groundless. It is very injudicious, and makes men commonly dote on their
Defects, and expose their blemishes by their Fondness, which makes 'em more
remarkable by the care and ornament bestowed on 'em. It persuades hard Favored
and distorted Fellows to dress, and value their Persons, Cowards to pretend to
Courage, and provoke Beatings, Blockheads to set up for Wit, and make
themselves ridiculous in Print, Upstarts to brag of their Families, and be
reminded of the Garrets they were born, and the Stalls they were brought up in.
In Women the object of it is their Beauty, and is excusable in those that have
it. Those that have it not may be pardoned, if they endeavor at it; because it
is the only undisputed advantage our Sex has over the other, and what makes 'em
respected beyond all other Perfections, and is alone adored. In Men it has not
only this Object, but all those before mentioned, and a hundred other. It is
admirably seen in a Writing, reciting Fop Author, is in full Luster in a Beau,
but its most unlucky Prospect is in a Swaggering Coward, who is a Fool beyond
the Conviction of Smart. Character of a Bully.
His Courage is like an Ague Fit, that leaves him upon a Fright, and returns
when he is out of the reach of a Cudgel. He spends much time in the Fencing
School, and Fights briskly where there is no danger of Wounds nor Smart. His
Hands are instructed, but his Heels do him all the Service. He is a nice
observer of Punctilio's, and takes more Affronts than are given him. He draws
first, and runs first, and if ever he makes another Man run, it is after him.
He is a Pebble that sparkles like a Diamond, but wants hardness. He talks
perpetually of what he will do, but thinks continually of what he shall suffer.
He is often in Quarrels, yet seldom in Rencounters, and is glad of a Challenge,
that he may know whom, and when to avoid. He brings up the Rear at an
Engagement, and leads the Van in the Retreat. He is a Man of much Passion, but
the most predominant is his Fear. He offers affronts readily, but has too much
honor to justify them, and will submit to any terms of satisfaction rather
than occasion Bloodshed. He is so full of Courage, that it boils over when
there is no occasion, and his Sword and Person are always at Leisure, and at
your Service, till you want them, and then to his great Trouble, he is always
indispensably engaged otherwise. He wears Red, and a long Sword openly to show
his Valor, and Mail privately to show his Discretion. He threatens terribly,
but he is like a Witch, if you draw Blood of him, he has no power to hurt you.
No Man shows or boasts more of his Scars with less Reason. He scorns to take a
blow in the Face, and a Back-piece is as good to him as a whole suit of Armor.
He is at first the Terror of all the Young Bullies, at last their Maygame, and
they blood their Cub Heclors upon him, as they do young Beagles on a Hare. Good
usage makes him insolent, but he fawns like a Spaniel most upon those that beat
him. When he is discovered by all the rest of the World, the Cheat passes still
upon himself, and he is pleased with the terrible Figure he makes in his Glass,
though he is ready to shake at his own Shadow.

There are men of an humor directly opposite to this, Character of a Scow^er.
yet every whit as Mad, Foolish, and Vain; these are your Men of nice Honor,
that love Fighting for the sake of Blows, and are never well but when they are
wounded They are severe Interpreters of Looks, are affronted at every Face that
don't please 'em. and like true Cocks of the Game have a quarrel to all Mankind
at first sight. They are passionate Admirers of scarr'd Faces, and dote on a
Wooden Leg. They receive a Challenge like a Billet Douce, and a home thrust as
a Favor. Their common Adversary is the Constable, and their usual Lodging the
Counter. Broken heads are a diversion, and an Arm in a Scarf is a high
satisfaction. They are frugall in their expenses with the Tailor, for they have
their Doublets pinkt on their Backs, but they are as good as an Annuity to the
Surgeon, though they need him not to let 'em blood. Flanders is their Mistress,
and a Clap from her carries 'em off the Stage. If they return, an Hospital is
their Retreat, or the Sheriff their Executour. These two, Madam, are very
different extravagances, and very strange one's, yet they are real, and such as
appear every day. But, what is most to be wondered at, arise both from the same
Principle, and the same mistaken Notion, and are only differenced by the
diversity of Tempers in Men. The common Motive to both is Vanity, and they
jointly concur in this Opinion, that Valor is the most estimable, and most
honorable Quality, that Man is capable of; they agree in a desire to be
honored and feared, but they differ in their methods in persuing this common
End. The one is naturally active, bold and daring; and therefore takes the true
course to arrive at it by showing what he can do, by what he dare suffer, and
his immoderate desire and indiscretion suffer him to know no bounds. The other
is mean Spirited and fearful, and seeks by false Fire to Counterfeit a heat
that may pass for genuine, to conceal the Frost in his Blood, and like an ill
Actor, over-does his Part for want of understanding it, which it is impossible
he should. Among peaceable Men, and those of his own Temper he comes of with
Colors flying, and those are the Men he would be valiant amongst only, could
he read Men's hearts. But the first Rencounter betrays the Ass through the Lions
Skin, and he is Cudgel'd like an Ass in Spite of his Covering. It is our
happiness Madam, that we lie under no manner of Temptation from these two
Vanities, Imitation ridiculous.
whereof one is so dangerous, the other so ridiculous. For all humors that are
forced against the natural bent of our tempers must be so. Nature is our best
guide, and has fitted every Man for somethings more particularly than others;
which if they had the sense to prosecute, they would at least not be
ridiculous, if they were not extraordinary. But so prevalent are our Vanity,
and this Apish Humor of Imitation, that we persuade our selves, that we may
practice with applause, whatever we see another succeed in, though as contrary to
the intent of our Nature, as Dancing to an Elephant; so some Men that talk well
of serious matters, are so moved at the applause some merry Drolls gain, that
they forget their gravity, and aiming to be Wits, turn Buffoons; There are
others, that are so taken with the actions and grimace of a good Mimick, that
they fall presently to making awkard Faces and wry Mouths, and are all their
lives after in a Vizor, Maskt though bare faced.

These, and innumerable others of the like Nature, are the lesser Follies of
Mankind, by which their Vanity makes 'em fit only to be laughed at. There are
others, who by more studied and refined Follies arrive to be more considerable,
and make a great Figure and Party among their Sex.

Of the first rank of these is the Beau, Character of a Beau.
who is one that has more Learning in his Heels than his Head, which is better
covered than filled. His Tailor and his Barber are his Cabinet Council, to whom
he is more beholding for what he is, than to his Maker. He is One that has
traveled to see Fashions, and brought over with him the newest cut suit, and
the prettiest Fancied Ribbands for Sword Knots. His best Acquaintance at Paris
was his Dancing Master, whom he calls the Marquess, and his chief Visits to the
Opera's. He has seen the French King once, and knows the name of his chief
Minister, and is by this sufficiently convinced that there are no Politicians
in any other Part of the World. His improvements are a nice Skill in the Mode,
and a high Contempt of his own Country, and of Sense. All the knowledge he has
of the Country, or Manners of it, is in the keeping of the Valet that followed
him hither, and all that he retains of the Language is a few modish words to
lard his discourse with, and show his Breeding, and the names of his Garniture.
He should be a Philosopher, for he studies nothing but himself, yet every one
knows him better, that thinks him not worth knowing. His looks and gestures are
his constant Lesson, and his Glass is the Oracle that resolves all his mighty
doubts and scruples. He examines and refreshes his Complexion by it, and is
more dejected at a Pimple, than if it were a Cancer. When his Eyes are set to a
languishing Air, his Motions all prepared according to Art, his Wig and his
Coat abundantly Powdered, his Gloves Essenc'd, and his Handkercher perfumed and
all the rest of his Bravery rightly adjusted, the greatest part of the day, as
well the business of it at home, is over; it is time to launch, and down he
comes, scented like a Perfumers Shop, and looks like a Vessel with all her
rigging under sail without Ballast. A Chair is brought within the door, for he
apprehends every Breath of Air as much, as if it were a Hurricane. His first
Visit is to the Chocolate House, and after a quarter of an Hours Compliment to
himself in the great Glass, he faces about and salutes the Company, and puts in
practice his Mornings Meditations; When he has made his Cringes round, and
played over all his Tricks, out comes the fine Snush Box, and his Nose is
Regaled a while: After this he begins to open, and starts some learned Argument
about the newest Fashion, and hence takes occasion to commend the next Man's
Fancy in his Cloths, this ushers in a discourse of the Appearance last Birth
Night, or Ball at Court, and so a Critic upon this Lord, or that Ladies
Masquing Habit. From hence he adjourns to the Playhouse, where he is to be met
again in the side Box, from whence he makes his Court to all the Ladies in
general with his Eyes, and is particular only with the Orange-Wench. After a
while he engages some neighboring Vizor, and they together run over all the
Boxes, take to Pieces every Face, examine every Feature, pass their Censure
upon every one, and so on to their Dress; here he very Judiciously gives his
opinion upon every particular, and determines whose Colors are well chosen,
whose Fancy is neatest, and whose Cloths sit with most Air; but in conclusion
sees no Body complete but himself in the whole House. After this he looks down
with contempt upon the Pit, and rallies all the slovenly Fellows, and awkard
Beau's (as he calls them) of the other End of the Town, is mightily offended at
their ill scented Snuff, and in spite of all his Pulvilio and Essences, is
overcome with the stink of their Cordovan Gloves. To close all, Madam in the
Mask must give him an account of the Scandal of the Town, which she does in the
History of abundance of Intrigues real or feigned; at all which he laughs aloud
and often, not to show his satisfaction, but his Teeth. She shows him who is
kept by such a Lord, Who was lately discarded by such a Knight, for granting
Favors too indiscreetly to such a Gentleman: who has lately been in the
Country for two or three Months upon extraordinary Occasions. To all which he
gives great attention, that he may pass for a Man of Intelligence in another
Place. His next Stage is Locket's, where his Vanity, not his Stomach, is to be
gratified with something that is little and dear, Quails and Ortalans are the
meanest of his Diet, and a Spoonful of Green Pease at Christmas, are worth to
him more than the inheritance of the Field where they grow in Summer. Every
thing falls in his Esteem, as it falls in price, and he would not so much as
taste the Wine, if the hard name, and the high rate did not give it a relish.
After a glass or two, (for a Pint is his stint) he begins to talk of his
Intrigues, boasts much of the Favors he has received, and shows counterfeit
Tokens, and in Conclusion, slanders some Lady or other of unquestioned Virtue
with a particular fondness for him. His Amors are all profound Secrets, yet he
makes a Confidence of 'em to every Man he meets with. He pretends a great
reverence for the Ladies, and a mighty tenderness of their Reputations; yet he
is like a Flesh Fly, whatever he blows on is tainted. He talks of nothing
under Quality, though he never obtained a Favor, which his Man might not have
for half a Crown. He and his Footman in this Case are like English and Dutch at
an Ordinary in Holland, the Fare is the same, but the Price is vastly
different. Thus the Show goes forward, till he is beaten for Trespasses he was
never guilty of, and shall be damned for Sins he never Committed. At last, with
his Credit as low as his Fortune he retires sullenly to his Cloister, the
King's Bench, or Fleet, and passes the rest of his days in Privacy, and
Contemplation. Here, Madam, if you please we will give him one Visit more, and
see the last Act of the Farce; and you shall find him (whose Sobriety was
before a Vice, as being only the Pimp to his other Pleasures, and who feared a
lighted Pipe as much as if it had been a great Gun levelled at him) with his
Nose Flaming, and his Breath stinking of Spirits worse than a Dutch
Tarpawlin's, and smoking out of a short Pipe, that for some Months has been
kept hot as constantly as a Glass-House, and so I leave him to his Meditations.

You would think it yet more strange, that any one should be Slovenly and Nasty
out of Vanity; yet such there are I can assure you, Madam, and could easily
give a description of 'em, but that so foul a Relation must needs be Nauseous
to a Person so Neat as your Self; and would be treating You as the Country
Squire did his Court Friend, who when he had showed him all the Curiosities of
his House and Gardens, carried him into his Hogsties. But there are more than
enough to justify what I have said of the Humor of Diogenes, who was as vain
and as proud in his Tub, as Plato could be in the midst of his fine Persian
Carpets, and rich Furniture. Vanity is only an Ambition of being taken notice
of, which shows it self variously according to the humor of the Persons; which
was more extravagant in the Anti-Beau, than in the Beau Philosopher. Vanity is
the veriest Proteus in the World, it can Ape Humility, and can make Men decry
themselves on purpose to be Flattered; like some cunning Preachers that cry up
Mortification and Self-denial perpetually, and are pampered all the while by
the Zeal and at the Charges of their Followers, who are afraid the good Man
should starve himself. It is the Blessing of Fools, and the Folly of Ingenious
Men. For it makes those contentedly hugg themselves under all the scorn of the
World, and the Indignities that are offered 'em, and these restless and
dissatisfied with its applause. Both think the World envious, and that their
merit is injured, and it is impossible to right either of 'em to their Minds;
for those have no title to the pretense of merit, and these not so much as they
think they have. Yet it is the Happiness of the first that they can think
themselves capable of moving Envy; for though they commonly mistake the
Derision of Men, Vanity a Blessing to Fools.
for their applause, yet Men are sometimes so ill Natured as to undeceive 'em,
and then it is their Comfort, that these are envious Men, and misrepresent the
Worlds opinion of 'em. Could these Men be convinced of their mistake, I see
nothing that should hinder them from being desperate, and hanging or disposing
of themselves some other such way. For though a Man may comfort himself under
Afflictions, it is either that they are undeserved, or if deserved, that he
suffers only for Oversights, or rash Acts, by which the wisest Men may be
sometimes overtaken; that he is in the main Discreet and Prudent, and that
others believe him so. But when a Man falls under his own Contempt, and does
not only think himself not wise, but by Nature made absolutely incapable of
ever becoming Wise, he is in a deplorable State, and wants the common Comfort,
as well of Fools, as Wise Men, Vanity; which in such a Case is the only proper
Mediator of a Reconcilement. No Quality seems to be more Providentially
distributed to every Man according to his Necessity; for those that have least
Wit, ought to have the greatest Opinion of it; as all other Commodities are
rated highest, where they are scarcest. By this means the level is better
maintained amongst Men, who, were this imaginary Equality destroyed, might be
apt to reverence, and idolize one another too much, and forgetting the common
Fate, they are all Born to, pay Honors too near divine to their Fellow
Mortals. But as the humor of the World now runs, this sort of Idolatry is
scarce likely to come into Fashion. We have too great an Opinion of our selves,
to believe too well of any one else, and we are in nothing more difficult than
in points of Wit and Understanding, in either of which we very unwillingly
yield the Preference to any Man. There is nothing of which we affect to speak
with more humility and indifference than our own Sense, yet nothing of which we
think with more Partiality, and Presumption. There have been some so bold as to
assume the Title of the Oracles of Reason to themselves, and their own
Writings; and we meet with others daily, that think themselves Oracles of Wit.
These are the most Vexatious Animals in the World, that think they have a
Privilege to torment and plague every Body; but those especially who have the
best Reputation for their Wit or Judgment; as Fleas are said to molest those
most, who have the tenderest Skins, and the sweetest Blood.

Of these the most voluminous Fool is the Fop Poet, who is one that has always
more Wit in his Pockets than any where else, Character of a Poetaster.
yet seldom or never any of his own there. Esop's Daw was a Type of him; For he
makes himself fine with the Plunder of all Parties. He is a Smuggler of Wit,
and steals French Fancies without paying the customary Duties. Verse is his
Manufacture; For it is more the labor of his Finger than his brain. He spends
much time in Writing, but ten times more in Reading what he has Written. He is
laden constantly with more Papers, and duller than a Clerk in Chancery, and
spends more time in Hearings, and Rehearings. He asks your Opinion, yet for
fear you should not jump with him, tells you his own first. He desires no
Favor, yet is disappointed, if he be not Flattered, and is offended always at
the Truth. His first Education is generally a Shop, or a Counting House, where
his acquaintance commences with the Bell-man upon a new Years day. He puts him
upon Intriguing with the Muses, and promises to Pimp for him. From this time
forward he hates the name of Mechanic, and resolves to sell all his stock, and
purchase a Plantation in Parnassus. He is now a Poetical Haberdasher of Small
Wares, and deals very much in Novels, Madrigals, Riddles, Funeral, and Love
Odes, and Elegies, and other Toys from Helic^n, which he has a Shop so well
furnished with, that he can fit you with all sorts and Sizes upon all Occasions
in the twinkling of an Eye. He frequents Apollo's Exchange in Covent Garden,
and picks up the freshest Intelligence what Plays are upon the Stocks, or ready
to be launched; who have lately made a good Voyage, who a saving one only, and
who have suffered a Wreck in Lincoln's- Inn-Feilds, or Drury Lane, and which
are brought into the Dock to be Careen'd and fitted for another Voyage. He
talks much of Jack Dryden, and Will. Wyc^erley, and the rest of that Set, and
protests he cannot help having some respect for 'em, because they have so much
for him, and his Writings; otherwise he could show 'em to be mere Sots and
Blockheads that understand little of Poetry, in comparison of himself; but he
forbears 'em merely out of Gratitude, and Compassion. Once a Month he fits out
a small Poetical Smeck at the charge of his Bookseller, which he lades with
French Plunder new Vampt in English, small Ventures of Translated Odes, Elegies
and Epigrams of Young Traders, and ballasts with heavy Prose of his own; for
which returns are to be made to the several Owners in Testers, or applause from
the Prentices and Tire Women that deal for 'em. He is the Oracle of those that
want Wit, and the Plague of those that have it; for he haunts their Lodgings,
and is more terrible to em, than their Duns. His Pocket is an unexhaustible
Magazine of Rhyme, and Nonsense, and his Tongue like a repeating Clock with
Chimes, is ready upon every touch to sound to 'em. Men avoid him for the same
Reason, they avoid the Pillory, the security of their Ears; of which he is as
mercilefs a Persecutor. He is the Bane of Society, a Friend to the Stationers,
the Plague of the Press, and the Ruin of his Bookseller. He is more profitable
to the Grocers and Tabacconists than the Paper Manufacture; for his Works,
which talk so much of Fire and Flame, commonly expire in their Shops in Vapor
and Smoke. If he aspire to Comedy, he intrigues with some experienced Damsel of
the Town, in order to instruct himself in the humor of it, and is cullied by
her into Matrimony, and so is furnished at once with a Plot, and two good
Characters, himself and his Wife, and is paid with a Portion for a Jointure in
Parnassus, which I leave him to make his best of.

I shall not trouble you with any more Instances of the foolish vanities of
Mankind; Vanity Universal.
because I am afraid I have been too large upon that Head already. Not that I
think there is any Order or Degree of Men, which would not afford many and
notorious instances for our Purpose. For as I think Vanity almost the Universal
mover of all our Actions, whether good or bad; so I think there are scarce any
Men so Ingenious, or so Virtuous, but something of it will shine through the
greatest Part of what they do, let them cast never so thick a Vail over it.
What makes Men so solicitous of leaving a Reputation behind 'em in the World,
though they know they cannot be affected with it after Death, but this even to a
degree of Folly? What else makes great Men involve themselves in the Fatigues
and Hazards of War, and intricate Intrigues of State, when they have already
more than they can enjoy, but an Itch of being talked of and remembered, to
which they sacrifice their present happiness and repose?

But I shall carry these Considerations no farther; because I have already
singled out some of those many whose Vanity is more extravagant and ridiculous,
than any our Sex is chargeable with, and these slight Touches may serve to let
'em see, that even the greatest, and Wisest are not wholely exempt, if they
have it not in a higher Degree, though they exercise it in things more Popular,
and Plausible. I hope therefore the burden of this good Quality will not
hereafter be laid upon us alone, but the Men will be contented to divide the
Load with us, and be thankful that they bear less than their Proportion.

Impertinence comes next under Consideration, Impertinence.
in which I shall be as brief, as I conveniently can, in regard I have been so
long upon the precedeing Head. Impertinence is a humor of busying our selves
about things trivial, and of no Moment in themselves, or unseasonably in things
of no concern to us, or wherein we are able to do nothing to any Purpose. Here
our Adversaries insult over us, as if they had gained an entire Victory, and
the Field were indisputable; but they shall have no cause for Triumph, this is
no Post of such mighty advantage as they fondly persuade themselves. This
Presumption arises from an Erroneous Conceit, that all those things in which
they are little concerned, or consulted, are triffles below their care or
notice, Commonly mistaken.
which indeed they are not by Nature so well able to manage. Thus, when they
hear us talking to, and advising one another about the Order, Distribution and
Contrivance of Household Affairs, about the Regulation of the Family, and
Government of Children and Servants, the provident management of a Kitchen, and
the decent ordering of a Table, the suitable Matching, and convenient
disposition of Furniture and the like, they presently condemn us for
impertinence. Yet they may be pleased to consider, that as the affairs of the
World are now divided betwixt us, the Domestic are our share, and out of which
we are rarely suffered to interpose our Sense. They may be pleased to consider
likewise, that as light and inconsiderable as these things seem, they are
capable of no Pleasures of Sense higher or more refined than those of Brutes
without our care of 'em. For were it not for that, their Houses would be mere
Bedlams, their most luxurious Treats, but a rude confusion of ill Digested, ill
mixed Scents and Relishes, and the fine Furniture, they bestow so much cost on,
but an expensive heap of glittering Rubbish. Thus they are beholding to us for
the comfortable Enjoyment of what their labor or good Fortune has acquired or
bestowed, and think meanly of our care only, because they understand not the
value of it. But if we shall be thought impertinent for Discourses of this
Nature, as I deny not but we sometimes justly may, when they are unseasonable;
what censure must those Men bear, who are prepetually talking of Politics,
State Affairs and Grievances to us, in which perhaps neither they, nor We are
much concerned, or if we be, are not able to propose, much less to apply any
Remedy to 'em? Surely these are impertinent; not to call the Beau, or Poetaster
on the Stage again, whose whole Lives are one continued scene of Folly and
Impertinence; let us make the best of our News Monger.

He is one whose Brains having been once overheated, Character of a
Coffee-House Politician.
retain something of the Fire in 'em ever after. He mistakes his Passion for
Zeal, and his Noise and Bustling, for Services. He is always full of Doubts,
Fears, and Jealousies, and is never without some notable Discovery of a deep
laid Design, or a dangerous Plot found out in a Meal Tub, or Petticoat. He is a
mighty Listner after Prodigies, and never hears of a Whale, or a Comet, but he
apprehends some sudden Revolution in the State, and looks upon a
Groaning-board, or a speaking-head, as forerunners of the Day of Judgment. He
is a great Lover of the King, but a bitter Enemy to all about him, and thinks
it impossible for him to have any but Evil Counselors, and though he be very
zealous for the Government, yet he never finds any thing in it but Grievances
and Miscarriages to declaim upon. He is a Well-wisher to the Church, but he is
never to be reconciled to the Bishops and Clergy, and rails most inveterately
at the Act of Uniformity. He hates Persecution implacably, and contends
furiously for Moderation, and can scarce think well of the Toleration, because
it is an Act of the State. He professes himself of the Church of England,
pretends to like the Worship of it, but he goes to Meetings in spite to the
Person of his Parish. His Conscience is very tender and scrupulous in Matters
of Ceremony, but it is as steely and tough as Brawn behind his Counter, and can
digest any Sin of Gain. He lodges at home, but he lives at the Coffeehouse. He
converses more with News Papers, Gazettes and Votes, than with his Shop Books,
and his constant Application to the Public takes him off all Care for his
Private Concern. He is always settling the Nation, yet could never manage his
own Family. He is a mighty Stickler at all Elections, and though he has no Vote,
thinks it impossible any thing should go right unless he be there to Bawl for
it. His business is at Home, but his thoughts are in Flanders, and he is
earnestly investing of Towns till the Sheriff's Officers beleaguer his Doors.
He is busy in forcing of Counterscarps, and storming of Breaches, while his
Creditors take his Shop by surprise, and make Plunder of his Goods. Thus by
mending the State, He marrs his own Fortune; and never leaves talking of the
Laws of the Land, till the Execution of 'em silence him.

This sort of Impertinents the Coffee-houses are every day full of; nay, so far
has this contagious Impertinence spread it self, that Private Houses, and
Shops, nay, the very Streets and Bulks are infected and pestered with Politics
and News. Not a Pot could go glibly down, or a stitch go merrily forward
without Namur, a while ago; 'twas Spice to the Porter's Ale, and Wax to the
Cobler's Thread; the one suspended his Draught, and the other his Awl to
enquire what was become of the Rogue, and were very glad to hear he was taken,
and expected no doubt he should come over and make 'em a Holy Day at his
Execution. They were mightily rejoiced at the Arresting of the Marshall
Boufflers, and made no question but they should see him amongst the rest of the
Beasts at Bartholomew Fair for Two Pence. This Folly of the Mob was in some
measure excusable, because their Ignorance led 'em into an expectation of
seeing what had given the World so much Trouble. But those that have better
knowledge of things have no such Plea, they ought to have been wiser, than to
have busied themselves so much and so earnestly about affairs, which all their
care and Solicitude could have no more Influence upon, than over the Weather.
'Twas pleasant to see what Shoals the report of the arrival of a Holland, or
Flanders Mail, brought to the Secretary's Office, the Post Office, and the
Coffee-Houses; every one Crowding to catch the News first, which as soon as
they had, they posted away like so many Expresses to disperse it among their
Neighbors at more distance, that waited with Ears pricked up to receive 'em, or
walked uneasily with a Foolish Impatience to and from the Door, or Window, as
if their looking out so often would fetch 'em the sooner. Most Men in their
News are like Beau's in their Diet, the worst is welcome while it is fresh and
scarce, and the best is not worth a Farthing when it has been blown upon; and
commonly they fare like Beau's, are fond of it while it is young and insipid,
and neglect it when it is grown up to its full, and true relish. No sooner is it
rumored that a Breach is made in the Castle Wall, or the White Flag hung out,
but a Council of War is called in every Coffee-house in Town; the French, and
Dutch Prints, their Intelligencers are called for immediately, and examined,
and not a Shot is mentioned but they start as if the Ball whizz'd just then by
their Ears. After this follows a serious debate about a general Assault, and
whether they shall storm immediately, or not; who shall begin the Attack; what
Conditions shall be granted on Capitulation. The Castle of Namur thus taken, or
Surrendered, they proceed to take their Measures, and settle the next Campaign,
and whatever harm we suffer by those mischeivous French in the Field, they are
sure to take sufficient Revenge, and pay 'em off Swingingly in the
Coffee-houses: But as if this were not enough, Our greatest Actions must be
Buffoon'd in Show, as well as Talk. Shall Namur be taken and our Hero's of the
City not show their Prowess upon so great an Occasion? It must never be said,
City Militia.
that the Coffee-houses dared more than Moor-Fields; No, for the honor of
London, out comes the Foreman of the Shop very Formidable in Buff and
Bandileers, and away he marches with Feather in Cap, to the general Rendezvous
in the Artillery Ground. There these terrible Mimicks of Mars are to spend
their Fury in Noise and Smoke, upon a Namur erected for that purpose on a
Molehill, and by the help of Guns and Drums out-stink and out-rattle
Smith-field in all its Bravery, and would be too hard for the greatest Man in
all France, if they had him but amongst 'em. Yet this is but Skirmishing, the
hot Service is in another Place, when they engage the Capons and Quart Pots;
never was Onset more Vigorous, For they come to Handy-Blows immediately, and
now is the real cutting and slashing, and Tilting without Quarter, Were the
Towns in Flanders all walled with Beef, and the French as good meat as Capons,
and dressed the same way, the King need never beat his Drums for Soldiers; all
these Gallant Fellows would come in Voluntarily, the meanest of which would be
able to eat a Marshall, and whom nothing could oppose in conjunction.

Nothing is more common, and familiar than this sort of Impertinence; Most Men
would have little to do, did they busy themselves about nothing, but what they
understood, or were concerned in. A Monkey is not liker a Man in his Figure,
than in his humor. How ready are all Mankind to censure without Authority, and
to give advice unaskt, and without reason. They are very much mistaken, that
think this forwardness to thrust themselves into other's affairs, springs from
any Principle of Charity or Tenderness for 'em, or the least Regard to the
Welfare of their Neighbors. It Is only a Vain Conceit that they are wiser, and
more able to advise, which puts 'em upon engaging in things they have nothing
to do with, Off^ious Impertin^nces.
and passing their Judgments Magisterially on matters they have no Cognizance
of, and generally little Information, or Skill in. They are desirous the World
should have as great an Opinion of 'em as they have of themselves, and
therefore impertinently interpose their own Authority and Sense, though never so
little to the purpose, only to show how well they could manage, were it their
Business; thus they advise without good intention, or kindness, and censure
without design, or malice to the Persons counseled, or reflected on, These
buzzing Insects swarm as thick every where, and are as troublesome as
Muskettoes in the West Indies. They are perpetually in a hurry of Business, yet
are forced to rack their Inventions to employ their Leisure. They are very
busy for every Body, and serve no Body. They are always in have, and think
themselves expected every where with Impatience, yet come sooner always than
they are welcome. They will walk a Mile, and spend an hour to tell any one how
urgent their Business is, and what have they are in to be gone. Their
Expedition is their greatest Loss, For Time is the only thing that lies heavy
upon their hands. They are walking Gazetts, that carry News from one Neighbor
to another, and have their Stages about the Town as regular and certain, as a
Penny Postman* Every Man is their acquaintaince, but no Man their Friend. They
drudge for every Body, and are paid by no no Body, and though their Lives be worn
out in endeavors to oblige all Mankind, when they die no one regrets their
Loss, or misses their Service.

There are another sort of Impertinents, Character of a Vertuoso.
who, as they mind not the Business of other Men where it concerns 'em not,
neglect it likewise where it does; and amuse themselves continually with the
Contemplation of those things, which the rest of the World slight as useless,
and below their regard. Of these the most Egregious is the Virtuoso, who is one
that has sold an Estate in Land to purchase one in Scallop, Conch, Muscle,
Cockle Shells, Periwinkles, Sea Shrubs, Weeds, Mosses, Sponges, Coralls,
Corallines, Sea Fans, Pebbles, Marchasites and Flint stones; and has abandoned
the Acquaintance and Society of Men for that of Insects, Worms, Grubbs,
Maggets, Flies, Moths, Locusts, Beetles, Spiders, Grasshoppers, Snails, Lizards
and Tortoises. His study is like Noah's Ark, the general Rendezvous of all
Creatures in the Universe, and the greatest part of his Movables are the
remainders of his Deluge. His Travels are not designed as Visits to the
Inhabitants of any Place, but to the Pits, Shores and Hills; from whence he
fetches not the Treasure, but the Trumpery. He is ravished at finding an
uncommon shell, or an odd shaped Stone, and is desperately enamored at first
sight of an unusual marked Butter-flie, which he will hunt a whole day to be
Master of. He trafficks to all places, and has his Correspondents in every part
of the World; yet his Merchandises serve not to promote our Luxury, nor
increase our Trade, and neither enrich the Nation, nor himself. A Box or two of
Pebbles or Shells, and a dozen of Wasps, Spiders and Caterpillars are his
Cargoe. He values a Camelion or Salamanders Egg, above all the Sugars and
Spices of the West and East Indies, and would give more for the Shell of a
Star-fish, or Sea Urchin entire, than for a whole Dutch Herring Fleet. He
visites Mines, Colepits, and Quarries frequently, but not for that sordid end
that other Men usually do, viz. gain; but for the sake of the fossile Shells
and Teeth that are sometimes found there. He is a smatterer at Botany, but for
fear of being suspected of any useful design by it, he employs his curiosity
only about Mosses, Grasses, Brakes, Thistles, etc. that are not accused of any
virtue in Medicine, which he distinguishes and divides very nicely. He
preserves carefully those Creatures, which other Men industriously destroy, and
cultivates sedulously those Plants, which others root up as Weeds. He is the
Embalmer of deceased Vermin, and dresses his Mummyes with as much care, as the
Ancient Egyptians did their Kings. His Cash consists much in old Coins, and he
thinks the Face of Alexander in one of 'em worth more than all his Conquests.
His Inventory is a list of the Insects of all Countries, and the Shells and
Pebbles of all Shores, which can no more be complete without two or three of
remarkable Signatures, than an Apothecaries Shop without a Tortoise and a
Crocodile, or a Country Barber's without a battered Cittern. A piece of Ore
with a Shell in it is a greater Present than if it were fine Gold, and a string
of Wampompeag is received with more joy, than a Rope of Orient Pearl, or
Diamonds would be. His Collection of Garden Snails, Cockle Shells and Vermin
completed, (as he thinks) he sets up for a Philosopher, and nothing less than
Universal Nature will serve for a Subject, of which he thinks he has an entire
History in his Lumber Office. Hence forward he struts and swells, and despises
all those little insignificant Fellows, that can make no better use of those
noble incontestable Evidences of the Universal Deluge, Scallop and Oyster
Shells, than to stew Oysters, or melt Brimstone for Matches. By this time he
thinks it necessary to give the World and Essay of his Parts, that it may think
as highly of 'em (if possible) as he does himself; and finding Moses hard beset
of late, he resolves to give him a lift, and defend his Flood, to which he is
so much obliged for sparing his darling Toys only. But as great Masters use, he
corrects him sometimes for not speaking to his Mind, and gives him the lie now
and then in order to support his Authority. He shakes the World to Atoms with
case, which melts before him as readily as if it were nothing but a Ball of
Salt. He pumps even the Center, and drains it of imaginary stores by imaginary
Loopholes, as if punching the Globe full of holes could make his Hypothesis
hold Water. He is a Man of Expedition, and does that in a few days, which cost
Moses some Months to complete. He is a Passionate Admirer of his own Works
without a Rival, and superciliously contemns all Answers, yet the least
Objection throws him into the Vapors. He sets up for a grand Philosopher, and
palms Hypotheses upon the World, which future Ages may (if they please) expect
to hear his Arguments for; at present he is in no humor to give 'em any other
satisfaction than his own word, that he is infallible. Yet those that have a
Faith complacent enough to take a Gentleman's word for his own great Abilities,
may perhaps be admitted to a sight of his grand Demonstration, his Raree Show;
the particulars of which he repeats to 'em in a whining Tone, every whit as
formal and merry, though not so Musical, as the Fellows that used formerly to
carry theirs at their Backs. His ordinary discourse is of his Travels under
Ground, in which he has gone farther (if he may be believed) than a whole
Warren of Conies. Here he began his Collection of Furniture for his
Philosophical Toy Shop, which he will conclude with his Fortune, and then like
all Flesh revert to the place from whence he came, and be translated only from
one Shop to another.

This, Madam, is another sort of Impertience our Sex are not liable ^o; one
would think that none but Mad Men, or highly Hypochondriacal, could employ
themselves at this rate. I appeal to you, or indeed to any Man of Sense,
whether acts like the wiser Animal; the man that with great care, and pains
distinguishes and divides the many Varieties of Grass, and finds no other Fruit
of his labor, than the charging of his Memory with abundance of superfluous
Names; or the Ass that eats all promiscuously, and without distinction, to
satisfy his Appetite and support Nature. To what purpose is it, that these
Gentlemen ransack all Parts both of Earth and Sea to procure these Triffles? It
is only that they may give their Names to some yet unchristen'd Shell or
Insect. I know that the desire of knowledge, and the discovery of things yet
unknown is the Pretense; But what Knowledge is it? What Discoveries do we owe
to their Labors? It is only the Discovery of some few unheeded Varieties of
Plants, Shells, or Insects, unheeded only because useless; and the Knowledge,
they boast so much of, is no more than a Register of their Names, and Marks of
Distinction only. It is enough for them to know that a Silk Worm is a sort of
Caterpiller, that when it is come to maturity Weaves a Web, is metamorphos'd to
a Moth-Flye, lays Eggs, and so Dies. They leave all further enquiry to the
Unlearned and Mechanics, whose business only they think it to prosecute
matters of Gain and Profit. Let him contrive, if he can, to make this Silk
serviceable to Mankind; their Speculations have another Scope, which is the
founding some wild, uncertain, conjectural Hypothesis, which may be true or
false; yet Mankind neither Gainers nor Losers either way a little in point of
Wisdom or Convenience. These Men are just the reverse of a Rattle Snake, and
carry in their Heads, what he does in his Tail, and move Laughter rather than
Regard. What improvements of Physic, or any useful Arts, what noble Remedies,
what serviceable Instruments have these Mushrome, and Cockle shell* Hunters
obliged the World with? For I am ready to recant if they can show so good a
Medicine as Stewed Prunes, or so necessary an Instrument as a Fly Flap of
their own Invention and Discovery. Yet these are the Men of exalted
Understandings, the Men of elevated Capacities, and sublime Speculations, that
Dignisie and Distinguish themselves from the rest of the World by Specious
Names, and Pompous Titles, and continue notwithstanding as very Reptiles in
Sense, as those they converse so much with.

I would not have any Body mistake me so far, as to think I would in the least
reflect upon any sincere, and intelligent Enquirer into Nature, of which I as
heartily wish a better knowledge, as any Vertuoso of 'em all. You can be my
Witness, Madam, that I used to say, I thought Mr. Boil more honorable for his
learned Labors, than for his Noble Birth; and that the Royal Society, by their
great and celebrated Performances, were an Illustrious Argument of the Wisdom
of the August Prince, their Founder of happy Memory; and that they highly
merited the Esteem, Respect and Honor paid 'em by the Lovers of Learning all
Europe over. But though I have a very great Veneration for the Society in
general, I cannot but put a vast difference between the particular Members that
compose it. Were Supererogation a Doctrine in Fashion, it is probable some of
'em might borrow of their Fellows merit enough to justify their Arrogance, but
alas they are come an Age too late for that trick; They are fallen into a
Faithless, Incredulous Generation of Men that will give credit no farther than
the visible Stock will extend: And though a Vertuoso should swell a Title Page
even till it burst with large Promises, and sonorous Titles, the World is so
ill natured as not to think a whit the better of a Book for it. It Is an ill
time to trade with implicit Faith, when so many have so lately been broken by
an overstock of that Commodity; no sooner now a days can a Man write, or steal
an Hypothesis, and promise Demonstration for it hereafter in this or the next
World; but out comes some malicious Answer or other, with Reasons in hand
against it, overthrows the credit of it, and puts the poor Author into Fits.
For though a great Philosopher that has written a Book of three Shillings may
reasonably insult, and despise a six penny Answer, yet the Indignity of so low
pric'd a Refutation would make a Stoic fret, and Frisk like a Cow with a
Breeze in her Tail, or a Man bitten by a Tarantula. Men measure themselves by
their Vanity, and are greater or less in their own Opinions, according to the
proportion they have of it; if they be well stocked with it, it may be easy to
confute, but impossible to convince 'em. He therefore that would set up for a
great Man, ought first to be plentifully provided of it, and then a Score of
Cockle Shells, a dozen of Hodmandods, or any Triffle else is a sufficient
Foundation to build a Reputation upon. But if a Man shall abdicate his lawful
Calling in pure affection to these things, and has for some years spent all the
Time and Money he was Master of in prosecution of this Passion, and shall after
all hear his Caterpillars affronted, and his Butter-flies irreverently spoken
of, it must be more provoking to him, than it is to a Lion to be pulled by the
Beard. And if, when to crown all his Labors, he has discovered a Water so near
a kin to the famous one, that could be kept in nothing but the hoof of an Ass,
that it was never found but in the Scull of the same Animal; a Water that makes
no more of melting a World, than a Dutchman does of a Ferkin of Butter; and
when he has written a Book of Discoveries, and Wonders thereupon, if (I say)
the Impertinent Scriblers of the Age, will still be demanding Proofs and
writing Answers, he has reasons to throw down his Pen in a rage, and pronounce
the world, that could give him such an interruption, unworthy to be blessed with
his future labors, and breath eternal Defiance to it, as irreconcilable, as
the quarrel of the Sons of Oedipus. To which prudent Resolution, let us leave
him till he can recover his Temper.

These Instances, Madam, will (I hope) suffice to show that Men are themselves
altogether as impertinent, as they maliciously misrepresent us. It is not for
want of plenty of others that I content my self with these; but I am not
willing to trouble you with any of an inferior Character. These are all
impertinents of Mark and Note, and have severally the good fortune to find
crowds of Fools of their own Sex to applaud and admire them. Impertinence is a
failing, that has its Root in Nature; but is not worth Laughing at, till it has
received the finishing strokes of Art. A Man through natural defects may do
abundance of incoherent, foolish Actions, yet deserve Compassion and Advice
rather than Derision. But to see Men spending their Fortunes, as well as Lives,
in a course of Regular Folly, and with an industrious, as well as expensive
Idleness running through tedious Systems of impertinence, would have split the
sides of Heraclitus, had it been his fortune to have been a Spectator. It Is
very easy to decide which of these Impertinents is the most signal; the
Vertuoso is manifestly without a Competitour. For our Follies are not to be
measured by the degree of Ignorance, that appears in 'em, but by the Study,
Labor and Expense they cost us to finish and complete 'em. So that the more
Regularity and Artifice there appears in any of our Extravagancies, the greater
is the folly of 'em. Upon this Score it is, that the last mentioned deservedly
claim the preference to all others; they have improved so well their Amusements
into an Art, that the Credulous and Ignorant are induced to believe there is
some secret Virtue, some hidden Mystery in those darling toys of theirs; when
all their Bustling amounts to no more than a learned Impertinence, (for so they
abuse the Term) and all they teach Men is, but a specious expensive method of
throwing away both Time and Money.

I intend not in what remains to trouble you with any more such instances;
because I am sensible these have already swelled this Letter to a Volumn, which
was not at first my intent. I shall therefore dispatch the remaining part of
the charge in as few Words as possible. Amongst the rest Dissimulation is none
of the least Blemishes, Dissimulation become necessary.
which they endeavor to fix upon us. This Quality, though it cannot upon any
occasion deserve the name of a Virtue, yet according to the present
Constitution of the World, is many times absolutely necessary, and is a main
ingredient in the Composition of Human Prudence. It is indeed oftentimes
criminal, but it is only accidentally so, as Industry, Wit, and most other good
Qualities may be, according, to the Ends and Purposes to which they are
misemploy'd. Dissimulation is nothing but the hiding or disguising our secret
thoughts, or Inclinations under another appearance. I shall not endeavor to
absolve our Sex wholly from all use of this Quality, or Art (call it which you
please) because I think it may upon many ocsicaons be used with Innocence
enough, and upon some cannot without great Imprudence be omitted. The World is
too full of Craft, Malice, and Violence, for absolute Simplicity to live in it.
It behooves theresore our Sex as well as the other to live with so much Caution,
and Circumspection in regard to their own Security, that their Thoughts and
Inclinations may not be seen so naked, as to expose 'em to the Snares, designs,
and practices of Crafty Knaves, who would make a property of 'em; or lay 'em
open to the wicked Efforts, and mischievous Impressions of Envy, or Malice,
whose pleasure springs from the hurt of others. Nothing gives our Adversaries
so great an advantage over us, as the knowledge of our Opinions, and
Affections, with something agreeable to which they will be sure to bate all
their Traps and Devices. For this reason it is that it has been Proverbially
said of Old, that, He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to live.
The Experience of all Ages since has confirmed this Observation, and ours no
less than any of the Preceding. This premised, I suppose no Wise Man will blame
our Sex for the use of an Art so necessary, to preserve 'em from becoming a
Prey to every designing Man, an Art of which himself must make great use to
deserve that Title. Yet I am afraid, that upon enquiry our Sex will not be
found to have so much of it as is requisite, at least not generally; Our
sedentary Life, and the narrow Limits to which our Acquaintance, and Business
are Circumscribed, afford us so little Variety, so regular a Face of things,
that we want the means of obtaining the Master of so useful an Art, which no
question but we should as soon acquire as Men, had we but equal Opportunities.
Hence it is that Women are more apt to show their Resentments upon all
Provocations than Men; and are thought naturally more Peevish and Captious, by
those that apprehend not the true reason; Whereas Men are altogether as
Stomachful, and take Offense as soon, but they cover and suppress their
Indignation better, not with a design to forget any Injury received, but to
wreak their Revenge more covertly and effectually. This is another advantage
Men derive from liberty of Conversation and promiscuous Business, wherein the
Variety of Contingencies they have to provide against, and the Diversity of
Tempers they deal with, force 'em to turn and wind themselves into all Shapes,
and accommodate themselves to all Humors. There is indeed yet a higher sort of
Dissimulation, Dissimulation when criminal.
which is always Criminal, that is when Men not only cloud their real
Sentiments and Intentions, but make Profession of and seem zealously to affect
the contrary; this by a more proper and restrained Name is called Deceit, and
is always used in an ill Sense. This Art is most practiced in Courts where
Policy, and Ambition reign; there You may see Enemies hugging and caressing
one another with all outward Expressions of Tenderness and Friendship
imaginabe, while they are secretly contriving each others ruin. There you may
see Men cringing to those, they would Spurn if they durst, and Flattering those
they despise and rail at behind their Backs, The Court is a place where we come
very rarely otherwise than as Spectators, not as Actours; as Ornaments, not as
Instruments; and therefore are seldom involved in the guilty Practices of it.
Nor is it the Court only, but all Places are infected with this Vice, where
there is any Encouragement of Profit or Pleasure to be hoped from successful
Treachery, of which no Place is so barren as not to afford some. This Deceit
is so far from being the Vice of our Sex, that they are the common Object on
which it is daily practiced: Nothing is more frequently met with than false
Love in Men, False Love commonly practiced.
which is now grown so familiar, that a Company of Six of both Sexes can scarce
meet, but a Sham Passion commences immediately, is urged, protested, and sworn
to be real with all imaginable Violence. If these false Arts, mock sighing, and
Dying prevail upon any foolish, easy, credulous Woman, the Sham Lover is blown
up with the Success, he is big and in Labor till he be delivered of the
Secret, which with great satisfaction he proclaims in all Places where he
comes: it is his highest Exploit of Gallantry, which he will by no means lose
the credit of. Thus he thinks her ruin a step to Reputation, and founds his
own Honor upon her Infamy. This Madam is the basest of Treachery; for they are
not satisfied with the Success of their false Promises, and Oaths, but they
insult over the weakness of a too fond Woman, and Triumph in her Dishonor. I
am sorry there are any Women so foolish and forward, as to give hopes and
encouragement to such ungenerous Fellows; yet we may be assured, that they are
not a quarter so many as those vain Boasters would make 'em. Much more be said
on this head, but that I think it high time to pass on to the next, which is
Enviousness, so foul a Blot to a fair Character, that no Merit can wash it out,
or atone sufficiently for it.

Envy is the Parent of Calumny, and the Daughter of Jealousy. Men seldom envy
others, till they fear being out stripped by 'em in Fortune or Reputation.
Enviousness
It is the most criminal, because the most injurious to Virtue, and worth of
all our natural Failings, against which it is Malice is generally bent. This
vice and Jealousy seem to be more particularly hated of Providence than any
other; For they carry their Punishment inseparably along with 'em, The Envious
and the Jealous need no other Tormentours than their own Thoughts. The Envious
Man ruins his own to disturb another Tranquillity, and sacrifices his own
Happiness and Repose to a perverse Desire of troubling his Neighbors. He feeds
like Toads upon the Venom of the Earth, and sucks in Scandal greedily, that he
may at Pleasure disgorge it to the greater annoyance of other Men. His mind has
the Vapors, a Sweet Report of any one throws it into Convulsions, and Agonies,
and a foul one is the Releif and Refreshment of it. A wholesome Air free from
the Blasts of Detraction and Slander is as certainly pernicious to him, as
Ireland to Frogs and Toads. This Vice is generally disclaimed by both Sexes,
yet generally practiced by both. Men love as little to have their Reputation as
their Chimneys over-topt by their Neighbors; For they think by that means
their names become dark, as their Houses do smoaky by the other: Yet through a
lazy Malignity had rather pull the other's down to their Level, than build
their own up higher. This Humor prevails indeed, yet not in equal Measure in
both Sexes. For as we have confessedly less Ambition, so have we apparently
less of this Poison which usually attends it, and arises from a self Interested
Principle, which makes 'em endeavor by base sinister means to level that Merit
which they think stands in their way to Preferment, and which they despair of
being able to surmount by honorable attempts. For what need any one use base
Sleights to stop the Man, whom by fair Speed he thought he could overtake. No
sooner is any Man raised to any Eminence in the World, but half the Sex at
least join in Confederacy to raise a Battery of Scandal against him, to bring
him down again. Honor is the Pillory of great Desert, whither a Man is no
sooner raised, but the vile Rascally inferior Crowd gather immediately
together, to throw Dirt at him, and make that which was intended as a Grace,
and Reward, but a more honorable Punishment. Our Sex seldom arrive to this
Pitch of Envy, our Ambition is more bounded, and our Desires sooner satisfied,
Hence it is that we are less troubled at the Prosperity of others; for not
giving our selves the Liberty of aiming at things far out of our Power, they
are the sooner compassed, and we the sooner at Ease. He, that thinks himself
Happy, is incapable of Envying another's Felicity, since he sees him possessed
of nothing which either he has not or despises not. Yet it must be confessed
that the lesser Piques, and Grudgings are daily to be met with among us, but no
less among Men. What is it that spawns daily such Fryes of Satyrists without
Wit, and Critics without Judgment, but this humor of carping, and nibbling at
the Reputation of others? But they are generally abundantly furnished with
Impudence, a good Quality that commonly supplies largely the want of all other.

A Critic of this sort is one that for want of Wit sets up for Judgment;
Character of a City Critic
yet he has so much Ambition to be thought a Wit, that he lets his Spleen
prevail against Nature, and turns Poet. In this Capacity he is as just to the
World as in the other Injurious. For as the Critic wronged every Body in his
Censure, and snarl'd, and grin'd at their Writings, the Poet gives 'em
Opportunity to do themselves Justice, to return the Compliment and laugh at or
despise his. He wants nothing but Wit to fit him for a Satyrist, yet he has
Gall and Vanity enough to dispense with that Want, and write without it. His
works are Libells upon others, but Satyrs upon himself, and while they Bark at
Men of Wit, call him Fool that writ 'em. He takes his Malice for a Muse, and
thinks himself inspired when he is only Possessed, and blown up with a Flatus
of Envy and Vanity. His great helps to Poetry are Crambo, and Arithmetic, by
which he aspires to Chime, and Numbers, yet mistakes frequently in the tale of
his Fingers. He has a very great Antipathy to his own species, and hates to see
a Fool any where but in his Glass. For (as he says) they Provoke him And offend
his Eyes: 7th. Satyr of Boileau Eng.
He Follows 'em as a Dog persues his Prey, and barks whenere He smells 'em in
his way: He knows, to say no more that Wit is scarce, to gingle out a Rhyme, or
tag a Verse: Or Cobble wretched Prose to numerous Lines: There if he has a
Genius there it shines. His Fund of Criticism is a Set of Terms of Art picked
out of the French Critics, or their Translators; and his Poetical stock is a
Common Place of certain Forms and Manners of Expression. He writes better in
Verse than Prose; For in that there is Rhyme, in this neither Rhyme nor Reason.
He talks much of the Naivete of his Thoughts, which appears sufficiently in the
Dullness of 'em; yet nothing but the Phlegmatic, Spiritless Air is his own. He
rails at Mr. Oldham for want of Breeding and good Manners without a grain of
either, and steals his own Wit to bespa^^er him with, but like an ill Chemist,
he lets the Spirit fly of in the drawing over, and retains only the Phlegm. He
censures Mr. Cowley for too much Wit, and corrects him with none. The
difference between Mr. Cowley and him is this; the one has too much Wit, and
too fine for the Standard; the other not enough to blanch his base Metal, or
cover the Brass of his Counterfeits. To complete himself in the Formalities of
Parnassus, he falls in love and tells the World, it is obliged to his Passion
for his Poetry; but if his Mistress prove no more indulgent than his Muse, his
Amor is like to conclude but unluckily. For if his Love be no warmer than his
Lines, his Corinna may play with his Flame without danger of Burning. He
pretends to have written only his sincerest Thoughts; I don't know how well his
Mistress may take that from the Lover, but I dare swear the World did not
expect it from the Poet. He is happiest at the Picture of a Rhiming Fool, for
he need only to look in his Glass, and he may Copy a Country Wit from the City
Original. If this Rhiming Humor lasts, there is a good Sugar-Jobber spoiled for
an ill Poet; yet for his comfort, Time, Improvement, and two or three Books
more may raise him to Rival E -- S -- and sing London's Triumphs, to the Envy
of Tom Jordan of happy Memory.

You may wonder, Madam, why I should give you the trouble of this Character,
after I had given you my word to trouble you with no more of this Nature. I
must confess, I am sorry that so foolish an Occasion could make me forget my
self; but a Book newly published happening just at this Juncture unluckily to
fall into my Hands, I could not without Indignation see the Scurrility and
Insolence, with which Mr. Oldham, and Mr. Cowley are treated; and could not but
resent a little the Wrongs done to the Memory of Men whom the rest of the World
with Justice admire; and could not help taking Notice upon so fair an
Opportunity, that they are not, though dead, to be so rudely played with, and made
the May Game of every Splenetick Boy. There are some yet living, whose Wit and
Performances deserve a more respectful treatment, than they have met with from
him. But they are able to revenge their own Quarrel, if they think he deserves
the honor to be Scourged by 'em. Nothing but Envy and a Vain Conceit of
himself could move him to attack the Reputation of Men, whose Verse will
always command Admiration, while his own raise nothing but Scorn and
Indignation. If his Bookseller were but blessed with half a dozen such Authors,
he would in a short time infallibly be Stationer general to all the Grocers and
Tobacconists in the Town.

After this Digression, Madam, let us return to our Subject. We stand yet
charged with Levity, and Inconstancy, two Failings so nearly related and so
generally United, that it his hard to treat of 'em apart; Levity.
we will therefore consider 'em briefly together. Levity is an unsteddy Humor
that makes men like and dislike, seek and reject frequently the same things
upon slender or no Reasons. This is the Humor of the Infancy of both Sexes,
and proceeds from the strength of their Appetites, and the weakness of their
Judgments. At these tender Years every thing we see moves our Curiosities, and
because we think little beyond our Appetites, desire impatiently whatever
pleases. This wears of in Proportion to the growth of our Judgments, when we
begin to consider the Fatigue, Hazard, Disreputation, and other Inconveniences
that attend unreasonable, or inordinate Desires. Herein our Sex have a manifest
Advantage over the other; For it is confessed on all hands that our Judgments
ripen sooner than theirs, Less Levity among Women then Men.
whence of course it Follows, that this Folly prevails not so long upon us, as
them. It Is yet true, that even the most experienced and wisest of Us have no
small mixture of it, which appears in the greatest Part of our Actions. But it
is certain likewise, that Men have a greater proportion of it than we. From
this it is that Novelty derives all its Charms, and that Men pursue with so
much Eagerness and Impatience what they so soon slight if obtained. I appeal to
the Experience of all mankind, if they do not generally frame to themselves
much greater Idea's of any thing they desire, and are unacquainted with, than
they find real, when they become Familiar to 'em; and if they did not imagine
greater Pleasures, while they were in persuit, than they met with after they
were in Possession of their Wishes. The Imagery of Fancy is, like some
Paintings, ravishing, and surprising at a due distance, but approach 'em near,
and all the Charms and Beauty vanish, and they appear rough and unpleasant.
Hence it is that Men grow uneasy, and their desires pall so soon upon the full
enjoyment of their Wishes; they see then the imperfections as well Beauties of
what they coveted, which glittered so far of, and like the Moon appeared all
Luster and Smoothness, but when arrived at, all dark and uneven. These
Fallacies Men are more submitted to than we, by those very Privileges which
give 'em in some things the advantage over us. The variety of Business, and
Society they run through, the large acquaintance they contract, give 'em
encouragement to aspire to, and hopes to obtain many difficult things, which
our Sex seldom lift their Thoughts up to. I know this aspiring Humor of theirs
is generally called Ambition, and I allow the Term to be proper; but their
Ambition works upon their Levity, which only can make them Barter certain Ease,
Peace and Security, for uncertain Pomp and Splendor; and forsake a Condition
they know to be good, for one they know no more of, than that it Shines, and
that it Glitters, and and so part with the true Jewel for the false one. These
are the seririous and applauded Follies of Mankind, and show the Weakness and
Levity of those we call the greatest, and wisest Men, that sacrifice the Ease
and Pleasure of their Lives to Popular Breath, and sounding Titles, which is
like bartring a small Diamond for a large Glass Bubble.

Inconstancy is so like Levity that little more needs to be said of it,
Inconstancy
only that it is commonly restrained to the change of Affections in regard to
Persons, and so is chiefly concerned in Love and Freindship. It is founded upon
Levity, through which we first make an injudicious Choice, and are afterward as
unreasonably disgusted with it. This happens oftener in Love, than Friendship;
because the Impressions of Love are more suddenly received, and the Effects of
it more violent, than those of Friendship; and the Desires, which are commonly
kindled by one single Perfection, such as Beauty or Wit, not being suddenly
answered, are in Process of time extinguished, or abated by observation of some
disgustful Imperfection or other in the Person beloved. This is indeed the true
Reason, Love, why so soon cold.
why Love, which is generally so hot at first, cools commonly so suddenly;
because being generally the Issue of Fancy, not Judgment, it is grounded upon
an over great Opinion of those Perfections, which first strike us, and which
fall in our Esteem upon more mature Examination. From whence it is likewise
that Men are less constant in their Affections, than we; for Beauty only being
generally the Object of their Passion, the Effect must necessarily be as
fadeing as the Cause; their Love therefore being only the result of wonder and
Surprise, is abated by Familiarity, and decays, as they wear of, by Degrees.
Beside, that, a Love so Founded is liable to be ravished by any Superior
Beauty; or if not so, yet the Novelty of the Former once worn of, the New Comer
has the assistance of Fancy the Slave of Novelty to gain the Superiority. This
is the Cause why so few real and lasting Passions are found amongst Men. For
Charms depending upon, and owing their Power to Fancy; can maintain no
Conquests any longer, than that is on their side, which is as inconstant as the
Wind. Women constanter Lovers.
In this also we are less faulty, than they; For, not usually fixing our
Affection on so mutable a Thing as the Beauty of a Face, which a thousand
accidents may destroy, but on Wit, Good Humor, and other Graces of the Mind,
as well as of the Body, our Love is more durable, and constant in proportion to
the longer continuance of those Qualities in the Object. Neither indeed have we
the means, or temptation to be Fickle and inconstant so ready as Men have; For
Modesty, and the Rules of Decency observed among Us, not permitting to us the
Liberty of declaring our sentiments to those we love, as Men may, we dare not
indulge a wanton Fancy, or rambling Inclination, which must be stiffled in our
own Breasts, and could only give us a hopeless Anxiety, unless we were able to
inspire the same Passion for us in them; which it were vain to expect, without
breaking through all restraint of Modesty and Decorum at the price of our Fame
and Reputation, which I hope few are so daring as to venture. Besides this our
Tempers are by Nature calm, sedace, and tender, not apt to be ruffl'd, and
disturbed by Passions, and too fearful to enterprise any thing in satisfaction
of 'em; theirs on the contrary, bold, active, and uneven, easily susceptible of
all manner of Desires, and readily executing any Designs to gratify 'em. Thus
are we debarred the liberty of choosing for our selves, and confined to please
our selves out of the number that like and address to us, of which if we fix
our Affections upon any one, we are generally fixed and unmovable, as having
neither the Inclination to, nor opportunity of Inconstancy, that the Men have.
I don't deny but that there may be some among us guilty of this Fault, but they
are vastly short of the Number of Men involved in the like Guilt, amongst whom
it is now grown so fashionable, that is become no Scandal; but is daily
justified, and the Treachery boasted of as high Gallantry. The Crimes therefore
of some few Women ought, to be no reproach to the Sex in general. Of Infidelity
in Friendship I shall say little, because I think there are so few Instances of
any thing that deserve the Name, that scarce any Age has been so fruitful as to
produce two Pair of real and true Friends. I know that the Name is commonly
given to such as are linkt by any Ties of Consanguinity, Friendship.
Affinity, Interest, mutual Obligations, Acquaintance, and the like: But these
are such Friendships (if they may be called so) as are always contracted with a
tacit Reserve to Interest on both sides, and seldom last longer than the
Prosperity of either Party, and during that are frequently renounced upon
slight Disobligations, or languish and die of themselves. Yet if I may presume
to give my Opinion in a Case, where matter of Fact does not appear, I think we
should be the more Faithful even in this too: For as we are less concerned in
the Affairs of the World, so we have less Temptation from Interest to be false
to our Friends. Neither are we so likely to be false through Fear; Women truer
Friends than Men.
because our Sex are seldom engaged in matters of any Danger. For these Reasons
it is, our Sex are generally more hearty and sincere in the ordinary
Friendships they make than Men, among whom they are usually clogged with so
many Considerations of Interest, and Punctilio's of Honor; to which last
perhaps are owing the greatest part of those honorable Actions, which are
mistakenly imputed to Friendship. For something done to salve Honor, commonly
puts a Period to all Friendship, with unfortunate Persons; whom Men think they
may afterward grow cold to without Reproach.

These are the most considerable Imperfections, or at least those, which with
most Color of Reason are charged upon us, as general Defects; and I hope,
Madam, I have fairly shown, that the other Sex are both by Interest and
Inclination more exposed, and more Subject to 'em, than we. Pride, Lust,
Cruelty, and many more, are by the Declaimers against us thrown into the Scale
to make weight and bear us down, but with such manifest Injustice, that without
giving my self any further trouble, I dare appeal to any reasonable Man, and
leave him to decide the Difference. I know there was a Tullia, More ill Men
than Women.
a Claudia, and a Messalina; there was likewise, a Sardanapalus, a Nero, a
Caligula; but if the Sexes in general are to be reproached with, and measured
by these; Human Race is certainly the vilest Part of the Creation. It Is very
ill Logic to argue from Particulars to Generals, and where the Premises are
singular, to conclude Universally: But if they will allow us the Liberty they
take themselves, and come to numbering the Vicious of both Sexes, they will
certainly out poll us by infinite Numbers. It were therefore better Policy
surely in them, to quit a way of arguing, which is at once so false, and so
much to the disadvantage of the Cause they contend for: and when they can by
sound Arguments make out any Advantages their Sex has over ours, other than
what I have already granted, I am ready to be convinced, and become their
Convert; and I make no doubt but every ingenuous Man will do as much by me.
Thus I have endeavored to vindicate our Sex, from the unjust Imputations with
which some unreasonable, malicious Men would load us: For I am willing to think
the greater, or at least the better Part of their Sex, more generous than to
encourage their Scandal. There remains nothing more, but to show that there are
some necessary Qualifications to be acquired, some good Improvements to be made
by Ingenious Gentlemen in the Company of our Sex.

Of this number are Complacence, Gallantry, Many Advantages from Women's Company.
Good Humor, Invention, and an Art, which (though frequently abused) is of
admirable use to those that are Masters of it, the Art of Insinuation, and many
others. It Is true a Man may be an Honest and Understanding Man, without any of
these Qualifications; but he can hardly be a Polite, a Well Bred, an Agreeable,
Taking Man, without all, or most of these. Without 'em Honesty, Courage, or
Wit, are like Rough Diamonds, or Gold in the Ore, they have their intrinsic
Value, and Worth, before, but they are doubtful and obscure, till they are
polished, refined, and receive Luster, and Esteem from these.

The Principal of these is Complacence, Complacence to be (...) it.
a good Quality, without which in a competent Measure no Man is fi^ted for
Society. This is best learnt in our Company, where all Men affect Gaiety, and
endeavor to be agreeable. State News, Politics, Religion, or private Business
take up the greatest Part of their Conversation, when they are among themselves
only. These are Subjects that employ their Passions too much, to leave any room
for Complacence; they raise too much heat to suffer Men to be easy and
pleasant, and Men are too serious when they talk of 'em, to suppress their
natural Temper, which are apt to break out upon any Opposition. Men are as apt
to defend their Opinions, as their Property, and would take it as well to have
their Titles to their Estates questioned, as their Sense; and perhaps in that
they imitate the Conduct of our Sex, and do, like indulgent Mothers, that are
most tender of those Children that are weakest. But however it be, I have
observed, when such Arguments have been introduced even in our Company, and by
Men that affect Indifference, and abundance of Temper, that very few have been
able to show so much Mastery, but that something appeared either in their Air,
or Expression, or in the Tone of their Voices, which argued a greater Warmth,
and Concern, than is proper for the Conversation of Gentlemen, or the Company
of Ladies. These Uneasinesses happen not so often among us, because the Men
look upon us to have very little Interest in the Public Affairs of the World,
and therefore trouble us very seldom with their grave, serious Trifles, which
they debate with so much earnestness among one another. They look upon us as
Things designed and contrived only for their Pleasure, and therefore use us
tenderly, as Children do their Favorite Bawbles. They talk gayly, and
pleasantly to us, they do, or say nothing that may give as any Disgust, or
Chagrin, they put on their chearfullest Looks, and their best Humor, that they
may excite the like in us: They never oppose us but with a great deal of
Ceremony, or in Raillery, not out of a Spirit of Opposition, (as they
frequently do one another) but to maintain a pleasant Argument, or heighten by
variety of Opinions an agreeable Entertainment. Mirth, and Good Humor reign
generally in our Society, Good Manners always; For with us Men show in a
manner, the Reverse of what they are one to another: They let their thoughts
play at Liberty, and are very careful of the Expression, that nothing harsh, or
obscene escape 'em, that may shock a tender Mind, or offend a modest Ear. This
Caution it is, which is the Root of Complacence, which is nothing but a Desire
to oblige People, by complying with their Humors. It Is true some Tempers are
too Obstinate, and froward, ever to arrive at any great Height of this good
Quality, yet there is nothing so stubborn, but it may be bent. Assiduity and
constant Practice will contract such Habits, as will make any thing easy and
familiar, even to the worst contrived Disposition; but where Nature concurs,
Men are soon Perfect. This is one great advantage Men reap by our Society, nor
is it to be despised by the Wisest of 'em, who know the use of this
Accomplishment, and are sensible, that it is hardly, if at all, to be acquired,
but by conversing with us. For though Men may have Wit and Judgment, yet the
Liberty they take of thwarting, and opposing one another makes 'em Eager, and
Disputative, Impatient, Sour, and Morose; till by conversing with us* they
grow insensibly ashamed of such Rustic Freedom. The truth of this is Evident
from the Observation of the Universities, and Inns of Court, I mean those
Students in 'em that lead a more recluse and Monastic Life, and converse
little with our Sex. They want neither Wit, nor Learning, and frequently
neither Generosity, nor Good Nature, yet when they come into gay, though
Ingenious Company, are either damped and silent, or unseasonably Frolicksom and
Free, so that they appear either Dull, or Ridiculous.

Nor is Complacence the only thing these Men want, Gallantry acquired by our
Company.
they want likewise the Gallantry of those Men that frequent our Company. This
Quality is the height and perfection of Civility, without which it is either
Languishing, or Formal, and with which it appears always with an engaging Air
of Kindness, and Good Will. It sets a value upon the most inconsiderable
Trifles, and turns every Civility into an Obligation. For in ordinary
Familiarities, and civil Correspondencies, we regard not so much what, as how
things are done, the Manner is more looked upon than the Matter of such
Courtesies. Almost all Men that have had a liberal, and good Education know,
what is due to Good Manners, and civil Company. But till they have been used a
little to Our Society, their Modesty sits like Constraint upon 'em, and looks
like a forced Compliance to uneasy Rules, and Forms of Civility. Conversing
frequently with us makes 'em familiar to Men, and when they are convinced, as
well of the Easiness, as the Necessity of 'em, they are soon reconciled to the
Practice. This Point once gained, and they become expert in the common, and
necessary Practices. Those that have any natural Bravery of Mind, will never be
contented to stop there; Indifference is too cold and Phlegmatic a thing for
'em, a little Formal Ceremony, and common Civilities, such as are paid to every
one of Course, will not satisfy their Ambitious Spirits, which will put 'em
upon endeavoring for better Receptions, and obliging those, whom they cannot
without Reproach to themselves offend. This is the Original, and first Spring
of Gallantry, which is an Humor of Obliging all People, as well in our Actions
as Words. It differs from Complacence, Difference betwixt Complacence and
Gallantry.
this being more active, that more passive; This inclines us to oblige, by
doing or saying after our own Humors such things as we think will please; that
by submitting to, and following theirs. A Man may be Complacent without
Gallantry, but he cannot be Gallant without Complacence. For it is possible to
please and be agreeable, without showing our own Humors to Others; but it is
impossible without some regard to theirs: yet this Pleasure will be but faint
and languid, without a Mixture of both. This mixture of Freedom, Observance,
and a desire of pleasing, when rightly tempered, is the true Composition of
Gallantry* of which, who ever is complete Master, can never fail of being both
admired, and beloved. This Accomplishment is best, if not only to be acquired
by conversing with us; for besides the natural Deference, which the Males of
every observable Species of the creation pay to their Females, and the Reasons
before given for Complacence, which all hold good here, there is a tender
Softness in the Frame of our Minds, as well as in the Constitution of our
Bodies, which inspire Men, a Sex more rugged, with the like Sentiments, and
Affections, and infuses gently and insensibly a Care to oblige, and a Concern
not to offend us.

Hence it is that they employ all their Art, Invention (...) our Society.
Wit, and Invention to say and do things, that may appear to us, surprising and
agreeable either for their Novelty or Contrivance. The very End and Nature of
Conversation among us retrench abundance of those things, which make the
greatest part of Men's discourse, and they find themselves obliged to strain
their Inventions to fetch from other Springs, Streams proper to entertain us
with. This puts 'em upon beating and ranging ore the Fields of Fancy to find
something new, something pretty to offer to us, and by this means refines at
the same time their Wit, and enlarges, and extends their Invention; For by
forcing 'em out of the common Road, they are necessitated to invent new
Arguments, and seek new ways to divert and please us, and by restraining the
large Liberty they take one with another, they are compelled to polish their
Wit, and File off the Roughness of it. To this they owe, the Neatness of
Raillery, to which abundance of Gentlemen are now arrived; For Contrariety, of
Opinions, being that which gives Life, and Spirit to Conversation, as well
Women as Men do frequently hold Arguments contrary to their real Opinions, only
to heigthen the Diversion, and improve the pleasure of Society. In these the
utmost Care is taken to avoid all things that may sound harsh, offensive, or
indecent, their Wit is employed only to raise mirth, and promote good Humor,
Conditions that cannot well be observed, when Men contend for Realities, and
dispute for the Reputation of their Wit or Judgment, Fools no fit Companions
for Women.
and the truth of their Opinions. It Is true these Improvements are to be made
only by Men, that have by Nature an improvable Stock of Wit and good Sense; For
those that have it not, being unable to distinguish what is proper for their
Imitation, are apt to Ape us in those Things which are the peculiar Graces and
Ornaments of our Sex, and which are the immediate Objects of Sight, and need no
further Reflection, or thinking. This Affectation is notorious in our Modern
Beau's, who observing the Care taken by some of our Sex in the setting of their
Persons, without penetrating any farther into the Reasons Women have for it, or
considering, that what became them, might be ridiculous in themselves, fall to
licking, sprucing, and dressing their Campaign Faces, and ill contrived Bodies,
that now, like all Foolish Imitatours, they out do the Originals, and
out-powder, out-patch, and out-paint the Vainest and most extravagant of our
Sex at those Follies, and are perpetually Cocking, Brustling, Twiring, and
making Grimaces, as if they expected we should make Addresses to 'em in a short
Time. Yet ought not this to discourage any Ingenious Person, or bring any
Scandal upon our Conversation, any more than Traveling ought to be brought
into Disrepute, because it is observed, that those, who go abroad Fools, return
Fops. It is not in our power to alter Nature, but to polish it, and if an Ass
has learnt all his Paces, it is as much as the thing is capable of, 'twere
absurd to expect he should chop Logic. This is so far from being an Objection
against us, that it is an Argument, that none but Ingenious Men are duly
qualified to converse with us; Who by our Means have not only been fitted, and
finished for great things, but have actually aspired to 'em. For it is my
Opinion, that we owe the Neat, Gentile Raillery in Sir George Etheredge, and
Sir Charles Sedley's Plays, and the Gallant Verses of Mr. Waller to their
Conversing much with Ladies. And I remember an Opinion of a very Ingenious
Person, who ascribes the Ruin of the Spanish Grandeur in great measure, to the
ridiculing in the Person of Don Quixot, the Gallantry of that Nation toward
their Ladies. This Opinion however Ingenious carries me beyond the Scope and
design of the present Argument, and therefore I shall leave all further
Consideration of it to those that are more at leisure, and less weary than I am
at present.

There remain yet some things to be spoken to, but I must confess to you,
Madam, that I am already very much tired, and I have reason to fear that you
are more. When you enjoined me this Task, I believe, you did not expect, I am
sure, I did not intend so long a Letter. I know I have written too much, yet I
leave you to judge, whether it be enough. One Experience I have gained by this
Essay, that I find, when our Hands are in, it is as hard to stop 'em, as our
Tongues, and as difficult not to write, as not to talk too much. I have done
wondering at those Men, that can write huge Volumes upon slender Subjects, and
shall hereafter admire their Judgment only, who can confine their Imaginations,
and curb their wandering Fancies. I pretend no Obligation upon our Sex for this
Attempt in their Defense; because it was undertaken at your Command, and for
your Diversion only, which if I have in any measure satisfied, I have my
Ambition, and shall beg nothing farther, than that my ready Obedience may
excuse the mean Performance of

Madam, Your real Friend, and Most humble Servant.

THE CONTENTS.
A
ARgument from Providence, p. 9. -- from the different Make, and Temper of Body
in the two Sexes, p. 18. Amazons, why they banished Men, p. 24. Advantages of
Women's Company, p. 135.
B
Bodies Organized alike, p. 12. Brutes of both Sexes of equal sense, p. 13.
Bully's Character, p. 62. Beau's Character, p. 68. Boasters of Intrigues base
Fellows, p. 115
C
Conversation, its End, p. 7. -- its requisite Conditions, p. 9. Country
Squire's Character, p. 20. Coffee-house Politician's Character, p. 87. City
Militia, p, 92. City Critick's Character, p. 119. Complacence how acquired, p.
136.
D
Dissidence of themselves a great discouragement to Women, p. 55. Dissimulation
necessary, p. 110. -- why most used by Men, p. 112. -- when Criminal, p. 113.
-- How differing from deceit, p. 114.
E
Education Men's greatest advantage, p. 6. -- Of the Female Sex not so deficient
as commonly supposed, p. 36. English Books very improving, p. 41. -- best helps
to Conversation, p. 47. Envy most injurious to Virtue, p. 116.
F
Friendship, its requisite Conditions, p. 9. Failings falsely charged on Women,
p. 60. Fools no fit Companions for Women, p. 145.
G
Gentlemen, best Writers of Morality, Humanity, etc. p. 52. Gallantry how
acquired, p. 140. -- How distinguished from Complacence, p. 142.
I
Invention improvable by the Society of Women, p. 143. Ignorance of Latin no
disadvantage, p. 57. Imitation ridiculous, p. 66. Impertinence, what, p. 84. --
commonly mistaken, p. 85. -- Epidemical, p. 89. -- Officious, p. 94. -- To be
measured by its Artifice* p. 109.
L
Learning unjustly restrained to Latin and Greek only, p. 45. Love frequently
false, p. 115. Levity, what, p. 124. -- Less among Women than Men, p. 125.
Love, why so soon cold, p. 128.
P
Pedant's Character, p. 27. Points of deep Learning and Politics, improper for
mixed Conversation, p. 40 Poetaster's Character, p. 79.
Q
The Question stated, p. 6.
R
Religion, etc. no proper subjects for mixed Conversation, p. 38.
S
Sexes not distinguished in Souls, p. 11. Salique Law, its Original, p. 22.
Scowrer's Character, p. 64.
U
Vulgar of both Sexes of equal Capacicity, p. 15. Vanity the Vice of Men, p.
60. -- Fools Blessing, p. 76. -- Universal, p. 82. Vertuoso's Character* p. 96.
W
Women, bred to too much Ignorance of Business, p. 16. -- Industriously kept in
ignorance, p. 20. -- Why constanter Lovers than men, p. 129. -- Truer Friends
than Men, and why, p. 132. -- Not generally so vicious as Men, p. 134.
FINIS*

