THE Royal Apology OR, AN ANSWER TO THE Rebels Plea: WHEREIN, The most Noted
Anti-Monarchical TENANTS, First, Published by DOLEMAN the Jesuit, to promote a
Bill of EXCLUSION against King JAMES. Secondly, Practiced by BRADSHAW and the
Regicides in the actual Murder of King CHARLES the 1st. Thirdly, Republished by
SIDNEY and the Associators to Depose and Murder his Present MAJESTY, Are
distinctly considered. With a PARALLEL between DOLEMAN, BRADSHAW, SIDNEY and
other of the True-Protestant PARTY.

LONDON, Printed by T. B. for Robert Clavel, and are to be sold by Randolph
Tailor, near Stationers' Hall. 1684.

TO THE READER.
IN the Year 1594. the Jesuit PARSONS published a Conference under the Name of
DOLEMAN. The Design of which Pamphlet, as every one knows, was to promote a
Bill of Exclusion against King JAMES.

And though the Jesuits malice was herein defeated, as to the Person of that
King; yet how much it influenced the Sufferings of his late Majesty, is a sad
story to repeat. For he who shall peruse the many virulent Libels, which first
occasioned, and then fomented that unnatural Rebellion; he will easily be
instructed how that Conference was Transcribed and Transprosed by the Patrons
of the Faction: And to speak in our Modern Language, he cannot but observe,
That the Popish DOLEMAN is the Oracle of the TRVE-PROTESTANT Party.

Now that this may not be rejected as a slandering Design, only to make them
odious to Authority, as is commonly Objected; I have here drawn for the Readers
satisfaction, a short PARALLEL between Doleman, Bradshaw, Sidney and some
others. Upon perusal of which it will plainly appear, that the Jesuits
Principles, as managed by Bradshaw and the Regicides, did cut off the Head of
King CHARLES the first.

And since the same Principles have been transcribed by the Brethren of the
ASSOCIATION; we have just reason to suspect the fame Practices likewise: And
that those who defend the Murder of King CHARLES the first, would doubtless, if
they had Power in their Hands, Depose and Murder King CHARLES the Second.

If any Republican shall think fit to doubt that the following Discourse is
either Partial or Vnconconcluding, i. e. that I have either said something that
is false, or else have omitted in any Instance, the very Strength of their
Cause, let him make known his Grievance. And I do here faithfully promise, upon
such notice given, I will (through Divine Assistance) endeavor his
Satisfaction.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Occasion of this Treatise, Page 1. Which Consists Of an Objection p. 3.
and its Answer p. 5. Containing these Particulars, viz. The Government of
England not a mixed Monarchy p. 6. The King not one of the three Estates p. 16.
In what sense the King of England is an Absolute Monarch p. 19. And how he is
Limited p. 43. That known saying of BRACTON Lex facit Regem how to be
understood p. 20. That other controverted Passage, Rex habet Superiorem, Deum
and Legem, etiam and Curiam, largely considered p. 25 ad p. 37. Of the
Coronation Oath p. 38. Of the Kings Prerogative p. 45.
THE Royal Apology: OR, AN ANSWER TO THE Rebels PLEA.
ALthough the Kings Title to his Crown and Dignity, together with his just
Right and Authority, over all Persons and in all Causes, are beyond Exception
established, by the Ordinance of God, and the known Laws and Constitutions of
these Kingdoms; yet so far has Prejudice, or something worse, prevailed with
some Men (and those not of the meanest Rank) as to suffer themselves to be led
into a Belief.

That the Original of all Government is from the People; and that the Power
which Kings and Princes have, was derived unto them from the People by way of
Pact or Contract. Particularly, That the King of England (as appears from his
Coronation Oath) having solemnly engaged to his People, to maintain Religion,
to execute Justice, and to keep the Laws and rightful Customs of the Kingdom;
upon these Conditions was admitted to the Kingly Power. The which Conditions if
he shall omit to observe (and of this, they themselves will be Judges) they
then fancy, that he has forfeited his Crown; and that the People who first
made him King may, by their Representatives in Parliament, dethrone and Depose
him.

That this is the Scheme of some Men's Policy, the many Treasonable Papers, such
as, The Association, Vox Populi, Appeal to the City, Coll. SIDNEY'S Papers,
etc. together with the late horrid Conspiracy grounded thereupon, do
sufficiently demonstrate.

And therefore I hope it will be no unseasonable Undertaking; but may, through
Gods Blessing, contribute somewhat to secure the King's Liege-People in their
due Obedience, whilst I endeavor to evince the Falseness and destructive
Consequences of these Anti-monarchical Principles.

Which that I may the more effectually, and with the greater clearness perform,
I shall first lay down the utmost Strength of their Cause in one entire
Objection, and then endeavor their satisfaction in the following Answer.

OBJECTION.
THE Government of England is a mixed Monarchy, consisting of Three Estates
King, Lords and Commons: And therefore the King of England is not an Absolute,
but a limited Monarch; and as Such is to govern by, and according to, the Laws
of the Land, and not otherwise: And by the Oath which he has taken at his
Coronation, he is obliged to use the Power, Trust and Office then committed to
him, for the Good and Benefit of the People, and for the preservation of their
Rights and Liberties.

Now if the King, thus entrusted to keep the Laws, and preserve Religion,
should be guilty of a wicked Design, to subvert our Laws, and destroy our
Religion, by introducing an arbitrary, Tyrannical Government; he must then
understand, that he is but an Officer of Trust: And the Parliament of England
(the Representatives of the People, in whom all Power does originally reside)
they are to take order for the Animadversion and Punishment of such an
offending Governor. Parliaments were ordained to restrain the exorbitant Power
of Kings, and to redress the Grievances of the People.

It is very true, what some have said, Rex non habet parem in Regno. But this
is to be understood in a limited Sense: For though major singulis, yet he is
minor universis. This we know to be Law, from that famous Lawyer BRACTION: Rex
habet Superiorem, Deum and Legem, etiam and Curiam.

Which is thus Interpreted by Mr. SIDNEY.

For this Reason Bracton says; That the King has Three Superiors, to wit,
Deum, Legem and Parliamentum; That is, The Power originally in the People of
England, is delegated unto the Parliament. SIDNEY'S Trial, page 23.

This is, as I conceive, the Sum of all that has been, and the utmost of what,
I suppose, can be said in this matter. To which I return this

ANSWER.
THAT this Phrase a mixed Monarchy, though somewhat frequent in the Mouths of
these Men, is yet no very plain or intelligible Expression.

For, if by a mixed Monarchy, they design such a Government, wherein though the
Supreme Power may reside in one single Person, yet the Monarch is so limited in
the Execution of that Power, that he cannot legally perform several Acts of
Sovereignty without the Concurrence of his Subjects (as with us here in
England, the King neither makes LAWS, nor does raise Taxes without his
Parliament) If this be the utmost they design, when they call England a mixed
Monarchy; then, though the Expression is very improper (an arrand Bull, a flat
Contradiction in adjecto) yet where we are agreed in the Thing, we shall not
contend about Words; but may safely grant, that in this Sense, as now
explained, The Government of England is a mixed Monarchy.

But if by a mixed they denote such a Monarchy, wherein though the Style and
Title of King, together with some Ceremonious Appendices of Royalty, as Cap and
Knee, Guards, etc. are indeed invested in One single Person, yet the Supreme
Power and Sovereignty is not solely and entirely in the Monarch, exclusively to
all others (as with us here in England, say these Men, the Sovereignty by way
of Coordination, is partly in the King, partly in the Lords, and partly in the
Commons, and for this reason they are styled the Three Estates of the Kingdom)
if this be their Notion of a mixed Monarchy (as most plainly it is, if Actions
may interpret Intentions) it is then not only false and absurd, but dangerous
and destructive. And therefore in this Sense we do peremptorily deny; That the
Government of England is a mixed Monarchy.

For, The Supreme Power is solely in the King; and consequently the King is
not, by way of Coordination, One of the Three Estates, but the HEAD and
Sovereign of them all.

In order to his Conviction, the Dissenting Republican, who denies this Truth,
may please to consider,

That he who shall desire to inform himself rightly, where the Supreme Power in
any Government is placed; as also by whom, how and how far such Power has from
time to time, been either exercised or restrained; he must of necessity have
recourse to the Public Laws and Constitutions of such Government. Particularly
here in England, he who designs to be truly instructed in this matter; he must
not receive his notice from the Discourses of private men (which are many times
fallacious, partial and uncertain) but he ought to consult the Known Laws and
Statutes those Authentic Records of the Kingdom.

Now the Oath of Supremacy, established by several Parliaments, does expressly
Declare; That the Kings Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm,
and of all other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual
or Ecclesiastical Things or Causes, as Temporal.

Words as plain and intelligible as the Wit of Man could devise.

From whence it is obvious to make this Inference;

That if the King is Supreme, then he has no Superior; if only Supreme, then
no equal. If over all Persons (and as such the 55th. Canon enjoins us to
acknowledge him in our Prayers) then All Persons in these his Realms, and all
other his Dominions and Countries, are subordinate or Subject unto him, and if
subordinate, then none of them, either severally or jointly are coordinate with
him.

Now is it possible, after so plain and express a Determination, for any Man to
doubt; That the Supreme Power is solely in the King? I observe it is possible:
For, some Men who will not be satisfied with Reason, do thus urge.

That the Oath of Supremacy, being expressly levelled against the Usurpations of
the Church of Rome, was consequently so framed as to discover those who are
Popishly affected.

For, the Persons taking that Oath are obliged only to Declare; That they
Renounce all Foreign Jurisdictions: i. e. They do swear; That the King of
England is no Feudatory Prince, and that he holds not his Crown in Fee, either
from the Pope, or any Foraign Power whatsoever. But what is all this, say these
men, to the Parliament? Or, how comes this Oath to be urged against the
Jurisdiction of the two Houses? Since in those very Statutes in which this Oath
is enjoined, the Legislative Power (which doubtless is the Supreme Power) is
expressly Established in the Parliament, as well as in the King, in these Words.

Be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
Authority of the same. Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons do Enact
jointly with the King, and therefore have a Coordinate Power.

To which it is thus Replied.

That when this Oath of Supremacy was first framed, the Pope being then the
most noted Usurper, was for that reason more particularly mentioned than any
other; but from thence to infer.

That it was designed, by way of Test, to discover Those, who are
Popishly-affected, is a very great Mistake.

For, the Supremacy of the Kings of England, being the chief Prerogative of the
Crown, was always challenged and maintained by V. 27. Ed. 3. c. 1. 3 R. 2 c. 3.
7 R. 2. c. 12. 16 R. 2. c. 5. 2 H. 4. c. 4. 6 H. 4. c. 1. 24 H. 8. c. 12. 25.
H. 8. c. 19. 26 H. 8. c. 1. 37 H. 8. c. 17. Parl 2. 1. Mar. c. 1.
Popish Princes as well as Protestant, 1 Eliz. c. 1. 5 Eliz. c. 1. 13 Eliz. c.
2.
as appears by these several Statutes here mentioned in the Margent.

The Intent then of this Oath was not to discover who are Papists, but in plain
Terms, who are Traitors: And therefore let Men's Pretenses to Religion be
otherwise what they will; if by scrupling this Oath, they refuse to give
assurance to the Government, that they will be honest and loyal, they are to be
esteemed, if not Traitors, yet at least Traitorously affected.

And whereas they further urge, That the Coordinate Power of the Parliament is
no way condemned by this Oath; which only takes notice of a Foraign Usurpation;
They are for their satisfaction, desired to consider,

That, since rectum est Judex sui and obliqui, Domestic Usurpation is hereby
excluded as well as Foreign: The Sovereignty of the People as well as of the
Pope.

And as to that which is pleaded from the Form of the Statute, by the Authority
of the same, as if the Lords and Commons did by their Authority, make and enact
Laws jointly with the King; To this I do humbly Answer, That this Expression,
if duly considered, does not in the least favor the Republican Fancy of a
Coordinate Power.

Which I shall best express to vulgar Capacities (for whom this Discourse is
chiefly designed) thus faithfully by representing the Matter of Fact.

Although the Legislative Power is solely in the King, yet His Majesty does not
make Laws, without the concurring Advice and Approbation of his Subjects: For
the King, like other Men, being mortal and of limited Capacity, is neither
omniscient nor omnipresent. He cannot be in all Parts of his Dominions at one
and the same time, and consequently can no otherwise be acquainted with the
Grievances of his Subjects, but by the Reports of others.

To supply this Defect, he calls whom he pleases (such as he thinks able and
faithful to assist and direct him) to be of his Privy Council; whose advice he
takes in the Execution of those Laws which are already Established.

But since all human Laws are liable to Defects (for it is the sole Prerogative
of Gods Law, as being the result of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, to be
exceeding broad; to be fitted to all times, and to answer all occasions) it is
therefore sometimes necessary that new Laws should be made, and the old ones
either abrogated and nulled; or else reinforced with greater Penalties.

In such Cases, according to the happy Constitution of these Nations, the King
summons his Great Council; the High and most Honorable Court of Parliament;
The Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal and the Commons; Representing the Three
Estates of the Kingdom; Who coming from all Parts of the Nation, are best able
to inform His Majesty of the Grievances of his Subjects; and by what Ways and
Methods they may most suitably be redressed.

In order hereunto; when any Proposal, or as we phrase it any Bill, has passed
the Approbation of the Two Houses; it is then humbly presented to the King for
his Royal Assent. Which if His Majesty thinks fit to grant, then Le Roy le
veult, makes it a Law: But if the King shall dislike the Bill, he then rejects
it, with a Le Roy ne veult, the King will not pass it; or else in that more
obliging Form of Denial, Le Roy avisera, the King will consider or advise about
it.

This is the plain matter of Fact. From whence it is very easy to understand,
what this Form of words, By the Authority of the same does import, viz. not of
the same Lords and Commons (as if either Lords or Commons had an Authority
contradistinct from, or coordinate with, the King) but by the Authority of the
same Parliament.

The which Parliament, as Sir Edw. Cook Instit. part 4. Cap. 1. p. 1.
informs us, consists of The Kings Majesty, sitting there as in his Royal
Politic Capacity, and of the Three Estates of the Realm, viz. The Lords
Spiritual, the Lords Temporal and the Commons. So that in Propriety of Speeeh,
neither Lords nor Commons (though in a vulgar Sense, and to some purposes, they
are sometimes so called) I say neither Lords nor Commons strictly and properly
are a Parliament without the King; who summoning them by his Writs; and
presiding over them as their Head, animates and informs them, and makes them a
Legal Parliament, who otherwise, without the Royal Summons, would be no better
than an unlawful and riotous Convention.

The Lords and Commons have indeed an Authority, to meet and sit and debate as
a Parliament; But they have this Authority solely from the King, and not from
Themselves or from the People: For, the King Calls them when he pleases, and
so makes them a Parliament; and he Dissolves them when he thinks fit, and so
makes them none.

Again, The Lords and Commons have an Authority, but not to Enact or make Laws
(for the Words, Be it enacted refer only to the King) but to advise and consent
to such Laws as shall be made by the King: And therefore this Phrase, Be it
enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, etc. has an Ellipsis in
it; and is to be read thus. Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty,
by the Advice and with the Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the
Commons in this Parliament assembled, etc. Advice and Consent though for
Brevities sake they are not always expressed, yet are still to be understood.

And for the Truth of this, I appeal to the Form of our ancient Statutes (as
also to some modern ones) and that not only in the Title, but also in the
Preface and Sanction of them. For till the time of Henry VIII. the words
Advice, Assent or Consent were never omitted. As appears from the Statutes
themselves, to which recourse to be had.

From these Premises it plainly appears, That the Supreme Power is solely in
the King; and, That the Two Houses of Parliament are (not Partners in the
Government but) his most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects; as in all their Petitions
most truly they do style themselves. And that this Form in our Statutes, By the
Authority of the same, when rightly understood, does neither give them Title to
make Laws, nor perform any other Act of Sovereignty, which may countenance this
Fancy of a Coordinate Power.

The next Pretense of these Republican Politicians (which I find they often
urge in vindication of the late Rebellion) is this; That the King is One of the
Three Estates; and from thence they infer: He has but One share in the
Government; and that the other Two are Copartners with Him.

The which Suggestion being apparently False, I shall need to say the less in
it is Confutation, especially being so happily prevented by a late Learned Hand,
viz. The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right, etc.

The judicious Author of which Treatise having first premised;

That the whole Parliament assembled, are the best Judges, which are the Three
Estates in Parliament; and that their Authority is more to be valued, than that
of any particular Persons, whether Lawyers or others; He then, in many
Instances, informs us from the Parliament Rolls and public Records of the
Kingdom; That the Three Estates are the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal and
the Commons.

In these Records we read of Impeachments R. 2.
made before the King, and all the Estates of the Realm. Of Commissions
appointed by the Peers and Lords Spiritual R. 2.
and Temporal, and the Commons of the Kingdom, representing all the States of
the Kingdom.

Of such and such things, 6 H. 6. n. 24.
advised and appointed by the Authority of the King, assenting the Three
Estates of this Realm.

The Duke of Bedford appeared in Parliament 11 H. 6. n. 10.
before the King and the Three Estates of this Realm.

In the Parliament 1. H. 6. The Queen Dowager, in her Petition, mentions the
Ratification made in Parliament, 9 H. 5. and says; It was not only sworn by
the King, but by the Three Estates of the Kingdom of England, i. e. by the
Prelates, Nobles and other Grandees, and by the Commons of the Realm of England.

And to add one Instance for latter times in the Parl. 1 Eliz. cap. 3. The
Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal and the Commons declare, That they do
represent in Parliament the Three Estates of the Realm.

With several others which I shall not mention, but refer all those, who either
want or desire satisfaction, to the Book it self.

And as to my plain, honest Reader, who has neither ability nor opportunity to
consult these Public Records, I shall desire him to open his
Common Prayer Book; and to turn to the Office for the 5th. of November. In the
Preface of which he thus reads, A Form of Prayer with Thanksgiving -- for the
happy Deliverance of the King, and the Three Estates of the Realm. And in the
Collect before the Epistle, We acknowledge the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of
God, in preserving the King, and the Three Estates of this Realm assembled in
Parliament.

It thus evidently appearing; That the King is not One of the Three Estates,
and consequently, that his Anthority is not limited or restrained, by the
Coordinate Power of the other Two; we may with better assurance proceed to
examine the Truth of their next Suggestion, viz. That the King of England is not
an Absolute Monarch.

In which Inquiry, least I should diminish the Kings just Right and Prerogative
on the one hand, or encroach upon the Subjects Freedom and Liberty on the
other, I must neither affirm nor deny without due Distinction.

Now the Kings Power and Authority does admit of a Twofold Consideration.

For, either we may observe it is efficient Cause, the Spring and Fountain from
whence it flows; or else may take notice of the Execution and Administration of
it.

As to the First of these;

If the Question should be asked; whence has the King this Power to Rule and
Govern these Nations? Who gave him this Authority?

To this a just Answer may be suggested from His Majesty's Royal Motto; DIEU ET
MON DROIT, God and my Birthright have given me these Kingdoms.

If it further be demanded, How Birthright does Entitle to a Crown? It Is then
truly replied That it is a Fundamental Law of England, That the Crown does
descend to the next in Blood; England being not an Elective but an Hereditary
Kingdom.

And from hence we are occasionally instructed, how to understand that
Controverted Place in Bracton (which I therefore mention because I find it
repeated with great Triumph in several Pamphlets) Lex facit Regem; the Law
makes the King; Lib. 1. c. 7. f. 5. and Lib. 3. c. 9. f. 107.
The Law, i. e. The Law of Succession. In which Sense doubtless my Lord Cook
(as I have somewhere read) told King James, That the Law set the Crown upon his
Head.

And it is the same Law that set the Crown upon the Head of His Present Majesty.

For though His Majesty's personal Qualifications deserve a Crown; yet it was
not any Acceptance or Consent of the People, expressed at his Coronation or
otherwise, but it was his Birthright only which made him King, because Son and
Heir apparent of King Charles the First.

This is the full Import and Meaning of that saying of Bracton.

But now from hence to infer (as some canting Politicians have done) That
because The Law, in this Sense as now explained, makes the King; therefore the
Law is Superior to the King; therefore the Law has a Coercive Power over the
King; therefore, If the King shall neglect to Discharge his Trust, the
Parliament of England (who are not only the highest Expounders, but the sole
Makers of Bradshaw's Harangue at the Kings Trial.
the Law) can by that Law which made him King, censure and condemn him for his
Neglect. I say thus to infer, is not only false and explosive in it self; but
Treasonable to the King, and Destructive to the Kingdom: But of this, God
willing, more fully in it is proper Place.

It may suffice at present to observe, that the Crown of England is an Imperial
Crown, i. e. Such a Crown which as to the Coercive part; is not subject to any
human Tribunal or Judicature whatsoever, as most plainly appears from our
Law Books and Statutes.

It was asserted in our Laws in the Time 16 R. 2. c. 5.
of King Richard the Second, That the Crown of England has been so free at all
times, that it has been in no EARTHLY SUBJECTION BUT IMMEDIATELY SUBJECT TO
GOD, in all things touching the Regalty of the same Crown, and to none other.

And in 24 H. 8. it was declared in Parliament, 24 H. 8. c. 22.
That this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in the
World, governed by one Supreme Head and King, having the Dignity and Royal
Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a Body Politic -- of
Spiritualty and Temporalty, been bounden and owen to bear NEXT TO GOD, a
natural and humble Obedience.

And 25 H. 8. It is Declared; That 25 H. 8. c. 21.
This Realm, recognizing NO SUPERIOR UNDER GOD, BUT ONLY THE KING, has been,
and is free from Subjection to any man's Laws, but only to such as have been
devized within the same. V. 1 Eliz. cap. 3. and 1 Jac. c. 1. which are very
pertinent to be perused, in confirmation of these preceding Statutes.

And if private Authorities may not seem superfluous after the recital of such
Authentic Records, I might largely confirm this Supreme Independent Power of
the King, by the repeated Testimonies of our most eminent and noted Writers.

But because I would not be too tedious, I shall mention none but the forecited
Bracton Lord Chief Justice under Henry the 3 d. And I the rather take notice of
Him, because some passages in his Works have been perverted and abused, by the
IGNORANCE or MALICE of ill designing Men.

From this Learned and Judicious Author we are thus instructed.

Omnis quidem sub eo, and ipso sub nullo, nisi tantum sub. Deo. Parem autem non
habet in Regno suo, quia sic amitteret preceptum.
All Ranks and Degrees of Men are subject to the King; but the King himself is
under none but God. There is none equal to him, or coordinate with him in the
Kingdom; such a fancy being wholly inconsistent with his Kingly Power -- Si
autem ab to petatur (cum brevo non currat contra ipsum) locus erit
supplicationi quod factum suum corrigat and emendet, quod quidem si non
fecerit, satis sufficet ei ad paenam quod Dominum expectet ultorem.

Nemo quidem de factis suis praesumat disputare, multe fortius contra factum
suum venire.

Vid Bracton de Leg. Ang. Lib. 1. cap. 8. Sect. 5. fol 5.


And if any Man has occasion to implead the King (since no Writ can be taken
out against him) he must then proceed by way of Petition. But if the King shall
still refuse to do him right, it will be sufficient punishment for him to
expect the Lord as an Avenger.

Doubtless no man should presume to question the Kings Actions; much less to
oppose them by force. And in his 5th. Book de Defaltis Cap. 3. Sect. 3. he
speaks the same Language.

For having put the Case, That if the King being Petitioned to redress the
Grievances of his Subjects, should yet neglect to grant them Justice, what
further course the Subject might take for his Relief? He Rules it thus.

Quo casu cum Dominus Rex super hoc fuerit interpellatus, in eadem voluntate
quod velit tenentem esse defensum cum injuria, cum tentatur Justitiam totis
viribus defensaro, ex tunc erit injuria ipsius Domini Regis, nec poterit ei
necessitatem aliquis imponere quod illam corrigat and emendet nisi velit, cum
superiorem non habeat nisi Deum, and satis crit illi pro paena quod Deum
expectat ultoram.

Bracton Lib. 5. de Defaltis c. 3. Sect. 3. fol. 368,


If the King, who is bound to administer Justice to his utmost Power, will not
recall the wrong he did upon a false Suggestion; in this case he injures his
Subjects, but no body can force him to do Right; because he has no Superior
but God only. And it is sufficient that we shall have a day of hearing
hereafter at a Just Tribunal.

V. Lib. 2. c. 24. Sect. 1. p. 55. and lib. 2. c. 37. Sect. 5. p. 87. and lib.
3. c. 9. Sect. 3. p. 107.

But here I am Alarmed with that noted saying of this Author; Rex habet
Superiorem, Deum and Legem etiam and Curiam.

And there is scarce a Pamphlet, pretending Vid. Sidney's Trial p. 23.
either to Law or Latin, which does not triumph in this Sentence of Bracton. I
am therefore obliged, for their sakes who may otherwise be misguided, to
endeavor the full Sense and Meaning of these Words.

In order to which Task, and that he may the better apprehend the clearness of
my Answer, I must trouble my Reader to peruse the whole Section.

De Chartis vero Regiis and factis Regum, non debent nec possunt Justiciarii,
nec privatae personae disputare; nec etiam si in illa dubitatio oriatur,
possunt eam interpretari, and in dubiis and obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos
contineat intellectus Domini Regis erit expectanda interpretatio and voluntas,
cum ejus sit interpretari, cujus est concedere, and etiam si omnino sit falsa
propter rasuram, vel quia forte signum appositum est adulterinum, melius and
tutius est quod coram ipso Rege procedatur ad Judicium. Item nec factum Regis,
nec chartam potest quis judicare, ita quod factum Domini Regis irretetur. Sed
dicere poterit quis, quod Rex Justitiam fecerit, and been, and si hoc, eadem
ratione quod male, and ita imponere ei quod injuriam emendet, ne incidat Rex
and Justic. in Judicium viventis Dei propter injuriam. REX AUTEM HABET
SUPERIOREM, DEUM. S. ITEM LEGEM, PER QUAM FACTUS EST REX. ITEM CURIAM SUAM,
viz. Comites, Barons, quid Comites dicuntur, quasi socii Regis, and qui habet
Socium, habet Magistrum, and ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, i. e. sine Lege,
debent ei fraenum ponere, nisi ipsimet fuerint cum Rege sine fraeno, and tunc
clamabunt subditi and dicent, Domine Ihesu Christ in chamo and fraeno maxillas
eorum constringe, ad quos Dominus, vocabo super eos gentem robustam and
longinquam and ignotam, cujus linguam ignorabunt, quae destruet eos, and
evellet radices eorum de terra, and a talibus judicabuntur, quia subditos
noluerunt just judicare, and in fine, ligatis manibus and pedibus eorum,
mittet eos in caminum ignis and tenebras exteriores, ubi erit fletus and
stridor dentium. V. Lib. 2. c. 16.. 3 fol. 34. This is the whole Section, in
which that controverted Passage, Rex habet Superiorem, etc. is contained.

Now as preparatory to a just Explication, it will be pertinent to consider
these Two Things.

First, That all difficult and obscure places in any Author, ought to be
determined by such as are plain and obvious; but not e converso. And therefore,

Secondly, When we doubt of the true Sense of an Author, it is much more modest
as well as charitable, to confess our own Ignorance, and to say, we do not know
what he means, rather than to calumniate and mistake him, by affixing such a
Sense to his Words as he never intended.

And consequently, it might be a sufficient Answer to affirm; That since our
Bracton has so plainly and so often told us; That the King is under none but
God. That all Orders and Degrees of Men are Subject to the King. That he has
no equal much less Superior. That no man should presume to question his
Actions, etc. It evidently follows;

That whatever can be understood by this Curia (whether Lords or Commons) yet
this Curia is not Superior to the King: It neither gave him his Authority at
first, nor has the least shadow of a Coercive Power, to limit and restrain
him. For certainly that cannot be the meaning of Bracton, which he has so
expressly contradicted in other parts of his Works.

But that I may Answer as well as Evade, I now come to explain, what I think to
be the true Sense and Meaning of these Words, Rex habet Superiorem, etc.

The Subject matter of this Second Book of BRACTION is, De acquirendo rerum
Dominio. It explains the nature of Legal Titles; and sets forth the several
ways, by which a man may acquire such a Right and Property in the thing
possessed as to call it his own. And amongst many others, DONATION as being the
chief, is more particularly considered by him.

Now these Gifts or Grants (as he tells us in the beginning of this 16 Chap.
Sect. 1.) fiunt in scriptis, sicut in Chartis, ad perpetuam memoriam, propter
brevem hominum vitam, and ut facilius probari possit Donatio. They are for
Mortalities sake, put into Writing, that so the Donee (should his Title be
questioned) by the Evidence of such enrolled Deeds, may secure his Possession.

Of these Grants or Charters, some are made by the King; others by private Men.
And having largely discoursed of these private Charters, Sect. 2. 4. and so on;
in this intermediate 3 d. Sect. he more particularly gives us his Judgment de
Chartis Regiis; which by way of Eminency are styled Charters.

De Chartis vero Regiis and factis Regum, non debent nec possunt Justiciarii,
nec privatae Personae disputare: Neither the Who are here meant by those
Justiciarii, let the learned in the Law determine.
Justiciarii nor private persons, have any Commission to dispute the Kings
Charters; or to question any other of his Majesty's Proceedings; nec etiam si
in illa dubitatio oriatur, possunt eam interpretari: For where the Royal Grant
is doubtful and obscure, it would be presumption in them to pretend to explain
it. Et in dubiis and obscuris, vel si aliqua dictio duos contineat intellectus,
Domini Regis erit expectanda Interpretatio and voluntas; cum ejus sit
interpretari cujus est concedere.

But if any part of it be ambiguous, and does admit of a double Sense, than the
Kings pleasure (since His Majesty who first made the Grant best knows his own
Mind) is the surest and most authentic Interpretation; Et etiam si omnino sit
falsa propter rasuram, vel quia forte signum appositum est adulterinum, melius
and tutius est quod coram ipso Rege procedatur ad Judicium.

Moreover should there be suspicion, that any Charter (either by erasing or
corrupt Interpolation) has been falsely transcribed, it is the best and safest
course, to determine the matter before the King himself. Item nec factum Regis,
nec chartam potest quis judicare, ita quod factum Domini Regis irritetur.
However (as was said before) let no man presume to censure the Kings Charters,
or any other of his Proceedings, so as to make null and void the Act and Deed
of our Lord the King.

Sed dicere poterit quis, But here it may be Objected, quod Rex justitiam
fecerit, and been, If the King will do Justice, it is well; and si hoc eadem
ratione quod male, and ita imponere ei quod injuriam emendet, ne incidat Rex
and Justic. in judicium viventis Dei propter injuriam. and should he not do
Justice, it seems that must be well taken too, since no body dares tell him
that he does amiss; and accordingly there will be none to admonish him to
correct his fault, that so he may escape the Judgment of the living God.

To this Objection BRACTON returns an Answer, though indeed not ushered in with
the usual Formality of a Sic Respondeo. And his Answer is this;

Rex autem habet Superiorem, etc.

It Is true indeed, none can control the Kings Person or censure his Actions
(his Majesty being Supreme over all Persons, and in all Causes) autem; but yet
we have these encouraging Reasons, that the King will do Justice, and govern
his People according to Right.

For 1. Rex habet Superiorem, Deum, sc. As high and as great as the King is,
there is one higher and greater than he, even Almighty God; The King of Kings
and Lord of Lords. It is therefore much hoped; that a due Sense of this
dreadful Majesty (before whose Tribunal the greatest Monarchs as well as the
meanest of their Subjects must one day appear) may overawe and restrain the
King from all unjust and injurious Proceedings.

2. Item Legem per quam factus est Rex. And moreover the better to enable the
King to do Justice, there is a Law to direct him in his Interpretations, the
which Law his Majesty is obliged even in gratitude to observe, since it was the
Law which made him King. (But how this must be understood is already explained.)

3. Item, Curiam suam, viz. Comites, Barons; but besides these Two preceding
Considerations, there is a Third Expedient to restrain the King from all unjust
and exorbitant Proceedings.

For, as there is a God in Heaven to overawe him; and as there is a Law on
Earth to direct him: So likewise he has his Curia, to admonish and advise him,
viz. Comites, Barons, quia Comites dicuntur quasi Socii Regis; His Nobility,
his Earls and his Barons; who by reason of their constant attendance at Court,
are admitted into a nearer Familiarity with his Majesty, and are, as it were,
the Kings Companions. Et qui habet Socium, habet Magistrum; and by such
Intimacy as this, they are, in some sort, the Supervisors and Censors of his
Actions; Et ideo si Rex fuerit sine fraeno, i. e. sine Lege, debent ei fraenum
ponere. If therefore the King shall omit to observe the Laws; it is then their
Duty to admonish him of his neglect; saying, SIR, This is the Law, this should
bridle you; this should limit and direct your Actions. And this doubtless they
will do, nisi ipsimet fuerint cum Rege sine fraeno; unless they themselves have
a mind to be lawless as well as the King.

But if matters should be brought to this pass, what shall then the poor
Subjects do? how shall their Grievances be redressed? Shall it not then be
lawful to take up Arms (in the just Defense of King and Kingdom) to remove
these evil Counselors from the King? No such matter! and tunc clamabunt
subditi and dicent, Domine Jesus Christ, in chamo and fraeno maxillas eorum
constringe; Our honest Bracton allows the Subject no other Arms against his
Sovereign, but the old Primitive Artillery of Prayers and Tears.

Ad quos Dominus, vocabo super eos gentem robustam and longinquam and ignotam,
etc. And if the Subjects being under any Oppression, shall thus dutyfully refer
their cause to God, he will then take Care to do them right; and will not only
restrain, but also punish their Oppressors: As our Author more fully explains
to the end of this 16. Section, which I shall not need to translate any
further, there being no difficulty in it.

If this Paraphrastical Translation (which I thought would most naturally lead
us to the true sense of the words) does not yet fully remove the Doubt; I shall
then, for the Readers satisfaction, give this further Interpretation.

BRACTON in this 2 d. Book. Chap. 16.. 3. is discoursing (as I have already
observed) de Chartis Regiis. And he tells us; that the Royal Charters, when
either doubtful or obscure, are to be determined coram Rege i. e. in the Courts
of King's Bench and Chancery. (For these being the Kings own immediate personal
Courts, in one of which the Kings of England have formerly sat in Person, all
Writs returnable there run in this Style, coram nobis; and all judicial Records
there are styled, and the Pleas there holden entered Coram Rege. And therefore
this Phrase in BRACTON Coram Rege is, I think warrantably rendered, the Courts
of King's Bench and Chancery.

Now if the Plantiff shall suspect, that the Proceedings in these Courts are
not just and equal, he may then make his Appeal. For the King has not only
Legem; his ordinary Courts of Justice, but also Curiam suam, (viz.) Comites,
Barons His HOUSE OF LORDS. The Cause may then be removed by Writ of Error, or
by Appeal into the House of Lords.

But if the Party shall still complain that he has not Justice; there is then
no other Remedy but Prayers and Patience.

For, this House of Lords being the Supreme and highest Court of Judicature, no
Earthly Appeal can be made any further. Sistendum est in aliquo. In all
Judicial Proceedings, Ecclesiastical and Civil, there must be a non ultra. For,
as the Law of Nature does instruct us, that Appeals must of necessity be
allowed (otherwise those Injuries which may be occasioned, through the
Ignorance or Corruption of inferior Judges could never be redressed) so the
same Law does also teach us; That Appeals must not be Infinite; i. e. There
must be some Supreme Power, in whose final Determination (be it right, or be it
wrong) all Inferiors must acquiesce and submit. Otherwise, no Controversies
could be decided; nay, there could be no Government, nothing but Disorder and
Confusion in the World.

These are my present Thoughts of this difficult Passage: And whether I have
yet given it is proper Sense is humbly submitted to the Impartial Reader. But
whether I have or have not; the Republican Objector is again desired to take
notice;

That whatever else can be the meaning of these Words, yet our Bracton does not
affirm this Curia to be superior to the King; Such an Interpretation being
inconsistent with Grammar as well as Loyalty.

We have this Rule in our Syntaxis; that, If the Relative be referred to two
Clauses or more, then the Relative shall be put in the Plural Number.

If therefore this Relative word Superior do refer not only to Deum, but also
to Legem and Curiam, it should not be Superiorem in the Singular, but
Superiores in the Plural.

Bracton was not only very learned and judicious as to his Sense, but also
(considering the Age he lived in, and the Subject he discoursed on) very polite
and elegant as to his Style; and consequently we must not suppose him guilty of
so gross a Solaecism, which the meanest Schoolboy is able to correct.

If the Patrons of the Faction, who are very hard to please, shall think fit to
Reply; That it is a most unusual and Pedantick Method, to interpret a Law-Maxim
by a Rule in Grammar; and thence are unalterably resolved to insist upon it;
That unless we can explain, in what Sense this Curia is Superior to the King,
all that hitherto has been said on this occasion is trifling and explosive;

If, I say, these Republicans will not otherwise be contented, let them then
take it thus. Rex habet superiorem -- Curiam -- i. e. The King can do more with
the Advice and Assistance of his Curia then without it. Or more plainly thus.
The Kings of England have more Power and Capacity in Parliament, then out of
Parliament.

If this will not satisfy. Cras respondebo. For at present, I think fit to add
no more in this matter.

This passage of BRACTON (which has given us so large a Digression) being thus
dispatched; we shall now return to our former Discourse.

It Is undeniably evident from the Authentic Records of the Kingdom (not to
mention private Authorities) That the King of England has no Superior but God.
That His Majesty did not receive his Authority from any Earthly Power. That he
is not Foeudatory, either to the Pope or any other Foreign Prince, much less to
his own People. That he was not admitted to his Kingdoms with any Limitations
or Conditions; As the Kings of Poland and some others are. And consequently,
since the Terms Absolute and Conditional are opposite and contradistinct; If
the Kings Power and Authority (with respect to its Original Efficient Cause) be
neither Conditional nor Dependent, it is then Absolute as well as Independent.
And therefore we may safely conclude (in this sense as now explained) The King
of England is an absolute Monarch.

But here I expect it will be replied (and it is a very Popular Objection.)

That the Coronation Oath, in which there is a plain Contract and Bargain
between the King and his People, does sufficiently intimate; That the Crown is
Conditional, i. e. was conferred upon his Majesty with certain Limitations and
Conditions. For, the King having promised, to keep and defend the Laws and
rightful Customs of the Kingdom, etc. He is then publicly showed to the
People; and their consent to his Coronation being first demanded; he is, by
that solemn Action, accepted as their King. Plainly insinuating, that without
such a Promise on his part, he would not have been accepted on theirs. And from
hence Mr. SIDNEY (a very Authentic Author with some men) does infer; That
there is a mutual Compact between the King and his Subjects; and if the King
does not perform his Duty, the Subjects are discharged from theirs. His words
are these, That those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them,
having the Force of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be
violated without danger of dissolving the whole Fabric: Which in plain English
is this: If the King breaks his Oath, and does not govern according to Law; he
then forfeits his Crown, and the People are absolved from their Obedience.

In Answer to which, we are to take notice; that this plausible Objection is
raised upon a false Foundation, viz. That the Coronation Oath makes the King;
which is a most gross as well as dangerous Mistake; the King being as perfect
and completely King before his Coronation as after.

It Is a Maxim in our Law, The King never dies: There being no such thing here
in England as an Interregnum. For the very same moment that the Predecessor
deceaseth, the Rights of Majesty descend and fall upon the Successor. And
herein I am instructed by those eminent Lawyers, the Lord Chancellor Egerton,
and Sir Edw. Coke. By the former thus,

The Sovereignty is in the Person of the King, L. Chanc. Egerton Postnat. p 73.
the Crown is but an Ensign of Sovereignty. The Investure and Coronation are
but Ceremonies of Honor and Majesty. The King is an absolute and perfect King
before he be Crowned, and without those Ceremonies. By the latter in these
Words: If the Crown descend to the rightful Heir, he is Rex Cooks Inst. part 3.
p. 7.
before Coronation. For by the Law of England there is no interregnum: and
Coronation is but an Ornament or Solemnity of Honor. And so it was resolved by
all the Judges, Hill. 1. Jac. in the Case of Watson and Clark Seminary Priests:
For by the Law there is always a King, in whose name the Laws are to he
maintained and executed, otherwise Justice should fail. Thus he,

But that I may effectually convince our Associators of their mistake in this
matter, I thus argue ad hominem.

Was his present Majesty actually King (i. e. King de facto as well as de jure)
before his Coronation, or was he not?

If they acknowledge that he was; the Cause is then decided. But if they say he
was not; I must then remind them of another point of Law, laid down by that
Oracle of the Law in the preceding words, a Pardon granted by a King de jure,
that is not also de facto is void. Now when they have first considered; That
the Act of Oblivion was made before the King was Crowned, I shall then leave it
to themselves to determine the Case.

Doubtless upon second Thoughts which are usually the best, they will readily
confess; That his present Majesty was actually King before his Coronation; and
consequently, That the Oath which he then took, was not any Condition
preparatory to his admittance to the Kingly Power.

Coronation then is but a Ceremony, and no part of his Title: I say, it is but
a Ceremony; and yet (that I may remove some impertinent Scruples against it) it
is no trifling, insignificant Ceremony: For,

First, The solemn Splendour in which the King appears in that Action (the
generality of People being much affected with outward Pomp) does naturally make
Impressions of awe and reverence toward his Person.

Secondly, The Oath which he then takes, may expel all jealous Fears; disposing
his Subjects cheerfully to submit to his future Government. For when the King
(who is not responsible to them for any of his Actions) shall condescend thus
publicly to promise his People, in the Presence of that God who gave him his
Trust (and to whom alone he must render an Account for the management of it)
That he will govern his Subjects according to Law; That he will preserve
Religion from Heresy and Schism; defend their Persons from wrong and violence;
secure their Estates from Fraud and Rapine: Such assurance as this, must needs
enlarge their Affections to their Prince; make their submission more hearty;
their Obedience more cheerful, since under his Government (if it is not their
own Fault) they may rationally expect to live a quiet and peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty.

It appears, I hope, from these Premises (notwithstanding this or any other
Objection to the contrary) That the Kings Power, in respect of it is Original,
is Absolute, i. e. He received it from none but God. Neither from the Pope, nor
any other Foreign Prince, much less from his own People.

But now when we speak of the Kings Authority, with respect to the Execution
and Administration of it, the Case is very different. For the Kings of England,
out of their abundant Grace and Favor, and to make their Government more easy
and acceptable to their Subjects, have suffered themselves to be so limited in
the Exercise of their Power; That they can neither make Laws, nor raise Taxes
but in Parliament; much less can they pretend to take away the Life, or dispose
of the Estate of the meanest of their Subjects but by due course of Law: And
therefore in this second Consideration of his Authority, viz. the Execution and
Administration of it; The King of England is not an Absolute but a limited
Monarch.

And indeed, if these Republicans were not much more forward, to remind the
King of his Duty than to discharge their own, these things did not need to be
repeated. For the King has very often most graciously promised; That he will
govern by, and according to, the Laws of the Land and not otherwise: And that
he will use the Power, Trust and Office committed to him, for the good and
benefit of the People, and for the preservation of their Rights and Liberties.
All this is readily granted, in the very words of the Objectors.

Only this Phrase, That he will govern according to the Laws, and not otherwise
for the avoiding of mistakes, must be a little explained.

There are some Men, either through Ignorance or Malice, who have fancied;
because the King is obliged to govern by Law, that therefore he must always act
according to the Letter of it: So as that it shall not be in his Power, for
instance (especially when it is their Interest to restrain him) either to
Pardon Capital Offenders; to Change the manner of their Death; or to mitigate
the rigor of the Law on any other occasion. And, in fine, these confident
Reformers (who trade in Post-scripts more than Bracton) do talk of the Kings
Prerogative at such a rate; as if it were an Arbitrary, Illegal Encroachment;
and are so extravagant as to fancy; That by diminishing the Kings Prerogative,
they advance the Laws; and that to oppose the King, is to defend the Kingdom.

In charity therefore to these men, and to rectify their mistakes, I shall
briefly lay down the nature of the Kings Prerogative: What it is? how it comes
to be Established? And whether, as is pretended, it be destructive to the
Liberty of the Subject.

The Word Jurecons. hac voce vary utuntur: modo pro authoritate and eminentia:
quadam modo pro jure quodam praecipuo, speciali seu privilegio, Gal. Lex Jurid.
verb Praerogat.
Prerogative (to omit other Significations Foreign to our purpose) does
properly denote; some special peculiar Privilege or Pre-eminence, granted by
Law. Hence the Kings Prerogative is very fitly styled by Sir H. Spelm. Gloss.
Praerog. verb.
SPELMAN, Lex Regiae Dignitatis, which in 1 Instit. cap. 5. sect. 125. p. 90.
Sir Edw. Cooks words may be thus Translated. The Royal Prerogative legally
extends to all Powers, Preheminences and Privileges, which the Law gives to
the Crown. And Littleton, says our Author, speaks of the Kings Prerogative
but twice in all his Books, viz.. 125 and 128. and in both places as part of
the Laws of England.

From whence our new Politicians may please to observe. That the Kings
Prerogative is established by Law; and his Majesty has as good Law for his
Royal Prerogatives. viz. The descent of the Crown to the next in Blood: The
Power of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments: The Negative Voice: The Power of
the Militia: Pardoning Offenders, etc. I say His Majesty has as good Law for
these and all other his Prerogatives, as any Subject has for his Paternal
Estate.

Whoever therefore shall presume to dispute these Privileges of the Crown, he
must not think me uncharitable whilst I tell him, He is an Enemy to the
fundamental Laws of England, and a Betrayer of the Rights of the Kingdom.

If the Case be thus, may some say; If these Royal Prerogatives are so sacred
as not to be touched; it would then be a very suitable undertaking to enlarge
your, etc. and to acquaint us more distinctly what they are, and where we may
find them.

In answer to which Demand we are thus instructed by that Loyal Judge JENKINS,
Jenk. Rediv. p. 136.
The Kings Prerogative and the Subjects Liberty are determined and bounded, and
admeasured by the written Law what they are. We do not hold the King to have
any more Power, neither does his Majesty claim any other but what the Law gives
him.

The right method therefore to be informed in this matter, is to search the
written Laws, with the learned Interpretations upon them. For though these
Statutes are not Constitutive of the Royal Prerogatives (All Jenk. Rediv. p. 4.
Kings had them; the said Powers have no beginning; i. e. They are so ancient
we cannot trace their Original) yet they are Declaratory of them.

I say, though these Privileges of the Crown are most of them antecedent to
our Acts of Parliament, and the written determined Cases of our Laws (and
consequently are not primarily established by them) yet they are so often
either explained, confirmed, or otherwise there mentioned; that he who is
conversant in those public Writings must needs know what they are?

But since every one has not the Leisure or the Ability for so laborious a
Task; those therefore who shall desire Compendio sapere, they may please to
peruse a little Treatise called Jura Coronae; or His Majesty's Royal Rights and
Prerogatives Asserted. And amongst several others there mentioned and
explained, they will find this Prerogative.

That the King has Power, in many cases, to Dispense with the Laws: And that
no Jur. Coron. p. 84.
Act of Parliament can bind the King from any Prerogative, that is solely and
inseparably annexed to his Sacred Person and Royal Power; but that he may
dispense with it by a non obstante.

The Reason of which Prerogative (which to some unthinking Men may seem
extravagant) is plainly this.

All human Constitutions are liable to Defects: And there was never any Law yet
framed with such Policy and Skill, which might not, on some occasion or other,
be burdensome to the Subject. For particular Cases and Contingencies are so
infinitely various, that it is impossible for human Wisdom to foresee or
prevent them.

And therefore it is absolutely necessary; That there should in all Governments
be some Power, Superior and Paramount to the written Laws: By whose Authority
the Subject might be relieved and pardoned; when the nice and strict Observance
of the Law (through some unexpected Event) might be grievous to himself, or
destructive to the Public. And Bish. Sandersons Judge. of subm. to Usurp. p. 18.
this Power of dispensing with particular Laws (as the learned Bishop Sanderson
informs us) is such a Prerogative, as without which no Commonwealth can be well
governed; but Justice would be turned into Gall and Wormwood: Nor can the
Supreme Governor, without Forfeiture of that Faithfulness which he owes to the
Publick-Weal divest himself thereof.

If some Men (who are very unwilling to give the King his Due) are still
dissatisfied in the point; the present posture of Affairs here in England may
then fully convince them.

We all know that according to the Law High Treason is punishable with Death.
And the Judgment of the Court, on such occasions, is to be Hanged, Drawn and
Quartered. This is Law. Let me therefore ask these Men. Can the King by his
Prerogative dispense with this Law, so as to free the Criminal from the
Punishment (a Toto or a Tanto) or can he not? If they say not. Ipsi viderint.
Let them look to that who are most deeply concerned.

But if now at the last they are grown so considerate, as to say that he can:
Give me leave then to expostulate with them, concerning that late Instance of
the unfortunate Lord Stafford.

When his Majesty, out of Compassion to that Noblemans Person and respect to
his Quality, had changed the manner of his Death, and given him the favor to
be Beheaded: What a noise was then raised, That the Law must be observed? What
Fears and Apprehensions of Arbitrary Power! What a Tumult did those scrupulous
Sheriffs make on that occasion, by Petitioning the Two Houses; Whether the
Kings Writ ought to be obeyed? But what Answer they received both from Lords
and Commons is sufficiently known.

I shall make no Reflections upon it, tho indeed the Impertinence of that
Action (in which I doubt they were encouraged by some greater than themselves)
might deserve a Remark.

From these Premises it is evident, That there is Lex Coronae, a Royal
Prerogative granted by the Common Law to the Crown of England, Superior to all
written Laws. By virtue of which Prerogative-Law, the King has Authority (on
emergent occasions, and when such Dispensation may promote the ends of
Government) to Dispense with most Statutes or Acts of Parliament. Salus populi
suprema Lex esto; when rightly understood is a full proof of this Assertion.

As therefore on the one hand;

When Sedition is rampant, and affronts the Government; when the Mercy of a
King shall be voted his weakness; and his Royal compassion and unwillingness to
Punish, shall have this Gloss put upon it; He dares not do it.

As in such a Case, Reason of State (which is Salus Populi) does require; That
some should be executed in terrorem; to repress the insolence of others; So on
the other hand,

When Tumults are abated; when Faction is broken, and that Men begin to
acknowledge their Mistakes, and return to their Wits: If under such inviting
Circumstances as these, the King out of his Grace and Mercy, shall either
Pardon a Traitor, or abate the rigor of his Sentence, who will pretend to say,
that such undeserved Favor is Illegal? Or that the King, whether he pardon or
punish, does not govern, in both Instances, according to Law?

The Objectors go on.

If the King thus entrusted to keep the Laws and preserve Religion, should be
guilty of a wicked Design, to subvert our Laws, and destroy our Religion, by
introducing an Arbitrary, Tyrannical Government; he must then understand, that
he is but an Officer of Trust.

All this is granted; If the word Trust do only refer to Almighty God, but not
to the People.

The King does cheerfully acknowledge, that he is Authorized and Deputed by the
most High, to govern these Nations; and that he must render an Account for so
great a Trust committed to his charge. And though the King has many Enemies,
both Spiritual and Temporal, yet his Support is this. He who gave him his
Commission is able to Protect him. He has hitherto very signally preserved
him. And it is the constant, hearty Prayer of all Loyal Subjects; That his God,
and the God of his Fathers will preserve him still. His Majesty has indeed
many Enemies (and good Princes did never want them) but in the Mercy of the
most High he shall not miscarry.

But if this Trust do refer to the People, as if the Kings Power and Authority
were derived to him from the People by way of Pact or Contract: Let them then
explain, Who are this People, with whom he did thus Contract? When was this
Bargain made? What are the Conditions? Before what Witnesses? Who must Judge of
the Delinquency? Where are the Records of these Transactions to be perused?

If no Evidence to confirm any of these Instances; the Case is then decided by
that known Maxim, Idem est non esse and non apparere. This Fundamental Contract
of the Nation, is only a hard Word to amuse the vulgar. We know not what it is,
nor where to find it.

But it follows in the Objection.

The Parliament of England (the Representatives of the People, in whom all
Power does Originally reside) they are to take Order for the Animadversion and
Punishment of such an Offending Governor. Parliaments were ordained to
restrain the exorbitant Power of Kings and to redress the Grievances of the
People. The Sum of which charge is this.

There is a Coercive Power over the King. Which Power (Mr. SIDNEY tells us)
Originally in the People of England, is delegated Sidney's Trial. p. 23.
unto the Parliament.

To which I do thus Answer.

That though his Majesty has a just esteem for Parliaments; and thinks the
Parliament of England the happiest Constitution that ever Nation did enjoy; and
has graciously assured us; That no Irregularities of Parliaments, shall make
him out of Love with Parliaments; but that he will have frequent Parliaments:
Yet such an extravagant Power of Parliaments as is here pretended, is such
height of Treason; as deserves a sharper Confutation than can be given it from
this Treatise.

As to the point of Non-Resistance (most seasonable to be enforced at this
time) I did once design very fully to have enlarged upon it. To have showed its
Obligation from all Laws Natural, Positive, Divine, Human. As also to have
Answered the most Popular Pleas for such Resistance. But I am so happily
prevented by the Learned Labors of others (particularly my Lord Bishop of
Winchester, Dr. Falkner and Dr. Sherlock; who have indeed exhausted that
Subject) that I shall give no further trouble; but conclude my short Discourse
with this following Argument.

The Supreme Power must not be resisted; But the King of England has Supreme
Power; Therefore His Majesty cannot lawfully be resisted.
The Proposition is the voice of Nature. There can be no Order nor Government,
unless this Truth be admitted. Reason tells us; Par in parem non habet
potestatem, much less has an Inferior a Coercive Power over his Superior.

To which let me observe; That even the late Rebels themselves were convinced
in this matter. For, to vindicate their former Treasons, and to patronize their
intended Murder of that Blessed Prince, they voted, Jan. 4. 1648. Resolved,
That the People are (under God) the Original of all just Powers. That the
Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, being chosen by, and representing
the People, have the Supreme Power in the Nation. That whatsoever is Enacted or
declared for Law by the Commons in Parliament has the Force of a Law, and the
People concluded thereby, though consent of King and Peers be not had thereunto.

Plainly insinuating, That whilst the Subjects of England, according to their
Duty, did acknowledge the Supreme Power to be in the King, they must needs
apprehend, That the War was Rebellion; and his pretended Judges were Traitors.

And as to the Assumption, viz.

That the King of England has Supreme Power; this, I hope, has been so fully
proved in this little Treatise, that I might suppose the Conclusion without any
further Enlargement.

But because some late Seditious Pamphlets have very impertinently advanced the
Power of Parliaments; I shall, ex abundanti, thus undeniably convince them,
That the Parliament of England is Subject to the King.

Mr. SIDNEY Informs us, That the Sidney's Paper p. 2.
Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, is that which the Laws of
that Country make it to be. If therefore it do appear by the Laws and Statutes
of the Kingdom, That the Parliament of England is Subject to the King, then the
Controversy is at an End.

For Proof of this, they are desired to Consult, 12 Car. 2. c. 30. Where the
Lords and Commons thus Petitioned to his Majesty.

We your Majesty's said Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Lords and Commons in
Parliament Assembled, do beseech your most Excellent Majesty that it may be
Declared; That by the undoubted and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither
the Peers of this Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, nor
the People Collectively or Representatively, nor any other Persons whatsoever
ever had, have, has or ought to have any Coercive Power over the Persons of
the Kings of this Realm. Words so plain and undeniably evident that they are
not capable of any further Explication.

Only it will be pertinent to observe Two Things.

First, the Lords and Commons do not here petition, that it may be Enacted, but
that it may be Declared; intimating that the Kings Supremacy was not first
established in this Statute (as if before the making of this Act, the
Parliament had been Superior to the King) but is here only Declared to have
been Established by the undoubted Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom; i. e. by
such Laws as are the Foundation of the Government. Whoever therefore shall
Affirm, That the Parliament has a Coercive Power over the Person of the King,
he alters the Foundation and destroys the Government.

Secondly, I do from this Statute observe, That their famous Axiom, major
singulis, minor universis, will no longer support their Cause, it being plain
from this Act; That the King is major universis as well as singulis.

When our Republican Clubs, who talk so much of Law, shall have answered this
Statute; they may then expect to hear further from me.

In the interim, I shall recommend a Text, to be held forth in all their
Conventicles, the next time of their meeting.

Prove. 24. 21, 22. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

From whence may be raised these good Obversations, viz.

Honesty is the best Policy, and Loyalty the best Religion. FINIS.
THE PARALLEL.
DOLEMAN
THERE can be no doubt but that the Commonwealth has Power to choose their own
fashion of Government, as also to change the same upon reasonable Causes. In
like manner is it evident, that as the Commonwealth has this Authority to
choose and change her Government, so has she also to limit the same with what
Laws and Conditions she pleases. Conference about Succession. Part. 1. cap. 1.
page, 12, 13.

All Law, both Natural, National and Positive does teach us; That Princes are
subject to Law and Order, and that the Commonwealth which gave them their
Authority for the Common good of all, may also restrain or take the same away
again, if they abuse it to the Common-evil. The whole Body, though it be
governed by the Prince, as by the Head, yet is it not Inferior but Superior to
the Prince. Neither so gives the Commonwealth her Authority and Power up to
any Prince, that she depriveth her self utterly of the same, when need shall
require, to use it for her defense, for which she gave it. Part. 1st. cap. 4.
p. 72.

And finally the Power and Authority which the Prince has from the
Commonwealth is in very Truth, not Absolute but Potestas vicaria and delegata,
i. e. a Power Delegate, or Power by Commission from the Commonwealth, which is
given with such Restrictions, Cautels and Conditions, yea with such plain
Exceptions, Promises and Oaths of both Parties (I mean between the King and
Commonwealth, at the day of his Admission or Coronation) as if the same be not
kept but wilfully broken on either Part, then is the other not bound to observe
his Promise neither, though never so solemnly made or sworn. Part 1st. cap. 4.
page 73.

By this then you see the ground whereon depends the righteous and lawful
Deposition and Chastisement of wicked Princes, viz. Their failing in their Oath
and Promises, which they made at their first entrance -- Then is the
Commonwealth not only free from all Oaths made by her of Obedience or
Allegiance to such unworthy Princes, but is bound moreover for saving the whole
Body, to resist, chasten, or remove such evil Heads, if she be able, for that
otherwise all would come to Destruction, Ruin and public Desolation. part 1.
cap. 4. page 77, 78.

BRADSHAW
THE People of England, as they are those that at the first (as other Countries
have done) did choose to themselves this Form of Government even for Justice
sake, that Justice might be administered, that Peace might be preserved; so Sir,
they gave Laws to their Governors, according to which they should Govern; and
if those Laws should have proved inconvenient or prejudicial to the public,
they had a Power in them, and reserved to themselves to alter as they shall see
cause. Kings Trial p. 64.

CHARLES STUART King of England; The Commons of England Assembled in
Parliament, according to the fundamental Power that rests in themselves, have
resolved to bring you to Trial and Judgment. p. 29. If so be the King will go
contrary to the end of his Government, Sir he must understand that he is but an
Officer of Trust, and he ought to discharge that Trust, and they are to take
Order for the Animadversion and Punishment of such an Offending Gover. p. 65.

Sir, Parliaments were ordained for that purpose, to redress the Grievances of
the People. And then, Sir, the Scripture says, They that know their Masters
will and do it not, what follows? The Law is your Master, the Acts of
Parliament. page 66, 67.

This we know to be Law, Rex habet superiorem, Deum and Legem, etiam and
Curiam, and so says the same Author; and truly Sir, he makes bold to go a
little further, Debent ei ponere fraenum, They ought to bridle him. page 65.

That the said Charles Stuart being admitted King of England, and therein
trusted with a limited Power. Vid Char. p. 30.

The House of Commons, the Supreme Authority and Jurisdiction of the Kingdom.
page 48. Which Authority requires you, in the name of the People of England, of
which you are Elected King, to answer them, page 36. Sir you may not Demur the
Jurisdiction of the Court -- they sit here by the Authority of the Commons of
England; and all your Predecessors and you are responsible to them. page 44.

For there is a Contract and Bargain between the King and his People, and your
Oath is taken, and certainly Sir, the Bond is reciprocal. -- Sir, if this Bond
be once broken, farewell Sovereignty. page 72.

Sir, though you have it by Inheritance in the way that is spoken of, yet it
must not be denied that your Office was an Office of Trust: Now Sir, if it be
an Office of Inheritance, as you speak of your Title by Desient, let all men
know that great Offices are seizable and forfeitable, as if you had it but for
a year and for your Life, p. 73.

And Sir, the People of England cannot be so far wanting to themselves, which
God having dealt so miraculously and gloriously for, they having Power in their
hands, and their Great Enemy, they must proceed to do Justice to themselves and
to You. p. 75.

SIDNEY and other of The True-Protestant Party.
GOD has left Nations unto the Liberty of setting up such Governments as best
pleased themselves.

The Right and Power of Magistrates in every Country, was that which the Laws
of that Country made it to be, Sidn. Pap. p. 2.

St. Peter 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. styles Kings, as well as the Governors under him,
the Ordinance of Man, which cannot have any other Sense, but that Men make them
and give them their Powers: Hunts postsc. p. 37. By all which it is evident;
That the Succession to the Crown is the Peoples Right. And though the
Succession to the Crown is Hereditary, because the People so appointed it;
would have it so, or consented to have it so; yet in a particular Case for the
saving the Nation, The whole Line and Monarchy it self may be altered, by the
unlimited Power of the Legislative Authority. Hunts Postsc. page 43. Some Men
will talk as if they believed themselves, That the Legislative Power is in the
King, when no King of England yet ever pretended to it. A Legislative Authority
is necessary to every Government, and therefore we ought not to want it, and
therefore Parliaments, in which our Government has placed the making of Laws,
cannot be long discontinued. Hunts Postsc. p. 28.

BRACTON says that the King has three Superiors, to wit, Deum, Legem and
Parliamentum; that is, the Power Originally in the People of England is
Delegated unto the Parliament. Sidn. Trial p. 23.

All Government is founded in Trust, and settled in such a Person, or limited
to such a Family, for the safety and advantage of the People, as well as of the
Ruler.

It is remarkable that there was never a Conveyance of the Crown of England to
any Person, but upon the tacit Concurrence, and with the Virtual or Implicit
Consent of the People. And therefore anciently before an King of England was
actually Crowned, the People being first acquainted with the Day appointed for
that Solemnity, were three several times publicly asked, whether they would
have such a Person to rule over them. Let. from Gentl. in the City concerning
D. Y. page 13, 14.

Those Laws were to be observed, and the Oaths taken by them, having the force
of a Contract between Magistrate and People, could not be violated without
danger of dissolving the whole Fabric. Sidn. Pap. page 2.

If he does not like his condition, he may Renounce the Crown; but if he
receive it upon that Condition (as all Magistrates do the Power they receive)
and swear to perform it, he must expect that the performance will be exacted,
or revenge taken by those he has betrayed. Sid. Try. p. 23.

I will hope there are very few in this Nation so ill instructed, that do not
think it in the Power of the People to depose a Prince, who really undertakes
to alienate his Kingdom, or that really Acts the Destruction or the Universal
Calamity of his People. Great consid. relating to D. Y. considered p. 6.

To give every one his due, is to administer Defense to the Innocent, and by
Authority of Law to subdue the Aggressors of Mankind, how great and mighty
soever they be, Fiat justitia therefore. Id. Page 16.


