A DISCOURSE Against Blasphemy. Being a Conference with M. S. CONCERNING

1. The Rudeness of Atheistical Discourse. 2. The Certainty and Eternity of
Hell Torments. 3. The Truth and Authority of the Holy Scriptures.
Published Pursuant to their Majesty's Injunctions) To Suppress Atheism and
Irreligion.

The Third Impression.

By William Assheton, D. D. Chaplain to His Grace the Duke of Ormond.

London, Printed by T. B. and are to be Sold by Richard Simpson, at the Three
Trouts in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1694.

Imprimatur.

May 2. 1690. Z. Isham, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Lon^ a Sacris.

^o the Illustrious His Grace James Duke of Ormond, etc.
May it please Your Grace,
^O permit Your Obliged Chaplain to publish this following Treatise under ^^^r
Grace's Name. The Design of which, ^ll humility, is to vindicate the Great
^^jesty of Heaven, from the Malicious ^lections of a Blasphemous Tongue.

^f the Person concerned in these Papers (...) not confessed, upon Demand, That
^e is a God; I should then have judg^ by the rest of his Discourse, that he ^s
a downright Atheist. And ought ^ave treated him as such, and not ^he milder
Name of Deist.

^ut whether Deist or Atheist his Ex^^ons were so extravagant, That I did think
to have returned him no An^^^^ It being neither prudent nor safe ^^st Pearls
before Swine. And per^^^^ such Bravoes as these are best An^^^^'d with Silence:
Who deserve a sharp^ ^onfutation then can be given them (...) the Pen. But when
I remembered (...) advice of Solomon; Answer a Fool ^ording to his folly, lest
he be wise is own Conceit. And did likewise ^^ve, how this Hector of Satan
re^^ed his Rambles in the Neighbour^d of my Parish. And with what Scorn ^reated
my Profession, with a Come ^^son conv^nce me if you can. I then thought it my
Duty, to magnify mi^^ Office, by pleading the Cause of (...) Great Master,
against the taunting R^proaches of this insulting Sennacheri^

If what I have here writ may be i^ any measure useful to the Cause of
Religion, I do cheerfully Publish it und^^ Your Grace' s Patronage. And when
have first Declared; That I perfect hate Flattery; And am either too Pro^^ or
too Honest to be guilty of such mea^ness; I will then take the Freedom tell the
World, how highly I Honor Yo^^ Grace' s Worth and Virtues. And wha^
Satisfaction it is to all true Lovers (...) the House of Ormond to observe the
Bu^ding Hopes of Your Grace' s Greatness.

It Is an Argument of a truly great a^^ generous Mind, to bear Adversity wit
Patience. And tho it is much hope through Gods Blessing upon His Maj^sties Arms,
Your Grace's Affairs will i^ a short time, be in a better Posture; y^^ possibly
few Persons, of Your Grace' s ^^gure, would have born some Passag^ with such
Decency as You have done.

But when I remember the genero^^ Examples of your Illustrious Grand-F^ther and
Heroie Father, it is but w^^ was expected from Your Grace. Greatness seems to be
entailed u^^^ Your Family. And that Your Gr^^^ may live to equal the Worth
Greatness of Your Ancestors, is Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Grace's Chaplain in all D^^ful Observance W. Assheto*

TO M. S.
SIR,
I Have just cause even as a Christian, but much more as a Churchman, to
express my Resentments against your late Discourse. Those Atheistical Harangues
against the Majesty of God and his Providence; the Immortality of the Soul,
Rewards and Punishments in another World; particularly, against the Certainty
and Eternity of Hell Torments; were doubtless to be rejected with the highest
Indignation. And I am so far from condemning my self, as guilty of an
unnecessary Zeal in so doing; that I rather judge it my Duty, to confirm and
enlarge the Admonitions I then gave you.

I will not exasperate by a minute repetition of your extravagant Expressions
(for indee^ they are not fit to be repeated but shall in Charity to your se^
and others of your Complexio^ desire you briefly to conside^ these Two Things.

I. The Rudeness. II. T^^ Danger of such Discourses.

From the former of these Topics, let me advise you to pollish your
Conversation; and to be have your self, at least as a Gentleman, if not as a
Christian. For pray, Sir, consider; How un gentile it is, to disturb innocent
Mirth, and ingenious Society with such exasperating Digressions.

It Is, you know, an unfortunate mistake to affront any Person in the presence
of his Friend. And upon such intimation given (ever out of respect to the
Company the most inveterate malice is usually silenced.

You will likewise acknowledge* he must needs be a Man of a very cold
Constitution, who can sittame and unconcerned, whilst his Prince, his Parent,
his Patron and Benefactor shall be reviled and aspersed.

If the King shall be Libelled and Reproached, his Person Ridiculed, his Title
disputed, his Government traduced as Tyrannical and Unjust: An honest, loyal
Subject will not barely reprove such a railing Shimei, with a Curse not the
Lords Anointed, but according to his Allegiance, he will bring the Rebel to a
sharper Account.

A Dutiful Child will, beyond all Patience, be provoked; to hear his Father
treated as a Villain and a Rascal. And a faithful Servant, on such occasion,
will equally be moved for the Credit of his Master.

Now is God only Friendless? Is no Man think you concerned, for the Honor and
Glory of so great a Majesty? When Blasphemous Mouths shall revile his Nature;
Burlesque his Laws; Despise his Promises; Contemn his Threatenings; Laugh at his
Terrors* Do you think such Enlargement as this, can be welcome or accepted in a
Christian Society? If you fancy that it will, let me then convince you of your
mistake, whilst I thus briefly inform you, what apprehensions we Christians
have of Almighty God.

We Believe; That there is One Supreme Being, not only infinitely Great and
Powerful, but also infinitely Good, Benign and Gracious. That as he made all
Things by his Power, so he governs them by his Providence. That he has a more
peculiar regard to his Creature Man, whom he has endowed with Perfections
beyond other Beings. That he has not only provided all suitable Accommodations
for this Life (in which we continually depend on his Care and Bounty) but also
has made us capable of a better. That when we Die, we do not perish as the
Brutes, but have Souls immortal, which shall never cease to be. That he has
provided a Happiness for these Souls (yea and our Bodies also, which shall rise
again and be uni^ed to them) infinitely beyond our present apprehensions. That
unspeakable Joys are prepared for those that love God, i. e. who are obedient
to his Commands. As for those who shall finally reject his Precepts, and
stupidly follow their own brutish Inclinations, there is a sad Eternity expects
them in the other World.

But our comfort is, God made us to be happy; and if We are not so, it is
certainly our own faults. For he shows us our Danger, and instructs us how to
avoid it. He expostulates with us, why we will Dye and Perish? And we may be
confident, since God is Truth it self, he is very sincere in those
Expostulations. And as the highest Evidence of all this, He sent his Son into
the World, not only to instruct us, and to be an Example of holy Life, but also
to Dye for us, and to reconcile us to himself.

Now, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him also, freely give us all Things?

In Sum, God is the most Indulgent Father, the most bountiful Benefactor, and
the surest Friend, He has promised (and he is able to do it) to defend us in
all Dangers; to relieve us in all our Wants; to direct us in all our Doubts.
Finally, He will guide us by his Counsel here, And, if we follow his Conduct,
will at last bring us to his Glory.

Such Apprehensions as these all good Christians have of God. From whence,
pray, do you judge, how unpleasant it must be to Persons thus persuaded, to
hear such an excellent Being Despised; So great a Majesty Profaned; and such
infinite Goodness Abused.

And therefore since Men are impatient to hear that contemned, which they value
and admire; Or to be told that is false, which they firmly believe to be true:
Do not turn Conversation into Brawls and Quarrels. At least be so modest as not
to affront the common Sense of Mankind. But if you will not Worship God your
self, yet at least be so civil as not to Laugh at those that shall.

And that I may convince you, what little Cause there is to be so pleasant on
such Occasions; I must desire you further to consider, Not only the Rudeness,
but also,

II. The Danger of such Discourses.

And here I may rationally suppose, you have so much Love for your self, that
you dread the Thoughts of being Eternally miserable. And I appeal to your own
Experience, if the serious Apprehension even of the Possibility of such
Torments, like Belshazzar's Hand upon the Wall, has not loosned your Joints;
perplexed your Thoughts, and dampt your Pleasures?

And therefore, since a mistake in this matter is like to prove so fatal, you
ought to be well assured what you do, and upon what Grounds you do proceed.

For it is not sufficient Security in this Case to affirm [ Perhaps there is no
Life after this; And, It Is probable there is no Account to be given in another
World. And you are not able to understand, how there should be such a Hell,
such a Place of Torments, etc.] I say, this is not sufficient. But if you will
proceed with Reason, you must then further Demonstrate; That it is plainly
impossible, and a flat Contradiction that such Things should be. Unless
therefore you can prove this Proposition; It is impossible there should be any
future Account; Any Torments in another World, you do not act upon Prudential
Grounds, nor show your self Master of such exalted Reason, as you commonly
pretend to.

It Is a known Rule, which all Wise Men will observe, Provide for the Worst. And
therefore tho it should be granted to be highly improbable, Or (as you are
pleased to Phrase it) A very unlikely matter, that there should be a Hell, or a
State of such dismal Torments, yet unless you can further prove, That it is
utterly Impossible, you are obliged in Prudence to provide for the worst. Even
to amend your Life, and to reform those Practices, which, if there be a Hell,
will most certainly bring you thither.

I must confess you have a very difficult Task, whilst you attempt to prove a
Negative. But if you will be trying of your skill, I Will show you the Method in
which you must proceed.

Whoever shall undertake so extravagant a Design as to prove there is no Hell,
He must First consider those Grounds and Reasons, upon which all good
Christians do believe it, and he must then show those Grounds to be Impossible,
and to imply a Contradiction; or else he trifles and deceives his own Soul.

Now if any one should ask me, Why I Believe a Hell? [ Did I ever see any of
that Infernal Region? Did I ever converse with those Damned Spirits? Did they
ever tell me there is such a dismal Place?]

I Answer, No. But I therefore believe it, Because God, who is infallibly True,
has plainly Declared it. If it further shall be Demanded, [ How am I assured
that God has thus Declared?]

I Answer, Because the Holy Scriptures which contain the mind of God, and in
which the surest Notices of another World are to be found; I say, These
Scriptures do in plain Terms inform me, That there is such a Hell, Therefore I
Believe it.

So that this Truth, There is a Hell, and the Torments of it are Eternal, is
proved and supported by these following Propositions.

1. God has Revealed his Will to Mankind.

2. These Books we call the Holy Scriptures contain this Revelation of the
Divine Will.

3. This Truth, That there is a Hell, and that the Torments of it are Eternal,
is fully Revealed in these Holy Scriptures.

4. What God has Revealed in these Holy Scriptures is Infallibly True.

And consequently; Whoever will pretend to prove it Impossible, That there is
such a State of Eternal Torments, He must make good these Propositions.

1. That it is Impossible, that Almighty God should reveal his Will to Mankind.
Or else,

2. If the Possibility of such Revelation shall be granted; he must then prove,
That it is Impossible, that these Books we call the Scriptures should contain
this Revelation of the Divine Will. Or,

3. If both the former shall be acknowledged; He must then prove it Impossible,
That such a Doctrine concerning the Eternity of Hell Torments should be
revealed in Scripture. Or else,

4. He must make it appear, That what God has thus Revealed cannot possibly be
true.

As to the First;

DIvine Revelation is so far from being Impossible, that it has the highest
Probabilities to support it.

You have already granted, There is a God. And I am sure, upon due
Consideration you will further grant; That God is a Rational Intellectual
Being; A free Agent, having Liberty of Choice to determine his own Actions. And
consequently, what should hinder, but that such a God may communicate his
Designs and Intentions to Mankind?

Men you know do frequently discover, not only what they resolve at present,
but also their Apprehensions de futuro, what they purpose to perform hereafter.
And this faculty is acknowledged a great perfection in human Nature, such as
other Creatures are not capable of. Why then will you deny that Capacity to so
excellent a Being as 'an infinite God, which yet you will grant to a limited
and finite Creature?

And this expostulation will appear the more rational, when I have further told
you; That if you deny the Possibility of Divine Revelation, you have then the
Suffrage of all the World against you. All Nations and all Religions, Jewish,
Heathen, Mahumetan as well as Christian do acknowledge and suppose it.

If still You can doubt of so clear a Truth, Tully in his Books de Divinatione
may then convince you. His Authority I shall not urge (for the Authority of God
himself is rejected by you) but it is his Reason only I desire you to observe.

SI sunt Dii, neque ante declarant hominibus quae futura sunt: Aut non
dilligunt homines: Aut quid eventurum sit ignorant: Aut existimant nihil
interesse hominum scire quid futurum sit: Aut non censent esse suae Majestatis
praesignificare hominibus quae sunt futura: Aut ea ne ipsi quidem Dii
significare possunt. At neque non diligunt nos: Sunt enim benefici, generique
hominum amici: Neque ignorant ea quae ab ipsis constituta and designata sunt:
N^que nostra nihil interest scire ^a, que eventura sunt: Erimus enim cautiores
si sciemus: Neque hoc alienum ducunt Majestate sua: Nihil est enim beneficenti
a praestantius; Neque non possunt futura praenoscere: Non igitur and sunt Dii,
nec significant futura. V. Cicer: De Divin. Page 269. Edit. du Puis. Lut. 1565.
Fol.

Thus that excellent Philosopher argues, in the Person of a Stoic. The Sense of
whose words, I shall thus faithfully give you in this following Paraphrase.

If there be a God, and yet this God does not reveal his Will to Mankind: If he
has made no Discovery of a future State; nor given us any notice of Rewards
and Punishments in another World. Then, Some of these following Particulars
must be asserted by us. Either. 1st. That God has no Love nor Concern for
Mankind; Or else, 2dly. That God himself is ignorant of future Events; Or 3dly.
That God apprehends it will be of no advantage to us, to know what may possibly
befall us: Or else, 4thly. That it is a Dimunition of his State and Majesty, to
Communicate his Intentions to Mankind. Or else Lastly, If there be a future
State, Then, That God himself is not able to Declare it.

But none of these Things can be affirmed.

Not the First; For God truly Loves us, and is very indulgent and beneficial to
Mankind. Nor 2dly; Can God be ignorant of future Events, because they are
appointed and determined by him. Nor 3dly; Can it be pretended, that the
notices of a future State will be of no advantage to us: Since this very
apprehension that we must render an Account of all our Actions, will make us
more cautious; not to live at random; but to take heed what we do. And
therefore 4thly. It is far from being repugnant to the Majesty of God to reveal
his Intentions; since nothing is more generous then Bounty and doing Good. And
Lastly, God is so ^ar from being unable to Declare future Events; that he could
not be God unless he did foreknow them.

From these Premises I may very suitably conclude with the same TVLLY. Sunt
autem Dii, significant ergo. There is a God, Therefore He has revealed his
Will to Mankind.

The Possibility of Divine Revelation, in Thesi, being thus established; let us
next examine, in Hypothesi, by what Mediums you can pretend to evince,

Secondly, That it is Impossible, That these Books we call the Scriptures
should contain this Revelation of the Divine Will. Or* That the Doctrines there
in expressed should proceed from God; should be dictated by his Spirit, or
Published by his Command.

Now there are but Two Ways; whereby the proof of such Impossibility can be
attempted. Either,

1. It must appear, That the Contents of this Book are unworthy of such an
excellent Author; and that the matters therein contained, are inconsistent with
that due Notion of God* which even natural Reason does suggest; or else,

2. That the Penmen of these Scriptures were Persons of such slender
Reputation, that we have no reason to believe them, tho they tell us expressly
they received this Book from God.

As to the former of these pretenses; Toll, Lege. Take this Divine Book into
your Hand; But do it without prejudice. Read it with the same indifference you
would peruse any other Author, and then resolve me. What Passage (either
Historical or Doctrinal) can you find in this sacred Volume, which does in the
least contradict, either the Holiness, Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Truth, or any
other of the Divine Attributes? If you affi^m, that there is some such Passage,
and that there are such Contradictions; When you have first produced them, and
told us what they are; I shall then, through Divine Assistance, endeavor your
Satisfaction.

As to the 2l, viz. The Credit of the Penmen; The utmost that can be urged
against their Authority is this. [ That there being many Cheats and Impostors
in the World, it is the Character of true Wisdom not to be over-credulous. And
therefore tho we read expressly in the Bible, All Scripture is given by
inspiration of God. And Holy Men of God spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost: Yet this (says the Deist) is but the Testimony of Men in their own
Cause: Who are indeed to be admitted, as very faithful Witnesses, if we may
believe themselves, and must take their own ^^rds.]

For the true State of the matter, according to his Sense is this. [ The
Writers of these Books to support their Credit, and to raise themselves a Name
(as Mahomet from his Pigeon, and Numa Pompilius from his Egeria) have
counterfeited a Divine Commission, and delivered their Message in the Name of
the Lord.]

To which mal^cious Suggestion, I shall return this brief and, I hope, full
Reply.

The highest Evidence of Divine Authority, is the Concurrence of Divine Power,
i. e. The utmost assurance which can be given by any Person, that he acts by a
Divine Commission, and that the Message he delivers was received from God: It
is the working of such Miracles, in Confirmation of his Doctrine, as are beyond
the Power of any natural Agent.

Now Jesus of Nazareth, the Author of the Christian Faith, most expressly
assures us, That the Doctrines he delivered were received from God. My Doctrine
is not mine, but Joh. 7. 16. 12. 49, 50.
his that sent me. I have not spoken of my self, but the Father that sent me,
he gave me a Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. Whatsoever
I speak therefore even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.

And because it might seem unreasonable, to believe him herein upon his own
word; he makes this plain Confession. If I bear Witness Joh. 5. 31.
of my self, my Witness is not true, i. e* If I only bear Witness of my self,
my Witness is not effective, or convincingly true. There is another that
bears Witness V. 32, 33. 34, 36.
of me: Ye sent unto John, and he bare Witness unto the Truth. But I receive
not Testimony from Man, i. e. only from Man. I have greater Witness then that
of John: For the Works which the Father has given me to finish, the same Works
that I do, bear Witness of me, that the Father has sent me. Joh. 10. 24, 25.
And when the Jews came round about him, and said unto him, How long do thou
make us to doubt? If thou be the Christ, tell us plainly. Jesus answered them,
I told you, and ye believed not: The Works that I do in my Fathers Name, they
bear Witness of me.

What these Works are, the Evangelists have largely Recorded. Some of them are
briefly repeated by our Lord himself, in his Answer to John's Disciples. -- The
Blind Luk 7. 22.
see, the Lame walk, the Deaf hear, the Dead are raised. By such miraculous
Works as these, our Blessed Savior does justify his Commission, That he was
the Messiah, i. e. that he was that Person who was sent from God; to Publish,
to Purchase, to effect the Salvation of Mankind.

These were the Credentials of this Heavenly Agent: The Divine Seal to his
Commission, which made it Authentic. Which unless he had produced, he could not
rationally have challenged any acceptance from the World. If I do not Joh. 10.
37.
the Works of my Father (i. e. Works only imputable to Gods extraordinary
Power) Believe me not. If I had not done among -- 15. 24.
them; the Works which none other Man did, they (the incredulous Jews) had not
had Sin: i. e. had not been culpable for Unbelief. Intimating plainly; That if
he had not confirmed his Doctrine with such convincing Miracles, they were not
to be blamed, tho they did reject him as an Impostor.

But still you will say, [ The Question is de facto, How can I be assured that
such Miracles were really done by him? Had I lived in those Days, and seen any
of his Miracles, I should then have known how to have judged of them. But to
tell me of Things done Sixteen Hundred Years ago, is not much to the purpose.
There has been Juggling and Collusion in other Cases; and for ought I know,
there has been in this.]

To satisfy which trifling Scruple, give me leave with some freedom thus to
express my self. That if Men will turn perfect Skeptics; and Causelessly suspect
the Truth of all such Passages, as they did not actually see done with their
own Eyes, or hear with their own Ears, they are not worthy of Conviction. And
if this be your Temper, we must then Turn you to Grass, and there leave you.
But if there is such a thing as Fides historica; or any assurance can be had of
those Transactions, which are beyond and above our own Times, there may then be
given as great evidence of these Miracles, as any matter of Fact is capable to
admit. For, These things were not done in a Corner; but plainly and openly, and
in the sight of many Witnesses; and with such remarkable Circumstances, as
might best expose them to the strictest Examination.

To omit many others, pray read the Stories of Luke 8.
Jairus Daughter, the Luke 7.
Widows Son of Nain, and of Joh. 11.
Lazarus. The last of which ( viz. Lazarus) had been Dead four Days, and Buried
till he flank, and yet at the call of Jesus (although bound Hand and Foot with
Grave-Cloths) he came forth, all the Multitude beholding.

This last Miracle was so eminently convincing, and did so startle the Chief
Priests and Pharisees; that they called a Council upon it, and said, What do
we? For this Man does many Joh. 11. 47, 48.
Miracles. If we let him thus alone, all Men will believe on him.

[ All this, says the Deist, were evidently true, and must needs be granted,
if we had not just cause to suspect your Proof. You tell us indeed that Jesus
did such and such Miracles; particularly, That he raised the Dead. But pray who
are they that report these Things? Were they not his own Disciples and
Followers? And have we not great reason to susp^ct, they might forge these
Stories for the Credit of their Master?]

In Answer to which Cavil (because Objections are endless) we shall put the
Matter upon this short Issue.

These Writers do tell us; That Jesus did not only raise others from the Dead;
but also that he raised himself. Yea, further they acquaint us, That before he
Died, he promised his Apostles that he would rise again. And moreover gave this
also as a Sign to all the People, whereby they should know; That his Doctrine
was true, and that he was sent from God. If therefore I can evidently prove to
you, That Jesus of Nazareth did rise again from the Dead, and consequently;
That the Penmen of the New Testament did herein declare nothing but Truth; you
will then have no reason to suspect their Fidelity in any other Instance.

Now in order to your Conviction (which is most heartily prayed for) I must
desire you to grant me this Postulatum, viz.

That the Resurrection of Jesus is Matter of Fact. And consequently can no
otherwise be proved, then Matters of Fact use to be.

When we design to convince another, that such a Thing was Done, the surest
Evidence we can give him, is the Testimony of sufficient credible Witnesses who
saw it done. And he who is not satisfied with such a Proof, we look upon him as
a Person not fit to be Discoursed with.

Now there was never any Matter of Fact, better or more strongly attested, then
the Truth of this Assertion; That Jesus rose from the Dead. And that, Whether
we consider the Nature of the Things to be attested; Or the Number and Quality
of the Witnesses attesting.

First; The thing to be attested was of that Nature that it might be fully
perceived by those who saw it; i. e. It was an Object fit and proper to be
judged of by their Senses.

As to the Death and Passion of Jesus (the necessary Antecedents of his
Resurrection) they were plain Objects of Sense: Done in the presence of the
whole City of Jerusal^m, and consequently of his greatest Adversaries. That he
truly Died, all the World could testify. No Man's Death was ever more solemn or
remarkable: Nor was this ever disputed. So that thus far we are fixed and
certain; That if Jesus did rise again; his Resurrection was no juggling Trick,
but a real Miracle.

After his Resurrection* those to whom he appeared were frightened at it,
supposing him to be a Spirit. But he sufficiently assures them of the contrary
by appealing to their Senses. Behold my hands and Luke 24. 39.
my feet, that it is I my self. Handle me and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh
and Bones, as ye see me have. q. d. Satisfy your selves, that it is I the same
who was Dead, that am now alive again. But,

Secondly; Not only the nature of the Thing (of which even our Senses are
competent Judges) but also the Witnesses attesting do sufficiently prove; That
Jesus is risen.

Now there are Two Things must concur to make a credible Witness. Knowledge and
Integrity.

1. Knowledge. No Man ought to be received as a fit Witness in any Matter,
unless it do appear; that he had the opportunity fully to inform himself of the
truth of that which he pretends to attest.

Should any Man affirm; That he saw a Thing done, or heard a Word spoken; and
yet it shall be Deposed, by as credible Witnesses as himself, that he was at
the same time Twenty Miles distant; Such Evidence, however confidently
delivered, must needs be false and ridiculous.

But now the Disciples of our Lord had all imaginable advantages, to know the
Truth of what they Witness; whilst they affirm; That Jesus is risen.

They were his constant Followers and Attendants. And for the space of Three
Years, were the daily Observers of his Conversation. And it is worthy your
notice; That when by the Apostasy of Judas, they wanted one of their Number;
they were very careful to choose such a one to succeed him, as had been a
constant Follower of Jesus, and had taken exact notice of every thing they were
to Witness. Wherefore (says St. Acts 1. 21, 22, 23.
Peter) of these Men which have companied with us, all the time that the Lord
Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the Baptism of John unto that
same Day, that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a Witness
with us of his Resurrection.

Observe here how exact they were in their Choice. They would admit of none,
but one who had been with them from first to last. That could speak Things (as
we phrase it) not by Hearsay only, but of his own knowledge: That if any Man
should ask him: Did you your self See? Or, Did you your self Hear, this, which
you do report? That he might then truly answer that he did; and that what he
Preached was upon his own certain Knowledge.

Now the Disciples of our Lord were the constant Hearers of his Doctrine; and
amongst other Passages they heard him expressly Declare: That he would rise
again the Third Day. Destroy this Temple, Joh. 2. 19, 21.
and in three Days I will raise it up. But he spoke of the Temple of his Body.
And this Expression of rising the Third Day was so familiar, and so often
repeated; that the Chief Priests and Pharisees took notice of it to Pilate,
Mat. 27. 63.
saying, Sir, we remember that that Deceiver said, while he was yet alive,
after three Days I will rise again.

Moreover, The Disciples and Followers of our Lord, were not only instructed in
his Life time, that he would rise again; but they likewise saw him after he was
risen. And in such a manner, with such Circumstances, as might most effectually
command their Belief.

They saw him, not only once or twice, but several times. They saw him, not
only singly and a part, and in lesser Numbers; but all of them, yea Five
Hundred of them at once. And therefore tho One or Two might perhaps be
mistaken, yet so great a Number could not possibly be imposed on.

Especially, when we have considered further; That they not only saw him, but
had likewise all other imaginable Evidences to convince them.

For when he had appeared to them, and Discoursed with them, which might also
be done by a Spirit; to give them a certain proof that he was no Spirit; Handle
me and see (i. e. observe and satisfy your selves) for a Spirit has not Flesh
and Bones as you see me have. And least they might yet scruple, that it was not
the same Jesus that was crucified, but some other Dead Body; which, being moved
and actuated by an Angel, did take his shape and appear in his likeness: To
remove this doubt; Behold (says he) my Hands and my Feet, that it is I my
self. Those Hands and Feet which were pierced with Nails, and fastened to the
accursed Tree. And if you will not believe your Eyes (which, according to the
Vulgar Notion, may have a Mist cast before them) then to satisfy your selves
further, take the proof of another of your Senses. Handle me and see. And when
St. Thomas was a little more distrustful then the rest. Reach hither thy
Finger, and Joh. 20. 27.
behold my Hands, and reach hither thy Hand, and thrust it into my side, and be
not faithless but believing.

Now recollect the forementioned Passages, and then resolve me; What could have
been further either said or done to convince them, That Jesus was risen? They
saw him, he discoursed with them, did eat before them, they touched him and
handled him. And all this variety of Conversation they had with him, not only
once or twice, but for the space of Forty Days together.

The Premises considered, you must needs grant; That the Apostles were very
sufficient Witnesses of our Blessed Saviors Resurrection in respect of their
Knowledge. i. e. They had all imaginable advantages, to know the Truth of that
which they witnessed and attested. But,

2. Supposing their Knowledge; And that they had sufficient means of
Information; yet whether were they Persons of that Honesty and Integrity as to
be Believed; Or, was there not just reason to suspect, that they might deliver
a Falsehood instead of Truth?

And for this, let me desire you to consider that known Saying, Nemo gratis
malus est. There is scarce any Man so absurd, as to be a Villain for nothing.
Or so impertinently Wicked, as to do mischief for mischiefs sake. Whoever
therefore shall presume publicly and solemnly to deliver a False Testimony; he
must be supposed to do it upon some urging Cause. As, To raise himself a Name:
To please a Party; To advance his Fortunes: Or to gratify a Revenge.

Now, All that is in the World (says 1 John 2. 16.
St. John) is the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of
Life. And whatever the Apostles could propose to themselves, it will be
comprehended under one of these Three. Honors, Riches, or Pleasures.

1. As to Honor; They could not expect it, since all Dignities and Promotions
were then in the Hands of Jews or Pagans: From whom they received nothing but
ignominy and reproach. And by whom they were accounted the Dung of the Earth,
and the Offscouring of the World.

2. As to Riches. Instead of gaining an Estate, they were forced to part with
all that they had. Either by a voluntary Resignation to supply the wants of
others (for at first they had all Things common) or else by the fraud and
rapine of their Oppressors. They no sooner came to one City, but they were
Persecuted, and forced to fly unto another. And by this ambulatory Kind of
Life, without any fixed certain Being, they were so far from being able (had
they otherwise designed it) to have raised Estates and Fortunes; that they
lived upon the Alms and Charity of others. And then,

3. What kind of Pleasures they were to expect as their Master did foretell, so
they themselves did sufficiently experience. In the World Joh. 16. 33.
ye shall have Tribulation. They shall Luke 21. 12, 16, 17.
lay their Hands on you, and persecute you, and ye shall be betrayed both by
Parents and Brethren, and Kinsfolks, and Friends, and some of you shall they
cause to be put to Death, and ye shall be hated of all Men for my Name sake.
Joh. 16. 2.
Yea the time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God
Service.

St. Paul informs us, That God had set 1 Cor. 4. 9.
forth the Apostles as appointed unto Death, and exposed them as Spectacles of
scorn and obloquy to the World. According to which it did in effect happen to
them. Even V. 11.
to this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are
buffeted, and have no certain dwelling Place; being reviled we bless, being
persecuted we suffer it, being defamed we entreat; we are made as the filth of
the World, and as the Offscouring of all things unto this day.

In short. If Contumelies and Reproaches, if Racks and Prisons, if Flames and
Gibbets, with other the most exquisite tormenting Deaths; if these be
Pleasures, then indeed the Apostles and followers of our Lord, who witnessed
his Resurrection, had their share of Pleasures.

And now Sir, having seriously Debated these Things, pray resolve me; What just
cause can be assigned, why Persons of sober rational Deportment (having the
same Principle of Self-preservation with other Men) should, by Publishing
Christ's Resurrection, not only deprive themselves of all comfortable
enjoyments, but also submit to the greatest Severities, and at last Death it
self? I say, what cause can be assigned of such Self-denial, if they had not
the highest Convictions of the Truth of what they Published?

But yet further. If the Apostles of our Lord were such Cheats and Impostors
why were they not discovered, and exposed as such? If the Resurrection of Jesus
was no better than a Legendary Story, and a cunningly devised Fable, why was it
not then confuted? The World at that time abounded with Learned Men, both Jews
and Heathens; who wanted neither Wit nor Malice for such an Undertaking. Why
were not their Pens sharpened as well as their Swords? The Reason is evident.
There were then such Authentic Records of these matters, as could not be
Disputed. The Eusebius. Hist. L. 1. c. 9.
True Acta Pilati (to which Apol. 2. page 76.
Justin Martyr, and Apol. c. 5. p. 6, etc. ana c. 21. p. 23. V. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. L. 2. c. 2. p. 40. V. Not. Val.
Tertullian so successfully appealed) were then extant. And these were such
irrefragable Proofs, that Malice it self was not able to ^iss against them.

There was indeed a very early, tho ridiculous, Attempt to stifle this Truth.
The Chief Priests and Pharisees having heard him say, while he was yet alive,
After three Days, I will rise again; They not only Sealed up the Sepulcher, but
also procured a Guard of Soldiers to watch it. That if any report were made of
his Resurrection* they might then effectually disprove it by producing his
Body; which for that end, they had now got into their own Possession.

But observe the Malice of these Men; not to be convinced; no, not by a
Miracle. For being told by the Watch (with the greatest Consternation) that an
Angel had appeared; that the Stone was rolled away: and the Body was gone: They
then hired these Soldiers to report; That his Disciples came by Mat. 28. 13.
Night and stole him away whilst they slept. What! All of them slept? No
Sentinel to watch for the rest? This was such an extravagant Vn-soldier-like
Allegation, that nothing but the Impudence of a Jew, could have imposed upon
the World.

From these Premises, I hope it has been competently proved.

1. That it is very possible, That God should Reveal his Will to Mankind. And,

2. It is no less possible; that those Books we call the Scriptures, should
contain this Revelation of the Divine Will. And therefore,

3. If (these Two Propositions being granted) you can still be so extravagant
as to affirm; The Impossibility of Eternal Torments; You must then prove it
Impossible; That any such Doctrine, concerning the Existence or Eternity of Hell
Torments, should be revealed in Scripture. Or else,

4. You must prove; That what God has Revealed in Scripture cannot possibly be
true.

As to this Fourth Proposition; I should but trifle to expostulate it with you,
Truth being such an Essential Attribute of God, that it never was Disputed. If
therefore God has made this Revelation; There is a Hell, and the Torments of
it are Eternal: Who art thou, O vain Man, that disputest against God; Let God
be true, but every Man a Liar. And then the only Proposition for me to confirm,
and you to disprove is this; It is very possible that the Holy Scriptures do
reveal this Doctrine, viz. That there is a Hell, and that the Torments of it are
Eternal.

For if this be Impossible; pray then inform us, what is the true sense and
meaning of these following Words?

Jude 6.
The Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation,
he has reserved in Everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the
great Day. 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9.
When the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Who shall be punished with Everlasting
Destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power.
John. 5. 28, 29.
Marvel not at this: For the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, they that have done good,
unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, unto the
Resurrection of Damnation. Dan. 12. 2.
And many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall awake, some to
Everlasting Life, and some to shame, and Everlasting Contempt. Mat. 25. 41.
Then shall he say unto them on the left Hand; Depart from me, ye Cursed into
Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25. 46.
And these shall go away into Everlasting punishment: But the Righteous into
Life Eternal Mat. 13. 49, 50.
At the end of the World, the Angels shall come forth, and severe the Wicked
from among the Just; and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire; there shall be
wailing and gnashing of Teeth. Mark. 9. 43, 44.
If thy hand offend thee, cut it off: It is better for thee to enter into life
maimed, then having two hands, to go into Hell, into the Fire that never shall
be quenched: Where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched. Rev. 20.
10.
The Least and the False Prophet shall be Tormented Day and Night, for ever and
ever. Luke 12. 4, 5.
Be not afraid of them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that
they can do. But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him, which after
he has killed, has Power to cast into Hell; yea I say unto you, fear him.

And now Sir, having seriously perused these Places of Scripture, pray resolve
me. Are not these following Truths as plainly therein delivered, as any words
can express them?

1. That wicked Men are liable to a further Punishment after Death. Those that
kill the Body, are not able to kill the Soul. But God is able to destroy both
Body and Soul in Hell, i. e. (as St. Luke interprets St. Matthew) to cast them
into Hell.

2. This Punishment is very great and dreadful. It Is represented by Fire (the
most smart and pungent Torment) and by wailing and gnashing of Teeth, out of
Anguish and Despair,

3. These Torments are Eternal. Everlasting Punishment. Everlasting Fire. Never
shall be quenched. Their Worm dies not.

There are indeed some impertinent Criticisms, urged by the Socinians and
others, to ener-vate these Texts. But what then? Was there ever any Truth so
certain which has not bin Disputed*

But what if these Critics are mistasten? what if wiser Men then they have
thought otherwise? Pray then do not hazard an Eternal Concern upon such
Niceties.

I did once think to have expostulated these Things largely with you And to
have done it with all the warmth and vigor, that the Concern for a precious
immortal Soul could dictate. But I must remember to whom I write. For unless
your Judgment is rectified, the best things I can say will be but matter for
your Sport. If the Word of God shall still be Burlesqued, and Ridiculed by you;
I have no reason to expect any great Reverence should be showed to mine. But I
hope better Things, and Things that accompany Salvation tho I thus speak.

God Grant that you may in this your Day, consider the Things that belong to
your Peace, before they be hid from your Eyes.

FINIS.

