A DISCOURSE Showing the Nature of the GOUT: With Directions to such Remedies
as will immediately take away the Pain, and prevent the danger of Life, by
keeping it from the inward Parts; Or, a certain Help, if it be got in the
Bowels, Stomach or Head. And also Helps for Palsies, Plurisies, Cholick,
Convulsions in Limbs or inward Parts; also for nummed Limbs, Rheumetisms, or
Sinews that are shrunk. With Receipts and Directions for the Cure of the
King's Evil, and other Diseases. By W. ATKINS the Gout-Doctor, who is removed
from White-Chappel into the Old-Jewry.

London, Printed for Tho. Fabian at the Bible in Cheap Side; and are also to be
had at the Author's House, with the Medicines. 1694.

The Effigies of W. Atkins the Gout Dr. who for Gouts, Rumetisms, Palsy, and
Convultions, and all Pains in any parts, he exceeds all men* both for Safest
and speediest Cures, as appears by his book.
portrait of W. Atkins

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas several have, since my removal, been troubled to find me out; this is
to give notice that they may hear of me at any Bookseller's or Coffee-House
near the Exchange, by the name of the Gout-Doctor.

THE PREFACE.
IT is almost incredible to declare what strange and speedy Cures have been
performed by my Medicines, the like has not been known in our Age: For many
have been weak and helpless for some Months, and have been restored
immediately; but most find speedy help, and are recovered to Health in a few
days, though judged uncureable by others. Such great Success I have had for
many Years past, that most I have been concerned with are yet living, and able
to declare their own Experience. But since in my Studies I have discovered my
Gout-Medicines, it has pleased God by his Blessing to perform most strange and
more miraculous Cures than formerly. I must declare it to be the Gift of God,
who has directed me to find out such excellent Things, that I never had of
Man, nor ever did read them in other Men's Works, or any thing like them:
Therefore Thanks be to God, who has blessed my Studies with so great Success,
as to make me helpful in such an Age as this, wherein many Diseases have proved
incureable; and there are others that are very dangerous, and some new
Distempers that have puzzled Learned Men to know what to call them: Many that
have been afflicted with them, have been lost for want of Remedies. No doubt
but there are excellent things in the World, which Man has not yet arrived to
the knowledge of: Therefore such as by their ingenious Studies do find out
hidden things for the preservation of the Lives of many, ought to be
encouraged; and every Gift that God gives to Man, ought to be improved.

There are some envious People in the World, who hate such Medicines as are
really good to perform speedy Cures, and do all they can to put People in fear,
and endeavor to persuade against them, pretending they are dangerous, though
they know not any thing of their Ingredients. But yet notwithstanding the great
Opposition and envious Contradiction my Medicines have met with by wicked and
malicious Persons, yet they are become famous; for before the very Face of my
Adversaries, I have performed great Cures, which has shamefully put them to
silence: My Medicines have been often proved by wise and understanding Men;
therefore let not any regard the evil Persuasions of the Ignorant, or be afraid
where there is no man of Danger.

I desire no plainer Proof for the Satisfaction of those that may not yet know
my Medicines, than this, that when you see the Case is desperate, and there is
in the Judgments of all no hopes of Life, then admit that I may come to give my
Assistance, and you will be satisfied in my common Success in such Cases. And
this I can say for farther encouragement, I never had any died under my hands;
but I have been a Means of preserving the Lives of many when given over, as
dying Persons; and some that have been long Speechless, and had neither Sense
nor Knowledge of any thing, yet have been recovered to Health again. And the
Means that I use, are attended with so great a Blessing, that for the most part
great Alterations, and some appearances of Recovery are seen before I depart
from them.

It is now as great a pleasure to me to be doing good, by improving my
Knowledge, as it was delightful to me in my younger Days to be reading and
seeking after those things which now I have obtained, through the Goodness of
God, who makes me able to do good in my Generation. And though I was crossed
by my Relations, in the things my natural Inclinations led me to, yet nothing
could prevent me, and God's Hand has been with me, and has directed me to the
Employment of healing the Diseased: And it plainly appeared to me, by the much
Business that came in to me of this kind, and the happy Success I have had in
my Undertaking, that it is a Work that God has called me to; and I dare not
neglect, but look upon my self bound in Conscience to follow this Practice. And
as God makes me able, my Resolution shall be to do good while I live, and
shall be ready to be helpful to such as are not able to help themselves:
Therefore let such as are not able to get the Medicines, apply themselves to
me. But let not any come as Deceivers; for tho I may not know their Condition,
and being ready to take the Word of any that do but say they are poor, yet I
have afterward found out by their Neighbors that they have been Rich: and
though they have been unwilling to let their Neighbors know how they came to
be cured; yet some being importunate with them, being in the like Disease, have
prevailed upon them to discover how they were healed. Let such take heed lest
their Covetousness bring a worse thing on them.

My mind is not to exact on any, but I shall be willing that every one may have
help according to their Condition. I am not forward to take Money where I think
I cannot do good, but my desire is to do as I would be done by: And if the Case
be difficult, and is such a Matter that I my self do question or doubt of a
Cure, I had rather run the hazard at my own Charge, than abuse People, as some
do, to take their Money, when at the same time they know they can do them no
good. Many are greatly abused by false Pretenders, who ruin them both in Body
and Estate; so leave them to perish, being in an uncureable Condition. These
ignorant sort of Practitioners are apt to speak ill of others, and think all
are Cheats like themselves; and because they are not able to perform the Cures
they undertake, in order to make some Profit of the Patient, they will have
half down, or else they can do nothing: But it is not my way to draw People in
after this manner; if I do not some good to those that come to me, when I first
take them in hand, I desire no Reward. God has given me that Knowledge, that in
many I am able to give a near Judgment whether they are cureable or not; and do
know, if they are cureable, nearly the time it will be performed; and have
commonly Success according to my expectation: which makes many of my envious
Adversaries say, How came this Man by this Knowledge? I do give you to
understand, that I came by it, not by Slothfulness, but by my industrious
Studies: and it was many Years before I came to have the knowledge of the Nature
of Diseases; but now, through the Goodness of God, I have* attained to the
curing of Diseases, but not with other Men's Receipts, as you report; but these
things by which I do perform such great and speedy Cures, are great Secrets
that I have found out by my own Knowledge and Experience.

I had in my youthful Days a natural inclination to study Physic; and that
which did at first put me on it, was for my own Health, being a diseased young
Man. In time I obtained my Ends, and cured my self, and since I have had great
Success in helping of others. Thus by my reading, and much studying, and long
practicing, I have gained Knowledge, and am now able to prepare proper Medicines
suitable for the helping of many Diseases, which I shall not here mention; I
shall only name some particular Diseases which I chiefly concern my self in,
and wherein I have more than ordinary Success: As in Gouts, Rheumetisms,
Bedridden-Palsies, Pleurisies, Cholicks, Convulsions on Nerves or inward Parts,
or shrinking of the Sinews, numness of Limbs, old Pains. I recover such as have
lost the use of their Limbs for many Years, and also such as are deprived of
the use of Nature, or stoppage of Urin, or Stranguries, and most painful
Diseases, either in the Limbs or inward Parts: Also Dropsies, Yellow-Jaundice,
and Consumptions; also venereal and pestilent Diseases, and Fevers.

God has given me more than an ordinary Gift in curing such as I have here
named; and I hope he will give me a Heart to improve it. In order to this I
publish this little Book of Directions, and advise such as are at a distance in
the Country, too far off to have the help that those may have in London, or the
Towns adjacent, that they be provided with some of these Medicines to keep by
them, that in time of danger, observing the Directions which I shall give, they
may help themselves, and do much good for their poor Neighbors: Especially
observe not to be without these three, being of great use on sudden Occasions;
and though I call them the Gout-Medicines, you may read what great use they are
for in many other dangerous Cases.

1. The Gout-Balsam, that takes away sudden Pains immediately in most Cases;
and though used outwardly, it helps inward Pains in a strange manner.

2. The Gout-Glister, observing well its Use, will do strange Cures, and very
speedy, in desperate Cases, as you may read.

3. A Powder for Snuff.

With these three I have been a Means of preserving the Lives of many; and
though they have been seemingly Dead, and all motions of Life to appearance
have been gone, yet in such Cases I have recovered them.

According to what I have known, I do ^udg that some People in England are
buried alive: Therefore let this be a Caution to all, to observe well the
Bodies of those who are laid out for dead, especially such as die suddenly; for
though the Body may be changed to a dead Color in all parts, and may be cold
and stiff after it has been laid out some time; if you do not observe it
before, observe it then, and do not let it go to the Grave, if you find a kind
of a damp or cold Sweat on the Stomach, or a little warmth in the small of the
Back; then you may conclude there is some hopes of Life, though you may not
discern any Breath. This may be a good Rule for the old Women that are the
Searchers of the Dead to observe. As for my part I should be very unwilling to
bury my Dead before they begin to stink or purge, as is usual, and then I
should away with them to their Place. This Caution I give, in hopes thereby
some may be preserved and restored after suchlike dying Fits. But my care
shall be to advise and help you, rather to prevent danger in time by the use of
Means: And after I have given you large Directions for the use of such Means as
may be provided to your hand, in the next place I shall direct you to prepare
some necessary and useful things for the helping and curing of several
Diseases, which may be of use in your Family, especially for such as cannot be
at the charge of a Physician to help them.

I shall also communicate unto you some Receipts that have cured great numbers
of the King's Evil, and other suchlike Diseases; with many other choice
Receipts, that will be of great use in many Cases; that you need not expose
your selves, with hazard of your Lives, to make trial of any false Pretenders:
for when you are satisfied in what you have here before you, I do not suppose
that you will run a hazard, before you have made a trial of your own
Preparation, according to the Directions given you, especially when given out
by a Person of good Report and Reputation, by multitudes of Witnesses of his
Success in the like Cases, as is here mentioned. Therefore being thus plain
with you, I leave you to judge, by what you find, whether this I write be ^^r my
private Interest, or for the pub^^ck Good.

I meet in the Streets with many Objects of Pity: By their Physiognomy I know
their Cases, though I think it not my concern to meddle with them; yet for the
good of all, I do give out this little Pocketbook, to advise such as are under
bodily Infirmities, to seek out for help before it be too late.

And as God has blessed me with Success in my Undertaking, so I do hope if you
carefully observe my Directions, God will still continue his Blessing on the
same Means: Which shall be the hearty Desire and Prayer of him, who is your
Friend and Servant,

May 26. 1694. William Atkins.

The CONTENTS.
A Discourse of the Gout, Page 1 Quest. 1. What is the Gout? 2 Q. 2. What Parts
are afflicted? 5 Q. 3. What causes the Pains of the Gout? 9 Q. 4. From whence
do these Humors come that flow to the Joints? 13 Q. 5. Which way do these
Humors flow into the Joints? 16 6. A Remedy, or Cure, 17 The Virtue of the
Gout-Balsam, 22 The Use of the Balsam in the Gout, 23 The Use of this Balsam in
Rheumatism-Pains, 25 Directions for its use in old Pains, and lameness of Limbs
of long continuance, 25 Directions for its Use, for Sinews that are shrunk, 26
Directions for its use, to help Gout-like Pains in the Head, 27 Directions for
its use in Convulsions of the Nerves, 28 Directions for the use of the
Gout-Balsam in outward Convulsions, 29 Directions for the use of the
Gout-Balsam in Palsies, or numness of Limbs, Page 29 Directions for the use of
Gout-Balsam in Dropsies, 30 Directions for the Gout-Balsam in the Sciatica, 31
Directions for the use of the Gout-Balsam for the Spleen or Pleurisy, 32
Directions for the use of the Gout-Balsam for Kernels or Swellings, ibid.
Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam in dangerous and painful Sores, 33
The use of the Gout-Balsam in Giddiness and Apoplexy, 34 An Observation, that
this Gout-Balsam is good to take inwardly, ibid. Directions for the second
Medicine for the Gout, which is a red Balsam, 35 Directions for the third
Medicine, etc. 36 Directions for the fourth Medicine, etc. 37 The fifth Remedy
for the Gout, 38 The sixth Help to carry off the Gout, ibid. The seventh Help
for the Gout, 39 The eighth Help for the Gout, 40 The ninth Remedy for the
Gout, 41 Directions for ordering your Body, 43 Cautions, ibid. Direction for
Diet, 48 A Remedy to hinder or prevent the Gout returning again, Page 63 A
Vindication in my own Defense against my malicious Adversaries, 72 Many are
offended because I am not a College-Doctor, etc. 73 Another Reflection or
Supposition is, that some dangerous Matter is in the Medicine, as Aquafortis,
etc. 77 An Account of Cures done by Blisters drawn by the Gout-Balsam, 79 Great
and Remarkable Cures performed on Palsies and Convulsions in the Nerves, 92 An
Explanation, or a Discovery of the Safety of the Ingredients of the
Gout-Balsam, 104 A Word to the Surgeons, 106 My Apology to the Apothecaries,
107 My Apology to the Doctors of the College, 109 An Answer to some false
Reports, 115 The Conclusion, 118 Receipts, with Directions for the Cure of the
King's Evil, etc. 119 A Catalogue of Choice Medicines, sold at the Author's
House at reasonable Rates, 127
A DISCOURSE OF THE GOUT.
MY Design is to speak something concerning the Gout; but it being a Disease
that of late Years is grown very common, most do know what it ^s, therefore I
shall not need to make a long Discourse concerning it.

My Intent is rather to direct you ^o that as may help you speedily; and though
this is hard to be believed by many, yet by what I shall write, you may be
convinced that there is one that does perform great Things, and gives present
Help in the greatest Extremity; and such as use to be confined many Months, are
set at liberty in less than one Week, but the Pain is taken away in less than
one Hour. This is the common Success of the Gout-Balsam, if rightly applied, to
which I shall give here large and full Directions in all Cases wherein this
Balsam is useful: But before I come to that, I shall lay open something of the
Nature of the Gout, by several Inquiries, discovering the Nature of this
Disease, with the Signs and Causes.

Quest. 1. What is the Gout?
In general, all may know so much of it as to tell it is a sore painful
tormenting Disease; but those that are afflicted with it, are more sensible to
know what it is, and when they may be said to have it, especially after two or
three Fits; for usually it comes after one and the same manner as a^ the
first, and about the same time of the Year; and for the most part it comes to
the same Joint or Part where it first begins; and usually it gives some
warning before it comes; all which does signify to us the Nature of this
Disease.

Now the common Signs that do foretell that the Gout is coming, are these
following Tokens.

Sometimes an extraordinary Itching in the Blood, or by sudden Heat, Flushings
all about the Body, or sick Fits, or a Fullness after moderate Eating, or a
great Heaviness, or Melancholy, or a Weariness after moderate Exercise, or
subject to Dreams and disquiet Sleeping, or ill Taste, or Flemical, or
Feverish, or a Tenderness of the Joints, or a Change of the Urine pale: and
these are some of the common Signs that the Gout is coming; but I do not mean
that all these Signs are in one Body.

But as there are differing Pains of the Gout, so there are differing Causes
and differing Signs: My Intent is but to touch on these Things; but if you
observe, you will have some Sign to foretell that the Gout is coming as
aforesaid; and in a short time after any of these Signs, the Pain comes, and
is commonly violent at the first. The Extremity of the Pain causes a Soreness,
and the Settlement of the Humors causes a Weakness. Those that are afflicted
with this Disease, are for a long time disabled; and though it be a Disease
that comes by Fits, yet for the most part every Fit grows longer, and
weakneth the Parts afflicted after the Extremity of the Pain is gone off; so
the Disease grows more powerful, as the Party grows in Age.

Many of late have died of the Gout; and it is observed, that it is more
dangerous than formerly. Thus in short I have set before you the Nature of this
Disease, and after what manner it comes; so I shall come to the second Query,
which will show some of the immediate Causes, the differing Sorts of Pains, in
nine parts.

Q. 2. What Parts are afflicted?
For the most part the Pain comes in the Joints; for the Joints being more
loose and open than other parts, do receive the greater quantity of Humors
that causes the Pain; and for the most part the pain comes to the same part
again, as if there were the Seat or Settlement of the Humors. Which for some
Reasons may be concluded to be true, for the Cavity of the Joints being hollow
and loose may be full, and yet nothing seen when the pain is greatest: But
after the pain is gone, it is common to have a Weakness in the Joints, which
remains on some always till the Gout comes again; for because of the Relics
that do remain in the Joints, it more readily enters in: But when the Joints
are full, and the parts swelled, then the Humors do sometimes flow to other
parts of the Body; so by the increase of the Humors, all parts may be
afflicted together, both in the Limbs and inward parts.

But some have it not in the Joints at all, but in the inward Parts only: and
usually when it is in the inward Parts, the Pain is exceeding great for a short
time, and runs about like a Cholick or Spleen, sometimes like the Pain of
the Stone, and sometimes like the Gripes in the Bowels, and sometimes like
Plurisies. Thus many are afflicted with the Gout in the inward Parts only.

Others there are that have the Gout in the Head, and in no other part at all;
and the Pain is great by sits, but does not continue painful so long as it does
in other parts. When the Gout is in the Head only, I have observed that it is
in the External part without the Scull, and so it will flow under the Skin all
over the Head at times; but usually it does fix on the upper part of the Head,
where it does sometimes continue for a long time very painful.

But when the Gout flows from other parts of the Body into the Head, it is in
the Internal part of the Head within the Skull; this is not painful, but
causes a lightness, and does often deprive a Man of his Senses; and indeed it
is so dangerous, that few escape Death: it must be extaordinary Means that
recover this.

There is Help to be had in this Case; but if Men, through unbelief, are
regardless of their Lives, they may for want of Means at hand in such a time be
cast away.

I cannot but pity such as I hear do die of the Gout, for I know so much of the
Nature of the Disease, that when the Gout thus comes from other parts into the
Head, they are not sensible of their Danger, because they seem to be at ease,
and will have a conceit of their doing well when they are near their End.

If the Danger do appear, by their being in a raving Condition, it is dagerous;
I know not where any have been recovered in that Condition, but what I have
recovered my self; let such know that have the Gout, that are in fear or danger
of their Lives by it, that it has pleased God to provide Means to give help
for the preservation of your Lives in that dangerous Condition: for of all the
parts that are afflicted with this Disease, there is no such danger of Life as
when it is thus got into the Head; so let this be a sufficient Caution for you
to take help in time.

The next thing to inquire further, is to know the Cause of the Pains of the
Gout.

Q. 3. What causes the Pains of the Gout?
As there are differing Pains, so there are differing Causes. I shall give an
account first of the immediate Causes.

1. In some the immediate Cause is Wind being fixed in the part, and not having
vent. This does sometimes cause an Inflammation, or a Swelling that will be
very sore and tender for a long time.

2. In some the immediate Cause is a thin and cold whitish Water fixed in the
Joints, that looseneth the Ligaments and other parts, binding the Joints
together, that causes a pain and great weakness in the parts afflicted.

3. In some the immediate Cause, is a slimy Matter that is without the Joints:
This Humor being cold and thickish, causes a hard swelling that pitteth like
a Dropsy; and the part is cold and stiff, but the pain is more moderate than
the Humors that are thin. But this sort of Dropsylike Gout usually continues
long* and causes a great weakness, except timely prevented.

4. In some the immediate Cause is a hot Vapor or Steam, driven into the parts
by the heat of the Blood* and when the Pores are opened where the pain is, this
Vapor does come out like the Smoke of a Chimney that shall be seen to fill a
Room almost with Smoke; and when* this Smoke is come out, the pain is presently
gone, and the Party walks about, though helpless just before.

5. In some the immediate Cause of the pain, is a windy and frothy Blood that
stops in its Circulation: this swells in Knobs like the Cramp, is very
painful, but quickly over. This is a kind of a scurvey sort of a Gout, and
usually runs over all parts of the Limbs and Joints.

6. In some the immediate Cause of the Pain, is a black and settled Blood,
occasioned by great cold: This causes universal pains in all parts of the
Body; yet in this Case ^t is not good to part with your Blood, but rather to
cleanse it, by using that Medicine that opens the Pores: then a sweating Pill
is proper to carry off the Cause.

7. In some the immediate Cause, is a thick and matter-like Humor, that being
fixed long in a place, grows to a hard kind of a Kernel, that when it is dry
it cracketh the Skin, and crumbleth out like little Stones; but the pain is
most before it comes to a hardness. The best time to help this sort of Gout
is, when it first begins to be painful, for then the Humor is thin, and
will easily come forth when the Pores are open.

8. In some the immediate Cause is, for want of the Blood circulating into all
parts: And if the stoppage be about the Joints, it eauseth the Sinews to be
stiff and dry, and sometimes to shrink, and sometimes draws the Joints
together. This will cause the Knuckles to be hard and knotty; for by clinching
of the Hands together, they are deprived of the Nourishment that should come to
them by the free circulation of the Blood. In this Case it is dangerous to give
way: but to prevent the shrinking of the Sinews, endeavor to keep the Joints
in exercise.

9. In some the immediate Cause of the pains in the inward parts proceeds
from a foul and slimy Matter that gathers in the Bowels, that by the stoppage
of the offending Matter does cause the Wind that gathers in those parts
unnatural, to break its way upwards; and sometimes it breaks its Course, and
torments both Back and Sides, and runs about the lower parts like Stiches or
Spleen-like pains, and sometimes like Gripes in the Bowels: And oftentime these
kind of Humors do turn to Convulsions. And many in this Case have been lost
for want of help; for commonly it flows to the Head, and then the Case is
desperate. But now there is a Remedy that will carry off the Cause, better and
quicker than if it were in other parts of the Body.

This may be sufficient to set forth the Nature of this Disease, by showing the
immediate Cause of the Pains. The next Queries will discover something of the
Foundation-Cause.

Q. 4. From whence do these Humors come that flow to the Joints?
There is a great difference in the Judgments of Physicians about this Point.
One says, they flow from the Head, the external part without the Skull, and so
flow under the Skin to the Joints. Others say, they flow from the inward parts
of the Head, from the Brain: Others from the Bowels: Some name other parts; so
that if we put the Judgments of all together, the gouty Humors flow from all
parts of the Body.

I shall give you my Judgment, and that is, that the Fault lies chiefly in the
Digestion, and yet Nature may have sufficient vent in the lower parts; but the
Digestion does not so speedily do its Office, by conveying a part of the
Sustenance when it is received, so speedily as it ought into the lower Vessels:
but when Meat and Drink is received in the Stomach, it usually seems to
oppress with a Fullness for some time after eating or drinking; and tho Nature
does carry it off after in little time, yet the Food perishes in the Stomach
before it passes; and this does hinder natural Nourishment, and turns to ill
Humors which disperse about the Body, but especially to the parts afflicted;
but yet every one that has a bad Digestion is not troubled with the Gout: but
wheresoever it is, the Body is much out of order; in some it causes Headpains,
in others Fevers, and many other Distempers which are destructive to the Body:
the Humors are not in all alike.

But the Humors causing the Gout do commonly proceed from a disorderly
Government of the Body, as sometimes by immoderate Exercise or ill Diet, or too
much Drinking or Passion, or any other vehement Motion, and Colds and Heats.
These and other suchlike disordering the Body, breed ill Humors, and open the
secret Passages of the Body, and for the most part fixes at the Joints. And
this is one part of the Foundation-Causes of the Gout.

Next thing is to know,

Q. 5. Which way do these Humors flow into the Joints?
We cannot be unsensible that the Branches do receive their Nourishment from
the Root, so the Limbs do receive their Nourishment and Moisture from the Body;
and (as before) I say the Food perishes in the Stomach, breeds ill Humors and
not natural Blood: So I conceive that by the same way that the Blood passes
into the Limbs, so do these Humors circulate through the Veins and Arteries
into the Joints. And the Humors being thin and cold as they flow from the
Stomach, sometimes may be sensibly felt to run through the circulating
Passages, and to settle in the Joints; the Joints being more loose and open
than other parts, do receive the greater Quantity. And this is the way, as I
conceive, that the Humors flow from the Stomach into the Joints.

And thus I have given some short account concerning the Gout, what it is, and
what parts are afflicted with it, with the immediate Causes, with some part of
the Foundation-Cause.

6. A Remedy, or Cure.
But if I should write never so much in a long and large Account about the
Nature of the Disease, this will not be any help to them that are ^fflicted
with it, without the know^edg of a Remedy for it. What would it signify if a
Man see his House on Fire, for him to spend his ^ime about inquiring how it
came, and what was the Cause? and while ^e is busy about that, the House is
^onsumed, when Means was at hand ^o extinguish it: Shall this be coun^ed
Wisdom? No; most will say that Man is a Fool.

So it is concerning the Body; there ^re some Diseases that no Man can know the
Causes, but yet the principal part may be known, and that is how to cure such
Diseases: Yet some are so foolish, that except a Man will tell the Cause, they
will not have the Cure.

I could tell of some but in the Year 1693, that in the Gout, when their Case
was seen to be dangerous, and they were foretold of it, and the Means was at
hand, but yet refused, now they are in their Graves: whereas many others in the
like Case did embrace the Opportunity, and are all living and well in health.
And this I can say, that of the great Numbers that I have for several Years had
in hand concerning the Gout, I do no^ know of any one but is yet living.

This I do declare, that the Medicines I have to carry off the Gout have
prevented other Sickness, and cured other dangerous Diseases, by clearing away
the Causes: And (...) can prove many great Cures have been done with the
Gout-Medicines that no Man living has done the like in our Nation, with such
speed, for lame and helpless Persons to be cured in one Hour's time.

Also Children in Convulsions, if they have but any Life in them, by the same
Means they are recovered speedily, and cured of that Disease.

In my giving you the Virtue and Use of these Medicines, you will understand
the common Success I have in the Applications, and will know the better how to
make use of them for your Advantage: And though the Parties afflicted may be
many Miles distance, and thereby may be deprived of my Assistance, yet
observing the Rules I give, I hope, with the Blessing of God, the Lives and
Limbs of many may be preserved.

It has pleased God to bless the same Means under my Hands with great Success;
for I have had great Experience for many Years past in Practice, and do keep a
Catalogue of Cures done, given under the Hands of the Persons cured, that any
Person afflicted with the same Disease, may read, for their own satisfaction,
the Persons Names and Dwellingplaces, that have been cured.

And in order to do good for the Public, because I am taken up in my new
Business, and have not that time as formerly I had to give out Medicines with
Directions in many other Cases; therefore being willing that People should have
the Advantage of some good Medicines of great Use, I order my Wife to sell them
with Directions.

She is also able to help and give Advice in Women's Cases; but in difficult
Matters I shall give my assistance.

But my chief Business will be to follow my studying about Remedies for the
Gout, and all other painful Diseases in the Limbs or inward Parts; and I hope
to obtain great things in that kind of way, for in my studious Thoughts I find
great Encouragement.

I have lately corrected and amended my Gout-Balsam, and have also discovered
another choice Secret, being a Powder for the removing of the inward Causes of
the Diseases of the Limbs, and have already had great Success in the use of it.
And as God has given me understanding to know the Nature of Diseases, and has
helped me to find out Remedies for the Cure of them; I shall make it one part
of my Business to write them down, to be left for others to make use of when I
am dead; and I have already taken that care that they shall not die with me.
This I mention, to satisfy many who are much concerned for fear they should be
lost when I die.

And in order to do all the good I can while I live, I shall give a large
Account of the Nature, Virtue, and Use of these Gout-Medicines for every
particular Disease, wherein they have been proved to be useful, and have
wrought very great Cures.

I shall begin with the Gout-Balsam.

The Virtue of the Gout-Balsam.
It brings away the offending Matter by opening the Pores, and does thereby
prevent the danger of Repelling; for the immediate Cause is seen to come away
from the part afflicted, and this brings down the swelling of the Gout, and
for the most part the pain goes away immediately after it is applied: and it
does strengthen weak Limbs, and is very comfortable to cold and nummed Parts.
In many Cases it is a Medicine of great Use, as will further appear by the
Directions for the Use of it.

Next follows the Use of it for the Gout.

The Use of the Balsam in the Gout.
Take a Stick or Quill, and dip into the Pot of Balsam, and spot it about the
part afflicted, as far as the pain is; then stir it about with your Finger very
well till it be near dried in, but not by the Fire, for it is hot of it self;
therefore I order you to spot it about, because if you lay on too much in a
place it will smart: but some will bear much to be laid on and feel nothing,
therefore my way is to apply a little first, and then stir that about; and if
it be not felt, then I lay on more; and if it do not itch or smart, I go over a
third time, and all before I put it up; so that my way is to apply it till it
be felt, and if there be more put on than will be dried in, then I do commonly
lay on a piece of Bladder, or any kind of Skin, to keep the Balsam to it, for
Clothes will take it away from the part. Thus dressed, I put it up for four and
twenty Hours, or longer; but if the pain remain, I anoint it again quickly,
according as it can be well born or endured. It Is needless to use it when there
is no pain; for the best time to do the most good, is to anoint it when the
pain is greatest, for then the Humor is in the part, and may be brought forth:
But in case of a weakness remaining after, or any little kind of pain, I do
sometimes dress the part once in a day, or in two or three days, or once a
week, according as Need requires. In this manner use the Balsam for the Gout,
or such like pains; but if need require, you may use it till it blister, if the
Humor will not go off without; but then anoint the part with any healing
thing, as Salet-Oil, or Lucatellus's Balsam, and this will heal it again in a
little time; but if it swell after it is anointed with the Gout-Balsam, apply it
again quickly, and the offending Matter will come out.

The Use of this Balsam in Rheumatism*Pains.
When the pains are in all parts at once, then begin according to that
Direction for the Gout, in that part as is mostly pained: and when that is well
dressed and put up for some time, then apply it to the next part, and wait a
little time after it is thus applied; and if after this the pain yet remain in
other parts, apply it still where the pain is greatest, and with so doing you
will find that this Medicine will cure the Rheumatism: but you need not apply
so much in this Case to every part, as when a pain is fixed to one place.

Directions for its Use in old Pains, and Lameness of Limbs of long continuance.
In such Cases the Humors being settled to the parts, it requires to be
applied more freely to open the Pores by small Blisters or Pimples, by which
means the offending Matter that causes the pain or weakness, comes away: and
though the Lameness has been of many Years standing, yet in such Cases the
Cure is perfected at once dressing, as many have had experience; but some are
dressed a second or third time before it be performed; very few miss of a Cure,
if there be any pain in the parts.

Directions for its Use, for Sinews that are shrunk.
Take a very little just to moisten the part, then chafe it in very well with
your hand, and stroke it with great strength with one hand, while you bear out
the Joint with the other; and when the first Application is dry, then apply it
again, and do thus a third or fourth time, with a strong hand still stretching
out the part; thus doing, the Sinews give way; then if need require, I bind the
Joints out straight for one day or more. Sometimes there is no need of so
doing, but they keep out and are presently cured, applying it after this manner
for about two hours time together.

Directions for its Use, to help Gout-like Pains in the Head.
When the Pain is on the upper part of the Head, or all over, then the Hair
must be shaved off to anoint the part pained; and the Temples also must be
anointed very freely, for if the Temples blister, it is very profitable in that
Case. When the Head is anointed, put on a Bladder to cover the part, and keep
it close for one week; and if the pain be not gone, you may dress it a second
or third time, but let it be a week between every dressing; if the Head be sore
or tender, anoint it with Salet-Oil, or any other mollifying thing; but if the
Temples should run, lay on a Plaster of Paracelsus, or any other Plaster that
is moderate; but it should not be healed too quickly.

Directions for its Use in Convulsions of the Nerves.
Observe the parts that are twitched, and so far as the Motion works, apply the
Balsam; use it moderately as it may be dressed every day; and after it is
dressed, let it be bound up as hard with a Roller as can be well endured: If
after two or three dressings the Convulsion be not gone, then it will be
needful to take the Gout-Glister, according to the Directions given for the
Use; so take it once in three days, for three times if need require so often;
but one time commonly does perform the Cure.

Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam in inward Convulsions.
When Convulsions are in the Bowels or Stomach, then anoint the Belly or
Stomach all over, but very moderately, especially in young Children: speck a
very little about, just to damp it over; so stroke a hand over it easily, and
as soon as it is done, give the Gout-Glister according to the Direction, and
one Spoonful of the Gout-Cordial.

Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam in Palsies, or numness of Limbs.
Take of the Balsam, and anoint all over the parts afflicted; lay on so much as
can be well endured, and bathe it very well till it be all dried in, except the
part be cold; then put on a little more, and put it up moist in Flannel, or
other Cloth, to keep it warm; so dress it once a day for nine days together, if
need require.

Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam in Dropsies.
Apply it moderately, by spotting it all over the parts that are swelled, and
stroke it as hard with your hand as can be endured, for an hour together; and
as you find it dry in, apply more: but if the parts are cold, and do not feel
any heat, or smart, then you may apply it more freely; and if you discern Water
to arise out of the Pores, forbear chafing it; and when you put it up, lay
Linen next to the parts anointed, for Woollen will cause it to itch too much.
Thus you may dress it once a day, for three or four days together if need
require. Some are cured of the Dropsy with once dressing; and the Water will
come away plentifully for several hours together.

Directions for the Gout-Balsam in the Sciatica.
Apply it to the small of the Back first, then to the Hip, and all down the
outside of the Thigh to the Knee, and down the outside of the Leg to the
hinder part of the Heel; so apply it, spotting it about the parts, stirring it
in very well; and after three or four days dress it again. If the pain be not
gone, then begin to dress it from the Nape of the Neck all along the Backbone;
do it in this part moderately, but so as that you may feel it itch or smart:
Thus apply it to the Hip and Huckel-bone, and down to the Heel as aforesaid;
after this manner you may apply it once in three or four days, but if it be
tender, use it but once a week. And thus if you skilfully manage it, according
to this Direction, it will help the Sciatica; every dressing lesseneth the
Pain, and the Cure is performed easily in about two or three weeks time.

Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam for the Spleen or Pleurisy.
Apply it, with laying it first in your hand, so stroke the parts, both Side
and Breast, as hard as can be endured: Then give the Party a Sack Glass full of
the hottest Gout-Cordial; but still keep stroking the part till the Pain go
away: the Extremity will be over immediately, and in a very little time the
Party will be well without bleeding.

Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam, for Kernels or Swellings.
In unnatural Swellings and Kernels, if they be in tender parts, use it
moderately, especially in the Groin or privy Parts: If they are not gone the
first dressing, then after twelve hours dress it again, and if need a third
time in like manner: But if the Knobs or Swelling be in the Legs, it may be
applied more freely, and all will be gone; in twelve hours time it does, by
opening the Pores, bring the venereal Matter out of the Body.

Directions for the Use of the Gout-Balsam, in dangerous and painful Sores.
When a Sore is greatly inflamed and very painful, then anoint round about the
sore part, as near to the Sore as you can conveniently; a very little does in
this Case: but my way is to apply it, according as can be well endure it, for
speedy help; I know better how to manage it than I can direct others, therefore
use but little at first; apply it a second time if need require; but usually
after once doing, though the Sore has seemed uncureable before, it will heal
up in a little time and be well.

The Use of the Gout-Balsam in Giddiness and Apoplexy.
Apply it to the Temples, with your Finger stirring it a little time; also
round the Ears, and cross over the Forehead close to the Hair, and moisten your
Hand and chase round the Neck backward, as close to the Hair as you can; so
done, put a little of the Gout-Snuff up the Nostril.

An Observation, that this Gout-Balsam is good to take inwardly.
I shall not give you Directions for that, only to let you know there is no
dangerous thing in it, as I can satisfy any, by taking it my self before them
if required. I have found it profitable for my own Health, to take a little in
hot Liquor, when I have disordered my self by overmuch walking, or eating or
drinking that as does not agree with Nature; it expels the offending Matter,
and restores the Body into good Order again, and is a prevention of Fevers and
other Sickness.

This Balsam is of great Use in Pestilence, and other Fevers, by way of
Blisters. But this I must apply my self.

Directions for the second Medicine for the Gout, which is a red Balsam; it is
to strengthen the Parts.
Take of this Balsam and anoint the Joints: if there remain a weakness after
the pain is gone, then bathe it in with a hot hand; but if need be to qualify
the heat, or to lay the itching of the Gout-Balsam, then use this cold, but
bear the itch or smart of the other so long as you can; for if you apply this
strengthening Balsam before the Gout-Balsam has been on some hours, then you
hinder the benefit of that dressing; but my intent is, that after the pain is
gone, and when the Gout-Balsam is too sharp, by reason of the tenderness of the
Skin, then use this strengthening Balsam twice a day as a Moderator.

Directions for a third Medicine, which is a Liquor of a red Color, to bathe.
This is to use if small pains should come after the Gout-Balsam has been used
so often as to bring off the Skin, then it is proper to use this Liquor, bathing
it well twice a day by the Fire; it will take away little grinding pains, and
heal it again: then it is proper to lay on a piece of a thin Bladder, or some
thin Skin of Mutton-Suet when you put it up, or thin Leather.

Directions for the Use of the fourth Medicine for the Gout, which is a
Conserve to carry away the Cause, and to prevent a Return.
Of this Lectuary, take the quantity of a small Nutmeg first in the Morning,
and one hour before eating, and last at Night, for three or four days together;
it will cause a good Digestion, and cleanses the Stomach, and causes a good
Appetite.

But if you would use it as a Prevention, then take it for three days together,
when you have any Signs that you fear the Gout is coming; and with so doing, if
you do not hinder its coming, the Fit will be very short.

The fifth Remedy for the Gout, is a hot and comfortable Cordial; it is good
against the Stone.
But when the Gout is in the inward Part, or any Illness in the Stomach
proceeding from it, then take a Sack-Glass full or more, this will give present
ease, by causing Wind to break away: It will greatly strengthen such as are
weak or faint; such should take two or three Spoonfuls three times a day at
least; and though it be hot, it will prevent a Fever. With this Cordial I cure
the Hectic Fever, that is in many the greatest Cause of a Consumption.

The sixth Help to carry off the Gout, is by a proper Purge.
If the Body be hot and costive, it may be of use to take something purging
moderately; and therefore I shall direct you to that as is profitable in this
Disease, and that is Caryocastinum.

Take of this half an Ounce, or a little more or less, according as you find
your Constitution will require: Or if you find at any time your Body out of
order for want of Stool, then you may take a little, though at the latter part
of the day, and it will answer your Expectation. If this be well and faithfully
prepared, it is the best Purge you can take for the Gout.

The seventh Help for the Gout is a Glister of an excellent Preparation in this
Case, and for inward Convulsions.
If the Gout come into the Bowels or Stomach, and though the Party thus
afflicted seem to be past all hopes of Recovery, yet by this means there is
speedy Help given, and the Danger is quickly over. This does certainly reeover
when in the greatest Extremity; therefore it is needful for such as are
afflicted with the Gout, to keep it by them in a readiness to prevent all
Danger; it will keep many Years. With this Glister and the Balsam I cure
Convulsions in young Children; and though some have had most of their Children
die of that Disease, yet with the use of this Means their other Children are
speedily recovered.

It is also good for such as are afflicted with the Cholick, or other inward
painful Diseases; and also for Vapors and Lightness, or Swimmings in the Head;
it brings the Vapors downwards, so gives great Relief in many Cases, too
large to mention here.

The eighth Help for the Gout is a Plaster.
When after all has been done, if yet there should remain a Weakness in the
Joints, then it is proper to lay on this Plaster round the Joint, and bind it
on so long as it will stick. This Plaster is good to recover strength in some
sort of Gouts, when other things will not do. It Is good also to bring down
Swellings, and will take away great Pain; therefore in some there may be
occasion for this Plaster.

The ninth Remedy for the Gout in the Head, is a Snuff-Pouder.
When the Gout is in the Head, then put up a little of this Powder in the
Nostrils; and though the Party thus afflicted be raving mad, it will quickly
compose the Head by purging the Brain, a waterish Humor that is very cold will
run down the Nostrils. But as there are differing Gouts, so there are differing
Causes, in the Head as well as in other Parts, for all are not seen to be
lightheaded, but seem to be heavy to sleep: still observe to use this Powder,
if the Head be out of order, so as you fear the Gout is the occasion of it.
When I find the Gout dangerous in the inward Parts, or in the Head, I do apply
the Balsam to the Temples, and use the Snuff-Pouder, also the Glister and the
Cordial; and with the use of these things I have recovered them as have been so
far gone, that they have not known any thing that has been done to them.

Thus I have given you the Virtue, with Directions for the Use of these
Gout-Medicines, to the end that all such as are at a great distance from me may
have the benefit of them. They are only prepared by me, and sold at my House,
in Sir John Frederick's Court in the Old-Jewry, where I give Advice and
Directions according as the Case brought before me does require.

It will be most for the Advantage of those that are afflicted with any painful
Disease that comes within the reach of the Gout-Medicines, to apply themselves
to him who is the Author, who has skill in applying them; and likewise to
advise to what other Means he may think needful: but such who cannot have my
help, may observe the Directions here given; and looking to him who gives us
all things for a Blessing, I hope you may have good Success in curing your
selves.

Directions for the ordering your Body.
When you have the Gout on you, or suchlike painful Disease, whereby you are
under Confinement, observe these Cautions.

1. Caution.
Bleeding is certainly hurtful; tho at the present it may seem to give a little
ease, yet afterward you will find the ill Effects by the Pains returning, and
the next Fit will be much worse: but many have not the least Ease by bleeding,
but are much more painful; and by the weakness of the Body, the Disease fixes
it self in several parts by drawing away the Blood, for at that time the Blood
is waterish and thin, then the best comes away, but the ill Humor that is the
Cause of the Pain, lodges in the Body, being too thick to be drawn away
through the Veins; but the best way to bring this Humor away, is by that
Medicine which opens the Pores where the Humor lodges, then there is no
danger of repelling, but rather hopes that in time the Cause may be removed out
of the Body.

2. Caution.
Take heed of keeping the Body with low Diet, to think thereby to starve the
Gout; for you may sooner starve your selves, than cure your selves of the Gout
by so doing: you need not bar your selves from good Diet, for you will find
your Stomach will fail you too quick of it self: it is more dangerous than you
are aware, to bring down your Stomachs to low and weak diet, for this does not
in the least ease the pain; but by the bringing your Body weak, your pain is
greater, and the Body more helpless, and in so doing are in danger, by your
weakness and the continuance of the Disease, of falling into a Fever; and by
the emptiness of the Body, you are in danger of bringing the Gout in your
inward parts.

3. Caution.
Take heed that you do not indulge your self too much by confining your self
from Exercise before your Disease force you to it, especially under the use of
the Means; you had better strive than give way to it, so soon as it begins
to come on you; but by your speedy applying the Means, and by exercising your
self, you may prevent your being confined at all, especially after you have
been once recovered by the Means herein directed.

4. Caution.
Take heed of overmuch purging, for if you think thereby to cure the Gout, you
will be greatly deceived; for by this means you will rather endanger a
Consumption, or at least a long Confinement by reason of great weakness of
Body. My way is to order a Gouty Person, as I do Consumptive Persons; I cure
them without Physic: By keeping up Nature a Man may strive with a Disease till
the Cause be removed; but by using such Means as weaken the Body, in this Case
it is the contrary way for a Cure.

5. Caution.
Take heed of being too busy with sleepy Potions; some have been so stupefied
with such Potions, that when the Gout has been very dangerous, they have not
been able to give an Account of their Condition, nor to tell where their Pains
lay; so the Disease is drawn into the Head, and the Man goes sleeping to his
Grave: It Is better to hear the Man cry aloud, for then some Help may come; and
though his pains may be great, and continue long, so that he want Rest and may
endanger a Fever, yet in all this there is more hopes of recovery than when the
Man is stupefied, and thereby made unsensible of his Condition: but since there
is ease to be had by outward things, these dangerous Means may be avoided, and
the Lives of many may be preserved.

Directions for Diet.
First, I shall tell you what is hurtful for the Bodies of such as are
afflicted with the Gout. Salt Meats are not good, nor stale Beer, nor no sharp
or sour Things, nor mixed Wines, nor Claret, nor too much Spoon-meats, but be
sure to forbear Cider; these and suchlike things avoid, and be temperate and
moderate in the use of all things, and this will be a good Rule to observe
against this Disease. But in the Fit of the Gout you may eat Meat once a day
freely; you need not refrain any good Diet no more than at other times. I shall
not stand to name particulars, but in short, you may eat Fish or Flesh, or
Herbs, or any thing else that is nourishing Food. But such as have had the Gout
long on them, and are brought to be weak, and have not an Appetite to common
Diet, let them strive to eat and drink something that is more strengthening than
Water-Grewel, for sometimes eating too much of that and other Spoon-meats,
brings a Dropsy, and hinders the curing the Gout.

I shall advise you to such things as are good to strengthen and nourish you;
and whereas you can eat but little, eat the oftener, and by so doing you will by
degrees get a better Appetite. But being willing to help you, I will direct to
suchlike Diet as may be suitable to help weak Persons.

In a Morning for a Breakfast, Take a pint of Ale, boil it and scum it; then
take it from the Fire, and let it stand till it be half cold, so break in two
or three new-laid Eggs, brew them together, and drink it while it is warm.

In my judgment, if a Man has ^ot a Stomach to eat a good Breakast, he may
with such a Morning's-^raught hold up till Dinnertime. But weak Stomachs want
change of Diet. Now if you have a good old Nurse, they commonly know how to
make much of themselves, and therefore are the better able to advise to that as
may do good for a Master or Mistress. My Mind is, that People as are not sick
should get the best Kitchin-Physick as can be provided, or else for want of
this Lameness may soon turn to Sickness. I do not intend to fill up my Book
with Directions for Diet, but yet I would give a little help to put your Nurse
in remembrance to study to make good heartning things to keep up the Body.

For Change I shall give you farther Directions, that you may know what may be
good in a Morning, or some times between Meals, and use the best of your skill
in providing.

Good Jellies are proper sometimes made after this manner.

Take two Calves-feet, and pu them into three quarts of Water boil them in a
Pipkin till half b wasted away; then strain off the Feet, and set the Liquor on
the Fire again; put in half a pound of blew Currants well cleansed, and two
pennyworth of Saffron, and half a quarter of an ounce of Cynamon, a dram of
large Mace; boil these till the Currants be plump, and take it from the Fire,
and let it stand till it be half cold; then have ready at hand a pint of
White Wind, with four Eggs well beaten to mix with the Whitewine, and six
ounces of fine Loaf-Sugar. Brew these with the White Wind very well; then take
your Calves-Feet Gelly, being, as I said, half cold; mix all together, beating
it very well with a Spoon till it be almost cold: this, well prepared, is good
to eat at any time, Night or Day; and it may be eaten, either warm or cold,
according to the Season of the Year, but in cold Weather warm it a little. This
is a good thing in a Morning, to take about half a pint or more.

I would advise you for a Dinner to eat Flesh, though never so little; but eat
as freely as you can, for that is the best way to get strength; sometimes
eating against Stomach, does procure a better Appetite against the next Meal;
for those that are weak, it is not good to boil or roast their Meat overmuch.
I am sure, for Consumptive People, Flesh overroasted is not good; but if you
love not your Meat with the Gravy in it, then you had better stew it, and put
in Sippets of White-bread; so eat it, for then the Liquor is the best of it;
and Meat thus dressed is strengthening.

If you are disposed to eat Fowl, it is proper to have them well roasted or
boiled. Also Fish if it be not well dressed, is not good, being subject to rise
in the Stomach, and that does cause a loathing of Food. One good way to help
the weak, is to study new things, for often change of Diet is a great help to
procure an Appetite: and this is the proper Business of good Cooks and Nurses.

I would advise you to eat freely in the Day, but at Night be moderate, for
then you have more freedom to drink, either Wine or strong Drink, for that is
not hurtful, provided you drink not to excess: but small Beer is certainly the
best thing you can take to bring the Gout on you; therefore if you love the
Gout, drink good store of small Beer, and you may be sure it will come with
full power. This I can speak by Experience, that I have found that small Beer
will bring a Man into a Consumption sooner than any thing I know of: I have
been caught twice, but I take heed to avoid a third bout, for when I find my
self thirsty, I drink good strong Drink. I have seen some afflicted with the
Gout, that with low Diet and small Beer have been almost consumed to nothing;
and the Disease is much more powerful, and they have no strength to help
themselves. It is a miserable thing that a Man or Woman shall be in bodily
Health, but yet in great tormenting Pain with a Leg or an Arm, that the very
Anguish of the Pain shall cause them to cry aloud till they are almost spent;
and yet in this Condition they are persuaded to refrain from eating or drinking
of the Best, though then they have most need of it to support Nature; and I am
certain that there is less danger of a Fever to keep the Body in strength, than
when the Body is brought low and weak. I do know that what I say in this, by
admitting you to eat and drink freely in the Fit of the Gout, is contrary to
the Judgments of some Men; but let none be offended for my giving Advice,
according to my knowledge, of the Nature of the Disease: If you think my Advice
is not good, then I make my Appeal to you that find fault with me, and I leave
you to be Judges by my way of Practice, and by the Success I have; for no Man
can say that ever any died of the Gout that have been under my hands.

It is now near three Years since I discovered the Gout-Balsam; and I have done
greater Cures with that Medicine in this time on the Gout, than have been done
by any others, as I have proved before many Witnesses. But since I have
corrected and amended my Gout-Balsam, and discovered other great Secrets, I
cure many other Diseases, and for the most part with outward Medicines: but
when I find any that are weak and low, I am constrained to direct and advise
them to such things as are good to strengthen and raise them up again.

After this manner do I deal with those that have the Gout; and have great
Success in my Undertakings.

Thus I have given plain Directions, that you may do good for your selves: But
if you do not apply things so well as to have that Success as I have, do not
reflect on the Medicines, or blame him that made them, but rather send for him,
and see what he can do with the same Medicines, and then you may be satisfied
in the use of them against another time.

You may conclude, that by my publishing this Book, my Intention is to do good;
for it would be much more for my Advantage if I did not expose my Medicines to
sale, my Profit in undertaking Cures would be much more to me, and less trouble
in preparing. Sometimes they fall into the hands of ignorant People which know
not how to use them, though directed; and they find fault, because they have
laid out their Money, and are nothing the better. There are others that buy
them and turn Doctors, so pretend they have the same Art with me; and sometimes
get a great deal of Money; so the People are deceived and cheated, for they may
be ignorant of using them rightly: these things I have known to be done. Others
there are that will buy them, thinking thereby to find out the Ingredients; but
that is impossible, so they deceive themselves. Many there are that have tried,
with all the Tricks and Inventions they could, to discover my Medicines, but
yet come short of their Design.

My Gout-Balsam has near twenty Ingredients in it, but I never knew that Man
that could name two things, and yet many will pretend they know what it is made
of. Any one that pretends to know that one Medicine, let them make it, for
there is but one of the Trade; and if any one can do this thing, he may be my
Partner, but till then I shall keep it to my self.

Many there are that would pick Quarrels about my Gout-Balsam, if they could
tell how, by finding out some dangerous thing in it: but that cannot be done,
for they know it may be taken inwardly, and I have proved it to be safe; and
though in some Cases it may not do good, yet in this you may be satisfied it
will not do hurt.

In some Fevers I will use it to draw Blisters on the Temples, and it will give
great Relief, it will draw out that Vapor that takes away the Senses; but if
it were hurtful or dangerous, then I venture hard to apply it to such tender
Part so freely as to blister it: And if I should use such Medicines as should
prove dangerous, I should not only hurt them to whom I apply them, but do my
self greater damage, by being exposed to the Advantage of those that wait for
such Opportunities; but my care has been at all times to prevent them, for I
never meddle with dangerous things, therefore none can take that Advantage
against me. I know there are some Medicines that will cure one and kill
another; but what Medicines I use, I can bring ^penly to be proved before the
Faces of any. And this is my Comfort, I have nothing to burden my Conscience
for any Wrong that I have done ^o others: And God has given me his Blessing,
and makes me prosperous in what I take in hand; you may be encouraged to
follow my Directions with hopes of Success, for you shall have the very same
Medicines as I use my self; and observing the Directions I have given, with
God's Blessing you may go on and prosper.

By what I have written, you may be satisfied in the safe use of the Medicines;
and by the Directions and Advice I have given, you may be encouraged to make
use of them your selves, or send for help, you need not lie in misery: it is
sufficient that there is proper Means prepared to your hand in a readiness
against a time of need, that will set you at liberty, and that very speedily;
and by reason the very Humou is discharged out of the Body through the Pores,
you may be preserved from the Gout for a long time; and by this means some are
perfectly cured of the Gout. Yet I do not pretend to cure an old Gout so that
i^ shall never come again, but this may be done with the Balsam only: when the
Gout does come, apply this Balsam according to the Direction, and the Gout will
go away presently, and not return for that Fit; you may expect it the next Year
according to the usual time, but then if you have your Remedy at hand, you are
freed of the Gout again: after this manner do many keep from being confined,
whereas before they used to be laid up in their Beds for some Months together.

This is the Advantage that is to b^ had by the Gout-Balsam, present help,
being freed of pains, and se^ at liberty. But observe, that in wha^ Case
soever, you use the Go^^ Balsam as I direct in the Gout, so you must remember
not to anoint the ^art before the Fire, for that will ^ause it to smart very
much; and you may remember also to keep it from your Linen, for though it do
not hurt the Body, it will spoil your Linen.

By what I have written, you may be satisfied by my giving you these plain
Directions, that my real Design is more to do good to others, than to advance
my self.

I shall not need to enlarge any further about the Directions of the
Gout-Medicines; you have what is sufficient to help you in your Extremity, in
many Cases as well as in the Gout: and you may be further satisfied, that none
of these Medicines are in the least repelling; but on the contrary, wheresoever
they are used, they do prevent the Humors getting into the Stomach or Head,
and they will certainly secure you from that danger; therefore you may conclude
there is no manner o^ danger; for if they should not cur^ you, they will
certainly do you some good; and if you do not presently experience the good
received, yet i^ you do but observe, you will find afterward your Body to be
more healthful; for in many Cases they vent Vapors and other ill Humors from
the Body, by opening the Pores; and prevent catching of cold, being a great
defense to the Body, by creating natural Warmth; and they comfort and
strengthen the Weak, as has been well experienced by their use in young
Children and aged People.

The next thing will be to direct you to what may prevent a return of ill
Humors, being also proper to hinder the returning of the Gout; and this has
been experienced: and tho it be not for my Interest, yet I am freely willing to
direct you, and if possible so to assist you, that you may never have a Fit
more of the Gout.

A Remedy to hinder or prevent the Gout returning again.
This is a Powder that formerly I have used in Consumptions with great Success,
I have found it profitable in the Gout; it helps the Digestion, and causes
Nature to carry off any offending Matter; cleanses the Stomach, procures an
Appetite, causes the Body to be in good natural order; and does, by purifying
the Body, prevent ill Humors circulating to the Limbs; and is proper to take
at any time if the Body be any ways disordered, either by eating or drinking:
Then take so much as will lie on a new Groat in a Spoonful of Ale, last at
Night and first in the Morning; this observed may prevent Sickness: But if you
fear that by any Disorder of the Body, or by any Signs appearing that do
foretell the Gout is coming, then take the same Quantity as before directed, and
at the same time, and also an hour before every Meal: Or if you find, when you
are drinking of Wines or other Liquors, your Taste is bad, then take of this
Powder such a quantity as beforementioned, in the same Liquor you may be
drinking, and it will recover your Taste. It is profitable in many other Cases,
but if you observe this order, it will be a means to prevent the Gout coming on
you.

These Medicines have been tried, proved, and experienced by Learned and
Understanding Men, and have been successful in the speedy and safe curing of
many dangerous Diseases that have been counted uncureable. God has by their
use wrought miraculous Cures; and there are great numbers of Witnesses of the
Truth of these Things, of the Persons cured that have been in their Beds in a
helpless Condition; and the very Hour the Means have been applied, their
Strength has been recovered, and have got up and walked about immediately: and
many have been present who are Eyewitnesses of these things.

There is hardly one Week passes, but that there is some great and notable
Cure performed by these Gout-Medicines, being of great use in many other
Diseases not mentioned in this Book; and in most Cases the Cure is speedily
done, both in aged Men and Women, and in young Children: And though in aged
People that have been many Years afflicted with painful Diseases, yet such have
been cured in one Hour's time, and have continued well afterward.

Such as are Inhabitants in or about the City of London, may be informed (by
enquiring almost in any part of the City) of Cures that are done; or if they
come to the Author of this Book, they may be satisfied what Persons have been
cured in their Condition; and may have satisfaction in their own Cases, whether
curable or not.

He will also give his Advice and Directions to such whose Cases are uncurable,
to put them in a way to help themselves to do that good as can be done for them.

And as for such as are not capable to prepare Medicines for themselves, if the
Case be curable, they shall have the Medicines bestowed on them: and if ever
they are in a Condition to be able to pay, I will trust them till then; but if
they have not a Heart to do any thing, then I shall not look after them, but
leave it to their own Consciences to do according to their Ability, something
toward the charge of Medicines, that I may the better hold out to help them
that can do nothing.

As for such as are able to pay for their Medicines, they shall have them
faithfully prepared, and at reasonable Rates: and I shall endeavor, by my
Advice, to give them that Assistance, that they may receive benefit by them,
and have no cause to complain that they have laid out their Money and are
nothing the better. But if I can see the Persons, or have a right Account
brought me, that I may be able to give a true Judgment of their Condition, I
shall then deal plainly with them, and shall not suffer them to be at any
unnecessary Charge, for it is against my Mind to take Money where I find there
is no hopes of doing good.

I am so far from coveting Gain to my self, by preparing Medicines for such
whose Cases are doubtful, that I had rather give them my Advice and Directions,
to make and prepare the Medicines themselves, and then they will be the more
willing to use the Means for their own Good, when they know the Ingredients;
and in so doing they may cure themselves. But if they have not their Cure, they
cannot blame me; for by this you may see my Intention is to do all the Good I
can: and though God may deny his Blessing on the Means to some, yet others by
the same Means may be cured; therefore let none despair of Help, but rather
wait upon God in the use of Means for his Blessing, in hopes of Success in the
End. And though the Means I use my self is for the most part very successful in
performing present Cures, yet sometimes in some Distempers it does require
longer time. There are some whose Diseases are uncurable, but such are commonly
proved, after the Means I use is once applied: and some there are that cannot
be perfectly cured, but yet do receive great help; and by the use of Means do
keep up their Bodies that they can walk abroad. But Experience has showed,
that when they have not had the Means at hand, the Disease has got Advantage
again.

By reason of the differing Causes of bodily Diseases, it is impossible for Man
to find such an infallible Medicine as to cure all Diseases. But there are for
natural Causes, natural Helps; and for differing sorts of Diseases, there are
many sorts of Medicines proper for their Cures: And those that have
Understanding will seek for help in time, if they know where to have it, for it
is difficult to find out such as have good Skill and a good Conscience. Many
will say, the World is a Cheat; and the Scripture says, All Men are Liars; and
it may be you will say, you have met with such ill usage that you know not who
to trust, especially in Matters that concern Life and Health: in this you are
at a loss and know not what to do, and bodily Diseases come on a sudden; and
commonly in haste you run to the next that comes to hand for help; but if it
prove not a skilful Man, it may be there is a Life lost, or some Mischief done
for want of a right understanding of the Disease, and for want of a proper
Remedy. And such as seek only their own Interest, will make Profit of them, and
make it no Matter of Conscience whether they live or die; and if they know they
can do no good, they will not be so honest as to tell them so, but will keep
them in hand while it is too late for others to help them. There are too many
such Practitioners, and this is a great Discouragement, and makes many afraid
to put themselves into the hands of Physicians; but I would advise such that
are in Health, to get knowledge of an able Physician before Sickness comes; and
those who know their bodily Diseases, to be provided of such Remedies as they
hear do cure others in the like case; and this is the way not to be deceived.
Believe not any Man by his own Report only, nor by a bare Discourse of others,
but get plain proof of his Skill, and then you may venture with safety.

Now since I have been in the practice of Gouts, Rheumetisms and Palsies, and
all suchlike painful Diseases and weakness of Limbs, there are some that would
seek to ruin me if they could, and do hate me, and are maliciously set against
me for my doing good: I could name some, but I shall omit that now; and if they
give me farther Occasion, I shall make them ashamed of their Doing, for no Man
shall discourage me from improving the Gifts God has bestowed on me; and all
may know what great Success I have had by what I have written.

I am unwilling to put Persons Names in print that I have cured, by reason many
are troublesome to go and make enquiry when they have no occasion. This I have
told you, that all that have need of help may come to me, and I will show them
what I have under the Hands of those I have cured, sufficient to satisfy all
Persons what I have done, and what I can do. But because some through Envy do
publikly endeavor to run down my Gout-Medicines, I look upon my self concerned
to make mention of something of Proof against them, who have made it their
Business to speak against me without Cause.

A Vindication in my own Defense against my malicious Adversaries.
As most of the Discourse against me is by some private Persons, yet it comes
to a kind of a public Discourse. Were it a public thing in open Court, then I
would make a public Defense in that manner as has not been seen, that the
World may judge what good I have done in my time: but according to my present
Occasion, I shall in this private way make my Defense, that may be read at
leisure, being in a little compass, it may serve for a Pocket-Companion.

Many are offended because I am not a College-Doctor, and brought up gradually
to be a Physician, and therefore cannot have Skill.
In answer to this, first, Most do know I do not pretend to be a Doctor, for my
Business is not among the Sick; yet I must tell you, I do understand much in
many Diseases as to the curable part: but that I leave to the Doctors, except
it be so that I may have a Friend given over by all; if I can do them any
neighbourly Service of Love, or help such as cannot be at the Charge of a
Doctor, so far as Christian-Love and Charity requires my help.

But that which is my Practice, the Doctors do not pretend to, as to cure or
help the Gout after that speedy manner as I do, for these are new things of
late discovery, that no Man knows but my self; and though many are
unbelieving, yet what is written is certainly true, that I can do more than
other Men in the aforementioned Diseases.

And though I were not brought up gradually (as you call it) to be a Physician,
in that way and order as College-Doctors, so I do not pretend to that Knowledge,
Skill and Learning; but this I can tell you, that I have been a Student of
Physic for many Years: and though I did not wear a Gown at the University, yet
I did learn much of my Knowledge at Oxford, and had the Privilege of a Scholar
in the great Library, and began in my Youthful Days. After I had obtained to
the knowledge of many good things, I did not practice it for some Years, only
for my self and Family: But after some time I became serviceable to my Friends,
Acquaintance and Neighbors; and thus I gradually came by my Knowledge and
Learning. And though I have not the knowledge of discoursing like a Doctor in
their Terms, yet I do know something of the Nature and Cause of Diseases, and
know now to cure a Disease.

There are some that their Parents do bestow much on them to train them up to
be Ministers or Doctors; but if they have not a natural Inclination that way,
many times all comes to nothing. Also there are some as can use their Tongues
well in Latin and other Languages, can talk a great deal and do but little. I
have known many such in my time, being acquainted in the University with all
Sorts and Degrees, so it is not a Rule to trust to, for every Man that is
well-learned in Latin, Greek and Heb^ew, that he is therefore a skilful Man;
for I have been acquainted with some that have had all these Parts of Learning,
and yet fit for nothing but to talk. Now all that know me, do know I am no
talkative sort of Man, being naturally one of few words, and am like one always
in a study; but yet I am ready to give an Answer in any Matter whatsoever, by
which you may know I am not an ignorant nor unlearned Person, neither do I
undertake that as I am not able to perform* and though I am not a
College-Doctor, yet I have knowledge and skill in that I do practice, as does
plainly appear, being examined, tried and proved: It Is clearly seen, and may be
believed, that so far as I do pretend, God has given me Skill and
Understanding, and he it is that makes me to prosper.

This may be sufficient to answer this Part, I shall in the next place answer
some other Reflections.

Another Reflection or Supposition is, That some dangerous Matter is in the
Medicine, as Aquafortis, or some other suchlike things, because it draws
Blisters, and with overdoing causes the Skin to come off.
I did never use Aquafortis in my Life. And in answer to this Supposition,
among the many things that have been named by the Doctors and other
Practitioners, put the Judgments of all together, they never named more than
one thing in it. You may know by what I have already declared, that there is
nothing hurtful or dangerous in it, because I can take it inwardly my self, and
in the very Nature of the thing, in drawing any venomous Matter out of the Body.

And further, let any Doctors, or others, propose what way soever they will to
apply it, on purpose to do all the hurt they can with it, I will expose my own
Body for the Trial and Proof of it in Public, if required. If there were
danger of doing Mischief with it in the use of it, then it would have been
discovered before this time, for I have applied it to Men, Women and Children,
and never did hurt to any; and I do use it freely to blister the Part, if need
requires.

But you will not believe this, that I dare use it so freely; I shall give some
proof of this to help your Unbelief, for in some Cases I cannot cure the
Disease without blistering the Part; it does not make any large blistering, but
they rise as Pimples; which if you suffer your Woollen Cloth to chase the Part,
this will cause the Skin to come off, but it will quickly heal again; this is
the greatest Mischief that can come on it, but is often profitable if wisely
ordered. This may be sufficient to answer this Scruple of dangerous Matter in
it, and what follows will satisfy further.

An Account of Cures done by Blisters drawn by the Gout-Balsam.
JUDGE Advocate Jenkins was cured of the Dropsy; with once dressing the Humors
came out in one Night's time, and he was well.

Mrs. Hathaway in Browns-Lane in Spittle-Fields, had Blisters drawn on both her
Temples with this Balsam, in an Apoplectical Disease; she had lain as dead for
a long time before I came to here, and no hopes of her Life: But after I had
applied this, and other of my Gout-Medicines, she was recovered to her Speech
in half an hour, and revived, and rose up in a very short time after. I advised
her to lay something to draw the Blisters, and to keep them running; which she
did, and they run for two Weeks, and so healed up. After this she had her
Health better than she had for many Years before.

Mr. Clifton in Old-Fishstreet has been confined by the Gout for all the whole
Winter, several Years together, but was set at liberty about Christmas last,
who used to be confined till May. His Humors were drawn off by blistering the
Parts with this Balsam.

Mr. Jacobs, Turkey-Merchant in Aldermanbury, by Blisters on his Feet, had help
for the Gout, that came out like Gravel, and Dropsy-like Humors which came
away as clear Water, near half a Pint in one Morning. He also was recovered in
a short time.

Captain Hutson in Grace-Churchstreet, was dressed freely, and the Humors of
the Gout were helped off by Blisters, and was recovered to go abroad in a
little time.

Mr. Hide in Stanhope-street, had Blisters drawn for the Stony-Gout, which
brought out the Humors like thick Curds, and prevented the extremity of Pain,
by discharging of the Humor in this kind of way, and then it healed up again
in a very short time.

Mr. Terry at the King's-Head in Cheap Side, had it freely applied for Blisters
on his Knee, to bring out Humors, that caused the shrinking of Sinews, that he
could hardly go with Crutches; but in less than 12 Hours his Sinews were
brought out, and he could walk without Crutch or Stick.

Mr. Howard at Limehouse-Corner, that was much afflicted with the Gout, and
could not be helped, till by Blisters the Humors were let out, and then he was
at ease, and could walk abroad. But sometimes the Blisters will be healed up in
one Night's time, then I apply it freely again: but some are so quickly healed
up, that I am forced to dress it on the Blisters, and open them three or four
times one after another. After this manner he was helped, and kept well for a
long time.

Mrs. Ambrose, at the Bell in Wood-street, was afflicted with a painful
tormenting Disease in one Hand; it was swelled all over the Hand, and about the
Wrist, as if it had been poisoned: She lay in a miserable Condition for many
Weeks, and neither Doctors nor any others could give her Ease till I was sent
for; then did I apply this Balsam, which did immediately take away her Pain,
and afterward dressed it freely to raise these Blister-Pimples; so the
venomous Humor came out, and in this manner was she cured.

Mr. Tarrant, at the Bell in Booth-street in Spittle-Fields, was greatly
afflicted with Sciatick Pains in his Hip and Thigh, that he was almost consumed
away like a Consumptive Man, and kept in Bed in a helpless Condition, and there
was no Help nor Ease could be had till I came; then I applied the Balsam, and
blistered the Part, and the Humor came away; so he had present Ease, and was
recovered to go abroad in a few Days: and by applying it two or three times, he
was perfectly cured, and is well in Health, much better than he used to be in
former time.

The Widow Hudson, who keeps a Coffee-house in Jewry-Lane, being long afflicted
with the Gout and Dropsy, and kept in Bed very helpless, till by the use of
this Balsam, by way of blistering the Parts like the stinging of Nettles; thus
the Humors were vented, and she is very well recovered.

Sir Richard Fisher, at Islington, when he could not stir to help himself, but
was carried about by two of his Men from Bed, and to Bed; in like manner was
helped the same way, and the Humors came out; he walked about the same Day,
and continues well. It was done about a Year and half ago, and there is hopes
it may not come again.

Capt. Dudley, at Ratcliff-high-way, in the Gout, was also helped by blistering
the Parts afflicted.

Mr. Hall, by the Pewter-platter in Whitecross-street, was cured of the Dropsy
after the same manner; the Humor came out plentifully, and since has remained
in good Health.

Mr. Mason, in Denmark-street by Ratcliff-high-way, was helpless, being
afflicted with a painful tormenting Disease, and perfectly cured after the same
manner.

Mr. Sheffield, near Ratcliff-Cross, for a pain and weakness in his Back* he
went as if his Back had been broken; he was cured after the same manner, by
blistering that part.

Mr. Palmer, at Ratcliff-Cross, for the Gout in his Leg, was helped after the
same manner; and others o^ the Neighbors in that place, as you may enquire at
the Shoemaker's Shop.

Mr. Flowers, in Old-Soho, his Wife was greatly afflicted with the Gout, and
was helped also after the same manner.

Mr. Hancock a Counselor, at the lower end of Arundel-street, in Extremity of
the Gout, was helped after the same manner.

Mr. Edwards a Brewer, in Old-Gravel-lane by Wapping, for the Gout was helped
after the same manner, by blistering the Part, and is cured; has remained well
a long time.

Mr. Spirey, at Anchor-stairs by Deptford, being in tormenting pain of the
Gout, by once dressing after this manner, was set at liberty, and freed of his
Pains, and walked about the same day.

Mr. Holmes a Salesman, over against the Earl of Bedford's in the Strand, being
afflicted with the Sciatica, for a long time was cured after the same manner.

Mr. Palmer, near St. Katherines by the Bell, was lame a Month in great Pain;
and with once dressing in this manner was perfectly cured.

Mr. Cooper, at the three Compasses upon Redriff-wall, in tormenting pain of
the Gout, with once dressing after this manner, was well recovered, and went
abroad the same day; he was anointed, though weak and helpless before his
dressing.

Mr. Olive, in Shagby's Walk in Wapping, having great pain and a lameness on
him for a long time, with once anointing was perfectly cured.

Mr. Tailor, on Wapping-Wall, was very lame, and in tormenting Pain night and
day; was perfectly cured by once dressing.

Multitudes of People have received great Good by my Medicines in many Diseases
which I do not make mention of: but you may understand by what I have given
you, that my principal intended Business, is to attend such who are afflicted
with Gouts, Rheumatisms, Palsies, Convulsions, and all suchlike Cases. I have
cured some that have been lame many Years, and the Cure has been performed
very speedily; but some do require a longer time. This you may conclude, if I
undertake a Cure, you may be encouraged it shall be my loss if I do not perform
it.

If I should tell here the Cures I have done for Consumptive People, you could
hardly believe it, but I shall not insist here on such things: If I could have
had time, I should in pity have writ something to help such in this Book, but
that I shall refer to the next Impression, and in the mean time shall be
willing to help such by my Advice, if they can come or send to my House.

Now I must return to the Matter intended, for if I should fill up my Book with
never so many Testimonies of curing the Gout and suchlike Diseases, yet still
some cannot or will not believe this to be true, that there is a Man that can
do these things.

In a Trial at Law, in difficult Matters, the plain Proof of two or three
Witnesses on Oath, puts an end to all Controversies, and both Judge and Jury is
convinced to believe, and judge according to the Proof and Truth of the
Evidence. Such large Proof has been given of speedy Cures of many diseased
Persons, of Gouts, Rheumetisms, Palsies, and suchlike, and were so speedily
freed of their Pains, that it is incredible to declare it. But that you may be
convinced of the Truth, I have given you the Testimony of ten Men, who have
declared on Oath, every Man in his own Case, their particular Cures, and how
speedily done: in the presence of many Witnesses was this Proof given, before
the Right Honorable Sir John Fleet, late Lord Mayor of the City of London. And
for a farther Confirmation, he has given it in writing under his own Hand;
also subscribed by his Attorney at Law.

It cannot be supposed that I should put a Cheat on the People by publishing
this, or that I should dare to counterfeit the Handwriting of so great a
Magistrate, which would but expose me shamefully to suffer punishment for so
doing. All rational Persons may believe this is Truth, therefore I shall not
need to give any of their Names in this Book; but such as desire to be further
satisfied, may see every Man's Affidavit in Writing under their own Hands, or
may have a printed Paper of the Copy at the Author's House; with many others
who have given under their Hands the manner of their Cures, therefore shall not
mention any of them here.

Several of these also are perfectly cured by my Gout-Balsam, being applied
freely to blister the Parts; by which all may be well satisfied there is no
danger, though it may blister and cause the Skin to come off where it is freely
applied: but yet some Bodies are so differing from others, that if they use
never so much, they cannot feel it, and it will not cause either Pimple or
Blister on them; but yet though it be not felt, it does so open the Pores that
it lets out the Disease, let it be Wind or Water, and no more to be seen
afterward than if nothing had been done: so some are cured with ease and
pleasure, rather than punishment, by using it. And this may be observed for a
Rule, if you do not feel it you may use it as often as you will; or if you are
minded to use but little, it does require the longer time for your Cure.

Now this is my way of vindicating my self, by giving you a plain Account what
is done by my Medicines, rather than to name or publish what envious lying
Persons report. If I should be as unkind to them as they are to me, I could
spoil their Practice and selling of Medicines, by making known what Discourse
has passed to me in the hearing of others; for many have visited me in pretense
of Love, that will in other Company speak against me without a Cause, being
only envious for my Prosperity and good Success in Business; and there are many
offended at the Good I do: It would be a Crime in me if I should not do Good;
and the Cures I perform prefer me in Practice, and the Success I have shameth
my Adversaries, who are not able to do the like.

You have had an Account here of Cures mostly concerning the Gout, and
suchlike painful Diseases, that have been performed chiefly by the
Gout-Balsam, being freely used to blister the Parts, and no hurt done to any.
Thus you have that which is sufficient to prove them Liars that would say it is
a dangerous Medicine.

The next thing, as a farther Vindication of the Excellency of my Gout-Balsam,
is to give you an Account of what strange Cures have been done in Palsies, and
suchlike Cases, with the use of that and my other Gout-Medicines.

Great and Remarkables Cures performed on Palsies and Convulsions in the Nerves.
Mr. Hoar, a Painter in Wapping, lost the use of his Limbs by the dead Palsy
for five Months, was perfectly cured in a few days.

Mr. Dimsdell, in Wenford-street by Spittle-Fields, was helpless in his Limbs,
by the Num-Palsy and Convulsions in the Nerves, and was perfectly cured in
about two Weeks time.

Many poor People who have been brought to my House, being helpless, in
Coaches, have been speedily recovered to go away on foot and without Crutches.

Mrs. Ashworth, in George-Yard in Shoreditch, who for a long time had been
afflicted with running Pains in all Parts with Convulsions. She had used all
Means as could be heard of to help her; had tried the Bath, and all was
ineffectual, but grew worse: but at last, by Providence, she heard of one in
the same Neighborhood that I had cured: I was sent for; when I came, the
Neighbors were about the Bed expecting her departure; with all speed I applied
the Means, for I found it was the Cholick, Convulsions and Gout, had affected
all parts at once, both Limbs, Bowels, Stomach and Head. In about two Hours I
did remove the Cause, and she was comfortably revived, and in four days time
she was cured.

Mrs. Lucas, just without Aldersgate, had been lame many Months in a helpless
Condition; the Doctors could not find out the Cause, and none could help her;
so she lay under great pain and weakness, which was on one Side only, yet she
could not help her self; the Nurse carried her about like a Child in Arms. When
I came, I went speedily to my Work, and in one hour's time she walked about;
and in about four days time she had recovered such strength, that she could
walk from her Country-Lodgings at Islington, to her Dwelling House at
Aldersgate.

Mr. Morgan's Son, at the corner of Little-Britain in Aldersgate Street, had
been helpless a long time almost in all Parts. It was a kind of inward
Convulsion that affected the Bowels and Limbs, as was the Cause of his
weakness: I applied the Means I use for helping the Gout in the inward part;
which after once dressing he walked about, and the second dressing perfectly
cured.

Several others in that Street I have speedily helped in extremity of pains;
but it is needless to multiply to fill up, it would tire your patience to read
all.

Mr. Moon, a Cheesmonger in High-Holborn, over against the new Watch-House that
is built in the middle of the Street by the Fountain-Tavern: He had kept in Bed
for a long time as a bedridden Man, and could not help himself; all Means that
had been used were ineffectual, so he lay in a hopeless Condition despairing of
help: At last, by strange Providence, I came to him; and because he had no
pain, I feared he was uncurable; but my Medicines were applied, which
discovered the Disease; it appeared to be a palsical waterish Humor that was
on the Sinews, with a kind of Convulsion in the Nerves, that was the Cause of
his Weakness. In less than one hour after I had applied my Medicines, the Cause
being brought out, his strength came to him, and he rose out of Bed and walked
about his House. I dressed him twice afterward, and in a little time he came
to his full strength, and in good bodily Health. After this manner was this
Cure performed.

I have formerly cast off several that have been under great Weakness, because
they have had no pain, and sometimes no feeling; for at first my Medicines had
not that Success in such Cases as now they have: but now they are much amended,
and I daily increase my Knowledge in these things, and do much Good, and perform
greater Cures than formerly, in several Diseases which I have thought
uncureable my self; as appears by the aforementioned Cures, and others as
follow, which are sufficient Proof of the great Skill and Knowledge God has
given me in curing Diseases.

Mr. Meriton (Minister of Old-Fishstreet) his Son, in the 21 st Year of his
Age, was strangely afflicted with a Disease that took away his Limbs, and
deprived him of the use of Nature; it had so affected hi^ inward parts from the
pit of the Stomach, that all his lower parts were as dead; his Bowels and
inward parts were as dead, without any feeling or strength to help Nature; also
down both sides to his Toes ends. In this very weak Condition this Gentleman
had lain for a long time, and no help could be had by all means that was used,
by the Advice and Help of able Doctors of the College. There were several
concerned to advise and help one another, consented to use the utmost of their
Skill in this Case; but no good could be done, neither could they discover the
Cause of this Disease; so there was no hopes of his recovery, but in all
likelihood grew nearer to his End as it got upwards. At last I was sent for by
a Letter to come at a set time; so when I came there was Dr. Merity, and two of
the College-Doctors, and several others: After a little discourse, I began to
apply my Medicine, which did in a very little time cause a sensible feeling of
the Blood circulating, and in less than two hours he stood up, and his strength
began to come; he walked about a little then. Now as it appeared, the Cause of
this was from Convulsions on the Nerves and inward Parts, and by this means the
Limbs were affected with a palsical Disease, that takes away all strength
wheresoever it comes; the Convulsions had appeared by twitchings in his Toes
and Feet: but after the means had been applied about three or four hours, he
appeared more strongly. Then I came with my Medicines that cure Convulsions,
and in a quarter of an hour I brought away the very Cause, and from that time
he never had any more Convulsions then his strength came, and the next day he
walked about without any help; so I dressed him a second and a third time. Thus
he was perfectly cured in about four days time. This was in cold frosty Weather
this last Winter, so it was two Weeks before he went abroad.

Madam Hudson, on Tower Hill, was much after the same manner as Mr. Meriton
was, both in the Limbs and inward Parts; only hers was all on one side of the
Body, half the Head, one Arm, and one Leg; but in the inward parts all together
as he was; and had been in this Condition about four Months, and all means was
ineffectual, and no help could be had: though she had all done as the Doctors
could advise her, yet still she remained in this Condition till I came. I
applied the Means, and in 24 Hours she was in good order, and stronger and
better to walk with that Leg that was lame, than with the other, for she was
weak in all parts with lying so long, and a Consumptive Woman long before. This
great Alteration was done, chiefly by the first dressing; and since it has been
her lot to fall into my hands, I hope, by my Direction, and God's Blessing, to
cure her of the Consumption. I have done much in helping her, both for the
Cholick and Stone, and hope to see her in good Health on all Accounts: She is
now under the use of Means for the Consumption, and is in a good way of
recovery.

Mr. Boulton's Kinsman, living near the aforesaid Mr. Moon in Holborn, was lame
of a nummed and dead Palsy: It affected all parts, both Head and Body,
especially from the middle of the Body to the Toes ends; both his Legs were
dead and cold, had no feeling at all; pinching, pricking, or cutting, nothing
could hurt him: He was tried, but, he said, if we would cut off his Legs, he
should not feel it; they were also pale, and looked like the Limbs of a dead
Man. This put me to a stand, whether I had best do any thing to him or not: I
had him then took out of Bed, and laying him cross on the Bed, I dressed him;
and after a little time he felt a pricking in both his Legs* Then he began to
be warm, I still chafed the weak parts till he had good feeling; I pinched him
and he cried out. In a little time his strength came; in less than two hours
time I had done all, and put on his Clothes, and he walked down two pair of
Stairs presently, without Stick or Crutch; then I left him among the Family.
This was done the first dressing, being the fourth day of this instant May
1694. This young Man lives with his Uncle, who keeps a Public House in
Bloomsbury-Market. He is a Tapster, and has since gone up and down Stairs to
draw Drink, from five a Clock in the Morning till Night. But this was too hard
for him, for it has caused a stiffness in his Limbs; yet he will be well of
this in a little time, if not neglected or over-wrought before he has got his
full strength.

A young Gentlewoman at Mr. Millers (the Bull-head Tavern in Woodstreet near
Cheapside) was taken with a Dead-Palsy on all one side of her Body; it drew her
Mouth, caused an Impediment in her Speech, affected her Senses being much in
her Head, and her Limbs on that side were as dead. Thus she lay in a helpless
Condition for some Weeks, and none could help her. Mrs. Miller came to hear of
some Cures I had done in that Street, and sent for me: In like manner I dressed
the dead Parts, and before I went out of the House, she walked about without
any help; in about a Week's time she walked strongly: her Head is also
recovered, but her Arm is not yet, by reason of her being blooded; therefore
remember my Cautions: By this Arm it may be seen how she was in other Parts; I
have her yet in hand for her Arm, and hope in time to recover that also. This
is one of the first Questions I ask in any suchlike Cases, Are they blooded? A
Word to the Wise is sufficient. If my Advice had been observed but two Years
ago, as it is now, I am satisfied some might have been yet living that are now
a rotting in their Graves.

What sad Objects are daily seen, of Persons afflicted with Palsies and other
Diseases, as we walk the Streets, that could never be helped because no Cure
was found out for them! and great Numbers do lie in Beds in Chambers and
Garrets, hid from the World, and thus they lie till they die. What if God send
Means at last to help such Objects of pity, why should any be offended at this?
You have heard what I have done; you know what I can do by what I have said
before; How shall I satisfy you further? Will nothing serve but I must unfold
these Secrets to you? Must I give my Labor to another, and my Skill to such as
love not to take pains? it is not reasonable. But yet to satisfy you further, I
will discover something of the Nature and Safety of this Gout-Balsam, that you
may have nothing more to say against it by your false Suppositions.

An Explanation, or a Discovery of the Safety of the Ingredients of the
Gout-Balsam.
First of all; You say it is dangerous because it will blister: You have heard
of the Cures that have been done that way by its use. What I declared further
is truth, and if required can give it on Oath, that the most dangerous part in
it is often given in Cordials by Doctors, that there is nothing in it but what
is taken inwardly. And further, some of the Ingredients are often eaten for
Food, and for the most part is in common use, but especially in Summertime in
most Families: Thus far I declare, find out the rest. You may suppose I do
something more than ordinary to draw out the Virtue, to make them useful in
this way, but it is impossible if I would to raise any dangerous Matter from
the Ingredients; neither is any part thereof repelling, but all on the
contrary; and is so far from doing any hurt, that it is a prevention of all
Danger, as plainly appears in the manner of its Operation.

What I have laid down is sufficient to give Satisfaction, both to you as have
given a wrong Judgment in the Matter, and to others that may be fearful and
timorous; no Man has any just Cause to be offended at me, for I am not willing
to speak against others, except in my own Defense, and design not to give
offense to any; therefore to remove all Prejudice and Envy, I shall make an
Apology to the Practitioners in and about the City of London, to let them
understand, my Business may be a help rather than a hindrance to them, so we
may agree together to serve our Friends. I advise my Patients (when I see
occasion for it) to call for farther assistance; I do not love to hinder other
Men's Business. This is my Method.

An Apology to the Practioners in and about London, both Surgeons,
Apothecaries and Doctors.
I. A Word to the Surgeons.
That which was my Business when I first began to be public in the World, came
the nearest to your Concern; but yet I left that as properly was your Business,
and applied my self to that as was the most difficult, troublesome and
dangerous Cases, as King's Evil, Cancers, Ulcers, Imposthumes, and suchlike
Cases. Many of you know I did great things, and had in that way of Business
good Success, and great Practice; but now I am come from all this, and leave it
to you, therefore you have less cause to be offended than any others: yet I
hear abroad how some of you do speak slightly, and in an undervaluing way do
run down me and my Medicines; and although you know my Skill and great Success,
you are so unkind to your Friends, as to let them lie in Misery till they seek
out for farther help, and so hear of me. It would be better if there were a
Spirit of Love and Unity; you shall not hear me to speak against you in any
backbiting way, nor meddle to run down another, for this is not to do as I
would another should do to me: So let us agree, and serve one another in Love,
and to do all the good we can to serve the Public.

II. My Apology to the Apothecaries.
I know that you do not like any Physicians that do prepare their own
Medicines, so I can hardly expect your good Word: but yet if you do but
consider the Necessity Men are put upon to do this thing, it should silence you
in finding Fault, considering that in some difficult Cases there is no Cure to
be had by any Medicines as you have; and this puts ingenious Men to study to
find out something else; and if they do attain to that which effectually does
Business according to expectation, who shall be offended at this? Is it not all
our Duties to study to do all the Good we can?

I do not intend to cast any Reflections on you, for your Medicines are very
necessary and useful; and most of you have good Business, and no cause to
complain: As for my part, I shall not prepare any Medicines that belong to your
Trade; but those things that I prepare, are more like Food than Physic; and I
am so far from hindering your Business, that I rather promote it, by giving
directions to my Patients to the use of your Medicines, as occasion requires.
If it were in my way to serve you more, I should certainly do it; my Business
does not lie among the Sick, but with them that are Lame, and under painful
Diseases; and for such I use only such things as I prepare my self, as you have
an account of in this Book; and many Physicians and other Practitioners do make
use of them with great success.

III. Lastly, I make an Apology to the Doctors of the College at London.
I do know some of you are very angry with me, because I often come where you
are concerned: You see I raise your Patients on their Legs; and why should you
be offended? the great Success I have, should rather move you to promote my
Medicines by your Advice; when you see the Case requires it, you would do well
to send for my Assistance: and seeing you do not prepare your own Medicines,
and you cannot find any other Person that can do what you know I can, I shall
therefore give my Attendance to serve you, if you think well of it.

Let this Offer be well taken, and let not any be offended; and such as have
been angry, I hope will be pleased again: if you will not be reconciled, I
cannot help it; and though you have threatened me, and do intend if you can to
put a stop to my Practice, I will stand in my Defense against you; if you can
do the like, I will give place to you. The Law is not intended to bind Men's
Hands from doing good, nor made for the private Interest of some particular
Persons, but the intent is for the good of all the Subjects; and if any prove
otherwise, our Parliaments can repeal or amend such Laws if they see good.
Commonly such as are troublesome to others for well-doing, do but little good
themselves, but seek their own Interest more than the Advantage of others.

I do not intend any long Discourse of this kind, being not willing to give any
Offense; but because some malicious Persons have interrupted me in my Business,
and show their malicious Intentions, what they would do if they had Power, I am
well satisfied in my Mind, that they have such Malice against me, that if
Opportunity served they would certainly do me a Mischief. If it lie in my power
I shall be ready to do them good, and should be glad I had not occasion to
mention these things; but I shall forbear, in hopes that all Anger and Malice
may be over in time. I have now some that are my very good Friends among you,
and I shall endeavor so to behave my self in my public Business in the World,
that I shall give no just Cause of Offense; but if I must fight, my greatest
Weapon shall be my Pen to defend my self: I am peaceable of my self, and not
easily provoked; but if I Am forced, I shall do as well as I can, trusting God
will be my Defense.

The Lives and Limbs I have preserved,
have gained me much Love;
And he that taught me all this Art,
he dwells in Heaven above:
And I hope he will instruct and
learn me a great deal more;
And make me able to do more
than I have done before.
A great part of the Inhabitants in and about London, are a middle sort of
trading People: My Business has been much among them, and I am content with a
middle Station. If I had studied my own Interest more than to serve the
Public, I might have set up a Coach and six Horses; but I am content to ride
in a hired Coach, and find it most convenient for speed, for I love to make
haste to do good, though it be to serve such as cannot pay for it, God has
given me enough to my full Content, and now I am ready to be serviceable to any
according to my Ability* for in great and difficult Cases, I will help the Poor
for nothing, rather than hide the Talent God has given me.

I must declare this to you, though some that do not know me call me a
Quack-Doctor, because I am not of the College, and it may be they think I am as
ignorant as themselves; but you know me, or at least have heard of me, yet you
may not know so much as them that have experience of me: therefore I shall let
you know something I can do more than ordinary in other Cases as is not
mentioned.

I have a quick way in curing Hectic Fevers, and therefore can do much in
Consumptions.

I have a speedy way to help such who are Distracted, or Lightheaded under any
kind of Fevers, drawing ^he Vapors down immediately, and rebuking the Fever in
a strange manner.

Such as are taken raving Mad, ofttimes the Disease lies in the Head; I can
cure them perfectly in one day's time.

Such as are in torment with the Cholick and Gravel in the Kidneys, I have an
artificial way to ease them quickly, and bring away the offending Matter.

Such as have Falling Sickness and other Fits, I can do much in helping them
speedily, especially in Women.

In several other Cases I give such speedy help, as the like has not been
known in our Age.

Had I been in some Men's places, some great Persons that lately are gone to
their long Homes, might have been in the Land of the Living.

I commit these things to your consideration, and if you please, try me and
prove me; and when you are satisfied, consider with your selves whether it is
reasonable to hinder my Practice, or to encourage it.

I have taken this way to speak my Mind to you, because I see you are not
disposed to discourse me in a familiar friendly way when I meet you in the
College; but I hope we may meet in Friendship and Love when we are better
acquainted. So farewell.

I have heard of false Reports given out by some, thinking thereby to hinder my
Practice; to which I shall give my Answer.

An Answer to some false Reports.
Whereas several say, (by reason of the speediness of my Cures) I use Magic,
or the Black Art, to do these things.

In answer to this I do declare, that I have never seen any Books of Astrology,
to read in them, for fear I should be hindered in better things. I have a Rule
to observe for gathering my Herbs at the proper time, by the Planets; and in
all the other parts I am as ignorant as a newborn Child; and I am so well
known, that I can give good satisfaction of my Life and Conversation: I am so
far from being concerned that way, that I spend my spare Time in reading Books
of Divinity. God only knows the Heart; but I have walked so circumspectly in
my Life and Conversation, that I have kept my self unspotted from the World on
all Accounts: Yet some have reported me to be a Person of a wicked Life and
Conversation. Several false and malicious Reports have passed as I have heard
of; I appeal to the whole World: if any Person knows, or can prove any thing
against me, I am ready to answer for my self. Others give out that I am dead;
but that needs no answer, I am at my Dwelling House in the Old-Jewry, ready to
give Satisfaction in any Case whatsoever.

I think none can blame me for what I have written in my own Defense, against
them that publicly, in a backbiting way, have spoken against me: Many of them
I do not know, therefore I thought it necessary to give it out in print; by
chance it may come into their hands, and convince them of their Folly; and it
will be for the satisfaction of those who have been doubtful and timorous, and
through their persuasion have been discouraged to use the Means: And though
they cannot do any thing to give them Relief, yet they have hindered them from
taking help in time. They have done more harm to others, than they can do to
me; for many that might have been cured, are now uncureable, and some are dead
as might have been living. But thus it has been in former Ages, evil-minded
Men are offended at any good Works: and as they love not to do good themselves,
so they would hinder others; had they but Power, they would, like devouring
Beasts, destroy their Fellow Creatures.

CONCLUSION.
Ingenious Students,
LET all that are lovers of Art, help and encourage one another, and join hand
in hand together to do good, and exact on no Man, but do unto others as they
would be done by; that is the way to obtain a Blessing, to make you prosperous
in all your Undertakings, and endeavor to make improvement of Time; we need
not spend it idly: he that knows most may learn more, and the best comes
short in many things. Let us still press forwards, and do Good while we live,
that we may have Peace when we die: let us live in Peace and Unity as Brethren;
we are all but on a Journey, traveling toward the Grave, let us take the
Advice of our old Father Jacob, See that ye fall not out by the way.

Next follow some good Receipts which I have used my self with great Success in
curing many.

A Receipt with Directions for the Cure of the King's Evil.
TAKE a Kilderkin, or a lesser Vessel, with one end out; and put into your
Vessel two Gallons of Spring Water; then put into the Water three Pounds of
Stone-Lime unslacked, stir it about very well; put in two Gallons more, and
three Pound of Lime, stirring it: then add more Water and Lime, to what
quantity you please, still stirring it till it has done hissing; then cover it
up for nine Days, and it will be very clear.

Then take of this Limewater two Gallons, and put into a Stean, or Pot; then
put in half a Pound of Liquorish sliced, and half a Pound of Anni-Seeds, and
half a Pound of Currants beaten, with half a Pound of white Saxafras-Root
sliced; stir them all together, and after 24 Hours begin to drink of it.

Take half a Pint first in the Morning, and at four in the Afternoon, and last
at Night, for some Weeks together. It Is best for this Disease to take it at
Spring and Fall if need be, for a Month together.

This King's Evil Drink has cured many of this Disease; and being a great
cleanser of the Blood, is good in many other Diseases, as has been
experienced: It works chiefly by Urine, And helps Scurvy and Dropsy, Ulcers and
Imposthumes, Piles and Fistula's, Consumption*wastings, Cinpanies, Stone and
Gravel, Swelling and Sores, All Corrupt Humors, Shortness of Breath, Want of
Appetite.


If you have any Wound or dangerous Sores that may be under Cure, then drink of
this, and it will help the Cure by purifying the Blood.

I have observed, that the King's Evil and other corrupt Diseases, are mostly
among poor People: I hope this Receipt, with other Directions I shall give,
will be of great use to help such, and be a means of preserving their Limbs,
that they may be able to work for their Livings; for many poor Families have
been ruined for want of Cure in many suchlike Diseases.

If you make a quantity it will not keep long, except you leave out the
Currants; if you leave them out it will serve: Or you may mix up a little, and
have it fresh. If you would make it pleasant, you may put in a spoonful of
Syrup of Elder-Berries into every Draught, or sweeten it as you like it.

Now if your young Children have need of it, if they cannot drink a Quantity to
do them good, let them drink the oftener: If they drink it for their common
Drink several Weeks together, it is profitable so to do.

Some Gentlemen that have experienced it, will drink it a Month together for
the Scurvy.

It is also good for any itching or scabby Diseases to drink, for six or eight
Weeks together if occasion be.

Another thing good to add to this Drink if need require.
Take of those things commonly called Hog-Lice, or as some call, Lock-chesers,
because they role round up in your Hand. Dry these and powder them, and take as
much as will lie on a Sixpence, last at Night, and first in the Morning, in a
Spoonful of the King's Evil Drink; then drink a little after it, but not so
much as when you do not mix this Powder in it. Observe when you take this,
follow it for nine days together.

A Plaster for the Swellings of the Evil.
Take a Handful of Hounds-tongue, and boil it in a Pint of Oil: Then strain
your Oil, and to half a Pint of this Oil, put in half a pound of Red-lead; boil
them about a quarter of an hour, or something longer, till it be fit for a
Plaster. Apply this to the swelling, and let it stick on till it drops off;
then apply another if need be. This is good to dissolve the Swelling.

For running Sores of the Evil.
You may apply this Plaster, and if it run much, lay on a fresh Plaster once
in two days; but open it twice a day, and wash it very well with Limewater;
this will keep it clean, and in time heal it up. It is not good to use
Plasters that draw much, that is hurtful; for by drawing the Humors too much
to one place, they being sharp, there will be danger of hurting the Bones.

Another Help for running Sores.
Take the inward Bark of Elder, and boil in Limewater; then wash the Sores
twice a day with this, and sometimes lay on Elder-leaves for some days for
change; after two or three days apply the Plaster again: this observed, will
keep all the Sores in good order, better than if they kept to one thing,
especially if the Humor be very sharp. If you do make good use of these
things, you may have great Success in curing the King's Evil, especially if you
apply them in time, then the Cure is performed quickly: I have cured some in a
month, and others in less time; but when the Distemper is old and fixed, it
requires a longer time: still keep using the Means, you will find
encouragement by the Amendments. You must keep to the outward Means till it be
well; the Drink need not be taken but according to the Directions, chiefly at
Spring and Fall. I wish you may have the Success I have had in the King's Evil
and Scurvy, and other corrupt Humors, you have the same Means. Next I shall
give Directions for such as have sore Breasts.

For Swellings in the Breast which are not to be broken, that come by Cold.
Take a Handful of Holyhock-leaves, and as many Violet-leaves; cut them small,
and boil them in fresh Butter, or Hogs-Lard; make it like a Poultis, and lay it
on a Woollen Cloth to cover the Breast: lay it on as warm as can be endured;
let it lie on 24 hours, and if need be apply it a second or third time. This is
also good for Breasts that are broken, and have many Holes; apply it in this
manner, and this will heal them in a little time.

For a Cancered Breast.
Take the Cords or Corns, as some call them, of a Stone-horse: dry them and
beat them to Powder, and take half an Ounce in a draught of Ale, fasting two
hours after do thus three Mornings together. This is a choice thing for
suchlike Humors in the Breast.

To use Outwardly.
Take a Pint of Ale, a Sprig or two of St. John's-wort, either green or dry;
boil it till it come to a quarter of a Pint or less, it will be like Salve:
When it is cold, lay it on thin Leather, and dress it twice a day, laying it
well on the Sore, then lay on the Plaster: Keep to this, and in a few days you
will find a good Alteration.

For a Dropsy and Tinpany.
Take Salt of Wormwood, Salt of Ash, and Salt of Broom, of each half an Ounce;
put these in a quart of Wormwood-water, shake it well, and after twelve hours
begin to drink of it, a Sack-Glass full every Morning, fasting two hours after
it: One Bottle is sufficient if timely taken.

Another.
Take blew Flower-de-luce Roots, and bruise them, and take of the Juice two
Spoonfuls, and two or three Spoonfuls of Syrup of Roses, and two Spoonfuls of
Syrup of Rhubarb: Take this for three Mornings, it will help these Diseases.

Another.
Take a Spoonful of Mustard Seed in half a Pint of Ale last at Night, and do
the like first in the Morning. These things are of great use against the Dropsy
and Tinpany.

A Cure for Agues.
Take Sinkfoil, otherwise called Five-leave Grass; dry it and powder it, and
take as much as will lie on a Sixpence, in half a Pint of Wormwood-Beer, very
hot; take it when the cold Fit comes, and the like when the hot Fit comes:
doing thus three Ague-days together, it will cure.

Another.
Take a pint of warm Milk, and a quartern of Brandy, and drink it when the Fit
begins.

Another.
Take a pint of Ale, and a whole Nutmeg grated in it, an ounce of Alum beaten;
make it hot, and drink it off, stirring about after it: use these, and one or
the other will cure your Ague.

An easy Cure for Piles.
Take the white Ashes of slaty Coals, as are often among Sea-coal, and apply
the Ashes to the part; it is an excellent thing for speedy help.

For Specks and Whites in the Eyes.
Take the White of Hen-dung poudered, and put it in the Eyes: it is a harmless
thing, and good for many Distempers in the Eyes.

Another good thing for Eyes.
Take the Cock-tread out of an Egg, and put in the Eye, it will take any thing
out of the Eye in a short time.

To stop Bleeding at the Nose in Women.
Take Man's Blood and powder it; put it up the Nostrils, and Women's Blood for
Men in like manner: But observe, after the Blood has stood sometime, take of
that as is thickest. Now you that are troubled with such Diseases, should not
be unprovided.

A Catalogue of Choice Medicines, sold at the Author's House at reasonable
Rates.
I. A Drink for the Green Sickness, that opens Obstructions, takes away
Stomach-Pains, and shortness of Breath; it is good for Old or Young. Price 2 s.
the Bottle.

II. A Remedy for Giddiness and Pain, in the laying Vapors; it causes a good
Digestion. In Six-penny and Twelve-penny Papers.

III. A Cordial Remedy against Fluxes and Vomiting. In 6 d. and 12 d. Bottles.

IV. A Drink that cures the Gripes immediately. In 12 d. and 18 d. Bottles.

V. A pleasant Drink for the Cholick. 12 d. the Bottle.

VI. A Powder that cures the Toothache immediately, and clears the Head of
Cold. At 6 d. the Paper.

VII. A pleasant Conserve to destroy Worms in Children: It does so remove any
inward offending Matter, that palefac'd Children will have a fresh Color and
Healthy, in two Weeks time. It Is 12 d. the Pot.

VIII. A Powder to whiten and fasten Teeth, and to cleanse the Mouth of scurvy
Humors. In 6 d. Papers.

IX. That Elixir, called Daffy's Elixir. At 2 s. the Bottle.

X. Eye-Water for Pearls, and Rheums in the Eyes. In 6 d. Bottles.

XI. A Remedy for such as cannot hold their Water; it also helps them that make
Urine in their sleep.

XII. Also a Help for such as have stoppage of Urine.

FINIS.

