PER ME REGES REGNANT

IUSTITIA STABILITUR SOLIUM

SCRIPTURA ET LEGES SUNT FUNDAMENTA CORONAE

CEDANT ARMA TOGAE



THE Original and Growth OF PRINTING: COLLECTED Out of HISTORY, and the Records
of this KINGDOM.

Wherein is also Demonstrated, That PRINTING appertains to the Prerogative
Royal; and is a Flower of the Crown of England.

By RICHARD ATKYNS, Esquire;

White Hall, April the 25th. 1664.

By Order and Appointment of the Right HONORABLE, Mr. Secretary MORICE, Let
this be Printed.

THO: RYCHAUT.

LONDON: Printed by JOHN STREATER, for the AUTHOR, MDCLXIV.

TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THough I had the Honor to be very well known to His Majesty of ever Blessed
Memory, Your most Royal Father, and to be a Sufferer in the loss of a
considerable Estate, for His most Just Cause, yet I may not be so well known to
Your Sacred Person: however, the same Duty that moved Me* to fight for Him,
remains in Me to write for You; not out of any Confidence in my Pen (for I am
the first shall judge that my Self) but out of Conscience and Loyalty to my
Sovereign; for whose sake, I resolve to hazard Censure, rather than to be
wanting in any Discovery, that may tend to Your Majesty's Interest, and
indubitate Right.

The least loss of Power in a Magistrate, is a great Detriment to his
Government, and an Advantage to his Enemies; the least Creep-Window robs the
whole House; the least Error in War not to be redeemed* And as that ever
Blessed late Martyr said (when He gave his Watch of Government* to be cleansed
by the too-long Parliament) the least Pin of it being left out, would cause a
Discord in the whole: Therefore might Solomon well say, Where the Word of a
King is there is Power: The King and Power being Relatives.

That Printing belongs to Your Majesty, in Your public and private Capacity,
as Supreme Magistrate, and as Proprietor, I do with all boldness affirm; and
that it is a considerable Branch of the Regal Power, will no Loyal Person deny:
for it ties, and unties the very Hearts of the People, as please the Author: If
the Tongue, that is but a little Member, can set the Course of Nature on Fire;
how much more the Quill, which is of a flying Nature in it self* and so
Spiritual, that it is in all Places at the same time; and so Powerful, when it
is cunningly handled, that it is the Peoples Deity.

That this Power which is entire and inherent in Your Majesty's Person, and
inseparable from Your Crown, should be divided, and divolve upon Your Officers
(though never so great and good) may be of dangerous Consequence: You are the
Head of the Church, and Supreme of the Law; shall the Body govern the Head? Men
use to trust, when they cannot avoid it; but that there may be a Derivative and
Ministerial Power in them, with Appeal to Your Majesty, I do with all Humility
admit and propose.

Printing is like a good Dish of Meat, which moderately eaten of, turns to the
Nourishment and health of the Body; but immoderately, to Surfeits and
Sicknesses: As the Vso is very necessary, the Abuse is very dangerous: Cannot
this Abuse be remedied any other way, then by depriving Your Majesty of Your
Ancient and Just Power? How were the Abuses taken away in Queen Elizabeth, King
James, and the beginning of King Charles his time, when few or no Scandals or
Libels were stirring? Was it not by Fining, Imprisoning, Seizing the Books, and
breaking the Presses of the Transgressors, by Order of Councel-Board? Was it
not otherwise when the Jurisdiction of that Court was taken away by Act of
Parliament, 17 Car. If Princes cannot redress Abuses, can less Men redress
them? I dare positively say, the Liberty of the Press, was the principal
furthering Cause of the Confinement of Your most Royal Fathers Person: for,
after this Act, every Malcontent vented his Passion in Print; Some against
his Person, some against his Government, some against his Religion, and some
against his Parts: the Common People that before this Liberty believed even a
Ballad, because it was in Print, greedily sucked in these Scandals, especially
being Authorized by a God of their own making: the Parliament finding the Faith
of the Deceived People to be implicitly in them, Printed the Remonstrance, the
Engagement to live and dye with the Earl of Essex, the Covenant, etc. and so
totally possessed the Press that the King could not be heard: By this means the
Common People became not only Statists, but Parties in the Parliaments Cause,
hearing but one side* and then Words begat Blows: for though Words of
themselves are too weak Instruments to Kill a Man; yet they can direct how, and
when, and what Men shall be killed: In the Statute of 21 Jac. Printing keeps
very*able Company* as Saltpeter, Gunpowder, Ordnance, etc. all which are
Exempted from being Monopolies.

Not to be longer tedious, I too much fear, this late Act for two years
compleats all the former Concessions of the late King: I know it was done in
have, and with a good Intent; but by Your Majesty's Gracious Leave and Pardon,
even then very considerable Persons in Your House of Commons, were of Opinion
they had nothing to do with it, the Power of the Press being so wholly in Your
Majesty. Indeed, Necessity that has no Law, was the cause of this Law, viz. to
hinder the Growth of Scandalous Books and Pamphlets; but it has fallen very
short of the End: for few or none, of many Printed, have bin brought in by the
Stationers. I have now discharged my Duty to Your Majesty, and if I find I have
so far prevailed upon Your Royal Goodness, as to ask unconcerned Council what
is best to be done, I have my End; I hope Your Majesty will have the Advantage.
So prays,

Your Sacred Majesty's most Humble Servant, and most obedient Subject, RICHARD
ATKINS.

TO The Right Honorable, THE LORDS* AND TO The Honorable, THE COMMONS
ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
May it please your Honors,
I Have ever better understood mine own Disabilities, then to desire to appear
in Print, where the Author stands as a Butt to be shot at, by the sharp Arrows
of every busy Critic, and runs a most certain hazard, and most uncertain
Benefit: But having been above twenty three years in Chancery, and other Courts
of Justice; and spent more then One Thousand Pounds, in vindicating the Kings
Grant of Printing the Common Laws of England, and His Lawful Power to grant the
same, and kept His Title alive even in the worst of Times (when 'twas reputed
unlawful, because the Kings*) I cannot refrain from defending it, now the King
is, or ought to be, restored to His Rights again; especially since all Persons
are invited by Order to speak their Minds freely concerning this Subject: So
that there is a Necessity upon me to speak now, or for ever hereafter to hold
my Peace; this being probably the last time of Asking.

It Is not unknown to every Member of each House, how little Benefit has
accrued to the Kingdom, by the late Act of Parliament for two years, Entitled,
An ACT for preventing the frequent Abuses in Printing Seditious, Treasonable,
and Unlicensed Books and Pamphlets, etc. Which Act determines June next: Nor
can it be thought, but that there is cause enough for another Act to take
place, when this is expired. The Reason why this present Act has operated so
little is most apparent; because the Executive Power is placed in the Company
of Stationers, who only can offend, and whose Interest it is to do so: They
are both Parties and Judges, and 'twere a high Point of Self-denial for Men to
punish themselves: But they will wipe their Mouths with Solomon's Harlot, and
take it very unkindly, if the same, or a greater Power be not continued to them
in the next Act to be made: They will promise as fair as the Long Parliament
did to the late King (to make Him a Glorious King) and perform it as certainly
as they did too.

Jugglers seldom show the same Trick twice together; and the Italian Proverb
is, If a man deceive me once, it is his fault; if twice, it is mine own: That
the Great Council of this Nation, should further trust those that have deceived
them already, and believe fair Pretenses, contrary to Reason and Practice,
would be a sad Fate upon Us all; when woeful Experience tells Us, That if the
King be taken from being Head of the Law, there will not want a Law to take off
His Head in a short time.

There were a sort of People in King David's time, which imagined Mischief as a
Law; as in the late King's time, that practiced Mischief by a Law: Which might
incline the Parliament to frame a strict Law against this kind of Mischief. But
I hope the King's Mercy in forgivin such, (by which He imitates His Maker) will
find so hearty a Conversion, that Ingratitude shall never join with Rebellion,
to provoke a Tyrannical Government over this Kingdom: such Men (if I may so
call them) are worse then the Gentiles, of whom St. Paul says, That having not
the Law, and doing by Nature the things contained in the Law, are a Law unto
themselves, which show the Law written in their Hearts; nay, worse then Beasts,
who by Nature observe a Law amongst themselves.

Shall Sense and Reason alone teach Creatures willingly to confine themselves
to certain Rules for the Common Good, and shall Professors of Christianity
break them? Shall the Law of Nature command Men to be free from offending; and
shall the Law of God be thought to command them to be free to offend? Let not
our too-near Neighbors the Turks have that Advantage against Us. But whilst I
declaim against others for breaking their Bounds, I may be thought guilty of
committing the same Error myself; I shall therefore most humbly beg your
Honors Pardon, and rest,

Your Honors Most Humble, and Faithful Servant, RICHARD ATKINS.

THE Original and Growth OF PRINTING.
REASON is the great Distinction between Man and Beast; Gusman calls the Man of
most Knowledge, A God amongst Men. And Bishop Hall divides the whole Duty of Man
into Knowledge and Practice. In the Infancy of the World (especially before the
Sealing of the Scripture-Canon) God Revealed himself and his Will frequently,
either Vocally by himself, as to Moses in the Mount; or else by diverse and
sundry other manners, As by Dreams, Visions, Prophecies, Ecstasies, Oracles, and
other Supernatural means: Nor will I Blow up the Humors of these Times so
high, as to Confine these his Miraculous Revelations to Gods People only
(though to them most frequently Revelation not Confined only to the People of
God.
and especially), but sometimes also to Hypocrites within the Church, as to
Saul and others; yea and sometimes even to Infidels, as to Pharaoh, Balaam,
Nebuchadnezzar, Abimelech, etc. But since the Writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, (commonly called the Scriptures) And that the Christian Church by the
Preaching of the Gospel, is become Ecumenical, Dreams and other Supernatural
Revelations, as also other things of like nature as Miracles, have ceased to be
of ordinary and familiar use; So as now we ought rather to suspect Delusion in
them, than ^o expect Direction from them: Yet God has no where abridged or
Limited himself from these supernatural ways of Revealing his Will, in case
his Written Word should be taken from us, or we from it: But we of this Latter
Age have all these so Lively represented to our View, by the benefit of
Printing, The great Benefit of Printing.
as if we our selves were personally present: For Printing is of so Divine a
Nature, that it makes a Thousand years but as yesterday, by Presenting to our
View things done so long before; and so Spiritual withal, that it flies into
all parts parts of the World without Weariness. Finally, it is so great a Friend
to the Scholar, that he may make himself Master of any Art or Science that
has been treated of for 2000 years before, in less than two years time. But
Virtue it self will not want Opposers, and Philosophy is ever odious to
ignorant Ears: Nay, there are a sort of People in the World, that account
Ignorance the Mother of Devotion, and therefore out of Conscience would not
have even the Scriptures Printed in the Mother Tongue: But I shall not go out
of my own Way, to bring them unto it, further than by defending the Theme I
have in hand.

Concerning the time of bringing this Excellent ART into England, and by whose
Expense and Procurement it was Printing supposed to be brought into England in
the Year 1471.
brought; Modern Writers of good Reputation do most erroniously agree together.
Mr. Stowe in his Survey of London, speaking of the 37th year of King Henry the
Sixth his Reign, which was Anno Dom. 1459. says, That the Noble Science of
PRINTING was about this time found in Germany at Magunce by one John
Cuthenbergus a Knight, And that Page 404.
William Caxton of London, Mercer, brought it into England about the Year 1471.
And first practiced the same in the Abbey of St. Peter at Westminster; With whom
Sir Richard Baker in Page 284.
his Chronicle agrees throughout. And Mr. Howell in his Historical Discourse
of London and Westminster, agrees with both the former in the Time, Person, and
Place in general; but more particularly declares the Place in Westminster to
be the Page 353.
Almory there; And that Islip Abbot of Westminster set up the first Press of
Book Printing that ever was in England. These three famous Historians having
filled the World with the supposed truth of this Assertion, (Although possibly
it might arise through the mistake of the first Writer only, whose Memory I
perfectly honor) makes it the harder Task upon me to undeceive the World
again: Nor wouldI undertake this Work, but under a double notion; As I am a
Friend to Truth, and so it is unfit to suffer one Man to be entitled to the
worthy Achievements of another. And as a Friend to my self, not to lose one of
my best Arguments of Intituling the King to this ART in his Private Capacity.

Historians must of necessity take many things upon trust, they cannot with
their own but with the Eyes of others see what things were done before they
themselves were, Bernardus non vidit omnia; It Is not then impossible they
should mistake. I shall now make it appear they have done so, from their Own,
as well as from other Arguments: Mr. Stowe his Expressions are very dubious,
and the matter expressed very Improbable; He says PRINTING was found in Magunce,
which presupposes it was practiced some where else before, and lost: And
further, That 'twas found in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, Anno Dom. 1459. and
not brought into England till Eleven years in the succeeding Reign of Edward
the Fourth, being 12 years after, as if it had been lost again. If this be
true, there was as little Rarity as Expedition in obtaining it, the age of 12
years time having intervened, and so indeed it might be the Act of a Mercer
rather than a more eminent Person: But when I consider what great advantage the
Kingdom in general receives by it, I could not but think a Public Person and
a Public Purse must needs be concerned in so public a Good. The more I
Considered of this, the more inquisitive I was to find out the truth of it: At
last, a Book came to my hands Printed at Oxon. Anno Dom. 1468. which was three
years before any of the recited Authors would allow it to be in England; which
gave me some reward for my Curiosity, and encouragement to proceed further: And
in prosecution of this Discovery, the same most worthy Person who trusted me
with the aforesaid Book, did also present me with the Copy of a Record and
Manuscript in Lambeth-House, heretofore in his Custody, belonging to the Sea
(and not to any particular Archbishop of Canterbury) the Substance whereof was
this, (though I hope, for public satisfaction, the Record it self, in its due
time, will appear.)

Thomas Bourchier, Archbishop of Canterbury, moved the then King (Hen. the
6th) to use all possible means for procuring a Printing-Mold (for so 'twas
there called) to be brought into this Kingdom; the King (a good Man, and much
given to Works of this Nature) readily hearkened to the Motion; and taking
private Advice, how to effect His Design, concluded it could not be brought
about without great Secrecy, and a considerable Sum of Money given to such
Person or Persons, as would draw off some of the Workmen from Harlein in
Holland, where John Cuthenberg had newly invented it, and was himself
personally at Work: 'Twas resolved, that less then one Thousand Marks would not
produce the desired Effect: Toward which Sum, the said Archbishop presented
the King with Three Hundred Marks. The Money being now prepared, the Management
of the Design was committed to Mr. Robert TurnoUr, who then was of the Roabs to
the King, and a Person most in Favor with Him, of any of his Condition: Mr.
Turnour took to his Assistance Mr. Caxton, a Citizen of good Abilities, who
Trading much into Holland, might be a Creditable Pretense, as well for his
going, as stay in the Low Countries: Mr. Turnour was in Disguise (his Beard and
Hair shaven quite off) but Mr. Caxton appeared known and public. They having
received the said Sum of One Thousand Marks, went first to Amsterdam, then to
Leyden, not daring to enter Harlein it self; for the Town was very jealous,
having imprisoned and apprehended diverse Persons, who came from other Parts for
the same purpose: They staid till they had spent the whole One Thousand Marks
in Gifts and Expenses* So as the King was fain to send Five Hundred Marks more,
Mr. Turnour having written to the King, that he had almost done his Work; a
Bargain (as he said) being struck betwixt him and two Hollanders, for bringing
off one of the Workmen, who should sufficiently discover and teach this New
Art: At last, with much ado, they got off one of the Under-Workmen, whose Name
was Frederick Corsells (or rather Corsellis) who late one Night stole from his
Fellows in Disguise, into a Vessel prepared before for that purpose; and so the
Wind (favoring the Design) brought him safe to London.

'Twas not thought so prudent, to set him on Work at London, (but by the
Archbishops means, who had been Vice Chancellor, and afterward Chancellor of
the University of Oxon) Corsellis was carried with a Guard to Oxon; which Guard
constantly watched, to prevent Corsellis from any possible Escape, till he had
made good his Promise, in teaching how to Print: So that at Oxford Printing was
first set up Printing first set up at Oxford.
in England, which was before there was any Printing-Press, or Printer, in
France, Spain, Italy, or Germany, (except the City of Mentz) which claims
Seniority, as to Printing, even of Harlein it self, calling her City, Urbem
Maguntinam Artis Tipographicae Inventricem primam, though it is known to be
otherwise, that City gaining that Art by the Brother of one of the Workmen of
Harlem, who had learnt it at Home of his Brother, and after set up for himself
at Mentz.

This Press at Oxon was at least ten years before there was any Printing in
Europe (except at Harlein, and Mentz) where also it was but new born. This
Press at Oxford, was afterward found inconvenient, to be the sole
Printing-place of England, as being too far from London, and the Sea: Whereupon
the King set up a Press at St. Allans, and another in the Abbey of Westminster,
where they Printed several Books of Divinity and Physic, (for the King, for
Reasons best known Printing depraved, by being Incorporated with others
to himself and Council) permitted then no Law Books to be Printed; nor did any
Printer exercise that ART, but only such as were the Kings sworn Servants; the
King himself having the Price and Emolument for Printing Books.

Printing thus brought into England, was most Graciously received by the King,
and most cordially entertained by the Church, the Printers having the Honor to
be sworn the None but the Kings sworn Servants permitted to be Printers.
King's Servants, and the Favor to Lodge in the very Bosom of the Church; as
in Westminster, St. Albans, Oxon, etc. By this means the ART grew so famous,
that Anno prim. Rich. 3. cap. 9. when an Act of Parliament was made for
Restraint of Aliens, from using any Handicrafts here (except as Servants to
Natives) a special Provisoe was inserted, that Strangers might bring in Printed
or Written Books, to sell at their pleasure, and Exercise the ART of Printing
here, notwithstanding that Act: So that in the space of 40 or 50 years, by the
especial Industry and Indulgence of Edw. the Fourth, Edw. the Fifth, Rich. the
Third, Henry the Seventh, and Henry the Eighth, the English proved so good
Proficients in Printing, and grew so numerous, as to furnish the Kingdom with
Books; and so Skillful, as to print them as well as any beyond the Seas, as
appears by the Act of the 25 Hen. 8. cap. 15. which Abrogates the said Provisoc
for that Reason. And it was further Enacted in the said Statute, That if any
person bought Foreign Books bound, he should pay 6 s. 8 d. per Book. And it
was further Provided and Enacted, That in The Price of Books not to be enhauced.
case the said Printers and Sellers of Books, were unreasonable in their
prices, they should be moderated by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the
two Lord Chief Justices, or any two of them, who also had power to Fine them 3
s. 4 d. for every Book whose price shall be enhanced.

Thus was the ART of Printing, in its Infancy, Nursed up by the Nursing Father
of us all, and in its riper Age brought up in Monasteries of greatest Account;
and yet were the Instruments thereof restrained from the Evil of enhancing the
prices of Books, to the Detriment of their Fellow Subjects, by the Authority
aforesaid. While they had this Check upon them, they were not only Servants to
the King, but Friends to the Kingdom: But when they were by Charter
Concorporated with Book-Binders, Booksellers, and Founders of Letters, 3 and 4
Phil. and Mary, and called the Company of Stationers, the Body forgot the Head,
and by degrees, (breaking the Reins of Government) they kicked against the
Power that gave them Life: And whereas before they Printed nothing but by the
Kings especial Leave and Command, they now (being free) set up for themselves
to print what they could get most Money by; and taking the Advantage of those
Virtiginous Times, of the latter end of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. and Queen
Mary, they filled the Kingdom with so many Books, and the Brains of the People
with so many contrary Opinions, that these Paper-pellets became as dangerous as
Bullets, to verify that Saying of Tertullian, That Lawyers Gowns hurt the
Commonwealth as much as Soldiers Helmets. Thus was this excellent and
desirable ART, within less than one hundred years, so totally vitiated, that
whereas they were before the King's Printers and Servants, they now grew so
poor, so numerous, and contemptible, by being Concorporated, that they turned
this famous ART into a Mechanic Trade for a Livelihood.

Object. 1.
But here I must break off (though abruptly) and answer an Objection; for
methinks I hear the Critic say, How can that be a Mechanic Trade now, that
the Author allows to be a famous Art heretofore, being always one and the
same thing?

The Matter of which before I answer, I must crave leave to give you the
signification of the Word Mechanic; the rather, because the several sorts of
Trades, of which the Company of Stationers are Composed (and more particularly
the Booksellers who say they are of no Manufacture) do peremptorily deny
themselves to be Mechanics.

How and why the ART is called a Mechanic Trade.
The Word Mechanicus, which signifies a Handicrafts-man, does in the strict
Sense comprehend Printers, Founders of Letters, and Book-Binders; And I
believe, in the large Sense, all Tradesmen whatsoever: But if that be
deficient, let us go to the Original Greek Word (...) which signifies, a
Cunning Contrivance of the Head, as well as Hand; and this will Answ. 1.
certainly take in all Trades, for as much as there is Cunning in all Trades:
But if it should miss any, yet it cannot fail of the Company of Stationers,
because they are denominated a Mystery, and there the strict signification of
the Word comes in again.

Now for the matter of the Objection, That a Famous ART cannot be a Mechannick
Trade.

Answ. 2.
I Answer, This is so far from being true, that there is nothing in Nature but
is good or bad according as it is used; for the great Creator of all things made
nothing to no purpose; even Meat and Drink (without which we cannot live) if
abused, destroys life; Twenty dye of Surfets, for one that is starved for want
of Meat. But to give you an instance ad idem:

A Simile taken from Music.
Music is not only an Art, but one of the Liberal Arts practiced by Princes
themselves, and made isntrumental to the Glory of God; yet what Trade is there
more despicable in the World both in Name and Nature, than a Common Fiddler;
though he may draw as good a sound out of an Instrument, and have as much Art
in Playing and Composing as any Gentleman, yet if he get his Living by it, and
makes it his Trade, he is still but a Fiddler: and herein I pity him more than
any of other Professions, because he perverts the Creation, and turns Day into
Night; for most commonly when sober Persons are in Bed, he must play to please
the humors of the lighter sort; And though his Heart be ready to break through
Melancholy, he must sing a merry Song to delight the Company, if commanded, or
have his Fiddle sing about his Ears: Is not this Mechanic, think you?

But to Return where I digrest; Printing became now so dangerous to the
Commonwealth, That there were more Books Burnt in Ten years, than could be
Printed in Twenty: And now it concerned the Prince altogether as much to
Suppress the Abuse, as it was before to Obtain the Use of Printing; And had
there not been a Reserve of Licensing such Books as should be Printed still
remaining in the Crown, they might have published the wickedness of their own
Imaginations with Authority. But Queen Elizabeth at her very first Entrance to
the Crown, finding so great Disorders in Church and State, by reason of the
abuse in Printing, Secures in the first place the Law and the Gospel, of both
which the Kings and Queens of England have inherent Right as Heads of the
Church, and Supreme of the Law; and not only in their public, but private
Capacity, as Proprietors; the Power and Signiory of this, under Favor, cannot
be severed from the Crown: The Kings being the Trustees of the People, who have
formerly taken an Oath at their Coronation, That they shall keep all the Lands,
Honors, and Dignities, Rights, and Freedoms of the Crown of England, in all
manner whole, without any manner of minishment; and the Right of the Crown,
hurt, decayed, or lost, to their Power shall call again into the Ancient
Estate. Which Oath, the said Queen kept inviolably, and lived the more quietly
for it all the time of her Reign, and died in Peace. True it is, they may, and
do gratify their Friends and Servants, in giving them the Emoluments and
Profits that arise from Printing; but the Power they cannot alienate from the
Crown, without losing the most precious Stone out of their Diadem. To show you
one Example for all, the said Queen, Patents for Printing, granted to several
persons.
the first Year of her Reign, grants by Patent the Privilege of sole Printing
all Books, that touch or concern the Common-Laws of England, to Tottel a
Servant to her Majesty, who kept it entire to his Death: After him, to one
Yestweirt, another Servant to Her Majesty: After him, to Weight and Norton; and
after them, King James grants the same Privilege to More, one of His Majesty's
Clerks of the Signet; which Grant continues to this Day; and so for the Bible,
the Statute-Laws, the Book of Common Prayer, Proclamations, as much as the
Grammar, the Primer, etc. art all granted by Kings and Queens, not only to
gratify their Friends and Servants, but to preserve the Regal Power and
Authority on Foot, and these Books from being corrupted.

The Truth of this the most impudent Opponent will not deny, because the
Patents themselves give Evidence against them; nor will they deny in words
(though they do daily in fact) that the King has Power to make such Grants.

Object. 2.
But this they will Object and say, That Gentlemen being not Printers by Trade,
nor Free of the Company of Stationers, can never find out the Abuses of
Printing themselves, nor understand the Cheats of them, they being so many; but
they must be discovered either by the Printers, or the Company of Stationers,
or both together: This is the Common Objection.

Answer.
To which I Answer; The Objection cannot properly lie against any man for being
a Gentleman, because the greatest Nobleman will not deny himself to be one, nor
can he with Honor refuse a Challenge from any Gentleman: And the very
Mechanic is so willing to disguise his want of Gentility, that when he arrives
to a Considerable Estate, he is very forward to purchase Honor. Nor can I
think any man the less knowing for being a Gentleman, whose Education is most
commonly at School, at the University, the Inns of Court, Travel, or both;
Whereas the Education of a Mechanic is only at School, without any other
Improvements: This being the Course that each of them generally runs, it is
strange if the Gentleman should not get the start, and be better known to
Letters, Manners, and Men, than the Mechanic. But this Objection goes further.

3. Object.
That though they may know Letters, etc. better than the Mechanic, yet they
can never arrive to a full Discovery of the Mystery and deceitful part of the
Trade; that they must give Handicrafts men leave to know best.

1. Answ.
To which I Answer; First, That there is no Magic in this Art; Jugglers they
may be, but Conjurers they are not.

2. Answ.
Secondly, That Gentlemen may and do know the Mystery and Deceit of the Trade
as well as those that act it; but their knowledge tends different ways. It is
the Gentlemen or Patentees part to detect and hinder this Deceit; As it is the
Stationers to promote and practice it: Their Profit blinds them so, that they
resemble certain Birds, who when they hide their heads, think none can see
their Bodies; Or like Children, who after a fault Committed, wink themselves,
thinking thereby that none can find them out. To render this possible, I will
give you an Instance of a Person, that none can deny to be a Gentleman, though
he were much more, (I mean the late King) who was not only aliquis in omnibus,
but singularis in omnibus.

The King more skillful than Mechanics in their own Trade.
This excellent Prince, hearing of a rare Head, amongst several other Pictures,
brought Me from Rome, sent Sir James Palmer, to bring it to Whitehall to Him,
where were present diverse Picture-Drawers and Painters: He asked them all, Of
whose Hand that was? Some guest at it; Others were of another Opinion; but none
was positive: At last, said the King, This is such a Man's Hand, I know it as
well, as if I had seen him draw it: But (said he) is there but one Man's Hand
in this Picture?

None could discern, whether there was or not: But most concluded, there was
but one Hand: Said He, I am sure there are two Hands in it, for I know the Hand
that drew the Heads; but the Hand that drew the rest, I never saw before. Upon
this, a Gentleman that had been at Rome, about Ten Years before, affirmed, That
he saw this very Picture, with the two Heads, unfinished at that time; And that
he heard his Brother (who staid there some years after him) say, that the Widow
of the Painter that drew it wanting Money, got the best Master she could find
to finish it, and make it saleable. Is it not strange, that the King that was
no Picture-Drawer himself, should see further into a Picture, than Painters by
Trade.

Patentees fittest to redress the Evils of the Press.
But were the Objection true (as it is much to be doubted) yet were the
Patentees still the very fittest Persons to be employed, in redressing the
Evils of the Press, wherein they are concerned, because their Interest leads
them to it: And Men will come to a soon Discovery, even of obscure things,
where their Interest inclines them; Indeed, the Printers Argument against the
Booksellers, etc. being all of the Company of Stationers, does hold in point of
Government amongst themselves, A brief Discourse concerning Printing. Page 8.
That it is absurd and ridiculous for any, to have the Rule and Oversight of
that which they have no insight in.

But this is not at all applicable (nor do they intend it to be so) to the
King's Patentees; who (if they be not Printers themselves, nor have a Printer
of their own) agree with one to Print such a Book, whereof they have the
Propriety, which Printer gives him Security to Print the same perfect, and with
a fair Letter; it matters not whether the Pattentee can set the Letters, or
have Skill in the Manufacture himself; it is sufficient for him to examine it
with his Copy when it is done, (which Copy cannot err, because it is under the
public License) and try whether it be as 'twas agreed; and if it be not as it
ought to be in all respects, the Printer loses his Labor and Charge: It Is the
Printers Interest then as well as the Patentees, to Print it perfect and fair;
without which, (should they both join together) they could not vend it, after
'twas Printed. I confess, it would argue an ill Nature in me, not to be sorry
for the just Occasion the Printers have to complain of their Brethren the
Booksellers, were it not for this, That when some men fall out, others shall
hear of their Goods: Yet I cannot but side with the Printers thus far, as to
Declare, Printers and Founders only necessary to the Art of Printing.
That they, with the Founders of Letters, are the only Instruments of absolute
Necessity in this ART; whereas Booksellers might be supplied out of the
She-Shopkeepers in Westminster Hall, if all the rest were higher promoted. In
fine, These Booksellers are the Drones that devour the Honey, made by the
Laborious Printers; I cannot so sensibly express it, as themselves have done:
therefore hear them* and not Me; Say A Brief Discourse concerning Printing Page
5.
they, So far were the Stationers from redressing the Printers Wrongs, that
some of themselves, took upon themselves, the Exercise of their Function, and
gave a Forreigner his Freedom gratis, to enable him to usurp the Exercise of
the Printers Calling; and to complete the Abuse, Erect a Printing House of
their own: so as it is become a Question among the Booksellers, Whether a
Printer ought to have any Copy or no? Or if he have, They (keeping the Page 7
Register) will hardly enter it: Or if they do, they and their Accomplices will
use all means to disparage it, if not downright counterfeit it, that they
Tyrannize over Printers. And further, That for want of a due Establishment,
Transgressors never want Incouragers Page 12.
to begin, or Chapmen to vend such Ware, when finished among the Stationers.
They desire, that such as are free of the Trade, may be free indeed, and not
manumitted (as of late) from the Service of one Master, to the Slavery of many
Tyrants: That the Stationers have Usurped their Callings, and encouraged, yea
Page 14.
hired others so to do, and stand related to each other, as the Buyer to the
Seller. Upon all which, they refer their Cause, to the same Power that gave
them theirs, who may resume, or abridge the same, upon Mis-use, at their
pleasure. This is a sad Complaint of Elder Brethren against their Younger; if
one Dog will not prey upon another, what Reason can be given, why Men should
devour Men? And if this be the Usage those must trust to, to whom they profess
Friendship; what is like to become of the Patentees, against whom they profess
Enmity? If such a Power be continued to them, which I hope will be seriously
considered The dangerous Consequence of power in the Stationers.
of, before it shall be re-granted. Success (which usually gives Confidence)
has so hardened them, that having not felt the Justice of the King's Hand, for
above twenty years last past, they now begin to swear Him out of, and Themselves
into, this Part of His Regal Power: For they being lately Examined upon
Interrogatories, between Atkins et Uxor. Plaintiffs, and Flesher and the
Stationers Defendants; some of them (I am sure) are so streight-mouth'd, that
they do not declare the whole Truth of what they know on our Part, and seem to
make a Conscience of Swearing at all; As if St. Paul had been in an Error,
when he said, An Oath for Confirmation, is an end of Strife. Indeed, they
strein'd at a Gnat, but when The Stationers Conscience.
they were to swear on the other Part (namely their own) they open their
Mouths wide enough to swallow a Camel. Say they, from the Year 1641. or 1642.
until the time of His Majesty's Blessed Restoration to His Crown, any
Booksellers that listed, did print, or cause to he printed, such Law Books as
seemed good unto them, without Restraint or Prohibition, occasioned by the
License of the late Times: And that such as had License under the King's Grant
to print Law Books, were hindered to make the Benefit of the said Grant; And
that it was usual for such persons as printed Law Books, to enter the same in
the Book of Stationers' Hall; And that it was conceived and taken, that such
person and persons, as Entered a Copy in the said Hall-Book to be Printed, had
the sole Right to print the same; and those that claimed the Right of Printing
Law Books under the King's License, were thereby taken to be Excluded, and
debarred to claim any Benefit therein.

Observe what a sad time the Kings Patentees endured for almost Twenty years
together, confessed by the Oaths of these honest Men, that joined in dividing the
Spoil: And shall it be so still, now the King is returned again? I dare
positively say it shall; Witness a Book called Poulton's Abridgment,
particularly Expressed in the Law-Patent, which they Printed since the Kings
Restoration, by virtue of an Entry only in their Hall-Book, against the said
Patent; the Patentee's Lessee Flesher (a principal Member of the Company)
finding the Stationers like to be worsted at the Council Board in the Contest
of their said Entry against the Kings Grant, joins Interest with them, and also
Engages the Kings Patentees Trustee, and the Kings Printers (who pretended
Some Interest in the said Book) on their side; As if several bad Titles could
create one good one: By which means after Four Hearings, the Cause (seeming to
be between Party and Party) was dismissed, but with the Recommendation of the
King and Council to the Lord High Chancellor, on the behalf of the said
Patentee (who had the Equitable Right): The Company to requite the Lessees
kindness in defending them from a Contempt against the KING, (he being the
person in Law that ought to have defended the Patent for the King against the
said Company) like Brethren -- join with the Lessee to defend him against the
Justice of the Court of Chancery, and Combine together to defeat the Patentee
of his Rent by Covenant, and so bandy the Legal Interest from one hand to
another, that it cannot be yet found where it Vests; and to enable him the
better, make him Master of the said Company for two years together (never known
before), and choose Wardens fit for the purpose, who Engage the Stock of the
whole Company on his behalf, against the King's Patentee: And being thus
fortified, they published the said Book with this Title Page, Printed for the
Company of Stationers, John Bill and Christopher Barker his Majesty's Printers;
and so make a mixed Interest, to render the Title the more questionable in the
future; but do not so much as mention the Kings Patent at all, by which the
said Book is granted by Name: This serves the Turn for the present occasion,
and being so possessed as aforesaid, Flesher and the Stationers give 200 l. to
the Patentee's Trustee to release the Rent and Covenants of the said Lease, and
the Kings Printers 100 l. or 200 l. for their assistance in so difficult a Work
as this, and then sell the Impression for 1600 l. (as appears by their own
Oaths) which Impression alone over-payes them all the Moneys they are out of
Purse: And had they not been stopped in their full Carrear at the Council Board,
or rather by Injunction in Chancery, (which they Complain of as a hinderance to
their Trade also by Oath) they had by this time altered the Ancient Law Books,
and cast them into a new Model of their own Invention; that by degrees the
state and truth of the good Old Laws by which Men hold their Lives and
Estates, should utterly be lost and forgotten, and new Laws framed to fit the
Humors of a new Invented Government; which they little value, so they may have
full rates for their Books, and their Goddess Diana be safe.

I have gone thus far upon mine own Strength only, without any public or
private assistance; and because I am not willing to endure theField much longer
of my self, I think it my Duty to state the Case truly as it is, and implore
the Aid of such Neighbors (who cannot probably prevent the burning down of
their own Houses, when mine is first set on fire): Common Experience tells us,
a just Cause signifis little of it self, if it be not backed with Diligence and
Friends: Bonum apparens et bonum verum et absolute, are so like, (though of a
Contrary Nature) that the Credit of the best Testimony gives either precedence;
it is therefore not only hard, but impossible for one Man to Contend with a
Thousand, and not be Conquered. Hercules was most Strong and Valiant, and yet,
ne Hercules contra duos. I have no proper Refuge but to his Majesty in this
Case, which I do chiefly Espouse for his sake, who like King David is worth Ten
Thousand of us. I have not the Power to Impose, but rather to Propose his
Majesty's timely Assistance: Only this I hope I may say without offense, That
if the King suppose it not for his Interest* I shall more willingly lay down
the Cudgells, than I took them up at first: But if otherwise, I am as Careless
of their Malice, as Gallio, it being not the first time I have past upon the
Forlorn Hope.

By this time the Impartial Reader may inclined to believe, It Is against the
Stationers Interest to redress the Evils of the Press.
the Company of Stationers are not the fittest Persons to redress the Evils of
the Press; because it is most certain, that none but themselves can offend: And
'twould be greater Self-denial in them than can be expected, to punish
themselves contrary to their Interests. There are at least 600 Booksellers that
keep Shops in and about London, and Two or three Thousand free of the Company
of Stationers; the Licensed Books of the Kingdom cannot employ one third part
of them: What shall the rest do? I have heard some of them openly at the
Committee of the House of Commons say, They will rather hang than starve; and
that a man is not hanged for stealing but being taken; necessitas cogit ad
turpia. But this is not all, it is not only for their Interest not to Suppress
them, but to Maintain them: An unlicensed Book bears Treble the price of
another; and generally the more Scandalous a Book is, by so much the more dear:
This has inricht the Wealthiest of them; and when they fear losing their
ill-got Goods, they put their Journy-men of the poorer sort, or their
Apprentices, upon the Work, going shares with them, and taking their Oaths or
other Security to be true to them, though false to all the World besides. Thus
do they breed up their Youth like the Lacedaemonians, who allowed their Children
little or nothing but what they could get by filching and stealing: That the
Printers are Poor and Numerous, can no body deny, for it has lately been the
great Work of this Parliament to lessen their Number, and to provide for their
Poor. But because Extreme Prices may be doubted by those that do not usually
buy, I will give you one Instance for all; I was lately in a Book-seller's
Shop, where I saw a Book in Quarto, entitled, Killing no Murder, The
unconscionable dealing of Booksellers.
it had but eight Leaves in all, stitcht up without binding, he demanded 5 s.
for it, and would not take less: A Book of the same bigness Licensed, would
have cost but 4 d. or 6 d. at the most. It Is not then the Interest of the
Company of Stationers to suppress unlicensed Books: Whose is it then? I
Confidently Affirm, it is the Patentees, who derive from the King. I shall give
you one Similitude of the like Nature; The King, as belonging to the Honor of
Windsor, has a great Quantity of Ground of which he makes little or no
benefit, because it lies in Common; And the Neighbors thereabouts, do not
only eat the Herbage, but steal the Kings Deer, and destroy his Woods, without
giving any Account or Satisfaction whatsoever: To prevent which Mischief, the
King Incloseth several Parks, and gives the keeping of them to several Persons
by Patent, reserving what he pleases out of them, the rest he gives the
Patentees: these are still the Kings Parks, though kept by the Patentees; for
the King kills what Deer he pleases, disposes of the Venison, and fells the
Timber for Repair of his Houses, Shipping, etc. What wrong does He to His
Neighbors, by Enclosing His own Lands, which He denies to none of His
Subjects? Yet His Neighbors are troubled, because they cannot wrong Him as
before; and upon every Distemper of the Commonwealth, destroy the Fences, and
make it Common again. Is it not (think You) the Interest of the Pattentees, to
defend the Kings Right, and their own Profit under Him, and to prosecute the
Law against such Offenders? Is not the Interest of the King and His Patentees
so involved, that they cannot be divided? Just so is it by Enclosing Printing;
the King Crown Lands and Printing, equally the Kings Right.
(having the Right thereof, as much as of any Crown Lands) Grants all sorts of
Books, necessary for the Education of Youth, or the Improvements of Age, or
whatsoever else is useful for Soul, Body, or Estate, to several Persons by
Patent; it will much concern these Patentees, in Honor and Profit both, to see
their several Grants be not Trespassed upon, nor Corrupted by others: And so
they have ever kept their Copies entire, till the latter end of the late King
Charles His Reign; At which time* the Company of Stationers, by fair The sad
Effects of the Executive Power of Printing in the Company of Stationers.
Pretenses, (as they did before to Queen Mary, to get their Charter) obtained a
Decree of Star Chamber, to Invest the Executive Power of Printing in them,
against the Patentees; and then Libellous and scandalous Books and Pamphlets
began to fly about like Lightning: And when this was strengthened with an Act of
17 Car. which took away the Jurisdiction of the Councel-Board and the
Star Chamber (at least between Party and Party), their Mischief was completed,
and they empowered to vent the Passions of all Discontented Minds in Print,
against Monarchy and Episcopacy; which they persu'd with such Diligence and
Success, that they did eradicate both Root and Branch: Whereas the
Council Board, and the Star Chamber, did usually Fine and Imprison such
Transgressors* Of which, I can show several Presidents, from the time of Queen
Elizabeth, to this King's Reign.

Object. 4.
But it may be said, Scandalous, Libellous, and Heretical Books may be Printed
of themselves, without any Relation to the several kinds of Books granted by
Patent.

Answ.
I Answer, It Is very true; but as long as the Gospel, the Laws, and all other
Books for the Advancement of Learning, good Manners, and Education of Youth,
that are in Grant, be kept entire, without any mixture of Heresy, Scandal, or
Schism, 'twill go a great way in preventing Libells and Scandalls; and the
Parliament may do the rest with greater Ease, by reducing the Number of
Presses, and inflicting great Penalties upon such as shall Print and Publish
Too great Penalties cannot be inflicted for Offenses in Printing.
unlicensed Books and Pamphlets: Which Penalties cannot be too big, because it
lies in their own power whether they will offend or not.

If the Power this Parliament has given the Company of Stationers, had taken
any good Effect, they might have possibly continued it: But as a Worthy
Gentleman Notes, amongst other most true and Ingenious Observations, That not
one Person has been Fined, and but one prosecuted, by the Company of
Stationers, since the late ACT, notwithstanding so much Treason and Sedition
Printed and More Treason and Sedition discovered by a Gentleman in two years*
than has ever been by the Stationers.
dispersed since that time; but he himself (being an Active Gentleman and Loyal
Subject) has Discovered more within this two years, than the Company of
Stationers have done ever since they had a Charter. To this give me leave to
add, That it is not likely (setting profit aside) even in order to Kingly
Government, they should suppress these Books; for a Corporation being in it
self a Petit- State, is inconsistent with Monarchy. Woeful Experience tells us,
That very few, if any, went further with the KING than their own Interests led
them; Which puts me in mind of a Story of Queen ELIZABETH, who being at
Quinborough upon an Occasion, the Mayor of the Town brought her onwards of her
Way so far, till the Queen desired him to return back again, saying, he had
brought her far enough: To which he replied, Madam, I Will bring your Majesty as
far as my Way lies. For his Worship, being a Landed Man, had a small Tenement
about a mile further.

I wish Corporations would do but as much as that, and not go out of their Way
to destroy Monarchy; for I must needs confess, that shining Shoes and set
Ruffs were very forward to sit in Judgment upon the late King's Party, for
doing but their Duty to their PRINCE, which they themselves ought to have done.

And here I might take occasion to say, That though the Laws of GOD be
infinite and everlasting, and fitted for all Times and Persons, yet the Laws
of Men are like themselves, Humane Laws subject not only to Imperfection, but
Death it self.
finite, imperfect, and subject to Infirmity, and Death it self, as the makers
are: Hence it comes, that so many Laws are repealed, and others made in their
rooms; and hence it may come, that all lesser Governments under a Monarchy may
by misuser be wholly taken away, or else abated; as was heretofore the Barons
Power by their so often taking up Arms against the KING; and the two Hundreds
of Dudson and Kings Barton, who were by this very Parliament taken out of the
Jurisdiction of Gloueester, though enjoyed by them ever since the Times of
Richard the Third, the Grant being judged unreasonable; our best Laws and
Constitutions by Age losing strength and vigor, as our Bodies do, either by
the Crafty Evasions of the Offenders, or by the alteration of their Vices, or
by the maladministration of Justice upon the Malefactors; for the just
performance of which last, none have greater Encouragement than the reward of a
good Conscience to fortify them against the malice of those they punish; who
though they Act according to their best Judgment, yet by reason of some
doubtful penning of a Law, Offenders are also many times taken out of the hand
of Justice, to the very great encouragement of the Delinquents, and
discouragement of the Punishers; insomuch, as when Twyn was lately arraigned
for Printing Treason, he was condemned by the old Law, though there be a new
one now Extant for that very purpose. And so I return to the Stationers again;
where I find them very Sollicitous with the Parliament to Enlarge, or at least
Confirm, this Power they have already, (resolving to have it by Hook or by
Crook) and Promising all care and diligence for the future, if they shall be
once more trusted; saying, with Absalom, O that I were made Judge in the Land,
etc. That every Man might have Justice: and what follows, but presently
raising an Army against King David, though his own Father.

Let not the Reader conjecture I lay an Imputation upon every particular Member
of the Company, (for there are too many of them that groan under the like
Burden, as I my self do,) but against the whole Corporation, as a Body
Politic (especially as it is now governed.)

I have now showed you the Practices of the Company of Stationers, and some
particular Members thereof, against the King, and his Patentees; who, like
Painted Sepulchers, appear Glorious without, but within are full of Rottenness
and Corruption: I have also opened, tented, and sering'd the Sores of their
Body Politic, and tried them to the quick (which I hope will not prove like
the Touch of a Galled Horseback, to receive a Kick for my Labor and
good will). But because I am not so good a Surgeon, as to close and cure
them again my self, I shall implore the help of the Parliament, and shall most
humbly Recommend them to their Cure, together with these ensuing Observations
and Proposals.

The Reasons inducing Queen Mary to Incorporate the Stationers, are expressed
in her Charter in these words, Nos considerantes quod seditiosi et heretici
Libri, Rithmi, etc. indies sunt editi, excuss. et iuspressi per diversas
scandalosas, malitiosas, Schismatic. et heretic. personas, non solum movend.
Subditos et Ligeos nostros ad seditiones et inobedientias, contra nos, Coronam
et dignitatem nostras, verum etiam ad maximas et detestabiles hereses, contra
fidem, etc. Et remedium congruum in hac part providere Volentes; de gratia
nostra speciali etc. The Queen Erects the Corporation with Powers and Trusts,

1. To make Laws pro securo regimine of the Members of the Company.

2. To search for and seize Books Printed contrary to Law.

Observations and Proposals recommended to the Parliament.
Observe. 1. The Erecting this Corporation has not proved Remediall against the
Mischiefs recited in the Charter; But the Queen was wholly deceived in the
Design aimed at in passing the Charter.

2. The Intrusting the Stationers with the Powers aforesaid, has not only not
remedied, but has encouraged, increased, and secured the Printing Sedition and
Treason. For,

3. The Persons who are Entrusted with the Search and Discovery of the Offenses
to be remedied, are themselves the Common Offenders therein.

Principals and particular Members of the Company high Delinquents.
The Company, in their Politic Capacity, cannot Execute the Trusts, or merit
or offend, but by their particular Members; diverse principal Members of the
Company have been actually Convicted, some as privy and accessory, other as
Principals, in Printing and Publishing Illegal Books; and many Treasonable
Books have been printed, during the late Troubles, for several principal
Members of the Company.

4. The Company of Stationers have in other things exceeded the Authorities
granted by their Charter, as by Imposing and Administering of Oaths, etc. and by
Entering other Men's Copies in their Hall-Book as their own, and then Printing
and Selling them, in Opposition to the King's Grant; and this by virtue of a
Law in the lat Evil Times: and have also assumed to themselves (by Color of
the said Charter) the whole Right of Priviledging and Exercising Printing, and
have Combined to oppose and overthrow the King's Just Power and Prerogative
herein, and Interest of His Patentees.

1. From all which it appears, the Crown has been deceived in the End and
Design of Erecting the said Corporation.

2. That they have not proved Remediall, but Instrumental, to the Increase of
the Mischiefs they should redress.

3. That they have broke and acted contrary to the Trusts imposed in them by
their Charter.

4. They have, by Color of their Charter, abused the Favor of the Crown, in
exceeding the Authorities granted them, and assuming to themselves the whole
Power of the Crown, concerning the Matter of Printing.

I therefore take the boldness, most humbly to propose to your Honors;

I. That the King's Just Power and Prerogative, in the impowring The Proposals.
and restraining Printing, and in the Hearing, Regulating, and Determining all
Differences touching the same* as a Matter of State, be Declared and Confirmed,
as an Ancient and Hereditary Right of the CROWN; And that all Laws contrary
thereunto be Repealed.

II. That an ACT for Regulating Printing may Establish Propriety therein
according to the Kings Grants thereof, and may direct Rules for the Licensing
and Management of Printing, and inflict Penalties for Abuses therein, with
Legal Means for the Executing such Penalties, and for settling and securing
every Man's Propriety, (saving the Right of the Crown) to regulate or restrain
any Interest or Right in Printing, or other matter concerning the same, which
by the King and Council shall be conceived a Nuisance of State.

III. That the Charter of the Company of Stationers, who Claym thereby an
unlimited Power in Printing, be examined, together with the Unreasonablenesse
thereof, and the Abuses committed thereby, by Testimony of Witnesses to be
Summoned to that purpose; And that the said Charter, and the Powers thereby
granted, be limited according to Reason and the true Intent of the Grant.

IV. That the Penalty for Printing without License, be forfeiture of the Book
or thing so Printed, and treble the value thereof, one Moiety thereof to the
Patentee or Party interessed in the Right of Printing such unlicensed Book (if
any person be therein interessed), or otherwise to the KING, and the other
Moiety to the Informer: But that Books once Licensed, may be reprinted without
License, or so much of them as shall be without addition or alteration.

V. That the KING's Patentee for Printing Law Books, be Priviledg'd with a like
Privilege, as the Patentees for the Bible are, or shall be Privileged; and
with Power to search with an Officerfor unlicensed Law Books, and to Seize and
carry away the same to some public place.

VI. That no Disloyal or Notorious Criminal Person for Printing Treasonable or
Seditious Books in the late Times of Trouble, be admitted to keep a
Printing-Presse; And that such as be Entrusted with a Printing-Presse, be Sworn
not to offend the ACT of Parliament, etc. and give Security for the same.

VII. That the Entry of other Men's Copies in Stationers' Hall, be declared to be
of no Validity, especially as to give them any Title to such Books as are
Granted by Patent to others.

Object. 5*
And now it may be most truly said, That the Author is very tedious, and yet
has made few or no Propositions but such as concern the King and his Patentees.

Answer.
To which I Answer, That all other Interests have not been wanting to make the
best of their Case, and their Desires to be fully understood; And as for the
Company of Stationers, they were by this late ACT so amply provided for, as
that at the Committee of the House of Commons they had nothing more of
Substance to desire. The Printers have also published a late Book, wherein they
desire to be Incorporated and made a Company of themselves, apart from the
Company of Stationers, of which they now are; and therein also have stated the
best of their Case. Mr. L'Estrange has also published a Book, wherein he
Treats of the whole matter in general, and shows the several Abuses of
Printing and Printers, but has not applied himself to any particular Interest:
And therefore I have taken the Boldness to say somewhat, though weakly, for the
KING and his Patentees; hoping an ill Pen shall not destroy a good Cause; But
that the Wisdom and Loyalty of this Parliament, which is Exemplary for both,
will Supply all Defects, and take the Will for the Deed; The rather, because
Extreme Necessity enforces me to say somewhat now before the ACT be past;
Which makes me rather adventure to be ridiculous, than wanting to my Duty. I
shall add only one word more, That in a Business of so great Intricacy and
Concernment as this of Printing, your Honors would not without very great
Consideration, make an ACT for Perpetuity, In which all Interests may be
equally Considered; the rather, because the late ACT now in being, which was
past in have, is judged (even by Your Selves) to have many Imperfections in it.

And if the Brewers, who at most can but steal away a Phlegmatic part of the
King's Revenue, deserve the serious Consideration of the Supreme Council of
England, how much more these, that do not only bereave the King of his
Good-Name, but of the very Hearts of His People; between whom there is as much
odds, as between a Pyrate that robs a Ship or two, and Alexander that robs the
whole World.

FINIS.

