AT Amsterdamnable-COFFEE-HOUSE
On the 5th. of November next, will be Exposed to pulick Sale these Goods
following, in several parcels.
Lot 1. THree large Volumes of the D. of Ms. Politiques, valued at three Crowns
to advance 3 d. each bidding.

2. Two Bundles of the said D. Behavior, Loyalty and Obedience, in 5 parcels,
of small value to advance nothing.

3. One Hobbs Leviathan with large additions, much studied by the late E of S.
in his Retirements, Teaching the reasonableness of Separation, and laying the
foundation of Government in the people, valued above all the Fathers, to
advance Atheists and Republicans.

4. Several Noblemens cast Suits Faced with Loyalty, and Lined with Honesty,
not much the worse for the wearing, which because they are not in fashion will
be sold at half the value to advance 6 d. each bidding.

5. Two span new Maidenheads sold by their own mother, for 100 Guinneys, now
valued at half the value to advance 2 s. 6 d. each bidding.

6. One large invisible Ring of Sir Tho. Armstrongs Engraven with Crowns and
Scepters, with a large Chain of the Mobile to lead a fooll by the Nose, valued
at a Kingdom, as they shall find occasion.

7. Six brace of Winding Horns that were sent from the K. of Poland to his
Principal Secretaryes of State, M. Gray, Russel, and to raise the Beagles of
the old game, valued at a Generals pay to advance 2000 dogs a piece.

8. Two large Wagons of the same to be distributed among Armstrong and the
rest of the inferior Mungrels to raise the blood scented Rabble, to advance a
Rebbel each bidding.

9. Six Whiggs Sheriff Chains with as many Aldermens of the same value 10
advance the same rate.

10. Two Cabinets of rich Jewels, Beads and Necklaces taken by Sir W. W. for
Popish Relics Valued at two thousand pound, to advance the spawn of the Old
Rump.

11. The Noble Peers Speech, the Appeal, the Raree show, with a large bundle of
Seditious Libels, by C. C. and the rest of the true Protestant-Pamphleteers not
worth the hanging, to advance the Pillory.

12. Three Loyal Votes pipeing hot from the house of Commons, One to exclude
the lawful Heir, and set up a Lawles one, 2. To make the King great by giving
him no money, The third for Establishing the Church and Monarchy, by setting up
Presbyttery, valued at the public good, to advance the Good Old Cause.

13. Two Narrative Sham-plots of Tapskies own invention, as true as Gospel,
valued at a Polish Crown, to advance the Salamanca Dr.

14. Twice as many Presbyterian Plots, proved as clear as the Sun, valued at
nothing to advance proportionably.

15. 6 Brace of Irish Mastiff Evidences in Pension to carry on the Presbyterian
Plott against the Papists.

16. Ten thousand spick and span new Protestant Flails, besides Swan Quills,
Goose Quill^ and Crow Q^ills to settle the Protestant Religion, by knocking
Monarchy on the Head, valued at the Authors necks, to advance the Protestant
Joyners.

17. Two models of the Association, from the Cabal, under the pretense of
Running Races, to raise he Country in Arms, valued at half a Crown to advance
a Coxcomb.

18. Two Else of the Association, valued above six Else of the Covenant, to
advance a new Common Wealth.

19. Two Sucking Bottles for the Babes of Grace, taken from the Tap head of
Reformation, by turning the Church into a Conventicle, to advance the
Protestant Religion.

20. An Epidemical Elixir in three Doses, Protestant Religion, Liberty, and
Property, as an infallible Antidote against Popery and Arb^^rary Power, fresh
from the same Tap, valued at the price of a Scaffold to advance a Traitors head.

21. Six pots of round and sound Protestants of the Church of England, among
whom are Be. Dr. B. the Author of Julian the Apostate, the Ignoramus Dr. all
valued at so many Halters to advance thirteen pence half penny.

22. A new Experiment teaching how to avoid the strokes of Justice, by cutting
ones own throat, valued at the Authors life.

23. A Magazeen of Blunderbusses, Muskets, Pistols, and designed by a Crew of
damned Rebels, to make a sacrifice of Royal Blood, valued at the purchase of a
Sledge to advance them to Tyburne, to be drawn, hanged and quartered Goodenough
for such Hellish Traitors.

ADVERTISEMENT.
At the same place you may be furnished with a Treatise called, The true
Protestant Translator, teaching how to translate Rome to Geneva, Jesuits into
Phanatiques, Pharisees into Dissenters, Monarchy into Parity, Order into
Confusion, Unity into Schism, Gospel into Sedition, Light into Darkness. Truth
into falsehood, Subjects into Sovereigns, Churches into Stables, Palaces into
Sails, and Kings from a temporal Crown to an eternal: Published by a late
Assembly of Pharisaical, Hipocritical and seditious Whiggs and Covenanters.

FINIS.

