THE Fundamental Constitution OF THE English Government.

PROVING KING WILLIAM and QUEEN MARY our Lawful and Rightful KING and QUEEN.

In Two Parts.

In the First is shown, The ORIGINAL CONTRACT, with its Legal Consequences
allowed of in former Ages.

In the Second, All the Pretenses to a Conquest of this Nation by Will. 1. are
fully examined, and refuted.

With a large Account of the Antiquity of the English Laws, Tenures, Honors,
and Courts for Legislature, and Justice.

And an Explanation of material Entries in Dooms-day-Book.

By W. A. Author of the first Answer to the late Chief Justice Herbert on the
Dispensing Power.

Errat siquis existimat tutum ibi esse Regem, ubi nihil a Rege tutum est;
securitas securitate mutua paciscenda est.

Sen. London, Printed by J. D. for the Author, 1690.

To the Right Honble AUBREY DE VERE, Earl of Oxford, Baron of Bolebec, Sandford
and Badlesnere; Lieutenant General of their Majesty's Forces; Colonel of the
Royal Regiment of Horse-Guards; Lord Lieutenant for their Majesty's in the
County of Essex; Knight of the most honorable Order of the Garter; and one of
His Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
My LORD;
THEY who observe what License has been given, as well as taken, to blemish the
Instruments, under God, and our King, in the greatest Deliverance, with the
most immediate appearance of God in it, perhaps of any next to that of his
chosen People of old; would think the Nature of things to be inverted, Triumph
to belong to the Conquered, and the most desired Deliverance to be worse than
the deprecated Bondage, or to lose its Nature, because it was the return of
Prayers and Tears, and not purchased by Rivers of Blood.

And aftertimes, I have seen an exact Pedigree o^ the Earl's Family from
Syford a noble Norman Gothic Extraction, Vid. Pref.
who was eminent under Rollo, who, Anno 912, obtained Normandy by Treaty with
Charles the Simple, and marrying his Daughter. This Syford made the like
bargain with Arald the first, Earl of Flanders, from which Marriage the Earls
of Flanders, and the Veres Earls of Guisnes in Flanders, descended. Alberic, or
Aubrey de Vere, or Ver, as he stands entered in Doomsday Book, is supposed to
have come into England with W. 1. It Is certain at the time of the great Survey
he was a Proprietor in several Counties, particularly in Essex; and Humphrey
the Son of Alberic had at that time several Manors in Norfolk and Suffolk.
It Is probable that this Son of Alberic died in his Father's Lifetime. I should
take the Comes Albericus, who is entered in Doomsday Book in several Counties
as a Proprietor, from before the reputed Conquest, to have been Alberic de Ver,
and the rather, because, otherwise he and his Descendents from that time are
wholly lost: and besides, no place in England can be found of which any
Alberic, or Aubrey was Earl, till the time of H. 2. when Aubrey the third of
his Name was created Earl of Oxford. But before that time the Office of High
Chamberlain belonged to the Family, and, as appears by Records which I have
seen in the Tower, was annexed to their Barony. But that of Bolebec belonged
not to it till about the time of King John, when Earl Robert married the eldest
Daughter of the Lord of Bolebec; the Barony of Sandford came by another
Marriage about the time of H. 3. the Barony of Badesmere came not till the time
of E. 3: with the eldest Sister and Coheir of Bartholomew Lord Badlesmere.
in which your Lordship's Great Name will flourish, taking root downwards, as
it has spread upwards to the first Ages, will treat their Memories with
Contempt, who would inure the Brand of Disloyalty and Unchristian Behavior
upon your Lordship, and the Followers of so bright an Example.

Seldom Dissert. ad Flet. f. 519. speaking of the time of Will. 2. sub idem
tempus, etc. eminentissimus erat, pristini plane commatis juris sine ulla
Caesarci intermixtione peritus, atque exercitatissimus apud nos Albericus de
Ver.
Nor was your Ancestor Earl Aubrey more eminent in the time of W. 2. for his
Skill in the unmixed English Laws, than your Lordship is, and will be to
Posterity, for your generous Defense of them.

Certain it is how much soever some pretend to passive Valor, they cannot bear
the Reproach of such extraordinary Virtue, and are forced to shut their weak
Eyes at that shining Bravery, with which your Lordship strugled, with the
Flatteries, and Threats of Fortune, and of Power: Becoming, in the Language of
the Heathen Philosopher, "a Spectacle most "pleasing to the Gods: the Effects
of which Pleasure your Lordship has felt, in the admired Tranquillity of your
own Mind, and in the Glory permitted you, of being signally accessory toward
the present Happiness of your Country; not only by your resolute Undertaking,
but even by your Sufferings.

I must own the Sufferings of others to have contributed to it by accident, as
those things may well be said to be, which happen contrary to the intention of
the Agent, and nature of the Action.

But the Nation was glad to find their private Resentments, and self-Defence,
to carry them along with the Public Interest, which some of them had
sacrificed to low Ends, or stupidly neglected; being as unconcerned at public
Calamities, as if their former Exemptions, which they seemed to aim at, had
made them of another distinct Community.

Such as these deservedly lost the Credit of their share in this Revolution,
not only as they had drawn their Sufferings upon themselves, and others, by
tempting those whom they flattered to make Experiment of the force of their
Doctrine; but as their subsequent Carriage has demonstrated, upon what narrow
Principles they engaged, not in the Cause of their Country, but their Own.
Their lowness of Spirit makes them resemble those fawning Creatures, whom the
least Gentleness raises to Familiarity; but notwithstanding the Advantages
which they enjoy under this Government, it is not to be presumed that they are
given them otherwise, than to reclaim and wean them from Notions, as
destructive, as they are useless, to this equal Administration.

They who now pretend to merit, by transplanting the Doctrine of the Bow-string
into the Service of this Government, would do well to consider, whether in the
late Reign it really profited any but themselves; and whether they kept to it
any longer, than while they found their account in it.

As it is our Happiness to have a King born, and acting for the Good of
Mankind, it is not to be feared that he should cherish what is contrary to
their common Sense, and Interest; or that he will countenance Reflections upon
those noble Patriots, who ventured every thing dear to them, in the same Cause
with himself, while Success was doubtful; and whose Reputations, next to his
own, facilitated that Revolution, for which late Posterity shall praise those
of this Generation.

One would think that such a Cause should not stand in need of Advocates, or
they of Patrons: yet when Men High in Titles, and Pretenses to the Service of
Crowns, range themselves on the other side, and Reflections fly about, and must
fall some where; it is requisite for Men of my Mediocrity, to be clothed with
the Privileges of them for whom they plead.

Under this Protection I may affirm, that while your Lordship would have the
Throne established in Righteousness, So Seneca represents the Epicureans
justifying the Worship of a God. Deus colitur propter Majestatem eximiam,
singularemque naturam. Sen. de Beneficiis, lib. 4.
and the Crown not only to be easy to them that wear it, but amiable to all;
Others, out of folly, or design, would remove the very Foundation of this, and
all regular Governments, hanging them by Geometry upon mere Air; and render
Kings, like Indian Gods, to be worshipped only for their Power to destroy, not
for the Beneficence of their Natures: which eximious quality in their
Majesty's, and in your Lordship, absolutely disposes of,

My Lord, Your Lordship's most obliged and devoted humble Servant, W. ATWOOD.

PREFACE.
THE following Collections, in which I may say I have taken some Pains, are but
an Enlargement upon what I published, immediately after the Accession of their
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, to the Throne of this Kingdom.

I must needs say I was glad to find, that the Effect of those Studies, which
had drawn upon me the weight of an Arbitrary Government, might at least entitle
me to the Protection of a Government, which rose, like the Phoenix, from the
Ashes of the other; and was founded in such a Consent as gives Establishment to
our Laws.

Some may think I carry the Point too far, and prove more than is fitting; they
at least for whose Conviction so much was needful, that they may gain strength
to their Party, will represent all that oppose their Extreme as embarked in the
other. And as they were justly become odious to all People who had any love for
the English Liberties, they will be sure to run down others as Commonwealths
Men, not fit to live and breath in a Monarchy.

But to give the Objection its full weight, The Doctrine of Non-resistance, or
Passive Obedience, no way concerned in the Controversy, etc. By a Lay-Gentleman.
I shall consider it as it has been managed by a Lay-Gentleman, who contends
that the Doctrine of the Bowstring was just to the late King, and would be
serviceable to this; but that the contrary is dangerous to all Crowned Heads.

And while I vindicate them who expose the modern Notion of Passive Obedience,
I will show that they who may be presumed best to understand their own
Doctrine, in effect condemn him for a Renegado.

This Lay-Gentleman absurdly labors to prove, That they who would not assist
their Prince, to maintain that Power which they had beyond measure advanced,
and were both in Principle and Practice, against contributing toward our
present happy Settlement, are, for those very Reasons, the only Persons fit to
be trusted under it.

The greater his Abilities are, and the larger his foresight of Consequences,
the more is he confounded in the Defense of those of our Clergy, who have made
the greatest Noise for that spurious Non-resisting Doctrine, which he, and
they, would impose upon our Church as its genuine Sense.

While he, like a true Son of the Church, takes the Rules of his Obedience, and
of judging in Civil Affairs, not from the Laws and Legislative Power, but from
the Bishops; upon which account alone, he will have the Truth of our King's
Declaration, The Doctrine of Non-resistance, etc. p. 5.
when he was Prince, not to be questioned, because, forsooth, all the same
things in a manner are complained of in the Bishop's Proposals.

And thus, if Matters of Fact, or Points of Law, are adopted by the Clergy,
it is not for the profane Laity to enter upon this hallowed Ground, without
their License; and for them to take it from the Church, is such a sort of
Sacriledg, as Dr. Heylin, and others, charge upon our Reformers, for alienating
and clearing the Nurseries of Superstition.

Vid. Hist. of Passive Obedience, p. 97. speaking of Dr. Hicks his Jovian, that
elaborate Commentary on the Doct. of Passive Obedience.

P. 96. Dr. Sherlock's Book of Non-resistance is so strong, and his Arguments
from Scripture so cogint, etc. The Doctrine, etc. Page 2, 38.


Tho this Lay-Gentleman had not explained what he means by the Non-resisting
Doctrine, any Man who has read those Books which are still vouched as the
Standards for it, might easily understand, that that which they who wish well
to the present Government would have extirpated out of the World, and he would
keep up, as having such Characters of Divinity as deserve Respect from us all,
as we are Christians, is,

The not resisting the King, or any commissioned by him, but being wholly
passive, when our Constitution and Laws are notoriously violated, and we are
persecuted against Law.

Page 2.
Wherein this Gentleman would have Obedience to continue when the Law which
required and ascertained it, is subverted in such a manner, as there can be no
question of it, this he owns that the late King was guilty of, Page 7.
and that he would give us no assurance we could rely on, to do otherwise for
the future. So that we were to expect, that what he calls an arbitrary, Page 3.
tyrannical, exorbitant Persecution, would, if not prevented, have been
entailed on our Posterity.

And the truth of it is generally, to avoid Suspicion, he sufficiently loads
the late King; yet it is not without reason, that the boldest Talkers have
formerly been suspected to have secret Indulgence; The Design of the Author of
the Magistracy and Government vindicated.
but in this he is something more politic than the Author of the Vindication
of the Magistracy and Government of England, who would make his Court to this
Government by justifying the last; yet this Gentleman's Policy is no more than
needful, when he contends that to excuse them of the English Nation, who have
been instrumental toward the late Revolution, Page 36.
we must set up our selves against the Doctrine of Christianity. Such a Liberty
do some Men take, with hopes of Impunity, of branding those Men, whom all
Generations to come will praise, for shaking off that Yoke, which neither they
nor their Forefathers were able to bear; and must have entailed Curses on
their own Memories, had they suffered it to be entailed on their Posterity.

This zealous Gentleman need not wonder, Page 1.
or be impatient (except as his Sores are rubbed) at the bandying of this
Non-resisting Doctrine to and fro in this distracted Kingdom, Page 1.
till the Broachers of it, who first raised the Disturbance, if they have not
the Grace to repent, at least have the Modesty not to boast of it, and to style
themselves the only good Subjects, Page 3.
and good Christians; especially till they leave off, not only censuring, but
misrepresenting others, who, by a fair state of the Question, are they alone
who are directly contrary to them; which himself is elsewhere sensible of, when
he says " of the direct contraries in all probability one is true; Page 35.
but the direct contrary to what they hold is not, that it is lawful for every
Man to rebel when ever he thinks it necessary; Page 2.
much less when he pleases. Page 37.


Himself yields that non-assisting the late King was notoriously necessary for
preservation of the Nation; and what restrains others from judging when there
is the like notoriety for resisting? As he charges others with holding, that
they may resist when and whom they please; they may say that he is for not
assisting in the like latitude, Page 37.
and for cramping the Government, if he has not the Courage to attempt against
it.

We may resist when the Original Contract is notoriously broken, and we must
not resist when the Original Contract is notoriously broken; are contrary and
contradictory Propositions, one of which I grant to be true: But we must resist
in no case, and we may resist in any case, Page 37.
when every Man pleases, or, at least, thinks it necessary, are not Contraries,
Page 2.
but Extremes; and it is odds but the Truth lies in the middle, that we may
resist in some case, which cries aloud, and justly stirs up a Nation, as with
the Voice of God.

This Gentleman does not observe, that the Question is of one who ceases to be
King, according to that of Bracton, non est Rex ubi dominatur voluntas, and non
Lex, which is not barely his Opinion, but warranted by that noble Transcript of
the Original Contract, the Confessor's Law, which shows, that if a King does
not answer the true end for which he was chosen, he loses the Name, or ceases
to be King, which was very well understood by J. 1. who told his Parliament,
Vid. J. 1. his Speech in Parl. March 21. Anno 1609.
that every just King is bound to observe that Paction made with his People by
his Laws, framing the Government thereunto; and a King leaves to be a King, and
degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off to govern by Law. And thus
the Protestants in Germany who resisted the Emperor, notwithstanding their
Oaths of Fidelity to him, Hornii orbis Polit. p. 18.
pleaded that they resisted him not as Caesar, but qua non fuit Caesar.

Our Author confesses that the late King notoriously subverted our
Constitution, Page 2.
did not treat us like Englishmen, but Slaves, and says, all grant his design
was certainly to extirpate the Protestant Religion, Page 16.
to enslave, and consequently to extirpate the English Nation. And I dare
appeal to Dr. Falkner's Christian Loyalty to try ours by in such case, Dr.
Falkner's Christian Loyalty.
where there was a manifest Renunciation of the Government as an English King.

And surely no Man of Sense will say, that such a liberty for resisting, as
this Lay-Gentleman imputes to the Williamites, can be the Consequence of
resisting such a Prince as he describes, and of exploding that Sycophantry
which did encourage, and would support him; or that the best of Princes can
need the influence of that Doctrine, which hurried on the other to his Ruin:
the insinuation of this is the greatest Reflection which can be put, not only
upon the Friends of their present Majesty's, but upon their Majesty's
themselves.

Tho some would have been so ungrateful to have sent his Majesty back
uncrowned, after he had rescued them from their present Fright, which might
soon have been laid with a fevv flattering Caresses; the English Nation abhors
such a Reproach: nor can their Majesty's so far depart from their own Nature,
to violate that Constitution which they have restored; nor yet can the
confuting their slavish Doctrine of Passive Obedience, Page 36.
in the least derogate from that religious Awe and Reverence, which is due to
Crowned Heads: tho it may remove that Bugbear and Mormo, with which some would
fright Mankind out of love with them.

Nor can any good Prince's Crown be unsecure, by rejecting the deceitful
Officiousness of others; since nothing can hazard it, but such extravagant
Actions as a well-dispos'd Prince can never fall into, and which by natural
Consequence as well as Equity, provoke a whole Nation. The Laws make all
Risings against the King punishable with Death, and therefore single Persons or
Companies, in their sound Minds, will not attempt them, but when the Cause is
so apparent, that they who suffer them to stand alone in it, do but invite and
encourage Attempts upon the Lives and Liberties of all: But if, as often such
there are, hot Men over-valuing themselves, or the Strength of their Adherents,
will endeavor to destroy a good Government to raise their Faction, or
accomplish some low Ends of their own; the Prince has sufficient Security with
the Laws and Hearts of his People on his side: And how strict soever the Laws
are, it is a vain thing to expect Safety from them alone, when any part of that
Authority from which they flow, is rendered cheap, or invaded with an high
hand. And they who think to get above all Law, will find their open Violations
to give the same Freedom to others, which they take to themselves.

It ought, says the Lord Clarendon, Lord Clarendon's Survey of the Leviathan,
p. 48.
prudently to be considered whether People may not be very naturally disposed
to use that Force against him, that declares himself to be absolved from all
Oaths, Covenants and Promises: and whether any Obligation of Reason, or
Justice, can establish the Government in him, who founds it upon so unrighteous
a Determination.

As a judicious Person has well observed, The new Oath of Allegiance justified,
Edit. An. 1689. sold by Ran. Tailor.
If single Persons, or many together be injured by the Prince, they are obliged
to suffer quietly, rather than disturb the Public Peace, and in this case
Passive Obedience is a Christian Duty, and is necessary to the Quiet of every
Nation; since the best Governors may by mistake injure some few; and if they
do so, that does not break the Compact, because all the People collectively, or
representatively, were but one Party in the Stipulation; and therefore those
Acts, by which a King must forfeit, are such as are likely to take away the
Rights of the whole People, or aim at changing the Form of the Government,
subverting the Laws: In such case Passive Obedience is not the Duty of a
Community, who have Rights and Liberties secured by Law; and for the whole
People to stand by silent, and see that done, is the greatest Folly, and the
highest Treachery to their Country and Posterity.

Doctrine of Non-resistance, p. 1.
But as this Gentleman asks, What can the Friends of their present Majesty's
pretend to palliate their Contempt and Scorn of the current Doctrine of Passive
Obedience? Some would ask, whether he does not exclude himself from the
glorious number of Friends?

Nor will they be shy of affirming that he does so, when they observe, that he
contends that they forgot their Duty both as good Christians, Page 3.
and good Subjects, who declared for the Prince of Orange, his now Majesty,
before the late King actually left the Nation.

Yet he seems not aware, that while he blemishes these, with setting up
themselves against the Doctrines of Christianity, he condemns, Page 36.
not only some of our Clergy, but the Church of England, for maintaining a
Doctrine, which he does not deny to be destructive to the Constitution of our
Government, and to Mankind: by which one would be tempted to think, that his
business is, to make Men not only out of love with Crowned Heads, but with
Christianity it self.

Page 36.
As to particular Persons he confesses, that the heat of Controversy has misled
some of the Church of England, to write too much in favor of wicked and
tyrannical Princes, even to the encouraging them to do worse, than otherwise
they would. Where he taxes their Doctrine of Non-resistance with encouraging
Tyranny, and such excesses of it, as the Tyrant would not otherwise presume
upon.

Page 31.
Nor does he less condemn the whole Church. The Disloyalty, says he, of two
other Parties have made the Church of England take into the contrary Extreme;
and, as a Jesuit wished it might do her much good in scorn; So she had like to
have paid too dear for the pretense: and they who would now again sacrifice
her to their Interest and Reputation, are, to speak softly, none of her best
Friends. They pretend we have not suffered enough for our Religion to justify
our Resistance, Why? according to their Principles, we are never to resist
whatever we suffer, but to suffer on till there is not one left to resist.

Herein I confess he makes a true Representation of that Principle which
himself runs into so naturally, that he is not sensible of it.

But is not this by him judged to be an Extreme to be avoided? Does he not
yield that the Church of England has been made to take into this Extreme, out
of abhorrence to the other? Nay, does he not in effect admit, that himself and
others sacrifice the Church to their own Interest and Reputation, while, that
they may justify their Extreme, they condemn those who avoided both Scylla and
Charibdis, in Making to an happy Port, along with our Caesar and his Fortune.

God forbid that it should still be Men's Interest to justify that Extreme! and
let them enjoy the Reputation, of never acknowledging an Error, tho the most
gross and pernicious.

But what a miserable Defender has our Church, which must needs reject such
Doctrines and Defenses!

If Churchmen are the Church, Statesmen the State,
Truth may profane, or lybel else the Great.
This Gentleman pretends to have the Scriptures, Page 35.
and all Primitive Antiquity on his side, Vid. inf. f.
to which he would draw in the Church of England; which upon a rational
Construction cannot be thought to mean more than, that we are bound to obey the
King's Legal Commands, and not to resist him while he continues King: nor has
that any thing against the Supposition of a Civil as well as Natural Death. And
as to the two other Topics, it is to be considered, 1. That the Scriptures
meddle not with particular Constitutions, but give a general Rule for Obedience
(which is more than bare Non-resistance) according to those Constitutions which
are God's Ordinance, as he authorizes Human Laws, in Civil Affairs, not
contrary to his own. And, 2. Page 3.
This Gentleman himself sets aside all Primitve Antiquity when he confesses,
that in those times the Religion was contrary to the established Laws; and so
Men could not be persecuted for it against Law, at least not so as to come up
to our case: especially if we take in what he acknowledges farther;

The Roman Emperors, says he, under whom they lived, So Jovian, p. 85, 86.
Julian did persecute them legally, vid. p. 91.
were absolute independent Princes, whose Will was the Law; and the
Constitution of the Empire differed vastly from that of England, so that we are
not under the same Obligation they were; because our Princes have not the same
legal Power as the Roman Emperors had: but then I doubt not but we are as much
bound to submit to the legal Commands of the King of England, as the Primitive
Christians to the legal Commands of their Princes. But, says he, this was no
part of the Controversy under the Reign of James 2. who had as little Law as
Reason for what he did.

If this be not a giving up all Primitive Antiquity, I shall never pretend to
understand how words ought to be taken.

Since therefore, neither the Scriptures, Primitive Antiquity, nor the Doctrine
of the Church of England are against them, who embraced and assisted in the
Deliverance which his present Majesty vouchsafed us; it became not this
Gentleman, who takes such pains to purge himself from having any hand in it, to
censure those Worthies who had, as not behaving themselves like good Christians
and good Subjects. Page 3.


Page 3.
And to call them a few, is almost an equal Reflection upon the honor of the
Nation, which has never been backward in freeing it self from Tyranny; and was
ready as a Man to act in this King's Service, before they were so just as to
lay the Crown at his Feet; nay, before Success had crowned his glorious
Enterprise: which almost all were eager to evidence as they had opportunity;
and I may say of many, with Mr. Cowley in his Description of Envy.

They envy even the Praise themselves bad won.
That the Body of the Nation were thus forward, is manifest in their declaring
by their Representatives that the late King had broken the Original Contract;
which must have been before the Judgment passed upon it, or ortherwise the
Judgment were not warrantable.

Page 25.
When the Gentleman will allow of no Title in his present Majesty, but real
Conquest over the Nation as well as the late King, and lawful, meaning lineal,
Succession; either of which Titles he supposes he may claim by; he would do
well to consider, 1. That he reflects upon the great Representative of the
Nation, which founds it upon the others Misgovernment. 2. He sets it all aside,
when he owns that this King does not claim by Conquest; nor in truth could he
be a Conqueror, who was not only invited by those who had a just Ascendant over
the Minds of the People, but was prayed for, and received with open Arms, by
the Nation in general; tho indeed such an universal Consent, with such
Inducements from Gratitude and the common Necessity, ought to subdue all
Scruples, as much as the most real Conquest.

And this Gentleman must yield that our King does not claim as lawful
Successor, if lawful be confined to Succession in the Line, not only as the
Predecessor is alive, and two are invested with the Sovereignty annexed to the
Crown of this Realm, which according to Dr. H. and others of that Notion, Vid.
Dr. H. his Preface to Jovian, p. 41.
is void and null; but if Conquest (which could be no Foundation for Hereditary
Succession in the Conqueror) be out of the question, according to this
Lay-Gentleman's Principle, there could be no color for the Succession, but a
bare Desertion, or leaving the Kingdom without providing for the Government,
which whether voluntary or involuntary he matters not; and consequently, Page 6.
as this might be forced and submitted to animo revertendi, that alone could
not devolve a Right upon a Successor: Shall no Misgovernment whatever put an
end to this Right, yet shall a supposed faultless Desertion? How could any upon
this Principle excuse the Attempts for restoring King Charles the Second? Men
cannot reasonably hope to serve their Party with Notions, which would condemn
more of them than they can pretend to justify.

Besides, effectually to set aside the invidious Suggestion of a real Conquest
over the Nation, and absurd one of a legal lineal Succession, in such
Circumstances as attend this Case; his Majesty cannot be presumed to claim the
Crown, but as he received it, nor to have received it but as it was offered,
which was upon the Vacancy of the Throne, through the others Violation of the
Original Contract between Prince and People.

But if, for the sake of an unreasonably disaffected Party, Men shall be
allowed to reflect, Page 36.
not only upon those, who being duly discharged from their Allegiance to the
late King, assisted this from the beginning in settling the Kingdom; but upon
the Proceedings of our true Representatives, and the Settlement it self, for
fear lest the exposing their Insolence and Folly should exasperate them; it
would argue that distrust of the Cause, which would be a greater Justification
of their Insolences, than they can derive from any other color.

But if, as our Representatives have judged, and thereby concluded us, the
Contract was broken before they determined so; what ought to have restrained
them, who were so inclined, and had opportunity, from meeting our Great
Deliverer, as the Jews did Alexander, with an High Priest, or Bishop in the Van?

And they who leave wholly to Providence, what may require their Cooperation,
deserve an Epicurean God, like unto themselves, merely Passive, or unactive,
while the World goes round.

Page 34.
This Gentleman tells us, that as we had no disloyal Exhortations from Press and
Pulpit to persuade Men to fight against their Prince (tho he might have met
with many a strong innuendo, enough to have stigmatized a poor Whig) so neither
had we any to pers^ade us to fight for him, but the thing was committed to God
to determine as he thought fit; and he says, if it were unlawful to resist him,
Page 7.
it was also as unlawful to assist him, and enable to destroy the true
Religion, the English Liberties and Immunities, nay the very Nation.

Now it is evident, that if our present King had not received Encouragement
from many in this Nation who had promised, and were ready to assist him as
occasion might serve, the bare non-resisting the late King and his Army, had
enabled him to destroy the English Nation, which it is granted that he was bent
upon; and therefore assisting our present King was not only no Sin, but a Duty,
by the same reason that it was a Duty not to assist the other.

But they who are of a contrary Opinion can by no means excuse themselves, for
not fighting for the late King, or endeavoring to assist him, when he stood in
need, and required it of them; for if he continued their lawful King, whom they
were bound not to resist upon any account whatsoever, according to this
Advocate for the Non-assisters, they were obliged to obey all his legal
Commands; Page 5.
and they were certainly equally bound as they would be true to their Oaths to
bear him Faith and true Allegiance, and to their Power to assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies and Authorities granted or belonging
to him, as King, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

This they were certainly bound to against a Foreign Force, for Preservation of
that Head of the Government, which, notwithstanding the most tyrannical Sway,
they will have still to be God's Ministers to them for good, Vid. page 1.
and which their Prayers, and Tears, joined to temporal Arms, might have
rendered useful to their purposes: Tho they were not obliged to assist him in
the Execution of illegal Violences, yet, if they were to bear with him
notwithstanding the utmost, they were in other things to help him carry on the
Government: and their Sins of Omission, must needs be as heinous as others of
Commission.

Nor is this Gentleman more happy in appealing to Primitive Antiquity to
justify the Non-assisting, than he has been for the Non-resisting Doctrine: For
those Fathers who forbad a Soldier's Life, did it not as 'twas in the Service
of Pagan Emperors, but upon Supposition that the use of the Sword was unlawful
for them to whom they gave the Precept, to which end he that takes the Sword
shall perish by the Sword, was applied, which yet was originally meant, only of
taking it up without a lawful Call.

But Tertullian, on whose Authority our Non-resister relies, agrees that they
who had taken the Military Oath to Pagan Emperors before Baptism, were bound to
fight for them; according to which, they who had sworn Allegiance to King
Charles the Second, his Heirs and lawful Successors, and to defend the Rights
of the Crown; nay, all they who had sworn at any time before our Seers had
their Eyes opened, by their feeling the Effects of their own Doctrine, were,
upon pain of Damnation, to fight for the late King, till the chance of War had
decided the Controversy.

And whatever liberty of judging he charges as the Consequence of the resisting
Doctrine, will fall upon the non-assisting, which is as truly a departure from
Duty, and as great a breach of the Oath of Allegiance, while the Duty of
Allegiance remains, as the other. Let him assign the time from whence it was a
Duty not to assist, and I shall not scruple to pronounce, that from that very
time Resistance was as warrantable, and more honorable.

But suppose, for once, that the Primitive Fathers were against fighting for
Pagan Emperors, as they were Pagans, and to bring it home to the late Case that
the Protestant Jacobites were excusable from fighting for the late King, as he
was a Papist; would not this be a virtual disabling him from being King of this
Protestant Nation? for otherwise, as it is an undoubted Prerogative, or
Privilege of this Imperial Crown, for the King to make War and Peace when he
judges it fitting, notwithstanding Men's Oaths to defend all the Regal
Privileges, they were not bound to defend this, especially if the War were
against Protestants; in which case, the Subject would take to himself the
Judgment of the Justice, or Expedience of the War, as much as others do of the
necessity of resisting.

Or, suppose yet farther, that the late King had discharged his Mercenaries,
and commanded the Militia, by Law established for the Defense of the Kingdom,
to march and fight against his present Majesty, had not this been a legal
Command? The King's legal Commands, he agrees with me, that we are bound to
obey, yet he with all agrees, that it was unlawful to assist the late King
against This, before he was crowned: How then can the matter be adjusted,
without yiedling, that the late King lost his Regal Power by assuming a
Tyrannical one?

This may suffice to show, that they who resisted the late King, did it not out
of Principles either Antichristian, or Anti-monarchical; and that they who are
for the non-resisting Doctrine, as it past for current in the last Reign and
the foregoing, and yet pretend a Zeal for the present Government, do but daub
with untempered Mortar; and as they were not to contribute to the late
Revolution, so much as in their Prayers, but on the contrary were to pray for
the late King's Victory over all his Enemies, and in effect that God would keep
and strengthen him in his Kingdom, as well as in that Worship, which they could
not but know not to be God's true Worship; So if that misguided Prince should
desert Ireland, and return into their Arms, for a Punishment of those Opinions
which occasioned his Ruin, their pretended Loyalty to this King, if they prove
true to their Principles, must fall to the ground: And the least puff of Wind,
adverse to us, but prosperous to the Jacobites, would blow up that Fire covered
with deceitful Ashes, to the extinguishing of which I shall readily devote my
Service.

The Lay-Gentleman who has extorted my Reflections, by his indecent Censure of
the Subjects of this Monarchy, who contributed toward the late Revolution,
thinks it clear that the Doctrine of Passive Obedience is no way concerned in
the Controversies now depending, between the Friends, and no Friends, if not
Enemies to their present Majesty's; having, in his vain Imagination, put it
past question that the Williamites were neither good Subjects under the late
Administration, nor good Christians, and true Members of the Church of England:
And that his good Christians and true Members are the only Persons, whose
Principles may be relied on now.

Yet since he will have the Sense of the Church to be known from the Cry of the
Clergy, and a Bishop, supposed to be a Martyr for it, may be presumed to give
the Sense of that Truth, which he would be thought to attest to the last.

If this Gentleman will not hear me, let him hear the Church, for his
Conviction in this matter.

The late Bishop of Chichester's Paper.
BEing called by a sick, and I think a dying Bed, and the good Hand of God upon
me in it, to take the last and best Viaticum, the Sacrament of my dear Lord's
Body and Blood, I take my self obliged to make this short Recognition and
Profession.

That whereas I was baptized into the Religion of the Church of England, and
sucked it in with my Milk, I have constantly adhered to it through the whole
course of my Life; and now, if so be the Will of God, shall die in it; and I
had resolved, through God's Grace assisting me, to have died so, tho at a Stake.

And whereas that Religion of the Church of England, taught me the Doctrine of
Non-resistance and Passive-Obedience, which I have accordingly inculcated upon
others, and which I took to be the distinguishing Character of the Church of
England, I adhere no less firmly and steadfastly to that, and in consequence of
it, have incurred a Suspension from the Exercise of my Office, and expected a
Deprivation. I find in so doing much inward Satisfaction, and if the Oath had
been tendered at the Peril of my Life, I could only have obeyed by Suffering.

I desire you, my worthy Friends and Brethren, to bear Witness of this upon
occasion, and to believe it as the Words of a dying Man, and who is now engaged
in the most Sacred and Solemn Act of conversing with God in this World, and
may, for ought he knows, to the contrary, appear with these very Words in his
Mouth, at the dreadful Tribunal.

Manu propria subscripsi, Johannes Cicestrensis.


This Profession was read, and subscribed by the Bishop, in the Presence of Dr.
Green, the Parish Minister, who administered. Dr. Hicks, Dean of Worcester. Mr.
Jenkin, his Lordship's Chaplain. Mr. Powell, his Secretary. Mr. Wilson, his
Amanuensis, who all communicated with him.


Here it is observable;

1. That the Bishop, as fallible as an inferior Clergyman, died in that
Opinion, which he had professed and inculcated in his Lifetime, so warmly and
so often, that himself believed it: Tho it may be a Question, Whether he would
on his Deathbed have affirmed (as he had done in his Pulpit, where Men's
Affirmations ought to be as solemn as at the last moments of Life, Sermon at
Tunbridg.
) That they could not enter into Heaven without particular Repentance, who in
derision were called Ignoramus Jurymen; because they would enquire into the
Credibility of Witnesses, and scorned to enslave themselves to the Directions
of Judges, or more powerful Influences from White Hall.

And tho it seems the Tower had not weaned him from his fondness of Passive
Obedience, perhaps it did from that which he had expressed toward our then
Court's firm League with France, while he believed it designed to curb none
here but the Fanatics.

Vid. the Defense of his Profession concerning Passive Obedience, and the new
Oaths, Ed. Anno 1690.
These severe Truths, tho in proof beyond Contradiction, I should gladly let lie
buried with him, were not his Ghost still kept walking to do Mischief.

And if the Authority of a Man's Person or Office shall, without any other
ground, be set up to condemn the far greatest number of Persons, of at least
equal Credit and Station, it is no more than requisite to show that this Man is
not more than others, exempted from Errors, and the common Incidents to
Humanity.

2. The Bishop shows, that the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, which he had
inculcated, as the Doctrine of the Church of England, and which he found
himself obliged to propagate at his Death, is so far concerned in the
Controversies now depending, that upon the account, or in consequence of
holding to it, he had incurred Suspension, and expected Deprivation, for not
taking the Oath of Allegiance to our present King and Queen; wherein he
abundantly confutes our Son of the Church.

And all the Authority which can be derived from the Bishop's
Dying-Declaration, to prove the Doctrine of Passive Obedience to be the
Doctrine of the Church of England, equally proves that this is essential to the
Controversies depending, between the Friends of the late Government, and the
happy Subjects of this.

As a just Corollary from which, we may affirm, that no Man who is true to the
Doctrine of Non-resistance, or Passive Obedience, can bear Faith and true
Allegiance to our King and Queen. In consequence to which, as I have above
shown, such are bound to their Power to assist the late King, and to maintain
the Regal Rights which he still claims, as King of England; if they are
entrusted with any of our King's Secrets, to reveal them to the other; and to
employ all those Advantages, which his Majesty's Favor may give them, Preface
to the Hist. of Passive Obedience.
toward the advancing that Interest, to which they believe themselves
unalterably bound.

And tho our King, with the Generosity of Alexander, may trust himself with
them, of whose at least probable Designs, he may have certain Information; yet
no Man need wonder that his Friends offer him the Notice, and that they would
have that Doctrine extirpated out of the World, without which, it were
impossible for him to have an Enemy in the English Nation, but a Papist. And
even among them, I dare say, all but the bigoted Slaves to their Clergy, are
sensible of the benefit of his Protection; and may encourage themselves in
civil Obedience to him who is King over them, from the Examples of St. Anselm,
with other holy Men, and the generality of their Clergy, who quietly obeyed the
Power which protected them, without considering, whether the Person who
administered it stood next in the Line, or no.

And tho it may be excusable for a dying-Man to justify his own Sincerity to
his private Friends; yet when the matter which he affirms is of such
Consequence to the Peace of that Government which had rescued him, and the
Church in which he had such a Trust, from impending Ruin, and afforded it and
him sure Protection, tho he had disabled himself from farther benefit; he ought
not, certainly, to have taken such Pains to transmit his Opinion to the
knowledge of the unthinking Vulgar, who were likely to be influenced by it;
unless he were certain, beyond the least shadow of doubt, that this was not
only a Truth, but of such a nature, that the Sin of Ignorance in others were
damnable: Or else, that the Restoration of the late King were preferrable to
Submission to this. The last, I hope, his Admirers will not say; and since the
first evidently depends upon Points of Law; tho ignorance of human Law cannot
reasonably excuse before Men, who know not the Heart, and when the Plea ought
to be allowed, when not; yet there is no doubt but it will before God.

But who would not be impatient to find our great Law-Casuist Dr. H. to justify
his Disaffection to the Government, under the Umbrage of the Bishop's
Declaration, and to boast himself a Confessor to this pretended Martyr,
without producing more color for it, than a dying-Bishop's Belief, that this
is in Consequence of adhering to the Religion of the Church of England.

Had any one published thus much in the Reign of Innuendoes, when Dr. H. was
the Trumpeter to the Imperial Power, in Contradistinction to the Political one,
he would have met with Col. Sydney's Doom, who suffered for publishing
Hicksian Treason all over his own Study.

Jovian, p. 236.
And were Dr. H. to be judged by his own Law, it is certain he would be
pronounced a Traitor, if the Publication of this Paper were proved upon him.
For in his Jovian he says, What tends to Treason is Traitorous.

The Lord Hollis his Book against the Bishop's voting in Capital Cases; he
says, for the same Reason is an impious and treasonable Book; because it
abounds with Falsifications of Records, etc. and asserts that the King is one
of the three Estates. Page 237.
And the Dialogue between the Tutor and Pulpit is a treasonable Piece, because
it misrepresents the English Government, as if it were a Reciprocal Contract
betwixt the King and the People; and as if the Parliament ought, whether or no
the King pleased, to sit till all Grievances were redressed, and Petitions
answered. By the last of which the Bishops were Traitors for their Proposals to
King James. And by the former, Vid. the Bishops Proposals.
all those Passive-Obedience-Men are Traitors, who publicly maintain an
Opinion which necessarily implies, that the Right of the last King could not be
altered or diminished, for any matter which induced King William to undertake
our Deliverance.

If Men of the Doctor's Opinion will be exasperated for being driven from their
Coverts, they should consider that they ought rather to be thankful, that they
are put to no further Mortification, while they cease not to give jealousy to
the Government, by maintaining or patronizing, what is inconsistent with that
Peace, which they are bound to pray for.

But Dr. H. it should seem, Jovian, p. 104.
now aims at the Glory of taking that boldness and liberty of speaking and
acting, which he says was common among Confessors, by which they showed the
greatness of their Zeal to suffer for God: and how much they despised that
Authority which was over them, in Competition with their Duty to God. And this
may be to retrieve his Reputation for not calling the late King an Idolater,
Ib. page 96*
a Bread-worshipper, a Goddess-worshipper, a Creature-worshipper, an
Image-worshipper, a Wafer-worshipper, etc. which we might have expected for the
making good his Vapor before he came to the Trial.

Did his then Silence agree with that supernaturul Courage, Page 297.
which he was fully persuaded God would inspire him with?

And does it not seem odd, that the Inspiration should seize him to the
Prejudice of that Government, under which alone it can reasonably be expected
that Protestancy can be supported; but should be vvanting in a Popish Reign?
The Jews had a Divine Caution against receiving even those Prophets who
wrought Wonders, if they labored to withdraw Men from the Worship of the true
God. And surely Protestants would not scruple to reject the Doctor's Pretenses
to Inspiration, Vid. Dr. H. his Raviliac Redivivus*
which some would be ready to ascribe to that Spirit which himself had found
out for the fluency of some Men's Prayers, or rather to that lying Spirit in the
Mouths of the Jewish Prophets, which encouraged Ahab to go out to fight, for
what had formerly been in the Possession of the Crown of Israel.

3. The Bishop will have this Doctrine of Passive Obedience to be the
distinguishing Character of the Church of England; and therein admits, that she
holds it in a manner differing from all other Protestant Churches. And if this
be so, the acting or believing according to it, can be incumbent only upon the
unfeigned Assent and Consent-Men. But we of the Laity, who believe our selves
to be true Members of the Church of England, may be allowed to act without any
regard to that Principle, which would distinguish us from all other
Protestants. And how much soever some may be concerned to keep up the
Distinction, it is to be hoped that we shall be more wise, and more true to the
Interest of the Church universal.

If, as the Bishop says, the Religion of the Church of England has taught this,
and this is the distinguishing Character of this Church, will not Men say that
he makes this Church to have a Religion as well as Ceremonies of its own?

The Mischief of Separation.
A Prelate more deservedly eminent, tells us, That the sign of the Cross is the
Right of Admission into the Church of England, as Baptism into the Catholic.
But according to this Bishop, the Admission into our Church ought to be upon
the Condition of subscribing this Doctrine, Jovian, p. 227. speaking of the
Church of England and himself, It is she that taught him to preach up Passive
Obedience, like a Parasite, Sycophant and Murderer: Poor Man! he sucked it in
with his Mothers Milk.
which his Godfathers and Godmothers were to have promised and vowed in his
Name. And then, tho he had not, like Dr. H. (who, perhaps, herein played the
Plagiary from Jovian) sucked in this Religion with his Milk; he might well have
been baptized into it.

The Reasons of this Bishop's maintaining and endeavoring to propagate his
Opinion, to the Disturbance of our present Settlement (next to his Obligations
to the late King, which the first misunderstanding was not to erace) were
apparently,

1. The sourness of the Milk, which he had sucked in from his Nurse or Mother;
which is known to have a great influence upon the Constitution of the Body, and
that upon the Mind; insomuch that Mr. Dreyden, and some other such
Philosophers, have insinuated that the Soul is nothing else but the Temperament
of the Body.

2. The prejudice of his Education, whereby he was taught to believe this to be
part of his Baptismal Vow. Which being the only Reason that he has thought fit
to bless us with, as judging it sufficient; in following this Episcopal
Authority, he who was bred a Pagan ought to be a Pagan still: And if we believe
a topping Divine of the Church of England, Vid. Warley's natural Fanatic,
dedicated to the then Chancellor of England. F.
the Pagans can produce better Reasons for their Infidelity, not only than any
we have yet had for this distinguishing Piece of Religion, but, than can be
brought for Belief in the true God, without having recourse to the Scriptures
interpreted by the Church. But the Church which he complemented being the
Church of England, the Popery of his Notion went down very glibly at that time,
as the Authority of this single Bishop does with many now.

3. The Weakness of his Judgment, which is obvious, not only in the wording his
dying-Paper in such a manner, as either condemns his own Church of Singularity,
or all others of Corruption, in departing from that Religion which she alone
has the honor to profess; but farther yet, if he were in his sound Mind at the
subscribing his own, or Dr. H. his Confession of Faith, he would have
reflected, that tho he might have done enough to quiet his own Mind, he had not
used due means for informing himself of what he ought to press upon others, as
a necessary matter of Belief; having debated it either with Divines, who are
but second-hand Casuists for this, or else with Laymen of the Gentleman's
Opinion, who would maintain the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, and yet exclude
it out of the Controversy which it has raised and keeps up.

I speak not this without grounds: for in debate with a Divine of our Church,
whose great Worth, Learning, Moderation, and Integrity have justly raised him
above all degrees in Station; the Bishop did frankly confess, that he believed
the Question to issue in a Point of Law: And for his Satisfaction he had
discoursed with a certain eloquent Person, whom he named, supposed to have
sucked in Law with his Milk, as the Bishop did his new Divinity, nurss'd up
since Queen Elizabeth's days. But this Person being one who has acted upon the
same Principle, and makes it his Glory not to have his Opinion altered by his
place; I think no Man who observes what lame work the Lay-Gentleman has made,
of endeavoring to reconcile the Doctrine of Passive Obedience with Submission
to our present Government, will wonder, that he could not receive Satisfaction
from one, who held the same Premises with himself, but denies the Conclusion.

This ground for the Bishop's Pertinaciousness, I must own, is not evident to
all: but his consulting Dr. H. is; who, I may well say, is hardened and steeled
in his Profession beyond hopes of Conviction; since by the Writer of this, Vid.
Letter to Jovian, Ed. An. 1683. p. 14.
he was long since admonished, of having shamefully abused those Authorities on
which he relied, and of having, by his Concessions and Contradictions, fully
set aside all that he would enforce: and this at a time, when this Writer ran
the utmost hazard by exposing a Man, thought so highly to have served them who
were in Power, and called themselves the Government; And when the Doctor, by
refuting the Objections, might have had the Reward, as well as boast of a
Triumph.

Yet for the Comfort of them whom he then trampled upon, he had disabled
himself of his Sting, while he quitted the Authority of a Preacher of God's
Law, for a partial Reporter, and Expounder of Man's.

His Errors or Perversions, as far they concern our present Controversy and
Government, may be reduced to two Heads.

1. The Estate in the Crown, and Derivation of it. 2. The Rights or
Prerogatives of the Crown.
1. For the first, he says, this Kingdom is originally hereditary, Preface,
Page 13.11.9.78.5.53.60. Jov. p. 38. Page 25. Preface, Page 55.
in an inalienable, indivisible, lineal Succession, by the Original Custom and
Constitution of the English Government, tied to the next of the Blood: Or, as
he has it elsewhere, fixed in one Family, and lineally descending in Proximity
of Blood. With this Hereditary Monarchy an Interregnum, or Vacancy of the
Throne, is inconsistent, as also its descending upon two Heirs at once.

The Succession which he describes, he says is from God alone, who has given
it to the Royal Family for a perpetual Inheritance, and has by his Providence
ordained, that it should come to one of them after the Decease of another,
according to Birthright and Proximity of Blood: Page 58.
But God's Providential Appointment of one to reign, he grants, not of it self,
to carry the Right beyond the Person in Possession by such Appointment:
Wherefore tho God's Providence had often given the Roman Empire to a Man, and
some of his lineal Descendants after him, he contends, Page 46.
that the Roman Empire was not Hereditary, but Elective, by the Suffrage of the
Legions, and the Consent of the Senate, according to the Custom of the Empire:
And so was, in his Sense a Republican sort of Monarchy; Page 52.
and Heirs, says he, among them is to be taken in the Sense it then had, for
chosen, or constituted Heirs, or Successors.

But the first rise of the Custom concurring with God's Providence to fix the
Crown here, Pref. p. 7.
he makes to be the reputed Norman Conquest, which first brought in this
limited way of hereditary Succession unto one Line.

This I take to be a true and full Scheme of his Notion upon this Head; whereby
it appears, That it wholly condemns our present Settlement, Pref. p. 56.
as against that absolute Right or Birthright, to exclude which, even in
Reversion, he says, would be to oppose the Will of God. And yet till he
disprove what I shall offer against the belief of a Conquest made by W. 1. or
show either that Custom or Constitution which proves that the Crown of England
has, so much as since the supposed Conquest, been strictly and indivisibly tied
to him or her who either was in Possession, or expected it, as next of Blood; I
may affirm, that according to his own Hypothesis, God has not so given it in
his Providence.

I would desire no greater scope to prove our Government to be fundamentally
an Elective Monarcy, keeping within a Family, but not confined to the next of
Blood, than he takes to prove the Roman Empire to be Elective. Nor would I
desire any other Justification of the present Oath of Allegiance,
notwithstanding the former to the King, his Heirs and Successors, than what
himself would allow of in the Roman Empire.

But if God has by his Providential Appointment transferred our Allegiance to
our present Sovereigns, Vid. the Preface to Predictions concerning this
Government.
and no such Original Constitution or Custom, as is pretended, can be produced,
which I have formerly evinced, and more at large in the following Treatise, the
Doctor's Foundation of unalterable Allegiance to the last King failing, it is
odds, but an Agreement between a King, with the Lords, and a full
Representative of the Commons of England, will bid fairer for being according
to the Original Constitution of our Government, than the Doctor's fancied
Fundamental, and indivisible Entail of the Crown.

If Conquest only, without any Original Entail by the Conqueror, or Consent of
the Conquered, has fixed it to the next of Blood (tho in truth the Providential
Appointments, till the Settlements occasioned by the Quarrels between the two
Roses, have generally been otherwise;) then it is plain that this is such a
Right as may be entirely lost by the conquered Possessor. And as Will. 1.
conquered Harold, tho he did not conquer the Kingdom, Vid. inf.
having been designed Successor in the Confessor's time, and after invited by
the Clergy chiefly; and coming to a speedy Agreement with all in general: So
this King conquered the late; for he who runs away without fighting, is at
least as much conquered, as he who fights and is beaten; nay, in truth, more
absolutely: for he that is beaten, generally gets some Terms for himself,
whereas the other dares not stay to take them.

2. As to the Rights, or Prerogatives of the Crown, by such an impious way of
using Quotations as he unduly charges upon the Lord Hollis, he goes about to
prove, that all that Sovereign Power by which the Nation is governed, which
must be equally absolute in all independent Governments, (in which sense all
Crowns that are not Feudatory, or any ways under a Foreign Power, are Imperial)
is by our Constitution vested solely in the Person of the King. In the English
Government, Page 240.
says he, tho the House of Commons bears the show of a Democracy; and the Peers
look like an Aristocracy among us, yet our Government is a perfect Monarchy,
because the Supreme Power is, as I have proved, neither in the one, nor in the
other, nor in both together; but solely in the Person of the King.

Vid. Grot. de summa potestate, subjecto potestatis, and modo habendi
potestatem.
Where he is not satisfied to have the Supreme Power in the King in a supreme
manner, so as neither Commons nor Lords, nor both, have it equally or
co-ordinately, but nothing less than the absolute manner will answer his
Scheme, as will appear farther.

I was the more willing, says he, to make this Observation, that when I speak
of Sovereign Princes, Jov. p. 240.
I may not be maliciously traduced, as if I spoke of them exclusively of other
Sovereigns, as if Monarchy were of sole Divine Right. For want of this
Distinction, other Writers have had this invidious Imputation laid upon them.
But this Reason of not resisting the Sovereign, because he is God's Vicegerent,
and only subject to him, is a common Reason of Passive Obedience to all
Sovereigns, as well as unto Kings, and unto Kings as well as unto any other
Sovereigns, etc.

If the Government of Men, as well as Angels, be from God, then it must follow,
That upon whomsoever God is understood to bestow the Sovereign Authority, he
must also be understood to bestow upon him all the essential Rights of
Sovereignty.

It Is manifest that this is upon Supposition that God has bestowed the
Sovereignty absolutely; for otherwise every one who has the Name of Sovereign,
would be equally entitled to all the Rights: And where God has not bestowed all
the Essential Rights, it is as evident that he has not bestowed the Sovereignty
absolutely.

Accordingly, himself owns, Page 239.
that the Sovereign must be always understood the real, and complete Sovereign:
because there are many seeming Sovereigns, which are not really such: and
instances in the Kings of Sparta, subject to the Ephori, who being appointed by
the People, he says, The People themselves were the real Sovereign next under
God.

Upon which some may ask, Whether if our Constitution in some case warrant
taking up Arms without, or against Command from the King, that may not be done
by the Authority vested in the People, for preserving the Constitution, without
using the traitorous Position that the King's Authority may be turned against
his Person? And whether if there be such a real Sovereignty lodged with them to
that end, and the Constitution likewise in some Cases discharges Allegiance,
and makes the Person to whom it was sworn cease to be King, this Right can be
altered or diminished by the Declaration, that it is not lawful to take up Arms
against the King?

But to proceed with the Doctor.

Page 242.
In all Sovereign Governments Subjects must be Slaves as to this particular;
they must trust their Lives and Liberties with their Sovereign: Which with us
he supposes he had proved to be the King, according to all the Rights of
absolute, or complete Sovereignty. And having started up an Imperial Law, or
Common Law of Sovereignty, Page 202.
for the evacuating the Political Constitutions of this Nation, made in the
complete Exercise of the Sovereignty, I am sure, says he, in this Realm the
Sovereign cannot wrong nor injure his Subject, Page 226.
but contrary to the Political Laws; where perhaps he may serve himself of Mr.
Hobbs his Distinction, Leviathan, f. 98.
that his Sovereign may commit Iniquity, but not Injustice or Injury in the
proper Signification.

And thus a King of England has Right to make his Subjects Slaves when he
pleases. Tho this naturally follows from the Doctor's Tenets; yet one would
have thought that in Prudence this frightful Consequence should have been left
for others to find out; were it not that there was some reason to believe, that
by such Prints and Preachments the People had been sufficiently prepared for
Slavery.

But here indeed the Doctor admirably distinguishes, that this is with relation
to particular Persons, whom he may destroy one by one, Page 192.
or Company by Company, yet he has no Right to enslave the whole People, by
altering the Constitution of the Government from a Civil into a Tyrannical
Dominion, etc.

Yet even in this Case he allows of no Resistance, but that still being upon
Supposition that the Power, which was restrained in the Exercise (a Power to
act, and not to act) was vested absolutely in the Sovereign; till he proves it
so here, all his Authorities from Scripture, Homilies, or elsewhere, fall
beside the Question, which is of one assuming an absolute, or imperial Power,
when the Constitution gave no more than Political one; Vid. Fort. de laudibus
Legum Angliae.
according to his own Quotation out of Fortescue, explained by the whole course
and design of that admirable Vindication of our Laws.

After all, he owns the whole to be a Controversy of Law, that all the Laws of
Men, are the Laws and Ordinances of God. And so God's Law places the absolute
Sovereignty wherever Man's Law does.

Wherefore from the whole it follows,

1. That Lawyers are the best Casuists in this Point.

2. That if our Law requires true Allegiance to be paid to the King in
Possession, and allows of all Constitutions made by him with Consent of Lords
and Commons duly represented, then the new Oath of Allegiance is required by an
Ordinance of God; and they who refuse it fight against God. For the not obeying
lawful Authority is evidently more a resisting God, than the forcibly opposing
a pretense to Authority neither derived from God, nor Man.

This Inference I must own will not reach those Passive-Obedience-Men who
believe that Monarchy is the only Govenment of Divine Right, or that human
Choice or Constitutions cannot intervene in the disposal of the Sovereignty,
nor yet Dr. H. his own Notion of the Original Entail of the Crown.

But till the Doctor has answered the Letter formerly addressed to him, or
rejoined to Mr. Johnson, I should think this enough for his Conviction, tho I
do not expect that he will confess it; For the keeping up a Reputation with a
Party, in hopes to become an Head, is a probable means for making good Terms
for ones self: And then the Party may shift for themselves. And this the Doctor
may do the more honorably, having dropped some Expressions, which a Man of
less Art and Subtilty than himself, may easily turn to the Service of the
Government that is uppermost.

In the mean while, the poor Bishop, either through the Prevalence of his
Distemper, the Weakness of his Judgment, or Violence of the Doctor's
Importunity, has been induced to subscribe a Paper which may do much harm among
them, to whom a Bishop's dying words, concerning matters of which he was no
competent Judge, are of more weight, than the clearest Reasons, The Censure of
the Observations upon Mr. Johnson's Remarks.

P. 6. You have signed a kind of Post-humous Apology for your Judges, and
almost justified the Inhumanity of your Sentence.


and most undeniable Authorities.

Upon the Bishop's Principle of affected or acquired, I am sure unnatural
Religion, the scurrilous Observator, upon Mr. Johnson's Remarks, chews the
Cudd, in repeating his delight in those Sufferings, which are more the
Reproach of some of either Gown, than Mr. Johnson's; which however this vain
Writer, if Humanity, and the Consciousness of his own Deserts, could give
leave, would justify ex post facto; but out of his great Tenderness allows him
the choice of Death, as a gentle Commutation of Penance.

Upon this Principle he imputes to that extraordinary Person perfidious
Apostasy from the Church of England, and the abdicating his Religion together
with his King, threatens the Nation with Judgments, because they have not kept
their Master, the Lord's Anointed; Vid. Tit. Page.
and charges all them, who having sworn Allegiance to the late King swear now
to this, with Perjury, Page 14.
in swearing a direct Contradiction to what was lawfully sworn before; as if we
might not, without danger of contradicting the former Oath, go upon the
Supposal, that there may be a Civil, as well as Natural Death of a King; that
an Oath sworn to a Person as legal King, and in relation to the Laws, has no
force, when the Law is either subverted or altered, or that the Law may
transfer Allegiance from the Person in Possession, to a Successor legal by the
Constitution of the Government, without need of Absolution from any Power
whatever: Dr. H. would teach this younger Brother, that paying Allegiance to
such a Successor is part of the Oath, tho indeed there is a Question between
us, what Succession the Constitution requires or warrants.

Jov. Pref. p. 53.
The Doctor contends that Faith and Allegiance is promised to the possible
Heirs, according to the ordinary Rule of Succession, the Original and
Fundamental Custom of this Realm, to which he gives the addition of Hereditary.

Vid. Pref. to Predictions of Nostredamus, Grebner, etc.
If therefore, as I have formerly showed at large, and now in the following
Treatise, our Allegiance has been duly transferred according to the Original
and Fundamental Custom of this Realm, (whether Hereditary or not, or how far
still being subject to that Custom) then this removes all danger of
Contradiction, and necessity of Papal or other Absolution.

But the Spirit of Contradiction is a Disease which assimulates whatever comes
in its way; and it may be very dangerous to meet this Zealot in his Paroxisms,
lest he drive you to the Wall, and force you to confess, that a legal King and
a Tyrant are but the same under different Names, and that the maintaining
Tyranny is implied in swearing to defend all the Rights of this Imperial Crown,
and Political, not Despotical Monarchy. I am not enough disposed for Sport to
observe all the Follies of his Invective, but I am sure the Government will not
allow Mr. Johnson's sound Assertion, Page 3.
that no Man can authorize himself, in Abatement of the Guilt of denying that
Authority which made the Oath; since that Authority was received from God, who
has not only in his Providence permitted, but by a signal Interposition
asserted, that Original Constitution of our Government from whence our Laws and
Allegiance are, under God, derived; nor will it excuse his malicious, as well
as false Insinuation, of no Title in our King, not one Precedent to warrant it,
his being only King de facto, and that those Inducements, which moved the
Compassion of our great Deliverer, were Lies and Forgeries without which, says
he, Page 21*
they could never have driven their Master away.

Wherein, tho he is more daring, yet he is more cunning than the Gentleman, who
with Lay-simplicity yields the whole truth of the late King's subverting the
Constitution, while the more subtle Clergyman denies all, and puts us to
prove it; after it has been found by the Grand Inquest of the Nation, and
confirmed by the most Authoritative Judgment, which is of less weight with him
than the hastiest Church-Censure. I would gladly know of him, whether
notwithstanding that Precept, Touch not mine Anointed, do my Prophets no harm;
he has not delivered, or been ready to deliver many of God's chosen or anointed
People over to Satan, and the Secular Power, without enquiring into the ground
of the Sentence? And, whether the Unction of the Spirit is not as sacred, as
that which is used to Kings, and the right to the Sacraments and Christian
Assemblies, from which he would not scruple to debar many in virtue of an
Ecclesiastical Censure, as Divine, as a Right to a Crown?

But, as he affirms that the late King was driven away by Lies and Forgeries,
he insinuates that this King's Government was founded upon them, and stands in
need of them for its support, Page 21.
than which he may well say there cannot be a greater Evidence of a bad
Cause; yet nothing but assurance in some hidden support could make him thus
insolent, Page 5.
and confident that his Tongue or Pen has not been too familiar with his
Thoughts; and it is very pleasant that he should still pretend to want
Impunity for venting his lurking Scruples, as if his bold Dogmatical
Assertions, directly against our present Government, and in defiance of it,
were more safe than the proving matter of Fact contrary to what others alledg,
the falsifying their Quotations, or showing the weakness of their Inferences;
wherein he might with safety to himself expose his Adversary, as he thinks he
does Mr. Johnson, for betraying that Cause which he pretends to serve: But
perhaps he believes that if he should be thus cautious; he should lose his
Reputation with his own Party, and give the Government encouragement to punish
him, which he may fancy that it dares not do, while he talks big, and seems
assured of being strongly backed.

But it may not be amiss to take a nigher view of the Folly as well as
Insolence of his Boast, what feats he could do if the Law would stand Neuter
for a while.

The Observator's ridiculous Challenge.
He promises in his own, and believes he may in the Name of all his Brethren,
that are yet unsatisfied, that their refusal to comply shall lie no longer hid
in lurking Scruples, and Reasons best known to themselves, than till their
Superiors shall be pleased, with Indemnity, to allow them to bring them forth.

Having, as he thinks, made this fair Challenge, he concludes that it is,
Uncivility, Rudeness, and an ungentile Insolence to provoke them whose Hands
are tied.

It seems they would be at liberty to condemn this Government, as illegal, and
founded upon Injustice: But if a Reason for this be demanded, O Sir! our Hands
are tied, provoke us not by asking what is not in our Power; we can rail, and
call you Rebels, insinuate that your King has no Title, your Laws no Authority,
but you are very uncivil not to allow them who can give no Reason, to rail on
without it.

However this Man undertakes if he might have Indemnity in speaking out, at the
forfeiture of his Head, where he says Mr. Johnson's is due, before Judges
appointed by the Government, to answer those Questions, which he owns no Man
dare be so bold as to answer, and to back those Answers with such Reasons,
which shall ensure him the Privilege of being for Mr. Johnson unanswerable.

Before the Judges have been appointed, he concludes, that Mr. Johnson's Head
is due for writing against the late King's Title: and, with at least as much
Equity, we may say, that his Head is due, for writing against the Title of this.

But since he is willing to lose his Head, if he cannot satisfy such Judges, it
is a pretty sort of Indemnity which he desires, not to lose his Head for any
thing which he may offer before the Judges; when he consents to lose it, if
what he offers is not backed with satisfactory Reasons.

Has he more to press, or could he do it more cogently, than Men of his Mind
did in Parliament, where there was full liberty of Speech? Or is it to be
supposed, that there was not as good a Disposition in the Majority of them
whose Votes carried our Settlement, to listen to such unanswerable Reasons, as
he can expect from any appointed to be Judges of the Controversy; but perhaps,
observing what Indulgence his Principle has met with, he may hope that he, or
Men of the same Leven might influence the Nomination of the Judges; and it is
evident that therein must lie the only colorable ground of his confident and
ridiculous Challenge. Tho there is no Reason to apprehend that Innuendoes
should be now, Innuendoes.
as they have been in those times which he justifies, when they were admirable
Engines to dive into the bottom of the Heart, and fetch up those secret
Intentions which no foregoing Discourse led to; yet, as one of the other Gown,
I should advise him for the future, not to make his Pen so familiar with his
Thoughts as he does, where, speaking of Mr. Johnson's Assertion, That King
William is the rightfullest King that ever sat upon the English Throne, Page 3.
which he may very well be, without supposition of coming to it in a manner
different from all others; since the Consent with which he was crowned was the
most universal that had been known in any Age, he says he is content never to
desire a greater advantage, than to reduce an Adversary to the Absurdity of
making no difference between a Title and no Title.

Wherein I fear he vvounds himself, while he thinks to hit Mr. Johnson in the
Eye, for his due Application of the self-evident Distinction between Law, and
no Law: and tho there is no Law to reach Mr. Johnson for his Reflections upon
the late King and his Title; this Writer may find a Law to punish him. And if
he would be at the pains to consult our Records, Law Books, and old Historians,
he may find full warrant from the Constitution to make a good Title in our
King, upon the Determination of the others, and such a Consent as God himself
seemed to direct, and appoint.

Yet since he supposes what is said by Mr. Johnson of the Reciprocal Contract
between Prince and People, to be like his own Assertions, Page 7. The
Reciprocal Contract.
a begging the Question, or at least an haughty Imposition of his own
Sentiments without proof, but admits that if this could be substantially
proved, it would go a great way toward a Conviction of those, Ib.
whose Consciences for want of Information IN THIS VERY POINT, will not give
them leave to take the new Oath.

I would entreat him to show wherein I either falsify in the Authorities which
I have formerly produced, and here repeat with Additions to this very Point, or
make wrong Inferences from them.

Which till he does, as a due Correction for his railing at Mr. Johnson (whose
Memory will flourish in after-Ages, when he shall be no otherwise known than
under the Character of his Reviler) I may say, that his refusing to swear
Allegiance to our legal Government, is Obstinacy, and his distinguishing Faith,
Faction.

And if he should be called in Question for that impotent Libel, and no other
means of reducing him to Sobriety being effectual, should, according to his
snarling Reflection upon the immortal Memory of the Lord Russel, and other
inferior Patriots, be condemned to mount toward an Apotheosis, for his
meritorious Crime of Treason, against that Power which has been ordained of God
the most apparently, of any Civil Government that has been known for at least
many Centuries; could he expect to be as much desired, lamented, and praised,
by all that are themselves worthy of Praise?

Should he, as he went along, tell the good People, that he suffered for that
Doctrine which shall know no end, but when all things confess their Ashes, Page
6.
and that tho his Sins are strangely great, yet he now paid his Head forfeited
by the Letter of the Law, for Treason against a King which that acknowledges,
where Mr. Johnson's is due, by a true equitable Construction, for Treason
against one who is no King in the Eye of the Law: would not Men be tempted to
make the Poet's Observation, upon such a spruce and finical Malefactor?

-- Crimina rasis
Librat in antithetis, doctas posuisse figuras
Laudatur --
In smooth Antitheses his Crimes he weighs,
And his departing Figures force our Praise.
I well know, that Men are as zealous for a false Religion, and their own
Superstructure of Hay and Stubble, as for the true Foundation. And they who
expose their Additions are in danger, if not of suffering as Heretics, of
being censured as Atheists.

And tho false Doctrines, like false Miracles, impare the Credit of the true;
yet he that attacks them after they have spread, and gained the Name of sacred,
not only hazards himself, but while he untwines, or roots up the Weeds, may
chance to shake some standing Corn.

Which may excuse the early freedom which I have taken, to prevent the speading
of that new Law-Divinity in this Age, which rose in the last, upon the fall of
good Archbishop Abbot, was reared up by Bishop Laud's Canons, upon which the
Parliament which brought in Car. 2. put a sufficient mark of Dislike, and was
fatned with the Charters of well-fed Corporations, and the Blood of its
forwardest Opposers.

While I expose the Folly of some Men's Notions, which fight as much against our
present Settlement, as against common Safety; and show the Obligation which
lies upon Kings to keep their Compacts with the People, I would not be thought
to go about to loosen the Bond of due Subjection to the Powers which are over
us. I am sure they who will acknowledge none but King James to be their
rightful King, have no color to urge this against me; and yet, by means of
such false Alarums, they have made most dangerous Approaches toward the
Destruction of this Government.

I would not be thought to revive the powerful Hereditary Offices of the
Palatine of Chester, the High-Steward, and the Constable of England; that
Tribunitial Authority which they had, would be very dangerous in most times,
and too great Incentives to ambitious Men to set up for themselves.

The Author of the Sighs of France enslaved, observes, that Charles Martel, Les
soupirs de la France Esclave. Mem. 9. p. 130.
Mair du Palais, or High-Steward, made himself King of France, and Pepin his
Son caused himself to be chosen, the Family of the Merovingians being rejected.
That Eudes, Mair du Palais, upon the declining of the House of Charlemain, took
the Crown, and caused it to pass to Hugh Capet, and that Hugh Capet and his
Descendants wisely suppressed this Office.

It has doubtless been no less the Wisdom of this Government, to have the like
Offices with us to be now only known in Story; yet they, at least, are
Evidences of the English Liberties, Vid. Les soupirs de la France Esclave Mem.
9. p. 142. On doit recicillir, que quelque changement qui soit arrive dans le
Government a Pegard des noms, and des fonctions des Principaux Officiers, Mairs
du Palais, Connestables, Chanceliers, Grande Combelloins, etc. a touts cete
sans aucun prejudice des Proits du Peuple; les Officiers de la Cour, and don de
la Couronne out en plus ou moius de pouvoir, mais c' est par rarpert au Royles
Droits de la Nation sont tou jours demeures en leur entier.
nor are the Liberties the less, or the less inviolable, because the Subjects
of this Monarchy have had greater Confidence in their Kings, than to insist
upon having such settled Officers; who may represent their Grievances with the
better Authority, and unite them in the common Cause, when the oppressed Nation
should want nothing but an Head, under which they might become formidable to
evil Ministers, who either think that the former Injuries which they have done,
are too great to be forgotten, and therefore seek for Security in the Ruin of
them who had before smarted under them; Or, who, next to setting up themselves,
have no other aim but to make way for their supposed King of Right.

Such Men pretend, that tho they cannot swear, or declare, that King William
and Queen Mary are Lawful and Rightful King and Queen, yet they can act in the
Service of them as King and Queen; and that there can be no danger from them,
because of the harmless Doctrine of Passive Obedience. Prayers and Tears alas!
are all their Weapons, and with them they may solicit Heaven and Earth, Vid.
The Form of Prayer and Humiliation, Ed. An. 1690. p. 60.

Page 39. That we may no longer be without King, without Priest, without God in
the World.


pray to God to restore their Prince, who they say for the Sins both of Priests
and People is now kept out; and encourage a Rebellion against him, who in their
very Prayers to God Almighty they will have to be no King. I may add, Flectere
si nequeant superos, Acheronta movebunt.
If neither Heaven nor Earth afford them Aid,
They Will try to fetch it from the Stygian Shade.


If such things as these do not show that there was occasion, for my gathering
together those Precedents and Authorities, which evince, that in declaring for
our present Sovereigns, the Nation has proceeded according to their Inherent
Power, and in due form: I at lest shall have the Satisfaction of having, in my
Capacity, served my Country, and, therein, I shall have more than my Labor for
my Pains: which I may here close with that of Pliny to his Friend Tacitus.

C. Pliny, Ep. lib. 9.
Posteris an aliqua cura nostri nescio. Nos certe meremur ut sit aliqua; non
dico ingenio (id enim superbum) sed studio, sed labor; and reverentia
posterum. Pergamus modo itinere instituto; quod ut paucos in lucem, famamque
provexit; ita multos e tenebris and silentio protulit.

I know not whether they that come after will have any care of us; we surely
deserve from Posterity some Care and Esteem; I do not say for Ingenuity (for
that would argue Pride) but for Study, and Labor. Let us only go on in that
way which we have entered upon; which as it has raised some few Men to Splendour
and Fame; so it has drawn out many from Obscurity and Silence.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Uniformity, tho unprofitableness of Truth. The Insufficiency of
false Mediums to defend this Government, used by Men who thereby seek only
themselves. Quietism in Allegiance advanced by some. The Supposition of a
Conquest made by his present Majesty, or his Succession in the Line, no way for
his Service. That Lawyers are the best Casuists in this matter. Mr. Lessey's
Protestation when he took the Oath of Allegiance. Lord Clarendon's Complaint of
Divines busying themselves in Matters of State. Mr. Tirrel, and the Author of
two late Treatises about Government, set against Sir Robert Filmer's Authority.
Dr. Heylin's Opinion of Sir Robert. The Judgment of Hooker touched upon
concerning the Derivation of Power. The present Bishop of Worcester's Judgment.
Cragius his. A large Account of the Derivation of Power from the People of Rome
to their Emperors, brought to explain what our ancient Lawyers mean, when they
receive the Roman Lex Regia. The Sense of Grotius, Plato, Conringius,
Pufendorf, of the Subject or Seat of Power. That all Empires, and other Civil
Societies, must have been founded in Contract. A right to design the Person, if
not to confer the Power, admitted in the People by the greatest Asserters of
Monarchy. The Dispute here chiefly of the Right to design the Person: what that
is, referred to the Constitution. Allegiance to our present King and Queen
undertaken to be proved lawful, both by the Equity and Letter of our
Fundamental Law, explained by the Practice of the Kingdom. page 1. CHAP. II. Of
Equity, or implied Reservations. Who judges of the Equity. The Lord Clarendon's
Judgment of such Cases. Cocceius his. A short Reference to three late Treatises
of great use upon the Question. Some Reservations which Bp Sanderson will have
implied in all Oaths. Grotius his Opinion, and his Quotation out of Barclay, in
relation to the withdrawing the Allegiance which had been due to Kings. Even
the Author of Jovian of some Service here. Mr. Falkner's Christian Loyalty set
in a true Light, and shown, notwithstanding his being misled by the Canons of
J. 1. and of 1640. to be wholly on our side, in what relates to our present
Enquiry, and to join with Grotius, Barclay, Bp Bilson, Lessius, and Becanus. So
Bp Bedell, tho a Cloud has been endeavored to be drawn over his Opinion. Mr.
Lawson's Opinion. Bp Bilson's, whose Authority is confirmed by the Objection
made to it in the History of Passive Obedience. To which is added the Divine
Plato. page 11. CHAP. III. Five Heads of positive Law mentioned. Upon the first
Head are produced the Confessor's Laws, Bracton, Fleta, and the Mirror, showing
the Original Contract, with the Consequences of the King's breaking his part.
Some Observations upon the Coronation Oath, with the Opinions of Sir Henry
Spelman, Cujacius, and Pufendorf, of the Reciprocal Contract between Prince and
People. The Objection from the pretended Conquest answered in short, with
reference to the second part. The Sense of Dr. Hicks and Saravia upon the
Coronation Oath, received with a Limitation from Grotius, The Curtana anciently
carried before our Kings, explaining the Mirror. A Passage in Dr. Brady against
the Fundamental Contract touched upon, referring the particular Consideration
of him to the second Part. page 28. CHAP. IV. The second Head of Positive Law.
The established Judicature for the Case in question, implied, if not expressed,
in the Confessor's Law, and asserted in Parliament 12 R. 2. with an account why
the Record then insisted on is not now to be found. Our Mirror, the foreign
Speculum Saxonicum, Bracton, and Fleta, explaining the same. The Limitation of
that Maxim, The King can do no Wrong. Precedents from Sigibert, King of the
West Saxons, to the Barons Wars in the time of King John, confirmed by occasion
of an Objection to the Instances in the Northumbrian Kingdom. How far this
Monarchy was reputed Hereditary or Elective before the time of W. 1. there
touched upon. Instances of the Peoples Claim of their Rights in the times of W.
1. W. 2. H. 1. King Stephen, H. 2. page 34. CHAP. V. The Barons Wars in the
time of King John; That he had abdicated the Government; That he had lost all
means of being trusted by his People. How unwilling they were to engage in a
War against him. They invite over Lewis the Dauphin of France. His Case a
Parallel to the late Abdication. The Vacancy of the Throne insisted on by the
French King's Advocate, and that thereupon the Barons had right to choose
another King, of the Blood Royal of England, as Lewis was. Why the Barons fell
off from Lewis. What the Homilies say concerning their inviting Lewis, swearing
Allegiance to him, and fighting under his Banner against King John, considered.
page 41. CHAP. VI. The Barons Wars in the time of H. 3. particularly
considered. H. 3. Crowned by a Faction. Had no right but from Election, as his
Father had. That no Right could descend to him from his Father. Lewis, while
here, as much King as H. 3. Three express Contracts entered into by H. 3.
besides the Confirmations of the Great Charter. Those applied to the
Consideration of the Wars. Three of them under such as seem like the Roman
Tribunes of the People. Dr. Falkner's Objections against those Wars, answered.
The Answer confirmed by a full instance, in the time of E. 1. page 46. CHAP.
VII. The known Cases of Ed. 2. and R. 2. touched upon. The Power of the People
manifested in the Wars and Settlements of the Crown, occasioned by the Disputes
between H. 6. and E. 4. Why the Instances from those Times to the Abdication
omitted. The Objections from the Oath against taking Arms, and from the
Declaration against a Coercive Power over Kings, removed by Sherringham, and
the Triennial Act, 16 Car. 1. Pufendorf's due Restraint of the Power of the
People. Instances of the like Power in other Nations; particularly Denmark,
Swedeland, and Norway, when under the same King. For France, Hottoman,
Sesellius, the Author of Les Soupirs de la France esclave. Bodin explained, and
shown to justify King William in his descent hither; and the People of England
in their asserting the true Constitution of the Government. For the German
Empire, Bodin and Conringius. An occasion taken from him to show the Antiquity
and Power of a Palatine in Germany and England. Gunterus used to show that
Office in several Countries. Loyseau concerning it in France. The Distinction
in the Author of Les Soupirs, between Officers of the King's House, and
Officers of the Crown: The Antiquity and Authority of the Offices of Constable
of England, of the High Steward, and the Earl Marshal; which with the Earl of
Chester, have been as so many Tribunes of the People. page 57. CHAP. VIII. The
Third Head of Positive Law. The Kingdom founded in Monarchy, yet Elective, sub
modo. The Form of Government not dissolved with the Contract between Prince and
People. The Argument from Election of Kings, as it is used by the Author of the
Sighs of France enslaved. The Crown of England proved Elective, sub modo, 1.
From the Saxon Pontifical, and the Council of Calcuth, An. 789. 2. From the
Practice till the supposed Conquest. 3. From the Confessor's Law received by W.
1. and the Expressions of Ancient Historians and Lawyers since the time of W.
1. 4. The Common usage in asking the People's Consent at Coronations. 5. The
Opinion of Kings themselves. 6. The old Oaths of Allegiance. 7. The Liberty,
even after a Settlement of the Crown. 8. The Breaches in the Succession. 9. The
Statute 11 H. 7. Answers to the Objections, 1. That the King never dies. 2. The
supposition of a Testamentary Heir. 3. The Declaration, temp. E. 3. against
consenting to the disherison of the King and His Heirs. 4. The Claims of Right
between two Families. 10. A qualified Election of Kings of England, confirmed,
by observing how it has been in other Nations descended from the same common
Stock. page 72. CHAP. IX. The Fourth Head of Positive Law. A short
Recapitulation of what has been proved. An actual Discharge of Oaths of
Allegiance to J. 2. shown from the Authority of the Judgment past. His usurping
a Legislative Power; leaving the Kingdom without providing for the
Administration of Justice; and going into France. This confirmed by Rastal,
Lord Hobart, Justinian's Digest. The Rescript of Theodosius and Valentinian.
Pufendorf de Officio hominis and civis. His Elementa Juris prudentiae. His
Treatise de Jure Gentium. Grotius. Pufendorf de Inter-regnis. Knichen's Opus
Pol. Philip Paraeus. A particular Consideration of what the Learned Knight, Sir
R. Pointz says, seeming against these Authorities, but shown in truth to
confirm them, and to bring the Rules of the Civilians to our side. That the
Crown came not by Right of Descent to the next in Blood, after the discharge of
the Allegiance to J. 2. The Arguments for the People's being restored to the
Liberty which they had before the Settlement of the Crown, enforced from a
particular Consideration of the State of the Settlement. Where is it shown how
the word Heirs may be looked on as restrained in the first Settlement on Heirs,
by Gomezius his Rule. The Titles of H. 6. E. 4. H. 7. and H. 8. His several
Settlements, and their Effects in relation to the Queen Mary and Elizabeth, and
J. 1. The Recognition to J. 1. not extending to his Heirs. And questioned,
Whether the Recognition was not his best, if not only Title. With a modest
Inference. page 84. CHAP. X. The Fifth Head of Positive Law. The effect of the
Dissolution of the Contract. The use of the Triennial Act 16 Car. 1. against
the necessity of common Form. The Form and proceedings of the Convention
assembled upon the Death of H. 3. The Dilemma used by the Formalists, answered,
with a Distinction. Pufendorf's Answer to Hobbs. Another Passage of his applied
to a Passage in a late excellent Treatise against Sir Robert Filmer: And to a
Letter upon this Juncture. Tho what Dr. Brady says against the Rights of Lords
and Commons, were true; yet it is shown, that the Acts of the late Assembly
would be conclusive to the Nation. Neither forty days Summons, nor Writs, nor
yet Summons to a Parliament Essential. And this confirmed, not only by the
Precedent 12 Car. 2. but by two Precedents of the time of H. 1. The Subjects in
the time of E. 1. said to have held a Parliament by themselves, and of their
own appointing. The Objection of want of Form answered out of the Civil Law;
and its Reasons applied to our Case. Objections made by the Author of Elimenta
Politica considered. The Conclusion. page 98.
APPENDIX.
Among other things.
SIR Robert Filmer, and some of our Divines, played against one another, in
relation to Ecclesiastical and Civil Power, and Sir Robert against Himself.
page 1. Allegations in behalf of the High and Mighty Princess the Lady Mary,
now Queen of Scots, against the Opinions and Books in the Part and Favor of
the Lady Katherine, and the rest of the Issues of the French Queen, touching
the Succession of the Crown. Written in the time of Queen Elizabeth.
Reflections on Bishop Overal's Convocation-Book.
THE Fundamental Constitution OF THE English Government, PROVING KING WILLIAM
and QUEEN MARY our Lawful and Rightful King and Queen.
CHAP. I.
The Uniformity, tho unprofitableness, of Truth. The Insufficiency of false
Mediums to defend this Government, used by Men who thereby seek only
themselves. Quietism in Allegiance advanced by some. The Supposition of a
Conquest made by his present Majesty, or his Succession in the Line, no way for
his Service. That Lawyers are the best Casuists in this matter. Mr. Lessey's
Protestation when he took the Oath of Allegiance. Lord Clarendon's Complaint of
Divines busying themselves in Matters of State. Mr. Tirrel, and the Author of
two late Treatises about Government, set against Sir Robert Filmer's Authority.
Dr. Heylin's Opinion of Sir Robert. The Judgment of Hooker touched upon
concerning the Derivation of Power. The present Bishop of Worcester's Judgment.
Cragius his. A large Account of the Derivation of Power from the People of Rome
to their Emperors, brought to explain what our ancient Lawyers mean, when they
receive the Roman Lex Regia. The Sense of Grotius, Plato, Conringius,
Pufendorf, of the Subject or Seat of Power. That all Empires, and other Civil
Societies, must have been founded in Contract. A right to design the Person, if
not to confer the Power admitted in the People by the greatest Asserters of
Monarchy. The Dispute here chiefly of the Right to design the Person, what that
is, referred to the Constitution. Allegiance to our present King and Queen
undertaken to be proved lawful both by the Equity and Letter of our Fundamental
Law, explained by the Practice of the Kingdom.

HAving sufficient Experience of the Consequences of being always on the
Forlorn Hope, tho in the noblest Cause, I should yield to the Justice of my
Friend's kind Rebuke, for engaging in so many unprofitable Battles, wherein
they who have raised neither Envy nor Provocation, are suffered to carry away
the Prize by the Consent of Friends, as well as Enemies: were it not that he
who is mercenary, and fights for Pay or for Spoil can be no fit Votary to
Truth, which may sometimes be consistent with Men's Worldly Interest, rarely
advances it, but can never vary with it: while they who court Truth for the
Dowry are often driven to Inconsistences with her and themselves, and must be
content to serve themselves of her thinnest Disguises. Which I take to be the
case of them, who pretend to justify this Government upon any other bottom than
that on which it really stands, and may flourish in spite of open Enemies, if
it be duly armed against false Friends, who ground it upon their own Fictions
and flattering Schemes, prepared in times with which they suited, and were but
like the Hypotheses of Philosophers to answer the then present Phenomenon.

Such Men valuing their own Reputation and Interest too much above the Public,
expose it to the Contempt of the more subtle Adversaries, Vid. Considerations
offered for taking the Oath of Allegiance, said to be Dr. Whitby's, reflected
upon in a Treatise called The Charity and Loyalty of some of our Clergy.
who cannot but smile to see Quietism prevail in Allegiance, as well as in
Devotion; and them to pretend to discharge the Duty of Subjects, and to deserve
Protection from the Government, who not only make resisting the late King
damnable, which implies a scrupling to defend that Government which protects
them; but broadly insinuate that no personal Assistance is due to keep the King
and Queen in their Station, even tho they have sworn Allegiance to them: which
shows what is to be thought of some Men's Promise, constantly to pay that
Fidelity and Allegiance which they have all sworn. When the fit of Quietism is
over, and the opportunity inviting, they may, in the sense of some of the
Brethren, with a safe Conscience, fight for their King de Jure: Wherein it is
evident that no Provision is made for the Safety of this Government, but only
for securing to themselves their Places of Profit under it; yet no Man can
believe, that the Law which requires the Oath of Allegiance, can give the least
scope for so gross an Evasion, so serviceable to that pretense of Title which
it rejects.

Vid. The Doctrine of Non-resistance and Passive Obedience not concerning the
Controversy, Vid. the Preface.
Nor will the Jacobites be less thankful for their Doctrine, who not only
condemn all those, whose active Zeal helped to turn the Scale against them, but
allow no Title in our King, unless it be by a real Conquest of the Nation, or
legal Succession in the Line. The first of which the King not only disowns, and
the People would be loath to fight to maintain over themselves, but, according
to the Objection in Elementa Politica, Vid. Elementa Politica.
would have required a formal Denunciation of War. And the last labors with
such Difficulties as few can be able to resolve themselves or others in.

But as I am verily persuaded that our Government stands upon such a Rock as
has been unmoved for many Ages, and has no need of a Lie for its Support; I
shall with the utmost Faithfulness address my self to its Defense, wherein if I
offend some of contrary Sentiments, I must entreat them to answer me like Men,
with Reason and Authority, and not in those Methods wherein they have hitherto
been too successful.

All the Opposers of our present Settlement, who pretend to talk Sense, when
pressed home, grant that the Constitution of the English Government must be the
Guide to their Consciences in this matter. And tho I cannot commend those
Justices of the Peace, who permitted a Divine, Thomas Lessey Rector of Laurence
Lyddeard in Somersetshire.
Eminent in his Country, and an Example to others, to read a Protestation
before his taking the Oath of Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, yet I
ought not to reject his Testimony, that Lawyers are the best Directers of
Conscience in this case. The words, according to a Copy of his written Paper
now in my hand, transmitted from the Country, were these.

I am assured by Learned Men in the Law, whom I have consulted as the best
Directers of my Conscience of this case, This was at last Christmas-Sessions
for the County, Sir Edward Philips being Chairman.
that by the Laws of this Nation the Allegiance of the Subject is due to a King
in Fact, or in Possession of the Government, provided they have been recognized
by the three Estates of the Kingdom in a Public Convention. I am fully
convinced of the Truth of this: And this is a Reason prevails with me to swear
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary.

The great Unhappiness of this Nation is, that Divines not only set up for the
greatest Statesmen, but will pretend to be the best Lawyers and Casuists in
these Points, of which the truest Friends to them and the Church have
complained.

Thus the late Earl of Clarendon having in his excellent Book against Mr.
Hobbs, Lord Clarendon's Survey of the Leviathan, p. 75.
taxed some Divines of malicious Endeavors to render Monarchy insupportable,
by the unlimited Affections, and Humors, and Pretenses, and Power of a single
Person. Says others of them, believe as unreasonably, that the Disposition,
Natures and Hearts of the People cannot be applied to the necessary Obedience
toward their Princes, nor their Reverence and Duty be so well fixed and
devoted to them, as by thinking that THEY HAVE NOTHING OF THEIR OWN, but
whatever they enjoy they have only by the Bounty of the King, who can take it
from them when he pleases. Whatever such Casuists hold of the absolute and
inseparable Sovereignty of Princes, if I prove that King William and Queen Mary
are Rightful King and Queen, according to the ancient Constitution of the
English Government; how much soever my Endeavors of real Service to the Cro^
may be misrepresented by Men of another Allegiance; I shall hope at least to be
thought to have served my Country, too much infected with wrong Notions, or
distracted with false Mediums; and to have done Justice to our Great Deliverer,
and those English Worthies, who invited or embraced the Deliverance, and by
their steady adhering to the Interest of their Country, avoid that Forfeiture
of Protection, which too many have incurred.

To which end I shall show;

1. That the People of England had a rightful Power lodged with them for the
Preservation of the Constitution, in virtue of which they might declare King
William and Queen Mary King and Queen of England and Ireland with all their
Dependencies, tho J. 2. was alive at the time of such Declaration.

2. That this rightful Power was duly exercised in the late Assembly of Lords
and Commons, and afterward regularly confirmed by the same Body in full
Parliament.

1. As to the Nations rightful Power, I shall not go about to refute the fond
Notion of an absolute Patriarchal Power descending from Adam to our Kings in an
unaccountable way; because, tho if this were true, there could be no more
Compact between Princes and their People, than is between Fathers and Children
for establishing the Rights of Fatherhood, Patriarcha non Monarcha, Ed. An.
1681.

Two Treatises of Government, In the former the false Princeples and Foundation
of Sir Robert Filmer and his Followers are detected and overthrown, Ed. Anno
1690.

Heylyn 's Certamen Epistolare, p. 386, 387.


yet the difference between a Patriarchal and Monarchical Authority, is so well
stated and proved by my Learned Friend Mr. Tyrril; that few besides the unknown
Author of the two late Treatises of Government, could have gained Reputation
after him, in exposing the false Principles and Foundation of Sir Robert Filmer
and his Admirers; one of which Dr. Heylyn, in his Letter to Sir Edward Filmer
the Son, speaking of his Father says,

His eminent Abilities in these Political Disputes exemplified in his judicious
Observations on Aristotle's Politics, as also in some Passages on Grotius,
Hunton, Hobbs and other of our late Discoursers about Forms of Government,
declare abundantly how fit a Man he might have been to have dealt in this
Cause, which I would not willingly should be betrayed by unskilful handling;
and had he pleased to have suffered his excellent Discourse called Patriarcha
to appear in public, it would have given such Satisfaction to all our great
Masters in the Schools of Polity, that all other Tractates in that kind had
been found unnecessary. This he says might have served for a Catholicon, or
general Answer to all Discourses of this kind.

Since Sir Robert Filmer and Dr. Heylin were our late Observator's Predecessors
in guiding the Inferior Clergy, it is not to be expected that they should nicely
enquire into the Errors and Contradictions of their Leaders; but the Doctor's
scandalous Reflections upon the Reformation in England, and the Misfortunes of
Charles the First, in some measure at least occasioned by the Countenance given
to Sybthorpism, Manwarism, and Filmerism, may justly raise a Prejudice against
these Men and their Doctrines in the thinking Laity; and those who are not able
to think of themselves, may take every Morning some Pages of the two Treatises
of Government, for an effectual Catholicon against Nonsense and Absurdities;
which have nothing to recommend them but Style and Names cried up among a Party.

Vid. Dr. Heylyn's Stumbling Block of Disobedience and Rebellion.
Wherefore I may well think that I may pass over the Stumbling Blocks which such
Men lay in the way to my Proof, that the Power whereby this Nation is governed,
is originally under God derived from the People, and was never absolutely
parted with.

Hooker 's Ecclesiastical Polity, lib. 1. f. 10.
Many have cited the Authority of the Judicious Hooker till it is threadbare,
to prove, that it is impossible there should be a lawful Kingly Power which is
not mediately, or immediately, from the Consent of the People where it is
exercised.

The present Bishop of Worcester, whose Name will undoubtedly be held in no
less esteem in future Ages, Irenicum. p. 132.
is as express in his Irenicum. That all civil Societies are founded upon
CONTRACTS and COVENANTS made between them, which, says he, is evident to any
that consider, that Men are not bound by the Law of Nature to associate
themselves with any but who they shall judge fit; That Dominion and Propriety
were introduced by free Consent of Men; and so there must be Laws and Bonds,
fit Agreement made, and Submission acknowledged to these Laws, else Men might
plead their natural Right and Freedom still, which would be destructive to the
very Nature of those Societies. When Men then did part with their natural
Liberties, two things were necessary in the most express Terms to be declared.
1. A free and voluntary Consent to part with so much of their natural Rights as
was not consistent with the well-being of Society. 2. A free Submission to all
such Laws as should be agreed upon at their entrance into Society, or
afterward as they see Cause. But when Societies were already entered into, and
Children born under them, no such express Consent was required in them, being
bound by virtue of the Protection which they find from Authority to submit to
it, and an implicit Consent is supposed in all such as are born under that
Authority.

The Account which the Learned Cragius gives of the first Institution of Kingly
Government, seems to deserve not to be omitted.

Quum multa iracunde, multa libidinose, multa avare fierent, etc.
Cragius de Feudis, f. 2.

Vid. The like account in Sir Will. Temple 's admirable Treatise of Monarchy,
among his Miscellanies.

So Bracton Rex a regendo non a regnando Jus dicebant.


When many things were acted wrathfully, many things lustfully, many things
avariciously, the best Man of a Society was chosen who might take Cognizance of
the Offense or Injury, and determine what was equal among Neighbors. Thus were
Judges constituted in every City for the sake of distributing Justice: These
were called Kings; for Kings at the beginning were no more than Judges, having
their Denomination from ruling. Each presided over his own City, that is,
administered Justice. Hence that multitude of Kings in Holy Writ.

To descend from generals to the Romans in particular, whose Emperors were
supposed to have been the most absolute, and that the Obedience to Higher
Powers required in the Gospel, is to be taken from the measures of Subjection
due to them. Dr. Hicks, Dr. Hicks his Jovian.
the great Maintainer of the Absolute Power of Monarchs, takes a great deal of
Pains to show that the Empire was not Hereditary, and by Consequence that their
Power was immediately vested in the particular Emperors by the Consent of the
Legions, or other People, who set them up.

Saravia, as careful of the Rights of Princes, owns, Saravia de Imp. Author. f.
159.
That by the Roman Law the Crime of Laesa Majestas, or Treason, is defined to
be that which is committed against the People of Rome, and its Security.

Where he confines it to Crimes against the People only, Vid. Tacitus p.
which indeed agrees with the dying Speech of an old Roman in Tiberius his time.

But that in the Eye of our Law there may be a Laesa Majestas, Vid. Glanv. p.
1: Crimen quod in legibus dicitur crimen Laesae Majestatis, ut de nece vel
seditione Domini Regis vel Regni.

So Fleta de Crimine Laesae Majestatis c. 21

Vid. 26 H. 8. c. 2. 28 H. 8. c. 18. Traitors against the King and Realm.

Fortescue f. 6. temp. H. 6.


or Treason against the People of England, is evident not only by Glanvil, who
wrote in the time of H. 2. and Fleta of Edw. 1. but by two Statutes made in the
time of H. 8. who was as jealous of the Rights of Sovereignty as any Prince
before or after him.

And is plainly enough supposed in the Statute 25. Ed. 3. which shows that
there may be Treason against the Government as well as against the King, or any
of the other Treasons of which ordinary Judges are permitted to judge.

But since this Majesty of the People may have been given as well as reserved
or left, I shall not urge this as an undeniable Argument of the derivation of
Power from them.

Nor yet shall I transcribe the many Passages in Fortescue proving such
Derivation, because tho his Book is of great Authority in our Law, yet it was
written in a King's Reign which some may think to stand in need of such a
Justification.

Neither shall I here urge how far this Monarchy has been Elective, because the
particular Consideration of that will follow, this I only observe of it here,
that so far as the Monarchy shall prove to have been Elective, so far will it
appear, that all Power not ascertained by the Law of God contained in
Scripture, or the Book of Nature, is mediately or immediately derived from the
People.

But I think I may be able to show from one of those Passages which seem the
most to imply the absolute Authority of our Kings, that whatever it is, Crompt.
his Jurisdic. of Courts, p. 60.
it was derived from the Consent of the People, and that the Peoples Consent is
still requisite for the Exercise of an Absolute Power, according to the
memorable Speech of H. 8. in Parliament, where he thought himself to stand in
his highest Estate Royal.

The Civil Law of the Romans says, Quod Principi placuit Legis habet vigorem,
that which has pleased the Prince has the force of Law; Glanvil 's Prologom.
Bracton, lib. 3. c. 9. Fleta l. 1. c. 19.
but take this according to the Opinion of Glanvil, Bracton, Fleta, and ancient
Civilians who wrote about Bracton's time, who, as Mr. Seldom informs us, wrote
according to what they found in the Governments established throughout Europe,
The Principi placuit was no more than the Le Roy le veut with us: The Civil Law
shows, that whatever Authority the Emperors had, the ground of it was, Seldom
ad Fletam, f. 469.
that the People in eum Imperium and Potestatem conferret, conferred Empire and
Power upon him, as Odofred a Civilian coeval with Bracton has it, tho the
following Copies have it omne suum, as if the People conferred all their Power;
This may signify no more than all that Power which the Emperors had, yet
perhaps the other Sense was intended, and may well be imputed to the Servility
of later Times, Saravia de Imp. Author. f. 278.
especially if we consider not only what Saravia says, who besides the Majesty
of the People abovementioned out of him, tells us that the Roman Emperors
acted under the Peoples Authority; which he proves in that their Acquisitions
were in the Name of the People.

Sanderson 's Lectures, Ed. An. 1660. p. 149, 150, 151.
And even Bishop Sanderson, having approved of the restrained Sense of the Roman
Lex Regia, used by our ancient Lawyers, adds, I do affirm, and it is the common
received Opinion, that the Laws propounded and instituted by a Prince, or Head
of a Commonalty, do not oblige Subjects, nor have the Power of a Law, unless
they be received by the Commonalty themselves, and are allowed by the Customs
and Suffrages of those that use them. According to Demosthenes the Law is
(...), the common Engagement of a City. If peradventure his Authority be of
less value, because he lived in the Popular Commonwealth of the Athenians, will
you be pleased to hear the great Lawyer Julius, who lived when the Roman
Emperors had the fullness of Command, his words in his 32 d Book De Legibus, are
these, Ipsae Leges nulla alia ex causa nos tenent; quam quod judicio Populi
receptae sunt: The Laws do oblige for no other cause than that they are
received by the Judgment of the People.

But if we observe how the Roman Emperors came by their Trust from the People,
and of what nature it was, this I take in relation to the Legislation to which
our Lawyers apply the Civil Law, will appear to have been no more than the
Tribunitial Authority: The Tribunes of the People chosen by them, were in their
Name to deliver their placet or Consent to the Emperor or Senate; nor did the
greatest Emperors think it below them to court the Suffrages of the Populacy
for this.

Before Julius Caesar arrived to an Imperial Power, while the People of Rome
governed all the Nations round about, in all Emergencies they consulted
Deputies, Vid. Cic. in Catil. Orat. 3. ut Comperi Legatos Allobrog. belli
transalpini and tumultus Gallici excitandi causa a P. Lentulo sollicitatos,
etc. Tacitus Ed. Plant. p. 105. Tiberius vim Principatus sibi firmans Imaginem
antiquitatis Senatui praebebat postulata Provinciarum ad disquisitionem patrum
mittendo.
or Representatives of the several Provinces under them, as appears in Cicero's
third Oration against Catiline, and after Julius even Tiberius, then whom no
Man could be more intent, or more cunning to enslave his Subjects, continued an
Image of the ancient Usage, by sending the Demands of the Provinces to the
Disquisition of the Senate.

But the People of Rome were tricked out of their Liberty by that artful
Emperor by his removing the Comitia, Tacitus in vita Tiberii Ed. Plant. p. 10.
Tum primum e campo comitia ad patres translata sunt. Nam ad eam diem etsi
potissima arbitrio Principis quaedam tamen studiis Tribunorum fiebant, neque
populus ademtum jus questus est nisi inani rumore.
or Great Councils from the Fields, where the Tribunes took their Directions
from the People, to the Senate House, where false Representations of the Sense
of the People might be made behind their backs: they vented their Resentments
at this only in empty Murmurs, and as the Satyrist has observed of them, -- Qui
dabat olim Juv.

Imperium, fasces, legiones, omnia, nunc se
Continet, atque duas tantum res anxius optat
Panem and Circenses. --
They who their Laws and Magistracy chose,
Quietly gave up all for Bread and Shows.
Yet upon observing the steps by which the Emperors advanced to their Power
with the People, 'twill be evident, that it was but lodged as a Trust and
Confidence that they would truly act according to their Sense and Interest,
which before was to be faithfully represented by their Tribunes.

When Lepidus was to incite the People against Sylla, Oration Lepidi Salustii
op. Ed. Par. An. 1530. p. 134. Jus judiciumque omnium rerum penes se quod
populo Romano fuit.
he found nothing more moving than to tell them, that the Tribunitial Authority
would be overturned by him, he adds in Explanation of it, that he would have
the Power and Judicature with him which did belong to the People, upon which he
pathetically enlarges.

If these things are thought by you Peace and Concord, approve of the greatest
Disturbance and Destruction of the Commonwealth, yield to Laws imposed upon
you, take Quiet with Servitude, and transmit to Posterity an Example of
betraying the Commonwealth at the price of ones own Blood.

It appears by Salust, that the great Power to which Julius Caesar arrived was,
by siding with the Populacy of Rome, Salust ad G. Caesarem de Rep. Ordinanda p.
147. In te ille animus est qui jam a principio nobilitatis factionem
disturbavit, plebem Romanam ex Gravi Servitute in libertatem restituit, p. 145.
whose Rights had been invaded by the Senate, 'twas his great Mind which he
tells him, at the beginning, disturbed the Faction of the Nobility, and
restored the Populacy of Rome to Liberty from grievous Slavery, and he reckoned
that upon his settling Affairs after his Victory, renovata plebs erit, the
Plebeians will be renewed, or have a new Life; accordingly he advises him to
cultivate good Manners among tnem, and as Salust had expressed himself to
Caesar a little before, Magistratum Populo, non creditorem gerere, and
magnitudinem animi in addendo non demendo Reip. ostendere. To show himself a
Magistrate, and not a Creditor to the People, and to evidence the Greatness of
his Mind by adding to the Commonwealth, and not taking from it.

This may give some tolerable account how Caesar came to be murdered in the
Senate House, and may raise his Character even above Brutus, who has passed for
the Hero of Common-wealths-Men.

Marcelli Donati Dilucidationes Ed. An. 1605. p. 392. Praeterea Caesarum
temporibus Patritios and Senatorios viros non modo Tribunatum appetivisse sed
illos Imperatores inquam Tribunos Plebis factos Tribunitiam potestatem
occupasse manifestum est. Si quidem Julius Caesar test Tacito per initia, lib.
1. Annal. Consulem ferens and ad tuendam Plebem, Tribunitia Potestate contentus
fuit. Et Augustus ex Appiano l. 5. perpetuus Plebis Tribunus a Romany dilectus
fuit. Et Suet. illum Tribunitiam Potestatem perpetuam recipisse scribit. Quod
and Dion. in illius vita confirmat and Tacitus lib. Annal. 1. describens Pompam
funeris Augusti, ait de illo, continuata per. 37. annos Tribunitia Potestate.
Et lib. 3. de Tribunitia Potestate loquens, inquit: Id summum vestigii
vocabulum Augustus reperit, ne Regis aut Dictatoris nomen assumeret, etc.
Marcellus Donatus in his Comment upon Tacitus, puts it out of doubt that the
chief Power which the Roman Emperors had was as Tribunes of the People; his
Authorities for which are numerous; and that sometimes they were entrusted with
it for Years, sometimes for Life, sometimes the Consent expressed, sometimes
tacit, and implied, as it was assumed by the Emperors, and permitted by the
People.

The Application therefore will be easy to any one who reads our ancient
Lawyers, where they transcribe and comment upon the Roman Lex Regia. Glanvil,
Bracton, and Fleta differ from one another in very few words, all to the same
Sense. The words of Fleta are these, speaking of the King of England.

Fleta lib. 1. c. 17.
Et licet omnes potentia praecellat, cor tamen ipsius in manu Dei esse debet;
and ne potentia sua maneat irrefraenata, fraenum imponat temperantiae, and lora
moderantiae ne trahatur ad injuriam, qui nihil aliud potest in terra nisi id
quod de jure potest. Nec obstat quod dicitur, quod Principi placet legis habet
potestatem, quia sequitur cum lege Regia quae de ejus Imperio lata est. Quod
est, non quicquid de voluntate Regis tantopere presumptum est, sed quod
Magnatum suorum Consilio Rege authoritate praestante, and habita super hoc
deliberatione and tractatu recte fuerit definitum.

And although he excels all in Power, yet his Heart ought to be in God's Hand, and
lest his Power should remain unbridled, he ought to apply the Bridle of
Temperance, and the Reigns of Moderation, lest he be drawn to Injustice, who
can do nothing else whatever but that only which he may do by Right. Nor is it
an Objection that it is said, that which pleases the Prince has the force of
Law, Vid. Seldens Dissert. ad Fletam, f. 467.
because it follows, since [by the Law of the King which was made concerning
his Power] -- as some render it (with the Law of the King) as others. That is
to say, not whatever is only presumed of the King's Will, but that which shall
be in due manner determined [by the Counsel of his Great Men the King giving
them Authority thereto] which seems to relate to the King's Counsel in
Parliament advised with in drawing Bills, in Points of Law, and the like, Vid.
Conring. p. 11. in verbis Taciti. De minoribus rebus Principes consultant de
majoribus omnes; ita tamen ut ea quoque quorum penes plebem arbitrium est, apud
Principes pertactentur; ubi tamen cum Hugone Grotio summo sane viro legendum
forte praetractentur.
there being had upon it a Deliberation and Treaty.

Since in this our Lawyers receive the Civil Law, and give the same reason for
the Royal Power which the Roman Law does, that it was conferred by the People,
it being contained in the Lex Regia; what I have shown to prove that the Roman
Emperors derived their Power from the People of Rome, equally shows that our
Lawyers, besides what they say of Elections of our Kings, believed that the
Royal Authority here came from the People of England.

I need not therefore scruple to affirm, that our Law agrees with Grotius de
Jure Belli and Pacis, l. 3. p. 52. summae Potestatis subjectum commune est
Civitas.

So where the Statute says, the People of the Counties shall choose the Sheriff,
this is limited to Freeholders, vid. 2. Inst. upon the Statute.


Grotius, who holds that the Civitas is the common Subject of Power: This in
the most restrained Sense is meant of People of Legal Interests in the
Government; yet if they are entitled to any sort of Magistracy they become part
of his subjectum proprium, the proper or particular Seat of Power, which is
narrower than the Civitas: and therefore I take Plato's Schelius de jure
Imperii, p. 32. Plato (...) definit eum qui judiciorum particeps sit.
(...) and Hermanni Conringii Exercitationes Acad. de Civibus Imperii, p. 3.
Ordines Imperii Incolae.
Conringius his Cives to be too restrained, the first limiting it to them that
have shares in the Judicature and Magistracy; the other to the States and
Orders of the Empire, allowing no others to be more than Inhabitants or
Strangers: Whereas the Civitas must manifestly reach to that diffused Body, who
are either capable of being part of the Ordines or Great Council, or of being
represented in it; for otherwise, the common subject of Power must needs fail
as often as there are Intermissions of the States, or Great Council. And it is
plain that Conringius his Reason why none but the Status vel Ordines Imperii
are more than Inhabitants, reaches farther. Every Civis, he says, is a
Companion of the Civil Society; and it is the part of a Companion to give his
Suffrage and Judgment of things belonging to the Society.

This certainly he does virtually who gives his Suffrage in the choice of them
who conclude the rest; and if this should not make a Citizen, there could be no
means of exerting any moral or lawful Power in any Society, upon the
determination of the Authority of those particular Persons who had constituted
any dissolved Assembly of States: unless the sole Power resided entirely and
absolutely in the Person or Persons with whom they had lodged a Trust for
summoning them together, that is, giving public notice of the Time and Place
for meeting.

Indeed, if none but the Ordines were part of the Civitas, Grotius his
Distinction between the common (...) proper or particular Seat of Power would
be very vain: wherefore I take his Cives to be the same with Pufendorf's Quorum
coitione and consensu primo Civitas coaluit, aut qui in illorum locum
successerunt, nempe Patres familias. Sam. Pufendorf, de officio Hominis and
Civis, p. 265.
By whose Conjunction and Consent the Civil Society first came together, or
they who succeeded into their rooms, to wit, the Masters of Families.

Indeed if we consider, it will appear, that never any Empire or other Civil
Society was founded, but there was an Original Contract or Agreement among the
People for the founding of it. How was the most absolute Authority of a single
Person ever raised or maintained but by the undisciplined Rabble, or
disciplined one of an Army? and what could keep them together but a Contract or
Promise of Pay or Spoil to the Leaders or Officers, who were to be undertakers
to the common People, or the Soldiers? I remember Mr. Hobbs in his History of
the Civil Wars of England, Hobbs his History of the Civil Wars.
blames King Charles the First for engaging in a War against the Parliament,
while at the same time he pretended to justify what he did by Law, and to leave
all that that assisted him to answer to the Law; when he should have encouraged
them to have been hearty on his side by hopes of the Spoil of the Nation: but
whatever may be the Inducements to fight for an Authority lawfully established
before, surely no People ever submitted to any without a prior Obligation, but
where they had hopes or expectations of Advantage or Ease, the obtaining of
which, if not made a Condition, was ever implied.

Suppose a Colony of some hundreds of Men, among which one is chosen General,
Head, or Leader, without any particular or express Contract, and his Son
suffered to succeed after him: Is the Power either of Father or Son, antecedent
or obligatory, before the free Consent of the rest has past? Or, is it to be
imagined that either the Father or his Successor have this People as an
Inheritance given them from above, to dispose of their Lives and Fortunes
without any regard to the Good of All?

The most sensible of them, who utterly deny that any Power can be derived from
the People, as fighting against their fancied Divine Right of Kingship own,
that the People have a Right to design the Person, Vid. Sacrosanct. Regum
Majest. Potestas designativa personae vel collativa Potestatis.
tho not to confer the Power: only these Men will have it, that the extent of
the Power of a King is ascertained by God himself; which I must needs say, I
could never yet find proved with any color. But to avoid a Dispute needless
here, since the Question is not so much of the Extent of Power, as of the
Choice of Persons, or Derivation of it; Whether any Choice is allowable for us,
must be determined by the fundamental or subsequent Contract, either voluntary,
or imposed by Conquest; and it is this which must resolve us, whether the
Government shall continue Elective, or Hereditary to them that stand next in
the course of Nature, guided to a certain Channel by the common Law of
Descents; or limited only to the Blood, with a Liberty in the People to prefer
which they think most convenient, all Circumstances considered.

And if our Constitution warrants the last, then we may cut the Gordian Knot,
and never trouble our selves with Difficulties about a Demise, or Cession, from
the Government or Abdication of it; for which way soever the Throne is free
from the last Possessor, the People will be at Liberty to set up the most
deserving of the Family, or whom they judge so; unless there be subsequent
Limitations by a Contract yet in force between Prince and People, which being
dissolved, no Agreements take place but such as are or have been made among
themselves. Vid. infra cap.
In which Case, whatever ordinary Rule they have set themselves, they may alter
it upon weighty Considerations. And that the People of England have lawfully
and rightfully renounced their Allegiance sworn to J. 2. and transferred it to
the most deserving of the Blood, notwithstanding any Oaths or Recognitions
taken or made by them, I shall evince, not only from the Equity of the Law, and
Reservations necessarily implied in their Submission to a King; but from the
very Letter, explained by the Practice of the Kingdom, both before the reputed
Conquest, and since.

CHAP. II.
Of Equity, or implied Reservations. Who judges of the Equity. The Lord
Clarendon's Judgment of such Cases. Cocceius his. A short Reference to three
late Treatises of great use upon this Question. Some Reservations which Bp
Sanderson will have implied in all Oaths. Grotius his Opinion and Quotations
out of Barclay in relation to the withdrawing the Allegiance which had been due
to Kings. Even the Author of Jovian of some Service here. Mr. Falkner's
Christian Loyalty set in a true Light, and shown, notwithstanding his being
misled by the Canons of J. 1. and of 1640. to be wholly on our side, in what
relates to our present Enquiry, and to join with Grotius, Barclay, Bp Bilson,
Lessius, and Becanus. So Bp Bedell, tho a Cloud has been endeavored to be
drawn over his Opinion. Mr. Lawson's Opinion. Bp Bilson's, whose Authority is
confirmed by the Objection made to it in the History of Passive Obedience. To
which is added the Divine Plato.

FOR the Equity and reserved Cases, I think it appears in the nature of the
thing, that they for whose benefit the Reservation is; must be the Judges, as
in all Cases of Necessity he who is warranted by the Necessity, must judge for
himself before he acts; tho whether he acts according to that Warrant or no,
may be referred to an higher Examen: But where the last Resort is, there must
be the Judgment, which of necessary Consequence in these Cases must needs be in
the People, the Question being of the Exercise of their Original Power; and
where they have by a general Concurrence past the final Sentence, in this case
their Voice is as the Voice of God, and ought to be submitted to.

The late Earl of Clarendon, Survey of the Leviathan, p. 86.
speaking even of a Contract wherein the absolute Power of a Man's Life is
supposed to be submitted, says,

He was not bound by the Command of his Sovereign to execute any dangerous or
dishonorable Offices; but in such cases Men are not to resort so much to the
Words of the Submission as to the Intention: which Distinction he will have
applicable to all that monstrous Power which Mr. Hobbs gives his Governor, to
take away the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, without any Cause or Reason,
upon an imaginary Contract, which if never so real, can never be supposed to be
with the Intention of the Contractors in such Cases.

Cocceius de Principe p. 197. Leges fundamentales Regni vel Imperii quae vel
diserte pactae sunt cum Principe antequam imperium ineat, etc.
Cocceius holds the fundamental Laws of any Kingdom or Empire to be, not only
those for which there has been an express Contract with a Prince before, or
upon his assuming the Government, but such also as seem tacit inesse rei
publicae "to be implied as belonging to "every Community or Civil Society.

For the direction of Men's Judgments in such Cases, they need not consult
voluminous Authors, but may receive sufficient Light from those excellent
Papers; The Enquiry into the present State of Affairs; The Grounds and Measures
of Submission; and, The brief Justification of the Prince of Orange' s Descent
into England, and of the Kingdom's late Recourse to Arms.

Which I shall here only confirm by some Authorities.

The first, as being of most Credit among them who raise the greatest Dust,
Sanderson de Juramenti obligatione, p. 41.
shall be Bishop Sanderson, Of the Obligation of an Oath; who shows several
Exceptions or Conditions, which of Common Right are to be understood before an
Oath can oblige; in which I shall not confine my self to the Order in which he
places them.

1. If God permit: because all things are subject to the Divine Providence and
Will. Nor is it in any Man's Power to provide against future Accidents:
Wherefore he who did what lay in him to perform what he promised, has
discharged his Oath.

2. Things remaining as they now are: Whence he who swore to marry any Woman,
is not obliged, if he discovers that she is with Child by another.

These two Exceptions sufficiently warrant Submission to such Government as God
in his Providence shall permit, notwithstanding Oaths to a former King: And if
he cease to treat his People as Subjects, the Obligation which was to a Legal
King determines, before his actual withdrawing from the Government.

3. As far as we may: as if one swear indefinitely to observe all the Statutes
and Customs of any Community, he is not obliged to observe them farther than
they are lawful and honest.

4. Saving the Power of a Superior: Whence if a Son in his Father's Family
swear to do a thing lawful in it self, but the Father not knowing it, commands
another thing, which hinders the doing that which is sworn; he is not bound by
his Oath, because by the Divine Natural Law he is bound to obey his Father. And
he who has sworn not to go out of his House, being cited to appear before a
lawful Judge, is bound to go out, notwithstanding his Oath; the Reason is,
because the Act of one ought not to prejudice the Right of another.

These two last Instances, added to the Consideration of a Legal King, Vid.
Stat. 13. car, 2. c. 1.
will qualify the Oath declaring it not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever,
to take Arms against the King; and abhorring the Traitorous Position, of taking
Arms by his Authority against his Person, or aginst those that are commissioned
by him.

This I think I may say, with warrant from Bishop Sanderson, That no Man is
bound by this Oath to act against Law, Vid. infra, p.
under color of the King's Commission; Vid. Grounds and Measures of
Submission. Salus Populi suprema Lex.
nor to permit such Actions, if it be in his Power to hinder them; the common
Fundamental Law being in this Case the Superior, which he is to obey, and which
is to explain and limit the Sense of Acts of Parliament seeming to the contrary.

To Bishop Sanderson, I may add Grotius, Vid. Johannis a Field Annotata ad
Grot. c. 3, and 4.
who runs the Prerogative of Kings as far as any Man in reason can: Yet he
allows of reserved Cases, in which Allegiance may be withdrawn, tho there is no
express Letter of Law for it: As,

1. "Where the People being yet free, Grot. de jure Belli and Pacis, c. 3. p.
60.

Vid. Pufendorf Elementa Juris prud. p. 256. Nemo alteri potest quid
efficaciter injungere per modum praecepti in quem nihil potestatis legitimae
habet.

Grot. c. 4. p. 86. habet pro derelicto.


command their future " King by way of continuing Precept. Whether there be any
such with us, can be no doubt to them who read the Coronation Oaths, from time
to time required and taken upon Elections of some Kings, and the receiving
others, by reason of prior Elections, and Stipulations with their Predecessors.

2. If a King has abdicated or abandoned his Authority, or manifestly holds it
as derelict, indeed, he says, he is not to be thought to have done this, who
only manages his Affairs negligently. But surely no Man can think but the Power
of J. 2. is direlict.

And he cites three Cases, wherein even Barclay, the most zealous Asserter of
Kingly Power, allows Reservations to the People.

1. If the King treats his People with outrageous Cruelty.

2. If with an hostile Mind he seek the Destruction of his People.

3. If he alien his Kingdom. This Grotius denies to have any effect, and
therefore will not admit among the reserved Cases: Vid. Mat. Par. Addit. f.
281. The King of France his Attorney General speaking of King John 's resigning
his Crown to the Pope. Etsi dare non potuit, potuit tamen dimittere.
But if no Act which is ineffectual in Law, will justify the withdrawing
Allegiance, then none of the Instances will hold; for to that purpose they are
equally ineffectual: Yet who doubts, but the King doing what in him lies to
alien his Kingdom, gives pretense for Foreign Usurpations, as King John did to
the Pope's? And whoever goes to restore the Authority of the Sea of Rome here,
be it only in Spirituals, endeavors to put the Kingdom under another Head than
what our Laws establish, and to that purpose aliens the Dominion. Vid. Bellarm.
how the Pope hooks in Temporals in ordine ad Spiritualia.
Nor can it be any great Question, but the aliening any Kingdom or Country,
part of the Dominion of England, will fall under the same Consideration; which
will bring the Case of Ireland up to this, where the Protestants had been
disarmed, and the Power which was armed for the Protection of the English
there, Vid. Leges S. Edwardi.
put into the Hands of the Native Papists; nor is it now likely to be restored
to its Settlement at home, or dependence upon England, without vast Expense of
Blood and Treasure.

Even the Author of Jovian owns, Dr. Hick 's his Jovian, p. 280. Ib. p. 192,
193.
that the King's Law is his most Authoritative Command; and he denies that the
Roman Emperor had any Right to enslave the whole People, by altering the
Constitution of the Roman Government, from a Civil into a Tyrannical Dominion;
or from a Government where the People had Liberty and Property, into such a
Government as the Persian was, and the Turkish now is, etc.

No Clergyman of the last or foregoing Reign having treated of Civil
Government with more Temper and Judgment, and yet with greater Applause of the
warmest Men of his own Gown, Falkner 's Christian Loyalty, Ed. An. 1679.
than the Learned Mr. Falkner of Lyn; I shall be the longer in giving an
account of his Discourse of Christian Loyalty, which will prove an Authority on
my side, beyond what could be hoped for, considering the time when his Book
came out with License, and a Dedication to the Archbishop of Canterbury: it
being when Mr. Johnson, by way of Composition against a threatened Suspension,
was obliged to drink his Coffee at home, lest he should inlighten his Brethren,
who filled all places of public Resort with their Pulpit-Law, and the Dictates
of their Guide Sir Roger. I must own that Mr. Falkner was in some things
carried away with that Tide, which if any of that Cloth besides Mr. Johnson had
the Courage to stemm, they had at least the good fortune to be less observed;
but the showing wherein the Author of Christian Loyalty gave too much way to
the Fashion, or the Noise, may yield farther strength and light to that Truth,
which will arise out of those very Clouds, with which he might think requisite
to obscure it.

His Treatise is in two Parts, in the first he vindicates and endeavors to
explain the Oath of Supremacy.

1. In relation to the Regal Power, as it is received in our Church, or at
least by Churchmen, or as it is acknowledged by our Laws.

2. As the Oath renounces all Foreign Jurisdiction, the last of which falls no
otherwise under Consideration here, than as it shows the King's Duty to
preserve his Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Supremacy, and not to alienate
either.

In the second part this Worthy Author considers the public Declarations
against Subjects taking Arms.

Page 14.
1. In the first he rightly affirms, That the asserting the Supremacy of
Government is never designed (meaning I supppose, by the Law) in any wise to
violate either Divine or Christian Institutions, or to assert it lawful for any
Prince to invade that Authority and Right, which is made particular thereby,
whether in Matters Temporal or Spiritual. Where by Christian Institutions, Page
3.
it is plain that we are to understand the Ecclesiastical and Civil Laws of
Christian States, or the Laws of others not contrary to Christianity; and thus
he deservedly blames them who nourish false Conceptions, and mistaken Opinions
concerning the CIVIL POWER, beyond due Bounds exalting it so high, as not to
reserve that Respect which belongs to God and Christian Institutions; Page 15.
and rightly observes, that the Supremacy does not exclude the Subject from a
real Propriety in his own Estate. And that there are some Kingdoms where
without any Disparagement to the Supremacy of their Prince, Page 11.
they are governed by the fixed Rules of the Civil Law; and others where other
Laws established by their Predecessors are standing Rules.

Page 391.
And particularly in relation to the People of this Realm, he says in the second
Part, The English Constitution does excellently and effectually provide against
injurious Oppressions. Of which more in its place.

1 Canon An. 1640.
However I cannot but here observe, that even the Canons of 1640. which he
receives as speaking the Sense of the Church of England, own that the Subject
has a Propriety, but withal say, that Tribute, Custom, and Aid, and all manner
of necessary Support and Supply are due to Kings from their Subjects by the Law
of God, Nature and Nations; yet tho it is the Duty of Subjects to supply the
King, it is part of the Kingly Office to support his Subjects in the Propriety
and Freedom of their Estates. Still, it seems, subject to the King's Judgment
of necessity, which is right Sibthorpism and Manwarinism, afterward echoed to
by the Courts at Westminster, in the Resolution about Shipmoney, and of late in
that of the Dispensing Power.

I think in two things what Mr. Falkner writes upon the first Head lies open to
Exception.

1. That generally by Civil Power, Page 356.
he seems to mean the Person of the King, and that not according to his own
Definition of a King, which he says does denote the Royal Person who governs,
which himself owns to be according to the respective Limitations in those
places where they govern, many having the Title of a King, Page 339.
who had not such Royal Power as is allowed by our Constitution: but he
ascribes to a King generally speaking, and particularly to ours, such a
Sovereignty as carries with it the absolute and arbitrary Exercise of that
Civil Power whereby a Nation is governed.

Thus he asserts with St. Austin, That Subjests may and ought to obey their
Prince's Commands where they are certain, Page 302.
that what he commands is not against the Command of God: And hence he
attributes to the Kings of England even more Power than he allows to the Roman
Christian Emperors, as will soon appear. And it appears, that this is not only
a casual dash with his Pen; Page 123.
for having before in one place spoken of the business of the Civil Power
described by St. Peter, Page 131.
in another he mentions the Authority with which he supposes Kings and Princes
to be vested to govern in Matters of Religion, not as originally arising from
their Christianity, but from the general Right of Dominion and Sovereignty, and
says, this includes a Right of establishing, by their Authority, what is truly
unblameable, orderly, useful, and necessary with respect to Religion.

Accordingly he speaks of the Ecclesiastical Laws of Ina, Page 153.
and several other English Saxon Kings; as if they were established by them, as
having the Civil Power solely and absolutely in themselves.

And indeed if, as Mr. Falkner has it elsewhere, Page 41.
the Sovereign Ruler has a Right to promote God's Public Worship, and to
establish it by a Civil Sanction; it must follow either that these Kings were
no Sovereigns, or that they alone made those Ecclesiastical Laws, giving them
their Civil Sanction.

Yet that he denies even to the Emperor Constantine such a Power as he
ascribes to Kings and Princes, and particularly to ours, Page 172, 173, 174.
is evident from his justifying Athanasius in his disobeying the Emperor's
positive Command to restore Arius to his Church of Alexandria, after a final
S^^tence of Deprivation of the Council of Nice; which Sentenc(...)g grounded
upon his Heresy, the Emperor might well think that subscribing and swearing to
the Nicene Creed, might render him a Person equally capable with any other, to
supply the Vacancy.

2. Mr. Falkner's second Mistake in his first Part.
Another Mistake Mr. Falkner seems to have been led into by thinking
Ecclesiastical Canons to be of Authority in Points of Law or State.

Hence it is that he cites the second Canon 1 J. 1. which he says threatens
Excommunication against them who shall affirm, 2 Canon, Vid. Christian Loyalty,
p. 50, 51.
that the King has not the same Authority in Cases Ecclesiastical, that the
Godly Kings had among the Jews.

He might have observed that it excommunicates them ipso facto without
admitting them to any Plea or Defense for themselves. In which Comparison, tho
perhaps much was intended, according to the Mos Regius described by Samuel; I
fear it proves too little, nor would they who made those Canons have been
willing to confine the Royal Power to that fundamental Law for it, which we
find in Deuteronomy; Deuteronomy. 17. from ver. 14. to the end.
where the Rule for the Election of Kings is stated, that the Person whom they
set over them should be no Stranger, but one from among their Brethren, and his
Power is bounded within Moses his Law, that his Heart be not lifted up above
his Brethren.

And it is certain that the Stream of Learned Men are on the side of Petrus de
Marca, Falkner, p. 89.
who observes, that they do not deserve well at the Hands of Christian Princes,
who would measure their Authority and Dignity from the Exercise of Royal Power
under the Times of the Old Testament. Ib. p. 75. Even Grotius will not allow
the Government over the House of Israel to have been Monarchical. Ib. p. 102,
454.
But leaving Mr. Falkner with his Canons to fight this out with De Marca,
Seldom, Grotius, Schickard, Bellarmine, Baronius, the greatest part of the
Jewish Rabinnical Writers, Blondel, and even Josephus, who says the King was
not to act without the High Priest, and the Consent of the Senators; I shall
but mention some Heads in which it will be difficult to disprove me.

1. The Kings of Israel; quatenus Kings, had no Interest in the Legislative
Power; for that Government so far continued a Theocrasy, that God, who promised
in an especial manner to dwell among them, Exodus 29.45.
was their sole Legislator; and Mr. Falkner himself tells us, Page 464.
The Jewish Commonwealth was peculiarly ordered by God, or as he has it
elsewhere, Page 438.
peculiarly Theocratical.

2. Wherever any Alteration in the outward Administration, or Circumstances
of things appointed by God's Law, delivered by Moses, went under the Name of
any King; it will hardly be possible to prove that the King did not make it,
either as he himself was a Prophet, or by the Direction of the chief Prophet,
or Seer; whose Commission, Jer. 1.10.
if we may judge by that of Jeremiah's, was very large, being set over the
Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to build and
to plant.

Orig. sacrae, p. 150.
The present Bishop of Worcester shows, that God appointed a Succession of
Prophets to make known his Mind to the Israelites; and that there were Schools
or Colleges of the Prophets, which some think Samuel erected, Page 154, 164.
where God Almighty ordinarily dispensed his Effusions. Out of these the Kings
had their Seers, Gad was David's Seer, and Jeduthun Josiah's, after Israel and
Judah were divided; according to that Observation made by the Bishop, neither
were these Schools of the Prophets only in Israel, but in Judah likewise was
God known.

Page 463.
3. The Right of the Crown of Israel was not so fixed to a Family, but, as Mr.
Falkner owns, God reserved to himself the Right of disposing the Sovereignty of
that Kingdom.

By which, as he would justify some Risings against Kings in Possession, he
must likewise admit, that no Instances of Passive Obedience among the Jews, can
concern Governments more truly of Human Institution.

4. For the Judicial Power, it may be difficult to show the King to have been
more than the Head of the Sanhedrim; and perhaps considering that the Law by
which they were to judge was God's Law, which the Priests, Deuteronomy. 31.9, 11.
who bare the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, were to read to the People;
Exodus 28.29, 30.
the High Priest who was to bear the Judgment of the Children of Israel upon
his Heart continually, with his Vrim and Thummim, the Breast Plate of Judgment,
may bid fair for the chief Place in that Court.

And tho Moses, their King, Deuteronomy. 1.17.

Vid. Dr. Heylin's Certamen Epistolare, p. 290.

Fortescue, c. 1. p. 4. b. Moses called Dux Synagogae.

Orig. sacr. p. 150.


reserved to himself an Appeal from the Sanhedrim, it will be difficult to show
that the Seer did not succeed him in that; especially since he shows that his
Right of being hearkened to, or obeyed, was as he was a Prophet: and the
present Bishop of Worcester holds that the Promise of a Prophet to be raised up
to the People of Israel, ought to be understood not only of Christ, but also
and more immediately, of an Order or Succession of Prophets to be obeyed in all
things.

5. Whereas Mr. Falkner labors against Josephus, Maimonides, and Schickard, to
show that the Kings of Israel might make Arbitrary War, or War of choice,
without the Authority of the Sanhedrim: he should have added [or the Directions
or allowance of any Prophet] to have proved any thing to his purpose: Falkner,
p. 97.
and it will appear that the two Instances which he gives, were from the
Prophetical Power; thus when he says Saul resolved upon War against the
Ammonites, upon his present hearing the Cause of the Men of Jabish Gilead; The
Text says, The Spirit of God came upon Saul. 1 Samuel 11.6.


And tho wicked Ahab would have engaged Jehosaphet the King of Judah, who was
with him out of his own Country, in a War against Syria, without consulting the
Order of Prophets in Israel; it is of his own showing, that Jehosaphet would not
undertake it till the Prophets of Israel were consulted, and had encouraged it.
However Jehosaphet having been King of Judah, is not an Instance so directly to
the Point.

But as Mr. Falkner, notwithstanding his Mistakes in comparing our Polity to
the Jewish, shows a Propriety in the Subject, Vid. Canon 1. 1640.
beyond what they will allow, who infer a contrary Right from that manner or
way of Kings with which Samuel, The Hebrew imports no more than ratio or mos,
the Chaldee Paraphrase, Statutum Regis.
either would deter the People of Israel from choosing one, or at least
foretells what they would lose by quitting the Theocracy, administered by Persons
more immediately commissioned by God himself; Mr. Falkner no less fully comes
up to the case of putting the Kingdom under any other Head, than that which the
Law allows, and says.

The Constitutions of this Realm oblige all the Subjects thereof, to maintain
the the Royalty of the Crown: and further, that it is a great and special
Privilege of a freeborn People, that they cannot, Falk. p. 234.
according to the Condition of Slaves, have the chief and principal Dominion
over them translated from one to another, according to the Pleasure of any
Person whomsoever, though it be their own natural Prince.

What was in his Judgment, the due Consequence of such an Attempt, will appear
by considering his second part, Mr. Falkner's second Part.
where he speaks more directly to it; and tho it be against the Subjects taking
up Arms upon any pretense whatsoever, yet it sufficiently justifies the late
real Occasion for recourse to them ultimo necessitatis praesidio. Vid. Inf.


It must be understood, that looking upon the Canons of 1640, as the Sense of
our Church, he thinks himself bound to assert the Divine Right of Kingship,
Page 419.
in a more peculiar manner than any other Form of Government: and having duly
observed that in those States or Relations which are fixed by Divine
Institution, Page 422.
there are some things so necessary and essential, that they cannot be
separated from them; Page 423.
he makes Irresistibleness to be one of those Essentials: nor could he do less,
Vid. Stat. 13. Car. 2. cap. 12. which provides that it shall not be thought to
extend to confirm the Canons made in the Year 1640. Page 419. Can. 1. 1640.
seeing, tho all the Canons of 1640, lie under a Censure of much greater
Authority in our Church than that with which they were made; he cites the first
Canon as the Sense of our Church, That the most high and sacred Order of Kings
is of Divine Right, being the Ordinance of God himself, founded in the prime
Laws of Nature, and clearly established by the express Texts both of the Old
and New Testaments: upon this ground he might well suppose that the People in
choosing a King (which he allows often to have been where there has been a
Vacancy, and none could claim a Right of Succession) whatever Terms or Contract
were made at the Choice, Page 414. Page 420.
stand obliged from the Nature of that Relation they thereby enter into, Page
414.
and the Laws which God has established concerning it, and not only from their
own Intention.

And if the Rights of Princes, or any of them are ascertained by God himself,
Page 423.
not by the ancient Constitution of the Government or express Contract; then
indeed, even in Elective Principalities, those Divine Rights of Soveraingty, as
well as such as arise from the Original, or more immediate Contract, are
invested in the Person elected thereto before the Coronation.

But to qualify this, it is to be considered, that he contends that the
Declaration against taking Arms relates particularly to the King, not
indefinitely to any King, and can bare no other Construction, than to condemn
the English Subjects taking Arms against their natural Sovereign the King of
England: Page 338.
and therefore, tho the like Attempts against any other Kings who enjoy
Sovereign Authority, are equally blameable in their Subjects; yet this
Position, says he, does not assert the utter unlawfulness of taking Arms
amongst any other Nations, against him who has the Title of King; if he does
not therewith enjoy that Right of Supreme Government, which our Kings have and
exercise.

So that notwithstanding the Canons of 1640, even in his Judgment, the Laws of
England must determine this Controversy.

And elsewhere he grants what shows, that the Examples for Passive Obedience
which he instances in from the Jews, or Primitive Christians, will not affect
us.

Page 541.
The Agreement, says he* between the Condition of those Jews, whom he
mentions, and the Primitive Christians under their Persecutions, was so great,
that if the Laws of Nature would have allowed these Jews to resist, it must
also have been lawful for the Christians to have done the same; which is
contrary to their general Profession, and universal Practice.

But then in relation to the Practice, he says, Page 501.
The Result of all these Testimonies is, that when the Authority, Laws, and
Rules of Government they lived under, did oppose the Christian Profession, or
the Truth and Purity of its Doctrine, they thought it their Duty patiently to
suffer, and not, in Opposition to those Laws which were then established, to
take up Arms against their Governors.

And coming to Examples of Passive Obedience among the Jews, when the Sovereign
Power had undertaken to destroy a part of the People, he says,

Forasmuch as the Sovereign Power in Judea, Page 535, 536, 537, 538.
and many other Eastern Nations, and also in the Roman Empire, as their Laws
declare, had such an Authority, that the particular Rescripts and Edicts of the
Emperors were accounted Law, and what they determined was a Legal Decision or
Sentence, and a judicial way of proceeding: From these Considerations, he
supposes it was not lawful for any of the Persons in the Instances
abovementioned by him, tho some of them were unjustly sentenced, to have taken
Arms in their own Defense.

But he tells us, Page 539.
The excellent Constitution of our English Government has this advantage among
others, that it gives sufficient Security to the English Subjects, that there
is no way of judiciary or legal Proceeding by the King himself, or any other
against the Life or Property of any Person, who lives peaceably and orderly,
but according to the established Laws of the Land, and upon a fair Trial of his
Case: Nor will our Laws allow any such general Sentence, which may take in
innocent Persons.

The destroying Corporations, the managing Juries, and improving Religious, and
lawful Civil Assemblies, into Riots, nay, Consults for Treason, had not then
been brought to Perfection.

And the Dispensing Power having been attempted, but receded from, he says,

The true Religion is established by our Laws, Page 542.
and no Law can be repealed or altered to the Prejudice of English Subjects, by
the Pleasure of any Prince alone, and without the Consent of the Peers, and the
Representatives of the Commons of England.

And indeed the good Man takes a great deal of Pains, from the Duty, Honor,
and Interest of the Prince, the danger to evil Instruments, and the like, to
prove, that it ought not to be presumed that any such Case, as we have known,
will happen; which at this time looks like a Philosophical Argument against
Motion, and deserves the like Confutation. However, Page 532.
looking upon such Violations as but simply possible, he maintains that the
Declarataion against taking Arms ought to be in general Terms; for that such
extraordinary Cases, as may be put, fall not under Consideration, Page 361.
(I may add) till they happen; for then they must be put, and remembered to
justify what they have rendered necessary.

Nay, himself restrains the general Terms to a Subject's taking Arms without
any Command from his Prince, Page 360.
against those who act by virtue, and in pursuance of his Commission
[REGVLARLY] granted to them.

Page 346.
I will yield to him, that it would be an high Reflection upon the Laws of our
Realm, if there were need of consulting skilful Lawyers for the general Rule of
Duty, and to whom Men ought to yield Obedience and Submission: Yet if learned
Men will confound the plain Rule of Submission to the Powers which are in
being, by setting up a supposed inseparable Right, in a Power which once had a
being, but is become a mere Shadow and Spectre; 'twill be requisite to have
recourse to them who have taken some pains in enquiring into the Constitution
of the Government, to see what Remedy is thereby allowed in extraordinary Cases.

Christian Loyalty, p. 521.
And whereas, speaking of Officers supposed by some to have Authority of
resisting in such Cases, he seems to know of none but by Charter or Commission
having their Authority depending upon the King; a little Skill in the Law, or
in Antiquity, would have informed him of several others, at least such as were
not so dependent, Vid. inf. of the Earl Marshall, etc.

Vid. The Act of Pacification between the English* and the Scots, Temp. Car. 1.
which provides that it shall be lawful, for the Subjects of either Nation, to
fall upon the Forces which shall come out of one into the other, without the
Consent of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms.


not only hereditary Great Officers, and other Great Men of the Kingdom, but
other Officers chosen by the People, the Heretochii, or Lords Lieutenants, and
the Sheriffs anciently, and the Officers in Boroughs by Prescription, and
Constables at this day.

I will be as ready as he to maintain that for the future, such Supposals as he
touches with great Fear and Tenderness, will be very remote Possibilities; and
being looked upon in our Law as vain in the Apprehension, are thought not to
stand in need of any particular Provision: but he mentions three Cases in which
upon yiedling the Suppositions, Page 531.
he grants the Answer given by Barclay to two of them, and to all three by
Grotius, to be true.

To the general Question, May there no Cases fall out, in which the People [by
their Authority] may take Arms against the King?

Page 515.
Barclay answers, Certainly none, as long as he is King, or unless ipso jure
Rex esse desinat, which is pregnant with the Affirmative, that there may be
some Case wherein he by Law, or of Right, ceases to be King.

And Barclay manifestly allows of two, Grotius adds a third branched into a
fourth, in which Mr. Falkner concurs with him* as well as with Barclay and
Grotius in the other two.

Page 525, 527.
The first particular Case upon which he delivers his own Opinion, Voluntary
Resignation, or Cession, or Abdication.
without referring to Authorities, is, of a King's voluntarily relinquishing
and laying aside his Crown and Government: of this several Examples are
mentioned, and among the rest nine of our Saxon Kings; Page 426.
and he rightly observes, that if such Persons should act against the settled
Government of their respective Kingdoms, after they are fixed in the next Heir
in an Hereditary Kingdom, or in another King, according to the Constitution of
Elective Principalities; the resisting any of them is not the taking Arms
against the King, but against him who now is a private Person.

If therefore the late King's Abdication were such a relinquishing as he means,
Vid. sup. f. 13.
which it must be if he receive Grotius; or if he hold to the other Cases, in
which, as it will appear, he yields that he would be divested of Sovereignty;
in all such Cases every thing is lawful against the late King, that would be
lawful against any other private Person.

2. The second Case agreed by all three, and by Bishop Bilson, Page 526.
is of a Prince' s undertaking to alienate his Kingdom, Alienation of the
Kingdom.
or to give it up to the Hands of another Sovereign Power against the Mind of
his Subjects. And he thinks Barclay, Grotius, and Bishop Bilson, truly to
assert, that such an Act of Alienation, or of acknowledged Subjection,
especially if obtained by evil Methods, as was done in the Case of King John,
is null and void; and therefore can neither give any Right of Sovereignty to
another, nor dispossess the King himself thereof.

But if any such Prince shall actually and forcibly undertake to bring his
Subjects under a new Supreme Power, who have no Right thereto, and shall
deliver up his Kingdom to be thereby possessed. Grotius, says he, doubts
not, but he may be resisted in his undertaking; but then says Mr. Falkner, this
Resolution must proceed upon this ground, that this Action includes his
devesting himself of his Sovereignty, together with his injurious proceeding
against those who were his Subjects: And Barclay, who allows only two Cases in
which a Prince may be divested of his Royal Dignity, does account this to be
one of them.

Not to mention the notorious truckling to France, and Pupilage under that
bribing and imposing Monarch; since the Kings of England are Supreme in
Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil Affairs; and the late King by Force and open
Violation of the Laws, against the universal Bent and Mind of his People,
renounced his own Supremacy in yielding to the Pope's; and since the People
might resist him therein; but that which justified their resisting him,
divested him of his Sovereignty; it is evident, that according to Mr. Falkner,
and the Learned Men, whose Authority he receives, the late King thereby ceased
to be King: which sufficiently justifies that Vote of our Convention, since
confirmed by the Parliament, that a Popish King is inconsistent with this
Protestant Kingdom.

3. The last Question, or rather part of a Question, Page 527.
which this learned Author takes notice of, in the Resolution of which he
agrees with Barclay and Grotius, is, Attempting to destroy the Kingdom, or any
considerable part of it. Page 528, 529.
Whether if a Sovereign Prince should actually undertake to destroy his whole
Kingdom, or any considerable part thereof, they may not in these Circumstances
have liberty of defending themselves by taking up Arms?

Now we must allow him here to distinguish his Sentiments, by inveighing
against Junius Brutus, Page 528.
and other Subverters of Sovereign Power, who start and urge this Question:
However it may not be amiss to take him into a Corner, to know his Mind of the
matter, under the Rose. Page 531.
It must be remembered that he allowed of Barclay, as a competent Judge in the
Questions which he determines, and as to a Sovereign Prince's undertaking to
cut off, Page 529.
or to ruin and destroy the whole Body of his People, he acknowledges that this
is the other only Case in which Barclay esteems a Sovereign Prince to forfeit
his Right of Government, and that thereupon it may be lawful to resist him.
Tho, as I observed before, Grotius cites Barclay for a third, Sup. f. 25.
this which he receives as Barclay's second, as he gathers from Barclay, must
not exceed the Bounds of mere Defense, without any Attempts of invading or
revenging; yet it may be a Question, how far this may be consistent with his
yiedling, that a former King in such case becomes a private Person. And indeed
I think he is in the right in allowing of no case to warrant Resistance, till
he who had been a King becomes a private Person. Page 526.


Accordingly, neither Barclay nor he, in the case of a King's undertaking the
Ruin of the Whole, or in any other case, will allow the taking Arms against the
Sovereign Power; because a Prince by such an undertaking as this, loses his
Royal Authority, and is no longer King; se omni dominatu and principatu exuit,
atque ipso jure, sive ipso facto, Rex esse desinit.

Page 530.
And the Reason given by Grotius in the same case is irrefragable, consistere
simul non possunt voluntas imperandi, and voluntas perdendi: quare qui se
hostem Populi totius profitetur, eo ipso abdicat Regnum: A Will to govern, and
a Will to destroy, cannot consist together; wherefore he who professes himself
an Enemy to his whole People, in that very thing abdicates his Kingdom.

I cannot but observe that here is a Forfeiture owned, and an allowance of a
Right in the People, Page 529.
or some of them at least to judge of the Forfeiture. Barclay esteems a
Sovereign to forfeit his Right, etc.
Elsewhere Mr. Falkner says, To assert that the People or Inferiors, are of
right Judges of the Cases in which they may resist their Superiors, is as much
as to say, they are bound to Subjection only so far as themselves shall think
fit, and that they may claim an Authority over their Governors, Page 365.
and pass Judgment upon them, and deprive them of their Dignity, Authority, and
Life it self, whenever they shall think it requisite and needful.

Page 359.
But this Inference here, as well as his former Declaration, shows, that he
speaks not of extraordinary Cases, which as he has it, we may well presume, or
hope, may never be in act.

And if a judicial Power, even in such extraordinary Cases, sound harsh, we may
learn of him to soften it, with the Terms in which he justifies the Exercise of
a like Power over Kings in Spirituals.

Page 321.
Tho, says he, all Christians upon manifest Evidence, may in some cases see
cause to disown a Sovereign Prince (as was done in Julian) from being any
longer a Member of the Christian Society; Page 322.
yet in such Cases his Membership cease, and is forfeited by his own Act, and
not properly by a judicial Sentence and formal Process. And some of the Romish
Writers go much this way, in giving an account, how the Bishop of Rome, whom
they suppose to be Superior to all Men on Earth, may by reason of Heresy or
such Crimes, be deprived of Christian Communion.

I must herein agree with Mr. Falkner, that it is not the Judgment which creates
the Forfeiture, but the Grounds of the Judgment; which ought to be duly weighed.

Page 542.
4. The only thing which, according to Mr. Falkner, in this Case can farther be
proposed is, Whether if a Supreme Governor should according to his own
Pleasure, and contrary to the established Laws, and his Subjects Property,
actually engage upon the destroying and ruining a considerable part of his
People, they might not defend themselves by taking Arms?

This which he says is notional and speculative, Page 543.
has too sadly been reduced to Practice, in Ireland especially.

After mentioning the Parisian Massacre, he confesses, that if ever any such
strange Case as is proposed, really happen in the World, Page 544.
it would have great Difficulties. Grotius, says he, thinks that in this utmost
extremity the use of such Defense as a last Refuge, ultimo necessitatis
praesidio, is not to be condemned, provided the Care of the common Good be
preserved. And, says Mr. Falkner, if this be true, it must be upon this ground,
that such Attempts of ruining do, ipso facto, enclude a disclaiming the
governing those Persons as Subjects, Page 545.
and consequently of being their Prince or King. And then the Expressions of
our Public Declaration and Acknowledgment would still be secured, that it is
not lawful upon any Pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King.

In short, Mr. Falkner's Judgment in these three, or rather four Cases, is
this, That these Cases are so extraordinary, that they fall not under any
Consideration as a pretense, but will justify the Subjects taking Arms when
they are real; and that when any such Case happens, the taking Arms is not so
much authorized by any Judicial Power in the People, or their Representatives,
as by the Facts themselves, whereby the King ipso facto, without Sentence,
incurs a Forfeiture, and ceases to be King. And had he lived to apply his own
Rules, no Man can doubt but he would in Terms have justified our renouncing
Allegiance to the late King: Whether upon the account of the Forfeiture, or the
Judgment upon it, or both, is not very material: especially considering that
both Barclay and Grotius speak of an Absolute Prince, not a Platonic Monarchy,
Vid. Page 398.
(...), "yoked or coupled with Laws.

It Is well known to have been Grotius his Opinion, Page 348.
That if the Supreme Government be part in the People, or Senate, and part in
the King: If the King invade what is not his Right, Page 344.
he may be opposed with just Force, because he has not so far any Supremacy:
Cited in Christian Loyalty, page 348.
and this he thinks must take place, tho it be said that the Power of War is in
the King; for that, says he, is only to be understood of Foreign War, when
whosoever has any part in the Supreme Power cannot but have a Right to defend
that part.

Falkner indeed excepts against this, as erecting two distinct Governments,
each of which have a Supreme Power of judging and executing.



1. Because it is allowed by its Constitutions and Capitulations: But then he
says, If we look into the Records of the former Ages, Page 349.
we may thence discern that no Subjects whatsoever of this Realm had, under any
pretense, an Authority to bear Arms against the King.

How far he is right in this Assertion, I submit to their Judgments who shall
impartially weigh the following Authorities.

2. His other Reason of a Difference between the State of the Empire, and of
England, is, That the Princes of the Empire in their own Territories enjoy u
Right of peculiar Sovereignty, which alters not the case in relation to the
Emperor; for both they and their People are Subjects to the Emperor: and the
mischief of a Judgment left in Subjects, is either equal both in one and the
other, or if there be any difference it is greater in the Empire: because, tho
the Latitude for judging may be the same, the Princes there have the greater
Opportunities of gathering strength against the Sovereign, and consequently
more Temptations to it, than where all is more immediately under the
Inspection, and Influence, of the Supreme Governor.

Falkner, that what he says, must relate only to an ordinary Judicial Power, or
in ordinary Cases; for if he allows it in extraordinary Cases, even where the
Prince is more absolute, than he agrees the Kings of England to be; a fortiori,
is this allowable here in such Emergencies?

Page 344, 345.
Wherefore notwithstanding his charging the two Jesuits, Lessius, and Becanus,
with an high strain of Treason and unchristian Disloyalty, bating what they say
in justification of killing a Prince by private Persons, for their
self-defence, even while he remains a Prince; I see not any material
difference between him and them.

And being our Dispute is chiefly with Papists, with others but as they are
their Friends out of Folly or Design, it cannot be improper to transcribe part
of his Quotation from the two learned Jesuits, agreeing almost word for word in
these Positions.

Page 344.
That a Prince who has a just Title becomes a Tyrant with respect to the
Administration of the Government, when he designs in his Government, and aims
at his private Advantage, and not the Public Good, and burdens the
Commonwealth with unjust Exactions, sells the Offices, and Places of Judges,
and makes Laws to his own Advantage, and not the Public.

That when this Tyrant is no longer fit to be born, this Prince is first to be
deposed, or to be declared an Enemy by the Commonwealth, or the Chief Estates
of the Kingdom, or any other who has Authority, and then he thereby cease to
be a Prince, and it becomes lawful to attempt any thing against his Person and
Life.

It being made a Question, What was Bishop Bedell's Opinion of Subjects taking
Arms against their Prince in Extraordinary Cases; he having been said barely to
represent the Defense made by others, without interposing any thing of his own:
and the Learned Writer of his Life having declared it unlawful and impious for
a Subject to resist his Prince in any Case whatsoever, which he says he
observes for fear the Bishop's words should be taken by the wrong Handle. As if
the Bishop gave no Intimation of his Mind herein, to countenance resisting in
any case whatsoever.

Life of Bishop Bedell, p. 442.
I shall take leave to give an account of the Bishop's Answer to Mr. Wadsworth,
who charges the Hugonots and Guises of France and Holland with raising Civil
Arms, shedding of Blood, occasioning Rebellion, Rapine, Desolations,
principally for their new Religion.

The Bishop says, Page 443.
these poor People having endured such barbarous Cruelties, Massacres, and
Martyrdoms, as scarce the like can be showed in all Stories, are now accused as
the Authors of all they suffered. No, says the Bishop, they be the Laws of the
Roman Religion that are written in Blood, and the perfidious Violation of the
Edicts of Pacification, that have set France and Flanders in combustion. And
afterward having enlarged upon the Fact he adds.

And tell me in good sooth, Mr. Waddesworth! Page 444.
Do you approve such barbarous Cruelty? Do you allow the Butchery at Paris?

What is this less than to say, that no Man can condemn these poor Protestants,
without approving the Cruelties exercised against them?

The Bishop proceeds in their Vindication.

Do you, says he, Page 445.
think Subjects are bound to give their Throats to be cut by their fellow
Subjects, or to (offer them, without either humble Remonstrance or Flight, to)
their Princes at their mere Wills against their own Laws and Edicts? You would
know, quo jure the Protestants Wars in France and Holland are justified (I
interpose not my own Judgment, not being thoroughly acquainted with the Laws and
Customs of those Countries, but I tell you what both they, and the Papists
also, both in France and Italy, have in such Cases alleged). First the Law of
Nature, which (they say) not only allows, but inclines and enforces every
living thing, to defend it self from Violence. Secondly, That of Nations, which
permits those that are in the Protection of others, to whom they owe no more
but an honorable Acknowledgment, in case they go about to make themselves
absolute Sovereigns, and usurp their Liberty, Added in the Margin.
to resist and stand for the same. And if a lawful Prince* (which is not yet
Lord of his Subjects Lives and Goods) shall attempt to dispoil them of the
same, The Passage above is to be considered as a Relation, not as the Author's
Opinion: But yet for fear of taking it by the wrong handle, the Reader is
desired to take notice, that a Subject's resisting his Prince in any Cause
whatsoever, is unlawful and impious.
under color of reducing them to his own Religion, after all humble
Remonstrance, they may (say they) stand upon their own Guard, and being
assailed, repel Force with Force, as did the Maccabees under Antiochus. In
which case notwithstanding, the Person of the Prince himself, ought always to
be sacred and inviolable. These are the Rules of which the Protestants that
have born Arms in France and Flanders, and the Papists also both there and
elsewhere, as in Naples, that have stood for the defense of their Liberties,
have served themselves. How truly, I esteem it hard for you and me to
determine, unless we were more thoroughly acquainted with the Laws and Customs
of those Countries, than I for my part am.

1. Here his Interrogation strongly implies the Assertion, that Subjects are
not bound to give their Throats to be cut by their fellow Subjects, or offer
them without either humble Remonstrance or Flight to their Princes, at their
mere Wills against their own Laws and Edicts.

2. The Argument from the Laws of Nature and Nations, he represents with due
strength, and apparent marks of Favor.

All the Hesitance which he makes in pronouncing absolutely on their side is,
from his not being thoroughly acquainted with the Laws and Customs of those
Countries.

Wherefore as he supposes not Christianity to lay any Obligation upon the
Subjects, beyond the Duty resulting from the particular Constitutions of the
respective Governments; so he does fully admit that the Laws ad Customs of some
Countries may allow of Resistance in some Cases. Hence it appears, that no Man
can truly say that he takes the Bishop's words by the wrong handle, who would
infer from him, that it is neither unlawful nor impious for Subjects, in some
Countries, and in some Cases, to resist their Princes. Nay, without knowing the
Constitution of France, or of the Low Countries, he supposes that in such
extraordinary Circumstances as the poor Protestants in both places lay under,
no Man can condemn them, without approving of the barbarous Cruelty and
Butchery of their Persecutors.

Page 446.
Nay, for Holland, he particularly urges, that the Kings of Spain were not
absolute Lords there, and says, any reasonable Man may doubt, Whether the Title
of Earl, to which they succeeded, imported such a Power as they exercised;
which is as much as to say, that since they assumed a greater Power than the
Constitution warranted, Arms against them were lawful: and if thus much is not
implied, Bp Bedell, p. 447.
it must be owned that the Bishop very impertinently affirms, that the Kings of
Spain were not absolute Lords in Holland.

No Man can doubt of his meaning thus much; since he affirms positively, that
it is no hard matter to discern pretended Privileges from true, and Treason
from Reason of State. But, says he, to take Arms to change the Laws by the
whole Estate established is Treason, whatsoever the Cause or Color be: which
may take in those that fight on the side of a King, as well as those who fight
against him.

Nor do I know what can well be said against what the judicious Mr. Lawson
urges to this purpose: Lawson's Politica sacra and Civilis 362. last Edit.
Treason, says he, against Laws is more heinous than Treason against Persons;
and Treason against Fundamental Laws, than Treason against Laws for
Administration. This Treason against the Fundamentals was charged upon the Earl
of Strafford, and the Personal Commands of the King could not excuse him; yet
it was not thought that the Judgment past upon him should be made a Precedent
for Inferior Courts; because none but a Parliament could judge of and declare
the Constitution, and what is against it, and what not.

Bishop of Christian Subjection, Ed. 1586. p. 279, 280.
If, says Bishop Bilson, a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a
Foreign Realm, or change the form of the Commonwealth from Impery to Tyranny;
or neglect the Laws established by common Consent of Prince and People, to
execute his own Pleasure; in these and other Cases which might be named, if the
Nobles and Commons join together to defend their ancient and accustomed
Liberty, Regiment, and Laws, they may not well be accounted Rebels. And soon
after he speaks of a Power for preserving the Foundation, Freedom and Form of
their Commonwealths, which they fore-priz'd when they first consented to have
a King. Where his meaning cannot be restrained to express Provisions, excluding
such as may be equitably intended.

That which is offered in the History of Passive Obedience to qualify Bishop
Bilson's Expressions, History of Passive Obedience, p. 27.
I dare say will be a Confirmation of his Authority, in the Judgment of any Man
who impartially weighs the following Proofs of the nature of our Government.

At the time, says the Historian, when Bishop Bilson's Book was written, Queen
Elizabeth was assisting the Dutch, against their and her common Enemy, the
Crown of Spain: Now if in the Low Countries the Government was founded in
Compact, as many Learned Men say, and that all their Privileges, Sacred and
Civil, contrary to that Agreement, were invaded, and the Inquisition
introduced, all their Petitions slighted, and some hundred thousands
barbarously murdered, this alters the Case, while it can no ways hold good in
Governments where there is no such Compact. Passing by due Reflections upon the
Impunity which he allows to the most barbarous Murders, where the Government is
not founded in Compact; it will appear to be enough for us, that where it is
founded in Compact, the Nobles and Commons may join in the Defense of their
ancient and accustomed Liberty, Regiment and Laws; nor may they in such Case
well be accounted Rebels.

And not to heap Authorities, with this agrees the Divine Plato, who after he
had affirmed that the highest degrees of Punishment belong to those, who will
misguide a Ship, or prescribe a dangerous new way of Physic, having brought in
Socrates, asking whether Magistrates ought not to be subject to the like Laws?
himself asks, Platonis Politicus, f. 299. Ed. Serrani: (...).
What shall be determined, if we require all things to be done according to a
certain Form, and set over the Laws themselves, one either chosen by the
Suffrages of the People, or by Lot, who slighting the Laws, shall for the sake
of Lucre, or to gratify his Lust, not knowing what is fit, attempt to do things
contrary to the Institutions?

This Man, both he and Socrates condemn, as a greater Criminal than those which
he mentioned; whose Crime he aggravates, as it is an acting against those Laws,
which through a long Experience had been ordained by their Counsel and
Industry, who had opportunely and duly weighed every thing, and had prevailed
upon the People to submit to them.

CHAP. III.
Five Heads of positive Law mentioned. Upon the first Head are produced the
Confessor's Laws, Bracton, Fleta and the Mirror, showing the Original Contract,
with the Consequences of the King's breaking his part. Some Observations upon
the Coronation Oath, with the Opinions of Sir Henry Spelman, Cujacius and
Pufendorf of the Reciprocal Contract between Prince and People. The Objection
from the pretended Conquest answered in short, with reference to the second
part. The Sense of Dr. Hicks and Saravia upon the Coronation Oath, received
with a Limitation from Grotius. The Curtana anciently carried before our Kings,
explaining the Mirror. A Passage in Dr. Brady against the Fundamental Contract
touched upon, referring the particular Consideration of him to the second Part.

TO proceed to positive Law, I shall show how the Contract between Prince and
People stood, and has been taken, both before the reputed Conquest, and since:
Where 'twill appear.

1. That Allegiance might, and may in some Cases be withdrawn, in the Lifetime
of one who continued King, until the occasion of such withdrawing, or Judgment
upon it.

2. That there was and is an established Judicature for this, without need of
recurring to that Equity, which the People are supposed to have reserved.

3. That there has been no absolute Hereditary Right to the Crown of England,
from the beginning of the Monarchy; but that the People have had a Latitude,
for setting up whom of the Blood they pleased, upon the Determination of the
Interest of any particular Person, except where there has been a Settlement of
the Crown in force.

4. That they were lately restored to such Latitude.

5. The People of England have duly exercised their Power in declaring for King
William and Queen Mary, and recognizing them to be Lawful and Rightful King and
Queen.

1. If the King not observing his Coronation Oath in the main, lose the Name of
King, then no Man can say that Allegiance continues: But that so it was before
the reputed Conquest, appears by the Confessors Laws, Vid. Leges Sancti
Edwardi, 17. de Regis Officio. Nec nomen Regis in eo constabit.
where they declare the Duty of the King.

But the King, because he is Vicar to the Supreme King, is constituted to this
end, that he should rule his Earthly Kingdom, and the People of God; and above
all should reverence God's Holy Church, and defend it from injurious Persons,
and pluck from it wrong Doers, and destroy and wholly ruin them; Vid. Bracton,
l. 2. c. 24. Est enim Corona Regis facere Justitiam and Judicium and tenere
Pacem sine quibus non potest ea^ tenere.
which unless he does, not so much as the Name of a King will remain in him,
etc. To which Bracton seems to refer, when he says, The King cannot hold his
Crown without maintaining Justice, Judgment and Peace: that therein consists
his Crown or Royal Authority.

Hoveden shows how this Law was received by William 1. Hoveden, f. 604. Rex
atque Vicarius ejus. Nota, There was occasion for naming the Deputy, by reason
of the accession of Normandy, requiring the King's Absence sometimes.


The King and his Deputy (or Locum tenens in his Absence) is constituted to
this end, etc. in substance as above: Which unless he does, the true Name of
King will not remain in him. And, as the Confessor's Laws have it (in which
there is some mistake in the Transcriber of Hoveden otherwise agreeing with
them) Pope John witnesses, That he loses the Name of King, who does not what
belongs to a King: which is no Evidence that this Doctrine is derived from the
Pope of Rome; The Pope only confirms the Constitution, or gives his Approbation
of it, Vid. The Case of Rehoboam, inf. in the Quotation out of Lord Clarendon,
f. 32.
perhaps that the Clergy of those Times might raise no Cavils from a supposed
Divine Right. And to show that this is not only for violating the Rights of the
Church, the Confessor's Laws inform us, that Pipin, and Charles his Son, not
yet Kings, but Princes under the French King, foolishly wrote to the Pope,
asking him, if the Kings of France ought to remain content with the bare Name
of King? Lambert. Qui vigilanter defendunt and regunt Ecclesiam Dei and Populum
ejus.
By whom it was answered, They are to be called Kings, who watch over, defend,
and rule God's Church and his People, etc. Hoveden's Transcriber gives the same
in substance; but, through a miserable mistake in Chronology, will have it,
that the Letter was written by Pipin and his Son, to W. 1. Lambart's Version of
St. Edward's Laws goes on to Particulars, among others, That the King is to
keep without diminution all the Lands, Honors, Dignities, Rights, and
Liberties of the Crown; Barons Majores and Minores.

Vita Aelfredi, f. 62. Ego tria promitto populo Christiano meisque subditis,
etc.


That he is to do all things in his Kingdom according to Law, and by the
Judgment of the Proceres, or Barons of the Realm; and these things he is to
swear before he is crowned.

By the Coronation-Oaths before the reputed Conquest, and since, all agreeing
in Substance, every King was to promise the People three things.

1. That God's Church, and all the People in the Kingdom, shall enjoy true
Nota, Protection.
Peace.

2. That he will forbid Rapine, and all Injustice, in all Orders of Men.

3. That he will promise and command Justice and Mercy in all Judgments.

And it is observable, that Bracton, Bracton, lib. 3. c. 9.
who wrote in the time of H. 3. transcribes that very formulary, or rather
Abridgment of the Oath, which was taken by the Saxon Kings. In Bracton's time,
it is certain, the Oath was more explicit, tho reducible to those Heads; and
it is observable, that Bracton says, The King is created and elected to this
end, that he should do Justice to all. Where he manifestly shows the King's
Oath to be his part of a binding Contract, it being an Agreement with the
People, while they had Power to choose. With Bracton agrees Fleta, and both
inform us, Fleta, lib. 1. c. 17.
that in their days there was no scruple in calling him a Tyrant, and no King,
who oppresses his People violata dominatione, as one has it; or violenta, as
the other; either the Rule of Government being violated, or with a violent
Government; both of which are of the like import.

Mirror, p. 8.
The Mirror, at least, puts this Contract out of dispute; showing the very
Institution of the Monarchy, before a Right was vested in any single Family, or
Person: When forty Princes, who had the Supreme Power here, chose from among
them a King to reign over them, and govern the People of God, and to maintain
the holy Christian Faith, and to defend their Persons and Goods in quiet, by
the Rules of Right. And at the beginning they caused the King to swear, That he
will maintain the holy Christian Faith with all his Power, and will rule his
People justly, without regard to any Person, and shall be obedient to suffer
Right or Justice, as well as others his Subjects. And what that Right and
Justice was in the last result, the Confessor's Laws explain, when they show,
that he may lose the Name of King.

Vid. Seld. spicil. ad Ead. merum, f. 171. Dissert. ad Flet. f. 591. Hoved. f.
608. Leges H. 1. confirming St. Edward' s Laws.

Cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater meus emendavit consilio Baronum suorum,
Mat. Par. f. 243. Barons petierunt de Rege Johanne quasdam libertates and
Leges Regis Edwardi, f. 244. partim in carta Regis Henrici scripta sunt, partim
ex legibus Regis Edwardi antiquis excerpta sunt.


These Laws were not only received by W. 1. and in the Codex of the Laws of H.
1. but were the Laws which the Barons in their early Contests which they had
with their encroaching Kings, always pressed to have maintained; and that their
Sanction might not be questioned, the Observance of them was made part of the
Coronation Oath, till some Archbishops or others, careful only of Clerical
Rights, provided for no more of those Laws than concerned them, leaving out the
People's share: as if while the Clergies Rights and Power were kept up, a
Nation could never be in danger of suffering under Tyranny.

Vid. Appendix to Plain English, Ed. An. 1690.

Vid. Rushw. 1 vol. f. 200. Coronation of C. 1. namely the Laws, Customs, and
Franchises granted to the [Clergy] by the glorious King St. Edward.

Vid. Rot. claus. 1. E. 3. Rot. claus. 1. R. 2. n. 44. Magna Cart. Ed. cum
Privilegio An. 1558. Juramentum Regis quando coronatur. Spelman Glos. tit.
Fidelitas.


By the Oath which is upon Record, and in ancient Prints, the King is to swear
to grant, keep, and confirm among others, especially the Laws, Customs, and
Freedoms granted [ the Clergy and People] by the most glorious and holy King
Edward. And even after the King has taken his Oath, they were to be asked, If
they would consent to have him their King, and Liege Lord? which is the Peoples
part of the Contract; and thus the Contract becomes mutual. To which purpose
the Learned Sir Henry Spelman cites Vid. Cujac. de feudis lib. 2. f. 512. Et
quibus ex causis vassallus feudum amittit eisdem etiam fere Dominum
proprietatem sine diminutionem feudi amittere eamque vassallo accedere.
Cujacius the Great Civilian, to show that Faith between a Lord and Vassal is
Reciprocal; and gives an Instance in the Oath of one of our Saxon Kings [
Knute] for the proof of its being so here between King and Subject. With
Cujacius agrees the no less judicious Civilian Pufendorf, one of the Ornaments
of the present Age. When, says he, the Power is conferred upon a King, there is
a mutual Translation of Right, or a reciprocal Promise.

Sam. Pusend. de Interregnis, p. 274. Quando in Regem confertur Imperium est
mutua juris translatio, seu reciproca promissio.


I answer; Answ.


1. Till there be a Consent and Agreement to some Terms of Government and
Subjection, 'twill be difficult, if possible, to prove any Right in a
Conqueror, but what may be cast off as soon as there is an opportunity.

Yiedling, says a judicious Author, Vid. Templum Pacis, page 767. Deditio est
pactus quo bello inferior majoris mali evitandi ergo potestati alterius sese
submittit, and in jura aliena transit. Dividi potest in simplicem sive purum,
quando quis mero Victoris arbitrio sese submittit: Et compositum sive
conditionatum, quando alterius quidem potestati quis sese subjicit, sed sub
conditionibus quibus aut singuli sibi consulunt, aut toti universitati.
is a Pact by which he that is overcome in War, to avoid a greater Evil,
submits himself to another Power, and takes new or strange Laws. This, says
he, may be divided into simple or pure, when any one submits himself to the
mere Will and Pleasure of the Conqueror: And compound or conditional, when
indeed one submits to another Power, but under Conditions, whereby either
every Man provides for himself, or for the whole Community.

And to the same purpose Textor in his Synopsis of the Law of Nations. Textoris
Synopsis Juris gentium, p. 129.


Victory, says he, is either restrained by Compact, or absolute; in the first
case the Conqueror acquires no more Right than was yielded to him by the Pact.

And the Lord Clarendon says, Survey of the Leviathan, p. 45.
All Government so much depends upon the Consent of the People, that without
their Consent and Submission, it must be dissolved.

The Author of the Temple of Peace, makes the most Absolute Submission a Pact,
and as the ground of it is the avoiding a greater Evil, it implies, that tho no
Terms are expressed, the Inhumanity and Tyranny of a Conqueror may work a
discharge: however we have no need of following that Implication, Gemetecensis
de Ducibus Norm. lib. 6. c. 37. Walsing. Hypod. Neustriae, f. 436. Sim. Dunelm.
f. 195. Hoveden, f. 450. Flor. Wigorn. f. 634, 635. 2 Samuel 5.3.
the Contract between W. 1. and the People being as express and as conditional
as can be desired. For,

2. Every Election of a King truly so called, is an Evidence of a Compact; but
ancient Authors tell us, that W. 1. was elected King, nay they are express that
he was received upon a mutual Contract, and that Faedus pepigit, he made a
League with the People; which comes to the same thing with what the Holy Writ
records of King David, "That the People made a League with him.

King William's Coronation Oath was the same with that which was taken by his
Saxon Predecessors, Lord Clarendon 's Survey of the Leviathan, page 109, 148,
149. aequo jure.
except that the Circumstances of that time required an additional Clause for
keeping an equal hand between English and French. It Is not to be doubted, but
that the Norman Casuists informed him that this related only to legal Justice,
but that in matters of Grace and Favor he was left at large. How much soever
he might have strained in this or other matters, I am sure he was far from
acting so arbitrarily, Vid. inf. second Part.
as some have industriously represented him; I will not say on purpose to
encourage such Actions in other Princes: And it is yet more certain, that
whatever Right either he, or any Prince under him enjoyed, came from the
Compact, not from the breach of Faith.

Vid. inf.
3. If the Compact were not sufficiently expressed at the first, at least it was
made so by his several Confirmations of the Confessor's Laws, which he received
with that very Clause, which shows in what case he would cease to be King of
England.

4. He neither at the beginning, nor in the course of his Reign, pretended in
the least to be a Conqueror, but always insisted upon Title, which, as I shall
show, was such as was not disputed in those days [the Choice of the People] and
this before his Victory over Harold; Vid. inf. second Part.
who was always looked on as an Usurper; not having been set up by a true
Choice of the People, but crowned by a Surprise, and contrary to that Election
and Designation of a Successor to the Confessor made in his Lifetime, who,
with the Consent of the Nation, had sent a Solemn Embassy to the Norman Duke to
assure him of the Succession.

Vid. inf. Vid. Leges W. 1. de fide and obsequio erga Regem.
5. If William I. did gain the Right of a Conqueror, it was personal, and he
never exacted this for his Heirs, as appears, not only by his Declaration when
he came to die, but by the Fealty, or Oath of Allegiance, which he required in
his Laws.

6. If our Ancestors had made as absolute a Submission to Will. I. as some
pretend; Lord Clarend. Survey, p. 51.
in the Judgment of the Lord Clarendon, it would not extend to us: For, says
he, if it can be supposed that any Nation can concur in such a Designation, and
devesting themselves of all their Right and Liberty, it could only be in reason
obligatory to the present Contractors: Nor does it appear to us, that their
Posterity must be bound by so unthrifty a Concession of their Parents.

The King's Oath is the real Contract on his side, and his accepting the
Government as a Legal King, the virtual one; and so it is vice versa, in
relation to the Allegiance due from the Subject.

Jovian. p. 244.
Thus far the Author of Jovian is in the right; As in the Oath of Allegiance the
People swear nothing to the King, but what they are bound to perform unsworn;
so the King in his Coronation Oath, promises nothing to the People, but what in
Justice and Equity he is bound to perform unsworn. Vid. Dr. Stillingfl.
Irenicum p. 132, 133. Saravia de Imperii authoritate, f. 221.

Grotius de jure Belli and Pacis, p. 59. Successio non est titulus Imperii sed
veteris continuatio Lord Clarendon's Survey, p. 74. The Description which
Samuel made of the exorbitant Power of Kings, was rather to terrify them from
pursuing their foolish Demand, than to constitute such a Prerogative as the
King should use, whom God would appoint to go in and out before them; which
methinks is very manifest, in that the worst of Kings that ever reigned among
them, never challenged or assumed those Prerogatives; nor did the People
conceive themselves liable to those Impositions, as appears by the Application
they made to Rehoboam, on the Death of Solomon, That he would abate some of
that Rigor his Father had exercised toward them: the rash Rejection of which,
contrary to the Advice of his wisest Counselors, lost him the greater part of
his Dominion; and when Rehoboam would by Arms have reduced them to Obedience,
God would not suffer him, because he was in the fault himself.


Upon which account I will yield to Saravia, That in Hereditary Kingdoms the
Coronation Oath confers no new Right; and therefore there may be a King before
his Coronation: Yet we must attend to Grotius his Rule, who rightly observes,
That Succession is only a continuance of that Power which the Predecssor had;
so that if the first Possessor comes into Power qualified by express Contract,
this binds the Successor, and he is to be thought to come in upon those Terms.

Nay, even Dr. Whitby, Considerations humbly offered for taking the Oath. Pref.
who to save the Credit of some of his Brethren, rather than the Reputation of
the Government, argues as if our King were barely King de facto, yet says, he
does by no means condemn those Writings which plead for taking the imposed Oath
upon such grounds as do more fully justify the Title of our present Governors.
And himself, in answer to them who laugh at the Notion of an Original Compact,
shows very particularly that W. 1. was received upon Compact, and that the same
Compact has continued, and been renewed by our succeeding Kings.

One of the Terms before the time of W. 1. as appears by the Mirror, was that
the King should suffer Right, or Justice, as well as his Subjects: And St.
Edward's Sword, called the Curtana, Vid. inf.
carried before our Kings at their Coronation, was in the time of H. 3. as will
afterward more particularly appear, a known Emblem and Remembrancer of this,
of the same nature with that Boy, ordered every Morning to put Philip of
Macedon in mind of his Mortality. But surely whoever was entitled to carry the
Curtana, or to use a judicial Power in such Cases as above, how much soever
they continued their Allegiance to the King's Authority, could not well be said
to retain it to his Person.

Dr. Brady indeed says, There never was any Pact between King and People, no
Fundamental Terms of Government agreed between them; nor indeed, says he, ever
was there, or is it possible for any such thing to be in any Nation of the
World. Matter of Fact, so long as we have any Memorials of it in these
Kingdoms, shows to the contrary.

If the Matter of Fact here could show it not possible in any other Kingdom,
his, might pass for an universal History; but if the Authorities in this first
Part do not take off from the Doctor's Credibility in this Point as far as
relates to England, Vid. inf. second Part throughout.
I will undertake before I have done with him in the second, where his Notions
fall more directly under Consideration, to show, Jani Angl. facies nova.
that he deserves little more Credit, than when he made my Tract maintaining
the Rights of the Commons of England to be represented in Parliament, Dr.
Brady's Introd. to his complete History.
an Evidence of my being in a Plot against the Government.

CHAP. IV.
The second Head of Positive Law. The established Judicature for the Case in
question implied, if not expressed, in the Confessor's Law, and asserted in
Parliament 12 R. 2. with an account why the Record then insisted on is not now
to be found. Our Mirror, the foreign Speculum Saxonicum, Bracton and Fleta
explaining the same. The Limitation of that Maxim, The King can do no Wrong.
Precedents from Sigibert, King of the West Saxons, to the Barons Wars in the
time of King John, confirmed by occasion of an Objection to the instances in
the Northumbrian Kingdom. How far this Monarchy was reputed Hereditary or
Elective before the time of W. 1. there touched upon. Instances of the Peoples
Claims of their Rights in the times of W. 1. W. 2. H. 1. King Stephen, H. 2.

Leges St. Edward. sup. vid. ib. Rex debet omnia rite facere in regno suo and
de judicio Procerum suorum.
THere was and is an established Judicature for the great Case in question, as
is implied by that part of St. Edward's Laws abovementioned, which supposes
some Judge or Judges in the case: and those Laws investing the Proceres with the
supreme Judicature, withholds not this from them. And the same Laws declare
that a Folcmot, or an Assembly of the People of every County, Leges St. Ed.
Tit. Greve. Vid. second Part.
as it is there explained, was to meet every first of May, in a Common Council,
to provide for the Indemnity of the Crown of the Kingdom, and for repressing
the Insolence of Malefactors, for the benefit of the Kingdom, which, as appears
from the words, and subsequent as well as former Practice, besides the Opinions
of ancient Lawyers, did not except the King himself; whatever Care is taken of
the Crown of the Kingdom. However it is certain the Parliament 12 R. 2. referred
to a known Statute, when they mind him of an ancient one, not long before put
in practice; Whereby if the King, Knighton, f. 2683. meaning the Case of E. 2.
through a foolish Obstinacy, Contempt of his People, or perverse froward Will,
or any other irregular way, shall alienate himself from his People, and will
not be governed and regulated by the Rights of the Kingdom, and laudable
Ordinances made by the Council of the Lords and Great Men of the Realm; but
shall headily, in his mad Counsels, exercise his own Arbitrary Will; from
thenceforth it is lawful for them, with the common Assent and Consent of the
People of the Realm, to depose him from the Throne, etc. This Law is not now
extant, but was not then denied; Knighton, f. 1752.

This observed after me by the Author of the Answer to the Popular Objections,
p. 44.


and the Reason why it is not to be found, is very evident, from the Articles
against this King some Years after: In the 24 th Article they accuse him of
causing the Rolls and Records, concerning the State and Government of his
Kingdom, to be destroyed and razed, to the great Prejudice of the People, and
Disherison of the Crown of the said Kingdom; and this, as is credibly believed,
in favor and support of his evil Governance. More particularly in the
Historian unmasked by the same Author. Mirror, p. 9.


The Mirror tells us, That of Right the King must have Companions to hear and
determine in Parliament all Writs and Plaints of Wrong done by the King, etc.

And the Learned Hornius cites the Speculum Saxonicum, Hornii orbis imperans,
p. 196.
of the like Name and Nature with our Mirror; the Author of which last, was of
his own Name: The Saxon Mirror, as he says, was written before the Normans came
hither.

The Justices, or private Persons, says he out of the Speculum, neither ought
nor can dispute of the Acts of Kings; yet the King has Superiors in ruling the
People; Hornius, p. 196.
who ought to put a Bridle to him: And, Hornius says, the old Saxon Lawyers
limit that Maxim, The King has no Peer, to wit, in exhibiting Justice; but in
receiving Justice, they say, he is the least in his Kingdom.

Tho Bracton seems to restrain this Rule to Cases wherein the King is Actor, in
judicio suscipiendo si petat; Fleta, who takes it from Bracton, seems to
correct the Copy, and has it si parcat, Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 17.
If he spare doing Justice; to which end, both affirm, that he was created and
chosen King. And Bracton himself shows elsewhere, Bracton, l. 3. c. 9. p. 107.
that he means more, by the Reason which he assigns why the King ought to be
the least in receiving Justice, Lest his Power should remain without Bridle.
This for certain he sufficiently explains, Ibid.
when he says, That no Justices or private Persons may dispute of the King's
Charters and Acts; Bracton, l. 2. c. 16. p. 34.
but Judgment must be given before the King himself (which must be meant of the
King in Parliament, as appears by a Petition in Parliament 18 E. 1. Vid. Ryly,
Plac. Parl. f. 20.

Fleta supra, Superiores.

So Mirror, p. 9. Ceux Compagnions sont ore appelles Comites, and in Latin
Comitatus; where he takes in all that come up to Parliament from the Counties.


where Bracton's Rule is received.) But Bracton says, he has God for his
Superior, also the Law by which he is made King, also his Court, that is to
say, the Earls and Barons, for they are called Comites, being as it were
Companions to the King; and he who has a Companion, has a Master: Therefore if
the King acts without Bridle, they are bound to bridle him; and Bracton in one
place says, In receiving Justice, the King is compared to the least of his
Kingdom, without confining it to Cases where he is Actor.

This puts a necessary Limitation to that Maxim, That the King can do no Wrong;
that is, not be adjudg'd so by the Judges Commissaries, or Commissioned Judges,
Vid. Mirror, p. 209. He there says, Suitors are Judges ordinary; and 274.
speaks of Counties, and les autres Suitors, having Jurisdiction in Causes which
the King cannot determine by himself, or by his Judges.

So Judge Crook's Argument in Hampden's Case, p. 59. Whatever is done to the
Hurt or Wrong of the Subjects, and against the Laws of the Land, the Law
imputes that Honor and Justice to the King, whose Throne is established by
Justice, that it is not done by the King, but it is done by some unsound and
unjust Information, and therefore void, and not done by Prerogative.


which the Mirror uses in Contradistinction to Judges Ordinary, sitting by an
Original Power; yet this does not in the least interfere with the Judicial
Power of the High Court of Parliament; and it may be a Question, Whether that
Maxim, as received in the Courts of Justice, is ever taken to reach farther
than, either in relation to the Remedies which private Persons may there have,
against personal Injuries from the King; as where it is said, The King cannot
imprison any Man, because no Action of false Imprisonment will lie against him;
or rather because of the ineffectualness in Law of his tortious Acts.

But what the Nation, or its Great Councils have thought of such Acts, will
appear by a long Series of Judgments, from time to time past and executed upon
some of their Kings.

Long before the reputed Conquest, Sigibert King of the West Saxons becoming
intolerable by his insolent Actions, Chronica de Mailros, f. 137. Anno 756.

Bromt. f. 770. Co^gregati sunt Proceres and Populus totius regni and eum
provida deliberatione a regno unanimi consensu omnium expellebant.


was expelled the Kingdom; and Bromton shows, that this was done in a judicial
manner, by the unanimous Consent and Deliberation of the Peers and People; that
is, in the Language of latter Ages, by Lords and Commons in full Parliament.

Lambart's Pref. to Archaionomia Northumbrorum Imperii magnitudo ea fuit, quae
nunc est Ehoracensis, Dunelmensis, Northumbriae, Cumbriae and Westmorlandiae
Comitat. atque reliquam praeterea Lancastrensis Com. partem complectebantur.
Chron. Mailros, f. 138. Anno 774. Sin Dunelm. 106. and 107. Consilio and
consensu omnium, Regiae and Familiae ac principium destitutus societate, exilio
Imperii mutavit Majestatem.
And eighteen Years after, Alcred, King of the Northanimbrians, that is,
Northumberland, and other adjacent Counties, was banished, and divested of his
Sovereignty, by the Counsel and Consent of all his Subjects. Ib. f. 108. Anno
779. Mailros, Anno 794. f. 139. S. Dunelm. f. 113.
Five Years after this, their King Ethelred was driven from the Throne and
Kingdom, for treacherously procuring the Death of three of his Great Men,
Alwlf, Cynwlf, and Ecga. Within fifteen Years after this, the People having
without Example called back Ethelred from Exile, slew him without any allowable
Precedent, and set up in his stead Osbald a Nobleman, none of the Royal Stock;
and he not answering their Expectation, they deposed him in twenty eight days.

Milros, f. 141. Anno 806.

Ibid. f. 143. Anno 866. degenerem. Ibid. 144, 872.


Twelve Years after they deposed their King Eardulf, and remained long without
choosing any. Sixty Years after they deposed their King Osbrich, and chose Ella,
who still swerved from the Ends of Government. Six Years after they expelled
their King Egbert. For sixty nine Years the Kings and their People agreed,
without coming to any Extremities; F. 148, 941. F. 148, 947.
but then they renounced the Allegiance sworn to King Edmond, and chose Aulaf
King of Norway for their King. Aulaf had not reigned six Years, when they drove
him away; and tho they received him again, they soon cast him off again, and
swore Allegiance to the English King Edred: Then they rejected him, and chose
Egric a Dane, with whom their independent Monarchy expired, and turned into the
Government of Earls.

I would not be thought to mention those numerous Examples with the least
approbation; it is certain, they argue great Levity in rejecting, or Folly in
choosing. But if we are believed to receive many Laws and Customs from the
Germans, from whom we are more remotely derived, much more may the English
Monarchy be thought, to partake of the Customs of the contiguous Kingdoms which
compose it; and by this frequent Practice the Members of it were sufficiently
prepared, to understand that part of the Compact, whereby the Prince was
obliged to suffer Right as well as his Subjects; Vid. Mirror sup. Leges S. Edw.
and that if he did not answer the End for which he had been chosen, he was to
lose the Name of King.

Indeed a very Learned Author, Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a
new Separation on the account of the Oaths, p. 15.
in a Treatise for the most part unanswerable, seems to set aside all the
Precedents within the Kingdom of the Northumbers, as if that were of no
consequence to any other part of England.

I shall not, says he, meddle with the Kingdom of the Northumbers, which alone
was originally elective, as appears by Matthew Westminster.

The words to which he refers are these;

Anno Gratiae 548, Regnum Northanhumbrorum exordium sumpsit. Math. West. f. 101.
Cum enim Proceres Anglorum magnis Laboribus and continuis patriam illam
subjugassent. Idam Juvenem nobilissimum sibi unanimiter praefecerunt.

In the Year of our Lord 548, Anno 548.
the Kingdom of the Northumbers began. For when the Great Men of England had,
with much and continual Labor, subdued them, they chose for King Ida a most
Noble Young Man.

I cannot understand how the showing the Foundation of one Kingdom, in
Election, is any Argument against the Original Electiveness of others within
the same Island: Nay, prima facie, without more of one side or other, it gives
ground to believe the others to have had the like Foundation: and this
Quotation particularly, is so far from implying, that this was the only
Kingdom, within the Isle, Originally Elective; that it supports the Authority
of the Mirror, which informs us, that forty Princes at the beginning of the
Monarchy chose one to reign over them: Mirror sup.
for this speaks not of the English, as then under one King, or more, in their
respective Divisions, but under several Proceres, Great Men, or Princes; and
that part of the Island seems to have been the first which chose a King: but I
know not by what Rule of Logic, it can be gathered from this Passage in
Matthew Westminster, that other Kingdoms which chose their King afterward,
were not equally Elective in their Foundation, tho not so ancient, or the time
of the Commencement not so easily to be shown. Vid. inf. Vid. Falkner, p. 329.
This called a Synod of all England. 827.548.279. Malmsbury, f. 13.
Certain it is that the Council of Calcuth in the Year 789, which provides for
the Election of Kings, was Conventus Pananglicus; and if it took not in the
Northumbrian Kingdom, as having been disjoined from the rest till the Reign of
Egbert, An. 827, being 279 Years, it is to be presumed that all England besides
was included. Nay, this very Author produces Authorities, which prove other
Kingdoms here, though their beginning is not so well known, to have been as
truly Elective as this which he waves.

1. He shows, Page 14.
that Beornred being set aside by a Convention of the Nobility and People of
the Kingdom of Mercia, Offa was chosen King, who was of the Royal Stem, but not
the next Heir: And so, says he, William of Malmsbury observes in the West Saxon
Kingdom after Ina, that no Lineal Succession was then observed; but still some
of the Royal Line sat in the Throne; and of Ina himself, that he was rather put
into the Throne for his Virtue, than by Right of Succession.

Discourse sup. p. 15.
2. He argues, that if by the Fundamental Constitution, Allegiance were
indispensably due to the next rightful Heir in this Monarchy. Athelstan, whom
he shows not to have stood next in the ordinary course of Descent, would not
have been chosen Magno Consensu Optimatum; and gives several other Instances,
wherein he observes that Reason of State, Page 17.
and the public Interest still overruled this matter.

3. He shows that Reason of State, and the Public Interest overruled, not only
for Elections, when the Throne was free from a Possessor, but even for the
removing Kings in Possession.

P. 13. An. 454. Vid. sup. Anno. 756. P. 14. An. 758. An. 854, 867. P. 16. An.
957.
For which he cites the Cases of Vortigern under the British Government.
Sigebert King of the West Saxons. Beornred of Mercia, abovementioned.
Aetheluph King of the West Saxons, and the eldest Son of Edmund, who was set
aside because in Commisso regimine insipienter egit, "He acted foolishly in the
Government committed to him.

After all, he contends that ours is not only a true Original Monarchy, but
Hereditary, where the Right of Succession and public Good did not interfere:
and thus much I readily grant him, but in restraining this to Cases where there
was not a natural or moral Incapacity, he plainly confines Reason of State, and
the Public Good, to narrower Limits than before he allowed; for if these were
to overruled, Page 17.
as he before observed, then the Question upon Competitions for the Crown,
between Persons of the Royal Family was barely, which of the Competitors, all
Circumstances being considered, was most likely to advance the Public
Interest, of which the People were to be Judges: whereas according to his
Limitation, they were bound to take the Person who was next in the Line, if he
lay not under a natural or moral Incapacity, directly contrary to what he shows
out of Malmsbury of the West Saxon Kingdom, in which, after Ina, no Lineal
Succession was observed. When Athelstan, Page 15.
of his own showing was chosen King, were his Brothers Edward and Edwin under
any natural or moral Incapacity? Or, were the Sons of Edmond Iron-side either
way incapable when Edward the Confessor was elected? For Confirmation of what
himself produces upon this Head, I take leave to add one Authority from the
Writer of the Life of King Alfred.

Vita Aelfredi lib. 1. f. 19.
Many Examples, says he, are found among the Saxon Kings, of a Brother's
succeeding to the Brother before his Son, especially if the Son had any
Impediment from the Infirmity of his Age, or other Ineptitude for governing:
Nay, OFTEN BY REASON OF LESS MERIT.

I must admit, that for the deposing one actually invested with the Regal
Authority, the Author's Limitations were to be observed, tho they were not
strictly kept to; and I cannot but think that this Author confounds himself for
want of this Distinction.

Either the frequent Examples of setting Kings aside, whom the Nation judged
incapable of the Government, through some natural or moral Defect, or Excess,
or rather the continual Engagements in war with Foreigners, had such Effect,
that from the time of King Edwin, Nephew to the English Monarch Edred, who was
driven out of the Kingdom, Anno 957, to the time of W. 1. being 109 Years, I
find no like Instance but one, Anno 1014, 52 Years before the supposed
Conquest, which was the case of Etheldred, who abdicated the Government and
went into Normandy, from whence the Nation agreed to receive him again upon
Condition, si vel rectius gubernaret, Flor. Wigorn. An. 1014.
vel mitius eos tractare vellet, if he would either govern more according to
Law, or treat them more mildly. Upon which he promiss'd omnia Rege and Populo
digna, All things which become a King to his People.

For the most part during the Saxon Government, a King was but a more splendid
General; nor could he hope to maintain his Dignity, but by hardy Actions, and
tender Usage of his People.

Even Will. 1. notwithstanding the Pretense made in after-Ages of his having
broken the English Spirit, Vid. second Part.
was not only obliged to keep within Bounds, as the following Discourse will
evince, but to renew his Compact with the People more than once.

Their extraordinary Power had slept very few Years after the Death of this
reputed Conqueror: Ed. Land. Mat. Par. f. 19. Rex Willielmus videns omnes pene
regni, proceres una rabie conspiratos, Anglos fortitudine and probitate
insignes, faciles Leges and tributorum lenamen liberasque illis venationem
promittendo, sibi primo devinxit.
for the Sickness of his Son W. 2. giving the English Nobility an opportunity
of consulting together, they, almost as one Man, were for declaring against
him, which he timely prevented by fair Promises to them. Nay, tho his Brother
H. 1. came in with the universal Applause of the Nation, yet a great part of
his Navy deserted him, and declared for his Brother Robert; not because he was
the elder Brother, but because Henry was unmindful of that Contract, which
gained him the Preference, Quia Rex jam tyrannazaverit, as the Historian has
it, "because the King proved a Tyrant. King Stephen, his immediate Successor,
after Allegiance sworn to him, had it a while withdrawn for Maud the Empress,
Daughter to H. 1. but the People soon returned to it again, rejecting her who
was nighest in Blood, because she denied them the benefit of St. Edward's Laws.

And, Discourse, p. 21.
as the Author of the learned Discourse about the New Separation observes, out
of Manuscript written by Fortescue, Chancellor to H. 6. Maud was set aside, and
the Reversion of the Crown entailed on her Son, although she was living, and this
was done in Parliament, Communi Consensu Procerum, and Communitatis Regni
Angliae; "By the common Consent of the Peers, and Commons of " England: for
which, Fortescue, whose Skill and Integrity no Man can justly question, appeals
not only to the Cronicles, but to the Proceedings of Parliament. However this
Author will have it, that the Commons were not there, but as represented by the
Barons, being misled by the general Expressions of the Historians, whose
Authority he opposes to the Rolls of Parliament. Yet for the purpose here, it
is enough, that this was done by a Parliament of that Time; that the Agreement
then made was confirmed by the Oaths of the Great Men; and that the Public
Good, which was the Foundation of the Agreement, was thought to be the measure
of the Obligation of such Oaths.

Hen. 2. came to the Crown by virtue of an Agreement with King Stephen, to
which the Nation consented: for ought appears, he was a strict Observer of the
Constitution of the Government; but being rendered uneasy by the Refractoriness
of the Clergy, and desirous that his Son should enjoy that Kingdom, which he
found a desirable Possession to them who would keep the Laws; he took his Son
into a Partnership of the Care and Dignity: this occasioned a Competition for
Power, which the Admirers of the traitorous St. Becket improved into a War,
which divided the People; Archbishop Parker's Antiquitates Britanicae f. 130.
salva fide Regi patri quamdiu viveret, ac regno praeesse vellet.
but this, being between two Kings, both in Possession, I should not look on as
any Precedent to our Point, did I not find that the Allegiance sworn to the
Son, at the receiving him to the Succession, was with a Salvo, for that which
was due to his Father, as long as he should live, or think fit to reign.

CHAP. V.
The Barons Wars in the time of King John; That he had abdicated the
Government; That he had lost all means of being trusted by his People. How
unwilling they were to engage in a War against him. They invite over Lewis the
Dauphin of France. His Case a Parallel to the late Abdication. The Vacancy of
the Throne insisted on by the French King's Advocate, and that thereupon the
Barons had right to choose another King, of the Blood Royal of England as Lewis
was. Why the Barons fell off from Lewis. What the Homilies say concerning their
inviting Lewis, swearing Allegiance to him, and fighting under his Banner
against King John, considered.

THE Power lodged in the People for the public Good to be sure was roused and
justified by the Tyrannical Reign of King John, who, tho he had effectually
abdicated, or unking'd himself, by his giving up his Crown, as much as in him
lay, to hold in Vassallage of the Pope, as well as by other his Exorbitances;
yet was not set aside till the Nation was necessitated to it, by the Success of
his Usurpations and Ravages, to which, as he was encouraged and enabled, by the
Influence of the Pope's Authority, over the less honest, or less discerning; so
he thereby lost all means of gaining Trust from his People for the future.

The Earls and Barons of England having, without any Writ from the King, given
one another notice of meeting, demonstrated that they engaged not out of any
Affectation of Change, but merely to secure those Liberties which were their
due by the Constitution; for they agreed to wage War, Mat. Pa. f. 339.
and renounce Allegiance to him only, in case that he would not confirm those
Liberties, which were contained in the Laws of Hen. 1. and the ancient Laws of
King Edward the Confessor.

That they might proceed with such Deliberation as became them, they appointed
another Meeting for a peremptory Demand, declaring that if he then refused
them, they would compel him to Satisfaction by seizing his Castles: nor were
they worse than their words, and their Resolutions had for a while their
desired Effect, in obtaining a Confirmation of their Liberties: which tho they
were as forceable in Law before, and his Promise to maintain them as little to
be credited as ever; yet his open Violation of them after his own solemn
acknowledging them, and granting that Petition of Right, was likely to cast the
greater Load upon him and his Courtiers, when they should act to the contrary;
and to take from their side numbers of well-meaning Men, who otherwise might be
cheated with a pretense of Prerogative.

The Pope, as was to be expected, soon absolved the King, and encouraged him to
break those legal Fetters, which was ipso facto, an Absolution to the People,
of more effect in Conscience, than the Pope's ipso facto Excommunications.

They being thus discharged, the wiser and sounder part of them, stoutly
casting off the Authority both of King and Pope, proceeded to the Election of
another King, Lewis the Dauphin of France.

Mat. Par. lib. and Addit. An. 1216.
The Account in Matthew Paris of a Debate which the French King and his
Advocate, or Attourny-General, held with the Pope's Nuncio, who would have
dissuaded the Dauphin's Expedition against King John, the Pope's sworn Vassal,
is so exactly parallel to the Case now in question, that many who will allow us
no Precedent of ancient Times, will be ready to say, that some words at least
were foisted in, since our present happy Settlement.

The French King, as became a Monarch, spoke his mind in few words, Si
aliquando fuit verus Rex, postea Regnum forisfecit per mortem Arthuri, de quo
facto damnatus fuit in Curia nostra. Item nullus Rex, vel Princeps, potest dare
regnum suum sine assensu Baronum suorum, qui regnum illud tenentur defendere.
If ever he were King, he afterward forfeited his Kingdom by killing Arthur, of
which Fact he was condemned in our Court. Besides, no King, or Prince, can give
his Kingdom without the Assent of his Barons, who are bound to defend it.

That is, to preserve the Kingdom against the King who has parted with it, or
any Demisee, as appears by his Advocate's Enlargement to whom he left the rest,
after himself had granted all Kingly Power to have this implied Limitation.

Mat. Par. Addit. f. 281.
The Advocate goes on, addressing himself to the King.

Domine Rex, Res notissima, etc.

May it please your Majesty: It is a thing well known to all, that John, called
King of England, was condemned to death in your Court for his Treachery to his
Nephew Arthur, whom he slew with his own Hands. And was afterward by the
Barons of England, for his many Homicides and other Enormities there committed,
rejected from reigning over them. Whereupon the Barons waged War against him,
Ne regnaret super eos reprobatus, ut ipsum solio regni immutabiliter
depellerent.
that they might drive him from the Throne of the Kingdom, never to return.
Moreover, the said King, without the Assent of his great Men, gave his Kingdom
to the Pope and the Church of Rome, to receive it again, to be held under the
yearly Tribute of a thousand Marks: Dare non potuit, potuit tamen dimittere eam.
And although he could not give the Crown of England to any one without his
Barons, he might demise it, or divest himself of it, which as soon as he
resigned, he ceased to be King, and the Kingdom was vacant without a King.

Therefore the vacant Kingdom ought not to have been administered without the
Lords: What difference between the Kingdoms being vacant without a King, and
the Throne vacant? Vacans itaque Regnum sine Baronibus ordinari non debuit,
unde Barons elegerunt Dominum Ludovicum ratione Uxoris suae, etc.
By reason of which the Barons chose Lord Lewis upon the account of his Wife,
whose Mother, the Queen of Castile, was the only Survivor of all the King of
England's Brothers and Sisters.

This was so true and so convincing, that the most plausible Return which the
Pope's Nuncio could make to it was, that King John had been signed with the
Cross for the Service of the Holy Land; and that therefore, by the Constitution
of a General Council, he ought to have Peace, and be under the Pope's
Protection for four Years.

And you may be sure that the French King would not interrupt him in his
Journey thither, but was well satisfied that his Son should supply his place in
England. Who tho he had been received not only as one that rescued the Nation
from King John's enormous Tyranny, but as one that was, in the Right of his
Wife, entitled to the Privilege of the English Blood Royal; and so duly chosen
according to the standing Law of this Monarchy, as has been mentioned, and will
hereafter more fully appear. Vid. sup. and inf.
Yet the Clergy, and all who were so weak as to be led by them in Civil
Affairs, being against Lewis, Mat. Par. f. 384.
as he stood excommunicated by the Pope, besides it having been made known by
the Death-bed-Declaration of one of Lewis his Confidents, that his Master had
evil Designs against those very Men who were the chief Instruments in his
Advancement, and that he looked upon them who fought for him as Traitors; he,
through the uncertainty and indifference of his Friends, more than the strength
of his Enemies, was obliged to quit the Kingdom to Hen. 3.

H. 3. were it not needful first to remove an Objection against their
Proceedings with his Father, which tho not founded on the Histories of the same
Age, may seem to have weight from the Authority of Divines of later times.

The Homilies pass this Censure upon them.

Had English Men at that time known their Duty to their Prince, Homilies, the
sixth Sermon against wilful Rebellion, last Ed. 383.
set forth in God's holy Word, would English Subjects have sent for, and
received the Dauphin of France, with a great Army of Frenchmen into the Realm
of England? would they have sworn Fidelity to the Dauphin of France, breaking
their Oath of Fidelity to their natural Lord the King of England? and have
stood under the Dauphin's Banner displayed against the King of England?

To which I answer;

1. That our Church pretends not to Infallibility, nor will it be any
Imputation upon it to have erred in relation to Fact, or the Constitution of
the Government, without regard to which it is not to be supposed, that the
Fathers of our Church would apply the Duty of Subjects set forth in God's Word.
Pseudomartyr, Chap. 6. p. 172.
And I doubt not but Dr. Done Dean of St. Paul's in the time of C. 1. very
well understood the Scriptures and our Homilies, and yet he tells us, that some
ancient Greek States are called Laconica, because they were shortened and
limited to certain Laws. And some States in our time seem to have conditional
and provisional Princes; between whom and Subjects there are mutual and
reciprocal Obligations, which if one side break, they fall on the other. This
he supposes to be, wherever there is not a Pambasilia in the hands of one
Man; that is, as he explains it, that Sovereignty, which is a Power available
to the main ends. One of the main ends of Government must needs be making Laws,
and levying Taxes, if that be not vested in any single Person, he has not the
Pambasilia; and if he have not the Pambasilia, according to him he is but a
conditional or provisional Prince; and if he be a conditional Prince, the
Obligations between him and his Subjects are mutual and reciprocal, and the
Subjects may take the advantage of a failure on the Prince's side.

History, p. 40.
This being taken from an Authority, cited in the History of Passive Obedience
since the Reformation, shows what Limitations may be put upon those Passages in
the Homilies, which seem, like the late King's Declaration to Scotland, to
require Obedience without reserve.

Vid. sup. c. 2.
Mr. Falkner, as appears above, had carried the Point as high as the Homilies
have done; and yet he admits, that if those extraordinary Cases happen, which,
as he contends, ought not to be supposed, in such Cases Subjects may resist,
notwithstanding Oaths for Passive Obedience, without any such Exception in the
words.

2. Whatever Obligation may be upon the Clergy from their Assent and Consent,
none is given by the Laity, and they may do all that is requisite to make them
true Members of the Church of England, without being concluded by the Opinion
of Churchmen about Civil Government.

3. Even Clergymen look upon the very Articles but as Articles of Peace, that
they may not disturb the Government, by public maintaining what is contrary to
them: but surely cannot think that they are obliged to disturb the Government,
for the sake of any matter, merely as it is contained in the Articles, or
Homilies.

4. The Doctrinal matter contained in the Homily, That a natural Lord is not to
be resisted, may be true; and yet this may not in the least condemn resisting
an unnatural Tyrant: And the Application of their Doctrine to the Case of
inviting and joining with Lewis, may have been grounded upon a false State of
the fact, as if King John had done nothing whereby he truly ceased to be King.
And that they went upon a false state of the Fact, is the rather to be
believed, because Archbishop Parker, Antiquitates Brit. f. 148.
by whom we may well gather the sense of these Fathers, though he admits King
John to have been an ill Man, and to have joined with the King of France
against his Natural Lord and King R. 1. yet will have it, that he was
justifiable in his Actions against his Rebellious Subjects, and excuses his
very Abdication, in resigning his Crown to the Pope, as an act of mere
necessity, being compelled to it by the Artifice and Turbulency of the Clergy,
Ib. f. 131. Eodem annno Alexander, Papa Turonense Concilium celebravit, cui
Arch. and Prelati Angliae Regis permissione and licentia interfuerunt, ac a
dex^ris Papae Thomas cum suis suffraganeis, a sinistris vero Ebor. Arch. cum
solo Dunelm Episcopo sederunt ibi Capto de Ecclesiastica quadam super regiam
liberate pertinaciter retinenda concilio A Papa ocyus dimissi and in Angliam
reversi sunt. Post hoc Turonense concilium cum omnibus pene in rebus Clerus se
a populo disjunxisset, cepit in Anglia de Regni atque sacerdotii authoritate
atque vi multo varioque sermon disceptari, factaque perturbatio gravis de
prerogativa atque privilegiis ordinis Clericalis.
which he observes to have carried on a separate Interest divided from the
Nation ever since the Council of Tours in the year 1163.

But Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, in King John's time, is to be presumed
better acquainted with the Justice of the Arms on either side, than Archbishop
Parker, or the Composers of the Homilies; upon that King's gathering Forces
against his Barons, the Archbishop tells him, that he would break the Oath that
he took at his Absolution, si absque judicio Curiae suae contra quempiam bella
moveret, Mat. Par. f. 137.
if he waged War against any body, without the judgment of his Court;
referring, it seems, to that part of his Oath, wherein he Swore, That "He would
judge all his Men according to the just judgment of his Court. Nay farther yet,
Mat. Par. f. 268.
King John had brought over Forces against his Barons from Poictou, Gascony and
Flanders, before they had recourse to any Foreigners.

5. The Case of Swearing Allegiance to Lewis, cannot be brought as a parallel
to Swearing Allegiance to our present King and Queen; because Lewis was never
received by the whole Collective or Representative Body of the Nation, the last
of which has received and declared for King William and Queen Mary, upon a
solemn Judgment given by them the proper Judges of the Fact, That the late King
had broken the Original Contract, and thereby ceased to be King.

CHAP. VI.
The Barons Wars in the time of H. 3. particularly considered. H. 3. Crowned by
a Faction. Had no right but from Election as his Father had. That no right
could descend to him from his Father. Lewis, while here, as much King as H. 3.
Three express Contracts entered into by, H. 3. besides the Confirmations of the
Great Charter. Those applied to the consideration of the Wars. Three of them
under such as seem like the Roman Tribunes of the People. Dr. Falkner's
Objection against those Wars, answered. The Answer confirmed by a full
instance, in the time of E. 1.

TO proceed to the Reign of H. 3. who was Crowned by a Faction at Gloucester,
while Lewis was in possession of London, the Metropolis of the Kingdom; That he
came not to the Crown as Successor in an Hereditary Monarchy, but upon a plain
Election and Compact, with part of the Nation at least, in the Name of the rest
who would come in under those terms, may be proved beyond contradiction: For
though in the Language of the Homilies, King John were Natural Lord to the
Subjects of England; yet as Arthur, who was the next in the Line to King John's
Predecessor, had the Right of Blood, Mat. Par. f. 278.
as far as that could operate, before King John, which he insisted on in the
Fourth of that King's Reign, even while he was his Prisoner; the same right had
Eleanor, Arthur's Sister, all the remainder of King John's time, and for some
years during the Reign of H. 3.

2. The Father came to the Crown by virtue of a Free Election of the People, as
the Archbishop of Canterbury told him at his Coronation; wherefore his Election
could not invest him with more than a Personal Right, unless more were
expressed at the time. But the Archbishop Hubert, Mat. Par. f. 264. 1 Johan.
Audite universi noverint discretio vestra quod nullus praevia ratione alii
succedere habet in regnum nisi ab universitate regni unanimiter invocata
spiritus gratia Electus, and secundum morum suorum eminentiam praeelectus.
who spoke in the name of the Community, was so far from giving the least
Umbrage to a Right that might extend to Heirs, that he affirmed, That no man is
Entitled to succeed to the Crown upon any other account, previous to the
unanimous choice of the Kingdom, except only the eminence of his Virtue. And
being afterward asked why he took such freedom of Speech? He declared, That he
foresaw, and was assured by Ancient Prophecies, That King John would corrupt
the Kingdom and Crown of England, and precipitate it into great confusion: And
he asserted, That he ought to be minded of his coming to the Crown by Ne
haberet liberas hab^nas hoc faciendi.
Election, not by Hereditary Succession, least he should take a liberty to act
as he feared.

3. Since therefore what the Archbishop feared, came to pass; and that
Contract, in virtue of which King John assumed the Royal Scepter, was
notoriously broken, How can it be thought that a Right devolved upon his Son H.
3. especially considering the interruption that was made by a Choice of Lewis,
though not Universal?

I must confess, there is no Evidence occurring to me, that Lewis was ever
Crowned here; yet considering that the Coronation, as is agreed by most, is but
a Ceremony, the bare want of it would not the less argue a breach in the
Succession, since the sounder part of the people took the benefit of that
Forfeiture which King John manifestly made: and if nothing but an Universal
Concurrence in this, could justify withdrawing Allegiance from him, then it is
hardly possible for any resisting of Tyranny to be lawful at the beginning; and
he who is forwardest in the Cause of his Country, must be always a Criminal.

But being there is a deep silence as to Lewis his Coronation, Mat. Par. Illico
Coronandus.
tho he was promised by the Barons at London to be Crowned immediately upon his
coming over; I take the reason of the silence in this matter to be, That if he
were Crowned in form, it was by the Laity alone, because the Pope was fast to
the side of King John, and his Son; and Lewis lay under a Papal Sentence of
Excommunication, so that the Clergy durst not Communicate with him in those
Acts of Religious Worship, which accompany Coronations. But these Ceremonies
being to be performed by Clergymen, it is most probable, that the Laity
contented themselves with the Substance, and left those Ceremonies for a more
convenient time. But that Lewis was in Possession of the Crown and the Regalia,
is to be believed, as London, with the Tower, where they used to be lodged, had
not only been in the Possession of his Friends from the beginning, but held so
till the second Year after H. had been Crowned, as it is to be presumed, with a
Crown made for that purpose. Whether Lewis were Crowned or no, he was as fully
received by them that had withdrawn their Allegiance from King John, as if he
had been Crowned; and reciprocal Oaths past between them. And he was so far
looked on as King, Mat. Par.
that Alexander King of Scots swore Homage to him, for the Lands he held of the
Crown of England.

But certain it is, as the Circumstances evince, that there were at least three
Express and Binding Contracts which H. 3. entered into with his People, either
beyond, or rather explanatory of what is included in the Coronation Oath, and
which H. 3. was bound to observe, as he would be King of England; and these,
besides several Confirmations of the Great Charter, purchased with the Peoples
Money; and one of the Grants of Aid so particularly Conditional, that
Treasurers for it were appointed in Parliament, and the Money was to be
returned, upon the King's not performing the Conditions of the Grant.

1. The First Contract which I shall observe, was that which Lewis, perhaps
induced to it by the Money which he borrowed of the Londoners, obliged H. to,
before he would quit his Pretensions: So that one was plainly the Condition of
the other; and as the Civilians have it, ran into the other by way of Mutual
Consideration. Vid. inf.


Lewis, for the reasons which I before touched upon, finding his Interest daily
decline, thought good to come to terms with Henry, whereby Lewis obliged
himself by Oath to withdraw from England, Mat. Par. fol. 400.
with all his Followers, never to return; and to use his endeavors, that his
Father might restore all the Rights of the Crown of England, which he had
seized on beyond Sea. In consideration of which, Henry, the Earl Marshal of
England, and the Pope's Legate, F. 423. Na. Discord not Rebellion, f. 431.
swore to the restoring to the Barons of England and all others, all their
Rights and Liberties for which there had been Discord between King John and his
Barons. This Agreement with Lewis, the Great Council of the Nation afterward
insisted on, 7o H. 3. when they urged a Confirmation of the Great Charter,
which they obtained not, till 9o of that King.

2. The Second particular Contract, was that of which the Great Council or
Parliament 28o H. 3. mind him, and of which they then after much struggling,
purchased a Confirmation. According to this, among other things, 28 H. 3.
referring to 20. f. 864.
Four Great Men were to be chosen by Common Consent, as Guardians of the
Kingdom, to be the standing Council about the King, with a very large Trust
reposed in them. The Chancellor, Treasurer, and Chief Justice, were to be
chosen by the like Consent; and neither any of the Council, nor other Officers
were to be amov'd, but by Order of the Majority of the Council, or in full
Parliament. This they insist on as sworn at a Coronation of that King, Edmund
Archbishop of Canterbury being Sponsor for the King's Performance.

This Contract was certainly 20o H. 3. at his Third Coronation, when he was
Crowned with his Queen newly married, and had the Curtein carried before him,
to admonish him of the Consequence of a Breach. Vid. inf.


That this was 20o, when he was Thirty years old, and in as flourishing a
condition, as at any time of his Reign, till the chance of War had subjected
his Barons to a more imperious Sway, appears in that the Ceremonies of his
first Coronation were performed by the Bishop of Winchester, and Bath and
Wells: The second by Archbishop Stephen, Ao 1220. in the third year after Lewis
his departure, which it seems, was the first time that he was publicly
received for King with an universal consent; special notice being taken, that
the Coronation was in the presence of the Clergy and People of the whole
Kingdom.

Besides, Edmund was not Consecrated till the year 1234. 18o H. 3. and the
Historian is express, That Archbishop Edmund performed the Ceremonies of the
Coronation 20o.

There is farther Evidence, that the Charter mentioned 28o H. 3. was granted
20o; for it appears, that the great Officers were appointed 20o, according to
the Charter which the Parliament, 28o, insist on, as granted at a Coronation
where Archbishop Edmund was present, and undertook for the King's performance.

Mat. Par. f. 563 Officium Cancellariae Angliae and omnia officia ordinata
sunt, quae Regia sunt, and Assise in scaccario unde Cancellarius, Camerarius,
Mareschallus, Constabularius, sibi ibidem sedem sumpserunt, ratione Officii
sicut Barons omnes in sui Creatione Fundamentum in Civitate Londinensi unde
quilibet eorum suum ibi locum sortitur. Vid. Flet. lib. 2. cap. 26.
Matthew Paris writing of the Twentieth, says, The Office of the Chancery of
England, and all Offices belonging to the Regal State, and Sittings in the
Exchequer, were settled. Whereupon the Chancellor, Chamberlain, Marshal,
Constable, took their Seats there by reason of their Offices, as all Barons at
their Creation had their Foundation in the City of London.

Vid. inf. 2d part.
This Right of Places at London, in which it is plain Westminster was then
included, seems to imply a Reason why the Acts of the Barons at London, past
both at home and abroad, for the Acts of the Baronage of the Kingdom. Hence the
King of France, Lewis his Father, looked upon their Invitation of his Son, as
the Binding Act of all; accordingly he both demanded and had Four and twenty de
Nobilioribus Regni, Mat. Par. f. 373 Implorantes Patrem ut filium mitteret in
Anglia regnaturum and Filium ut veniret illico Coronandus.
'of the Chief Nobility of the Kingdom, as Hostages for their performing what
they had promised his Son, which was the Crowning him King of England.

3. The Third particular Contract was contained in the Provisions at Oxford,
42o H. 3. which Provisions are Printed at large in the Annals of Burton, and
referred to in many Records now in the Tower; Vid. Annals Burtonenses. f. 412.
Rot. Par. 42. H. 3. m. 3. Mat. Par.
but the Record of the Provisions has been imbezled since Mr. Selden's time,
whose Abridgment of them I have seen. There had been a Parliament that year at
London met on Hoke-Tuesday, a fortnight after Easter: at that Parliament the
King demanded Money, the Parliament a redress of Grievances; but nothing being
concluded on, the Parliament was Adjourned to Oxford; the Barons having
promised to give the King Supplies if He would Reform the State of the Kingdom;
which condition the King accepted of, promising that the State of the Kingdom
should be Reformed by Twelve faithful persons of his Council, chosen in that
Parliament at London, and Twelve others to be chosen by the Barons.

The Parliament meeting at Oxford according to the Adjournment, Twelve were
chosen by the Earls and Barons, to be added to the Twelve before chosen of
Counsel with the King: These Twenty four chose Four of their own Number, who
named Fifteen to be a standing Council to the King. And among the Regulations,
besides the choice of Officers, and the Custody of the King's Castles, it was
provided, That there should be Three Parliaments every year, the first at the
Octaves of St. Michael, the second in Candlemas week, Ke Treis Parlements seint
par. An.
the third the first day of June. To these Parliaments, Twelve prodes homes,
honest legal men, were to come, for sparing the cost of the Commons; and at
other times when the King sent for them, upon occasion to treat of the business
of the King and the Kingdom: and the Community were to hold for established
what these Twelve should do.

These might seem not to have been Parliaments to make Laws, but Ordinances, or
Provisions in the Intervals, and for sparing the trouble of more numerous
Assemblies; that they were but such as were known in after days by the name of
Great Councils, distinguished from Parliaments, would seem by a Record of the
time, which is a Commission to Four Knights, chosen according to the Provisions
then made, 42 H. 3. m. 3. De Inquisitionibus faciendis per singulos Comitatus.
Rex Aluredo de Lancaster, Joan. de Rochford, Joan. de Stroda, Willo. de Raymes,
de Com. Dors. cum nuper in PARLIAMENTO nostro apud Oxon. Communiter fuerit
ordinatum, etc. Et inquisit. inde fact. sub sigillis vestris and sigillis eorum
per quos facta fuerint, deferatis apud Westminster. in Octavis S^. Mich. in propriis
personis vestris liberand. Consilio nostro, ib.
by Juries duly returned, to enquire into all Abuses, Enormities, and
Transgressions within the County of Dorset, in the same form with others in the
respective Counties throughout England. The Inquisitions were to be returned at
the Octaves of St. Michael, the first Parliament, appointed by those
Provisions; and this was at that very time to be brought to Westminster, as one
would think, to be delivered into Parliament; but it is in the Record said
only, To be delivered to our Council.

And I find that Writs issued out after the Parliament at Oxford, Rot. Par. 42
H. 3. m. 1. Nus volens and otroiens kece ke nostre Consel and la greignure
party de eus ki est esluz par nus and la commune de nostre Roiaume a fet ou
fera a honir de dieu and nostre foi and pur le profit de nostre Roiame sicum il
ordenera seit ferm and establi in touts chooses a tuz jourz. Commandous a tuz
noz faus and leaus en la fei kill nous devient kill fermement teignent and jurent
a tenir and meintenir les establisments que sunt fet, ou sunt a fere par la dit
Conseil.
declaring, That all things provided or to be provided by the King's Council,
and the greater part of them, who were chosen by the King, and the Community of
his Realm, should be held firm and established, and requiring all men to swear
to hold and maintain, the Establishments made, or to be made by the said
Council.

Vid. Flet. Habet Rex. Consilium suum in Parliamentis, etc.
But upon farther consideration, I find that Council was the King's Council in
Parliament, and those Knights who were the Inquisitors for the Counties, were
not only obliged to come to deliver in their Inquisitions, but their Consent
was requisite to what the King should ordain by his Council in Parliament,
which then were a select number chosen as abovesaid, Claus. 42. H. 3. m. 1.
dorso. Quia Robertus Cambhen and socii sui de Comitatu Northumb. de precepto
Regis venerunt ad Regem apud West. etc. pro quibusdam negotiis Communitatem
totius Communitatis praed. tangentibus. Mandatum est. Quod prefatis quatuor
militibus de Communitate praed. rationabiles expensas suas in eundo and
redeundo habere faciat. In another of the same time to Huntingtonshire, they
are said to have appeared coram Consilio nostro apud Westminster. in Parliamento.
Vide of this at large, in the 2 d part.
since, as it should seem, all the Lords. Certain it is, there are Writs upon
Record for the Expenses of those Four Knights for every County, as since there
have been for Two.

The observing of the abovementioned Contracts, will give light to that
Judgment which may by us at this distance be past upon the Wars between H. 3.
and his Barons; and not to mention any small disturbances, and the Violations
of the Rights of particular men, and what they did in defense of them; I find
H. 3. four times opposed by the People in Arms, in Three Wars, and a Fourth
rising, which wanted only Numbers on the King's side, to make it a War; all
managed under Heads formally chosen, or seeming to have claim to the Conduct,
by virtue of their Offices.

1. The first was under Lewis the Dauphin of France, whom the Barons at London
had chosen for King; in this there was one King against another, both standing
in truth upon the same title, the choice of the People; Lewis had the greater
part of the Chief Nobility on his side, how much soever the Pope's Thunder
might have frightened the more ignorant Vulgar, and prevailed upon their
interested Guides.

2. The Second was under the Conduct of the Earl of Chester, named first, as
it is to be supposed, for the reason before shown.

The occasion of the Insurrection began Ao. 1223. 7o. of that King, when he
being Seventeen years old, obtained a Bull from the Pope, declaring him of full
Age, and enabling him to order the Affairs of the Kingdom, chiefly by the
Counsel of his Domestics, that is, such as he should choose, turning out those
Officers which either had Hereditary Rights, or had been chosen in Parliament,
according to what was insisted on at his Coronation 20o. as matter of Right;
wherefore his assuming all the Power into his own hands, and countenancing the
Exorbitances of Hubert de Burgh, Mat. Par. Addit.
Chief Justice of England, (who indeed, as appears upon his Defense afterward,
when he came to be impeached, had been chosen in one of King John's
Parliaments, but was continued in by H. 3. against the sense of his own
Parliament) sowed the Seeds of Discontent, tho they did not break out into a
general Rising, but all seemed to be quieted by his Confirming the Great
Charter. Ao. 1224.


Yet soon after, when he was in truth of full Age, he was resolved to act as
one out of Wardship; 11 H. 3.
and in a Parliament at Oxford declared himself free, and by the advice of
Hubert de Burgh, cancelled the Great Charter of the Liberties of the Forest, as
of no validity, because granted in his minority; and forced many who had
Ancient Grants of Liberties, to purchase them anew, at such Rates as the Chief
Justice imposed. Besides Hubert had advised the King to act Arbitrarily with
his own Brother, Richard Duke of Cornwall, which drove him to shelter himself
under the Publick-Cause; and glad were the Great Men to find his resentment
contribute to such a general demand of Justice, Mat. Par.
as forced the King to compliance in a Parliament at Northampton.

3. But by the Seventeenth of H. 3. Peter, Bishop of Winchester, An. 1233.

Mat. Par. f. 413. Adhuc sub custodiam Petri Winton.


who had succeeded to William Earl Marshal, in the custody of the King during
his minority, having been supplanted by Hubert the Chief Justice, at last put
the Dice upon the less subtle Layman, and resolving not to fall again for want
of flattering his Prince, advised him, in order to become Absolute, to remove
his Natural Subjects from the Great Offices, and put Foreigners in their
Places; who were brought over in great numbers, and oppressed and plundered the
Nobility upon false accusations and pretenses, seized their Castles, and
enjoyed the Wardships of their Children.

This occasioned a general insurrection under Richard Earl Marshal, who, as a
Roman Tribune of the people, went to the King, and in their name demanded a
redress of Grievances; but the Bishop of Winchester having given an haughty
answer, justifying the King's calling over what Strangers he thought fit, to
reduce his Proud and Rebellious Subjects, as he called them, to due obedience;
The Marshal, and the rest of the Great Men who were Witnesses to that
insolence, Swore to stand by one another to the last extremity, in the Cause of
their Country: But the Earl of Chester, another Tribune here, sold his Country
for a Sum of Money. The Marshal finding himself deserted, was obliged to have
recourse to Leolin Prince of Wales for aid. Upon this the King Proclaimed him
Traitor: 9o October. Ao. 1233.
But in a Parliament held at Westminster, at the latter end of that year, though
the Earl Marshal was absent, and in Arms, the Parliament advised the King not
to Banish, Spoil, or Destroy his Subjects without Legal Process; nor to call
them Traitors, who endeavored the Peace of the Kingdom, Mat. Par. last Ed. f.
388.
and by whose Counsels the Government ought to be managed.

Which was a full justification of the Arms taken by the Marshal. Nay, the
Bishops proceeded so far, as to Excommunicate the Bishop of Winchester, and
others the King's Ministers, and to lay upon them the imputation of disturbing
the Peace of the Kingdom.

The Marshal carried all before him with universal applause. The Bp. of
Winchester and his Accomplices were punished in a Parliament held at Candlemas.
The King having sent to treat of Peace with the Marshal and Prince Leolin, the
evil Counselors, which were the Marshals chief cause of Complaint being
removed, and his Estate in Ireland having received great damage from his
Enemies, he left Leolin to Treat for himself and his Friends, and went over to
Ireland, where he was slain by Treachery. The Treaty went on, and among the
terms it was provided, That all Men on the one side or the other, Rot. Claus.
18. H. 3. N. 17. dors. Homines etiam illi qui hinc inde recesserunt a
fidelitate dominorum suorum and se tenuerunt ex adversa part libere
revertantur. Rot. Claus. 18. H. 3. N. 20. dors.
who had receded from the fealty of their Lords, and adhered to the adverse
Party, should return with freedom. And in the Credential Letters which were
sent to Leolin with them that managed the Treaty on the side of King Henry, He
gives him to understand, That before that, he had restored the Lands to all
people who had been disseiz'd by occasion of the War between him and the Earl
Marshal, where it is far from being called a Rebellion on the Marshal's side;
and at the time of the Treaty, the King found himself obliged to protest, that
he was clear of any consent to the Death of the Marshal; and that his Seal was,
by the great importunity of his evil Counselors, set to Letters, which
encouraged the Treachery against him, and pronounced him a Traitor: But that he
was wholly ignorant of the Contents of them.

Vid. Matthew Paris.
The Clergy, the Historians, the People of that Age, in all things extol the
Marshal, would never allow him to have been a Traitor; and were not his own
Defense of himself too long to transcribe, I should add it as an embelishment
to these Remarks.

Dugdale's Baronage o, Vol. 1. f. 752. Simon 16. H. 3. bore the Title of the
Earl of Leicester, and obtained from Almaric his Brother, then bearing the
Title of Constable of France, a grant of all the Lands in England, with the
Stewardship of England. This came to the Earls of Leicester, with the Honor of
Hinkley in Leicestershire, from Petronil Daughter of Hugh de Grentesmenil. Vid.
Mat. West. 20 H. 3. Simon Montfort holding the King's Basin at his Nuptials, as
Steward of England.
The Fourth War, was that under the Great Simon Montfort, Earl of Leicester,
another Tribune of the People, as he was hereditary High Steward, by Purchase
from his Brother Almaric, Constable of France; the Stewardship of England
having descended from their Mother Amicia, eldest Sister to Robert Fitz Parnel,
Earl of Leicester, who died without Issue.

Mat. Par. f. 1302.
Whoever reads the History of H. 3. must needs conceive a mean opinion of him;
his Cowardice was as remarkable as that of one of his Successors, who is said
not to have been able to contain at the sight of a drawn Sword; nor could H.
bear the terror of Thunder and Lightning; yet when Simon Montfort endeavored
to remove one of his frights, Quod scilicet Comes Leycestriae virilius
perstitit and ferventius in persequenda provisione ut saltem Regem and omnes
adversantes suis astare consiliis cogerent, etc.
he confessed to him, That he feared him most: Which was suspected to proceed
from Montfort's warm and strenuous pursuing the Provisions at Oxford, at least
his being for compelling the King and all opposers to stand to the Counsel of
his Barons.

Simon thinking the execution of the Oxford Provisions to be well secured, Fol.
1314.
went beyond Sea; upon which, Richard the King's Brother prepared to come into
England, with intention, and hopes, as it should seem, to get them vacated, as
being made without consulting him. But the rest of the Barons, though they were
in great fear because of Simon's absence, Ib. f. 1315.

Juramentum quale Barons Angliae reipub. Zelatores exigebant.


would not suffer Richard to Land, till he had obliged himself under his hand
to take such an Oath, as the Barons of England, who were zealous for the
Commonweal, or Publick-good, required; the form of which follows:

I Richard Earl of Cornwall, will be faithful and diligent, to reform the
Kingdom of England with you, hitherto too much deformed by the Counsel of
Evil-men. And I will be your effectual helper, to expel the Rebels and
disturbers of the said Kingdom.

Notwithstanding the seeming agreement between the King and People, and
Security taken for his performance, Foreigners invited and supported by him,
became an intolerable burden; and the King being kinder to them than to his
People, obtained from the Pope an Absolution from his Oath, Mat. Par. F. 1322.
to make good the establishment at Oxford: But the Barons resolutely insisted
upon the Establishment; and when the King sent Itinerent Justices into
Herefordshire, Ibid.
the Barons of that County would not suffer them to execute their Office there,
as being contrary to the Provisions at Oxford; which contrariety seems to lie
in the King's directing enquiries of misdemeanors to be judged of in the
Countries: when according to what was then Enacted, the Inquisitions were to be
returned before the Parliament, or at least such Council as was chosen in a
Parliament.

But the King having procured an Absolution from his Oath, thought himself free
to act by the Counsels of Foreigners, which his Great men would not bear.

Wherefore the Earl of Leicester and others, met together in Arms at Oxford,
resolving either to dye for the Peace of their Country, F. 1323.
or to drive out the Foreigners.

The Foreigners met at the same place; but finding themselves out-number'd, and
that the Lords were resolved to call them to account for their violations of
the Government, and make them swear to observe with them, the Provisions made
for the profit of the Realm, they fled away by Night; but were pursued by the
Barons, and forced to quit the Land.

Yet soon after this, the King, as the Historian says, Anno 1260. 44 H. 3. 45
H. 3.
by the evil Counsel of some, fell from the pact which he had made with his
Great Men, betook himself to the Tower of London, and compelled the Citizens to
swear to be true to him, without regard to the terms before settled, and raised
what Forces he could.

Whereby it is evident, That he began the War; and that it was an open
violation of his Contract made with the people at Oxford.

The Barons took Arms against him in their own defense, F. 1331. Communiter
prestitum.
and sent Messengers to him, to entreat him to observe the Oath which had been
sworn to by all. Which Message he slighted at first, but afterward was
prevailed upon to consent, that he should choose one, and the Barons another, to
arbitrate their differences, the Arbitrators having power to choose an Vmpire;
but that this should be respited till the King's Son Edward came from abroad.

When his Son came home, he was so fully convinced of his Father's being in the
wrong, that he joined with the Barons, and they resolved together to drive away
all the evil Counselors; which the King perceiving, again betook himself to
the Tower: But an agreement being made with some of the Barons by the Queens
mediation, the King having left the Tower in the Custody of one in whom he
confided, went a progress, and found his Barons very quiet and peaceable; but
he soon discovered that he was resolved to act without regard to the Provisions
at Oxford: Violently seized several Castles, and coming to Winchester,
displaced the Chief Justice and Chancellor which had been constituted by the
Baronage; F. 1335.
the Barons met him at Winchester with a considerable Force, upon which the
King hastens again to the Tower of London. The Barons, one would have thought,
were now in a fair way of securing the performance of the last Contract made at
Oxford; but now the Clergy had their Game to play, and acted it like Men who
knew how to manage the Nation against its interest; they keeping a
correspondence with the Clergy of France, were Authors of advice to the Barons,
That all things in difference should be referred to the Determination of the
French King; no doubt, making the Barons believe, that they had assurance of
that King's good Wishes for the Prosperity of England. Both the King and Barons
agreed upon the reference; upon which, as was to be expected, the French King
gave Sentence for the King against the Barons; and for annulling the Statutes
at Oxford, with all Provisions, Ordinances, and Obligations thereunto
belonging. With this Exception, that he intended not by that Sentence, in the
least to derogate from the Ancient Charter of King John, granted to the Kingdom
of England.

Qui habebant sensus exercitatos.
Which Exception, says the Historian, obliged the Earl of Leicester, and others
of sound Judgments, to resolve firmly to keep the Statutes of Oxford, which
were founded upon that Charter.

And Matthew Paris condemns those as guilty of Perjury, who upon this, A
fidelitate Comitis Leicestriae.
receded from their Faith to the Earl of Leicester, who fought for Justice. He
grew so strong, and so successful, that the King came again to Terms with him,
and with the other Barons; the Terms were these. Mat. Par. f. 1327.
That Henry his Brothers Son should be delivered out of Prison. That all the
Kings Castles throughout England, should be put into the Custody of the Barons.
That the Provisions of Oxford should be inviolably observed. That all
Foreigners shall depart the Kingdom within a certain time, excepting only them,
whose stay should be permitted by unanimous Consent, as being faithful to the
Kingdom.

Mat. Par.
But notwithstanding all Pacts, Promises, and Oaths, the King sends to have
Windsor-Castle besieged, but was disappointed by the Earl of Leicester.

After this, a Parliament met at London, in which several deserted the Earl,
and adhered to the King, so that he seemed the strongest. The Barons writ him a
Submissive Letter, declaring, That they had no evil Intentions against his
Person, but complain of his Counselors. The King in his Answer justifies his
Counselors, and says, their Enemies are his. The Barons on the King's side,
send a defiance to the others, and particularly to the Earl of Liecester, and
to Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hereford, undertaking to prove them
Traitors in the King's Court. Which Trial the Barons thought they then had
Reason to decline; but the Barons offer the King 30000 l. for his Damage
sustained by the War, 1329.
provided the Statute of Oxford may be observed; but their Proposals not being
accepted, they came to a pitched Battle at Lewis, wherein the King was totally
routed, and taken Prisoner, and his Son Edward soon after yielded himself. Upon
which followed a form of Peace solemnly sworn to, while the King and his Son
were in Prison; Pat. 48. H. 3. m. 6. dors.
but the Son making his Escape, took the Advantage of a Difference between the
Earls of Leicester and Gloucester, Vide Cave, de Scriptoribus Eccles. f. 716.
His Character of that Bp. who animated the Barons. Vir erat, ut pietatem, vitae
Sanctimoniam, reliquasque virtutes Christiano Praesule dignas praetermittam,
ingentis animi, acris ingenii, in re literaria quantum ea ferebant tempora, ad
summum pen^e apicem evectus, totum encyclopediae circulum emensus, in literis
sacris pariter, and prophanis, etc.
and over-powering Montfort, gained an entire Victory at Evesham, by the Death
of that Earl; who as Matthew Paris's Continuator tells us, laid out himself for
the Relief of the Poor, the Assertion of Justice, and the Right of the Kingdom,
and was incited to it by the Famous Grosthead, Bishop of Lincoln, who always
affirmed, that they who died in that Cause, would be Martyrs.

The King being victorious, no wonder that a Parliament called immediately upon
it at Winchester, condemned the Conquered for Rebels; but it is evident, that
more Parliaments justified such as then were Rebels for being beaten; Falkner's
Christian Loyalty, p. 349.
and methinks Mr. Falkner does not argue with his usual fairness, when he urges
the unfortunate conclusion of the Barons Wars in the later end of H. 3. as
sufficient evidence, that if we look into the Records of the former ages, we
may thence discern that no Subjects whatsoever of this Realm had, under any
pretense, an authority to bear arms against the King.

The Dictum de Kenelworth, 51 H. 3. mentioned by him as an evidence of the
sense of another Parliament, besides that of Winchester, is plainly an
abatement of the rigours of that Parliament, and was only a determination and
award made, after Simon Montfort the younger, Vid. Brady's Hist. f. 655.
had submitted to any terms that should be imposed, saving his Life and Limbs,
and excepting perpetual Imprisonment.

Mr. Falkner adds,

Anno 52. P. 351.
The Statute of Marlbridge mentions it as a great and heavy mischief and evil,
that in the time of the late Troubles in England, many Peers and others refused
to receive Justice from the King and his Court, as they ought to have done
(which is more expressly contained in the Original Latin, than in the common
English Translation) Justitiam indignati fuerint recipere per dominum Regem,
and curiam suam, prout debuerunt and consueverunt; and did undertake to
vindicate their own Causes of themselves. P. 352.
Now to declare that all Peers, and all other Persons ought to have received
Justice only from the King and his Courts, and not to revenge themselves, or be
Judges in their own cases; does more especially condemn the entering into War
its self, which is an Undertaking founded upon a direct contrary Proceeding.
And thus we have a sufficient Censure in our English Laws, upon that War
against the King, which those who have pleaded for the Lawfulness of Subjects
taking Arms, do account the most plausible Instance for their purpose, as our
Chronicles can furnish them with.

King's Court, will be of no service to Mr. Falkner's purpose; the Court which
is presumed to be intended, if it relates to the Controversies between the King
and his Barons, being the Parliament, where they would be Judges in their own
cases; which Mr. Falkner says they ought not to be. 2. The Statute of
Marlborough does not in the least condemn the Barons Wars. For

1. The Subject of that Act is to remedy the abuses of Distresses, which are
matters within the Jurisdiction of the ordinary Courts of Justice; and no way
extends to the great questions of the Kingdom, determinable only in the highest
Court.

2. The Statute does not call those Wars a time of Rebellion, Vid. Stat. Marlb.
Fleta p. 25.
but of Dissension and Troubles; suitably to which, even in the time of E. 1.
among the Articles of the Crown, in charge to the Justices in their Circuits,
one provides for enquiry after them, who have subtracted Suits of Shires, etc.
after the War moved between King Henry the Third and his Barons.

Mat. Par. f. 373.
3. Tho the Barons once threatened H. 3. That unless he would send away the
Foreigners, they would all, by the Common Council of the whole Realm, drive Him
and his wicked Counselors out of the Kingdom, and would consider of making a
new King; yet it appears by the Circumstances and Events of the several
Insurrections, that their design was only to bring him to reason: they still
were for continuing him King: and therefore it might not be improper for the
Parliament at Marlborough to hold, That for all matters of private differences,
even while Armies were in the Field, the Course of ordinary Justice was to go
on, and that it was not to be looked on as a state of War.

This may be enough to remove the Objections made by Mr. Falkner, against the
Barons Wars in the time of H. 3. which he supposes to be the most plausible
Instance brought by them against whom he writes; and I take it, that the Reign
even of E. 1. one of the most warlike of our Kings, affords an Instance no less
plausible.

Ao. 1297. Knighton f. 2510. Libratas.
In the twenty-first year of his Reign, he summoned all who had twenty Pounds a
Year ^ Land, of whomsoever they held, to attend him at London with Horse and
Arms, in order to go with him to Flanders. When they met at London, he was
advised to be reconciled to some of the Great Men, with whom he had been at
variance. He complied with the Advice, excusing himself for former Exactions,
and desiring their farther Assistance, since what he was engaged in, was not
his own private concern, Mat. West. f. 430.
but the concern of the whole People, as he was their Protector and Defender.
And he entreated them to pray for him, which the Historian says very few did
heartily.

But Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford and Essex, High-Constable of England, and
Roger Bygot, Earl Marshal, withdrew from the King; whereupon he discharged them
of their Offices, and gave them to others.

Yet the King found himself obliged to send some Persons to mediate between Him
and Them: To whom they declared, That it was not their own Cause alone, but the
Cause of the whole Community, which they undertook: Knighton f. 2511.
For not only They, but the whole Community of the Land was agrieved with
unjust Vexations, Tallages, and Levies, and chiefly, That they were not treated
according to the Liberties in Magna Charta. Wherefore they drew up a
Remonstrance of their Grievances; which if the King would command to be
redressed, they were ready to follow him to the Death.

Knighton f. 2512.
The King gave a dilatory Answer, excusing himself through the absence of some
of his Council; and having desired them not to do any thing to the prejudice of
Him or his Kingdom, passed the Seas, notwithstanding the dissatisfaction that
he left behind; concluding, it is likely, That that Success which commonly
attended him in his Wars, would gain him a more absolute ascendant over his
People.

The King being gone, the Constable and Marshal, with their Adherents, forbad
the Chancellor and Barons of the Exchequer to issue out Process for levying the
eighth Penny, which had been granted the King in Parliament, and which yet they
said was granted without their Consent, either as they had not due Summons, or
were upon just Cause absent.

They continuing together in Arms, the King's Son, who had been constituted
Vicegerent, found a necessity of giving them satisfaction: To which end he
calls a Parliament; Knighton f. 2523.
where through the mediation of the Archbishop, whom Knighton blesses for it,
it was agreed, That the King should confirm Magna Charta, and the Charter of
the Forest: That for the future, Magnates.
he should not ask or take any Aid of the Clergy or People, without the good
will and assent of the Great Men. And that he should remit all Rancor to them
and their Adherents.

In the Charter, or Act of Parliament which then passed, there are these Words.

Remisimus Humfredo de Bown, Comiti Herfordiae and Esekes, Constabulario
Angliae, Rogero Bygot, Comiti Norfork, Mareschallo Angliae, etc. rancorem
nostrum and malam voluntatem quam ex causis praedictis erga eos habuimus, and
etiam transgressiones [si quas nobis vel nostris fecerint] utque ad praesentis
Cartae confectionem.

We have remitted to Humphrey de Bowne, Earl of Herford and Essex, Constable of
England, Roger Bygot, Earl of Norfolk, Marshal of England, etc. the rancour and
ill will, which we had against them for the foresaid causes, and also all
Transgressions or Offenses [if they have committed any against us or ours] to
the making of this Charter.

Here was a quiet conclusion of an Insurrection managed under two Tribunes of
the People, whose Union had such an effect, that what they did, was not looked
on by the Parliament to be so much as a Misdemeanor.

CHAP. VII.
The known Cases of Ed. 2. and R. 2. touched upon. The power of the people
manifested in the Wars and Settlements of the Crown, occasioned by the Disputes
between H. 6. and E. 4. Why the instances from those times to the late
Abdication omitted. The Objections from the Oaths against taking Arms, and from
the Declaration against a Coercive Power over Kings, removed by Sherringham,
and the Triennial Act, 16 Car. 1. Pufendorf's Due Restraint of the Power of the
People. Instances of the like Power in other Nations; particularly Denmark,
Sweedland, and Norway, when under the same King. For France, Hottoman,
Sesellius, the Author of Les Soupirs de la France esclave. Bodin explained, and
shown to justify King William in his descent hither; and the People of England
in their asserting the true Constitution of the Government. For the German
Empire, Bodin and Conringius. An occasion taken from him to show the Antiquity
and Power of a Palatine in Germany and England. Gunterus used to show that
Office in several Countries. Loyseau concerning it in France. The Distinction
in the Author of Les Soupirs, between Officers of the King's House, and
Officers of the Crown: The Antiquity and Authority of the Offices of Constable
of England, of the High Steward, and the Earl Marshal; which with the Earl of
Chester, have been as so many Tribunes of the People.

TO proceed to E. 2. Son to E. 1. it is certain that the sentence threatened H.
3. was executed upon his Grandson E. 2. who was formally Deposed in Parliament,
for his misgovernment: Walsingham, f. 107. Rex dignitate regali abdicatur and
filius substituitur.
His Case with his next Successor's but one, R. 2. by what I have observed
before, appear to have been no Novelties in England.

Nor was it long before the like was again put in practice more than once.
Hollingshead f. 637. Ib. f. 639, 640.
H. 6. being a weak, misled Prince, gave occasion to Richard Duke of York,
whose Line was put by, to cover his designs for restoring the elder Family,
with the pretense of redressing public Grievances. A Crown over a Branch of
lights in the H. of Commons, and another from the top of Dover-Castle, falling
about the same time, ib. f. 659.
The Crown he was so far from pretending to at first, that himself swore
Allegiance to H. 6. in a very particular manner. But having afterward an
advantage given, by the Divisions of them who had driven him out of the Land,
he in a fortunate hour, with lucky Omens, as was believed, challenged the Crown
as his Right; upon which there was an agreement ratified in Parliament, That H.
6. should enjoy it during his Life, and Richard and his Heirs after him.

Tho Richard Duke of York, and his Son Edward, afterward E. 4. had sworn that
H. 6. should enjoy the Royal Dignity during life, without trouble from them, or
either of them; yet Richard having been treacherously slain by the Queen's
Army, immediately after the solemn Pacification, Edward, at the Petition of
some of the Bishops, and Temporal Lords, Ib. f. 661.
took upon him the charge of the Kingdom, as forfeited to him by breach of the
Covenant established in Parliament.

Yet this gave him no sure footing; for the popularity of the Earl of Warwick
drove him out of the Kingdom, without striking a stroke for it. Ib. f. 678.
Upon which H. 6. was again restored to his Kingly Power, and Edward was in
Parliament declared a Traitor to the Country, and an Usurper of the Realm, the
Settlement upon Richard and his Heirs revoked, and the Crown entailed upon H.
6. and his Heirs Males, with remainders over, to secure against Edward's coming
to the Crown.

But the Death of the Earl of Warwick having in effect put an end to King
Henry's Power, he was soon taken Prisoner, and put to death, as his Son had
been before; and then Edward procures a Confirmation in Parliament,
Hollingshead f. 693.
of the Settlement, under which he enjoyed the Crown.

Thus the Parliament from time to time determined the Controversy according to
the Inclination of the People, or Reason of State: And as the power of the
People of England, or of Great Men of interest with them, turned the scales
sometimes one way, sometimes another; so their consent fixed them at last,
during the Life of E. 4. I might, following the light of History, take in the
most material Occurrences from the Reign of E. 4. to the last Revolution; but
tho the unanimity which appeared at the first casting off the former Yoke, made
me with cheerfulness undertake the justification of those who have contributed
to the Change; yet I must needs say I am checked in that freedom, which
otherwise I might have justly used in relation to late times; and tho I labor
against prejudice in what I bring from faithful Memorials of ancient days; yet
I hope the prejudice will be free from that heat and passion which mixes with
men's own concerns, or the concerns of them from whom they immediately descend,
in Blood, or Parties.

Object. Vid. 13 C. 2. Stat. 2. c. 1.13 and 14 C. 2. c. 3.14 C. 2. c. 3, and
4.15 C. 2. c. 5.12 C. 2. c. 30.
It may be said, That whatever the Law or Practice has been anciently, neither
can now be of any moment, by reason of the Oath required by several Statutes,
declaring it not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the
King; and abhorring the Traitorous Position of taking Arms by his Authority
against his Person. And

2. The Clause in the Statute 12 Car. 2. whereby it is declared, That by the
undoubted and fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, neither the Peers of this
Realm, nor the Commons, nor both together in Parliament, or out of Parliament,
nor the People Collectively or Representatively, nor any other Persons
whatsoever, had, have, or ought to have, any Coercive Power over the Persons of
the Kings of this Realm.

What has before been observed from and upon, Mr. Falkner's, Answer. Vid. Chap.
2.
Christian Loyalty, might make it needless to take notice of the Objection from
either of these Clauses, were it not that many either cannot or will not
observe what lies at the least distance.

I shall not here insist, in answer to the first part of the Objection, on the
necessity of a Commission, and a King, continuing legal in the Exercise, as
well as Possession of Power; nor the difference between the Traitorous Acts of
single Persons, and the Revolt of a Nation; nor yet upon the Authority of the
Common Law, whereby a Constable, or other Officer chosen by the people, Vid.
Justin. Pandec. l. 1. tit. 3. Nulla juris ratio, aut aequitatis benignitas
patitur, ut quae salubriter pro utilitate hominum introducuntur, ea nos duriore
interpretatione contra ipsorum commodum producamus ad severitatem.
may act without any Authority from the King.

And for the latter part of the Objection, as [ Coertion] is restrained to the
Person of the King, the declaring against that, is not contrary to the
Authorities for discharging Allegiance by a judicial Sentence, or otherwise, by
virtue of equitable and implied Reservations; provided a tender regard to the
Person be still observed. But if proceedings to free our selves from his
Authority, fall under this [Coertion]; then I shall offer something which may
remove both this and the other, from being objections to what I have above
shown.

To keep to what may equally reach to both Authorities:

I shall not urge here, Vid. Rot. Parl. 39 H. 6. n. 18.
That these Statutes being barely declaratotory, and Enacting no Law for the
future, introduce none; so that if the Fundamental Laws shall appear to be
otherwise, the Declarations do not supplant them: Nor yet to insist upon a Rule
in the Civil-Law, That the Commonwealth is always a Minor, Vid. Cujac. Tom. 4.
f. 154. Resp. circumscripta in integrum restituitur perinde ac pupillus vel
adolescens, and Vid. Cic. de Legibus. Salus populi Suprema Lex esto Inter Leges
12. Tabularum, of which Tacitus says, Accitis quae usquam egregia, compositae
duodecim Tabulae finis aequi juris. Tacitus Ed. Plant. p. 90.
and at liberty to renounce the obligations which it has entered into against
its benefit, which is the Supreme Law.

But I shall stop their Mouths who object these Statutes, and maintain, That
according to what themselves receive for Law, the Parliaments which Enacted
these Declarations, had no power so to do, and then the Law must stand as it
did. For this let us first hear Mr. Sheringham, whose Authority few of these
Men dispute.

They that lay the first foundation of a Commonwealth, Sheringham of the King's
Supremacy. p. 41.
have Authority to make Laws that cannot be altered by Posterity, in the
Matters that concern the Rights both of King and People. For Foundations cannot
be removed, without the Ruin and Subversion of the whole Building.

Wherefore admit the Acts had been duly made, according to him, they would be
void, if the Fundamental Law were as I have shown.

However, I am sure I can irrefragably prove to them who will not have a Nation
saved without strict form of Law, That the Parliament which made those Acts,
had no Power at the time of making them, being by the express words of a former
Statute repealed.

Triennial Act 16 Car. 1. Nota, There was no attempt to repeal this till 16
Car. 2.
The Triennial Act 16 Car. 1. provides in a way not easily to be defeated, not
only for holding a Parliament once within three years at least; but that all
Parliaments which shall be Prorogued or Adjourned, or so continued by
Prorogation or Adjournment, until the Tenth of September, which shall be in the
third year next after the last day of the last Meeting of the foregoing
Parliament, shall be thenceforth clearly and absolutely dissolved. Now say I,
That Parliament which Enacted these Laws, had sat beyond that time; Ergo, etc.
These were made in the Parliament next after the Convention which brought in
the King, Brook tit. Commission, N. 21. Ib. tit. Officer n. 25. vid. Stat. 17.
C. 1. Every thing, or things done or to be done for the Adjournment,
Prorogueing, or Dissolving of this Parliament, contrary to this present Act,
shall be utterly void.

Anno 1647. Vid. Hist. of the Civil-Wars, f. 207.


which they I am sure will not call a Parliament. Wherefore we must go back to
the first long Parliament, which upon their own Rule, Rex est caput and finis
Parliomenti, was dissolved by the Death of C. 1. Anno 1648. notwithstanding the
Act for making it perpetual, which indeed by the words of it, seems only to
provide against any Act of the King to the contrary, without their consent; but
by the Death of the King that Parliament lost the being which before it had, as
it was under him, when it was Parliamentum nostrum, the Parliament of Charles
1. and so expired Anno. 1648. by Act in Law. And perhaps its own breaking up in
Confusion before, was in Law an Adjournment, sine die, working a dissolution;
by either of which, that Parliament was Dissolved more than three years before
the meeting of that Parliament which made the Statute in question; which
Parliament Assembled, Anno 1661. and was ipso facto dissolved, when it
attempted to make those Statutes; it having been continued by Prorogation or
Adjournment beyond the Tenth of September, in the third year after the
Dissolution of the last Parliament of Charles the first, which was the next
foregoing legal Parliament, according to strict form: For the Parliament which
brought in Charles 2. Anno 1660. was not summoned by the King's Writs;
consequently the Parliament 1661. having, according to them, no power after it
had continued as above; whatever was the Ancient Law in this Matter, remains as
it did before those Laws.

If it be objected, That the necessity of the times had dispensed with the
Letter of the Triennial Act, as to this Particular:

1. They who would plead these Statutes, cannot urge this, since they will not
allow of greater necessity to Authorize the Maintaining and Restoring the
Constitution. But surely however necessity might support our Laws, it shall not
such as alter the Constitution; but every legal advantage shall be taken for
restoring it.

2. The necessity was not absolute; for the first Parliament of Charles the
Second, might have continued together as long as they could sit without
Prorogation, or Adjournment, and be good for a day at least; time enough to
have Repealed the former Statute as to that part, and to qualify themselves for
a longer continuance.

In short, they with whom our Dispute is, are either for the unalterableness of
Fundamentals, according to which, what I have shown remains, notwithstanding
all efforts to the contrary; or else, all of a sudden they have a mighty Zeal
for the strict Letter of the Law, by which that Parliament which endeavored to
alter the Fundamental Contract, was, ipso facto, dissolved before such attempt:
However since the Question is not about a Coercive Power over Kings, but barely
concerning Allegiance to them; Quum aufertur ratio juramenti, juramentum cessat
ratione eventus; qui casus est eorum qui juraverunt se obedituros Domino aut
Principi alicui, qui postea cessat, esse talis. Amesius de Juramento, lib. 4.
c. 22.
whenever he who was King ceases to be so, either by the Act of God, or the
Law, the Obligation of Allegiance necessarily determins, as the subject matter
of it fails.

But lest the Liberty allowed in extraordinary Cases, be used as a Cloak for
maliciousness, I shall restrain it with the Authority of the Learned Pufendorf.

In Contracts by which one is made subject to Another, Sam. Pufendorf. de
Interregnis. p. 272.
this has the Right of Judging what the Subject is to perform, and has also a
Power conferred of compelling him to performance, if he refuses; which Coercive
Power is by no means reciprocal. Wherefore he who Rules, cannot be called in
question for breaking his Contract, Omnem Reipublicae curam abdicaverit dolo
malo.
unless he either wholly Abdicate the Care of the Government, or become of an
Hostile mind toward his People; or manifestly, with evil Intention, depart
from those Rules of Governing, upon observance of which, as upon a Condition,
the Allegiance of the Subjects depends: Which is very easy for any one who
Governs, always to shun, if he will but consider, that the highest of Mortals
are not free from the Laws of Humane Chance.

But that the Judicial power of the people, so qualified as above, is not
peculiar to England, might appear by the Customs of most Neighboring Nations.
For Denmark, Sweedland and Norway, which had anciently three distinct Negatives
in the Choice of a King, I shall refer to Krantius, Krantii Hist.
particularly in the remarkable Story of their King Eric, who was Adopted Son
of the Three Kingdoms, Anno 1411. he having provoked his People, by
countenancing the outrages of his Officers and Common Soldiers, was opposed
with Force by one Engelbert a Danish Nobleman, transmitted down to posterity,
with the fair Character of engaging in the Public Cause, neither out of Love
of Rule, nor greediness of gain; but mere compassion to an oppressed people.

This generous undertaking was so justly popular, that Eric, not able to stem
the Tide, withdrew from Denmark, where he usually resided, to Sweedland.
Engelbert's Noble Cause found so few opposers there, that the King, as a
pattern to James 2. privately ran away, and recommended his Nephew to succeed
him. But they told him plainly, he was made King by Adoption, Ib. f. 188.
and had no Right to surrogate another. Himself (there not being the
inconsistency of a different Religion between the Head and Members of the same
Body) they would have received upon terms; but he refusing, the three Kingdoms
unanimously chose one of another Family.

For the Authority of the people, even in France, Hottomanni Francogallia, c.
23.
insisted on no longer since then the time of Lewis 11. Hottoman gives a large
proof in his Franco Gallia.

And I meet with an excellent Treatise of the French Government, written
originally in that Language, by an eminent French Lawyer, Claudius Sesellius,
soon after the death of Lewis 12. and dedicated to his Successor, Francis 1.
This Treatise the Learned German, Sleidan, Sleidani Dedicatio Ed. sexto Anno
1548. f. 263. Vid. Tres Gallicarum Rerum Scriptores Nobiliss. A Johanne
Sleidano e Gallico in Lat. Sermon. convers. Ed. Francofurti Anno 1578.
turned into Latin, and Dedicated it to our King E. 6.

Sesel. f. 268. Qui tutorio nomine Rempublicam procurant. f. 269.
Sesellius, at that time, looked upon France as an Hereditary Monarchy, in
which he admits, that there may be great inconveniences through the folly,
vice, or minority of a Successor to a good Prince, or the wickedness of those
who execute the Government during his minority; yet says he, There are remedies
at hand, by which we may restrain a King Reigning Arbitrarily, and them who
have the care of one who cannot Govern for want of fit Age; so that the King
may have the Dignity which belongs to him, and yet it may not be lawful for him
to do what he pleases, but what is agreeable to Law and Equity. Provision is
made for this by the best Laws, and most Sacred Establishments, which may not
be violated without great hazard, although sometimes force is offered to them.

He tells us, their Kings have, as it were, three Bridles, with which their
Sovereign Power is restrained: Sesellius, f. 269.
1. Religion; And if the awe of that is not sufficiently impressed upon him,
yet the reverence of some Holy Man may prevail; it being allowable for any
Bishop, or other Ecclesiastical person of an unblameable life, and in esteem
with the people, to admonish him of his Duty; nor can he use any severities to
his Admonisher, without danger of alienating the affections of his people. 2.
The Jurisdiction of the Senate or Parliament, whose Power, he says, Ut decretis
ipsorum Rex quoque pareat. Vid. Les Soupirs De la France Esclave Memoire 8.
Histoire de l'origine du Parliament de Paris. Sesellius f. 270.
is such, that even the King obeys its Decrees: And yet when he wrote, the
Parliament of Paris, the mere shadow of the Assembly of the States of the
Kingdom, and which in its institution was but a Committee chosen out of them,
had through the Artifice and Usurpation of their Kings, driven out the
substance. 3. The Polity, or Laws of the Kingdom, which temper the Regal
Authority, this he says, is greatly to the Honor of their Kings; For if they
could do every thing, they would be much more imperfect: And as it does not
derogate from God Almighty that he cannot sin, but his perfection is the more
illustrious, and to be admired for this very reason; so Kings, when they obey
their Laws, deserve the greater praise, and come nigher to perfection, than if
they could command all things at their will and pleasure.

Sleidan, in giving an account of Sesellius his Book to E. 6. says:

Sleidani Dedicatio, ad E. 6.
Although these things seem written in a peculiar manner in relation to the
King of France; yet they equally belong to all Kings. For all Kings are
Monarchs, very few excepted: And as they acknowledge no Power over them, so they
deserve great praise, when they keep themselves within the bounds of those
Laws, with which they Govern their People. And these are those Offices which he
treats of as becoming a King and Prince: Which if he neglects, and thinks
himself not to be obliged by any Law, he loses in the eyes of good Men, all
Splendour, Reputation, and Glory, and the very name of King.

A modern French Author, Les Soupirs de la France Esclave Qui aspire apres la
Liberte Ed. Anno 1690. Memoire 6. p. 82.
who has with great diligence collected the Evidences of the Ancient Government
of France, supposes all the descendants from the old Germans, as the Francs and
we were, to have had the same sort of Government, and resemblance of
Constitutions.

Among his several Arguments, to refute the pretensions of the Court of France
to Arbitrary Power, one is, Memoire 7.
That nothing of great importance ought to be done within the Realm, P. 97.
but with the advice and consent of the Estates; insomuch, says he, That the
Government of France is rather Arstocratical than Monarchical; or at least it
is a Monarchy tempered by an Aristocracy, exactly such an one as England is.

The sum of his Authorities upon this Head, he reduces to these particulars:

1. 'The Estates of the Kingdom may Choose and Depose their Kings, Ib. p. 110.
'and by consequence may Judge them.

2. 'They may Judge between the People and the King.

3. 'They may Judge between King and King, when more than 'one aspire, and
pretend to the Crown.

4. 'They Determine the Differences which Kings have with their 'Subjects.

5. 'They give Tutors to Kings, and Regents to the Realm.

6. 'They dispose of the great Offices of State.

7. 'They make Ordinances, which alone have the Force of Law 'within the Realm.

8. 'They regulate the Affairs of Money.

9. 'They appoint Impositions and Levies of Taxes.

10. 'They are to be consulted upon all great Affairs.

11. 'In fine, They are, of right, to Correct all defaults of Government, 'even
those of which their Kings are Authors.

By all these particulars, says he, it appears, Soupirs Mem 7. p. 110.
that in some respects the States are superior to the King; for example, when
they choose, depose, judge, and correct, and that in other matters they share
with the King in every part of the Sovereignty. He adds, If we have need of
farther proof, the name Parliament, which all our Ancient Histories give the
Assembly of States, may furnish us with one. This is the name which the English
give this Assembly, which partakes of the Sovereignty with their King. The
French, and the Ancient Britains had the same Laws, and the same Language; they
Governed themselves by States, gave the same name to their Assemblies: And
without doubt they had the same Authority. Nay, it is certain that the States
had formerly in France, the same Power that the Parliaments have in England.

As this Author makes the Liberties of the English Nation, and the Power of its
Parliament, an Argument of the Right of the French Nation; Bodin, who wrote
after their Parliament at Paris, had taken the place of the Assembly of States,
makes England a parallel to France, Turkey, Persia, Muscovy, Bodin de Repub.
lib. 2. c. 4. ed. A Lion, p. 302. Ib. Cap. 3. p. 286. This was H. 2.
for the absolute Sovereignty of their Princes; but that he was little
acquainted with the History of the Govenment of England, appears, in that he
supposes that Henry, who procured his Son to be Crowned in his life time, to
have been the Son of W. 1.

Bodin, p. 300.
Even where a Prince is the most absolute, he admits, That if he Govern
Tyrannically, he may be lawfully killed by a Foreign Prince; and that it is a
noble and magnificent action for a Prince to take Arms to rescue a people
unjustly oppressed by the cruelty of a Tyrant, as did the Great Hercules, who
went about the World exterminating the Monsters of Tyrants; and for his high
exploits has been Deified: So did Dion, Timoleon, Aratus, and other generous
Princes, who have bore the Title of Chastisers and Correcters of Tyrants.

This, says he, was the sole cause for which Tamerlain, Prince of the Tartars,
denounced War against Bajazet King of the Turks; And when he Besieged
Constantinople, said he came to chastise his Tyranny, and deliver his afflicted
people: And in fact he vanquished him in a pitched Battle, in the Plain of
Mount-Stellian; and having killed and put to flight Three Hundred Thousand
Turks, he kept the Tyrant in a Golden-Cage till he died.

Ib. p. 301.
And in such case it matters not whether the Virtuous Prince proceed against
the Tyrant with Force, or Art, or way of Justice: True it is, if the Virtuous
Prince has taken the Tyrant, he will have more Honor if he make his Process,
and punish him as a Murderer, or Parricide, or Robber, rather than to make use
of the Law of Nations against him.

This passage in Bodin shows beyond contradiction, That if he were now alive,
and not of the Romish Superstition, he would have extolled and justified the
Heroic undertaking of King William, for the delivery of this Nation. But the
ground of the justification is, That even the most absolute Sovereign may
injure his Subjects, as no doubt but he would, if he treated them contrary to
natural equity, and his own established Laws; Jovian, p. 226.
whereas the Author of Jovian having set up an Imperial Power above all
Political Constitutions, says, In this Realm the Sovereign cannot wrong or
injure his Subjects, but contrary to the Political Laws: And by consequence not
at all, if the Political Laws are to give way to the Imperial. Wherefore I
wonder not to find him a Subscriber to the late Bishop of Chichester's Paper,
which condemns Swearing Allegiance to our present King and Queen. But Bodin, as
he justifies our King William in freeing us from an oppressing Monarch, no less
clears the Subjects of England in joining with him, upon supposition that the
Constitution of our Government is not rightly understood by him.

Bodin, p. 301.
But, says he, as to Subjects, we ought to know whether the Prince be
absolutely Sovereign; or whether he is not absolutely Sovereign: For if he is
not absolutely Sovereign, it is necessary that the Sovereignty be in the
people, or in the Lords. In this case there is no doubt but it is lawful to
proceed against the Tyrant by way of Justice, if we can prevail against him: or
by way of Deeds and Force, if we cannot have Reason otherwise: as the Senate
did against Nero in one case, and against Maximin in another; so that the Roman
Emperors were nothing else but Princes of the Commonwealth, that is to say,
the First and Chief, the Sovereignty remaining with the people and the Senate.
As I have shown, this Commonwealth may be called a Principality. Although Seneca
speaking in the person of his Scholar Nero, says, I alone, among all Men
living, am elected and chosen to be God's Vicegerent on Earth. I am Arbiter of
Life and Death; I am able at my pleasure to dispose of the estate and quality
of any Man. True it is, that in fact he usurped this Power; but of right the
State was but a Principality, where the people were Sovereign: As also is that
of the Venetians, who condemned to death their Duke Falier, and put to death
others without form or figure of Process. Insomuch that Venice is an
Aristocratical Principality, where the Duke is but Chief, and the Sovereignty
remains with the States of the Venetian Noblemen.

And in the like Case, the German Empire, which also is but an Aristocratical
Principality, where the Emperor is chief and first, the Power and Majesty of
the Empire belongs to the States, who in the year 1296. deposed the Emperor
Adolph, and after him Wenceslaus, in the year 1400. in form of justice, as
having jurisdiction and power over them.

How much soever Bodin was mistaken in relation to the Government of England,
he seems herein less a Stranger to that of the German Empire.

The Learned Conringius, in his account of the German Judicatures, Hermanni
Conringii Excercit De Judiciis, p. 251.
tells us, it is difficult to give an account of them for some Ages next after
the time of the Francs. But beginning with the Causes of Kings themselves, whom
he shows, according to Ancient Custom, to have been subject to some
jurisdiction upon the account of their Government. The Causes, says he, Ib. p.
252.
of their Kings belonging to the administration of the Government, as
anciently, so afterward, were frequently agitated in the Great Councils of the
Kingdom. So the Emperor H. 4. was accused in a Great Council, and by its
Authority divested of his Royal Dignity. The same befell Otto 4. and This about
the year 1251. No new Emperor was chosen till Anno 1273. after Twenty two years
vacancy. Prideaux Introd. p. 245.
Frederic 2.

But, says he, Two things sometimes happened, much differing from the ancient
Usage. One is, That the Power of the Council of all the States, began to pass
to the Electors only, after Charles 4. Novo more The Duke of Bavaria, made an
eighth in the last age.

Vid. Apud Cujacium de feudis 4. tom. lib. 5. a. f. 602. ad. 1627.

Mat. Par. ed. Land. f. 563.


had without precedent, brought in the Dignity of the Septemvires. The other
was the Arrogance and Usurpation of the Pope.

The Golden Bull of C. 4. who, as Conringius will have it, brought in the
Authority of the Electors of the Empire, provides who shall sit Judge, or High
Steward, when the Emperor is impeached. By that the Palatine of the Rhine has
the like power with that, of which Matthew Paris shows the Earl of Chester to
have carried the sign or emblem, at the Coronation of H. 3. 20 of his Reign,
Anno 1236.

Comite Cestriae gladium Sancti Edwardi qui Curtein dicitur ante Regem
bajulante, in signum quod Comes est Palatinus, and Regem si oberret habeat, de
jure, potestatem cohibendi.

The Earl of Chester carrying St. Edward's Sword called the Curtein, as a sign
that he is an Earl Palatine, and has of Right, power to correct the King if he
go astray.

It appears that this was no new grant to the then Earl of Chester; for Matthew
Paris informs us, that the Great Men at that Coronation, exercised what
belonged to them by ancient Custom, and ancient Right. That this
Palatine-jurisdiction was with us before the entrance of the Norman Duke, may
well be thought by them, Vid. 2 d Part.
who shall consider the Record which I shall afterward produce, proving that
Hugh Lupus enjoyed the Earldom of Chester in the time of W. 1. as heir to
Leofric; Earl of in the Confessor's Reign, and that W. 1. confirmed it to
Lupus, to hold as freely [by the Sword] as himself held the Kingdom. The Sword
which the Earl of Chester carried in the time of H. 3. being expressly said to
be St. Edward's, is an evidence that it was the same which Leofric carried in
that time, by reason of his Earldom, and not of any particular Lands: agreeable
to what I find in the time of H. 3. in Inquisitions after the death of Hugh de
Veer, Earl of Oxford, to whose Barony, the Office of Chamberlain to the King is
found to belong.

But that it may not seem strange that I should find a Palatine here before the
Conquest, when few of the German Writers place it higher than the time of our
H. 3. Mr. Seldom shows out of an Ancient Chronicle, a Comes Palatii in France,
as early as the Reign of Clothar 3. about the year 660. Vid. Titles of Honor,
Ed. 4. Anno 1614. p. 242. This with several other considerable passages omitted
in the Ed. f.
And he observes upon the passage which he cites, That the King and other great
Courtiers seemed to sit sometime; but the chief Authority, Delegate and
Judiciary, was in the Count du Palais; and before him, as Chief Justice, were
all Suits determined, Crimes examined, the Crown Revenue accounted, and
whatsoever done which to so great jurisdiction was competent: Neither was
there, it seems, always one only in this Office; but sometime more. That the
Jurisdiction of Palatines was known here in the time of H. 2. appears beyond
contradiction from John of Salisbury, Joh. Sarisbur. Epist. 263. sicut, alii
Praesules in partem solicitudinis a summo Pontifice evocantur, ut spiritualem
exerceant gladium; sic a Principe, in ensis materialis communionem Comites
quidam, quasi mundani juris Praesules, asciscuntur. Et quidam qui hoc Officii
gerunt in Palacio, Juris Authoritate, Palatini sunt.
a Bishop at that time, who in a Letter to Nicholas then Sheriff of Essex,
says, As other Prelates are called by the Pope into part of the care to
exercise the Spiritual Sword, so some Earls are by the Prince taken into
Partnership of the Material Sword, as Prelates of Worldly Right: And some who
bear this Office in the Palace, by the Authority of Law, are Palatines.

This fully justifies Matthew Paris, in speaking with reference to the known
power of a Palatine in the year 1236. One hundred and twenty years before the
Bull of Charles 4. that being in the year 1356. This shows that, however it
might have been as to the other Electors of the Empire, the Power of the
Palatine was prior to the Bull of Charles 4. The Bull it self has sicut ex
consuetudine introductum dicitur, as it is said to have been introduced by
Custom; this Custom Conringius supposes to have begun in the time of Frederic
2. but holds that there was no express Law for it till that Bull. Yet Frederic
having been coeval with our H. 3. whose Sister he Married, it would seem very
strange if this Power or Office which had been so early in France and England,
should have been no earlier in Germany.

Titles of Honor ed. Ao. 1631. f. 382.
Mr. Seldom shows one Otto an Earl Palatine in Germany, in the year 1154. and an
other Otho, who slew the Emperor Philip, Anno 1208. and in the Margin refers
to Eginhart, who wrote the Life of Charles the Great, who was Emperor over the
Francs and Germans, for proof that one Anselm was Comes Palatii, or Earl
Palatine under him, Anno 812.

Freherus gives an instance of the Palatine's Power in the Empire, Freheri
Orig. Palate. f. 113, 119, 120.
before the Bull of Charles 4. in the Case of King Albert, threatened to be
deposed for killing his Liege Lord Adolph, to whom he succeeded, Anno 1290.

With Freherus agrees Gunterus in his Octoviratus, who says, Prideaux his
Introd. Gunteri Thulemarii Octovirat. cap. 18.
That the Palatine of the Rhine, Major Domo to the Emperor, is, by Custom,
Judge of the Emperor himself; or rather in the highest matters, declares the
sense of the Electoral College.

He cites several Authors to prove the like Office or Power to have been in
diverse Kingdoms and Principalities; and names France, England, Arragon, Spain,
Denmark, Poland, Bohemia, etc.

For France, Loyseau, who wrote within this Century, Loyseau du droit des
Offices ed. Anno 1610. f. 409, 410.
shows this Power to have belonged to their Major du Palais; for he owns the
Power to have been greater than the Roman Prefect of the Palace had; and yet he
cites the words of the Emperor Trajan, giving his Prefect a naked Sword, which
he enjoined him to use against himself, if he misgovern'd. And Loyseau says,
That this dangerous Office was put down by the Kings of the Third Line, that
they might perpetuate the Crown in their Family.

But the Author of the Sighs of France, Soupirs de France Esclave Mem. 7. p.
116.
shows the first interruption to the exercise of this Office, to have been put
by the States of the Kingdom, who when Clothair pressed them to consent to the
choice of a Major du Palais, in the place of Warnhier then lately deceased,
would not consent, declaring that they would not have that charge filled.

Loyseau supposes this Office to have been split into the Constable,
Chancellor, Treasurer, and the Grand Maistre du France, or Count du Palais,
which he seems to resemble to an High-Steward with us.

The Author of the Sighs of France shows, Les soupirs Mem. 7. p. 167.
that when Childebert was chosen King, they chose Grimoald for Maire du Palais.
And says he,

Through all our History we may always see a very clear distinction between the
Officers of the King's House, and those of the Crown: This distinction remains
to this day, as a Monument of the Ancient Liberty of the French. For we say,
the Great Master of the King's Household, the Great Chamberlain, etc. But we say
the Constable of France, the Admiral of France, the Chancellor of France: And
these last Charges do not dye with the King; whereas the Officers of the King's
House dye with the King, and may be changed by his Successor. The Reason of
this difference comes from this, That that which is given by one King, may be
taken away by another: But the Officers of the Crown being made by the People,
and by the Realm, cannot be turned out by the King alone. And it is very
remarkable, that these Offices of the Crown, which the States of the Kingdom
may give, and which they alone can take away, may extend to the whole, to the
War, to Justice, and to the Finances, or Treasury.

In a Book published in Queen Mary's Reign, which at least went under the name
of Bishop Poinet, one of our Confessors, History of Passive Obedience* p. 38.
who fled to Germany from the Marian Persecution, such a Power as is above
mentioned, is affirmed to have belonged to the High Constable of England.

Treatise of Politic Power. Anno 1556.
As God, says the Author, has ordained Magistrates to hear and determine
private Matters, and to punish their Vices; so also will he, that the
Magistrates doings be called to account and reckoning, and their Vices
corrected and punished, by the Body of the whole Congregation, or Commonwealth:
As it is manifest by the meaning of the Ancient Office of High-Constable of
England, unto whose Authority it pertained, not only to summon the King
personally before the Parliament, or other Courts of Justice, to answer, and
receive according to Justice; but also, upon just occasion, to commit him to
Ward.

Theloal, in his Digest of Writs, Printed in the year 1579. 21 Eliz. Collects
what is in the Year-Books concerning Summoning the King.

Theloal's Digest tit. Roy. p 71. This was H. 3. Vid. 22. E. 3. f. 3. b. Trin.
24 E. 3. f. 55. b 43 E. 3.22. a. Wilby, Justice.
Fuit dit. H. 22 E. 3. que en temps le Roy Henry and devant le Roy fuit impled,
come serroit autre home de people. Mes Edward son fits ordein, que home sueroit
verse le Roy per petition. Et issint dit suit T. 43. E. 3.22. que en temps le
Roy Henry, le Roy ne fuit mes come comune person, car a ceo temps home averoit
brief d'entre sur disseisin verse le Roy, and touts autres manners d'actions come
verse auters persons, etc. Et Wilby dit. T. 24. E. 3.23. que il avoit vieu tiel
brief Precipe Henrico Regi Angliae, etc. En lieu de quel est ore done petition
pur sa Prerogative.

It was, says he, held, Hill. 22 E. 3. that in the time of King Henry, and
before, the King was impleded as any other Man of his people; but Edward his
Son ordained, That a Man shall sue to the King by Petition. And so it was said
Trin. 43 E. 3.22. That in the time of King Henry, the King was but as a common
person; for at that time a Man might have a Writ of Entry upon Disseisin
against the King, and all other manner of Actions, as against other persons,
etc. And Wilby said, Trin. 24 E. 3.23. That he had seen such a Writ Precipe
Henrico Regi Angliae, in lieu of which, now a Petition is given for his
Prerogative.

Sir Robert Cotton, of the Constable of England MS. in the Herald's Office.
It may be difficult to distinguish between the Office of the Earl of Chester,
and the Constable of England, who as Sir Robert Cotton held, is Second to the
King, and has the Custody of his Sword, the carrying which, as appears by
Matthew Paris, belonged to the Earl of Chester by reason of his Palatinate, and
yet at the same time Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Constable of England,
was in full possession of his Office: Dugdale 's Bar. 1. Vol. f. 180.
11 H. 3. he stood up with the Earl of Chester and others, on the behalf of
Richard the King's Brother, and was alive and in England, 20 H. 3. when the
Earl of Chester carried the Sword as of Ancient Right; so that one seemed to
have the right to carry, the other to keep the Sword.

The Office of Constable seems to have been no ancienter than the the time of
W. 1. Vid. Patent to Earl Rivers. Temp. E. 4. Vid. 2 d. Part.
to which the Patents for the Office refer; but the Earldom of Chester and its
Rights were Ancienter: Wherefore one would think that W. 1. erected the Office
of Constable, to balance that of the Earl Palatine.

Sir Rob. Cotton, Of Constable, etc. MS. sup.
The other Great Officers, the High-Steward and Marshal, are easily
distinguishable from the Constable; and as Sir Robert Cotton observes, the
Office of Constable was of Military, that of the High-Steward of a Civil
Jurisdiction.

The Marshal was in the nature of an High Sheriff, Vid. Stat. 3. R. 2. Stat. 1.
C. 2. Of the Constable and Marshal.

Flet. lib. 2. c. 60. Of the Steward and Marshal.

So Ryle 's Placita Parl. f. 126. 21 E. 1.

Seldom 's Bar. 2 d Part, c. 5. f. 739

F. 743.


to see to the Execution of the Process and Judgments of either, and yet had a
Judicial Power with both. In some Cases, all three acted with joint authority,
as appears by the most Ancient Copies of the Modus tenendi Parliamenta, which
though it has been put into Latin since the Conquest, and has the names of
Things and Offices adapted to what was known and in use at the time of the
Translation from the Saxon MS. yet certainly, for substance, gives a true
account of what was before the Conquest. Mr. Seldom supposes it to have been no
ancienter than about the time of E. 3. yet confesses, that he had from Mr.
Hackwel a Copy of an Inspeximus 12 H. 4. Exemplifying under the Great Seal,
most of the particulars that occur in the ordinary Modus for England, fitted
for Ireland, as sent thither by H. 2. but it would have been very strange, if
there should have passed an exemplification under the Great Seal, of what was a
mere fiction.

The Modus says, Modus tenendi Parl. Cum dubitatio vel casus difficilis pacis
vel guerrae emergat, etc. Vid. Append.
When any doubt or difficult case of War or Peace happens in the Kingdom, or
without, let that Case be referred and brought in Writing into full Parliament,
and let it be treated of and debated among the Peers of Parliament; and if need
be, let it be enjoined by the King, or in his Name, to every degree of the
Peers, That every degree act by its self, and let the Case be delivered to
their Clerks in Writing, and in the said place let them cause the said Case to
be recited before them; so that they may consider among themselves, how it may
in the best manner, and most justly be proceeded upon, as they would answer
before God for the Person of the King, and their own proper persons, and also
the proper persons of them whom they represent. And let them report in Writing
their Answers and Advice, that all their Answers, Counsels and Advices on all
sides being heard, it may be proceeded upon according to the better and more
wholesome Counsel. But if the Peace of the Kingdom, or the Nation, People, or
Commonwealth, be weakened, by reason of discord between the King and other Great
Men, so that it seems to the King and his Council, What that Council was, vid.
2d Part:
that the matter should be treated of, and amended by the consideration of all
the Peers of his Kingdom; or if the King and Kingdom are disturbed by War; or
if a difficult Case arise before the Chancellor of England, or a difficult
Judgment is to be given before the Justices and the like; And if it happen that
in such deliberations, all, N2 a Remedy where equally divided.
or at least the greater part cannot agree, then the Earl Steward, Earl
Constable, and Earl Marshal, or Two of them, shall choose Twenty five persons
from all parts of the Kingdom, viz. Two Bishops and Three Proxies of the
Clergy; Two Earls, and Three Barons; Five Knights of Shires, Five Citizens, and
Five Burgesses, who make Five and Twenty; Et condescendere in eos.
and they Five and Twenty may choose Twelve out of themselves, and be concluded
by what they do. The Twelve may choose Six, and be concluded by them; The Six,
Three, and be concluded by them: But the Three cannot be reduced to fewer
without leave of the King. And if the King consent, the Three may be brought to
Two, and the Two to One; and so at last their Ordinance shall bind the whole
Parliament; and so by coming from Twenty five to One, if the greater number
cannot agree to an establishment, at last one Person, as is said, shall Ordain
for all, because he cannot disagree from himself; saving to the King and his
Council, That they may examine and amend such Ordinances after they are written,
if they can, and will; Provided they do this upon the place in full Parliament,
and with the consent of the Parliament, and not out of Parliament.

According to which, the High Steward, Constable, and Marshal, being looked on
as Hereditary Officers, were entrusted with a means of composing the
differences of the Nation, when they should happen to be equally divided.

I find the Authority of the High Steward and Constable more express in a
Translation of another Modus tenendi Parl. agreeing in substance with that
which I have cited. The MS. which I have used, seems to be of the time of H. 7.
MS. penes Authorem.

MS. penes Authorem.


tho Mr. Elsing says, That which is in Sir Robert Cotton's Library was written
temp. E. 2. The Translation of the other was Printed with Royal Privilege in
King James his time, as I take it; It was done in a very pedantick style, by
one Anthony Bustard of Lyons-Inn. He that wrote the Latin in his Preface,
speaks of it as the Order settled by W. 1. Pref.
That Modus places the Power of choosing the Twenty five in the Steward and
Constable: It adds, That if any of the Ministers act contrary to their Duty,
the King, the Steward, and others of the Parliament, may remove them from their
Office: And says particularly, That the Steward of England, with the Constable
and Nobles of the Realm, shall send to evil Counselors, willing them to desist
from giving Counsel, and entreat the King not to listen to them; and if they
regard not such advertisement, they were to send to the King to put such away
from him: And if King and Counselors neglect such wholesome Advice, then for the
safety of the Commonwealth, it has been thought fit and lawful for the
Steward, and Constable, and Nobles, and others of the Commons of England, with
the King's Banner displayed, the King's name omitted, the said Counselors to
take and keep in Custody till the next Parliament, and Seize their Goods, Vid.
Append.
Lands and Hereditaments, until they receive Judgment by consideration of the
whole Parliament.

Sir Robert Cotton, Of the High Steward, etc.
There is no more in this, than is warranted by Sir Robert Cotton's Letters in
the Herald's Office; part of which seem to be taken from a MS. joined to the
Modus in his Library, under the name of Fleetwood.

The High-Steward's Office, as I have before observed, was annexed to Land, 4
Inst. f. 127. Dyer, f. 285. b. Kelway, f. 170.
and so was the Constable's of England, as appears by our Law Books in the Case
of the Duke of Buckingham, 6 H. 8. who pleaded, That Humphrey de Bohun,
formerly Earl of Hereford, was seized in Fee of the Manors of Harefield,
Newnam, and Whitenhurst in the County of Gloucester, and held them by the
service to be Constable of England, which the Judges allowed of as a good Plea.

Dyer.
Indeed they held, that tho the King might compel him who had the Land, at his
pleasure to execute the Office, so he might at his pleasure resuse to have it
Executed: But as to that, this being an honorary and profitable tenure by Grand
Serjeanty, it is to be considered, 12 Car. 2. c. 4.
that the Stat. 12 Car. 2. when it took away those Tenures of the Crown which
were burthensom to the Subject, provided that it shall not take away the
Honorary Services of Grand Serjeanty.

But H. 8. Dyer.
thought it sufficient that he disclaimed the Service, and the Reason of the
disclaimer, was, because it was very high and dangerous, and very chargeable to
the King in Fees; the last part of which showed the Subject's property
concerned in the question.

Upon the Duke of Buckingham's claim to this Office, Kelway, f. 171^
Nevil says it has been a common saying, That the Constable of England, by
virtue of his Office in some case, may Arrest the King himself; and therefore
held it necessary that the King should be appriz'd what Authorities belong to
his Office.

Fineux, Chief Justice, says, We know of no such Authority to belong to any
Officer within the Realm [by the Common Law of the Land.]

Which he afterward explains; for being asked by the King, upon the report
made by the Justices of their resolution for the Duke, what things the
Constable can do by reason of his Office? Sir, says he, this Point belongs to
your Law of Arms, of which we have no experience nor cognizance.

This may show what occasion Cardinal Wolsey had to strain a point of Law
against that Duke, and to have one, who durst insist upon a Right to be
Constable of England by inheritance, Vid. Inf. 2d Part.
to be taken off by an High Steward out of Parliament, made for that turn.

And what Fineux says of the Power of the Constable, may account for the
silence of Bracton, Fleta, and other Ancient Common-Lawyers in relation to the
Authority of the Constable and Marshal; Flet. lib. 2. c. 31.
yet Fleta shows that the Constable had a Seat in the Exchequer, and overlooked
Accounts relating to Soldiers, Forts and Castles; and gives a shrewd hint
concerning the Earl Marshal, speaking of the Exchequer.

The Justices, says he, sitting there, were all Barons, Fleta, lib. 2. c. 26.
because Barons used to sit in their places, while the Earl of Norfolk and
Martial of England had his Place and Seat there as Chief Justice of the Kingdom
of England; whose Place the Treasurer possesses at this day, but he cannot
occupy his Office.

This shows, that in the Exchequer the Earl Marshal had place above the
Constable; accordingly when 25 E. 1. they came into the Exchequer to forbid the
Levying of the Tax. The Barons in their account of this to the King, say, There
came to the Bar of the Exchequer, Vid. Append.
the Earl Marshal, and the Earl of Hereford; and the Earl-Marshal and the
others declared they would not suffer it to be Levied.

That this Office was of extraordinary Authority, Rot. Pat. 42. H. 3. M. 4.
appears by a Record 42 H. 3. which shows, That the Precept for executing the
Provisions at Oxford, were by the King and his Council in Parliament delivered
to the Earl-Marshal; and if we consider the Authority exercised by the Earls
Marshal, in the time of H. 3. and E. 1. with the approbation of Parliaments,
Vid. Mat. Par. 28 H. 3.
it may be thought that he was an hereditary Conservator of the Kingdom,
notwithstanding which, in the 28th of H. 3. the Parliament insisted upon it, as
their right, to have four Conservators chosen by them.

This Office perhaps is the only one which was enjoyed in gross, and went along
with the name of Marshal till the time of H. 3. when Hugh Bigod, Earl of
Norfolk, Bar. 1. Vol. f. 133.
Married Maud the Daughter of William Marshal, Earl of Pembroke: Sir William
Dugdale says, the first mention which he finds of the Name and Family of
Marshall, Ib. f. 599.
was in the time of H. 1. but in all probability that Name and Office went
together from before the time of W. 1. I am sure Roger Marshall was a very
considerable Proprietor in Doomsday-Book. Vid. 2 d Part.
Indeed the first contest about the Office was in the time of H. 1. when it was
adjudged to belong to the Family of the Mareschals, Vid. Appendix. Rot. Pat. 1.
Johan. N. 85. M. 12.
as appears by the Record of the Confirmation, 1o Johannis.

CHAP. VIII. The Third Head of Positive Law.
The Kingdom founded in Monarchy, yet Elective, sub modo. The Form of
Government not dissolved with the Contract between Prince and People. The
Argument from Election of Kings, as it is used by the Author of the Sighs of
France enslaved. The Crown of England proved Elective, Sub modo, 1. From the
Saxon Pontifical, and the Council of Calcuth, Anno 789. 2. From the Practice
till the supposed Conquest. 3 From the Confessor's Law received by W. 1. and
the Expressions of Ancient Historians and Lawyers since the time of W. 1. 4.
The Common usage in asking the People's consent at Coronations. 5. The Opinion
of Kings themselves. 6. The Old Oaths of Allegiance. 7. The Liberty, even after
a Settlement of the Crown. 8. The Breaches in the Succession. 9. The Statute 11
H. 7. Answers to the Objections, 1. That the King never dies. 2. The
supposition of a Testamentary Heir. 3. The Declaration, temp. E. 3. against
consenting to the disherison of the King and His Heirs. 4. The claims of Right
between Two Families. 10. A qualified Election of Kings of England, confirmed,
by observing how it has been in other Nations descended from the same Common
Stock

THE Kingdom I own is founded in Monarchy; and so is Poland, which yet is
absolutely Elective: Nor is there any consequence that the dissolution of the
Contract between the immediate Prince and People, This objected by the Author
of Elementa Politica.

Of the Magistracy, etc. vindicated, and others.

Vid. Pufendorf de Interregnis, p. 267. Post decretum circa formam Regiminis
novo pacto opus erit, quando constituuntur ille vel illi in quem vel in quos
Regimen coetus confertur.


should destroy the form of Government; for that depends upon a Prior Contract,
which the People entered into among themselves: And that by virtue of this, to
avoid endless competitions, our Kings have generally from the first erection of
the English Monarchy, been chosen out of the same Family, appears beyond
contradiction.

If our Monarchy will appear from the foundation, to be no otherwise an
inheritance than as it is settled on a Family, with a latitude for choice within
the Family, no Man can doubt but it will tend greatly toward removing
objections against our present Settlement; it is certain the Learned Author of
The Sighs of France, improves the Argument farther than is needful for us.

Soupirs de France, Mem.
'It is, says he, indubitable, That they who have power to Choose, 'have power to
Depose.

Every Nation, says he, that makes a King, P. 81.
preserves to its self a right to unmake him, when he goes beyond the bounds of
his duty, and when he ruins the Estate instead of preserving it; and this very
thing makes it appear, That Elected Princes neither are, nor can be Sovereigns
of an Arbitrary Power.

I know some talk of a Birthright and Inheritance in the Crown of England,
which is not founded in the statutes, Jovian, p. 87.
but on the original Custom and Constitution of the English Government, which
is thought to be an hereditary Monarchy, according to proximity of blood.

But I would desire all Men of this Opinion, impartially to weigh these
following particulars:

1. Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, shows us the form of Prayer used at the
Coronation of Saxon Kings, wherein they pray God to bless him whom they choose
for King, and call him one chosen to be Crowned King, Et hunc electum in Regem
coronandum been Titles of Honor, f. 157.

Out of the Saxon Pontifical.

At Calcuth, Anno 789. Spel. Council. 1 Vol. f. 291.


dicere and consecrare digneris. And as anciently as the year 789. an Act was
made in a General Convention of all England, in Conventu Pananglico, that their
Kings should be Elected by the Clergy, and senioribus populi, and Elders of the
people; that is, such as were Members of their Great Councils, or Witena
Gemots, Assemblies of Sage and Wise Men. This, tho it was long before the
reputed Conquest, yet was never repealed or cut off by the Sword; nay, seems
received with the Confessor's Laws, as included in them.

2. It appears by the several instances given in the fourth Chapter, and the
testimonies there, both of Malmsbury, and the Publisher of the life of King
Alfred, That no lineal Succession was observed here, before the supposed
Conquest.

3. The Confessor's Law received by W. 1. Vid. Sup.
and continued downwards as the noblest Transcript of the Common Law, shows,
that the Kings of England were to be elected, and the end for which they are
chosen by the people. After the same manner do the ancient Historians and
Lawyers, as well since that time as before, commonly express accessions to the
Throne; and seem industriously to mind Kings of it, that, according to the
caution given the Jewish Kings, Deuteronomy. 17.20.
their hearts be not lifted up above their Brethren.

4. According to the usage from before the reputed Conquest downwards, the
People are asked, Whether they are content to have such a Man King.

5. The most absolute of the English Monarchs never believed, Cambd. Brit. s.
104. de W. 1 Neminem Anglici regi constituo Haredem, sed a terno conditori
cujus sum, and in cujus manu sunt omnia, illud commendo: non enim ta^tum decus
hereditario jure possedi, etc,
that then Children had a right to the Crown, except the people consented that
they should succeed; as appears by King Alfred's Will, and the Deathbed
Declaration of William 1. And therefore some of our Kings, against whom there
has been no pretense of better Title in any particular Person or Family, when
they stood upon good Terms with their People, have often prevailed with them,
in their Lives-time, to secure the Succession to their eldest Son; and H. 2. to
prevent hazarding the Succession, endangered himself, by getting his eldest Son
Crowned, himself living: But as the going no farther than the eldest, argues,
that they looked on that as a Favor; the pressing for a Settlement on their
Issue in any manner, argues, That it was not looked upon as a clear Point of
Right without it.

Of later Times Settlements have been made in Tail, which though they were
occasioned by Pretenses to Titles, are Records against an Hereditary Monarchy,
according to the common notion, which is one that by the original Constitution
descends to the next in the Line, male or Female.

V. Leges W. 1. de Fide, etc. Statuimus etiam ut omnes liberi homines foedere
and sacramento affirment, quod intra and extra regnum Angliae Willielmo Regi
Domino suo fideles esse volunt, etc. Leges S. Edw. tit. Greve. Vid. Juramentum
homagii facti Regi.
6. The Oaths of Allegiance, required of all the Subjects, were never extended
to Heirs, but were barely Personal, till Settlements of the Crown were obtained
upon the Quarrels between the Families of York and Lancaster; and though H. 4.
obtained in Parliament an Oath to himself, the Prince, and his Issue, and to
every one of his Sons successively; and in the time of H. 6. the Bishops and
Temporal Lords swore to be true to the Heirs of R. Duke of York; yet perhaps no
Oath of Allegiance to the King and his Heirs can be shown to have been required
of the Subjects in general, till that 26 H. 8. according to the Limitations of
the Statute 25.

7. Even where the People had settled the Crown, they seemed to intend no more,
than to give a preference before other Pretenders; not but that as Ideocy,
Frenzy, or the like, might set such an one aside; so upon other weighty Reasons
they might alter the Settlement; Pryn 's Signal Loyalty, p. 274. Pol. Virgil.
1. 22. sub initio.
as appears by Polydore Virgil, who was never thought to lie on the Peoples
side, whatever Evidences for them he may have concealed, or destroyed; whose
words of H. 5. to whom the Crown had been limited by Parliament, may be thus
rendered.

Nota, Proceres may take in the Nobiles minores.
Prince Henry having buried his Father, causes a Council of Nobles to be
convened at Westminster; in which while they, according to the Custom of their
Ancestors, consulted about making a King, behold, on a sudden some of the
Nobility, of their own accord, swear Allegiance to him; which officious
Good Will was never known to have been shown to any, before he was declared
King.

William 2. was elected during the Life of his eldest Brother, who was set
aside by the English, against whom he had discovered Ill Will, in spite of the
Normans. So H. 1. Stephen was elected while Maud the Daughter of H. 1. was
alive; and H. 2. succeeded in her Lifetime, upon an Agreement made with
Stephen, by the Peoples Consent. R. 1. as within. King John crowned in the
Lifetime of his eldest Brother's Son, Prince Arthur: So was his Son H. 3. in
the Lifetime of Eleanor, Prince Arthur's Sister. E. 1. as within. E. 2.
elected. E. 3. set up by the People in his Father's Lifetime, which the Father
took for a Favor. R. 2. declared Successor by Parliament, in the Lifetime of
his Grandfather. H. 4. of the younger House, came in by the Peoples Choice,
upon their deposing R. 2. H. 5, and 6. Son and Grandson to H. 4. came in upon a
Settlement. E. 4. of the elder House, came in under an Agreement made in
Parliament, between his Father, who lived not to have the benefit of it, and H.
6. His Son. E. 5. was never crowned. R. 3. who set him aside, was of the
younger House. H. 7. who vanquished him, could have no Right of Proximity; for
the Daughter of E. 4. and his own Mother, were before him. All that came in
since, enjoyed the Crown, either under the various Settlements of H. 8. or that
of H. 7. which took place again in J. 1. or from H. 6. at the highest.
8. As the Practice of the Kingdom is an Evidence of its Right, numerous
Instances might be produced of Choices since the supposed Conquest, not only so
called by Historians, but appearing so in their own Natures; wherein no regard
has been had to Proximity, but barely to Blood.

And I believe no Man can show me any more than Two since the reputed Conquest,
of whom it can be affirmed, with any semblance of Truth, that they came in
otherwise than upon Election, expressed by the Historians of the Time, or
implied, as they had no other Title, or else a late Settlement of the Crown,
either upon themselves immediately, or in Remainder. The Two upon which I will
yield some color, are R. 1. and E. 1. which singular Instances will be so far
from turning the Stream of Precedents, that unless the Form or Manner of
Recognizing their Rights as Hereditary, be produced, the Presumption is strong,
that the Declarations of the Conventions of those Days, or the Peoples
acquiescing upon the Question, Whether they would consent to the King in
nomination, or both, made even their Cases to be plain Elections. And of these
two Instances, Walsingham, f. 1.
perhaps one may be struck off: For tho Walsingham says of E. 1. They
recognized him for their Liege-Lord, that does not necessarily imply a
Recognition from a Title prior to their Declaration; for which way soever a
King comes in duly, he becomes a Liege-Lord, and is so to be recognized or
acknowledged; and that the Title was not by this Author supposed prior to the
Recognition, appears, in that he says, Walsing. ib.
Paterni honoris successorem ordinaverunt, "They ordained or appointed him
Successor "of his Father's Honor. And yet his Father, Sir P. P. Obligation of
Oaths, f. 295.
to secure the Succession to him, had soon after his Birth issued out Writs to
all the Sheriffs of England, requiring all Persons above Twelve Years old, to
swear to be faithful to the Son, with a Salvo for the Homage and Fealty due to
himself.

Indeed, of R. 1. the Historian says, Walsingham, Ypod Neustriae, f. 45.
He was to be promoted to the Kingdom by Right of Inheritance; yet the very
Word, promoted, shows something that he was to be raised to, higher than that
Right alone would carry him; which he fully expresses in the Succession of E.
2. Walfing. f. 68.
which, he says, was not so much by Right of Inheritance, as by the unanimous
Assent of the Peers and Great Men. Which shows, that ordinarily they,
respectively, who stood next in Blood, might look for the Crown before another,
till the People had by their Choice determined against them. This appears very
fully by the Commissions issued out for the taking the Oath of Allegiance to E.
1. both in England and Ireland, after the People of England had agreed in his
absence, to receive him for their King. The Commission, or Dedimus for Ireland,
Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 20. De conservatione pacis in Hibern.
runs thus: Cum Angliae Gubernaculum, and terrae Hiberniae dominium,
successione hereditaria nobis pertineant; ob quod Praelati, Comites and
Proceres, ac Communitas regni nobis tanquam domino suo ligio, and regi,
fidelitatis juramenta and omnia alia, quae nobis ratione Coronae and dignitatis
regiae, ab ipsis fieri aut praestari nobis in absentia nostra potuerunt,
plenarie and sine omissione aliqua, prompto and libenti animo praestiterunt, ac
vos tanquam Regi and Domino vestro ligio consimile Sacramentum fidelitatis
praestare teneamini, etc. Dat. 7. December. Here the Lords and Commons, by whose
direction the Commission was sent to Ireland in the King's absence, acted
without staying for Powers from him; they own indeed his coming to the Crown by
Hereditary Succession; and that by reason of that Inheritance, or his standing
next to his Father, they had sworn Allegiance to him; yet they say, they had
done it prompto and libenti animo, voluntarily; which, tho it does not
necessarily imply a free choice, leaves room for the admission of it. And he
that observes the Dedimus for England, may see that this ordinary Right of
Inheritance was not looked on as enough to constitute him King, without the
consent of the Proceres Regni, which in the Language of that time, took in the
Commons, Vid. Jan. Ang. fa. Nov. and Jus Anglorum ab Antiquo. Vid. etiam 2
part. inf.
as I have elsewhere shown, and appears not only by the enumeration, in the
record for Ireland, of the Parties who received and swore to him as their King;
But even by the Dedimus for England, which says the Magnates and Fideles caused
his Peace to be Proclaimed. So much of the Record as is material, here follows.

Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 11.
Quia defuncto jam celebris memoriae Domino H. Patre nostro ad nos regni
Gubernaculum Successione hereditaria, ac procerum regni voluntate and
ffdelitate nobis praestita sit devolutum, per quod nomine nostro, qui in
exhibitione justitiae and pacis conservatione omnibus and singulis de ipso
regno sumus ex nunc debitores, pacem nostram dicti Magnates and Fideles
fecerunt proclamari. Here the said Proceres are brancht into Magnates and
Fideles, Lords and Commons; and their Consent, and Swearing Allegiance, is
joined with the Succession, as the per quod, or ground of the King's becoming a
Debtor, for exhibiting Justice, and preserving the Peace as King of England.

What I have here shown of E. 1. with that under the Sixth Observation, giving
an account of the Peoples forwardness in swearing Allegiance to H. 5.
abundantly confutes the Inference from the Allegiance sworn to those two Kings,
Elementa Politica, p. 12.
made by the Author of Elementa Politica, in these words, We may observe that
the Kings of England are in full Possession of the Crown, immediately upon the
Death of their Predecessors, and therefore King Edward 1. and H. 5. had
Allegiance sworn to them before their Coronation; whence, says he, it follows,
that as swearing does not make them Kings, so neither can Perjury, tho truly
objected, unmake them again.

He instances also in King John, but surely cannot pretend that he had any
Right before the Peoples immediate Choice, to which the Archbishop told him,
that he owed his Crown. And if the People swore first, yet it is certain it was
not, till he had been received as King of England, which implies the terms
expressed in the Oath.

Bromton, f. 1155. So Hoveden, f. 656.
But to return to R. 1. it is observable, That he was not called King here, but
only Duke of Normandy, till he was Crowned; which, next to the People's Choice,
was in great measure owing to his Mother's Diligence: For he being absent at
the Death of his Father, his Mother, who had been released out of Prison by his
means, to secure the Succession to him, went about with her Court from City to
City, and from Castle to Castle, and sent Clergymen, and others of Reputation
with the People, into the several Counties, by whose Industry she obtained
Oaths of Allegiance to her Son and her self, from the People in the County
Courts, Bromton, f. 1159.
as it should seem; notwithstanding which, the Archbishop charged him at his
Coronation, not to assume the Royal Dignity, unless he firmly resolved to
perform what he had sworn: To which he answered, That by God's help he would
faithfully observe his Oath. Hoveden, f. 656.
And Hoveden says, That he was Crowned by the Counsel and Assent of the
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and a great number of Milites, which Word
was then of a large extent. Wherefore I submit it to Consideration, whether
these are any Exceptions to the General Rule, or are not at least such as
confirm it.

11 H. 7. c. 1.
9. The Parliament 11 H. 7. declares, That it is against all Laws Reason, and
good Conscience, that Subjects should lose or forfeit for doing their true Duty
and Service of Allegiance to their Prince, or Sovereign Lord for the time
being; that is, to the King de facto; as appears by the occasion of the Law,
which was to encourage the service of H. 7. who had no Title but from his
Subjects. And there is a Provision, That any Act or Acts, or other Process of
Law to the contrary, shall be void. Which if it relates to Acts of Parliament,
being built upon the Supposition, That according to the Fundamental Law, the
Peoples Choice gives sufficient Title, perhaps is not vain and illusory, Lord
Bacon's Hist. of H. 7. f. 145.
as the Lord Bacon would have it; but argues strongly, that the Parliament then
thought the Monarchy fundamentally Elective; at least with that Restriction to
the Blood; which I yield. And if this be part of the Fundamental Contract, for
which it bids very fair, then perhaps no body of any other Stock may be King
within this Statute.

But I take it not to be evident, that the Acts here mentioned must needs be
Acts of Parliament: For they might, and by the word [ other] seem to be, such
Acts as are of the nature of ordinary Process, or whereon such Process is
grounded, as Ordinances of the Lords in Parliament, Orders of the Privy
Council, Judgments or Decrees in Courts of Law or Equity, and the like.

However, admit this Clause should be vicious and insignificant: My Lord Bacon,
I am sure, gives no countenance to a certain Dissenting Bishop's Argument in
public Discourse, who undertook from hence to prove, That the Statute it self
is of no force.

Yet such sort of Arguments are of great service to men resolved upon a
Conclusion; nor can better be expected from them.

To what I have offered on this Head, the following are all the Objections of
seeming weight which have occurred to me.

That the King never dies: Or, to use the words of Finch, 'The Perpetuity which
the Law ascribes to him, Finch's Description of the Common Law. French Edit.
An. 1613. f. 20. b. and 21. a. The same made use of in Reflections upon our
late and present Proceedings, p. 10.
having 'perpetual Succession; and he never dies; For in Law it is called the
Demise of the King.

Dyer f. 165. Anderson f. 44. He has it, Le Successeur and le Heir. Elsewhere,
Heir on Successeur, ib. f. 45.
tho never so long after the Death of the Predecessor, yet by way of Relation,
it is as if there were a Demise, or Translation of Interest without any
Inter-regnum: as it was resolved by all the Judges, 1 Eliz. Of which the words
of Lord Dyer are, 'The King, who is Heir or Successor, may write and begin his
Reign 'the same day that his Progenitor or Predecessor dies: With which agrees
the Lord Anderson.

But that to many intents a King dies in his Politic Capacity, as well as
Natural, Vid. 1. E. 6. c. 7. 7 Rep. f. 30.
appears by the discontinuance of Process in Criminal Causes, and such in Civil
as was not returned in the Life of the former King till kept up by Statute; the
determination of Commissions, and the like.

Agreement betwixt the present and former Government. Supposed to be Doctor
Fulwood's. P. 42.
A Learned Author, that he may reconcile our present Settlement to this supposed
Maxim, which appears, not to have any foundation in Antiquity; will have it,
That by the Vacancy of the Throne, no more was meant by the Convention, than
its being free from the former Possessor: but that it was full of a Successor,
and that there was no Interregnum; For, says he, such a Vacancy we have upon
every Demise of the Crown.

And so there was a Vacancy of the Throne, and no Vacancy at all. For in
ordinary Demises, it is manifest there is none. Freedom from the last Possessor,
is not a Vacancy of the Throne.

Two Grounds this Doctor goes upon to justify his Equivocation in this, for I
can call it no better.

1. That otherwise this would be inconsistent with the nature of our Ancient
Hereditary Monarchy.

2. That the Convention show, that they meant it no otherwise than in his Sense.

1. As to the First, It is observable, 1. That the Notion which himself goes
upon, P. 40.
is as inconsistent with the ordinary Rule: For he makes the Heir to have only
jus in re, and to want Livery and Seisin. And consequently, till the Coronation
there is an Interregnum: Tho it may afterward be supplied by relation to the
Descent of the Right.

But herein the Doctor is certainly out: For in ordinary Descents, or Demises,
Hales's Pleas of the Crown, p. 40.
Treason may be committed against the Heir as in full possession, before any
Recognition or Coronation. But since he will hardly affirm that it could have
been so in our Case, he must grant that there was a more absolute Vacancy than
that for which he contends. P. 54.
It is his own Argument, that our present Sovereigns are really King and Queen,
because Treason may be committed against them within the purview of the Statute
25 E. 3. And by the same Reason they were not King and Queen before they were
declared so, unless Treason could have been committed against them before such
Declaration.

2. But 2. The Doctor owns, that though upon some extraordinary Revolution, and
some absolute necessary Reason of State, for our common preservation, a
Stranger, none of the Blood Royal, should be advanced to the Throne for one or
more turns; whilst that necessity continues, the Constitution of the Government
would not be altered. And yet would suppose, P. 56. V. p. 41. Where he speaks
as his own Sense, what in the other place is put by way of Objection.
that if our King and Queen come in otherwise than by Descent, it would be a
Designed Alteration or Change of the Ancient Constitution of this Hereditary
Monarchy.

And yet himself owns, That by the Law of Nature, Salus Populi is both the
Supreme, and the first Law in Government; and the scope and end of all other
Laws, and of Government it self. Nay, he yields, That the Oath of Allegiance,
that Sign or Testimony between King and Subject, is discharged or dispensed
with, when Salus Populi, the preservation of Three Kingdoms is concerned, and
in danger.

If then an Alteration of the Course of Descent, in case of Necessity, is so
far from a Change of the Constitution, that it is by virtue of the Chief
Fundamental Law the Salus Populi: I hope it will be allowed, That the
Representatives of the People, have upon the Vacancy of the Throne from a
former Possessor, which he yields, to have been in the Case in question, a
right to judge wherein their own Safety lies. Otherwise they have a Law of
which they can have no benefit. And since our Representatives have made so wise
a determination, they that do not submit to it, may well be looked upon as
Persons who abdicate themselves from the benefit of this Government.

Nay, further, the Doctor confesses, that for his part he knows no Law against
the possibility either of a Vacancy in the Throne, or an Interregnum in
extraordinary Cases; such as himself yields ours was.

But the remaining Question is, Whether the Convention showed that they meant
such a Vacancy as caused an Interregnum? Their Words, as he observes, are
these, P. 38:
[ King James the second having Abdicated the Government, and the Throne being
thereby vacant.] So far he is in the right, That the Convention went upon the
Supposition of a Vacancy; but their supposition did not make one, neither did
it make an Abdication: But it is evident that the supposition of the Vacancy, as
Consequent upon the Abdication, was the Ground of settling the Government as it
is; and that they looked upon the Vacancy as more than a freedom from the last
Possessor, appears by their preferring His Majesty in the Settlement: Which
preference had been justifiable even according to what the Doctor receives, tho
this King had not been of the Blood Royal.

But for a farther Evidence, The Stat. 1 W. M. for reviving of Actions and
Process lately depending in the Courts of Westminster, and Discontinued by the
not holding of Hillary Term, and for supplying other defects relating to
proceedings at Law. Consid. touching the Oath in the Title page.
that the Throne was absolutely Vacant in the eye of the Law, and so judged and
declared to all Men by the Convention, and Their Majesty's, concurring in a
Parliamentary Act; The Doctor may please to consider the Statute for Supplying
defects relating to proceedings at Law: Which provides, that for Crimes
committed between the 11 th of December, and the 13 th of February following,
Informations or Indictments shall have only the year of our Lord God, instead
of the year of the King's Reign. And where Conclusions used to be contra pacem
Domini Regis, they shall conclude, contra pacem Regni.

Let not Divines therefore go to argue us out of our Government; but let them
submit to that Rule which Dr. Whitby cites, Optima regula qua nulla est verior,
aut firmior in jure, neminem oportet esse sapientiorem Legibus.

Testamentary Heirs of the appointment of the Predecessor: Which argues an
Inheritance in him that Disposes. And Dr. Brady thinks he produces an Example,
Brady's Hist. of the Succession. f. 8, 9.
where the Election of the People was bound and limited by the nomination of
the Predecessor.

But if he had duly weighed the Presidents of this kind, he might have
understood, That an Election without a Nomination, had full effect, while a
bare Nomination had none. And he might have learnt from Grotius, That among the
Germans, from whom we descend, Kingdoms did not use to pass by Wills; and that
Wills were but Recommendations to the Peoples Choice, but not Dispositions.

Mezray in the Life of Clotair 2.
And that thus it was in France, appears by their Historian Mezray, who shows,
That anciently the King's of France were chosen out of the Royal Race: But that
Three Conditions were ordinarily required. 1. Birth; for they were to be
Legitimate. 2. The Will of the Father. 3. The Consent of the Great Men; which
commonly used to follow the other two.

E. 3. the Realm declared, Vid. Debates about Deposing.
That they would not consent to any thing in Parliament, to the Disherison of
the King and his Heirs, or the Crown whereunto they were Sworn.

England so early as that, Swore Allegiance to the King and his Heirs, this
were to the purpose. Knighton, f. 248.
Indeed, I find, that before this, 24 E. 1: a Foreign Prince, the King of
Scotland, Feudatory to the Crown of England, did Homage to the King and his
Heirs; but the like not being exacted of the Subjects of England till
particular Acts, whereby the Crown was settled; it argues strongly, as indeed
appears from the Subject matter, That the Homage paid by a Foreign Prince, was
due to none but the present King, and his Successor to the Kingdom, whoever was
next of Blood. And by parity of Reason, the Disherison of the King, and him,
her, or them who succeeded to the Crown, was all that could be referred to,
when they urged the Obligation of their Oath to the King and his Heirs, or the
Crown: Which appears farther, Leges Sancti Edwardi tit. Greve. Conjurati
fratres ad defendendum Regnum, etc. and honores illius omni fidelitate cum eo
servare. So Leges W. 1. tit. De Fide and obsequio erga Regem. Quod Willielmo
Domino suo fideles esse volunt and honores illius, etc. defendere. Bracton,
Lib. 2. Cap. 29.
not only from the old Oath of Allegiance, to which they must needs have
reference, whereby they are bound to defend the Rights of the Crown; but even
from the Matter then in question, which was not of the Right of Succession, but
of a Flower of the Crown. Bracton puts this out of Dispute, when he tells us,
That Inheritance comes not from an Heir; but an Heir from Inheritance: And that
Inheritance is the Succession to all the Right which the Predecessor had by any
sort of Acquisition.

Vid. Sir P. P. As Successors are Heirs, so Dr. Brady tells us, Gloss. f. 18.
That Prepossessor, one that possessed the Land before the present possessor,
without any relation to Blood or Kindred, is Ancestor in Doomsday, and in the
Writ de Morte Antecessoris. Sir P. P's Obligation of Oaths, f. 302. F. 298. F.
300.
With Bracton agrees the Civil Law, Haeredis significatione omnes significari
successores credendum est, etsi verbis non sint expressi: By Heirs we are to
believe all Successors to be signified, although not expressed in words: And
again, Nihil est aliud haereditas quam Successio in universum jus quod
defunctus habuit; 'Inheritance is nothing else but Succession 'to all the Right
which the deceased had. Wherefore I cannot but wonder that so learned a Man as
Sir P. P. should cite this to prove, that Allegiance is due to the Heirs and
Successors in a Legal Course of Descent; That is, as he explains, or receives
it out of Mr. Prynn, by Proximity of Succession, in regard of Line.

Nor is this Learned Man more fortunate in mentioning the Salvo which Littleton
tells us is to be taken to the Oath of Homage to a Subject, Salve la Foy que
jeo doy a nostre Signior le Roy; Sir P. P. f. 297.

Littleton, tit. Homage, Sect. 85.


where there is not a word of Heirs: But he tells us, that Littleton cites
Glanvil, where the word Heirs is. Whereas it is the Lord Cook who makes the
Quotation, as he does of Bracton, whose sense of the word Heirs we have seen:
And Littleton fully confirms it, by leaving out the word Heirs, as a
Redundancy, Allegiance being due to every one that becomes King, and to no
other.

But to put the Extent of Heirs to a King out of Controversy, Popham 's Rep. f.
16, and 17.
we have the resolution of all the Judges in B. R. in the time of Q. Eliz. on
my side. King R. 3. had granted certain Privileges to the Burgesses of
Gloucester, with a saving to himself and his Heirs. And it was agreed by all the
Justices, That although the words are saving to himself and his Heirs, it shall
be taken for a perpetual saving, which shall go to his Successors. This
therefore they adjudged to reach the Queen, who it is well known was not Heir to
R. 3.

York and Lancaster, each side pretended Title by Proximity of Blood; and as
either prevailed, their Right was acknowledged to be according to God's Law,
Man's Law, and the Law of Nature. To which I answer,

As appears in the very Objection, this was applied to those who had no Right
of Proximity, as well as to those who had. And thus 'twas to R. 3. as well as
to E. 4. and even the Election of H. 4. after the Deposing and Relinquishing of
R. 2. with his own express consent, is by the same Parliament that says so much
of the Title of E. 4. called an Usurpation upon R. 2. Wherefore if this Record
be any way leading to our Judgments, no Deposing or Resignation, what ever be
the Inducement, can be of any force.

Whence it is plain, that all those are but Complements to the longest Sword;
However they neither set aside former Authorities, nor establish any Right for
the future; at least not more for the Heirs of E. 4. than the Parliament of R.
3. did for His Heirs: Yet whoever comes next by Right of Proximity, according
to any Settlement in being, I will not deny that they enjoy the Crown according
to God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature: For, Fortescue de laudibus
legum Angliae, c. 3.

Jovian, p. 253.


as the great Fortescue has it, All Laws published by Men, have their Authority
from God. Upon which the Author of Jovian argues, and supposes all Laws of Men,
to be the Laws and Ordinances of God. Yet who can say but these Human
Creatures, or Ordinances of Men, may be altered, as they were made? And tho it
may seem strange to some, yet I may with great Authority affirm, That when the
People had determined the Right on the side of R. 3. He was King as much
according, to God's Law as E. 4. For Peufendorf holds, That where the Question
is, Peufendorf. de Interregnis, p. 288. Quod si dubitatur qui gradus aut
quaelinea sitpotior, declarata voluntas populi finem liti imponet, etc.
What Degree, or what Line is best? The declared will of the People determines
the Controversy; since every one is presumed to understand his own Intention.
And the people that is now, is to be thought the same with that by which the
Order of Succession was Constituted.

But let Men argue as nicely as they please for a Right or Sovereignty
inseparable from the person of the next in Blood, to the last Lawful King; let
this fall upon J. 2. the reputed Prince of Wales, or any other person of
unclouded Birth and Fame; and let them argue upon the Declaration 1 E. 4. That
Allegiance, accordingly, is due by God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of Nature:
Certain it is, That the Statute 11 H. 7. abovementioned, was not only made in
an Age of greater Light; but being a subsequent Law, derogates from whatever is
contrary in the former. By this last it is declared to be against all Laws,
That Subjects should suffer for doing true Duty and Service of Allegiance to
the King de facto: Which is as much as if 'twere expressed to be against God's
Law, Vid. 3 Inst. f. 7. upon the Stat. of Treason 25 E. 3. referring in the
Margin to this Statute. This is to be understood of a King n possession of the
Crown and Kingdom: For if there be a King Regnant in possession, although he be
Rex de facto and not de jure, yet He is Seignior le Roy, within the purview of
this Statute; and the other who has the Right, and is out of possession, is
not within this Act. Nay, if Treason be committed against a King de facto, and
after the King de jure come to the Crown, he shall punish the Treason done to
the King de facto, And a Pardon granted by a King de jure, that is not also de
facto, is void.
Man's Law, and the Law of Nature. By the necessary consequence of which,
Allegiance is due to a King de facto, according to all these Laws. Wherefore
whoever denies Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, or maintains a
contrary one to J. 2. offends against God's Law, Man's Law, and the Law of
Nature. Nor, whatever some imagine, can the Proviso at the end of this Statute
in the least impair its force, as to what I use it for. The Proviso runs thus:

11 H. 7. c. 1.
Provided always, That no person or persons shall take any benefit or advantage
by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his or their said Allegiance.

Where said Allegiance, shows it to be meant of Allegiance to the King de
facto, whose Service is called true Duty. And no Man surely can think the
meaning to be, that if after such Service they turn to the other side, or
become Traitors to the present Power, they shall suffer for the former Service
as Traitors against him that had the Right, either during the Reign of the King
in being, which would be an unlikely owning the Ejected Power; or hereafter, if
that should come to be restored; which would be far from answering the apparent
end of the Clause, which is to keep Men in obedience to him who has the Power
of punishing the disobedient. Wherefore the meaning may be, That no Man who
departs from his Duty of Allegiance to the present King, shall save himself by
pleading, that he had been in Arms, or had done him any signal Service. In
short, this was to be no Corban to Answer for any following departure from Duty.

But as the body of the Act provides only for the Indemnity of them who pay due
Allegiance to the King de facto; this Proviso may be particularly for the Kings
own Security in affirmance of the Common Law, which makes all Resisting the
Possessors of Crowns, Treason, in single persons. And the sense may run thus:
Provided, that whoever declines from Allegiance to the King in possession, to
help another to the Crown, shall not, if the first happen to be Restored, plead
that the other became King de facto.

However, this does not in the least diminish the Obligation of Allegiance to
the King who shall obtain possession by the Ousting another.

And I suppose by this time it is pretty evident, That both the Body of the Act,
and the Proviso, relate only to a King de facto, and endeavor to free the
Nation from nice speculations about the Right to the Crown.

For confirmation of what I have shown, to prove that the English Monarchy has
been Elective, within the Royal Family, it may not be improper to observe how
it has been anciently in Germany and France, See this distinction in Nauclerus.
Aimonius lib. 1. c. 4. Les Soupirs de la France esclave, Mem. 6. p. 83. P. 84.
or France Germanick, from whence we came, and France Gallick branched out from
the Ancient Germans. Aimonius says, 'That the Francs chose a King, and placed
him upon the Throne, in imitation of other Nations; which the Author of the
Sighs of France enslaved, renders the other Nations of the Gauls and Germans:
And that Author puts it by way of question, implying the stronger affirmation,
Whether it does not appear throughout the whole History, that the French have
preserved to themselves the Right to choose within the Royal Family, him who
appeared to them the most fit to Protect, Defend, and Govern them well?

The German Conringius, Esse quid hoc dicam vivis quod fama negatur? Conringius
de Negotiis Conventuum Imperii p. 417.
being an Author already possessed of that Credit which may spring out of the
French man's grave; I shall transcribe Conringius to this Point more at large.

Although, says he, some think that our Kings anciently came to their Power by
Succession, others by Election; yet it seems fit to say, that a middle way was
in use: That the Children of Kings or Emperors did not succeed, unless approved
of by the States; and yet were not passed by, if they were worthy of the
Empire. For they who were come from the Royal Stock, were believed to tread in
the steps of their Ancestors, and that they would not only preserve, but exceed
the glory of their Progenitors, according to that of Aristotle, Aristot. Rhet.
lib. 2. c. 16.
They who are of Noble Birth, are desirous of Praise and Glory: For it is the
nature of men to desire to increase, not to diminish or lose the goods which
they had before.

But when the Royal Family was extinct, then it was permitted the States to
raise to the Empire whomsoever they pleased, by an Election in every respect
free. So the Caroline Family being extinct, the Kingdom of the Western Francs
was conferred upon Henry, afterward called Auceps, by a most free Election of
the Francs and Saxons, of which Translation of Power, Regino in his Chronicles
of the year 920 says thus.

Duke Henry is chosen King by the Consent of the Francs, Almains, Bavarians,
Thuringians, and Saxons, when, however, he had no prior Right to the Empire
before the other Princes. In the same manner afterward Lothair a Saxon,
Conrade 2. a Suede, Otho 4. a Saxon, and many more, obtained the Empire of
Germany, in the right of pure Election, as Onuphrius witnesses.

'But whether they were of the Royal Family, Onuph. Panvin. c. 5. de Comitiis
Imp.
or obtaind the Kingdom 'only and merely by Election, they were chosen by the
States and People in full Conventions. For which he instances in the Elections
of Sigebert the Son of Dagobert; In plenis Comitiis.
Charles and Charlemain chosen together upon the death of their Father Pipin:
Of Charles upon the death of his Brother; and Lewis the Pious after him.

This manner of Choosing within the Royal Family, he observes to have remained
in the Empire, to the time of H. 4. but that it was interrupted by Pope Gregory
7. who under show of advancing the Liberties of Germany, made way for the Papal
Influence and Tyranny. Having observed the mischief of absolute Elections, he
adds, Indeed I should not wholly prefer mere Succession, Election being quite
taken away; but I think this manner of Election to be best, where great account
is had of Blood, and no Son worthy to succeed his Father is put by. That the
way of constituting Kings, mixed with Hereditary Succession, and free Election,
was very suitable to the manner of Ancient Germany, appears at least from
hence, that afrer that mere free Election had been introduced by Hildebrand,
all things in Germany were in Commotion and Disorder.

CHAP. IX. The Fourth Head of Positive Law.
A short Recapitulation of what has been proved. An actual Discharge of Oaths
of Allegiance to J. 2. shown from the Authority of the Judgment past. His
Usurping a Legislative Power: Leaving the Kingdom without providing for the
Administration of Justice; and going into France. This confirmed by Rastal,
Lord Hobart, Justinian's Digests. The Rescript of Theodosius and Valentinian.
Pufendorf de Officio hominis and civis. His Elementa Juris prudentiae. His
Treatise de Jure Gentium. Grotius. Pufendorf de Inter-regnis. Knichen's Opus
Pol. Philip Paraeus. A particular consideration of what the Learned Knight, Sir
R. Pointz says, seeming against these Authorities, but shown in truth to
confirm them, and to bring the Rules of the Civilians to our side. That the
Crown came not by Right of Descent to the next in Blood, after the discharge of
the Allegiance to J. 2. The Arguments for the People's having been restored to
that Liberty which they had before the Settlement of the Crown, enforced from a
particular Consideration of the State of the Settlement. Where it is shown, how
the word Heirs may be looked on as restrained in the first Settlement on Heirs,
by Gomezius his Rule. The Titles of H. 6. E. 4. H. 7. and H. 8. His several
Settlements, and their effects in relation to the Queens Mary and Elizabeth,
and J. 1. The Recognition to J. 1. not extending to his Heirs. And questioned,
Whether the Recognition was not his best, if not only Title. With a modest
Inference.

That the People of England were lately restored to a qualified Choice.
I Think I have with due regard to all colorable Objections, made it appear,
That Allegiance may in some Cases be withdrawn from one who had been King, till
the occasion of such Withdrawing, or Judgment upon it.

And this I have done, not only from the Equity, and reserved Cases necessarily
implied, but from the express Original and continuing Contract between Prince
and People; which with the Legal Judicature empowered to determine concerning
it, I have likewise shown, and exemplified by the Custom of the Kingdom, both
before the reputed Conquest, and since. And have occasionally proved, That tho
Oaths of Allegiance may reach to Heirs, according to special Limitations, as
was 26 Hen. 8. yet in common intendment, by Heirs of a King or Crown, no more
is meant, than such as succeed to it according to the Law, positive, or
implied. And that whoever comes to the Crown upon either, Allegiance is as much
due to him by the Law of God and Nature, as it was to the nighest in Blood:
Sanderson de Obligatione Juramenti Lect. 4
Or to use the words of Bishop Sanderson, Dignity varies not with the change of
Persons: Whence, if any Subject or Soldier swear Fealty to his King or General,
the Oath is to be meant to be made unto them also who succeed to that Dignity.

And when the Crown continues in the Blood, this especially by what I have
above-shewn, puts the Obligation of Allegiance to the King in being, out of
Controversy, unless it can be made appear, that the Right of the former King
remains; or that there is some Settlement of the Crown yet in force, which ties
it strictly to the next.

I come now to prove, That the People of England are actually discharged from
their Oaths of Allegiance to J. 2. and were lately restored to that Latitude of
Choice which I have shown to be their Original Right.

The Lords and Commons having a Judicial Power in this matter, as has been
proved at large; their Exercise of this Power, in the nature of the Thing,
determines the Right, unless an Appeal lies from them to some higher Court in
this Nation: But that no Power can legally question them or any of them in this
matter, appears more particularly in that there is no Statute now in force,
(nor was since the Death of Car. 2.) which makes it Treason to conspire to
Depose a King, or actually to Depose him. Vid. Sir Rob. Atkins his Excellent
Defense of the L. Russel* f. 22, 23.
But this is of the Nature of those Common-Law-Treasons which are left to the
Judgment of Parliament. And they who are the only Judges of their own Actions
have a pretty large liberty in them, especially according to them who would
infer the absolute Power of Princes, from the supposition of no constituted
Judges of their Actions. Wherefore the Defense of their Proceedings might
justly seem to be superseded, were it not for an ungovernable sort of men, who
either cannot, or will not judge according to the Rules of Right Reasoning; but
as they will hardly admit of any Doctrine as true, for which they have not the
Decision of some Father or Council; will believe no Action, not proceeding from
their imperious Dictates, justifiable even in Cases of the utmost necessity,
for the preservation of the true Religion and just Laws, for which they have no
warrant from the Examples of their Forefathers, or Opinions of Men, whose Books
have past with their Allowance: Which often drives me to the seeming Pedantry
of Quotations, to confirm the most obvious Considerations to which my own
thoughts led me.

The either open, or more covert Matters of Fact, inducing the Declaration of
Lords and Commons, That J. 2. has broken the Original Contract, I need not now
inquire into. All People must own that he has, if they in the least attend to
the Constitution of our Government, and how apparently he, by his general
Dispensations, usurped a Legislative Power for the Destruction of the
Protestant Religion and Civil Rights; which we were in a fair way of being
Dragoon'd out of by a standing Army, by degrees to have been totally under
Popish, or Complying, Officers. Yet if there were no more than his Leaving the
Kingdom, without making any Provision for keeping up the Justice of it, and
going into France, a Country from whence all mischiefs have of late Years
flowed upon us and our Religion, Who can deny but this alone would have been
enough to set him aside? Rastal's Entries tit. Reattachment. f. 544. b. Resum.
etc. quia extra Regnum Angliae progres. fecimus, nullo locum tenente nostrum
sive Custode Regni relicto, etc.
The going out of the Realm without appointing a Custos, was anciently in our
Law a Discontinuance of Justice.

Hobart f. 155.
And the Lord Hobart gives it as a Maxim, Cessa Regnare, si non vis Judicare:
'Cease to Reign, if you will not judge, or maintain the 'Course of Justice.

Vid. Leges 12. Tab. de Magistrate.
Many, I know, upon these Questions rather regard the Civil Law; and that, I am
sure, gives a home thrust, in the Case of deserting one's Country, and going
into such an one as France is to our Nation, tho it has been in too strict
Alliance with our Kings.

The Digests say,

Digest. lib. 49. tit. 15. De Captivis and Postliminio. Transfugae nullum
postliminium est, nam qui malo Consilio and Proditoris animo patriam reliquit,
hostium numero habendus est, etc. transfuga autem non is solus accipiendus est,
qui aut ad hosts aut in bello transfugit, sed ad eos cum quibus nulla amicitia
est fide suscepta transfugit.
A Deserter has no Right of being restored to his Country: For he who left his
Country with an evil and treacherous mind, is to be held as an Enemy, etc. But
we are to take not only him for a Deserter, who runs over to Enemies in time of
War, but also during a Truce: Or, Who runs over to them with whom there is no
Amity, either after undertaking to be faithful to his Country, or else
undertaking to be faithful to the other. Either of which senses the words will
bear.

It Is likely to be said, That this out of the Civil Law is improperly applied
to the Prince, who according to that, is exempt from all Laws.

Imp. Theod. and Valentin. Caes. ad Volusianum Praefectum Proetorio. Digna vox
est Majestate Regnantis, Legibus adligatum se Principem profiteri. Adeo de
auctoritate juris nostra pendet auctoritas: and re vera majus imperio est
submittere Legibus principatum. Et oraculo praesentis Edicti, quod nobis licere
non patimur aliis indicamus.
But I would desire such, besides what I have observed upon the Roman Lex Regia,
to read the Rescript of Theodosius and Valentinian, wherein they thus declare:
It Is an Expression suitable to the Dignity of one that Reigns, to profess
himself bound by the Laws. Our own Authority does so depend upon the Authority
of Law. And in truth for the Governing Power to submit to Law, is greater than
Empire. And by the Promulgation of this present Edict, we make known to others,
what we will not allow our selves.

That J. 2. had before his Departure, broken the Fundamental Laws, and that now
he not only ceases to protect, but before the Judgment passed upon the Breach,
was in a Kingdom which foments and strengthens a Rebellion in Ireland, part of
the Dominions belonging to the English Crown, I think no body will deny. Nor
till they can answer what I have shown of the mutual Contract, continued down
from the first Erection of the Monarchy here, ought they to deny, that he
thereby broke the Original Contract, which bound the People to him, and him to
them. What results from this Breach, is now more particularly to be considered.
That it is a Discharge from all Allegiance to him required by any Law, and
confirmed by any Oaths, is evident, not only from the former Authorities, but
from the Condition going along with such a mutual Contract, as I have proved to
be with us between Prince and People. Or rather to use the Words of the Learned
Pufendorf,

The Obligation is not so much dissolved, as broken off, Peufendorf, de Officio
Hominis and Civis, p. 201.
by the perfidiousness of either Party; for when one does not perform that
which was agreed on, neither is the other bound to performance: For the Prior
Heads of things to be performed in Contracts, are in the subsequent, by way of
Condition. As if it should be said, I will perform, if you will perform first.

This he more fully explains in another Book, Pufend. Elementa Juris
prudentiae, p. 85, and 94. Vid. Puf Supr. de Interregnis, p. 274.
where he distinguishes between an Obligation imperfectly mutual, as he
supposes it to be between an Absolute Prince and his Subjects; and one
perfectly mutual, as he takes it to be, where the People have conferred a Power
on any Terms.

Of such Obligations, he says,

These, since they have a mutual respect to the things agreed on, Pufend.
Elementa Juris prud. p. 94.
and suppose mutual Faith; it is evident, That if one Party violate the Faith
which he plighted, the other is no more bound: And therefore he is not
perfidious, who stands not to those Contracts which the other has broken. For
all the Heads of one and the same Contract run into each other by way of
Condition, etc.

In that Book of his which is counted the Standard of the Law of Nations,
Pufend. de Jure Gentium, p. 1105.
he asserts it to be lawful for Subjects to oppose their Prince by Force (which
is a sufficient departure from Allegiance) if he goes about, Modum habendi
potestatem immutare, V. Grot. de Jure Belli and Pacis, de summitatem habendi
plenitudine, p. 62. Dissertationes de Interreg. p. 272. Supra.
i. e. to change that Manner in which he, by the Contract, enjoys the Power,
from less to more absolute.

And in his Tract de Interregnis, cited above, he allows of this; If the King
abdicate all Care of the Commonwealth, becomes of an hostile mind toward his
Subjects, or manifestly departs from those Rules of Governing, upon the
observance of which, as upon a Condition the Subjects have suspended their
Obedience.

Nor is the German Author, Knichin, less plain; whose Words are,

If the Magistrate have absolute and full Majesty, due Subjection ought by no
means to be denied him, tho he be impious; Rudolphi Godofredi Knichen opus
polit. f. 1226.
Nor may he be cast out, and another substituted in his room: Much less can a
new form of Government be introduced. But if he were Constituted by the People
under certain Pacts and Promises sworn to him by the People, and therefore is
bound to certain Rules of Laws, and either to do or avoid any thing contained
in those Contracts, whether Fundamental Laws, or things particularly concerted,
(as for Example, the Emperor in our Empire:) They not being observed, but
studiously, enormously, and obstinately violated; the hopes of amendment, after
many of the Subjects Prayers and Admonitions, plainly vanishing; he may
rightfully be removed by the States and People, etc. The Reason is, because he
was Promoted to the Government by such Agreement, and that sworn to, according
to the Laws of the Agreement or Contract: The Nature of which consists in this,
That if that Party for whose sake or cause they are Constituted, violate them,
the other Party, of very Right, is freed from the Observance of those things
which are granted by such Laws.

Philippi Paraei Vindicatio, p. 50, and 51.
Nor does Philip Paraeus come short of this, in his Defense of his Father David,
where he speaks very particularly of the Effect of the mutual Compact.

Sir R. Poyntz his Vindication of Monarchy. Ed. Anno. 1661.
What is said by the Learned Knight Sir Robert Poyntz, to disable such
Authorities as I have Cited, in truth confirms them.

The Doctrine of the Civilians, concerning the nature of Contracts, he handles
with Judgment; but if he fails in applying their Distinctions, the Foundation
of our Government being different from that which he goes upon, then he will
prove an Authority on my side.

P. 86.
The Doctors of the Law, says he, are much perplexed in debating these two
Rules in Law, One is, That in vain he requires the performance of a promise or
contract, to whom he refuses the performance of that which he ought on his
part to perform. The other is, That a Man is not bound to perform his Oath, if
that be not performed in consideration whereof he did swear. And unto these
Rules they assign diverse Exceptions and Limitations: One is, That [regularly]
ubi contractus est perfectus, etc. and a mutual Obligation arises, it is not
rescinded by the failure of either Party: And that in contractibus innominatis,
Innominal Contracts, such as are without any Condition expressed, it is not
lawful agere ad resolutionem Contractus, P. 86.
to act toward the Dissolution of the Contract, by reason of a Contravention
on one side, sed vel ad implementum contractus, vel ad interesse; but either
toward the compelling performance, or the obtaining satisfaction for the
breach.

The Contract between Prince and People, he supposes to be both, 1. A perfect
Contract, and 2. An innominal one;


Consequently indissoluble, notwithstanding any Breach on the King's side. But
if it be looked on barely as a perfect Contract, without Consideration of its
being without Condition expressed; by the same Reason, even the Rebellion of a
Subject would not discharge the King's Duty to protect him, any more than the
King's subverting the Constitution will discharge the Subjects Allegiance:
Which shows, that this is meant only of Instances which are not of the Essence
of the Contract. And this is implied in restraining the assertion with the word
[ Regularly], to Matters within the ordinarily Rule.

But consider these severally,

1. By perfect Contracts, must be meant such, wherein the Obligations are fixed
and completed at the beginning, or from the nature of the Relation entered
into. And he says notwithstanding, The Distinctions and Limitations in
Contracts and Obligations Civil, all agree, That in those Duties which are
mutual by the Laws of God and Nature, as between the Father and the Son, the
Husband and the Wife, the Lord and his Vassal, the Prince and his Subjects; the
breach of Duty in the one, is no discharge unto the other.

Not to observe how extensive he makes that Law of God or Nature which
ascertains the Lords right over his Vassal, and the Princes over his Subjects,
I much question, Whether all agree that his Rule holds in such Cases as destroy
the very nature of the Relation, as the Adultery of the Wife, or the like:
However himself yields that there may be an Obligation superior to these; for
having produced Examples of Passive Obedience, P. 96.
he says, ' We cannot here ground an Argument 'for justifying obedience to all
Tyrants and invaders of our Country. Omnes enim omnium Charitates una Patria
complexa and supergressa est, etc. filius sine scelere, Proditorem Patriae,
licet Pater sit occidit. In omni tempore bellum gerendum sit pro Defensione
sua, and Patriae, and Legum Patriae.

For our Country alone comprehends, and goes beyond, all private affections. A
Son, without sin, kills a Traitor to his Country, tho he be his Father. At all
times War may be waged in Defense of ones self, ones Country, and the Laws of
ones Country.

He owns expressly, that Obedience is so far from being due to a Tyrant, that it
is not justifiable. And he could not but know, that the Civilians, whose Rules
he receives and applies, under this Apellation include as well one who Vid.
Comment. de Regno aut quovis principatu recte and tranquille Administrando.

Advers. Machiavellum Ed. Ao. 1577. p. 248. Bartolus duas species tyrannorum
Statuit, quarum unam juris seu tituli, alteram exercitii sive usus vocat.
Tyrannus titulo is est, inquit, qui sine ullo jure, aut iniquo and minime
legitimo titulo Principatum invadit; Tyrannus exercitio sive usu is est, qui
legitimum quidem jus ad principatum habet, sed eum injuste and contra Leges
exercet. Itaque demum Statuit ejusmodi Tyrannis obsequium non deberi: Sed e
Magistratu deturbandos esse. Ib. f. 249.


having a lawful Title to Power uses it unjustly, as one who usurps Power
without any Title, or other than what is unjust and illegal.

Wherefore, since he makes no Distinction of Tyrants, it is not to be doubted,
but he, with the Civilians, particularly the Learned Bartolus, discharges all
Obedience, and consequently Allegiance, the Legal tie of Duty, to a Tyrant in
the exercise of Power, as well as in Title. Of both these, Bartolus, as a
Judicious Author, represents his sense; held, That Obedience is not due to
them; but that they are to be thrust out of the Government.

And the deservedly esteemed Great Man, Mornay du Plessis, Tractatus de Eccles.
per Phil. Mornaeum, p. 68.
in his Treatise of the Church, cites Zabarel, Baldus and Bartolus for the same
distinction of Tyrants. Nay, observes that these Lawyers, tho Papists, held,
that even Popes might be Tyrants, in either of these respects.

2. As to the innominal Contracts, Sir Roger's Rule is, That the Breach of one,
will not justify the other, to proceed toward the dissolving of the Contract,
which comes not up to any Case which does ipso facto dissolve it. Besides, this
notwithstanding, there may be either a Dissolution of the Contract, a
compelling to perform, or satisfaction taken. According to which in all Cases
wherein the two last are insufficient, a Dissolution of the Contract ought or
may follow. But farther, the fixed Obligation of the Subject, whatever the King
shall do contrary to the Contract, is by him founded upon the supposition,
either that the People of England have transferred the Power of the Nation to
their Kings, as absolutely as he supposes that the People of Rome had done to
their Emperors; Vid. Sup.
or rather that W. 1. made a Conquest of this Nation.

If, says he, we cannot find any Law or Reason, Sir Roger Poyntz, p. 123.
that the Romans or any other People, who had in them the Supreme Power, could,
after they had transferred this Power to Kings, and elected them, reassume this
Power again, and when it does please them, depose their Kings, or limit and
restrain their Power by virtue of an habitual Power still remaining in the
People, as is supposed; then undoubtedly we can find no Right in the People,
Vid. the punishment which the Senate decreed against Nero, More majorum.
or in any Societies or Communities of People, to Depose, Restrain, or Limit
Kings of hereditary Succession, especially those who have not their Right from
the People, but by Conquest, as in England.

From such Kings of Hereditary Succession and Right, all Jurisdictions do
proceed, and in them reside; and unto them they return, say the Lawyers, Rex
est lex animata: And his Office and Function is, Indesinens consulatus. All
other Rights and Liberties whatsoever, have been, as in other Kingdoms, at the
Will and Mercy of the Conquerors of our Island, the Romans, Saxons, Danes,
Normans: Our Rights and Liberties contained in Magna Charta granted and
confirmed by diverse Kings, after much effusion of Blood we, nor our Ancestors
did, nor could ever claim by Virtue of any Reservation made by the People, or
any others, when they were Conquered. Neither by any Original Right inseparably
inherent and vested in the People, and from them derived.

Here it is observable,

1. That tho Sir Roger will not have any Original Right to be inseparable from
the People; yet he owns, that in some places they may have Elected Kings, and
have had Supreme Power in them, till they transferred it to their Kings:
Sherringham's Supremacy asserted. Introduct. p. 11.
Contrary to Mr. Sherringham, who to make his Court at the coming in of C. 2.
held, that all Authority is originally in Kings, or other Supreme Magistrates
themselves, immedidiately from God, Tanquam in primo creato Subjecto, as in the
first created Subject.

2. Sir Roger with that Divine, holds, that W. 1. obtained the Crown by
Conquest. Sher. p. 53. Vid. 2 d Part.
Mr. Sherringham indeed owns, that there was a composition and agreement; but
will have it, that this was not till after a Victory: as if the Victory over
Harold made a Conquest of the Nation. Of which, more in its place.

3. Sir Roger goes no more beyond our Case, when he argues upon supposition of
a total Translation of the Power, whereby a People or Nation is Governed, than
he does in arguing against the People's Reassuming this Power again, and
Deposing their Kings, when it does please them.

4. Sir Roger's Argument upon a Supposition of either a total Translation of
the Power, or Conquest, as much destroys the Power of Restraining and Limiting,
as of Deposing Kings. If it be said, That it is all to be intended only of
Actions of the People, without the Consent of their Kings; if he will allow
that Kings may by their own Consent be set aside as well as Limited, then
whatever voluntary Actions of theirs imply a Renunciation of Government, will
as much discharge the Subjects, as their express Consent.

He admits, that where there is no such total Translation of the Power, and no
Conquest, the People may claim Liberties by virtue of a Reservation. Sir Roger
Poyntz, p. 86.
And then he brings the Civilians to our side, according to whom he confesses,
That In diverse Promises and Transactions, and in Leagues and Truces (yet, says
he, this of Truces is much Controverted) the Breach of one Party is holden to
be a Discharge of the other from the whole Obligation: Upon this Reason,

Quia singula capita conventionis insunt conventioni per modum mutuae
contemplationis, and correspective posita sunt, nec debet contractus claudicare
ex una part, ex uno latere, and fidem frangenti fidem non esse servandam: Vid.
the same in Pufend. sup. f. 87.
quod dictum referendum esse ad unam eandemque conventionem, and ad ea quae una
eademque sponsione comprehensa sunt, and in promissionibus quarum altera
alterius causa facta est, cum connexorum sit unum idemque judicium; 'sed secus
est in diversis and separatis.

Because all the Heads of the Agreement are included in it by way of mutual
consideration, and are placed with respect to each other. Nor ought a Contract
to be lame on one part, on one side. And that Faith is not to be kept with him
that breaks his Faith. But that this is to be referred to one and the same
Agreement, and to those things which are comprehended in one and the same
Sponsion, and in promises, one of which is the cause of the other; being of
things conjoined, there is one and the same Judgment: But it is otherwise in
things diverse and separated.

Upon the supposition that W. 1. made a real Conquest of the Nation; and that
if he gave Terms, 'twas not till after a Conquest, I must own that no help can
be had from these Rules: But if, on the other side, he was at first received
upon terms, and had no right to govern the Nation till those terms were settled,
then I think I need not so far question the Reader's Judgment, as to make
particular application of these Rules to our Case with the late King.

But notwithstanding the Discharge from Allegiance to J. 2. some will urge,
That it continues to the Person that stands next in Blood.

Against which, I doubt not but I shall offer full Evidence. For,

1. If, as I have shown, the Promise to the King himself be Conditional, and
his Interest determines by his Breach of the Condition; Vid. Brook tit.
Condition, n. 67.
be the Condition precedent, in which case no Interest is vested till
Performance: Or subsequent, in which, the Breach divests what before was
settled: What Interest can the Heir have in a Conditional Estate determined by
Breach of the Condition? And since it has been made appear, That the Heirs of a
King with us, take not as Purchasers by an Original Contract, (upon which there
might be some pretense of an Interest vested in them, independent on their
Father's Title); but they who can be said to have succeeded without an
immediate Choice, did it by virtue of subsequent Settlements, entirely
depending upon the Original Contract, continuing down to their immediate
Ancestors respectively; If that Contract be dissolved, what can support the
Settlement? Can the Agreement for the benefit of a King and his Posterity, be
supposed to be other, than that if he govern them as King, performing the
Essentials of the Contract on his part, he and his Descendants shall enjoy the
Crown? Can it be imagined that this was made for the separate benefit of the
Heir, Vid. Lit. c. 5. Estates sur Condition.
without regard to the Ancestor's Performance? Or is it to be supposed in the
nature of the thing, that the People would have made such a Contract, whereby,
after being justly discharged from their Allegiance to a King, V. L. Clarendon,
cited above in the Margin, his Survey of the Leviathan, p. 86. Grot. de Jure
belli and pacis l. 1. c. 3. p. 60.
and having acted pursuant thereto, they shall enable a Successor to revenge
his Ancestor's Quarrel? This were such a Contract as that which the Lord
Clarendon assures us, if never so real, can never be supposed to be with the
intention of the Contractor. And Grotius argues against a King's Power of
aliening his Kingdom, from hence, that this is not to be presumed to have been
the will of the People in conferring the Power. And in another place he says,
Right is to be measured according to the Will of him from whom the Right
arises. Grot. sup. p. 64.


2. The Power of the King, as Fortescue has it, and the Authorities above
plainly evince, is a Populo effluxa, 'derived from the People.

And the Interest of J. 2. being determined, he yet living, so that there can
be no Heir to him, Vid. 11 H 6. f. 12. b. Rolls Abr. tit Remainder f. 415.
or of his body; What hinders the operation of the known Rule in Law, That
where there is no Remainder to take effect at the determination of the
particular Estate, it shall revert to the Donor? Which in this Case is
manifestly the People.

If it be said, That this Rule shall not extend to the Descent of the Crown,
which differs from common Inheritances; I dare say, No man can show any
difference, but what is more strong for the Peoples Choice. For whereas common
Estates are for the benefit of them who have the present Interest, the Crown is
a Trust for the benefit of the People.

3. The ancient Statute abovementioned, of which the Lords and Commons mind R.
2. V. sup. Knighton f. 2683.
upon his Maladministration, says, That for the Causes there expressed, they
may with the common Assent and Consent of the Nation, set upon the Throne in
his stead, propinquiorem aliquem de stirpe Regia: Nota. Not Proximum.
'Some body of Kin to the King, of the Stock Royal. If they were tied to the
next, it certainly would have been proximum: Besides, the word aliquem shows a
Latitude. And according to this, upon R. the second's being Deposed, H. 4.
claimed the Crown, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. n. 54.
Als descendit be right Line of the Blood comeynge fro the good Lord Henry
Therde. But because this, without consideration of his Merits in rescuing them
from R. 2. entitled him to the Crown, no more than another of the Blood;
therefore the Lords and Commons drew up an Instrument purporting their
Election. Ib. n. 55.


4. But admit none of the foregoing Arguments were enough to show, That upon
James the second's Abdication, or at least losing his Interest in the
Government, the People of England were restored to that Liberty which they had
before the Settlement of the Crown, which was in force till the Original
Contract was broken by him; yet I conceive the particular Consideration of the
state of the Settlement, might afford sufficient Argument.

Brady's Hist. of the Succession. f. 25.
Henry the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth, if we believe Dr. Brady, held the Crown by
Usurpation: Yet the earliest Settlement of the Crown farther than the first Son
or Grandson, was in the time of H. 4. Nor, as I shall show, was the Crown
enjoyed by J. 2. under better Title than they had. H. 5. and 6. came in under
an Entail of the Crown; 7 H. 4. Vid. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 4. n. 60.
confirmed 8. The misgovernment of H. 6. having given occasion to Richard Duke
of York of the Blood Royal, and Elder-house, to assert the Peoples Rights, not
his own, Henry and the Duke, with the Consent of the Lords and Commons, come to
an agreement in Parliament, That Richard and his Heirs should enjoy the Crown
after the Death of Henry. Tho here the word Heirs is mentioned without
restraint, yet considering that it is the first time that ever the Crown was
settled so far, Gomezius de Qualitatibus Contractuum, f. 319. Hottomanni Com. de
Verbis Juris usus-fructus est jus alienis rebus utendi fruendi, salva
rerumsubstantia. Emphyteusis.
I know not whether it is not to be taken with Gomezius his Restriction, of an
Usufructuary or Emphyteutical Estate; of the last of which, much of the same
nature with the other, he says, If it did not use to be granted to more than
the first, second, or third Heirs, the mention of Heirs simply, ought to be
restrained to those only; because the Nature or Quality of the thing granted,
ought to be attended to.

After the Death of Richard Duke of York, his Son Edward the Fourth, as I
before observed, took the Government upon him, as forfeited by breach of the
Covenant estabish'd in Parliament. However, Vid. sup.
H. 6. being set up again ten Years after, gets that Settlement by which E. 4.
was to have benefit, to be revoked, and the Crown to be entailed on his Issue;
the Remainder to the Duke of Clarence, younger Son to the Duke of York.
Afterward E. 4. having success, 13 E. 4.
revives the Settlement 39 H. 6. Only that he attaints H. 6. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7.
n, 16. Vid. Append. H. 7. Son to Edmund Earl of Richmond, Brother by Mother's
Side to H. 6.
with others of his Party. Which Attainder was removed 1 H. 7. and declared
contrary to due Allegiance, and all due Order. And not only the Attainder, but
that Act of Parliament it self was revoked. So that hitherto there had been no
Title in the Heirs of Richard Duke of York, or of Edward the Fourth, but what
was derived under the Settlement of Henry 6. called an Usurper, and Edward the
Fourth's Treason deprived him of the Benefit even of that Settlement.

H. 7. Indeed married the eldest Daughter of E. 4. But before that Marriage,
having conquered Rich. 3. he claimed the Crown, as his Words in Parliament
were, Tam per justum titulum haereditantiae; Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. Vid. Append.
quam per verum Dei judicium, in tribuendo sibi Victoriam de inimico suo; "As
well by just Title of Inheritance, as by the true Judgment "of God, in giving
him the Victory over his Enemy.

If it be asked, how he could have a Right of Inheritance, when the Daughter of
E. 4. and his own Mother were alive; Vid. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 16. supra.
it seems in the Judgment of that Parliament, That E. 4. having acted contrary
to his Allegiance due to H. 6. he and his had lost the Benefit of the
Settlement revived by his successful Treason; and that this was lost, even
before the Revival was destroyed by Parliament. And then, though H. 7. could not
come in without an Election; yet he, as H. 4. before, might have a sort of
Inheritance; according to a very witty Author, Vindiciae contra Tyrannos, Ed.
Amstelodami, p. 110.
who speaking of the Kingdom of Israel, says, Concludere licet, regnum
Israelis, si stir pem spectas, haereditarium certe fuisse; at sane si personas,
omnino electivum; We may conclude, That the Kingdom of Israel, if you look at
the Stock, was certainly Hereditary; but if at the Persons, altogether Elective.

Be this as it will, the Lords and Commons so far regarded King Henry's Claim,
that they not only received him for King, but it was enacted by the Authority
of the then Parliament, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7.
That the Crowns of the Realms of England and France should rest in him and the
Heirs of his Body lawfully coming, perpetually; and in NONE OTHER.

When they had thus done, the Commons requested the King to Marry Elizabeth
Daughter to E. 4. that by God's Grace there might be Issue of the Stock of
their Kings. So that this was only to preserve the Royal Blood, not to give any
new Countenance or Confirmation to his Title.

H. 8. enjoyed the Crown, not as Heir to his Mother, but under the Settlement
upon H. 7. Nor can it be said, that he was in by Remitter, since that Act under
which his Mother should have derived, was Repealed: And had it stood in force,
yet it would not have made the Title more Sacred; unless it can be shown, that
the Mother had a Title prior to the Act of Settlement 39 H. 6. the contrary to
which appears by the former Account, from Law and History.

H. 8. procured several Settlements of the Crown, according as Love or
Jealousy prevailed in him. 25 H. 8. c. 22.
In the 25th of his Reign, 'twas settled upon Himself, and the Heirs Male of
his Body, lawfully begotten on Queen Anne, etc. declaring the Marriage with
Queen Katherine unlawful; Remainder to the Lady Elizabeth, Remainder to his own
Right Heirs. 26 H. 8. c. 2. 28 H. 8. c. 7.
26 H. 8. an Oath was enjoined for that purpose. 28 H. 8. the two former Acts
25 and 26 are Repealed, the Illegitimation of Mary Daughter to Queen Katherine
is confirmed; the like declared of Elizabeth Daughter to Queen Anne; and the
Crown entailed upon his Heirs Males by Queen Jane, or any other Wife; Remainder
to Heirs Females by that Queen, or any other lawful Wife; Remainder to such
Person or Persons, and according to such Estates as he should appoint by
Letters Patent, or by Will. 35. the Crown is settled subject to such Conditions
as the King should make, according to the Power there given; first, upon Prince
Edward, and the Heirs of his Body: the Remainder, in like manner, upon the
Ladies Mary and Elizabeth, and the Heirs of their Bodies successively, without
taking off their Illegitimations. And the same Power is given of disposing by
Letters Patent, Vid. 28 H. 8. sup. and 35 H. 8.
or by Will, as by the Statute 28. for which a memorable Reason is given in
both Acts; Lest if such Heirs should fail, and no Provision made in the King's
Life, who should Rule and Govern this Realm, for lack of such Heirs, as in
those Acts is mentioned, that then this Realm should be destitute of a Lawful
Governor. E. 6. succeeded according to both those Acts: After him, Queen Mary,
by the last; who, at her coming to the Crown, could not be looked on as of the
Right Line, because of the Acts which Illegitimated her; and besides, she was
but of the Half-blood to E. 6. to whom she succeeded. But in the first of her
Reign, the same Parliament takes off her Illegitimation, and repeals the Acts
25 and 28 H. 8. And in this the Parliament seems rather to provide for the
Honor of her Descent, Hist. of Succession, f. 34.
than (as Dr. Brady would have it) to declare the Succession to be in
Inheritance by Right of Blood. Whatever might be the secret Intention, 1 and 2
P. M. c. 9.
I am sure there is no such authoritative Declaration: And the Acts 28 and 35
H. 8. seem to say quite the contrary. 1 and 2 P. M. though there is no direct
Settlement, it is made Treason to compass the Deprivation or Destruction of K.
P. during the Queen's Life; 1 Eliz. c. 3.
or of the Queen, or of the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten. Queen
Elizabeth succeeded by virtue of the Limitation 35 H. 8. And though Bastardiz'd
by the Statutes 28 H. 8. and 1 M. and but of the Half-blood both to E. 6. and
Queen Mary, yet her first Parliament declares, That she is Rightly, Lineally,
and Lawfully descended and come of the Blood Royal of this Realm; to whom, and
the Heirs of her Body, the Royal Dignity, etc are and shall be united: And
Enacts, That the Statute 35 H. 8. shall be the Law of the Kingdom for ever. But
the Fee of the Crown not having been disposed of, according to the Power given
by the Statute 28, and repeated 35 H. 8. And the 25, whereby it was limited in
Remainder to the Heirs of Henry the 8th. being repealed; upon the Death of
Edward the 6th, and the Queens, Mary and Elizabeth without Issue, there
remaining no Heirs of the Body of H. 8; in the Judgment of two Parliaments, the
Realm was destitute of a Lawful Governor.

Indeed, according to the Act of Recognition, 1 J. 1. 1 Jac. 1. c. 1.
the Crown came to him, being lineally, rightfully, and lawfully descended of
the Body of the most Excellent Lady Margaret, the eldest Daughter of the most
Renowned King Henry the Seventh, and the High and Noble Princess, Queen
Elizabeth his Wife, eldest Daughter of King Edward the Fourth: The said Lady
Margaret being eldest Sister of King Henry the Eighth, Father of the High and
Mighty Princess of Famous Memory, Elizabeth late Queen of England.

Tho this pompous Pedigree, to avoid all Objections, goes as high as E. 4. the
Derivation of Title, as appears above, can be no higher than from the
Settlement 1 H. 7. Nor does this Act 1 J. make any additional Provision; but
indeed seems to flatter the King into a Belief, that there was no need of any;
telling him, That they made that Recognition as the First Fruits of their
Loyalty and Faith to him, and his Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever. But
neither then, or ever after, till that in this present Parliament, did the
People make any Settlement of the Crown, but it continued upon the same Foot as
it did 1 H. 7. when it was entirely an Act of the People, under no Obligation,
but from their own Wills. Sir Robert Filmer's Power of Kings, f. 1.
And if we should use Sir Robert Filmer's Authority, Impossible it is in Nature
for Men to give a Law unto themselves, no more than it is to command a Man's
self in a Matter depending of his own Will. There can be no Obligation which
takes State from the mere Will of him that promises the same.

Wherefore, to apply this Rule: Since the People that is now, Vid. Pufend. de
Interregn. sup. p. 288.289.
in common presumption is the same with that which first settled the
Succession, and so are bound only by an Act of their own Will; they have yet as
arbitrary a Power in this Matter, as Sir Robert and his Followers contend that
the Prince has, whatever Promises or Agreements he has entered into.

But not to lean upon such a broken Reed, nor yet to make those many Inferences
which this plain State of the Settlements of the Crown might afford; Three
things I shall observe:

1. If the Settlement made 1 H. 7. who was an Usurper, according to the Notion
of Dr. Brady, and his Set of Men, was of no force; then, there being no
Remainders, since limited by any act, but what are spent, and no descendants of
the whole Blood from Elizabeth, Daughter to E. 4. and Wife to H. 7. but by
Daughters, the eldest of which was Married into Scotland; If Acts of Settlement
could not alter the Right of Descent of the Crown, neither Queen Mary, nor
Queen Elizabeth had Right, but after the death of E. 6. it belonged to the
Scotch Family. And if Acts of Settlement could dispose of the Crown, and it
should appear that from the time that the limitation came to a Foreigner not
named in the Settlement, nor the immediate issue of a King or Queen of England,
it was spent in the eye of the Law; then of necessity the People must have had
Power of Choosing, or there could have been no lawful Government since Queen
Elizabeth's time, when the last Settlement was spent, except what is now made.

2. The Declarations of two Parliaments, 28 and 35 H. 8. fully balance the
Declaration 1 Jac. 1. if they do not turn the Scales; considering, that the
Judges in the later Times seem to have had less Law or Integrity than they had
in H. the Eighth's. I will not take upon me to determine which was the Point of
Two that they might go upon. 1. That a Government shall not pass by
Implication, or by reason of a dormant Remainder. But there having been so many
Alterations since the Settlement 1 H. 7. and the whole Fee once disposed of,
nor ever any express Restitution of the Settlement 1 H. 7. the People were not
to think themselves obliged to a Retrospect: It Is evident, at least, that they
did not. Or, 2. Perhaps they might question, whether they were obliged to
receive for Kings the Issue of Foreign Princes, That this was a Question in Q.
Elizabeth's time, appears by a Letter from Lethington, Secretary of Scotland to
Cecil, Secretary to Q. Eliz. Appendix to Vol. 2. of the Hist. of the Ref. f.
269. This appears farther from the Treatise at the end of the Appendix, which
seems to admit, That the Right to the Crown would have been in the issue of the
younger Daughter, being born in England, if the Birth had been without blemish.
since there was no means of being sufficiently informed of the Circumstances
of the Birth, neither the Common, or any Statute Law affording any Means of
proving it, as appears by the Statute 25 E. 3. which for the Children of
Subjects only, born out of the King's Allegiance, in Cases wherein the Bishop
has Conusance, allows of a Certificate from the Bishop of the Place where the
Land in question lies, if the Mother passed the Seas by the King's License. But
if our Kings or Queens should upon any occasion be in Foreign Parts, it is to be
presumed, that they would have with them a Retinue subject to our Laws, who
might attest the Birth of their Children, and be punished if they swear falsely.

Stat. 25. E. 3.
Wherefore, 25 E. 3. it is declared to be the Law of the Crown, That the Children
of the Kings of England, ENFANTZ DES ROYS, as the Record has it, in whatever
Parts they be born, be able, and ought to bear the Inheritance after the Death
of their Ancestors. Yet this is most likely to be meant of those private
Inheritances which any of the Kings had, being no part of the Demeasns of the
Crown; since the Inheritance of the Crown was not mentioned, nor, as has been
shown, was it such as the King's Children were absolutely entitled to in their
Order.

The most common acceptance of Children, is of a Man's immediate Issue: Vid.
1. Anderson, f. 60, and 61. A Devise to the Wife, after her Decease to the
Children: Vid. Wild 's C. 6. Rep. In Shelley 's C. 1. Rep. f. 103. A Gift to a
Man and semini suo, or prolibus suis, or liberis suis, or exitibus suis, or
pueris suis de corpore.
As where Land is given to a Man and his Children, Who can think any remote
Descendants entitled to it? Nor could it extend farther in the Settlement of a
Crown.

37 E. 3. c. 10. a Sumptuary Law was made, providing for the Habits of Men
according to their Ranks, and of their Wives, and Children, ENFANTZ, as in the
former Statute of the same Reign. Now although this should extend to Childrens
Children born in the same House, it could never take in the Children of
Daughters, Vid. Sir James Dalrimple's Institutions of the Laws of Scotland* f.
52.
forisfamiliated by Marriage; nay, nor to those of such Sons as were educated
in a distinct Calling from their Parents.

Farther, the very Statute of which the Question is, cuts off the Descendants
from Females out of the number of a King's Children, when among other Children
not of the Royal Family, it makes a particular Provision for Henry Son of John
Beaumond, Vid. Dugdale 's Bar. 2. Vol. Beaumont.
who had been born beyond Sea; and yet Henry was by the Mother's Side in the
Fourth Degree from H. 3. for she was Daughter to Henry Earl of Lancaster, Son
of Edmund, Son to H. 3. Had this Henry been counted among the Children of a
King, it is certain there had not been a special Clause for him, among other
Children of Subjects.

Nor does the Civil Law differ from ours in this Matter; for tho under the name
of Children, are comprehended not only those who are in our Power, but all who
are in their own, either of the Female Sex, or descending from Females; yet the
Daughters Children were always looked on as out of the Grandfather's Family,
Just. Inst. lib. 1. tit. 9. So Bracton, l. 1. c. 9. Greg. Tholos. Syntagma
juris universi, f. 206. Spiegelius, tit. Liberi. Non procedere in privilegiis
quae generaliter publicae utilitati derogant. Vid. Antonii Perezi Inst.
Imperiales, p. 21. Vid. Cujac. ad tit. de verborum significatione, p. 147, and
230.
according to the Rule in the Civil-Law, transcribed by our Bracton, They who
are born of your Daughter, are not in your power: And Privileges derogating
from Public Vtility, were never thought to reach them, as a Learned Civilian
has it: A Daughter is the end of the Family in which she was born; because the
name of her Father's Family is not propogated by her. And Cujacius makes this
difference between Liberi, and Liberi Sui; Sui, he says, is a Legal Name, the
other Natural: The former are only they who are in a Man's power, or of his
Family; and Liberi strictly taken, he will have to go no farther.

But in truth, Considering the purview of the Statute which we are here upon,
Children in it seems to be restrained to Sons and Daughters, without taking in
the Descendants from either; the occasion of the Law being the Births of
several ENFANTZ in Foreign Parts, which could be but Sons or Daughters to the
immediate Parents, whether Kings, or Private Persons.

3. But however, this may be enough for my purpose, That there is no color of
any Settlement in force, but that 1 H. 7. And admitting that to have continued
till J. 2. had broken the Original Contract; yet that being broken, the present
Assembly of Lords and Commons had full as much Authority to declare for King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY, as the Parliament 1 H. 7. had to Settle the Crown: For
H. 7. could give them no Power, but what he had received immediately from them.
Nor is it material to say, He was Crowned first; since, as I have shown, the
Crown Confers no Power distinct from what is derived either from an immediate,
or prior Choice.

But if there is reason, from what I have shown, to believe that even the
limitations in Henry VII th's. Settlement, were all long since spent; then at
least, it is not to be doubted but the interest of J. II. being determined, the
People of England might lawfully and rightfully declare for King William and
Queen Mary, as being the most deserving of the Blood Royal; which if they were
free to do, not to submit to be Gover'n'd by Their present Majesty's, would
have been the highest Ingratitude that could be.

CHAP. X. The Fifth Head of Positive Law.
The effect of the Dissolution of the Contract. The Use of the Triennial-Act 16
Car. 1. against the necessity of Common Form. The Form and proceedings of the
Convention assembled upon the death of H. 3. The Dilemma used by the
Formalists, Answered, with a Distinction. Pufendorf's Answer to Hobbs. Another
passage of his applied to a passage in a late excellent Treatise against Sir
Robert Filmer: And to a Letter upon this Juncture. Tho what Dr. Brady says
against the Rights of Lords and Commons, were true; yet it is shown that the
Acts of the late Assembly would be conclusive to the Nation. Neither Forty days
Summons, nor Writs, nor yet Summons to a Parliament, Essential. And this
confirmed, not only by the President 12 Car. 2. but by two Presidents of the
time of H. 1. The Subjects in the time of E. 1. said to have held a Parliament
by themselves, and of their own appointing. The Objection of want of Form,
Answered out of the Civil-Law; and its Reason applied to our Case. Objections
made by the Author of Elementa Politica considered. The Conclusion.

THE Power, having upon the Dissolution of the Contract between J. 2. and his
former Subjects, returned to the People of Legal Interests in the Government,
according to the Constitution; there can be no doubt with unbiassed Men, but
this takes in them only who have Right of being in Person, or by Representation
in those Assemblies where is the highest Exercise of the Supreme Power. But
there are two Extremes opposite to the late Election made by such an Assembly.
The First is of them who would have all things go on in the same Form as under
a Monarch, which was impossible; and therefore the Supream-Law, the
Publick-Safety, must needs supply the want of Form. Nor can be justly
controverted, till the Lawfulness of the end is disproved. For all Means
necessary to such an End, are allowable in Nature, and by all Laws. But if this
should still be disputed, all their Darling-Laws made by the Long-Parliament,
which met after that Convention, Anno 1660. will fall to the ground, according
to the former application of the Statute abovementioned, 16 Car. 1. Vid. Sup.
Nay, the attempt of Repealing that Statute, being in a Parliament which had
been actually Dissolved before, by that very Law which it went about to Repeal,
that Form which was usual before, is, in default of King and Officers, supplied
by another Provision for the Regular Meeting of Lords and Commons. And what
hinders but the people had as much Power to vary from the Common Form, when
there was no King, and that Form could not be observed, as when there was a
King, and a possibility of having that Form?

Here I may observe these two things:

1. If, as I have shown at large, the Right of Succession to the Crown, was not
fixed to the next in Blood, neither before the reputed Conquest, nor since; if
there have been several vacancies of the Throne, and the People had right to
choose upon every such Vacancy, then whatever they did in order to the choice,
must necessarily have been freed from the Forms which were required under a
King.

2. Even where the Kingdom has gone by descent, there may have been a necessity
for the people to take the Government upon them, as if the present Possessor
has turned Madman, or he who stood next in the Succession, were under age,
without any Guardian appointed in the Lifetime of his Father, or out of the
land when his Father died, which were the cases of R. 1. and of E. 1. the
account of the last of which deserves particular notice. The Annals of Waverly
having mentioned the Death of H. 3. add,

Hoc anno, scilicet post Festum S. Hillarii, Annals Waverleiensis, f. 227.
facta convocatione omnium Prel. and aliorum Magnatum Regni apud Westminster.
postmortem illustris Regis H. convenerunt Arch. Ep. Com. and Bar. Abbates and
Priores, and de quolibet Comitatu quatuor Milites and de qualibet civitate
quatuor, qui omnes in presentia Dom. Will. scil. Arch. Ebor. Rob. de mortuo
Mari and R. Burnet Cler. qui in loco Domini Regis Anglorum Edwardi praefuerunt,
Sacramentum eidem Domino Ed. tanquam terrae Principi susceperunt, ubi Dominus
W. de Mertone Cancellarius constitutus est, and ut moram trahat apud Westminster.
tanquam in loco publico usque ad adventum Principis. Et ibi provisum est, quod
nulli sint Justiciarii itinerantes usque ad adventum Principis sed in Banco.

Dominica prima Quadragesimae 4 Id. Martii consecratus fuit frater R. de
Kilderlii in Arch. Cant. Item concessa est decima Ecclesiarum and Religiosorum
Domuum Domino Ed. and ejus Germano ad supplicationem Domini Papae ut sit pro
duobus Annis. F. 228.


In this year, to wit, after the Feast of St. Hillary, all the Prelates and
other great Men of the Kingdom being called together at Westminster, after the
Death of the Illustrious King Henry, there met the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
and Barons, Abbots and Priors, and Four Knights from every County, and Four
from every City, which all in the presence of William Archbishop of York,
Robert Mortimer, and R. Burnet Clerk, who presided in the stead of Edward their
Lord, and King of England, took an Oath to the said Lord Edward, as Governor of
the Realm. Where the Lord William of Merton is constituted Chancellor, and that
he should abide at Westminster as in a public place, till the Prince's coming.
And there it was provided that there should be no Justices itinerant before the
Prince his coming, but only in the Bench. The first week of the Quadragesima,
to wit, on the Fourth of the Ides of March, Father R. of Kilderly is
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.

Matthew Westminster of the same time says, Mat. West.
Rege igitur Supulto sicut mos est regibus sepeliri, Gilbertus and Johannes
Comites Gloverniae and Warenniae, nec non Clerus and Populus, ad magnum Altar
Ecclesiae Westm' celeriter properarunt Ed. primogenito Regis fidelitatem
jurantes, qui si viveret penitus ignorarunt; Agebat enim in partibus
transmarinis contra Christi adversarios bellaturus. Postmodum ad novum Templum
Londini Nobiliores Regni pariter convenerunt. Et facto sigillo novo
constituerunt fideles ministros and Custodes qui Thesaurum Regis and Pacem
Regni fideliter custodirent.

The King therefore being buried in that state in which Kings used to be
buried, Gilbert and John, Earls of Gloucester and Waren, as also the Clergy and
People, as soon as might be, hastened to the great Altar of Westminster-Church,
swearing Fealty to Edward the King's eldest Son, tho they were wholly ignorant
whether he were alive or no; for he was in Foreign Parts, fighting against the
Enemies of Christ. After this the Nobility of the Kingdom likewise met; and a
new Seal being made, they constituted faithful Ministers and Keepers, who might
faithfully keep the King's Treasure, and the Peace of the Kingdom.

The Annals and Matthew Westminster differ in circumstances, tho they agree in
substance; but it would seem as if the same Convention had been adjourned from
Westminster to the Temple, and therefore its Acts might have been said to have
been at either of the places.

It at least appears from Matthew Westminster, that prior to that Solemn
Convention which the Annals mention, there had been a great confluence of
people headed by the Earls of Gloucester and Waren; at that meeting it is
probable that the three persons named in the Annals were chosen to hold the
Convention as Vicegerents to the King. This when it met, provided not only for
swearing Allegiance to the King, but for the administration of Justice, chose
the great Officers of the Kingdom, made a new Great Seal, and if occasion had
been, might have raised a Tax over the whole Kingdom, as well as they did of
the Clergy, or permitted their Representatives to raise of the rest.

This Convention was not so full and solemn a Representative of the People as
ours was, and yet it being a Representation which the People consented to at
that time, was then looked on as sufficient to conclude the whole, and is a
President in Point, showing that there was no necessity, in such circumstances,
to use the same form of Proceedings as when they had a King before whom they
were summoned. But as the men of Form are too strict, others are too loose in
their notions, and suppose the Consequence of a Dissolution of this Contract to
be a mere Commonwealth, or absolute Anarchy, wherein every body has an equal
share in the Government, not only Landed-men, and others with whom the Balance
of the Power has rested by the Constitution, but Copyholders, Servants, and
the very Faeces Romuli, which would not only make a quiet Election
impracticable, but bring in a deplorable Confusion. But this Dilemma they think
not to be answered:

Lords and Commons was irregular: If it does not, all the People are restored
to their Original Rights; and all the Laws which fettered them, are gone.

Form; for if it be taken of the Form of Proceedings or Administration, it is no
consequence that the Form of Government or Constitution should fail, because we
admit that the other does.

Mr. Hobbs indeed holds, That when a Monarch for himself and his Children has
left a Kingdom, or renounces it, the Subjects return to their absolute and
natural Liberty.

Pufendorf de interregnis p. 282:
Whom the Learned Pufendorf thus answers.

They who have once come together into a Civil Society, and subjected
themselves to a King, since they have made that the Seat of their Fortunes,
cannot be presumed to have been so slothful as to be willing to have their new
Civil Society extinct upon the Death of a King, and to return to their Natural
State and Anarchy, to the hazarding the Safety now settled. Wherefore when the
Power has not been conferred on a King by Right of Inheritance, or that he may
dispose of the Succession at his pleasure, it is to be understood to be, at
least tacitly, agreed amongst them, That presently upon the Death of a King,
they shall meet together, and that in the place where the King fixed his
Dwelling. Nor can there well be wanting among any people, some Persons of
Eminence, who for a while may keep the others in order, and cause them as soon
as may be, to consult the Public Good.

The Author of the best Treatises of Civil Polity which I have met with in the
English Tongue, Two Treatises of Government: In the former, the false
Principles and Foundation of Sir Robert Filmer and his Followers are detected
and overthrown. The latter is an Essay concerning the true Original, Extent,
and End, of Civil Government, Ed. Anno 1690.
who after the Confutation of Sir Robert Filmer's absurd Notions of Government,
establishes it upon the only true Foundation, the Choice of the People, that
Original and Supreme Act of the Society, antecedent to all Positive Laws in it;
seems not to have attended to the duplicity, P. 379.
or other particular nature of the Contract, in relation to the English
Government.

When, says he, treating of the Dissolution of Government, Vid. Ca. 19. of the
Dissolution of Government.
he who has the Supreme executive Power, neglects and abandons that charge, so
that the Laws already made, can no longer be put in execution: This is
demonstratively to reduce all to Anarchy, and so effectually to dissolve the
Government; for Laws not being made for themselves, but to be by their
execution the bonds of the Society, to keep every part of the Body-Politick in
its due place and function, when that totally ceases, the Government visibly
ceases, and the people become a confused multitude, without Order or Connection:
Where there is no longer the Administration of Justice for the securing of men's
Rights, nor any remaining Power within the Community to direct the form, or
provide for the necessities of the Public, there certainly is no Government
left.

But in whatever Community there is a Power remaining to provide for the
necessities of the Public, upon the determination of the Interest of any
single Person, who had the Supreme Executive Power, without recourse to the
confused Multitude; there it is evident the Government may still continue: and
by consequence, such a Government is more perfect, being less subject to
dissolution, than that which upon the loss of its Supreme Governor has all its
Bonds and Ligaments dissolved.

However, this his Scheme of Government is not erected as the most perfect, but
seems designedly adapted to what he takes our Government to be, tho not
expressly named; in which he supposes a single hereditary Person, having the
constant Supreme Executive Power, P. 435.371.
from whom all Inferior Magistrates derive all their several subordinate
Powers, or at least the greatest part of them.

Whereby it is plain, that all Monarchies in any measure Elective, and not only
Coordinate Powers, but all Officers who derive their Powers from the immediate
Choice of the People, or the Constitution, are besides his state of the
Question.

Vid. Cap. 3. of the state of war
And whereas he argues, That the people are by the Monarch's Violations of the
Constitution, restored to the state of nature, there being no common Judge in
that state of War to which his injuries force them; no man who observes how
clearly and consistently he always reasons, can believe that he would apply
this to such a state of the Question, as I have shown that our Constitution
warrants; which depends not upon a single Contract between the People, and a
Prince and his Heirs, whom they had set over them, whose Authority ceasing,
they were to new mold the Government, or set up the like, as they thought fit.

But there plainly was a farther Contract among themselves, to prevent Anarchy
and Confusion, at any time when the Throne might be vacant; and by virtue of
this Contract they have regularly made those Elections, which are frequent in
our Histories, and are authentic Presidents for our late Proceedings.

Yet, since this Judicious Author's bringing the Government back to its first
Principles sooner than our Constitution allows, does not proceed from want of
reasoning rightly, in which I cannot say that he ever fails; I hope it will not
be thought that I in the least derogate from the Honor due to him, when I
observe matter of fact not falling within his notice.

The Author of a late Paper in relation to these Times, has this passage, not
to be neglected:

A Letter to a Friend, advising in this extraordinary Juncture
All Power is originally or fundamentally in the People, formally in the
Parliament, which is one Corporation made up of three Constituent essentiating
Parts, King, Lords, and Commons; so it was with us in England. When this
Corporation is broken, when any one essentiating Part is lost or gone, there is
a Dissolution of the Corporation, the formal Seat of Power; and that Power
devolves on the People. When it is impossible to have a Parliament, the Power
returns to them with whom it was originally. Is it possible to have a
Parliament? It is not possible; the Government therefore is Dissolved.

Hence he would argue a necessity of having a larger Representative of the
People, Vid. Pufend. de Interregnis p. 267. sup. in Marg.
that the Convention may be truly National. But had this Ingenious Person
observed Pufendorf's two distinct Contracts, by the first of which a Provision
was made for a Monarchy, before any particular Person was settled in the Throne;
he would have found no such necessity. But if immemorially the People of
England have been Represented as they were for this Assembly, and no needful
form or circumstance has been wanting to make the Representation complete; all
men who impartially weigh the former Proofs of Elections, not without a
Rightful Power, must needs think the last duly made.

Dr. Brady indeed, with some few that led him the Dance, and others that
follow, will have the present Representation of the Commons of England to have
been occasioned by Rebellion, 49 H. 3. But I must do him the honor to own him
to be the first, who would make the Barons to have no Personal Right, but what
depends upon a King in being; for he allows none to have Right of coming to
Parliament, Brady's first Ed. p. 227. See this proved upon him in the Pref. to
Jus Anglorum ab antiquo.
but such only to whom the King has thought fit to direct Writs of Summons:
Yet, I dare say, no man of sense, who has read that Controversy, believes him.
But were his Assertions true, it might be granted, that the Barons would have
no more personal Right, to be of any Convention upon the total Absence or
Abdication of a King, than they would have of coming to Parliament without His
Writ. Yet since the Right of the People in person or Representation, is
indubitable in such a Case, what hinders the validity of the late Choice,
considering how many Elections of Kings we have had, and that never by the
people diffusively, since the first Institution of the Government? And the
Representations agreed on, (tho I take them to be earlier settled for Cities and
Buroughs, than for the Freeholders in the Counties) have ever since their
respective settlements, been in the same manner as now: at least, none have
since the first Institution ever come in their own persons, or been Electors,
but what are now present personally or representatively; and their own Consent
takes away all pretense of Error.

If it be said, That they ought to have been Summoned Forty days before the
Assembly held: That is only a Privilege from the King, which they may wave; and
have more than once consented to be Represented upon less than Forty days
Summons. Prynne 's Animadversions on 4 Inst. f. 10.
Mr. Prynne gives several Instances, as 49 H. 3. 4 E. 3. 1 H. 4. 28 Eliz. and,
says, he omits other Precedents of Parliaments Summoned within Forty days
after the Writs of Summons bear date, upon extraordinary Occasions of public
safety and concernment, which could not conveniently admit so long delay. And
Sir Robert Cotton, being a strict Adherer to Form, Vid. Rushw. 1 Vol. f. 470. 3
Car. 1.
upon an Emergency advised, That the Writs should be Antedated: which Trick
could make no real difference. To say, however, there ought to have been a
Summons from, or in the name of a King in being, is absurd; it being for the
exercise of a lawful power, which, unless my Authorities fail, the people had
without a King, or even against the consent of one in being.

Besides, it appears, That such Summons have not been essential to the Great
Councils of the Nation. Tacitus shows, That the Germans, Tacit. de Moribus
German. Coeunt, nisi quid fortuitum and subitum, certis diebus, etc. V. Leges
S. Ed. tit. Greve. In Capite Kal. Maij. Jus. Angl. c. 7. Vid. Append.
from whom we descend, had theirs at certain days, unless when some
extraordinary matter happened.

And by the Confessor's Laws, received by W. 1. and continued downwards by the
Coronaton Oaths required to this very day, the General Folcmot ought to be held
annually, without any formal Summons, upon May Day.

By the time of E. 1. this custom to hold a Parliament upon May Day received a
little alteration; for the Pope having at the beginning of that King's Reign,
demanded eight years Arrears of an Annual payment, which he claimed for the
Kingdom of England; the King had put him off till the next Parliament, which,
he said, had used to be held in England about the Octaves of our Savior's
Resurrection. This Parliament was held at the Octaves accordingly, as the King
acknowleges, upon the Pope's second demand; but pleads that it had been taken
up with the great Affairs of the Nation, till his want of Health occasioned a
Dissolution, before they could consider o^ tt Matter, which he promised should
be brought before them at the next Parliament, which he purposed to hold at
Michaelmas then following.

The Statute 16 Car. 1. which our rigid Formalists must own to be in Force, has
wholly taken away the necessity of Writs of Summons from a King.

Stat. 12. Car. 2. c. 1.
The Assembly of the Lords and Commons held Anno 1660. was summoned by the
Keepers of the Liberties of England, not by the Kings Writs; yet when they came
to Act in conjunction with the King, they declare, enact, and adjudge (where
the Statute is manifestly declaratory of what was Law before) That the Lords
and Commons then sitting, are, and shall be the Two Houses of Parliament,
notwithstanding any want of the King's Writ or Writs of Summons, or any defect
or alteration of, or in any Writ of Summons, etc.

Though this seems parallel to the present Case, yet in truth ours is the
strongest: For the King then had been only King de jure, no Authority could be
received from Him, nor could any Act of His be regarded in Law, through defect
either of Jurisdiction, or Proof, if not both: Accordingly, as not only the
Reason of the thing, but the Lord Coke shows, 3 Inst. f. 7. Sup. in Marg.
a Pardon from one barely King de jure, is of no force. Besides, the Keepers
were an upstart Power, imposing themselves upon the People, without any formal
consent; at least not so fully received to the public Administration, as our
present King was, who, at the request of a very large Representative of the
People, pursued the late Method of Calling a more solemn Assembly. If that Anno
1660. had Power, acting with the King, to declare it self a Parliament; Why had
not this, in defect of a King, to declare or choose one?

Sure I am, prudent Antiquity regarded not so much the Person calling, or the
End for which a General Council was called, as who were present; That Notice
which they complied with, being always sufficiently formal.

Anno 1127. Vid. Spelm. Con. 2 Vol. f. 1. De modo habendi Synodos in Anglia
primaevis temporibus. Vid. Jan. Ang. fac. nov. and Jus. Ang. Flor. Wigorn. f.
663. Confluxerant quoque illuc magnae multitudines Clericorum, Laicorum, tam
divitum quam mediocrium, and factus est Conventus grandis and inestimabilis.
Quaedam determinata, quaedam dilata, quaedam propter nimium aestuantis turbae
tumultum ab audientia judicantium profligata, etc. Rex igitur cum inter haec
Londoniae moraretur, auditis Concilii gestis consensum praebuit, and
confirmavit Statuta Concilii a Willielmo Cant. etc. celebrati.
Wherefore a General Ecclesiastical Council being Summoned in the Reign of H. 1.
by William Archbishop of Canterbury, thither, according to the known Laws of
those times, the Laity came: I cannot say they sat there; for the Numbers were
so great, as they commonly were at such Assemblies, before the Freeholders
agreed to Representations, That happy was the Man, whatever his Quality, that
could have a convenient standing.

After the Ecclesiastical Matters were over in the Council I now speak of, they
fell upon Secular: Some they determined, some they adjourned; some, the Judges
of the Pole or Voices could make nothing of, by reason of the great Crowd and
Din: And when the King heard their Determinations, and confirmed them, they had
full Legal Force.

The consideration of the time and circumstances of the Coronation of H. 1. and
the Force which the things then agreed on were reputed to have at that time,
and some of them ever since, till altered by subsequent Laws, may abundantly
prove, that there is no need of strict form, for the doing what is agreeable to
the sense of a Nation, tho not formally expressed at the time.

H. 1. did not stand next in the Line, his eldest Brother Robert, who was set
aside for W. 2., was then alive. Nor was it possible for all people of legal
interests to have been convened at that time, Collectively, or by a regular
Representation; it being within four days after the Death of his Brother W; yet
hear what Malmsbury says upon that occasion:

Occiso Rege Willielmo in Regem electus est. Itaque edicto statim per Angliam
misso injustitias a fratre Ranulpho institutas prohibuit, pensionum, Malms. f.
88. de H. 1.
and vinculorum gratiam fecit, effeminatas Curia propellens lucernarum usum
noctibus in Curia restituit, qui fuerat tempore fratris intermissus. Aliquarum
moderationem Legum revocavit in solitum, Sacramento suo and omnium procerum ne
luderentur corroborans. Laetus ergo dies visus est revirescere populis, cum
post tot anxietatum nubila Serenarum promissionum infulgebant lumina: Et nequid
profecto gaudio accumulato abesset, Ranulpho nequitiarum faece tenebris
ergastularibus incluso, Anselmum pernicibus nunciis directum. Quapropter
certatim plausu Plebeio concrepante in Regem Coronatus Londoniae, nonis Augusti
quarto post obitum fratris die. Haec eo studiosius celebrebantur, ne mentes
procerum electionis quassarentur poenitudine, quod ferebatur rumor Robertum
Comitem ex Apulia adventantem jamjamque affore.

King William being slain, He was chosen King; whereupon, by Proclamation
presently sent throughout England, He forbad the Injustices set up by Father
Ranulph, he remitted Debts and Imprisonments, driving effeminate persons from
the Court; He restored the use of Candles by Night in the Court, which had been
intermitted in the time of his Brother; He moderated some Laws according to
former usage, corroborating them by His own Oath, and the Oaths of all His
Peers, that they might not be eluded upon any account. A joyful day to the
people seemed again to flourish, since the Lights of Serene Promises shone upon
them after so many Anxieties. And that, in truth, nothing might be wanting to
their accumulated Joy, Ranulph, the Dregs of Villainies, being sent to Prison,
Messengers were immediately sent for Anselm: Wherefore He was Crowned King at
London on the Nones of August, the fourth day after His Brother's Death, with
the eager acclamations of throngs of the Common people. These things were
celebrated with the greater earnestness, least the minds of the Great Men
should be shaken with repenting of their choice; because there was a Rumor
that Earl Robert was coming out of Normandy, and that he would be here
immediately.

Hereby it appears, that the Honest Mob urged on and secured this Election,
which otherwise some of the formal Nobility would have disputed at the
beginning, or soon have repented of, upon expectation of making some particular
terms for themselves, not regarding the Public Good, for which H. 1. had so
largely provided.

To set the proceedings of that time in a true light, it may be requisite to
transcribe part of what Matthew Paris took from the Historians of the time, and
particularly from Sigebert:

Defuncto itaque Rege Willielmo, Mat. Par. 81. Sigisbertus Gemblacensis
Monachus huc usque cronica sua satis eleganter digessit. Mat. Par. f. 74.
cum Magnates Angliae ignorarent quid actum esset de Roberto Duce Normanorum,
Regis defuncti fratre primogenito, qui jam per quinquenneum in expeditione
Hierosolymitana moram pertraxerat, timuerunt diu sine regimine vacillare. Quod
fratrum ultimus and juvenis sapientissimus, cum callide cognovisset, congregato
Londoniis Clero Angliae and populo universo, promisit, emendationem legum
quibus oppressa fuerat Anglia tempore patris sui, and fratris nuper defuncti,
ut animos omnium in sui promotionem accenderet and amorem, and ut illum in
Regem susciperent and patronum. Ad haec Clero respondente, and Magnatibus
cunctis; quod si animo volente ipsis vellet concedere, and charta sua communire
illas libertates and consuetudines antiquas, quae floruerunt in regno tempore
SANCTI REGIS EDWARDI, in ipsum consentirent and in Regem unanimiter
consecrarent. Henrico autem hoc libenter annuente, and se id facturum cum
juramento affirmante, consecratus est in Regem apud Westmonasterium, favente
Clero and populo, cui continuo a Mauritio Londinensi Episcopo and a Thoma
Eboracensi Archiepiscopo Corona capiti imponitur. Cum fuerat diademate
insignitus has libertates subscriptas in Regno, ad exaltationem Sanctae
Ecclesiae, and pacem populi tenendam concessit, etc.

King William being dead, the Great Men of England, not knowing what was become
of Robert Duke of Normandy, So R. 1. was called but Duke of Normandy, till he
was chosen King of England.
the deceased King's Elder Brother, who had been five years at the Holy-war,
were fearful of wavering long without a Government. Which when Henry the
youngest Brother, a very wise young Man, cunningly observed, the Clergy of
England, and all the people being assembled, He promised an amendment of those
Laws with which England had been oppressed in the time of his Father, and his
Brother newly deceased; that he might stir up the minds of all to his promotion
and Love, and that they might receive him for King and Patron.

To these things the Clergy answering, and then the Great Men, That if with a
willing mind he would Grant, and Confirm with His Charter those Liberties and
ancient Customs, which flourished in the Kingdom in the time of Holy King
Edward, they would consent to have him, and would unanimously consecrate him
King; And Henry freely consenting to this, and affirming with an Oath that he
would perform, He was Consecrated King on our Lady day, by the Consent of
Clergy and People, upon whose Head the Crown was immediately set by Maurice
Bishop of London, and Thomas Archbishop of York. As soon as he was Crowned He
granted the underwritten liberties, for the exaltation of Holy-Church, and
preserving the Peace of the Kingdom.

Then follows his Charter, containing some Alterations of the Law, which had
before obtained, not only in relation to the Rights of the Crown, but of the
Subjects, particularly whereas the Relief had been, Cart. H: 1. Siquis Baronum
meorum Comitum vel aliorum qui de me tenent, mortuus fuerit.
as Fines now in most Copyhold Manors, at the Will of the Lords, they were
reduced to what was just and lawful, according to St. Edward's Laws; for which,
as should seem by the Charters of King John, and H. 3. declaratory of the
Common Law, there were known Rates, and H. 1. restored all the Common Law, with
the Statutes made for the amendment of it, in the time of W. 1.

He seemed in two particulars wisely to have ingratiated himself with the
people; the first was in gaining to his side the Directers of their
Consciences, by a concession to the benefit of Churchmen, which was wholly
new; and that was, That an Archbishop or Bishop, or Abbat being dead, Vid.
Cart. H. 1.
he would take nothing of the demean of the Church, nor of its tenants, until
the Successor was inducted; which was a departure from that Prerogative which
belonged to the Crown upon the Vacancies, as appears by the affirmation of H.
2. Vid. Anti. Brit. inf. f. 135. Carta Johannis. Haec omnia observentur de
custodiis Arch. Episcopatuum. Abbat. Prior, Eccles., and Dignitat. vacantium,
quae ad nos pertinent, etc. Prerog. Regis, 17 E. 2. c. 14.
the Charter of King John, and the Statute of the King's Prerogative, 17 E. 2.

This Indulgence to the Church, without special Provision for keeping it up,
was withdrawn by the next general Confirmation of the Confessor's Laws, and
therefore it is no wonder that it is left out of subsequent Charters.

If he was not popular in this, at least he was in another Action, which was
his imprisoning Ranulph, who had been the great Instrument of oppression in the
former Reign, Mat. Par. f. 76.
and that it was with intention of punishing him severely, appears by Ranulph's
making his escape out of Prison, by means of those great Treasures which he had
heaped up from the Spoils of the People.

Ranulph no doubt, could at a much cheaper rate, have applied himself to such a
Lawyer, as the Author of the Magistracy vindicated, if such an one could have
been found in that Age of less corruption, Vid. the last part of the Magistracy
and Government vindicated, p. 8. I Will not mention the Argument from the
Vacancy, that the Government was dissolved, every thing reduced into its
Primitive State of nature, all Power devolved into Individuals, and the
particulars only to provide for themselves by a new Contract; for if so,
there is no new consent for punishment of Acts done before the dissolution, and
consequently revenge for that, is at an end. Vid. ib. p. 2.
who might have advised him to rest satisfied, that it would not be consistent
with the Wisdom and Justice of a Prince, who came in upon a Vacancy of the
Throne (as H. 1. did, not standing next in the Line) to punish any Criminals of
the foregoing Reign; but Ranulph was wiser in running away, and perhaps more
modest, than to think that for his useful parts employed in the pillaging and
destroying innocent men, he might pretend to merit under the Successor. H. 1.
having truly shown a Fatherly care of the people, no man then raised any
foolish scruple upon the manner of the Proceedings, where the Substance was
pleasing to all.

But that which has been done by them who could get together upon the intervals
of Government, has been held valid, that the Vacancies might be as short as
possible, unless the general sense of the people has immediately appeared
against it; and thus Harold having been Crowned by surprise, when the Friends
of W. 1. were at the Confessors Buryal; some Authors upon that very Account,
Vid. 2. part.
will have it that Harold was an Usurper.

But that it may be seen how little apt people are to dispute Forms, when a
King acts agreeably to the sense of a Nation, I shall show that H. 1. acted as
King, even before he was Crowned, immediately upon his Election, for which
Huntindon is my Author, who having mentioned the death of W. 2. says,

Henricus frater ejus junior ibidem in Regem electus, Hen. Huntin. f. 216. b.
de H. 1.
dedit episcopatum Wincestriae W. Giffard, pergensque Londoniam, sacratus est
ibi a Mauritio Londonensi Episcopo.

His younger Brother Henry being there chosen King, gave the Bishopric of
Winchester to W. Giffard, and going on to London, was consecrated there by
Maurice Bishop of London.

And I am much mistaken, if what he did in relation to another Bishop, Anselm,
who had been Archbishop of Canterbury in the time of W. 2. is not an additional
evidence to what I have already produced, that the Convention in which he was
Crowned, was turned into a Parliament, or acted as one.

Ordericus Vitalis, says Anselmus, enim Dorebornensis Archiep. exulabat.
Eadmerus f. 38, 39, 40. shows this was at a Council at Winchester, ubi, says
he, ex condicto venimus. Mat. Far. f. 25. Trajacere quidem liberum esse sed
inconsulte id facturum siquidem nullam revertendi spem in posterum ei futuram.
Eadmerus.
Anselm, as appears by the circumstances of the story, had been condemned to
perpetual Banishment by Parliament, in the time of W. 2. for he resolving to go
take the Pall at Rome, 'twas declared to him in Parliament, that if he went, it
should be without any hopes of returning again.

Upon this the Sea of Canterbury became vacant, agreeably to what afterward
happened in the case of Becket; tho he was not banished, but fled away
voluntarily, yet the French King having pressed H. 2. to let Becket have the
Profits of the Archbishopric, the King told him,

Antiquitates Britan. f. 135.
Restituere se nihil ei posse, qui sponte Ecclesiam deseruerit, itaque cum e
Regni consuetudine Regisque dignitate, Cantuariensis Ecclesiae quam Thomas fuga
voluntaria pro derelicta fecit, fructus vacantes certis jam personis
contulisset, nolle se dixit, ea quae prout jure Regni potuit contulisset, in
irritum, dubiumve revocari.

That he cannot restore any thing to him, who left his Church of his own
accord; since therefore, according to the custom of the Kingdom, and the Royal
Dignity, he had conferred upon certain persons the vacant Fruits, of the Church
of Canterbury, which Thomas by his voluntary Flight had made derelict, he said
he would not make void, or call in doubt those things which he had granted,
according to the Law of the Kingdom.

If there might be any doubt of a Vacancy of the Sea in Becket's case, at least
there was none in Anselm's, who had in the time of W. 2. been banished by
Parliament, never to return; and yet the Convention 1 H. 1. being become a
Parliament, not only recalled him from banishment, in which they set aside an
Act of a former Parliament, but they called him to fill the Sea of Canterbury,
after it had been vacant; which was equally a Parliamentary Act in those days;
as appears by the choice of Lanfranc in the time of W. 1.; of this very Anselm
in W. the 2 d's; and of Becket in the Reign of H. 2.

Concerning the Election of Lanfranc, Arcbishop Parker tells us,

Ibid. f. 110.
Celeberrima est autem hujus prae caeteris electio, and consecratio. Electus
enim est a majoribus Cantuariensis ecclesiae, tum accessit Procerum, atque
Praesulum, totiusque populi quasi Populi, consensus, in Aula Regis, quod sane
est, ad instar Senatus seu Parliamenti Anglicani.

But this Election and Consecration was with more Solemnity than any other. For
he was chosen by the Chief of the Church of Canterbury. To which was added, the
consent of the Peers and Prelates, and as it were, of the whole People in the
King's Court, which in truth is of the nature of an English Senate or
Parliament.

Tho he will have this Election to have been more solemn than any other; and
that it was not in a real Parliament, but in an Assembly of the same nature;
yet what himself says of the Elections of Anselm and Becket, explained by more
Ancient Authors, shows that the Elections of other Archbishops used to be as
solemn; and that both that of Lanfranc, and of the others, were in a full
Parliament; or Great Council of the Nation.

Himself says, That both Peers and People were so much for Anselm's being made
Archbishop, that W. 2. would not openly contradict. Antiq. Brit: f. 116. W. 2.
Proffered Anselm the Archbishopric, but underhand dissuaded him from it, Sed
cum neque hac suasione quicquam profecisset, proque certo comperisset Proceres,
Populumque Angliae adversos, aut minus fidos sibi, Anselmo favere, eumque ad
Archiep. munus jam oblatum flagitare, aperte contradicere noluit.
Eadmerus, who was always by Anselm's side, shows, that W. 2. being taken ill,
in the seventh year of His Reign, Omnes totius Regni Principes coeunt,
Episcopi, Abbates, and quique Nobiles. There gathered together all the Princes
of the Kingdom, the Bishops, Abbots, and all the Nobles. This, as appears, was,
upon notice given among themselves, to provide for their Common safety. To that
Assembly the King makes solemn promises of Governing better than he had done:
And Anselm being there named for Archbishop, Concordi voce sequitur acclamatio
omnium, 'The acclamation of all followed, as with 'one voice. And Eadmerus
says, that he was made Archbishop, Secundum totius Regni Electionem, 'according
to the Election of the whole 'Kingdom.

And another Monk of the time says, Gondulfus Roff. Ep. Monac. Bec. inter
Anselmi Epist. lib. 3.
the King made him Archbishop:

Consilio and Rogatu Principum, Cleri quoque and populi petitione and
electione.

By the Counsel and Advice of the Peers, and the Petition and Election of the
Clergy and People.

Archbishop Parker, speaking of the Consecration of Becket, An. Dom. 1162. 7 H.
2.
in the 7th of H. 2. says,

Consecrationi huic tam illustri interfuit, H. Rs filius, Antiq. Brit. f. 130.
cum plerisque Regni Proceribus, and quatuordecim Cantuariensis Provinciae
Episcopis, innumeraque Plebis multitudine, atque copia.

There were present at this Consecration Henry the King's Son, with most of the
Nobility of the Kingdom, and Fourteen Bishops of the Province of Canterbury,
and an innumerable multitude and throng of the common people.

The former Presidents show, that they were consenting as well as present; nor
could the absence of the Bishops of the other Diocesses make their Meeting the
less a Parliament.

Sir Henry Spelman cites an Authority, proving that the Clergy were not
convened at the Council of Rochingham, 9 W. 2. Spelman. Council. vol. 2. f. 16.
In quo ferme totius Regni Nobilitas praeter Episcopos and Clerum Convenitur.
which must be meant of not being Summoned; for it appears by Eadmerus, that
Anselm and other Bishops were there.

And Bishop Jewel observes, that in the time of E. 1. Jewel contra Hard. f. 455.
a Parliament was held, from which the Clergy was excluded.

From these Authorities it appears, That as Anselm was chosen Archbishop in one
Parliament, and Banished in another; nay, tho he had gone away voluntarily, his
See became derelict; and admit the King might have pardoned his Banishment, out
of Parliament, he could not have restored him to the exercise of his Office,
but in a Council which was reputed to have the Authority of a Parliament: and
such Authority, it is plain that they in that time thought that Convention to
have had, in which H. 1. was Crowned; and which after his Coronation acted as a
Parliament.

Malms. f. 88.
It appears by Malmsbury, that Anselm was called back in the same Assembly
wherein Ranulph was committed to Prison; and Matthew Paris, who is not so
precise as to the time of Anselm's being sent for, says Ranulph, was Imprisoned
communi Concilio Gentis Anglorum, 'In a 'Common-Council of the English Nation.
And it appears by Matthew Paris, Mat. Par. f. 78, 79.
That Anselm upon his return was looked on, and acted as Archbishop. And if
this is not sufficient evidence that that Convention was reputed a Parliament,
or one of the General Councils of the Kingdom; at least the Charter which he
then granted, as I before observed, makes full proof of it.

Vid. Sup. f. 172, and 178.
It Is obvious that the Convention 1 H. 1. was far less solemn, and had much less
ground to be looked on as a Parliament, than ours; and yet it being for
removing a Vacancy, and Settling the Government, when the Nation was threatened
with an Invasion from Duke Robert; they thought the necessity of time would
sufficiently excuse the absence of Form.

But had there been no Warrant from former times for the late manner of
proceeding; the people of Legal Interests in the Government having been
restored to their Original Right, Who can doubt, but they had an absolute power
over Forms?

That they were not called a Parliament, I hope will not be an Objection, since
the Word is much less Ancient than such Assemblies: Nay, I find it used in the
25th of E. 1. for a Meeting of the People without the King, Vid. Append.
to consult for the Publick-Good, of which Matthew of Westminster says,
Parliamentum suum statuerunt.

Vid. Sup. Cap. 1.
Since the Cives, the Common Subject of the National Power, have made their
determination in our Case, this, according to that Positive Law which I have
shown above, ought to quiet the Debate, and command a submission. And yet were
there not Positive Law on their side, the equitable Reservations before
observed, might be sufficient Warrant.

Nor is the Civil-Law wanting to enforce this Matter.

One Barbarius, a run-a-way Servant, not known to be so, got in favor with
Anthony at the time of the Triumvirate, and by his means came to be Praetor;
Upon this, a great Question arose, Whether what he did, or was done before him
during his Praetorship, were valid? Hottom. Illust. Quest. 17.
Vlpian decides in the affirmative: and Hottoman upon that Question says, 'The
suffrages of the People have the force of a 'Law.

Gotofredus de Electione Magistratus inhabilis per errorem facta, p. 6.
The Reasons given for the Resolution, as they are in Gotofred, who best
reconciles the various Readings, will greatly strengthen our Case.

He tells us, That tho the Question there is only concerning a Servant, the
Reason of it reaches to Emperors, and all Secular and Ecclesiastical Dignities.
The Reasons why Vlpian holds the Acts of such good, are,

1. In regard of Common Utility, and the Inconvenience it would be to those who
had business before him, if it were otherwise.

2. From the Power of the People to give a Servant this Honor. Gotofred
thinks, If this may be done with certain knowledge that he was a Servant, much
more through mistake; for if the People, who have the Supreme Power, may with
certain knowledge, for the sake of the Publick-Good, not only design a Servant
for Praetor, but in this Case, by a just Election, take a Servant away from his
Master; How much more may it be done as in the Case propounded, not to make a
Servant wholly a true Praetor, not to take him from his Master; but only by a
commodious interpretation, to have what is done by him, or with him, sustained;
and that so long, the Error of the People, and Servitude of the Person chosen,
should not prejudice what is done?

Gotofred goes yet further, and says, of Magistrates and Judges constituted by
Tyrants, the manner of Judgments being kept, Gotofred. Sup. p. 25.
the things done according to form of Law, or Transacted according to their
Wills, have been held good. Sponte transacta.
And yet in this Case the defect seems greater, being the Power is collated by
one inhabil, and so a substantial form is wanting: Wherefore in this Part there
seems no difference between the inhability of the Elector, or the Elected.

And if ever the Common Utility, or Public Good, might warrant Actions out of
the Common Course, certainly this could never have been pleaded more forcibly
than in the Case of this Nation; which unless it had declared for King WILLIAM
and Queen MARY (which they did in the most regular way that the Nature of the
thing would bear) had in all likelihood, by Irish and French Forces, by this
time been reduced to the miserable condition of the poor Protestants in
Ireland, who are by no means beholden to the nice Observers of unnecessary and
impracticable Forms.

However such Formalizers would do well to answer the French King's Advocate in
the Case of King John, who shows a Vacancy of a Throne; and to whom in such
Case, the care of the Kingdom belongs. And they being the Barons Regni, I need
not now stand to prove, that in the Language of that time, 'twould comprehend
all such as were Members of our late Assembly of Lords and Commons. For admit
it were to be restrained to the Lords only, then at least the Commons now, were
but supernumerary: And since the Lords Voted by themselves, and not in the same
House with the Commons, for the majority of united Votes to carry it; the
Settlement Voted by the Lords, were enough to conclude the Nation.

But for the farther conviction of those who still urge, That to hold that
there may be a Parliament, without being summoned by the King's Writ, would be
of pernicious consequence to the Constitution of the Legal Monarchy under King
WILLIAM and Queen MARY; I shall refer them to a Paper which came out not long
since, entitled, Vid. Append.
The Present Convention a Parliament, which I have transcribed at large into
the Appendix. As that Paper gives an abstract of what might be proved by
Authorities; those which I have produced, give confirfirmation to that Paper.

Part 1. Object.
Here, I ought not to pass by some Objections of the Author of Elementa
Politica, in relation to the supposed want of due Form in proceeding to
Judgment, or of Actions leading to it; which if they were unwarrantable, the
Judgment must have been so too, being founded upon the belief, that there was
just occasion for those Actions.

The Substance of his Objections, may be reduced to these Heads:

1. Part of the Legislative Power is in the King: Whence it follows, Elementa
Pol. p. 5. Since published with the Title of Vindiciae Juris Regii.
that the whole Body of the People is not the Supreme Authority; nor
consequently can call their Prince to account, without his own consent.

2. That Part of the Legislative Power which is lodged in the People, is not
given at large to be exerted at their pleasure; but depends upon stated Rules
and Limitations, and can only be exerted by their Representatives in
Parliament. Nay, it is so precarious a Privilege, that without the King's leave
they can never make use of it: For it is neither lawful for them to Convene
themselves, nor yet to sit any longer than the King pleases. Which is in
different words, but the same with Mr. Hobbs his position, Where there is
already erected a Sovereign Power; Leviathan, f. 97.
by which he means a single person in possession of Power, There can be no
other Representative of the same People, but only to certain particular ends
limited by the Sovereign. If this were meant of Power in the abstract, no Man
neeed dispute the point with either of the Authors.

But to proceed with the Elements:

Elementa Pol.
3. The Liberties of the Subject were Acts of Grace from the Crown; and since
they had no Right to demand them by Force, they must take them upon such
Conditions as they are offered: Nor is it to be supposed that Kings would forgo
their Irresistible Power, unless they had Signed it away in so many words.

4. The Militia is by Law lodged in the King: Most of the Nation is obliged to
Declare against taking up Arms upon any pretense whatsoever, against Him, or
any persons Commissioned by Him: And the two Houses themselves swear Allegiance.

5. That Clause for Resistance in King John's Charter, contrary to this, is of
no force now; and however is an Authority against the Deposing-Power; there
being an express Proviso for saving the King's Person and Royalty, and His
being obeyed as formerly, upon Redress of Grievances.

Answ.
Not to observe the inconsequence from a qualified Legislative, to a Judicial
Power, in which the Dernier Resort is with the Lords; nor the mistake, as if
that Meeting and Sitting of Parliament which the Law has provided for, within,
and till a certain time, were wholly precarious: Viz. Till all Petitions are
Answered; and that is certain which is reduceably to a Certainty. Vid. Sup.
Nor the former Objection against the Militia-Acts, for want of a due Repeal of
the Triennial, 16 Car. 1. which this Author calls but a Proposal; nor yet that
the Allegiance sworn, must be according to the Constitution: For a full Answer
to all, it will appear, even by his own confession, That these Restrictions
have no place, but while the Constitution is preserved.

Himself admits, That had the Legislative Power been invaded* and the
Constitution of Parliaments dissolved, it would have superceded his Niceties.
But denies both, because, forsooth, the Judgments against Charters were begun
in a Protestant Reign, and applauded by the loyal part of the Nation; And the
Dispensing Power was affirmed by the Judges; which is only a justifying Crimes
by their Authors; of which too many may say, -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.


Nor may it be impertinent here to observe Tacitus his Account of the steps by
which Julius Caesar advanced himself to an arbitrary Power: Leaving the
Application to others.

When he had wheedled the Soldiers with large Pay, the People with Freedom from
Taxes, all with the sweetness of Peace; Tacit. ed. Plaut. p. 1. and 2. Ubi
militem donis, populum annona, cunctos dulcedine otii pellexit, munia Senatus,
Magistratuum legum, in se trahere nullo adversante, cum feracissimi per acies
aut proscriptione cecidissent, ceteri Nobilium quanto quis Servitio promptior
opibus and honoribus extollerentur, ac novis ex rebus aucti tuta and presentia
quam vetera and periculosa mallent. Neque Provinciae illum Statum abnuebant,
suspecto Senatus Populique imperio, ob certamina potentium, and avaritiam
Magistratuum, invalido legum auxilio, quae vis, ambitu postremo pecunia
turbabuntur.
he rose by degrees to draw the Offices of the Senate, Magistrates, Laws, to
himself without opposition: When the most fierce had fallen in the Wars, or were
driven from their Country, the rest of the Nobility being, as any of them was
the more forward for Servitude, raised to Wealth and Honor, and profited by
the Change; chose rather present Safety, than the former State, not to be
retrieved without hazard. Nor did the Provinces decline the Yoke; the
Government of the Senate and People becoming cheap, through great men's
quarrels, and the Avarice of Magistrates; the Law being enervated, and its
course interrupted by Force, Solicitations, and at last Bribery.

The Author of the Elements supposes, that if the Government were subverted by
the late King, all Rights whatsoever are lost, as well as his; which I have
shown, by no means to follow.

But particularly, as to the Resisting-Clause in King John's Charter, which he
observes to be turned into an Excommunication in H. 3 d's, it is to be
considered, That as a King could not be thought to subvert the Constitution
upon the first Breach of some particular Articles there, that Clause was in
this respect an Addition to the Constitution; but being only in the
Affirmative, could not derogate from it.

Himself says, If with reference to the present Case, the Government is
actually subverted, then I grant the King's Authority is destroyed. Elem Pol.
part printed.
And if the Government as to the King's share in it, is subverted, and his
Authority destroyed, then there is no doubt but the People are freed from all
those Forms to which his Presence or Consent were otherwise needful.

This Author yields in another place, Print, p. 13.
that where the People are not forced into Submission, but freely elect their
Monarch, there all remote inferences and doubtful cases ought to be interpreted
in favor of the Subject, because the Form of Government had its beginning from
them; and in this case Liberty proves its self.

This he admits, supposing that he had proved a Conquest of the Nation by W.
1.; which I shall examine in its place; tho what I have said above, might take
off the Inference from his Hypothesis, Vid. sup
especially considering the broken Succession since W. 1. and what Authority
the Constitution has given to the Peoples Choice, which W. 1. as appears by his
Deathbed Declaration, and what followed immediately upon it, left untouched.

CONCLUSION.
I Cannot think that I have followed Truth too nigh at the heels for my Safety
in the present Government, which I take to be built upon this staple
Foundation; and that Protestant fondly flatters himself, who thinks to retain
his Religion and Security upon any Terms, at a return of the Former, which some
who were Instruments in setting up this, seem madly to contend for. But could
men hope to find their private Accounts in such a Change, yet surely the dismal
Prospect of Common Calamities to ensue, should induce them to sacrifice such
low Ends, to the Interest of their Religion and their Country.

I am not sensible that I have misrepresented any Fact or Authority, tho I have
not urged them with that strength, which might have been by a better Pen.
Perhaps what I have offered may give another Notion of the Succession, than
what many have imbibed, who will think I violate what is sacred. I have not
urged the Illegitimation of the Children of E. 4. by Richard the Third's
Parliament; because, tho he was a King de facto, if the Character fixed on him
be true, he was a Tyrant as well as Usurper upon the Innocent Prince E. 5. in
whose Name he first took the Government upon him, and either terrified or
cheated the People into a Compliance with his Pretenses.

Tho I have not the vanity to believe, that any thing of my own can weigh with
them who have thought otherwise before; especially if they have listed
themselves on a Side contrary to that, which no Disadvantages can make me
repent of: Yet I cannot but hope that the Authorities which I have produced,
will occasion some consideration, till they are either evaded or disproved. And
being all legal Objections are answered; nor can any scruple of Conscience be
here pretended, without, much less against Law; What hinders, but that we
should exert our utmost in the Service of that Lawful Government, from which we
receive Protection, and may expect Rewards for virtue, at least the Defense of
it, if we do not madly quit the ground which we have gained from them, who have
hitherto made Virtue the greatest Crime?

Wherefore, for us now to look back, after we have set our hands to the Plow,
would be not only to distrust that Providence which has given such a wonderful
Encouragement to Perseverance; but were enough to tarnish all our Actions, with
the Imputation of making the public Interest a Pretense for carrying on our
own. It Is an happiness indeed when they are twisted and thrive together. But
the Cause is such, as a man ought not to fear to dye, nay to starve for it. And
how improsperous soever a man's endeavors for this, may prove, yet it may be a
comfort to have sown that Seed, which may grow up for the benefit of future
Ages. Nor ought he to repine, because another man has gilded over his Name by
what he has got by the ruin of his Country, or may have insinuated himself
again into Opportunities to betray it: Let it be enough for him, how much
soever slighted and contemned while he lives, to embalm his Memory, by a
steddiness to Truth, and the Interest of his Country; not to be shaken by cross
accidents to himself, or the Public Cause. Let him still act uniformly, while
others live in perpetual Contradictions or Varieties; their Actions and their
Principles thwarting themselves, or each other, or varying with the
State-weathercocks. Let them violate the Laws out of Loyalty; unchurch all
Protestant Churches, but their own, out of Zeal against Popery; narrow the
Terms of Communion, to spread the National Religion; confine all advantages to
that Communion, for the Public Good; make their King the Head of a Party, to
strengthen his hands against his Enemies; Deliver up Charters, and Retake them,
gelt of their Noblest Privileges, in performance of their Oaths to preserve
them; fight against their King, and yet urge the Obligation of Oaths requiring
an unalterable Allegiance to his Person; assert that the Power is inseparable
from him, and yet may in his Absence, without his Consent, be transferred to a
Regent, not to be Reassumed when he should think fit to return; grant that he
has broken the Contract, yet contend that he retains that Power, which he
received from the Contract: Or that tho the Contract be broken, the Throne is
not vacant: Or if it be vacant, yet an Heir has a Right; and so it is vacant,
and not vacant at the same time: Or that after one has broken a Condition, upon
which he took an Estate to himself and his Heirs in Fee-Simple or Tail, another
shall enjoy it as Heir to him, and that in his Lifetime; invite a Deliverer,
yet reject the Deliverance.

Upon such Principles as these, I find an Eminent English Prelate censured as a
Deserter of his Church, for going about, Letter to the B. of L.
according to his great Learning, to justify the Oaths taken to the present
Government: And thus the Cause of J. 2. is made the Cause of the Church of
England. Certain it is, whatever is now pretended, it is more difficult to
justify the taking up, or promoting Arms against a Deliverer, than an
Oppressor. And if Arms against the last were lawful, even with the prospect of
involving Thousands in the Miseries of War; much more are they, in Defense of
that Power which has restored those Liberties, which the other Invaded, and
reassured the Public Peace. And whoever first engaged, and now draw back, not
only brand themselves for Traitors, but make it evident, that Ambition,
Revenge, or some ungenerous Design, animated their Undertakings. And as I doubt
not but they will meet with their due Reward; perhaps that Success which has
attended the Heroical Actions of our present King, may go further with such
men, to keep them to their Duty, than the most demonstrative Proofs of Right,
which they generally measure by the Event. And as no Cause or Action is just in
their eyes, which is not prosperous; they in the language of the Poet are
always on the side of the gods: But few are in this Point such Philosophers as
Cato.

Victrix causa Diis placuit sed victa Catoni.
FINIS.
APPENDIX. N. I. Vid. sup. CAP. I. F. 4.
Tho those Authors which I have referred to in the Book, have sufficiently
exposed Sir Robert Filmer's Notions; yet the following Observations made by me
some Years since, upon the first applying of my Thoughts to such Studies, may
be more suited to meaner Capacities; at least they who will not give themselves
time to read those Elaborate Treatises, may be diverted with this Summary of
Inconsistencies, which Numbers swallow down as blind Men do Flies.

Sir Robert Filmer, and some of our Divines, played against one another, in
relation to Ecclesiastical and Civil Power, and Sir Robert against Himself.
SInce Sir Robert Filmer's Writings are recommended to the World, by the
Elogium of the Infallible Dr. Heylin, Vid. Heylin 's Ep. to Sir Ed. Filmer,
Certamen. Ep. p. 208. Ut sup. Cap. 1.
that Man that professed in print, that he could not reckon the early Death of
the Wonder of his and following Ages, Edw. the 6 th, for an Infelicity to the
Church of England: Pref. to Hist. of Ref.
You cannot but think that this his Monarch in Politics, whose Death he
laments, was not so ill- principled in himself, nor inclined to embrace such
Counsels, but that his Affections to the Church were as exemplary, as his Books
have manifested them to be to the State.

But methinks Dr. Heylin, by subscribing to Sir Robert's Judgment in
Politiques, and consequently to his Anarchy of a mixed Monarchy, does thereby
confess that the Church is wholly subject to the Law of the State; and that the
Civil Power is comprehensive of the Ecclesiastical, the dividing of the Power
being utter Anarchy and Confusion.

Nay, that excellent Discourse called Patriarcha, Ep. to Sir Edw. Filmer.
which the Doctor by way of Prophesy, (for I am sure it is not to be imagined in
the way of Nature) tells us would, when published, give such satisfaction to
all our great Masters in the Schools of Polity, that all other Tractates in
that kind would be found unnecessary. That Catholicon, (as he is pleased to
call it) would supersede the Divine Right of all Rulers, even in Ecclesiastical
Affairs, other than Temporal Princes, who prior to their Unction, by which it is
supposed that the Spiritual Jurisdiction is conveyed, are invested with all
that Power that the Patriarchs had, who according to our Prince of Politicians,
by Right in Nature, and God's special Ordinance, were absolute Priests and
Princes.

Now one would wonder what Principle was received by King Edw. the 6 th, more
injurious to the Church, than what the Doctor and his Followers eagerly embrace.

What was the Judgment of that King, I have seen in a Manuscript worth
Diamonds, written by his own Hand, and dedicated by him to his Uncle the Duke
of Somerset, in the Year 1549. when, as I compute it, he was but Twelve Years
old, entitled, Petit Traite A lencontre de la Primaute du Pape. Where amongst
other things, he discourses thus of the Power of the Keys. This has been since
translated by a Lady of great Quality.
Le second text est que les clefz du ciel estoyent donnees non seulement a
Pierre, mais aussy aux autres Apostres; and par cest argument je repons qu'il
n'estoit pas le Principal; Galat. 2.9.
car les autres recevoient la mesme authorite des clefz laquelle luy est
commise: Pour laquelle chose Paul appelle Pierre la Coulomne, non pas le
fondement de leglise, and son compagnon non pas son Gouverneur: car quelles
sont les clefz du ciel? l'authorite de pardonner les pechez? non, mais le
preschement de l'evangill de Dieu le pere, ouy bien de Dieu, non pas du Pape ou
Diable, Et tout ainsi que quand, l'huys est ouvert quiconques veult peut
entrer, ainsy quand Dieu envoyoit son sincere Commandment and son Evangile, 2
Cor. 2.92.
'ils ouuroient la verite, la quelle est la port du ciel: and donnoient aux
hommes a entendre la ecriture, la quelle sillz suivent, ilz seront saunez:
parquoy on peut entendre que 'l'evangile, and la verite de l'ecriture sont les
seules ports qui conduisent l'homme au royaume de Dieu: pour laquelle chose
St. Paul dit. Quiconque invoquera le nom de Dieu serra sauue. Romans 10.13, 14,
17.
Comment invoquerent ils celuy auquel ilz ne croient pas? Comment croyrent ilz
en celuy du quel ilz non't pas ouy parler? Comment orront ilz sans avoir un
prescheur? Et un peu apres il dit, Foy vient par ouir, and ouyr de la parolle,
de Dieu. Au quatriesme Chapitre aux Romans aussy il dit, Romans 4.5.
a celuy qui naeuure pas, mais croit en celuy qui justify les meschans, sa foy
luy est imputee a justice.

Maintenant nous prouuerons que le preschement de l'evangile est la clef du
ciel. Rectius Dixiesme.
Au huitesme Chapitre aux Romans (comme jay dessus dit) Paul affirm, que
quiconque invoque le nom du Seigneur est sauue, and que le preschement de
l'evangile, est l'entree en linvocation de Dieu: adonc il sensuit que le
preschement de l'evangile est l'entre du salut; D'avantage Paul affirm, que
foy justify, and que le preschement de l'evangile fait la foy (la quelle chose
jay demonstree icy devant) purtant il sensuit, que le vray preschment est
l'entree en justification: car tout ainsi qu'un terre semee peut produire
fruit, porveu que la semence ne soit semee en terre plein de chardons, brieres,
ou pierres: Et encore s'elle est semee en tell terre elle ferra la terre un
peu meilleure, ainsi, si le Commandment de Dieu est seem a cueur de honestes
gens, ou de ceux qui ont un bon zele a la verite, il les confirmera en toute
bonte, mais si aucuns sont obstinez and opiniatres, ilz ne peuent imputer la
fault a l'ecriture veu quelle est en eux mesm. Mat. 28.18.
Pourtant nous nous devons efforcer que l'evangile, soit preschee par tout le
monde comme il est ecrit. Tout povoir m'est done en la terre and au ciel: Mark
16.15.
pourtant allez and preschez a toutez creatures les baptizans en mon nom. Puis
donc quil est prouue que les clefs du ciel sont l'authorite de prescher, and
que l'authorite de prescher estoit donnee a chacun Apostre, je ne puis voir
comme par ce text l'authorite estoit donnee a Pierre plus que aux autres, etc.

Now, in short, here lies the Substance of these Principles, the Danger of the
improvement of which was happily prevented by Queen Mary's Reign.

The Power of the Keys, or Church Power, is only Authority to preach the
Gospel, that was equally given to all the Apostles; therefore all Apostles had
equally the Power of the Keys, and so were equal: And by consequence will some
say, all Preachers after them, that had only a general and ordinary Commission
to preach, are equal, of the same Order to one another, Order being taken for a
Power to do a special Act, as the Learned Bishop Andrews informs us; Ep.
Wynton. Resp. ad 3 Ep. Pet. Moline. p. 192.
Ordinem esse potestatem ad actum specialem, non a me dico, Schola hoc dicit
tota.

Even the Authority to preach the Gospel, which was in an especial manner
committed to the Apostles, and by Ordination by them practiced, conferred upon
others, and always continued in the Church, some great Churchmen will tell us
ought to yield to the Civil Power so far* that no Man forbidden by the
Magistrate ought to preach, without an immediate Commission from Heaven, by
working of Miracles. Whereas others will say, 'twas enough that the Power was
given at first, and attested to by Miracles. Something agreeably to which, a
Learned Churchman says, Touching the Worship of God:

Since the Divine Establishment of the Public Christian Service is contained
in the Gospel, Falkner 's Christian Loyalty, p. 41.
no Authority upon Earth has any right to prohibit this: And those Christians
that rightly worship God, in the true Catholic Communion, according to the
Apostolical and Primitive Church, have a right to hold such Assemblies for the
Christian Worship, as appear useful for the Church's Good, tho this should be
against the Interdict of the Civil Power.

This is greatly opposite to the Judgment since delivered in the Case; yet by
adding false Terms, he enervates his Argument; for his Argument is taken from
such Service its being contained in Scripture; but upon that he would support
those Modes of Worship, which though not contained in Scripture, were used in
the Primitive Church, which is an Individium vagum, which some confine to the
Lifetime of the Apostles, some extend to the whole first three Centuries, some
even to this, according to the Doctrine of Infallible Tradition. Suppose, for
Example, that in such Assemblies as are formed with or without leave of the
Civil Power, the Sign of the Cross be used as a Symbol of dedicating to the
Service of Christ, those who are let into Catholic Communion; and this they
judge useful to the present, and according to the Primitive Church, it will be a
Question, Whether the retaining of this, against a particular Interdict of the
Civil Power, (which is supposable at least) is to be justified upon these
Grounds? Put this Argument into Form, and you will find he has more or less in
his Conclusion, than in his Premises. Rightly taken, I conceive it lies thus:

If the Gospel contains a Divine Establishment of Public Christian Service;
such Public Christian Service as has therein Divine Establishment, no
Authority upon Earth has any right to prohibit.

But the Gospel does contain a Divine Establishment of Public Christian
Service: Therefore such Public Christian Service as has therein Divine
Establishment, no Authority upon Earth has Power to prohibit.

This being taken for granted, he proceeds; What no Authority upon Earth has
right to prohibit, may be done or performed notwithstanding the Interdict of
the Civil Power.

But such Service, ut supra, no Authority upon Earth has right to prohibit,
therefore it may be performed notwithstanding the Interdict of the Civil Power.

But he concludes contrary to the Laws of Arguing; That those Christians who
rightly worship God in the True Catholic Communion, according to the
Apostolical and Primitive Church, have a right to hold such Assemblies for the
Christian Worship, as appear useful for the Church's Good.

Now if hereby he means that they who worship God according to the Scriptures,
even though taking in the Practice of the Apostles, have not this Right, unless
they do it in the manner used till, or at the end of the first three hundred
Years after Christ, which is the modestest acceptance of Primitive Times.
Here, by adding of Circumstances, his Conclusion has really less than the
Premises, because it ties up them whom the Scripture has left free, and takes
from the Authority of Scripture where the Foundation was laid, and undermines
it by going to support it with the specious words of Apostolical and Primitive,
which still are of doubtful Acceptance. Whereas some believe that no manner of
Worship is to be termed Primitive, which was not truly Apostolical, that is,
used by the Apostles themselves, others call every thing within those three
Centuries at least, Primitive, and therefore Apostolical.

But to be sure here is a very false way of Arguing, if he uses any, or else
it is gratis dictum. But take it for an Argument, and then to his purpose, there
is more in the Conclusion than in the Premises; for the Premises are only of
such Public Service as is contained and established in the Gospel; and thence
he would conclude, that whatever has been practiced in the Primitive Church, in
the Public Service of God, may be continued notwithstanding the Interdict.
Nay, he would go farther, That they may in their Assemblies practice according
to their own Judgment, of what is useful for the Church's Good. If it be said,
that he means no more, than that they may hold such Assemblies for Christian
Worship as appear useful, that is, of Five besides a single Family, 22 Car. 2.
c. 1.
or more, as appears useful, if he means not that they may assemble, and
worship, in such a manner as appears useful, he excludes the Worship out of the
Assembly, and then it may be a Silent Meeting if the Civil Power please, and is
less than his Premises warrant.

I must confess, he seems to intend the amusing, rather than satisfying his
Readers, by putting in the true Catholic Communion; for he must mean either
that whatever Public Service is according to the Apostolical and Primitive
Church, is in true Catholic Communion, and so vice versa, that whatever is in
true Catholic Communion, is according to the Apostolical and Primitive Church;
so that the Church becomes the Rule to the supplanting of Scripture: or else,
that to worship God rightly and warrantably, notwithstanding a Civil Interdict,
it is not enough to be according to the Apostolical and Primitive Church, unless
it be in the true Catholic Communion, that is, with such Terms of Communion as
Christ himself, or his Apostles made Catholic and universally obliging; and
indeed in this sense, though he has not observed it, he comes up fully to the
Force of his Argument.

The great Sanderson, whose Judgment, where it was according to that lumen
siccum, the general want of which is to be deplored, is of great Authority, has
gone about to split the Hair between two Extremes, in relation to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and lays down what he says is most consentaneous
to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and moreover to the Laws of the
Kingdom; Sanderson de Obligatione Conscientiaa, Page 209.
Quod and Doctrinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Regni insimul Legibus maxim sit
consentaneum: Which, by the way, is an insinuation that the Church of England
holds some Doctrine not consentaneous to Law, and it may be the Canons of 1640
might be instanced in.

Now his Notion is, that the jus condendi Leges Ecclesiasticas, that is, the
Legislative Power in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is in the Bishops, Presbyters, and
other Persons duly elected by the Clergy of the whole Kingdom, and duly
assembled in a lawful Synod.

Upon this I would be bold to ask the Question, Page 188.
How this agrees with his Concession, That the King is Supreme Head and
Governor over all Persons and Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; since
his own Argument is, That he who is Supreme, has the Power or Right to make
Laws. But the King is Supreme, wherefore, P. 192.
according to him, the King, and not the Clergy, has this Power. This I think
is the unforced Consequence from his other Assertion; Potestatem (...) esse
potestatem (...). Hoc est jus ferendi leges quae obligant totam communitatem
esse penes eum solum, Page 186.
sive sit is singularis persona, ut in statu Regiminis Monarchici, sive plures
ut in aliis, qui cum summa potestate toti communitati praest. Nay, he argues
that it must needs be so in reason; Praecipuus actus gubernationis praecipuam
requiret potestatem, etc. Est autem (...) sive legum latio, actus gubernationis
supremus and praecipuus; Non ergo potest exerceri nisia persona habente, aut
saltem in virtute and ex authoritate habentis supremam authoritatem and
jurisdictionem in communitatem sibi subjectam.

The chief Act of Government, requires the chief or Supreme Power.

But the making of Laws, is the Supreme Act of Government.

Therefore it cannot be exercised but by a Person having, or at least by
Virtue, and from the Authority of the Person having Supreme Power and
Jurisdiction over the Community subject unto him. Now in this the Doctor seems
to be uniform to himself, since he grants that the Clergy cannot exercise this
Power without the consent of the King, and so they act by virtue of his
Authority. But it will be justly questioned, whether the Power be not in the
King, the Authority being his: For a Legislative Power, wherever placed, is
uncontrollable, and self-sufficient; and so the Doctor tells us; Potestas (...)
est (...); and if the Power, the jus condendi Leges Ecclesiasticas be in the
Clergy, then that Power is self-sufficient, (...); and by consequence their Act
of Legislation made known, obliges the Community, Eodem omnino modo quo
Princeps qui habet potestatem (...), Page 84.
ferendo leges obligat subditos ad ipsarum observationem.

But perhaps we may be told that a Difference is here to be taken between jus
condendi Leges, and potestas (...); but then the Doctor must be allowed not to
talk with coherence; For he takes it for granted, Posse de novo condi leges de
ritibus, rebus and personis Ecclesiasticis, omnibusque sacri cultus externi
circumstantiis ad ordinem honestatem, and edificationem spectantibus, extra eas
quae sunt a Christo and ejus Apostolis in Sacris Literis traditae; which is, in
short, that there is somewhere a Legislative Power in Matters Ecclesiastical,
not determined in the Scriptures. Now this very Power, Jus condendi Leges
Ecclesiasticas, he places in Ecclesiastical Persons; wherefore the Power which
he ascribes to them in Ecclesiastical Affairs, is a Legislative Power. And some
will question, how much soever the Clergy complement the King, whether they
take not the Restraint which they submit to, to be a Condescension; nay, that
Power is by him ascribed to the Clergy in the very same Expressions, wherein he
expresses the King's Power. Page 189.
For as he says, Jus condendarum Legum, Page 209.
is penes unum Regem; so he tells us, Jus condendi Leges Ecclesiasticas, is
penes Episcopos, etc.

I would gladly see the Difference rightly stated upon these Principles.

The Clergy have the Power of making Laws, or the Legislative Power in
Ecclesiastical Matters, yet the Exercise is restrainable by the King. Jus
condendi Leges Ecclesiasticas esse penes Episcopos, Presbyteros aliasque
personas a totius Regni Clero rite electas, and legitima Synodo congregatas;
Ita tamen ut ejus juris exercitium in omni Republica Christiana ex Authoritate
Supremi Magistratus politici pendere debeat; Idque a part ante, and a part
post.

The King has the Legislative Power in Civil Affairs, yet the Exercise is
restrainable by the People; Cum dicimus penes unum Regem esse jus condendarum
Legum, Page 189.
non id ita intelligendum, quasi vellemus quicquam Regi libuerit jubere id
continuo legis vim obtinere, nam and populi consensum aliquem, aliaque non
nulla ad Legem constituendam requiri mox ostendam.

Ergo, Quere, Whether Churchmen are not Supreme in Ecclesiastical Affairs, as
the King is in Civil?

It will be said, Admit they are, yet that Power may be very consistent with
Monarchy; for which purpose one need but transcribe, with very little
variation, the Doctor's words, applying what he says of the Lawgiver in
Temporal, to the Ecclesiastical Lawgivers.

Page 203.
Posse duo haec (Regis inquam consensum and supremum ECCLESIASTICORVM in
ferendis legibus potestatem) simul and amice satis consistere, praeterea quod
in rebus ipsis nulla videtur esse repugnantia) vel inde constare potest, quod
Angliae nostrae CLERICI, quorum supremam potestatem in ECCLESIASTICIS ante
infoelicissima haec tempora omnes hujus Regni incolae prolixissime semper
agnoverunt, nunquam tamen legislativam suam potestatem ita exercuerunt, ut sine
Regum suorum consensu Leges aliquas condiderint.

Now whether the Doctor's Reflections upon them that feign a Power coordinate
with the King; nay, whether his imputation of Perjury upon them who deny the
King a Legislative Power, after having sworn that he is Supreme Head and
Governor over all Causes and Persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, will
not fall upon himself, some will question; Page 191.
and they know not whether he were not one of them that believed Contradictoria
posse simul esse vera.

And thus again they argue out of him; Page 188.
In statu Monarchico unius Regis personae inhaeret summa potestas.

"In a Monarchy, the Supreme Power is inherent in the Person of "the King only.

But ours is a Monarchy, therefore the Supreme Power is inherent in the Person
of the King only, Ibid.
he is omnium personarum causarumque in suis Regnis Supremus, imo and solus
supremus Moderator. Making of Laws, either in Ecclesiastical or Civil Matters,
is an Act of the Supreme Power; therefore the Right of making Laws, Page 192.
in the one as well 'tother, is in the King, in whom the Supreme Power is
inherent, not in Churchmen.

But if one may dispute the Authority of so great a Man, one may be bold to ask
what proof there is, that what he asserts about Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, is
consentaneous, and Doctrinae Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Regni insimul legibus?

For take it in the largest sense, not that the Clergy have the Legislative
Power so qualified as aforesaid, but that they and the King have a Power of
making Laws in Ecclesiastical Matters which shall oblige the Community, without
any farther Consent or Ratification; This some will say may, for ought they
know, be agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church, or Churchmen; but where is
the Law to warrant it they are to seek. And besides the several adjudg'd Cases
that the Laity are not obliged, by any Canons of the Clergy, or Ecclesiastical
Laws, though made with all the Circumstances taken in by the Doctor; They urge
the Authority of this King in his Parliament, where 'twas enacted, that the
Canons made in the Year 1640, 13 Car. 2. c. 12. This was written before that
Parliament was dissolved.
should not be confirmed; which shows that they stood in need of Parliamentary
Confirmation to become Laws. And it is to be observed, that there had been the
Royal Assent to that Exercise of Ecclesiastical Power, both a part ante, and a
part post.

Some Men possibly may tax this Great Author with Deceit, in giving the King a
Legislative Power in general, without excluding those Ecclesiastical Matters
which the Great Legislator left undetermined; And yet afterward, when had he
said enough to gain Credit, stealing away a large share for the Clergy; but yet
he had given so much before, that he could not leave any thing to the Clergy,
or the Laity either, without manifest contradiction. He tells us, that in every
Monarchy the Prince has Supreme Power; that this Supreme Power is a Legislative
Power, and with us extends to Matters Ecclesiastical, as well as Civil; that a
Legislative Power is Self-sufficient and Arbitrary, and that that Prince who
has a Legislative Power, obliges his Subjects, ferendo Leges, by the exercise
of this Power; and that must be in what manner soever he exercises it,
otherwise it is not (...). Yet in another place he says, what the King commands
has not the Force of a Law, Page 189.
that is, does not oblige, without some Consent of the People.

And whereas he places in the King the Sanction of Laws in general, as being
the principal Cause that introduces the Form; and this he calls, jus
condendarum Legum; this Right or Power he places in the Clergy for Matters
Ecclesiastical, and so wholly shuts out the King and Laity, who have, according
to him, neither the Proposing, nor the Sanction: And therefore that restraint
of the Exercise which he yields to the Civil Power, amounts to no more than a
natural, not moral Power.

Praelectio 7 ma de Obligatione legum humanarum ex part causae efficientis.
And this appears farther, in that this was under the Head of the efficient
Cause of Humane Laws, which he makes the Clergy to be in Matters
Ecclesiastical, and that without Aid of the Civil Power, as he explains
himself, speaking of the Matter of Laws.

Prael. 7 ma. p. 174.
Leges autem Ecclesiasticas hic intelligo, non quae a personis Ecclesiasticis
sine Magistratus civilis authoritate constitutae sunt (quae schola non est
hujus loci sed ad alterius generis causam, efficientem, scilicet, pertinet,
etc.

I conceive he places the Authority of making Ecclesiastical Laws in the
Clergy, in the same manner that he does any Act of the Ministry; the Power of
which, according to some Great Men, remains, though the Act may be restrained,
which some Men cannot understand for their Hearts, for they suppose that one
may always act according to a lawful Power. But we are otherwise taught;

Ep. Wynton. Resp. ad 3 Ep. Pet. Moline. p. 191.
Post enim (quam dicunt) degradationem manet potestas ad actum ordinis, cujus
potestatis usus prohiberi potest, potestas ipsa tolli non potest.

To put an end to all these Disputes, Doctor Heylin's perpetual Dictator in
Politics, places a Power in Adam as Absolute and Arbitrary as all the Acts of
his Will, and does nothing if he goes not to prove that this his Power was to
be obeyed in every Act of his Sovereign's Will, relating to things Sacred, as
well as Civil; for a right to Command, without an Obligation upon others to
obey, is an empty insignificant Notion. Well, this being settled, beyond
dispute, in Adam and in his Posterity, by right of Fatherhood, and in Cain by
right of Birth, (though by the way he never was vested with such Power over his
Brother, Patriarcha, p. 19. Patriarcha, p. 12. Patriarcha, p. 13.
over whom we are told it is promised, for that Abel died in the Lifetime of
Adam) though it were indivisible, and of right an universal Monarchy settled
upon the Eldest Parent; yet it lawfully descended, or came, upon Sons in the
Time of their Fathers; as upon Judah, who by virtue of his Patriarchal Power,
condemned Thamar to be burnt, while his Father Jacob was in being: Such as
could set up for themselves in any of the divided Kingdoms of the Earth, had,
in spite of contradiction, just Shares in this still indivisible Monarchy; and
not only by consequence, but expressly are we taught, that Usurpers and Rebels
have good Authority, such as ought to be obeyed, though the lawful Prince be
alive.

But these, besides many other Absurdities and Contradictions, which Sir Robert
is pleased to divert us with, are but necessary Consequences upon the
Supposition, that every one who is Supreme in Power, Patriarcha, p. 19. All
Kings, etc. are to be reputed the next Heirs to those first Progenitors, who
were at first the natural Parents of the whole People.
however he come by it, derives his Title to an indivisible Power; that is, all
Power, from Adam, which holds not only as to all Power within any particular
Division or Tract of Land, but all over the World, as it is supposed Adam's
Power was. If it be meant of the Father of the People within such a Tract of
Land, then he derives not his Title from the Eldest Parent; and by Consequence
entitles such an one only to a subordinate Power. And therefore one would think
that Sir Robert has heaped together all the Absurdities flowing from such an
Opinion, with an intention to expose it to all Men of Judgment. They that will
say 'twas otherwise, surely are none of his Friends, but expose him as they do
themselves, in contending so eagerly for the maintenance of what, if he spoke
his Judgment, argues him to be none of the wisest, if 'twas not none of the
honestest.

If, as one of Sir Robert Filmer's pedantick Admirers flourishes, Pref. to the
Power of Kings.
All Readers are insensibly under his Command, as if they were his Subjects,
and are his by right of natural Sovereignty; and a Reason so far exalted above
ours as his, makes him appear like those Kings of old* who were in Stature much
superior to their Subjects, and seemed so far to overtop the rest, as if
Nature marked them out for Heads of all;

If still, this exalted Genius be guilty of Self-contradictions, and
undermining his own Foundations, what silly Creatures are they, or what Slaves
in their Understanding, who are made Captives without Resistance, and are
Slaves by right of Conquest. And if all Men fell under his Title, either of
natural Sovereignty, or of Conquest, how despicable were the Condition of
Humane Nature.

But surely Contradictions will not down with all Men; 'twere in vain to show
such easy Wretches, as are led captive by Sir Robert's false Reasonings,
wherein his Fallacies lie, as in not distinguishing the Power whereby a Nation
is governed, from the Person or Persons invested with Power; nor considering
the Manner wherein it is enjoyed, whether Absolutely, or with Limitation; or
whether the Administration or Exercise be according to the lawful manner; which
to them that are able to consider, would evince to how little purpose it is
urged that Sovereignty is indivisible. For an undivided Sovereignty may be in
several in unequal manners, and sometimes in equal. As in the Roman Consuls or
Decemvirs at least, and that by Sir Robert's own confession:

The Law, says he, of the Twelve Tables affirms; Regis Imperio Duo sunto, iique
Consules appellantur. Let Two have Regal Power, and let them be called Consuls.
Also the Judgment of Livy is, that the Sovereign Power was translated from
Consuls to Decemvirs, as before from Kings to Consuls.

Yet in another Place our Learned Knight, according to his usual
Inconsistencies with himself, tells us, that but one of the Consuls had
Regality, for they governed by turns: Which, by his Favor, I take it, was only
in the Wars, which require but one General, not at Rome: However he confesses,
that all the Decemvirs had Regality, for he pretends not that they governed by
turns, and he says, they were chosen to make Laws; and though some will
question whether a Supreme Gubernative implies a Legislative Power, no Man will
question, but a Legislative takes in the other, or at least may, at the
pleasure of him or them in whom it is vested. But I would fain know which one
of them had right to give Law to the rest, or had the Sovereignty in him alone:
And for it to be in more than one, Observe. touching Forms of Gov. p. 47.
is (as we are informed by him) quite contrary to the indivisible Nature of
Sovereignty. Yet he grants it may escheat to the Supreme Heads of Families,
that is more than one within that which had been at least immediately before
the same Community; nay, and that it may be exercised by many in other Acts,
besides the choice of one to head them, which he owns in these words:

Ib. p. 60, and 61.
Those Governments that seem to be popular, are kinds of petty Monarchies:
which may thus appear; Government is a Relation between the Governors and
Governed, the one cannot be without the other, mutuo se ponunt and auferunt.
Where a Command proceeds from a major part, there those individual Persons that
concurred in the Vote, are the Governors, because the Law is only their Will in
particular.

Yet, under correction, though some of those alter their Wills, and some which
were against the Law become for it, provided that the Balance continue as
'twas when the Law passed; in this Case the Law cannot be changed by those very
Persons which made it, There can be no Obligation which takes state from the
mere Will of him that promises the same. Power of Kings, Fol. 1.
and therefore some things which receive Force from the mere Will of the
Parties, yet continue to oblige against their Wills, and the Government is in
the united Body, not in those who made that Law, for the Power cannot be
derived from them who changed their Wills, but out of the whole Body; however
no one of them were a Monarch, and yet what hinders but that there was a
Sovereign Power amongst them?

This Power it seems Sir Robert knows not how to distinguish from the Exercise
or Act of Power. The Supreme Power being an indivisible Beam of Majesty, he
tells us, cannot be divided or settled upon a Multitude; God would have it fixed
in one Person, not sometimes in one part of the People, and sometimes in
another, and sometimes, and that for the most part, no where; as when the
Assembly is Dissolved, it must rest in the Air, or in the Walls of the Chamber
where they were assembled. Agreeable to which he says elsewhere; By this means
one and the same Assembly may make, at one Sitting, several Forms of
Commonwealths. So that he supposes the different Exercise to alter the form of
Government, and that it Dissolves when the Exercise ceases, or is discontinued:
which Error is of kin to theirs (whoever they are) that make a Church barely to
relate to Acts of Worship.

But to wave these Niceties, as above their reach, who cannot of themselves
discern palpable Contradictions, and wherein Sir Robert, under pretense of
Friendship, serves them as Joab did Abner. I shall take from his thoughts their
artificial Dress, and lay them open in their naked Deformity, that every
rational, at least honest Man and good Subject, may start from them; the Devil
cannot be so far transformed into the shape of an Angel of Light, but that his
cloven Foot must appear.

Sure I am, that he undermines the Right of all present Kings or Families, and
makes the Right of Succession as doubtful as the Event of War, admitting none
but Rebels within the possibility of Usurping; and thereby yielding that any
Foreign Prince may lawfully dispossess one in the Throne, or interrupt the
Succession: And if any Subject can prosper in his Rebellion, though the lawful
Prince or Heir be alive; and He that takes upon him the Power of a Superior,
sins sufficiently, and to purpose. Yet God's Providence having dispossessed the
former, Anarchy, p. 273.

Many times, by the Act of an Usurper himself, or of those that set him up, the
True Heir of the Crown is dispossessed, God using the Ministry of the wickedest
Men, for the removing and setting up of Kings; in such Cases the Subjects
Obedience to the Fatherly Power must go along with, and wait upon God's
Providence, who only has a Right to give and take away Kingdoms, and to adopt
the Subjects into the Obedience of another Fatherly Power.


and declared in favor of the Usurper, the People (if we believe him) are
adopted into the Obedience of another Fatherly Power, and not having Right to
cast off this Father, raised up by God himself, who only has Right to give and
take away Kingdoms; By his Doctrine, It was written Tempore Car. 2.
all the Endeavors toward his Majesty's Restoration, are condemned, for that
'twas against the Title made by the Almighty, and any voluntary Act of the
People being vain, not obliging them any longer than they please, as all the
Force came from their own Wills; Besides, no Act of the People having any
binding or moral Effect, since they are to be merely Passive, they being always
and unalterably as to Humane Causes, under the Power of the Natural Fathers;

By these Principles the Usurping Powers would still have lawful Authority; But
to be sure, For in Grants and Gifts that have their Original from God or
Nature, as the Power of the Father has, no inferior Power of Man can limit nor
make any Law of Prescription against them. Ibid.
according to him, any Prince had equal Right with the Ejected Monarch, to try
for the Kingdom: For though Sir Robert in his Preface to his Observations on
Mr. Hobbs, asks the Question, Power of Kings, F. 1.
How a Subject by Covenant can get a Right of Sovereignty by Conquest, when
neither he himself has Right to Conquer, or Subjects a Liberty to Submit? Yet
he has not one Objection against the Lawfulness of a Foreign Prince's
conquering at any Time, or with any Circumstances; which shows that his
Definition of Usurpation was intended to take in all unlawful usurpings of
Power, without which it is very lame. But thus it runs:

Usurpation is the resisting and taking away the Power from him, Directions for
Obedience to Governors. p. 75. Last Ed. p. 165.
who has such a former Right to govern the Usurper, as cannot lawfully be
taken away; so that it cannot be just for an Usurper to take advantage of his
own unlawful Acts, or create himself a Title by continuation of his own
Injustice, which aggravates, and never extenuates his Crime; and if it never
can be an Act indifferent for the Usurper himself to disobey his Lawful
Sovereign, much less can it be indifferent for him to command another to do
that, to which he has no Right himself.

So that Usurpation is the unjust taking away, or dispossessing another of
Power, and for it to be unjust, it must be the Act of a Subject against a
Lawful Prince, wherefore none but a Rebel can usurp; this Man, by continuance
of his Injustice, can never gain a Title. Yet in another place, in express
terms, he contradicts himself, Directions for Obed. p. 155. last Ed.
and affirms, that he may, and does not so much as take in Prescription in a
Man and his Heirs against the Party dispossessed, and his Heirs to strengthen
it; and indeed that could not well be urged by him, because that, Directions
for Obedience, p. 70. last Ed. p. 158.
he tells us, comes in by positive Humane Laws, which can signify nothing
against any Grants or Gifts which have their Original from God or Nature, as
the Power of Kings and Fathers has.

But let us take his words and see whether any thing can be a more direct
Contradiction.

Anarchy, p. 275. last Ed. p. 253.
Many times by the Act of an Usurper himself, or of those that set him up, the
true Heir of the Crown is dispossessed, God using the Ministry of the wicked'st
Men for the removing and setting up of Kings: in such Cases the Subjects
Obedience to the Fatherly Power must go along and wait upon God's Providence,
who only has right to give and take away Kingdoms, and thereby to adopt
Subjects into the Obedience of another Fatherly Power.

So that he makes a Government by wrongful Election, or Conquest, still to be
the Fatherly Government, and such as the People are bound to obey; for he puts
the case of the Usurpers being set up by others, as well as his own Act. But
the poor Prince it seems, has in neither Case right to the Peoples Obedience;
and he avows the Conclusion which he condemns upon Mr. Hobbs his grounds,
Preface to Obs. on Hobbs his Leviathan.
(viz.) The Rights of Sovereignty may be forfeited; for the Subject cannot be
at liberty to submit to a Conqueror, unless his former Subjection be forfeited
for want of Protection. But he tells us, the Subject is at liberty when the
true Heir is dispossessed. Ergo.

But he has a very fine Notion to evade the Consequence of Forfeiture, and yet
justify the Peoples Obedience to the Usurper.

Direct. for Obed. to Government, p. 72.
If a Superior cannot protect, it is his part to desire to be able to do it;
which he cannot do in the future, if in the present they be destroyed for want
of Government: therefore it is to be presumed, that the Superior, desires the
preservation of them that should be subject to him, and so likewise it may be
presumed, that the Usurper in general does the Will of his Superior, by
preserving the People by Government. And it is not improper to say, that in
obeying an Usurper, we may obey primarily the true Superior, so long as our
Obedience aims at the Preservation of those in subjection, and not at the
Destruction of the true Governor.

With this pious Intention, and mental Reservation, we may, it seems, obey an
Usurper, though the Prince have not forfeited his Right. And yet he says, The
Subject cannot be at liberty to submit to a Conqueror, unless his former
Subjection be forfeited for want of Protection. If by a Conqueror he means a
Foreign Prince, as by Usurper he means a Subject, the Argument is much
stronger, that an Usurper ought not to be obeyed; whereas he says, he ought,
which cannot be, unless the former Subjection be forfeited: the first Usurper,
he tells us, has the best Title, being in possession by the permission of God.
But if he be dispossessed, the second, or last, has a better than what continues
with the first, or his Heirs, if the People are adopted into another fatherly
Power. Yet, according to this substratum, there can be no Title but what comes
in a more natural way from Fatherhood; Pref. to Observe. on Arist.
for Adam being commanded to multiply and people the Earth, and to subdue it,
and having dominion given him over all Creatures, was thereby Monarch of the
whole World, none of his Posterity had any right to possess any thing but by
his Grant or Permission, or by Succession from him. The Earth, says the
Psalmist, has he given to the Children of Men. Which shows most plainly to one
of sublimated reason, that the Title comes from Fatherhood. For it could not
have been given to the Children diffusively, unless they had a Father; for if
there had been no Father, there could be no Child.

I must confess I know no Man who has a better faculty of arguing against
himself; I thought he was for the Absolute Power of every King within his own
Dominion, that is his drift if he be steady to any Design but Confusion; yet he
directly opposes it, and is only for one King over all, and therefore he says,
When we find, Patriarcha, p. 17.
that in the time of Abraham, which was about 300 Years after the Flood, in a
little Corner of Asia, five Kings at once met in Battle, most of which were but
Kings of Cities a-piece, etc. We must conclude, that these were but some petty
Lords under One great King.

For since Nature has not distinguished the habitable World into Kingdoms,
Anarchy, p. 268
nor determined what part of a People shall belong to one Kingdom, and what to
another, it follows that the Original Freedom of Mankind being supposed, every
Man is at liberty to be of what Kingdom he pleases; and so every petty Company
has a right to make a Kingdom by it self; and not only every City, but every
Village, and every Family, nay, and every particular Man, a liberty to choose
himself to be his own King if he please; and he were a Madman, that being by
Nature free, would choose any Man but himself to be his own Governor. Thus to
avoid the having but of one King of the whole World, we shall run into a
liberty of having as many Kings as there are Men in the World.

His Argument, if he makes any, is this. If Mankind were free by Nature, there
would be as many Kings as there are Men in the World; but they are not free,
Therefore there is but One King of the whole World; nor can it ever be
otherwise; Anarchy, p. 266
For the Monarchical Power of Adam the Father of all Flesh, was by a general
binding Ordinance settled by God, in him and his Posterity, by Right of
Fatherhood. Wherefore being settled on the Posterity, it must, according to
him, descend to the Eldest; and could not be otherwise disposed of by Adam
himself, (so that his Grant or Permission, or another Conquest, would be
invalid. Patriarcha, p. 19.
) for such Heirs are not only Lords of their own Children, but also of their
Brethren, and all others that were subject to their Fathers; and therefore we
find that God told Cain of his brother Abel, His desires shall be subject to
thee, and thou shall rule over him.

Sir Robert tells us, That all Kings that now are, or ever were, Anarchy, p.
273.
are or were, either Fathers of their People, or the Heirs of such Fathers, or
Usurpers of the Right of such Fathers. All it seems are with Title, and yet in
the very next Lines, he says in effect, That none have Title but one at a time,
and that is only the next Heir from Adam, unless Adam can have several Heirs at
the same time to his universal Monarchy. Which, since Nature has not
distinguished the habitable World into Kingdoms, is to make several Monarchs
within the same Community. I would fain know how it can be shown, upon Sir
Robert's grounds, that the several Polities in distinct Kingdoms were lawfully
erected, since they ought all to be dependent upon One, if he be in the Right:
nor can they prescribe to a Division; for there can be no Prescription against
the Right of the Universal Heir. If Usurpation acquires a Right, possibly the
Great Turk stands fairest for it at this Day; and having gotten so much natural
Power, all Princes not equal in Strength, ought to yield him their Crowns upon
his Summons.

Patriar. p. 45.
But this cannot prejudice the Right of the True Heir, though it may hinder him
in the use or exercise of his natural Rights, yet thereby no Man loses the
Right it self.

Anarchy, p. 273
Though this Right be in One over all, yet, says he, it is a Truth undeniable,
that there cannot be any multitude of Men whatsoever, either great or small,
though gathered together from the several Corners and remotest Regions of the
World, but that in the same multitude considered by it self, there is one
amongst them that in Nature has Right to be King of all the rest, as being the
next Heir to Adam, and all the others subject unto him.

That is in effect, If there were but one Multitude in the World, all would be
under Adam's Heir, as a natural Head; but there being several, the state of the
Question is altered, nay, and that by Divine Right too, for the Scripture says,
God has determined the Bounds of their Habitation, Acts 17.26. But admit
Adam's Heir who has Right to be King, resides with any particular multitude,
the Right cannot be in him and in another at the same time; and therefore no
other Title but that of a natural descent from Adam can be good.

He intimates as if no King could ever die without such Heir as the People are
bound to obey; nor by the same reason could Adam himself, or they that claim in
a natural descent from him; and consequently the true Heir to the first
Monarch, and no other would have the Right.

Anarchy, p. 272
Yet he grants, That if a King could die without Heir, the Kingly Power in that
case shall escheat to the Supreme Heads and Fathers of Families; Patriarc. p.
21.
or, as he explains it in his Patriarcha, Independent Heads, which he makes
such as are Heads adopted by Princes; but in effect grants more than any wise
Man will contend for, viz, that it escheats to every Man within the Kingdom,
Freeman and Servants; for that, by his Principles of Confusion, Nobility, or
adopted Headship, depends upon the Grace of the Prince, having no Foundation in
Nature; and that Grace with all its Effects, determines at the Death of the
Prince; Freeholders Grand Inq. p. 39 Vid. Inf. F. 15.
nay, and all former Laws too are void, till confirmed by the next Successor.
Wherefore Property, and all Distinctions not settled by God, or Nature,
dissolve, and then all Men are equal as to Distinctions brought in by Humane
Laws.

This I suppose is to make way for the natural Headship of Fathers in a strict
sense, and that he takes away too, and places it in the Nobility; and the
Nobility expiring, what becomes of it? Why, it is in nubibus, in Abeyance, till
they, who have no Right to do any Act of Power, part with the escheated Power
by free Choice, or yielding to a Conqueror: speaking of the Case, that the
knowledge of that One in the World, who is next Heir to Adam, be lost,

Patriarc. p. 21.
This Ignorance of the People, says he, being admitted, it does not by any
means follow that for want of Heirs, the Supreme Power is devolved to the
Multitude, and that they have Power to Rule, and choose what Rulers they please.
No, the Kingly Power escheats in such Cases to the Princes, and independent
Heads of Families, and every Kingdom is resolved into those Parts whereof it at
first was made, by the uniting of great Families, or petit Kingdoms, as we find
the Great Monarchies were at first erected, and into such again as into the
first Matter many times they return. And because the dependency of Ancient
Families is often obscure, or worn out of knowledge; therefore the Wisdom of all,
or most Princes, has thought fit to adopt many times those for Heads of
Families, and Princes of Provinces, whose Merits, Abilities, or Fortunes have
enabled them, or made fit or capable of such Regal Favors. All such prime
Heads and Fathers, have Power to consent in the uniting or transferring their
Fatherly Right of Sovereign Authority on whom they please.

It Is to be observed, that our worthy Knight never takes care for more than
serving the present Occasions; where he comes to show, that the House of Lords
are not born Counselors, nor can claim to be so, ex debito Justitiae, having
no Right in Nature, Vid. sup. F. 14.
nor any Superiority but what depends on the Grace of the Prince; and that, as
his last Essay explains it, of the immediate Prince. It was necessary to claw
the Commons, as standing fair for the Pretense of being natural Counselors, if
they can make out their Representation of the People to be full and complete.
But here when he talks of Independent or Supreme Heads, these were too big
Epithets for Commoners, and therefore these must be Lords. Not considering that
he makes them in another place cease to be so, till their Dignity be revived,
which cannot be by themselves; Power of Kings, p. 1.
but it must be ratified by the express Consent, or at least by Sufferance of
the Prince following who had knowledge thereof. The Reason of which he has given
in another place, Observe. touching Forms of Government, p. 149. Last Ed.
for every Law must always have some present known Person in being, whose Will
it must be to make it a Law for the present.

If the Independent Heads, or Nobles, are, instead of One Prince, to make
choice of an Head, which is a Law to that end; then a Law may flow from the
Will of many, as well as from that of One.

But take Sir Robert's Notion of Supreme or Independent Heads and Fathers, in
the most sensible meaning, that is, of Natural Fathers; these, where there is
no division into Tribes, as was amongst the Jews, will be numerous. Yet all, in
the Case presupposed, are allowed by Sir Robert, to be invested with Kingly
Power; and therefore the parting with it must be by their choice, as he himself
yields; and yet, according to his Principles, they can never so part with it,
but they may resume it.

I must confess in this, he doubly contradicts himself; for the End of his
Writings being to prove, that the Government ought always to be in One
absolutely, here he yields it to be in many. And when before he said, That
Civil Power, not only in general, Patriarc. p. 12.
is by Divine Constitution, but even the Assignment of it specifically to the
Eldest Parent; here he acknowledges it to be in several Parents, not in the
Eldest only.

But that every such Parent as was at any time vested with this Power, may
resume it, is the plain Inference from his Doctrine; for he tells us, Patriar.
p. 54.
That although a King do frame all his Actions to be according to the Laws, yet
he is not bound thereto, but at his good Will, and for good Example; Those Laws
which are the best or only means for the preservation of the Commonweal, bind
Princes.
Or so far forth as the general Law of the Safety of the Commonweal does
naturally bind him; for in such sort only, positive Laws may be said to bind
the King, not by being positive, but as they are naturally the best or only
Means for the preservation of the Commonweal.

Here still he opposes himself, for he yields that Princes are bound to those
Laws, which are the best or only means for the preservation of the Commonweal;
and so asserts that exploded Sentence, I will not call it Maxim, Freeholders
Grand Inq. p. 39 Anarchy, p. 265 No Laws whatsoever bind Princes.
Salus Populi suprema Lex: when at other times he tells us, That 'twas God's
Ordinance that Supremacy should be unlimited in Adam, and as large as all the
Acts of his Will; and as in him, so in all others that have Supreme Power. That
is, as by Supreme Power he means absolute, every one that has Absolute Power,
ought to have Absolute Power. But the Consequence from Adam's having had such
Power, is, That the Right Heir from Adam, in the natural course, ought to
inherit it: But as he supposes several at the same time to be Heirs, or to come
into the stead of Adam's right Heir, upon the Escheat of the Kingly Power,
these being so many Kings, or at least making one King, (where however the
Power is in many) though they parted with their Power, they might at any time
resume it, when they thought it for the Good of the Public; of which they, as
Princes, should be Judges, nay, and their Heirs in Succession might. Filmer's
Power of Kings, F. 2.
And so Sir Robert's Maxim rests, That the Prince is not subject to his Laws,
nor the Laws of his Predecessors, but well to his own just and reasonable
Conventions. Patriarc. p. 97.
Nay, though they should swear to observe all the Laws of their Kingdoms, yet
no Man can think it Reason, that Kings should be more bound by their voluntary
Oaths, than common Persons are by theirs.

I see not how upon his Principles, an Answer can be given to his Question.

Patriarc. p. 23.
If Obedience to Parents be immediately due by a natural Law, and Subjection to
Princes but by mediation of an Humane Ordinance, what Reason is there that the
Laws of Nature should give place to the Laws of Men, as we see the Power of the
Father over his Child, gives place, and is subordinate, to the Power of the
Magistrate?

He affords no other Title to Princes, than what Fathers have to be Princes,
each in his own Family; nay, he himself owns that the Kingly Power may escheat
to all the Independent Fathers, and that they may transfer it over to One. Now
that it is in this One, not still in all, or in some other, must be of Humane
Ordinance. Upon which Grounds the answer to his Question is obvious; which is,
that the Subjection due by Nature from Children to their Parents, is not
defeated by the Kingly Power's being in One; and therefore the Power of the
Father over his Child, does not give place to the Power of the Magistrate. If
it did, this their natural Right the Parents may resume, when it is for the Good
of their respective Families, or thought so by them, and indeed of one great
Family, they might resolve the Community into as many separate Governments, as
there are Families, or Patres Familias, at their Pleasures, without any moral
Obligation to the contrary. If the Power whereby a Nation is governed, were not
wholly distinct from that whereby a private Family is; and if both came by
Nature, since the true descent in Nature cannot now be made out, for every
Family to make a Kingdom by its self, must be most natural, and the only lawful
Government, unless Choice, that is, Humane Ordinance, may warrantably cement
them into one Government. And this is very evident in the Case of Escheat, and
of any Translation of Kingly Power from Natural Fathers: For the Kingly Power
is in the Fathers before the transferring it over, quatenus Fathers, or it is
not. If it be in them, quatenus Fathers, then, according to Sir Robert, they
may resume whatever is essential to the Sovereignty of Fathers, being it was
once lawfully vested in them, at least they have a great deal of Latitude for
their Claim, because, Power of Kings* Fol. 2. Patriarcha, p. 97.
For the same Causes that a private Man may be relieved from his unjust and
unreasonable Promise, as for that it was so grievous; or for that he was, by
Deceit or Fraud, circumvented, or induced thereunto by Error or Force, or just
Fear, or by some great Hurt; even for the same Causes, the Prince or Princes
may be restored in that which touches the diminishing of his or their Majesty.

It seems he grants that the Power once lawfully vested in any, cannot be
parted with but upon choice wholly free, ex mero motu, and voluntate spontanea.
Yet being there was no Obligation upon them from God, or Nature, to devolve
their Power upon one rather than another, but purely what proceeded from their
own wills, this if he argues rightly, they might resume when they list, at
least when they all agreed to the Act of Resumption; For says he, Power of
Kings* Fol. 1.
impossible it is in Nature, for to give a Law unto themselves, no more than it
is to command a Man's self in a Matter depending of his own Will, there can be
no Obligation which takes state from the mere Will of him that promises the
same.

And thus there can be no lasting Obligation at all; for he tells us, in
effect, that if there be any Circumstance which makes it not wholly
spontaneous, it is voidable.

But if this Power was not vested in them as Fathers, then it comes not to him
who has the Kingly Power as a Fatherly Power, but merely as Kingly,
contradistinct from, and superior to the Fatherly.

But how can the Supreme Fathers, Nobles, or Freeholders transfer their Power?
According to Sir R. F. it cannot be done in Nature, except every One, not the
major part only, consent.

As to the Acts of the major part of a Multitude, it is true, says he, Patr. p.
44.
that by politic humane Constitutions it is often ordained, that the Voices of
the most shall overruled the rest; and such Ordinances bind, because where Men
are assembled by an Humane Power, that Power that does assemble them, can also
limit and direct the manner of the execution of that Power, and by such
derivative Power made known by Law, or Custom, either the greater Part, or two
Thirds, or three parts of Five, or the like, have Power to oversway the Liberty
of their Opposits. But in Assemblies that take their Authority from the Law of
Nature, it cannot be so; for what Freedom or Liberty is due to any Man by the
Law of Nature, no inferior Power can alter, limit, or diminish. The major part
cannot in nature bind the rest.
No one Man, or a Multitude, can give away the natural Right of another. The
Law of Nature is unchangeable, and howsoever one Man may hinder another in the
use or exercise of his natural Right, yet thereby no Man loses the Right its
self. For the Right, and the use of the Right, may be distinguished; as Right,
and Possession are often distinct. Therefore unless it can be proved, by the Law
of Nature, that the Major, or some other part, have Power to overruled the rest
of the Multitude; It must follow that the Acts of Multitudes not entire, are
not binding to all, but only to such as consent unto them.

Hereby it appears, that it being taken for granted, that the major part, have
not by the Law of Nature, Power to overruled the rest, it must follow, that
where Power is vested in several as Independent Fathers, this can never be
parted with without the joint Consent of every such Father. But they must
always be in Mr. Hobbs his State of War, till all the Dissenters are reduced.
And when ever they have natural Power, that is, strength enough, they may try
for it again, there being no moral Obligation to the contrary. For, what ever
terms they submitted to by Deceit, Fraud, Error, Force, just Fear, or some
great hurt; If they diminish that Majesty which was once in them, they may
vacate the Conditions at pleasure. And what then becomes of all Title by
Conquest?

To show wherein Sir R. has deceived himself and others, would be superfluous
to the judiciously Learned, and thrown away upon them that are not so. But I
conceive that the meanest Capacity may by this be satisfied, that he is guilty
of many Absurdities, and ill Assertions. I must needs say, by those strong
Strokes which in many places occur, I conclude that he was far from being
deceived himself; for he was Master of more Reason; but possibly he practiced
upon the vulgar Understandings, to try how easily he could make them swallow
Contradictions. If it was not with this End, I am sure it was with a worse, to
loosen the Bonds of Government, and make way for real Anarchy; since he
attempts to weaken all other Foundations of it but his own, and yet takes away
even that too. I may reasonably hope, that for the future, no Man will justify
him, unless he first show his Principles to be consistent with themselves, and
with the right of our present Monarchs, few of which will insist upon being
natural Fathers of their People, or Heirs of such Fathers, or Usurpers of the
Right of such Fathers, and Sir Robert acquaints us with no other Title.

The natural intendment, at least the consequence of all his Writings, is, when
rightly considered, to encourage Rebellion, and dethrone Lawful Kings, upon
pretense of natural Right, and a supposititious Patriarchal Power; to degrade
the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Peers, and herd them amongst the Commons, upon
the Supposition, Freeholders Grand-Inquest, p. 38.
that the Power of the House of Commons may be founded on the Principles of
Nature: But that the House of Peers do not, nor cannot make any such pretense,
since, as he says, there is no reason in Nature, why amongst a company of Men
who are all equal, some few should be plucked out to be exalted above their
Fellows, and have Power to govern those who by Nature are their Companions. The
difference between a Peer and a Commoner is not by Nature, but by the Grace of
the Prince.

And this Grace giving no Right, but during the Life of that Prince, upon his
Death all Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, dignified Clergy, and others,
lose their Honors, Preferments, and whatsoever they derived from the Grace of
that Prince, or of his Progenitors, all falls into Anarchy and Confusion, and
all are equal in Dignity; nor have they any Power to alter that equality,
unless every individual Plebean (for so they all become now) freely consent.

For, as he teaches, the Laws, Ordinances, Letters Patents, Power of Kings p. 1.
Privileges and Grants of Princes have no force but during their Life, if they
be not ratified by the express Consent, or at least by the Sufferance of the
Prince following, who had knowledge thereof.

If this be good Doctrine, all those Lands and Possessions which the Piety and
Devotion of former Princes dedicated to the Church, are in a very unsettled
condition. For that, any succeeding Prince may, without Injustice take them
back, they being as much in him, as they were in any of his Progenitors, before
they were granted out. The Consequence of this, methinks, should alarm a Party
best able, if they list to expose him. However, I hope the abhorrence of such
Principles, so contrary to the Glory of the Prince, and Honor of his Peers,
not to mention the Rights of Inferior Subjects, This done since by the Author
of the two Treatises above cited, and by the Author of Patriarcha non Monarcha.
will draw on them a public Censure; at least that some Man of Learning, whose
Name may give Authority to the Truths he patronizes, will more fully convince
the unbelieving World of the Danger to the Government from such Goliahs defying
the Armies of our Israel. This Champion, like that of the Philistines, I
conceive I have laid prostrate with a Pebble-stone, a slight Weapon from a weak
Hand, and cut off the Head of his Argument with his own Sword.

In his Patriarcha he professes that he is not to question or quarrel at the
Rights or Liberties of this or any other Nation; his Task, he says, Patriarc.
p. 6.
is chiefly, to enquire from whom these first came, not to dispute what or how
many these are: But besides his other Contradictions, it may well be doubted
whether in this he is reconcilable with himself in other places, or with the
Foundation of all his Discourses, which lies thus.

It was God's Ordinance that Supremacy should be unlimited in Adam; Anarc. p.
245.
and as large as all the Acts of his Will; and as in him, so in all others that
have Supreme Power, in whatsoever manner they enjoy it. Or take it in other
words, most of them his own.

Adam was the Father, King and Lord over his Family, a Son, Preface to Obs.
touching Forms of Government.
a Subject, and a Servant or Slave, were one and the same thing at first.

But all Monarchs, one way or other, succeed to Adam's Power; therefore a
Monarch, Son, Subject, and Servant, or Slave, are, as to Right, one and the
same thing now. And then, what Rights or Liberties are there in this, or any
Nation, distinct from what he supposes to be inherent in the Person of one?

But that I may be sure to please at the end, Anarc. p. 293.
I shall conclude with Sir R's own words; Thus have I picked out the Flowers
out of his Doctrine about Monarchy, and presented them with some brief
Annotations: It were a tedious work to collect all the learned Contradictions,
and ambiguous Expressions that occur, in every Page of his Platonic Monarchy.

The PROVISIONS at Oxford.
42 Hen. 3.
Vid. cap. 6. F. 47. Anales Monast. Burton, F. 411.
FUerunt etiam in eodem Parliamento apud Oxoniam xxiv. electi, videlicet xii. ex
part Domini Regis, and totidem ex part Communitatis, quorum ordinationibus
and provisionibus Dominus Rex and Dominus Edwardus Filius ejus, sicut superius
praenotatur, se supposuerunt, super status eorundem and totius Regni Angliae
correctione, and in melius reformatione. Plura etiam fuerunt ibidem and alibi
percussa quae inferius continentur.

Provisio facta apud Oxoniam.
Provisum est, quod de quolibet Comitatu eligantur quatuor discreti and legales
Milites, qui quolibet die ubi tenetur Comitatus, conveniant ad audiendum omnes
querelas de quibuscunque transgressionibus and injuriis, quibuscunque personis
illatis per Vicecomites, Ballivos seu quoscumque alios, and ad faciendum
tachiamenta quae ad dictas quaerelas pertinent, usque ad primum adventum
Capitalis Justiciarii in parts illas. Ita quod sufficientes capiant plegios a
conquerente de prosequendo, and similiter ab eo quo queritur veniendo, and juri
parendo coram praefato Justiciario in primo adventu suo. Et quod praedicti
quatuor Milites irrotulari faciant omnes praedictas querelas cum suis
attachiamentis ordinate and serie, scilicet de quolibet hundredo seperatim and
per se. Ita quod praefatus Justiciarius in primo adventu suo possit audire, and
terminare praefatas quaerelas sigillatim de quolibet hundredo. Et scire faciant
Vicecomiti quod venire faciat coram praefato Justiciario in proximo adventu suo
ad dies and loco quae eis scire faciat, omnes hundredarios and ballivos suos.
Ita quod quilibet hundredarius venire faciat omnes conquerentes and defendentes
de balliva sua, successive secundum quod praefatus Justiciarius duxerit de
praedicto hundredo placitare. Et tot and tales tam Milites quam alios liberos,
and legales homines de Balliva sua per quos rei veritas melius convinci
poterit; ita quod omnes simul and semel non vexentur, sed tot veniant quod
possunt una die placitari and terminari.

Idem provisum est quod nullus Miles de praedictis Comitatibus, occasion
quietanciae quod non ponatur in Juratis vel assisis per Chartam Domini Regis
deferatur, nec quietus sit quoad provisionem istam sic factam pro communi
utilitate totius Regni.

Electi ex part Domini Regis.
Dominus Londoniensis Episcopus, Dominus Wintoniensis Electus, Dominus H.
Filius Regis Almaniae, Dominus J. Comes Warennae, Dominus Guido de Lysinan,
Dominus W. de Valentia, Dominus J. Comes Warewici, Dominus Johannes Mansell,
Fr. J. de Derlington. Abbas Westmonasterii, Dominus H. de Wengham.

Electi ex part Comitum and Baronum.
Dominus Wigornensis Episcopus, Dominus Simon Comes Lycestrensis, Dominus
Richardus Comes Gloverniae, Dominus Humfridus Comes Heref. Dominus Rogerus
Mariscallus, Dominus Rogerus de Mortuo Mari, Dominus J. Filius Galfridi,
Dominus Hugo le Bigot, Dominus Richardus de Gray, Dominus W. Bardulf, Dominus
P. de Monteforti, Dominus Hugo Dispensarius.

Et si contigat aliquem istorum necessitate interesse non posse, reliqui
istorum eligant quem voluerint, scilicet alium necessarium loco absentis ad
istud negotium prosequendum.

Ceo jura le Commun de Angletere a Oxenford.
Nus tells and tells fesum a saver a tute gentz, ke nus avum jure sur Seintes
Evangeles, e sumus tenuz ensemble par tell serment, e premettuns en bonne fei,
ke chescun de nus e tuz ensemble nus enter eiderums, e nus e les nos cuntre
tute genz, dreit fesante en rens pernant, ke nus ne purrum sanz mef fere, salve
la fei le Rei, e de la corune. E premettuns sur meime le serment, ke nus de nus
ren ne prendra, de tere, ne de moeble, par que cest serment purra estre
desturbe, u en nule ren Empire. E si null fet en contre ceo, nus le tendrums a
Enemi mortel.

Ceo est le serment a vint e quatre.
Chescun jura sur seintes Evuangeles, ke il al honur de Deu, e a la fei le Rei,
e al profit de Reaume, ordenera e tretera ovekes les avaunt dit jurres, sur le
refurmement e le amendment del Reaume. E ke ne lerra pur dun, ne pur premesse,
pur amur, ne pur hang, ne pur pour de nulli, ne pur gain, ne pur perte, ke
leaument ne face solum la tenur de la lettre ke le Rei ad sur ceo don, et su^
fez eusement.

Ceo jura le haute Justice de Engletere. Il jure ke ben and leaument, a sun
poer, fra ceo ke apent a la justicerie de dreiture tenir a tute gentz, al prou
le Rey e del Reaume, solum la purveance fete and a fere par les vint and
quatre, and par le cunseil le Rei e les hauz humes de la tere, ke li jurrunt en
cestes chooses a aider and a maintenir.

Ceo jure le Chanceler de Englettere.
Ke il ne enselera null bref, fors bref de curs, sanz le commandment le Rei and
de sun Cunseil ke serra present. Ne enselera ren ke seit encontre le ordinement
ke est fet and serra a fere par les vint and quatre, u par la greinure party.
Ne ke il ne prendra null loer autrement ke il nest divise as autres. E lem li
bandra un companiun en la furme ke le Cunseil purverra.

Ceo est le serment ke les Gardens des Chastles firent. Ke il les Chastles le
Rei leaument e en bone fei garderunt, al oes le Rei, and de ses heyrs. E ke eus
les rendrunt al Rei u a ses heyrs, and a null autre, and par sun cunseil, e en
null autre manner; Ceo est a savere par prodes homes de la terre esluz a sun
Cunseil, u par la greinture party. E cest furme par escrit dure deske a duze
ans. E de elokes en avaunt per cest establement, and cest serment, ne seint
constreint ke franchement ne les pussent render al Rei a se heirs.

Ceo sunt ceus ke sunt jurez del conseil le Rei.
Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis, Episcopus Wigornensis, Comes Glovernensis, Comes
Marescallus, Petrus de Sabaudia, Comes Albermarlie, Comes Warewick, Comes
Herefordensis, Johannes Mansel, Johannes filius Galfiridi, Petrus de
Monteforti, Richardus de Gray, Rogerus de Mortuo-Mari, Jacobus de Aldithelege.

Les duze de par le Rei unt eslu des duze de par le commun.
le Cunte Roger le Marescall. Hugo de Bigot.
E la party ver le Commun ad eslu des xii. ke sunt de part le Rei.
le Cunte de Warewik Johannes Mansell.
E ces quatre vint poer a eslire le cunseil le Rei, and quant il un eslu, il
les mustrunt as vint and quatre and la u la greinture party de ses assent, e
seit tenu.

Ces sunt les duze ke sunt eslu par les Baruns a treter a treis Parlementz par
an, oveke le cunseil le Rei, pur tut le commun de la terre de commun bosoine.

Episcopus Londoniensis, Comes Herefordensis, Johannes de Bailol, Johannes de
Gray, Rogerus de Sumery, Hugo dispensarius, Aegidius de Argenten, Comes
Wintoniensis, Philippus Basset, Johannes de Verdun, Rogerus de Monte alto,
Thomas de Gresly.
Ces sunt les vint and quatre ke sunt mis per le Commun a treter de aid le Rei.
Episcopus Wigornensis, Episcopus Londoniensis, Episcopus Sarum, Comes
Leycestrensis, Comes Glovernensis, Comes Marescallus, Petrus de Sabaudia, Comes
Herefordensis, Comes Albemarlie, Comes Wintoniensis, Comes Oxoniensis, Johannis
filius Galfridi, Johannes de Gray, Johannes de Bailol, Rogerus de Mortuomari,
Rogerus de Monte alto, Rogerus de Sumery, Petrus de Monteforti, Thomas de
Gresley, Fulco de Kerdiston, Aegidius de Argenton, Johannes Tyriel, Philippus
Basset, Aegidius de Erdinton.
E si aukun de ces ne i pusse estre u ne voile, a ces kel i ferrunt a peut poer
de autre eslire en sun lieu.

Del estat de seint Eglise.
A remembrer fet ke le estat le Seint Eglise seit amend, par les vint and
quatre esluz a refurmer le estat del Reaume de Angleterre, kant il verrunt liu,
and tens solum le poer ke il en unt par la Letter le Rei de Engletere.

De la haute Justice.
Derichef ke Justice seit un u deus, and quel poer il avera, and ke il ne seit
fors un an. Issi ke al chef del an respoine devant le Rei and sun cunseil, de
sun tens, and devant celui ke serra apres lui.

Del Tresorer, e de le Eschecker.
Autel del Tresorer. Mes ke il rende acunte del chef del an. E bone gens autres
seient mis al Escheker solum le ordenement les avaunt dit vint and quatre. E la
vengent totes les issues de la tere, and en nule part ailurs. E ceo ke lem
verra a amender, seit amend.

Del Chanceller.
Autel del Chanceler. Issi ke al chef del an respoin de sun tens. E ke il ne
ensele horse de curs, par la sule volunt del Rei. Mes le face par le Cunseil ke
serra entur le Rei.

Del poer la Justice, and de Bailives.
La haute Justice a poer de amender les tors fez de tutes autres Justices, and
de Ballifs, e de Cuntes, and de Baruns, and de tutes autres gentz, solum lei
and dreit de la tere, e en leus deues. E ke la Justice ne prenge ren, si ne
seit present de pain and de vin, e de teles chooses, ceo est a saver, viandes
and beyfres sicum lem ad este acustume a porter as tables de prodes homes a la
Jornee. E ceste meime chose seit entendue de tuz les Cunseleirs la Rei, and de
tuz ses Ballifs. E que null Ballif par achesun de plai, u de sun office, ne
prenge null loer par sa main, ne par autre en nule manner. E si il est ateint,
ke il seit reint, and cil ke done autre si. E si covent ke le Rei done a sa
Justice and a sa gent ke le servent, ke il ne eient mester ke il ren prengent
de autrui.

De Vescuntes.
Les Vescuntes seint purveus per leus gentz and prodes homes, and tere tenanz.
Issi ke en chescun Cunte seit un Vavasur del Cunte memes Vescunte, ke ben and
lenement trete la gent del Cunte and dreitement. E ke il ne prenge loer, e ke
il ne seit Vescunte fors un an ensemble. E ke en le an rende ses acuntes al
Echeker, e respoine de sun tens. E ke le Rei lui face del soen solum sun
afferant, coment il pusse garder le Cunte drietement. E ke il ne prenge null
loer, ne li ne ses Ballifs. E si ils seint atteint, seint reintz.

A remember fet ke lem met tell amendment a la Gynerie, and as gardens de la
Gynerie, ke lem y savue le serement.

De Eschaeturs.
Bons Eschaeturs seint mis. E ke il ne prengent rens des bens as morts, de
queles teres deivent estre en la main le Rei. Mes ke les Eschaeturs eient
franche administration des bens des ke il averunt fet le gre le Rei, si debt
lui deivent. E ceo solum la furme de la Chartre de franchise. E ke lem enquerge
des tors fez ke Eschaeturs unt fet la en arere, and seit amend de sell and de
tell. Ne tailage ne autre chose ne prenge, fors si come il devera solum la
Charte de franchise.

La Chartre de franchise de seit guard fermement.

Del Eschange de Lundres.
A Remember fet del Eschange de Lundres amender, and de la Cite de Lundres, and
de totes les autres Citees le Rei, ke a hunte and a destrucciuns sunt alez par
tailages, and autres oppressions.

De Hospitio Regis and Reginae.
A Remember fet del hostel le Rei and la Regine amender.

Des Parlementz quanz serrunt tenuz per an, and coment.
Il fet a Remember ke les xxiv. unt ordenne ke treis Parlemenz seint par an. Le
premer as utaves de Sein Michel. Le secund le demain de la Chandelur. Le terz
le premer Jor de Jun, Ceo est a saver, treis semaines devant le Seint John. A
ces treis Parlemenz vendrunt les Cunseilers le Rei esluz tut ne seint il pas
mandez, pur ver le estat del Reaume, and pur treter les communs besoingnes del
Reaume, quant mester Serra, per le mandement le Rei.

Si fiet a remembrer ke le Commun eslise xii prodes homes ke vendrunt as
Parlementz, and autre fez quant mester serra, quant Rei u sun Cunseil les
mandera, pur terter de besoingnes le Rei, and del Reaume. E ke le commun tendra
pur estable ce ke ces xii frunt. E ceo serra fet pur esparnier le cust del
Commun.

Quinze serrunt nomez par ces quatre, ceo est a saver, per le Cunt le
Mareschall, le Cunte de Warewick, Hugo le Bigot, and John Mansell, ke sunt
eslus par les xxiv pur nomer les devant dit quinze, les queus serrunt de
Cunseil le Rei. E serrunt cunfermz per les avantdit xxiv, u per le greinture
party de else. E averunt poer del Rei conseiler en bone sey, del government del
Reaume, and de totes chooses qe al Rei u al Reaume pertinent. E pur amender and
adreser totes le chooses ke ill verrunt ke facent a adreser and amender. E sur
le haute Justice, and sur totes autres gentz. E sil ne poent tuz estre, ceo ke
le greinture party fra serra ferm and estable.

Ces sunt les nuns des Cheveteins Chasteans le Rei, and de ceus ke les unt en
guard.
Robertus de Nevil, Bamburg, Novum Castrum super Tyne. Gilbertus de Gant,
Scardeburg, Willielmus Bardulf, Notingham, Radulfus Basset de Sapercote,
Norhampton, Hugo Bigot, Turris Londoniarum, Richardus de Gray, Doveria,
Nicholaus de Monles, Roucestria and Cantuaria, Wintonia, Rogerus de Stamford,
Porcestria, Stephanus Long Espee, Corf, Mattheus de Besill, Gloucestria,
Henricus de Tracy, Exonia, Richardus de Rochele, Haldesham. Johannes de Gray,
Herefordia, Robertus Walrant, Sarum, Hugo dispensarius, Horestan, Petrus de
Monteforti, Brugewater, Comes Warewik, Divises, Johannes filius Bernardi,
Oxonia.
N. III. Vid. CAP. 6. F. 56.
ILLO tempore voce praeconaria proclamatum fuit per Angliam, Mat. West. F. 430.
An. 1297.
ut possessores Lanarum exponerent ipsas venditioni infra mensem, in civit.
assig. alioqui tanquam forisfactura cederent ipsi Regi. Quae quidem in die
Sancti Greg. quasi modo praelocuto callide congregatae, pro forisfactura Regis
in Flandriam sunt transvectae. His and aliis extorsionibus turbati Comites and
Barons Angliae Parliamentum suum per se in Foresta de Wyre quae est in Marchia
statuerunt, etc.

Tenes locum These. and Baron. de Scaccario miserunt Domino Regi quasdam
litteras dicti Scaccii in hec verba Sire! Memd. in Scio. 25 ^. 1. F. 39.
Printed with the Year Book of E. 2.
que cest joel prochein devant le fest de Seint Bartholomew, a hours de 3nt,
vienner a vostre Eschequer a la bar le Conte Marshall and le Conte de
Hereford, etc. and plusours autres Baneres and Bachelors, and le Count de
Hereford, dit que il fuit charge a dire de per le Conte de Marshall and les
auters, que illonque fuer. and per toutle Cominalte du Royalme, auxibien Clers,
come Lais, que de deux chooses se sentierent eux e le Commonaute greeves, lau
d'ascun greevantes don't il aveyent fait monstrer les Articles a vous, coma lour
Liege Snr. Et l'auter que il entendirent que fuit fait per nous del 'Eschequer
sans vestre sen, come endroit del utyme lever, and des leins prender, and diont
q'en les breves que sont issues per lev. le utyme est contean que Countes,
Barons, Chivaliers and la Commonaute del dit Royalme unt grant le utyme, Si
come eux and lour Ancesters ont fait ce a en arrier, la ou le dit utyme per
eauz ne per la dite unques ne fuit grant: and dit ouster, que null chose ne niet
plu tot home enservage que rechat de Sans e estre taille a volunt: and que si
le utyme fueust issi levee, ce turnereit a disherison de eaux, e de lour Heirs,
Et dit apertment a touts les autres apres, que tiel taillage, and pris de
leynes ne fuer my sufferables, ne suffreint en null manner. Et nous preerent,
que cestes chooses seissons redresser a tant, seu partirent sans null respons
attender. Et pur ce sire! nous voiles mander vestre volount si vous plest sur
ce chose, etc. Ista litera missa fuit per Rob. Divelyn Hostiar de scio ad
praed. horam nonam.

Postea Dominus Rex Rescripsit voluntatem suam, etc. Nous avoins entender,
comment les 2 Countees viender a Eschequer ove lour company, etles chooses auxi
que ils ont dit, etc. quant a ce que il ne suffreint en null manner de lever le
utime, ne de fair la prise: Nous voil' que vous ne laisses my pur ce que vous
n'alles avaunt ataxer; mes per ce que il diseyent, que la leve turner in
disheritance, etc. faits scaver and tries per my les Contes en la taxation
d'utimes se doit fair, que si y ad null que deubter de tiel prejudice ou
disherison, que le Roy le quitter per ses Letters coverts, que la taxation, ne
la leve, ne poit turner en servage de nuly, ne esse tret en usage en temps
avenir. Mes que le Rey se puisse eyder ore pur son grant busoin, que est si
hastif. pur la Salvation de luy e d'eux mesmes, and de tut le Reaume, and pur
allegier l'un des eaux mischeifs duont il unt este charges ja grant piete. Et
voit que Chanchellor fra Letters, etc. Pur ceux que doubta, etc. Et quant a la
prise de leynes, voloit que l'Ordinans que ent se feynt se teigne, e dit soit
pur tut, auxi pur vous, come pur ceux que se intromitterent, que le Roy ne voit
rien prender mes per achat, fesant gree. Et que en aves auter foits a demand
avisement sur cest besoin, ou auter que soit hastif vous escries savoir a
nostre fitz and a son Counsel que aura pres luy, and eux mitter ont tien
Counsel come ils verront. Bundel Brev. de Priv. Sigillo in Turri Land. An. 25.
E. 1. and Pat. 26. E. 1.
Done a Winchelsey sous nostre Privy Seal.

Come le Roy avaunt son passage verse Flandre, eust volunte e desire de fair
redresser and amender les Grievances faits a son People, en noun de luy e sur
ceo envoiast ses Letters par tutez les Contes d'Engleterre, pur cest chose
metter en effect: ordine est par luy e par son Counseil, que en Chescun Conte
soient assignez quatre, cest savoir deus Chevalers, des queux le un serra mis
par luy, e lautre serra pris du Conte, un Clerk, un home de Religion, que
seint bons, e leaux e bien avises pur enquirer de touts manners de grievances,
come des chooses prises horse de Seint Esglise, des prises de Leynes, Peaus,
Quirs, Bles, Bestes, Charz, Pissons, e de totes autres maneres de chooses par mi
le Royalme, de Clers, and de Lays, puis la Guerre comotie enter le Roy de
France e lui: fust ce pur Guard de la Mer, ou en autre manner. Enquiront mesms
ceaus per qui, e as queuz, e de quoie, e de combien, e de value, e coment, e en
quen manner ices prises, e grevances fuerent faites au pueple. E ceus asignes
eient plein power, de enquirer, oir, and terminer, aufi bien par office, come a
fuit de party. E quant la verite de ces chooses serra ateinte, le quel que ces
seit par garant, ou sans garant, ce que serra pris sans garant seit return a
ceus que le damage ont receu, si le tortz fesantz eient de quoi, e outre ceo
puni pur le trespass. Et sil nient de quoi, ceaus as queaus les garantz e
commissions sont venus, come Viscontes, Clerks assigns, Baillifs, and autres
tiels maneres de Ministres, respoignent pur lour sourmis que averent fait tells
prises. E que de ce que serra trove pris par garant, le Roy serra certifiez, e
en fra tant que il se tendront apaiz par reason.

N. IV. Vid. CAP. 7. F. 65.
QUID loquar de Odone Baiocasino Praesule, Ordericus Vitalis. F. 522.
qui CONSUL PALATINUS erat, and ubique cunctis Angliae habitatoribus
formidabilis erat, ac veluti secundus Rex passim jura dabat: Principatum super
omnes Comites and Regni Optimates habuit, and cum Thesauris Antiquorum Cantiam
possedit, in qua Jamdudum Edelbertus Irminrici Filius, Eadbald, and
Ercombertus, and Egbert, atque Lotheris Frater ejus regnaverunt.

Odo, ut supra dictum, est Palatinus Cantiae Consul erat, Ibid. F. 666.
and plures sub se Comites, virosque potentes habebat.

Sigibert calls him in one place, Sigeberti Monachi Gemblatensis Chronicon.
Justiciarus and Princeps totius Angliae: In another, he shows that Odo had
been here in the Confessor's Time; and it is not improbable that he was made
Earl of Kent by the Confessor, Earl Godwin and his Sons being forced to yield
up the Services of their Knights to the King, Malmsbury, F. 56. Servitium
Militum per Angliam Bromton, An. 1052. F. 944.
after which they were banished. But returning again, they came to Terms with
the King; one of which was, That the Normans should be banished. Sigebert
speaking of the Reign of the Confessor, says,

Et Odonem CONSULEM and omnes Francos Godwinus and Filii sui art sua ab Anglia
exulaverunt.

N. V. Vid. CAP. 7. F. 66.
WHereas Records of the Tower show the Chamberlain's Office to belong to the
Barony of the Earl of Oxford; it seems it was so anciently, that at the
Coronation of Richard the Second, the Counsel of Robert de Vere advised him to
lay his Claim to it in Prescription. Accordingly in his Claim before the High
Steward, he says,

Ses Ancesters ont estre Chamberlains des Nobles Progenitors nostre dict Snr'
Roy puis temps de memory. Sir John Cotton 's Library, formerly Sir Roberts Tit.
Tiberius, N. 8.


This may seem to be an ill laying of Prescription, as within time of memory;
but it is to be observed, that in those early days, by Puis they meant from the
beginning of time of Prescription.

8 E. 2. ed per Dominum Maynard. F. 271.
Accordingly in the Year-Book of E. 2. I find it pleaded;

Nous avoiens este seize PUIS TEMPS de memory continuelment, and vous ne poits
my prendre issue sur la charter fait avaunt temps de memory, come puis, and
demandons jugement.

N. VI. Vid. sup. CAP. 7. F. 69.
Part of the Modus tenendi Parl.
CUM Dubitatio, vel Casus difficilis, pacis vel guerre, emergat in Regno, vel
extra, referatur and excutetur casus ille in scriptis, in pleno Parliamento and
tractetur, and disputetur ibidem, inter pares Parliamenti. Et si necesse sit
injungatur per Regem, seu ex part Regis si Rex non intersit, cuilibet graduum
Parium, quod quilibet gradus sedeat per se, and liberetur Casus ille Clerico
suo in scriptis, and in dicto loco recitari faciant coram eis Casum illum, ita
quod ipsi considerent inter se, qualiter melius and justius procedi poterit in
Casu illo, sicut ipsi, pro persona Regis, and eorum propriis personis, and
etiam propriis personis ipsorum quorum personas ipsi representant, velint coram
Deo respondere: and suas responsiones and avifamenta reportent in Scriptis, ut
omnibus eorum responsionibus, consiliis, and avisamentis, hinc inde auditis,
secundum melius and salubrius consilium procedatur; Et ubi saltem major pars
Parliamenti concordat. At si per discordiam, inter Regem, and alios Magnates,
vel forte inter ipsos Magnates, pax Regni infirmetur, vel populus, vel patria,
ita quod videtur Regi, and ejus consilio, quod expediens sit quod negotium
illud tractetur, and emendetur, per considerationem omnium parium Regni sui,
vel si per guerram Rex and Regnum turbulentur, vel si Casus difficilis coram
Cancellario Angliae emergat, seu judicium difficile coram Justiciariis fuerit
reddendum, and hujusmodi, and si forte in hujusmodi deliberationibus omnes, vel
saltem major pars concordare non valiant, tunc Comes Senescallus, Comes
Constabularius, and Comes Marescallus, vel duo illorum eligent viginti and
quinque personas de omnibus paribus Regni, scilicet duos Episcopos, and tres
Procuratores pro Clero, duos Comites, and tres Barons, quinque Milites
Comitatuum, quinque Cives, and quinque Burgenses, qui faciunt viginti quinque:
Et illi viginti quinque possunt eligere ex seipsis duodecim, and condescendere
in eis, and ipsi duodecim sex, and condescendere in eis, and ipsi sex ad tres,
and condescendere in eis, and illi tres in paucioribus se condescendere non
possunt, nisi optenta licentia a Domino Rege. Et si Rex consenceat ipsis tres
possunt in duos, and de illis duobus aliter poterit in alium descendere. Et ita
demum stabit sua ordinatio super totum Parliamentum, and ita condescendendo a
viginti quinque personis usque unam solam personam, nisi numerus major
concordare valeat, and ordinare; tandem una persona, ut est dictum, pro omnibus
ordinabit, quod cum seipsa discordare non potest. Salvo Domino Regi and ejus
Consilio, quod ipsi hujusmodi ordinationes postquam Scriptae fuerint examinare
and emendare valiant, si hoc facere sciant, and velint: Ita quod hoc faciant
ibidem, tunc, in pleno Parliamento, and de consensu Parliamenti and non retro
Parliamentum.

N. VII. Vid. CAP. 7. F. 70.
SEneschallia Angliae pertinet ad Comitem Leicester. and pertinet ab Antiquo.
Et sciendum est, Sir John Cotton 's Library, Tit. Tiberius. n. 8, De Officio
Seneschalliae.
quod ejus officium est supervidere and regulare sub Rege, and immediate post
Regem totum Regnum Angliae, and omnes ministros legum infra idem Regnum,
temporibus pacis, and guerrae, etc. Item officium Seneschalliae est, quod si
Rex habeat malos Consiliarios circa eum, qui sibi dant Consilia ad faciend.
talia quae sunt apta and prona ad dedecus suum, aut exhaeredationem suam, and
ad publicum malum, and destructionem populi sui, tunc Seneschallus Angliae
assumpto secum Constabulario, and aliis Magnatibus, and aliis de Communitate
Regni Angliae, mittent ad hujusmodi Consiliarium Regis, quod ipsum Regem ita
ducere and consulere, and desistat de hujusmodi malis consiliis prius Regi
factis mentionem faciend. Quod ab eo and ejus presentia recedat, and moram cum
eo, quod dedecus suum and damnum publicum ut predictum est, non faciat. Quod si
vero faciat, tum mittent ad Regem, quod ipsum ab eo amoveri faciat, and ejus
consilium non audiat, pro eo quod a toto populo malus Consiliarius inter Regem
and suum Populum praesumitur. Quod si Rex non fecerit, alias and pluries
mittent tam Regi, quam ei. Quod si demum non Rex nec hujusmodi Consiliarius de
hujusmodi missionibus, and supplicationibus advertat, sed ea potius facere
neglexerit; tum, pro bono publico licebit Seneschallo and Constabulario
Angliae, Magnatibus, and aliis de Communitate Regni, capere, and corpus ejus
salvum custodire, usque ad proximum Parliamentum, and seisire res, redditus,
and omnes possessiones suas, donec judicium suum attenderit, and subierit, per
considerationem istius rni in Parliamento.

N. VIII. Vid. CAP. 7. F. 72.
JOhannes Dei gratia, etc. sciatis nos concessisse, and presenti carta nostra
confirmasse, dilecto and fideli nostro Willielmo Marescallo, Comiti Pembroke,
and haeredibus suis Magistratum Marescalciae Curiae nostrae; quem Magistratum
Gilbertus Marescallus H. Rs. avi patris nostri, and Johannes filius ipsius
Gilberti, disrationaverunt coram praed. Rege H. in Curia sua, contra Rob. de
Venoiz, and contra Willielmum de Hastings, qui ipsum Magistratum
calumpniabantur. Et hoc judicium, quia defecerunt se de recto ad diem quem eis
inde constituerat. Quare volumus, and firmiter precipimus, quod predictus
Willielmus, and heredes sui post eum, habeant and teneant pred. Magistratum,
cum omnibus ad illum pertinen. been, and in pace, libere, and quiet, integre,
and honorifice, de nobis and heredibus Testibus W. Land. E. Elyens. and H.
Sarum. Ep. Dat. per manus H. Cant. Arch.

N. IX. Vid. CAP. 9. F. 93.
Rot. Parl. 1. H. 7. Presentatio Praelocutoris.
-- SUbsequenterque idem dominus Rex prefatis communibus ore suo proprio
eloquens, ostendendo suum adventum ad jus and Coronam Angliae fore, tam per
justum titulum haereditanciae, quam per verum Dei Judicium, in tribuendo sibi
victoriam de inimico suo in Campo, declaravit quod omnes subditi sui
cujuscunque status, gradus seu conditionis fuerint and haberent and tenerent
sibi and haeredibus suis, omnia terras, tenementa, redditus, and haereditamenta
sua, eisdemque gauderent, exceptis talibus personis quales suam Majestatem
Regiam ostenderunt, qui juxta eorum demerita in presentis Parliamenti Curia
aliter essent plectendi.

Titulus Regis.
Item. Quaedam Billa exhibita fuit praefato Domino Regi in praesenti
Parliamento, per Communitates Regni Angliae in eodem Parliamento existentes,
hanc seriem verborum continens.

To the Pleasure of Almighty God, the Wealth, Prosperity, and Suertie of this
Realm of England, to the singular comforth of all the King's Subjects of the
same, and in avoiding of all Ambiguities and Questions. Be it ordeigned,
Stablished, and Enacted, by Auctoritee of this present Parliament, that the
Inheritance of the Crounes of the Realms of England, and of France, with all
the preeminence and dignity Royal to the same pertaining, and all other
Signeries to the King belonging beyond the Sea, with the Appurtenaunces thereto
in any wise due or perteineing, be, rest, remain and abide in the most Royal
Personn of our now Sovereign Lord King Henry the vii th, and in the Heirs
of his Body lawfully comeing, perpetually with the Grace of God so to endure,
and in none other.

Qua quidem Billa in Parliamento praedicto lecta audita and matura
deliberatione intellecta, eidem Billae, de assensu Dominorum Spiritualium and
Temporalium in dicto Parliamento existen. ad requisitionem Communitatis
praedictae, necnon authoritate ejusdem Parliamenti respondebat eidem, in forma
sequenti.

Nostre Seigneur le Roy, del assent des Seigneurs Espirituelx and Temporelex
esteaniz en cest Parliament, and a la request des Commens avantditz, le voet en
toutz poyntz.

The King our Sovereign Lord remembering, Restitutio Henrici Sexti, 1. H. 7.
n. 16.
how against all Rightwisnes, Honor, Nature, and Dewtie, an inordinate,
seditious, and slaundres Act was made, agayns the most famous Prince of blessed
memory, King Herrie the Sixte his Uncle, in the Parliament holden at
Westminster, the fourth day of November, the first Year of the Reign of Edward
the Fourth, late King of England, whereby his said Uncle, contrary to due
Allegianee, and all due Order, was attainted of High Treason. Wherefore our
same Sovereign Lord, by the Advice and Assent of the Lords Spirituals and
Temporals, and Comines in this present Parliament assembled, and by Authority
of the same, ordeineth, enacteth, and establishes, that the said Act, and all
Acts of Attainder, Forfaiture, and Disablement, made or had in the said
Parliament, or else in any other Parliament of the said late King Edward,
against the said most blessed Prince King Herrie, or against the right famous
Princess Margaret late Queen of England, his Wife, or the right victorious
Prince Edward late Prince of Wales, Son of the same blessed King Herrie, and
Margarett, Jasper Duke of Bedford late Earl of Pembroke, or Herrie late Duke of
Somerset; ( the which Jasper, and Herrie late Duke of Somerset, for their true
and faithful Allegiances and Services done to the same blessed King Herrie,
were attainted of High Treason) or any of them, by what Name or Names they, or
any of them, be named in any of the said Acts, be against the said blessed King
Herrie, Queen Margaret, Edward late Prince, and the same Dukes, and the Heirs
of every of them, void, annulled, repelled, and of no Force, ne Effect.

N. X. Vid. CAP. F. 103.
SAnctissimo in Christo Patri and Domino, Claus 3. E. 1. m. 9. Cedula. In a
Letter to the Pope.
Domino G. divina providentia Sacro-sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae, and universalis
Ecclesiae summo Pontifici. Edwardus ejusdem gratia Rex Angliae; Dominus
Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae. Cum reverentia and honor salutem, and pedum
oscula beatorum. Mandavit nobis olim per literas Apostolicas, quas prona mentis
devotione recepimus vestra sanctitas reverenda, ut annuum censum, in quo
Sacrosanctae Romans Ecclesiae ratione Regni Angl. pro octo praeteritis annis
asseritis nos teneri, venerabili vestro Magistro R. de Nogeriis Capellano
vestro assignari liberaliter ac integre, nomine pred. Romans Ecclesiae,
faceremus. Nuper autem alias literas vestras recepimus cum Reverentia
continentes, quod cum nos respons. Relationis solutionis Census annui memorati,
quam nobis pred. Capel. vester exposuit vestrae and Ecclesiae Romanae Nomine,
diligenter Deliberatione Consilii Procerum Regni nostri, in Parliamento quod
circa Octabas Resurrectionis Dominicae celebrari in Anglia consuerit, pro eo
duximus reservand. quod tempore receptionis pred. lit. vestrae, noviter ejusdem
Regni gubernacula sumpseramus, nunc de hujusmodi censu sine ulteriori procrast.
impendi faceremus eidem satisfac. plen. Capellano. Fatemur enim S. Pater and
Domine, ad Parliament. nostrum in Octabis Resurrectionis Dominicae prox. pret.
Regni nostri Praelatos and Proceres evocasse; ibique multa statuisse divina
gratia favente, quae meliorationem status Ecclesiae Anglicanae, reformationem
Regni ejusdem recipient, and communes profectus populi capiant incrementa. Set
antequam eidem Parl. propter negotiorum multitud. quae reformationis remedio
indigebant, finem imponere valeremus, Eodem Capellano vestro responsionem
debitam sibi fieri instanter postulante, quaedam gravis nos invasit, sicut
Domino placuit, infirmitas corporalis, quae perfectionem multorum aliorum
negot. and deliberationem Petitionis Census annui supardict. de quo dolemus non
modicum, impedivit. Sicque cum occatione infirmitatis hujusmodi, a qua per Dei
gratiam cujus est perimere and mederi incepimus convalescere, Idem Parl. fuerit
dissolutum, and super hoc nequiverimus super Petitione Census ejusdem
deliberationem habere, cum Praelatis and Proceribus antedictis; sine quorum
communicato consilio sanctitatae vestrae super predictis non possumus
respondere; Et jurejurando in coronatione nostra prestit. sumus astricti, quod
jura Regni nostri servabimus illibata, nec aliquod, quod Diadema tangat Regni
ejusdem, absque ipsorum requisito consilio faciemus; Reverende Benignitati
vestrae humiliter supplicamus, and pro dono petimus spirituali, quatenus
moleste non ferat sanctitas vestra, si ad praesens super pred. sicut vellemus,
non possumus respondere. Imo patientia vestra paterna si placet nos super hoc
habere dignetur excutatos, Pro firmo scituri pie Pater and Domine, quod in alio
Parliamento nostro, quod ad festum Sancti Michaelis prox. fut intendimus dante
Domino celebrare, habito and communicato Consilio cum Praelat. and Proc.
memoratis, vobis super praem. ipsorum Consilio dabimus responsionem. Conservet
vos Dominus Ecclesiae Sanctae suae per tempora longaeva. Test meipso apud
Westminster. 19. die Junii Anno Regni nostri 3o.

The Present CONVENTION a Parliament.
N. XI. Vid. CAP. 10. F. 111.
I. THat the formality of the King's Writ of Summons is not so essential to an
English Parliament, but that the Peers of the Realm, and the Commons, by their
Representatives duly Elected, may legally Act as the great Council and
Representative Body of the Nation, though not summoned by the King, especially
when the Circumstances of the time are such, that such Summons cannot be had,
will (I hope) appear by these following Observations.

First, The Saxon Government was transplanted hither out of Germany, where the
meeting of the Saxons in such Assemblies was at certain fixed times; viz. at
the New and Full Moon. But after their Transmigration hither, Religion
changing, other things changed with it; and the Times for their public
Assemblies, in conformity to the great Solemnity celebrated by Christians, came
to be changed to the Feasts of Easter, Pentecost, and the Nativity. The lower
we come down in Story, the seldomer we find these General Assemblies to have
been held; and sometimes (even very anciently) when upon extraordinary
Occasions, they met out of course, a Precept, an Edict, or Sanction is
mentioned to have issued from the King: But the Times, and the very Place of
their ordinary Meeting having been certain, and determined in the very first
and eldest Times that we meet with any mention of such Assemblies, which times
are as ancient as any Memory of the Nation it self; hence I infer, that no
Summons from the King can be thought to have been necessary in those days,
because it was altogether needless.

Secondly, The Succession to the Crown did not in those days, nor till of late
Years, run in a course of Lineal Succession by right of Inheritance: But upon
the Death of a Prince, those Persons of the Realm that Composed the then
Parliament, Assembled in order to the choosing of another. That the Kingdom was
then Elective, though one or other of the Royal Blood was always chosen, but
the next in Lineal Succession very seldom, is evident from the Genealogies of
the Saxon Kings, from an old Law made at Calchuyth, appointing how, and by whom
Kings shall be chosen; and from many express and particular Accounts given by
our old Historians, of such Assemblies held for Electing of Kings. Now such
Assemblies could not be Summoned by any King; and yet in conjunction with the
King that themselves set up, they made Laws, binding the King and all the Realm.

Thirdly, After the Death of King William Rufus, Robert, his Elder Brother,
being then in the Holy Land, Henry, the youngest Son of King William the First,
procured an Assembly of the Clergy and People of England, to whom he made large
promises of his good Government, in case they would accept of him for their
King; and they agreeing, That if he would restore to them the Laws of King
Edward the Confessor, then they would consent to make him their King. He swore
that he would do so, and also free them from some Oppressions, which the Nation
had groaned under in his Brothers and his Fathers time. Hereupon they chose him
King, and the Bishop of London, and the Archbishop of York, set the Crown upon
his Head: Which being done, a Confirmation of the English Liberties passed the
Royal Assent in that Assembly, the same in substance, though not so large as
King John's, and King Henry the Third's Magna Charta's afterward were.

Fourthly, After that King's Death, in such another Parliament, King Stephen
was Elected, and Mawd the Empress put by, though not without some stain of
perfidiousness upon all those, and Stephen himself especially, who had sworn in
her Father Lifetime, to acknowledge her for their Sovereign after his decease.

Fifthly, In King Richard the First's time, the King being absent in the Holy
Land, and the Bishop of Ely then his Chancellor, being Regent of the Kingdom in
his Absence, whose Government was intolerable to the People for his Insolence
and manifold Oppressions, a Parliament was convened at London, at the Instance
of Earl John, the King's Brother, to treat of the great and weighty Affairs of
the King and Kingdom; in which Parliament this same Regent was deposed from his
Government, and another set up, viz. the Archbishop of Roan in his stead. This
Assembly was not convened by the King, who was then in Palaestine, nor by any
Authority derived from him, for then the Regent and Chancellor must have called
them together; but they met, as the Historian says expressly, at the Instance of
Earl John. And yet, in the King's Absence, they took upon them to settle the
public Affairs of the Nation without Him.

Sixthly, When King Henry the 3 d. died, his Eldest Son, Prince Edward, was
then in the Holy Land, and came not Home till within the third Year of his
Reign; yet, immediately upon the Father's Death, all the Prelates and Nobles,
and four Knights for every Shire, and four Burgesses for every Borough,
Assembled together in a great Council, and settled the Government till the King
should return: Made a new Seal, and a Chancellor, etc.

I infer from what has been said, that Writs of Summons are not so Essential
to the being of Parliaments, but that the People of England, especially at a
time when they cannot be had, may by Law, and according to our Old
Constitution, Assemble together in a Parliamentary way without them, to treat
of and settle the Public Affairs of the Nation. And that, if such Assemblies
so convened, find the Throne Vacant, they may proceed not only to set up a
Prince, but with the Assent and Concurrence of such Prince, to transact all
Public Business whatsoever, without a new Election; they having as great
Authority as the People of England can delegate to their Represantatives.

II. The Acts of Parliaments not Formal nor Legal in all their Circumstances,
are yet binding to the Nation so long as they continue in Force, and not liable
to be questioned as to the Validity of them, but in subsequent Parliaments.

First, The two Spencers, Temp. Edvardi Secundi, were banished by Act of
Parliament, and that Act of Parliament repealed by Dures and Force; yet was the
Act of Repeal a good Law, till it was Annulled 1 Ed. 3.

Secondly, Some Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. and Attainders thereupon, were Repealed
in a Parliament held, Ann. 21. of that King, which Parliament was procured by
forced Elections; and yet the Repeal stood good, till such time as in 1 Henry
4. the Statutes of 11 Rich. 2. were revived, and appointed to be firmly held
and kept.

Thirdly, The Parliament of 1 Hen. 4. consisted of the same Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses that had served in the then last dissolved Parliament, and those
Persons were by the King's Writs to the Sheriffs commanded to be returned, and
yet they passed Acts, and their Acts though never confirmed, continue to be
Laws at this day.

Fourthly, Queen Mary's Parliament that restored the Popes Supremacy, was
notoriously known to be packed, insomuch that it was debated in Queeen
Elizabeth's time, whether or no to declare all their Acts void by Act of
Parliament. That course was then upon some prudential Considerations declined;
and therefore the Acts of that Parliament, not since repealed, continue binding
Laws to this day.

The reason of all this, is, Because no inferior Courts have Authothority to
judge of the Validity or Invalidity of the Acts of such Assemblies, as have but
so much as a color of Parliamentary Authority.

The Acts of such Assemblies being Entered upon the Parliament-Roll, and
certified before the Judges of Westminster Hall as Acts of Parliament, are
conclusive and binding to them; because Parliaments are the only Judges of the
Imperfections, Invalidities, Illegalities, etc. of one another.

The Parliament that called in King Charles the Second, was not assembled by
the King's Writ, and yet they made Acts, and the Royal Assent was had to them;
many of which indeed were afterward confirmed, but not all, and those that had
no Confirmation, are undoubted Acts of Parliament without it, and have ever
since obtained as such.

Hence I Infer that the present Convention, may, if they please, assume to
themselves a Parliamentary Power, and in conjunction with such King or Queen as
they shall declare, may give Laws to the Kingdom as a legal Parliament.

ALLEGATIONS In behalf of the High and Mighty Princess THE LADY MARY, NOW Queen
of Scots, Against the Opinions and Books set forth in the Part and Favor of
the LADY KATHERINE, And the rest of the Issues of the French Queen, Touching
the Succession of the Crown.

Written in the Time of QUEEN ELIZABETH.

London, Printed by J. D. in the Year 1690.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
I Thought it not improper to subjoin the following Treatise, written by a
Lawyer in Queen Elizabeth's Time, whether ever printed or no I cannot say, in
favor of the Title of the Queen of Scots, against the Pretenses of the Lady
Katherine, descended from the French Queen, Sister to H. 8. and married to
Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.

The Author shows himself skilled in the Civil, as well as the Common Law; and
tho he had occasion to maintain a strict Right of Succession to the next in the
Line, according to which he will have it, that H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. withheld the
Crown by wrong; Which I suppose proceeded from his not observing what
Parliamentary Confirmations their Possessions had; Yet himself says, That we
are all bound in Reason, to have always more regard to the State and Dignity of
the whole Weal Public, than of the private Preferment or Commodity of any
particular Person. Nay, he says it appears from History, that many Princes
settled in their Kingdoms, have been judged unworthy of their Callings, for
what would now be looked on as a very slight Matter. And many things he speaks
with great Judgment, which tend toward the justification of what has lately
been done for the Publick-Weal, and Preservation of the State and Dignity of
this Realm.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
AS every man may think it very necessary, both for the great weal, and
great quyetnes of this State, to know certainly, to whom, of right, the Honor
and Dignity of this Imperial State, and Crown of this Realm of England
should fall, or descend unto (if ought should hap to Queen Elizabeth our
supreme and most graciouse Governor) whom it may please God long to prosper
with long Life, good Husband, and meny Children, to her Highness contentation,
and the general weal and reastfull days both of her Majesty, and of the
whole Realm: So think I that none can like well, that any, with any colored
or deceyueable mean or argument, should go about to set forth or persuade the
natural and lovinge Subjectes thereof; that the Succession appertayned to
those, that in deed have no just Right, Title, or Interest to the same. And
therefore because some have endeavored themselfes by wrytinge to show, that the
Succession apperteyned unto the Lady K. Gray, the which, as may appeerr, by no
dyrect right or reason, can pretend any just Title or Claim thereunto. I have
not thought it unfitt, heerby to show the state and troth thereof more plainly,
to such, that else, either by such practices, or else by such works, might
otherwise rest deceyvid. And that I shall be thus occasionyd to utter heerin,
neither is, nor shall be with any mind or motion to offer any injury, or to
stayne or spotte the Name or Honor of any, but only to answer those
Arguments, the which as they be grounded upon no truth, ar so, worthy of no
favor. And to answer therein, without wrestinge or applyenge any case
otherwise, then the state of the matter does most plainly and truly crave the
pronunciation of the Law. So that if any thing be said, it is the very
necessity of the cause, so necessarelie for this state and this time, to be
thus touched, and the judgment of the Law towchinge the same, that speakith or
vtterith any thing, and else no other disposition. And because our Bond and
Duty is rather to have regard of the State and Dignity of the whole Weal
Publik, and of the good success, prosperyte and quietness thereof, then of the
undue title, or interest, of any particular person or persons. I trust this
travail may the rather be acceptid and taken in better part.

And so to the Matter.

First to the illegitimacion of the Lady K. and the rest of the Issues of the
French Q.

And after of their Force or Interest by the Will.

Touching the First. It is notorious and well enough known, that when Charles
Brandon Duke of Suff. married with the Lady Mary the French Q. that he had then
an other Wife lyvinge, which was the Lady Margaret Mortimer, with whom after
marriage he lived dyvers years as lawful Man and Wife: and after upon certain
discord between them, of his own motion, without any form or manner of
lawful judgment, that he separated him self from her and forsook her. And
what rashness or rather folly may it be comptid, to reply or write against so
manifest a troth with conjectures? as to say, it is not likely that K. Henry
would ever have consented that his Sister should mary one which had an other
Wife lyvinge. Since that there is yet so meny lyvely Witnesses, the which of
certain knowledge can be Testes, The said Charles matchid with the French
Queen 1515. She died Anno. 1532. La. Mortimer died An. 1533.
that Charles Brandon and the Lady Mortimer were Man and Wife, and have seen
and did know the Lady Mortimer long after the marriage, yea, and peradventure
after the death of the said French Q. And touching the K. although it is to be
thought, that if he had known that the Duke had had an other Wife lyving, that
he would not have consentyd that his Sister should have married him: It might be
notwithstanding full well, and it is possible that yet he had one, and that the
King might not know thereof. For as Princes have been the greater or the
mightier, so much the less, commonly, have they ben wontyd to understand of the
doings in such matters of pryvate Persons. But in this case there be as perfect
Clerks, and of as good understandinge as any were, at the advise of these
Books abroad, that are of opinion certain, that the French Q. and the Duke were
matchid before the King was prevy thereof: and some Pardon or Pardons obtained
for the same, upon small search, may happen to be found that may testifye as
much; and of necessity, we can no otherwise think, but that it was so: Since
that as much as is said of the Lady Mortimer, may be affirmyd by the said
Witnesses as a thing most certain and notorious. The which being true, then
is it certain that the Lady Mary, the said French Q. cold not be his lawful
Wife. And that the said Charles, Duke of Suff. could not lyve with her but in
Adultery. For the words of the Lord be plain. Mat. 19. and Marc. 10.
Quicunque dimiserit uxorem, nisi ob fornicationem, and aliam duxerit,
machatur. Et qui dimissam duxerit, maechatur. Now that one borne in Adultery,
and notwithstanding is legitimate, that cannot be: And therefore the Lady K.
being comme of one not legitimatly borne, cannot inherit, or be capable of
the Crown. And heerin it is to little purpose to cavil with Canons or
Decretalles of the Pope, against the plain and manifest Word of God, from
whose usurped Power, as this Realm is most happily delyvered; so has his
Laws in the same lost their force and vigore. But admit that the Pope's
Law had in England any Authoryte, at least it should be an impious thing in
what place soever it were, where the Word of God is so clear and certain, to
stick rather to the Pope's Law, then to the Law of God. Parnormi in ca. super
illa de secundis nuptiis.
But all this notwithstanding, let us see what Reasons they be besides, that are brought in the favor of the Lady K. One is, forsooth, that the Lady Mary,
the French Q. and the Duke of Suff. havinge lyved meny years together as Man
and Wife, and their Matrimony celebrated publikly in the face of the Church,
without any thing said against them duringe their lyves; that therefore though
he had twenty Wyves then lyvinge, that yet the Children of the Queen and Duke
are to be taken no other then as legitimate. And the other, that it is
sufficyent for the legitimation of their Children, that the French Q. seemyd to
have no knowledge that he had any other Wife lyvinge.

To these great Reasons, and their Authority, it is easy ynnough to answer.
For it is a Maxim in the Civil Law, That that which from the beginning is
not good or lawful, cannot with any Process of time be betteryd. L. quod
mitio ff. de regu. juris.
And therefore the Matrymony not being lawful at the first, no time is
sufficyent or able to make it lawful. And if that which is said of the long
contynuance of the Matrymony, without any thing said against it, had been such
to have comme in any consideration, it might have had some color or show of
reason; the rather, if the parsons against whom any such controversy should
have risen, had been of such degree or condition, as any might freely have
proceedid against them. But they were Princes, the Woman the Kinge's Sister,
and the Man a Duke, and in great favor with the Prince, in such sort, that
the great and the iminent danger and peril that did depend thereof, was, and
is the aparaunt and manifest cause why no Man did or durst begin with them, or
attempt any such matter, and specially in a thing that touchid any whitte the
displeasure or dishonor of the King himself: And therefore that long
contynuance in Matrimony, after that sort, without controversy, is not to be
countyd for quiet and peaceable, but rather injurious and violent. Arg. l. in.
fi. C. de ann. exe. and l. 1.. si quis autem ff. de iti. act. pri. C. quia. de
conces. pre. l.. 1. ff. quod vi aut clam. and l. de pupillo.. si quis ff. de
open. noui nun. cum ibi not. per Bar. and alios.
And such as cannot help any thing to the legitimation of the Children born in
Adultery.

To the other, touching the ignorance of the Queen, although it were granted,
that some ignorance, in some sort, might the rather shadow the illegitimation
of the Children; yet it is not therefore that every kind or sort of ignorance
might be acceptid to bolster forth such causes, but a probable ignorance: for
the Law tendith to the favor of the vigilent and diligent in their own
causes, and not to the wilful, sloathfull, or negligent. And those that
contractith with any, they ought to know and understand each of the others
State and Condition, l. qui cum alio contrahit. ff. de regu. juris.
and not to understand that is commonly brutyd, is to be attributed unto the
Parties default. l. quod verba ff. depon. and l. si ut certo.. nunc videndum.
ff. common. cum ibi notatis.
And such a kind of ignorance is callid a Voluntary, or ellis a dessembled
Ignorance, and helpith nothing to the ligitimation of the Children, the
Matrimony being contrary to the public Law of Honesty, even by the
Canonical and Civil Law; Cap. cum inhibitio. de clan. desp.
for since Charles Brandon, after Duke of Suff. had lyved with the first Wife
so long, being of such a calling, and she his Wife, of such a House, and such
a Lyvinge, and in the same Country; It had been very easy, with any never so
little a diligence used, to have come to the knowledge, whether he had had any
other Wife lyvinge, or no. And the Law entendith, that one that either does
understand, or else is in ability easily to understand, to be all one. l. pen.
ff. ad maced. l. in bonorum. in fine ff. de bonorum poss.
Since then the French Q. if she had lyked any thing to have herkened,
searched, or demaundid, moght easily have had intelligence, whether the Duke
had any Wife lyving or no; It is as much as if she had known it: so does it
manifestly appear that the Children born in such Matrimony, cannot, by any
mean, be reputyd or taken for legitimate, or able to any Enheritance, and much
less of the Crown, since that for the Honor and Dignity of the Realm,
whosoever should be worthy or capable of the Crown, it is meet, that not only
they should be free from any stayne or spotte, but also from all suspicion of
any. As Julius Caesar said of his House, when, for the only suspicion of
Adultery, he did put away his Wife, saying; That the House of Caesar ought not
only to be without Vice, but also without all suspicion of any. Besides, if you
should consent to put your selfs in subjection to such so unworthely born;
Behold, and consider, I pray you, by the way, how far off you should show
your selfs inferior in consideration, from the many and noble Examples left
unto us by other Countries, as particulerly of later Memory, by the Noble
Nation of the Spayniardes. Where a Daughter being borne of the Queen, Wife to
Hen. 3. King of C^stile, and most speech, great presumptions and secreat
murmuracion thereof passinge, that not the King, but an Adulterer, should be the
Father thereof. The Barons, Earls, and other Nobles of the Realm, did assemble
together; and consydering what spotte and infamy it should be unto the whole
Nation and Country, if in time cominge they should have their Q. a Woman thought
of, and esteemyd but as a Bastard, did not only deliberate not to acknowledge,
or not allow of her as legitimat Heir of the Realm, after the death of the
King; The Case of the putative Prince of Wales.
But would without delay be dischargid, and assurid from that gratte dishonor
and infamy. And thereupon so became most humble Suitors to the K. that as it
apperteynid unto the Honor and Dignity of him and of the whole Realm; It
moght so please him to repudiate the Q. as Adulteress, and declare that
Daughter not to be his, but borne in Adultery. Showing him besides, that if he
wuld not have regard unto his own Honor, and to do that, that touched so much
his Estate, and the Dignytie of the whole Country; that they, for their
parts, could not, nor would not so much forget their Duties to suffer it. But
rather determined to depose him, as a Man that made small count, either of his
Calling or Honor, and therefore unworthy of the Crown. By which you may see
how far such Occasions may sometimes carry Men past the terms of their
Callinges; whereof did grow afterward great Contention, and finally that
Daughter never admittyd unto the Crown, but the Succession transferred unto
the Lady Isabell, Sister of the K. A Queen, for her Valor and rare Virtues,
of great Fame and Renown. And yet, notwithstanding, according to the
Canonical Law, (of force and strength in such Cases as most proper Judge)
although the Adultery of the Queen indeed were more then manifest, yet moght
they have presumyd that the Child had been rather of the Husband, then of the
Adulterer; so favorable are those Laws unto the Birth. But those Noble Men, as
jelous of the Honor, Fame, and Reputacion of their Country, did think that
it importyd a great deal more to maynteyne and assure the Dignity of the whole
Realm, refusinge a Person of doubtful Birth, then to have respect unto the
particular Interest of that Child. And thus tendrid these so much this Honor,
that they could not, nor would not tarry the time to entreat of the Succession,
when it should hap, but would, by and by, put the matter out of doubt. And you,
when it is so needful, and the time does so require it, to know one certeynly
for your Prince and just Governor hereafter; Will you make no count hereof?
They, I say, for these respects, did refuse one, that according to the
ordinary course of the Law, they moght easily have presumed of to have been
legitimate: And will you submit your selfs to a person, that, according to
the ordinary and Canon Rule and Order of the Law, is so manifestly known,
taken and showed, discendid plainly as illegitimate? Oh take heed, for if
ever this hap in your Heddes, what other thing will it turn or grow unto,
but unto an open and universal declaration unto all the World, that you,
between Honor and Dishonor, Right or Wrong, causes of Prosperyte or Ruin,
do make no difference at all: Which opinion once conceyvid of you, boast,
brag, or compare after, the Nobility or Excellency of your Country, or the
Stoutness of your Selfs, with other Nations, ye may well ynuough; but who
will not rather mock or scorn at your madness or folly, then believe you as
of any Reason or Judgment?

And this that is said (as is before touchid) has auctoryte, and is, both
according to Divine, Canon, and Civil Law, and besides, according to the
Law of Nature and Reason. But though we should admit, that by the Canon Law
these descendentes of the French Q. were to be tolleratyd or allowid as
legitimate, yet does it not follow, for all that, that in this Realm they
ought to be taken or accounted for ligitimate or inheritable: Because that for
any to be borne legitimate, heritable or Bastard Here, is judged, not
according to the Canon Law, but according to the Law of the Realm. And this
does appear manifestly, by the Statute of Merton, Cap. 9. Where the Bishops
instanced the Lords, that they would consent that all such as were borne before
Matrimony, should be legitimate according to the Canon Law, as well as they
that were borne within Matrimony. Which could not be obtained; but determination
made, that they should stand unto the Laws of the Realm, and not unto the
Canons: And that one borne of a second Wife (the first still lyvinge, by
occasion of ignorance, that the second Wife may pretend, that the Husband had
no other Wife alyve) should be taken or compted for ligitimate or inheritable,
is not auctorized by our Law. But plainly the contrary, as may appear by
Bracton, Glandvill, Britton, Parkins, and the whole course of the Law.
Wherefore to allege that it is not lawful to count such for Bastardes after
their death, though during their Life they were taken or compted for no other,
then as legitimate, is a poor healpe, a slender proof, and to this purpose
makith nothing at all; for Litleton, Cap. of Discentes does declare, that this
continuance to purge the Bastardy, is not to be alleadgid in every sort of
Bastardie, but in that only that is born of the Woman that the Father does
after mary, with other Circumstances, as may appeer, far from this Matter. But
to object that heerin might further have fortuned, though peradventure there
hapt never any such matter, because nothing may be thought of now, or else
remembrid hereafter, that in this case to the uttermost that might have
chaunsed, may not presently be fully said unto, and answered; Let us admit,
for the salvinge of the Bastardy of these Issues, that the Pope's Bulle might
have been obteynid, (which though both against any godly and lawful Matrimony,
and against the Law of the Land, perhaps, might easily have been compassed)
yet notwithstanding should the same have made as little to the purpose, as the
other proper Reasons before alledgid: For such a Bulle (though it had been of
valor in England, as it is neither now, nor yet ever was when the Pope was
here in greatist Authoryte) should either have pronounced and declared the same
Children to have been legitimately borne; or else of Bastardes, it should have
made them legitimate.

In as much as it should have declarid them to have been legitimately borne, it
had been needful that it should have been with pronuncinge the Matrimony with
the said Queen and Duke legitimate, notwithstanding the other Wife had been
alive; and that could not have been grauntyd, (the case being as it was) but
upon some false or feigned surmise. And therefore, according to their own Laws
or Canons, it should have been of no force or valor. But let it have been
according to what Canon they had lysted; the Common Law of this Realm of
England should never have been bounden by any such Bulle, and specially when the
matter upon any Point of Illegitimacion is to be callid in question, by reason
of any Issue joined upon Bastardie, after the death of the Parties, which are to
be impeached as Bastardes, by reason of any second, or other Marriage, during
the Life of the first Wife, the same being never upon any Suit at the Common
Law brought in Question, Vid. Bracton, F. 216. upon the Statute of Merton, he
mentions a special return at that time required. Of which more in the second
Part.
whilst the Parties in whom Bastardie is not allegid, lyvid. The greatest
doubt that in such case might have hapt, is, that if the matter had been callid
in question at the Common Law, duringe the Pope's Jurisdiction in the Lives of
any of the Children of the said Duke and the French Queen (which be now all
deceassed) and an Issue had been joined upon general Bastardy, or upon some
other general Issue of Divorce, the same should then have been tried by the
Certificate of the Ordinary; and thereby, perhaps, by sum such sleightful
Certificate, the unlawful Doings of the Pope (if any such had been in his time)
might so have been allowed covertly. But allowing it were triable at this day by
the Ordinary, the Pope's Dispensation carries not in our Law the Jurisdiction
of the Ordinary; nor is not so to be receyvid, but it must recyve a Trial
directly by the Ordinary, whose Certificate must proceed according to such
matter as may inform a Truth, or else it must receyve the Trial by a Jury of
twelve Men, according to the common usage of Tryalles. And who can think, if
the cause of any such separation, stirred upon no just Motion, but only of
corrupt or fleshly disposition, should come now in question; that either any
Ordinary, or else any Jury, in so plain and open Bastardy, would either so
far forgeete or hazard theimselfes, or else exceed the Bonds of their
Duties to God, their Country, or all honest Reputation to the World, to
certify such Issues to be ligitimate; whereby no Controversy should be decyded,
but rather dangerously increased, and the whole Government of such a Noble
Realm thereby brought unto a double Bastardy as the case now standith: For
touching the Issues between the Duke and the French Queen, if question be
asked whether they be lawful? answer is made, They are not, because the Duke
was first lawfully married to the Lady Mortymer, and continued with her above
seven Years; and that he was married after to the French Queen, duringe the
said Lady Mortymer's Life, who overlyved the birth of all the French Queens
Children: Which answer, by our Law, clearly distroyeth the second Marriage, and
makith it void, and so all the Issues clearly Bastardes. And this is the
absolute Judgementof our Law, so as now the Issues of the French Queen cannot
any way help theimselfes, but they must first destroy the first marriage, which
our Law will never disallowe until it be first disanulled. And therefore if
the Duke of Suff. had had any Issue by the L. Mortimer, those Issues should have been allowed his Heirs, by our Law, notwithstanding the Marriage after with
the French Queen. And therefore for that the French Queens Issues rest
dissabled in point of Common Law, they must make theimselfes able, by some
such proof as may satisfye the same Law, before they can be receyvid. And if
they seek their relief by any dispensation from Rome (as is said) it servith
not, although there were a Dyvorce to be proovyd by any such Instrument. And it
is most true, that they are able to prove no lawful Devorce within the Realm,
though by search it has not only ben perceyvid, but is evidently to be provyd
how meny corrupt and subtle attemptes by sundry means has been taken in
hand to cowntenance those matches with the French Queen and other, as by a
supposition of a Suit sued between one Anne Brown and the said Charles
Brandon, whereof should arise the displeasure between the Lady Mortimer, and the
said Charles her Husband, seven Years and more after their Marriage: During
which time the said A. B. God wotte, never took it so earnestly as she once
complaynid to the Law, or ever thought of the Matter, nor as it seemith would
ever have done, if in this time the said Charles had not consumyd the said Lady
Mortimers Wealth and Lyvelyhoode, and found her Years not answerable to his
Yeouth and wanton Disposition; for satisfyenge whereof, this Acquayntance, that
Belly risinge, and these Practices after hapt with the same Anne. Whereof rises
now these feeble-groundid Histories, this Speech, and these Devices, that she
forsooth should be precontracted to him before, and had a Child; which Child,
eight Years after, is known well inoghe, was but two or three Years old at
the most. A strange case; and yet she had it at seventeen, or ninteen, and was
but twenty at the time of this supposed Divorce, when the said Charles and she
came together. Well, I say no more, for the Case is skant worth the speakinge
of; but if this Matter were to be shewid, ye should see such a patron of a
Divorce, as they that faynest would have it, would soonest be ashamyd to
countenance their Title upon the same; and yet these Passages thus hapt in
these Days, and in that Life, from better to worse, advoutry upon advoutry,
and such other stuff.

But how vain is it to write, or to occupy you with these Digressions, as with
what might have been, what is supposed to have been, or such other vain and
frivolous practices or shifts* as hereafter may be, when it behoovith so much
presently to consider what in this case properly may and ought to be? And
therefore because it is one of the most assuryd ways to understand what the
Law wills, or is in any question to admit, that the Matter were at present
to be decided by dew course of Law, with all the Policies that on both
parts may be used for their most avayle and purpose, and so to bring the same
in Form of Law to such a point, as judgment may be thereof gyven rightly.
Take heerin for Ensample, that I. S. made a Gift of Land to Charles Duke of
Suff. and the French Queen, after their Marriage, and the Heirs of their
Bodies; and now the same I.S. bringith his Action of Forme-downe in reverter
for the same Land, against the Lady K. and her Sister, and the resydue of that
Line; and supposes that the Land ought to him to revert, for lack of Issue
lawfully begotten between the Duke and the French Queen: and they come and
plead, by way of Bar, the Marriage between the French Queen and the Duke,
and convey the Pedigree lineally. Whereunto I. S. replieth, and shewith a former
Marriage with the Lady Mortimer, and averrith her Life after their Birth. And
the Lady K. and the rest, cannot by Law maynteyne their Bar, and destroy his
Title, unless they plead a lawful Divorce; and if they plead any such, yet
the same shall not be under the Pope's Bulle, but by the Certificate of the
Ordinary, and for that the Ordinary has no Record, or other lawful Proof,
whereupon he can lay any Foundation to certify any lawful Divorce, therefore the
Certificate cannot be avaylable. And so to conclude, there is no doubt in the
troth of the case, and by like reason no doubt in Law (if you will allow the
Proceedinges according to troth) but that the Bastardie remaynith, and is not
able to be purged.

And if the Bulle should have been to make the Children of the said Queen and
Duke of Bastardes legitimat, besides the Reasons before alledgid, which are as
effectual in this purpose as in the other; yet it is most true, that such
legitimation had been of no more force or Virtue here in this Realm of
England, then they be of in those Contreyes that are at the Pope's Obedience.
And whosoever is legitimated there of the Pope, is not to be understandid for
all that, to be legitimate to inherit, but in the Lands that do belong unto
the Church. Imo, in ca. per venerabilem qui filii sint legi.
. And besides, whosoever, is legitimate, and abled generally to any Dignity,
is not in that neither to be understandid legitimatid unto a Royal Dignity.
Barthol. and Bal. in l. eam quam. C. de fide. con.
And the Reason is, that whosoever is borne Bastard, though he be after made
legitimate, is ever reputyd, notwithstanding, as infamous. Bal. in lege
generaliter. cum autem. C. de inst. and substi. sub condi. factis. and Alexan.
in 3. ff. de il. and post.
. And these Reasons may serve also to the Allegations before said, of the
innocence of the Queen, and the contynuance of the Matrimony without
controversy: for they do declare plainly, that although the Laws, where they
entreat of any other Enheritance, should make as legitimate the Children so
borne (the which indeed they no ways can do, as we have partly proovyd)
notwithstanding that the same Laws could never be alledgid in case of
Succession to any great Dignite, and chiefly unto a Royal Dignity, in the
which the whole state of the Common Wealth has interest.

And besides, touching the dooble Bastardy before remembryd, though we should
admit that of the legitimacion of the Lady K. there were no doubt or question,
yet such has been her Life, and Behavour, and so much has she stained her self
and issue; as she is to be thought unworthy of the Crown: for she was married
(as ye know) to the Lord Herberd: The Marriage was perfected by all necessary
Circumstances, there was consent of the Parties, consent of the Parents, open
solemnizinge, contynuance after, till lawful Years of consent, and in the mean
time carnal Copulation, all which, save the last, are commonly known by
diverse that saw them, and the last, which to all other might be most
doubtful, is known by the confession of them both, and so made the more lykely
to be true, because she her self (though in such things that Sex be most
covert and shamefast) has yet earnestly acknowledgid the same: after which
Consummacion every Man knowith that albeit the Matrimony had been before for
lack of Years not vaylable, that yet thereby it commith and is made perfect,
and of full force and valor. In sort that the Divorce and Sentence that was so
dryven, procured and practiced by the means of the Earl of Penbroke in Queen
Maryes Reign (for respects then well enough known) agyinst both the Parties
Wills as most manifestly appeeryd, not only by their great unwillignesse unto
it then, but also by their affectionate and willinge manner of lyving,
continent meny Years after, continuing in mutual Love testified by sondrey
means, meny Tokens, Messingers, and other signs of the same, cannot be of any
force to break the said Matrimony, nisi de facto. De sponsal. cap. 30. is qui
fidem.
But during this delay, she by daliance fell to carnal company with the Earl
of Herforde, which was not descryed till the bigness of her Belly bewrayd her
ill happ. In which what was commityd on both their behalfes, while he the Earl
unlawfullie companyed with the Wife of an other Man, and she the Wife of one
Man, did gyve her Body to be used of an other Man unlawfully, ye may easily
judge. But this done the L. Herbert seeinge himself thus deceyvid by his Wife,
did (as he might lawfully) join himself in Marying with an other Woman, and
that Life and Usage between the Lady K. and the Earl being confirmid by
dooble Issue, as it was utterly unlawful before God, so was it found
unlawful before such Bishops, and other Commissioners, as had the heeringe
of the same, and their Issue bastardid; whereupon does fall out, as ye see,
great wickedness and lashnes of Life in the Mother, and bastardy in the
Children. And it is not unknown, to those conversant in the Historyes, that
meny Princes settlid in their Kingdoms, have been judged unworthy of their
Calling for lyving in Whoredom; And how can she be countyd worthy to come to a
Kingdom, which, as her Case standith, cannot but lyve in like manner? Surely,
if she were the next Heir of the Blood Royal, her Fault is much the greater so
fowlie to have spottyd the same: For as by this Whordome she has deservyd
grevous Punishment, in disparaginge and disablinge the Blood; so has she, by
vyolatinge Marriage, cut off all hope of havinge lawful Issue by her to
succeed and possess the Crown hereafter: For by the Law that God gyveth,
Deuteronomy. 23.
Deuteronomy. 23. A Bastard, and unlawful borne Person, may not bear Rule in the
Church, or Commonweal: He is counted a Stranger, as the Hebrewe word
importith; and to the perpetual detestation of Whoredom was this Law made,
to punish the Parents Faults justly in their Children. The Civil Law
likewise does not only punish such Persons as make such unlawful Matches,
but removith the Issue, so borne, from the Inheritance, or taking by Legacy
any thing of the Parents. Co. de incest. and inut. nup.
And thus do you see, by the way, thus much of this double Bastardie; and what
Stay, Comfort, or Consolacion is lykely to come to this Realm of England, by
the L. K. and such Issue as she now has, or is lykely to have hereafter,
though she her self were by her Parents free from Bastardy, as by the Process,
and Allegacions before alledgid does plainly appear she is not. Wherefore, to
return to the Matter before in hand, and to conclude thereof. Since any Spotte,
or suspicion of any, is sufficient bar from the Inheritance of a Crown, much
more cause is this plain and open Bastardy; for we are all bound in reason to
have always more regard to the State and Dignity of the whole Weal Public,
then of the pryvate Preferment or Commodyte of any particular Person. And so
does it appear, that by no way, neither by the Divine Law, nor by the Common
Law of this Realm, nor yet by the Canon or Civil, that the Children
descendid of the said Queen and Duke, can be capable of the Crown by their
Birth.

But touching the other Part, they allege in favor of the Lady Katheryne,
King Henry the Eight his Will, by which they say she is left as Heir. Which
may be as plainly and easily answerid; For it is as certain that King Henry
should have had no Authority or Power to dispose of the Crown by Will, if by
Parliament it had not ben gyven him. And therefore as much as the Force and
Autorytie of the Parliament does extend unto, so much might he do, and no
more. And the words of the same Statute, though they be general, they may not,
for all that, be so largely taken or understandid, as they may be stretched
unto: For who will say, that by those words, there is Power or Faculty gyven
to appoint or gyve the Crown to any Person, that according to the Law and
Dignity of this Realm, is not meet or capable of the same? As unto a Turk,
an Infidele, an infamous or opprobrious Person, to a Fool, a Madde-man, or
generally to any kind of such Person; as of the which, if special mention had been made, it is lykely that the Parliament would never have consentyd or agreid
thereunto: as at the making of the same Statute, if any had gone about to have
pennyd it in this sort; that such should succeed and enjoye the Crown, as K.
Henry, either by his Letters Patentes, or else by his last Will, signed with
his most gracious Hand, had named, what Parsonnes soever they had been, although
they were infamous, mad, impious, or such other before rehearsed: it is not
lykely that in this manner or form the Parliament would have allowed or passed
such a Statute. And that, that is not lykely they would have consentyd unto by
words in such sort specially expressid, It is not to be thought, or
understandid, that such Persons should be capable and fit for that Calling, and
omni exceptione majores. And it is plain and notoryous (as is before-sayd)
that to be borne in Adultery, or of any other unlawful sort or match, is
reputid and taken a Spotte, and that a great one, not only by the Laws of
Man, but also by the Laws of God, Sapien. 3, and 4. Deuteronomy. 2, 3.
and so unworthy and unfitte, ar such to be thought capable of the Crown, that
in all States, where they use to gyve or grant any Seigniories, Titles, or
Liberties in Fee, as Baronyes, Erleshippes, Markeshippes, and such other, the
Bastardes ar never thought worthy to be admittid unto the Succession, although
that they be made legitimate. But they must specially be ablyd unto the
succession of the Fee by the Prince. Bartol. and Bald. in l. eam quam. C. de
fidei com.
And if they cannot inherit, or be capable of their Titles and Honors, which are not, nor cannot be comparyd unto a Royal Dignity, how should they be
thought worthy or capable of a Crown? And that, that is said of Bastardes,
is to be understandid also of those that pretendith the Succession as Heirs of
Bastardes. And since this Realm makith no less esteem of the Honor and
Dignity of the same, then any other Nation does of theires, it is not lykely
that specially they would grant unto the King Power or Authoryte, to gyve or
leve the Crown to any Person not legitimately borne, or to their Children, or
to any such Person, upon whose Birth and Proceedinges there might grow such
strife, dispute, or contention, according to the saying of Caesar, and example
of other a little before remembryd. And since it is not lykely that the
Parliament would have condiscendid specially unto it, it followith, and we must
conclude, that such a Grant cannot be comprehendid by general words.

But though he had Power or Authority to dispose of the Crown, to the Heirs
of the Lady Francys, and the Lady Eleanor, it is true yet notwithstanding he
could not do that, but with the Condition and Form, that by Power of the
Parliament was gyven him, that is, either by his Letters Patentes, under the
Great Seal of England, or else by his last Will, signed with his most
Gracious Hand.

By Letters Patentes without doubt he has not done it, and so of the Will is
the Controversy. But being able to make a sufficient and perfect Will, to all
other intentes and purposes, either in puttinge to his Hand, or else in not
puttinge to his Hand; yet if the King have made his Will, without puttinge
unto his Hand (as there be Witnesses sufficient, and some of those that
subscribed the same Testament, in that behalf can so truly and plainly
testify, that he has, as there is no such Cause left therefore either of such
doubt, or else of such conferringe, or comparinge the Prothocall with the
Sign or Stamp, as those that have set forth these Books would seem to
make; then it is plain and manifest that he has not done it to this purpose,
according to the form and manner prescribed unto him by the Statute. And every
Act or Deed that is done without the Form prescribed by Law, is
insufficient, L. 1. in pr. ff. de stipula. l. traditionibus. C. de pac. l. 1.
C. de pred. cur. lib. 10.
as well according to the Exposition and Rules of the Civil Law, as else by
the Exposition and Rules of the Common Law of this Realm: for according to
the Civil Law it is plain, and so taken, though the Matters they entreat of
be in favorable Causes; yet the lack of Form is no ways borne withal or
excused. L. cum hi.. si praetor. ff. de transa. Bal. cons. 324. volu. 20.
And much less heerin, consideringe the Form requyrid by the Statute, is
compiled with so meny great, good, important and probable Reasons: For the
Succession of the Crown being a Cause of such great weight, and in which
there was so great occasion to doubt so many hassardes of indirect or subtle
dealinge, they had good cause to prescribe such a Manner and Form to make the
Will by, as whereby they had least occasion to fear or suspect any
counterfetinge, confuse, or sinister behavour in the same. And so, according
to the Civil Law, in that Testament that they call a Solemn Testament, in
the which there is required meny Circumstances; if any of those do lack, the
Testament, or Will, is of no force or valor. Justin. de testa. and lege jube.
C. ibidem.
Besides, according to the same Law, all Statutes, or Agreements made, that
takith away, or correctith any thing of or from the Course or Body of the
Law, is reputed and taken as odious, and ought to be taken strictly, even
according to the Letter as the word standith. And this Statute whereof we now
speak, is such a One: For where the Succession of the Crown should have gone
whither the Common Law had appointed or directid it, as unto the next by the
Statute of 35 of Henry the Eighth; K. Henry had Auctority to leve it to whom
he lysted. And therefore this Statute is to be interpretid strictly and
precisely as the word gyveth: That is, that King Henry only by his Letters
Patentes, under the Great Seal of England, or else by his last Will, signed
with his most gracious Hand, might name whom he would to the Succession of the
Crown, and not otherwise. And likewise by the Common Law of this Realm, the
Statute is most plainly a direct abridgement of the same, by reason it takith
from the Common Law, the natural limitation of the Inheritance of the Crown,
and appointith it owte of the Rule of the Law, to the Order and Limitation of
King Henry; being in this respect authorized but as a private Person. And it
is in some degree a Penal Law, for it takith the Title of a Kingedome from
those that by the Common Law have a Right, and makith, in point of execution,
a Subject of a Prince, and contrarywyse a Prince of a Subject; which is not
only penal, as having respect to the loss of their Title to the Crown, if
it should so hap, as God forbidd; but also it is so penal, that if such ill
Chance should unfortunately befall, it makith Traitors of those that will
claim their Inheritance, although their intent were but to try their Titles.
And it is a Learning by the Common Laws of England, that long has been so
receyvid, that in every such case as any of these happen, no Exposition is to
be allowed; but the Law willith us to cleve to the Letter, without any further
wrestinge thereof, then the Letter naturally and strictly will reach unto. So
that if it be not a stricte observation of the Letter, according to his natural
intent, in any of these cases the Common Law allowith it not. And the rather
the Law is precise herin, for that it is a new Statute, which seldom ar
taken by equite in any point, because they are all pennyd at large. As for
Example; I will remember one or twoe, which may suffice to such as be Learnyd,
to search for other of like effect, whereof there are not a few. In Anno 1. of
King Edward the 6 th, there was a Statute made, That if any were condemnid for
the stealinge of Horses and Mares, they should lose their Clergy; and because
the words Horses and Mares were the plural nombre; it was taken not to extend
to one Horse, or to one Mare. And so for that cause a new Statute was made,
Anno 2. of the same K. that made like Law for stealinge one Horse, or one
Mare. And the chief cause of this was, because it is a Penal Statute, in
taking from a Man that, whereby his Life might be savid. In K. Richard the 3 ds
Time, there was a Statute made to Auctorize Cest a que use to enter upon his
Feoffees, and make Feoffementes. And it was in question, in Anno 9. of H. the 7
th, if he made a Letter of Attorney, whether this were good by the Statute, and
left therefore a doubtful question, by reason the Statute gyveth auctoryte
only, which must in all points be observed. And there is a great deal more
color to make that Feoffement good, being by Letter of Attorney, then to
make this Will to this purpose good, not signed with the Kings own Hand:
For if any other put his Hand thereunto, and not the King himself, then it is
signed with an other Hand, and not the Kings Hand. And if I gyve Auctorytie
to my Executors to sell my Lands, and say no further; then, if they sell the
same by Wrytinge, or without Wrytinge, it is sufficient; but if I add these
words, That they shall sell my Lands, so that they do it by Wrytinge, signed
with their proper Hands; if now they sell the same, and the one cause the
Residue, in all their presence, to write all their Names, as though every one
had severally subscrybed; I hold it no question, but this Sale is not good; for
they must pursue their Auctorytie strictlye, and otherwise it is of no effect:
And consyderinge, as is partly before remembryd, how great a matter it was to
commit such a Trust, it were a great lack and slander to the whole
Parliament, to think that they would condescend to the committinge of so high
and weighty a Confidence, as whereof the whole Estate and Weal of the Realm
should depend, but that they did forsee that their doings therein should not be
blinded by a Wrytinge signed with a Stamp, The same thing was urged by
Lethington the Secretary of Scotland, in a Letter to Sir Will. Cecil. Appendix
to the 2d Vol. of the Hist. of the Ref. F. 269.
which might be put unto, either when the King was void of Memory, or else
when he was deceassid; as indeed it after happened, as most manifestly appeeryd
by open declaration made in Parliament by the late L. Paget, and others, that
King Henry did not sign it with his own Hand, as it is plain and probable
enough by the Pardon obteynid for one William Clerk, for puttinge the Stamp
unto the said Will after the King was departid: and who doubtith but if his
meaning had been such, so to have disposed of the Crown, but that he would have
put this matter out of doubt, by signifyenge the same with his own proper
Hand.

And touching the two chief Examples that are brought forth, the one of the 21
and 33 of K. H. the Eight, whereby K. H. was aucthorized to gyve his Royal
Assent to Acts of Parliament, by his Letters Patentes, and so forth: and the
other, for that Queen Mary omittyd the style that was apoyntid by Parliament,
in 35 of H. the Eight, in her Parliament Writts, how little they make to the
matter every Man may judge: For the Statutes of 21, and 33 of H. 8. were only
made in affirmance of the Common Law, and such a Royal Assent would suffice, by
Letters Patents without any assurance thereof by the Sign. And this Statute
was but to put such matter out of question; for if the Common Law had been such
before, there is no doubt but that he must have signed every Patent with his
proper Hand; and so these Cases are no way like. And touching the second, if
the Statute that conteynith the King's Style be well consyderid, there would be
made thereof no such Collection. For the same apoyntith a punishment to such
Subjects as of purpose depryve the K. of the Realm, of that Style. But there is
no doubt, but the Writts that wantyd the Style, were in Law sufficyent, and
the Parties that made the same, punishable. So that these Examples cannot be
wrestid to serve any whit for the purpose.

And where there is made a great matter by reason the Will was inrollid in the
Chancery, and Constats thereof made under the Broad Seal, and the Legacyes
thereof in all points performyd. To that may be answered; That all that is
therein affirmed may easily be confessed, and yet it proovith nothing to
the intent applied; for it was his Will is ever he condescendid thereunto, though
he did never sign it with his Stamp, nor with his Hand, and a good and a
perfect Will to all Entents and Purposes, whereof he had by Common Law
Authority to make his Will of.

But it is not, or cannot be the more a perfect Will to this respect or
purpose, unless he did execute the authority apoyntid by the Statute of, 35
of H. 8. as is before remembryd. Since then the Duke had a Wife lyvinge, when
he maryd the French Queen, and by the Statute there is nothing to be Claymid,
onles K. Henry had passed any things either by his Letters Patentes under the
Broad Seal of England, or else by his last Will signed with his most gracious
Hand: And that it is true, that he had a Wife lyvinge when he maryd the
French Queen; that so if it were requisite, or hereafter may be, there might
be avouchid more then one, with much other matter touching that point of
Illegitimacion and Inhabilitie, as well in things paste, as also in things
present: And that most certeynly there was never either any such Letters
Patentes past under the great Seal of England, nor yet any such Will signed
with his most gracious Hand, as sufficient Witnesses yet lyvinge can well
testify. These two matters touching the legitimation and validity of the Will
in that behaulf, of any indifferent Person, I trust, may be acceptid as fully
and truly answered.

And thus (lovinge Reader) have I vtteryd and laid before the these cases as
they are. And whom would it not moove to commpassion, to behold the state of
these things? or whose English Heart would it not grieve, even to every part
of it, to find any such Books countenanced, or account made of such Bastardie
slippes (as appeerith by those Opinions and Books, spredde) to enherite so
noble a Realm, our most dear and natural Country? as though it were either so
unfortunate, so cursed of God, or else so far from Mercy, that such should be
fitter for the same, without any color of any just Title, to plague it with
most infamous Dissension, War, and all other Confusion, and so to bring it to
utter ruin and destruction; then those to whom of right it ought, both by the
Law of God and Man most justly to belong unto. What is he that esteemith or
tendrith the prosperyte of the Country in the favor of God, or the good fame
or fortune of the World, that would seek to exalt unto the Government thereof
such infamous and spottyd titles, with which is lynked always such wrath of
God, and th'Effectes thereof, with such continual strife and contention;
before the vnstaynid true and perfect Inheritors appointed by him, and by his
Laws, to set forth his Glory: and by whose Justice such ar always prosperyd
and defendid: to their own honor, and the great weal and safety of their
Subjects, as long as they remain in his fear, and obedyent unto his Laws
and Ordinances. But what might be said further: If those in great face and
show of great zeal and justice, and in great authority, has so much
neglected their Duties, and so much preferryd their own Ambitions and
corrupt Desires, before the Honor and Service of the Realm, as such have not
sticked to further these spottyd and coulerid Titles, and also to encourage
other to fall unto the same. What a case is this, that such so placyd, should go
about to extol such motions of Dishonor and ruin of their natural Country,
and yet remain with their Calling in so great countenance of honor for
their Good and faithful Service. O England, blame thou not the inferior sort
so much, that does but receyve these things as it is ministryd unto them, by
whose credyte and persuasion they may be easily abusd. But seek thou to
decifer and discover such Abusers, as have more regard to mainteyne
theimselfes, by whose overthrowe, or what wrong so ever it be, then to
proceed dirertly to thy Service, either to the Honor of God, Author and
Favorer of all Truth, or else to thy Weal, Prosperytie, and quietness. And I
exhort the, and exhort the again, not to suffer thy self to be led and
caryd away with any such foul injurious Persuasion, either of ambitious
Abuser, or such other corrupt or unadvised Person. For such foul injurious and
false persuasions ar apt to no other end, but to serve Sedition, Discord, and
Dissension in the, and overthrow also all those that dealith with them. And
how hard and perilous it is to obtain a Crown by any injust or sinister
Title, and how much harder the things gotten, it has been to contynew and keep
the same, we may daily see and learn in dyvers Historyes of sundry places by
such like Fortunes, and of the in that of K. H. 4. H. the 5. and H. the 6. who
after they had withholden the Crown by wrong, with the loss of meny a
Manne's Life, two discentes, wherein passed forty Years and more; at last were
overthrown and quite confoundid, and it restoryd to King Edward the Fourth,
that rightly requyrd and lawfully obteynid the same. Compare these together,
and consider what multitude of Friends such continuance in possession was like
to make, and of what fame and worthynesse the Princes were, and yet that the 3
d. and last could not enjoy the same, all that notwithstanding. And it may be
supposd; that there is few so simple, so far from reason, or so
affectionate, but may think that K. H. the 6 was much more abler to defend so
long a continued Possession, then the Lady K. or any coming of the French
Queen is able both to gain the like, and afterward to keep it. By which, and
such other Examples, we may call to mind, that God does not favor those that
does usurp with any injust or indirect Title against his Will and Ordinance.
And what greater mishappe, discomfort, or Misery can happ to any, then after
the liftinge up to such a degree, or the attaininge of any such desire, in a
moment to lose all, and to be cast down to utter confusion, both they and all
their Friends for ever. Consider, for the love of God, the Honor of your
Country, the Surety and Quietness of your Friends and Neighbors, Kynsemen
and dear Country-folkes! remember the Threttes pronouncyd of God against all
Injustice, and call to remembrance where about you go, ye that study and
endeavor your selfs to set forth these false and deceyvable Titles in the
part or favor of any; and behold, that insteade of the shadow of your vndewe
Desire, to the great hazard and peril of the tranquil and peaceable state of
your most dear Friends, and natural Country, that you do but procure both to
such as how would seem to favor, and also unto your selfs, such danger, grief
and sorrow, with such ill and adverse Fortune, as your most bitter and dedly
Enemies could no way wysh you greater.

And to conclude, thus much is due to th'Answer of the Books abroad, with
th'advancement of the Lady Mary the French Queen's Issue, and settinge forth
of these Cases of Bastady, before you: that after these matters thus manifestyd,
there should insewe of such Errors the less inconvenience, and that ye might
thereby hereafter the better judge what were in these cases the fittest, both
for the honor of God, and the Weal, prosperyte, and quyetnes of the whole
Realm. But thou, O England, ar, by the Grace and great Mercy of God, under
the Government of our most Gracious and Prudent Queen, who has the same
tender and lovinge care of the Weale-Publike, that the most careful and
lovinge Mothers have not greater for the Weal and Saufety of their most dear
and best-belovyd Children; of the which there may be daily seen most apparente
and manifest Examples. Her majesty havinge governid thee, with the noble
assistance of her Counsel, so meny Years, without manifest Danger, and great
peril of Civil War, and most miserable slaghter (as the case yet standith)
it is not to be thought, but that the Floude of Blood (from which God defend
thee) that otherwise might be shed, does continually flow before her Highness
pitiful and most merciful Eyes. And that her Majesty taryeth but some good
tide, most carefully to provyde for the same, as may be possible. Which it may
please God to grant unto her Highness, for th'Honer of Him, and the great
Benifyte of the whole Realm, with most convenyent speed. Amen.

20. Martii 1565.
God save Queen Elizabeth.
REFLECTIONS ON Bishop Overall's CONVOCATION-BOOK, M.DC.VI. CONCERNING THE
GOVERNMENT OF GOD's CATHOLIC CHURCH; AND OF THE Kingdoms of the Whole World.

LONDON: Printed in the Year M.DC.XC.

Reflections on Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book, 1606. etc.
IT having been my purpose to consider all Objections of any weight in
themselves, or from the Authority of Persons, which should occur to me against
the Right of Their Present Majesty's, and the Justice of their Undertaking our
Deliverance; I ought not to pass by Bishop Overall's Convocation-Book, composed
in the time of James I. Licensed by the late Bishop of Canterbury, since his
disowning this Government, and Printed, as it is to be presumed, with a
manifest Intention of undermining it; for every Man may discern, that the
Scheme of Government there drawn for the whole World, is contrary to the
Foundation of our Present Settlement: but tho the Hypothesis is laid together
with much Subtilty, nothing but Infallibility can give it Authority; and to me
it seems a piece of Presumption, only short of that of the Romish Church. For
having made a Collection from Sacred and Profane History, and the Apocryphal
Writings, (tho of the last they say, P. 64.
they mean not to attribute any Canonical Authority unto them, nor to establish
any Point of Doctrine) they Canonically condemn, of Errors, all that agree not
to their Inferences and Conclusions, upon a state of Fact which at least may be
false.

This single Observation might make it needless to consider more particularly
what is there said, especially, when I add this further, That it would make
Scripture Examples under the Jewish State, to have the force of Precepts now:
which if they have, then the Examples of Jehu in killing wicked King Joram,
then his Subject; and of Othniel, P. 46. 2 Kings Judges.
and Ehud, who rescued the Israelites, the one from the King of Moab, the other
from the King of Mesopotamia, who had brought them under Subjection, may serve
for Rules in the like Cases. If they do not, then to what purpose do they in
other Instances bring Presidents of God's dealing with the Jews, of his choosing
and anointing their Kings, and the like?

With these Antidotes we may venture upon a further taste of the Doctrines.

The Foundation of all, is the Patriarchal Power of Adam, which they suppose to
have been absolutely Monarchical all the World over; that Noah had the like
Authority all his Life; but that he divided the whole World among his Three
Sons; upon which they conclude, P. 84.
That if any Man affirm, Can. 35.
That God ever committed the Government of all the World, after Adam 's and
Noah 's times, to any one Man to be the sole and visible Monarch of it, he does
greatly err. And another Error which they Canonically condemn, is of them who
hold, that Christ does not allow the distributing of this his one Universal
Kingdom, Lib: 2. Can. 4. p. 147.
into diverse Principalities and Kingdoms, to be Ruled by so many Kings, and
Absolute Princes under him.

Upon the whole, the Fatherly Power was absolute in Adam, then in Noah, then in
his Three Sons together, and ever after in all the Princes in the World; Can. 2.
and as they affirm in relation to Adam's Monarchical Power, that it rose not
from any choice of the People; neither, say they, is it deduced by their
Consents naturally from them; P. 3.
Which is meant of the Powers which now are in the World. And yet, if I mistake
not, they elsewhere own, that the Consent of the People may be requisite to the
legitimating some Governments, when they justify Mattathias, P. 67.
who being moved with the Monstrous Cruelty and Tyranny of Antiochus, made open
resistance; the Government of that Tyrant being not then either generally
received by Submission, or settled by Continuance: wherein the Consent or
Submission of the People is owned to be material. The consequence of which will
reach a Prince that Exercises a Power beyond what has been submitted to, or
settled.

But admit their Notion of the Absolute Power of the Father should hold, while
the World was but one Family, and the Father might be supposed to be the sole
Proprietor; I doubt they cannot advance one step further, without mere Fictions
of their own Imaginations, or as vain and uncertain Tradition.

If we attend to the sacred Text, freed from their imposing Comment, Noah's
Sons are by God himself made joint Proprietors with him. Genesis 9.1, 2*
For the Text says, God blessed Noah and his Sons, and said unto them, Be
fruitful and multiply, and replenish the earth.

And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall be upon every Beast of the
earth, and upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moves upon the earth, and
upon all the fishes of the sea, into your hand are they delivered.

If this Donation had no effect, as to the Sons in the lifetime of the Father,
neither according to the Patriarchal Scheme, could the younger Sons have any
Benefit in the lifetime of the Elder; wherefore either here was a joint
Propriety in all, and consequently the Distribution must proceed from an
express or tacit Consent of the Proprietors; or else they must be beholden to
Jewish Tradition, for the establishing their Christian Canon, concerning
Government.

For two things, I must confess, we are obliged to them.

1. For pathetically describing the unhappiness of the Jews, and how Religion
went in those days, P. 72.
when the Priests had gotten the Reins into their own Hands.

2. For observing, That the Pharisees, the most proud and stubborn of the
Jewish Sects, P. 79.
were the only Men who refused to swear Allegiance to Herod and Caesar; Can. 30.
yet they say, If any Man shall affirm, that Jaddus, the Jewish High Priest,
having sworn Allegiance to Darius, might have lawfully born Arms against him,
he does greatly err.

This is in a Canon which they raise from the Fact in Josephus, of Jaddus's
refusing to assist Alexander in his Wars, and becoming Tributary to the
Macedonians, as he had been to the Persians; and this after Alexander had
overthrown Darius, who escaped by Flight. The Jewish High Priest seems to put
words into the Mouth of our late Archbishop, returning for answer, That he
might not yield thereto, because he had taken an Oath of Allegiance to Darius,
which he might not lawfully violate whilst Darius lived.

Compare this with the next Canon, according to the Analogy of their Doctrine,
and see how it provides for the Security of Princes, and Obedience to their
Governments.

Can. 31.
If any Man therefore shall affirm either, That the Jews generally, both
Priests and People, were not the Subjects of Alexander, after his Authority was
settled amongst them, as they had been before the Subjects of Babylon and
Persia; or that they were not all bound to pray for the long Life and
Prosperity, both of Alexander, and his Empire, as they had been bound before to
pray for the Life and Prosperity of the other said Kings and their Kingdoms,
whilst they lived under their Subjection; or consequently, that they might
lawfully upon any occasion whatsoever, have offered Violence and Destruction,
either to their Persons, or to their Kingdoms, for the long continuance and
Prosperity whereof, they were bound to pray; or that, after the Jews were
deliverred from their Servitude under the Kings of Syria, and the Government
over them, was settled in Mattathias's Posterity, it was lawful for the People
upon any occasion to have Rebelled against them, or to have offered Violence to
their Persons, He does greatly err.

The Justice or Injustice of the War on either side, between Darius and
Alexander, are made no part of the question; but here are two Princes, both
supposed Absolute, with all Adam's Power over their respective People, staking
their Kingdoms upon the chance of Battle; one of them is conquered and runs
away; yet, according to our Canonists, the Conqueror is not entitled to the
Fatherly or Patriarchal Power over the other's People; but it is suspended, at
least, during the Life of the King that was beaten, and the Authority not
settled all that while: and if the Monarchy was Hereditary, it may be yet more
difficult when to fix the Settlement. If it is admitted to be Settled in the
lifetime of the ejected and conquered Prince, and that it is a duty to pray
for the Life and Prosperity of the Conqueror, and upon no occasion to offer any
Violence to his Person or Kingdom; yet, according to these Canonists, they were
bound, at least, during the Life of the Conquered Prince, to give no active
Assistance to the other, in Person, or Contribution. And thus it might be
allowable to mock God Almighty, while they pray for that, to which they will
not contribute the means in their Power; or else their Prayers were to have
such a mental Reservation, as some have, who pray for King James, while they
pray for [ The King]. But if they were to pray for Alexander's Prosperity
without reserve, one would think it was lawful, at least, to Fight for him
against Darius, notwithstanding the Oath of Allegiance taken to Darius, by
reason of the Authority which he had lost.

If any one shall say, That this Convocation-Book was innocently published at
this time, let him read the following Canon.

If any Man therefore shall affirm, Can. 28.
either that the Subjects, when they shake off the Yoke of their Obedience to
their Sovereigns, and set up a Form of Government among themselves, after their
own Humors, do not therein very wickedly, or that it is lawful for any
Bordering Kings, through Ambition and Malice, to Invade their Neighbors: Or
that the Providence and Goodness of God, in using of Rebellions and Oppressions
to execute his Justice against any King or Country, does mitigate, or qualify
the Offenses of any such Rebels, or Oppressing Kings; or that when any such new
Forms of Government, begun by Rebellion, are after thoroughly Settled, the
Authority in them is not of God: or that any, who live within the Territories
of such new Governments, are not bound to be Subject to God's Authority, which
is there executed, but may Rebel against the same: Or that the Jews, either in
Egypt, or Babylon, might lawfully for any Cause, have taken Arms against any of
those Kings, or have offered any Violence to their Persons, He does greatly Err.

If this be taken according to any rational, or so much as probable Account of
Government in General, particularly applied to the English Constitution; I see
no danger in admitting, that People ought not to throw off the Yoke of
Obedience, and set up a Form of Government after their own Humors; and that it
is not justifiable in any Bordering King, or Prince, through Ambition and
Malice, to Invade his Neighbors. And yet this would not in the least condemn
either the People of England, in shaking off a former illegal and arbitary
Yoke, while yet they retain the ancient Form, and Fundamental Rights of the
Government; or our Present Sovereign in his Heroical Undertaking our
Deliverance. But if all Princes are as Absolute as their Notion makes them, the
Nation had no Ground of complaint, and His Present Majesty's Expedition would
fall under the Imputation of Ambitition, or Malice; it is certain, that no just
cause could be assigned for it upon their Principles; and yet these would as
well condemn our Dissenting Bishops of Disobedience to the Late King, in not
complying with the Commands of a Prince, whom this Book would make Absolute.

And of this, the Archbishop would have done well to have bethought himself,
when he gave his License for the Church-Militant, to put on this old rusty
Armor, which hung up without use for above eighty years, Vid. Advertisement,
called Anno 1603. continued to 1610.
had been full three, if not not six Years in hammering out, and was brought
forth in this Critical Time, to do Wonders for their supposed King of Divine
Right, of their making, at least, if not of God's. Whilst the Clergy in that,
and following times, Wrote, and Preached for Preferments, and Condemned all
Notions which lay in their way to it; it is to be feared, that they incurred
the Curse pronounced from more Divine Authority, against him that removes his
Neighbors Landmark. And he that would Model the English Government by those
of the East of old, set up and maintained by Confusion, would do well to
transplant his Family into Turkey, where he may find one of the truest Patterns
of the fancied Patriarchal Government.

But if that, or the Anticyrae, to which an old Romam would have advised them,
be too far for them to Travel in their Canonical Habit; they may take a step
into France, where its Monarch assumes and exercises a Power according to their
Primitive Stamp.

Yet the latter part of the foregoing Canon tells you, That you are bound to be
subject to God's Authority, even in those new Governments, which are set up
after the Humors of the People. So that fully to maintain their Passive
Character, even in the Case of Usurpation, and Introducing a new Form, contrary
to the Fundamental Constitution, they are bound to sit still, and never to
Assist to Restore their Rightful Prince, or ancient Form of Government, but
should trust Providence, or rather tempt it to forsake them, to their utter
destruction.

But they who would be led by the Authority of these Canons, to condemn our
present Settlement, I hope will learn even from thence to submit to it, and
attempt nothing against it; and then I doubt not but there are brave English
Men enough to defend it from all Foreign Force.

FINIS.

