SOME REASONS WHY The People called Quakers, Ought to enjoy their Meetings
Peaceably.
Published for the Information of those, who are not acquainted with their Way,
and to prevent Mistakes concerning them.
KNowing the Purity of the abovenamed Peoples Principles, together with the
Integrity of their Lives; I drew forth this Testimony concerning them: Though
they lie at the present under Restraint, yet innocently many of them, who are
real Friends to this Nation, lie in Prison; some upon Straw, and some upon the
bare Ground (or Boards) to bear witness, and to testify that they have Right
to Meet.

I. Because for their Liberty to Meet in the Exercises of their tender
Consciences, they have the Word of God for it; Seconded by the Word of a King
(yea of King Charles the Second) therefore they have Right to Meet.

II. Though the King's Proclamation does forbid unlawful and Seditious
Meetings; yet seeing the Quakers made no ill use of their opportunities in
Meeting together (neither was the Proclamation occasioned through any
miscarriage in them) therefore they ought to Meet.

III. Because the Ground or Cause of the Law, is the bottom or foundation
whereon it takes hold; or it is the subject matter against which the Law is
placed; Therefore as for those Persons, whose Principles and Practices afford
no ground nor bottom for any such Law, there the Law comes void concerning
them. But the Ground or Cause of the coming forth of that Proclamation, is
signified in the PROCLAMATION, (viz.) Because that some made so ill an use of
their Liberty, as to take those times as opportunities to Plot against the
Peace of their Neighbors (whom they ought to love as themselves) But from all
such Practices, Plots or Conspiracies, as to go about, or to compass any Hurt,
either to the King, or to any of his Subjects, the People called Quakers, are
wholly free from, both in Thought, Word and Deed; So the Cause of the
Proclamation touches not them, therefore they ought to Meet.

IV. Because they are the greatest Friends to Magistracy that may or can be;
for their whole Aim, End and Drift in all their Preaching and Living, is to
discountenance Sin and Vice, and to encourage Virtue (viz.) Goodness, Meekness,
Mercy and Truth; together with Love, Long-suffering and Patience exercised
toward all men, in the true fear of the living God; this is that they seek,
and in good measure find. So this being that which the Magistrate is to Defend,
both the Magistrates Work and theirs agree; thus they cleave close to the
Magistrate in Substance; and that is more than others who cleave to him by
Flattery, or for self Ends; therefore ought these People to Meet.

V. Because (in their Meetings) They Desire and seek no other Thing, nor
Liberty for themselves, than they are willing all men should have and enjoy;
therefore they have right to Meet.

VI. Because in their Meetings they seek the Good of all men, therefore they
ought to Meet.

VII. Because in their Meetings they do meet in the Spirit of Truth, therefore
they have right to Meet.

VIII. Because that when they Meet, they seek to bring others out of their
wicked ways, into the Obedience of the Truth; therefore of right they ought to
Meet.

IX. Because that in their Meetings they make No Plots against any man's Person
or Estate; therefore they have right to Meet.

X. Because that in their Meeting together they do nothing against the true
Peace of this Nation, but seek to bring all men into the Peace of God which
passes understanding; therefore they ought to Meet.

XI. Because in their Meetings they Edify one another in Love, calling and
warning all men to Repent from the wickedness of their ways, and with speed to
turn to the Lord before it be too late; therefore they ought to Meet.

XII. Because in their Meetings they take Care for the Poor, that there may not
be a Beggar amongst them; therefore they ought to Meet.

XIII. Because that in their Meetings they take Care to Pay the Rent of the
poor Widows, who are not of Ability to Pay it themselves; therefore they ought
to Meet.

XIV. Because in their Meetings they Provide for such Fatherless Children that
are amongst them, who being in want; and do Pay for the Nursing of some, and
the Schooling of others, etc. therefore they ought to Meet.

XV. Because that in their Meetings, They take Order and Provide for such poor
People as are amongst thim, who are out of Work, by setting their Families to
Work when Work is scarce, and by giving them better Wages then Shopkeepers
will; therefore they have right to Meet.

XVI. Because that in their Meetings they Appoint fit Persons to look to such
as are Sick amongst them, who Administer suitable Supplies to such, according to
their Necessities; therefore they have right to Meet.

XVII. Because that in their Meetings they take Care to provide for such young
Traders who want Stock, by lending them certain Sums of Money (according to
their Capacity who are to use it) for a Time freely; therefore they ought to
Meet.

XVIII. Because that in their Meetings their Compassion is extended to the Poor
who come from beyond the Seas with Letters of Request to this Nation, by a free
Contributing to their Necessities; therefore they have right to Meet.

XIX. Because they disown all such amongst them who walk disorderly, not
becoming the Gospel of Christ; therefore they have right to Meet.

XX. Because they use Violence to no man; therefore they ought to Meet.

Here follows certain Scriptures, which show that the People of the Lord
formerly Assembled together; And that notwithstanding they were forbidden by
those who were in Power, not to speak at all in the Name of Christ; yet they
chose rather to obey God than man, as you may read, in Acts 4.18.
Verse. 18. And they called them (viz. Peter and John) and commanded them, not
to speak at all, nor Teach in the Name of Jesus.

Verse. 19. But Peter and John answered and said unto them, Whether it be right
in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye. See also
Acts 5. verse. 28.

See Heb. 10.24. And let us consider one another, to provoke one another to
Love and to good Works. (Verse. 25.) Not forsaking the Assembling of our selves
together as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another; and so much the
more as ye see the Day approaching. (v. 26.) For if we sin wilfully after that
we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remains no more Sacrifice
for sins.

Which is to show, that it is a wilful sinning, if such should not (after they
have received the Truth) Assemble themselves together according to Paul's
Exhortation. Read also verse. 27. See also Acts 12.12.

Acts 28.30, 31. And Paul dwelt two full years in his own hired House, and
received all that came in unto him, Preaching the Kingdom of God, and Teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ with all Confidence, no man
forbidding him.

Whereby it does appear, that Paul under the Roman Governors, being Heathens,
had more Liberty to Meet, than the People called Quakers have here in England,
being already Deprived of it by such who call themselves Christians.

Written by one who has good Experience of them, having these many years
watchfully observed them, THOMAS ATKIN.
London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.


