THE Antiquity and Justice OF AN OATH OF ABJURATION.

In Answer to a TREATISE, ENTITLED, The Case of an OATH of Abjuration
Considered.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in Warwick Lane.
1694.

To the Right Honorable Sir John Summers, LORD KEEPER of the Great Seal of
ENGLAND.
My Lord,
WHEN such Assurance of the Fidelity of the Subjects to their Princes, as is a
principal part of the Constitution of our Monarchy, is, by the Gentleman whom I
oppose, censured as new, needless, mischievous, and impossible to be
maintained; and for this an Appeal is made to the supposed sense of the
Representatives of the Commons of England; equal Judges will think it but
requisite for one, from whom the greatest Authorities have been, and are likely
to be received, with Prejudice; to fly to the Protection of a Person, who,
under their Majesty's, is at the Head of our Laws: Not for false and servile
Glosses upon them, or a treacherous giving them up; but for restoring,
explaining, and adorning them.

Were it in my Nature to flatter, I am sure here the Subject would free me from
the Imputation; as my Incapacity to write upon it what I ought, may plead in
excuse of my offering at so little.

This I may say, that since your Lordship is well known, not to have served
their Majesty's by halves, as if they had a Naked Possession of the Throne
without Right; no one Man's Disability by an Oath of Abjuration, can be
lamented as a public Loss: Nor can any Example be more persuasive than your
Lordships; whose Judgment, and Integrity, no body is so singular as to call in
question.

Possibly many, who would incline to think nothing of mine worth reading, may
have the Curiosity to see, what it is that encourages my Presumption in this
Dedication; and the Hopes, that your Lordship, who have so few Moments which
are not taken up with the Affairs of the Public, and doing good to Mankind;
should spare some time to look into what its Author must be supposed, to judge
not unfit for your Lordship's View, and favorable Reception.

And* indeed, my Lord! those Memorials of passed times which I here publish,
and others which I refer to, have so long lain buried, and unobserved; and are
of so great consequence for vindicating the Right of the present Government,
from those Reproaches, which its Enemies pretend to found upon the Nature of
the English Monarchy; that I cannot but think, these Collections may be allowed
the Honor of having a Patron, whose Approbation would effectually recommend
them to the World.

If your Lordship shall think well of what I here tender, in Proof, that the
Right of their present Majesty's ought to be universally acknowledged, and
sworn to, if required by Act of Parliament; it will be a mighty Encouragement
for me to publish at large those Evidences, from the earliest times of this
Monarchy downward, manifesting their Right to be according to its Fundamental
Constitution. Which Province, tho many are more fit for it, has been assumed,
and labored in, by

(My Lord) Your Lordship's most Obedient Humble Servant, W. ATWOOD.

THE Antiquity, Justice, and Necessity, OF AN OATH OF ABJURATION.
THOUGH the Author of the Case of an Oath of Abjuration considered, makes a show
of Reason and Authorities against such an Oath, and against all that are Page
33. vid. Inf.
declarative of Right, or more expressive of the Duty of the Subject, than the
Oath of Allegiance, enacted 1 W. and M. I shall hope to make it evident, That
Reason, and the Stream of Authorities, are full against him; without being
thought in the least to reflect upon that Parliament which made the New Oath;
or upon those Members in either House, who have opposed farther Securities,
when, perhaps, they thought the Times did not require them; Or that the Terms
in which the proposed Oaths had been conceived were open to reasonable
Objections; nor, possibly, had any body been at the pains to lay before them
the Form, or Substance, of the Oath of Fidelity anciently used; and, as I doubt
not to prove, enjoined by the Constitution of this Monarchy, and still in force.

The Considerer would be thought as true a Friend to the English Nation, and to
our present Settlement, as any body; yet one may say, that the Cloven Foot
appears, by the manifest end of his Book; and, particularly, by two Passages,
when he was not upon his usual Guard.

One is, where he, without any real ground, brands the People of England with
the Character of Page 8. See the Inconstancy of English Men.
Inconstancy.

The other, where he intimates, That, in his Opinion, no Succession to the
Crown of England can be Page 25. Although they could not lay Claim thereto by
Lineal and Legal Succession.
Legal, unless it be Lineal; or, as he elsewhere explains his use of the Word,
Page 23.
Lineal and Immediate; by which he excludes his Majesty's Legal Right, as a
certain Bishop does her Majesty's, while he contends, That God has disposed of
the Kingdom to his Majesty by Conquest.

These Notions are, like Sampson's Foxes, joined Tail to Tail for the
Destruction of the present Settlement.

Sure I am, our Considerer will have no reason to complain of any Injury, in
being thought one of the same Principle, or rather Faction, with a Vid. The
Pretenses of the French Invasion examined. Licensed by the Lord Nottingham upon
Admiral Russel's beating the French Fleet, p. 11.
certain Author, who says, Considering the Hurry the late King's unexpected
Desertion put all things in, and the absolute necessity of a speedy Settlement,
the Friends of the Old English Monarchy have just cause to rejoice, it was made
so near the Old Foundation, Query, What he means by a Temporary Variation?
Whether during the Lives of their Present Majesty's, and of the Prince and
Princess, and of the Issue of either of them: Or, which is most likely, during
the Absence of the late King, while that Juncture or Necessity should continue?
with a small and only Temporary Variation from it, which was also absolutely
necessary in that Juncture of Affairs.

Yet the Considerer, that he may create a Confidence in them who acknowledge
the Right of their Majesty's, and believe the Settlement of it to be no
Variation from the Constitution of the Old English Monarchy, pretends not only
Page 1.
Sincerely to love their Present Majesty's, and to serve them according to his
poor Capacity and Station, well as any Man in England; but to entertain no
manner of Scruple concerning their Right; to have had a previous Disposition
for receiving it, in approving of the P. 22. This is a famous Passage, and
makes very much for a Bill of Exclusion, at least, if I mistake not.
Bill of Exclusion; and to admit, that very anciently the States of the Realm
did Depose one King, and set up another by a If they had not intended thereby
to show and exercise a Power they thought inherent in them on such
extraordinary occasions.
Power Inherent in them; or what they in those Times, when they could not be
ignorant of the Constitution of this Monarchy, judged so to be.

And yet, out of his great Concern for the Liberties of England, he would not
have the Subjects Hurt by compelling them to swear to an Authority, which, Page
22. They hurt John, etc. But they intended not to hurt the Subjects by
compelling them to swear against him.
of his own showing, or concession, is truly Legal; and to renounce a pretended
Authority, which never can be real, till that ceases which has been established
by a Power which the States of the Kingdom in the time of R. 2. and long
before, judged inherent in them; and if it were not originally inherent, was
given by express Law.

Though the Title of his Treatise relates only to an Oath of Abjuration, which
seems meant of an Express Abjuration; His Arguments run against all implied
Abjurations, Vide Page 33.
which Oaths Declarative of Right plainly are.

This might set aside the Consideration of the Head which he raises upon the
supposed Impossibility of keeping such an Oath: For, certainly, it is far from
being more impossible to be true to Princes, whose Right we swear to, than to
those whose Right we refuse to swear to.

Though he will not allow of any manner of Abjuration; Page 35. The other part of
Abjuration is of his Person and Government.
he seems particularly to reflect upon some Form offered at some time or other;
and yet is not so fair, or so distinct, as to give the Words at large, the
rejection of which he would justify.

But, as he opposes all Oaths of Abjuration in general; his Arguments will
appear to be of no Weight, unless they strike at all such Oaths, though relating
only to the present time: As if we should swear, which doubtless we may with a
good Conscience, when required, That James, lately King of England, has no
manner of Right or Title to the Crown.

Should we go further, and Swear, That we will to our utmost oppose his
Readeption This the Word used in the Year Book, 1 H. 7. in relation to the
Restoration of H. 6.
of Power; surely it is not impossible for us to keep this Oath, and yet submit
to God's* Providence, if it should be his Pleasure to re-establish him upon the
Throne.

What he says, therefore, in relation to future Contingencies, I might leave
out of the Question: As I might pass by all his Pretenses to skill in History,
upon the supposed Novelty of an Oath of Abjuration: For if it be needful, it is
being New, could be no Objection against it, with a Man, who, if he be what he
pretends, has no manner of Scruple against Abjuring the late King's Title and
Government, for the present.

Besides, if there never had been any Oath expressly Abjuratory; if it shall
appear that there have been Oaths Declaratory of Right; this would be enough to
expose his vain show of Reading.

His chief Positions and Insinuations are these:

I. That an Oath of Abjuration or barely Vide Page 33.
Declarative of Right, is Page 4.
Altogether new and strange in England, and in Page ^0. When that which secures
all other Governments in the World besides, and that which his secured our own
as well as any other for so many Hundreds of Years, ( viz.) An Oath of
Allegiance to the Possessors of the Throne, will not secure, or be thought
sufficient to secure the present Government, on what Foundation will the World
about us think we stand?
all other Governments in the World: That is, never had been required here, or
in any other Government.

For a seeming Proof of which Negative, in relation to England, it was but
requisite for him to make a great show of being thoroughly read in our
Histories; such an Undertaking becoming no Man who has not a comprehensive Idea
of the State of this Kingdom under all the Successions of Kings. Nor, however,
can he extend this Observation beyond his own Country, without assuming to
himself the knowledge of the past and present Governments of all other Nations.

Though, as I shall prove, he has been a very negligent or partial Observer of
the History of this Kingdom; he would have it taken upon his Word, That no Oath
of Fidelity was ever required of the Subjects of England, other than an Oath to
the Possessors of the Throne, as Kings in Fact, without Declarations of Right:
When yet, as he pretends to demonstrate by an indigested heap of Quotations,
there often has been as much occasion for such Oaths, as can be imagined now.

II. He labors to impose the Belief, That an Oath of Abjuration, or barely
declarative of Right, is needless; because, as he will have it, there is as
much Security to the Government from an Oath to a King, merely as King de
facto; and particularly in the Oath required by the Statute 1 W. and M. As from
an Oath recognizing the Right of the Possessors, and abjuring the Pretenses of
others.

III. That an Oath of Abjuration, or barely declarative of Right, would be very
mischievous: Because, 1. It would be a means of deceiving the Government, and
occasioning the wilful Perjury of many; he uncharitably suggesting, that those
his Friends, who take the Oath to their Majesty's, while they believe the Right
to be in the late King, will as readily swallow Formal, as they do Material
Perjury. 2. It will occasion Distractions, and strengthen the Jacobites, he
unreasonably supposing, Page 30.
that few will take it. 3. Page 31.
It will be the means of turning out a great number of good People, that serve
their present Majesty's with Faithfulness, and Honesty, and Diligence, and with
Affection too.

That is, who are in their Service, love their Persons, and pay them all the
Allegiance which they take to be due to a King and Queen in Fact: But if they
should be obliged to swear to their Right, must lose the Opportunities they
have of serving him, whom they contend to be their only rightful Prince; with
much greater Advantage than they could without Power and Wealth from their
Present Majesty's.

IV. He maintains, that an Oath of Abjuration is impossible to be kept: Falsely
supposing such an Oath to imply a Fighting against God's Providence, and
engaging never to obey the Person Abjured, though he should be restored without
their Assistance, or Connivance.

In refutation of which his false Colors I shall show,

I. That an Oath of Abjuration, or at least Declarative of Right, is not New or
Strange in France.

II. That the Oath of Fidelity to our Princes, required by the Constitution of
this Monarchy, is an Oath of Abjuration, either express or implied; and always
as to a King of Right: And that the old Oath of Fidelity is more expressive of
the Duty of the Subject, than the Oath of Allegiance required by the late Act;
and that old Oath still remains in force.

III. That in several Ages of this Monarchy other Oaths have been required, and
taken by the Subjects of England, besides those which were taken to the King
for the time being: And that they are Oaths of the like Nature with those which
he will have to be altogether New and Strange.

IV. That if there never had been an Oath of Abjuration before this time,
however, this would be no color of Objection against one now; for that it is
more needful now, than it can be thought to have been in any of those Reigns in
which he instances: And that an Oath expressly abjuring the late Kings
Pretension, is now absolutely necessary: Nor is it to be thought that it would
occasion Formal Perjury, but that it would prevent Material in many.

V. That it is likely to be of great Advantage, and Support, to the Government,
and Nation.

VI. That no Man ought to refuse such an Oath to their Present Majesty's, if
required by Act of Parliament; and that it is not to be believed that the
Refusers would be considerable, in number, or Interest.

I. Since he suggests, That the World about us would suspect the Foundation on
which we stand, if an Oath of Abjuration, Page 30. On what Foundation will the
World about us think we stand?
or more than to a King as barely King in Fact, or Possessor of the Throne,
though without Right, should be required; it may be convenient to prepare the way
for my Authorities in relation to England, with showing that France, which
makes so great a Figure in the World about us, would have no reason to draw any
Inference from such an Oath, to the Disadvantage of our present Settlement.

Bernard de Girard, Lord of Haillon, in his History of France, Sur du Haillon
de l' Estate and Succez des Affairs de France, p. 45.
written by the Command of C. 9. speaking of the Difficulty Pepin had to get
the People of France to depose Childerick, of the Merovingian Line, and set up
him, says,

He thought that to discover openly to the French in France, the desire which
he had to make himself King, would be lost time, and to endanger his Person;
seeing the French were by Oath solemnly sworn at the Coronation of their Kings,
to serve, maintain, and preserve him, toward, or in respect of, all men, and
against all men. Oblig^z a Ray de le servir, maintenir, and conserver envers
tous, and contre tous.
When the Prelates and Lords (instead of the Peers, Clerks, and Laics, since
instituted) in the name of the Church, Page 46.
the Nobility, and People, promised the King at the Ceremony of his said
Coronation, to obey, serve, and defend him. Moyenant quil soit just, etc.
Provided that he be just, valiant, diligent, a Drouturi^^.
Doer of Right, clement, a Minder of his Affairs; and that he knows how to
resist his Enemies, punish the bad, protect the good, and defend the Christian
Religion.

Here is not a bare Passive Obedience sworn to, as if it were only while they
lay under a Force, but an Active. And in swearing to Defend their King against
all Persons whatsoever, they, by plain Implication, swear, That no body besides
has right to their Allegiance; for then he would be one against whom they ought
not to defend their Prince. And yet it appears that here is an Oath which they
had no reason to complain of as a Burden, since it is so express upon what
Condition the Obligation depends.

I shall give one other memorable Instance, how little Reason the French would
have to undervalue us for an Oath of Abjuration; and that shall be in the Form
of the Oath which the Peers, the Great Men, the Nobles, Walsingham. fol. 401.
temp. H. 5. Proceres, Magnates, and Nobiles, ac status regni praed. tam
Spirituales quam Temporales, nec non Civitates and Notabiles Communitates, ac
Cives, and Burgense: Villarum ^^usdem regni, praes^ to consanguin^o suo pro
tempore obedientes, praestabant Juramenta quae sequuntur.
and States of the Kingdom of France, as well Spiritual as Temporal, together
with the Cities and Communities of any note, and Inhabitants and Burgesses of
the Towns of the Kingdom, were obliged to take to our King, Hen. 5.

First, That they will suffer the said Lord King Henry to dispose of the Army,
and govern the Common Weal; and will humbly and dutifully obey and observe his
Commands, in all things concerning the Government of the said Kingdom, and in
all other matters. Also, That the said Peers, Great Men, etc. as much as it may
concern all and every of them, in all things, and through all things, shall
well and faithfully observe and cause to be observed by all others, those
things which were appointed and agreed between the said Cousins of the said
King, and the King himself, by the Counsel of those whom the said Cousins and
the said Lord the King, thought fit to consult therein. And that, immediately
from and after the Death of the said Cousin of France, they shall be the
faithful Men, and Leiges of the said King Henry and his Heirs; and him, for
their Liege Lord, and Supreme King of France, without Opposition, Contradiction
or Difficulty, shall receive, and admit, and for such shall obey: And that they
shall never for the future obey any body, besides the said Cousin, as King, and
Regent, of the Kingdom of France, except the said King Henry and his Heirs.
Also, That they will not give any Counsel, Aid or Consent, that the said King
Henry should lose Life, or Member, or be Imprisoned, or should suffer Damage,
or Diminution, in his Person, State, Honor or Goods. But if they should know
any such thing to be attempted or plotted against him, they to their Power will
hinder it, and will give the said King Notice of it, as soon as they can,
themselves, or by Messengers, or Letters.

This Form was first settled by Articles, and the Articles afterward were
confirmed by the States of both Kingdoms, Rot. Parl. 9. H. 5. n. 18. Pars 1.
Approbatio pacis inter Regem Angli^e and Franciae nuper conclusae.
viz. as the Record expresses it, The Prelates, and inferior Clergy, Peers,
and Great Men, and the Commons of both Kingdoms. Which shows, that the
Parliament of England approved of such a Recognition and Abjuration.

This Oath is so express, and full, that I need make but this Observation upon
it; That our magnanimous King, Henry the 5 th, wanted some French man of this
Gentleman's Abilities, to insinuate himself into his Favor, by Protestation of
Zeal for his Service, Page 30. They will see us now forced to be chained to our
Obedience, and t^ed down grovelling, for fear of rising up against them. This
posture will not please our Friends abroad, etc.
and to persuade the King, That Friends abroad would not be pleased to see the
French Nation thus chained to their Obedience; and Enemies abroad, and at home,
would rejoice at it.

II. But since he who charges the English Nation with Inconstancy, would have
our Kings trust its Generosity for Obedience to them. Page 30. This Posture
will not please our Friends abroad, who understand our generous Tempers better,
they will fear the effects of such unusual Bonds.
I shall here examine whether the Wisdom of our Forefathers agree with his in
this Point.

Both Princes and People being subject to many Frailties, and Temptations,
which may draw them to separate Interests; it has been found expedient in all
Ages, and almost all Governments, to make their Promises to each other matter
of Religion, by the Interposition of the solemn Sanction of Oaths, to which God
is called a Witness, and Party. Hence it is, that, at least in all limited
Monarchies, the Princes have ever been sworn to the main Limitations: And in
both the limited, and absolute, the Subject has sworn Obedience. And though no
People have been truer to their Kings, while they preserved their Coronation
Oaths, than the English; the Swearing Obedience has been no where more
carefully provided for. If our Rhetorician will say, They have been tied down,
grovelling on the ground, for fear of rising up against their Princes; others
will say, that this can be applied only to such as, with him, think their Duty
a Chain.

And yet this is such a Chain, as was confirmed by the Great Charter of the
English Liberties, Declarative of the ancient Law of the Land; Magna Carta,
cap. 35.
according to which, the Sheriff's Turn is to be held twice a Year, once after
Easter, and once after Michaelmas; at which time there is to be a View of the
Free Pledges: Which View, says the Charter, is to be thus: Viz. That our Peace
be kept, and the Tything be entire, as it used to be.

Upon which the Lord Coke says,

2 Inst. fol. 73.
The Institution for keeping the Kings Peace, was, That every Freeman at his
Age of 12. should in the Leet, if he were in any, or in the Turn, if he were
not in any Leet, take the Oath of Allegiance to the King: And that Pledges, or
Sureties, should be found for his Truth to the King, and to all his People; or
else to be kept in Prison.

This Franck-pledge, as he observes, was most commonly of Ten Families, thence
called a Tything.

The Author of the Mitror. c. 1. Sect. 3
Mirror, speaking of King Alfred's Constitutions, says, Sheriffs Turns and
Views of Frank-pledges were ordained, and that none of the Age of XIV, or
upwards, should be received in the Realm for above 40 days, except Passengers
to Fairs, Pilgrims, and Messengers, if he were not first plevied by Freemen,
and sworn to the King by the Oath of Fidelity, and after received in a Tything.

And under Title Abusions he says,

It is an Abusion to suffer any one within the Realm above 40 days, Cap 5.
Sect. 1.
who is of the Age of XIV, be he Englishman, or Foreigner, if he be not sworn
to the King by the Oath of Fidelity, and plevied, and in a Tything.

By Leges Canuti c. 52. Habeat omnis D^minus familiam suam in plegio suo, etc.
Canutus his Law, every Pater familias was to be answerable for all within his
Family. Or, as it is there expressed, Have them in his Pledge.

The Leges Sancti Ed. c. 19. sub Decimali Fidejuspone.
Confessor's Law is express, That all People ought to be under, or within the
Franck pledges.

Leges Sancti Edw. de Friburgis.
This, as the Confessors Law terms it, was the Chief and Greatest Security, by
which all were sustained in a most settled state. And the Institution of it was
so far beyond the time of memory in those days, that, as the Heathens made some
God the Founder of a Family or City of unknown beginning; the Invention of this
Law was ascribed to King Leges Sancti. Ed. De Greve. Hanc legem invenit
Arthurus.
Arthur, whose truly great Actions have afforded so much matter for Fables.

The Confessor's Law does not give us the Form of Words used in Swearing to the
King's Peace; either requiring only the Substance, or supposing the Form of
what was so frequent, and so universal, to be known of all.

But we have a full Account of the Nature, and Substance of the Oath, where
speaking of the Annual Folckmote, to be held on the First of the Calends of
May, which by the Na. the Sheriffs turn, as appears above, was twice a year;
and the Oath to the King was to be in the turn after Michaelmas.
time of meeting, and the Parties which composed the Assemblies, could be no
other than a Common Council of the Kingdom, or Parliament. It says,

Leges Sancti Edw. Tit. Greve.
It was Enacted, that there all People and Countries should meet once in every
Year, to wit, on the first of the Calends of May, there In unum and simul.
one and all, to confederate and consolidate themselves with a Faith and Oath
never broken, Na. An Infamous Person was not to be admitted into a Frank-pledge.
as sworn Brethren, to defend the Kingdom against Strangers, and against
Enemies, Vna oum Domino suo Regi.
together with their Lord the King, and with him to keep his Lands and Honors,
with all Fidelity. And that they will be faithful to him, as Sicut Domino suo
Regi.
their Lord the King, both within and without the whole Realm of Britain.

So ought all the Princes and Earls to swear together, before the Bishops of
the Kingdom, in the Folckmote: And in like manner all the Peers of the Kingdom,
and the Knights; and, in general, all the Freemen of the whole Kingdom of
Britain, ought, in full Folckmote, to swear Fidelity to their Lord the King, as
aforesaid, before the Bishops of the Kingdom.

According to this Law, the Nation was to swear Active, as well as Passive
Obedience, and to defend the King, and Kingdom, against all Enemies whatsoever:
And to be faithful to the King, as King of Right; since he is to be received
for their Lord the King, or the only King.

What was to be sworn pursuant to this Law, does not differ materially from
what was long before the Confessor's time Enacted under Lamb. Archaionomia
Edmundus regnare caepit. An. 940. Desiit An. 946.
Edmund, King of the East Angles, contemporary with the West Saxon King Vide
Spelm. Council. 1* Vol. fo. 348. Council. Presentibus Ethelwolso Rege
West-Saxoniae, Beorredo Rege Morciae, and Edmundo Rege Est-Anglorum.
Ethelwolph.

Bromton, f. 859.
Haec est Institutio quam Edmundus Rex and Episcopi sui cum sapientibus suis,
instituerunt apud Culentonam, de Pace, and Juramento faciendo.

Imprimis ut omnes jurent, in nomine Domine, pro quo sanctum illud sanctum est,
fidelitatem Edmundo Regi sicut homo debet esse fidelis Domino suo, sine omni
controversia, and seditione, in manifesto, in occulto, in amando quod amabit,
nolendo quod nolet, and antequam juramentum hoc dabitur, Vide Lamb.
ut nemo concelet hoc in Fratre, vel proximo, plusquam in Extraneo.

This is the Institution which King Edmund, and his Bishops, with his Wise Men,
instituted at Culinton, concerning Peace, and Swearing.

First, That all Men, in the Name of the Lord, upon whose account an Oath is
Sacred, swear Fidelity to King Edmund, as a Man ought to be faithful to his
Lord; without all Controversy, and Sedition, in what is open, in what is
hidden, in loving what he loves, and being against what he is against. And
before that this Oath shall be given, that no body conceal this in a Brother,
or Neighbor, more than in a Stranger.

Here was required the Swearing Fidelity, and the Active Service due from a Man
to his Lord, and to be against every thing, or person, which he was against:
There was to be no Controversy, or Dispute, which might relate either to the
Commands, or the Authority of the Commander. Both, for certain, were supposed
to be according to Law, Verbum Regis est verbum Legis. Ld. C. Bracton.
contrary to which the King has never been presumed to have any Will.

The other Oath, as part of the Body of the Confessor's Laws, was received, and
confirmed, or rather declared to be in force, four times, as I take it, Seld.
ad Eadm. f. 172.
in the Reign of W. 1. Though Mr. Seldom will allow of but one Confirmati- of
those Laws.

1. At Berkhamstead before his Coronation, when the great Earls, Edwin, and
Morcar, with the Army out of the North, which Harold left behind him, besides
the Accession from all parts of England, treated with that King with Swords in
their Hands, and obliged him to make a Flor. W. fo. 653. and others. Foedus
pepigit. Na. Though the M. S. of Matthew Paris mentions it as done by the Advice
of Archbishop Lanfranc: His Name appears to have been added to the Copy. And
Fretheric certainly died at Ely before Lanfranc came over.
League, or Contract with them. At which time it seems to me, that Fretherick,
Abbot of St. Albans, swear the King expressly, to the Observation of St. Edwards
Laws.

2. At his Coronation, which was beforehand agreed to be, as Ordericus Vital.
f. 502. Cunctique Praesules Regnique proceres, cum Gulielmo Concordiam
fecerunt, ac ut diadema regium sumeret, sicut mos Anglici Principatus exigit,
oraverunt, etc.
the manner of the English Principality, or Political Government, requires. And
accordingly he took the Vid. Bromton, Col. 962. Stubs inter december Script. Col.
1702. and others.
Coronation Oath.

3. Vid. Seld. Dissert. ad Fletam, f. 519. Guliel. 1. dicitur Londinum Anno suo
4o. Convocasso omnes e provinciis suis universis Anglos and Nobiles and Lege
sua eruditos, ut eorum and jura and consuetudines ab ipsis audiret.
In the fourth of his Reign, when a Common Council of the Kingdom was held, to
enquire, and settle, what were the Laws of the Realm; which went under the name
of the Confessor's Laws.

4. At some other time, when those Laws were enforced, with such Additions, or
Amendments, as had been Enacted for Firmantur Leges Edwardi. Hoc quoque
praecipimus, ut omnes habeant and teneant Leges Edwardi Re^is, in omnibus
adauctas hiis quae constituimus, ad Vtilitate Anglorom.
the Benefit of the English.

Among the Laws thus amended, I find that about the Oath of Fidelity; there
being more express Provision for the Rights of the Kingdom, than had been
before. One Clause or Chapter has these Words:

Leges W. 1. c. 52. De fide and obsequio erga Regem.
We ordain, that all Freemen shall affirm with a League, and Oath, That within
and without the whole Kingdom of England, they will be faithful to King William
their Lord; preserve his Lands, This relates to the Pledges.
and Honors with all Fidelity, together with his Person, and defend them
against Enemies, and Strangers.

In another part of his Laws, after he has promised that all Freemen shall
enjoy their Estates, as had been before enacted and granted in a Common Council
of the Kingdom; there is this Clause or Chapter:

We also enact, and firmly enjoin, That all Freemen of the whole Kingdom be
Sworn Brethren, to defend our Monarchy, and our Kingdom, according to their
Strength, and Faculties, and manfully keep the Peace, and preserve the Dignity
of our Crown entire; and constantly to maintain Right, and Just Judgment, by
all means, according to their Power, without Fraud, and without Delay.

Hereby the Subjects were to be engaged by Oath.

I. To be faithful to the King as their Lord, or only Rightful King.

II. Not only passively to obey, but to defend his Person.

III. In effect, to Abjure the right of all others: not only as he was
acknowledged for their only true Lord; but as they were to Defend him against
all Enemies whatsoever.

IV. They were to Defend the Monarchy, and Kingdom, and to maintain Peace,
Right, and Justice, by all means within their Power: That is, by the Sword, if
others failed.

The Import of the Oath required by this Law, in affirmance of the Old
Constitution, is manifestly referred to, by the States of the Kingdom in their
Letter to the Pope, 29 E. 1.

The Pope having cited the King to answer judicially before him, 29 E. 1. In
Parl. apud Lincoln. Mat. West. de Anno 1301. and Ryley's Placita Parl.
concerning his Rights over Scotland; his Parliament wrote a Letter to acquaint
the Pope, that this ought not to be. And among other things they write thus:

Praecipue cum praemissa cederent manifest in exhaeredationem Juris Coronae
Regni Angliae, and Regiae dignitatis, ac subversionem status ejusdem regni
notoriam necnon in praejudicium Libertatis, Consuitudinum and Legum paternarum,
ad quarum observationem, and defensionem ex debito praestiti Juramenti
astringimur manutenebimus toto posse t^^isqu^ viribus cum Dei auxilio,
defend^mus. Nec etiam permittemus praemissa tum insolita, indebita,
praejudicialia, and alias inaudita, praelibatum Dominum nostrum R^gem, etiamsi
vellet, facere, seu modo quolibet attemptare.
Chiefly, since the Premises would manifestly turn to the Disherison of the
Right of the Crown of the Kingdom of England, and of the Royal Dignity, and
notorious Subversion of the State of the said Kingdom; and also to the
Prejudice of the Liberties, the Customs, and Laws, of our Ancestors; to the
Observation, and Defense of which, we are bound, by virtue of the Oath we have
taken, and which we will maintain with all our Power, and, by God's Assistance,
will Defend with all our might. Nor also do we, or can we (as indeed we may
not) suffer our Lord the King, even though he would, to do, or in any wise
attempt the Premises, so unusual, undue, prejudicial, and before this time
never heard of.

This may serve as a Parliamentary Explication of the Oath enjoined by the Laws
of W. 1. in affirmance of the Common Law.

Pursuant to which, I find, that all the S. Dune^m. f. 213. Anno 1086. Mandavit
ut Arch, Episc. Abbates, Com. Bar. Vicecom (cum suis militibus) die Call.
Augusti sibi occurrerent Saresberiae: quo cum venissent milites illorum sibi
fidelitatem contra omnes homines jurare coegit. Vide Jan. Anglor. faciem novam.
proving the extent of Milites ^^lorum.
Freeholders of England swore Fidelity to that King, against all men, in a
great Council of the Kingdom at Salisbury.

As they had done two Years before, in a great Council at London: Or else in
their several Counties, soon after the breaking up of the Council.

Annals Waverlenses, f. 133. Anno 1084. Deinde, etc.
At Pentecost, say the Annals of Waverly, he made his younger Son a Knight at
London. Then, or after that, taking Homage of all Proprietors of Land
throughout England, of whose ever Fee they were, he did not delay to receive
the Oath of Fidelity.

Which gives me occasion to observe,

1. That at this, and other times, we find a plain Distinction between Doing of
Homage to the King, or to his known Successor, and Swearing Fidelity: Yet,

2. Though Homage to inferior Lords was without Oath, the Homage to the King, by
reason of his Sovereignty, was often, if not always, sworn.

3. The Oath of Fidelity to the King, was an Oath of the nature of Homage; and
requiring the same Subjection and Obedience. And both the one and the other,
obliged the Subject to serve the King for the time being, as Rightful, and to
defend him against all Men, without exception.

1. As anciently as the time of the Heptarchy, Liege Fidelity, and Homage, Mat.
Par. Addit in Vita Offae 1. Rex totius ditionis suae convocat nobilitatem, quae
ex Regis praecepto and persuasione Offano filio suo Vnigenito ligeam fecerunt
fidelitatem and homagium.
are said to be done by the Nobility of the Mercian Kingdom to Offan, the Son
of Offa the First.

And an Historian, speaking of an Assembly of the Earls and Barons, with the
Clergy of the whole Realm, in a Parliament at Salisbury, where H. 1. obtained a
Settlement of the Crown upon his Son William after him, Hemingford, f. 473. A^.
1116.
says,

The said Great Men did Homage to his Son William, and Swore Fidelity: Where
the Distinction of Swearing one, and Doing the other, is exactly observed.

The Learned Knight Spelman's Gloss. Tit. Homagium.
Sir Henry Spelman supposes, That men were never sworn in Homage, because the
doing of Fealty immediately So Britton de Homages, p. 174. b. and quant. l'
Homag' serra pris tossed soit pris le serment, etc.
follows it. Which he takes to be the Reason why some Nonnulli docti asserunt
in Homagio jurari.
Learned Men assert that there is swearing in Homage.

But if it will appear that God has been invoked or appealed to, for the truth
of the Homage, this I take to be as much an Oath, as if the Hand be laid upon a
Bible. And for this I have the Judgment of Sanderson de Juramenti Obl. page 86.
Bishop Sanderson, who holds the formal Reason of an Oath to consist in the
Invocation of God: That this may be by Signs without Words, and by Words
without Signs: And particularly he mentions, So help me God, as Words of
Swearing. That these Words were used at the doing Homage to the King, when by
reason of his Sovereignty, and not barely upon the account of Tenure, appears
beyond Contradiction by the very Form of Homage done by the Temporal Lords
cited by Sir Henry himself: Agreeing with that which Mr. Prynn supposes to have
been used at the Coronation of R, 2.

Sir Henry Spelman's Form.
Gloss. f. 296. Prynn citing this very Form out of the Liber Regalis has [ To
live and die with you.] Prynn 's Signal Loyalty, p. 247.
I N. N. become your Liege-man of Life and Limb, and of earthly Worship, and
Faith and Troth I shall bear unto you, to live and die. [ Against all manner of
Folk. So God me help.

Mr. Prynn's.
I become your man Liege of Life and Limb, and T^owthe and Earthlyche Honor to
you shall bear [ against all men that now liffe and die. So help me God, and
Holy Dome.

3. That the Oath of Fidelity to the King was an Oath of the nature of Homage,
were to be believed, if it were only for the Proof that there is, that Homage
to the Subject, was in all Ages held to be of the nature of the Fidelity due to
the King; as appears in the Exception or Salvo in the Oath of Homage to the
Subject, of the Faith owing to the King.

The constant Form of Homage to a Subject was this:

I become your Man from this day forward, of Life, and of Member, and of
Worldly Honor, and Faith to you will bear; for the Lands which I claim to hold
of you. West, 2. c. 44. Littleton Sect. 85. Britton de Homages, p. 174. Lib.
Rub. in sccio. Omnis homo debet fidem Domino suo de Vita and Membris suis, and
terreno honor, and observatione Consilii sui per honestum and utile salva fide
Deo and terrae Principi.
Saving the Faith which I owe to our Lord the King.

And the Red Book in the Exchequer calls this Homage to the Lord, Faith of
Life, and Member, and Worldly Honor, etc.

This Faith of Life, and Limb, and Worldly Honor, was due to the King, without
exception of any man: As it was due to the Lord with the exception of the King.

By the Confessor's Law before cited, they were to be faithful to the King as
their Lord, and to Defend his Kingdom, and Person, against Foreigners and
Enemies, without exception of any Person whatever: when Vide Inf.
according to this Author, another Person had the Legal Right. That to W. 1. is
but a Declaration, or rather Explanation of the former.

Nor do either of them differ materially from the Form abovementioned, enacted
under Edmund, King of the East Angles.

But, as I take it, none of the Laws for Oaths imports more than what
Neubergensis, who wrote about the time of R. 1. gives, as a short Definition of
the Oath of Allegiance, or Fidelity, due to the Kings of England; Unless it be,
that those Laws express what is to be presumed to be implied in Newbergensis,
concerning the Kingdom: speaking of the Submission made to Hen. 2. by the
Nobility of Scotland, he has these Words.

Nubergensis, Lib. 2. c. 37.
Regi Anglorum tanquam Principali Domino hominium cum ligantia, i. e. solemni
cautione standi cum eo, and pro eo, contra omnes homines, Rege proprio
praecipiente, fecerunt.

They, by the Command of their own King, did Homage, with Allegiance, that is a
solemn Caution of standing with him, and for him, [ against all men.

Though this do not mention the Kingdom; 29 E. 1. m. 10. d. Apud Lincoln.
a Record 29. E. 1. giving an Account of the Oaths of Fidelity Sworn by the
Kings of Scotland, to the Kings of England, from before the time of W. 1.
downwards to the time of Hen. 3. inclusive, of the last Oath, says, Quo se
principaliter astrinxit quod in ipsius Regis and Regni Angliae detrimentum
nihil debeat penitus attemptare.

By which he principally bound himself, never in the least to attempt any thing
to the Detriment of the King, and Kingdom of England.



This Oath of Fidelity, as appears by the course of Authorities; and
particularly by Record 1 E. 1. was taken Rot. Pat. 1 E. 1. Pars 2. m. 2.
Prelati Comites proceres ac Communitates Regni nobis tanquam Domino suo Ligio
and Regi Juramenta fidelitatis, etc. praestiterunt.
to the King as the Swearers Liege, and true and lawful Lord, and King. And
indeed, for such the Kings were received at their Coronations, as appears by
the Rot. Claus. 1. R. 2. m. 44. After the Archbishop had given an Account to
the People of the King's Swearing, and Inquiring ab eodem populo si ipsi
consentire vellent de habendo ipsum Regem Dominum suum ligeum and ad obediendum
tanquam Regi and Domino ligeo.
Close Roll, 1 R. 2.

Nor was this only at Coronations, at Leets, and at Sheriff's turns: but
sometimes there were special Commissions for taking it in the several Counties
of England: As was paticularly Rot. Par. 45. H. 3. m. 12:
45 H. 3. where the King declares, That he does it in ease of the People, and
to prevent their Trouble and Expenses in coming to London: Which seems to have
regard to that part of the Constitution, mentioned in the Confessor's Law,
requiring the Oath to be annually taken in a Folcmote, or Great Council of the
Kingdom.

The Form of the Oath of Allegiance which Sir Henry Spelman exhibits, as of
later Date than that common Law-Oath, is this:

Spelman's Gloss. Tu J. S. Jurabis, etc. Fidelis and legalis. Vide the
Customary of Normandy, c. 43 cited by Sir H. S. Lig^antiam autem sive
Legalit^tem de omnibus hominibus suis totius provinciae debet princeps hab^^^
ex quo ei tenentur contra omnes homines qui mori possunt aut vivere proprii
corporis praebere consilii and auxilli adjuvamentum, and ^i se in omnibus
innocuos exhibere, nec ^i adversantium partem in aliquo confovere. Ipse etiam
^osdem tenetur regere, protegere, ac defensare, eosque secundum jura and
consuetudines and leges Pat^iae pertractare. Vid. The Oath sworn by the King of
Scots to E. 1. Knighton, sol. 2483. Je^ ferra feal and leal, and fei and lealte
porteray au Roy Dengleterre Edward and a ses heirs, de vie, and de membre, and
de terrene honer contre totez gentz que puiront viver ou morire. Et james per
nulli arms ne porteray ne en consail ne en eyd serra* contra Luy, ne co^tre
cez heirs pur nule cas que poet evenir, etc.
You J. S. shall swear, that from this day forward you shall be faithful and
loyal to our Lord the King and his Heirs, and shall bear Faith and Loyalty to
him of Life and Member, and worldly Honor: And that you shall hear of no Evil
or Damage against them, which you shall not prohibit to your Power. So help you
God.

Here is an Addition of [ Heirs,] and Omission of [ the Kingdom.] But as no one
can become the Man of another more, than by devoting his Life, Members, and
Worldly Honor and Estate to his Service: This is the true Homage. And he to
whom we swear to pay this, against all other Persons whatsoever, who would do
him Evil, or Damage, is thereby effectually recognized to be the only Lawful
and Rightful Prince; and the Pretenses of all others are thereby abjured.

Whether any certain Form of Fidelity to our Princes were fixed by the Common
Law; or whether, as seems most probable, the Words were variable, keeping to
the Substance: Certain it is, That the Oath of So styled in the Stat. 7. J. 1.
c. 6.
Obedience (or Allegiance) required by the Stat. 3 Jac. 1. c. 4. does not in
the least set it aside, only gives a Power upon occasion to administer a new
and more explicit Oath.

In that Oath which is so well known, that I need not recite it at large.

I. It is sworn, that the King for the time being is lawful and rightful King.

II. There is an express Abjuration of the pretended Authority of the Pope of
Rome; which if this Gentleman had thought of, he would not have so peremptorily
asserted, That an Oath of Abjuration is altogether new and strange in England.

III. There is an express Engagement to the Defense of the King's Person to the
uttermost of the Swearers Power, against all Though this seems restrained to such
as may be encouraged by the Sea of Rome, there is added, [ or otherwise.
Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever. This by the words of the Oath reaches to
his Successors, and therein to their present Majesty's.

If the Considerer had attended to this, surely he would not have maintained,
That an implied Promise of Defense, (if so much be implied in an Oath to be
faithful, and to bear True Allegiance to Princes, barely as Possessors of the
Throne) is is all that has secured this Government for many hundreds of years.
Page 30.


IV. By the Oath enjoined 3 Jac. 1. the Party was obliged to discover all
Treasons, and Traitorous Conspiracies, which he should know or hear of, against
the then King, or his Heirs.

Now perhaps, here our Author might equivocate and say, That an Endeavor to
restore his Rightful King, could be no Traitorous Conspiracy against the
Possessor. But he ought to consider that this Oath, as did the old Oath of
Fidelity, supposes no Man to be King, but the Sovereign Lord and King, in
Possession, or the King for the time being, according to the Statute, 11 H. 7.
declarative of the Law of the Kingdom.

Before the Oath of Allegiance, Enacted 3 Jac. 1, by the Oath of Supremacy, 1
Eliz. c. 1.
1 Eliz.

1. The Queen is acknowledged for only supreme Governor of this Realm.

2. There is a Renunciation, or Abjuration, of the Power of any Foreign Prince.

3. There is an Assurance, not only to bear Faith and true Allegiance, but to
defend all Jurisdictions, etc. belonging to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors.

So that whoever has taken that Oath, is obliged to recognize their present
Majesty's for the only Supreme Governors of this Realm; and to defend all
Jurisdictions, etc. belonging to them.

Now let us see whether the Caution to the Government required by the Act of
Parliament 1 W. M. comes up to those of former times: And whether the
Common Law Oath of Fidelity is yet in force.

The Act for declaring the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and settling the
Succession of the Throne, having recited Evidences of the late Kings Endeavors
to subvert and extirpate the Protestant Religion, and the Laws and Liberties of
this Kingdom, declares, that their said Majesty's having accepted the Crown and
Royal Dignity, did become, were, are, and [of right ought to be, by the Laws of
this Realm, our Sovereign Liege Lord, and Lady, King and Queen of England,
France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging In and to whose
Princely Persons the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms, with
all Honors, Styles, Titles, Regalities, Prerogatives, Powers, Jurisdictions
and Authorities to the same belonging and appertaining, are most fully,
rightfully, and entirely invested, and incorporated, united, and annexed.

After which follows an Entail of the Crown: And thereunto the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and Commons, do in the name of all the People aforesaid, most
humbly and faithfully submit themselves, N. This is no Temporary Variation, as
the Author of the French Pretenses examined supposes.
their Heirs, and Posterities for ever; and do faithfully promise that they
will stand to, maintain, and defend their said Majesty's, and also the said
Limitation and Succession of the Crown, herein specified and contained, to the
utmost of their Powers, with their Lives, and Estates, against all Persons
whatsoever that shall attempt any thing to the contrary.

This was after a Declaratory Vote of the House of Commons, Vote of the House
of Commons, 28 Jan. 7. 1688/9.
That King James the Second had endeavored to subvert the Constitution of the
Kingdom, by breaking the Original Contract between King and People.

Whereby, and by the declaring the Royal Dignity entirely and rightfully vested
in their Majesty's, it is manifest, that they not only recognized the Right of
their Majesty's, but declared against, and renounced all manner of Pretenses to
Right in the late King. And they farther Promise to maintain and defend their
Majesty's against hi^ as he attempts to destroy our present Settlement.

This, no doubt, is a good Foundation for an Oath of the like Extent; nor can
any man refuse to swear to this Settlement, if required by Act of Parliament,
but he must at the same time maintain the Law, declaring the Right to be in
their Majesty's, to be no good and binding Law. And upon this Account,
certainly, it was, that some have in a public manner censured the declaring
the Acts of their Majesty's first Parliament to be good and binding Laws, as
destructive of the Monarchy.

The Act of which I am speaking, provides, That the Oaths hereafter mentioned,
be taken, of all Persons of whom the Oaths of Allegiance gnd Supremacy might be
required by Law, instead of them: And that the said Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy be abrogated.

The Oath of Allegiance hereby abrogated, I take to be only the Oath enjoined 3
Jac. 1. For,

1. That Oath is the only Oath which had that Name affixed to it, and that was
7 Jac. 1. c. 6. when it was first called the Oath of Obedience (or Allegiance:)
But the Common Law Oath either was sufficiently known under the Name of the
Oath to the King, especially if the place where it was to be taken, and the
Persons by whom, were added: Or else, which is most probable, it had another
known Name, which was that of the Oath of Fidelity to the King.

Thus, not to mention the frequent Instances in History from before the time of
W. 1. downwards, where the swearing to the King is expressed by doing Fealty
and Fidelity.

I find it upon Record more than once in the time of H. 3. That Fidelity was
sworn to him, as it was particularly in a great Council held at Vide
particularly Rot Claus. 1. H. 3. m. 44 d. Celebrato nuper Concilio apud Bristol
ubi convenerunt universi Angliae Praelati tam Episcopi and Abbates quam
Primores and multi tam Comites quam Barons qui etiam universaliter fidelitatem
nobis facientes, etc.
Bristol, in the first year of his Reign.

And Rot. Parl. 1. E. 1. p. 2. m. 20. De Fidelitate Arch. Ep. etc. de Hibernia
facienda; Reciting, that in England the Ea^ls, Barons, and Commons had taken
the Oath.
the Oath of Recognition or Submission to E. 1. at his Accession to the Throne,
which the States of the Kingdom had required to be taken by the Subjects in his
Absence, is expressly called the Oath of Fidelity.

In the same Year a Commission was sent to take Sacramentum Fidelitatis, Rot.
Pat. 1. E. ^. m. 20
the Oath of Fidelity, of Lewellin, Prince of Wales. And the Commissioners make
a Return, giving an Account how far they went, to no purpose, to receive the
Oath of Fidelity.

E Bundel. Brev. An. 1. E. 1. m. 1. in Turri London.
And I find a very memorable Record to this purpose, of a Letter of the Bishop
of Carlisle to the Chancellor of England, complaining, that the Sheriff of
Cumberland had unreasonably distrain'd the Men of his Liberty, to oblige them
Fidelitatem dicto Domino suo Regi debitam facere, to do or swear the Fidelity
due to the said Lord the King; when, as he pretends, they had offered to swear:
Wherefore he prays that the Sheriff may be obliged to receive their Oaths; or
that others may be commissioned for that purpose.

All which Records make it evident, That the common Law-name of the Oath to the
King, was [ The Oath of Fidelity.

2. Allegiance is not a Word that will distinguish an Oath to the King from an
Oath to the Subject, more than Fidelity will: For though Men were not sworn to be
Leige-men to Subjects, they in Homage became so, in effect. And Britton shows,
that the chief Lord, or else the first to whom Homage was paid, tho a Subject,
was a Speaking of the Salvo when Homage was to other than the Liege Lord.
Britton de Homages, p. 174. Sau^e la foy que jeo doy au Roy and mez autres
Seignurages*
Liege Lord.

But Ligeance, or Allegiance seems to be used in Law, or strict speaking, as
the Cause or Ground of the Oath of Fidelity, and of doing Homage, where both
were done separately and distinctly, 29 Ed. 1. supra.
as appears by the Record, 29 Ed. 1. where it is said, that the King of Scots
agreed for himself, and his Successors.

Quod facient Homagium, fidelitatem and ligeantiam, ut Ligeo Domino contra,
omnem hominem.

That they will do Homage, Fidelity, and Allegiance, as to the Liege Lord [
against all men.

Where Allegiance coming after Homage, and Fidelity, must needs be used
exegetically, or by way of explanation of what kind, or upon what Account, the
Homage and Fidelity were. For it is not to be thought that the Allegiance
related to any Act distinct from Homage, and Fidelity; but that the doing
these, was in pursuance of the Obligation they were under to their Liege Lord.
According to which it has been usual for the Kings of England, to charge the
Subjects upon their Allegiance, without any particular relation to doing
Homage, or swearing Fidelity: And in this Sense I find Fidelity used as
synonimous with Allegiance, and distinguished from the Obligation of the Oath;
in a Writ from Hen. 3. Brev. in Turri London. 8 H. 3.
to Jeffry de Nevil, charging him to come with Horse and Arms, and all the Men
he could get together, to attend the King at Northampton, and to assist against
all that might disturb the Peace of the Kingdom; in fide qua nobis tenemini,
and sub debito Sacramenti vestri nobis praestiti. Upon the Fidelity which you
are bound to pay us, and by virtue of your Oath taken to us.

3. The Oath of Allegiance taken away by the Statute W. M. was an Oath which
had been required of none, but such as were, or might be ordinarily without any
new Law, obliged to take the Oath of Supremacy; Persons of whom the Oaths of
Allegiance [and] Supremacy, might be required: Not [ either of them.] But it is
certain, that the Common Law Oath of Fidelity was required, either of every one
of the Age of 12, as the Lord Coke says, or rather of 14, according to the
Mirror, which the Oath of Supremacy never was. And therefore, that Oath which
was to be taken by them, who might not without a new Law be obliged to take the
Oath of Supremacy, still remains in force.

4. If it were not the meaning of the Lawmakers 1 W. M. to leave the
Common Law Oath to the Crown, we must suppose, that they intended to set aside
the Security, which the Wisdom of our Forefathers provided, in swearing all the
Youth of the Kingdom to be true to the Government: For if the old Oath does not
remain, no Oath of Fidelity, or Allegiance, can be required of any under the
Age of 18. unless upon the account of some Office, or of Recusancy; 3 Jac. c.
4. It shall be lawful, etc. to tender the Oath, etc. to any Person 18 years
old, or above.
or else to free from the payment of Double Taxes, or to remove suspicion of
Disaffection to the Government. But no man can reasonably suppose it the
meaning of the Parliament, that the generality of the Nation shall be exempted
from giving that common Caution, or Security, to the Government, which had been
required of every Freeman, or Youth, at the Age of 12, or else of 14.

To proceed; instead of the Oath of Allegiance, first enjoined by the Statute 3
Jac. 1. The late Act requires only this Form:

I A. B. do sincerely promise, and swear, that I will be faithful, The new Oath.
and bear true Allegiance, to their Majesty's, King William, and Queen Mary. So
help me God.

Not here to show the Sense too commonly put upon this Oath; which will be more
proper, when I come to show the necessity of some farther Caution of Fidelity:
I shall here only observe in short,

1. As I before observed, Allegiance is only the cause or ground of Swearing to
be faithful, not any farther Tie. And therefore they that think their
Allegiance bound them only to swear to their Majesty's as King and Queen, in
fact, think themselves not otherwise obliged to be faithful.

2. Here is no Recognition of Right, which the Old Laws required fully enough,
according to the simplicity of those Times; and the Stat. 3 Jac. 1, required in
express Terms.

3. Here is no Active Duty sworn to, in Defense of their Majesty's, and the
Kingdom.

4. Here is no engaging against all Enemies to their Persons, and Government:
Vide Inf. That this would not be sufficient.
Which prima facie one would think, might prevent all Pretenses, That though
ordinarily Men are obliged to Defend their Majesty's, the Obligation would not
hold against the late King, if he should land.

5. This seems to be of the nature of the Common Law Oath of Fealty, by which
Men swore to be faithful and loyal to their Lords, Vide the Oath of Fealty,
Abr. of Statutes Ed Anno 33. Hen. 8. and Littlelon. Sect.
and Faith to them to bear. Where Faith, and Loyalty, is plain Allegiance, or
the Consequence of it. Indeed it is not according to the Allegiance due to the
King; and therefore the Law provided no Salvo to this Oath, for the Faith due
to the King; as there was in Homage; that being of the nature of the Subjection
due to the Kings of England: Neither, as I shall afterward show, is the
Allegiance, which many who take this Oath suppose to be all that is intended by
it; the Allegiance due to the Crown of England.

Instead of the Oath of Supremacy, we have this Form:

I A. B, do swear, that I do from my Heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as
impious, and heretical, this damnable Doctrine, and Position, that Princes
excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, or any Authority of the Sea of Rome,
may be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do Declare, that no Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or
Potentate, has, or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority,
Pre-eminence, of Authority, Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual, within this Realm. So
help me God.

Now this Gentleman, certainly, sees at a great distance, who does not observe,
That, as much as this Oath is curtailed, yet here is another Oath for the
Security of the present Government, besides the Oath of Allegiance to the
present Possessors of the Throne: Whereas be supposes, Page 30. cited supra.
that neither this Government, nor any other in the World besides, ever
required more than such an Oath of Allegiance, as he labors to prove
sufficient.

However, here are Four considerable Omissions out of the Oath of Supremacy,
enjoined 1 Eliz. which I leave to others to account for.

1. The former Oath requires Men utterly to testify, and declare, in their
Consciences, that the Queens Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other her Highnesses Dominions and Countries.

But there is nothing like this in the new Oath; which we can hardly call an
Oath of Supremacy. I am sure it is at most but a Negative Oath of Supremacy.
But where the Supremacy rests, is, to use a Law-term, left as it were in
Abeyance, or in the Clouds.

2. That Oath contains an express Abjuration of the pretended Authority of
every Foreign Person, Prelate, or Potentate.

3. It requires Men to promise, that they shall bear Faith, and true
Allegiance, to the Queens Highness, her Heirs, and lawful Successors: and to
their Powers shall assist, and defend, all Jurisdictions, Privileges,
Pre-eminencies, and Authorities, granted, or belonging to the Queen's Highness,
her Heirs, and Suceessors, or united, and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm.

If this Gentleman will show me these Words in the new Negative Oath; or what
import as much as they do, though sworn to their Majesty's only as Possessors of
the Throne, I shall be very thankful.

4. The former Oath in some measure swore men to the Succession of the Crown:
Third General Head.
Which leads me (in farther Disproof of his Supposition, that the Government
never required any other Security from the Oaths of the Subjects, besides an
Oath of Allegiance to the Possessors of the Throne) to show some Presidents of
Oaths to the Succession, in their nature Abjuratory.

Of these I might give numerous Instances, which yet may seem needless; since
he himself cites an Author who is express, Sim. Dunelm. Anno 1116. cited Page
10.
That a Convention of the Great Men, and Barons of the whole Kingdom, did
Homage, and swore Fidelity to William, Son of Hen. 1.

I shall not here stand to prove, That under these general Words the Commons of
England were comprehended: but shall observe from him, That at this time
William, the Son of Robert, Hen. the 1 st's Eldest Brother, was alive.

So that here was,

1. An Oath of Fidelity, besides what was taken to the Possessor.

2. An Oath in its nature Abjuratory; the Common Law requiring all Men, when
the Succession was settled, and secured by the Oaths of the Subjects, to swear
to the Successor as to the true Liege Lord; with a So the Oath to H. the Son of
H. 2. Salva fidelitate debita Patri viventi, mentioned in the Record, 29 E. 1.
apud Lincoln. So An. 1252. in the 36th of H. 3. Vniversalis Communia Civ. Land.
fecit fidelitatem Domino Ed. salva fide Dom. Regis Lib. de Antiquis Legibus in
Civ. Land. Page 68.
Salvo only for the Fidelity due to the King: And to defend him against all
other Persons whatsoever, who would injure his Person, or diminish the Rights
of the Crown, or Kingdom, to which he was chosen to succeed. And if William the
Son of Robert should have been a Competitor for the Crown with William, the Son
of Henry 2; by virtue of this Oath, the Nation had been obliged to fight
against the Elder Brother's Son, though present in Person.

Rot. Parl. 38. H. 6. n. 26.
Of the like nature with this, was the Oath of Obeisance to King Henry the
Sixth, the Queen, Prince Edward, and the Heirs of the King's Body.

Though Richard Duke of York, Father of E. 4. had, according to the Modern
Notion, the Divine Right of Succession.

And whereas the Nation did effectually Abjure Richard's Pretenses; he himself
had done as much before, swearing in these Terms:

I Richard Duke of York, confess and beknow, that I am, Vide the Oath at large,
Stow. f. 395, 29 H. 6.
and ought to be, humble Subject, and Liege-man, to you my Sovereign Lord King
H. 6. and owe therefore to bear you Faith, and Truth, as my Sovereign Liege
Lord, and shall do always, to my Lives end, etc.

It appears farther in fact, that though Richard bore Arms against Hen. 6. he did
it at first only out of pretense of redressing Grievances; but never laid Claim
to the Crown as his Right, till he had Hen. 6. in his Power. No Man therefore
can say, that the presumable meaning of this Oath, was, That he swear to Hen.
6. only as to a King in Fact. And that he might well take himself to be the
Sovereign Liege Lord of the Kingdom, when he swore that Hen. 6. was, and ought
so to be.

But were there any question, Whether the Oaths taken in former times for
securing the Successions, agreed to by the States, or People of England, were
in their nature Abjurutory; I think there is no possibility of doubt, but such
were Enacted more than once in the Reign of Hen. 8. when the Foundation of the
Reformation was laid, and secured, by the Oaths of the Subject.

And indeed, the Oaths of Supremacy are so plain Abjurations, and so great
Securities to the English Government; that one would think, no body but one who
cinsiders so little, or so much as on one side, as this Author, could maintain,
That an Oath of Allegiance to the Possessors of the Throne, Page 30.
has been that which secures all other Governments in the World besides, and
that which has secured our own, as well as any other, for so many hundreds of
years.

Yet, since nothing but love to Popery, can be thought at the bottom of the
Objections against our present Settlement; perhaps, this Gentleman may be one,
who thinks no part of the Security of the English Government to lie, in
maintaining the Supremacy of the Crown against the Usurpations of the Pope. But
for certain, Parliaments in the Reign of H. 8. judged it for the Security of
the Government, that the Subjects should be obliged to take such Oaths, both in
relation to the Succession, and the Regal Supremacy, as this Author
inconsiderately affirms, Page 2.
to be altogether new, and strange in England.

By the 25 th of H. 8. the Marriage with Katherine, Mother to Queen Mary, 25.
H. 8. c. 1.
was declared void, and the Marriage with Ann, Mother to Queen Elizabeth,
declared lawful, her Children made inheritable, according to the course of
Inheritances, and Laws of this Realm: First, to Males; then to Females: And it
was made Treason, by Writing, Print, Deed, or Act, to attempt any thing to the
Prejudice of that Settlement. And there was enacted the substance of an Oath to
be taken throughout the Kingdom, upon the Penalty of Treason, truly, firmly,
and constantly, without fraud, or guile, to observe, fulfill, and maintain,
defend, and keep, to their Cunning, Wit, and uttermost of their Power, the
whole effects and contents of that Act.

By the 26 th of that King, 26 Hen. 8.
the following Form was Enacted:

Ye shall swear to bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience alonely to the King's
Majesty, and to his Heirs of his Body, of his most dear and entirely beloved
lawful Wife Queen Ann begotten, and to be begotten. And further, Mother of
Queen Eliz.
the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord, according to the Limitation in the
Statute made for the Security of his Succession in the Crown of this Realm,
mentioned and contained; and not to any other within this Realm, nor Foreign
Authority. And in case any Oath be made, or has been made by you to any
person, or persons; that then ye repute the same as vain and annihilate: And
that to your Cunning, Wit, and uttermost of your Power, without Guile, Fraud,
or other undue meaning, ye shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend the said
Act of Succession, and all the whole Effects and Contents thereof, and all
other Acts and Statutes made in Confirmation, or for Execution of the same, or
of any thing therein contained. And this ye shall do against all manner of
Persons, of what Estate, Dignity, Degree, or Condition soever they be. And in
no wise do, or attempt, nor to your power suffer to be done, or attempted,
directly, or indirectly, any thing or things, privily, or apertly, to the let,
hindrance, damage, or derogation, thereof, or of any part of the same, by any
manner of means, or for any manner of Pretense. So help you God, and all
Saints, and the Holy Evangelists.

28 Hen. 8. v. 7.
By the Satute 28 Hen. 8. the Marriages with Queen Katherine and Queen Ann, are
declared unlawful, and the Children illegitimate; and the Crown is settled upon
the Issue of the Body of Queen Jane, Mother of King E. 6. and for lack of such
Heirs, to such person and persons, as the Kings Hlghness shall limit, and
appoint to succeed to the Crown, by virtue of the said Act.

It was farther provided, That if any of the King's Heirs, or Children, should
usurp the one of them upon the other in the Crown of this Realm, or claim, or
challenge the King's Imperial Crown of this Realm in any other Form or Degree
of Descent, or Succession, than is there limited; or if any Person or Persons
to whom the King should give, or dispose his said Crown and Dignity of this
Realm, or the Heirs of any of them, do at any time demand, challenge, or claim
the said Crown of this Realm otherwise, or in any other course form, or degree,
or condition than the same, should be given, disposed, and limited to them by
the King, by Virtue and Authority of that Act, etc. that then all and singular
the Offenders in any of the Premises, and all their Abetters, Maintainers,
Favorers, Counselors and Aiders herein, shall be esteemed and adjudged High
Traitors to the Realm: And as well the said Heirs and Children, as every other
Person and Persons, to whom the King should limit the Crown, and every of their
Heirs, for, every such Offense, shall lose and forfeit all such Right, Title,
and Interest, that they may claim or challenge to the Crown of this Realm, as
Heirs by Descent, or by reason of any Gift, or Act that shall be done by the
King, for his or their Advancement, by Authority of that Act, or otherwise, by
any manner of means or pretense whatsoever.

And an Oath, in substance the same with the former, and very little differing
in words, Ye shall bear Faith, Truth, and Obedience alonely to the King's
Majesty, Supreme Head in Earth under God of the Church of England.
is required of the Subjects, according to that Settlement; and, according to
the farther exigency of the time, Recognizing the King for Supreme Head in
Earth, under God, of the Church of England.

In the same Parliament a Law was made, 28 Hen. 8. cap. 10.
requiring every one in Office to swear, That he from henceforth shall
renounce, refuse, relinquish, or forsake, the Bishop of Rome, and his
Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction. And that he shall never consent, nor agree,
that the Bishop of Rome shall practice, exercise, or have, any manner of
Authority, Jurisdiction, or Power, within this Realm, or any other of the
King's Dominions; but that he shall resist the same at all times, to the utmost
of his Power. And that from henceforth he shall accept, repute, and take, the
King's Majesty to be the only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England.

It seems none of these Forms were found full enough to obviate the Evasions of
Subtle Swearers, and exclude the pretended Right of the Sea of Rome. And
therefore 35o H. 8. to the Renunciation of the Power of the Sea, and Bishop of
Rome, and Adjuration to the Settlement made 28 H. 8. and then confirmed in the
principal part, with some additional Provisions; these words were added:

[ With my Body,] Cunning, Wit, and uttermost of my Power, I shall observe,
keep, maintain, and defend all his Majesty's Styles, Titles, and Rights, with
the whole Effects and Contents of the Acts provided for the same, and all other
Acts and Statutes made or [ to be made] within this Realm for that purpose; and
in derogation, extirpation, and extinguishment of the usurped and pretended
Authority, Power, and Jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome.

And it is observable, that though that Act continued, the Illegitimations upon
the Ladies Mary and Elizabeth, yet in case the King and Prince Edward should
die without Heirs of either of their Bodies, then the Crown was entailed
successively upon the two Ladies; but the Interest of either was to determine,
if they did not perform such Conditions as the King should limit. And in case
of failure of Issue, or in performance of Conditions, lest the Realm should be
destitute of a lawful Governor, the Crown was to go to such Person or Persons
as the King should appoint in the manner there directed.

From which Statutes of the time of Hen. 8. concerning Oaths to the Crown, and
the Settlements of it, I may observe,

1. That when an Oath was appointed by due Authority, they who administered it
were not always obliged to a set Form of Words, keeping to the Substance: as
appears by comparing the Statutes, 25 and 26 Hen. 8.

2. That Oaths declarative of Right have been held useful and expedient,
appears by the Statutes 28 H. 8. c. 7. and c. 10. By the first of which the
Subjects were to swear the King to be Supreme Head in Earth under God, of the
Church of England. And by the last they were to swear to accept, repute, and
take the King so to be.

3. That Parliaments have had the same Judgment of Oaths of Abjuration, is
evident, by their sometimes swearing to one Rule of Succession, then to
another; contrary to that; and to defend that Succession to which they swore,
against all manner of Persons whatsoever.

And as these were implied Abjurations, they against the Sea of Rome were as
express as Words could make them.

4. That, in the Judgment of those times, implied Abjurations were as binding,
as the Express, is not to be doubted: Since it is certain, that it was the full
intention of those Parliaments to bind the Subjects to those Settlements,
without possibility of Evasion.

5. That Acts of Settlement were thought to govern the Oath of Allegiance, and
to make the Heirs to whom it was to be due, after the determination of the
Interest of the then King.

6. That the Right to the Crown in Reversion, or Remainder, was then held
forfeitable; and determinable, even after Possession, upon Nonperformance of
Conditions.

7. That if the Person, who, according to our de facto men, would have been
King or Queen immediately upon the Death of H. 8. should take Possession of the
Crown, contrary to an Act of Parliament, such Person might be a Traitor to the
Kingdom.

8. That supposed Bastardy was held no Impediment to an Election or Settlement
by Parliament, though it was to a Descent.

9. That it was not at that time thought, that any body in particular, who
could not claim under an Election, or Parliamentary Settlement, could be lawful
King.

10. The Reason why the Authority of the Sea of Rome was Abjured expressly, and
that of the Person who stood next (according to what some think the settled Rule
of Succession) only by Implication, seems to be, that the Authority of the Pope
was believed by many: But no one in particular was reputed to have a Right,
contrary to what was settled in Parliament. And therefore there was no need to
swear against it directly. And yet this was fully enough, in effect, when they
swore a Marriage lawful* while another to whom the King had been married, was
alive, and had Issue to claim a Right of Succession, contrary to the Settlement.

11. Though every Man was bound to defend the Settlements to the utte^most of his
Power, it should seem some Men thought themselves exempted from defending with
their Bodies, or fighting for either side: And therefore the Statute 35 H. 8.
adds the words, [ with my Body.]

12. Notwithstanding former Oaths, in some of which all manner of Attempts to
alter the then Settlements of the Crown seem precluded; Parliaments judged
those Oaths to bind the Subjects only in their private, not in their Politic,
and Legislative Capacity. And therefore, thought they might without sin concur
in the Repeal of those Acts, against which they had sworn never to attempt any
thing.

13. If an Oath should now be required, to maintain, and defend with their
Bodies, the present Settlement of the Crown, against all persons whatsoever;
and to maintain the Incapacity of a Popish Prince, (who would promote the
usurped, and abrogated Authority of the Bishop of Rome) to inherit, possess, or
enjoy the Crown and Government of this Realm; created, or declared, by the
Statute 1 W.M who, but our Considerer, would say, That such an Oath were New
and Strange? when the Law 1 W. M. is so manifestly one of those Laws, which
they who took the Oath 35 H. 8. if now alive, were, by virtue of that Oath,
bound to maintain; which is a matter very well worth the Consideration of the
Roman Catholics of England.

IV. Whoever considers what I have already shown, 1. Of the History of former
Times relating to the present Case.
of the nature of the Oath to the Crown, required by the Constitution,
generally of all the Subjects of England; and what farther Securities from the
Oaths of the Subjects have been required, upon occasion; will think it to no
great purpose to examine the Circumstances of those Times, when this Gentleman
supposes, that there was as much need of an Oath of Abjuration as now.

However, the observing his Mistakes in the History of this Realm, may give a
fit handle for the establishing, or hinting, of some useful Truths.

Page 4.
The Line of Succession, he says, has been as frequently interrupted in
England, as in any Hereditary Kingdom in the World. And therefore there had
been as much need of an Oath of Abjuration here, as any where, and yet we have
never had one.

This hisbold Negative, I think I have sufficiently disproved: but would gladly
know of him what he means by an Hereditary Kingdom.

If he means, as without doubt he does, a Kingdom, where, of right, in all
cases, the Succession ought to go to the next in the Line; and that every
Interruption of such Succession, is contrary to the Constitution: Then I may
say, and shall show him in its place, that he knows nothing of the Constitution
of this Monarchy: Which, as a witty Author long since observed of the Kingdom
of Israel, is in respect of Stock, or Family, Hereditary, as to Persons,
Elective.

And if this has been the known Constitution; then Interruptions of the Line,
provided the Family were kept to, could not require any other Abjuration, than
what was contained in the common Law Oath.

He tells us, he will not run up beyond the Conquest, and what Right William
the Conqueror had to these Kingdoms; he says, every body knows as well as any
body.

But I may tell him, he himself does not, with all his Pomp of Reading. And if
he were not biased by slavish Principles, he would have attended to the plain
Evidences, which could not but occur to any diligent, and impartial Enquirer,
proving, that W. Page 4.
1. had a better Title than Conquest, or the Promise of the Confessor: For
that, being qualified by his own Affinity, though a Bastard, and in his Wive's
Consanguinity, as she was descended from a Daughter of King Alfred; he was
chosen Successor in a Parliament, or Common Council of the Kingdom, in the life
time of the Confessor. The time and circumstances of which, I may show him in
due time; however shall give him two Authorities to animate his farther Enquiry.

William himself, in one of his Charters, has this Style: Monast. 1. Vol. f. 48.
Ego W. Rex Anglorum haeredi^ario jure factus.

I William, made King of England by right of Inheritance.



To understand how this was, take the words of Ordericus Vitalis, Ord. Vital.
f. 492.
an Author of sufficient Antiquity.

Edwardus propinquo suo Willielmo Duci Normanuorum, primo per Rodbertum
Contuar' Summum Pontificem; postea per eundem Heraldum, integram Anglici regni
mandaverat concessionem: ipsumque, concedentibus Anglis, fecerat totius juris
sui haeredem.

Edward had sent an Embassy to his Kinsman William Duke of the Normans, first
by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury; then by the same Herald, acquainting him
with the entire Concession of the Kingdom of England: and had made him Heir of
all his Right, with the Consent, or rather Concession, of the English.

It is very observable, that as this Author uses Concessio Regni, and
concedentibus Anglis, he seems to refer to the Coronatio H. 1. apud West. Anno
1100. agreeing with the Coronation of King Ethelred, Anno 989. Bib. Cotton. sub
Effigy, Claudii, A. 3.
Standing Rituals for the Coronations of the Kings of England, before the time
of W. 1, and since, agreeing in substance; according to which, the People,
being asked by one of the Bishops, whether they would subject themselves to
such a Prince, and obey his Commands? Answer, Volumus, and concedimus, 'We
will, and concede, or ' grant.

This Gentleman, out of his great Skill in History, tells us, that Page 5.
it is manifest beyond dispute, that when the Conqueror, as he calls him, came
to the Crown, the Right Heir was alive: who was Edgar Atheling, the Son of
Edward, Grandchild of Edmond Ironside. This Edgar, says he, was not only Heir
to the Crown by Lineal Descent; but designed to succeed Edward the Confessor,
by him himself; and sent for, for that purpose from abroad.

If he had been as skilled in Story, as he would be thought, he might have
remembered what is written of the famous Monk Guitmond, who told W. 1. that
according to the Laws of the Hebrews, and of other Nations, Ord. Vit. f. 325.
Aliique plures exlinea Regalis prosapia.
Edgar Atheling, and several others, descended from the Line of the Royal
Stock, were Heirs of the Crown of England: So far was he from thinking the
Right fixed in Edgar alone.

Besides; this Gentleman might have met with Proofs, that though Edgar, together
with others of the Royal Stock, were qualified for an Election, he could not
have a Right of Descent; being descended from a Bastard: For, to name one
Authority of many:

The Tho. Rudborne Hist. Maj^r Winton nuper Ed. Ethelred dictus Vnredi, etc.
cujusdam Ducis filiam nomine Algivam accepit in Concubinam, ex qua genuit
filium nomine Edmundum Irynside.
History of Winchester lately published, is express, That Ethelred begot Edmond
Ironside of a Concubine. Sure I am, I need not cite Authors to prove his gross
Mistake; as if Edgar was sent for by the Confessor, with design that he should
succeed him. Every body who has read the Story, can inform him, it was Edward,
Edgar's Father.

Page 7.
William the Conqueror, he says, left England to his Second Son: But William
himself declared upon his Deathbed, that it was not his to give. He wished it
indeed to his Son William, but left it to God's Providence; and that not to the
longest Sword, but plainly enough to the Election of the States: Vide Ord.
Vital. and Camden 's Brit. f. 104.

Vide etiam Seldom 's Notes upon Drayton 's Polyalbion.


For the reason he gave why he would not impose a Successor, was, lest it
should occasion Troubles in England.

Page 8.
Of his own showing there was no particular occasion for an Oath of Abjuration
in the time of W. 2. continuing during his Reign; there being an express
Agreement sworn to by 12 Great Men of each side, that whichsoever died first,
the other should succeed to all.

He makes a general Reflection upon Englishmen, Page 8, 9.
as guilty of Inconstancy, from the supposition that they generally engaged to
bring Robert, before they could have time to see whether King Henry would be as
good as his word.

Quia rex jaem Tyranizaverat. Mat. Par.
But Readers may choose whether they will believe him, or the ancient Author, who
says, it was because he had begun to play the Tyrant.

But observe how well he follows his Point: What, says he, did Henry do, with
regard both to his Brother Robert, and the vigorous Prince young William, who
had sworn severely to revenge his Fathers Injuries, and Eyes? Why, he contented
himself to Swear his own Son, who was also called William, into the Succession
of Normandy, Anno 1115. and of England, Anno 1116.

Supposing that the generality of his Readers will not mind the Latin so much
as the English; here is not a word mentioned by him, of swearing the People:
But as it is worded, it may pass as if his Son only was sworn. And yet one of
his own Authors says, The Son of King Henry is by all sworn to be made Heir of
his Father. Annals de Morgan.


And, certainly, when they swore to make him Heir, they believed they had Power
so to do. Nor was there color of believing, that any body in particular had a
Right needful to be Abjured, when no body could have Right but from them, who
had determined their Election, as far as their Sovereign Wills could be fixed.

He thinks to prove from the course of Authorities, Page 11.
that the common Oath of Allegiance was twice sworn to Maud in the Lifetime of
Hen. 1. If it were, this surely was a different Security from an Oath to the
present Possessor. Besides, all Authors agree, that the Oath to her in
Succession was conditional: Some say, if H. 1. should die without Heir Male,
which this Gentleman renders, Issue Male. But Gervace of Canterbury, who lived
about that time, says, Gerv. Dorob. Col. 1337.
Fecit Principes, and Potentes Angliae, adjurare eidem filiae suae Regnum
Angliae, si q^^dem Rex Pater suus H. decederet ^bsque hoerede.

He caused the Princes and Men of Power in England to adjure the Kingdom to his
said Daughter, in case King Henry her Father should die without Heir.



And considering in what sense several were in ancient times looked on as Heirs,
at the same time; and how Hen. 1. and his Son William, were made Heirs of their
respective Fathers. And particularly, that Hen. 1. Bib. Cot. sub. Of. Cl. A. 3.
in the Ritual of his Coronation, is said by Paternal Succession to have held
his Station delegated to him hoereditario judicio, 'By an hereditary Judgment;
that is, an Election, placing him in the Inheritance of the Crown. It can be no
great Question but many, at that time, thought they injured no body, nor went
against their former Oaths, in choosing Stephen; especially after H. 1. had, on
his Deathbed, as far as lay in him, released and freed the Nation from any
Oath taken upon his Account, which might prejudice Stephen's Election.

A Bib. Cot. Tit. Vespat. A. 19. de Monast. Elyensi.
M. S. in the Cotton Library, which gives the most particular Relation of this
matter that I have observed, among other things tell us, that H. 1. speaking to
those about him a little before his Death, said,

Ye Nobles and Wise Men! I produce unto you your Fellow-Soldier Earl Stephen,
my beloved Kinsman, noble in his Virtue, and very Religious: Regem per me ut
jure haereditario suscipiatis and constituo, and sic modis omnibus esse
contestor.
as much as lies in me, I appoint that ye receive him for King, by right of
Inheritance; and earnestly entreat, that it may be so.

The Reasons this Author gives of his being received, are very remarkable, Et
de Stirpe Regia descenderat.
Because he was a renouned, and honest Man, and much beloved, and a valiant
Soldier, and had descended from the Royal Stock; the Great Men, and Citizens,
being allured by Rewards, and the Clergy fearing, lest if repulsed, he should
raise Commotions; they received him for King of England. For the obtaining
which however, he was greatly helped by the Oath of Hugh Bigot, which he, as
the King, Stephen's Uncle had commanded, made upon the Holy Evangelists, before
the Clergy, and People; that he was with the K. at his Death, and heard him
granting the Kingdom to his Nephew.

What need was there, at that time, of an Oath of Abjuration of Title in Maud?
which no body but her Bastard Brother Robert, Vide infra.
seems to have though^ of, till Stephen disobliged the English in the highest
degree imaginable.

Page 13.
But I thank him for his Concessions, that Robert swore to Stephen, because he
could not otherwise be in a capacity of serving his Sister-in-Law. And, that he
fears, there are many Roberts of Gloucester now alive, that have taken the Oaths
to their Present Majesty's, with no better Design, than to capacitate
themselves to do them a shrewd turn when it lies in their way. He adds, Although
they, (which, to be Sense, must be meant of their Present Majesty's) see no
Shadow of unfaithfulness, or ill design, in them.

But certainly here, he goes beyond his Warrant: for, doubtless, their
Majesty's now see more than a Shadow of the Unfaithfulness and ill Designs of
some who have taken the Oaths; And who, to pursue the Parallel, for which I am
beholden to this Gentleman, like their Prototype, Vide ib. his Conditional
Homage.
hope to justify themselves by the words of an Oath with unusual Loop-holes.

He thinks it mightily to his purpose, that Stephen contented himself with the
ordinary Oath of Allegiance, though Maud was his Competitor. Page 13.
But he would have done well, somewhere at least, to have shown what the
ordinary Oath was; which if he had done, it would have appeared a sufficient
Security against Maud. And so indeed it proved in fact: For as long as Stephen
performed his part of the Contract, and consequently as long as the Oath to him
was in force, Maud was looked upon as justly excluded the Succession, seemingly
at least designed her. But as Authors say, Gerv. Dorob. Col. 1340. Bromton,
Col. 1024. pauca tenuit.
he treated the English Nobility with Contempt, relying upon the Council and
Assistance of Foreigners; he performed little of what he had sworn at his
Coronation; And as one rightly says, In process of time, through the Injustice
or Remisness of the Governor himself, Gerv. D^sidea, etc.
Discord arising by little and little, all things of a sudden were confused
with Dissentions, and Rebellions.

Till these Disorders arose, there was no color of ground for a particular
Abjuration of one who could raise no Competition. And when the Disorders were
begun, it was too late for him to attempt to engage the Nation into any Oath,
other than what those within his Obedience ordinarily took.

This Gentleman yields, that the Common Oath of Allegiance was taken to Eustace
his Son; which was a second implied Abjuration of any pretense which Maud could
make; and another Engagement to fight against her, as an Enemy to the King, and
Kingdom.

He speaks of the Agreement between Stephen and Hen. 2. but thought not fit to
represent it fairly. His Words are,

Page 14*
Stephen began to incline to Peace, which was agreed upon, you know, on
condition that Stephen should continue King during his natural Life, and Henry
to succeed him. But Bromton, Col. 1037.
Bromton assures us, 'twas not as King only in Fact; but tanquam princeps
legitimus, 'As the lawful Prince; as Henry was to succeed tanquam haeres
Legitimus, 'As Lawful 'Heir. And to show that this did not in the least
derogate from the Right of King Stephen, the Bromton. ib. Ego Stephanus
Henricum Ducem Norm. post me successorem Regni Angliae, and Haredem meum
Haereditario jure constitui
Charter made thereupon adopts, or constitutes, Henry, Heir to Stephen.

Nor was this any new thing in England: for W. 1. in one of his Charters,
declares that the Confessor had Cart. Antiq. in Turri Land. C. C. Quo me in
Regnum suum adoptivum heredem instituerat.
instituted him adoptive Heir to his Kingdom.

No wonder, therefore, that H. 2. took the usual Oath of Fidelity from his
Subjects, without any manner of regard had to William, Stephen's Son; who was
legally disinherited.

He seems to wonder, that, Page 15.
notwithstanding the Oath the Nation took in general to H's Mother Maud her
self; yet Henry succeeded Stephen, without any manner of notice taken of her.

This he would help out with an implied Cession, because she put in no new
Claim.

But he either conceals, or has not observed the real Abdication, which had
been in her case; the Nation having once intended to have received her for
Queen, till she absolutely refused the Condition, Vide Gerv. Dorob. Col. 1354.
in denying to confirm the Confessor's Laws. The knowledge of which Denial
being made public, so animated the People against her, that she ran away in a
Fright, and never more durst pretend to what she had so justly forfeited.

H. 2. he says, left his Crown uncontested to R. 1. But that he had it not by a
strict Right of Descent, prior to any Election of the States, is very evident
from the ancient Historians: For if he had been King by virtue of a Right of
Descent; then he would have been reputed King before he was Crowned: whereas
till then he was held for no more than Duke of Normandy. Bromton, f. 1153.
Hoveden, f. 656.
It was the great Art and Industry of his Mother, which procured Oaths of
Fidelity to him. Bromton, Col. 1159.
And his Coronation was not as an insignificant Ceremony; but according to the
ancient Rituals expressing an Election: accordingly Hoveden says, Hoveden supra.
he was Crowned by the Counsel, and Assent, of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, and a great number of Milites; which according to the use of the Word
in those times, extended to common Freeholders.

Page 15.
His Masterpiece in Story, is to show, that John had twice rebelled against his
Brother Richard; Page 16.
when, as he says, our common Historians confound Actions done at different
times: But what is all this to the question of Abjuring the Right (...) a
Competitor? When John never pretended to a Right before his Brother, but
sometimes pretended only to redress Grievance^; at others, that his Brother was
dead, or could never return from abroad to fill the Throne.

He takes notice, that John for his Treasons was abdicatus, Disinherited, and
deprived of all Honors, which he might hope for, or expect to have from the
Crown of England: Page 22.
Which he will have to be a famous Passage for the Bill of Exclusion; when, as
himself contends, John was not the next Heir: And, therefore, that was no
President for an Exclusion of the next Heir.

Tho, says he, Page 22. and 23.
John did actually succeed his Brother Richard; though Arthur had been declared
Successor to Richard; Though it was the Opinion of all the World, both abroad,
and at home, that Arthur was the undoubted Heir of the Crown; though many Nobles
sided with him; though he claimed the Crown himself openly, and gave John
abundance of Trouble, and alarmed him daily: Yet did John never attempt to get
him Abjured by the Nation, nor to secure himself any other way, than by the
common Oath of Allegiance.

Here is such a formidable number of Tho's, that one had need strike off some
of them. But I wonder, why John's succeeding his Brother, should come into the
number; for that of it self could require no more than the usual Oath, nor,
indeed, did any of the other Circumstances. That Arthur had been
authoritatively declared Successor, I do not remember: That it was the Opinion
of all the World, both abroad and at home, that Arthur was the undoubted Heir,
I am sure is not true: For Cujac. de feudis, f. 519. where it is called Mos
Britanniae.
Cujacius, who takes the Right of Representation, which was all that Arthur
had, to be the Law of England, says, That the Right of Proximity prevails in
other Countries; and particularly, it was the Law Grand Customary, cap. 25. d'
Escheance.
of Normandy. But Archbishop Hubert, more agreeably to our Constitution, Mat.
Par. 1 John.
declared in the name of the States, at the Coronation of John, That he was
chosen merely upon the account of his supposed Merit; and that no Man had right
to be King without their Choice. And what need was there for the Nation to
abjure any one's Right, when they did not think a Right fixed in any Person
whatsoever, other than what the Nation consented to?

He passes over the Reigns of H. 3, E. 1, and 2. upon supposition, that neither
of them had any Rival to fear; forgetting Lewis the Dauphin of France, who was
for some time a more troublesome and dangerous Competitor, both to John, and his
Son, than ever Arthur was to either.

This, one would think, our Historian could but have mentioned, were it not for
the unlucky Circumstance, that upon the account of that very Competition, the
French King's Advocate maintained.

1. Mat. Par. Addit. f. 281.

Vacans itaque regnum sine Baronibus ordinari non debuit unde Barons elegerunt
Dominum Ludovicum qui ratione uxoris suae, etc.


That John had been justly rejected by the Barons of England. 2. That thereby
the Kingdom became vacant. 3. That the Right of Administering Affairs, or
filling the Vacancy, fell into the hands of the Barons. 4. Accordingly they had
chosen Lewis. And, 5. That he was qualified for this Election in the right of
his Wife, who was King John's Eldest surviving Sister's Daughter.

He observes, that when E. 3. was Crowned, upon the Deposal of his Father,
there was no Oath of Abjuration. Nor surely was there need, when the States had
not left the Father so much as Annal^s de Gestis Anglor. Bib. Cotton sub Effig.
Cleop. D. 9.
the name of King; but enacted, that he should be called only Edward of
Carnarvan, the King's Father. Besides, if his Consent could signify any thing,
he himself Knighton, Col. 2550. Gratulabatur quod filium Edwardum post se
regnare elegissent, and ^i assensum suum, in quantum potuit, attribuit.
submitted, and took it very thankfully that they chose his Son to succeed him.

That there was no occasion of abjuring any supposition of Right in R. 2. after
his being deposed, appears fully enough from his own showing.

The Estates of the Realm, says he, Deposed him very solemnly, (even without
any notice taken of his Resignation, though after he had made it) objecting such
and such Crimes as deserved it; which they might well have spared, and surely
would have done it, even for pities sake, if they had not intended thereby to
exercise a Power they thought inherent in them, on such extraordinary
occasions.

Here he not only owns, that the States at that time might judge such a Power
inherent in them; but that if R. 2. were guilty of the Crimes alleged, which
is not now to be questioned, his Deposal was just. And however R. 2. had
resigned: And then, what need was there of Abjuring Richard?

If he had withal remembered The Statute which they referred to 11 R. 2. when
they told him of an ancient Statute, by virtue of which they might abrogate
him, and choose anyone of kin of the Royal Stock Vide Knighton de R. 2.
that Statute, with the execution of which they had some years before threatened
R 2. he could not have questioned the Power of the States, but would have
believed that they really had that Power by Law, which they thought inherent in
them: And that Hen. 4. being of the Royal Stock, was duly and legally chosen in
his stead.

The Reason he gives why he will not trouble his Friend with the Instance of H.
6. with regard to Richard Duke of York, nor of E. 4. with regard to H. 6. is
very comical.

Because, you say, there was no need of their doing so; Page 24.
since both of them looked upon themselves as Rightful Possessors of the
Throne: And what need was there of causing the Subjects to Abjure the Right of
one who had no Right at that time; nor as they thought, any time besides?

Where the only justifiable Reason for Possessors to desire an Oath of
Abjuration, with respect to any Competitor, which is the belief of their own
Right, his Art would improve against one: And certainly, no Man but this Author
would think a Law for such an Oath now, an Evidence that their Majesty's
thought the right to be still in King James; but directly the contrary.

Yet, though his Premises speak only of what the Possessors themselves believed,
his Conclusion is upon the general belief in those Times: which will appear to
run through all the Times in which he instances: And then, according to his own
Confession, there was no need of an Oath of Abjuration in any of those Reigns.

And if the Story of that Time from whence the de facto Men fetch their chief
Colors were duly weighed, it would in great measure silence this Controversy.
I shall here only point at what the Records and History of the Time make
evident.

1. Richard Duke of York, having never been Crowned, was never reputed King:
And himself had sworn to Hen. 6. as the only Rightful King.

2. Though R. by the Treachery of the King's Ministers, after the Death of his
wise and warlike Uncles, was advanced to Honor and Authority in the State,
till by degrees he filled most Places with his Creatures; got the King entirely
into his Power; and awed the Parliament with his Arms; yet he was obliged to
take up with a Reversion after H. 6. as Hen. Duke of Normandy did, after King
Stephen.

3. When E. 4. afterward claimed the Crown, he did it not upon supposition
that H. 6. had not been a true Legal King; but had broken the Contract
established in Parliament between his Father, himself, and H. 6. and was unfit
to Reign: According to which the Estates adjudged the Possession to E. 4.

4. Edward the 4th's own Parliaments never held him to have been King, till the
Estates had declared him King; notwithstanding his Success against Hen. 6.

5. The Acts of all Vide Stat. 1. E. 4. c. 1. Other than by Authority of any
Parliament, holden in any of their times.
the Parliaments in the time of H. 6. except that which was held after a
Readeption of Power, upon driving out E. 4. were held to have been made by good
Authority.

6. They never thought that there was more than one King at a time. And
therefore from the time that Hen. 6. was supposed to have been turned out for
having broken the Contract, Edw. 4. was in his time reputed the only King; Hen.
6. was held for an Usurper; and his Parliament Vid. Rot. Parl. 17 E. 4. n. 34.
Printed Stat. c. 6.
called a Pretensed Parliament.

7. Hen. 6. was not only in his time, before being out upon the supposed Breach
of Contract, reputed the only Rightful King; but by Act of Parliament Rot.
Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 16. Restitutio H. 6.
1 H. 7. the Atteindure of H. 6. by a Parliament of Ed. 4. is declared to have
been against Honor, Nature, and Duty; And in another place, contrary to due
Allegiance, and all due Order.

To return to our Author.

Neither, says he, will it serve to my purpose to instance in R. Page 4.
3. with regard to the Son and Daughter of his Elder Brother, George, Duke of
Clarence, because he confided so far in the Attaindure of the Father, that he
had no suspicion of the Children; he bastardiz'd, deposed, and murdered, the
Children of Ed. 4. But he thought the Act of Parliament had secured him against
the Family of Clarence; and therefore was regardless of them. We have no reason
to think he acted out of any better Principle toward them. And it was not then
so clear in Law as since, That the Crown takes away all Defects and Stops in
Blood; and that from the time the King assumes the Crown, the Fountain is
cleared, and all Attainders and corruption of Blood discharged. Which was the
Resolution of the Judges in the Case of Hen. 7.

Is it not great Pity, that where he would be thought to write so wisely, he
wants not only certainty, but truth of Fact, and of reasoning?

1. How can it be said that R. 3. deposed the Sons of E. 4. when neither of
them was ever King, or at that time reputed so to be?

2. If one were King, how could both be said to be deposed, unless one lived
some time after the other? Whereas they that suppose them murdered, will have
both to have been murdered at the same time.

3. He who reads Buck's History, would be modest in the Charge of Murder upon
R. 3. and would impute the Death of one to some natural Cause, and might
incline to think the other lived several years after R. 3 d's Death.

3. However, it is certain they were alive when R. 3. was Crowned and yet his
Parliament did not believe that they had any manner of Right. Nor does it seem
to have prevailed so far with the People, that there was any occasion of an
Oath of Abjuration. For the only Competition which might occasion it, was of
Henry, afterward Hen. 7, who had no Pretense of Right, but from the Choice of
the People, or States.

4. There seems no mean Grounds to believe, that the Children of E. 4* were
justly declared Bastards, by reason of their Fathers Precontract, in force when
he married their Mother.

6. Whether they were Bastards or no, the States thought they had sufficient
Authority to declare R. 3. to have the only Right to be chosen, because E. 4's
Children were not fit to Reign; And they thought R. 3. the most deserving of
the Royal Family.

7. The Maxim declared in the time of Henry 7. is as awkwardly represented, and
applied, Year-Book, 1 H. 7. f. 4. b.
as his other Collections.

A Question being put to the Judges 1 H. 7. Whether they who had been Attainted
in the Reign of R. 3. were capable of sitting in Parliament, and resolved in
the Negative; their Opinions were asked concerning the King himself, who
likewise had been Attainted. They Answer, Que le Roy fuist personable,
Year-Book, 1 H. 7.
and discharge d' ascun atteinder, eo facto qil prist sur lui le reign, and
est Roy. Town dit, que le Roy H. 6. en son readeption teignoit son Parliament
and uncore il fuit atteint, and ne fuit reverse and les auters Justices disont
que il ne fuit atteint mes disable de son corone, dignity, terres, and
tenements, and disont que eo facto que il prist sur luy le royal dignity deste
Roye que tout ceo fait void.

The King is personable, or a Person capable, and discharged of any Attainder
ipso facto, that he takes upon him to Reign, and is King. Town says, That H. 6.
at his Readeption held his Parliament, and yet he was atteinted, and the
Atteindure was not reversed. And the other Justices said, that he was not
attainted, but disabled from his Crown, Dignity, Lands, and Tenements: and
said, that by the very taking upon him the Royal Dignity to be King, all was
void, etc.



That the Maxim here declared does not relate to the Right of Succession, but
to the Act of assuming the Royal Dignity, with the Consent of the People, is
very plain. The Case of H. 6th's Readeption of Power, after he had been
dispossessed by E. 4. and by his Parliament disabled from holding the Crown,
being brought as a President for adjudging, that H. 7th's Assumption of the
Royal Dignity purged the Attainder he had lain under.

What does this relate to the Duke of Clarence, who was never King? Indeed it
contains a great Truth, which was never disputed in ancient Times; which is,
That any deserving Person of the Royal Family, was held a Person capable of
being chosen; and from the time of his being chosen, and declared King, all
Objections vanished. That this could not relate to a Right of a Descent, but to
a bare assuming the Crown, upon the Choice, or Submission, of the People, or
States, is evident by the Case then in question; which was of a Prince, who was
of a Bastard Branch of the Younger House. And though the Bastardy had been
removed by Act of Parliament, there was express Provision, That the Capacities
granted should not extend to the Inheritance of the Crown. Besides his Mother,
who if there were any Right of Descent, stood before him upon the Royal Line,
was alive at his Accession to the Crown: And if an Attainder had been no
Objection against a Right of Descent the Duke of Clarence's Children had that
Right before him.

And yet the Nation having generally declared for him, R. 3. was by Parliament
adjudged to have acted Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 3.
traitorously against him, before he had been Crowned.

From all these Instances, these Three Conclusions are very obvious.

1. That the Oaths of Allegiance to all these Kings, were, as to the only
lawful and rightful Kings; and implied Abjurations of all others.

2. That there was no manner of occasion for abjuring any one Person in
particular; because it was the settled Judgment of the Parliaments, and People
of all those Times, that no other Person besides the King Regnant was King, or
could be King, till he was admitted by the States, or People.

3. That it was not bare Possession, or want of Possession, which made any Man
more or less a King: For then H. 6. would have been the King after a Readeption
of Power: And neither E. 4. nor C. 2. would have been the King, while either of
them was out of the Kingdom: And every Prince would lose his Authority, while
Rebels are in possession of the Power of a Nation.

However, were it admitted that this Gentleman's Account is incontestably true,
it would appear to any impartial Considerer, That he has left the Merits of the
Case of an Oath of Abjuration untouched: for,

(1.) His supposed Instances relate only to the Times when the Person, who,
according to him, had the Legal Right of Succession, prevailed against the
Competitor: But he offers not the least Shadow of Proof, nor indeed can he,
That they who submitted to the other, accounted him, even during that
Submission, not to be the only Legal, and Rightful King.

(2.) As, therefore, it is to be presumed (which also is true in fact) that
they thought the Prince whom they obeyed the only Legal and Rightful Prince; if
the Oath required to be taken to him were not thought sufficiently to imply a
Renunciation, or Abjuration, of the Pretenses of every other Person whatsoever;
they were not only guilty of an Error in Politics, but of a great Sin, in not
improving the Opportunity God had entrusted them with, for securing the Public
Peace.

(3.) If the Oaths of Allegiance had this Defect; to this were to be imputed,
the many violent Changes which have happened in this Government: But,

(4.) Since the Oath was full enough for any honest Man; and, according to the
Simplicity of those Times: And yet the People sometimes forsook the next of the
Line, as well as the more remote; it is to be believed, that both the one and
the other were deserted by their former Friends, for some thing common to both.

(5.) It dos not appear in Fact, that ever any King of England lost his Crown,
merely from a Persuasion generally obtaining, That the Possessor was no
rightful King, as not being the First upon the Royal Line; and that the
Competitor had a Right to be the King, without any manner of Election. But the
misfortunes of Princes have been imputable chiefly to such Actions as amounted
to a Breach of the Contract between Prince, and People; or were taken so to be:
Or to the belief of extraordinary Merits in the Rival, and prospect of great
benefit to the Public by his Promotion. So that the Liberty which the People
thought they had to close with any opportunity of casting off the Possessor,
has not been, because the Oath of Allegiance did not sufficiently bind them to
defend the Possessor, while the Oath was in force; but that they thought
themselves really discharged from the Oath by the Possessor's Violation of the
Contract; or the Superior Law of the Public Good.

(6.) However it has been in former times, what the Act of Settlement had made
very plain, is so confounded by Men, who like the Pope, in order to Spiritual
things, claim to themselves a peculiar Right to interpret all manner of Oaths;
that there is an absolute Necessity not only for a Reinforcement of the
Common Law Oath of Fidelity, but for an Oath in express Terms, declaring their
Majesty's to be the only lawful, and rightful King and Queen of these Realms;
abjuring the late King's Pretense of Right, and engaging Men to Defend them to
the utmost of the Parties Power, against the late King, and all other Persons
whatsoever. If any thing short of this were sufficient; yet if the Old Oath was
Declarative of Right, and by undoubted Implication engaged the Subjects to
Fight for the Possessor, even against him who had been in Possession, upon
what, according to our Considerer, must have been the only Legal Right; and if
the present Oath mentions nothing of the Right of their Majesty's; and many who
have taken that Oath, declare with this Author, that it is only as to
Possessors of the Throne; This Omission, Page 30.
to say no more, gives too great Countenance to the Supposition, that they are
not our Legal and Rightful Sovereign Lord, and Lady. And it mightily concerns
every one, who believes their Right, to vindicate their Majesty's, and the
Settlement, from so foul an Imputation. Nor is it to be presumed, that their
Majesty's will reward Men for thinking them Usurpers. Here I shall show,

1. That they are thought by some only King and Queen in fact; that is, as
those very Men explain themselves, mere Usurpers upon the Right of a Prince,
whose Right continues.

2. That both, according to the Men of that Notion, and to the Reason of the
thing; no Man, while he believes them to be only King, and Queen in fact, can
give any Security of being true to this Government.

3. That he who should refuse to acknowledge the Right of their present
Majesty's, and abjure the Pretension of the late King, if required by Act of
Parliament, ought to be accounted an Enemy to this Government.

4. That whoever will give this Security, ought to be reputed a Friend; till he
show the contrary, by holding or acting, as he had done before.

5. That even an Oath of Recognition, without an Abjuration, cannot be thought
a sufficient Security.

1. The Present Dean of St. Paul's, who may be thought to trim the Notion of a
King de facto, and dress such an one up in the Clothes and Figure of a King of
Right, Case of Alleg. p. 14.
says,

In Hereditary Kingdoms, he is a Rightful King, who has by Succession a legal
Right to the Crown: And he who has Possession of the Crown without a legal
Right, is a King de facto; that is, is a King, but not by Law.

To apply this, he says:

King James, more I hope, by following ill Counsels, than by his own
Inclination, Ibid. Page 48.
had effectually removed all Prejudices, and Objections against such a
Revolution; excepting the Obligations of Duty, and Conscience.

So that according to him, notwithstanding all that King James had done, in
breach of the Contract between Prince, and People; as the Parliament plainly
judged; Duty and Conscience still bind us to him. And he, as being the rightful
Prince, ought still to have continued the Possession of the Throne.

Then speaking of Circumstances making way for his present Majesty's Accession
to the Throne.

Now, says he, not to dispute the Legality of all this, Page 49.
there was nothing so formidable as to prejudice an honest Man against
Submission and Compliance, as there was in the late Times of Rebellion; nothing
that could reasonably hinder a Compliance, but an Opinion that we must never
pay Allegiance to any but a Legal King.

Before which he had laid it down as a general Rule, Page 26.
that a legal and successive Right is the ordinary way, whereby the Providence
of God advances Princes to any Hereditary Throne: And this bars all other Human
Claims; but yet God may give the Throne to another if he pleases; and this does
not destroy the legal Right of the dispossessed Prince.

To me, I must needs say, here seems certainty enough to ground an Indictment
against the Dean, Act 1 W. M. by which the Oath is required.
for holding, that a Legal Right to the Crown still remains in the late King,
though the Parliament has declared, that the Royal State, Crown and Dignity are
rightfully and entirely invested in the Persons of their Present Majesty's.

Our Considerer knew too much Law to run this hazard; but we may conclude him
to be of the same Opinion, not only from what he says of a legal and immediate
Succession; but from his Concern, that the Government should look upon an Oath
of Allegiance to their Majesty's as Possessors of the Throne, while the
Swearers hold another to have the Right; to be as great Security, as an Oath
Declarative of their Majesty's Right.

2. That no Man, while he is of this Opinion, can give any Security of being
true to this Government, I shall make very evident: I. From the Opinions of
those Men, upon whose Account, or in consequence of whose Doctrines, the Right
of their present Majesty's is denied. II. From the nature of the thing.


1. It Is a miserable thing to consider, how much men endued with Reason subject
themselves to others, who have nothing but Noise and Assurance to entitle them
to a Dictatorship. But so it is, that when the Doctrine of our Church is to be
learnt from its Articles and Homilies; the most forward of the Clergy usurp an
infallible Chair, and to dissent from what they would impose, is enough to
place a man among the Publicans and Sinners.

The Popish Doctrine of Probability seems improved by these men: And it is not
only held safe to act as a few Great Doctors advise, but they who go upon other
Grounds, must be thought not to hear the Church.

Wherefore, to show how likely some men are to prevaricate, when they swear
Allegiance to their present Majesty's, I shall fairly represent what Sacred
Authority they would have, for imposing upon the Government with an empty sound
of Words, which are made to signify nothing, or very little.

Yet I cannot but observe, that though the Notions are adopted by Churchmen,
they had a Lay-Father, which was that man of immortal memory, Sir Robert
Filmer; Vide Heylin 's Certamen Epist. page 208.
of whom the great Dr. Heylin did not blush to learn Politics.

Sir Robert having, as he thought, fixed an absolute and arbitrary Power in
Adam, was mightily put to it to derive this down to all Kings at this day,
whether they came in by Right, or Wrong.

But this he heals by the present Dean of St. Paul's Doctrine of Providence.

Many times, says Sir Robert, Anarchy of a mixed Monarchy, page 275. last. Ed.
page 253.
by the Act of an Usurper himself, or of those that set him up* the true Heir
of the Crown is dispossessed: God using the Ministry of the wickedest men for
the removing and setting up of Kings: In such cases the Subjects Obedience to
the Fatherly Power must go along, and wait upon God's Providence, who only has
right to give and take away Kingdoms; and thereby to adopt Subjects into the
Obedience of another Fatherly Power.

We should be apt to think that when the Subjects are by God himself, by his
Active, Vide* Dr. S's Case of Alleg. p. 12. Nor does it make any difference in
this case, to distinguish between what God permits, and what he does.
not bare Permissive Providence, adopted into another Fatherly Power; all the
Obedience which was due to the former Fatherly Power, becomes due to the
present. But Sir Robert begs your Pardon for that.

If, says he, a Superior cannot protect, Directions for Obedien^n to
Government, p. 72.
it is his part to desire to be able to do it, which he cannot do in the
future, if in the present they be destroyed for want of Government: Therefore
it is to be presumed, that the Superior desires the preservation of them that
should be subject to them: And so likewise it may be presumed, that the Usurper
in general does the Will of [ his Superior,] by preserving the People by
Government. And it is not improper to say, that [ in obeying an Usurper, we may
obey primarily the true Superior, so long as our Obedience aims at the
preservation of those in Subjection, and not at the destruction of the new
Governor.

Here indeed is one thing which Sir Robert's Admirers will find directly
against them, in their Application of his Principles to the present Case; which
is, that, with him, no one can be an Usurper, unless it be upon the Right of
his Superior: Or, as he expresses himself in the Definition of Usurpation,
Directions for Obedience, p. 75. last Ed. p. 165.
Who has such a former Right to govern the Usurper, as cannot lawfully be
taken away.

Since, therefore, the late King never had Right to govern his present Majesty,
he cannot be an Usurper according to Sir Robert.

However, these men taking it for granted, that both their Majesty's are
Usurpers, apply Sir Robert's Rule, in justifying a sort of Obedience to them,
and swearing to it upon occasion, for the Service of him whom they believe to
be their true Governor; for which they will presume his Consent, contrary to
his public Declarations.

After Sir Robert comes a much greater Man, Bishop Sanderson:

Sanderson de legum humanarum obligatione Prael. 5

Sect. 19.


Who teaches, That there is a necessity of obeying an unjust Possessor of Power,
within the Bounds which he sets for Obedience, 1. In the Defense of the Country
against Foreign Force, and the Attempts of Enemies. 2. In the administration of
Justice. 3. In matters of commutative Justice. But that they must remember to
do this only as far as Gratitude or the public Safety requires; but not upon
the account of any Right or Authority in the Usurper; and that they take care
to preserve their Fidelity to their lawful Prince. To all this he holds, that
the Consent of the Lawful Prince is to be presumed, as it is his Interest to
have his People preserved for him: Provided they comply with the present
occasion Vt presentibus rebus quo Salvi sint se qua licet modeste accomodent.
as modestly, that is, as backwardly as may be, and only for self-preservation.
Upon this account he held it lawful to be true and faithful to the pretended
Commonwealth, Sanderson's Case of the Engagement, p. 111.
without King and Lords, so far as not to resist.

And yet he has a Salvo for an absolute Promise of this nature, in one of the
Exceptions which he takes to be involved in the nature of every Oath, De Oblig.
Jur. prael. 2. Sect. 10. and prael. 6. Sect. 12.
viz. Salva Potestate Superioris. 'So as it prejudice 'not the Power of the
Superior.

If therefore the supposed Rightful King command a de facto-man to resist the
Possessor; according to him, that Command is to be obeyed, notwithstanding the
Oath. For though he presumes the tacit Consent of the Prince, Prael. 4. Sect. 6.
that the Subject should take this Oath, provided it be as he directs, with
Reluctance, Ibid. Sect. 7.
and not till a Man is forced to it; he never supposes the Obligation to be
absolute, till the presumption of the Consent has passed so long, that it may
be too late to declare the contrary. Ibid. Sect. 6.


What he says of the Irritation, or making void an Oath, comes up so fully to
the present Question, De Jur. Obligatione Prael. 7. Sect. 6.
that I cannot but transcribe the most part of it.

He who is another Subject, is not his own Man, has not Power of obliging
himself in those things in which he is subject, without the will of the
Superior under whom he is: And therefore ought not by any Act of his to draw
upon himself any Obligation without his Consent, either expressed, or
reasonably presumed. For the Rights of Superiors over their Subjects are
perpetual, by the immovable and eternal Law of God. Moreover the Duties of
Subjects toward their Superiors, and the Right of Obedience and Subjection,
are by the same perpetual Law, perpetual and indispensibly obligatory: Which
antecedent Obligation (according to our third Hypothesis) hinders the effect of
a subsequent Oath, that it cannot oblige. For the Prior Obligation is always a
Prejudice to the Posterior, and makes void every Act inductive of a New
Obligation contrary to it. Therefore in this case we must say, 1. That a
Subject ought not, in those things in which he is subject to another, to swear
that he will do any thing, without the at least pretended Consent of his
Superior. 2. That if he has sworn, and the thing is not unlawful, he is
obliged to do it, as long as it does not seem contrary to the Will, Dignity, or
Utility, of the Superior. 3. That the Superior, if he has once confirmed the
Promise of his Subject, by his express Consent, either antecedent or
subsequent, cannot afterward make it void, or take off its Obligation. 4. That
if the Superior, as soon as he should know of the matter, should presently
signify to his Subjects his Dissent, openly and peremptorily, and prohibit
that which was sworn to be done, that transitory Obligation immediately ceases;
and that the Subject by virtue of the Obligation of Duty, which is permanent
and perpetual, is bound to act to the contrary of what he has sworn.

From Bishop Sanderson, to descend to Dean Sherlock.

Case of Alleg. Vide supra.
He has determined, 1. That their Majesty's are only King and Queen in fact. 2.
That God's Providence has actually given the Authority to their Majesty's: But
yet, 3. Has not altered the late King's Right.

However, one would think, that if God has by an active, and not permissive
Providence, given the Authority to their Majesty's; the same Allegiance and
Obedience will be due to their Majesty's, which was to the late King. But this
the Dean does not hold by any means: For,

Pref. to the Case of Alleg.
1. He declares, that he prayed for King William and Queen Mary by name,
according to the Apostles Direction, To pray for all that are in Authority;
even while he thought himself bound in Conscience not to swear Allegiance to
them: That is, according to himself, Page 17.
did not owe it them: For as he rightly says, What I am bound in Conscience to
do, I may swear to do. So that if we take his Example for a Rule, or what he
elsewhere says must be done, a King de facto may be in Authority; and yet no
Allegiance may be due to him.

Page 18.
2. Though the Dean teaches it to be a Duty to pray for a Prince, who has the
whole Government in his hands, and has power to do a great deal of Good: Yet he
says, We must take care to do it in such terms, as not to pray against the
dispossessed Prince.

3. He holds, that there are different Degrees of Submission, according to the
Degrees of Settlement; and though the generality of the Nation submit to such a
Prince, Ibid.
and place him on the Throne, and put the Power of the Kingdom into his Hands;
yet it may be we cannot yet think the Providence of God has settled him in the
Throne, while the dispossessed Prince has also such a formidable Power, as
makes the Event doubtful.

Upon this Principle the Battle of the Boyne brought some to take the Oaths:
However, these Words are not confined to the Forces of Subjects, but take in
the Forces of any Foreign Prince, authorized by the Dean to assist a Prince,
whom he says, God does not hinder from claiming his Right, when he finds his
Opportunity.

Since, therefore the dispossessed Prince has still a formidable Power, as he
is backed by the Power of France; the degree of Submission due to their present
Majesty's, ought, according to him, to be different from the degree of
Submission due to Rightful Possessors.

I must own, in this the Dean is not singular; for this, with others of his
Doctrines, I find in a M.S. of Obadiah Walker's, communicated to me by a worthy
Gentleman lately deceased, who had been his Pupil, while Obadiah professed
himself a Protestant.

My Assistance, says Obadiah, to the present State against Right is required,
M. S. Penes Authorem.
when the Sword they have unjustly acquired, and for which I obey them, is by a
new War, a wresting again out of their hands: And then at such a time, in
requiring my Aid, they require in some Sense also, my Protection, and bestowing
on them my Power, instead of being restrained by theirs: And my hindering a
Right, when it is in my Power to suffer it to prevail; which by no means may be
given by me: For now their Government being dissolved into a State of War; as
their Power upon which they established their Dominion over me is diminished;
so is my Obligation, and my Assistance naturally returns to him who has more
Right.

4. The Dean allows Men to swear, Page 17.
that they will live quietly and peaceably under such a Government.

Where he does not seem in the least to think the Swearers obliged to defend
the Government against Strangers and Enemies, which the Common Law Oath
required of all Men; and which is not required by the New Oath, if it leaves a
Latitude for Men to swear to their Majesty's only as Possessors of the Throne.

5. Whatever the Dean may hold in relation to the Defense of the Kingdom,
against other Enemies; if the Disposessed Prince be the Enemy; Case of Alleg.
p. 31. But a Prince may raise an Army for his Defense, besides the Militia of
the County. This he may do when he is out of possession; and loyal Subjects
ought cheerfully to serve him in it. Now here is a Question which I am not
Lawyer enough to decide, Whether a Commission granted by a King out of
Possession, be a Legal Commission? But be that how it will, I am sure there is
no Law which requires all Subjects to receive Commissions from the King, tho he
be in Possession.
he is so far from allowing it lawful to Defend the Kingdom against him; that
he too broadly insinuates, That he may send Commissions, which shall oblige his
Subjects to serve him, against the King in possession; or at least, which a man
may lawfully act by.

6. He says, We must pay Taxes to the Possessors: But if these are to be paid
with a tender regard to the supposed Right of the Dispossessed Prince; and we
are so far from being obliged by our Oaths to defend the present King and
Kingdom against him, that it may be a Question, whether we may not be obliged
to defend him against the Possessor; it is an easy thing for men who come with
these Notions into Places of Trust in the Government, to turn their Taxes into
Supplies for the King, whom they think themselves obliged to serve as far as
they can, without their apparent Ruin.

If therefore the Dean of St. Paul's is of any Authority upon this Question,
there can be little or no Security to the Government by the present Oath;
which, as this Gentleman himself contends, promises no other Faith and
Allegiance, than what is due to Possessors of the Throne, upon the Account of
Possession only.

And whereas Dean Sherlock contends, that Usurpers are the Case of Alleg. p. 11.
Higher Powers ordained by God; and that such a sort of Subjection, or degree
of Submission, as he teaches, is due to them, upon the Penalty in the 13th of
St. Paul to the Romans;

Another Man of great Name in the Church, who has written some things Dr.
Whitby. Vide the first part of his Protestant Reconciler; afterward recanted.
abmirably well, and seems Considerations for taking the Oath. Pref. I do by no
means condemn those Writings, which plead for taking the imposed Oath, upon
such Grounds as do more fully justify the Title of our present Governors.
almost to come up to the Legality of the present Settlement; has found out a
way of making a mere Bugbear of the Sentence of St. Paul, against such as
resist the Authority of their Majesty's, if their Possession is not Legal in
the Church Sense.

Consid. page 57.
The Word, says he, which we translate Damnation, in the Original is (...),
that is, Judgment: Now by our Law Treason may be committed against a King de
facto, and that is punishable by the Judgment of Death, etc. It may be Judgment
to resist the King de facto, in favor of the King de jure; that is, it may be
an Offense, which by the Law will render me obnoxious to Judgment, etc.

That is as much as to say, If I fight for the King de jure, the King de facto,
if he prevail, may hang me by the Law of the Land; though I did no more than my
Duty by God's Law: For by that I am obliged in case of a Competition to serve
him, whom it is eternal Damnation to resist.

I shall touch upon but one more Spiritual Interpreter, Reasons why the Rector
of P. took the Oath.
and that is the nameless Rector of P.

This profound Casuist holds, That the Oath of Allegiance to the late King is
still in force, and obliges every body to their Power, notwithstanding the
taking the Oath to their Majesty's. To help out which, he, instead of the Word
[ attempts] in the old Oath, against which Men were obliged to defend the last
King, while he continued King, uses the Word [ Contempts.]

As to the Word Allegiance in the Statute 3 Jac. 1. he uses several Arguments
to prove, that it does not imply actual Defense.

1. The Judgment of J. 1. Page 7.
in his Apology for the Oath, that no more was intended by it, than bare
Obedience; and that, Page 13.
as he says in another place, no more than Passive.

2. The Naturalization of Foreigners; when yet, he says, of necessity they must
be the natural Subjects of some other Sovereign Prince or State.

3. That if Allegiance required the bearing Arms, it would be a capital Crime
not to accept a Commission.

4. That Non-resistance is all the Duty taught by the Church of England.

5. That the Oath of Allegiance, Enacted 3 Jac. 1. did not by any Clause of
Repeal, abrogate or annul the Statutes and Common Law, Page 8, 9.
which allowed to the Clergy Exemptions from bearing Arms.

This premised, Page 12.
he declares it his firm Opinion, that the Imposers of the Second Oath expected
nothing that was inconsistent with the former.

1. Because, says he, most of them lay under the same Obligation to it that we
do. Page 13.
Taking it for granted, that they lay under the same Obligation which the
Rector thought he did; and that they were as sensible of the Obligation.

2. There are, says he, some Presumptions, Page 14.
that in this Second Oath they might rather design something less. Page 15.
The Presumption which he mentions is from the use of Abdication, to express
the occasion of the New Oath.

3. Let it, says he, be remembered, how many material Passages are left out of
the Oath: As the Recognition of his just and undoubted Right; with which
Allegiance seems to have a near Alliance: And as the Cause is manifest why that
should not be continued; so is it palpable, that this Abstract, these few Words
which they have selected, cannot have all the Force and Effect of the whole.

4. He urges the Account which the modish Comentators, Page 17.
as he calls them, have given of Allegiance, viz. that Allegiance is no more
than Obedience to a King, while he rules according to Law.

He seems to yield the Objection, that this reduces the Oath to an empty
Nothing. To which all that he says in effect, Page 17.
is, it is as much as the matter will bear.

Which being the avowed and direct Consequence of holding, that the Oath is
taken to their Majesty's only as to Possessors of the Throne: The Inference is
obvious, that when such like Evasions are found out, and spread; whereby Men
think that they may swear Allegiance to their Majesty's, and yet retain
Allegiance to the late King, as the only rightful King; it is necessary by a
new Law to stop the Contagion. And since Men are so artful in their
Interpretations; to obviate all manner of Subterfuges, by obliging them, not
only to recognize the Right of their present Majesty's, but to abjure the
pretended Right of the late King; which it is more than a perhaps, that they
think no general Words can reach: For let it be supposed, as this Author does
all along, that their Majesty's are but bare Possessors of the Throne, without
Legal Right; and then we may soon see what his Skill will signify, Page 25. I
am now in the second place, to show you according to my Skill, etc.
to cast a Blind; as if notwithstanding that Belief, a man is to be relied upon
for the Allegiance which he swears to their Majesty's.

It is very obvious, that when he is upon doing real Service to his Friends, he
may be allowed to blacken the Swearers with mental Reservations, and to carry
the meaning of this present Oath further than they will allow it to go; that he
may prevent their being chained to an Obedience they never intended, Page 30.
or cashiered for not swearing to what they would be thought to intend.

He would seem to hold, that whoever has taken the present Oath, Page 28.
and yet actually serves and corresponds with their Majesty's Enemies, would
make no bones of taking and breaking an Oath of Abjuration.

Yet I doubt not but if this should be his own Case, or the Case of any near
Relation, he would plead Church Authority for this; and would have more Excuses
for it than one: As,

1. That he did not correspond, while he could presume of his Rightful Prince's
Consent, that he should submit to their present Majesty's; but now he does it
by the greater Authority. Or,

2. He did not correspond till the Affairs of France and the late King were so
flourishing, that what he before thought a thorough Settlement, became
unsettled; and so the ground of the Oath failed. And thus Dean Sherlock's Notion
of Degrees of Settlement falls within another of Bishop Sanderson's implied
Reservations; rebus sic stantibus, matters standing as they were when he swore.

3. Though not to hold Correspondence with their Majesty's Enemies seems implied,
in being true and faithful to them: Yet this they must intend with an Exception
of the late King, because they hold, that he has right to make War, in order to
which he will want Intelligence from Men entrusted by their Majesty's. The
having this, therefore, is one of the Rights of the Superior, which they must
suppose excepted in the nature of the thing; though not mentioned.

4. They cannot think their Rightful King included within the general Word
Enemies.

This answers what he pretends to hold of the Obligation to Defense; though
without the Consent of High Church, which holds, That Passive Obedience, Vide
Dean S's Case of Resistance, and the Rector of P.
or Non-resistance, is as much as can, or ought to be required by the Sovereign
Power.

If therefore Non-resistance is all that the Legislative Power can require; an
Oath to defend the Government with Lives and Fortunes, would, Vide Sand. Prael.
3. Sect. 9. De re ex se illicita secundario 6. Sect. 14. Subintelligi semper
oportere hanc conditionem si ut id voluerit quod ex aequi boni jure ab illo
expectari, a nobis boneste concedi fas est.
in the Judgment of Bishop Sanderson, be an Oath in a Secondary Sense unlawful,
as being a Promise of what cannot modestly be required.

However, if it imported Defense against the late King, all these Casuists
would have said, it cannot honestly be granted; and is void to all intents and
purposes.

This shows the Fallaciousness of that Instance, by which he would illustrate
the supposed Security in the present Oath of Allegiance, without a Declaration
of Right.

If, says he, a man oblige himself by Oath to pay another an hundred Pound,
Page 33.
he is as strongly obliged to pay it him by virtue of his Oath, as if he had
truly borrowed it in time past of him. The Oath has given the other a Right to
the Money; and by the Oath the Promiser is obliged to pay it.

Where to make the Parallel hold:

1. The present Oath of Allegiance must be as expressive of the Duty of the
Subject, as the Common Law Oath, which was Declarative of Right.

2. Though no Right is declared; he who swears must believe that no other Person
has Right. For if he does, this is not like promising to pay money, which is
ones own to dispose of.

3. His very Instance is not universally true: For though a Man swear to pay
money to an Highway-man, the Highway-man has no Right to this money. Cicero
held the Oath absolutely void; (a) Grot. de jure Belli and Pacis. Lib. 2. Sect.
14.
but Grotius and Bishop Sanderson, who opppose him in this, are express, that
the Highway-man acquires no Right. And agreeably to them Vide a late Paper of
Dr. Hammond's Opinion.
Dr. Hammond holds, that he who swore may bring an Action for the money.

Case of Alleg. p. 34. Sovereign Power is God's Authority, though Princes may be
advanced to it by no honester means than Thieves take a Purse.
They who shall observe the Character Dean Sherlock gives of his Providential
King, will think my Instance, of swearing to pay money to an Highway-man, not
improperly applied to an Allegiance unwillingly sworn to, while men look upon
themselves under a Force, no way alterative of the Legal Right of the
Dispossessed Prince.

II. That in the nature of the thing, ^o man who holds their Majesty's to have
a Possession, contrary to Right, remaining in King James, can give reasonable
Security of Fidelity to their Majesty's; especially that the present Form of
Words pronounced by them yields none, may very easily appear from the nature of
the thing: For,

1. No man can be of the Opinion that they are only King and Queen in fact, but
upon those Grounds which carry some of our High Church men to swear Allegiance
to their Majesty's, barely as Possessors of the Throne, and others of them not
to Swear: but according to the Opinion of both Divisions of that Party, they
cannot be obliged to do any thing in the Service of their Majesty's, to the
real Prejudice of their King of Right: Or if they have, they are bound to
repent of it.

2. Though some Persons of Art and Abilities to delude, may have permission to
take the Oaths to their Majesty's; it is not to be presumed that the late King
would consent that these Oaths should be generally taken, lest People who
understand not Subtilties should think themselves obliged, by virtue of that
Consent, to serve their Majesty's, according to the true import of the Oath.
And indeed the late King's Declarations take off all Color from such
Presumption: So that the Non-swearers have a great Advantage in the Argument
against the other de facto-men.

3. Though Dean Sherlock in some places holds the rightful King out of Possession
not to be King, and ridicules Bishop Sanderson's Notion of his presumed
Consent, for a sort of submission to the Rival; yet he manifestly allows, at
least does not deny, such an Authority to remain in the dispossessed Prince, as
he could not have otherwise than as King. For he not only affirms, that he has
Right to make War, which he must not by his Principles yield to any Subject;
but makes his Person irresistible, and strongly intimates his Opinion of the
Legality of his Commissions, especially when his Power is formidable. If
therefore any Authority remain in the Dispossessed King, either two Rival Kings
may be invested with Regal Authority, Case of Alleg. page 14.
which he absolutely denies: Or else, if there be any Authority in the Commands
of the King de facto, it must lie in the presumed Consent of the other.

4. He must yield this at least, in one Case of a Prince's being kept from the
possession of his Right; which is, when an Usurper steps into the Throne before
the Prince, who, according to Men of that Notion, is King before Possession,
could assume the Ensigns of Royalty, which, according to them, was the Case of
Robert, the Eldest Son of W. 1. upon the Possession of W. 2. and H. 1. Of Maud
up on the Possession of Stephen: Of Prince Arthur upon the Possession of King
John, and so downwards.

This in direct Consequence would extend to the present Case, when, according
to him, a King de facto has, contrary to the Laws of this Realm, dispossessed a
King de jure, who, suitably to the Dean's Expressions, Page 49.
though he left the Crown and Kingdom in a fright, is not to be thought to have
renounced all future Right and Claim to it.

Since, therefore, he is so far from giving color to this Presumption, that he
publicly claims the Crown, and commands all the Subjects of this Monarchy to
assist him against their present Majesty's; they who believe him to be King,
and yet would swear Allegiance to their Majesty's; in whatever Form of Words
they swear, as they believe the Regal Authority to be legally and rightfully
vested in the late King only, must be supposed to intend to do nothing in
pursuance of that Oath, beyond what they can have King James's Authority for.

Nor must the Dean think to evade this Consequence, when all that he retracts
of his Case of Resistance, is his former Assertion, that when St. Paul says,
All Power is of God, he means only Legal Powers. But that, in an Hereditary
Monarchy, where the right Heir is living, Usurped Powers, are not of God.

I am sure he no where retracts another as positive Assertion, That the
Sovereign Power which makes Repeals, and dispenses with Laws, Case of
Resistance, page 199. and 200.
is inseparable from the Person of the Prince.

According to which, 1. The late King could do no Act which amounted to the
Breach of the Contract; and so bare Abdication, or running away in a fright, is
all the Foundation which would remain for the present Settlement.

2. This inseparable Sovereignty continuing in the Person of their Rightful
Prince, their Majesty's must upon this Principle act under the late King's
Authority, or without any at all.

3. This shows, beyond Contradiction, that they who would refuse to Recognize
the Right of their present Majesty's, and to Abjure the late Kings Pretension,
are to be accounted Enemies to this Government, notwithstanding all that our
Considerer offers to clear them.

A new Oath, he says, will only affect such as have taken the Oath of
Allegiance, Page 28. and 29.
bona fide, and kept it very honestly. And is it likely, that they who have
done so, should be Enemies to the Government?

Now this will not concern our present Question; unless these are Men who would
refuse to take an Oath of Recognition and Abjuration, by reason of the Belief
that King James remains the rightful King.

If therefore that Belief carries with it as great a Reflection upon the
present Government as its greatest Enemies can invent; and if farther, it
disables them from serving the Government, and paying that Allegiance which is
due to it: They (upon the known Rule, when the Exigences of Affairs require
Assistance and Defense) as they are not for the Government, must be reputed
against it.

I may add, as another Rule, that whoever denies to pay their Majesty's that
Allegiance, which the Constitution of this Monarchy requires to be paid to the
Sovereign Lord and Lady for the time being, must be Enemies in the Eye of the
Law; unless, being Subjects, they are rather to be accounted Traitors. But no
Man who swears Allegiance to them, while he believes the late King to be the
Rightful Ring, can pay them the Allegiance due to them by the Constitution;
that requiring Allegiance, upon the Account of a presumed Right in the
Possessor.

But that which puts this matter beyond all Question, is, that every Man is to
be supposed to act according to his Principles; but no Man can be led by any
Principle to believe the late King to have the Right, who will not by the same
Principle be obliged to do him Service; that is, pay him Allegiance whenever it
is in his Power: Though sometimes, as Bishop Sanderson has it, the Exercise of
Allegiance may be suspended by reason of a prevailing Force.

How far soever these men may justify their Swearing to their present
Majesty's, bona fide, according to the persuasion of their own minds, they
cannot be said honestly to have kept the Oath: For if they have kept the Oath,
they have acted contrary to their Belief: If they have acted according to their
Belief, they have not kept the Oath.

Oh! but says our Considerer, Page 29.
The Legislative Power imposed the Oath of Allegiance on the Subject, and
intended it for the Security and Establishment of the Present Government: The
Subject takes the Oath, and keeps it faithfully; how is he then an Enemy?

If he who believes King James to have the Right, though the Parliament declared
the Regal Power to be rightfully vested in their present Majesty's, can be
thought to have taken the Oath in that Sense in which the Parliament intended
it for a Security, this were something: And yet, if the Parliament might at
that time think there was no need of having the Oath as express as the Act of
Settlement, or implying as much, and should afterward find a necessity of
providing against a spreading Evil, of which they were not then so sensible;
they who have manifested their Opposition to the Grounds of the Settlement, if
they should refuse to give that reasonable Security, would be no less Enemies,
for having before given what they cannot be thought ever to have intended for a
real Security.

Since he thinks himself very lucky in his Similies, I must not pass by that
which he brings upon this occasion.

My Friend, says he, desires me to walk a Mile with him, Page 29.
to conduct him through such a thieving Lane, and I consent; and when he comes
to the Miles end, his Fears grow greater, and he desires me to walk another
Mile; but I tell him, It is late, and I can go no further without
Inconveniency, and Danger to my self; and for this he quarrels with me, and
accounts me his Enemy. I leave you to judge with what reason.

Apply but his own Instance to the present Case, and the Reason will appear
undeniable: For,

1. He admits the Case to be of two Persons, whose Ways and Interests are
divided; that is, one for King James, while the other is for their present
Majesty's.

2. He supposes that the Jacobite went with the Williamite as far as he could,
with his own Convenience, and without Danger.

3. That there is yet more Danger. This Danger he must not, by his Principles,
share with the other, especially when it is so late, that the utmost time which
has been allowed to keep along with the Williamite is expired.

4. It is therefore natural to conclude, that this Man is one of that Party
from whence the farther Danger is to be feared.

5. And upon that Account the Williamite ought in the first place to secure
this Man from doing him any Mischief; by his Oath, as full as Words can make
it, if he is a Man thought to make Conscience of an Oath; if not, by dislabling
him from adding to the Danger.

6. To apply this Instance to the present Case.

If a Man slightly Armed, traveling upon a dangerous Road, should meet with
several Passengers who had been robbed, and made such a Description of the
Theives, that upon the first approach of some Men well mounted, every one of
the Fellow-Travellers should be satisfied that they were part of the Gang who
committed the Robberies: And yet, though the Travelers were superior in Number
and Courage, they should be so generous as to trust the others with their Arms,
upon an Oath, that they would never set upon them till they were joined by the
rest of their Party; Would not this argue a strange sort of Generosity in them,
who should take such a slight Security?

It must not be said that this is not the present Case, in relation to the Oath
of Allegiance; since these men profess, that they intended to pay no other
Allegiance, than what is due to a King ba^ely as Possessor. Nor can the Import
of the Word Allegiance ever convince them who are resolved never to own, that
Allegiance, according to the Constitution, implies an acknowledgment of the
Right of the Possessor, and a Renunciation of all Pretenders; as it engages the
Subject in the Defense of their Prince against all men whatsoever.

VI. But whoever will take an Oath in such a Form, as leaves no color for
evading the Common Law-meaning of the Oath of Fidelity, ought to be accounted a
Friend till the contrary appear: For,

1. It is a common Presumption, that Men will not wittingly, and willingly,
Case, p. 28.
and with an evil mind, forswear themselves.

Though this Gentleman, to serve his purpose, takes a Liberty with his Friends;
it is by no means to be supposed, that any Man who should in express Terms
swear to the Right of their Majesty's; that he believes the former King to have
no Right; and that he will to the utmost of his Power defend the Persons and
Right of their Majesty's against him; should, notwithstanding this Oath,
believe that their Majesty's have no Right, but that the Right is in the late
King, and that it were unlawful to defend their Majesty's against him.

1. It is certain, the Consent of the late King to such an Oath is not to be
presumed.

2. If it were actually given, the Oath could not but be thought to bind,
according to the plain meaning of the Words: God being called as a Witness and
Party to a Renunciation of that very Exception, or Equivocation, with which,
otherwise, Men would think to juggle.

3. The Question being of Protestants who take this Oath; the Doctrine of
mental Reservations, or the Dispensation of any other Superior, besides them
who enacted the Oath, cannot be thought to take place here.

II. Though I will admit, that there are Exceptions to be made to the general
Rule and Presumption in this Case; because those Gentlemen, who pretend to be
the only Men fit for Employments, must not be thought so weak, as not to see
through all the Evasions which Clergymen* or others, have found out to elude
the meaning of the present Oath; and therefore it must be yielded, that they
break it wittingly and willingly: Yet the Rule holds good in the General;
because most Men are to be presumed to have regard to their Oaths, when there
can be no doubt of the meaning. Nay, even those Men who cannot but know, that
they break the Oath which they have taken to their Majesty's, would not be
likely to break a plain Oath of Abjuration: For,

1. Though their Biass may lean to those Interpretations of the present Oath,
which stifle their Convictions; no Evasion for such an Oath having yet been
invented, their Consciences would so stare them in their Faces upon the
apparent Violations of so solemn a Tie, that it is not to be thought they durst
venture.

2. Men who would venture Damnation to perjure themselves, would not do it in
such a manner, that the World must pronounce them wilfully perjured. As Sir
John Denham well observes, Vide his admirable Poem on Cooper's Hill.
Who fears not to do ill, yet fears the name;
And free from Conscience, is a Slave to Fame.


3. The Temptations for breaking such an Oath would be removed: For,

(1.) Neither could the late King trust 'em after such an Oath against him; nor
if he did, could they have any Reputation or Party wherewith to serve him to
any purpose, or render themselves worth courting.

No Man, whatever his Talents may be, can be a great Man as he stands alone.

They who swear to their Majesty's as King and Queen in fact, have hitherto
maintained their Reputations with a bigoted Party, upon that Doctrine of
Probability before observed, which makes the Evasions, with which the present
Oath is taken, to pass for the Church-sence. But since there can be no
Protestant Church-Cover for barefaced Perjury; they who should take a full
Oath of Recognition and Abjuration, and yet act as if they believed the late
King still to have the Right, must no longer pretend to be Protestants; and by
being necessitated to pull off that Mask, under which they have served Popery,
will become useless, and despicable.

(2.) As such an Oath as is proposed would be an effectual Renunciation of King
James and his Party; Interest, which has so long had the Ascendant over these
Men, would be an Argument for every one, who should take such an Oath, to
strengthen and support himself among them, who receive him upon this Test.

(3.) Though the Supposition, That the late King still remains King, or has Right
to be King, has no real Foundation in Law, Reason, or the Authentic Doctrine
of the Church of England: Yet some Men are for maintaining, that he still has
the Right, merely because they have held so hitherto. But as in abjuring the
supposed Right, they would own themselves to have been in an Error; Since they
could not have the Glory of Perseverance, they would, in all probability, be
driven to the Honesty of Repentance.

V. But it will be said, What need would there be of an Oath of Abjuration, if
there should be an Oath recognizing the Right of their present Majesty's? Would
not this sufficiently imply, that the late King has no Right?

Answ. 1. If it does, then, certainly, whoever would proffer to take an Oath of
Recognition, and yet refuse an Oath of Abjuration, would make the last
necessary by his Refusal; as it would argue that he has some hidden Reason for
his Refusal; and therefore did not mean honestly when he proffered the other.

2. The Refusal of an Oath of Abjuration must be presumed to be grounded upon a
Persuasion, that the late King has Right: And therefore, whether this is really
consistent with the Belief, That their Majesty's have Right, or no, is not very
material. However,

3. It is plain that these Men may, by their avowed Principles, take an Oath to
their present Majesty's, as having a Legal Right; and that they will defend
them against against all Men; and yet not think themselves obliged to defend
them against him whom they suppose to have the Divine Right; unless they swear
against him by Name: For,

1. According to them, the Sovereignty, and all the Rights of it, remain
inseparable from his Person; especially such as Kings may retain, when they are
not in a Condition to require the Actual Obedience of their Subjects: and by
plain consequence, the Prerogative of not being included in the general Words
of any Statute: And therefore a Defense against all Men, would, with the de
facto-men, imply an Exception of their dispossessed rightful Prince.

2. These Men to some purposes allow their Majesty's to be lawful and rightful
King and Queen; and yet not in such a sense as wholly excludes the late King's
Pretensions, as I might prove by several Instances; but shall confine my self
to Dean Sherlock, and the more wary Author of an Enquiry into the Nature and
Obligation of Legal Rights.

Though the Dean seems very full, that their Majesty's have no Legal Right; Dr.
S's Vindic. p. 8.
that the Settlement to which he contends that a sort of Allegiance is due,
Ibid. page 9.
is actual, not legal; and that, according to the Doctrine of the Convocation,
in the time of J. 1. Those Princes who have no Legal Right, may have God's
Authority. Yet it were no difficult thing to prove, by the direct Consequences
of what he holds, if not by the the express Terms, that he must needs be ready
to swear, that their Majesty's are lawful and rightful King and Queen; and yet
would not think King James's Right altered by that Providence, which settled
their Majesty's in the Throne; or that he ought to defend their Majesty's
against King James.

In his Vindication, where he seems to advance farther toward the Right of
this Government, then he had in his Vindic. page 16.
Case of Allegiance, he says, He is the King, who is in Possession of the
Throne, with the Case of Allegiance, page 9. The Submission of the Prince,
indeed, may be thought necessary to transfer a Legal Right.
Consent and Submission of the People. The Consent and Submission of the People
turn that which was originally no more but Force, into a Civil and Legal
Authority, by giving themselves up to the Government of the Prince: That
Vindic. page 18.
all Mankind have this Natural Right; That their Submission gives a Prince a
Right to govern them; and that this is a Lawful Right.

Any Man therefore, one would think, might maintain from these Premises, that
he who has a Legal Right to Govern, is the sole Rightful Prince, and is to be
defended against all others.

Ibid.
No hold you there, says the Dean, though the People confer a Lawful Right, they
cannot extinguish their former King's Claim, who has not submitted.

Well, but may not the King in Possession be secured of the Allegiance of
those, who acknowledge him to have Right, and swear that they will be true and
faithful to him?

Truly, the Dean intimates broadly enough out of Dr. Jackson, That though
Subjects would resist God's Ordinance; Page 77.
if they should resist till their Majesty's be declared Usurpers or Intruders,
by some higher Power or Authority; the late King, Case of Alleg. page 31.
like H. 7. against R. 3. is Authorized by God's Ordinance to execute
Vengeance, or to bring Condemnation on their Majesty's: Ibid. This Tyrant.
which every one might not have done, which perhaps no other might do, save
only in his Right and Interest, and by his Commission.

Upon which the Dean himself says, Now who ever doubted but a Rightful Prince,
Vindic. page 77.
when dispossessed unjustly, may recover his Throne again if he can, and
dispossess the Usurper; or that those who lawfully receive Commissions from
him, may lawfully fight in his Quarrel? But the great Question still remains,
Whether Subjects may lawfully take Commissions from the dispossessed Prince, to
fight against the Prince who is settled in the Possession of the Throne?

Since when he had taken the utmost time to consider of this Point of Law, he
would not determine against the Legality of such a Commission, all the
Implications in his First Book, of his Opinion for the Legality of them, remain.

And it must be remembered, that he had there asserted positively, Case of
Allegiance.
That Loyal Subjects ought cheerfully to serve their Prince in an Army, which
he may raise for his Defense when he is out of Possession. And then I think it
can be no great Question, whether they ought not to act under his Commission,
when required by him.

Besides, as the Dispossessed Prince still, according to him, must continue the
Rightful Prince, his unrecanted Doctrine of the Absolute Irresistibility of his
Person remains in full Force. Vide Case of Ressstance.
Wherefore we may conclude, that Dean Sherlock, though he should think his being
a Clergyman were no Exemption from the Defense of their Majesty's, and the
Kingdom; yet would not by virtue of an Oath, recognizing the Right of their
Majesty's, think himself obliged to defend them against King James. And yet I
dare say, no man thinks so hardly of the Dean; for my part, I profess I do not,
as to believe, that if he swear to defend their Majesty's against King James,
he would not, upon occasion, pursue the Obligation of that Oath.

Yet our Considerer must say, suitably to his licensed Freedom, that Dean
Sherlock would make no Bones of taking and breaking an Oath of Abjuration. Page
28.


2. The Author of the Enquiry having, without doubt, observed with what
Contradictions Dean Sherlock had been charged, both by Friends and Enemies to
the Government; and the Censure those had incurred, who finding no other Tory
Principle but Conquest left for the Foundation of this Settlement, had placed
it upon that; touches upon it very tenderly; and, if we except what he says
that way, it must be said, that he fixes the Foundation of this Government
wholly upon an Abdication, or running away in a Fright; Vide Dr. S. supra.
and the Judgment of the States upon this Abdication, which he supposes to have
given their Majesty's a Enquiry into the Nature and Obligation of Legal Rights,
etc. p. 17. A Legal Title to the Crown, and a Legal Authority, may be
separated; that he who has the Title, may not have the Legal Authority, nor be
the Legal King.
Legal Authority to administer the Government, while he admits that the late
King has a Legal Title, separate from that Authority: But this Authority of the
States he limits to a Page 7.
Vacancy; or, as he explains himself, where Page 11.
there is no Monarch actually in the Throne: and the Power of Judging or
Declaring, he allows not to go farther than for the Page 7.
next Heir. He says farther, in a particular Case, by way of a General Rule,
That where the undoubted Heirs to the Crown, by a Lineal Succession, are
unjustly kept from their Right, Subjects are bound to do them right, by placing
them on the Throne. So that,

1. Suppose the Prince of Wales were wholly out of Question; yet if his Majesty
has his Crown otherwise than in the Right of her Majesty, he would not be a
Legal King in this Author's Sense, notwithstanding all that he says to make us
believe, that he thinks his Majesty's Authority Legal.

2. If the late King still retains a Right; whatever Legal Authority their
Majesty's may have, the People, according to him, are bound to do King James
right, by placing him upon the Throne. And what he says of their having
answered the Law of Succession, Page 7.
in placing him formerly upon the Throne, is a mere Evasion; it not coming up
to what is due to a continuing Right, whether of Succession before Possession,
or of Restitution afterward: And, certainly, it is Nonsense to suppose, that I
am obliged to put a Prince into Possession, if an Usurper got in before him;
but not if the Usurper came in upon the dispossessing him.

As he supposes the Throne to have been no otherwise vacant, than by an
Abdication; this will plainly resolve its self into Dean Sherlock's Notion of
Degrees of Settlement, according as the Abdicating Prince is more or less
formidable, or intent upon pursuing his supposed Right. And thus he who is
thought to have divested himself of his Sovereignty, when he left the Nation,
without constituting any body to govern in his Absence; may be said to have
reassumed his Royal Dignity, by granting Commissions to a standing Council, or
to any particular Persons to manage his Interest. Which is the direct
Consequence of dividing the Breach of the Contract from the Abdication: For if
no regard be had to the breach of that, J. 2. would continue as Legal a King as
C. 2. was, during the late Usurpation.

And whatever Allegiance the de facto-men should swear to their Majesty's, and
intend to pay while the Strength of the Nation were in other Hands; it is
little less than Demonstration, that unless they swear their Majesty's have the
Right exclusive of King James; the present Government cannot be secured of
their Allegiance: because by their Principles, if they get into Power to turn
the Scales, they are obliged to recall their King.

This, I conceive, may be enough to show the absolute Necessity of an Oath,
whereby Men may not only recognize the Right of their present Majesty's, but
abjure the pretended Right, or Title, of the late King; which no man can do,
while he, with that subtle Author whom I last cited, separates the Legal
Authority from a Legal Title.

6. That they who take the present Oath to their Majesty's, while they suppose
the Right to be in the late King, are guilty of material Perjury, would be no
Question to any body, who does not take Bishop Sanderson, and other Casuists of
that Stamp, for Oracles.

The Bishop all along supposes, that Allegiance was due to C. 2. during the
late Times of Usurpation; and yet, that men might promise to be true and
faithful to the then Powers, without entering into any Obligation, Case of the
Engagement, p. 102.
contrary to their Allegiance to C. 2.

His chief Reasons are,

1. The Page 110.
Absenc of Words incapable of a Construction binding to less than the
Allegiance due to Governors de Jure.

2. That the Imposers intending by the Engagement to secure themselves,
especially, against the Designs and Attempts of those men, who they knew well
enough, held them for no other than Usurpers; must be in Reason supposed to
require no more Assurance of them by the Engagement, than such as may, and is
usually given to Usurpers: Which, says he, is not an Acknowledgment of their
Title, and a Promise of Allegiance, but merely a Promise of living quietly so
long as they are under their Power, and enjoy their Protection. Whereas,

(1.) Though he will not allow any Promise of Allegiance to be contained in the
Engagement; there was not only a Promise to be true and faithful to the
Commonwealth; but as then established, without King and Lords: Which was an
express owning it for an established Government. And himself had before laid it
down as a Rule, that Page 90.
Allegiance is a Duty, which every Subject, under what Form of Government
soever, by the Law of Nature, owes to his Country; and consequently, to the
Sovereign Power thereof. So that here must have been an Established Government
without a Sovereign Power, which is absurd; or else they who took the
Engagement with an honest Mind, could not but think that their Allegiance was
transferred to Persons invested with Sovereign Power.

(2.) He very absurdly supposes, that because Governments, esteemed Usurpations
by their Enemies, seek to secure themselves; therefore they seek to be secured
only as Usurpers: that is, not believing that they are de jure, and that the
Allegiance of the Subject is due to them, because their Enemies deny they have
any Right. Or else, that to oblige the Subjects to defend the Persons of the
Governors, is a necessary Security for Rightful Governors; but unnecessary
for Usurpers: which is equally absurd.

But admit the Bishops Evasions would hold for the Engagement; it is evident,
that there is no true ground for them in the present Oath of Allegiance: For he
takes it for a clear Truth, Case of Engagement, page 97.
That all Promises and Assurances, wherein Faith is required to be given to
another, ought to be understood ad mentem imponentis, according to the mind and
meaning of him to whom the Faith is to be given; so far forth, as the meaning
may reasonably appear by the nature of the matter about which it is conversant;
and such signification of the Words whereby it is expressed; as, according to
the ordinary Use of Speech amongst Men, agrees best thereunto.

And though he allow the Promiser of Faith in some cases to take advantage of
Ambiguity in the Words of the Promise, Page 99.
and to make use of that Latitude of Sense which was left undetermined: Yet he
does not permit Men to advantage themselves of any remote, secret, and reserved
intent.

But our Lawmakers have been so far from giving occasion to suppose, that they
had an hidden Intent to have this Government sworn to, only as an Usurpation;
That,

1. They acknowledge their Majesty's to be rightfully invested with the Regal
Dignity, and declare their Submission to them upon the Account of Right: Which
Submission being not only for themselves, but as the Representatives of all
England not personally present; the Subjects that swear to be true and faithful
to their Majesty's, cannot be thought to answer the meaning of their Oath, if
they pay not the Faith due to rightful Possessors.

2. They faithfully promise to defend the Persons of their present Majesty's,
and the Limitations settled by that Act, which requires the Oath, against all
Men whatsoever.

3. They use such a Word to engage the Subjects to the Service of their
Majesty's, as in common and legal Intendment, and by Bishop Sanderson's own
Confession, implies Subjection to a Rightful Government. Every Man must take
Allegiance to imply a Legal Tie; and the Law supposes this, to be only to a
Legal and Rightful Government. Nay, the Bishop himself holds, That it is due
only to the Rightful Governor; and that the exercise of it is suspended during
an Usurpation.

Whoever therefore takes the present Oath with a Belief, That he ought to
retain Allegiance to the late King; or that he is in any respect King of
England, or ought so to be, must needs be guilty of material Perjury. And if he
does it, after the Import of the Oath has been fairly represented, it will be
very difficult to avoid Formal Perjury.

I will agree with Dean Sherlock, Vindic. p. 80.
That a different Opinion may excuse from formal Perjury: For no Man is
formally perjured, who does not know it.

But then it is the Judgment of all Casuists, Vide Bishop Sanderson's Sermons.
That an erroneous Conscience is sinful and damnatory, where the Error does not
proceed from invincible Ignorance.

The evading therefore this Snare and hazard of Damnation, by an Oath which
artful Men have made of doubtful Interpretation, were one benefit of an express
Oath of Abjuration, which the Considerer seems never to have thought of.

Nor, indeed, has he said any thing material against those Arguments for one,
Fifth General Head.
which he has thought fit to mention; only has given occasion for Men to take
greater notice of the Advantages to the Government and Nation, which it would
be likely to produce.

He asserts very Magisterially, That an Oath of Abjuration will neither gain
their Majesty's any new Friends, Page 26.
nor fix the old ones faster: nor discover any old or new Enemies.

But I think, whoever impartially considers, may soon be satisfied in the
contrary to every one of these Assertions: For,

1. Since it is evident, that they who take the present Oath are really bound
to the Import of an Oath of Abjuration, and are guilty of material Perjury, if
they take the Oath in a lower sense; these Men, when they are under a necessity
of bethinking themselves of what they are already bound to, are likely to take
the Oath in such a Sense, as will make them Friends of Enemies: Or if they were
not to be accounted other than Friends before, they will by an Oath of
Abjuration be fixed faster to their Duty.

But if any, who have hitherto passed for Friends to this Government should
refuse an Oath of Abjuration; it appears by what has been above observed, that
this Oath would make a Discovery of Enemies, not before truly known.

2. Many Men may be thought to have held off from this Government, because they
thought it at least doubtful, whether it asserted its own Right; but would
readily submit to that Authority, which should put that out of question: The
chief Difficulty having been, to satisfy Men that they ought to swear
Allegiance to any Government, merely upon the account of Possession.

3. Several may have held off out of Worldly Policy, when they found so many
seemingly come into the Government, though really against it, that they might
think it in danger of over-setting by the number of Enemies within. But when
these found, not only the Men in Offices, but the Generality of the Nation,
engaged and united in the Defense of the Government against all Enemies
whatsoever; they would find no Temptation to be of a divided Party, or Interest.

4. Though those Subjects who are Friends to this Government upon a Principle,
cannot be fixed faster to it by an Oath of Abjuration; since that can oblige
them to no more than they already know to be their Duty, and Practice, as they
have Opportunity; yet it may be thought an occasion of fixing Friends abroad,
and of gaining new ones; when the Honor of the Government is vindicated, and
its Continuance and Strength secured, by an Oath, which will involve all men
who should break it, in formal, as well as material Perjury.

5. But as this Gentleman's Charity will not admit of a Distinction between
Formal and Material Perjury; and therefore he could not think of any Benefit
which might accrue by an Oath, which would free honest Men from the Danger of
the First; Neither do his Politics reach to another Benefit of an Oath of
Abjuration; which is the weakening Enemies, and strengthening and supporting the
Government, and the Friends to it: Which cannot properly fall within the only
Page 26. An Oath of Abjuration will neither gain their Majesty's any new
Friends, nor fix the old ones faster to them; nor yet discover any old or new
Enemies. And, what is an Oath good for, that will answer to none of these ends
and purposes.
ends and purposes of an Oath, which he could think of.

The Benefits likely to arise from such an Oath might appear in many Instances;
of which I shall name some:

1. Whereas, according to the Doctrine too generally received, Men may swear to
the Government, without giving any Security for the Support and Defense of it;
all Men who should take an Oath of Abjuration, would proclaim their being
engaged in its Defense; to the Horror of its Enemies, and Encouragement of
Friends, both at home and abroad.

2. Whether this struck Terror into Enemies or no, the engaging Numbers to
stick to the Government in all Events, when before they thought themselves at
liberty to choose their Side, could not but afford real Security and Strength.

3. Such an Oath would vindicate the Honor of the Government; which has
suffered most by the Reproaches of pretended Friends.

4. They who before thought themselves as much engaged as they could be by this
Oath, would be enabled to serve the Government with Courage, when they saw the
Nation Sworn-Brethren for the Defense of it: Whereas, before, the Fears of
Treachery might weaken and dispirit too many in the Service, who might think
that every Step they took, they trod upon a Mine ready to spring.

5. The Effects of an Act of Abjuration would be very beneficial, if it were
only upon the account of Offices.

The Influence of the Offices of the Kingdom Ecclesiastical, Military, and
Civil, is so very great, that the Constancy of the People of England to the
National Interest, while all the Offices were in the Hands of that Party, who
are now against the Right of their Majesty's; as it is an Evidence, how
despicable that Party must needs be without such Supports; is an undeniable
Argument for taking from them that wherein lies all their Strength and Power to
do Mischief.

Here the Considerer Objects:

Obj. 1. Will they not rather be enabled to do more mischief, by being more
trusted for such an Oath? Which admits of several Answers.

1. They cannot be more trusted than they have been, in confidence, That they
had taken the Oath without any mental Reservation.

2. If they should take such an Oath; the Presumption, as I have before shown,
will be strong for their keeping it.

3. They could not, if they would, do as much mischief as they have done;
because they could not have so many to join with them as they have hitherto
misled, with Pretenses which would serve no longer.

4. Some at least of the most dangerous, would be likely to refuse it: Either,
1. To have the Reputation of Constancy: Or, 2. Of being true Sons of the
Church; according to what has passed for its Doctrine: Or, 3. Because they are
too far engaged in Plots against this Government, to dare to desert their
Party: Well remembering that of the Satyrist, Carus erit Velli qui Vellem
tempore quo vult
Accusare potest --
He who has Vellie's Secret has him fast.


5. Admit they should all take the Oath, and design to elude the plain meaning
of it; this could not be without communicating and publishing their Evasions:
So that the Government would be sufficiently alarmed against trusting many of
them; and however, it is likely would make a Distinction between them who have
served it out of Principle; and them who must renounce their Principles to come
in to it.

6. As it is not to be supposed, that the Majority of those who had declared
the Right to be in the late King, would wilfully perjure themselves to keep
their Places; the Treachery of a few who had lost that Credit with which they
should serve their Party, could not balance against the advantage of having
all of a piece, and united against the common Enemy; and the strengthening the
hands of Friends by the places of them who should absolutely refuse to abjure
the late King's Pretension; or however, should be thought not to have deserved
so much for coming in at the Eleventh Hour, as they that came in at the First.

Obj. 2. But whereas to serve his purpose he had held, that all who take the
present Oath, and yet retain an Allegiance to the late King, wilfully perjure
themselves; that therefore all these would take an Oath of Abjuration; Page 27.
and that it is not in man to find out or assign one tolerable Reason why they
should not do it; he sounds his main Objection upon the Supposition, Page 31.
that all that take the Oath of Allegiance will not take the Oath of
Abjuration; but a great number of good People, that serve their present
Majesty's with Faithfulness, Honesty and Diligence, and with Affection too,
will by reason of that, be dispossessed of their Employments, and incapacitated
to serve them any longer: For to be sure, no other but the honest, faithful,
and the conscientious, will be dispossessed thereof.

To which I answer,

1. As has appeared above, how good foever such Men may be; they cannot be good
Subjects, but are to be accounted Enemies; because the only possible ground for
thhir Refusal, must be the Belief, that the late King still retains a Right to
dispossess their Majesty's; and, at the least, is not to be opposed: And
therefore, the more conscientious they are with that Opinion, the more
dangerous they are to the present Government.

2. Since he holds, That a great number of these Men will be dispossessed, so
much the greater will be the Benefit to the Public by such an Oath, as it
disarms the more Enemies, and supplies their Places with the more Friends;
making Men to be useful, who had been loss'd to the Public.

3. If we could suppose that these Conscientious Men are truly Faithful to the
Government; and yet their Faithfulness could not overbalance the Prejudice of
their Education, against the Right of them whom they serve, as having Right;
the men must needs be so shallow in their Understandings, that no Government
would have any loss of them.

4. If these Men were as affectionate to their present Majesty's as our
Considerer supposes, they should be contented to have their Places filled by
Men, who would vindicate their Majesty's from the reproachful Imputation of
being Usurpers; which the Principles of these Men six upon them.

5. If great Numbers should be dispossessed, we must suppose, that at least the
Heads of the Party would go among the rest: And then no man could be tempted to
deny the Right of their Majesty's as a Recommendation to Places under them; but
it would be as much a man's Interest to be for the Right, as it has been to be
against it.

When therefore Interest should fall in with the universal Bent of the Nation;
what would become of that Party which has been no way considerable, but by the
Artifices and Encouragement of pretended Friends?

6. If all the de facto-men should be dispossessed, they who declared the Regal
Dignity to be rightfully invested in their Majesty's, and they who have from
the beginning approved of that Declaration, will be enough to fill all the
Offices of the Kingdom; and to support the Government, which they so readily
and thankfully submitted to, as a Deliverance not only from the late King, but
from that Party which had much longer Tyraniz'd over them.

But, surely, the Considerer cannot but be thought something out of season in
his Argument, against dispossessing them who will neither abjure the late King,
nor Recognize the Right of their Majesty's; at a time when the Nation is so
sensible, that there has been Treachery somewhere: And cannot but think it most
probable, if not certain, that they who have a Set of Principles for the
purpose, should be the men that should act uniformly to them.

Indeed, it is very difficult not to think, that how much soever a Prince's
innate Goodness and Clemency may put him upon conquering Enemies by Kindness;
that method is always dangerous, while there is any Competitor for the Crown.
For if the Competition be weak, that is the most likely means of giving
Strength to it: But when, by the Treachery of them who have been trusted, or
any other means, the Competitor out of Possession has an inviting Prospect of
Returning; every Act of Indulgence toward his Party (which they that believe
him to have the Right must be) serves as a Step toward his re-mounting the
Throne.

Some of these Enemies, perhaps, hardly know themselves to be so: But if they
will not come up to that Test, which the Necessities of the Public require,
for the distinguishing them from Enemies, should they be let in, the Crowd
would follow.

By what I have already represented, it may appear, that the Design of
procuring an Oath of Abjuration, is not to be accounted vile and selfish, Page
31. and 32.
as this Gentleman insinuates: And that it is so far from tending to the Hazard
of the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom, that it seems the only probable means
of securing it: I had almost said must be judged so, by all who do not think
the Restoration of their King of Right, the only means to an end, which all
would be thought to aim at; even they who would receive the late King with
French Forces.

Certain it is, that many who would think it an happy day for England, when an
Oath of Abjuration should be enacted, would be as well pleased with the
Conversions, as with the Falls of the most of them, who, notwithstanding the
present Oath to their Majesty's, think or declare themselves at Liberty to
serve the late King upon all occasions: Not but that they who wish well for
England, must needs desire to see some men made as exemplary in Punishments, as
they have been in Treachery, and the Profession of Principles fitted to
justify them.

I think it has fully appeared, that an Oath of Abjuration is no new Project,
or a fresh Spanish Wreck; to which he most wittily compares it. If it were a
French Wreck, perhaps he might lay a Claim of merit to it.

However, they are most likely to deserve the Name of Projectors, who pretend
to secure the Government by an Oath less explicit than was ever before used,
and that at a time when new Arts had made it necessary to have one, more
explicit than ever; who would find out ^n Invention to support a Government
without defending it; to make Passive Obedience supply the place of Active; to
make two opposite Allegiances in force at the same time; and to carry on a War
between two Rival Kings, without engaging the Subjects in the Quarrel, till
they should see which side had the better; and, if they must fight against
either, to secure the Possessor, by fighting for the other whenever he should
land, or send his Commissions.

Though I must allow the Considerer to know the Sentiments and Proceedings of the
Enemies to the present Government; I am sure we are not to take it upon his
Word, That the Managers of the Jacobite Party, Page 30.
and more understanding People among them, do underhand abett and favor an
Oath of Abjuration; Page 31.
well knowing they shall find their Account in it.

If they did promote this, still, according to himself, who is always free with
his Friends; this would be no Objection against it; since, as he says, they
have hitherto sh^wn themselves but Puny Politicians, Page 30.
and have laid and managed their Designs with so much weakness and simplicity,
that they seem to be infatuated very much.

I am sure, if they should desire an Act of Parliament for an Oath Abjuring
their King's Pretense of Right, it would be an undoubted Evidence of their
Infatuation.

Nor can it enter into my Imagination, that any Jacobite should desire this:
For it must be either a Jacobite in Office, or a Jacobite out of Office: But
who can think that a Jacobite in Office should desire an Oath, to turn himself
out; when he may at his Pleasure give King James the same, or a greater Proof
of his Loyalty, by laying down before that Discovery of himself becomes a
Forc'd-put?

If it be one out of Office, nothing but Envy and Repining at the Advantages
which others enjoy who deserve no better than themselves, could make them wish
their Friends removed: And all Men must judge, that in such case Envy would be
more prevalent than Zeal for their King's Service; which one Man in a
considerable Post may promote more than Thousands elsewhere.

Oh! but they are likely to reap Advantage from the Distractions an Oath of
Abjuration will undoubtedly produce among us:

So far from that, that it will prevent Distractions and Divisions of Duty: For
Men who take an Oath of Abjuration, will no longer be able to trim between
Right and Fact, till they are almost distracted to know which they should
adhere to; nor will there be drawing of different ways among Benches of
Justices of the Peace, or other Officers; of which some notable Examples might
be given.

If the Distractions are, by the turning men out of Offices, who can serve
their Majesty's no otherwise than as Possessors of the Throne without Right; a
very fair riddance of them! But, surely, these Passive Men, who pretend that
they will live quietly under a Government, which their Consciences will not
give them leave to defend, will not raise a Rebellion to recover their Places.
And if they should, perhaps it were no indesirable effect of such an Oath: For
when the Body of this Nation, which is entirely for their Majesty's, had all
the Men in Offices of their side, how easily, how happily, would such a
Rebellion be quelled! If this were the effect of such an Oath, I am sure it
would discover, or occasion, the Distress of the Jacobite, or rather French
Party here; and would in all likelihood for ever free this Government from the
Danger of Enemies, Foreign, or Domestic.

But should there be hazard in this, it were certainly better to have the
Enemies declared, than lurking under the Mask of Friendship.

VI. Yet in farther Disproof of his Suggestions, I shall show, not only that no
one ought to refuse an Oath of Abjuration, if required by Act of Parliament:
But that the Refusers cannot be considerable in Number or Interest.

Here I may use, 1. Some Arguments ad hominem. 2. Others, such as I take to be
in their own nature convincing to Men capable of Conviction.

1. The Considerer has no reason to suppose, that any man ought to refuse an
Oath of Abjuration, if required by Act of Parliament: For not to repeat his
Concessions before observed,

(1.) He professes, that he shall think he has represented matter but
confusedly, Page 25.
if his Friend do not see from his Collections, That the Oaths of Fidelity and
Allegiance have been constantly imposed on, and taken by the Subjects of the
Land, (concerned to take them) to such Persons as were by the Consent and
Approbation of the Three Estates of the Kingdom invested with the Regal Power;
although they could not lay Claim thereto by Lineal and Legal Succession.

I think it is no great Question, but he here admits Allegiance to be due in
such case. And if Allegiance be due, there is no doubt but it is due in that
Sense in which it was constantly imposed and taken; which as I have shown, was
always as to a King of Right, and carried with it an implied Recognition, and
Abjuration.

He, therefore, in owning Allegiance to be due to their Majesty's, does as much
as confess, that they have the Right to the Crown, and that the late King has
none: Nor is it to be thought that any but a Quaker that believes this, will
refuse to swear.

Page 32.
(2.) He says, No one that in good Conscience took the Oath to their present
Majesty's, can find himself at liberty to serve by any ways or means one that
would certainly dethrone them. This is undoubtedly the least that an Oath of
Allegiance can do, that it ties the Hands of all that take it from lending any
manner of Aid or Assistance to the late King James. But if his Post be Active,
he he is farther obliged thereby to be Active in their Defense. If a Privy
Councellor, a Bishop and a General, take the Oath of Allegiance to King William
and Queen Mary, they are undoubtedly obliged thereby to advise faithfully; and
keep their Secrets; to pray for their Prosperity, and fight the Battles of them.

Where,

1. His Rightful King is such an one, as has no Allegiance due to him. And if
that which ties the Subjects to him is broken, he must confess that he is no
longer their King, nor can have Right to be their King, while another has Right
to their Allegiance.

2. He having expressly asserted, That no man who has sworn to their Majesty's
may aid or assist King James, what follows of Fighting the Battles of King
William and Queen Mary, must be meant as well against King James as any other.
But certainly, if the late King still remains Rightful King, his Person is
irresistible by Officers as well as others, who, according to those who are
supposed likely to scruple an Oath of Abjuration, are, or ought to be his
Subjects. If then his Irresistibility is gone, his Royal Character is lost,
according to the generality of the de facto-men; and particularly Vide his Case
of Resistance.
Dean Sherlock: Though indeed in his late Sermon 30. Jan. 1693. I shall not
dispute the lawfulness of resisting the Kings Authority; whether it were lawful
for the Parliament to take Arms against the King to defend the Laws and
Liberties of their Country.
Sermon before the House of Commons he seems to mince the matter.

Yet it must needs be said, That a King, till he ceases to be a King, is not by
the Law of England resistible, nor ever was; but by a temporary Clause in King
John's Charter, left out in all subsequent Confirmations of the English
Liberties.

He, therefore, that admits the late King to be resistible, therein, virtually
pronounces him to have fallen from the Royal Dignity; and may very well swear
the Right to be in their Majesty's, and abjure those Pretenses, against which
the Bishop invokes God's Decisive Judgment, when he prays for the Prosperity of
their Majesty's, while engaged in a War against him;

And the General, if he does not Pray, does as much, and perhaps a great deal
more, in Fighting himself, and animating Thousands.

3. No man who has taken the present Oath, is to be presumed likely to refuse
an Oath of Abjuration; because, though many are not sensible how far they are
engaged by the Oath they are under; they, as has appeared above, have already
virtually acknowledged the Right of their present Majesty's, and abjured the
late Kings Pretension. But not to swear expressly to what is sworn by manifest
Implication, is such a Nicety, as one would think reasonable men should not be
guilty of.

4. As it is under the Notion of keeping to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, that men think to justify their evading the plain meaning of the
present Oath, and their refusing to take any Oath more express; when the Church
Authorities making for an Oath of Abjuration come to be weighed with those
which are against it; the first must needs apparently turn the Scale, and
induce men to take an Oath, clearly expressing what the present Oath implies.

1. In Queen Elizabeth's Days, Bishop Bilson, agreeably to the known Profession
of the whole Church of England at that time, Bishop Bilson of Christian
Subjection, Ed. Anno 1586. p. 279, 280.
supposes it to be no Rebellion for the Nobles and Commons to join together
against their Prince, to defend their ancient and accustomed Liberties,
Regiment, Vide the Passages cited at large, Fundamental Constit.
and Laws; and that this may be done in all Kingdoms, by virtue of a Power for
preserving the Foundation, Freedom and Form of their Commonwealth; which they
foreprized when they first consented to have a King.

2. The Learned Dr. Falkner admits, That they who have sworn not to take Arms
against the King, yet in some Cases may resist his Person; if he actually
engage upon the destroying and ruining a considerable part of his People: For,
Falkner's Christian Loyalty.
after citing Grotius his Judgment for Resistance in such a case; he says, Page
542.
If this be true, it must be upon this ground, Page 545.
That such attempts of ruining do ipso facto include a disclaiming the
Governing those Persons as Subjects: and, consequently, of being their Prince
or King. And then, says he, the Expressions of our Public Declaration and
Acknowledgment would still be secured, that it is not lawful upon any Pretense
whatsoever to take (...) against the King.

3. I might cite several Passages in the Bishop of Worcester's incomparable
Irenicum, which make for the Right of the present Government; and by
consequence, for swearing to it, exclusive of the supposed Right of the late
King. But since some, who envy that great Prelate's Reputation, would have it
thought that he has repented of that Book; Unreasonableness, etc. p. 5.
ascribed to the Bishop of Worster.
I shall refer this Considerer to the Unreasonableness of the new Separation;
where he says,

I do not deny, that the chief Intention of those who require Oaths of
Allegiance to themselves, is to bind men as fast as may be to them: There is a
Personal Obligation consequent upon it: But then I say, that the Rule and
Measure of it is not to be taken from such Intention of the Persons, but from
the General Good, which was chiefly intended in such things. For there is a
common Good of Humane Society, which Mankind have an Obligation to, antecedent
to that Obligation they are under to particular Persons. For as Magistrates
were designed for a general Good, so the Obligation to them must be understood
so, as to be still in subordination to the main end.

And it is agreed on all hands, that an antecedent and superior Obligation
does void that which is subsequent and inferior, when they contradict each
other. Else an Oath might bind a man to sin: Which no man will assert.

Therefore whatever the Intention of the Person was, how strict soever the
Expressions may be, if the keeping the Oath be really and truly inconsistent
with the welfare of a People, in subverting the Fundamental Laws which support
it, I do not see how such an Oath concontinues to oblige.

He says further,

Page 13.
The Resolution of Conscience in this Case does not depend upon the Will and
Pleasure of the Person to whom the former was made: But upon the Grounds on
which it was made, and from which it had its force to oblige: And if those
cease, the Obligation of the Oath ceases, together with them. And whether they
do or not, no particular Person is so fit to judge as the Three Estates of the
Realm, as I shall prove from several remarkable Instances to this purpose in
our Histories and Parliament Records: Whereby I shall make it appear, That when
a Dispute has happened about the Right of Succession, and to whom the Oaths of
Allegi^^^ce were to be made; they have looked on it as their proper Right,
(...) limit the Succession, and to determine the Oaths.

In pursuance of which he, according to his great Judgment and Reading, makes
many just Observations from the ancient History, fully warranting what he
asserts: Which indeed an Vide the Enquiry into the remarkable Instances of
History and Parliament Records, used by the Author of the Unreasonableness of a
new Separation.
Author, who, if I am not much mistaken, is the famous Advocate for Slavery,
Dr. Brady, pretends to Answer, in his way: But in due time he may be shown his
Errors.

4. Tho Dean Sherlock is afraid of being Case of Allegiance p. 2.
confounded, if he should enter into the dark Labyrinths of Law and History; He
is express, that Page 54.
what Prince we must obey, and to what particular Prince we must pay our
Allegiance, the Law of God does not tell us: but this we must learn from the
Laws of the Land. However, I do not find that he allows the Laws of the Land to
give the Prince his Authority; I am sure in his Case of Resistance he says
quite the contrary: But if it will appear, That the Kings of England have
enjoyed the Crown no otherwise than under a Prior, or immediate Election or
Declaration of them, who in Concurrence with their Prince, make and declare the
Law, then it must not be denied but they receive their Authority under God from
Men, and Humane Laws; in which Case he declares, that he cannot imagine that
their Power is any other than a Trust, of which they must give an Account to
those who have entrusted them with it, according to those Laws by which they
were entrusted to exercise that Power. For whether there be any express
Provision made in the Law to call them to an Account, or not, the nature of the
thing proves, that if they receive their Power from Men, they are accountable
to them: For those who gave a Power, may take an Account of the Use and Abuse
of it.

But though he would not be thought Guilty of the supposed Commonwealth
Principle, received by the Great Divine and Lawyer Vide Dr. S's Case of
Resistance. Reciting Bracton's Lex facit Regem.
Bracton, That the Law makes the King, (to evade the manifest meaning of which
words, he takes the beginning and ending of a Paragraph, and leaves out the
middle.) Yet he embraces another Principle equally democratical; for he is
express, that he does not think the Right and Interest of any Prince so
considerable, Case of Alleg. p. 33.
as the Safety and Preservation of a Nation, and the Lives and Fortunes of all
his Subjects.

Besides which he subjects the Rights of Princes not only to the Judgment of
the P. 52. Legal Rights must be determined by a Legal Authority; and there is
no Authority can take Cognizance of the Titles and Claims of Princes, and the
Disposal of the Crown, but the Estates of the Realm.
States of the Kingdom, but even of the Page 54. Speaking of a Legal Right to
the Crown: Is it not most reasonable to think that to be the Sense of the Law,
which learned Judges and Lawyers have agreed is the Sense of it, etc.
ordinary Courts of Justice.

5. Since the Doctrine of the Church of England is thought to condemn the
present Settlement, and such Oaths as might bind the Subjects to the Defense of
it; I shall show some Passages in the Homilies of our Church, according to
which all true Sons of the Church will be obliged to obey their present
Majesty's, and by consequence, to swear to them, if required by Act of
Parliament, as the only lawful and rightful Sovereigns.

2 Hom. of Obedience, Ed. 8. p. 112.
We may not, say the Homelies, withstand, or in any ways hurt an anointed King,
which is Gods Lieftenant, Vicegerent, and Highest Minister in that Country
where he is King.

Then speaking of the Example of David when pursued by Saul, they say,

'By these Examples David gives a general Rule and Lesson, not 'to withstand
their Liege Lord, and King.

And in another place,

2 Hom. against wilful Rebellion, p. 605.
Such as rebel against their own Natural gracious Sovereigns, however they call
themselves, or are named of others; yet they are indeed no Christians, but
worse than Heathens, and such as shall never enjoy the Kingdom of Heaven, which
Christ by his Obedience purchased for true Christians, being obedient to him
the King of Kings, and to their Prince whom he has placed over them.

And whereas the Epithet of Natural might induce some to believe, 6. Sermon
against wilful Rebellion.
that they meant this only of a King by Right of Birth; they charge the
Subjects of this Realm, who fought for Lewis the Dauphin of France against King
John, with breaking their Oath of Fidelity to their Natural Lord the King of
England: Though at the same time Elianor, the Daughter of John's Elder Brother,
was alive: Of which it cannot be thought that our Church was ignorant.

From all which these Inferences are natural:

1. That the Anointed King upon the place, or for the time being, he who is the
Liege Lord and King; is God's Vicegerent, placed over the Subjects by God's
Act, Appointment, or Providence.

2. That though God may place two upon the Throne in a joint participation of the
Sovereignty; he cannot otherwise be said to have two Vicegerents in the same
Dominion. And therefore the Prince, who is dispossessed, cannot be God's
Vicegerent, nor have Right so to be, while the Vicegerent of God's Placing
keeps Possession.

3. That the Allegiance of the Subject is due to the Liege Lord and Lady, or
Vicegerents of God's placing; and to none else.

4. That as the Obedience to Princes is resembled to the Obedience of Christ to
God the Father; and of Christians to the Son; the Allegiance due to our
Princes, according to the Doctrine of our Church, is Active as well as Passive
Obedience. And therefore we ought to obey their Commands, in fighting for them
against the Dispossessed Prince, as well as against any other Person.

5. That, therefore, agreeably to the Doctrine of our Church, the Right of the
present Liege Lord and Lady ought, if required, to be sworn to; and the
Pretense of the late King to be Abjured.

6. That there can be no Objection against this, from the Supposition, that his
Majesty is not our Natural Lord, as not standing first upon the Royal Line: For
then, neither could King John have been a Natural Lord.

(2.) I might show several Arguments, in their own nature convincing; of which
I shall name some: As,

1. No Temporal Peer can be supposed to scruple an Oath of Abjuration, because
he either has, or is presumed to have sworn Homage to their Majesty's; which is
a devoting of Life and Fortune to their Service, against King James, as well as
any other Enemy.

2. No Commoner is to be thought to decline this; because it is to be presumed,
that he will be obedient to the Common Law; which, as I have shown, obliges him
to take the Common Law Oath of Fidelity, either in the Turn or Leet. And that
Oath, according to the Simplicity of ancient Times, and the natural Import of
the Words, carries with it both a Recognition, and Abjuration.

3. No Man can reasonably scruple this, as contrary to the continuing
Obligation of a Former Oath of Allegiance: For,

1. How careful soever the Constitution has been to secure the Allegiance of
the Subject, by an Oath to the King for the time being; it has made equal
Provision for the safety of the Kingdom. Vide supra.
Though men have not lately been expressly sworn to the Defense of the Kingdom;
the Constitution interprets the meaning and extent of the Word Allegiance.
When, therefore, that which was sworn to the late King came to interfere with
the Public Safety; either the equal Obligation to both left Men to their
Choice, or, rather, the supreme Law of the Public Safety took place; and that
the rather, because Prince and People were jointly bound to the Defense of the
Kingdom, and the preservation of the Rights of the Crown of the Kingdom. As
appears by the Explanation of the Coronation Oath, Vide Infra.
received with the Confessor's Laws.

2. As the English Subjects are sworn to their Princes, the Princes are
reciprocally sworn to their Subjects. These Oaths make a mutual Contract; the
wilful Breach of which on either side, discharges the other.

Sir Gloss. f. 271. Jurabat aliquando and Rex ipse subditis suis fidelitatem,
etc.
Henry Spelman says,

Sometimes the King himself swore Fidelity to his Subjects, I omit Foreigners;
but so Florence of Worcester concerning King Cnute in the Year 1016; they swore
Fidelity to him, and he swore to them, that according to God and the World, he
would be faithful Lord to them.

Sam. Puf. de Intervegnis.
Pufendorf lays it as a General Rule, That when the Government is conferred upon
a King, there is a mutual Translation of Right, and a Reciprocal Promise.

And it is observable, that Sir Citing Cujacius d^ feudis, and quibus ex causis
Vasallus feud' amittit, etc.
Henry Spelman applies what is held of Feudai Relations, to that which is
between Prince and People.

And thus I take it to have been received in our Law, Glanvil, Lib. 9. c. 4.
as anciently as the time of H. 2. For Glanvil says, Mutua quidem debet esse
Dominii and Homagii Fidelitatis connexio; quod ita quantum homo debet Domino ex
homagio, tantum illi debet Dominus ex Dominio, praeter solam reverentiam.

Indeed the Connection of Fidelity between Dominion and Homage ought to be
mutual: so that as much as a Man owes his Lord by reason of Homage, so much the
Lord owes him by reason of Dominion, Reverence only excepted.



Which being laid generally, cannot be thought restrainable to that Dominion,
which an inferior Lord has over his Tenant.

The Customary of Normandy before cited, Supra, page 18. in M.
speaking of the Allegiance of the Subject due to the Prince, which it
expresses by words of Homage, says,

He also is bound to Rule, Protect, and Defend them, and to treat them
according to the Rights, Customs, and Laws, of the Country.

But the Confessor's Law expressly received in the Fourth of W. 1. if not
oftener, Vide supea.
is an Authority so full and indubitable to this Point, and yet so little of it
has been mentioned by any late Author, that I may be very excusable in
transcribing the whole Chapter of the Office of a King, and the Right, and
Appendages of the Crown of the Kingdom.

Rex autem, quia Vicarius summi Regis est, ad hoc est Constitutus, ut Regnum
terrenum and populum Domini (and supra omnia sanctam veneretur ecclesiam ejus)
and regat, and ab injuriosis defendat, and maleficos ab ea evellat, and penitus
disperdat. Quod nisi fecerit nec nomen Regis in eo constabit. Verum, Testante
Papa Joanne, nomen Regis perdit. Cui Pipinus, and Carolus filius ejus, nec dum
Reges sed Principes sub Rege Francorum, stulto scripserunt, quaerentes, si ita
permanere deberent Francorum Reges solo Regio nomine contenti? A quo responsum
est illos decet vocari Reges, qui vigilanter defendunt and regunt ecclesiam
Dei, and populum ejus; imitati Regem Psalmographum dicentem, non habitabit in
medio domus meae qui facit superbi^m, etc. Debet vero de jure rex omnes terras,
and honores, omnes dignitates, and jura, and libertates Coronae regni hujus, in
integrum, cum omni integritate, and sine diminutione, observare, and defendere,
dispersa, and dilapidata, and amissa regni jura, in pristinum statum and
debitum, viribus omnihus, revocare. Universa vero terra, and tota, and insulae
omnes usque Norwegiam, and usque Daciam, pertinent ad Coronaem regni ejus, and
sunt de appendiciis and dignitatibus Regis. Et una est Monarchia, and unum est
Regnum, and vocabatur quondam regnum Britanniae, modo autem vocatur regnum
Anglorum. Tales enim metas and fines, ut praedictae sunt, constituit and
imposuit Coronae regni Dominus Eleutherius Papa, sententia sua Anno 67. post
passionem Christi, qui primo destinavit Coronam benedictam Britanniae and
Christianitatem, Deo inspirante, Lucio Regi Britonum. Debet autem Rex omnia
rite facere in regno, and per judicium procerum regni: debet enim jus and
justitia regnare in regno potius quam voluntas prava. Lex est semper quod jus
facit: voluntas autem, violentia, and vis, non est jus. Debet vero Rex Deum
timere super omnia, and diligere, and mandata ejus per totum Regnum suum
servare. Debet etiam sanctam Ecelesiam Regni sui cum, omni integritate, and
libitate, juxta Constitutiones Patrum, and predecessorum, servare, fovere,
manutenere, regere, and contra inimicos defendere. Ita ut Deus prae ceteris
honoretur and prae oculis semper habeatur. Debet etiam bonas Leges and
Consuetudines approbatas erigere; pravas autem delere, and omnes a regno
deponere. Debet judicium rectum in regno facere, and justitiam, per Consilium
Procerum regni sui, tenere. Ista vero debet omnia Rex in propria persona,
inspectis and tactis sacrosanctis evangeliis, and super sacras and sanctas
reliquias, coram regno, and Sacerdotio, and Clero, jurare, antequam ab
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis regni coronetur. Tres enim Rex habere servos
debet, scilicet luxuriam, avaritiam, and cupiditatem: quos si habuerit servos,
been and illustre regnabit. Regno omnia debet praemeditare. Et hoc Regis est.
Quia male cuncta ministrat impetus: juxta Evangelium, omne Regnum in se divisum
desolabitur.

But the King, because he is the Vicegerent of the Supreme King, is constituted
to this end, that he should both rule his Worldly Kingdom, and the People of
the Lord, and defend them from the Injurious: and above all, should venerate
his Holy Church, and pluck up from it, and pull down, and wholly destroy, all
ill-doers; which unless he do, not so much as the name of King shall remain:
but, as Pope John testifies, he loses the Name of King. To, whom Pepin, and his
Son Charles, not yet Kings, but Princes under the King of the Francks,
foolishly wrote, enquiring, whether so, or in such case, the Kings of the
Francks ought to remain contented only with the Name of King? By whom it was
answered, It is fitting that they should be called Kings, who vigilantly defend
and rule the Church of God, and his People; imitating the Royal Psalmist, who
says, He that acts proudly shall not dwell within my House. But the King ought
of Right all Lands, and all Honors, Dignities, and Rights and Liberties of the
Crown of this Kingdom, entirely, and without Diminution, to observe, and
defend; the dispersed, ruinous, and lost Rights of the Kingdom to the due
state, with all his Might, to restore. But the whole Circuit of Land, and all
the Isles as far as Norway and Denmark, belong to the Crown of his Kingdom, and
are part of the Appendages and Dignities of the King. There is both one
Monarchy, and one Kingdom, which anciently was called the Kingdom of the
English. For such Bounds and Limits as aforesaid Pope Eleutherius constituted
and appointed for the Crown of the Kingdom, by his Decree in the 67th Year
after Christ's Passion, who first sent a Consecrated Crown, and by Inspiration
from God, Christianity, to Lucius K. of the Britons. But the King ought to do
all things in his Kingdom according to Law, and by the Judgment of his Peers.
For Right and Justice ought rather to Reign in the Kingdom, than a corrupt
Will. Law is always that which makes Right; but Will, Violence and Force is not
right. But the King ought in the first place to fear God, and love him, and
keep his Commandments throughout the Kingdom. The Holy Church of his Kingdom he
ought also with all Entireness and Liberty, according to the Constitutions of
his Ancestors and Predecessors, to preserve, cherish, maintain, rule and
defend, against Enemies. So that God be honored above all things, and be
always had before his Eyes. He ought also to raise up the good and approved
Laws and Customs; but to abolish the bad, and drive them all from his Kingdom.
He ought to give right Judgment in his Kingdom, and maintain Justice by the
Council of the Peers of his Kingdom. But all those things the King ought in his
proper Person, the Sacred Gospel being looked into, and touched, and upon the
Sacred and Holy Relics, to swear, before the People, the Prelates, and
inferior Clergy, before he be Crowned by the Archbishops, and Bishops of the
Kingdom. For the King ought to have three Servants; to wit, Luxury, Avarice,
and Concupiscence; which if he keep Servants, he shall Reign well and
illustriously. He ought to premeditate all things for the good of his Kingdom.
And this is the part of a King. For Violence administers all things ill:
according to the Evangelist, A Kingdom divided within it self, shall be
destroyed.

Here I may observe,

1. That this Law Declarative of the Rights of the Kingdom, and Office of the
King, settled here with Christianity itself; exhibits the Contract on the
Prince's side, which may truly be termed Original; how many soever ridicule the
Notion of it.

2. That this Contract, is, in relation to that entered into by the People,
Pufend. Elementa Juris-Prud. p. 94.
perfectly mutual: where, according to the learned Pufendorf, The Heads of one
and the same Contract, run into each other by way of Condition.

For this Law says, If the End for which a King is Constituted be not answered,
the Name of King shall not remain: And fully explains the meaning of this,
where it says, That Pepin and Charles made a very foolish Question, Whether a
King might live contented with the Name only: which is as much as to say, they
were so foolish as to enquire, whether they might keep, what they had wholly
lost, both as to Name and Thing.

That this was the meaning of the Confessor's Law, will farther appear, if we
particularly consider what it refers to, as an Authentic President, and
Standing Rule for the like Cases: Which was the Judgment of Pope Zachary (through
the Mistake of some Transcriber, called John) encouraging the Francks to depose
their King Childerick. Vide suyra, p. 6.


Defense de la Nation Britanique Ed. Anno 1692. p. 219.
According to the Account of this matter in a late French Author; the Answer of
Pope Zachary, when he was entreated to give his Advice upon that occasion; was,
Qu' il croyoit que les Francois etoient quites en'vers Childeric du serment de
fidelite, puis qu' il ne s' aquitoit paes envers eux, de ce qu' il avoit
solemnellement promis: la nature des Contracts Conditiones etant tell, qu' une
party qui vient a manquer, absout l' autre de la promise.

That he thought that the French were discharged toward Childerick of the Oath
of Fidelity, since he had not acquitted himself toward them, of that which he
had solemnly promised: The nature of Conditional Promises being such, that the
Party failing, absolves the other from his Promise.



Though Du Haillan does not give the Words of the Pope's Answer, yet the
Inducement to it which he mentions, gives yet farther Light into this matter.

Pepin, he says, sent the Bishop of Witsburgh to Pope Zachary, Du Haillan supra
46. ^.
to get him to dispense and quit the French from the Oath made to their King.
The principal Point which the Bishop was to remonstrate, was, That King
Childerick was wholly unfit to be King, and that Pepin, Mayor of the Palace,
upon whom all the Affairs of the Realm lay, was indeed King, being to support
the Charges which belong to a King; of which the other had but the Name left.
That the French had till then shown great Patience in supporting the Imbecility
and unfitness of Kings: That they had had one after another, although they were
not subjected nor bound to obey them, but on the Condition of which we have
spoken above: Vide the Oath cited supra.
That Conditional Promises ought not to be kept, if they are not reciprocally
observed. But that Childerick had not done any thing of that which he was bound
to by the Condition: Wherefore the French ought to be freed from their Oath.
Besides that, the Bishop was to remonstrate to the Pope, that doing Pepin this
Favor, he should have Succors against the Lombards, who made War against him.
The Pope, therefore, being solicited, and moved by the Reasons laid before him
by the Bishop; and building upon the hopes of receiving Succors from Pepin
against the Lombards, Enemies of the Sea of Rome, discharged the French from
the Oath made to King Childerick.

This having a manifest Relation to the nature of the Oath, which appears to
have been expressly Conditional, yields a full Proof, That when the Law of
England received the Pope's Judgment upon Childeric's supposed Breach of his
Coronation Oath, it, in effect, declared the Oath of the Subjects to a King of
England to be of the same nature with the Oath of the Subjects of France. And
certain it is, that the Consequence of the King's Breach of the Oath, is
declared to be the same here as in France.

That thus it was held in the Time of Hen. 3. appears by Judge Bracton, whom
Fleta in the time of Edw. 1. in great measure transcribes. Fund. Constable. f.
29.35.
But having had former occasion to appeal to him, and being confirmed in it by
the Judgment of my Learned Friend Mr. Tyrrel, who puts the like Interpretation
upon Bracton's Expressions, I may refer the Reader to what I formerly cited out
of him; Bib. Pol. 10. Dial. p. 705, 711.
but, chiefly, to Mr. Tyrrel's Bibliotheca Politica. Observing only here,

1. That whereas the Confessor's Law speaks of the end for which a King is [
Constituted], which is a word of doubtful meaning; Bracton, by way of
explanation, has Bracton. l. 3. c. 9. ad hoc creatus est Rex and Electus.
created and elected. 2. That whereas the Confessor's Law speaks of losing the
Name of King, Bracton plainly does, of the loss of the Authority, declaring,
That the Lib. 2. c. 24. Est enim corona ejus facere justitiam, and judicium,
and tenere pacem, sine quibus non potest came tenere.
Crown consists in doing Justice, and maintaining the Peace of the Kingdom, and
cannot be held without it. 3. Whereas that Law speaks of the Kings Duty to do
all things in the Kingdom rite, or according to the Constitution, and by the
Advice of his Peers, Bracton is express, that those Peers are, to some purpose,
Superior, After speaking of the Superiority of God and the Law. Et Curiam
suam, etc.
as being Judges wherein a King exceeds his Regal Authority.

That the Coronation Oath is such a Condition or Contract on the Prince's side,
that the Obligation of the Oath taken by the Subjects depends upon it, will be
farther evident from the Rituals of the Coronations of our Kings, explained by
the History of the Times.

Whoever compares the ancient Rituals of the Times before the reputed Conquest,
with those since, will find them all agree in Substance, and for the most part
in Words: but as the confirming the Confessor's Law could be no part of the
Rituals before his time; neither was it till after Hen. 1.

But as it had been in the time of W. 1. so in his, the Confirmation of those
Laws was the Condition of choosing a King to be Crowned.

The Ritual of his Coronation shows plainly, that he was chosen to be King,
before his being Crowned: For,

It provides, That two Bishops should lead the King to be consecrated, from
Coronat H. 1. Anno 1100. in Bib. Cot. sub Ef^^g. Claudii A 3. Conse^randum
Regem de Conventu Seniorum duo Episcopi per manus producant.
the Convention of the Elders.

And Matthew Paris, whose Authority is generally received shows, that the
maintaining the Confessor's Law was settled in a Convention, (...) a Condition
of his being to be Consecrated King.

Mat. Par. f. 55. de H. 1.
Congregato Londoniis Clero Angliae, and Populo universo, promisit emendationem
legum quibus oppressa fuerat Anglia tempore patris sui, and fratris nuper
defuncti; ut animos omnium in sui promotionem accenderet and amorem; and
utillum in Regem susciperent and patronum. Ad haec Clero respondente, and
Magnatibus cunctis, quod si animo volente ipsis vellet concedere, and charta
sua communire, illas Libertates and Consuetudines antiquas, quae floruerunt in
regno tempore Sancti Regis Edwardi, in ipsum consentirent, and in Regem
unanimiter consecrarent; H. autem hoc libenter annuente, and se id facturum cum
sacramento affirmante, consecratus est in Regem apud Westminister' in die
assumptionis beatae Mariae favente Clero, and populo. Cui continuo a Mauricio
Land. Episc. and Thoma Ebor' Arch. Corona capiti imponitur. Cum fuerat
Diademate insignitus has libertates subscriptas in regno ad exaltationem*
Sanctae Ecclesiae and pacem populo tenendam concessit.

The Clergy and all the People, being assembled at London, he promised an
amendment of the Laws, with which England had been oppressed in the time of his
Father, and Brother lately deceased; that he might fire the minds of all to the
Promotion and Love of him: And that they might receive him for King, and
Patron. To this the Clergy, and all the Great Men answering, That if with a
willing Mind he would yield to them, and with his Charter confirm* those
Liberties and ancient Customs which flourished in the Realm in the time of Holy
King Edward, they would consent to have him, and would unanimously consecrate
him King: Henry willingly assenting, and affirming with an Oath that he would
do it, he was consecrated King at Westminster, on the Day of the Assumption of
the Blessed Virgin; with the Concurrence of the Clergy and People: upon whose
Head the Crown is immediately set by Maurice Bishop of London, and Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury. When he was adorned with the Crown, he granted the
Liberties underwritten, for the Exaltation of Holy Church, and for the
preserving Peace to the People.

In the Charter then passed there is this Clause: Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis
reddo, cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater meus eam emendavit, Concilio
Baronum suorum.

I restore to you King Edward's Law, with those Amendments with which my Father
amended it, by the Counsel of his Barons.



According to which it seems, that the Charter was Signed immediately upon the
Coronation, in pursuance of a Promise made at his first being Elected to be
Crowned.

And according to the most ancient of the Rituals, in which the maintaining the
Confessor's Law is expressed, the Promise always preceded the Coronation, as
appears by the following Form: Vide Lib. Re^alem.
Metropolitanus vel Epus Dominum Regem Coronaturus mediocri distinctaque voce
interroget, This Form seems no earlier than the time of E. 2.
si Leges and Consuetudines ab antiquis justis and Deo devotis Regibus Plebi
Angliae concessis, cum Sacramenti confirmatione eidem Plebi concedere and
servare voluerit; and presertim Leges, and Consuetudines, and Libertates, a
glorioso Rege Edwardo, Clero populoque concessas. Si autem his omnibus
assentire se velle promisserit, exponat ei Metropolitanus, vel Episcopus, de
quibus jurabit: Ita dicendo, etc.

Let the Metropolitan, or Bishop, who is to Crown our Lord the King, ask him
with a mild and distinct Voice, Whether the Laws and Customs granted by
ancient, just, and devout Kings, to the Commonalty of England, he will yield,
and secure to the said Commonalty, with the Confirmation of an Oath: And
especially the Customs and Liberties granted to the Clergy, and People, by the
Glorious King Edward. And if he promise that he will assent to all these, let
the Metropolitan or Bishop open the matters concerning which he shall swear,
saying, etc.



Whether the Promise of maintaining the Confessor's Laws were, as in the time
of H. 1. in a Convention before the Coronation, or made part of the Ritual;
this was either way a Condition of Receiving a King. And the Three Branches of
the Oaths which we have an Account of to this day, have been no more than was
contained in that general Promise; which may appear by the comparing together
the Coronation Oaths of Edward the Son of Edgar, and of Ethelred, before the
Reputed Conquest; and of W. 1, H. 1, H. 3, and W. M, since.

Nota. The Commentator upon the Life of King Alfred must mistake, In supposing
that this could be Ethelred. But it must have been Edward, the Son of Edgar,
who was Crowned about that time. Flor. Wig. de An. 975. Promissio Regis vel
Edvardi vel Aethelraedi, utrumque enim Dun stanus Kingstoniae coronavit circa
Annum 970. Hoc scripto de litera in literam descriptum Com. In vitam Alfredi.
Coronatio Aethelredi Regis Anglo Saxonum An. 989. Bib. Cot. sub Effig. Claud.
A. 3. Promissio juratoria W. 1. exacta per Archipraesulem Aldredum ante altar
Sancti Petri Apostoli apud West. coramclero and populo, secundum Historicos,
qui non verba sed effectum memorant. Coronatio H. 1. Regis Anglorum A. 1000.
adjuncta Coronationi supradict. Regis Aethelredi in Bib. Cot. Juramentum Regis
in Coronatione inter Statuta varia and Constitutiones regni Angliae ab H. 3. ad
E. 2. Bib. Cot. sub Effig. Vespat. B. 7. f. 86. Juramentum stabilitum per
statutum 1 W. M. In nomine Sanctae Trinitatis, ego tria promitto Populo
Christiano, meisque subditis. Haec tria populo Christiano, and mihisubdito, in
Christi promitto nomine. In Christi nomine promitto haec tria populo Christiano
mihi subdito.

1. Dei Ecclesiam, ac universum mei imperii populum Christia^um, ve^a pace
^uitu^m. 1. In primis ut Ecclesia Dei, and omnis populus Christianus, veram
pacem nostro arbitrio in omnitempore servent. 1. Se Velle Dei Ecclesias ac
Rectores earum defendere, nec non populum sibi subjectum just, and regali
Providentia, regere. 1. In primis me praecepturum, and opem pro viribus
impensurum, ut ecclesia Dei, and omnis populus Christianus, veram pacem nostro
arbitrio in omni tempore servent. 1. Servabis Ecclesiae Dei, Clero populoque,
pacem, ex integro, and concordiam in Deo, secundum vires tuas? Resp. Servabo.
1. Solemniter promittes, and jurabis, regere populum hujus regni Angliae, and
dominiorum eidem pertinentium, secundum statuta in Parliamento concordota, and
leges, ac consuetudines, ejusdem? Res. Solemniter promitto ita facere.

2. Me rapinam, omnemque iniquitatem, omnibus ordinibus interdicturum. 2.
Alium; ut rapacitates, and omnes iniquitates, omnibus gradibus interdicam. 2.
Rectam Legem statuere, and tenere. 2. Alium; ut rapacitates, and omnes
iniquitates, omnibus gradibus interdicam. 2. Facies fieri in omnibus judiciis
tuis aequam and rectam justitiam, and discretionem, in misericordia, and
veritate, secundum vires tuas? R. Faciam. 2. Secundum vires tuas fieri facies
in omnibus judiciis tuis legem and justitiam in miserecordia? Res. Faciam.

3. Me promissurum, and mandaturum, in omnibus judiciis, justitiam, and
miserecordiam. 3. Tertium; ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem and miserecordiam
praecipiam: ut mihi and vobis indulgeat suam mi sericordiam clemens and
misericors Deus qui vivit. 3. Rapinas injustaque judicia penitus interdicere.
3. Tertium; ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem and miserecordiam praecipiam: ut
mihi and vobis indulgeat suam misericordiam clemens and miserecors Deus. 3.
Concedis justas Leges and Consuetudines esse tenendas? and promittis esse per
te protegendas, and ad honorem Dei roborandas; quas vulgus elegerit, secundum
vires tuas? R. Concedo and promitto. 3. Pro posse tuo manutenebis leges Dei,
veram Professionem Evangelii, and Protestantium reformatam Religionem, per
Legem Stabilitam? and servabis Episcopis, and Clero, hujus regni, and ecclesiis
eorum curae commissis, omnia jura and privilegia, quae per Legem iis, vel eorum
aliquibus, pertinent, vel pertinebunt?

R. Haec omnia facere promitto. Quae hic supra promisi tenebo and servaho ita
me Deus adjuvet.



The Coronation Oath of Edward the Son of Edgar The Coronation Oath of
Ethelred. The Effect or Substance of the Oath of W. 1. The Coronation Oath of
H. 1. The Coronation Oath of H. 3. and others. The Coronation Oath established
by the Stat. 1 W. M. 1. That God's Church and all Christian People of my
Kingdom shall enjoy true Peace. 1. That God's Church and all Christian People,
as much as lies in us, keep true Peace, at all times 1. That he would defend
God's Churches, and their Rectors, and rule all the People subjected to him,
justly, and with Regal care. 1. That I will command and endeavor to my power,
that the Church of God, and all Christian People, as much as lies in us, keep
true Peace. 1. Will you preserve to the Church of God, the Clergy, and People
entire Peace and Concord in God, according to your Power? R. I will. 1. Will
you solemnly promise, and swear, to govern the People of this Kingdom of
England, and the Dominions thereto belonging, according to the Statutes in
Parliament agreeed on, and the Laws and Customs of the same? R. I solemnly
promise so to do. 2. That I will prohibit Rapine, and Iniquity, to all Orders
of Men. 2. That I will prohibit all rapacities, and all Iniquities, to all
degrees. 2. That he would make and observe right Law. 2. That I will prohibit
Rapacities, and all iniquities, to all degrees. 2. Will you cause equal and
right Justice, and discretion, in mercy, to be done in all your Judgments,
according to your Power? R. I will. 2. Will you to your Power, cause Law, and
Justice, in mercy, to be executed in all your Judgments? R. I will. 3. That I
will promise and command Justice, and Mercy, in all Judgments. 3. That I
command equity and mercy in all Judgments; that the clement and merciful living
God, may indulge his mercy to me and you. 3. That he would wholly prohibit
Rapines, and unjust Judgments. 3. That I command equity and mercy, in all
Judgments. 3. Do you grant, that the just Laws and Customs shall be observed?
and do you promise, that those which the People has chosen, or shall have
chosen, shall be protected and corroborated to your Power? R. Igrant and
promise. 3. Will you to the uttermost of your Power, maintain the Laws of God,
the true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion
established by Law? And will you preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this
Realm, and to the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights, and
Privileges, as, by Law, do, or shall appertain unto them, or any of them? R.
All this I promise to do.

The things which I have here before promised I will perform and keep. So help
me God.



The Uniformity of these Oaths, and the plain Contract which they import, as
they stand in the Rituals, after the Question to the People, Whether they would
have such an one for their King, is very obvious: I shall here only observe the
great Wisdom of the Parliament 1 W. M.

1. In freeing their Present Majesty's, and all future Princes, from the Snare
which lay in the general Promise to the Church; and maintaining the Confessor's
Laws.

2. In putting an end to the Contest upon the doubtful meaning of quas vulgus
elegerit.

For which, though they had full Authority in themselves; some Formalists would
be apt to cavil at such Alterations, were it not for those more ancient Rituals
above cited, which have no express Reference to the Confessor's Law, nor yield
that matter of Dispute which went to an unhappy height in the Reign of C. r.

But if what I have showed of the Confessor's Law, and the Rituals of the
Coronations of our Princes, left it yet doubtful, Whether there be such a
Contract between Prince and People, that the Prince's Breach of his Coronation
Oath discharges the Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance; the Abstract which I
here offer, of what Records, Histories and Law Books will abundantly evince,
may, as I conceive, silence this Controversy; both as to the late King's
ceasing to be King, and the Legality of the Possession of their present
Majesty's.

In the time of the Heptarchy there was a Law in a General Council of all
England, expressly affirming, Anno 789.
or providing for, the Liberty of the States to choose their King; which must
relate to their respective Kingdoms: But this Law makes no Limitation, so much
as to any Family: Yet from before that time, all the Anglo-Saxon Kings seem to
have been of the Blood of Woden: And particularly Cerdic, the first of the
West Saxons: and Ina, who seems the first of that Kingdom, who was Monarch over
all; was chosen, as being of the Blood of Cerdic.

In Ina we may lay the Foundation of the Monarchy; as he was the first Monarch
of all England, after being King of that Kingdom, to which, as to the Head, all
the rest were since united. From Ina to Brictrick no Lineal Succession was in
the least regarded. His Successor Egbert, whom some make the first Monarch,
because they suppose that then the Lineal Succession began, was chosen upon the
account of his Merit, and being of the Blood of Ina. To Egbert succeeded his
Son Athelstan, as is gathered from Charters, though not mentioned, as I remember,
by any Historian which has occurred to me. And this Athelstan was a King of some
Parts of England in the Lifetime of his Father. To Athelstan succeeded his
Brother Ethelwolf, who had been bred a Clergyman. His Son Ethelbald, was in
the Father's Lifetime King of the West Saxons. Tho, as it seems, he left Male
Issue, his Brother Ethelbert succeeded him: Then another Brother Ethered, who,
for certain, left Issue. Him the youngest Brother Alfred succeeded.

All these Successions of Brothers, as Alfred's Will proves beyond
Contradiction, were by virtue of Settlements, or Elections, in National
Councils. His Will also shows, that one Ethelbald, then alive, was the Son of
one of his Brothers; and that there was a Cosen Osferth, who might have been
the Son of Athelstan, Brother to Ethelwolf. To Alfred succeeded his Son Edward.
But the Ethelbald last before mentioned, was chosen by part of the Kingdom, and
made War against him: Wherein, though he lost his Life, his Party had the better.
To Edward succeeded his Bastard Son Ethelstan; then the mulier Edmund: his Sons
Edwi, and Edgar, were set aside for their Uncle Edred. Edwi succeeding, was
rejected by the Mercians and Northumbrians, who chose his Brother Edgar, who
afterward was chosen to the whole. Upon his Death there was a Competition
between Edward, who seems to have been Edgar's Bastard Son; and Ethelred,
undoubtedly legitimate. Edward's Party prevailed for his being King: But his
Murder soon made way for Ethelred. The Ritual, or Pontifical, used at his
Coronation, which appears to have been a Standing Form, is preserved to us in
the Cotton Library; wherein, among other things, there is a Prayer to God to
bless this Prince purely Elected. He being guilty of Misgovernment, was
rejected; and Swein the Dane received. Upon the Death of Swein, Ethelred was
soon restored, upon promise to govern better than he had done. Soon after,
Cnute the Son of Swein Lands, with a Claim, as it should seem, of the Divine
Right of Succession, as the Son of Goldesburgh, Daughter of King Ethelbald, who
either was the Son of an Elder Brother of King Alfred; or else, if it were
another Ethelbald, the Claim from him as a King in England, shows, That a
Qualification from the Saxon Blood Royal was accounted sufficient for any one,
of Merit, and Power, to make good his Claim.

Notwithstanding which Claim, part of the Kingdom kept to Ethelred; and upon
his Death they chose Edmund, who, as appears from undoubted Authorities, was a
Bastard.

Cnute possessed himself of the whole; and was succeeded by his Son. Harold,
who was Spurious, which is worse than a Bastard.

Hardicnute, the Legitimate Son, succeeded. Upon his Death Earl Godwin was
chosen Administrator of the Affairs of the Kingdom, during a Vacancy: And,
through his Influence, Edward the Confessor, Son of Ethelred by his Queen, was
chosen; whose Parliament says, The Hereditary Succession was endangered by the
Interposition of the Danes. In that Body of our Laws, which most of our Kings
to this very Day have expressly sworn to maintain, they are declared to be
Constituted to do Justice, and to cease to be Kings, if they Answer not the
ends for which they are constituted. The Confessor, being jealous of the Power
of Earl Godwin, and his 7 Sons, all of them Earls; to secure himself against
them, by the Power of the Earls Leofrick, and Siward, obtains a Settlement in
Parliament upon his Cosen William, Duke of Normandy, Grand Nephew to the
Confessor's Mother Emma: Besides that, William's Wife Matilda, Daughter of
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, came from a Daughter of King Alfred. W. 1. dying in
Normandy, was upon his Deathbed pressed by some about him to appoint his
Successor; which he declared, That he had no Authority to do, but left it to
God's Providence: plainly intimating, That as he could not appoint his
Successor, neither had any body a Right to succeed, till chosen or submitted
to, by the States, or People. He wished indeed, that his Second Son William
might succeed; which prevailed as a Recommendation: And though the Normans would
have had England to go as an Accession to Normandy, where Robert the eldest Son
of William 1. was received, the English made the Younger Son King: And after
his Death, chose a third Son Henry, though Robert was still alive.

The Ritual of the Coronation of H. 1. to be seen in the Cotton Library, bound
up together with that of Ethelred's, agreeing with it in substance, instead of
purely Elected, has pre-elected; plainly relating to the Choice before the
Investiture: Which, indeed, is supposed in both the Rituals, in that part which
is entitled, The Designation of the Royal State; where the Kings are exhorted
to retain the State, which they had to that time: He procured a Settlement of
the Crown upon his Son William; and after the Death of him, and of another Son,
upon his Daughter Maud.

One Author indeed says, It was only, in case he died without Heir: Others say,
without Heir Male. Certain it is, that Stephen, Sisters Son to H. 1. being with
him in Normandy at his Death, made use of his Recommendation; which, together
with his own Merit, and the Consideration of his being of the Blood Royal,
induced the States to choose him. Nor had he any disturbance from Maud's
Pretense of Title, till he began to play the Tyrant. And though she was near
being Crowned, she refusing the main Preliminary, the Promise of maintaining
the Confessor's Laws, was rejected before she had been fully received, and ran
away in a Fright. Which made way for Stephen's remounting the Throne.

Then her Son Henry became an Adventurer for the Crown. But the Chief Forces on
both sides being English; and Stephen's brave Son Eustace his designed
Successor, dying, both submitted to the Umpirage of a Parliament, which
decreed, That Stephen should Reign as long as he lived, and Henry after him, as
Lawful Heir; That is, as the Charter then passed explains it, as Adopted Heir
to Stephen.

Upon the Death of Stephen, H. 2. was made K. who, to secure the Succession to
his Eldest Son, got him to be Crowned King in his own lifetime; which brought
great Troubles upon the indulgent Father: Though in the Oath of Allegiance sworn
to the Son, there was an express Salvo, not to prejudice what was due to the
Father, as long as he lived, and would exercise his Right. This Son died in the
Lifetime of his Father; who was succeeded by another Son Richard, who was
called no more than Duke of Normandy till Crowned. After him, the States chose
King John, as the Archbishop then expressly declared. And this they did, though
John had been attainted in the Lifetime of R. 1; and another Brother elder
than John had left a Son, Arthur, besides a Daughter. But their Father dying in
the lifetime of Richard, John had the Right of Proximity, Arthur only of
Representation.

John having broken the Original Contract with a witness, the Barons invited
over Lewis, the Dauphin of France, to be their King; whose Right to be chosen,
the French King's Advocate asserted, in that the Throne was become Vacant; that
upon that the Administration fell upon the Barons; who chose Lewis, upon the
account of his Wife, whose Mother was the only Survivor of all the King of
England's Brothers, and Sisters. Upon Lewis his Landing, great part of the
Nation joined his Arms against John: And in all probability Lewis had obtained
quiet Possession of the Throne, had he not discovered an Intention to treat the
English as Traitors against their Prince, in receiving him. This his Folly, and
Ingratitude, made the Barons desert him. And John dying in the Quarrel, they
chose Henry the Son of John; tho the Father's Violations of his Oath, and their
Rights, were fresh in their Memories. At that time Eleanor the Sister of Prince
Arthur was alive, and lived till the 20th of the Reign of Hen. 3. in the 17th
of whose Reign the Barons of the Kingdom, or they who believed they were able
to influence the Body of them, threatened, by a Common Council of the whole
Realm, to expel him and his Evil Counselors; and to consult together for the
creating a new King.

Henry dying while his Son Edward was absent in the Holy War, the States
convened and chose Edward; upon whom, as they declared, the Government was
devolved by Hereditary Succession, and the Will and Fidelity, or Submission, of
the Peers of the Kingdom.

E. 1. in the 25th of his Reign publicly begged Pardon of his People for his
Misgovernment; and being upon crossing the Seas, entreated them to receive him
again, if he should return; if not, that they would make his Son King after him.

He was succeeded by E. 2. who for his Misgovernment was set aside, and his Son
E. 3. chosen in his stead. Upon whose Death R. 2. came in, by virtue of a
Settlement upon him in Parliament, though the Right of Proximity was in John of
Gaunt, the eldest surviving Son of E. 3. R. 2. governing very arbitrarily, was,
about the middle of his Reign, fairly admonished by his Parliament, who told
him, That they had an ancient Statute, according to which they might abrogate
him, and set up some body near of kin, of the Royal Stock: But he taking no
warning by that, and the Example of E. 2. was deposed, and H. 4. Son of John of
Gaunt, received: In whose time the Crown was entailed by Authority of
Parliament. H. 5. came in under the Entail; yet it was thought a mighty Sign of
the Confidence the Nation had in him, that the Lords swore Fidelity to him
before he had taken his Coronation Oath.

His Son H. 6. being a weak Prince, was prevailed upon to advance Richard Duke
of York, till he was raised to a Competition for the Crown, which he pretended
to as Son to Ann, Daughter to Roger Mortimer, Son to Philippa, Daughter of
Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son of E. 3. and yet weighty Objections lay
against that Claim: For,

1. The Right of Proximity was in H. 6. as descended from the Eldest surviving
Son of E. 3.

2. There are ancient Authorities which tell us, That the Crown had been
entailed in the time of E. 3. upon Heirs Male.

3. The like Authorities say, That Philippa, under whom Richard Duke of York
claimed, was a Bastard.

However, notwithstanding Richard's Claim of Right, Hen. 6. was, by the States,
adjudg'd to hold the Kingdom during Life. And Richard dying, his Son put in for
the Crown, upon Suggestion, that Henry 6. had broken the Contract established
in Parliament, and was unfit to Reign. But though Hen. 6. ran away from London,
the chief Seat of Power, Edw. 4. was by his own Parliament accounted not to be
King, till some time after, when the States had received and crowned him: He
leaving his eldest Son an Infant, Richard the Uncle assumed the Government, as
Protector of the King and Kingdom; with what sort of Consent does not fully
appear: But a Convention assembling soon after, declare, among other things,
That the Children of Edw. 4. were Bastards; because, as they alleged, the
Father had been contracted to another before he married their Mother; and
pronounce, that Richard had the only Right to be chosen.

The Power and Cunning of Henry Duke of Richmond, who had many Blots in his
Escutcheon, caused him to be received so generally, that Richard made Head
against him with a very unequal Number: and dying in the Field of Battle, his
Body and Memory were left to be trampled on.

Henry 7. having first obtained a Settlement of the Crown, by Authority of
Parliament, upon himself and the Heirs of his Body, marries the Daughter and
supposed only surviving Child of Edw. 4. from which Marriage came Hen. 8. who
made several Settlements in Parliament: In two of which he declared, That if
the Limitations then made, should fail, the Kingdom would be destitute of a
Legal Governor. He dying, his Son Edw. 6. came in, according to his last
Settlement, as did E's Half Sister Mary, though she lay under an Illegitimation;
as did her Half Sister, and Successor, Queen Elizabeth of Immortal Memory. She
dying without Issue, James, descended from a Daughter of Hen. 7. married to the
King of Scots, was received as next Heir; though being a Foreigner, he could not
claim a Right of Descent; nor was within any Settlement then in force: And though
the Parliament 13 Elizab. had made it Penal to assert, That any but the Issue
of her Body had Right to succeed her. During whose Life, it was made Treason to
deny the Parliaments Power to dispose of the Crown, and Forfeiture of Goods and
Chattels afterward.

Not to mention the frequent Solicitations of Lords and Commons for her to
name a Successor for their Confirmation; because the Law had not determined who
ought to succeed.

Though the Parliament 1 Jac. 1. seem first to have set up the Divine Right of
Birth; by good Fortune they accounted it so Sacred, or would have the King
believe so; that they made no Settlement, only offered their Recognition to
him, as the first Fruit of their Loyalty and Faith to him, and his Royal
Progeny, and Posterity, for ever: which if it were a Settlement, would leave
the States at liberty to choose any one of his Progeny and Posterity. This is
the last Color of any Settlement of the Crown, before that which was made upon
their Present Majesty's, directly agreeing with the Recognition, 1 J. 1.

If what I have represented above be true, it must be granted, that no
reasonable Objection against the Authority to require an Oath of Abjuration,
and the Duty of the Subject to take one if required, can remain with Honest
Minds.

Since therefore it is not to be presumed that any considerable number of Men
would hold off, without being able to assign a Reason; till what I have shown
receive a clear Answer, it will be natural to conclude; Either that the Number
of Non-swearers in such a case would be few, or that their apparent Obstinacy
would make their Interest inconsiderable.

Since it has appeared, that the Author of the Case has very little observed
what has passed in our own Kingdom, it is no wonder that he should take no
notice of what has lately been done in the Kingdom of Scotland, without any
such dismal effect as he would pretend to foretell, if an Oath of Abjuration
should be required here, by Act of Parliament.

But whereas he affirms, that an Oath of Allegiance to the Possessors of the
Throne, Page 30.
is that which has secured our Government for many Hundreds of Years, and does
secure all other Governments in the World besides: This Form of an Assurance to
the present Government is required by an Act of Parliament in Scotland, to be
taken by all People in any Trust or Power throughout the Kingdom.

I A. B. do in the Sincerity of my Heart assert, acknowledge, and declare, Act
of Parliament published in Scotland, May 23. 1695.
That their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, are the only lawful
undoubted Sovereigns of this Realm, as well de jure, that is, of Right, King
and Queen; as de facto, that is, in the Possession and Exercise of the
Government. And therefore I do sincerely and faithfully promise and engage,
That I with Heart, and Hand, Life and Goods, maintain and defend their
Majesty's Title, and Government, against the late King James, and his
Adherents; and all other Enemies, who either by open or secret Attempts shall
disturb and disquiet their Majesty's, in the Possession and Exercise thereof.

Which Assurance being required to be given at the time of taking the Oath of
Allegiance, or Fidelity, is so manifest an Explanation in what sense the Oath
is taken; that any man who has given this Assurance, and yet should declare a
belief that the late King is the only Lawful Sovereign, might well be thought
not to scruple to swear to any Form of Words.

But I challenge our Considerer to show, that this Assurance, of the nature of
an Abjuration, has had any worse effect in Scotland, than the turning King
James's Friends out of Offices under their present Majesty's; and occasioning
the Preferments of Men, who are engaged in Interest, and Principle, to defend
that Government, the Right of which they have maintained from the beginning.

After all, I pretend not in any thing that I have written to give Measures to
an English Parliament; from which I cannot but expect, in due time, all things
for the good of England.

I have only represented the Arguments without doors, nor can it be a Fault for
a private Person to answer one who appears under no higher Character. Which of
us has labored most in the Service of the Present Government, it is not for
either to judge; Vide Case, p. 1. There are not two Men in England, that in
their Hearts do more sincerely love their present Majesty's, nor that according
to their poor Capacities and Stations serve them better than you and I.
but each best knows his own Sincerity: and happy is he who condemns not
himself in that which he approves.

APPENDIX.
THO, perhaps, I may be thought already to have dwelt too long upon Presidents
of Oaths to our Kings, besides the Common Law Oath of Fidelity: Yet I cannot
but think, that those Readers who are not conversant in the Rolls of
Parliament, may be gratified by a Transcript of the Entries, concerning Oaths
taken at two different Parliaments in the Reign of H. 6. Page 24. supra. I will
not trouble you with the instance of H. 6. etc.
when the Considerer supposes, that there was no occasion for more than the
usual Oath of Allegiance.

The 24th day of July, the 33d Year of our Sovereign Lord the King H. 6. Rot.
Parl. 33. H. n. 25.
at Westminster, in the great Council Chamger time of Parliament, in the
Presence of our said Sovereign Lord; the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in
showing their Troth, Feith, and Love that they have, and bore to his Highness,
every Lord Spiritual, laying his hand upon his Breast, and every Temporal Lord,
taking our said Sovereign Lord by the hand, freely swear, and promitted, in
Manner and Form that follows:

I promit unto your Highness, by the Feith and Troth I owe to God, and to you,
that I shall truly and faithfully keep the Leigeance that I owe unto you my
most Sovereign Lord. And to put in my Devoir to do all that may be to the
Welfare, Honor, and Safeguard of your most noble Person, and Royal Estate,
Pre-eminence, and Prerogative. And I shall at no time will or consent to that,
that might in any wise be, or sownd, to the Hurt or Prejudice of your said most
Noble Person, Dignity, Corone, or Estate. And over that, I shall with all my
Power resist, and withstand, all them that would in any wise presume to attempt
the contrary: So God me help, and his Seyntes.

Rot. Parl. 38. H. 6. n. 7.
After this Richard Duke of York had been declared Successor, after a Claim of
Right to the Possession; but having rebelled against H. 6. was attainted by Act
of Parliament, in the Rolls of which there is this Entry.

N. 26. Memorandum, That the XIth Day of December, the Year of the most noble
Reign of H. 6. our Sovereign Lord 38. a Cedule of a Form of an Oath was read in
the Kings High. Presence, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal being in the
Parliament Chamber at Coventre. And after the reading of the same Cedule, the
Bishop of Winchester, Chancellor of England, by the King's High Commandment,
made Question to every Lord in his Presence, by himself, that he would make
such Oath as was read in the same Cedule; and thereupon all the Lords, whose
Names been here underwritten with their own Hands, and their Seals put to these
Presents; first the Lord Stourton, and so every Lord in his Presence, and by
himself, agreed to make such Oath as was read: and then and there in the same
Chamber, in the Kings High Presence, all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
every of them, by himself, in his Person, made the said Oath upon the Holy
Evangelies, setting thereto his Seal and Sign Manual, as here under appears,
according to the Tenure of the foresaid Oath and Cedule: The Tenure of which
Oath and Cedule follows in these Words:

I A. B. knoulech you most high and mighty, and most Christian Prince King H.
6. to be my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, and rightwesh by Succession born to
reign upon me, and all your Liege People. Whereupon I voluntarily, without
Cohertion, promitte and oblysh me, by the Feith, Troth, and Liegeance that I
owe unto you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, that I shall be without any
variance true, faithful, humble and obeisaunt Subject and Leigeman unto you my
most redoubted Sovereign Lord: and that I shall be unto my lives end, and at
all times and places, ready and attending at your Calling, in my most herty wise
and manner, as any true Liegeman owes to be unto his Sovereign Lord: Putting
me in my true undelaid Devoir, to do all that may be unto the well and suerte
of your most Royal Person, of your most Royal Estate, and the very
Conservation and Continuance of your most high Authority, Pre-eminence, and
Prerogatife; to the well, suerte, and preserving, of the Person of the most
high and benign Princess Margaret the Queen, my Sovereign Lady; and of her
most high and noble Estate, she being your Wife. And also to the well, suerte,
and honor, of the Person of the right High and Mighty Prince, Edward, my
right redoubted Lord the Prince, your first begotten Son: and of the most high
and noble Estate of the same: and feithfully, truly, and obeysantly, in my most
humble wise and mannere, honor, serve, obey, and bore mine Aliegeaunce unto
you my most redoubted Sovereign Lord, during your Life: which God fader of
Mercy, for my most singular recomfort, preserve long in Prosperity to endure.
And if God of his infinite Power shall take you from this Transitory Life, me
bering Life here in this World, that then I shall take and accept my said
redoubted Lord the Prince Edward, your said first begotten Son, for my
Sovereign Lord, and bare my Troth, Feith, and Liegeance unto him, as my
Natural born Sovereign Lord, and after him unto his Succession of his Body
lawfully begotten. And in Defaute of his Succession, which God defend, unto any
other Succession of your Body lawfully coming. And that I shall never at any
time, for any manner occasion, color, affinitee, or causes, Consent, give Aid,
Assistance, or Favor, or agree, to any thing that I may understand or know by
any mean, that may be prejudicial, or contrary, to the Premises, or any of
them. But that I shall, as soon as I may so have the knowlech, put me in my
due undelaied Devoir, in my most herty and effectious wise and manner, without
color, and fayntis, with my body, Goods, Might, Power, Counsel, and
Advertisement, to resist, withstand, and subdue, all them that would in any
wise presume to do contrary to the Premises, or any of them: So God me help,
and these Holy Evangelists. In witness whereof I set to these Presents my Seal
and my Sign Manual.

Archbishop of Cant. Archbishop of York. Bishops 16. Abbots 13. Priors 2.
Barons 22.
Upon these memorable Entries I may observe,

1. If all the Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, and all the Lay Nobility, who took
the Oaths above, especially the last; at the same time believed the Right of
Succession, or other Right to the Crown, to be in any other Person than H. 6.
they were manifestly guilty of downright Perjury.

2. As it is to be presumed that they would not all forswear themselves; it is
to be concluded, that they believed H. 6. to have been rightfully by Succession
born to Reign; or, as is said of his Son, natural born Sovereign; and by
consequence, that his Right was founded upon the Act of Settlement 7 and 8 H.
4; or, at least, some way different from what our de facto-men go upon.

3. It is to be believed, either that the same Oaths were taken in the House of
Commons, though no Journals thereof are now to be found: Or else, that the Power
and Influence of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, was then held so great, that
no Attempt of the Commons to the contrary of what the Lords had sworn to
maintain, was in the least to be feared.

It must be confessed, that these Oaths did not long secure that unfortunate
Prince H. 6. But then,

1. He was one of neither Spirit, nor Ability, to use the advantage which he
had.

2. It cannot reasonably be imagined, that if the last Oath had been taken
throughout the Kingdom, E. 4. could have raised any Party to make Head against
H. 6.

3. However, E. 4. claimed a Right to be received for King, upon pretense that
H. 6. had broken the Contract established in Parliament, and was unfit to
Reign. Nor is it for me to hold, that any Oath can or ought to be a Security
when such a case happens.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.
THE Works of Fr. Rabelais, M. D. Or, the Lives, Heroic Deeds and Sayings of
Gargantuo and Pantagruel. Done out of French by Sir Tho. Urchart, Knight. and
others. With a large Account of the Life and Works of the Author; particularly
an Explanation of the most difficult Passages in them. Never before published
in any Language.

Bibliotheca Politica: Or, a Discourse by way of Dialogue, on these following
Questions: 1. Whether the Vote of the late Convention, wherein they declared
the Throne to be Vacant, can be justified from the Ancient Constitutions, and
Customs of this Kingdom. 2. Whether the said Conventions declaring King William
and Queen Mary to be Lawful and Rightful King and Queen of England, may be
justified by the said Constitution. 3. Whether the Act passed in the said
Convention after it became a Parliament, whereby Roman Catholic Princes are
debarred from succeeding to the Crown, was done according to Law. Collected out
of the best Authors, as well Ancient as Modern. Dialogue the Twelfth. Printed
for R. Baldwin, where may be had the First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth,
Sixth, Seventh, Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Dialogues.

A True Relation of the Wonderful Cure of Mary Maillard, (lame almost ever
since she was born) on Sunday the 26th of November, 1693. With the Affidavits
and Certificates of the Girl, and several other Credible and Worthy Persons,
who knew her both before and since her being Cured. To which is added, A Letter
from Dr. Welwood to the Right Honorable the Lady Mayoress, upon that Subject.

Mercury: Or, the Secret and Swift Messenger. Showing how a man may with
Privacy and Speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The
Second Edition. By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord
Bishop of Chester Printed for Richard Baldwin, where are to be had, The World
in the Moon; and Mathematical Magic.

An Essay concerning Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and the Duty of Subjects
in all Revolutions. With some Considerations touching the present Juncture of
Affairs.

A Compendious History of the Taxes of France, and of the Oppressive Method of
Raising of them.

An Impartial Enquiry into the Advantages and Losses that England has received
since the beginning of this present War with France.

The Four following Speeches made by the Right Honorable Henry, late Earl of
Warrington, viz.
1. His Speech upon his being Sworn Mayor at Chester in November, 1691. 2. His
Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13. 1692. 3. His Charge to the Grand
Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester on the 11th of
October. 1692. 4. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for
the County of Chester, on the 25th of April. 1693.

