The Christian PHYSICIAN.

By Henry Atherton. M. D.

Solus homo Sapientia instructus est ut Religionem solus intelligat, and haec
est hominis atque mutorum vel praecipua vel sola distantia. -- Lact. de Ira
Dei. LONDON, Printed by T. James for William Leach at the Crown in Cornhill.
1683.

TO THE Right Honorable Lord JOHN Earl of Radnor, Viscount Bodmin, Baron of
Truro, and Lord President of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.
My LORD,
WHen I at first drew out a Scheme of the ensuing Discourse, I had the Honor
of your Lordships Approbation and Encouragement to proceed upon those Topics,
which caused me to sequester the vacant hours I could steal from my other
occasions, that I might employ them on these Meditations; which having brought
to some perfection (and received the concurrent consent of a great Prelate of
this Realm, who gave himself the trouble to peruse them, and me the honor to
recommend them as worthy of public view) I could not in the least dispute to
whom I should dedicate them; for not only your Lordship's condescension at
first in advising, but indeed those many other Obligations which your Honor
has been pleased to lay upon me, most justly challenge them, and even the
greatest of my Services: Neither am I so fond to imagine that the offering of
these to your Lordship's Feet does cancel any former debt, but rather I cannot
but be sensible that if your Lordship design to patronize and shelter them from
the storms of the World, it will be infinitely increased; I shall have the
deeper score to pay, and the greater pardon to beg for this presumption.

But I doubt not but that your Lordships good nature runs parallel with your
other Virtues (of which the World is a copious Index) and therefore shall hope
to obtain it, together with your Honor's Acceptance of this small
Acknowledgment. That your Lordship may enjoy a long uninterrupted state of
Health, whereby you may be able to assist His Majesty in his great and
momentous Counsels, and (as your Honor has began) may continue to be a prop
and support to this our tottering Church, and at length go late into Heaven,
are the hearty Wishes and constant Prayers of

From Newcastle upon Tine, Nov. 2. 1682. Your Lordships most humbly Devoted
Servant Henry Atherton.

THE PREFACE.
THis our latter Age has so much degenerated from the Piety and Simplicity of
the Primitive Christians (which were the only marks by which they were
heretofore distinguished from the Heathen Nations) as not only not to own and
live up to those Principles of their Profession as Christians, but instead
thereof openly and avowedly to defend Irreligion and Hobbianism in their
Arguments, Atheism and Profaneness in their Lives, even worse than Heathens. To
be Sober and Religious, is now adays to be morose and ingentile, if not
hypocritical: To be loose and debauched, is the only modish thing. To be able
by Sophisms to baffle the Arguments of a well m^aning Christian, is taken for
the characteristick Note of Ingenuity, and a pregnant Wit. And on the contrary,
to use any perswasives to Religion and Piety, savours of nothing but stupidity
and folly. Which things considered, I cannot but foresee what bad
Entertainment this small Tract is like to meet withal abroad in the World,
especially among those who pretend to the most ripe Reason, and keenest Wit,
whose custom (indeed) it is to make this ill use of it, as to turn all sober
things into Ridicule or Railery, or else to dispute themselves out of their
Duty; which they will easily do, when they suffer their understandings to be so
frequently bribed by their vicious Inclinations. There are (I must confess)
many native defects in this Essay, and to these I fear will be added the severe
Censure of its being altogether impertinent; at least I cannot nationally
expect that it should be accepted by all, or (like the Manna) fit every Palate;
however let it try it is fate, it will fall into the hands of some serious and
pious persons, who may probably approve the de^^ign, if not like the work; and
I hope with such (whom I chiefly desire to gratify (it may meet with a candid
and favorable reception.

The Reader may find here (I must acknowledge) many Excerpta, and if I have not
done right to every Author, I desire him to charge it wholly upon the defect of
Memory, or want of inserting the Name in my common Place Book.

In my Second Section I have followed Cartesius (...), as judging his method
very Argumentative.

How it comes to pass that the scandal of Atheism (if it be now such) even to a
Proverb Ubi tres Medici duo Athei.
has been cast upon those of our Faculty, or whether there have been any just
grounds for it, I know not; but this I am sure of, that the knowledge of Second
Causes, and our frequent Converse with them, ought rather to give us the
clearer apprehensions of the First, and by how much the Subject on which we
continually employ our Minds and Studies, is more noble and sublime, so much
the more divine ought to be our Speculations; this good effect it had upon the
Royal Prophet, Psalm. 139.14. Who when his Meditations drew him to consider that
he was fearfully and wonderfully made, he presently breaks forth into Praises
unto Almighty God, and Acknowledgments of his mavelous Works. Neither want we
instances (to take off that general Infamy) of many Men truly pious in this
Profession. Even Hippocrates who flourished Four hundred ninety two years
before Christ, obtained the Title of Divine, and that Character in his life,
that he was Vir Sanctis Moribus: And to speak nothing of Galen, Averroes,
Avicen, and other Foreigners in this Art, in whom Piety and Morality has
eminently shined, we have lately had a more modern Hippocrates both of this Age
and Nation, who amongst other sweet Odours to perfume his Memory, has this,
that he was In toto Vitae statu Christianus. But what need I mention any more,
when St. Luke himself was both Physician and Evangelist at the same time.

If I may by this small Treatise either silence the obloquies of some, convince
others, or so far prevail with, or encourage any, as to lay aside their
unreasonable Opinions, and betake themselves to more religious and circumspect
Lives; I have my aim, and shall think my self sufficiently recompensed for my
weak labors: If they fail of this, I shall at least have that satisfaction in
my own Breast, that I designed them well.

ON THE Christian Physician Written by his Honored AND Very much Esteemed
Friend. Dr. HENRY ATHERTON, OF NEW CASTLE.
LEt now no more in Natures widest Round
Be such a Prodigy as Atheist found,
Much less let on our Learned Physicians be
Hereafter cast that blackest Obloquy.
Our good Physician having conquered
Diseases which to death our Bodies led,
Aspireth higher yet, and does oppose
Diseases more incurable than those.
If Precepts crowned with good Example be
Most cogent Arguments, then well may he
Such useful Counsels here for others frame,
Who has himself so strictly lived the same.
Here learn the Art of Alchymy Divine,
Whereby we may our Earthly Minds Sublime.
On Muses Helicon let us not stay,
Whilst to Mount Olivet he shows the way;
There to the sweets of Contemplation pure
Let us always our highborn Souls enure:
Thence let us freely draw some small fore-tast
Of the unmixt Joys that shall for ever last:
Which differing quite from all things here below;
Nor end, nor yet satiety shall know.
John Drake Bachelor of Physic.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction, Page. 1.
SECT. I.
Concerning God, and what he is, Page. 6.
SECT. II.
That the Existence of a God and a Providence in the World, is as clearly
demonstrable as any truth whatsoever, Page. 9. God's Existence proved from the
impression made on our very Natures, Page. 10. From the consent of all Ages,
Page. 11. (A Digression concerning the degeneracy of ours) Page. 12. From the
sense of Guilt, and secret Conviction of Men's Consciences, Page. 13. From the
uncertainty of Reasoning without the Concession, Page. 16. From the
impossibility of any thing to Exist from it self, Page. 17. From the Perfection
of the Creation, and from the necessity of an intelligent Spirit, for such
accurate Productions as we find in the World, Page. 18. From the exact Order
and Disposition of all Things to their designed and adequate ends, Page. 20.
SECT. III.
That the Existence of a Providence in the World being granted, all things must
be conserved and governed by it, and there is not the least inconsiderable
thing that may be said to be obnoxious to the senseless guidance of chance and
fortune, Page. 32. God's Providence and Gubernation not to be severed, Page.
33. The Opinion of the Stoics and Epicureans condemned, Page. 35. The Stars
and Planetary Bodies have no coactive influence upon Terrestrial Bodies, Page.
36. Neither were things made by the fortuitous concourse of Atoms, Page. 40.
God that made the World, still continues to take care of it, and even the
smallest things are adverted to by him, Page. 44.
SECT. IV.
That all Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, with what ever else, having in it
a Med^cinal Virtue, had it first impressed on them by that Supreme Being, which
was the first Author and Maker of them, Page. 47. Gods wonderful Providence in
providing suitabl^ Remedies for the Diseases of frail Mankind, Page. 48. The
ways of discovering their Virtues to us, Page. 50. We ought to praise God for
them, and to make use of them, Page. 54.
SECT. V.
That although God did at first give such a particular Virtue to each
particular Plant, Mineral and Animal, yet for certain providential Causes, they
may not always exert their natural Operations, and prove successful to their
desired end, Page. 55. God has an absolute Sovereignty over all things, and is
not tied up to any particular method, but may dispose of every thing as he
pleases, Ibid. Gods usual way of working, is by Natural Means, yet for several
Reasons, he may sometimes anticipate them, Page. 57.
SECT. VI.
That Gods usual way of working is by fit and appropriate means, and therefore
the Empirick or he that understands nothing of the true cause of the Disease,
and nature of the Medicine, is not to be trusted, Page. 60. All Medicines
naturally produce their genuine Effects, especially given by a skilful hand,
Page. 61. Natural means used by our Savior, and the Prophets, Page. 62. Two
sorts of persons condemned, the Empirick, who ignorantly ventures upon what he
understands not, and the Stoic who thinks an indispensable necessity of
Events, Page. 63, 68. The danger of confiding in the former, and the
unreasonableness of the latter, Page. 70. ^n case of necessity, we ought to
apply our selves to second means, Page. 72.
SECT. VII.
That a holy and virtuous Life is a necessary qualification for a Physician, in
order to the imbettering of his Judgment, and his good success in Practice,
Page. 73. Knowledge and Wisdom is acquired by Piety, and destroyed by Vice,
Page. 74. God secretly guides and directs the good Man, whose Prayers
cooperate with his Endeavors, Page. 77. The Conclusion by way of Advice to
the rest of my own Faculty, Page. 79. The knowledge of our selves the way to
acquire other, Ibid. We must own Gods Mercies, and not arrogate that praise to
our selves which is due only to God, Page. 82. This is the best course in point
of Prudence, Ibid. Rules for Physicians. Page. 83. 1. To begin with Prayer. 2.
To proceed with reason and judgment, and not try Experiments, except in extreme
Cases, where a known and tried Medicine proves unsucessful. 3. That they do not
promise Cure in uncertain and dangerous Diseases, and so flatter the Patient,
whereby the putting his House in order, and his preparation for death is
deferred, if not wholly frustrated, Page. 83, 84, 85. The Common Objections
against it answered, Page. 86. It is best whether the Patient be a good, or a
wicked Man. Page. 87. The Physicians Prayer, and Ejaculations, Page. 90, 92.
The Second Part.
DIrections how to spend every day in the fear o^ God, Page. 1^. Of a private
Fast, and Directions for it, Page. 19. Rules for a Religious Fast, Page. 27. A
Prayer for Grace, Page. 53. A Prayer of Intercession, Page. 55. The
Thanksgiving and Conclusion of the Work, Page. 64. Reasons why we ought to keep
a Narrative or Catalogue of our Sins, and the benefit of it, Page. 71. The
manner of keeping your Narrative, and a^ Exemplification of it in some sins,
Page. 77. Directions for Saturday, Page. 86. Directions for the Lords day,
Page. 89. Of the Holy Sacrament, Page. 103. Remote preparations for Death,
Page. 107. Of the Proximate Preparations for Sickness an^ Death, Page. 113.
Remedies against some particular Temptations of the Devil in the time of
Sickness, Page. 120. Of Meditation, Page. 126. The Thanksgiving after
Meditation, Page. 134. Divine Meditations.
Concerning Gods Omnipresence, Page. 136. Of the Mercy of God, Page. 142. Of
the certainty of Death and Judgment, Page. 151. Of Heaven and Hell, the Joys of
one, the Torments of the other, Page. 164. Reflections upon Hell, and the
Torments of it, Page. 173. Reflections upon Heaven, and the joys thereof, Page.
183. Job. 16.24 When a few years are come, then shall I go the way whence I
shall not return, Page. 186. Meditations before (or at) Dinner or Supper, Page.
203.
Occasional Meditations.
1. On the sight of a dying Friend, Page. 205. 2. Upon the sight of two Apple
Trees growing one by the other. The one tall and spreading, but having only
leaves, no fruit; the other low, but full laden, Page. 208. 3. Upon the sight
of a Wasp without a Sting, Page. 210. 4. Upon the sight of two Doves billing
each other, Page. 211. 5. Upon the sight of a Lady's Fingers bedecked with many
rich Diamonds of great value, Page. 212. 6. Upon the sight of many Millepedes
killed for a Medicine for my Patient, Page. 214. 7. Upon the sight of a Brass
piece of Money curiously gilded over, Page. 215. 8. Upon the finding an Adders
skin left behind in a strait passage, Page. 216. 9. Upon a Glowworm, Page.
217. 10. Upon a rotten Dunghill, Page. 218. 11. Upon seeing a Shepherds Dog
bringing in stray Sheep, Page. 219. 12. Upon the sight of a Ship cast away
within a little of the Port, Page. 220 13. Upon an Epileptick Person falling
into the fire, and being thereby cured of his Disease, Page. 222
Ejaculations for several Occasions.
For Pardon of Sin, Page. 224 For Grace, Page. 225 For the Light of Gods
Countenance, Page. 226. Thanksgiving, Page. 227. In the time of outward or
inward Trouble, Page. 228. Comfort in Troubles, Page. 229. Thanksgiving for
deliverance from Troubles, Page. 230. Going to the Church or House of God,
Page. 231. In Church, if thou happen to be there before Service begins, Page.
232. Returning from the Church, Page. 233. In the time of Sickness or approach
of Death, Page. 235. A Prayer for the Morning in private, Page. 241. A Prayer
for the Morning in public with thy Family, which with little variation may be
used also in private, Page. 246. A Prayer at Noon, Page. 253, 254. A Prayer for
the Evening in private, Page. 255. A Prayer in public with the Family for the
Evening, Page. 259. A Prayer for Sunday Morning in the Family; which with very
little variation, may be used by any single person in his Closet, Page. 269,
270. A Prayer for Sunday. Evening in the Family, Page. 278. A Preparatory for
Death, to be often used in the time of Health, Page. 283. A Prayer for
Sincerity out of The whole Duty of Mar, Page. 216 For Contrition, out of The
same Author, Page. 287. A Prayer to be used by any Pious Christian in these
difficult times, Page. 289.
The Close, Page. 293.
THE INTRODUCTION.
IT is not because there have been none, or so few, who have busied their
Brains and Pens about this Subject of Gods Existence, or that they had managed
their Arguments so faintly, and unwieldily, as that they stood in need of my
weak support, which made me first enter the Lists with the Atheist, and launch
my small Boat into this vast and deep Ocean: But indeed the true reason of it,
was, that having Meditated the ensuing Discourse, I found my self necessitated
to lay such a Foundation for it, as might prop and sustain the Superstructure,
to wit, The Existence of a Deity; which unless proved, or believed, the whole
Fabric must of necessity fall, and be buried in its own Ruins.

It is well enough known how many whole Books (not to say Volumes) are
dispersed up and down the World against Atheism; besides as if these were not
enough, and the Controversy should still remain undecided, almost every Sermon
speaks the Minister afraid of it: And indeed in my judgment, it were well, if
much of what has heretofore been written of this nature, or spoken from the
Pulpit, had proved Abortive or been stifled in the same Womb that first
produced it. For in the Primitive times of Christianity, Antiqua Sapientia
nihil aliud quam facienda, and vitanda praetepit: and tunc melioreserant viri.
Postquam docti prodierunt, boni desunt. Simplex enim illa and aperta virtus in
obscuram and solertem sciontiam versa est, docemurque disputare, non viavere.
Senec. ad Lucilium.
when the Precepts extended only to what was to be done, and what to be
avoided, Men were more purely and simply Religious, and every where better
Christians; but after that learning and subtle enquiring into critical things,
had gotten the upper hand of simple and barefaced Virtue, we became indeed
more cunning Disputants, but less pious Men. The Writings of Moses are by all
acknowledged to be the most Ancient in the World, and though the very design of
them were to prescribe Doctrines and Rules for Religion, yet there is nothing
found in them by way of proof or persuasion, concerning the Existence of God;
but it is a thing taken for granted, as being universally acknowledged and
believed; yea even in the most blind and superstitious Age of Greece, when A
theism was first heard of in the World, (being introduced by the Obscene Poets,
who debauched the minds of the People, to believe such monstrous things of
their Gods) the Authors of it became a derision to all intelligent Men, and
were stigmatized with the blackest marks of Infamy; nay they banished one of
their Philosophers (Diagoras) because he began a Book with such words as these,
As touching the Gods, whether there be any I know not, etc. But alas! we live
now in such a curious and inquisitive Age, when nothing but what is gross
enough to be discovered by our Senses, and what looks as certain as
Mathematical Demonstrations, will be received, and believed by us. We are grown
as great Scepticks in Divinity, as we are in Philosophy, and I am verily
persuaded that the great reason of it is owing to those many nice Controversies
and Disputes, which have been raised about it. And I cannot be induced to
believe otherwise, but that those very Arguments which have been made use of to
confute one Atheist, have made twenty; for the less curious and examining
(which certainly are far the greater number) seeing learned persons start so
many difficulties, and spend so much time and labor in the Argumentative part
to convince, do from thence conclude that the thing is at least dubious; and
then being willing to have it so, that they may go on uncontrolled in their
Luxuries and Sensualities, without any further Scrutiny will easily incline to
believe that it is as they wish. Quis volumus, facile credimus.
But has God left himself without Witness? Does not the whole Frame and
Compages of the World, it is Creation, and Conservation, sufficiently evidence
his Existence? And may I not say of this as Abraham of the Request of the Rich
Man? They have Moses and the Prophets, they have clear and ample Discoveries,
both from within and without, and if they believe not them, neither will they
believe though Men Write and Preach never so much of this Nature. I esteem it
therefore much better to wave many of those needless Disquisitions and
Discourses, which in ordinary Capacitres raise oftentimes more Doubts and
Scruples, than they can resolve and satisfy. Examples are commonly more
prevalent and persuasive than Disputes or Precepts; and it were to be wished
that we should rather refute the damnable opinion of an Atheist by a Holy and
God-like life, than by bandying so many nice and obscure Questions, which
create new Difficulties, and raise new Jealousies concerning that Holy Faith,
which the pious simplicity of the Primitive Christians received only to
practice. But lest the Arrow should revert upon my own Head, and some should
too justly accuse me for that which I condemn in others, I shall not entertain
my Reader with many Arguments on this Subject (which has already by better
Heads been so largely and learnedly discussed) nor yet pretend to the invention
of many new, but only cull out a few which seem to me most cogent and
convincing, and which have given me the greatest confirmation of my own Faithin
the Existence of a Deity.

SECTION I. Concerning God, and what he is.
IT was not without great Reason advised by the Wisest of Kings, that when we
had a mind to speak any thing before God, we should not be hasty to utter it;
and Aristotle teaches us, Nunquam nos-verecundiores esse debere, quam cum de
diis agitur.
That we never ought to be more modest, than when we have to do about God: and
there is no doubt but that when we speak not only before God, but of him, we
ought most seriously to weigh our thoughts and words, and with much caution
produce them, lest we should any way derogate from the Purity and Excellencies
of so transcendent Majesty. But when we have weighed and considered all that we
can of him, our Apprehensions are very narrow and scant, and our Notions of him
come infinitely short of his Divine Perfections: For as he is Invisible to the
Eye, so he is Incomprehensible to the Mind. Whatsoever we conceive it is but in
part: there is much more we cannot perceive nor comprehend. He is represented
to us a Spiritual and Incorporal Essence, and till we come to be unbodied our
selves, we cannot perfectly conceive what he is: so that we may conclude with
Aristotle: Hoc tantum scio me nihil scire.
This only we know, that we know nothing; or with a Diviner Authori Elihu. Job.
37.23.
Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out.

There is no question but those that duly Worship and Honor God, duly agnise,
and are acquainted with him: But if the Atheist (to whom the greatest part of
this Discourse is directed) should interrogate, Where is your God? Jovis omnia
plena.
And bid us Worship what we know; we answer, God fills every place, John 4.22.
and we know what we Worship, and that is the true God, whose Nature and
Infinity though we (who are but finite Creatures cannot sufficiently
comprehend; yet he is more cognoscible to us by his Perfections and Attributes,
than any other thing whatsoever.

Under the Notion therefore of a God, I understand a Being that is Eternal,
Omniscient, Omnipotent, the Fountain of all Goodness, Mercy, and Truth, the
Creator of all things; and finally that has in himself the Complement of all
Perfections. This is a Glympse, a general Notion that we now have of that most
glorious God we Revere and Adore. Job. 26.14.
We now hear of him but a little portion, says Job. We know but in part, 1
Cor. 13.12.
and see him but darkly (as through a Perspective Glass) in the Works of his
Creation; but hereafter, when this earthy Tabernacle of ours shall be
dismantled, We shall know him, as we are known, and see him face to face.

Our Eyes are now too weak to behold this dazzling Sun, but then they shall be
strenghened and enlightened, all mists dispelled, and we shall with Cherubims
and Seraphims admire its luster and bear our part to him in that Divine Anthem:
Revel. 4.11.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory and Honor, and Power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created. Let us
learn then hence this Corollary, That though God be invisible to the Eye, and
incomprehensible to the Mind, and (as Job says) We cannot find him out in his
perfection. Job. 11.7.
Let us lay by our Sense and Reason, and apprehend him now by Faith, that so we
may know him to our Salvation for ever.

SECT. II. That the Existence of a God, and a Providence in the World, is as
clearly demonstrable as any Truth whatsoever.
IT has been often disputed, if there ever were, and whether it is possible
there ever should be such a Prodigy in Nature as a Speculative Atheist, and it
has been generally carried in the Negative; and for my part I can hardly
believe that there is such a Monster in the World; for amongst the immense
number of Deities that remoter Nations have had, and their disagreeings what
Gods they ought to have, yet none were so wild and barbarous as totally to
renounce all.

Nulla gens est neque tam immansueta, neque tam fera, quae non etiamsi ignoret
qualem habere deum deceat, tamen habe^dum sciat. Cicero de Legib. lib. 1. And
again,

Nulla gens tam fera, nemo omnium tam sitim manis, cujus mentem non imbuerit
deorum opinio. Tusc. Qu. lib. 1. So Seneca,

Nulla gens usquam estadeo extra leges moresque projecta, ut non aliquos deos
credat. Epist. 118. In omnium animis deorum notionem impressit ipsa natura.

Nature it self has herein given Laws to the minds of Men. This is one of
those (...) common Notions, The Law written in our hearts: and were there an
Absolute impossibility to have this Notion ab Extra, yet it is too deeply
impressed there by the God of Nature, ever to be errased or obliterated.
Otherwise what can we think of those who have been born both Deaf and Dumb, and
understood nothing of any Character to be instructed by, yet will give manifest
Discoveries of their Apprehension of a God, by paying him (in their
unintelligible way) Homage and Adoration, and often prostrating themselves on
the Earth, with their Eyes and Hands lifted up toward Heaven, with the
greatest seriousness and reverence imaginable. This is a part of Piety St.
Basil says, we never learned, but brought with us into the World, (...).
as an impression made in us by the hand of Nature it self.

Men were heretofore so superstitious in the belief of a Deity, that they those
rather to err on the right hand, than the left, and would have too many, rather
then none at all. They would have a Deity for every thing, their Corn, and
their Wine, and their Cattle, and so that the Romans by that method had
multiplied their Gods to above Thirty thousand, and other Nations came not much
behind them: But alas! our Age pretends to more light, and indeed I think only
too much has dazzled our Eyes, that we cannot see as far as the Wisest
Heathens. Non praestat fides quod praestat infidelitas.
Even Fabricius, Cato, and Regulus, will upbraid and shame many of us, who call
our selves Christians. Heretofore only a few poor Indians, Inhabitants of
Soldania in Afric, and Cannibals of Ammerica; or single persons, as Diagoras,
Milesius, Protagoras, Abderites, Lucian, and no number, much less Societies of
Men, ever denied a Deity; but now we need not go so far as those dark and
barbarous Corners of the World, to search for such Monsters as these (who
differ but little from the very Brutes) we may find them much nearer home in
Europe, as well as America, in England as well as Soldania; yea in the cleerest
times of Light and greatest Knowledge; when Reason seems to be exalted to its
(...), highest pitch, yet like the Moon at full, by a strange kind of
interposition of our sensual and brutish Appetites, suffers the greatest
Eclypse; and all the use it seems to serve us for, is to make us only more
ignorant, and less pious. For how do Men now a days, strain their Reason (shall
I call it) or Curiosity rather, to so high a peg, endeavoring to find out
hidden and abstruse Mysteries, such as God has not revealed, and he thought
fit we should be ignorant of. How curious and inquisitive are they to find out
how the World was made according to the Rules of Philosophy, and how it is
still upheld by the same natural Causes? And they proceed so far, till at
length they lose both their Hypothesis and Reason too; and because they cannot
find how these things should Physically be, will thence conclude they are not
at all. The Fool has laid aside all his Modesty that he had in the days of the
Royal Prophet; then he dared not to make his Tongue the Index of his Mind, and
prate of his Folly, but only tacitly in his heart said there is no God; but now
alas he out-braves the Sun at Noon day! and not only his heart, but his lips
(which should show forth God's praise) are become the Trumpets of his wicked
Thoughts: he dares boldly proclaim the No-being of Him, who gave to him and all
things else a Being, and thinks it a certain badg of Gentility, and the mark of
a pregnant, polite wit, so to do: But whether these brave Gallants think as
they say, will be no hard matter to determine; for certainly though they may be
so bold as to utter it with their lips, yet they cannot (with all their skill)
disband their own fears, lest it should be otherwise, (...).
no more than they can run away from their guilty Consciences, nor yet quiet or
satisfy their guilty Souls: Otherwise what mean these secret Stings and Racks
of Conscience? That horror of Mind, and paleness of Countenance? Those
distracted, and (many times) desponding thoughts, when seized with a fit of
some sharp Disease, and the apprehensions of their approaching death?

-- Quos diri consciafacti
Men's habet attonitos, and sur do verbere caedit.
Occultum quatiente animo, tortore flagellum. Juvenal. 13. Satyr.
Epicurus himself, though he seemed to disown a Deity, yet confesses he feared
nothing more than Death and the Gods. One clap of Thunder shall force Caligula
to run under his Bed, and even the rough and stubborn Mariners in a Storm,
will cry every one unto his God. The Satyrist of old observed it of such.

Hi sunt qui trepidant, and ad omnia fulgura pallent.

God has imprinted a fear of punishment in the very hearts of Men, which upon
the Commission of any great Sin, dogs them with secret pangs and horrors; and
though like the Wounded Deer they run every where to disentangle themselves,
Haeretlateri Laethalis arundo.
yet still the Arrow sticks fast. Though they love not God, yet they have a
flavish fear of him, and are forced with Juvenal to confess,

Esse aliquos manes, and subterranea Regna.

That there are some tormenting Spirits and a Kingdom of darkness. The Prophet
Isaiah excellently describes them, Isaiah 48.22. The wicked is like the
troubled Sea when it cannot r^st, whose Waters cast up mire and dirt. There is
no peace says my God to the Wicked. So that the Psalmist's Axiom is
undeniable, Psalm. 58.11. Doubtless there is a God that judges in the Earth.

But lest these stout Hectors should still maugre all the impressions of
Nature, and convictions of Conscience (which they endeavor (as much as in them
lies) to stifle and silence) continue to persist in those most Irrational and
Atheistical Tenets, let them (laying aside all prejudicate thoughts) consider
with me the subsequent Reasons, endeavoring to evince, That the Existence of a
God, and a Providence in the World, is as clearly demonstrable as any Truth
whatsoever.

The greatest Physical certainty that it is possible for any Man to have, is
from Mathematical Demonstrations, as, That every whole is greater than its
part: that of a Triangle its three Angles are equal to two right Angles: that
if you add equal to equals, the result will be equal, etc. These Axioms, I say,
are as undeniable, and as certain as any we can speak of; now that the Being of
God is as certain as any, or all of these, will appear hence. As first of all,
without this Concession of a Deity, all things that are the Objects of Sense,
may quite delude, and impose upon our understandings, Carts. Princ. lib. 1.
yea we cannot be assured of Mathematical Demonstrations themselves, or any
thing else that seems cleerest and truest to our judgments and apprehensions,
and we may be still in a Dream, and not discover whether these things seemingly
so demonstrable, are really true, or barely Phantasms, Chimaera's, and the
results of our giddy Fancies; for I must be first ascertained of the
infallibillity of my Senses, before I conclude that things represented to me by
them are true, and this it is impossible for me to be assured of, before I have
the knowledge of a Divine Existence. But when I seriously consider, and am
assured that there is a God, and that his chiefest Attribute is Truth, (which
has a direct Repugnancy to Deception and Error) and that He will not, cannot
therefore impose upon, and delude my Senses: Hence is it, that I infer the
reality of them, and thence conclude, that all things that are truly
represented to my Senses, are indeed so as they are represented; because God
never obtrudes Falsities upon us, under the pretext of Truth: Neither does it
at all invalidate this Argument, to assert that we are often deceived, because
that the Deception proceeds not from the Understanding, but from our Will, when
we too rashly consent to things not clearly and distinctly understood.
Therefore all Mathematical Truths are not to be suspected, and the Existence of
the Divinity, no more, (nay less) to be doubted of than them.

Next of all, it is plain and obvious, even to the lowest Capacity, yea known
by the dim light of Nature, that what at first had a beginning, did not derive
its being from it self, but that there must be some super-intended Cause, on
which (in respect of their Substance) all other things do depend, and which
must have in it the Complement of all Perfections; and that can be no less than
a Ray of Divinity, or rather God himself.

How perfect is every part of the Creation? (Who can tell where any thing is
superfluous, or any thing deficient?) And the more perfect cannot be produced
from that which is less perfect, as by its efficient and total Cause. Therefore
seeing such Beauties and Perfections as we discover in the World, and have
Idea's of, we cannot find to be in our selves; we may from thence rightly, and
on good grounds, conclude to be in some thing distinct from us, and that is
more perfect than our selves, namely, in God.

All the Pulchritude and Perfection of an Effect, ought to be contained in the
Cause, (for the Cause cannot give that to the Effect, which it self enjoys
not) wherefore all the Perfection of living Creatures ought to be comprehended
in that Cause.

If any thing could pretend to be the Author of its own Original, it must
certainly be Man; Man which is the Epitome and Perfection of all Sublunary
Beings; but He, alas! owes even his own being to another; and for his first
Production, stands in need of such a preparation of Matter, and concourse of
Causes, that it is many times a greater Wonder that He is, than that He is not;
and being born, stands in need of so many Second Causes, Helps and
Furtherances, that he may live, and at length dies and expires with so much
facility, that he has very little cause to boast of his own Perfections. A man
may sooner believe that there is no such Man as himself, than that there is no
Author of his being, no God, for himself can cease to be, and once was not, and
shall again be changed from what he is, and in very many Periods of his Life,
knows not that he is, (and so it is every Night with him when he sleeps) but
none of these can happen unto God, who is the same Yesterday, too Day, and for
ever. When we see a Clock or some curious Piece of Art, we presently enquire
after the Artificer, concluding it not to be its own Production: And although
we Finite Creatures cannot well comprehend what those Infinite Perfections of
God are, yet we can more plainly and clearly understand them, than any
Corporeal things; because they are better adapted to, and more fill our
Cogitations, and are more simple, not obscured by any limitations at all.

The Existence of a Deity, being ^evinced from those Principles that are
Interwoven in the very make of our Natures, from the Universal Consent of all
Ages and Nations, from the Uncertainness of our Reasoning without the
Concession, and the Necessity of an Intelligent Spirit, or Incorporeal Being,
for such Acurate Productions as we find in the World: It may in the next place
be further Illustrated from the exact Symmetry, Order, and Disposition of all
things in the World, with respect to their several Ends.

Esse praestantem aliquam naturam, and eam suspiciendam adorandamque hominum
generi, pulchritudo mundi, ordoque rerum coelestium cogit confiteri. Cicero de
Divin. lib. 2.

So great was the Foreknowledge and Providence of God, and so boundless his
Mercy and Goodness, that as the one plainly (upon the first Intuition)
discovered him the end; so the other most readily designed the means, and
laying aside obstinate perverse Man, there is nothing in the whole Frame of the
Universe that does not answer the end of its Creation.

If we consider the greatest Luminary of Heaven, the Sun, whose Luster is such,
as that it transcends all visible things, yet it is not made for it self, nor
can it apprehend, or reflect upon its own beauty, but is made for the good and
benefit of others; and how does it answer its assigned End, in that it conveys
Light not only to the whole World, (communicating to every Nation sometime or
other an equal share of its bounteous Influence) but also to the Inferior
Orbs, as the Moon, Planets, etc. and in that it warms and enlightens the Air,
which of its self is cold and dark; and in that it exhales Fumes from the
Earth, and Vapors from the Water, which again distill in gentle Dews, Rain, or
Snow, to refresh the dry and thirsty Earth: Whence proceed the Maturation of
Fruits, Grass, Herbs, and Trees, for the use of Man.

Consider also the Winds, how they serve their designed End, by ventilating and
fanning the Air, and keeping it from Putrefaction, which would otherwise
produce Plagues and noisome Diseases; by carrying the Clouds, and distributing
them to several Countries and Regions, and without them the Mediterranean
Places, and such as are remote from the Sea, would be ever destitute of Clouds
and Showrs; and scorcht with heat: These also serve the great end of
Navigation, by which we entertain Commerce and Traffic with all the habitable
Places of the World; and to show the Extensive Munificence of the Donor, they
are not always consined to one and the same Point, but are by turns liberal to
all, and sometimes one, sometimes another enjoys the Benefit of them, as their
Occasions require, or God sees it fit.

In like manner how does the vast Body of the Earth answer the wonderful ends
of its Creation? If we consider the upper Superficies of it, how is it made a
fit Receptacle for Men and Beasts, Birds, and feathered Fowls, Worms, Flies,
Insects, and living Creatures innumerable to dwell therein? and how does its
bountiful hand supply out of its rich Storehouse, what is convenient for the
maintenance and support of all its Offspring? sending forth Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, Plenty and Superfluity; Herbs for Food and Medicine for Man, Grass for
Fodder and Use of Cattle and Beasts: Flowers for Variety, Color, and Smell;
Trees for Shade, Timber, and Fruit, and Seeds to perpetuate and preserve every
Species; together with a multitude of other things, which conspire together,
for the preservation of its numerous Issue: and yet there is such an exact
Order and Harmony between all these, that neither of them interferes with the
other, but every Individual combines for the benefit of the Whole.

On this Spot of Earth are high Hills, which serve to curb the violence of the
Winds, to bound Kingdoms and Places; to furnish Stones for Buildings: to be a
Refuge for the wild Beasts; and to stand as so many Bulwarks to defend us from
our Enemies. On that Spot of Earth are the low Valleys, which not only afford
us Pleasure and Delight to the Eye, but abundant Profit to the Hand, and no
less Joy to the Heart. These are thickly laden with variety of Corn, and every
Ear is so proud of its Burden, that it seems to laugh and sing. Here are places
for Pasture and Fodder, green Herbs, and more fragrant Flowers; Things
pleasant, profitable, and useful. Here are Woods for Shelter, Firing, and
Timber, there are Crystal streams to water the Furrows and pleasant Meadows,
and to give Drink unto the Cattle.

Every Field has (as it were) a Monopoly of its own, and claims Privilege and
Prescription, for one Plant or other. In this grows the Cowstip, and Herba
Paris; In the next, the Poppey and the Violet; In the third, the Pearly Ros
Solis, and Royal Osmund; every Soil has its peculiar Faecundity.

Hic segetes, illic veniunt foelicius uvae:
Arborei foetus alibi, atque injussa virescunt
Gramina: Nonne vides croceos ut Tmolus odores,
India mittit Ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei?
It is admirable to consider, that God has not disposed all these in their
sundry places, without Discrimination, or particular Reasons for it, but where
the greatest needs of the Inhabitants, or Climate require it. Thus we see
Remedies planted there, where the Diseases are most popular, and every Country
is best provided against its own Evils. The Rhubarb is found where the Sun most
parches the Blood, and where Choler does most abound. The Rhenish Grape grows
plentifully on the Banks of the Rhine, where the Inhabitants are most obnoxious
to the Stone; and the Scurvey-grass is most luxuriant in the Maritine Places,
where the Scurvey is most predominant, etc.

If from the outer Surface of the Earth, we descend into its Bowels; we may
find that also to be not an useless Mass, but a safe Repository for the most
rich and precious Things: Here lie not only the Coal, the Stone, and the
Marble, the Jett, and the Adamant, but the rich Diamond, the glittering
Sapphire, the shining Chrysolite, the purple Hyacinth, and the noblest Gold; all
which have their particular uses and ends, either in Medicine, Merchandise, or
Conveniences for Man, and therefore made by some Supreme and most Intelligent
Spirit, who first conceived in him all those Ends, and considered aforehand
all those Means suitable to those Ends. Not to mention other living Creatures,
or the very Make and Frame of their Bodies, with respect to their several ends;
the Strength and Sinews of one, the Swiftness of another; the Tameness of one,
and the Teachableness of another: God's Providence in providing for them
Natural Armor and Weapons, Subtilty, Shelter, or Innocence, to defend
themselves against those that assault them, and preparing their Clothing; which
because they are not able to procure new, they receive that at first from a
Divine and Benign Providence, which needs no repairing.

Let us now convert our Eyes from the great to the little World, Man, and there
view, and consider the Excellent, (I had almost said, Divine) Structure of his
Body; the exact Symmetry of each Part, with reference to its End: And here I am
at a loss where to begin; Every, yea even the most Minute Part, if we consider
its Make and Ends, calls for nothing but Wonder and Admiration, and well may we
with holy David cry out, Psalm. 139.14. I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
The Consideration of which has made some affirm, that it was an impossible
thing for an Anatomist, or one that pryed into the many secret Recesses of the
Body, ever to become an Atheist. Demetrius when he had taken Rhodes, though he
exposed the City to Fire and Sword, yet preserved the Image of Protogenes, as
some Sacred Things, and placed it amongst his greatest Rarities, that he had
rescued from the Flames, for no other end, then that he might have always by
him the greatest and best Compendium of the Works of God, the (...) and
Lineament of the Body of a Man. It Is Frame, as it is worthy of its Artificer,
so it plainly shows, that nothing but what is Divine, could produce so
beautiful, so useful a Subject, whose Exactness is such, that if the Wisdom of
all men living were Concentred in one, it could not find out any one part which
needs correcting or amendment.

Not to mention the outer Cark^et, which is obvious to every Man's Eye, and
only a Covert to hide the more precious Pearls contained within: To pass by the
Excellent Proportions and Dimensions of ^is Body, made exactly to Quadrate with
each other, and adapted to those Uses to which they are Employed: To say
nothing of the Incomparable, nay Divine Features of his Face, and the
Exquisiteness of all his Senses; how admirable is it to consider that among the
(almost) innumerable Vessels and Parts of the Body within, there is not one but
has its particular Use; neither does that interfere with any other, or
intermeddle with his Province, (except it be sometimes to do his Neighbor a
friendly Office, when it is not able to help its self.) Thus is the Stomach
made for Concoction of Meats; the Intestines for the Expulsion of their useless
and unprofitable parts: The Lacteals for the reception of the Chyle, or more
Pure and refined Ones: The Chyliferous Vessels for conveying it into the mass
of Blood: The Blood for Sanguification and Assimilation of them: The Lungs for
Respiration, and Perpetuating the Motion of the Blood: The Heart for
transmitting it to the Brain, and other parts of the Body; and the Brain again
in requital, sends back Spirits to continue its motion: The Liver is made for
the secretion of Bile, or Choler: The Spleen for separation of the more earthy
and melancholy faeculencies of the Blood: The Kidneys for percolation of ^he
Serous parts of it for Urine: The Arteries for carrying the Blood out from the
Heart, to invigorate, warm, and nourish every part of the Body: The Veins for
reducing it again to its Source and Fountain, for a new Recruit of Heat and
Spirits: The Lymphaeducts for keeping a thin Humor to dilute and moderate the
Inordinancies of the Blood: The Nerves for conveying nutritive Juice and
Spirits to all parts; and the Muscles for all motions of the Body: And I dare
challenge the most exact Anatomist, to show me amongst that Vast and Infinite
number of Vessels that are in the Body of a Man, where there is any one
superfluous, or any defective. If any should reply, that some Creatures have
lived without some of their principal parts, (as a Dog will without a Spleen:)
I answer, that this does not enervate the Assertion, because tho they may make
a hard shift (...) vivere, to live, yet they want the (...) been vivendi, they
cannot live so comfortably as they might have done, had they not been deprived
of those parts; for all conspire together for the benefit and preservation of
the whole: Like sundry Artificers upon a fair Building, every one about his
particular Office and Employ, and yet all are Coadjutors toward the erecting,
or securing of that goodly Pile. The Sensitive Faculties are sublimed to a much
higher pitch, and may elevate our Minds to a higher Degree of Admiration. Who
cannot but wonder at the Swiftness of the sensible Species, posting to the
Sense, and the quickness and readiness of the Sense to receive it? Here you may
see a vast Mountain contracted into a small Model, and dwelling in the Angle
and Corner of the Eye: who cannot but admire the faithfulness of the Sensitive
Organs, in transmitting their respective Species, to the common Sensorium, as
into some Common-Council-house, where the busy Imagination joins and compounds
them together and reads a Lecture to the Appetite, to prove its assent, or
dissent; and no soone^ is the Appetite awakened, but the Loco-motive Faculty (a
most obedient Servant) puts the Decree in Execution, and is ready to prosecute
that Good. or fly that Evil, as the Affection shall dispose unto.

Therefore seeing that all Things proceed so Regularly to some certain and
adaequate End, and that the Thing themselves compounded only of blin^ and
unguided Matter, cannot fore-se^ and perceive their Ends by which they might
attain them; nothing is more manifest, than that they are directed by some
Superior Hand or Power, which could see and consider those Ends aforehand, to
which each particular Thing was designed; like a Clock, whose End it is to
distinguish the Hours of the Day, which because it knows not the End to which
it was designed, cannot dispose it self to that End; therefore it ought
necessarily to be directed by some understanding Mind, which knows these
Things, and can make Distinction of Hours. So that we may well conclude, that,
Opus Naturae est opus Intelligentiae, that those most Excellent Perfections of
Nature could be produced by no other than some Supreme Being, which is God
Himself. Materiam supernavit Opus.

SECT. III. That the Existence of a Providence in the World, being granted, all
Things must be Conserved and Governed by it, and there is not the least
inconsiderable Thing, that may be said to be Obnoxious to the senseless guidance
of Chance and Fortune.
FRom the Concession of the former Proposition, this seems as immediately and
naturally to result, as Light from the Sun, Fluidity from Water, and the
Streams from their Source and Fountain: Se mut uo ponunt and tollunt. So that
owning the one, the other will necessarily follow; like Hypocrates's Twins,
they live and die together: The taking away either of these undermines
Christianity, and saps the very Foundation of Religion. To assert that you saw
an Invisible Color, heard Music without a Sound, or felt a Body without the
Organs of Touch, were a Soloecism no less pardonable in Nature, than the
Separation of God's Providence and Conservation, from himself, is in Divinity.
All the Works of the Creation were the Product of God Almighty's Power, but
that of his Conservation pertains chiefly to his Providence; by that he
Commands and Governs all Things under the vast Canopy of Heaven, and makes them
presently subscribe to the Dictates of his Will and Pleasure: By this he
disposes all, even the most minute Things in this great Fabric of the
Universe, (...), according to his good Pleasure and Wisdom; neither is there
any thing can pretend Exemption from his Guidance and Direction.

Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.

Was true only of the Pagan Jupiter, not of the Great God Jehovah, whose Care
and Providence runs parallel with his Power and Omnisciency; and who can as
well, and as easily take Cognizance of the smallest, as of the greater
Transactions here below: And though Man be the Masterpiece of the whole
Creation, and constituted Lord of all Created Beings beneath him, yet the most
inconsiderable Animal or Infect, was made by the same Fiat, or Word of his
Power, and is no less the Object of his Care, than the mightiest Monarch in the
World. It is true, that Man bearing on his better part, the Soul, the Stamp and
Effigies of his Maker, has ever been so great a Favorite in Heaven's Court,
as to have the greatest Blessings and Dignities conferred upon him; but
certainly there is not the most abject Creature, nor lifeless Plant, nor
despised Mineral, but challenge a share in his Care and Providence: Nay I may
in some sense aver, that there may be more of Gods care manifested in the
Conservation of the Species of a small Insect or Animal, than in those greater
Works of Nature; for by how much the more weak and puny any thing is, so much
the more Care and Industry is required to its preservation: It Is not the
Magnitude of the Piece that commends the Artificer; there was more Art shown in
the small Fly of Regio montanus, than in the Mold of his great bodied Eagle:
There is more Skill, Chemistry and Mathematics, in one single Be, than in the
whole Republic of Elephants and Dromedaries. How soon would the whole System
and Compages of the World be reduced to its primitive Chaos and Nothing,
without a Moderator and Conservor? And not unlike our Body Politic in the late
Times of Rebellion (without an Head) be quickly turned into Anarchy and
Confusion. Idem est conservare ac creare; To continue a Thing in its first
Perfections, requires as much Power and Skill as first to make it; to preserve
it from rushing into Nothing, and to make it out of Nothing, are equally the
Results of a Divine Power: Hence is it that the Schools tell us, that Creation
and Conservation are but one continued Act.

Our next Assertion is, That those Sublunary Things are not Disposed or
Governed by any Thing else, but Providence, or (if you will) by the immediate
Hand of God. There are two Opinions which seem to invalidate the Strength of
this Position; The first is that of the Stoics, who endeavor to exclude this
Providence of God; saying, That God does Govern Heavenly Things by Himself, but
all Sub-caelestial Bodies by the inevitable Influences of the Planets. The next
is that of Epicurus and his Followers; Scil. That all things happen by the
Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, or by Chance.

As to the former, That the Starry Influences do not inevitably and fatally
determine things, is evident, since even they themselves are guided and
governed by an Overruling Hand, according to that of the Poet; Astra regunt
Homines, sed Deus Astraregit.

Quid potest esse tam apertum, tamque perspicuum, cum Caelum suspeximus,
caelestiaque contemplati sumus, quam aliquod esse numen praestantissimae
mentis, quo haec regantur. Cicero de Nature. Deorum, lib. 2.

So that what is in the Power of another, cannot be said to be Sui Juris, and
can only act Secondarily as a Delegate or Substitute to the Supreme; and what
is done must be only by a Permissive, not Coactive Power. Thus indeed may those
Heavenly Bodies dispose and incline, not in the least force and constrain:
Sometimes, as in the Civil Government of a Nation, the Supreme Power, or King,
acts by his inferior Deputies and Magistrates; and what is done by them, is
said to be done by the King himself, because done by his Order or Command; so
here the great Legislator, God Himself, may make use of those Planetary Bodies
(as his Delegates) to exert some particular Operations upon Sublunary and
Elementary Things: (For as St. Austin observes, Deus regit inferiora per
superiora.) But yet they are still accountable to their first Lawgiver, and
cannot transgress, or go beyond those Limits set unto them. It is confessed
that Second Causes do concur, but it is only in subordination to God, who is
the First: and those who look no higher than the Influence of the Sun,
Configuration of the Stars, the Changes of the Moon, and the like, deserve
nothing but disappointment. Besides, I think it will be no difficult matter to
show that the Planets cannot have that Power and Influence as is pretended; for
if you consider that wild Rapid Motion of the Heavens, which Ptolomy ascribes
to them, which is many thousand times swifter than a Bullet shot out of a Gun;
can we rationally suppose but that it must needs alter the Respects of the
Planets, not only every moment, but (if it were possible to conceive) every
hundredth part of a Thought next, it might be thus argued; If these had any
such Influence upon Terrestrial Bodies, a thousand years since, now they have
not, nor can have the same, according to our acception. The Consequence seems
valid enough, if you consider that Aries, Taw us, Gemini, and the rest, by
their periodical and private Motions (from West to East) have now changed their
places by thirty Degrees, and cannot have the same Positions and Aspects as
formerly; for Aries is gotten into the place of Taurus, and Taurus into the
place of Gemini, and Gemini into the place of Cancer; and yet we still take our
Calculations as before: and what we take for Aries, is indeed Pisces, and what
we take for Pisces, is Aquarius, and so on. To these give me leave to add, that
for the most part, those Observations made by the most exact Astrologers, are
found to be very deceivable and false; and if at any time they do^ hit right,
(as who may not sometimes?) they are more beholding to their good Luck, than
their Art for it. Thus we see many times that those that are bor^ under Mars,
are disposed as if born under Venus; and those born under Mercury, are disposed
as those born under Saturn, and so Vice versa: And we se^ that even Twins born
vel eodem enixu, at one and the same Birth, dissent oftentimes in the whole
course of their Life and Actions. Proclus and Euristhenes, Twins, and Kings of
Lacedemonia, were both in the end, and whole course of their life, most
contrary. Amphion and Zethus, though they began with some agreement, (for they
were both Expositi) yet in the whole course of their Lives, they were as
dissenting, as a gentle Philosopher, and an harsh Clown. Horace observed the
difference in his first Book of Epistles, Epist. 18. Gratia sic fratrum
geminorum Amphionis atque Zethi dissiluit. -- And so Propertius 3. Eleg. 15.6.
Et durum Zethum, and lachrymis Amphiona mollem,
Experta est stabulis matter abacta suis.


To say no more, we have the Example of Jacob and Esau, who were as different
in Disposition, Manners, Course of Life, and End, as if all Heaven had been
altered in their Births: So then let not men be so presumptuously injurious to
God's Providence, as to ascribe that to the Influence of those Heavenly Bodies,
which is due only to God himself.

The next Assertion is, That all things happen by the Fortuitous Concourse of
Atoms, or by Chance, which is all one.

Sunt qui in Fortunae jam casibus omnia ponunt,
Et nullo credunt Mundum rectore moveri,
Nrtura volvente vices, and lucis and anni.
This Tenet was anciently of Epicurus, and one should think that in the
Christian part of the World, and in a time of so much Light, and Pretensions to
Reason, his Schools should be thin at such Lectures: But alas! it suits too
well with the humors of loose and dissolute men to recede from ir; they hug
and cherish it, and as long as they retain their Vices, Epicurus cannot want
Disciples to foster and foment it. But can any man be so insensible and devoid
of that Reason, which alone differences him from a Brute, to imagine that this
Stupendous Fabric of Heaven and Earth, was made only by a happy chance or
hit, by the accidental Unition of some Particles of Matter? When all the Skill
of Art is not able so much as to make the poorest and most contemptible Fly, to
observe rare Effects, and no Cause; to see an Excellent Government, and no
Governor; a Motion without a Moveable; a Circle without a Center; a Second
without a First; a Thing that begins not from it self: And therefore to say,
that there is nothing from whence it took its beginning, are things so
repugnant to Philosophy and Natural Reason, that he must needs be more than a
Beast in his Understanding, that does not assent unto them; for what does he
but in effect say, The Thing that is made, is, and the Thing which made it, is
not. What can be more incongruous to Reason, or more unworthy of an Intelligent
Being, than to suppose that the World which is made with a Principle of the
greatest Reason, should have such a Principle induced by any Chance, or the
casual Concourse of Atoms? Unless by some way or other, they had had such a
Principle inherent in themselves before; ( For nothing can transfer that to
another, which it has not in its self:) And if Epicurus his Atoms had been
rational Atoms, they would never have done any thing by Chance, because they
had a Superior Principle to do it by; as the worthily honored Sir CHARLES
WOLSELEY has observed. Besides if the Fortuitous Concourse of these Atoms
could produce the World, it might next be demanded, Who first made these Atoms?
It would (no doubt) be a very rare Spectacle to behold the Materials for an
House, as Stones, Lime, Beams, Rafters, and the like Perquisites for Building,
blown from the Four Quarters of the Earth, and jump together into the Form of a
stately Edifice: Or to see a Vessel built, rigged and trimmed for a Voyage at
Sea, only by the casual Concourse of Plank, Masts, Sails, and the like.

Thus and much more ridiculous and fantastical is it to imagine all Things in
the World to be made by mere Chance, which if so, I would demand, How it comes
to pass, that we do not daily see the Production of New, and (never before
seen) Things? Why do we not observe every Year new Species of Plants and
Vegetables? Why do we not see daily a new Generation of Animals, and Variation
of their Parts? And why does the Heart in all Creatures keep the same Position?
Is it rational to conceive ame blind unguided Matter, should always start into
the same Form? And if it does so, (as we see it does) this seems to me a
sufficient Demonstration, that it acts necessarily; that is, that it cannot but
follow the same Footsteps it before had trodden, and so is no longer subject to
the uncertain guidance of Chance and Fortune. There are another sort of
Persons, who though they Concede that God did indeed at first frame the World,
yet he gave it then an Eternal Law, and did never intend to regard it more, it
being beneath the Majesty of so great a God, to intermeddle in the small low
Concerns of the World, and so he lets Things below go at Random, and as they
list; saying, Curat magna Deus, fortunae parva relinquit,
Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.
Or as Lucretius,
Semota a nostris rebus se junctaque long.
The Divine Nature is wholly taken up in the Contemplation of its Self. These
think it not fit to give God a Descent below the Circle of the Moon, and that
his knowledge would become vile, if it were abused to take notice of trivial
Objects and Occurrents; and are apt to say as Job, cap. 22.13. How does God
know? Can he judge through the dark Cloud? He walks through the Circuit of
Heaven. And there is a vast Interposition betwixt that Place and Earth; but
these are either Monsters in their Manners, or Frantic in their Understanding,
or ever find themselves confuted by a Thunder, or a Plague, by Danger or Death.
The Persian Gallants the Day before the Fight with the Athenians, being
confident of the Victory over their Enemies, drinking Drunk, railed against
their Religion, and all their Gods, saying, There were no such things; that all
things came by Chance and Industry, nothing by the Providence of a Supreme
Power: But the next day, being conquered by their Enemies, and pursued to a
River, where they could not pass, then fell on their Knees, and begged God for
Deliverance.

It is certain, that God's Eyes run to and fro in the whole Earth, taking exact
cognizance of every Action, and observes it (at one Intuition) with the very
same Advertence, as if there were nothing else in the whole World for him to
observe; Curat universa, ut singula; and singula ut universa. Neither is his
knowledge so stinted, and only confined to Action, but as the Royal Prophet
observes, There is not a word in our Tongues, but he knows it altogether: Yea
it goes farther, for it extends even to Thoughts, secret Thoughts, and he knows
them afar off. And indeed did we not believe this, we should rob God of one of
his most principal Attributes, his Omnisciency, without which he could not be
God; and certainly if God be privy to all our Actions, he does not suffer them
to pass by without regard, but even the most abject of them all, is strictly
adverted to by him, and we shall one day give a severe account of them: Neither
is it beneath (but highly consistent with) his Majesty, to concern himself with
the low Affairs of the World; Non vilitatem arguit sed perfectionem: This does
not disparage his Wisdom, but honor it. Archimedes propounded it as a matter
of wondrous Reputation to himself, if he could have made a just Numeration of
the Sand, which he foolishly attempted. The Glass is not vile, because it
presents Deformities; nor the Sun defiled, because its Beams fall on
Muddyplaces: If God could be infected with our Corruption, it might be some
prejudice to him, but he can turn that to his Honor, which Man does to his
Dishonor: He humbles himself to behold things done in Heaven, and in the
Earth, the one is no more humbling to him than the other, and he can as well
behold that at his Footstool, as that which surrounds his Throne.

St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 9.9. That God takes care for Oxen; yea he takes care
for Creatures less worthy, Ravens and Sparrows; yea he is concerned for those
things that we put no Value on our selves, even the Hairs of our Head, which
are all numbered.

Then how great reason have I to conclude, that nothing, even the most
inconsiderable thing here below, is left running to the senseless Guidance of
Chance and Fortune.

SECT. IV. That all Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, with what ever else,
having in it a Medicinal Virtue, had it first impressed on them by that Supreme
Being, which was the first Author and Maker of them.
THe good and all-wise God in Commiseration of our frail weak Natures, who are
liable to as many Infirmities and Diseases, as there are Vessels and Parts in
our Bodies, did not only provide for us Food, but Medicine; not only a naked
supply of Meat and Drink, by which we live, but also an ample store of
Medicaments, by which we may live well, and either prevent or cure those
Diseases that our frail Tabernacles render us obnoxious unto, and which would
otherwise make our lives no better (or rather worse) than Death; and therefore
he at first gave such Virtues to Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, as he in
his Infinite Wisdom, knew they were capable of receiving, and best able to
communicate to his Creatures, for their Health and Benefit.

Omnia fecit numero pondere and mensura. This great Physician has so provided
for his Patients, that there is not an Herb or Medicine wanting to relieve or
cure any Malady; nay he seems to be prodigal, and exceed in this his care; and
lest some should not be able always to be procured, he has prepared many of
the same Virtue and Efficacy.

Suitable to the Disease he has provided suitable Remedies. When I consider
(besides the Variety, excellent Beauty, and Symmetry of Parts) the exact
Temperature of the Elements and Qualities, the various Natures of Plants,
growing in one and the same Field, nay in one and the same Area, or Bed of
Earth: I am even ravished with Wonder and Admiration Every Plant has a Voice
in it, Quoe non hominem sonat, sed Deumcerte, which bespeaks God only the
Author and Contriver of it, and gives us various Instances of the Divine
Goodness, his Liberality, Wisdom, and Providence. The same may be said likewise
of Minerals, the preparations of which are of most wonderful and excellent (I
had almost said unsearchable) Efficacy. For, for one particular Virtue which we
know, and have experienced in any of them (so scanty is our knowledge) how many
occult are there, that we are altogether ignorant of, and which escape the
discovery even of the most inquisitive and prying Physicians? Maxima pars eorum
quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus. However, there do not want
daily Experiences and Discoveries of their Incomparable Qualities; and those
Diseases that prove to be too Herculean for Plants, are with no great
difficulty subjugated by these. Last of all in the Animal Kingdom, what great
Rarities and Virtues, are couched within their Bowels, which are of singular
use both for Food and Pharmacy, serving as well to nourish and restore the
decaies of Nature, as to repair the ruins introduced by Diseases. Now if we
will not obstinately shut our Eyes against so clear a Light, and wilfully stop
our Ears to such audible Voices as these, we must certainly conclude. That
nothing less thanan All-wise and Omnipotent God, who by his fore-knowledg saw
the necessities of Mankind, and those Diseases we were obnoxious unto, could
implant such Virtues on those Medicinal Things, as might exactly answer their
end, and oppugn that Valetudinary State, we were like to meet withal here in
this World: Neither does his bare endowing these his Creatures, with such
suitable Qualities, and his conferring them on us, for those particular ends,
only show from whence they came, but also the wonderful manner of disclosing
their effects and natures to us, does sufficiently demonstrate, to what benign
hand they owe their being. Had God Almighty made these many Vegetables,
Minerals and Animals, and had he endued them with those many Excellent Virtues
that we discover in them, and reserved them only for his own contemplation,
they might indeed have added to his glory, but would have brought little profit
and advantage to us, besides the bare pleasure of beholding them; but such is
his diffusive goodness, that he has not only given us the things themselves,
but has also by several, even miraculous means, communicated their natures and
uses to us. Some of which have been discovered by immediate Inspiration, as
that of a Bunch of Figgs for Maturation, and curing Hezekiah's Sore, etc. and
can we rationally suppose that Solomon, who knew the Virtues of all Vegetables,
from the Hysop (or Moss) to the Cedar, could in his short span of Life, attain
to that immense degree of Knowledge, without the help of Divine Wisdom, or
extraordinary Inspiration.

The Natures of others have been discovered by their Signatures, or by those
outward marks and figures, which either in color, shape, taste, or some
similitude, give an account of their inward dispositions, and represent those
parts of the Body, to which they are appropriated, and those Diseases which
they are proper to Eradicate. Thus Lungwort in its spots, rarity, and laxity of
Substance, resembles the Lungs, and is found to be even a Specific in some
^ulmonick Affections. The Polypody of the Oak, which is in color blackish and
full of Scirrhous Tubercles, de-obstructs and dissolves the inward
Scirrhosities of the Spleen. The Roots of Schrophulary (or Figgwoort) as also
the Spongious Excrescences of the Bramble, represent those tumors, which we
call Struma's, and Scrofula's, and are found to be most potent for the Cure of
them. Sarsaperilla in its length, equality of magnitude and figure, as also in
its outward Tunicles and inward Medullosity, resembles the Nerves, and
therefore (it being hot and dry) is most fitly applied to all Distempers of the
Nerves and Medula spinalis. I forbear to speak how all bitter and yellow things
purge Choler, as Rhubarb, Myrobolans, Aloes, etc, how all White things Phlegm,
as Agarick, Turbith, Hermodactils, etc. how all Black things Melancholy, as
Black Hellebor, Alloes, Indian Ingrobalans, Cassia, and many others (although I
shall not much contend for Elective Purgation.) I pass by that of Seeds,
Berries, Roots, and Stones, resembling the Stone in Humane Bodies, which
powerfully expel it. I should be too tedious, should I go about to enumerate
all instances of this nature, and which would aptly enough fall under this
head: Let it suffice to know, that all these things did not happen by a
fortuitous hit or chance, but by the predeterminate Counsel and Wisdom of their
great Creator. The Natures of other things have been found out by Experiments
and Humane Industry; as by many Trials upon Dogs, and other Animals. The
excellent Virtue of the Testaceous Powders, in correcting the Acidities of the
Blood, and dulcorating it, discovered by mixing them with Acids, as Vinegar, or
juice of Lemmons, which it presently dulcifies. Lastly, The Operation of others
have undoubtedly been manifested by mere Accident, as probably (if there be
Faith to be given to Botanists) was the Panax Coloni, and yet not so much by
Accident, but that that Accident was directed by a Superior Hand; for
otherwise, the Clown being in a place where was such Variety of Plants, might
as well have taken Arsmart, which might have mortified the Wound, as the Panax
to have cured it; Ludit in huma^is divina potentia rebus. The true Virtue of
all Plants are not found out unto this day; and if any ask me the Reason of it,
I can only give him this, That God Almighty thought fit to conceal them, that
he might invite Men to increase their labor and sedulity to search after them;
or for some other reason best known to himself. We may well therefore affirm,
that, Opusnaturae est opus intelligentiae, that all those Mirabilia Naturae,
were nothing else but Emanations from the bounty of an All-knowing Creator.

For a Conclusion of this Proposition, seeing that our good and gracious God
has made such an ample Provision for the Relief and Comfort of the frail
infirm Bodies of his Creatures, by infusing excellent Virtues and Powers into
Medicinal Things, and discovered their uses to us; let us in the first place
thankfully acknowledge this his Inestimable Mercy, and in the next place, when
our Necessities, either for prevention or cure, require it, apply our selves to
the use of those Means, which he has not only allowed, but commanded and
promised to succeed with his Blessing; and not be of the Morose Temper of some
of the World; who separate the end from the means, and think that God made all
these things barely for our Speculation, and to be gazed upon; saying, That if
they shall live, they shall live without them, and if they shall die, they
shall die with them.

SECT. V. That although God Almighty did at first give such a particular
Virtue, to each particular Plant, Mineral, and Animal, yet for certain
Providential Causes, they may not always exert their Natural Operations, and
prove successful to their desired end.
IT has been sufficiently (I suppose) Evidenced in the last Chapter, that
whatsoever Virtues are contained in the Three Kingdoms, of Vegetables, Animals,
and Minerals, are Mutuatitious, and owe their Origination to a Superior Hand of
Providence: But yet that God should always tie himself up to means, and proceed
only in one way and method, without any Deviation, is not Modest, nor indeed
rational to imagine: God Almighty has an Absolute Sovereignty, by right of
Creation and Conservation over all his Creatures, and tho he has (according to
his Infinite Wisdom) disposed them into several Classes and Orders, from which
they may not recede without his Immediate Commission, yet he may and does, as
often as he thinks fit, make Alterations and Changes, or else command them to
be idle and useless; and what are we, that we should exact a reason of his
proceedings? God's power is infinite, nor can any thing in Heaven or Earth
limit it, but his own will, which does regulate and restrain it; If he cut off,
or shut up, or gather together, says Job, in his 11 Chap. and 10 v. who can
hinder him? It has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, and he bids it to run its
race, and again commands it to stand still; he does whatsoever pleases him in
Heaven and Earth. Although God rule the World (...) by this Law of Providence,
as Naz^anzen calls it, tho he disposes and orders all things and actions of
Men, yet he lays not any Law of Necessity upon all things. Some Effects he has
fitted with necessary Causes, that they may infallibly fall out; (as says
Aquinas) and to other Effects, which in their own Nature are Contingent, he
has applied Contingent Causes; so that that shall fall out necessarily, which
his Providence has so disposed of, and that contingently, which he has left
in a contingency: and both these in the Nature of things necessary and
contingent, are within the Verge and Rule of his Providence, and he alters them
not, but Extra Ordinem, when he would do some extraordinary Work. Gods usual
way of working, is by regular and connatural Means (as shall more manifestly be
shown in the next Section) but yet sometimes he works without Means, and even
by Miracles; as our Savior cured many of diverse Diseases, barely by the word
of his power; yea and sometimes works even contrary to Means, as when he laid
on the Clay for a Cataplasm to the Blind Man's Eyes, and recovered his Sight,
which had it not been for the virtue of the Hand that applied it, was more
likely to have put them out.

Both the Physician and the Medicine, says the Son of Syrach; Eccles. 38.1, 4.
are created of the Lord; and yet it follows, of the most High comes healing,
v. 2. he adds likewise in the 13. v. There is a time when in their hands there
is good success: And it is easy to infer there is a time when in their hands
there is not good success; when the use of the most regular Means, shall be
altogether unprosperous and unsuccessful.

The All-wise God, who is well acquainted with our Frame and Natures, knows
well enough what Condition is best for us, and for certain particular ends and
reasons, does dispose and order the Means that tend thereto. -- Sometimes in a
state of an uninterrupted Health and Ease, he sees we are apt to grow proud and
haughty, insolent and vainglorious; to slight his Mercies, and perhaps contemn
his Judgments, and therefore sees it most fit to lay a restraint upon us, by
visiting us with Pains and Sickness, and reasonably enough may suffer the Means
to be ineffectual, until he has accomplished his End, that so we may put a
greater value and estimate upon that portion of health, which we afterward
enjoy: Juxta seposita magis elucescunt. A rich Diamond is most admired in the
dark, and a serene Evening never more prized than after a Stormy Morning; for
even Sickness and Afflictions have their Errand, and serve to make Men more
humble, watchful, and considerate. -- Sometimes again the bounds of a Man's Life
(which he cannot pass) are at hand, his Stock of Radical Moisture is quite
exhausted, his Flesh withers, his Spirits are dissipated, and the Strength of
Art and Medicine cannot repair the loss; and so of necessity he returns again
to his dust.

(Pharmaca nil prosunt, praebetur potio frustra.
Heu nulla tristis mors est medicabilis art!)
Of necessity, I say, because I find some late Author seem to affirm, That if a
Man be but luckily furnished with a skilful Physician, he may live to what Age
he pleases, or choose whether he will ever die at all.

Si foret in terris rideret Democritus. This Opinion is rather to be laughed
at, than confuted, and even by the Non-immortality of the most Learned and Able
Physicians that ever were in the World, falls of it self to the ground.

SECT. VI. That God's usual way of Working is by fit and appropiate Means, and
therefore the Empirick, or he that understands nothing of the true Cause of the
Disease and Nature of the Medicine, is not to be trusted.
HAving in the last Section shown you how (by a special providence of God, and
for ends best known to himself) the Course and Order of Nature, may be
sometimes inverted: It shall be my endeavor in this to make it appear, that it
does never (without a positive command from God) recede from those Laws
anciently given her, but always proceeds in the same regular Method.

When God at first created all the numerous Families of Vegetables, Minerals,
and Animals, he infused into them their particul Virtues, which they should
retain even unto their Ultimate Annihilation; neither may we think they can
alter those Laws at first set them, or assume new Qualities, until he who is
Unchangable, cease to be so. The Rhubarb, and Sena will continually purge: The
Emetick Preparations of Antimony, will always Vomit, and the flesh and parts
of Animals well constituted (if they meet with a fit subject) will never cease
to nourish and restore: And these has God by his infinite Power and Wisdom,
made and destined as the proper and adaequate Instrument to those very Ends
from all Eternity: Thus we ordinarily find that all Medicines well prepared,
and exhibited by a Skilful hand, which understands not only the Nature of the
Medicine but the Patient's Disease, never fail of their designed effect. It is
recorded in Sacred Writ, that several Cures have been wrought by our Savior,
his Apostles, and Prophets, which though in one sense they have been miraculous
(because the end has very far exceeded the strength of the means) yet we
rarely find any without Application to Natural Means. When the Israelites were
bitten with fiery Serpents in the Wilderness, God commanded Moses to erect a
Brazen Serpent for their Cure: Number. 21.8. But although the Divine Will had
annexed a power of healing unto that Serpent instrumentally, yet the same Will
appointed the actual application of that power to the looking upon that
Serpent: Every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it, shall live.

God could have cured Hezekiah by a word, but he must apply a Lump of Figs to
the Boil, before it shall be effected; Isa. 38.21. Naaman must (by command from
the Prophet) wash (not in the Rivers of Damascus, but) in Jordan, before he can
be healed of his Leprosy; 2 Kings 5.10. although he could have done it by the
very Touch of his Hand: Nay our Savior himself, makes Clay with his Spittle
for the Blind-Mans eyes: John 9.6, 7. And he must afterward wash in Siloam. He
laid his hands also upon some and healed them. So that it is very manifest that
God Almighty does not separate the Means from the End, but makes the former a
necessary preparative to the latter; otherwise he should always do Miracles
(for Miracles are nothing else but the Works of God, without, and against the
ordinary Means) but he works by succeeding all lawful Means with his
Blessing. This may serve to condemn two sorts of persons.

First, The Empirick, or him that pretends to Physic, understanding nothing of
the true Nature and Causes of a Disease, and therefore cannot prescribe fit and
appropriate Means, suitable to their desired End.

Secondly, It reproves those that think a fatal and indispensable necessity of
Events, and so neglect the use of Means proper for their Health or Recovery.

As to the first, When I consider seriously with my self how difficult and
misterious the Art of Physic is, and of what price the Bodies (shall I say) or
rather the Souls of Men are (the welfare of which, for ought we know, may
depend upon the protraction of their lives) what depth of Judgment, Learning
and Experience, how great Skill in Natural Phi^osophy, Anatomy, Botanism,
Chemistry, the Materia Medica, Pathological and Practical parts of Physic, are
required to make a competent Physician. I am not a little startled to see the
Confidence (I had almost said Impudence) of Quacks and Empiricks, (and those
too for the most part of the Dregs of the People) and many Ignorant Women,
venture so boldly Decorio humano ludere, to sport away way the lives of those
they promise to Cures: And be the Disease what it will, never so much
complicated, and as abstruce as to puzzle a Collodge, yet they shall not want
Confidence and Imodesty, to warrant a peremptory Cure, to the great damage,
and often times destruction, of their (truly called) Patients.

It is the first Aphorism of our Divine Hypocrates, Vita brevis, Ars longa,
Occasio momentosa, Empirica periclitatio periculosa, Judicium difficile, etc.
That our life is but short, that the Art of Physic (by reason of the
difficulty and multitude of things that are to be known, and the Judgment and
Experience that is required, which takes up so much time) is very long; that
there are certain Golden Seasons or Opportunities to be laid hold of, which are
of so great moment, that being once lapsed, are irrecoverable, and so the
Disease does in deterius vergere, still grow worse, if not incurable: That
Experience, and Empirical Remedies, are dangerously deceitful and deceitfully
dangerous, producing for the most part (especially in Acute Distempers) nothing
less than the utter destruction of the Souls Mansion place, and the Temple of
the Holy Ghost; and that (by reason of the difference of Constitutions,
Climates, Complications, Accidents, and the like) any certain judgment is very
difficult to be made; yet how obvious is it to find every where unlearned and
unexperienced Men, confuting Hippocrates, who having amassed a few Receipts,
commence Doctors in a moment, and daringly venture on those things, which a
modest knowing Physician would tremble at. The great Arabian Averroes confesses
of himself, that he never administered a Purgation, but his Heart trembled some
days before; but these have quite laid aside all primitive Modesty, and boldly
dare venture on any thing. Neither are they the less Criminal, if sometimes
(perhaps) by the strength of Nature, or coming immediately upon the Rear of a
Physician (on whom the Patient will no longer attend) who has removed the
Cause, their Application should prove fortunate and successful; for what do
they, but like Slingers cast their Darts into the Air, not knowing where they
will fall, or what Effects they are like to have; neither is it sufficient to
say (as their phrase is) that they gave nothing but innocent and harmless
things, which if they did no good would do no hurt; for here is no Medium in
this, Et qui morbo non occurrit aegroto manus infert. He that lets the time
lapse in which the Distemper might have been removed by a Skilful hand, or so
confounds it that it is now become quite other than at first, and so renders it
Incurable, does as much in effect as give him Sublimate, or Arsenick, and
though it may not kill as sudden, it will as sure: Imperitia Medicorum dolo
comparatur (say the Civilians.) Ignorance in a Physician is a kind of Cheat,
and a Bloody cheat too; for what does the Ignorant Physician, but Negotiari
animas hominum (as old Cato in Pliny says) Trade and deceive Men out of their
lives, when they repose most trust in them. But yet murder with them has no
voice, and be cause it is heartily interpreted by the Vulgar, and connived at
by the Law, they hope at least to escape being found Homicides in Foro Divino
too, at the last Great Audit: But certainly they will then hear a voice saying,
Who has required these things at your hands? you ought to have moved in that
Sphere, in which you were placed, to abide in your own Callings, (...) to mind
your own business, and not (...), surreptitiously to take that dignity and
charge upon you, which you were neither educated in, nor fit for the
performance of: the best Excuse such can take up, is, that they did honesta
menta peccare, that they did evil that good might come thereof, that they did
sin, and offend God with a good intention, and honest mind, which gloss may be
fitted to the greatest Sin, and is one of the most splendid Chariots the Devil
has to carry us to Hell. Christianity does (I am sure) though Ambition,
Policy, or Gain may not, oblige every Man to his own province and business; yet
there is a generation of Men, that extremely busy themselves in other Men's
matters, and sleep in their own; which fly to every mark that is set up, but
that which their Calling and Religion directs them to aim at; that will thrust
their Sickles into other Men's Harvests, and let their own rot at home: These
things are very sinful and indecorous: Let every Man fill his own place, and
then he will have little leisure to thrust himself into another man's: Let the
Laywer plead, and the Divine preach, the Physician practice, and the Tradesman
follow his Trade, the Husbandman plough the Earth, and the Merchant the Sea:
Let the Master of the House govern, and the Mistress mind only the concerns of
the Family: Let all men make good their place, every one do his own business,
and so all rejoice together in the public order and peace.

There is a second sort of people who deserve reprehension, that think a fatal
and indispensible necessity of events, and so wilfully neglect the means proper
for their health and recovery.

It is most certain that nothing comes to pass contrary to the divine will, or
permission, and that the period of every man's life is fixed in respect of the
divine prescience; yet for us to jmagine that therefore, when a Sickness
invades us, we ought not to make use of means, saying with the Vulgar, If I
shall die, I shall die with them, and if I shall recover, I shall recover
without them; is very absurd and irrational: for first of all, Whether the life
of a Man be determined by an absolute, and inconditionate Decree, is much
controverted; and that many Men's lives have been lengthened, and preserved by
God's blessing on proper Remedies, applid by Skillful Physicians, is most
evidently evinced by continual Experiences: And on the contrary, that many have
been forcibly hurried to their untimely graves, by falling into the hands of
unskilful Empiricks, is too notorious: Instead of many I will give you one
Instance in both. Not twice three years since, a Boat too much packed with
Soldiers (all of them of an Athletick temper) was passing a River, and sunk
with them a little off the shore, where most of them perished; but within a
short time, by the diligence and help of some Spectators, several of their
bodies were taken up, and laid upon the shore, which were equally Cadaverous;
an Eminent Physician, passing by, and moved with compassion, bleeded some of
them, and prescribed such Medicines as he thought proper to their condition;
which it pleased God to succeed with his benediction: so that those, and those
only recovered which were thus handled, the others suffering the common (though
untimely) fate of all Mankind: So that hence it seems manifest that tho God had
prepared the means, yet had there not been an actual application of it, they
must of necessity have shared in the same destiny.

The other is this, which I my self have been more than once the sad beholder
of, that persons laboring under a troublesome Cough or Catarrh, which has
disturbed their rest at nights, and being of a thin texture of Body, and weak
Constitution, by the unseasonable, and unskilful administration of Opiatick
Medicines, have taken their laethaean nap, and gone smoothly and quietly to the
Land of forgetfulness. The like may be said of giving the same Medicine, in a
Pthysis, Pleurisy, Empyema, and the like, which has often produced the same
effect. To say nothing of those many strong robust men, that merely through
wantonness, or for prevention of some Epidemical and Popular Disease, that has
then threatened, have committed themselves to the hands of confident Empiricks,
who not regarding, or not knowing the temper of their Patients Bodies, and the
Nature and Dose of their Medicines, have been by a Hypercatharsis (or too
violent Evacuations) sent head long to the other World; which may sufficiently
evince, that many have shortened their days, by rashly exposing themselves to
such dangers, or else wilfully neglecting those assistances they might have had
for the preservation or prolongation of their lives.

The common Objection of Asa's reprehension for seeking to the Physician, and
not to the Lord, is a very weak one, to draw this Conclusion from, That
therefore I ought not to apply my self to a Physician: for it is evident by the
text 2 Chronicles. 16.12. that here is no Antithesis, or opposition, but a
Protimesis, and is an Expression by way of choice and estimation: Asa is
reproved because that in his Disease he sought not to the Lord, but rather to
the Physicians, or them only: Had he implored the divine as well as humane
assistance, he had not (without doubt) been reprehended for it. So in the 16 of
St. Matthew the 19. and 20. verses, we are bid not to lay up treasures for our
selves upon Earth, but lay up for our selves treasures in Heaven; and in a
Parallel place, we are forbad to labor after the Meat that perishes, but to
labor after that which endures to everlasting Life; which are not to be
understood as plain prohibitions to lay up Earthly treasures, or to labor for
our daily food, but by way of choice or (...), rather lay up treasures in
Heaven, than treasures upon Earth: rather labor after that Meat which endures
to everlasting Life, than that which perishes; which is no more than this,
have a greater care of the one than the other: Our Savior himself says, They
that are whole need not the Physician, but (as it follows) they that are sick;
which is a sufficient warrant for all in that Condition to apply themselves
unto him: for he is, as Herophilus observes, Manus Dei, the hand by which God
conveys health unto their diseased Bodies: And though he can (as I have before
showed) cure them by a miracle, yet his usual and common way, is by fit and
appropriate means; so that they who wilfully neglect them, do sihi manus
infer, even cruelly prove their own Executioners: therefore as the Son of
Syrach, Eccles. 38.4. observes, that seeing God has created Medicines out of
the earth, he that is wise will not abhor them.

I could here swell this Section to a great bulk, if I designed, to depaint the
dignity of Physic, and learned Physicians, but the Sun needs not the light of
a Candle to make it seen, nor a perfect natural Complexion the disgraceful
help of such Artificial Tinctures; besides being of the same Profession my
self, I fear I should be condemned either of Pride or Vainglory, and therefore
shall conclude this only with too Disticks of the famous Horstius.

In ventum Medicina Dei est, Medicusque peritus
Recte mortalis dicitur esse Deus.
Hoc Medico, hoc commune Deo, quod uterque misellis
Auxiliatrices detque feratque manus.
SECT. VII. That a Holy and Virtuous Life, is a necessary Qualification for a
Physician, in order to the imbettering his Judgment, and his good success in
Practice.
WHat is true in Theology, That the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of
Wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy Ones is Understanding; Prove. 9.10. and
that, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; Psalm. 25.14. is also
most true in Physic and Philosophy; which Truth is acknowledged by the best
and divinest Philosophers, and hence is it that they so frequently discourse of
their (...), Purgative Virtues, such as they judged necessary to prepare the
Soul, in order to its clearer Contemplation and Knowledge of the most useful and
sublime Speculations: It is Aristotle's Observation (...), that Wickedness is
destructive of Principles; and a greater than he, has observed that Wisdom
cannot enter into a Wicked Heart, nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto
Sin. Wisdom 1.4. Immorality and a Vicious Life, unfits and indisposes the most
Ingenious Minds for the Acquisition of the noblest Truths, whether Moral or
Divine, and though sometimes they may hit upon some Curious and Philosophical
Notions, and Secrets of Nature, yet even here they had done far better, and
excelled themselves, had they been more purged from Vice and Wickedness, which
casts such a mist before their Eyes, that they can not discern Truth from
Error, dulls their Invention, and so clouds their Understanding, that they
never arrive to the full discovery and (...) even of common Arts and Sciences:
Thus you see that a Holy and Good Life, affords the greatest advantages to the
imbettering the Judgment, not only in Divine but Philosophical Speculations:
Next of all, such a life is necessary in order to their Directions of
profitable Prescriptions for their Patients: Although (as I have before hinted)
God is not always tied up to means, or to these in particular, yet he usually
co-operates with those that are proper and adequate to the end. Those that do
truly fear God (as the pious and worthy Judge Hales, of late blessed Memory
has observed) have a secret Guidance from a higher Wisdom, than what is barely
Humane, namely from the Spirit of Truth and Wisdom, that does really and truly,
but secretly prevent and direct ^^em; and let no Man think that this ^s a piece
of Fanaticism, for any Man that fears Almighty God, and relies upon him, calls
upon him for his Guidance and Direction, has it as really as the Son has the
Directions of his Father, and tho the voice be not audible, nor the Direction
always preceptible to Sense, yet it is equally as real as if a Man heard the
voice, saying, This is the way, walk in it. And although this secret Direction of
Almighty God is principally seen in matters relating to the good of the Soul,
yet it may be also found in the more momentous concerns of this life, which a
good and holy Man shall very often, if not always find. In all thy ways (says
Solomon) acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Proverbs 3.6. What Man
is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way that he shall
choose; Psalm. 25.12.

Lastly, A Holy and Virtuous life, is a necessary qualification for a
Physician, in order to his good success in Practice, and that whether you
respect the success it self, or the prevalency of his Prayers, for the benefit
of those he is concerned for.

As to the first, the Royal Prophet had by his long Experience observed, and
after his Observation declares (in his first Psalm and third verse) concerning
the pious and good Man, that whatsoever he does it shall prosper; that those
ourward things, which are not of the Essence of true Felicity, but yet are as
advantageous Accessions and Accomplishments thereof, shall in an eminent manner
be preserved to the pious Man, he having the promise of the life that now is,
and that which is to come; 1 Timothy 4.8. All his Productions of all sorts, his
Thoughts, his Resolutions, his Studies, his Actions, and all wherein he is
concerned, shall by Gods special Blessing and Providence be exceedingly
prosperous and successful to him: In a word, he shall be blessed in all that he
sets his hand unto. Then again it is necessary if you regard the prevailency
of his Prayers for the benefit of those for whom he is concerned; St. James
commands us in Chap. 5.16. That we should pray one for another, that we may be
healed; and tells us that the Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord
shall raise him up: It was Hezekiah's Prayer that procured the lengthening of
his days for Fifteen Years; Isaiah 38.5. and we know not what efficacy the
Prayers of holy and good Physicians may have for the procuring Gods Blessing on
their Endeavors, if not for the protraction of the lives of their Patients: I
shall not give much credit to the many extravagant Stories of the many
admirable Cures wrought by the Prayers of the Religious Votaries of the Church
of Rome; but yet this I may confidently believe, which St. James says, James
the 5.16. The effectual fervent Prayer of a Righteous Man, avails much; and
that too without any limitation, not only for himself, but others also. The Son
of Syrach says, Eccles. 38.14. That the Physicians shall pray also unto the
Lord, that he would prosper that which they give for Ease and Remedy to prolong
Life; and if our Prayers be Fer^^nt and our Persons Righteous, which are the
conditions to make our Prayers acceptable and prevalent; St. John will tell us,
We shall not fail of having our Requests granted; 1 John 3.22. But that
whatsoever we ask of him, we shall obtain: and the Blind Man in the Gospel,
understood well enough what he said, Now we know that God hears not Sinners,
but if any man be a Worshipper, and does his will, him he hears: Joh. 9.31.

Thus we have seen that Sanctity of Life in a Physician is a necessary
Qualification in order to make him successful in his Practice; and therefore it
were to be wished that they that take upon them that honorable Title, would
lead such holy and good lives, as might adorn their Profession, and not Vicious
ones, to sully and stain it; that so their Patients might not be robbed of the
benefit, and they themselves of their expectation.

The Conclusion, by way of Advice to the rest of my own Faculty.
IT is reported that this short, but very expressive Sentence, (...) was first
spoken by an Oracle, in which (not as in others, delivered by that Reputed
Deity) there is sound nothing of Amphibology, but it is at first blush, obvious
and adapted to every Man's Understanding, and no less worthy of his
Consideration and Practice; so that it may seem no Solecism to assert (with
Juvenal) Ecoelo descendit. And surely this knowledge of our selves is the
readiest way to the Acquirement of all other; and Men never lose themselves so
much, and discover their own weakness and folly, as when they swell themselves
with high Opinions of their own Worth and Excellencies, and forget their own
Natures, forget that they did exist not from themselves, but by the Creation of
an Omnipotent Arm; that their lives are at his disposal, who first gave them
their being, and that these (they being only Usufructuaries) shall shortly at
his good pleasure who has Jus Dominii, be again taken from them, and they
themselves reduced to their primitive dust. But alas! how do we find by daily
Experience, Men so devoid not only of Wisdom, but Common Reason, who will with
no less folly than confidence, pretend not only their own lives, but others
also, to be at their disposal; and if by Gods Blessing on their Endeavors,
their Patients return to Health and Soundness, they will think it a derogation
from their honor, if you place God before them in the Eulogy, and the whole
Country shall echo their Praises, whilst in the mean time, God who has been
the prime Actor, is not called in for the least share in the Dividend. Si
quand^ enim nobis aliquid prosperi praeter spen^ and meritum nostrum, Deus
tribuit, aliu^ ascribit hoc fortunae alius eventui, aliu^ consilio, etc. nullus
Deo. Salv. de Gub lib. 7. Thus is the Majesty of Heaven affrouted by
vainglorious and impious Physicians, who proudly arrogate all the praise and
glory to themselves. But if it please God that if their Patients die or
miscarry, then to be sure God shall be said to have a hand in their
destruction; saying, God denied his Blessing: It was his will to have it so,
and we could not oppose it. Thus they Worship God, as the Greeks did Hercules,
by Railing, and Mercury by throwing Stones at him: But let all such consider
that God is a jealous God, and his Glory he will not give to another. It is he
alone who at first gave all things their being, and he expects not only that
they should be all owned as the Workmanship of his own hands, but also to
receive Glory by them: It was he that created the Physician ( Eccles. 38.1.)
and that (in compassion of our Infirmities) endowed the Earth with such
excellent Medicinal Things for the Preservation and Restitution of Diseased
Mankind; and that we finding the Sanative Qualities and Effects of them, might
thereby be drawn to the deeper admiration of his Goodness, and return him by
way of acknowledgment, the easy Tribute of our most due Praises. Every Plant
has a voice in it, Quae non hominem sonat, sed Deum certe which bespeaks God
and not Man the Author of it: and therefore he alone deserves the Glory. And if
we shall be so impudent to appropriate that to our selves which belongs only to
him, we may justly expect to fare as the Man in the Gospel, Acts 12.23. who was
eaten up of Worms, for not giving the Glory to the right Proprietor.

It is of his pleasure and goodness that we our selves enjoy our health and
beings, and of his great mercy that we can be any way Instrumental to convey
the one, or preserve the other, to any person; let us not be therefore so
unreasonable and ungrateful to defaulk from God what is his due, and of right
pertains to him; but as his is the Work, so let him have the glory. Moreover,
neither does this only correspond with Divinity, but common Prudence; for since
it is in the power of God, to bless or frustrate our proceedings, to prosper or
blast the operation of our Medicines ( For it is he that makes sore, and
binds up; he wounds, and his hands make whole: Job. 5.18.) we cannot
rationally imagine but that he will do better when he sees them turn to so bad
an account: And I do not doubt but this one sin is that which renders them so
often unprosperous, and ineffectual. Now that they may better succeed for the
future, and that the Physician may discharge his duty in his place, I should
(with submission to more pious and learned persons) offer these following Rules
and Directions.

1. Having premised that a Physician ought to live a Holy and Virtuous Life,
let him in the first place when any sick person desires his assistance, cast
himself on his knees, or if the suddainness or multitude of business, or want
of privacy, interrupts, he may supply it by silent Ejaculation, and most humbly
implore the great Phpsician to instruct his Judgment, and bless his
Undertakings, for whatever the Second Cause be God is the First, and therefore
the Divine presence and assistance is absolutely necessary, and first to be
invoked in all weighty affairs, (and what greater than those which concern the
Lives of Men) (...): Plin. in Paneg. Been and sapienter majores instituerunt ut
rerum agendarum initium a praecationibus caperetur: and it was a high pitch of
a Heathens mind, namely Epictetus, Enchirid. Cap. 78. In quovis incaepto haec
optanda sunt, duc me o Jupiter, et tu factum. Guide me O God, and thou divine
providence. (...) Pla^o in Tymaeo. If Hippocrates thought it necessary for
those, who had taken any Cure in hand (...), to ask Advice of all, even of
Idiots, and those who knew but little in that Art, much rather then ought we
(...), ask Counsel of God by Prayer, and then perhaps our Prayer may do as much
as our Medicine; or if both prove successless (tho we are assured to the
contrary, James 5.15. That the Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick) yet we have
this satisfaction in our Consciences, that we have done our duties.

2. Neither must we rest here, but must join our Studies and Endeavors to our
Prayers, and after we have fully informed our selves of our Patients condition,
and thoroughly examined all Circumstances, carefully and advisedly prescribe
them, abstaining from trying any new Experiments or extreme Remedies, except in
extreme and desperate Diseases, or where they are very consentaneous to the
Rules of Physic, and highly probable to answer those designs, which a known
and tried Medicine would not effect, that to they make not themselves accessory
to the destruction of their Patients, and ruin of their own Reputation.

3. That we do not peremptorily promise a Cure in uncertain and dangerous
Diseases.

It is too well known how many Physicians there are, who are so Dogmatical in
their Opinions, confident of their own Abilities and Success of their
Medicines, that they will not stick even in the most difficult Cases, at first
sight, to warrant a perfect Cure: by which, at last when they find themselves
defeated in their hopes, and their prognostics deceive them, they expose their
Judgments, and many times forfeit their Repute: And it were well, if this were
all, but alas the consequence is far more dangerous! for by this means the
Patient is careless of putting his House in order, and (which is worse) of
trimming and preparing his Soul for Death.

The best Christians, although they live in an habitual holiness and constant
preparation for their end, and like the Wise Virgins have Oil in their Lamps,
in expectation when the Bridegroom will come, yet they would willingly then
yet once more dress their Wedding Garments, and trim their Lamps, by Repetition
of Acts of Repentance, Faith, Hope, Devotion, Patience, Charity, and
Resignation of themselves to God. And who is there, who when he is ready to
breath his last, thinks so well of his Condition, that he would not pray David's
Prayer? O spare me a little, that I may recover my Strength, before I go hence,
and be no more seen. Or cry out with Crisorius in Gregory, Iuducias vel usque
ad mane, iuducias vel usque ad moan. Truce, respite, Lord until the Morning.
But I fear the far greater number of those we are concerned for, are such as
need not only trimming, but Oil in their Lamps too; not only the Ornaments, but
the Garment it self; and then certainly when there is time for it, and God may
in mercy accept of a Deathbed Repentance, how much have we to answer for,
either for flattering them with the hopes of Recovery, or not acquainting them
with their approaching danger.

I know the common Objection to this, is, that by encouraging the Patient, his
langushing Spirits are upheld, he more readily submits to the use of means, and
bears his Sickness with a greater cheerfulness; and on the contrary, by telling
him the truth, his Spirits are dejected, he becomes impatient, and rejects the
Prescription. To these it is easily answered, that either the Patient is a
Religious good Man, or a Vicious and Wicked Man. If the former he loves not to
be flattered, but will certainly have the better esteem of his Physician, for
dealing so plainly with him; and because he thinks the time of his deliverance
from his present Pains and Sickness, and inauguration into a State of
everlasting Joy and Blessedness, so near approaches, his Spirits instead of
being dejected, are exalted; and because he knows that his time is in Gods
hand, that neither he nor the Physician can infallibly know the time of his
departure, and that God has commanded the use of means; he is content to
submit to the Rules prescribed him, and leave the success to God.

On the contrary, If he be a Vicious and Wicked Man, it is but fit that if more
gentle and mild persuasions will not prevail, that he should be fright'ned into
a sense of his desperate condition, and not suffered to go like an Ox to the
slaughter, to his eternal perdition, without some Monition and Advice, which
for ought we know, being given prudently and in season, may with the Operation
of Gods Spirit concurring, work so good an effect upon him, as to draw him to a
true (tho late) Repentance, and then he has pulled him out of the Fire, as a
Firebrand ready to be consumed, and saved a Soul from Death; as St. James
says, Chap. 5.20. and then let any one tell me if this be not a sufficient
recompense for his pains, and amongst all sober and prudent persons, salve
enough for his Reputation.

It may be farther urged that Physicians are only to take care of the Body and
the Divine of the Soul: It is true, for that purpose they were consulted, and
it were to be wished the Divine might never be forgotten, but acquainted early
with the Diseased's Case, and earnestly in treated to visit the Patient as well
as the Physician; but yet I humbly conceive that the Physician has many better
opportunities than he can have, and which is much to be lamented, he is seldom
so early or so often advised with as the Physician; and though the later be not
so much obliged by his Profession as the former, yet certainly even he cannot
be excused in point of Charity.

The last Caution or Advice, is, That if it shall please God to make us
successful in our Endeavors, we do not ascribe the praise of it (as is too
common) unto our selves, but unto God; to whom alone it is due.

I have in the former part of this Section showed the reasonableness of it, and
therefore all I shall add by way of Conclusion, shall be this; That this is the
^eadiest way to find success in our Undertakings: By this shall we be more
famous than our Neighbors round about ^s. This will most advantage both
Pa^ient and Physician, and cause God to continue such his Mercies toward us.
Whilst on the contrary, by arrogating the ^ole praise to our selves, we rob God
of ^he honor due unto him, and our selves of the reward of our good Action:
Therefore let us all unanimously from our hearts ^ay, Non nobis Domine, non
nobis, sed ^omini too sit gloria: Not unto us, not unto us, but unto God be the
praise, both ^ow and for evermore. Amen.

The Physicians Prayer.
O Thou great Creator both of Heaven and Earth, and of all things contained
therein: Thou art the Fountain of all Goodness, Mercy and Benediction, who by
my Education and other Effects of thy Providence, has called me to this
Profession of Physic; that by my industry therein, I may in my small
proportion be instrumental for the bringing of some good and benefit both to my
self and others; I humbly beg thy grace to guide me in my intention, and in
the transaction of my Affairs; that I may be diligent, studious and faithful;
and grant me thy Favor, that these my Endeavors may be accepted as a part of
my necessary Duty; and grant me thy Blessing to assist and prosper me in all my
Studies and Undertakings: And seeing, O Lord, I am a Man, not God, to heal, be
thou graciously pleased to let thy Wisdom go before me to direct my Judgment
for thy good of thy Servant, who desires my Assistance: Let thy blessing
accompany what I shall direct, giving unto all things a due and kindly
Operation, that so a prosperous and happy success come after it: And I pray
thee, O Lord, give me and all my Patients (who by thy blessing have received
benefit by my hands) hearts truly thankful unto thee for thy Mercies, and Grace
to ascribe (as is most due) all the Praise, Honor, and Glory, unto thy holy
Name. And grant me, O Lord, a quiet and cheerful Submission unto thy all-wise
Providence, when ever it shall please thee to deny me the Blessing of Success:
Let thy holy Spirit be ever present with me, to direct me in all my
Undertakings, that I may manage my Affairs, with Prudence, Honesty and most
Christian Sincerity, that so my Profession may be sanctified by my Religion,
and all my Actions by thy Blessing, that when I have done that portion of Work
thou have allotted ^ne, and improved that Talent thou have entrusted unto me,
and served the Commonwealth in my Capacity, I may receive the mighty price of
my high Calling, which I most earnestly beg may be in the portion and
inheritance of my ever blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus. Amen.

Those who by reason of the multitude of Patients, may not find leisure for the
using of the aforesaid, or any other set Form of Prayer at the time of their
Address to them, may yet do it every Morning before they leave their Closet,
and only use this, or the like short Ejaculation, at the time when they are to
treat with their Patient, or to direct for him.

O Lord, the Giver of Health and all good things, let thy Wisdom, I beseech
thee, i^struct my Judgment in order to the Health and Recovery of thy Sick
Servant, who now next to thee commits him (or her) self to my care, and succeed
my Directions with thy Benediction, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

When you enter into the Sick Persons Chamber Ejaculate thus.

Peace (O Lord) and Health be unto this Sick Person, through Jesus Christ.

Raise him (or her) up again (O Lord that we may reward thee with Praises and
Thanksgivings. Amen.

Finis Partis Prioris.
The Christian PHYSICIAN.

The Second PART.

By H. A. M. D.

Non magna loquimur, sed vivimus.

Quanto plus, and melius scis: tanto gravius inde judicaberis, nisi sanctius
vixeris.

Gerson. De Imitatione Christi. LONDON, Printed by T. James for William Leach
at the Crown in Cornhill. 1683.

TO THE Right Honorable the Lady LAETITIA ISABELLA Countess of RADNOR.
MADAM,
THis following small Treatise comes to beg your Honors shelter and
acceptance, which if it be ever safe, I am very certain it must be with your
Ladyship, who (without flattery) are so generally known to be the Patroness and
Protectrix of all that is Pious and Virtuous, that I can never in the least
doubt of it till even Virtue it self comes to want a Patronage. I dare not, nay
indeed I cannot tell the World how much you deserve that Title, it being a Task
too difficult far for my undertakings (for who can paint the Heavens) besides I
am so well acquainted with your Ladyships Temper, that I know your Noble Mind
loves the substance only, not the outward show; and delights more in being
Virtuous, than in appearing or being known to be so, which makes me decline
those praises which really and deservedly your Virtues call for. -- I cannot in
the least think that your Honor stands in need of any of those following Helps
and Directions, your whole life being indeed nothing else but a Map or
Transcript of Piety, and had I consulted your Ladyship, I know they would have
been much more complete; however (at least I hope) it may contribute some
assistance to them who have not better advice. And being to make this public,
I know no person that I have so many Obligations to dedicate it to as your
Ladyship; and having nothing better to present by way of an ackonwledgment, I
hope your Ladyship will not refuse to accept this (though of a small value) from

From Newcastle upon Tine, Nov. 2d. 1682. Your Honors most Faithful and most
Obedient Servant Henry Atherton.

THE PREFACE.
HAving in the former Treatise (I hope) satisfied all rational persons
concerning the Existence of a Deity, it will (I judge) naturally follow, that
this Deity is to be Worshipped; I say Naturally, because I never read of any of
the Heathens who acknowledged gods, but they paid them homage and adoration:
Qualescunque sunt (says Cicero in his Book De Natura deorum, after he had
reckoned up the variety of gods) hos does and venerari, and colere debemus.
Whatsoever they are (if we own them gods) we ought to honor and worship them.
Nay He, though a Heathen, goes farther, Cultus autem deorum est optimus,
idemque castissimus atque sanctissimus, plenissmusque pietatis, ut eos semper
pura, integra, incorrupta and mente, and voce veneremur. For indeed the worship
of the gods is best of all, most pure, most holy, and most full of Piety: and
he advises, that when we worship them, it should be always with a sincere
honest Heart, and undefiled Tongue.

There are many ways by which God may be worshipped, but that which I only
intend to mention here, is by Prayer and Invocation, which I shall not
curiously dissect neither into its various parts; but only tell you, that this
being a part of Gods Worship, those that own his Existence, and their
dependence upon him, are indispensably obliged to pay him that so easy Tribute
and Adoration.

Prayer is the great duty, and greatest privilege of a Christian: By it we
have intercourse with Heaven, and bear a part with Angels, and beautified
Spirits. It is the Medium by which we discover all our wants and necessities
unto God: the Key to unlock Heaven, and draw down all Blessings spiritual and
temporal upon us. Is any Man Afflicted? let him Pray. Does any Man lack Wisdom?
James 1.5.
Let him ask of God, who gives to all Men liberally, and it shall be given
him. Therefore seeing it is so much our interest as well as our privilege and
duty, let us not be wanting to our selves in it.

You will find in the following Sheets, a small Manual of Directions and
Devotions, which (as by the homeliness of the dress, you may easily see) were
composed only for my own private use and addresses, and never intended that
they should as much as peep out of my Closet door. And now I shall not tell you
(as many do) that they were pressed out, or extorted from me by importunity of
Friends, or the like; but indeed (after a little pause and consideration with
my self) they came out voluntarily; hoping at least they may have some good
influence on some or other, either for Direction, or Encouragment to a Holy
Life; and if not, they will only remain useless to others, as they did before
in my Closet; and yet however I shall have this satisfaction in my own
Conscience, that I intended them well, and I hope the purity of the Intention,
will some way sanctify the Action, and procure Acceptance if not with Men, yet
with God.

I am very sensible of the most excellent and unparalleled composure of the
Liturgy of our Church, for all public and most private concerns; and how the
deficiency of this as to particular wants (if any such be) is supplied by the
incomparable Authors of the Whole Duty of Man, Practice of Piety, Method of
Private Devotions, Devout Christian, by Bishop Tailor, and many other worthy
and pious Persons, whose Shoes I am not worthy to bear (out of some of which
you will find several Collections in the following pages.) But yet give me
leave to east in my Mite too, and take in good part my weak endeavors also,
which probably in some things may be more particular than what you meet in
them: Neither dare I (being a Laick) prescribe them as Forms for others, but
only acquaint my Reader that they are such as I use my self, and may perhaps be
beneficial to him upon the like occasions. These I know are very defective too,
and as he grows more prolifick in Grace, so he will be able to supply my
defects by a new Additament of his own: And if these may give any such
encouragment, or have any good effect upon any one, I have my aim, and shall
think my self well recompensed for my Studies Hic Rhodus, Hic saitus.

I know this little Tract will fall into the hands of many a Momus, who will
either carp at, or deride it. The Learned will perhaps think it impertinent or
at least not dainty enough for their curious Paluts; and the looser vulgar
taunt and scoff at it: This is the best usage I can expect it shall meet withal
in this profligate Age, but however I doubt not but amongst sober and pious
Christians it will find better entertainment, which will make me dis-esteem the
Censures of the one, and the revilings of the other; it being my design to
gratify, ^ot the most but the best.

Directions how to spend every day in the Fear of God.
EVery Morning as soon as thou awakest out of Sleep, endeavor to get thy Soul
Affected with the Majesty and Mercy of God: Consider his Power that he was able
to raise thee again, and his Goodness, that he would not suffer thee to sleep
in death: his Mercy, that he has carefully defended thee (and thine) from the
many sad Casualties and Accidents which might have justly fallen either upon thee
or them, by reason of your Sins; and then lift up thy Soul to God in these or
the like short Prayers or Ejaculations.

O Almighty God, who have in thy Mercy awak'ned my Body out of Sleep, so I
beseech thee by thy grace, awaken my Soul from the sleep of Sin, and grant I
may so walk before thee this day, and all the days of my life hereafter, that
when the last Trumpet shall awaken my Body out of the Grave, I may rise to the
Life Immortal through Jesus Christ.

My Voice shall thou hear in the Morning, O Lord, in the Morning will I direct
my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.

I will sing of thy Power, yea I will sing aloud of thy Mercy in the Morning,
for thou have been my Defense and my Refuge, in the time of my Trouble.

My Soul desires to wait for thee, O Lord, more than they that wait for the
Morning: O God therefore be thou merciful unto me, and bless me, and cause thy
Face to shine upon me. O fill me with thy Mercy this Morning; so shall I
rejoice and be glad, even all the days of my life. So teach me to number my
days that I may apply my Heart unto Wisdom, when I awake up I am ever with
thee.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in
the ginning, is now, etc.

Then have an especial care that no vain, filthy, or impure thoughts, have any
entertainment within thy Breast; but if any such endeavor to crowd themselves
in, presently discard them with detestation and abhorrency; emembring that the
First Fruits belong to God, and he ought to have the r^ime of all thy Thoughts;
then cast thy self out of Bed, and whiles thou art dressing thy self, desire
God to cloth thee with the Righteousness of his Son Christ Jesus, and use the
following Ejaculations.

O Lord grant that I may put on the whole Armor of God, that I may be able to
stand against all the Fiery Darts of the Devil.

Above all things, O Lord, give me the Shield of Faith, the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit, the Girdle of Verity, the Helmet of
Salvation; and let my Feet be shod with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

O grant that I may put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the
Flesh, to fulfill it in the Lusts thereof.

Before thou art thoroughly dressed, kneel down by the Bedside, and say,

In the Name of the Father, and of the the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, prevent
me O Lord in all my doings with thy most gracious Favor, and further me with
thy continual Help, that in all my works begun, continued, and ended in thee, I
may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy obtain everlasting Life,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

On Combing your Head or Plaiting the Hair, you may use such Ejaculaions as
these.

Grant O Lord, my Ornament may not be that of the Hair, but that of a lowly,
meek, quiet and humble Spirit. Let it not be that of the outer, but of the
inner and hidden Man of the Heart.

Make me a clean Heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

While you are Washing, you may Ejaculate thus:

O Lord wash me thoroughly from mine Iniquities, and cleanse me from my Sin.

O cleanse me from all Filthiness, both of Flesh and Spirit. Not only my Hands
and my Face (O Lord) but my Heart also.

Purge me with Hysop, and so shall I be clean, O Lord wash me, and I shall be
whiter than Snow.

I am unclean, I am unclean, but O Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean;
O touch me, and say, I will be thou clean.

Being now completely dressed, withdraw to thy Closet or place of Retirement,
and there lift up thy Soul to God in this, or the like manner.

O Lord I beseech thee, let thy holy Spirit direct me how I may spend this day
most of all to thy Glory, and my own and others benefit. And then ponder a
while on the business of the day, and consider what sins either thy natural
Temper, Business, or Company, may most subject thee to; to what dangers thou
art most liable, and what opportunities thou art like to have either of doing
God Service or thy Neighbor good: Against the former implore Gods Aid and
Assistance, in a particular Petition (which you may find a convenient place to
insert in your Morning Devotions) and also Arm your self beforehand with
Resolutions and the best Means you can to prevent them; that so you may avoid
the occasions of Sin. And for the latter, resolve to embrace all opportunities
for the discharge of your Duty; and then use this Ejaculation:

Thus, thus (O Lord) I purpose by thy Grace to spend this day; O be thou
pleased to be present with me by the preventings and assistings of thy Grace
and Holy Spirit, that so I may perform what I intend, to the Glory of thy Name,
the discharge of my Duty, the benefit of others, the comfort of my own Soul
here, and everlasting happiness hereafter in and through Jesus Christ.

Let thy Grace be sufficient for me.

Consider also seriously what Sins have passed from thee since thy Evening
Devotions.

Being thus prepared, take Gods Holy Book into thy hands, yet not without
Reverence, and to put a distinction between this and other Books, it will be
commendable if thou uncover thy head in the reading of it, or stand up (even
the Hearhens pay it Reverence, the Jews hear the Law with Adoration, and the
Turks kiss the Alcoran) thou may also use one of these or the like
Ejaculation, or the Collect of the second Sunday in Advent.

Assist me, I pray thee, O Lord with thy Holy Spirit, in the reabing of thy
holy Word; enlighten the Eyes of my Understanding, that I may understand the
same; give me a retentive Memory and Grace to reduce the same into Practice, in
my Life and Conversation, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Savior. Amen.

Open thou mine Eyes, O Lord, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, O teach me thy Statutes.

O Lord sanctify unto me my present Reading and Meditations, for Jesus Christ
his sake.

Then read that portion of Scripture, that is either accommodated to the day,
or most fitted for your own condition, and that with much seriousness,
attention, and particular application of it to your self: When you have ended,
use the common Doxology, of Glory be to thee, O Lord.

Then re-collect what things observable you have met with in your reading, and
spend some time in Meditation of them, and consider what use you may afterward
make of them, either to encourage to Virtue; or deter from Vice: without this
Post Meditation, you will reap no more benefit by this ^alutary Word, than a
Body by the reception of the most nutritious Aliment, which is not well
digested in the Stomach: Nay, as this will be apt to turn into Crudities and
Diseases to the Body, so will the other prove fatal to the Soul; and that which
should have been the savor of Life unto Life, will be nothing else than the
savor of Death unto Death. Meditation being ended, betake your self decently
and reverently to your knees, and with great fervency offer up your Morning
Devotions uno^ the Throne of Grace; which being done, follow your lawful
Studies or Employments, still having an awful sense of Gods Omnipresence. But
if you be a Master of a Family, then call your Family together, and let they as
well as you, serve the Lord. Read a Chapter unto them, and Pray again with
them, before you dismiss them to their business: And if you live in a place
where Public Prayers are Celebrated, and your manner of Life be such, that you
can without considerable inconveniences dispense with it; think your self not
excused from the Prayers of the Church in the Congregation. At Noon, when you
see the Table spread, you may meditate concerning Gods Mercy and Bounty toward
thee and all mankind, and use those (or the like) Ejaculations hereafter,
prescribed for that purpose; and then receive the good Creatures of God with an
hearty desire of his Blessing, Moderation and Thankfulness; remembering that
every Creature of God is good, and not to be refused, if it be received with
Thanksgiving; and that it is sanctified by the Word of God, and by Prayer. [At
any other time, besides at Set Meals, venture not to eat or drink without
craving a Blessing and returning Praise, at least by Ejaculation.] After a
little Diversion return to thy Closet, read a Psalm or two, meditate and follow
David's Example, by offering up a Meridian Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving
in the following, or like Method. Then betake thy self again ^o thy Employments
or Studies, and be ^iligent in them.

At Four in the Afternoon, if thy occasions permit (as there are but very few
who can not spare so much time, if the ^eart be inclined; for thou may do
this ^n the midst of thy business, and make ^hy Closet in the very Street) use
some ^f the following Ejaculations, either as ^hy Devotion or particular
necessities ^rompt thee to.

If there be again any Public Prayers, if thou be not a Man of Employment and
Business, omit them not. Use the same Meditations again at Supper, as before at
Dinner; and after Supper, if the time of the Year or Season permits, walk into
the Fields, and there contemplate and admire the wonderful Works of God, the
strange Effects of his Wisdom, exhibited to us in the variety of Plants, their
decorous Order, exact Symmetry of Parts, and the like. Praesentem narrat
quaelibet herba Deum. Let thy Soul say, O how mavelous are thy Works, O Lord,
in Wisdom have thou made them all: The Earth is full of thy Riches: Who can
express the noble Acts of the Lord? Or show forth all his praise, etc?

And if you use any Recreation, have an especial care, first, that it be not
unlawful, or with evil Company, next that it be not immoderate, and take up too
much time; but that it may be such, as may either tend to the health of thy
Body, or refreshment of thy Mind; that so thou may be the better disposed
either for the Service of God, thy Neighbor, or thy Self: And because we are
too apt to be led by Sense, and to forget God in our Mirth, thou may often
lift up thy Soul to God, to set a Watch before thy Mouth, and to keep the door
^f thy Lips; and take care that no lying, ^ain-glorious Jesting, frothy or idle
Discourse proceed from thence; consisering that thou must give an account ^f
every idle word as well as sinful action: Keep always a Religious sense of God
in thy Soul, and let no sensual plea^ure or delight stain thy innocence.

When the time for Rest draws nigh, ^etire to thy Closet, cast off as much as
^hou can all worldly thoughts, and use ^hese or the like Ejaculations.

Let the words of my Mouth, and the Meditations of my Heart be now and ^lways
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my Strength and my Redeem^r.

O Lord I beseech thee, bring into my ^emembrance the Sins of the day past,
whether of Omission or Commission, whether of Thoughts, Words, or Acti^ns, that
so I may humbly confess them before thee, and find favor at thy Hands ^r the
pardon of them in and through fesus Christ: And also I humbly pray ^hee, the
mercies of the Day past, whether Spiritual, or Temporal, that so I ^ay in some
measure offer unto thy Divine Majesty that praise which is due unto thy Great
and Glorious Name for them. Then reflect and consider how you have spent the
Day, in what Company you have been, how you have discharged your Duty in your
Place, Relation, or Calling; and how you have in all things behaved your self:
And if any Sin beyond the common frailties of Nature has passed from thee,
keep a Diary of it, that thou may repent it over again, on thy Fast Days, or
before the Sacrament.

And that you may not think this Task and Discipline too severe (to speak
nothing of the common practice of pious Christians) even Heathen Philosophers
took this Course, Pythagras, Seneca, and Plutarch; yea the poor barbarous
Indians, as Apuleius reports, used to call themselves to a daily account of the
good and evil of the day: and how much greater obligation lies upon us
Christians (besides the serenity and tranquillity of mind every Man feels by
such short reckonings with God Almighty) I leave to every Man piously inclined
to consider: And that thou may do this the better, after a general survey of
thy Company, Actions, and the like; in particular examine if thy thoughts have
not been vain, peevish, uncharitable, or unchaste? Whether they have been so
holy or at least so innocent as they ought to have been, etc? If thy words have
not been vain and empty, rash and inconsiderate? Whether no foolish speaking,
or jesting, lying, or frothy and corrupt Communication, has proceeded out of
^hy Mouth? Whether thou have not slan^ered or back-bitten thy Neighbor?
Whether thy words have been mixed with that Grace, Discretion, tending ^o
Reprehension and Edification, as they ought to have been?

Whether thy Actions have not been ^nweighed and inconsiderate? Whether ^hou
have had purity of intention in them? Whether thou have been so tem^erate, so
chaste, so careful of spend^ng thy Time and Estate, as thou ought^st to have
been? Whether thou have ^ischarged thy Duty in thy Calling, as ^hou should,
or whether thou have o^itted any Duty, which thou ought (...) have
performed, and have had oppor^nity for? Where thou have been faul^, confess it
humbly to God, and an^ex this short Ejaculation, Lord be mer^ful to me a
Sinner: And venture no more to sleep in thy sins unreconciled to God, than thou
would to die so; for, for ought thou know, thou may now sleep in Death,
and never see the dawn of another day.

Then seriously and thankfully consider also the Mercies of the day past, both
spiritual and temporal, which may be commonly such as these; delivering thee
from those many sad casualties and accidents, which might justly have fallen upon
thee, by reason of thy Sins; refreshing thee plentifully with his good
Creatures: blessing thee in thy Studies, Labors and Undertakings; giving thee
leave to lift up thy Soul to him by some (tho weak and imperfect) Prayers and
Praises; and also preserving thee (if it has so happened) from any
presumptious sin, into which thou would certainly have fallen, had not Gods
restraining Grace prevented thee, etc. Then say, Not unto me, not unto me, but
unto thy Name be the praise: Blessed be the Lord God, which daily loadeth me
with his benefits, even the God of my Salvation, and blessed be the Name ^f his
Majesty for ever.

Then read a Chapter in the New Testament, meditate on it, and the^ immediately
before you Address your ielf to God by Prayer, to help your Devotion, consider
that God is a most Holy God, that he will be sanctified of all them who draw
near unto him; that nothing but what comes from the ground of the Heart is
accepted by him, and that only the Fervent Prayer is effectual and prevails
with him: how great need you have of those things you ask, and that for ought
you know, this may be the last time you may have an opportunity of putting up
any Petition unto him. Then draw near unto God in Faith, and in Humility, in a
sense of his great Majesty and thy own Wretchedness and Misery. In the entrance
to thy Prayer, earnestly desire the Assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, and have a
care to keep out all vain and wandering thoughts. In the close of thy Prayer,
remember to give God thanks for that gracious opportunity vouchsafed thee, for
that strength of Body and Assistance of his Holy Spirit, which he has been
pleased to afford thee in the performance of thy Duty; and desire him for the
continuation of the same Mercies, to pardon the Frailties and Imperfections of
thy Holy Duties, and to do more abundantly for thee, than thou art able to ask
or think, etc.

This being done, prepare thy self for thy Bed, unless thou art Major Domo,
Master of a Family, and then call thy Family together, read unto them, or cause
them to read a Chapter or two, and afterward Pray with them; and be not
unmindful to adapt thy Prayers as near as thou can to their (as well as thy
own) particular wants and necessities, which by having an eye over them, thou
may without any great difficulty, observe and know.

As thou art putting off thy Clothes, Meditate that it will not be long before
thou put off thy Body also: Beg of God therefore (by Ejaculation) that when
this Earthly Tabernacle of thy Body shall be dissolved, thou may have a
building with God, not made with hands, but Eternal in the Heavens; and that
when thy Body shall lie down in its Bed of Darkness, thy Soul may pass into the
Regions of Light, and dwell with God for ever more, through Jesus Christ. Amen

After thou art in Bed, use these or the like short Prayers or Ejaculations.

I will remember thee in my Bed, I will think upon thee in the Night Season.

At Midnight will I give thanks to ^hee, because of thy Righteous Judgments.

O Lord deliver me from the place, works, and spirits of Darkness: O Let ^e not
walk in the Night of Sin, lest I ^umble and fall: In the midst of Dark^ess, and
the shadow of Death, O Lord ^e thou my Light.

Give thy Holy Angels charge over ^e, to keep me in all thy ways, and be ^hou,
O blessed Savior unto me, both (...) life and death advantage.

I will lay me down in Peace, and ^ake my rest, for thou Lord only make ^e
dwell in fafety.

Consider and bear me, O Lord my ^od; Lighten mine Eyes, that I sleep ^ot in
Death.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, ^oul, and Body; for thou have redeemed
^^em, O Lord, thou God of Truth.

Glory be to the Father, and to the ^on, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was (...)
the beginning, is now and ever sha^ (...), etc.

If any time remains before sleep seizes on thee, you cannot do better than to
spend it in Meditation of some portion of that Scripture, which you before read.

If you awake in the Night, fill up the Chasms and Intervals, with short
Prayers, Ejaculations, or Meditations, upon the four last things, Death,
Judgment, Heaven and Hell. So shall thou sleep and awake with God, Prove. 3.24.
yea thy sleep shall be sweet, and no dangers of the Night, or Spirits of
Darkness shall terrify thee: So shall thou be in a continual epectation of the
coming of thy dearest Lord, that if he call for thee at Morning; or at Evening,
at Midnight, or at Midday; at the third or fourth Watch, thou will be found
prepared for his coming; thou will lay thy head down in the dus^ with joy, rest
in hope, and at length rise to a glorious Immortality, which will make an ample
Compensation for these thy pains and services.

Of a Private Fast, and Directions for it.
FAsting in its Definition, I take to be nothing else but an abstaining from
our lawful Food, upon a Religious account; which although it be no where in
Scripture enjoined simply for its own sake, yet if we consider the many
advantages of it, in order to the benefit of our Souls, we shall not think the
Commands of the Church and the Practice of the Primitive Christians too severe
and inimitable.

The Jews fasted twice every Week, sc. Tuesdays and Thursdays, concerning which
is the boast of the Pharisee, Luke, 18.12. and the Christians have not come
behind them, and the Sabbath being for good Reasons altered, they have observed
Wednesdays and Fridays for a Religious Fast; which days are taken notice of by
Tertullian, and called Dies Stationarii. But alas, we that now live in this
profligate and degenerate Age, are so far from following the steps of pious
Antiquity, or the Commands of our Holy Mother, the Church, that if we set apart
a Day for this purpose, once in (a quarter shall I say before the Sacrament, or
(a year rather, we think we have sufficiently denied our selves; and discharged
our Duty! But certainly did we seriously consider, and put a due estimate upon
the great Emoluments and Advantages of this Holy exercise, we should not be so
remiss and negligent in it; which I shall in the next place give you a taste of.

1. And first of all, Fasting is very instrumental to all Acts of Devotion, for
seeing there is so near an affinity between the Soul and the Body, the former
using the Organs of the latter for its Operations, and for the most part
follows the Temperament of it, it cannot be when the Body is stuffed even to
Satiety, and clogged with a Load of indigested Humors, that the Soul should be
so active and vigorous as at other times, and mount with those Wings of
Devotion, with that Zeal and Affection toward Heaven, as when it is freed from
that Burden, which still presses it down to the Earth: And if there were no
other reason to be given for it, every good Christian's own Experience will
sufficiently evince the Truth of the Assertion.

2. Fasting is very instrumental in order to our humilation for Sins past, and
subduing of Lusts for the future.

Such is the misery of Mankind, That whilst we are driven by an indispensable
necessity to Eating and Drinking, that we may support our frail Beings, we also
by the same Act cherish and foment our Vices. Our Flesh is apt to be too
rebellious, and we find a Law in our Members constantly warring against the Law
of our Minds, and leading us Captive at will: Now fasting is the Soul's
Physic, and there is no better way to tame this Monstrous Panther, than by
substracting that Pabulum which nourishes and feeds it. This course Holy David
took, he wept and chastened himself with Fasting, and many of God's Children
imitate his Example; and no doubt when it is performed with good ends and
designs, as it is an act of Austerity and holy Revenge upon our Selves, so by
God's Mercy it will procure that Mortification, that we aimed at by it, and we
shall find either the Temptation removed, or God impowering us from on High
with Grace sufficient to withstand it.

3. It is very profitable and instrumental for the removing or prevention of
Judgments, and that either particular upon thy Self, Family, or Friends, or
National. Ahab though a wicked King, yet because he fasted and humbled himself
before God, tho positive Judgments were denounced against him, he receives a
Suspension of them in his days; 1 Kings 21.27, and 29. and tho David found not
that effect when he fasted for the Child, 2 Samuel 12.16. because his Sin was
notorious and scandalous, and God would have the punishment as public to; yet
it is manifest that David expected it, and thought that the readiest way to
attain it.

The Heathen Ninevites succeeded in their Fast for the removal of a general
Judgment upon the whole City, Jonah 3.5. they proclaimed a Fast, and in the
tenth verse you have the good success of it, God repented of the evil that he
had said he would do unto them, and he did it not.

Lastly, Fasting is very seasonable, when we have any extraordinary thing to
beg of God.

I do not give much Credit to the many Stories amongst the Romish Credentials,
and what great things have been done by Prayer and Fasting, but we have a much
surer Word of Prophecy: we know what the effect of Hester's Fast was, Esther.
4.16. how she obtained her request for the deliverance of the Jews.

We know that when Paul and Barnabas were to be ordained Apostles, there was
Fasting as well as Prayer premised, Acts 13.3. Therefore if we have any
Internal Mercy or Grace to desire of God, or if we have any extraordinary
External Blessing to implore at his Hands, let us unto our Prayer join Fasting
also.

One Emolument more I will (by way of surplusage) subjoyn, which probably with
some sort of persons may be more persuasive than all the rest, and that is the
advantage of it upon the Score of Health.

In most Constitutions, when the Stomach does (as it were) keep Holy day, and
is not charged with a new load, or taken up with the concocting of new Food, it
has time to digest Crude and Superflous Humors, which oppress it, and so
after Concoction either manifestly evacuates, or insensibly dissipates them; so
that that which could not be before digested by a full Stomach, is now
effectually performed by an empty one. All the ways and passages of the body
are by this means rendered open and ready for Exclusion. Fasting powerfully
opens Obstructions, makes Respiration more Free and Easy, and the Mind and all
the Senses more cheerful, quick and vegate. Fasting is not only the Physic of
the Soul, but the Body too: Many Diseases have been by this prevented, many
cured. Hence that of Fernelius: Quos igitor morbos inedi^ non sustulit,
Medicatione curato. So that you see if we had nothing else in Prospect but our
own Health, Fasting (or rather in this sense Abstinence) seems most fit and
reasonable.

It will be impossible for me to prescribe to every one, how often they ought
to fast: Every Man's piety, and his necessary occasions must instruct him in
the frequency of this Duty. From those who labor, and are bound in the Sweat
of their Brows to procure a Competency for themselves and their poor Family,
little of this Duty is expected. However seeing they ought to separate some
time before the receiving of the Holy Sacrament, for Examination of themselves,
Prayer and Preparation, they cannot do better than add Fasting also. But for
those who are not under such indispensible necessities, and have any tolerable
leisure, their Piety certainly may well prompt them to set apart one Day every
Week for Fasting, Calling themselves to an Account of their Sins, Humiliation
and Prayers unto God for Pardon, Preventing or Strengthening Grace.

It is Observed even in the outward affairs of this World, that those who keep
the closest Accounts, thrive best; and though there be a Day-Book (as they call
it) in which they set down the Debentures of every Day, yet once in a Week (at
least) these are all summed up, and put into a better Form in the great
Shopbook, that they mey be found and reviewed upon all occasions: Thus ought
the Spiritual Merchant do likewise; though he examines himself every day for
the Sins thereof, yet he ought to have other particular days to look them over
again; that so having a few of them altogether, it may make him more humble,
more penitent.

If thou therefore art a Man of leisure, and God has wrought in thy Heart to
set apart one Day in a Week, thus to humble thy self before him, to be
reconciled to, and to be at peace with him, and thy own Conscience, thou have
thy liberty to choose which Day of the Week thou will for this purpose: only
give me leave to inform thee, That it has been the Practice of the Primitive
Christians (and that not without some reason) and it is the Command of our
Church too, to set a part Friday for that purpose, as being the Day of our
Blessed Savior's Crucifixion; which was thus long observed by the Christians
after his Passion. Others choose rather Saturday for that Action, which was
likewise kept as a Fast by the Christians who bewailed our Saviors absence, he
now lying in the Grave. And others observe the same day, because it may serve
as a preparation to the Lords Day, which may be best sanctified, when some
Preparatory Religious Acts have gone before, casting off the Cares and Thoughts
of the World beforehand, that they may attend upon the Lord without
distraction.

Either of these I judge convenient enough, neither do I think it necessary to
bind you to either of them; Prudence and your own occasions must prescribe to
you in this: However this is my Custom, I always design Friday for my Fasting
day, because if by any Interposition of Friends, or Company, or accidential
Business, I am then hindered from my Design, I may have the benefit of another
Day; i. e. Saturday, to perform my Devotions in.

You may also perhaps see cause to set apart a particular day (or days) in a
year to humble your self for any great or capital Sin that day committed; or to
praise God for any great mercy or deliverance that day received.

And that you may perform this Exercise the better, I shall give you some
particular Rules or Directions for it.

Rules for a Religious Fast.
THe Evening before you fast, insert some such Petitions as these (by way of
preparation) into your private Prayers.

O blessed God, to whom all hearts are open, and all desires known, and from
whom no secret is hid: I could not think a good thought, unless thou had
first infused it into my Soul, much less can I perform any good Action that
might please thee: I most humbly beseech thee, that as by thy special Grace
preventing me, thou do put into my Mind good desires and intentions; so by
thy continual help, I may bring the same to good Effect: To that end, I beseech
thee, cleanse the thoughts of my Heart, by the Inspiration of thy Holy Spirit,
and give me such a preparation of Soul, as may qualify me for the Duties of
the ensuing day; and grant that I may perfectly love thee, delight in thy
service, and worthily magnify thy holy Name, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Morning being come, consider what necessary business you have to do that
day, and dispose as prudently of it as you can, that it may not interfere with
your Holy Exercises of Religion, when you begin upon it: And if any such be,
you may do well to dispatch it in the Morning. In your private Morning
Devotions, be not unmindful to continue your Requests unto God, for his
assistance in the Duties of the day, in these or the like Expressions, which
you may find place to insert among your other Petitions.

O Most gracious God, thou have been pleased to discover unto me my Duty, and
have given me an hearty desire to perform the same: But, O Lord, I know without
thee, I can do nothing, but through thine assisting Grace, I shall be able to
offer up such a Sacrifice this day as may be well pleasing and acceptable in
thy sight: Let that Grace, O Lord, be sufficient for me, to quicken my
Devotions, to kindle my Zeal, and to work in me a Godly Humiliation for all my
past Sins, together with steadfast Resolutions of forsaking them for the time to
come: And tho, O Lord, I know thou hear not Sinners wilfully resolved to
persevere in their Sins, yet thou will hear those that confess and abandon
them. Hear me therefore, O Lord, in the multitude of thy Mercies, even in the
Truth of thy Salvation, and remove my Sins from before thy sight, that they may
not hinder good things from me this day, but set them full in mine, and let
them ever be before me, that I may not only confess them with an humble, lowly,
penitent, and obedient Heart, but also actually forsake them; that so (...) may
obtain forgiveness of the same, by thy infinite goodness and mercy, in and
through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Another to this purpose, out of the Method of Private Devotions.

O Lord, who see the purposes of al^ Hearts, and have been privy to the
Intentions of thy Servant, touching calling himself this day to an account of
his ways, and humbling himself before thee for all his Transgressions (and
rendering thee praise and thanks for all thy Mercies.) Be thou in Mercy present
to m^ by the preventings and assistings of thy Grace, that I may with a true
Hear^ and contrite Spirit perform what I intend. Grant that no worldly cares o^
business may so take off my mind from thee, but that I may be able forthwit^ to
return and without distraction, to employ my whole Soul in my designe^
Devotions; to the Glory of thy Name my own amendment and comfort here and
everlasting Blessedness hereafter, i^ and through thy Son Jesus Christ my Lord.
Amen.

1. First abstain from all Food and Sustenance (unless thouart of a weak and
valetudinary temper) until the Solemnity be over: If thou art, if thou eat and
drink sparingly, with a design only to strengthen thy self, the better for the
carrying on of thy Duty; I think thou have not broken thy Fast: The Fast it
self being not enjoined so much for its own sake; but as it is a help and
furtherance to other Duties.

2. Have a care that you do not only fast from Meat, but from Sin also; for if
you abstain from the former, and not from the latter, it is a great Argument of
your Hypocrisy, and that your Righteousness does not exceed that of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who fasted to be seen of Men; Matthew. 6.16. and are
promised their Reward shall go no farther than that of Men too. This is not
such a Fast as God has chosen, or will accept.

3. Abstain likewise this day from all gratification of your Senses, from all
Pleasures and Recreations: This day you have designed for condemning your self
for your sins, for humiliation of your self for them, and mourning over them,
then how inconsistent will this be with Mirth and Jollity? Altogether as great
a Soloecism as Music and Dancing at a Funeral: to have silence in the Kitchen,
and the noise of Mirth in the Chamber, is a thing very indecent and incongruous.

4. Lastly, let not Intemperance be either the Preface or Conclusion to your
Fast, least the Fast be so far from taking off your old sins, that it be an
occasion to draw on new guilt.

Thus I have led you through those previous Acts toward this Duty of Fasting:
we now come more closely to the Exercises of it.

Being retired to thy Closet about Noon (thy mind being as much as possible
disburthen'd of Worldly Thoughts) cast thy self down upon thy knees, and humbly
say,

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Prevent me, O Lord, in all my doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further me with thy continuual help, that in all my Works begun, continuued,
and ended in thee, I may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy Mercy
obtain everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.
And then taking Gods Holy Book into thy hands, ^ay:

Sanctify unto me, O Lord, my present Reading and Meditations, that it may in
some measure prepare me for that great Work I am now about: Take off my mind
from all Vain and Earthly Things, and inspire it with a holy Zeal, that I may
with spiritual desires and affections perform this spiritual Duty, and grant
that nothing may find admit^ance into my heart, but what shall rea^ilysubmit to
thy Laws and Discipline. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ ^is sake. Amen.

After you have spent half an hour in ^he reading of that portion of Scripture,
which you have thought fit to select for his purpose, or that good practical
^ook which you have made choice of, ^pend another half hour in digesting it, ^r
Meditating upon it, and make parti^ular applications of it to your self. This
^roximate preparation also you will find ^ery necessary in Order to the calling
^f your Mind from Vain and Worldly ^houghts, which without it, would be too apt
to Straggle, and be Distracted, and to fix and intend them on that Exercise
which you are about. This being done, you begin again with Prayer, after this
manner.

O Lord, thou High and Holy one, whose glory is above the Heavens, and have
Thousands of Angels Ministering unto thee, and yet are pleased to humble thy
self to behold the things that are done by us poor wretched Mortals here on
Earth: In confidence therefore of thy mercy, I here prostrate my Self before
thee, begging leave of thee that I may once more worship and adore thee, and be
admitted into thy Service which is perfect Freedom: It is the unfeigned desire
of my soul now wholly to attend upon thee, and to devote my self entirely to
thy Service. I am come into thy presence to call my self to an Account for my
Sins, with Sorrow to bewail them, most earnestly to deprecate thy displeasure
for them, and to renew my Vows and Obligations to thee against them for the
time to come; to acknowledge my dependence on thee, to praise thee for thy
Mercies, and to make an absolute surrender of my self all the days of my Life
unto thy Service; But alas! O Lord! what am I? and what can I do without thee?
I do not attempt this great Work, trusting in any power or strength of my own,
but in the gracious assistance of thy most holy and blessed Spirit. O Gracious
God, who have promised to give thy Holy Spirit unto them that ask it, send it
now down into my Soul, and let him bring into my remembrance (and convince me
of) every Sin, and every Evil way: What I see not teach thou me: Search me O
God and know my heart, O try me and know my thoughts, and see what way of
Wickedness there is in me, and lead me in the way everlasting: Make the (...)
remembrance of my former sins bitter unto my soul; Work in me a complete
repentance for them, a loathing and abhorrence of them; steadfast purposes and
resolutions of forsaking them for the time to come, and of making an entire
resignation of my Self to thy service, that so I may obtain the pardon of them
in and through Jesus Christ. O let not O Lord any of my former great and crying
Sins, the breach of former vows and promises, my impenitency or obduracy, or
want of suitable Affections for this holy Exercise, or any other thing,
interpose between me and thee this day, to stop the current of thy mercy, or
cause thee to hide thy Face from me in displeasure: But gracious God scatter
all my Sins, which may be as a cloud to hinder my prayers from coming up
toward thee, and thy mercies from coming down upon me, that so in the end of
this my Duty, I may have an assurance of thy favor, (which is better than life
and all the comforts of it) I may have peace with thee, and peace in my own
Conscience, and joy in the Holy Ghost: and receiving Power and Strength from
thee, may run with cheerfulness the ways of thy Commandments, and serve thee by
(...) sincere, impartial, uniform obedience, all the days of my Life, through
Jesus Christ. Amen.

Those whose Piety may enlarge their Devotions, may here also fitly use the two
Prayers of the Author of the whol^ Duty of Man for Sincerity and Contrition,
which because all those perhap^ into whose hands this Manual may fall may not
have by them, I shall anon insert toward the end of it.

Then betake your self to a Seriou^ and Impartial Examination of your se^^
concerning your Sins, and if you be a person who use your self to those
periodical Returns every Week, your inquisition need go no farther than the
preceding Week, (unless it be before every Sacrament, when it may be necessary
to renew your Repentance for the Capital Sins of your whole Life) you may begin
with reflecting upon the spending every day of the week, where you were, in
what Company, and what your Business, or the like; which will be apt to afford
you fresh remembrances of your Sins, and then (if you please) you may first
consider and examine what your thoughts have been, wherein they have been
exorbitant and sinful, what the bent and inclinations of your heart have been,
and how you have endeavored to suppress the evil, and to cherish the good; and
when you have found them, humbly confess them, and lift up your Soul to God in
this Ejaculation: Lord be merciful to me a Sinner.

Consider next your Words, Whether they have been Vain, Idle, Corrupt, Lying,
Detracting, Uncharitable, Passionate, or the like? Whether they have been mixed
with that Grave Discretion, tending to Reprehension and Edification, etc? And
then after Confession annex the former Ejaculation: God be merciful, etc. Last
of all Examine thy self strictly also concerning all thy Actions, thy
Violations of the First and Second Table, thy Sins of Omission and Commission
toward God, thy Neighbor and thy Self: Examine how thou have spent thy time,
resisted Temptations, or compli'd with them, and what the circumstances of
aggravation have been; then humbly confess them: Endeavor to Work your heart
to a true Sorrow and Contrition for them: Be angry with your self that you
should be so basely led away by the corruptions of your Nature and the
pleasures of Sin (which are but for a Moment) by Evil company, or the like
Temptations, then lift up thy Soul in this manner:

Thus, thus O Lord have I sinned against thee; yea I know not O Lord how often
I have offended; many a times more I am sure I have, which I have either
forgot, or not adverted to. O cl^anse, cleanse thou me from my secret faults.
Here make serious Resolutions against every Sin, and especially those thou have
by Examination found thy self guilty of. After this fall down up on thy knees
(or perhaps if the Sins be great, and thy humility so too, thou may think it
more proper to prostrate thy self on the ground) and Petition the Throne of
Grace in this, or the like Form following.

O God the Father of Heaven, have Mercy upon me a miserable Sinner.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have Mercy, etc.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have Mercy, etc.

O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, Three Persons and one God, have Mercy,
etc.

The Prayer taken out of the Whole Duty of Man, magna ex part.
O Most holy, holy, holy Lord God, who art of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity; how shall I who am nothing but Iniquity, dare to appear before thee?
Or take so Sacred a Name into my unhallowed lips; but yet, O Lord, whom shall I
invoke but thee, whom I have offended? Against thee, thee only have I sinned,
and done these evils in thy sight: I know that thou alone can forgive sin,
and that we might not be discouraged to come unto thee, thou have published thy
self to be the Lord gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great
goodness; a God forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and Sin; yea thou have
promised, That if we confess our Sins, thou will be faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness: Relying
therefore on this thy gracious promise, I am now emboldened to postrate my self
before thee, in all Humility of Soul and Body, desiring to be ashamed, and to
blush when I lift up mine Eyes unto thee; for my Iniquities are increased over
my head, and my Trespass is grown up even unto Heaven: All the thoughts and
imaginations of my heart have been Evil, and only Evil, and that continually: I
have wrought many and great provocations in thy sight (especially O Lord, etc.
Here enumerate thy old capital Sins) and that in the mos^ provoking manner:
They have not been only single, but repeated acts of sin; for, O Lord, of this
black Catalogu^ which I have now brought forth before thee, how few are there
which I have not often times committed; nay which are not become even habitual
and customary unto me? And to this frequency, I have added both agreediness and
obstinacy in sinning; turning into my course as the Horse rusheth into the
Battle, doing evil with both hands, earnestly; yea hating to be reformed, and
casting thy words behind me; quenching thy Spirit within me, which testified
against me, to turn me from my evil ways, and frustrating all those outward
means whether of Judgment or Mercy which thou have used to draw me to thy self.
Nay, O Lord, even my Repentances may be numbered amongst my greatest Sins; they
have sometimes been feigned and hppocritical, always so slight and ineffectual,
that they have brought forh no Fruit in amendment of Life, but I have still
returned with the Dog to his vomit, and the Sow to the mire again; and have
added the breach of many resolutions and vows (both at thy Table and in
private) to all my former Guilts: Yea, O Lord, I desire to confess to my own
shame and confusion, that since the last time that I humbled my self in thy
sight, and so solemnly vowed and purposed to forsake every Sin, and not to
regard any iniquity in my heart, I have returned unto the same (if not worse)
Sins than I then came to confess before thee, and to beg pardon at thy hands
for: for my thoughts O Lord have been vain, etc. (Here enumerate the sins) My
Words have been inconsiderate, etc. my Actions have been unweighed, etc.

And besides all this, O Lord, I have still the same proneness to that which is
evil, aversness and obstinacy toward what is good: I have still an impenitent
hard heart, which is not (sufficiently) mollified with the sense of my Sins, or
thy wrath due unto me for them. O God! God be merciful to me a Sinner! yea I
know not how often I have offended, O cleanse, cleanse thou me from my secret
faults. Thus, thus O Lord, am I become out of measure sinful, and since I have
thus chosen death, I am most worthy to take part in it, even in the second
death, the lake of Fire and Brimstone, which burns for evermore. This, this,
O Lord, is in Justice to be the portion of my Cup; to me belongs nothing but
shame and confusion of face, and that eternally. But to thee O Lord God
belongs mercy and forgiveness, though I have ^^belled against thee. O
remember not my Sins and Offenses, but according to thy mercy think thou upon
me O Lord for thy goodness. Thou sentest thy Son to seek and to save that which
was lost, be hold, O Lord, I have gone astray like a Sheep that is lost; O seek
thy servant and bring me back again to the Shepherd and Bishop of my Soul: Let
thy Spirit work in me a hearty sense and detestation of all my abominations,
that true contrition of heart, which thou have promised not to despise: And
then be thou pleased to look upon me in mercy, to take away all my iniquity,
and to receive me graciously into thy favor, and for his sake who has done
nothing amiss, be thou reconciled to me, who have done nothing well. Wash away
the guilt of all my Sins in his Blood, bury them so deep in his grave, and hide
them in his Wounds, that they may never rise up in Judgment against me, either
here to shame me, or hereafter to condemn me; and subdue the power of them by
his grace: and grant, O Lord, that I may from this hour bid a final adieu to
all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, that I may never once more cast a look
toward Sodom, or long after the Flesh Pots of Egypt, but consecrate my self
entirely to thee, to serve thee in righteousness and true holiness, all the
days of my life; reckoning my self to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto
God, through Jesus Christ our blessed Lord and Savior. Amen.

After this go on with your Devotions and pray over the One and fiftieth Psalm.

HAve mercy upon me, O God, after thy great goodness, according to the
multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wash me thoroughly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sins.

For I acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me.

Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done these Evils in thy sight, that
thou might be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou art judged.

Behold I was shapen in Wickedness and in sin has my Mother conceived me.

But lo, thou requirest Truth in the inward parts, and shall make me to
understand Wisdom secretly.

Thou shall purge we with Hysop, and I shall be clean, thou shall wash me, and
I shall be whither than Snow.

Thou shall make me hear of joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have
broken may rejoice.

Turn thy face from my sins, and put out all my misdeeds.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

(O take away this stony, this hard heart of mine, and give me a heart of
flesh.)

O give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Then shall I teach thy ways unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.

Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou that art the God of my health;
and my tongue shall sing of thy righteousness.

Thou shall open my lips, O Lord, and my mouth shall show thy praise.

For thou desire no Sacrifice, else would I give it thee; but thou delightest
not in burnt Offering.

The Sacrifice of God is a troubled Spirit; a broken and contrite Heart, O God,
shall thou not despise.

O be savourable and gracious unto Sion; build thou the Walls of Jerusalem.

Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of Righteousness, with the burnt
Offerings and Oblations; then shall they offer Young Bullocks upon thine Altar.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, World without end. Amen.

Conclude your Penitentials with the following Collects.

ALmighty and everlasting God, who hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of all them that are penitent; create and make in me a
new and contrite heart, that I worthily lamenting my sins, and acknowledging my
wretchedness, may obtain of thee the God of all mercy, perfect remission and
forgiveness, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Lord I beseech thee mercifully hear my prayer, and spare me who now confess
my sins unto thee, that I whose conscience by sin is accused, by thy merciful
pardon may be absolved (from all my offenses) through Christ our Lord. Amen.

O most Mighty God, and Merciful Father, who have compassion upon all Men, and
hate nothing that thou have made; who would not the Death of a Sinner, but
that he should rather turn from his Sin and be saved; mercifully forgive me my
Trespasses, receive and comfort me, who am grieved and wearied with the Burden
of my Sins.

Thy property is always to have mercy, to thee only it appertains to forgive
Sins: Spare me therefore good Lord, spare me whom thou have redeemed; Enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant, who am vile Earth, and a miserable Sinner; but
so turn thine anger from me who meekly acknowledge my vileness, and truly repent
me of my faults; and so make have to help me in this World, that I may ever
live with thee in the World to come, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

This being done, you are next to review your Sins again, and consider what
were the occasions which drew you into each particular Sin; and then consider
and think of those ways and mean, by which you may for the future avoid them;
and arm your self beforehand with reasons and holy resolutions against their
assaults, whenever they invade: which you may do well to commit to Writing.
After this consider what Graces directly oppose your Vices, that you may in the
next place petition for them; for it is not enough that you are pardoned, but
you must also remember, that that will not stand you in stead, If you again
return to your Old Vices.

An Examplification of this you have in one or two Sins following: As,

January -- I fasted, and upon Examination, I found my self guilty of unclean
and unchaste thoughts (and that with delight and approbation) which sometimes
brake forth into corrupt, frothy Discourse, and immodest or unclean Actions.
Upon reflecting into the Causes of this Sin, I found them to be, Eating and
Drinking too highly, keeping light or idle Company; not keeping that Guard over
my self as I ought, nor behaving my self in all places with that gravity and
seriousness as I should: and giving way to the first motions of vain and impure
thoughts. Upon which I resolved to use my self to a spare low Diet, to avoid
Drinking much Wine or Strong Liquors, to avoid light Company, and not suffer
mine ears to hear, or my tongue to utter any frothy or corrupt Communication,
to carry my self always with a becoming gravity, in my behavior: to deport my
self as in the immediate presence of God, remembering that he is a God of
infinite Purity and Holiness. I will be watchful over my own Heart that I do
not permit any unclean thoughts or fancies to enter within me, much less give
them Entertainment; and as soon as they offer themselves to my fancy, I will
endeavor to divert them by holy and heavenly Meditations. And last of all, I
will be frequent in my prayers to God for a clean heart and purity of spirit,
and for the Graces of Temperance and Chastity.

When I fasted, likewise I found my self guilty of muth deadness and dullness in
my Devotions, vain and wandering thoughts in them, etc. Upon Examination of my
self I found the great Causes of it, to be the want of keeping my self
continually in a serious frame and temper of spirit: my not spending some some
time in Meditation before I came to pray; my want of frequency in my Devotions,
and want of the due sense of God's great and dreadful Majesty, and my own
necessities of those things I come to pray for. Upon which I resolved
constantly to keep my self in an habitual frame and temper of piety, to be more
frequent in Prayer; and to praemeditate of the dread and awfulness of that
Majesty before whom I appear: to consider beforehand that nothing but what is
hearty, and from the ground of the Soul, will be accepted by him, and how great
need I have of those things I ask. I will pray often for the Spirit of
Devotion, and Sincerity, and will be sure to watch over my thoughts, when I am
at my Devotions; but if any such enter, I will presently repel them, and then
pray with greater fervency, to cross the Devil's design therein. These
meditations and resolutions being over, you may begin again thus:

O Lord increase my weak Faith; Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief, and
give me Grace to live and die according to my belief; for I believe in thee O
God the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth.

And in Jesus Christ thy only Son our Lord, who was conceived by the holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified
dead and buried. He descended into Hell. The third day he rose again from the
dead. He ascended into heaven, and siteth on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, the Forgiveness of Sins: The Resurrection of the Body, and the life
everlasting. Amen. O Lord be with my Spirit.

O Most gracious God make me careful to discharge and perform all my Vows and
Resolutions which I have made unto thee both in public and in private. Make me
a serious and professed enemy to every sin, and to all ungodliness, especially
O Lord to all, etc. (Here meition thy most prevailing Sins and Corruptions) and
let no sinful thought surprise me without a sorrowful sigh; no ungracious word
pass me without a sudden retractation, and devour confession; no wicked action
defile me without a sincere and godly humiliation: Unto each measure of sin,
enable me to allow a due measure of sorrow: Let those sins that have been
reigning over me be at set times constantly revenged by me; and as my body has
been a deep sharer in my Sins, so let it have a daily share in my Sufferings:
Help me at set times to deny my self some of those outward Enjoyments, which
thou O Lord in mercy have allowed me, as a true sign of my godly sorrow for
that sinful excess, which I have too often taken without thine allowance: Let
those sinful hours which have been vainly lost in idleness and emptiness be
willingly redeemed in a constant observation of Religious Duties: Let no day
pass me with out a solemn and devout task of Devotion, no hour without some
sweet Ejaculation; and when at any time the troubles and disturbances of this
frail life shall deny me happy opportunities for those heavenly performances,
what is wanting in act let it be made up in desire; which thou Lord I trust
wilt graciously accept and look upon because faithfully intended: These and
whatever mercies thou know needful and requisite, I humbly beg in the name
and for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen.

A Prayer for Grace, out of the Whole Duty of Man.
O Most Gracious God, from whom every good and perfect gift comes, I wretched
creature, that am not able of my self so much as to think a good thought,
beseech thee to work in me both to will and to do according to thy good
pleasure. O inlighten my mind that I may know thee, and let me not be barren or
unfruitful in that Knowledge. Lord work in my heart a true faith, a purifying
hope, and an unfeigned love toward thee; give me a full trust on thee, zeal
for thee, reverence of all things that relate unto thee; make me fearful to
offend thee in any thing, careful to please thee in all things, thankful for
thy mercies, humble under thy corrections, devout in thy service, sorrowful for
my sins; and grant that in all things I may behave my self so, as befits a
creature to his Creator, a servant to his Lord: Enable me likewise to perform
that duty I owe to my self, Give me that meekness, humility, and contentedness
whereby I may always possess my Soul in patience and thankfulness: Make me
diligent in all my duties, watchful against all temptations, perfectly pure and
temperate, and so moderate in my most lawful enjoyments, that they never become
a snare to me: Make me also, O Lord, to be so affected toward my Neighbor,
that I never transgress that Royal Law of thine, in loving him as my self:
Grant me exactly to perform all parts of Justice, yielding to all whatsoever by
any kind of right becomes their due; and give me such bowels of mercy and
compassion, that I may never fail to do all acts of Charity to all Men, whether
Friends or Enemies, according to thy Command and Example. Finally, I beseech
thee O Lord, to sanctify me throughout, that my whole Spirit, and Soul and
Body, may be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; to
whom with thee and the Holy Ghost be all honor and glory for ever. Amen.

Here you may also pray more particularly for those graces, you have found your
self most of all to stand in need of; better forms for which I can not advise
you to th^n those contained in the Book of that Excellent Author, The whole
Duty of Man, where you have devout Prayers for all those particular Graces
which a Christian can stand in need of.

These Prayers being over, spend some time again in Reading and Meditation;
afterward (having before prayed for your self) you are next in Charity bound
to pray for others also, being as members of the same mystical body the Church:
which you may do in this or the like Form.

A Prayer of Intercession.
O Most gracious Lord, who so tenderly lovedst Mankind as to give thy dear Son
out of thy bosom to be a propitiation for the Sins of the whole World, grant
that the effect of this redemption may be as universal as the design of it,
that it may be to the Salvation of all. O Let no person by impenitence and
wilful Sin forfeit his part in it, but by the power of thy Grace bring all,
even the most obstinate sinners, to repentance. Inlighten all that sit in
Darkness, all Jews, Turks, Infidels and Heretics, take from them all
blindness, hardness of heart, and contempt of thy Word, and so fetch them home,
blessed Lord, unto thy Fold, that they may be saved among the number of the
true Israelites. And for all those upon whom the Name of thy Son is called,
grant, O Lord, that their conversations may be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, that his Name be no longer blasphemed among the Heathens through us. O
blessed Lord how long shall Christendom continue the vilest part of the World,
a sink of all those abominable pollutions, which even Barbarians detest? O let
not our profession and our practice be always at so wide a distance. Let not
the disciples of the holy and immaculate Jesus be of all others the most
profane and impure. Let not the Subjects of the Prince of Peace be of all
others the most contentious and bloody, but make us Christians in deed, as well
as in Name, that we may walk worthy of that holy vocation wherewith we are
called, and may all with one mind and one mouth glorify thee the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Have mercy on this languishing Church and sinful Nation;
look down from Heaven the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory: Where is
thy zeal and thy strength, the sounding of thy bowels and of thy mercies
toward us? Are they restrained? Be not wroth very sore, O Lord, neither
remember iniquity for ever; but though our backslidings are many, and we have
grievously rebelled, yet according to all thy goodness, let thy anger and thy
fury be turned away, and cause thy Face still to shine upon thy Sanctuary,
which is in danger to be desolate, for the Lord's Sake: do thou compose our
differences, heal the wounds which our unhappy schisms and divisions have made
in thy Church, and make up the breaches of our Sion; and so separate between us
and our sins, that they may no longer separate between us and our God. Avert
those heavy judgments, which we either fear or feel, and our sins cry aloud to
Heaven for, and deny us not the continuance of those mercies which we yet
enjoy, and are altogether unworthy of; but whatever temporal mercies thou art
pleased to deny us, whatever temporal judgments thou art pleased to bring upon
us, O remove not thy Candle-stick from us, nor quench the light of our Israel;
but, blessed Lord, be pleased still to continue unto us the liberty of thy
House, the freedom of thy Gospel, the enjoyment of thy Sabbaths, Sacraments,
and Ordinances in their primitive purity and regularity, until time shall be no
more. Save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes and Governors, especially
thy Servant Charles our King; and those to whom we owe subjection: Plead thou
their cause, O Lord, against those that strive with them, and fight thou
against those that fight against them, and so guide and assist them in the
discharge of that Office whereunto thou have appointed them, that under them we
may live quiet and peaceable Lives, in all godliness and honesty. Bless them
that wait at thy Altar, by what Names or Titles dignified and distinguished,
whether Arch Bishops, Bishops, or other inferior Clergy; Grant that they may
all speak as the Oracles, and live as the Messengers of God, that so they may
both save themselves and those that hear them. More especially be gracious unto
thy Servants. (Here you may insert the Bishop of the Diocese, your Parochial
Minister, the Authors of good Books yet living, or any that have been
instrumental to your conversation;) Pour down a double portion of thy Spirit
into their hearts, make them eminent Instruments for thy glory: Let them turn
many from their wicked ways unto thee the living God, and hereafter let them
shine as Stars of the Firmament, in thy Kingdom. O let not the Lights of the
World any more be put under Bushels, but keep them in their Candlesticks, that
they may give light to all that are in the House. Let not Jeroboam's Priests
profane thy service, but let the seed of Aaron still minister before thee. And
O thou Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, succor and relieve all that
are in affliction, and deliver the outcast and poor; help them to right that
suffer wrong: Let the sorrowful sighing of the Prisoners and the Captives come
before thee, and according to the greatness of thy Power preserve thou those
that are appointed to die. Grant easy to those that are in pain, health to
those that are in Sickness. (Here mention any that you know in that Condition.)
Give them patience and contentation under this thy Visitation, and a happy
Issue out of all their Afflictions, when and which way it shall seem best to
thy godly Wisdom; only so preserve them by thy Grace that Christ may be unto
them, whether in Life or Death, advantage. Give suitable supplies to all that
are in want, to all presumptuous sinners give a sense of their sins, and to all
despairing, a sight of thy mercy; and do thou, O Lord, for every one above what
they can ask or think; forgive my Enemies, Persecutors or Slanderers, overcome
all their evil with thy infinite goodness; turn their hearts, and draw them
powerfully to thy self. Pour down thy blessings on all my Friends and
Benefactors, all that have commended themselves to my prayer, or that I am
bound to pray for, especially, etc. (Here specify thy nearest relations,
particular Friends, and all committed to thy Charge.) O Lord infuse Grace where
it is not, and where it is weak, do thou strengthen it; give them all things
necessary for their Souls and Bodies, guide them here by thy counsel, and
afterward receive them to thy self in glory: And grant, O merciful Father,
that through this Blood of the Cross, we may all be presented pure and
unblamable, and unreproveable in thy sight; that so we may be admitted into
that place of Purity, where no unclean thing can enter; there together with
Saints and Angels, to sing eternal Praises, Doxologies and Alelujahs to Father,
Son, and holy Ghost, for ever. Amen.

Either before or immediately after this Intercession, make an oblation unto
God of something for the Poor, or Pious Uses; and if it be the tenth of all thy
Acquists, thou will in the end be no looser by it, but 'twill prove unto thee a
piece of frugal prodigality: He that sows bountifully, shall reap
bountifully; 2 Cor. 9.6. We put our money into sure hands, it is but lent
though it be given. We engage God himself, and he will pay us again; Pro.
19.17. This is the Fast that God has chosen and delights in, Isa. 58.7. This
stock that you thus lay up, is the treasure that you send before you to heaven,
your Friend of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when these earthly things
fail, will receive you into everlasting habitations. It Is called a Sacrifice
wherewith God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. and again Phil. 4.18. a Sacrifice
acceptable, well pleasing to God. St. Augustine, says, that Jejunium sine
Eleemosina, Lampas sine Oleo: Fasting without Alms is a Lamp without Oil: It
may show beautiful to the Eye, but will never lead you by it is light to Heaven.

When you have separated that portion which you cheerfully design for this
Charitable Use, it may not be amiss if you offer and devote it to God in this
or the like manner:

O Blessed Lord God, I know that my goodness extends not to thee, thou art
infinitely happy in and from thy self alone, Lucret.
and wants nothing of ours to make any addition to thy happiness: Yea, O Lord,
all that we have and enjoy, is from thy bounty and goodness, and I can
retribute nothing to thee, but what must first come from thee: Yet, O Lord,
seeing there are many of thy poor necessitous Servants that stand in need of
our Charity, and thou have said that whatsoever we do unto these, we do it unto
thee; in consideration of my duty and thy mercies, I here offer and devote unto
thee for pious and holy uses, this small portion as thou have been pleased to
bless me the week past: O let it be a Sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing in
thy Sight, through^ Jesus Christ. Amen.

Put this up in the poor Man's Purse by it self.

By this course thou will have always something in store by thee to give all
indigent persons, as there is opportunity offered; and this great advantage
thou will have by it also, thou will not give grudgingly (as the Apostle terms
it 2; Cor. 9.7.) or murmur when a poor Man asks an Alms of thee, Deuteronomy. 15.10.
for thou look upon this stock as not thy own, and thy self only as Gods
Purser, and the Hand to dispense it; yea thou will rejoice and give God thanks
when thou have a fit opportunity to distribute, do good, and refresh the hungry
bowels of thy poor Brother.

After this spend some time in Reading, or Meditating, or both: Then call to
mind and consider your Mercies both Spiritual and Temporal, which you have in
the foregoing Week received at the hands of God; and if they have been any way
eminent, omit not to commit them to your Diary, where also you may place your
Vows, if you have made any (the benefit which may accrue from hence I shall
hereafter show you.)

If you have no other mercies but the preservation of you from your own
vile-Lusts Lusts and Affections, from Presumptuous Sins, and from Death and
Damnation, for the Temporal Mercies of each particular day, and the mercies
even of this day, thou have Matter enough of thanksgiving; therefore you cannot
do better than conclude your Fast with Praises and Thanksgiving.

The Thanksgiving and Conclusion of the Work.
O Most holy and for ever blessed Lord, God, thy Name only is excellent and thy
praise above Heaven and Earth.

Heaven is thy Throne, and that thou fillest with thy Majesty, the Earth is but
thy Footstool, and yet that thou fillest with thy Goodness. O how great are
thy tender Mercies to us O Lord, how large is the Sum of them! If I would
declare them and speak of them, they are more than I am able to express. I may
as well count the sands upon the Sea Shore, or the drops of the Ocean, as
enumerate thy favors. Thou did at first create me out of nothing, instamp
thine own Image upon me, and gave me Dominion over the Works of thy hands.
Thou art he that took me out of my Mothers womb: By thee have been holden up
ever since I was Born: thy Almighty hand has constantly supported me, and thy
Providence watched over me; and I still acknowledge my dependence on thee. When
Mankind had departed from thee by Disobedience, and erased that Image and
Innocence in which he was created, and for feited that Right to all thy Mercies
which thou freely and undeservedly at first gave him, and made himself
obnoxious to thy Wrath and eternal Misery, thou have not abhorred our Nature,
but have so loved and honored thy sinful Creatures, as to manifest thy self in
our Flesh. O! that Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and
declare the Wonders that he does for the Children of Men. I revere and adore
thee, O Most Glorious Majesty, for the Son of thy love, and for all those
mercies we enjoy in and through him: I praise and magnify thy holy Name for
the Mission of thy holy Spirit, to be the Seal of our Adoption, the Sanctifier
of our Souls, the Earnest of the Inheritance of the Saints, and the First
Fruits of Everlasting Felicity: that thou have spared me so long, and given me
so large a time for Repentance, whereas thou might have justly long since
cut me off in my Sins, and sent me headlong into eternal Destruction.

Had I no other Mercies but (Here enumera^^ thy spiritual Mercies) I have
sufficient matter for perpetual Praise and Thanksgiving: O what, what shall I
render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me? I will take the
Cup of Salvation, and will call upon the Name of the Lord: Worthy is the Lamb
that was slain, to receive Riches and Wisdom, and Honor, and Power, and Glory
and Blessing: Wherefore Blessing and Honor, Glory and Power be unto him that
sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever.

Besides, O Lord, those Spiritual Mercies, I have infinite Obligations upon me
to bless and praise thee for those Temporal ones I have, and do yet enjoy: Thou
followest me with thy goodness day by day, and loadest me with thy benefits
every moment: It is a great mercy that I live, and a greater that I enjoy not
only the necessaries, but the comforts of Life. Thou have been wonderfully
gracious unto me in thy protections of me from, and deliverances out of many
apparent dangers: I desire with all thankfulness to remember (here mention thy
deliverances) many more I have forgotten, or which I have suffered to pass
unregarded through inadvertency; for all which my Soul does magnify the Lord,
and all that is within me praises his holy Name: Praise thou the Lord O my
Soul.

Blessed be thy holy Name, in particular for the fresh Testimonies of thy
mercies this day, for that thou have put it into my heart, and given me an
opportunity now to humble my self before thee by Prayer and Fasting, to call my
self to an account of my Sins, to make steadfast Resolutions against them, to
beg thy preventing Grace, to render thee thanks for thy Mercies, and to
endeavor a reconcilation with thee, and for any assurance of thy love and
favor, which thou have given in unto my Soul. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and
forget not all or any of his benefits. And now I beseech thee, O blessed God,
to accept of my Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, of my Fasting and
Humiliation, Alms and Oblation, and do thou smell a sweet savor from them: Let
it be a Sacrifice well pleasing and acceptable in thy sight, though not for any
worth in it self, yet in and for the Merits of Jesus Christ.

I confess, O Lord, should thou be extreme to mark the Iniquities of my holy
things, my Prayers have need to be prayed for, my Repentance to be repented of,
and my Humiliations and Fastings to be humbled and fasted for: But, O Lord,
consider I pray thee that I am flesh and blood, yea dust and ashes, and so pity
and pardon all my Infirmities, and deal with me not according to the weakness
of my performances, but according to the riches of thy mercy in and through
Jesus Christ: Seal unto my Soul the pardon of all those sins that I have this
day confessed before thee, and begged pardon at thy hands for (especially, etc.)
and not only those but all others, known or secret, of what Nature or what kind
soever: Grant unto me all those Graces I have this day desired, or thou see
me to stand in need of (especially, etc.) give me Grace to resist all Sin for
the time to come, not to regard any Iniquity in my heart, but to abstain from
the very appearance of Evil, to have respect unto all thy Commandments, and to
serve thee by a constant, sincere, uniform, and impartial Obedience, all the
days of my Life.

O mind me continually of all my Vows and Obligations, and I pray thee let me
receive such strength from thee, as may enable me readily to perform the same:
Of my self I am a frail weak Creature, obnoxious to the arrests and victory of
all temptations, O do thou perfect thy strength in my weakness, and let thy
Grace be sufficient for me. O deliver me (Blessed God) from my own self, and
save me or I perish everlastingly, that so when I appear again before thee in
this manner, I may find I have gotten Strength over my Corruptions, and that I
can now run the way of thy Commandments, because thou have set my Feet at
liberty.

And now, O Lord, seeing thou have been pleased to promise that thou will give
thy holy Spirit to them that ask it, I most humbly and ardently beseech thee to
send down this holy Spirit into my heart, and let him take possession there,
and rule, and reign, and govern therein for ever. And let this Spirit of thine
also, if thou see it fit (in the close of this Exercise) assure my Soul of my
pardon and reconciliation with thee, and let me have any, even the least taste
of those joys, those ravishments of thy Love wherewith some of thy Saints have
been so transported, that I may never be weary of well-doing, nor faint in my
mind, but may run the way of thy Commandments with cheerfulness and alacrity,
and may very feelingly, and in the sincerity of my heart confess, that thy ways
are ways of pleasantness, and all thy paths are Peace.

Hear me O Lord for my self: Hear me for others: Hear others for me, and hear
the Intercessions of thy dear Son Jesus Christ for us all. In whose prevailing
Name and holy Words I conclude my imperfect Prayers and Services, saying, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy love, O heavenly Father, thy sweet and
comfortable Fellowship, O holy, blessed, and glorious Spirit of Grace, be with
me and remain with me always. Amen.

This being over, leave thy Closet, and carry thy self with a Cheerful gravity
toward thy own Family or others; that thon appear not unto M^n to fast: Mat.
6.18. then receive the good Creatures of God with moderation and thankfulness,
and conclude the day as you do other Days.

You having been for some time constant in this Duty, your Soul will still call
for it, as your hungry Stomach will for food; and you will delight in the
^eturns of it. Some time the Week after it may be very profitable if you review
your Catalogue of old Sins, and your holy resolutions against them, that you
may be still humbled for the one, and be put in mind to perform the other. And
because I have here mentioned the Catalogue of Sins, I shall in the next place
show you the reasons and benefits of keeping such a Catalogue or Narative by
you, and afterward direct you to the manner of doing it, by giving you ^n
Exemplification thereof in some Sins.

Reasons why we ought to keep such a Narrative, or Catalogue of our Sins, and
the benefits of it.
1. FIrst the committing of our Sins to such a Diary, or Catologue, ^eeps them
in perpetual Memory, and makes them (in David's phrase, Psalm. ^1.3) to be ever
before us, so that we may Novas agere penitentias, renew our ^epentance for
them, which probably was ^ot so complete at first as it ought to have been,
besides we should think such Sins never sufficiently bewailed and repented of,
and possibly too our memory may be too willingly treacherous, we may forget
them, or at least the aggravating Circumstances of them: we desire God indeed
not to remember them, but then we our selves must and ought.

2. The committing of our Sins to such an Accomptal, makes us presently to
remember when God sends any Judgment upon us, for what particular Sin it is.

Punishment is the natural effect and consequence of Sin: God many a times
spares when we deserve punishment, but he never punishes us without our
demerits; yea God many times does so adapt the punishment to the sin, that we
may very intelligibly read the one in the other; and then we shall have this
benesit, that understanding the Cause, we may hasten to the Cure, confess and
bewail the same, kiss his Rod, acknowledge the Justice of his proceedings, and
say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and just are thy Judgments: This affliction is
but the genuine product of my Sin, I may thank my self for it, and therefore I
will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him; the
Cup is bitter, but salutary. God chastens me here, that he may satisfy his
Justice, and spare me hereafter: And so the Sin repented of, the removal of the
Judgment soon follows, seeing it has answered that end for which it was sent.

3. The keeping our sins in memory has this great benefit in it, to teach us
how to arm our selves against the same sins for the time to come. If we have
been once foiled by an Adversary, it is ten to one but (if we have adverted to
it) we may easily remember what it was that gave him the advantage over us, and
so like Alfrid strongly prepare against the next Assault: Si modo victus erat
ad crastina bella parabat. It will be no difficult matter, having an account of
your sin, and the circumstances of it, to re-collect also what inducements and
temptations prevailed against you; at what avenue the sin entered, and so thou
may immediately guard and fortify thy self, that thou do not twice fall by
the same Stratagem.

4. It is profitable that you may see what strength you have got over them, and
know how to keep your ground against them. Though an Enemy be several times
repulsed, yet if he be still potent, subtle and malicious, he will not cease to
assassinate. King Alfrid sat as unquiet, when he was Conqueror as when he was
conquered.

Si modo victor erat ad cras^ina bella pavebat. We have entered the lists
against a strong and malicious Combatant (...), the Enemy of Mankind by way of
Eminency, and he is constantly upon his Guard, going his Round, and seeking
whom he may devour; and so subtle, that like Hanibal he will lay an Ambush even
in the smoothest Field: let us not therefore ^emit our watchfulness or diminish
our force, lest he again enter, and our last Estate be worse than the first.

5. A fifth Reason is, That we may frustrate the Devils great Design and
Endeavor, which is either to make them appear small in our Eyes when they are
indeed very great, or else to hide them altogether from us until the Judgment
of the great Day.

No sin is indeed positively small, being committed against a God of infinite
purity and holiness, but comparatively so, with relation to other sins; but yet
the Devil is such an Impostor, that he would needs persuade us, that even great
sins are no sins at all, or very small ones, peccadillo's; and tells us as Lot
of Zoar, Is it not a little one? It Is but a small inconsiderable Lust, a humane
Frailty, this will not ruin thy Soul, many thousands are guilty of far greater
than this. Thus he will endeavor to hood-wink thee for the present, but then
at the hour of Death, or day of Judgment, he will take off this Vail, and open
thine Eyes, when to thine astonishing amazement, thou will find how miserably,
how irremediably thou have been deceived.

The constant sight of thy sins will be apt to raise thy thankfulness to God,
for being delivered from the power of them. Sin is the greatest Evil, and if we
once come to be sensible of it, we shall not only fly from it, but have our
hearts enlarged with the greatest thankfulness to God for our delivery from the
power and dominion of it.

Lastly, The keeping of such a Catalogue, is very profitable, that by reflex
thoughts on our sins, we may be kept in the greater humility and low opinion of
our selves. We have generally in our Natures an inbred Principle of Pride,
which puffs us up with a vain conceit of our selves, and more especially in
respect of Grace, with which being but slenderly imbued, we are presently
opinionated of our selves, undervalue others, and think that we have arrived to
the very (...) and height of Grace in a moment; not unlike your young
Sophisters, who having suddenly sucked in some of the Elements of Logic and
Philosophy, think as well or better of themselves than the Doctors of the
Chair. Now the serious remembrance of our former Obliquities and Follies, will
be apt to chastise this Vanity, and correct our Pride.

It is storied of the Peacock, that though his Train be never so much expanded,
and his Crest elevated, yet one glance of his Eye upon his black Feet, will
presently depress his Crest, shrink and contract his Plume. In the highest^
thoughts of our selves, the consideration of our great enormous sins (if we be
any way pious or ingenious) will humble us, and make us confess, That in us
dwells nothing that is good.

He that covers his sin shall not prosper; but he that confesses his sin
shall find mercy.

The manner of keeping your Narrative, and an Exemplification of it in some
Sins.
SUffer no sin to pass by you unregarded, and make every day a particular
reflection upon the actions of the day (as before directed) that you may
discover what sins you have been guilty of, and what most inclined to: And if
there be any sin (upon Examination) found besides the common Frailties of
humane Nature, in which your Conscience must not be partial, commit it to your
Diary, and when you sum up all on your Fastday, you may have a particular
Paper Book for that purpose, and proceed after this method:

Jan. -- I fasted, and found my self guilty of unclean and unchaste thoughts,
and with delight and approbation of my will: Of some frothy and corrupt
Communication, and of a propensity to unclean Actions. Upon Examination of my
self I find, that drinking of Wine or strong Liquors; using too plentiful
Feeding, Softness and Delicacy, and suffering my thoughts to rove and wander;
has been the chiefest cause that has drawn on this Sin. Upon which I intend
(God assisting me) thus to regulate my self for the future.

1 First, I will labor to keep my body under by a low spare Diet, avoiding
drinking much Wine or Strong Drinks: by spare sleeping; and using hard postures
in my Prayers.

2 I will keep a strict Watch over my Thoughts, and not permit any that are
sinful or unclean to enter within me, much less give them entertainment; but as
soon as they offer themselves to my fancy, I will labor to divert them by holy
and heavenly Meditations and Ejaculations.

3 I will avoid all light and vain Company, frothy Discourse, idle Talk, and
the like.

4 I will pray often unto God for a clean Heart and purity of Spirit, for
Temperance and Diligence.

Likewise found my self guilty of misspending my time in vain and idle
Thoughts, Discourse, Company Keeping, Recreations, etc. which I purpose by
God's grace thus to avoid.

1 First, I will consider every morning what I am to do that day, what time my
Business or my Studies exact from me; and so draw out as it were a platform of
the whole days business, allowing my self so much time for this thing, and so
much for the other, that I may have no time to spend idly.

2 I will be often thinking how precious my time is, that I shall shortly give
a strict account for it; and that for ought I know time this day may expire in
eternity, or at least may be no more as to me. God has taught me the great
value of it by his strait-handedness in the distribution of it, insomuch that
he gives me not two minutes together, but when he gives me one, he takes away
the other.

3 I will fill up the chasms and intervals of my business with holy
Meditations, and take all opportunities to bless and praise Almighty God, and
to excite others to do the same.

Lastly, I will watch over my own heart, and withdraw my thoughts, when I
perceive them ramble, That so in the whole series and connection of them I may
be careful to prevent what is idle and impertinent, and may use my self to
think only of such things, of which if a Man upon a sudden should ask me, What
it is I am thinking? I may freely answer with that Royal (tho Pagan)
Philosopher, this and that. Antonin. Medit. p. 55. Found my self also Guilty of
much deadness, dullness, and wandering Thoughts in my Devotions. Exaamining my
self, I found the cause to be want of keeping my self always in an habitual
temper of seriousness and piety; want of due praemeditation before I come to
pray, and not keeping that watch over my own heart in prayer as I ought. Upon
which I resolved by God's assistance,

1 First, To endeavor to abstract my self from multiplicity of business and
cares in the World, and by frequent returns of my Soul to God, to keep my self
in an habitual frame and temper of piety continually.

2 I will always before my Devotions prepare my self with such Meditations as
these: That that God before whom I am now going to appear, is a God of infinite
Majesty and Glory: That nothing but what is hearty and from the ground of the
soul is accepted by him: That it is the fervent prayer only that is effectuaal
and prevails with him: How great need I have of those things that I come to
ask; and that for ought I know this may be the last opportunity I may have to
put up any petition unto God.

3 I will be sure to keep a strict watch over my heart in prayer, and if I find
my thoughts straggling, I will presently chide my self, and recollect them with
greater fervency, to cross the Devil's design therein.

4 If all my care cannot yet prevent, I will implore God's mercy and pardon
after, and continue to pray for the Spirit of Supplication and Devotion until I
have obtained it.

Lastly, Found my self guilty of some ^incture of Hypocrisy, directing my
Words and Christian Actions to the end of praise and esteem of Men, to be
thought Religious, etc. which I purpose ^o avoid.

1 By considering the hainousness of ^his Sin, how detestable it is to God, and
odious to Man.

2 If I embrace this praise of Men, ^his is like to be all the reward I shall
have for all my strict and holy Walking. ^erily, says our Savior of the
Scribes and Pharisees, who did all their holy ^uties for ostentation, and to be
seen of Men, they have their reward; and may expect none from God in another
World.

3 Let me take care of harboring any thoughts of my own Excellencies in
respect of Grace, etc. or of ascribing any praise and glory to my self, which
is due only to God, and say, Not unto me, not unto me, but unto God give the
glory.

Thus I have given you a taste of the manner of keeping your Narrative, and the
examples of it in some Sins, which you may your self enlarge as there is
occasion.

The use of this Narrative or Catalogue of Sins is obvious to every one,
especially good Christians, who alone, o^ else such as desire to be so, (I
suppose) give themselves the trouble of perusing this Manual. I have given some
Account of it before, and shall therefore now but briefly touch on it.

The great use of it is, That on days of Fasting and Humiliation (especially
before the Sacrament) you may read them over with a serious consideration,
examining your own Conscience strictly, with all the heightning circumstances,
which may make them seem more odious in thy sight, and raise in thee a deeper
Sorrow, Contrition, and Repentance for them; also to work in thee serious
Resolutions against them for the time to come, and that not only in general,
but particular, every sin; and consider what it was that induced thee to the
commission of this or that sin, and resolve to avoid the occasions of it for
the future; and also what it is that may be most useful to thee toward the
attainment of this or that Grace, which thou either want, or is but faint
and weak in thee.

And as it will be fit for thee to keep by thee a Catalogue of thy Sins, so I
judge it will be no less profitable also to preserve a Catalogue of any
extrordinary Mercies that God has vouchsafed to thee in the whole course of
thy Life, whether Spiritual or Temporal: And here seeing Gods Mercies are like
himself, infinite, it will be impossible for me to set down any definite number
of them; and therefore I shall leave it to every particular person to make his
own Collection and Observation.

But certainly the Spiritual Advantages will be very great, to intermix the
remembrance of Gods Mercies, with the remembrance of his own Sins; especially
at such a time of Humiliation: it will conduce much to the augmenting of his
sorrow and contrition for sin: for when the pious Soul shall thus reason with
himself: Lord I have daily provoked thee to displeasure by my sinful and wicked
Life, though thou have followed me day by day with thy Mercies. I have
crucified my Blessed Savior afresh, and put him to an open shame, though he
thought it not too much to suffer such great things, and at last to die for me,
to rescue me from everlasting Damnation. I have grieved thy holy Spirit by my
frequent Oppositions of his blessed Motions, who would have led me to
Repentance, and has often courted and invited me to it; and when I have run
wilfully into Sin, O what earnest solicitations has he made unto me to
forbear? Thus and thus, O Lord, have thou done for me, but yet what unworthy
returns have I made for all this love of thine? O my Soul! can thou think of
this without remorse? Can thou forbear condemning thy self, and justifying
God? And to say, Thou, O Lord, art Righteous, but I am Vile and Wicked; thy
ways are upright and equal, but mine very crooked and unequal: thou have not
dealt with me after my Sins, nor rewarded me according to my Iniquities. This
was the Method that God himself took with David to work him to a true
Compunction of Spirit, after he had been guilty of Adultery and Murder, 2 Samuel
12.7, 8. where you have God reckoning up the Mercies he had conferred on David;
I anointed thee King over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul,
and I gave thee thy Masters House, and thy Masters Wives into thy Bosom, and
gave thee the House of Israel and of Judah; and if that had been too little, I
would moreover have given unto thee such and such things; which in the 13. v.
made him with sorrow of heart confess that he had sinned. So in Deuteronomy. 32.6. Is
not he thy Father that has bought thee? has not he made thee, and established
thee? Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise?

Directions for Saturday.
THings of great moment are never so well performed, as when there has some
preparation gone before to usher them in: Hence it is that we read John 19.31.
of the preparation of the Passover (which was the day before it was to be
celebrated) and Mark 15.42. of the preparation of the Sabbath. Moses taught the
People over Night to remember the Sabbath, Exodus 16.23. and our Savior
himself sends Peter and John beforehand to prepare the Passover, Luke 22.8.
Here is a memorandum annexed to this Commandment, which is not to any other, as
if God had said, Remember beforehand to keep holy the Sabbath day. A Man must
not think he can step from his Shop-board, or his Plough, or his Recreations,
into the Church, and perform a Sacrifice well pleasing to God. Alas! our
hearts are so corrupt, and our memories so tenacious of the vanities and things
of this World, that it is no easy matter to give them a dismission; and I fear
when we have done our utmost) even our best preparations are very mank and
imperfect; and certainly I cannot easily be induced to be lieve that he designs
to sanctify the Sabbath, who (without some manifest and necessary hindrance)
does not make some preparation for it before it comes.

You may therefore in order to it make use of this following Method:

The Forenoon, and till Three in the Afternoon (which if I mistake not, was the
beginning of the preparation of the Sabbath among the Jews) you may spend as
you do other days; only it may be your care so prudnetly to dispose of your
common Affairs, that they may be about that time at an end: The remaining part
of the day, and till you betake your self ^o rest (which should be earlier than
on ^^her days, that you and your Family may rise the earlier the next Morning)
^ou cannot do better than spend in pri^ate Prayer; for Devotion, Sincerity,
^aith, Thankfulness, and other Graces, which are fit for the Actions of the
following day, or that you find your self ^o stand in need of, or in public
Pray^rs in the Church, if there be any (as (...) is great pity there should
not) in reading the Scripture or some other good Book, in Meditation, and the
like holy Exercises.

In the close of your Evening Devotions, desire God to fit and prepare you for
the great business of the ensuing day, that he will banish all vain and and
worldly Thoughts, Desires and Cares; that he will fill thy Soul with Affections
suitable to thy Duty; that so lying down in his fear, and being awak'ned to the
Comforts of the succeeding day, thy Soul may be affected with the Majesty of
it, and thy Mouth filled with his praise; that he will abstract thy thoughts
from all the Vanities and Concerns of this World, and sublime them to a higher
degree of Purity, that so beginning his day in his fear, thou may wholly
spend it in his Service, and end it in his favor; to the Glory of his great
Name, the discharge of thy Duty, the comfort of thy Soul here, and everlasting
Happiness hereafter, in and through Jesus Christ.

Having thus prepared thy self, thou may not fear to want the Assistance of
Gods Spirit in the Duties of the following day, which though thou art not so
strictly able to perform as God requires, yet thou may do it so as he will be
pleased to accept in and through Jesus Christ.

Directions for the Lords Day.
AS soon as you are awaked in the Morning, lift up your Soul to God by some
Devout Ejaculations, or short Prayer, and say,

This is the day which the Lord has made, I will be glad and rejoice in it;
Psalm. 118.24.

Grant, That as Christ was raised up from the dead by the Glory of the Father,
even so I also may walk in newness of Life: Romans 6.4.

Because thou live, I shall live also; Joh. 14.19.

Thanks be to God, who has not appointed us to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation
by our Lord Jesus Christ; who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep, we
should live with him; 1 Thessalonians. 5.^, 10. Knowing that he which raised up ^he
Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by Jesus: 2 Cor. 4.14. and shall present us
faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy: Jude 24.

Glory be to God on high, on Earth peace, good will toward Men: Luke 2.14.

Thou art my God, and I will thank thee; thou art my God, and I will exalt
thee: Psalm. 118.28.

Then rise out of your Bed, and that too more early than upon any other day in
which you follow your Worldly Emplyments, to show your greater readiness to
serve God than your self. When you are dressed retire to your Closet, and keep
a strict guard over your thoughts, that you suffer nothing (if possible) of any
Worldly thing to enter there, but meditate that you are to keep this day in the
blessed memory of your Lord and Savior's Resurrection, and of the great
goodness of God in vouchsafing you the liberty of another Sabbath day, the
continuance of his Word and Ordinances; whereas there are many thousands which
yet sit in Darkness and the Shadow of Death: And therefore resolve with thy
self to spend it entirely to his Glory, and in his Service; and that not only
in general but in particular: and draw out as it were a platform of thy holy
performances that day, and resolve with thy self thus and thus to spend the
day: as first I will read and meditate, then I will offer up unto God my
Morning Sacrifice of prayer and praises in private by my self, afterward with
my family: Then I will spend the time between this and the public prayers, in
examining my self concerning any unrepented Sin, in Reading, Meditation,
Singing Psalms, or the like.

Then betake thy self humbly to thy knees, and pray fervently and earnestly
unto Almighty God, and praise his name, desiring God in the conclusion, to
inflame thee with a spiritual zeal and affection; that thou may enter into
his Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise: that thy soul may
be satisfied with the fullness of his House, as with marrow and fatness: That he
will give thee reverence in his House, and a holy dread and awe of his more
immediate presence there: that he will give thee fervency in thy Devotions,
attention unto his Word, a retentive memory and grace to reduce the same to
practice ^n thy Life and Conversation: In a word, that he will so assist thee
with his holy Spirit, that thou may perform all those duties God requires
of thee, so as they may be well-pleasing and acceptable in his sight; that so
at the end of the day, upon examination of thy self, thou may not find any
thing to charge thy Conscience with, whereby thou have omitted any part of thy
duty, or committed any sin against God. Forget not to pray also for all the
faithful Ministers of God's holy Word, that God would open their Lips that
their Mouths may show forth his praise; that they may deliver his word with
power and efficacy, to the convincing the most obdurate sinner, and comforting
the feeble minded; and in particular, pray that God who knows the several
Conditions of all Men, that he would be with the Spirit of that his Servant,
who is to be the Dispenser of his Word unto thee that day, and put a Word into
his Mouth, which may particularly respect thy own Condition, and give thee
grace to apply it to thy self, and to practice it; and finally that he will be
with all Congregations that are that day assembled in his faith, Fear, etc.

A prayer comprizing these Petitions you have in the subsequent pages.

At the time appointed for Divine Service call thy whole family together, and
go toward God's House, but not without considering where thou art going; Keep
thy Foot, Eccl. 5.1. and go not without longing Desires, and hearty
Ejaculations, and though thy tongue should be silent yet thy heart should speak
the louder, and let it say;

As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O
God. My soul is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall I
come and appear before him? One day in thy Courts is better then a Thousand: I
had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents
of ungodliness, etc.

As thou art Entering say, Surely the Lord is in this place. Surely this is no
other but the House of God, this is the Gate of Heaven.

When thou art Entered into the House, uncover thy Head, and if thou followest
the Custom of the Greek Church (to put a distinction between the House of God,
and that which is profane or common) and bowest thy self, lifting up their
Ejaculation, (...). God be merciful to me a Sinner, thou will show thy
reverance to the Place, and him that is said to dwell in it, and give no
offense to truly pious Christians, who do not esteem any essential but a
relative holiness inherent in it.

When thou come into thy Seat kneel down, and use this or the like short
Prayer.

O Thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel, who dwell between the
Cherubims, and yet are pleased not only to permit, but to invite thy poor
sinful Creatures to draw near unto thee, even for their own soul's Good: I who
am not worthy to tread thy Courts, am here bold to present my self, to hear
what the Lord will say unto me: O Pardon all my sins and frailties, which make
me unworthy to appear in thy presence, and so assist me with thy holy Spirit
that I may so perform all those duties thou requirest of me here, that they may
be well-pleasing and acceptable in thy sight, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

Be sure to go early to the house of God, at least before the Minister begins
with the prayers of the Church, and if any overplus of time remain before,
spend it not in gazing about, or in vain worldly discourse (as is too common)
or in sleeping, or the like, but take thy Common Prayer Book, and thy Bible,
and turn to the Service of the Church, the Lessons, Epistle and Gospel, and if
there be yet spare time, read over the latter, and see how fitly the prudence
and piety of the Church have adapted them to the day, and treasure up all those
good Lessons and Instructions contained therein, in thy mind. When the Minister
is about to begin, say O Lord be with the Spirit of thy Servant in the
Discharge of his present duty, and open thou his Lips that his Mouth may show
forth thy praise. When the Minister begins with the sentences, stand up, as
also at the reading or singing of the Psalms (which was a Custom used by the
Ancients and now continued by many good Christians) because they are of a
sublime nature, and full of holy Prayers and Ejaculations: stand up likewise at
the Hymns, Creed and Gospel: kneel at the Confession, Absolution, Litany, the
Decalogue, and all the Prayers, and content not your self with that slovenly
posture of sitting or careless leaning, too common with many: God who made both
for his glory, expects the worship of the body as well as that of the Soul, and
certainly where there is real devotion and spiritual affection in the heart, it
will discover it self by an outward reverence in the body. At the end of every
prayer say an hearty Amen, a Custom which our times (which pretend to so much
zeal) has quite laid aside, not following our Saviors example, Matthew. 6.13.
who placed it at the end of his own Prayer, nor the commands of the Apostles, 1 Corinthians. 14.16.

Be very attentive to the Absolution, and when the Minister pronounces those
Words, And has given power and commandment to his Ministers to declare and
pronounce to his people, being penitent, the absolution and remission of their
sins: He pardons, etc. Do thou thus ejaculate, O Lord confirm now I beseech
thee this power unto thy Servant.

Do thou ratify and establish in Heaven what thy Servant does now on Earth:
Amen, even Amen Lord Jesus.

Make your alternate responses with an audible voice, and still bear your part
in the Doxology, Glory be to the Father, etc.

Do not slubber over your Devotions, but regard the manner as well as the
matter: pray with fervency, and that for others (in any Sickness or Affliction)
as well as for thy self, and as if thou were in the same condition thou
would desire them to do for thee: sing and praise God with the Spirit:
Attend unto the Word of God read and preached, with all diligence and
carefulness, and as unto the Word of God, and not of Man. Suffer not thy Eyes
to rove and wander, or any vain thoughts to enter within thee, to choke the
good Word, and to that end fix thy eyes constantly on the Minister, and what
things are profitable for instruction, revolve often in thy mind, that thou
may remember them, or (if thou be so disposed) write down the Sermon.

Show respect to the Place and Ordinance, by keeping thy head uncovered: (...)
never knew any take Cold in the Church. Depart not from God's House without the
final Blessing, which receive (according to the primitive manner) upon thy
knees, and rise not till thou have made his short prayer:

BLessed be thy Holy name, O Lord, for all thy mercies, chiefly for this thy
gracious opportunity: O Lord accept of my weak and imperfect Services, pardon
their frailties and imperfections: Sanctify unto me all thy Ordinances, and
continue such thy mercies unto me for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

As soon as thou returnest from the Church, retire into thy Closet, offer up a
short prayer of thanksgiving again unto God, praising him for his mercies, and
desiring him to sanctify unto thee that good Word thou have heard, that it may
bring forth Fruit in thee to the amendment of Life, that so it may in the end
prove to be the Savor of Life unto Life, and not of Death unto Death; that he
will bring again to thy rememberance what profitable Instructions thou have
heard, and write them in thy mind, and by the power of his Grace dispose thy
Soul to a constant obedience of them.

Then if thou have omitted to do it before, commit to Writing what mos^
practical Lessons thou have been taught. Then receive the good Creatures
provided for thee, with cheerfulness and thankfulness, yet keeping a more
strict Watc^ over thy self than on other days, tha^ thou be not guilty of vain,
idle an^ worldly discourse: Eat moderately, (...) as not to make thy self dull
or drowsy in the remaining Duties of the day, but so that thou may return
unto them with greater cheerfulness and gladness of heart.

After a little Parenthesis or Breathing, betake thy self again to thy
Retirement, and offer up thy Meridian Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, as
well for the Refreshments of thy Body as the Soul; and desire God to go with
thee again into his House, and to be present with thee by the Assistances of
his Holy Spirit, in the remaining Duties of the day, etc.

Then call thy Family together, make each read a Chapter, and read thy self
unto them out of some good Book, or explain those places of Scripture they have
read; or if thou art not able to do it thy self, make use of an Expositor.

When the time calls thee again to the Church, repair there with cheerfulness,
holy Meditations and Ejaculations, behaving thy self there as directed for the
Forenoon. When thou returnest home, again give Thanks, meditate on what thou
have heard, and consider whether nothing particular to thy condition has
proceeded out of the Ministers mouth, which has been the effect of thy former
Prayer; if so, give God thanks that he has heard thy Prayer, and be sure to
make particular Application of it to thy self.

Spend not the residue of the day (as too many loose and profane persons do)
either in Recreations or Pastimes, or (which is worse) at the Taverns and
Alehouses; but either in Reading, Medicating, holy Conference, Visiting the
Sick, praying either with them, or in private for them, especially for any who
have that day desired the Charity of the Public Prayers: pray also for those
Graces thou see thy self to stand in most need of; as, Faith, Hope, Chastity,
Temperance, Patience, Charity, Preseverance, etc.

After Supper call thy whole Family together, examine each person what they
have learned that day, and make them give thee an account: Encourage those that
have done wcll, and reprehend those that have been faulty. If they have not
been Catechized at the Church, Catechize them at home, and instruct them in the
Principles of Faith and other their Duties. Spend an hour or more in repeating
the Sermons, reading to them out of the Bible, or some Practical Author, or
causing them to read; and then conclude with a Psalm. Then you may withdraw,
and suffer your Family to do so too for a little while, that both your self and
they may have time to meditate on what has been read or taught.

Examine now your own Conscience impartially concerning the Sins of Omission
and Commission of the day, and of the Mercies received both Spiritual and
Temporal, that so you may beg pardon for the former, and render praises for the
latter. Then offer up your private Evening Devotions, which being done, prepare
your self for public Prayer in your Family, by Meditation, not only of the
subject Matter of your Petitions, but even of the most accomodated Expressions,
especially if you do not pray by a Form; and if you do, you may beforehand
consider of a convenient place to insert such Petitions, as either the
extraordinary occasions of the day, or the particular necessities of any of
your Family require, which you should be watchful over to understand. Then
close the duties of this day with your public Family Prayers, in which you may
find a place also to insert a Repetition of some profitable Truths that you
have learned from the Minister: You may pray against that Vice that has been
condemned, or for that Grace which has been commended, and desire God to write
his Law in your inward parts, and to give you all Grace to practice it in your
Lives and Conversations. Pray to God also for the pardon of your Frailties and
Imperfections in the discharge of your holy Duties: That he would bless his
Minister that has this day blessed you, that he would pour down a double
portion of his Spirit into his heart, and make him an eminent Instrument for
his glory; and finally may so live, and so preach, that he may both save
himself, and them that hear him. Pray also that he would continue such his
spiritual Mercies toward you, and make you to grow in knowledge, and to be more
fruitful under all the means of Grace, that so his Word may be unto you the
savor of Life unto Life, and not to any Soul of you, the savor of death unto
death, etc.

Thus shall thou sanctify this day unto the Lord, and the Lord will sanctify
thee unto himself: He will give thee of the blessings of this Life and that
which is to come: Remember the words of the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 58.13, 14. If
thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my Holy
day, and call the Sabbath a Delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thy own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking thine own words: Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I
will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with
the heritage of Jacob thy Father: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Of the holy Sacrament.
SHould I here go about to enumerate the many great benefits of this holy
Mystery, I might in the next page also reckon up all the benefits of Physic,
Meat, and Drink; for what there are to the Body, the other is to the Soul: Meat
and Drink are the Supporters of our Beings, strengthen the Powers and Abilities
of the Body, preserve its natural heat and vigor, and repair its decays; and
our Savior says of this Holy Sacrament, my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood
is Drink indeed; such as will not only like Meat strengthen and nourish, but
like Drink (or Wine) comfort, encourage and revive even drooping, dying Souls:
It came down from Heaven, and it is of Efficacy sufficient to translate us
thither; and as the Body being but a little deprived of Food, languishes, and
at last expires; even so is it with the Soul, being deprived of this spiritual
Sustenance (which is said to nourish the Soul unto Life everlasting) it
immediately grows sick, and at length dead unto all good Works: And then as the
Body by too great plenty of feeding at last contracts Corruption and Diseases,
and has need of some Physic to cleanse and purify it, and to preserve the
Blood from dangerous putrefactions, even so is it with the Soul, which by
conversing with the pleasures and delights of the World is apt to contract some
stain and foulness, which may here in this sacred Fountain be washed away and
cleansed, and the Soul by this Antidote preserved from future Corruptions.

It is not my design here to acquaint you with the nature, use, and end of this
Sublime Mystery, or with the manner of worthy receiving it; this being a
Province above my low Sphere or Capacity, and already so exactly done by the
Learned and Pious Authors of the Christian Sacrifice, Whole Duty of Man, Method
of Private Devotions, etc. to which I refer you. All that I shall say in it, is
to endeavor to press you to the frequency of communicating, which if we
consider the Will and Command of Christ, Luke 22.19. our continual wants and
necessities, and the great and inestimable benefits we reap by it, we should
not think our selves excused from any opportunity that offers it self, but
rather court every one, and if it be in our power, make it rather than want it;
for certainly if thou be a good Christian, thou will think every return too
slow, and confess with David, That as the Heart pants after the Rivers of
Waters, so pants thy Soul after God: That thy Soul is athirst for God, even
for the living God, when shall thou come and appear before him.

And if thou, not knowing it beforehand, come into a Congregation where the
Table is spread, or art suddenly invited to communicate with a sick or dying
person, I cannot see how thou can turn thy Back upon that sacred Ordinance,
although thy preparations are not according to the Sanctuary, or so strict as
they ought to have been, had thou had timely notice thereof. Supposing thee
therefore to be one who lives in an habitual preparation, (that is) in a daily
Examination of thy Conscience, and calling thy self to an account of thy Sins,
and in a constant performance of Religious duties, and even now lamenting that
thou have not more time to prepare thy self, so that what is wanting in Act is
made up in Desire, thou may undoubtedly draw near with comfort, and receive
as worthily (though not perhaps so much to thy own satisfaction) as if thou
had made a greater and more solemn preparation: and I must tell thee, who
ever thou art, that unless thou art thus always ready to receive, thou art in
no wise prepared to die; which that thou may be, I shall in the next Section
set down some short Rules and Directions, which may help thee toward it.

Remote Preparations for Death.
THere is nothing so much sharpens the sting of Death, and adds greater
malignity and venom to it than the want of due Consideration of it beforehand,
and Preparation for it. Inexpertata plus aggravant, novitasadjicit
calamitatibus pondus. Senec. Epist. 91. The suddenness and surprise of an evil
adds to the weight and smart of it. Death we are told is an enemy, 1 Corinthians.
15.26. and (you know) to be surprised by an Enemy puts all into tumult and
confusion, and permits not the free use of that reason and conduct that we
should otherwise have had upon a timely monition and preparation: Nay we are
told that it is the last enemy, and being to fight but this one battle, it will
be the greatest imprudence in the World not to muster up all our forces, not to
make all the provision we can beforehand, that we be not worsted in this last
Conflict: Non licet in bello his peccare: To fail once here is to fail for
ever: And we shall never have any opportunity more to rectify a former fault.
And therefore that you may not miscarry in so momentous a concern, take and
follow these brief Directions. First in the time of your greatest health carry
your self with the greatest innocence, watchfulness, and circumspection.
Endeavor to keep your Soul in an habitual frame and temper of piety
continually; abstain from the commission of any known Sin, and do not that at
any time, which if God should then call for thee (for no Man has any assurance
that he shall not die suddenly) thou would not be ashamed to be found doing.
If a sharp Sickness seizes our Bodies whilst we have a load of guilt upon our
Souls, what consternation and terror does it strike unto us? Our Sins stare us
in the face, our Consciences accuse us, our faces are appaled, and our thoughts
Distracted, to think that if this Sickness should prove our last, we must
certainly not only be excluded from God's presence for evermore, but have our
portion with Devils and Reprobates, in the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone to all eternity.

2. In the time of thy greatest health be frequent in the meditation of
Sickness and Death. Si sapis, utaris totis, Coline, diebus extremumque tibi
semper ad esse puta. Martial. It was the passionate Wish of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.29.
O that Men were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end! The consideration of our latter end beforehand is the very (...),
the highest pitch of wisdom and understanding: and on the contrary the putting
far from us the evil day is the perfection of folly. It is reported of Bilney
the Martyr, that he used some time before his Martyrdom to acquaint himself
with the heat and burning of a Candle, that the greater flames might not be
novel and strange unto him at the time of his Suffering. The Grave would be no
surprise to us if we did sometimes in our Health descend there in our thoughts
and meditations. Praecogitati mali mollis ictus venit. Senec. Ep. 76. Thou
may therefore sometimes when thou art in thy retirement fancy thy self to be
then Arrested with thy last Sickness, and consider then what thou would do,
and how thou would behave thy self in it: Imagine thy sickness long and
tedious, thy pains violent, thy nights wearisome and restless; think that thou
see thy helpless Friends mourning about thy Bed, and thy hands so feeble that
thou can not stretch them forth to take thy last farewell of them; and at
length find thy Spirits quite Languishing, thy Eye-strings Cracking, Cold
sweats bedewing thy Face, and thy extreme parts growing chill and dead, and thy
Soul just taking it is flight to appear in the presence of God. Believe it, This
is more than Romantic Story, or an Imaginary thing, and it is only a fancy with
relation to the difference of time, otherwise a great reality.

Thou may proceed farther likewise with these Considerations: Probably I may
die a sudden death, and may possibly be snatched hence before I have time to
make my peace with God, if I do it not now in the time of my health; and then
how shall I be of all men the most miserable: It is but the just reward of my
demerits for trifling away so much precious time as was allotted me for that
purpose: I know many have died suddenly, a Syncope, Imposthume, or an
Apoplexy, a small Obstruction in my Veins or Arteries, a Stone falling from the
top of a House, a fall from my Horse, a Thousand casualties and accidents may
take me off, or if I have the favor of a Deathbed, probably my pains may be
so sharp, a Lethargy or Phrensy may seize my head, and dethrone my reason, or
my thoughts may be so distracted, and in confusion, that I may be altogether
unfit then to perform the great Work of repentance, or secure my peace with
God: therefore take up holy Job's resolutions, Job 14.14. All the days of my
appointed time will I wait till my change shall come.

3. In the time of thy greatest Health lay up in store a stock of proper Graces
against the time of Sickness and Death. In the time of peace and quietness we
discover no want of our Armor, but let an Enemy invade us, we are sensible of
the folly of our neglect, because we are now destitute of that which should
secure us in our greatest necessity. If we provide not beforehand a stock of
Faith, and Patience, and most Christian Fortitude and Resolution; Armor to
shield, and Weapons to repel the Frauds and Encounters of our great Assailant
the Devil, which will then take all advantages of our weakness, we must
certainly be foiled in the Combat. The Graces then to be ex^^cised are chiefly
these, Faith, Hope R^p^ntance, Patience, Devotion, and Charity, of which I
shall speak more Particularly when I show you this manner of exercising them on
your Deathbed.

4. Set not your Affections too much on the World, and the vanities of it, but
wean your self from them by degrees, lest at last your heart come to be so
united to them, that you cannot think of leaving them without great Reluctance,
and you be apt with the Disciple to talk of building Tabernacles here and set
your Affections on things on the Earth more than things of Heaven; therefore
Love not the World nor the things of the World; Lay not your Affections that
way more than a natural convenience requires: put now your House in order, and
dispose of your outward concerns, prudently, piously, charitably, (Insere nunc
Maelibaee, pyros; pone ordine vites.) that so when you come to die, you may
have nothing else to do but to die; Emori satis est, and having nothing else,
to do it well: This alone will exact our greatest care, our greatest diligence.

5. Lastly, In the time of thy health be frequent in prayer unto God, that he
will fit and prepare thee for that fiery Trial, that so Death find thee not
unprovided. Pray often for those Graces that thou shall then have occasion to
make use of, that so, When this Earthly Tabernacle of thy Body shall be
dessolved, thou may have a Building with God, not made with hands, but
Eternal in the Heavens.

Of the Proximate Preparations for Sickness and Death.
FIrst, Therefore when it shall please God to visit thee with Sickness, ^hink
thus, This Sickness will put a pe^^od to my days; I shall now go to the ^ates
of the Grave, whence I shall not ^eturn; but before it comes to that, I ^ust
pass through a tedious Sickness, and ^ost acute Pains; but however, be it that
it will, I resolve by Gods Assi^ance, patiently to undergo it, and ^eerfully to
submit to Gods Will and ^easure in it: My Sins have deserved ^uch more, Thy
will (O Lord) be done (...) Earth as it is in Heaven.

If thy Distemper will suffer it, before ^ou take thy Bed, kneel down and
pray to God that he will sanctify unto thee this his Fatherly Chastisement,
give thee a cheerful patience under it, and convert this thy Sickness into the
advantages of Holiness and Religion; that he will strengthen thy Faith,
encourage thy Hope, support thy Weakness, pity thy Infirmities; and that being
tried, thou may come out of thy Affliction as Gold out of the Fire, more
pure and more refined, and more fit for thy Masters use: Or if he has in his
Wisdom otherwise disposed, that he will be unto thee in death as well as in
life advantage That he will not suffer thee to be temp^ed above what thou art
able, but with the Temptation will make a way for the to escape, that thou
may be able (...) bear it. That he will arm thee against all the Subtilties
and Assaults of the Devil, and discover to thee the sin for which he now sees
it fit to afflict thee; an^ make an absolute surrender of thy se^^ unto Gods
all-wise disposal.

2. As soon as thou art in thy Bed, an^ have leisure and privacy, begin while
thou have strength, and the free use (...) thy Reason (which possibly in some
acu^ Distempers thou may not long enjoy to renew thy Repentance, taking a
fre^ survey of all thy Capital Sins (which the former Catalogue will help thee
in) and of any others lately committed by thee, remembering that God never
corrects but for Sin; When thou with rebukes (says David) do chasten Man for
sin: Psalm. 39.11. These again humbly confess to Almighty God, acknowledge thy
de-merits, and the justice of his proceeding, and most earnestly implore his
pardon.

3. Next exercise thy Faith by a steadfast recumbency on God (through Jesus
Christ) for the full pardon of all thy sins, and resting upon those gracious
promises of his that he has made: Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool:
Isa. 1.18. That God will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; Heb. 13.5. That
Jesus Christ is the propitiation for thy sins, and that in him God has said,
He is well pleased; Math. 3.17. That God will deliver thy Soul from going down
to the pit, because he has found a Ransom; Job. 33.24. and will certainly give
thee Eternal Salvation, if thou continue faithful unto Death. Believe also that
God is wise and just in sending thee Afflictions, that he will not suffer thee
to be tempted above what thou art able: That all things shall work together for
good, to them that love God; Romans 8.28. That if thou live, thou shall live to
him, and if thou die, Death shall be unto thee advantage: In a word, firmly
believe all those Truths that thou did believe and were persuaded of in the
time of thy greatest health.

4. The next Grace now to be exercised is Hope, which is nothing else but a
comfortable expectation of the performances of all those good promises made,
unto thee by God. Job assures us that the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish,
because it was not founded upon a good bottom, he continued in his sins, and
yet hoped for Mercy: But thou have repented of thy sins, and purified thy self
from them, quite forsaken them, and therefore thy hope is such as makes thee
not ashamed, but thou may be assured that thou art of the number of those
Righteous ones, Who have hope in their death; Prove. 14.32.

Fifthly, Exercise throughout the whole course of thy Sickness, Prayer and
Devotion. This is a time of trouble, and God bids us then to call upon him; and
to encourage us, has promised to hear us; Psalm. 5.15. besides as we have now
greater needs than ever, so for the most part the Devotion of every pious Soul
is at this time raised to a greater height, and accompanied with more fervency
and humility than in the time of his greatest health: Therefore frequently Pray
and Ejaculate unto God, as thou find the temper of thy Soul requires;
whether it be for support under thy weaknesses against despondencies,
impatience, distractions or confusions of Mind, whether for Revelations of his
Goodness and Irradiations of his Love and Favor; and if thou art a constant
Reader and Meditator of Gods Word, thou can not want suitable Expressions out
of that rich Treasury, the Holy Bible. You may find some culled out for that
purpose in the subsequent pages, and in The Whole Duty of Man many more: But if
thy Devotion be not so much exalted as thou would have it, remember this is
a time for Passion, not Action, and God will accept thee.

6. Exercise likewise throughout the whole time of thy Sickness Christian
patience: You have need of Patience; says the Apostle, Heb. 10.36. That when
you have done all, you may inherit the promises: Now is the chief use of this
grace, therefore you cannot want it: It is that which crowns all the rest: This
discovers it self by a cheerful submission to Gods Fatherly Correction,
justifying God, and condemning thy self; saying with the Psalmist, Thou have
punished me less than my sins have deserved: or with the Prophet, I will bear
the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him; Micah 7.9. or
with good old Ely, It is the Lord, let him do as it seems him good: Or with
the Apostle, Chasten me here as thou please, that I be not condemned with the
World. And then resting in a cheerful Expectation that God will convert all to
thy good, and that he will be to thee both in life and death advantage, taking
up holy Job's resolve; That tho he kill thee, thou will trust in him; Job.
13.5. and that tho thou walk through the valley of the shadow of death, thou will fear no Evil: Psalm. 23.4.

Submit to the Rules of thy Physician, and be kind and courteous (not peevish
as too many are) toward thy Attendants, and all that come to see thee, and
give them and thy Family good Instructions, ^eeing those that are spoken from a
Friend on a dying Bed stick closest ^f any: Be sure no word drop from thee of
repining or murmuring against Gods dispensations toward thee, but let thy
words be sueh as tend to the use of Edifying; and in all things behave thy
^elf, as if thou were giving up the Ghost ^he next moment.

Be willing and content to die: say as St. Paul did, I desire to be dissolved
and ^o be with Christ, which is best of all: or as David, Like as the Heart
desires the Waterbrooks, so longs my Soul aftee thee, O God.

My soul is athirst for God, even for the living God; when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God?

O that I had Wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away, and be at rest.

Thou art my Helper and my Redeemer, O Lord make no long tarrying.

Last of all exercise thy Charity (not as if thou were not to use it all along,
but now more particularly) give and forgive: Beg pardon for any injury done thy
Neighbor, and if it be in thy power, make restitution for any Offense that is
capable of it; if not, beg God to accept of thy Intentions, and to pay thy debt
in Blessings: Forgive from thy heart all others who have injured thee, as thou
expectest to be forgiven by God.

When thou shall find thy strength fail, and Death approaching, say, or
ejaculate thus:

Lord Jesus receive my Soul.

Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed it, O Lord, tho^
God of Truth.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Remedies against some particular Temptations of the Devil in the time of
Sickness.
THe Devil is so delusory and subtle a Spirit, that like the cunning Angler he
loves to fish in Troubled Waters, and takes all Advantages of our weaknesses
and disturbances of mind to ensnare us; and then most strongly assails us when
we have the least power to resist him: There was a time when Satan did suspend
his Tyranny, sit close in the heart feeding on those lusts he found there,
without any outward show of violence; (Certa quiscendi tempora fata dabant.)
But now he awakes as a Lion out of sleep, and as a young Lion greedy of his
prey, ready to tear the poor Languishing Soul in pieces, calls in all his
powers and artifices, because he knows that he has but a short time, and if he
miss this opportunity he must then let it alone for ever. Therefore it will be
very necessary that you pre-arme your self against his Objections or
Assailings; and they may be such as these.

1. First, He may assail thee by setting before thee the multitude and
hainousness of thy Sins, that they are so many and so great that thou can not
expect that God should pardon them, and so endeavor to draw thee to a
despondency of God's mercy. But then presently oppose this Temptation of his by
calling to Mind the multitude and infinitness of God's mercies, which cannot be
out-numbred by our Sins, nor out-weighed by our most presumptuous
transgressions. Remember that place of Micah. 7 and 18. Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of thine
heritage? Who retains not his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy:
and that other in Isa. 1.18. Though your Sins were as Scarlet, they shall be
white as Snow; though they be Red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool.
Consider also that the greatest Sinners repenting have found Mercy, as
Manasses, Mary Magdelen, Peter, Paul, yea the Thief on the Cross, who at the
last breath found mercy.

2. The Devil may in the time of thy Sickness assail thee by setting before
thee the Strictness and Severity of God's Justice, and tell thee, It is true
God is merciful indeed, but he is just too; Zephan. 3.5. Psalm. 92, 15. And he
will not let the Wicked go unpunished; his justice runs parallel with his
mercy; and as the one is infinite, so is the other too. To this oppose Christ's
full and complete Satisfaction: Indeed by the Law no Man could be justified,
but Christ was made a Curse for us that he might redeem us from the Curse of
the Law. That he might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gala. 3.13. Christ by one
Oblation of himself once offered, made a full, perfect, and sufficient
Sacrifice, Oblation, and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. Christ
himself will answer for thee: These are mine, and shall be made up with my
Jewels, for their transgressions was I stricken and cut off from the Earth, for
them was I bruised and put to grief; my Soul was made an offering for their
Sins, and I bare their transgressions; they are my seed, and the travel of my
Soul: I have healed them by my Stripes, I have justified them by my Knowledge;
they are my sheep, who shall take them out of my hands?

3. Satan may object that thou have no part in these promises, because thou art
not elected. To this oppose God's free Covenant; all are invited to receive
mercy, God excludes none but such as exclude themselves: Ho, every one that
thirsts come ye to the Waters, and drink, is the Language of God by the
Prophet: Isa. 55.1. Nay our blessed Savior confirms it also, John. 7.37. If
any (excluding none) Man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: and again in
the 55. of Isa. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous Man his
thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord and he will have mercy upon him, and
to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. And so in the 33. of Ezekiel 11. As
I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked; but
that the Wicked turn from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your, evil
way, for why will ye die, O house of Israel? And therefore if thou be one that
has turned from thy evil ways, never dispute thy election, but as sure as God
lives, and that his Oath and Word are Truth, so sure shall thou live with him
in everlasting bliss and happiness; and therefore here thou may call to mind
some of the fruits of thy Faith that thou have at any time found in the Course
of thy Life, and thence comfort thy drooping Soul; concluding that thou art
certainly of the number of those that are ordained to Salvation.

4. Fourthly, The Devil may perhaps endeavor to persuade thy Soul that because
thou art as it were in some kind of desertion, and want that clear evidence
which formerly thou had, by reason of Gods present dealings with thee, that
God is not thy God, that thy unpardoned Sins causes him now to hide his Face
from thee in thy greatest Extremity, and that he will no more be entreated by
thee.

Indeed if thou have not repented of thy Sins, the Devil's argument is good;
but if thou have, the Testimony of thy Conscience, that thou have truly
repented of all thy sins, and that in simplicity and godly sincerity, thou have
had thy conversation in this life; never be discouraged, but assure thy self,
that though God seems to hide himself from thee, yet he has no other design in
it but to try thee, and the strength of thy Faith, thy Christian courage and
resolution: This will be but for a short time, and then the sweetness of his
return will abundantly compensate for his short withdrawing: For a small
moment (says God) Isa. 54.7. have I forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will
I gather thee. Job had sufficient confidence of the return of God's favor and
mercy, though for the present there was no manifest appearance of it, but lay
under the greatest pressure of affliction that a poor mortal could bear; and
was advised, because God had forsaken him, to curse God and die; and therefore
with a generous and noble Spirit resolves that though he kill him yet will he
trust in him, Job. 13.15. Holy David's faith and courrage was no less, when he
could confidently say, though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death
yet will I fear none evil; Psalm. 23.4. I have read of a Martyr that during the
time of his Imprisonment, being under some trouble of Mind, had often besought
God for some irradiations of his Love and Favor, and that he would send him
the Comforter, but could receive nothing of it, but rather more disquiet and
anxiety of mind, but yet he was resolved to wait God's leisure, which he did;
and when he was fastened to the Stake, he cries out with a heart too full of
joy to express it in larger terms: He is come: He is come. I shall conclude
this with the words of the Prophet Isaiah, chapter 50.10. Though a Man walk in
darkness and see no light, yet may he trust in the Lord, and lean upon his God.

Of Meditation.
IT is the Character as well as the Practice of a good Man, That he delights
himself in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law he does meditate Day and Night
Psalm. 1.2. Meditation is the consequence or effect of delight, and what any
man loves and delights in, he is often thinking and meditating upon; and
certainly much Reading without Meditation, seems to favor more of formality
and custom, than of any real delight in it.

Reading is like the Manducation or Chewing of our Food, and Meditation as the
Concoction of it: and if both these go before, there is no doubt of a good and
salutary Reflection to follow; and as one affords wholesome laudible Chyle for
the nourishment of the Body, so will the other give forth strength and
spiritual Refreshment for the Soul. But if a Man have the Lientery, that his
Meat pass from him quickly and unchanged, what strength and vigor of Body is he
like to receive by it? He may indeed eat more than a sounder Man, but he will
draw thence but a small, faint and languishing Nutriment: Even so is it with
such as have this Spiritual Boulimos, who have great Appetites and strong
Desires after Reading and Hearing, but they never suffer it to digest, it
suddenly passes through them, and the poor Soul is like to starve in the midst
of so much plenty. Meditatin is styled by a Learned Author (...), a kind of
augmentation, a beating out of the Gold into Plate and Wire: An Enlargement of
the Object we look upon, which by our continual Survey of the Beauty of it, we
make it more clear and visible than before. Our study and desire of this holy
Exercise wants no opportunity of time and place, Sed inter medios Rerum actus
invenit aliquid vacui. In the midst of our Employments and Business finds
leisure, and makes its Closet in the very Streets. I cannot therefore think any
person totally excused from this Duty: Indeed those whose leisure is greater,
and opportunities more, God will expect more from: According to that of the
Apostle, Luke. 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much
required; but if thou have less time, and thy occasions are more pressing, yet
thou may cast in thy Symbol, thy Mite too, and no doubt but God will accept
it.

Meditation, I take to be a serious Cogitation or Consideration of any Divine
or Spiritual Subject, and a particular Application of it to our selves, so as
to work upon, and raise our Affections.

It is not a mere Employment of the Brain, but an Act of the Heart, and engages
the Affections and all the Powers of the Soul. Of it there are two sorts, the
one set and deliberate, the other occasional or sudden. Both these have a large
Field to walk in, and are as unconfined as the Matter and Subjects of them are;
but principally the former is taken up in Contemplation of the Love, Wisdom,
Power, Justice, and other Attributes of God: in Consideration of the great and
miraculous Love of Jesus Christ in his Incarnation, miserable (yet senseless)
Life, bitter Death, Resurrection, Ascension, continual Intercession, and all
the benefits of our Redemption; of the Miseries of Life, the Certainty of
Death, and Uncertainty of the Time of it; the glory of Gods Saints; the
dreadfulness of Judgment, the Terrors of Hell: Or else in Meditating of any
part of Gods holy Word, etc.

The latter is only conversant about sudden and occasional things, whereby the
busy active Soul makes particular Applications and Reflections, according as
the Subject or Occasion offers it self.

The benefits of both these are very great. Meditatio quasi mentis ditatio.
Meditation is an enriching of the Soul. By this means you have a sufficient
Treasury or Stock of Scripture, fit for all Occasions and Conditions, to
strengthen your Faith, to encourage your Hope, to incite your Love, both to be
the matter of, and also to quicken your Devotions, and to comfort you in all
your Trials and Afflictions, etc.

I shall begin with the former of these, set or deliberate Meditation, and here
according to my slender capacity, I shall give you some brief Instructions for
it, and Examples of it.

This work is of all others the most spiritual and sublime, and therefore the
person most fit for this Heavenly Employ is the most holy, most heavenly
Christian. He only can extract the Elixir and Quintessence from this precious
Mineral.

As to the time and place for your Meditation, it matters not much, so you make
choice of that time when you may have the greatest vacancy and recess from your
worldly Concerns and Business, and when the Temper of your Body and Mind is
most fit for Contemplation, and that place where you may have the most privacy
and retirement. Nunquam minus solus, quam cum solus; said Scipio Africanus

The time of Isaack's Meditation was in the Evening, and the place was the
Field; Genesis 24.63. David's time was at Midnight, and in the Bed; Psalm. 63.6.
Our blessed Savior (we read) used both these times, Matthew. 14.23. Mark 1.35.
His place was either in a Mountain, Wilderness, or solitary Garden; insomuch
that even Judas when he came to betray him, knew where to find him, John. 18.1,
2. And though he took his Disciples there with him, yet he separated himself
from them, for more private Devotions; Luke 22.41. And though his Meditation be
not directly named, but only his Praying, yet it is very clearly implied,
Matthew. 26.38, 39. his Soul is first made sorrowful with the bitter Meditations
on his Death and Sufferings, and then he pours it out in Prayer; Mark. 14.34.
Our Savior then had an accustomed place, for this accustomed Duty, whose holy
Example we ought to imitate: And if thou be a Man who can dispose of thy
Affairs at thy pleasure, it will be convenient at least, that thou observe the
same time for this holy Exercise. A stated time is a hedge to Duty, and defends
it from many Temptations to Omission.

The more frequent thou art in it the better, because seldom conversing with
God, will create a strangeness betwixt thy Soul and him, and will take off much
of that life, heat, and pleasure, which thou formerly had in the discharge of
this Duty.

Being then retired at a convenient time to this solitary place, which thou
choosest for thy Meditation, endeavor in the first place to disband all vain
and worldly thoughts, and to work up thy Soul to a due frame and temper of
seriousness; to help which, thou may use this or the like short Prayer.

LEt the words of my Mouth, and the Meditations of my Heart, be now and always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my Strength and my Redeemer.

O Most gracious God, without whom I am not able so much as to think a good
thought; be thou pleased to be present with me at this time, by the preventings
and assistances of thy holy Spirit, that the course of my Meditation may be
guided aright, and blessed: Remove from me all Distractions by worldly
Thoughts, enlighten my Judgment, quicken my Invention, rectify my Will, and
increase my Affection to heavenly Things, that my Heart may be more enlarged
toward thee, and my Devotion so enkindled, that I may find my Corruptions
abated, and my Graces thriven, and my Life every way bettered by this holy
Exercise. Grant this, O Lord, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

Next consider seriously with your self, what the thing is whereof you
meditate, and endeavor rightly to understand it in its definition, then
proceed to the division and explication of it: from thence, if it be an
Attribute of God, proceed to the Admiration and Love of God, for such his
infinite Perfections; and if it be such as is imitable, steadfastly resolve to
seek to attain it in part, which thou can not in degrees; if it be a Virtue
thou art meditating of, represent it to thy Soul in the most amiable dress, by
comparing it with the contrary deformities of Vice. If a Vice uncover its
nakedness, and show all its ugliness and evil consequences; freely confess thy
former Follies, resolve against it, and beg Gods Assistance against future
Backslidings. If it be Mercies or Providence thou art meditating of, be sure
to mention all the Circumstances of them, and to raise thy Soul to the highest
pitch of gratitude for them: And in all these remember that if the Sacrifice
wants a Heart, it will not be accepted by God; never therefore leave
considering and meditating, until thou have engaged thy Heart and Affections in
the Work.

Throughout the whole time of thy Meditation, be frequent in Soliloquies and
Ejaculations, and at length conclude all with Thanksgiving, and recommending
thy self to God.

It will be impossible for me (and I think for any other) to prescribe an exact
method for proceeding in this Duty, because of the different matter and various
subjects of Meditation: Every pious Soul after some constancy in it, will know
best how to adapt it to his own greatest profit. However take in good part
(Reader) those following Exemplifications.

The Thanksgiving after Meditation.
O Blessed God, the fountain of all Mercies, I give thee most humble and hearty
Thanks for this present Expression of thy love and kindness, for the
Assistances of thy holy Spirit, and inward Comforts which I have now received
by ^his holy Exercise.

O that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders
that he does for the Children of Men; for he satisfies the empty Soul, and
fills the hungry Soul with goodness: Grant me, O Lord, an unweariedness in
well-doing, and let it be the delight and joy of my Soul to do thy will; and
let thy comforts always encourage and refresh my Soul. Pardon, O Lord, all my
sins, pity all my Infirmities, especially those of my present performances; and
receive me into thy gracious protection, both now and ever; through Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Divine Meditations.
Concerning Gods Omnipresence.
BY the Omnipresence or Ubiquity of God, is meant Gods being present in every
place, and at all times. Gods most glorious presence is in the highest Heavens,
where he is encircled with Myriads of Angels, and beautified Spirits, who
continually behold and admire his Majesty and Glory; yet he is not here Circum
Scriptive, or as confined only to that place (for then he were not God) but he
is here also on the lowest Earth, and we daily discover him in his Providence:
Nay he is in Hell too, and that the Devil and Damned discover by their
Torments; his Center is every where, and his Circumference no where. Though no
place can contain him, yet none can exclude him; for he fills Heaven and Earth:
^rem. 23.24. Whither shall I flee from ^y presence (says David) if I ascend
(...) into Heaven, thou art there: if I ^ake my Bed in Hell, behold thou art
^ere also; Psalm. 139.7, 8.

No place, no time can bound his pre^^nce. The most wild and untrodden ^aces of
the Desert, the solitary Caves and Recesses of the Earth, the thickest and more
than Cimmerian darkness of ^e Night, are no shelter from thy All-^eing Eye; the
darkness is no darkness ^ith thee, yea the day and night to ^^ee are both
alike; Psalm 139.12.

God is present in the Church, behold^^g our Order and Behavior there: He
(...) present in the Closet, when the door (...) closest shut, to inspect our
serious^ess and devotion there: He is present ^t our Tables, and at our Merry
Meet^ngs, at our Feasts, and at our Fasts: ^e is about our Beds, and about our
^aths; he takes particular notice of all ^ur Actions, and weighs all our words
^n a balance: Nay thoughts, secret ^houghts, are not hid from him; but he
^nows them long before we do or can. Our flesh, alas, is too pervious to hinder
^im from entering into the secret recesses ^f our hearts.

1. This then should teach thee, O my Soul, to revere and adore the God of such
infinite Perfections, and firmly to believe what thou can not comprehend. We
know a humane Body (the perfection of the whole Creation) cannot be in two
places at one and the same time, yet (blessed God) I am assured by Faith, and
by the constant dispensation of thy Providence in all places, that thou art
Omnipresent at the same time: That there is not any Creature that is not
manifest in thy sight; Heb. 4.13. but all things are open and naked unto the
Eyes of thee, with whom we have to do; for in thee we live and move, and have
our being: Acts. 7.28.

2. Thou may learn hence, O my Soul, to have continually an awful sense of
the Divine Majesty, to tremble at the apprehensions of his presence; Jereu^.
5.22. and to behave thy self always as in his sight, not to dare to commit any,
even the most minute sin in secret, because God sees, and is present, who will
be both thy Witness and thy Judge. How shall I do this Wickedness, says
Joseph, and sin against God? Genesis 39.9. Though no Eye saw him, yet he was
conscious that God was a Spectator, and therefore he dares not offend in his
presence. Do thou therefore (good God) thoroughly convince my Soul of this great
Truth, that I can never abscond my self from thy presence, that thy Eye is
watchful over all my Actions; that thy Ear is ever open to hear all my words;
and that thou discernest the most secret of my thoughts; that so looking upon
thee as a Witness of my whole Conversation, I may always keep a Conscience void
of offense toward thee and toward all Men.

3. Be careful, O my Soul, because thou art in the immediate presence of God,
to be sincere toward him in all thy Religious Duties, as well private as
public, and approve thy self to thy Father, who sees in secret; Matthew. 6.6.

4. This will be a comfort to thee, O my Soul, in all the Afflictions, in all
the Troubles thou can meet withal here in this World. Psalm. 91.15. Genesis 17.1.
God is present with thee, he sees all thy wants and necessities: He is an
All-sufficient God, he is able, and will always succor and relieve thee; take
up then holy David's resolution, Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art
thou disquieted within me? put thy trust in God: Psalm. 42.5. Or that of the
Church, Lamen. 3.24. The Lord is my portion, says my Soul, therefore will I
hope in him.

5. This should stir up in thee longing and ardent desires after the full
enjoyment of his more immediate presence in Heaven, where our joys shall be
full, and our pleasures everlasting; Psalm. 16.11. Draw nearer, yet then, O my
Soul; Is there in his presence such fullness of joy? Bring forth then thy
strongest love toward him that has prepared such great things for so
contemptible Worms as we are: Thy strongest endeavors to please him here, and
desires to enjoy him hereafter. I have had some prelibations or fore-tastes of
the sweetness of thy presence in Praying, Meditating, Hearing thy Word, and
Receiving the Holy Sacrament, but these have been incomplete and interrupted:
It will not be long before I shall (by his Mercy) be admitted unto a more full,
perfect, and complete enjoying of his more immediate presence, where I shall
for ever behold his Face, and be united to him, without any divorce or
separation to all Eternity. Eo feror, quocunque feror. Nihil aliud velim quam
permanere illic in aeternum. St. Aug. Conf. If those Servants were accounted
happy that stood continually in the presence of an Earthly Prince; 1 Kings
10.8. and if the Twelve Apostles were happy in the enjoyment of the sweet
company of our Savior here on Earth, though in the State of his Humiliation;
then thrice happy are those Men and those Servants which shall stand
continually before thee in thy Kingdom, who art King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords.

One day in those Celestial Courts, is better than a thousand. My Soul has a
desire and longing to enter into the Courts of the Lord, my Flesh and my Heart
rejoice in the living God.

My Soul thirsts for thee, my Flesh also longs after thee, in a barren and
dry land, where no water is.

Like as the Heart desires the Water brooks, so longs my Soul after thee, O
God.

My Soul is athirst for God, even for the living God; when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God.

Of the Mercy of God.
MErcy in God is an Attribute Essential to his Nature, by which he pitieth
those that are in Misery, relieveth those that are in Necessity, and passes by
many sins and frailties in his Creatures, which he might in Justice severely
punish.

Mercy and Misery are relatives, and were there no Want nor Trespass, there
needed no Mercy.

Mercy is either in the Affection or Expression: In the Affection it is termed
Bowels of Mercy: in the Expression, Works of Mercy.

The former God always has; for it is one of his principal Attributes, and
cannot be separated from him, no not at the time when he is in the Execution of
his Justice; for when his hand strikes, his heart (as I may so speak) melts and
pities, and his Bowels yearn within him; like a merciful Judge who at the same
time (being compelled by justice) that he condemns the Criminal, relents in his
heart for him. In the very midst of Judgment God remembers Mercy.

The latter, every Man living has daily fresh Experiences of in the plentiful
Largesses of his undeserved Bounty. That thou yet live, is an unparalleled
Mercy; for thou might have been now in Hell, beyond the Hopes of any more
Mercy, as well as many thousands who perhaps have deserved it less than thy
self.

It is of the Lords Mercy that we are not consumed; Lam. 3.22. Should I go
about to enumerate the variety of Gods Mercies toward us as Men, and as
Christians, I might in the next page recount (what the Philosopher foolishly
attempted) the sands of the Seashore, or the drops of the Ocean. Gods Mercies
toward us, as they are undeserved, so they are free; he has no other motive
than what proceeds from his own goodness and pleasure; He has Mercy on whom he
will have Mercy: Romans 9.18.

Alas, there is nothing in us that could invite his Mercy, but our own misery
and wretchedness: he pitied us when we lay in our blood, and said unto us, live.

God's mercy is universal, illimitable: His mercy is over all his Works; Psalm.
145.9. The wicked as well as the godly daily taste of his mercies; for he
sends Rain upon the just, and the unjust; Matt. 5.45. but yet his Mercy is
more special toward his Elect Servants: 1 Timothy 1.16. for those he has
mercies, tender mercies; yea multitudes of tender mercies: Psalm. 51.1.

God is great in mercy, Psalm. 119.156. 2 Samuel 24.14. He is rich in Mercy: Ephesians.
2.4.

The duration and constancy of God's mercy, it is for everlasting; Psalm. 100.
ul^ 136.1.

God is delighted in mercy. He is mercy in the abstract, and therefore David
calls him: his mercy. Psalm. 59.10.

It it said that Mercy rejoices (or triumphs) over Judgment; 2 Jam. 2.13. as
if there were a pretty kind of contention between them, and mercy had gotten
the upper-hand. (...), God in the Second Commandment threatens to punish to the
third and fourth Generation, but his mercy extends to thousands. There is no
perfection in God the Acts of which are more manifest, than in that of his
Mercy: Let us Consider it is opposite, Justice: How few Acts can we find of
this, for multitudes of his mercies? And when he does smite, how many warnings
does he give beforehand? How long is he whetting his Sword, and lifting up his
hand to strike? He seems even to lay aside his Omnisciency, that he might be
frustrated in doing this work, This his strange Work: Isaiah 28.21. I will go
down (says God) and see if their wickedness be altogether so great as the Cry
which is come up unto me: and if not, I will know: Genes. 18.21. God delights
in mercy: Micah. 7.18. But it grieves him to the very heart (if I may so speak)
when he is forced to execute his Justice. Dolet Deus quoties cogitur esse Deus.
Who is there that can say he has been punished according to his demerits? Nay,
can thou find out any Act of his Justice which has not an Alloy or Mixture
of his Mercy? for his tender mercies are over all his Works. Psalm. 145.9.

1. Learn then hence, O my Soul, to admire and adore this infinite perfection
of Almighty God, and to labor after a due Sense and Consideration of it, that
rhou may glorify him for it.

2. Learn hence to acknowledge God's mercy in all that thou have, and do
enjoy. All thy mercies come from him; 1 Chronicles. 29.14. What have thou which thou
have not received from his benign hand? Every good gift comes down from above;
James. 1.17. and St. Paul tells us, 2 Corinthians. 1.3. That he is the Father of
all mercies; and certainly if we are dutiful Children, we shall not suffer the
remembrance of them to be buried in ungrateful silence: but as the Heart will
be filled with the sense, so will the mouth with the acknowledgment of his
Mercies. Who can express the noble Acts of the Lord, or show forth all his
praise? Psalm. 106.2. Oh how great is the Sum of them? If we tell them, they are
more in number than the Sand: Psalm. 139.17, 18.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his Holy Name:
Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits.

3. And is God so merciful? Then this, O my Soul, should teach thee humility,
and to have low thoughts of thy self. If thou were not miserable, thou had no
need of Mercy: If thou were righteous, 'twere but justice to receive good from
the hands of God, not mercy. Every particular blessing I enjoy is the fruit and
effect of the mercy of God, and ought to each me a Lesson of Humility.

Many Stripes, many Judgments indeed have I deserved, but I must confess with
holy Jacob, That I am not worthy of the least of all his Mercies: Genesis 32.10.

4. Is God a God of such infinite Mercies? This then should teach thee, O my
Soul, in all thy difficulties and distresses, in all thy wants and necessities
to, have recourse unto him, to rest and depend upon him.

The Angel of the Lord, says holy David, tarrieth round about them that fear
him; Psalm. 34.7. and delivers them: And Psalm. 34.22. The Lord delivers the
Souls of his Saints, and all that put their trust in him, shall not be
destitute.

And as in temporal dangers, so in temporal wants we must cast all our care
upon him; for he cares for us: 1 Pet. 5.7. They that fear the Lordlack
nothing; Psalm. 34.9. and v. the 10. They that seek the Lord, shall want no
manner of thing that is good. God is a God all-sufficient, and able to help me
in my greatest necessities: He is a God rich in Mercy, and will not suffer me
to want; therefore I will cast my burden upon him: I will put my trust in him.

5. Is God so Merciful? This should teach me to fear him: This may perhaps seem
strange, What shall I fear him, because of his Mercifulness? I have great
reason to trust him indeed, and to love him, but shall I fear him for it? Yes
certainly we ought to fear him even for his Mercy: There is forgiveness with
thee (says David) therefore thou may be feared: Psalm. 130.4. and 67. ult.
God shall bless us, and all the ends of the Earth shall fear him. Though he
forgives, though he blesses, though he shows us mercy, yet we must fear him:
Yea, I must needs say, that of all Gods Attributes, Mercy is the dreadfullest;
for wherever his Mercy lights, and is neglected, or returns empty, without
answering Gods Designs, he will certainly recompense his abused Mercy with
double Severity. Laesa patientia furor fit.

6. Is God thus Merciful? This should teach us to imitate his Mercy, by being
merciful to our poor necessitous Brethren. Let us imitate it in its
universality; it is over all his works: Who is there under the Sun that has
not tasted of it in its reality? He gives liberally and upbraideth not. It is
far from God to do any thing seemingly; it is not enough to profess Compassion,
and to say as those in St. James, chapter 2.16. Depart in peace, be ye warmed, be
ye filled, and yet give nothing to cloth or to feed them. But thou shall do
according to the Precept in Deuteronomy, chapter 15.10. Thou shall surely give him,
and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give unto him. And to encourage
thee, take Gods own promise annexed to it, Because that for this thing, the
Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy Works, and in all that thou put
thine hand unto. Thus we must imitate God in being merciful unto all, and in
being really merciful. All our acts of mercy to our poor Brethren, Christ takes
as done to him; Matthew. 25.40. In as much as ye have done it unto the least of
these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. The miseries of my Brethren are my
own miseries, and therefore your mercies to them, are in a sense mercies to me.

Lastly, Is God thus merciful? This should teach thee, O my Soul, to be
continually praising him for his Mercies. Praise is a Duty incumbent on all the
Sons of Men, because that all have tasted of his goodness and his mercy.

Give the Lord, says David, the honor due unto his Name; Psalm. 29.2. Showing
that it is not an arbritrary or voluntary act, but a just debt which we owe to
God. God not only supplieth, but even daily loadeth us with his benefits (as
the Psalmist observes) and as he expects no other, so we can make no other
retribution unto him, but our Praises and Thanksgivings: O let us never then
defraud him of that so easy Tribute; but let our Hearts be continually filled
with the sense, and our Mouths with the acknowledgment of his Mercies.

We confess, O Lord, that we are not worthy of the least of all thy Mercies,
and therefore the less we deserve them, the more thou deservest our Praises. O
let us not by our ingratitude provoke thee to discontinue thy Mercies, or to
shut up thy tender Mercies in displeasure; and so teach us to value them, by
making us feel the want of them. Alelujah.

Of the certainty of Death and Judgment.
Hebrew 9.27. And as it it appointed unto Men once to die, but after this the
Judgment.


GOD at first Created Man in a state of Innocence, and appointed him Laws to
observe, and gave him withal a power to keep them; and to the keeping of which
he annexed the continuation of a happy life, and immunity from death: and lest
his credulous Nature might be too easily imposed upon to his own and his
posterities ruin; lest the ties of Love, and promise of a Reward, were not
strong enough to bind him to his Duty and Allegiance; God was pleased to hedge
in his way with a denunciation of threatenings and judgments, in case he should
any way disobey those Laws set, and tells him, Genesis 2.17. In the day that thou
eatest thereof, transgressest my commands (for I have told thee positively,
thou shall not eat of it) thou shall surely die: but Man, degenerate Man, soon
cast off his primitive Innocence, violates those Laws, and thereby renders
himself and all his posterity obnoxious to that Judgment of Death before
threatened.

And now God ratifies his former denunciation, establishes it by a perpetual
Decree, That unto dust he shall return; Genesis 3.19. So that now we see whence
Death had its first beginning, Romans 5.12. It is but the product and birth of
Sin. Sin having once conceived, never prove abortive, but brings forth Death;
James 1.15. It is now appointed unto Men once to die, and as certain as the
Decree of God is Irreversible, so certainly shall all the Offspring of Adam,
High and Low, Rich and Poor, Learned and Unlearned, descend unto the gates of
the Grave, mingle their dust, and pay down their Symbol of Mortality.

Divesne, prisco natus ab Inacho,
Nil interest and infima
De gente, sub dio morieris,
Victima nil miserantis orci.
Omnes eo^em cogimur, etc.
Horat. Carmin. Lib. 2. Ode 3. St. Austin observes three kinds of ^eath: The
first, is when God forsakes ^he Soul; so he forsook Saul, 1 Samuel 6.14. and so
he forsook Pharaoh, Exodus ^13. This Death is also mentioned, Matt. ^.22. Let
the dead bury their dead.

The second is, When the Soul for^^kes the Body, which is in the common ^urse
and order of Nature: So Laza^s died, John. 11.

The last is, When both Body and Soul ^ffer eternal Death; and this is
menti^ned, Matt. 25.46. and so also, Luke 16.^2, 23. The Rich also Man died and
was ^uried, and in Hell he lift up his Eyes ^eing in torments, etc.

Now Sin is the parent of all these; ^ut great sins and a state of impenitency
and hardness of heart are the cause that love God to the first and last: First
to ^rsake the Soul (but not till the Soul ^rsakes him) next to consign him over
(...) that state of Immortal Death.

The second kind of Death is common ^o the Godly as well as the Wicked, to ^im
that fears an Oath, as well as ^im that swears; to the Religious, as ^ell
as the Profane; because Gods Decree (...) unchangeable, Eccles. 7.20.
and because that even they also cannot lead a sinless life, but have many
sins, many frailties and imperfections, that they cannot totally be freed from,
while they live. Death (says the Apostle) passed upon all Men, for that all
have sinned; Romans 5.12.

Death then is certain to all -- nullum
Saeva caput Proserpina fugit.
and yet nothing more uncertain than the time of it.

Mors certa est, incerta dies. One dies in the (...) and vigor of his Age, when
his Bones are full of Marrow, and his Blood of Spirits: Another in his Infancy,
wen there are great expectations of future comfort, and hopeful successes.
Another is intombed in his Mothers Womb, and never sees the Light. Another dies
in the Flower of his Youth Another in Old Age: but all sooner o^ later come to
one Seat, the Grave. One goes well at Night to his Bed, and in the Morning is
found dead.

Lotus nobisum est, hilaris coenavit and ide^
Inventus mane est mortuus. Andragoras
Martial. l. 6. Another goes out of his doors, an^ his beloved Consort is with
much jo^ and impatience expecting his happy re^urn, and anon she receives the
sorrow^^l news of his Death, by a Fall, or a ^eavor. Of all the uncertain
things in ^^e World, I know not a more uncer^^in thing than the times of our
Death.

There are so many thousand Casual^es that may intervene to deprive a Man ^f
life, that it is a greater wonder that ^e is, than that he is not. A Plague, or
^^me popular Disease, or Fevour, or Small^ox: an Immoderate Grief, or profuse
^y, an Intemperate Draught, or undi^ested piece of Meat, yea a Hair, or a
^rape-stone, with Myriads of other acci^ents, may introduce Death.

And as Death is certain, so is Judg^ent too.

As it is appointed unto Men once to ^e, so after this the Judgment. As one
fixed by an irrevocable unalterable De^ee, so is the other too.

He has appointed a day in which he ^ill judge the World: Acts 17.31.

This Judgment will be universal both (...) to persons and things. God will
judge ^e secrets of all hearts by Jesus Christ, ^om. 2.16. Every Man shall
receive the ^^ings done in his body, according to ^^at he has done, whether it
be good or evil; 2 Cor. 5.10. and to that end we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ.

God is said to be the Judge of all, Heb. 12.23. which evinces the certainty of
a day of Judgment: Otherwise to what purpose is there a Judge: And shall not
the Judge of all the Earth do right?

Here the good man finds the sharpest Misery and greatest Afflictions; the Evil
Man the sweetest Felicity, and fullest Pleasures. Here the Rich man's Table
stands pressed with Delicacies, and poor Lazarus lacks even Crumbs to feed him.
Therefore it would much impeach the Justice and Goodness of God, if there were
not a time and place to make some retribution to each of these; to reward the
Righteous, and to punish the Wicked. Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you who are troubled,
rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, with his
mighty Angels; 2 Thessalonians. 1.6, 7. Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst
thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted and
thou art tormented: Luke 16.25. So that a Man shall say, Verily there is a
reward for the Righteous; Verily he is a God that judges in the Earth: Psalm.
58.11. Otherwise where is our Hope? For if in this life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all Men most miserable; 1 Cor. 15.9. Nothing could buoy up
the Spirits of a good Christian, amidst all the heavy Pressures and Afflictions
of this Life, but that he has the Hopes and Assurance, that there is an
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory, laid up for him in the life to come.

St. John in his Revelation tells us, Chap. 20.12, 13. That he saw the Dead,
small and great, stand before God; and the Books were opened; and the dead were
judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to their
Works: And the Sea gave up the Dead which were in it, and Death and Hell
delivered up the Dead which were in them; and they were judged every Man
according to their Works.

From the whole, you see there is a certainty, nay a necessity of Death and
Judgment. This then should teach thee O my Soul,

1. First to be often meditating of it before it comes; Nil sic revocat a
peccato quam frequens Mortis et Judicii meditatio. This will restrain thee from
Sin, and make Death and Judgment less terrible when it comes. Is there such a
day approaching for all the Sons of Men? How should we then resolve with David
to make a Covenant with our eyes, that they behold not vanity: that we set a
Watch before our Mouths, and keep the door of our lips, as with a bridle, that
we offend not with our tongues: that we always have clean hands, and a pure
heart, that at length we may dwell in his Tabernacle, and rest upon his holy
Hill for ever. Si sapis utaris totis Colinediebus:
Extremumque tibi semper adesse puta.
Martial. I know the sting of Death is Sin; but thanks be to God who gives us
the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

2. Are there such days approaching and is the time uncertain? this then should
teach thee, O my Soul, to be continually preparing for them. Upon this (...)
this moment of time, depends eternity. After a few years, perhaps months or
days (it may be minutes) thou shall be arrested by Death, and thence pass to
Judgment: Are thy Accounts fair? Can thou give them up with joy, and not with
grief? Art thou reconciled to God? and have thou peace with him, and thy own
Conscience? then, come blessed day: But if not, neglect not one day, nay one
minute more; thou know not what a day may bring forth. How many have thy
Eyes seen, or thy Ears heard of, that have been one day frollicking and taking
their fill of pleasure, and the next shut up in the prison of the grave, whence
there is no return to rectify thy former aberrations, and where there is no
more repentance? The Grave is a safe repository, and as it receives, so it will
keep thee to the Judgment of the great Day: He that goes thither filthy, will
be filthy still; and he that is unjust, will be unjust still: He that is
righteous, will be righteous still; and he that is holy, will be holy still.
Revel. 22.11.

Give me grace (Good God) all the days of my appointed time, to wait until my
Change shall come; to think every day my last, and to prepare Accordingly: that
so though the time be uncertain, I may not be at any time unprovided, but when
I come to die I may have nothing else to do but to die; that my Soul in the
Arms of the Holy Jesus may be deposited with safety and joy, there to expect
the Revelation of his day, and then to partake the Glories of his Kingdom.

3. Are there such days approaching? Then this should strike Horror and
Amazement to all loose and wicked persons. The consideration of a Judgment to
come made stout Felix tremble. The foolish Virgins did bethink them of Oil for
their Lamps, when they heard the noise of the Bride-groom's Coming, and perhaps
these when on their Deathbeds, will then too late think of this Day; but it is
not then a few still-born abortive prayers, a Lord have mercy upon us, or the
like, will serve their turn. The Sinner may frollick it now, follow his
intemperance and unlawful pleasures, and say still these are but tricks of
youth, or frailties of his Nature; but let him remember that for all these
things God will bring him into Judgment; Eccles. 11.9. It Is strange that
Sinners should be so stupid, and put so far from them the evil Day: they think
they shall still rejoice as in their youth, and see no evil, and so never
bethink them of their condition, till they find themselves in the confines of
Hell. Tell them now of pre^aration for Death, they will answer ^ou, it is time
enough yet; and the fit^est season for that, is when they are ^perannuated, and
unfit for any thing ^^se: Their time must now be divided ^etween their lusts
and vanities, between ^nlawful pleasures, and imoderate sleep (...) idleness;
they cannot now find a time ^r Repentance, Prayer, and attending upon the
things of God; never consider^^g that they must find a time to die in, ^^d that
when Death comes, they must ^e at leisure for that. All their false pleasures
are vanished like a shadow, and ^ow nothing remains but the sense of ^uilt, and
a fearful expectation of Judgment: they now perceive the Arrows of ^^e Almighty
stick fast on them, and ^^at there is no profit (but extreamless) (...) those
things, whereof they are now ^hamed: they now feel their Torments ^^gin, and
court death to be freed from ^^e stingings of Conscience; but that on^^
consigns them over to greater and ^ore impassible miseries; who like pri^ners
condemned to die, they are ^rought out of prison, their Chains ^nock'd off, and
yet carried to a more ^eadful Execution.

4. Are there such Days approaching? Then this brings great comfort and
satisfaction to the Godly Man: he is ready to say with Jonah Chap. 4.3. And now
I beseech thee, take away my Life, for it is better for me to die than to live:
or with Saint Paul, I desire to be dissolved. Death I know, is but a stepping
behind the Dark Curtain, and a passage into another Room: I set here in this
Horizon, but I shall presently rise in another. It Is not a Period, but a
Parenthesis, which may be put in or left out, To me to die is gain. I have had
my Portion of evil things in the World, my share of miseries and troubles, but
now I shall be freed from them all, and gain my port, which I have so long
looked out after. And can you blame a Man that is tossed up and down the
turbulent Waves of the Sea, to desire a safe Harbor to land in? Can you blame
the poor Man that labors and toils all the day long in the sweat of hi^ Brows,
when his Work is done, to desire the night, wherein he may take hi^ ease, and
sweet repose? Neither is the Godly man (by Death) only freed from those
Calamities and Troubles from with out, but from the depraved Corruption of his
Nature; from Temptations from within and without, and from Sin it self; the
greatest joy to a pious Soul: who more rejoices that he cannot sin, than that
he cannot suffer.

And as the approach of this Day brings great comfort and satisfaction to the
Godly, upon the score of those Negatives, so it is much enhansed upon the
consideration of those positive Rewards (styled by the Apostle the recompense
of Reward) promised by Almighty God; which they have oftentimes some
praelibations, or foretastes of: This makes them choose Death rather than Life,
and to take up St. Austin's Words (breaking out in a holy rapture, commenting
upon Moses's desire of God ( Exodus. 33.) That he would show him his glory, and
God's answer, Thou can not see my Face; for there is no Man shall see my
face and live.) O let me die, that I may behold thy glory. Eia Domine, moriar
ut videam, videam, hic ut moriar; nolo vivere, volo mori, dissolvi cupio, and
esse cum Christo. St. Aug. I know that my Redeemer lives, that where he is,
there his Servant shall be; I shall see him as he is, and my eyes shall behold
him; (...), face to face; and then, Olim haec meminisse juvabit -- It will be
very pleasant to think of those many past troubles, and escaped dangers

Grant me gracious God so to live, that at last I may lay down my Head in the
dust with joy, rest in hope, and at length rise to a blessed and glorious
Immortality. Amen, even Amen Lord Jesus.

Of Heaven and Hell; the Joys of one, the Torments of the other.
JVxta se posita magis elucescunt. The darker the Foyl, the more radiant does
the Diamond appear. The blackness and deformity of the Maid, makes the
Mistris's Beauty more remarkable. The Meditation of the torments of Hell
renders the joys of Heaven the more valuable; and therefore I begin with the
former. God has set before us Life and Death, eternal Rewards and eternal
Punishments. He has given us just and holy Laws to observe and keep, and power
to keep them; and to the keeping of which he has annexed an everlasting
reward, by an irrevocable Decree: to the violation of which, he has (by the
same Dec^ee) annexed an everlasting punishment: so that if we embrace the
former we shall not fail of the recompense of reward; but if we persevere in
the latter, we treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and shall be sure at
length to feel the Righteous Judgment of God. This is God's Covenant that he
makes with us; To them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory,
and honor, and immortality, eternal Life: but unto them that are contentious,
and do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish; Romans 2.7, 8, 9. Now it is essential to God to be just
to his Covenant. The Lord is just, says the Prophet, Zephan. 3.5. He is Just
in all his decrees, and just in the Execution of them: He is just in himself,
and just in his Law: just in his rewards, just in his punishments. He is
Justice in the abstract. He is the Judge of all, and shall not he do right? Yes
certainly he shall, and will. As he keeps mercy for the righteous, so he will
by no means clear the guilty; Exodus. 34.7. Let no wicked person therefore
condemn in this the severity of God's justice in proceeding against wicked
Wretches, Whose damnation (as the Apostle says, Romans 3.8.) is just. For it is
their own voluntary free choice, their Destruction is of themselves, Hos. 13.9.
Let God be true, and every man a Liar; that he may be justified in his saying,
and clear when he is judged by wicked and unreasonable men: Romans 3.4, 5, 6.

St Paul puts the question, Is God unrighteous, who takes Vengeance? and
answers it himself, God forbid; for how shall God then Judge the World? For if
God be a Judge he be must just, and distribute punishments as well as rewards.
The Lord is just (says the Psalmist) and there is no unrighteousness in him;
Psalm. 92.15.

O enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no
flesh living be justified.

O Lord if thou condemn me thou art righteous; thou have but dealt with me
after my sins, end rewarded me according to the demerits of mine iniquities.
Righteous art thou in all thy ways, just and true are thy Judgments. Holy St.
Jerome was wont to say, That whether he did eat or drink, sleep or wake, or
whatever he did, he thought the Sound of the last Trump did echo in his Ears,
and heard a voice, saying, Arise ye Dead and come to Judgment. If this holy Man
were under such continual apprehensions, and had such fears of the approach of
the last day, that he could not at any time disband them from his thoughts: How
then should it strike horror and amazement into the hearts of obstinate
impenitent sinners, to think of the dreadfulness of that day, and the greatness
and perpetuity of their torments, which shall then commence but never have an
end?

They have had their Heaven upon Earth, and now they shall have Hell instead of
Heaven. Bona accepisti: Remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things, none remain now, but evil things; now thou art tormented.

Ezekiel's Role was sweet in his Mouth but bitter in his Belly. Had Solomon's
simple Man seriously considered what Shot his fatal Banquet would have cost
him, He would never have commended the sweetness of his stolen waters, and
pleasantness of his Bread eaten in secret, for he knew not (at least would not
know) that he was a companion with the dead, and that his fellow guests were in
the depths of Hell; Prove. 9.17, 18. where being once come he can never return.

-- Facilis descensus Averni,
Sed revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras,
Hic labor, hoc opus,
Hell is a place appointed by God for the tormenting of the Devil, wicked
Angels, and sinful Souls, to all Eternty; and we are told that it is a place
downwards, and beneath us; Prove. 15.24. The way of Life is above to the Wise,
that he may depart from Hell beneath; and so chapter 7.27. speaking of the Harlot,
Her house is the way to Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death; besides in
Prove. 9.18. It is called Profundum, a Depth; to define the local place of
which, is too deep for me; God grant I may never be able better to define it:
Sin I am sure laid the Cornerstone of that deep and dark Vault, and it must be
my Innocence that must preserve me from being an Inhabitant in it.

The Ingenious Mr. Cowley has given this Description of the place in his
Davideis.
BEneath the silent Chambers of the Earth,
Where the Sun's fruitful Beams give Metals birth,
Where be the growth of fatal Gold does see,
Gold, which above more influence has than he,
Beneath the Dens where unfletch'd Tempests ly,
And infant Winds their tender voices try;
Beneath the mighty Ocean's wealthy Caves,
Beneath the Eternal Fountain of all Waves;
Where their vast Court the Mother Waters keep,
And undisturbed by Moons in silence sleep;
There is a place deep, wondrous deep below,
Which genuine Night and Horror does o'r flow;
No bound controuls the unwearied space, but Hell,
Endless as those dire pains that in it dwell.
Here no dear glympse of the Sun's lovely face
Strikes through the solid darkness of the place:
No dawning Morn does her kind reds display;
One slight weak Beam would here be thought the day.
No gentle Stars with their fair gems of Light
Offend the tyran'ous and unquestioned Night.
But it is not so much the Place as t h Torments there to be endured: Who can
express their Sharpness? Who their Number?

Non mihi si centum linguae, sint oraque centum,
Far a vox, omnes scelerum compr'endere formas;
Omnia poenarum percurrere nomina possim.
No heart of Man can think, no tongue can tell,
The direful pains ordained and felt in Hell.
All the Senses shall be rend'red more exquisite than ever, the more fully to
perceive their Torments; and every one have their fill of them.

The Sight shall be afflicted with a more than Egyptian Darkness, and the
continual beholding of monstrous Fiends and Devils.

The Hearing with Shreeks and horrible Cries.

The Smelling with Fumes of Brimstone, and noisome Stenches.

The Taste with ravenous Hunger and insatiable Thirst.

The Feeling (the most exquisite of all the Senses) with intolerable yet
unquenchable Fire, because the Breath of the Lord, like a stream of Brimstone
does kindle it; Isaiah 30.33. Add to these a Fire continually flashing in the
Reprobates Face, which shall yield no more light than with a glympse to show
him the Torments of others, and others his; yet withal of so violent a burning,
that should it glow on Mountains of Steel, it would melt them like Snow.

Suppose thou should be confined to lie but one Night grievously afflicted
with a raging Fit of the Stone, Strangury, Colic, Gout, Toeth-ach, or the
like; though thou had a soft Bed to lie upon, Friends and Companions about
thee, and all things necessary that thou could desire, but ease from thy
pains, how long would thou count the minutes, and blame the Clock for its
slow progression? What will it be then for thee to suffer the torment of the
hottest Flames? And that not for a Night only, but for Myriads of Ages; and
when that circle is gone through, there is yet no point or end: It Is Labor
actus in orbem, a continual Revolution.

Believe it, This is no Poetical, Fantastical Styx or Acheron, but a real Hell.

Ixion's Wheel was a place of Rest, compared with this Wheel of Justice.

The Task of Sisyphus or Danaus's Daughter, but a sport compared with this
Torture.

And besides, these external Torments of the Body, the Soul (the more sensible
part) drinks most deeply of this Cup of God's fury. All the Furies of Hell
afflict his Conscience: Thought calls to Fear, Fear to Horror, Horror to
Despair, Despair to Torment, Torment to Extremity; all to Eternity. The damned
Soul, has no Soul now capable of comfort; and tho his Eyes distill like
Fountains, and his Prayers and Cries were loud enough to silence the dismal
Shreeks of all his miserable Companions; yet God is now inexorable, and speaks
to them in this Language: You refused to hear me when I have called, yea when I
have so often wooed and entreated you: I have waited to be gracious, and
stretched out my hand all the day long, and you have not regarded; I will not
now hear your Cry, I will laugh at your Calamity, and mock at your Fear; this
shall be your portion for ever.

This is the Damned's Poena Sensus, their positive punishment: There is also
Poena Damni to be considered, their privative punishment; and this the
Contemplation of the Blessedness of the Righteous, will much help them too;
when they shall too late consider that such joys as the Righteous are now
partakers of, might have been their lot and portion, if they had obeyed the
Laws and Commands of God, as the others did. The consideration of this, is that
Worm of Conscience that never dies; that cruel Vulture that continually gnaws
upon the Liver of this Tityus, and cannot be shaken off.

-- Haeret latori laethalis arundo. I could speak much more to aggravate the
misery of the Damned, and represent the Torments of Hell; out, -- par nulla
figura Gehennae.

Reflections upon Hell, and the Yorments of it.
Is Hell such a direful Place? And are the Torments of it so acute, so
inexpressible, so remediless, so eternal? Then this should teach thee, O my
Soul,

1. First to avoid Sin, which was the Founder of it, and which if persevered
^n, will certainly bring thee to that dismal Place, those dire Torments, from
which there is no Redemption. Did sinners seriously consider of the evil
consequences of Sin, and had they ^ut one glympse of those Torments they are to
suffer in Hell to all Eternity, how would it charm their Spirits, appale their
Faces, and strike fear and astonishment to their Hearts; for who can think of
the Divine Wrath without trembling? Or, Who can dwell with Everlasting
Burnings? O poor secure sinners, what will ye now do? Where will you hide your
selves? Or what shall cover you? Mountains and Rocks are gone, the Earth and
Heavens that were, are passed away; the devouring Fire has consumed all,
except your selves, who must be the Fuel for ever. There is no remedy for you
but Repentance, that plank after Shipwreck, that can rescue you from this
Vengeance: Think, O think of this, ye that now forget God, lest he pluck you
away, and there be none to deliver you.

2. Is Hell such a direful place? etc. Then this should teach thee to mind
those things that are above.

The way of Life is above to the Wise, says Solomon, that he may depart from
Hell beneath. The way to depart from Hell, which is the lowest, is to mind
those things which are highest, which are above (...), to seek (or be wise for)
those things that are above: This is the truest Wisdom, the greatest piece of
Understanding. It Is not enough to cease to do evil, but we must also learn to
do well. Non progredi est regredi. If we lie still, we shall never come to our
Journeys end: There is no standing idle or loitering in the School of Virtue.

As we must abstain from the appearance of Evil, so we must follow after
Holiness (without which no Man shall see God) so shall we be freed from the
fears of this dreadful place: And when Christ who is our life shall appear, we
shall also appear with him in Glory; Coloss. 3.4.

3. Is Hell such a direful place? And are the Torments of it so insupportable,
so endless? Then this should teach me to pity, instruct, and pray for those
that are posting thither. We see Dives even in Hell, pities his poor Brethren,
and would (could he have found a Messenger) have sent them an account of the
Torments he felt, that they might escape their coming into that place. And
although this Province be chiefly the Ministers, yet private Persons, as place
and fit opportunity occurs, may also instruct and reprove the unfruitful works
of Darkness; or if that does not take place, we may at least pity them, mourn
in secret for them, and pray for their Conversion; and though they perhaps may
not reap the benefit, yet we may: God accepts our Charity, and will reward our
Prayers; they shall return into our own bosom: Psalm. 35.13.

4. Is Hell such a direful place? And have I any assurance that I shall escape
it? This then should raise my thankfulness to God for this his great and
distinguishing Mercy toward me, that he has called me from under the power of
Darkness, into his mavelous Light. This should cause me to be continually
magnifying his great and glorious Name, for so unspeakable, so inestimable a
Mercy, that whereas others lie wallowing in the puddle of their Sins, heaping
up Wrath against the day of Wrath, and hastening to their eternal ruin, he has
been graciously pleased to snatch me as a Firebrand out of the Fire, and has
given me some hopes and assurance that I shall never come into this Place of
Torment. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, praise his holy
Name. Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits; who saves
thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness:
And now being delivered out of the hands of these my spiritual Enemies, I may
serve God without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness all the days of my life.
This is that which will exact our greatest praises here, and because this life
is too scanty and contracted for it, it will afford us matter for our eternal
Praises in the Kingdom of Heaven.

My next Method leads me to the Meditation of the joys of Heaven.

And here I must pause a while -- This is a Theme too sublime for Humane
Oratory: the Tongues of Men and Angels come infinitely short of Expressions of
those joys; nay they never entered into the heart of Man to conceive them: 1
Cor. 2.9. The Eye sees much, the Ears hear more, the Heart conceives most, yet
all come short of apprehension, much more of comprehension of those joys:
Therefore enter thou into thy Masters joy, for it is too great to enter into
thee, said a pious Author: But as Pythagor as guessed at the Stature of
Hercules by the length of his Foot: And as the Israelites made some discovery
of the sertility of Canaan, from the few Clusters of Grapes brought them by the
Spies: so may we make some imper fect Collection of the Glory of this heavenly
Kingdom, from that of this temporal one; for the visible things of this World
which are made, declare unto us the invisible things of God; Romans 1.20. If we
look downwards upon the beauty and comeliness, the order, decency, and
usefulness of all created Beings here below; what Excellencies do we find
there? But if we cast our Eyes upwards, and consider the Embroidered Canopy of
Heaven drawn over our heads, the Majestic brightness of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, Lights to which pre^ious Stones in their brightest Luster are but
Clouds. What is exposed to our view, is admirable, how much more what we cannot
see. If the outside of the Royal Palace be so Magnificent, if the Hall appear
so rare, what Ornaments are there in the Presence Chamber of the King? If the
lower side of that Pavement which the Feet of the Saints shall walk upon in
Heaven, be so glorious, What be the Parlors and Inner Chambers unseen? Whence
the Poet, If in Heaven's outward Court such Bea^ty be,
What is the Glory which the Saints do see?
Heaven I should express but in faint Me^aphors, should I tell you of Crystal
Streams and Shady Groves, of a feigned Elysium or Temporal Canaan. St. John in
his Revelation gives us some imperfect account of this Holy Place, this New
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. to bring the thing as near to sense as he can, and our
apprehensions; he tells us the Walls are of all manner of precious Stones; the
City of pure Gold: the Twelve Gates whereof are Twelve Pearls, every several
Gate of one Pearl: There is no Night there, neither is there any need of the
Sun or Moon to shine in it, or of a Candle to lighten it; for the Glory of the
Lord does lighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof: of which Ingenious Mr.
Cowley.

For there no Twilight of the Suns dull ray
Glimmers upon the pure and native day:
No pale-faced M^on does in stolen beams appear,
Or with dim Taper scatters Darkness there.
We are now come to the high Court of Heaven; and if these things be so full of
Majesty and Glory, what is the transcendent brightness and glory of their
Maker? And here I can go no farther for as no Man has ever seen God at any
time, so no mind could ever comprehend him: Whatsoever we can conceive of him,
it is but in part; 1 Cor. 13.12. We hear of him but a little portion, says Job
(chapter 26.14.) and we know less. Who can behold the Sun in his glorious Shining?
Much less can we comprehend the glorious Majesty of God: Who has beheld it,
that he may demonstrate it? Not the Angels, for they are fain to cover their
Faces; Isa. 6. v. much less we that dwell in houses of Clay, who have that
ignorance and guiltiness that those glorious Seraphims are freed from.

Should Angels, Cherubims and Seraphims descend from Heaven, to proclaim the
exceeding greatness of his Glory, we may at length conclude with the Queen of
Sheba (concerning Solomon's Magnificence) That the one half was not told us.
And yet such is the immense goodness of God, that he has promised us wretched
Creatures, Dust and Ashes, who faithfully serve him, the Vision and
Contemplation of this his Glory; that we shall be where he is, and behold him
Face to Face. And in this Beatifick Vision consists the greatest joy and
blessedness of the Godly. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God; Matt. 5.8. Here we shall have a perfect complete knowledge of his Goodness
and Glory, and the full fruition of his presence, which will abundantly
satisfy; and no wonder, for in his presence is fullness of Joy, and at his
right hand are pleasures for evermore: For quality they are pleasures, for
quantity fullness, for dignity at Gods right hand; for eternity, for evermore;
Psalm. 16. ult.

Delight we in good Company? Here is the glorious presence of the Blessed
Trinity; the Father that made us, the Son that redeemed us, even with the price
of his own most precious Blood; the Holy Ghost that sanctified us, and that
brought us unto this place: the holy and unspotted Angels that rejoiced at our
Conversion on Earth, much more at our Consolation in Heaven: All the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and the full Communion of Saints.

Delight we in pleasant Music? Here are Quires of Angels, and beautified
Spirits, who cease not night and day to sing Praises and Hosanna's unto him
that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb; and oh the sweet Melody of
Alelujahs, which so many glorified Souls shall sing to God in Heaven.

Delight we in dainty Fare, or good Cheer? We shall eat and drink with Christ
at his Fathers Table, and hear Christ himself thus Welcoming us; Eat O my
Friends, and make you Merry, O well be loved: Cant. 5.1.

Such honor have all his Saints.

Delight we in good Apparel? We shall be arraied with Fine Linen, and long
White Robes; Revel. 6.11. If in Dominion? We shall Judge the Angels. And they
shall Reign for ever and ever; Rev. 22.5.

In a word, We shall enjoy more than ever we could desire or wish. All our
Faculties (which shall now be more capacious than ever) shall be silled to the
utmost, and we shall be possessed of those Joys and Delights, which know
neither measure nor end.

And as the consideration of the duration of the Torments of the Wicked to all
Eternity, gives them their greatest venom and malignity; so on the other side
the consideration of the continuance of those Joys to all Eternity, adds unto
them their greatest Beauty and Perfection; they shall come out from thence no
more for ever.

For as nothing enters into that holy place that defiles, so there is nothing
there that can defile. The great Dragon, the grand Enemy and Accuser of the
Brethren, is cast down into the bottomless Pit; whence he shall never return to
tempt the Godly more. The World is consumed, and no Temptation can come thence;
or if we could come to it, those pleasures now would have no gusts or relish.
The Flesh cannot tempt us, for that is now refined and purified from all
Corruptions and vain Desires; we are now so confirmed in our State of
Happiness, that God himself (with reverence do I speak it) cannot alter or
change it to all Eternity.

Reflections upon Heaven, and the Joys thereof.
AND now, O my Soul! Is Heaven such a glorious place? Are the joys thereof so
transcendant, so satisfactory, and so permanent, without any fear of
Diminution, or Mutation? Then this should teach thee to use all possible
diligence, that thou may in the end attain them; and think no pain, care or
trouble too great for their Acquisition. This is the Pearl of great price, for
which if thou sell all to purchase it, thou will be a great gainer. This is the
Vnum necessarium, the only thing necessary; thy all that thou have to do in
this World.

2. Is Heaven such a glorious Place? and are there such Joys and Privileges
reserved for blessed Souls? Then woe is me that I must remain in Meshech, and
have my habitation among the tents of Kedar. I cannot but say with Elias, I am
weary of my life; and with Simeon, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace with St. Paul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; which is
far better than to abide in this Baca of Tears, and Wilderness of Fears; for
there all Tears shall be wiped away from mine Eyes I shall cease to sorrow,
cease to grieve cease to sin. If the poor deluded Mahometans can rejoice at the
expectation of a feigned sensual Paradise: If a poo^ Heathen could desire to
die, Cicero de Somn. Scipion.
because he had hopes of conversing after death, with such Heroic Spirits as
Socrates, Aristides, Scipio, etc. ^ow much more should all true Christi^ns, who
have far greater hopes and firm assurance of the enjoyment of a real spiritual
Paradise, of conversing with Saints and Angels, with our blessed Re^eemer, nay
God himself; rejoice to ^hink of that day, and cry out with holy David, Oh that
I had Wings like a Dove, for then would I fly away and be ^t rest. My Soul is
athirst for God, yea ^ven for the living God, when shall I ^ome to appear
before the presence of God? For one day in thy Courts, is better ^han a
thousand: I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, than ^o dwell
in the Tents of Wickedness.

Thou art my Helper and my Redeemer, O Lord make no long tarrying.

3. Is Heaven such a glorious Place? And are there such joys and pleasures at
Gods right hand? Then this discovers unto me the madness and extreme folly of
the World, who put so high a value and estimate upon the pitiful, contemptible,
empty things of this Life, as riches ^onours, pleasures, and the like (which we
either lose living, or leave dying) without securing themselves of that Heaven
and those Joys, which are far above all value and comparison. What a deal of
toil and trouble do Men take, for that Meat which perishes? And neglect that
which endures to everlasting Life? How eagerly do Men gape after Riches; rise
early, and late take rest; endeavoring by all unlawful as well as lawful
means, to enlarge their Possessions, to add Field to Field, and House to House,
till there be no more place* and neglect the true Riches? Yet mus^ at last be
content with a mouthful o^ Earth, whom many Manors did no^ content in life.
How do Men prefer a^ little outward pomp and grandeur, o^ a fading title of
Honor, before the Ornaments of a meek and humble Spirit before the honor of
being Gods Children here, and of being admitted into his presence, to reign
with him for ever* How do Men greedily hunt after, and court the
unsatisfactory, yea troublesome pleasures of this vain World (...) which are
but momentany; and aspire not to those which are at Gods righ^ hand for
evermore.

O my Soul, come not thou into their secret, to their Assembly be not thou
united.

4. Is Heaven such a glorious Place (...) Do the joys thereof so far transcend
all ^umane Conceptions and Imaginations? Then this should teach thee, O my
Soul, ^o be content with whatever coarse En^ertainment thou shall meet withal
in ^hy way thither; be it poverty, sick^ess, disgrace, disappointment, losses,
^r the greatest temporal Evil or Calami^y that may befall thee: Consider that
Heaven will make amends for all: O how great is the goodness which thou have
laid ^p for them that fear thee. All the Af^lictions thou can meet with here,
will ^ccompany thee no farther than the Grave, and that is but a little way, a
^hort time, at most but a moment, with respect to Eternity. Those light
Afflictions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of Glory; 2 Cor. 4.17. Those may not retard thy motion neither,
for commonly they rather acce^erate the course they work for us; where as too
much prosperity slackens, ^logs us, and works against us; makes us apt to set
up our rest on this side Jordan, and never long for a better, for a more
heavenly Canaan. If we come to a Friends House where we are well accommodated,
and have all things according to our desire, we are inclined to stay longer
than at first we designed, and are very difficultly drawn thence; but if we
meet with bad Accommodation, and unwelcome Entertainment, we care not how soon
we are gone, and present^y bethink us of our home, where we shall have all
things at our desire. This World is but our passage, our way, not our home:
Heaven is our home, our abiding, our resting place, and we can never be well
accommodated till we arrive there.

We have many difficulties to pass through, before we come to our Journeys end,
and then we may sit down and rejoice, Et olim haec meminisse juvabit; and then
it will be pleasant and delightful to reflect upon our past dangers. Here I am
in a state of Bondage, I shall then enjoy perfect Freedom and Liberty, yea the
Liberty of the Children of God. I cannot here attend one minute to thy service
without distraction, there I shall be free, and find no interruption. O bring
my Soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name, and together with
Angels and Archangels, and all the company of Heaven, laud and magnify thy
glorious Name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God
of Hosts: Heaven and Earth are full of thy Glory. Glory be to thee, O Lord most
high. Amen.

JOB 16.24. When a few years are come, then shall I go the way whence I shall
not return.

THere is not a more powerful Argument to reclaim a Sinner from the wickedness
of his ways, or to encourage a holy man in the prosecution of Piety and
Goodness, than the frequent Meditation of Death. When a wicked Man shall
seriously consider, That though he now gives himself the full swing and liberty
of his unlawful pleasures and desires, and denies himself nothing that his
depraved Appetite can crave or suggest unto him; yet these are but fleeting and
momentany: That when a few years are come, he shall be taken from them, and go
the way whence he shall not return; this will certainly imbitter his false
joys, and lay some restraint upon him in the Career of all his Sensual
Delights. On the other side, when a good and holy Man shall consider, that
although in the ways of Virtue and Holiness he meets with many straits and
difficulties, he has many fears and troubles within, many trials and
temptations without, yet these will not continue long; when a few years are
come, he shall be freed from them all: he shall go the way, whence he shall
not return. This certainly will encourage him to persevere, and to continue
faithful unto Death.

This was that which afforded holy Job so much comfort in the midst of all his
Afflictions: He was in a very miserable Condition, under the power of Sathan's
Malice, full of noisome Boils and grievous Pains; laughed at, and mocked by his
cruel Enemies; nay reproached and contemned by his nearest Friends (as you may
see a Catalogue of his Sufferings, from verse the ninth to the 17th) yet he
still maintains his Integrity with the considerations of the shortness of his
life, and consequently of the duration of his afflictions; saying, When a few
years are come, then I shall go the way whence I shall not return: from the
words we may collect

1. The certainty of Death: When a few years are come, then I shall go the way,
etc.

2. The uncertainty of the time of it, When a few years are come. The Prophet
leaves it in indefinite, he does not say, Such a number of years, or in such a
year I shall die, but, when a few years are come, etc.

3. The brevity of Man's Life: Thought he mentions years, yet they are but few:
When a few years, etc.

1. The certainty of Death: St. Paul tells us, Heb. 9.27. That it is appointed
unto Men once to die, and this Royal Decree of Heaven is like that of the Medes
and Persians irreversible; had Man continued in his primitive Innocence, he
should not indeed have died; but when once Man put off that white Robe, he
became immediately obnoxious unto Death; and God tells him, Genesis 3. Dust thou
art, and to Dust shall thou return. The wages of sin is Death.

As certainly as we live, so certainly shall we die. Neither the Majesty of the
Prince, nor the meanness of the Peasant: the Wealth of the rich Man, nor the
Poverty of the Poor: The strength of the Mighty, nor the holiness of the Pious,
can exempt from Death; so that I may take up that Interrogation of the Prophet,
What Man is he that lives, and shall not see Death?

2. The uncertainty of the time of it. Astrologers by Calculating Nativities,
have pretended to foretell the Deaths of others as well as themselves, but have
seldom ever hit right in either, and have been miserably deceived. Our times
are in God's hand: This is one of the Arcana Imperis, those incommunicative
prerogatives God keeps to himself, and dare any Mortal be so bold as to pretend
to it. God has said that he comes as a thief in the Night, and has bid us
Watch: That of the hour and the season knows no Man; and yet shall we say
that we have any certainty of his coming. Do we not see how many are daily
snatched away by a sudden and untimely Death? And yet shall we boast our selves
of too morrow? Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Manhood and Ripeness of years, can no
more plead Exemption from Death, than old Age; so that you see how uncertain
the time of it is.

3. The brevity of Man's Life. David observed that the days of our Age are
Threescore years and ten, and at most but fourscore, and if we wade through
many thousand Accidents, and at last arrive to that Age, it is still but short
with respect to Eternity, and we spend our years as a Tale that is told,
scarcely remembering when or where we began. But it is not one of many
thousands, whose Lamp burn thus long to its lowest Basis, but either the Oil is
consumed, or a puff of wind has blown it out long before. What is our life,
says St. James? It is even a vapor that continues but a little while, and
then vanishes away. David compares it to sleep, which lasts but for a Night;
to Grass, which in the Morning is green and grows up, but in the Evening is
cut down, dried up, and withered. Lucian calls it a Bubble, which by the next
breath of wind vanishes into Air. Homer a Leaf, which if it be not gathered by
the hand, or eaten by a Worm, or forced by the wind, will wither and fall of
its own accord at Autumn. Pindar, the Dream of a shadow; what more vain,
unconstant, short lived things than these? Yet such is the Life of Man. Well
then might Job say, When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I
shall not return.

From the words we may gather these four Corollaries or Observations.

1. From the Example of this holy Man, I learn that we ought to think of Death
before it comes. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way, etc.

2. That we ought not only to think of Death in general, but of our own Death
in particular: I shall go the way, whence I shall not return.

3. That it is the highest piece of Prudence to prepare for it before it comes,
because that after Death we shall not be able to return, to amend or rectify
the deficiency of our former preparations; I shall go the way whence I shall
not return.

4ly. and Lastly, That to a pious and innocent Soul, the consideration of Death
and never returning again to a troublesome and sinful Life, is matter of great
joy and comfort. When a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence I
shall not return.

1. As to the first, That we ought (from the Example of holy Job) to think of
Death before it comes. There is nothing so much discomposes a Man, or unfits
him for the due Exercise of his Reason and Prudence, in the conduct of any
weighty Affair, as to be surprised suddenly, and without his expectation. Even
a sudden and profuse joy, as well as an immoderate and unlooked for grief, has
cut off the thread of the lives of many: What disorder and discomposure then,
will a sudden Arrest from Death, make in the heart of that Man, that never as
much as thought on, or looked for it before hand? How will it amaze or distract
him? And turn all his Senses into Confusion? If a Man had only one thing of
great moment to do in his whole Life, upon the success of which depended either
his happiness or misery; we should count him certainly the most stupid and
careless Fool, that should not as much as think and consider of it, and
contrive all ways possible before hand, how he might succeed in it: You have
seen already that Death is certain, and upon our dying depends our Eternal
Salvation, or Eternal Damnation; how insensible must we then be, if we are not
often in the time of our life and health, taken up with some serious thoughts,
and contemplations of it?

2. That we ought not only to think of Death in general, but of our own death
in particular: I shall go the way whence I shall not return.

Death is a general term, and if it touch not us or our Family, our Friends, or
Relations, we are as unconcerned as to hear of a Sickness or Mortality beyond
the Seas, in which we are like to be no fellow sufferers or sharers. We can
read every Week the Bills of Mortality, and hear of this and the other great
Person dead; nay we can take many turns in the Church and Yard, and walk over
the Graves of our deceased Friends, and yet be as unmoved and unsensible of our
own change, as the Stones we walk upon: But Alas! Do we think that our selves
alone are Immortal? That we only shall have an Exemption from Death? Shall not
the Passing Bell at length Toll for us, and shall it not at length be said in
the Streets, That such a one is dead? Yes certainly, when a few years (perhaps
weeks or days) are come, then thou in particular shall go the way whence thou
shall not return. O then think of Death before it comes, and of thy own death
in particular; say thus within thy self, I am now in a state of health and
strength, I have now time and opportunity for Repentance, my Lamp is yet
burning, I am invited to the Marriage of the Bride, and the Door is yet open;
now my Tears will be accepted, now my Prayers will be heard; now is the
acceptable tme, now is the day of Salvation: Now or never must I prepare for
Eternity, now or never must I make my peace with God: What madness, what folly,
will it be in me to hazard my Eternal Salvation upon the hopes of a long life?
Or upon the possibility of having time to repent on my Deathbed.

Our time you see is uncertain, and many there are who are taken away by a
sudden death, even in the midst of their sins: Why may not I be one of those?
Many that thought as little of it as I do, and had as good Resolutions as I
have, have yet perished to all Eternity. Others there have been, who though
they have had timely Warnings of their Death by a lingering and tedious Disease,
yet either their pains and uneasiness have discomposed them for Repentance and
fitting themselves for their change; or else God has then in Justice denied
them the grace of Repentance, who have been so long time neglective of it.
Repentance is the gift of God, and he that has promised pardon to the Penitent
whenever he repents, has not always promised to give the Sinner Repentance.
And if God should thus deal with me (as he may justly do) even then deny me
Repentance (without which I cannot be saved) when I call upon him for it, Qui
promisit paenitenti veniam, non promisitpeccanti paenitentiam.
because I refuse to do it now, when he calls upon me; how miserable and
deplorable will my condition be? Can I endure the Wrath of a Sin-revenging God?
Can I dwell with everlasting Burnings? Can any thing screen me from those
direful Torments, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; but now I to have my
share in them! O remember what God says, Because I have called, and ye refused,
I have stretched out minn hand, and no Man regarded; but ye have set at naught
my counsels, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear com^th.

3. That it is the highest pice of Prudence to prepare for Death before it
comes, because that after Death we shall not be able to return to amend or
rectify the deficiency of our former preparations. I shall go the way whence I
shall not return -- Vestigia nulla retrorsum. The grave receives all that come
into it, but will never suffer any to return thence before it hears the Voice
of him that has the Keys of it, saying, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment.
As the Tree falls, so it lies, there is no Repentance in the Grave, whither we
all go: As Death leaves us, so the Resurrection will find us: If we died
Sinners, no Purgatory can make us to rise Saints: He that was filthy at his
Death, will be found to be filthy still; and he that was unjust then, will be
unjust still; and he that was righteous, will be righteous still; and he that
was holy, will be holy still; Rev. 22.11. O then let it be now thy care, as it
is thy prudence and interest, so to prepare in life, that thou may receive
comfort in death; that thy accounts may be fair, no error or deficicncy in
them, and thou may be able to give them up with joy and not with grief, and
receive that blessed Character and Reward, of, Well done thou good and faithful
Servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy.

4. That to a pious and innocent Soul, the consideration of Death and never
returning again to a troublesome and sinful life, is matter of great joy and
comfort: When a few years are come, then I shall go the way, whence I shall
not return. This life is a life of trouble; we no sooner enter into it, but we
commence miserable; the best part of it is Checkered with Sorrows, and when we
leave it, it is not without pains and groans: So that the whole Series of it
from the Cradle to the Grave, is nothing else but one Chain and Link of Misery.
This lot happens both to the good, and to the bad; to the just, and to the
unjust; and the latter as well as the former might seem to solace himself with
the consideration of the brevity of the duration; but yet the righteous and
holy Man, as his troubles are far greater, having the addition of grief for his
own and others Sins, the fears of Relapses into them, the difficulty of
conquering Temptations, and being faithful unto death: This enhanses his
sorrow, and multiplies his troubles, and so consequently the consideration of
his approaching Death and never returning more to so troublesome and sinful
State of Life; must needs revive his Spirits, and magnify his joy. Methinks I
hear him expostulating with himself in such language as this, Ah Wretched Man
that I am, I came into the World with pains and tears, my Infancy was spent in
sleep and ignorance, but yet not without its allay of sickness and inquietude:
My riper years have been wholly taken up with Folly and Vanity, dishonored
with the multiplicity of Lusts and Sins, ensnared with passions, amazed with
fears, divided between cares and impertinencies, wearied with labors, laden
with diseases, afflicted with want, evil spoken of with and without a cause: I
have had many disappointments and losses, been unfortunate in my Friends and
Relatives; and (which is worst of all) I have been daily harrassed with many
impetuous Lusts and Temptations: My sins have prevailed against me; I have
displeased my God, and wounded my own Conscience, interrupted my hopes of
Heaven, and am continually tormented with evil and wicked inclinations: I find
still a Law in my Members warring against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me
into Captivity, to the Law of Sin and Death: Those things which I would do,
I cannot do; but those things that I would not do, those I do: O Wretched Man
that I am! Who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin and Death that I carry
about me? I am afraid lest my Faith should fail, lest having received the Grace
of God, and tasted of the heavenly Powers, I should again be entangled by the
Snares of my old beloved Lusts, and so forfeit all my right to Heaven, lose the
Reward of all my strict and circumspect Walking, and not continue faithful unto
Death: But, O my Soul, there is something, the remembrance of which alleviates
my grief, and sweetens this bitter Cup; These my sorrows will not last long, a
few years are the most, and they will suddenly come, and then I shall go the
way whence I shall not return: I shall then cease to grieve any more, cease to
sorrow, cease to fear, and cease to sin any more for ever. All tears shall then
be wiped away from mine Eyes, and there shall be no more Sickness, nor Sorrow,
nor Death, nor Crying, nor Pain: I shall then have perfect rest and joy, peace
and quietness, without any interruption; for in his presence is fullness of joy,
and at his right hand are pleasures for evermore. Though the way be foul and
troublesome, yet the Journey is but short, and the end will be pleasant and
peaceable, and this consideration shall make me go cheerfully away with my
present burden; for when a few years are come, then I shall go the way whence
I shall not return.

Meditations before (or at) Dinner or Supper.
1. When you see the Table spread, Meditate on Gods Fatherly goodness and
providence toward all his Creatures, what vast infinite numbers there are, and
yet he carefully (as a loving Father for his Children) provides for them all
their Meat in due season.

2. Meditate how much more gracicious God is to thee, who has richly furnished
thy Table, and prepared these his good Creatures for thee without any great
care or trouble of thine; whereas there are many thousands in the World far
better than thy self, who are sentenced to a necessitous Condition, and are
enforced daily to tug at the Oar, to delve in the Dirt, to wash their Faces and
bathe their Bodies in their own Sweat, and yet for all this, must be content at
last with course Fare, and hungry Stomachs.

3. Meditate that every Creature of God is good, if it be received with
Thanksgiving, and that it is sanctified by the Word of God and by Prayer; and
therefore resolve always to implore his blessing on the same in the first place.

4. Meditate that several of Gods Creatures lose their lives to preserve thine,
whose Nature have as great a repugnancy to Annihilation as thy own, and as thou
now feedest on them, so the Worms shall shortly feed on thee; and let this
excite thee to be temperate in the use of them, and so to eat and drink, as may
the better dispose thee for any service of God, thy Neighbor, or thy self: Let
not the daintiness of the Cheer tempt thee to Luxury, remembering that it is the
greater Virtue to abstain when there is the greater Temptation.

5. Lastly, Meditate that God who fills things living with his goodness,
expects no other return but praise and thanksgiving; therefore when thou have
eaten and art full, have a care that thou forget not to pay him that so easy
Tribute.

Occasional Meditations.
Upon the sight of a Dying Friend.
IT was not many days since that we had sweet Commerce together, and our
Conversation was dear to each other; we frollick'd it till the Night parted us,
and then our separation was as the shadow of Death: We thought the Nights
tedious and the Days long, till we should be again happy in each others
Embraces; but ^o how soon the Scene is altered, my Friend is arrested by a
fatal Disease, and is just expiring his last Breath: I came to comfort him, and
to receive Comfort and Satisfaction from him; but alas, all that is left me to
do now, is to be only a witness of his dying groans, to close his Eyes, and to
receive his departing Breath. Those Arms that used to hug and embrace me at our
first Meetings, are now become so weak and languid that he cannot shake hands
at parting, nor lift them up unto his Maker, That Tongue that was formerly the
Conduit of Eloquence, and Charmed all that heard him (by its sweet and
mellifluous Expressions) into a sensible but silent admiration, is now become
mute and speechless, that he cannot as much as take his Vltimum Vale, or bid me
farewell at parting. Those Ears that were heretofore delighted with pleasant
Discourse and melodious Sonnets, are now become thick of hearing, and cannot
distinguish between the soft murmurs of some, and the louder cries of other his
mournful Friends, nor can admit of the least comfortable Advice in this his
greatest extremity. His Eyes sometimes so sparkling and sprightly, that they
would not suffer the most minute Object to pass their Advertency, are now
become so dull and heavy, that they can scarce peep out of their Casements, to
behold the most glorious Object, nay not so much as to salute that Heaven,
which he is just going to be the possessor of. That countenance which a few
days since was so amiable and pleasant as to attract the Eyes (as well as raise
the Envy) of all beholders, is now so pallid and ghastly, and his Cheeks so
bedewed with Cold Sweats, that his dearest Friends and Relations draw the
Curtains about him, that they may not contemplate his grim Visage. In a word,
his brother Body, the Receptacle of his Divine Soul, and partner with her in
all her Actions, which till now kept an indissoluble Relation with it, is
turning into Dust, and says to the Grave, Thou art my Father, and to the
Worms,, my Mother and my Sister, Job. 17.13. Good God, how great a change is
this, in so short a span of time? This shall teach me to put a very slight
estimate on all the imperfect Perfections of this World, and to seek after
those things which alone are truly valuable. This shall teach me also to think
often of my latter end, and all the days of my appointed time, to wait until my
change shall come.

O consider with thy self that thou art made of the same Flesh and Blood,
molded out of the same Clay, and that this might have been thy present
Condition as well as thy Friends; and that it will be so before many years
(perhaps months or days) pass by thee. Be wise therefore now in this thy day,
and provide for it before hand: Lay up Treasures in Heaven, that when this
Earthly Tabernacle of thy Body shall be dissolved, thou may have a building
with God, not made with hands, but Eternal in the Heavens, and then be received
into Everlasting Habitations.

2. Upon the sight of Two Apple Trees, growing one by the other: The one tall
and spreading, but having only Leaves, no Fruit; the other low, but full laden.
CErtainly there has been as much Cultivation and M^nuring bestowed upon the
one as the other; they stand in the same soil, and if there be any difference,
it is that the tallest seems to have had the greater plenty of Nourishment, and
the more prolifick Influences of the Suns Beams; how then is it that we find
here only a fair Spreading Tree, and a multitude of shining Leaves, but no
Fruit? This minds me of that place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many Noble
are called. Prosperity puffs up, but Adversity humbles. Those that are
advanced to a degree above their Brethren, do many a times forget God and their
duty; and over-topping others, shine very bright at a distance, and make a fair
show, but if we come near and examine their Lives, we find indeed leaves and
formal outward Profession, but no real Fruit. On the other hand, this low Tree
represents the humble Christian, which lives (as it were) under the shadow of
others Wings: He is content with his mean Condition, praises God for that
Competency he enjoys, and makes it his business not so much to exhibit Leaves
as Fruit, not so much to appear, as to be sincerely Religious.

How mean soever my Condition be, grant good God that I may not be like the
barren Figg Tree, and after all thy patience in digging and dunging, after all
thy various Methods and Means of Grace, I may not be barren or unfruitful in
good Works, and so be cut down for cumbring the ground, but may through thy
discipline bring forth much Fruit to the Saving of my Soul.

3. Upon the Sight of a Wasp without a Sting.
I Was fast asleep in my Arbor, and the Noise of this Creature buzzing
awak'ned me: I was angry with him at first, and took him in my hand, thinking
to have killed him; but finding that he had no Sting, and had done me no hurt,
but only roused me from my lazy slumbers, whereby I might better employ my
time, I let him go, and thought my self obliged to his Courtesy. Thus it is
with Afflictions; they may be somewhat irksome and ungrateful at first to Flesh
and Blood, but they only serve to rouse us up out of our Carnal Security, and
make us to consider of our Condition; but seeing they have no Sting, they
cannot hurt us, and therefore we have great reason to thank God for them.

4. Upon the sight of Two Doves billing each other.
THe sight of this loving pair, minds me of the mutual Endearments between
Christ and his Spouse the Church: He is pleased himself to call her by the Name
of his Dove, Cant. 2.14. as being the greatest Emblem of unspotted Innocence,
and of entire and unmixed love. When one of these has lost his dearest Mate,
how pensive and melancholy does he wander alone, seeking her in every corner,
and calling after her till he finds her; and then congratulates her with all
the Expressions of Joy and Love. When the Church is deprived of Christ her
Husband, though but for a little time, she is sick of Love; she seeks him, she
calls him, she enquires after him until her head is full of Dew, and her Locks
with the drops of the Night; and when she finds him whom her Soul loves, she
kisses him with the kisses of her Lips, and her right hand does embrace him,
Cant. 5.

Make me, O my God, so much in love with my dearest Savior, that I may with
all diligence and unweariedness seek him, never rest satisfied until I have
found him, think no pains or troubles too great to endure, that I may enter
into a nearness and familiarity with him, and then caress and welcome him;
exhibiting all the Testimonies of my love unto him, by admiring and adoring
him, and engaging my self in such new indissoluble bands of Love, as no Waters
may ever quench, no Floods drown, but that maugre all difficulties, my beloved
may be mine, and I may be his to all Eternity.

5. Upon the sight of a Ladys Fingers bedecked with many rich Diamonds of great
value.
I Cannot but with much pleasure look upon those beautiful Stones, and at once
admire both their intrinsic value and outward luster: Where Virtue and Beauty
are conjoined, the Object is much more desirable.

(Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus.)

But if it be not my happiness to enjoy both, may I ever possess the former.
Give me ever, O Lord, the bona Animae, the Graces of thy Spirit, and then as to
the bona Fortunae, those Ornamental Endowments of Riches and other Earthly
Enjoyments, deal with me as it seems good in thine own Eyes.

I consider again the great value of those Jewels, and think how useless they
now lie, which if sold, and the Money employed, how much overplus would come
in to relieve the Bowels of the Poor, which now only please the Curiosity of
the Eye, and how much better I should be for the prayers of my poor Christian
Brother, than the admiration or applause of the Vulgar. Grant good God, I may
not be as a Treasure hid in the Earth, useless and unprofitable; but diligently
employ all those Talents thou have entrusted me with, for the benefit of others
as well as my self, that I fall not under the sentence of the slothful and
wicked Servant.

6. Upon the sight of many Millepedes killed for a Medicine for my Patient.
THese poor silly Worms which but just now had a life and being with my self;
made and preserved by the same hand of providence with me, are in a moment (by
my means) deprived of both, that they may be salutary to my Patient, and answer
those ends for which they are designed. I am a Worm too, only of a greater
magnitude, furnished with nobler Faculties indeed, but less Innocence, perhaps
usefulness too: Thou may, blessed God, with much more reason and justice,
because of my infinite transgressions, cut me as suddenly off from the land of
the living, as I destroy these poor Creatures, and I might thereby answer the
end of thy Justice, by teaching others not to presume too much on thy Mercy:
But thou, O Lord, art God, and not Man, and therefore I continue to live; O let
me live to answer the ends of my Creation; to glorify thee here, that I may
enjoy thee for ever hereafter in thy Kingdom.

7. Upon the sight of a brass piece of Money curiously gilded over.
THis is like all outward things; before you enjoy them, they seem to be
glorious, and promise much of satisfaction; but when you have enjoyed and tried
them, you soon discover that ^t is but a false luster that Satan and our own
exhorbitant Lusts put upon them: They have gilded outsides, but when they come
to wearing, the gilt wears off, and you find after a while what they are
within: Or not unlike the wicked Man, who varnishes over his fouler Actions
with some specious color of pious Intentions; but as for spiritual things, the
more you wear them, the more you find the beauty and excellency that is in
them; for there is a dust and a rust that is cast upon them, which likewise the
wearing takes off, and after a while makes it appear what they are, not a
Counterfeit but a true Coin, which bear the stamp of their Prince and Author.

8. Upon the finding of an Adders Skin left behind in a strait passage.
THis Creature being weary of her old Garment, voluntarily forced her self
through this narrow passage, to be freed of its burden, by which she has
renewed her life and vigor. What is this but the lively representation o^ the
good Man's strait passage through the dark and narrow Gates of the Grave, to
Immortal Life?

His life was indeed troublesome and wearisome; he a long time desired to put
off this his Earthly Tabernacle, that he might be clothed with the Robe of
Immortality, but yet would not be any Volunteer to force his speedier
dismission; but when God called him to it, he cheerfully deposited the burden
of his Flesh, and being found clothed with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
he is now passed to a state of Bliss and Immortality.

9. Upon a Glow Worm.
ALthough this Worm looks like a little Star in the night, and a Man would
think at a distance it were some Glorious body, but if you approach near it,
you will find it has no more Light than to show it self to be something, and
all it is splendour is sure to be benighted with the rising Sun, and then nothing
appears but an ugly Worm. The Hypocrite in the Eyes of the world makes a Gaudy
show of Religion, has such great pretensions of Piety and Holiness, that a Man
would think him (at first Blush) to be nothing less than a Saint on Earth; but
if we come near, and thoroughly view and scan his Actions, we shall find no more
goodness in him than to discover him to be an Hypocrite and Counterfeit; and
when the Sun of Righteousness shall appear, who shall detect the secret of all
hearts, then every ones work shall be made manifest, and all the Hypocrite's
gilded Glory vanish, and nothing remain but an empty deformed Caitif.

10. Upon a Rotten Dunghill.
SEe how the generous Sun casts his enlivening Rays and Influences upon this
most contemptible place, and how this again requites that bounty it pertakes of
in a Stenchy fume or generation of vermin. We ought to imitate the courteous
Sun by our diffusive kindness to all persons, the poor as well as the rich, the
bad as well as the good; and not be like that vile ungrateful generation of
Men, who daily participate of the sweet Influences of Heaven, and yet requite
that Bounty with no other than eructations of Oaths and Execrations, and
instead of improving God's mercies to his glory, turn them into Wantoness, make
them an occasion of greater looseness and debauchery; as if because God has
been exceeding good to them, they industriously resolved to repay that his
goodness with exceeding ingratitude and disappointment.

We ought rather to emulate the true Crystal, whose property it is either to
transmit or reflect those Rays it receives with great advantage of Light to the
Darker Objects about it, and of a more visible splendour and glory to the Light
it self; and so proportion our gratitude to the bounty which enriched us.

11. Upon seeing of a Shepherd's Dog, bringing in the stray Sheep.
HOw useful is this contemptible Creature, and how exactly does he answer the
Commands and Intentions of his Master? The Shepherd observing some of his Sheep
to stray from the Flock, sets on his Dog, not to worry them, but gently to
reduce them to the Herd; and as soon as they are come in, he rates off the Dog,
and the Sheep are at quiet. I know, O Lord, that even Afflictions have their
use as well as Comforts: in the Enjoyment of an uninterrupted Prosperity, we
are apt to forget thee, and to stray from thy Paths and Commandments; but then
thou the great Shepherd, in very faithfulness sendest us some crosses, some
troubles or afflictions, not to consume us, but to be only as so many Monitor's
to us, to return again into thy Fold, and when we are come in, thou ratest off
those Afflictions, and they shall no longer rest upon us.

Give me Grace, good God, in all thy dispensations toward me to acknowledge
the Methods of thy infinite Wisdom and Mercy. Eceles. 7.14.
In time of prosperity make me watchful. In time of adversity make me humble,
and to consider that if I have strayed from thy ways, I may speedily return,
and till then, chasten me here, O Lord, as thou please, that I be not
condemned with the World.

12. Upon the Sight of a Ship cast away within a little of the Port.
THis Ship has been a long Voyage, and run through many Hazards, and
Difficulties, yet now at last, even in sight of the Harbor by a secret Leak,
or a sudden Storm, is unfortunately with all it is Cargo cast away. This minds
me of the hypocritical or unstable Christian, who did run well for a long time,
had overcome many sinful Habits, and inbred Corruptions, but still retained one
beloved lust, which has ruined his precious Soul; or else now at last, in a
day of Temptation, when Persecution arises for the Gospel, he cannot ride out
the Storm, but cowardly (to avoid suffering) betrays his Faith, sinks under the
pressure, and so is cast into Hell, when he is just upon the Confines of Heaven.

The heart I know, O Lord, is deceitful above all things, yet suffer me not, O
my God, to harbourany hypocrisy and unsincerity in mine, but make me rather
continually the more watchful over it, that I do not permit any Dalilah or
Darling Lust to have entertainment there; but having shaken off my Old Lusts, I
may no more (be the temptation what it will) return with the Dog to his vomit,
or the Sow to the mire, to my former pollutions; but that as I have received
how I ought to walk, and to please thee my God, so I may abound more and more.
And if, O Lord, thou shall see it fit to try me in the fire, to call me to the
Cross for thy sake, make me readily and cheerfully to embrace it. I carry
always about me a Body of Flesh, which is ready to shrink at the approach of
any thing grievous, do thou, O Blessed Jesu, pray for me, that my Faith fail
not, that no terrors of Death, or Pains, may ever shake my constancy, or cause
me to deny that Lord that suffered such bitter Agonies for me; but that I may
continue faithful unto Death, and so receive a Crown of Life.

13. Upon an Epileptick Person falling into the Fire, and being thereby Cured
of his Disease.
THis Person had for a long time labored of his Epilepsie, the accessions of
which at length were so frequent and violent, that it would often precipitate
him to the Ground without as much as giving him any warnings of it is
approaches, where he would lie as incapable of helping himself, as he was
insensible of his condition: The Patient used to have a Servant attending him
to prevent danger, but was now by God's providence out of the way; In the mean
time a fit seizes him, he falls into the Fire, which being fervent scalded and
burned the hinder part of his Head and Neck, whereby were produced many
Blisters and Ulcers, which afterward unexpectedly by Gods blessing effected a
Cure of that obstinate Disease which hitherto had eluded the force of all
Medicines. Good God! what a Providence is this? how wonderful art thou in all
thy doings? what an allay of Mercy with Judgment is here? judgment in
Afflicting, mercy in Relieving. The impotent Man which thirty and eight years
had been Diseased, lay a long time at the Pool Bethesda, but could not be cured
till our Savior came; when we are all together unable to help our selves, and
when all outward means do fail, then God comes with his seasonable Relief, and
to our amazement and admiration perfects that which we could not expect: He
that once brought light out of darkness, can still bring good out of evil;
nothing shall impede or hinder his Designs, but even that which in humane
Judgment seems contrary, shall prove a salutary Remedy. This shall teach me
even in the midst of the heaviest pressures not to despond, but to trust in
him who is able (by ways tho altogether unknown to me) to relieve me in the
greatest difficulties.

Ejaculations for several Occasions.
For Pardon of Sin.
HAve mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness, according to the
multitude of thy tender Compassions blot out all my Transgressions. Wash me
thoroughly from my Iniquity, and cleanse me from my Sin.

For I acknowledge my Transgressions, and my Sins are ever before me.

O God thou know my foolishness, and my Sins are not hid from thee.

Purge me with Hyssop and I shall be clean, wash me, and I shall be whiter than
Snow.

If thou Lord should be extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord who could
abide it? But there is forgiveness with thee, therefore thou may be feared.

Hide thy Face from my Sins, O Lord, and blot out all mine Offenses.

Be Merciful unto me, O Lord, heal my Soul, for I have sinned against thee.

Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and loving kindness, for they have been
ever of old.

For thy Names sake, for thy Mercies sake, yea for thy dear Son Jesus Christ
his sake, pardon all my Iniquities, for they have been very great.

For Grace.
TEach me to do the thing that pleases thee, for thou art my God.

Show me thy way, O Lord, and I will walk in thy Truth: O knit my heart to
thee, that I may love and fear thy holy Name.

Lead me in thy Truth and teach me, for thou art the God of my Salvation; on
thee do I wait all the day.

With my whole heart have I sought thee; O let me not wander from thy
Commandments.

Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousness.

Make me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me.

Search me, O God, and know my heart, try me and know my thoughts, and see if
there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way Everlasting.

Set a Watch, O Lord, before my Mouth, and keep the door of my Lips.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, teach me thy Statutes.

So teach me, O Lord, to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto Wisdom.

Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is, that I
may know how frail I am.

For the Light of Gods Countenance.
O Lord hide not thy Face far from me, put not thy Servant away in anger: thou
have been my help, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my Salvation.

O Lord, whatever thou art pleased to deny me, yet lift up the Light of thy
Countenance upon me.

Thy loving kindness is better than life: My Lips shall praise thee.

Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.

Give me the comfort of thy help again, and stablish me with thy free Spirit.

Withhold not thy tender Mercies from me, O Lord, let thy loving kindness and
truth continually preserve me.

Turn me again, O God of Hosts, and cause thy Face to shine upon me, and so
shall I be saved.

Make me to hear of joy and gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may
rejoice.

Speak peace unto my Soul and Conscience, and say unto my Soul, Thou art my
Salvation.

Thanksgiving.
I Will praise the Lord according to his Righteousness, I will sing praise to
the Name of the Lord most high.

I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will show forth all thy
mavelous Works.

I will freely sacrifice unto thee, I will praise thy Name, O Lord, for it is
good.

Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which only does wondrous things.

Morning and Evening, and at Noon, will I praise thee.

Seven times a day will I praise thee, because of thy Righteous Judgments.

While I live I will praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God while I
have any being.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me praise his holy Name.

Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits.

Blessed be the Lord God, which daily loadeth us with his benefits, who is the
God of our Salvation, and blessed be the Name of his Majesty from everlasting
and to everlasting. Amen. Amen.

In the time of outward or inward Trouble.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine Anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

Look upon my Adversity and Misery, and forgive me all my sin.

Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for my Soul trusts in thee, and under the
shadow of thy Wings shall be my refuge until these Calamities be overpast.

Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak, O Lord heal me, for my Bones are
vexed.

My Soul also is sore vexed; but thou O Lord, how long?

Be not far from me, for trouble is near at hand, and there is none to help.

Give me help, for I am in trouble, and vain is the help of Man.

Keep me as the Apple of thine Eye, hide me under the shadow of thy Wings.

O keep my Soul and deliver me, let me not be disappointed, for I put my trust
in thee.

Comfort in Troubles.
THe Lord is my Light and my Salvation, whom then shall I fear? He is the
strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid?

When my Father and Mother forsake me, the Lord will take me up.

Many are the troubles of the Righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of
them all.

But thou, O Lord, art a shield for me, my Glory, and the lifter up of my Head.

I have set the Lord always before me, He is at my right hand, therefore I
shall not be moved.

My defense is of God, which saves the Upright in Heart.

At what time I am afraid, I will put my trust in thee.

In God have I put my trust; I will not be afraid what Man can do unto me.

The Righteous cry, and the Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all
their troubles.

In God is my Salvation and my Glory, the Rock of my Strength, and my refuge is
in God.

Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope
in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my
God.

Thanksgiving for deliverance from Troubles.
BLessed be the Lord God, for he has heard the Voice of my Supplication: With
my Song will I praise him.

O Lord my God, I cried unto thee, and thou have healed me.

I will praise thee, O Lord my God with my whole heart, and I will glorify thy
Name for evermore, for great is thy Mercy toward me, and thou have delivered
my Soul from the lowest Hell. The Snares of Death compassed me round about, and
the pains of Hell got hold upon me.

I found trouble and heaviness, and I called upon the Name of the Lord: O Lord
I beseech thee deliver my Soul.

Gracious is the Lord and Righteous; yea our God is Merciful. I was in misery
and he helped me.

Sing unto the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me sing praises at the
remembrance of his Holiness.

Blessed be God, which has not cast out my Prayer, nor turned his Mercy from
me.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

I will offer to thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and praise thy Name for
ever and ever.

Going to the Church or House of God.
I Will wash my hands in Innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar, O Lord.

It is good for me to draw near unto God, even unto God, in his Sanctuary.

How amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts? My Soul longs, yea even
faints for the Courts of my God. When shall I come and appear before him?

As the Heart pants after the Water brooks, so pants my Soul after thee, O
God.

Immediately before entering into Church.
I Will enter into thy Gates with Thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with Praise.

I will Worship in thy holy Temple, and will praise thy Name.

I will wait for thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy Temple.

In Church (if thou happen to be there before Service begins.)
BUt as for me, I will come into thy House in the multitude of thy Mercies, and
in thy Fear will I Worship toward thine Holy Temple.

Lord, I have loved the Habitation of thy House, and the place where thine
honor dwells.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I might
dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple.

Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary: Who is so great a God as our God?

I will abide in thy Tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the Covert of thy
Wings.

Blessed are they that dwell in thy House: They will be always praising thee.

A day in thy Courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a Doorkeeper
in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of Wickedness.

God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and to be had in
reverence of all them that are round about him.

Thy Testimonies are very sure: Holiness becomes thine House, O Lord, for ever.

This is my rest for ever: Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein.

O let my Soul be satisfied, as with Marrow and Fatness, when my Mouth praises
thee with joyful Lips.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. As it was in
the beginning, etc.

Returning from the Church.
O What shall I render unto thee, O Lord, for all thy benefits toward me? I
will receive the Cup of Salvation and will call upon the Name of the Lord.

Worthy art thou, O Lord, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength; and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing: Wherefore Blessing, Honor,
Glory and Power, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb
for ever and ever.

The Law of thy Mouth is dearer unto me than thousands of Gold and Silver.

I have had as great delight in thy Testimonies, as in all manner of Riches.

I have thought of thy loving kindness O God, in the midst of thy Temple.

O let my heart be sound in thy Statutes, that I be not ashamed.

Hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.

Order thou my Steps in thy Word, so shall I not be disappointed of my hope.

Thy Word is a Light unto my Feet, and a Lanthorn unto my Paths.

O lead me in thy Truth, and Teach me, for thou art the God of my Salvation, on
thee do I wait all the day.

In the time of Sickness, or approach of Death.
I.

O Lord Correct me not in thine Anger, neither Chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

For thine Arrows stick fast on me, and thy hand presses me sore.

Mine Eye is consumed because of Grief.

There is no Health in my Flesh, because of thy displeasures; neither is there
any rest in my Bones by reason of my Sin.

My Soul also is sore vexed, but thou, O Lord, how long? Return O Lord, deliver
my Soul: O save me for thy Mercies sake.

For in Death no Man remembers thee; and who will give thee thanks in the Pit?

What profit is there in my Blood, if I go down into the Pit? Shall the dust
praise thee? Shall it give thanks unto thee, or declare thy Truth? The living,
the living shall praise thee, even as I do this day.

O Let my Soul live, and it shall praise thee.

Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my Bones are
vexed.

Cast me not away in the time of Age: Forsake me not when my Strength fails
me.

Hide not thou thy Face from me, for I am in Trouble: make haste, O Lord, to
deliver me.

Hear me, O God, and have mercy upon me: Lord be thou my helper.

O spare me a little that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and be
no more seen.

II.

I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of Men?

The Lord is Righteous; for I have rebelled against his Commandments, Lam. 1.18.

I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

Thy ways are equal; but mine have been very unequal.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his Works.

Thou have punished me less than mine Iniquity has deserved.

I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son, no not the meanest of all thy Servants: But yet, O do not thou
cast off the bowels and compassions of a Father, but as a Father pitieth his
own Children, so be thou merciful unto me.

Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant, O Lord; for in thy sight shall no
Flesh living be justified.

But there is Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

Thou art full of Compassion and Mercy, long Suffering, and very Pitiful, and
forgivest Sins, and savest in time of Affliction. Eccles. 2.11.

Look upon my Affliction and my Pain; and forgive me all my Sin.

My sins have deserved Eternal Torments; make me cheerfully and thankfully to
bear my present Pains: Chasten me here as thou please, that I be not
Condemned with the World.

III.

I have set the Lord always before me: Because he is at my right hand I shall
not be moved.

Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil;
for thou art with me, thy Rod, and thy Staff shall comfort me.

Thy Word stands fast for ever; in thy Word [and gracious Promises] is my
hope: This is my Comfort in my Affliction.

In the multitude of the Sorrows that I have on my Bed, thy Comforts shall
refresh my Soul.

My Flesh and my Heart fails; but God is the strength of my Heart, and my
Portion for ever.

I will wait patiently for the Lord, until he incline his Ear unto me, and
hear my cry.

I know that my Redeemer lives, and because he lives, I shall live also.

He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him for us all, how shall he not
with him also freely give us all things.

Why art thou cast down, O my Soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? Put
thy trust in God; for I shall yet give him thanks, who is the health of my
countenance and my God.

I have fought a good Fight; I have finished my Course; I have kept the Faith:
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Glory.

IV.

I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better than to
remain in this Vale of Tears; for there all Tears shall be wiped away from mine
Eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor pain.

O that I had Wings like a Dove; for then would I fly away and be at rest.

My Soul is athirst for God, even for the living God: When shall I come to
appear before the presence of God?

In thy presence is fullness of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for
evermore.

Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace; for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation.

Thou art my Helper, and my Redeemer: O Lord make no long tarrying.

Into thine hands I commend my Spirit; for thou have redeemed it, O Lord, thou
God of Truth.

Come Lord Jesu; come quickly.

Thanksgiving for Recovery.
BEhold for peace I had great bitterness* but thou have in love to my Soul
delivered it from the Pit of Corruption; for thou have cast all my sins behind
thy back, Isaiah 38.17.

The Lord was ready to save me: therefore will I sing unto him as long as I
live; yea I will sing praises to the God of my life while I have any being.

I should utterly have fainted, but that I believed verily to see the goodness
of the Lord in the land of the Living.

I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my Salvation.

The Lord has Chastned and Corrected me, but he has not given me over unto
Death.

Open to me the Gates of Righteousness: I will go into them, and will praise
the Lord, and pay him the Vows which I promised with my Lips, and spoke with my
Mouth when I was in trouble.

Gracious is the Lord and Righteous; yea our God is merciful.

The Lord preserves the simple: I was in Misery, and he helped me.

Return into thy rest, O my Soul; for the Lord had dealt bountifully with thee.

For thou have delivered my Soul from death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet
from falling.

What shall I render unto the Lord for all the benefits he has done unto me? I
will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord.

I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

Hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my Footsteps slip not.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, etc.

A Prayer for the Morning in private.
EArly in the morning will I direct my Prayer unto thee, O lord, and will look
up: O hear me in the multitude of thy mercies, and for the sake of Jesus
Christ. O thou great Creator both of Heaven and Earth, and of all things
contained therein: thou art a God infinately Wise, Holy, Powerful, Just, and
Good; transcendent in all perfections: give me I beseech thee, O Lord, a firm
belief and an acknowledgment of thy divine Nature and Existence; a deep sense,
and due apprehensions of all thy excellencies and goodness, together with
suitable affections and demeanor toward thee, that I may daily more and more
adore thee, love thee, fear thee, honor thee, and depend upon thee. Give me a
deep sense of thy infinite Purity and Holiness, which may cause in me aversness
unto, and an abhorrence of whatsoever is sinful and impure; and excite in me
the fear of Reverence and Caution of offending thee, by doing any thing that
may displease thee, or omitting to do what may be pleasing unto thee. I
confess, O Lord, had thou been exact to mark iniquity, and laid judgment to
the Line, and righteousness to the Plummet, I had long since been cut off in
the midst of my sins, and felt the Effects of thy severe displeasure; but
because thy mercy triumphs over thy justice, I am not consumed unto this day: I
have one opportunity more (praised be thy holy name) to beg pardon at thy hands
for all my sins, which (to my own shame and confusion) I confess to be
exceeding great and heinous, but yet, O Lord, I know thy mercies do far exceed
the multitude and haniousness of my Transgressions, O magnify therefore the
Riches of the same mercy, in the full pardon and forgiveness of them all, cast
them behind thy Back, bury them in my Savior's Grave, that they may never rise
to shame me here, or to condemn me hereafter: and I pray thee, O Lord, to give
me every day a deeper sense of my sins, and a more complete repentance for
them, a loathing and detestation of them, and let their remembrance be bitter
unto my soul. Send down thy holy Spirit into my heart, and let him root out
every accursed unmortified Lust, and sinful corruption from my Soul, and
destroy in me all the remaining affections unto Sins, and dispose my Soul to a
constant obedience of all thy Commandments and keep me in an habitual frame and
temper of Piety, all the days of my Life. O Lord, give me daily a clearer sight
of my Duty, and incline my heart to walk exactly, and so acceptably continually
before thee; make me sensible of thy exuberent Love, and let not all thy
mercies, longanimity, and patience toward me (a miserable Sinner) prove
successless; but raise in my heart all grateful acknowledgments.

Blessed be thy great and glorious Name, O Lord God, for all the mianfestations
of thy love and goodness toward me unto this day, for the Mercies of thy
right, as well as thy left hand, but especially for the Fountain and Foundation
of all our Mercies, Jesus Christ; for the means of Grace, for the hopes of
Glory; for thy particular preservation of me (and mine) this Night past, and
for all other thy goodness and loving kindness; and I pray thee, O Lord, Give
me that due sense of all thy Mercies, that my heart may be unfeignedly
thankful, and that I may show forth thy praise; not only with my lips, but in
my life, by giving up my self to thy Service, and by walking before thee in
Holiness and Righteousness all my days. And now, O Lord, since thou have been
pleased in thy Mercy to bring me safe to the beginning of another day; preserve
me, I beseech thee, in the same by thy mighty power from all sin, and from all
danger. Let thy spirit and providence direct and preside over all my Actions
this day, and keep me by the power of thy Grace from those Sins to which my
wicked and disorderly Nature subjects me to, but especially free me from [Here
mention thy most prevailing Sins, or such as thy Nature, Business, or Company,
may that day incline thee to.] Make me exactly watchful over my self, to behave
my self as in thy presence, and to set thee always before my Eyes, that so I do
nothing which may dishonor thee my God, or wound my own Soul; and grant that
by the conduct of thy Grace I may be directed and assisted in keeping strictly
close unto all thy Commandments, and in the discharge of my Duty in that place
and Calling in which thou have set me. Let thy blessing, O Lord, attend me in
my Studies, Labors or Employments this day, give me holiness of intention in
them, and succeed all with thy benediction: Let thy Providence signally watch
over me, and thy Presence secure me from all evil, either of Soul or Body, this
day and for ever. Hear me, O Lord, and answer me graciously, and do for me more
abuundantly then I can ask or think; and all I beg for Jesus Christ his sake,
for whom my Soul desires to bless thee, and in whosemost prevailing name, and
holy words, I farther pray unto thee, saying, Our Father which art in heaven,
etc.

A Prayer for the Morning in public with thy Family, which with little
variation may be also used in private.
It is a good thing to give thanks unto thee, O Lord, and to sing praise unto
thy name, O thou most high: to show forth thy loving kindness in the Morning,
and thy faithfulness every Night.

Hear our Prayers, O Lord, and accept of our praises in Jesus Christ.

O Most Gracious Lord our God, whose Mercies endures for ever, and thy
Remembrance throughout all generations: Thou art boundless in thy compassions
toward all thy Creatures, and art infinitely good unto them, not only beyond
what they can deserve, but what they can wish: We the unworthyest of them,
desire (at this time) to give glory unto thee, in a humble and hearty
acknowledgment of those many mercies and favors, both Spiritual and Temporal,
which thou from time to time have vouchsafed unto us, and most liberally heaped
upon us. We confess, O Lord, that we are not worthy of the least of all thy
Mercies, but most worthy of the greatest and severest of all thy Judgments,
especially when we consider the sinfulness and wickedness of our lives past;
for we have drank iniquity like water, gone on very Stubbornly and Rebelliously
against thee and thy Commandments, all the days of our lives, continually
committing those things thou forbiddest, and leaving undone those things which
thou command; yea all the thoughts and imaginations of our hearts have been
evil, and only evil, and that continually, and (which is worst of all) we have
still the same proneness to all that is evil; but aversness and obstinacy
toward that which is good: We have still impenitent hard hearts, that are not
mollified with the sense of our Sins, or of thy Wrath due unto us for them: But
O thou who art a God of infinite Mercies and Compassions, manifest the same
unto us in the full pardon and forgiveness of all the Sins that ever we have
committed against thy Divine Majesty: Accept of that satisfaction and
atonement made by thy innocent and beloved Son Jesus Christ, and for the
merits of his suffering pardon all that is past, and be thou fully reconciled
unto us: And so assist us with thy Grace and Holy Spirit, that we may be able
for the time to come to repel all the temptations of the Devil, the World, and
the Flesh, and to live more Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this present
evil World, that so having our fruits unto holiness here, we may have our ends
everlasting Life. O make us steadfastly resolved to despise all the pleasures of
sin, rather than offend thee our God: and to choose the most difficult parts of
Virtue and Piety to obtain and secure thy Love: O let us delight in thy
Service, and desire thy favor above al^ things, which is better than life it
self, and all the comforts of it: Let us love what thou love, and hate what
thou hate, wish nothing so much as to please thee, fear nothing so much as to
offend thee, and in all things be conformable to thy holy Will, and walk before
thee in all well pleasing. O Lord put us in mind of Death and Judgment, that
every day we draw nearer to our last day, and that we shall all shortly give a
severe account of all that we have done in the Body, and all that we have left
undone; of all that we have spoken, nay of all that we have thought: So teach
us therefore, O Lord, to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
Wisdom; and continually so to demean our selves, as those that must one day
appear before the Judgment seat of Christ. As to all our outward concerns here
in this life, we desire to refer our selves wholly unto thee, our good God;
Thou art infinitely wise, and know what condition is best for every one of
us: give us therefore any measure of prosperity, or adversity, riches or
poverty, health or sickness, whereby we may most of all glorify thy holy Name,
and in every condition give us grace to look up unto thee as the author and
disposer of it, and therein to be really content.

Together with us, we beseech thee to be mindful of all mankind: Let thy ways
be known upon earth and thy saving health among all nations. Bless thy
universal Church, lead it into all truth, and let not the Gates of Hell be ever
able to prevail against it. Be gracious unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the
Queen, and all the Royal Family, to all the Ministers and Magistrates, toall
that fear thee, and call upon thyname. Remember all the Sons and Daughters of
sorrow and affliction in what case or state soever, and relieve them all
according to thy Mercies, and their several necessities; for thou only know
them all. Bless all our Friends, Kindred, and Benefactors, and all that we are
under any Obligation to pray for, whether Friends or Enemies; infuse Grace
where it is not, and where it is weak do thou strengthen it, give them all
things necessary for their Souls and Bodies, guide them here by thy Counsel,
and at length receive them to thy self in Glory. And now, O Lord, because it is
very meet, right, and our bounden duty at all times, and in all places, to give
thanks unto thee, we desire at this time to praise and magnify thy holy Name
for all the freeness and fullness of thy Mercy, and loving kindness toward us
and others: Thou daily loadest us with thy benefits, spiritual and temporal,
who art the God of our Salvation; thou have given a fresh Testimony of thy
Goodness and Mercy to us in our preservation this Night past from those many
sad Casualties and Accidents, which might justly (by reason of our sins) fall
upon us, and brought us safe unto another day. O Lord thou might have made
our Beds our Graves, our Sheets our Winding Sheets, and our rising again this
Morning a rising unto judgment: What is man that thou art mindful of him? Or
the Son of Man, that thou visitest him? Praise the Lord, O our Souls, and all
that is within us praise his holy Name. Praise the Lord, O our Souls, and
forget not all his benefits; and grant that we may render thee not only the
fruit of our Lips, but the obedience of our Lives, by consecrating our selves
entirely to thy Service, and walking before thee in a sincere and impartial
observance of thy holy Commandments, all the days of our lives. And seeing thou
have been graciously pleased to add another day unto our Lives, so we beseech
thee to give us Grace to add more Wariness, Repentance, and Circumspection unto
our days: Make us, O Lord, carefully to watch against all Sin, especially those
that do so easily beset us, and that we have been so often conquered by. Teach
us by the Strength of thy holy Spirit to deny our selves, to pluck out even our
right Eyes, to cut off even our right hands, to undergo the severest
afflictions rather than to offend so Sacred a Majesty: Let our thoughts be
always holy and heavenly, and when we are about our Studies and Employments,
let them be often carried up unto thee by holy Meditations, and Divine
Ejaculations. Let our words be seasoned with Salt, with prudence and
discretion, not stained with filthiness and vanity, lying, detraction, or any
other sin, but such as may tend to the use of Edifying, and minister Grace unto
the hearer: Set a watch, O Lord, before our Mouths, and keep the doors of our
Lips. Let our Actions, O Lord, be always holy and just, or at least innocent
and unblameable: give us grace to walk as in thy sight, and evermore to set
thee before our Eyes. Make us careful in the well spending of our time, so as
we may best prevent or resist Temptations, and by discharging our Duties in our
places and callings, may glorify thy holy Name. Take from us, O Lord, all
slothfulness, and give us diligent and active Spirits, that when the Devil
assaults us, he may not find us idle, but improving those Talents entrusted to
every one of us, that we may at length receive from our great Lord and Master
Jesus Christ that blessed Sentence, Of Well done ye good and faithful Servants,
enter ye into your Masters Joy. Do thou O Lord, be with us in our labors and
employments this day, and bless us; bless and prosper, O Lord, the works of our
hands upon us, yea prosper thou our handiwork. Give thy holy Angels charge
over us, to keep us in all our ways, that we rush not into any Temptation, nor
fall into any kind of bodily danger, which our sins may justly expose us to;
but preserve us as the Apples of thine Eye, and hide us under the shadow of thy
Wings, that in our going out, and in our coming in we may be blessed, and have
always thy watchful protection over us. These and whatever other Mercies thou
know needful and requisite for us, for all thine, and thy whole Church, we
humbly beg in the Name, and for the sake of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; and in whose words we shut up our imperfect Petitions, saying as he
has taught us.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A Prayer at Noon.
Morning, and Evening, and at Noon, will I praise thee, and thou will hear my
Voice. Open thou my Lips, O Lord, and my Mouth shall show forth thy praise.

O Father of Mercies, and God of all Comfort and Consolation, Thou art to be
Worshipped and Adored with my continual Praises and Thanksgivings, for thou
continually followest me with thy Goodness, and thy Mercies are renewed upon me
every moment. In thee I live and move, and have my being, and without thy
succor and support I should quickly return to my first Principle, of no being
at all: Thou have created me, redeemed me, and by thy Fatherly care and
providence constantly provided for me: Thou art the God of my life, and the
Author of all those Mercies I enjoy, whether Spiritual or Temporal, and
therefore thou alone deservest my praises, and unto thee I ascribe, as is most
due, all honor, praise, and glory, both now and for evermore. More especially
I desire to bless and praise thy holy Name, for thy particular Mercies toward
me at this time, that thou have so plentifully refreshed my Body with thy good
Creatures, and filled me with the Flower of Wheat: Blessed be the Lord God who
daily loadeth me with his benefits, even the God of my Salvation: O Lord
refresh my Soul also with the Spiritual Manna of thy Heavenly Grace, and grant
my pursui^ may not be after the Meat that perishes, but after that which
endures to Everlasting Life. Pardon I beseech thee, O Lord, as all my sins in
general, so especially whatever amiss has passed from me this day, and for
Jesus Christ his sake do thou become unto me a reconciled Father, own me for
thy Child, and continually preservr me by thy providence; keep in me always a
Religious Sense of thee, and of thy goodness toward me, and sanctify my heart
with thy holy Spirit, that I may walk before thee the remaining part of this
day, and all the days of my life, to thy honor and gl^ry, through Jesus Christ
my blessed Lord and Savior, in whose Name and Words I continu^ to implore thy
Mercies; saying, Our Father, etc.

A Prayer for the Evening in private.
O Most holy, holy, Lord God; Heaven and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy
Glory: Thou art a God of purer Eyes then to behold the least Iniquity with the
least Approbation, thou chargest thine Angels with folly, yea the Heavens are
not pure in thy sight; How shall I then so sinful and impure a Wretch, dare to
appear before thee, or to take so holy a Name into my sinful and unhallowed
Lips? But, O Lord, thou art God and not Man, thy ways are not as our ways, nor
thy thoughts as our thoughts, but as high as the Heavens are above the Earth,
so are thy thoughts of Love and Peace higher than our thoughts, and therefore
relying on thy Mercies and gracious Promises, I am bold at this time to
prostrate my self before thee, humbly confessing that I am corrupt in my very
Nature, having an inability and aversness to that which is good, and an
aptitude and proneness to all that is evil; but I have corrupted my self yet
much worse by many vicious Customs and sinful Habits: I have transgressed my
duty to thee, my Neighbor, and my self, followed too much the devices and
desires of my own wicked heart, and not only not obeyed, but many times
wilfu^ly broken thy Commandments which are holy, just, and good: and to my
former provocations I have added the sins of the day past, of omission and
commission, of thoughts, words, and actions. [Here particularize any sin.] Yea,
I know not how often I have offended, O cleanse, cleanse thou me from my secret
faults. And now, O Lord, should thou be extreme to mark what I have done
amiss, I could not be justified in thy sight, nor be able to answer thee for
the sins of this one day; but thou, O God, delightest in Mercy, and there is
forgiveness with thee that thou may be feared O I beseech thee let
Repentance and Contrition prepare me for that Mercy of thine, and then be thou
pleased to take away all mine Iniquity, and to receive me graciously into thy
favor. Neither do I desire thee only for the pardon of my past sins, but do
most bumbly beg for a Divine Power, that I may be able to subdue them for the
time to come, and get a complete Victory over all the Temptations of the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil: To that end, let thy Grace and goodness, and tender
mercies prevent and follow me all the days of my life; and bring into obedience
whatsoever exalts it self against thy blessed will, that at last I may come
to be such as thou would have me to be, even holy in all manner of
Conversation. And as I pray unto thee, so I desire likewise from an unseigned
heart, to praise and to bless thee for thy infinite Mercies, for those which
relate to this life, and a better; particularly for the Mercies of the day
past. [Here enumerate them.] O Lord, the least of these deserves my hearty
Thanksgivings: let not the universality and commonness of thy goodness, make me
to have the slighter regard of it, but fill my Soul with a Sense of thy Love,
and my Tongue with sincere acknowledgments; that as I daily receive blessings
from thee, so I may daily from an affectionate and devout heart offer up thanks
unto thee; and let my whole life, and all my actions be the verification of my
Praises. And now I beseech thee, O Lord, receive me this Night into the Arms of
thy providence, hide me under the shadow of thy Wings. Give thy holy Angels
charge over me, to pitch their Tents round about me, that no evil happen unto
me, nor any plague come nigh unto my Dwelling; but that I, and mine, and all my
Concerns may be safe under thy gracious protection, that lying down in thy fear
and being refreshed with moderate rest, I may be the fitter to serve thee in
the duties of the ensuing day. And all I beg in the Name, and for the sake of
Jesus Christ my alone Savior and Redeemer, for whom my Soul has endless cause
to bless and to praise thee; to whom, with thy self, and Holy Spirit of Grace,
be by me ascribed (as is most due) and all thy Saints and Servants, both in
Heaven and in Earth, all possible Praise, Might, Majesty and Dominion, both now
and for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer in public with the Family for the Evening.
HEar us, O Lord, in the multitude of thy Mercies, even in the truth of thy
Salvation; and let not, O let no^ the loud cry of our sins hinder our Prayers
from coming up unto thee, or thy Graces and Mercies from coming down upon us;
but pardon our sins which make us unworthy to appear in thy presence, and our
services to be accepted by thee; and assist us we pray thee with thy holy
Spirit, which may make us fervent and earnest in our Devotions, that so we may
obtain our Requests at thy hands in and through Jesus Christ.

O Eternal and Everliving Lord our God, thou art in thy self most glorious and
in thy Son most gracious: Heaven is thy Throne, and that thou fillest with thy
Majesty, the Earth is but thy Footstool, and yet that thou fillest with thy
Goodness; both Heaven and Earth loudly proclaim the exceeding greatness of thy
Glory, and transcendent Excellencies: We thy sinful Creatures, who are not
worthy to lift up our Eyes unto Heaven, for we have sinned against Heaven and
before thee, are yet bold in the Bowels and Mercies of Jesus Christ, to cast
our selves down at the Footstool of thy Majesty, desiring in all humility of
Souls and Bodies to acknowledge our own vileness and wretchedness. O Lord we
brought into the World with us evil and wicked Inclinations, and we have since
made it our business to improve them into practice: As the thoughts and
imaginations of our hearts, so the very words of our Lips, and actions of our
Lives have been evil, and only evil, and that continually: Our provocations
against thee, our God, have been very great and heinous, and as for their
number, more than the Sands of the Sea: We have lived in an universal
disobedience to thy Laws, and violated all thy holy Commandments, in the
keeping of which there is great Reward: And this, O Lord not only through
ignorance and frailty, but too many times knowingly and wilfully, against the
Motions of thy holy Spirit, against the Checks of our own Consciences, against
those various methods of thy Mercies and thy Judgments, which thou have used to
draw us to thy self; yea against those many Promises, Vows, and Resolutions
which we have so often made betwixt thee and our own Consciences, both in
public and in private, of better obedience and amendment of Life: And now, O
Lord, what belongs unto us but shame and confusion of Face? And should
thou abandon and cast us out of thy favor for ever; we must needs confess that
the Lord our God is Righteous, and that we reap but the fruit of our ways; but
unto thee our God belong Mercies and Forgiveness, though we have rebelled
against thee: Thou have published thy self to be the Lord Merciful and
Gracious, slow to Anger, and abundant in goodness and in truth: A God forgiving
Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, and therefore it is that we yet hope; and
because we hope, we pray: Have Mercy therefore upon us, O God, according to thy
loving kindness, and according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies, blot out
all our Transgressions washus thoroughly from our Iniquities, and cleanse us
from our Sins, for we acknowledge our faults, and our sins are ever before us.
We know, O Lord, that though our sins are exceeding great and many, yet they
cannot exceed the multitude of thy Mercies, nor the greatness of Christ his
Merits: O we beseech thee therefore, remember thy tender Mercies, which have
been ever of old, and remember the bitter Sufferings of our blessed Redeemer;
and for the Merits thereof, pardon all that is past, and become unto us a
reconciled Father, and own us for thy Children. Neither do we desire thee only
to forgive unto us our past sins; but we pray thee also to sanctify our
Natures, to instruct our Understandings, that we may know the things that
belong to our Peace: to regulate our Affections, and place them on their right
Objects, and to dispose and incline our Wills readily to choose, and cheerfully
to embrace what relates to thy Glory and our own Eternal Happiness: Subdue all
our Lusts, mortify all our Corruptions, and bring into obedience whatsoever
exalts it self against thy most holy and blessed will, that at last we may
come to be such as thou would have us, and can delight in. Strengthen us,
O Lord, against all the Temptations of the Devil, the World, and our own
corrupt Flesh: O Lord, thou know the Frailties and weaknesses of our
Natures, and the number and strength of those Temptations we have to struggle
with: We humbly pray thee leave us not to our selves, for then we shall quickly
leave thee, but assist us with thy Grace, perfect thy Strength in our weakness,
and where thou feast we are either by Nature, or Custom, Company, or
Temptation, most apt to be drawn aside to sin, there do thou more especially
magnify thy power in our preservation: Set a watch, O Lord, before our Mouths,
and keep the doors of our Lips: Turn away our Eyes from beholding Vanity, our
hearts, lest they think on Vanity, and our hands, lest they at any time act it;
and quicken thou us in thy way. Search us, O God, and know our hearts; O try
us, and know our thoughts, and see what ways of Wickedness there are in us, and
lead us in the way Everlasting. Give us grace to abstain from the very
appearance of Evil, and to watch and pray that we enter not into Temptation.
Possess our Souls continually with an holy fear and love of thee our God. Make
us holy as thou art holy, pure as thou art pure, and merciful as thou our
heavenly Father art Merciful; and Crown all thy Graces in us with Patience, and
Perseverance, that notwithstanding all those discouragements and oppositions
which we may meet withal here in this sinful World, we may go on cheerfully and
constantly to do and suffer those things which thou requirest of us in order to
thy Glory and the Salvation of our precious and immortal Souls: O grant that we
may not recede from any Christian performance, upon the sight of any
Obstruction lying in the way, but may be willing to resist even unto Blood for
the Name, and for the sake of Jesus Christ. Fit and prepare us, O Lord, for all
Estates and Conditions whatsoever thou in thy Divine Providence have allotted
for us; for Adversity, as well as prosperity; for Sickness as well as health,
for an Evil, as well as a good Report. But above all, fit and prepare us for
the hour of Death, and the day of Judgment, that so whenever, wheresoever, or
howsoever it shall please thee to call for us out of this Vale of Tears, we may
be found prepared for thy coming, and may cheerfully and contentedly resign our
Souls up into thine hands, as into the hands of a faithful Creator. But seeing
that whilst we are here below, we have a continual need of supply of all those
outward things for supportance of these Houses of Clay, we humbly beseech thee
give us such a portion of them, as thou know may make most for the glory of
thy Name, and the good of our selves and others: Grant that we may seek first
thy Kingdom, and the Righteousness thereof, and then let all those outward
things be added unto us in such a measure, as thou in thy Divine Wisdom see
best for us; and in every condition that it shall please thee to place us; give
us Grace to be content. Take away from us, O Lord, both the Evil of Sin, and
the Evil of Punishment: O keep thy Servants from presumptuous Sins: deliver us
from thine Anger, from the withdrawing of thy Grace, and from Everlasting
Damnation: and as for all Temporal Afflictions, not as we will, O Lord, but thy
holy and blessed will be done in all things; only whatsoever thou shall please
to inflict upon us, give us patience and contentment under it, and then chasten
us here, O Lord, as thou please, that we be not condemned with the World.

With us we humbly beseech thee to be mindful of all thine the World over, give
thy Enlightening Grace to all that are in darkness: Thy Converting Grace to all
that are in Sin.

O be favorable and gracious unto Zion: Build thou the Walls of Jerusalem;
look upon the Tribe of thine own Inheritance, and the place where thou have
dwelt.

Let thy Mercies and Blessings rest upon all people of this Nation from the
highest to the lowest; more especially bless with thy choicest blessings our
Gracious King Charles: The Queen, and all the Royal Family. Bless all our
Ministers and Magistrates: Grant that they may be Men fearing God, and hating
Coverousness. Charge thy Providence with all our Friends and Relations: Let
those that are near and dear unto us, be near and dear unto thee; let their
Souls be bound up in the bundle of Life, give them all things necessary for
their Souls and Bodies; guide them here by thy Counsel, and afterward receive
them to thy self in Glory. Extend thy Compassions toward all that are in any
Want, Trouble, Sorrow, Sickness, or other Adversity, either of Soul or Body; O
visit and relieve them according to thine own Mercies. Reward those that have
done us any good, and pardon those that have done or wished us any Evil.

And now, O Lord, we desire to mingle praises with our Prayers, and to bless
and magnify thy glorious Name for all thy Mercies and Favors from time to
time vouchsafed unto us; but more especially for the Fountain of all our
Mercies Jesus Christ, for the means of Grace, and the hopes of Glory; for all
those Temporal Mercies, which thou have given us richly to enjoy: For the
Mercies of the day past to our Souls and Bodies, to our selves and others:
Blessed be the Lord God, which daily loadeth us with his benefits, even the God
of our Salvation, and blessed be the Name of his Majesty for ever and ever.

Finally we recommend unto thee (our good God) our Souls and our Bodies, all
that we have, and all that are near and dear unto unto us; most humbly
beseeching thee to receive us this Night into thine Almighty protection, and
whenever it shall please thee that our Souls depart our Bodies; receive them,
O Lord receive them into the Arms of thine Everlasting Mercy; in whose presence
is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore: Grant us
quiet and comfortable Refreshment by sleep, and awaken us again the next
Morning with hearts full of the sense, and with mouths full of the
acknowledgments of thy Mercies, that we may all of us return with more
cheerfulness to serve thee in the respective places of our calling.

Hear us, O most merciful Father, and graciously answer us in these our
Requests, and not only in these, but in whatever else thou know more needful
and requisite for us: Accept we humbly pray thee both of our persons and our
Prayers at this time, pardon the many frailties and imperfections of our holy
things, and deal with us not according to their weakness, or our demerits; but
according to the Richness of thy Mercy in and through Jesus Christ; for whom we
bless thee, and in whose Name and Words we farther pray, Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc. Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father,
thy sweet and comfortable Fellowship, O holy and blessed Spirit of Grace, be
with us, remain with us, guide, defend, and comfort us this Night, and for
evermore. Amen.

A Prayer for Sunday Morning in the Family; which with very little variation,
may be used by any single person in his Closet.
Hear our Prayer, O Lord, give Ear to our Supplications: In thy faithfulness
answer us, and in thy righteousness.

O Thou high and lofty One, that inhabitest Eternity: Thy Name is great,
wonderful, and holy, and thou dwell in the high and holy place, with them
also that are of a contrite and humble Spirit; howshall we then sinful Dust and
Ashes, who dwell in Houses of Clay, and are very far from that Humility and
Contrition, which should render us fit for thy Co-habitation, dare to appear
before thee, or approach the place where thine honor dwells? But though thou
art high, yet have thou respect unto the lowly, and art pleased to humble thy
self to behold the things that are done by us poor wretched Mortals here on
Earth: Thou art pleased not only to permit, but to invite and command us
miserable and needy Creatures, to make known our Requests unto thee; and it is
our interest, as well as our duty so to do: In obedience therefore unto thy
Commands, in a sense of our Du^y, and in a sense of our own Necessities (which
can no where else be supplied but from the riches of thy Bounty) we are now
emboldened at this time to present our Petitions unto thee: And because thou
have said, that if we confess our sins, thou will be faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; relying an thy
Mercies, and gracious Promises, we desire in the first place, most humbly to
confess before thee that we were not only conceived in Sin, and brought forth
in Iniquity; but (as if that had been but a small matter) we have proceeded on
to the commission of many actual Transgressions; To Sins of omission, we have
daily added sins of commission: To sins of weakness and surprise, sins of
wiljulness and obstinacy: To sins of ignorance, sins of presumption: Yea, O
Lord, if we reflect upon the actions of our lives. past, and seriously consider
how we have behaved our selves even from the first use of our Reason, to this
very moment, we can scarcely find that sin which we have not committed; that
Commandment of thine which we have not often broken; although to the keeping of
it thou have annexed a great reward. Thou have not been wanting unto us in any
thing that might invite or encourage us to promote the welfare of our precious
and immortal Souls: Thou have given us the knowledge of our duty, and instructed
us in it, and followed it with the inward work of thy Grace, whereby we might
be enabled to perform it, and to conquer our sinful Lusts and Desires: But, O
Lord, we still retain a darkness in our Understandings, an unruliness in our
Affections, and a crookedness in our Wills, bending down toward the carnal
part, and great proneness to gratify it: Thou have deterred us also by thy
menaces and denunciation of Judgments, saying, Thou will by no means clear the
guilty: Tribulation and Anguish, Indignation and Wrath upon every Soul that
sins; and yet neither have thy Mercies allured us, nor thy Threats
affrighted us, from following the dictates of our own sinful Inclinations; but
we have gone on in a continual Rebellion against thee, as if we meant speedily
to fill up the measure of our Iniquity, and to hasten our own destruction. And
now, O Lord, what can we say for our selves? But that we have deserved the
severest of thy wrath and displeasure, and that it is purely of the Lords Mercy
that we are not consumed. And now Lord what is our hope? Truly our hope is even
in thee. Thou have revealed thy self to be a God gracious and merciful, slow to
Anger, and of great kindness, repenting thee of the evil. We Appeal therefore
from the Bar of thy Justice to the Throne of thy Mercy, humbly beseeching thee
not to deal with us after our sins, nor to reward us according to our
Iniquities, but for thy Names sake, for thy Mercies sake, yea for thy dear Son
Jesus Christ his sake (in whom thou have said thou art well plsased) blot out
the multitude of our Transgressions, pardon all our sins, and receive us
graciously yet once more into thy favor. And as we destre thee to free us from
the guilt and punishment of our sins, so we pray thee also to free us from the
power of them too: So assist us continually with thy grace, that we may be able
to repel all the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Teach us
to deny all Ungodliness, and every worldly Lust, and to live more Soberly,
Righteously, and Godly in this present World, that so having our Fruits unto
holiness here, we may have our ends Everlasting Life. And grant, O Lord, we may
not only cease to do evil, but we may also learn to do well, that we may have
respect unto all thy Commandments, and serve thee by a sincere, uniform,
impartial Obedience, all the days of our lives; giving all diligence to add
unto our Faith Virtue, to Virtue Temperance, to Temperance Chastity, to
Chastity Humility, to Humility Meekness, to Meekness Brotherly kindness,
Charity, Preseverance, and every Christian Grace. That we may at length arrive
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ; to be such as thou
would have us to be, holy in all manner of conversation, even as thou our
God art Holy.

Prepare us for all Conditions that thou shall see fit to call us unto here in
this life, and give us hearts truly thankful, submissive, and contented in all
thy disposals. Give us a sanctified use of all thy Creatures, and such a
portion of those Temporals as may best secure our eternal concerns. Mind us of
Death and Judgment; That we dwell in Houses of Clay whose Foundation is in the
dust; that when a few days are past we shall go the way whence we shall not
return; and that it will not be long before we shall stand at thy just
Tribunal, and be called to give an account of all our Actions in the Flesh,
whether they be good or evil: Give us Grace therefore all the days of our
appointed time to wait until our change shall come: That we may be continually
trimming our Lamps, and waiting for the coming of the Bridegroom, that at
whatsoever hour he calls for us, we may be ready to enter in, and be admitted
to sit down at the Eternal Supper of the Lamb.

Neither desire we a blessing for our selves alone, but for the whole race of
Mankind. Let the knowledge of the Lord cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the
Sea. Let the people praise thee, O God, yea let all the people praise thee.
More especially bless, we beseech thee, the Congregation of Christ's Church,
however dispersed over the face of the whole Earth. Have a particular regard to
that Church and Nation in which we live. Bless the principal Member of it, our
gracious Sovereign Lord the King, the Queen, and all the Royal Family. Bless
all that wait at thine Altar, by what Names or Titles dignified or
distinguished. Grant that they may speak as the Oracles, and live as the
Messengers of God. Bless all to whom thou have committed the Sword of Justice;
let them not bear it in vain, but so use it, as to be a terror to evil doers,
and a praise to them that do well. Bless all the Commonalty of this Land; every
one of us in our several places and relations, and grant that we may all live
in the true Faith and Fear of thee our God; in humble obedience to the King,
and in brotherly Love and Charity one toward another. Bind up the broken
hearted: Give liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them
that are bound. Comfort all that mourn in Zion; give unto them Beauty for
Ashes, the Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness.

And as we pray unto thee, so we desire likewise to laud and praise thee for
all thy Mercies Spiritual and Temporal toward us; for thy protection of us
this Night, for all the Mercies of the Week past, to our Souls and Bodies: More
especially we beseech thee accept our praises for the great Mercies of this
day, for all the wonderful works of thy Creation, and for the providential care
and provision made for every one of them: That thou have appointed us certain
seasons and opportunities to Worship and Adore thee, even for our own good. But
above all we acknowledge thy inestimable benefits bestowed upon us in Jesus
Christ. We praise thee for his immaculate Conception and Incarnation, his holy
Life, and bitter Death; for his glorious Resurrection upon this day, for the
Mission of his blessed Spirit, and continual Intercession for us at thy right
hand; for all the means of Grace, and the hopes of Glory. We praise thee for
the glorious Company of the Apostles; for the goodly Fellowship of the
Prophets; for the Noble Army of Martyrs, and for all other thy Saints and
Servants departed this life in thy Faith and Fear; beseeching thee to give us
grace so to follow their good Examples, that we together with them, may be
partakers of a glorious Resurrection unto life everlasting.

And now, O Lord, seeing this is thy day, a day which thou have sanctified and
set apart for thy Service, be pleased to give us Grace wholly to devote it unto
thy glory. Make us more watchful over all ^ur thoughts, words, and actions,
than on other days; and so assist us with thy holy Spirit, that we may perform
all those Duties thou requirest of us, in such manner as they may be well
pleasing and acceptable in thy sight. Fit and prepare us for thy House of
Pr^yer, and for the discharge of those great and weighty Duties, which thou
there expectest from us; purify bur hearts from all sin, and inflame them with
a Spiritual Zeal and Affection, that we may enter into thy Gates with
Thanksgiving, and into thy Courts with Praise. Give us Grace to come before
thee with reverence and godly fear: Make us servent in our Devotions,
answerable to our needs and necessities: Give us hearing Ears, understanding
Hearts, retentive Memories, particular Application of it to our selves, and
holy Resolutions of practicing it in our Lives and Conversations, that we may
return satisfied with the fullness of thy House, and praise thee more and more.
Open thou the Mouths of thy Ministers every where this day: O be present with
the Assemblies of thy Saints. Spea^ unto thy Servants (the Ministers) that they
may speak unto thy people, and deliver unto every one such Doctrine as may be
suitable and seasonable to the several Conditions of their Auditors: That the
most obdure sinner may be convinced and converted; the most weak in faith may
be strengthened; the most d^je^cted in spirit may be comforted: And grant that
all who speak, and all that hear this day, may add some Glory unto thy Name,
and receive some benefit and comfort to their own precious and immortal Souls.
Finally, thou, O Lord, who know the several wants and necessities of all thy
Servants; O that thou would be graciously pleased to put a word into the
mouth of thy Minister, which shall dispense thy holy Oracles unto us this day,
which may particularly respect our Condition; whether it be for Comfort or
Terror, Reprehension, or Exhortation; Give us grace to apply it to our selves,
and to reduce it into practice, that thy word may be unto us the savor of life
unto life, and not unto any Soul of us, the savor of death unto death. These
Mercies, O most merciful Father, for our selves, or any of thine, and whatever
else thou know fitting for us (together with the acceptance of our praises)
we humbly beg at thy hands, though not for any worthiness that is in our selves
(for we utterly disclaim all) but for the Merits of him who alone is worthy,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; in whose endearing Name, and holy Words, we
continue to pray unto thee, saying, Our Father, etc. Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus
Christ, etc.

A Prayer for Sunday Evening in the Family.
Open thou our Lips, O Lord, and our Mouths shall show forth thy praise.

O Most blessed and glorious Lord God, Father of Mercies, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Thou fillest Heaven with thy Glory, and the Earth with thy Goodness:
All thy works praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints give thanks unto thee: Thy
Name only is excellent, and thy praise above Heaven and Earth; but because thou
art good, and delightest in doing good, thou art pleased to permit us thy poor
unworthy Creatures here on Earth, to offer up our Prayers and our Praises unto
thee, who dwell in the highest Heavens, that thou may reward them with
thy favor and loving kindness: And that we might never be wanting to our
selves, thou art daily pleased to give us new and fresh occasions of Praising
and Magnifying thy Holy Name Even this very day we have had large Experiences
of thy Goodness, which call for our highest Thanksgivings: The temporal Mercies
we have received in thy protection of us from those many dangers to which we
were exposed by reason of our sins, and the plentiful refreshment we have had
in the use of thy good Creatures, deserve our due acknowledgments; but that
thou have given us (Dust and Ashes) an opportunity and leave to come into thy
more immediate presence, to wait upon thee in thy House, to speak unto thee
(the glorious Majesty of Heaven, before whom Angels cover their Faces) and to
hear thee speaking unto us, instructing us in our Duties, and offering unto us
terms of Reconciliation, most justly challenge our devoutest Affections, and
most exalted Praises. Thou have given thine only Son to be a Sacrifice for us,
by whom we have Redemption through his Blood; thou have given him Victory over
Hell and the Grave, by his Resurrection from the dead, and he is now sat down
at the right hand of the Majesty on high, making continual Intercession for us.

Thou have given us the constant Solicitations of thy blessed Spirit of Truth,
the Seal of our Adoption, and the earnest of the Inheritance of the Saints;
together wih a succession of Pastors and Teachers, to be the Dispensers of thy
Word and Will, and the Guides of our Souls: And thou have prepared such things
for those that fear thee, as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor ever entered
into the heart of Man to conceive. Lord, what is Man that thou art mindful of
him? Or the Son of Man, that thou have done such great things for him? Praise
the Lord, O our Souls, and all that is within us praise his holy Name. Praise
the Lord, O our Souls, and forget not all his benefits.

O that all this Goodness of thine might engage us by way of just return to thy
free and undeserved Mercies, more heartily to love thee, more devoutly to
worship thee, and more diligently to live after thy Commandments.

Give us a due savor and relish of those Divine Truths we have learned this
day: Grant that we may not be only hearers, but doers of thy Word; lest we
deceive our own Souls. Cherish those holy Thoughts, Affections, and Resolutions
which thy good Spirit has raised in us: O Let not them pass out of our minds
with the day, but leave Impressions upon our hearts the whole Week following,
and all our days; that as we have received how we ought to walk and to please
thee, our God, so we may abound more and more.

Bless all the faithful Dispensers of thy Word and Sacraments, however
dignified, or distinguished: More especially bless him, O Lord, who has this
day blessed us in thy Name, Pour down a double portion of thy holy Spirit into
his heart, make him an eminent Instrument for thy Glory: Let him turn many from
their wicked ways unto thee, the living God, and hereafter let his Soul shine
as a Star in the Firmament of thy Kingdom.

Continue unto us, O Lord, such holy opportunities and seasons of Grace, as
thou now affordest us; and send them where they are not. Let not, O let not the
loud cry of our national Sins provoke thee to remove thy Candlestick from us,
or to quench the Light of our Israel; but blessed God, whatever temporal
Judgments thou art pleased to bring upon us; whatever Mercies thou art pleased
to deny us; yet for thy Names sake, and for thy Truth and Righteousness sake,
be pleased still to continue unto us the free liberty of thy House, of thy
Word, Sacraments, and Ordinances, in their primitive purity, and regularity,
until time shall be no more.

Pardon, we pray thee, good God, whatever thou have seen amiss in us the day
past, even the many frailties and imperfections of our holiest Duties, and
Performances.: Look not upon the weakness of our Flesh, but upon the sincerity
of our Hearts and Desires. Pity all our Infirmities; and let those Sacrifices
which we have this day offered unto thy Divine Majesty, be accepted in and for
that Sacrifice which thy Son Christ Jesus has offered up upon the Cross for
us. Finally, O Lord, we commend into thine hands, this Night, our Selves,
Souls, and Bodies, and all our Friends every where, to be protected by thy
providence, refreshed with moderate rest, and raised again the next Morning by
thy power; to serve thee with more cheerfulness, and to praise thee for thy
renewed Mercies: And all we beg for the alone sake and love of thy Son, who is
the Son of thy love, Jesus Christ our Lord: In whose holy Name we are bold to
beg the acceptance of our Petitions and Thanksgivings, and to continue to
supplicate thy Divine Majesty: Saying as he has taught us, Our Father which
art in Heaven, etc.
Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, etc.


A Prayer preparatory for Death, to be often used in the time of Health.
O Immortal and Everliving Lord God, thy years endure throughout all
Generations; from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. I thy frail
Creature, created at first (by thy power) to a state of Immortality with thy
self, which by Adams Transgression (the representative of all mankind) I have
long since forfeited my right to, and am become liable to Death. I acknowledge
thy mercy toward me in my Creation, and thy justice and faithfulness in the
execution of thy Threatenings, upon breach of the first Covenant. The Lord is
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Behold thou have now made
my days as it were a span length, and mine age is even as nothing in respect of
thee, and I am altogether vanity. The sentence of Death has passed upon all;
for that all have sinned: And I who have had so great a share in sinning,
cannot but expect to receive the due Wages of it, Death. Only I beseech thee,
blessed God. to make me wise now in the time of my Health and Srength, to
understand this, and to consider my latter end. Grant, O Lord, that by
departing from every known sin: by keeping Innocence, and always taking heed to
the thing that is right, I may be in an habitual preparation for Death, and
find peace at the last. Wean my heart daily more and more from the love of the
World, and worldly things, and place my affections upon their right and more
deserving Objects, Heaven, and Heavenly things; that my heart may be where my
Treasure is; and that whenever I shall be called to part with them, I may leave
all without any murmuring or reluctance; and be willing and content to die. Let
every pain and sickness mind me of my last: And that Death may not be a
surprise unto me, furnish my Soul with all those Graces beforehand, which I
shall have greatest occasions to make use of in my last Conflict. Give me
Repentance unto life, not to be repented of. A Steadfast Faith, that works by
Love toward thee my God, and Charity to all the World: A Firm Hope, such as
makes not ashamed, but may become an Anchor of my Soul, entering even within
the Vail: True Christian Courage and Patience, and a resolvedness of a cheerful
submission to thy Fatherly Correction: And Grant that in all things I may so
put my Soul, and House in order, that when I come to die, I may have nothing
else to do but to die.

Let not my Death be unexpected, untimely, or violent, if it be thy holy will:
And when it shall please thee to cast me on my last Bed, give me Grace to
search my Heart; to renew my Repentance and Interest in Jesus; and to compose
my Soul for God. Give me the opportunity and refreshment of thy holy Sacrament
(the Seal of the Divine Love) the benefit of Absolution: Some irradiations of
thy Love and Favor, in the assurances of pardon and peace, together with a
patient and comfortable expectation of the performance of all thy promises. Let
not the Devil take advantage of my weakness, nor any of his Suggestions prevail
upon me. Let not his Accusations or my Sins distract me in my last hour; but do
thou interpose thy seasonable Relief: O forsake me not when my strength fails
me, but in the midst of the sorrows and temptations that I have upon my Bed,
let thy Comforts refresh my Soul. O suffer me not for any pains of death to
fall from thee: And in my last Agonies, when my Soul shall quit the ruinous
habitation of my Body, let thy holy Angels convey it into the Regions of a
glorious Eternity; where there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying,
nor pain. Grant this, O merciful Father, for the sake of him, who by death has
overcome death, even Jesus Christ, my High Priest, and blessed Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for Sincerity, out of the Whole Duty of Man.
O Holy Lord, who requirest Truth in the inward parts, I humbly beseech thee to
purge me from all Hypocrisy and unsincerity. The heart, O Lord, is deceitful
above all things, and my heart (I fear) is deceitful above all hearts; O thou
who searchest the Heart and Reins, try me, and seek the ground of my heart, and
suffer not any accursed thing to lurk within me, but purify me even with Fire,
so thou consume my dross. O Lord, I cannot deceive thee, but I may most easily
deceive my self; I beseech thee let me not rest in any such deceit, but bring
me to a sight and hatred of my most hidden Corruptions, that I may not cherish
any darling Lust, but make an utter destruction of every Amalekite. O suffer me
not to speak peace to my self, when there is no peace, but grant I may judge of
my self as thou judge of me, that I may never be at peace with my self, till
I am at perfect peace with thee, and by purity of haert be qualified to see
thee in thy Kingdom, through Jesus Christ. Amen.

For Contrition, out of the same Author.
O Holy Lord, Who art a merciful Embracer of true Penitents, but yet a
consuming Fire toward obstinate sinners, how shall I approach thee, who have
so many provoking sins to inflame thy Wrath, and so little sincere Repentance
to incline thy Mercy! O be thou pleased to soften and melt this hard obdurate
heart of mine, that I may heartily bewail the Iniquities of my life: Strike
this Rock, O Lord, that the Waters may flow out, even Floods of Tears to wash
my polluted Conscience; my drowzy Soul has too long slept securely in sin,
Lord awake it, though it be with Thunder, and let me rather feel thy Terrors
then not feel my sin. Thou sentest thy blessed Son to heal the broken hearted,
but Lord what will that avail me if my heart be whole. O break it, that it may
be capable of his healing Virtue; and grant I beseech thee, that having once
tasted the bitterness of sin, I may fly from it, as from the Face of a Serpent,
and bring forth Fruits of Repentance in amendment of Life, to the praise and
glory of thy Grace, in Jesus Christ our blessed Redeemer. Amen.

Those whose Devotions are apt to be assisted by variety, or are desirous of
Forms for other Graces, or more particular occasions, may find a plentiful
supply in the Books of the aforementioned-Pious Author; in Dr. Tailor's holy
Living and Dying: but more especially in the Book of Devotions composed by the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Patrick.

A Prayer to be used by any Pious Christian in these difficult times.
O Most just and holy Lord God, thou art Righteous in all thy ways, and holy in
all thy Works; I must needs confess that when I seriously consider the
multitude and hainousness of my own Sins, and those of the whole Nation, which
cry loudly to Heaven for Vengeance, that it is even a miracle of Mercies that
we have not long since felt the severities of thy Wrath in some direful
Judgments; but thou, O Lord, have been exceedingly gracious, and with much
patience and long suffering have waited for our Repentance and Amendment of
Life; but yet we have abused this Mercy of thine beyond all the former, and
have not returned unto thee. And now, O Lord, seeing we would not be allured by
thy Mercies, thou art pleased to threaten us with the approach of thy
Judgments, which if thou will not avert, O fit and prepare me for the cheerful
Entertainment of whatsoever thy Wisdom shall think fit to inflict upon me,
whether in Mind, Body, or Estate; and to that end furnish my Soul with those
Gifts and Graces which are accommodate to the Condition of Suffering: Give me
Spiritual Wisdom, Discretion to manage my Affairs aright in these difficult
times, give me true Patience, Meekness, and an enlarged Charity toward all,
yea even those whom thou shall permit to be the instruments of my suffering, no
way murmuring or repining, but instead thereof, following that admirable
Example of my Blessed Savior, loving and praying for my greatest Persecutors.
Fortisie my Soul with Christian Courage and Constancy, that I may with
cheerfulness and inward joy run the race that is set before me, and O let me
receive such invisible Aids and Succors from thee, as may enable me thankfully
to resign my self to thy disposals, and to resist even unto Blood: And because
of my self I am a very frail Creature, subject to many Infirmities, having a
heart apt to be divided betwixt the love of God and the World, betwixt fear of
punishment, and trusting in thee; do thou, O blessed Mediator pray for me, that
my Faith fail not, but that tho it be tried with Fire, it may be found unto
Praise, and Glory, and Honor, at thy appearing: In the mean time take from me
all anxious, troublesome, and solicitous thoughts, and make me to commit my
self wholly unto the Lord, and to trust in him; and so in every thing by
fervent and humble Prayers with Thanksgiving make my Requests known unto thee,
my God: and having done this, let me cheerfully acquiesce in thy disposals,
meditate of thy Promises, of thy Faithfulness in performing them, and join
these with my constant Experiences of thy goodness; and so rest confidently
assured that all things, even the most bitter Afflictions that can befall me,
shall work together for my good, either to make me more holy in life, or else
more happy in death. Grant this, O merciful Father, for thy dear Sons sake,
Jesus Christ. Amen.

The Close.
I Have now (by Gods Assistance) gone through my proposed method, and I cannot
but think it high time to draw to a Close, especially being conscious of the
numerous Defects and Imperfections which the Reader has met withal in his
Journey hither. Many things (I confess) I have passed over siccopede, slightly
and cursorily, designing only a Specimen or Essay, leaving it for more pious
and worthy persons to make a complete discovery of the whole Merchandise.

By way of Surplusage I have added those last Forms of Prayer, yet I would not
be understood to be so supercilious as to think my own private Inventions
better than those public ones of the Church, or that the one ought to justle
out the other, or that any should be obliged to these Forms here prescribed
(who probably can much better adapt their Conceptions and Expressions to their
own particular Conditions) they being only designed to be a Direction ^r Method
for those who are defective (...) it; and therefore I shall hope to escape the
Censure of my holy Mother, the Church, and all pious persons.

If it be Objected by any that the course of Piety by me here prescribed, as
too severe, and the burden I would impose is too insupportable, I must answer
that if he be a person of leisure, and disposed to live a Godly Life; he will
be willing to press on farther toward perfection, and diligently apply himself
to every (even the most difficult) work of Piety, and walk in all the ways of
well-doing, that may conduct him to it. Use and Custom will make that Task
easy and pleasant, which at first seemed difficult, if not possible. Elige
vitam optimam (said Seneca) consuetudo faciet jucundissimam.

The Sands of Arabia, which to Strangers and Foreigners are troublesome to
pass, to the Inhabitants are easy, because accustomed to them. And I dare
presume may I so far prevail with any pious Soul as to put it in practice for
some time, he will then confess it to be not only tolerable, but facil and
delightsome. And yet I would not have any well disposed humble Souls to think
ill of their conditions, although they proceed not to so a severe a Course of
Piety as is here described; for I know this cannot be a Rule for all; nay it is
not proper for all to follow. Some have not leisure and opportunities, and here
it is not expected; others are Novices in the School of Grace, and those I
would not counsel to lay too heavy burdens on their Shoulders before they are
of Strength able to bear them. Milk is fittest for Babes, and strong Meat for
those of adult years. Let not therefore such be discouraged, or follow after
sorrowing, because they have not arrived to that height as others, but comfort
themselves with this, viz. That God exacts not a perfect, but sincere
Obedience; and that where Perfection is wanting in the act, that it be made up
in the desires and endeavors; and this God will please to accept.

We all pretend to be Christians, and we Name the Name of Christ, O let us
depart from Iniquity, and let our practice be someway (at least answerable) to
what we profess. I have read of Alexander, that hearing of a Captain in his
Army called by his own Name, that proved himself to be a very Coward, he sent
to him either to quit his Name, or to fight better. If we indeed own a God, and
pretend to fight under his Banner, let us live God-like, and behave our selves
as his faithful Soldiers and Servants. Though a speculative Atheist be indeed
a great wonder, yet the practical one is certainly the biggest prodigy of the
two; and I would much rather choose to be found at the last a Seneca,
Antoninus, Scipio, or Aristides, an honest Heathen, or a devout Idolater, than
a profane Christian.

I shall add no more but my Prayers that God will make us Christians in Deed as
well as in Name, that we may not only believe and acknowledge the Existence of
a God, but that we may also be subject to him, governed by him, and in all
things be conformable to his Will; which God grant for his Son Jesus Christ his
sake. Amen.

FINIS.
(...).

