THE ALAMODE MUSICIAN
Being a new Collection of Songs Composed by Some of the most Eminent Masters,
and Ingrav'd from the Originalls, with a through Bass for the Harpsichord, or
Bass-Violl and for the easier playing ye Trebles upon the Flute, each Song is
transposed (where necessary) to a Key proper for that Instrument.

Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple Chainge Fleet Street, School

A new Song
set by Mr: Forcer.
^

Farewell my useless Scrip, and poor unheed'd flocks,
No more you will round me trip, nor cloth me with your Locks,
Feed by you purling Stream where Jockey, where Jockey first J knew,
J only think J only think, J only think on him, J cannot, cannot, cannot think
on you.
Farewell each Shepherdess the bonny Lads adieu,
May each his Wish possess and to that Wish be true,
Your Oaten Pipes could please but Jockey then was kind,
Your bonny Tunes may Cease the Lad has Changed his mind.
For the Flute
^

Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple-Change Fleet Street (num^ 5)

A Song in the Comedy called the Town Unmasked
Set by Mr. John Eccles
Sung by Ms. Bowman
^ All things seem deaf, seem deaf to my Complaints, All things seem dea -- f
to my Complaints, in Vain J roa -- m the groves alone, in Vain J roa -- m the
groves alone; Hear me, hear me Ye Loves, ye Lo -- ves departed Swains, that to
Eli -- zyan Shades are gone, hear me, hear me Ye Loves depa -- rted Swains, that
to E -- li -- zian Shades are gone Jf to my faithful Celadon J prove not true,
if to my faithful Celadon J prove not true; Let it be both our dooms, let it
be both our dooms, let it be both our dooms, let it be both our dooms never to
com to you, never to com to you, let it be both our dooms, never to com to you,
no no no no no no no no no no no no no no never never never never never, no
never to com to you, no never never never never never, no never to com to you

For the Flute
^

Sold by Henry Playford at his shop in ye Temple Change Fleet Street

A new Song set by Mr: Barrett.
^ How wretched, how wretched is our Fate to Love, when doomed, when doomed to
Love in Vain, or Sigh and Tears suc -- cess -- less Prove, and in the fair no
Passions move, but hatred and Disdain. Ah dear Sibersa, Did you, did you, did
you know what Torments J endure you more Compassionate would grow, and some kind
tender pity show, my Wild despair to Cure, my Wi -- ld despair to Cure. To you
my Heart J've Sacrifis'd, to Sigh, to bleed, to bleed, to burn. For you the
World J have despised, you as my Goddess Jdoliz'd, and am by you by you undone,
and am by you, and am by you, by you, by you undone.

Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple Change Fleet Street (num^ 7)

A new Song
set by Mr: Jeremiah Clark
Sung by Ms: Campion at the Theater in Dorcet Garden
^ Long has Pa -- sto -- ra ruled the Plain, long, long, long has Pa -- sto --
ra ruled the Plain, the Day -- ly Song, the Day -- ly Song of every Sighing,
every Sigh -- ing Swain, in Softest notes, in Softest notes all tell their
Tender Love, each Stri -- ves -- in Vain, each Stri -- ves -- in Vain Pasto --
ras Breast to move, Ah happy, happy Nymph, Ah happy, happy Nymph, whose Charms
such Ma -- gick have, can Chain a World, can Chain a World and force Mankind
your Slave. Would you Improve and Still much brighter Shine, Oh do but Love and
You Will be all Divine, Oh. Oh, Oh do do but Love and You Will be all Divine.

For the Flute
^ Slow

Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple Change Fleet Street (Nu^. 2)

A new Song upon a lost Heart,
the words by Mrs. Child
Set by Mr. Wilford.
^ Return, return thou wand -- ring Guess return return to thy forsaken Breast,
forsaken Breast, fond Heart why do thou Still pursue, a fate which will thy
peace undo, fond Heart why do thou Still pursue, a fate which will thy peace
undo, thy peace undo. How ill have Str^ngers treated thee, with va -- rious
kinds of treachory, Yet thou as pleased with thy undoing do vainly fly -- to
meet thy ruin Oh do thou hope at last to find a Breast that is Constant Soft
and kind if that a lone crowns thy desire, then to thy own thou must retire, if
that alone Crowns thy desire, then to thy own thou must retire, end with the
first Strain.

For the Flute.
^ first strain again end with the first strain

Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in the Temple Change Fleet Street, (Num^.
3)

A new Song in the Fatal Deuorse,
set by Mr: Daniel Purcell,
Sung by Ms: Linsey.
^ O -- O -- Hymen must we must we allway's see. Perjured Man thus faithless
be, and still still securely sli -- ght. Securely slight our Deity, must Vows
and Oaths to us be Swore, and then be never, never, never, then be never, never
never, never, never, never thought on more, must Vows and Oaths to us be Swore,
and then be never, never, never, never thought on more. Jn Vain, in Vain, Jn
Vain, in Vain our Votrys Seek our Aid, Jn Vain, in Vain, Jn Vain, in Vain, Jn
Vain, in Vain -- our Votrys Seek our Aid; Jn Vain, in Vain our Votry's Seek our
Aid; Jn Vain, in Vain -- our Votrys Seek our Aid, if thus, thus, thus, if thus,
thus, thus they Still must be betrayed if thus thus thus if thus thus thus if
thus, thus, thus they Still must be betrayed, if thus, thus, thus, if thus,
thus, thus, if thus, thus, thus, they Still must be betrayed.

For the Flute
^

Sold by Henry Playford at his Shop in ye Temple-Change Fleet Street (Num^ 4),

A New Song
the words by Capt. Walker
set by Mr. Courtevill,
^ The Charms of bright Beauty so Pow -- erfull Are for that we make Peace and
for that we make War. then tell me no more, no more, then tell me no more, no
more of Reli-gion and Laws, your Cant of Jn justice your good and bad Cause,
your Con -- quest your Con -- quest your Conquest and Tri -- umphs your
Captives and Spoils, could never incite me, no never, could never incite me,
could never incite me, to Hazardous toils, could never incite me, to Hazardous
toils. To be great wise and wealthy, J never would choose, Should the Nymph J
adore shoud the Nymph J adore her Favors refuse. But let my Eugenia be
faithful, and kind, i will weather the Winter and weary the wind, i will Ra --
vage the Seas, i will Ra -- vage the Seas the Earth and the Air and Com -- bate
for Her even Death, -- even Death, Death and Despair,

For the Flute
^ Slow

Sold by Henry Playford at his shop in the Temple Change Fleet Street (Num^ 6)


