At the Queens-House in East Greenwich, in the County of Kent, the Ninth Day of
March, in the Fifth Year of the Reign of Their Majesty's King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, etc.
COMMISSIONERS then Present, Henry Lord Bishop of London, Simon Lord Bishop of
Ely, Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr.
Thomas Plume Archdeacon of Rochester, Sir John Shaw, Sir William Langhorn,
Sir John Morden, Baronets, Sir William Hooker, Sir Algernoon May,Knights,
Humphrey Styles, Edward King, Abraham Harrison, Edmond Took, and Philip
Boddenham, Esquires.

Kanc. ss.
WHEREAS a Commission under the Great Seal of England bearing Date at
Westminster the Third Day of November last past, has been directed to the most
Reverend Father in God John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; To the Right
Reverend Fathers in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, Thomas Lord Bishop of
Rochester, Simon Lord Bishop of Ely, John Lord Bishop of Oxford, Thomas Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Thomas Plume
Archdeacon of Rochester, Sir Stephen Lennard, Sir John Shaw, Sir William
Langhorn, Sir John Morden, Baronets; Sir William Hooker, Sir Algernoon May,
Knights, and to diverse other Honorable and Worthy Persons in the said
Commission Nominated and Appointed, Authorizing the said Commissioners, or any
Four, or more of them, by such ways and means as therein is directed, to
Enquire what Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Heraditaments, Goods,
Chattels, Money, and Stocks of Money, have been heretofore given by any well
disposed Person or Persons, for Relief of Aged, Impotent, and Poor People,
Maintenance of sick and maimed Soldiers and Mariners, Schools of Learning,
Free-Schools and Scholars of Universities, Repair of Bridges, Ports, Havens,
Causways, Churches, Sea-banks and Highwaies, for Education and Preferment of
Orphans, for or toward the Relief, Stock, or Maintenance for Houses of
Correction, Marriage of poor Maids, Supportation, Aid, and Help of Young
Tradesmen, Handicrafts-men, and Persons decayed, Release and Redemption of
Captives, Aid or Ease of any poor Inhabitants concerning payment of Fifteens;
Setting out of Soldiers and other Taxes, and of the Abuses, Breeches of Trust,
Negligences, Misimployments, not Employing, Concealing, Defrauding,
Misconverting, and Misgoverning of the same Lands, Tenements, Stocks of Money,
and other things given to any of the Charitable Uses aforesaid, and to set down
such Orders, Judgments and Decrees, as that the same Lands, Tenements, Money,
and other Things, may be duly employed to and for such of the Charitable Uses
aforesaid, for which they were given, limited and appointed by the Doners and
Founders thereof. And whereas we the abovenamed Commissioners appointed, with
others for the Purposes aforesaid, having this day considered the Usefulness of
the said Commission, in respect of many concealments, and misimployments of
several Charitable Uses, within the said County of Kent. To the end therefore
that all Persons that please, may have the Benefit and Advantage thereof, We
have thought fit, and do recommend it to the abovesaid Lord Bishop of
Rochester, that he will please to direct that Publication hereof be made in all
Parish-Churches and Chapels, within the said County, and that we intend to
meet frequently at the Queens House in East Greenwich, or elsewhere within the
said County, to receive and examine all such complaints as shall be Exhibited to
Us. And to the end that all Persons for that purpose may come prepared, We have
thought fit to direct, that they bring with them all such Wills, Evidences,
Charters, and other VVritings, whereby the respective charitable Uses were
given, limited and appointed as concern the same. And that any Person or
Persons in the mean time may apply themselves to the Clerk attending Us in the
Execution of this Commission for further direction and assistance therein. And
that his Lordship having been therewith attended, did approve of the Order
abovementioned, and directed the same should be forthwith Printed, and
Published in all Parish-Churches and Chapels, within the said County of Kent
accordingly.

I do Allow this Order to be Printed and Published in my Diocese.

Tho. Roffen.

LONDON, Printed by Alex. Milbourn, in Green-Arbor-Court in the Little
Old Bailey. 1693.


