THE History, and Reasons, OF THE Dependency of IRELAND UPON THE Imperial Crown
OF THE Kingdom of ENGLAND. Rectifying Mr. Molineux's State of the Case of
Ireland's being bound by Acts of Parliament in England.

Actum erat de foecundissima gente,
Si libera fuisset.
Plin. Panegyr. LONDON, Printed for Dan. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar; and Ri. Smith at the Angel without Lincoln's Inn Gate near
the Fields, School.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, in Parliament
Assembled.
YOur House, and they Anciently there was but one House and sometimes one
undivided Body sub dio. Thus one of K. Edgar 's Charters An. 970. Non clam in
angulo, sed sub Divo, palam evidentissime scientibus toti^s regni mei
Primatibus.
to whose Rights You succeed, having, for several Ages, been the Principal
Support of the English Monarchy; the Enemies to so excellent a Constitution
have thought it could never be more effectually undermined, than by the drawing
your Rights into Question: and thus have many made (...) their deceitful Courts
to Princes.

It Is not for me to determine, whether Malice or Sycophantry have induced some
to deny, your being in any manner invested with that Authority, which they
officiously ascribe to the Kings of this Realm, and their Council of Lords, or
rather Privy Council; to the derogating from the Lords in Parliament, no less
than from You.

I conceive it, allowable for me, to join the Men of this assurance with Dr.
Brady, and other Advocates for Despotick Power: who have contended, that your
first Presence, or Representation, in the National Council, began by Rebellion
in the Dr. Brady's Answer to Mr. Petty l. p. 1, 2. ^o rescue these sacred
things from groundless and designing i^^e^pretations: I follow his own Method,
and do affirm, 1. Tha^ the Common s of England represented by Knights, Citizens,
and Burgesses in parliament were not introduced, not were one of the three
Estates in Parliament before the 49th of H. 3. 2. That before that time the
body of the Commons of England, or Freem^n as now understood or as we n^w
frequently call them collectively taken, had not any share or votes iu making
of Laws for the government of the Kingdom, nor had any com^unication in Affairs
of State, unless they were represented by the Tex nts in Capite.
49. of H. 3. which being taken as proved, they conclude, that Kings may as
well set you aside, as a Subject may any obligation extorted by threats and
duress.

And whoever has made any attempt toward the removing that Corner Stone for
Tyranny, has been sure to incur the imputation of promoting Anarchy: as if your
venerable Body did not in the least interpose between those two Extremes.

The fairest color which the Men of Foreign Notions and Allegiance have, for
their premises, is from King John's Charter, which as they imagine, has
declared or established the Tenants of the Crown in Chief, to be the only legal
Members of the Common Council of the Kingdom: the far different sense of which
Charter, I may well say 'twas my fortune to find and evince, upon my Vid Jani
Anglor. faciem nov. ed. An. 1680.
first enquiry into the Nature of our Government; since the force of truth has
obliged even Vid. Dr. Brady 's Append. to his Co^pleat History cited in f.
Dr. Brady to yield it up to me, Dr. Brady's Introtuct. f. 3^6 Spe^aing of
Seditious Pieces defign'd, as he says, to overturn the Government, and
published on purpose to usher in Anarchy and Confusion, (leaving a Blank for
Mr. P^tyt's Name, whom be sufficiently describes) these and other such stuff,
says, he did mightily contribute to the Sedition and Rebellious Practices of a
Great Man who laid violent Hands upon himself to prevent the Hand and Stroke of
Justice, And like to this Piece are J^ni Anglor* ^acies nova, Jus Anglorum ab
antiquo, Reflections upon Antidptum Brit. etc. All written and timed to promote
Sedition and in expectation of Rebellion and the destruction of the Established
Government.
after all the hard Words which he had given me on that occasion.

Nor has he offered the least Shadow of Evidence against my List Jus Anglorum
ab antiq.
from Domesday Book; showing, that notwithstanding the supposed Conquest of
this Land by W. 1. they who had not forfe* ted their Estates, enjoyed them upon
or under Titles Priour to his Entrance; without relation to any Grant, or
Confirmation from him.

Permit me to say, that the Researches in which this Controversy engaged me,
have, in some measure, enabled me to assert your Authority, in the highest
Instances of the exercise of Power; and to make out by Deduction, and numerous
Presidents, what you have as 'twere by Intuition; that Ireland, as it is annexed
to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom; is subjected to that Authority, which
is, and must be absolute; and yet can never be gaievous, because of your share
in it.

Votes, Lunae, 27 Junii School.
Tho* the bold denial of this, has already received your just censure of being
of dangerous Consequence to the Crown, and People of England: Yet, if I may use
the Allusion, I might observe, that it is not held improper to make Comments
upon the Sacred Text, to explain it to Vulgar Understandings: Which, I should
hope, may plead in my Excuse, if not, Justification, while I am proving, that,
as you have rightfully concurred with the Lords, in giving Ireland a King, by
filling the Vacant Throne; and Vid. Mat. Par. Addit. f. 281. De foris factura
regni per Johannem, and regni vacatione per ejusdem demissionem in manus Papae.
that Glorious Preserver of your Liberties has, with the Advice and Consent of
the States of this his Realm, made Laws with a declared intention of binding
Ireland; these Acts of Sovereignty, are not only agreeable to the Laws of
Nature, and of Nations, but warranted by the Ancient Constitution of this
Monarchy.

The foundation of which, while I have been laboring to clear, from that
Rubbish which would render it unstable; it has happened with me, as with those,
who having exhausted themselves in working a rich Mine, are forced to leave the
bright Oar to them that come after: And thus it is likely to be with those
Collections which I have by me, concerning the Fundamental Constitution of this
Government: by which I had flattered my self, that I must have contributed
toward the Peace and Happiness of my Country, in showing the admirable Harmony
that there is between the constituent parts of this Empire; how strong and
beautiful they are in their due order; How conspicuous that Degree of the
Baronage, or Nobility of Engl. which you're present, has been in all the Ages
of this Monarchy, in maintaining its Glory; what Persuasive Reasons both Prince
and People have, to be satisfied with their several, and yet common Interests;
and how little they are to be thought Friends to either, who prompt them, as
the Learned Grotius has it,

In partem non suam involare. Whither I have been any way serviceable to the
Public, or can yet serve it, according to my Zeal; is submitted to the
Collective Wisdom of the Nation: The Judgment is with you; who, if you should
not think this, or any of my former labourous Effects of Idleness, as the Poet
calls the Writing of Books, worthy of your Protection, or Notice; I doubt not
will extend your Pardon, to Endeavors consecrated to your use, By,

Your Most Faithful and Affectionate Humble Servant, W. Atwood.

The History, and Reasons of the Dependency of Ireland, upon the Imperial Crown
of the Kingdom of England, etc.
AS there is no need of staying for Public Authority or Encouragement, to
oppose an open Invasion upon the Rights of my Country; I cannot but think it my
duty to make a stand, till better help come in, with Arms taken up on a sudden;
and that the rather, since by a show of Precedents, and popular Positions, some
lovers of English Liberties are drawn in, to join with the Invaders: nor do I
wonder, to find Sufferers under Arbitrary Reigns, easy to be misled, by a
seeming Mr. Molineux his Book* p. 3. I venture to expose my own weakness,
rather than be wanting at this time to my Country, I might say indeed to
mankind; for it is the Cause of the whole Race of Adam that I argue, etc.
Advocate for mankind, who undertakes the Cause of the whole Race of Adam.

And yet to any man, who will be at the least pains to think of Consequences,
'twill be manifest, that the Liberty which the Gentleman, whom I oppose,
contends for, as the inherent Right of all mankind, would be a total exemption
from all Laws and Government, except such as Adam had a right to in the state
of Nature: and, for want of knowing who has the title of Descent from him,
would turn all Nations to such Commonwealths, wherein every Paterfamilias is an
independent Sovereign. If men were to be considered in such a state, I will
agree Page 3.
with him, That on whatsoever ground any one Nation can challenge Liberty to
themselves, on the same reason may the rest of Adam's Children expect it.

But if this be taken with relation to the present Governments in the world;
then, suppose this Gentleman hold a Commonwealth to be the freest state of
mankind; to be uniform, he must believe, that no Monarchies ought to continue
longer than the people should think fit: because, according to his Maxim, the
People of a Monarchy have the same right to Liberty that the others maintain:
and, directly to the present question, no nation ought to have any dependence
upon any other Nation. And, perhaps others Vid. Plin. Pan. Quam nunc juvat,
provincias omnes in fidem nostram deditionemque venisse. Postquam contigit
Princeps terrarum, etc.
will say, neither ought they to have any protection.

It Is certain, that whether we consider the people of the same Nation, or the
relation which one Nation has to another, their state or condition, must depend
upon Constitutions and Agreements, express, or tacit. Indeed, what
Constitutions and Agreements are binding, and for what time, will fall under
the consideration of Reason, either of it self, or aided and assisted by
Revelation. S. Paul having taught us, That the Powers that are are ordained of
God; I should think that the common practice of the world (which this Gentleman
admits to be against Page 25.
his Notions) is no small evidence of the right of Acquisitions made by one
Nation upon, or over another: But if these could in right be carried no
further, than the It Is only damage sustained that gives title to another man's
goods.
damage sustained by the injured Nation; the bounds of the Acquisitions would
be very uncertain, and desultory.

That no true Principle opposes the Power, which England claims and exercises,
over Ireland, might be shown in a very narrow compass: Yet when many glittering
Arguments are made use of, to support an unseasonable as well as groundless
complaint; it may be requisite to give direct Answers to those things which may
seem most plausible; and to lay such Foundations as may supersede the
particular consideration of the rest: to which end I shall show,

1. The nature of Mr. Molineux his Complaint.

2. The true Foundation and Nature of that Right, of which England is
possessed, in relation to Ireland; and Mr. Molineux's Mistakes, Omissions, and
wrong Comparisons, and Inferences, concerning it.

3. That the Right which was at first acquired, is so far from being departed
from, that it is rather strengthened, and confirmed: and has been duly
exercised, as the good of England has required, and in subordination to that:
and, even in the greatest Instances now complained of.

4. That his Politics, and seeming popular Notions, are wrong, and misapplied.

1 st. Mr. Molineux would insinuate into his Mr. Molineux his complaint against
the Parliament of England. Vid. Dedication.
Majesty's belief, in his Dedication to him, that some of late endeavor to
violate those Rights and Liberties, which the Irish, or English there, have
enjoyed for above five hundred years: And he plainly enough charges, both
Kings, Lords, and Commons of England, and that acting Parliamentarily, not only
with this endeavor, but with actual violations of that, which to him seems,
the inherent Right of all mankind.

His Service to his Country, and to all the Race of Adam, he supposes to be
called for, by the present juncture Page 3.
of Affairs, when the business of Ireland is under the consideration of both
Houses of the English Parliament: that is, as his Margin explains it, the Case
of the Bishop of Derry in the House of Lords, and the prohibiting the
exportation of the Irish Woollen Manufacture, in the House of Commons.

P. 64, and 66.
He complains, That Acts of Parliament in England, before the 10 th of H. 4.
and 29 th of H. 6. had pretended to bind Ireland, without any confirmation
there, tho they have not expressly claimed this Right* P. 68, 99.
that there are modern Precedents of English Acts of Parliament pretending to
bind Ireland: but these are Innovations; tho, of his own showing, no more than
was done before the P. 105.
10 th of H 4. But he is sorry to reflect, that since the late Revolution in
these Kingdoms, when the Subjects of England have more strenuously than ever
asserted their own Rights* and the Liberties of Parliaments, it has pleased
them to bear harder on their poor Neighbors, than has ever yet been done in
many Ages foregoing.

P. 107. Nay but one Throne, the two Kingdoms*
The first attempt which this Gentleman complains of, since his Majesty's happy
accession to the Throne of these Kingdoms, is an Act made, in great compassion,
for Relief of the Protestant Irish Clergy: The next is one prohibiting all P.
108.
Trade and Commerce with France; while England was engaged in an actual War, of
which Ireland was a miserable Seat. Another is the Act for the better security,
and relief of their Majesty's Protestant Subjects in Ireland; wherein K.
James's Irish Parliament at Dublin, and all Acts and Attainders done by them
are declared void: And it is further provided, That no Protestant shall suffer
any Prejudice in his Estate, or Office, by reason of his absence out of Ireland
since December 25. 1685. And that there should be a remittal of the King's
Quit-Rent from December. 25. 1688. to the end of the War. And the last is, That
for abrogating the P. 111.
Oath of Supremacy in Ireland, and appointing other Oaths.

These are the Acts of Parliament, by the supposed submission to which, he will
have it, that the Rights of the People of Ireland have received the greatest
weakening under his Majesty's Reign, and they are made of all his Majesty's
Subjects the most unfortunate. Page 114.


These Acts are complained of, as Violations of the Rights of a Kingdom P. 128.
complete and absolute in it self, without any P. 129, 133, 139.
subordination to England, especially in relation to Parliaments: That they are
contrary to that P. 147.
amity which should be maintained between distinct Kingdoms, or the Children of
one common Parent; which have distinct Rights, and Inheritances, absolutely
within themselves: and P. 163.
inconsistent with the Royalties, and Preeminence of a separate and distinct
Kingdom. P. 154.
Against the common Laws of England, which are in force both in England and
Ireland, by the original Compact. P. 157.
Against the Statute Laws both of England and Ireland. P. 161.
Against several Charters of the Liberties granted to Ireland. P. 166.
Against the King's Prerogative. P. 168. Vid. e Cont. sup. p. 64, and 66.
Against the practice of all former Ages. P. 170.
Against several Resolutions of the learned Judges of former times. Destructive
of Ibid.
Property. Introductive of P. 171.
the greatest confusion, and uncertainty imaginable. And lastly, Ibid.
inconvenient for England, being likely to P. 172.
make the Lords and People of Ireland think they are not well used, and may
drive them into discontent. And yet this Complaint must be thought very modest,
because, if the Great Council Page 3.
of England shall resolve the contrary, he declares he shall then believe
himself to be in an Error, and with the lowest submission ask pardon for his
assurance.

I cannot in the least question, but that august and wise Assembly will use
that Method which he refers to for his Conviction: yet, since they are employed
in Affairs of more immediate consequence, than the asserting and clearing the
grounds of that Authority which they have long been possessed of; I shall think
that I may do some service to my Country, in showing,

The true Foundation and Nature of the Right of England over Ireland.
2 ly The true Foundation of that Right, which England is possessed of, in
relation to Ireland; and what are Mr. Molineux's principal Mistakes, Omissions,
and wrong Comparisons, and Inferences, concerning it. Here I hope to make it
evident,

1. That he mistakes the Grounds for the submission of Ireland to H. 2. as well
as the Nature of it; and omits material Passages which may illustrate that
matter.

2. That if he had been as conversant in Histories, and Records, as he would be
thought; he could never Vid. p. 3.
have had assurance enough to assert, P. 14.
that England may be said much more properly to be conquered by W. 1. than
Ireland by H. 2.

3. That he is as much mistaken in his comparison between Scotland and Ireland;
and that matter of his own showing, or admission, might have convinced him of
an essential difference.

Page 6. of the first annexation of the Land of Ireland to the Crown of England.
1. This Gentleman pretends to give the History of the Expedition of the
English into Ireland; which he supposes to have been in the Reign of H. 2. and
that all the Right which has been acquired by England, to have any Government,
or Superiority, over that Nation, was derived from within that King's Reign.
Which manifests his having seen very little of our English Antiquities; and his
not attending to what Irish Acts of Parliament might have taught him.

Lambard's Archainomia, f. 148. de Jure and Appendiciis Coronae Regni
Britanniae.
The Confessor's Law, under the Title of the Rights and Appendages, or
Dependencies, of the Crown of England, expressly names Ireland as one, which it
supposes to have been first annexed to the Crown of England by King Arthur.
Accordingly, besides other Authorities which might be produced, a very Ancient
Bibli^^h. Cot. sub effigy Julii.
Manuscript in Latin Verse in the Cotton Library, ascribed to a Gildas, who
lived in the Year 860. speaking of several things done by B. 11.
that King in this British Kingdom, says; His ita dispositis in regnum tendit
Ybernum. These things thus settled, he for Ireland goes.

Another Claudius. D. 2.
Manuscript in the Cotton Library, treating of the number of the Cour^ies of
England, and the Countries, and Islands, which of Right, and without doubt,
belong to Na.
the Crown, and Dignity of the Kingdom of Britain, and the several Laws or
Customs, by which they were governed; among the places subject to the Danelege,
mentions Man, the Orcades, Guernsey, (...) I take it.
Gurth, and the other Islands of the Western Ocean, about or in the way toward
Norway, and Danemark: within which we may well think Ireland to have been
meant, since the Isle of Man is one of the Islands, there taken to be about,
Circa (...).
bordering upon, or in the Road to Norway, and Denmark.

Tho the Confessor's Law places the Foundation of the Right of the Crown of
England to Ireland, in the acquisition of King Arthur; it must be agreed, that
this was so antiquated, and so many Changes had happened in the State of this
Nation, between his time and King Edgar's, that he might well have no regard to
any Right from King Arthur: And, however, might suppose himself to have been
the first of the Anglo-Saxon Kings, who had subjected Ireland, or the greatest
part of it, to the Crown of England; which that he did, we have the Testimony
of his memorable Charter.

Ego Eadgarus Anglorum Basilius, omniumque Regum insularum, quae Britanniam
circumjacent, cunctarumque nationum quae infra eam includuntur, Imperator, and
Dominus; Gratias ago Deo Omnipotenti Regi meo, qui meum Imperium sic ampliavit,
and exaltavit, super Regnum patrum meorum; qui, licet Monarchiam totius Angliae
adepti sunt, a tempore Ayelstani, qui, primus Regum Anglorum, Nationes quae
Britanniam incolunt sibi armis subegit: nullus tamen eorum ultra ejus fines,
Imperium suum dilatare aggressus est. Mihi autem concessit propitia divinitas,
cum Anglorum imperio, omnia Regna Insularum Oceani, cum suis ferocissimis
Regulis, usque Norvegiam, maximamque partem Hiberniae, cum sua nobilissima
civitate Dublinia, Anglorum regno subjacere. Quos etiam Armis meis imperiis
colla subdere, Dei juvante gratia, coegi. Rot. Cart. 5. E. 2. m. 12. n. 25. and
3 E. 3. m. 10. n. 23. Pro Priore and Conventu Wigorn. per inspeximus.
I Edgar, King of the English, and Emperor and Lord of all the Kings of the
Islands which lie about Britain, and of all Nations that are included An. 964.
regni sui 6.
within it, give Thanks to God Almighty my King, who has so enlarged and
exalted my Kingdom above the Kingdom of my Ancestors; who, although they had
gained the Monarchy of all England, from the time of King Athelstan, who was
the first of the Kings of the English that brought under him by Arms the
Nations which inhabit Britain: yet none of them attempted to stretch his Empire
beyond its bounds. But the propitious Divinity has granted me, with the Empire
of the English, to put under the Dominion of the English, all the Kingdoms of
the Isles of the Ocean, with their fiercest little Kings, as far as Norway, and
the greatest part of Ireland, with its most noble City Dublin: Even all those,
by the help of God's Grace, I have compelled to submit their Necks to my
Commands.

From this time 'twill be evident, to any who observe the styles of our Kings,
till H. II's time, that the Authority of England over Ireland was taken to be
included under the style of King of the English Saxons, of Britain, of the
Island of Albion, or the like: not but that, for several Reigns before the time
of H. II. Parliaments, in which the King's Charters passed, were often careful
to have the style more expressive of the Title to the Dominions out of England.
For instances of both kinds:

Edgar, after the Charter above cited styles himself,

Basileus dilectae Insulae Albionis, subditis nobis sceptris Regum Scottorum,
Cumbrorumque ac Britonum, and omnium circumcirca Regionum. Rot* Pat. 12. E. 2.
m. 13. n. 42.
King of the Beloved Island of Albion, the Scepters of the Rot. Cart. 2* E. 3.
m. 23. n. 78.
Kings of the Scots, the Cumbers, and the Britons, being An. 970. and Cart.
Antiq. in Turr. Loud. B. n. 11.
subject to us, and of all the Regions round about.

In another; Rot. Car^* 5. E. 2. m. 12* n. 25.
Basileus Anglorum, and Imperator Regum Gentium. King of the English, and
Emperor of the Kings of Nations.

After this King Ethelred styles himself sometimes; Rot. Cart. 5. E. 3. m. 1^*
n. 17. per Prior and Convent. sanctae Frischeswide* Oxon. An. 1084. re^^i^ 25.
Ego Adelred totius Albionis Monarchiam gubernans. I Athelred governing the
Monarchy of all Albion*

Subscribes, Rex Anglorum. King of the English.

Sometimes, Rot. Cart. 5. E. 3. m. 32. n. 85. A. 979.
Ego Athelred totius Britanniae Basileus. I Athelred King of all Britain.

Sometimes, Rot. Cart. 36. E. 3. m. 7. n. 3. A. 964.
Ego Ethelred Britanniae totius Anglorum Monarchus. I Ethelred Monarch of all
the Britain of the English.

Sometimes, In Bib. Cot. An. 1001.
Ego Ethelred totius Insulae.

I Ethelred King of the whole Island.



Subscribes, Rex and Rector Angulsexna. King and Ruler of the Anglo-Saxons.

That Ireland and other Kingdoms and Dominions, were included within this
style, will appear by other Charters of the same King. Thus he styles himself,
Monast. 1. vol. f. 94. a. A. 983.
Totius Anglorum Gentis Basileos, caeterarumque Nationum in circuitu
persistentium, primatum gerens. King of all the English Nation, and having the
Supremacy over the other Nations living round about.

At another time he styles himself; Rot. Cart. 5. E. 3. m. 32. n. 85. pars
unica. A. 987.
Ego Ethelred Rex Anglorum, aliarumque gentium in circuitu persistentium. I
Ethelred King of the English, and other Nations living round about.

And the same style Hist. Elyens. in Bib. Cotton.
he uses in the Year 1001. tho, as appears above, in another Charter of the
same Year, he styles himself only King of the whole Island. And in another,
Vid. Rot. Cart. 2. R. 2. m. 13. n. 5. Bib. Cot. sub. effig. Claudil c. 9. Hist.
Eccles. Abind. Cart. Antiq. B. n. 4. K. n. 22.
at the beginning of his Reign, only King of the English.

W. I. generally styles himself no more than King of the English, or King of
the English, and Duke of Normandy. Yet, as one of his Charters has it, he was
Cartae Antiquae in Turri Land. D. n. 12. Coenob. de Salebi^.
the most powerful of all the Kings of that time, ruling the greatest Empire of
England. That other Nations were then held to be Dependencies upon the Kingdom
of England, appears by a Charter of his in the 15 th of his Reign, which
begins; Cart. An* tiq. Q. n. 2* An. 1081.
Ego Gulielmus Deo disponente rex Anglorum, caeterarumque gentium circumquaque
persistentium Rector, and Dux Normannoru^. I William by God's Disposal King of
the English, and Ruler of the rest of the Nations round about, and Duke of
Normandy.

After his time his Successors, till H. 2. left the Dependencies of England out
of their Style, adding only other Dominions, which they had as distinct and
independent.

Thus H. 1. to mention no other, styles himself King of the English, and Duke
of Normandy; but before the death of his Brother Robert, only Bib. Cot. sub
Effigy Claudii 9 Regist. Abind. dehund. de Hormmere.
King of the English.

Not here to bring other Evidences, of the continuance of the Superiority over
Ireland; to turn P. 129. If our Church be free and absolute within it self, our
State must be so too.
Mr. Molineux Of the Superiority and Authority of the Church of England over
the Church of Ireland.
his Argument upon him, if I show the Church of Ireland to have been then
dependent upon, or under the Church of England, he must not deny but the State
was too.

Archbishop Parker, who must be Parker 's A^tiq. Brit. Et quique Nobiles cum
Clero.
allowed to have seen and understood the Evidences of the Rights of the Sea of
Canterbury, and is agreed to be a faithful Collector, speaking of the time of
H. 1. shows, that upon the vacancy of the Bishopric of Waterford, Murchertach
King of Ireland, with the Bishops, all the Nobility, and the Clergy, and People
of the Island, sent to Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury, desiring Quatenus ipse,
primatus quem super eos gerebat potestate, and qua fungebatur Apostolica fretus
Authoritate, sanctae Christianitati, ac necessariae plebium utilitati eis
subveniret. That by the Power of the Supremacy which he had over them, and the
Apostolical Authority which he enjoyed, he would be aiding to holy
Christianity, and the necessities of the people.

Petitioni ^orum Armuit.
At their request, he upon the death of the Bishop of Dublin, consecrated one
Malchus, whose Bishopric Fo. 23. Ann. 1151.
Pope Eugenius raised into an Arbishoprick: But notwithstanding the Popes,
Eugenius and Adrian, had Ibid.
constituted Archbishops there; yet they all acknowledged Ib. F. 23.
Nihilominus Cant. Primatem in omnibus agnoscunt.
the Supremacy of the Sea of Canterbury in all things.

And after Archbishop Parker had enumerated 33 Bishoprics in Ireland, he adds,
Antiq. Brit.] sup.
Hi omnes 33 Episcopatus, usitato and antiquissimo regni jure, ac instituto,
Cantuar* sedi ut Metropoli parent. All these 33 Bishoprics, by the accustomed
and most ancient Right and Constitution of the Kingdom, obey the Sea of
Canterbury as the Metropolis.

If it were doubtful whether he meant that this Right was, by the ancient
Constitution of the Kingdom of England, the former Authorities make it evident
that it was. However I shall confirm them with two more.

Inter december script. Gerv. Dorob. Actus Pontif. Cant. F. 1633. Ann. 605.
Gervace of Canterbury, who lived in the time of H. 2. speaking of Lawrence
Archbishop of Canterbury, who succeeded the reputed English Apostle Austin,
says,

Nec non and Scothoru^ qui Hiberniam insulam Britanniae proximam incolunt,
pastoralem impendere sollicitudinem curabat.
He not only took care of the new Church gathered out of the English, but of
the old British Inhabitants; and also took care of his pastoral Charge over the
Scots, who inhabit Ireland, an Island very near Britain.

Brompton, F. 970, 971. de An. 1071.
Bromton, an Author who is cited by Mr. Molineux, mentioning the Dispute about
Superiority, in the Great Council, or Parliament at Winchester, in the
beginning of the Reign of W. 1. between Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the then Archbishop of York, says Not that the whole History need have been
read in the Council, but the chief Passages produced by them who had read it.
, Ubi Historia Bedae perlecta, monstratum est, a tempore primi Augustini usque
ad ultima Bedae tempora, quod circiter centum quadraginta annos erat, Cantuar.
Arch. primatum super totam Britannicae Insulam, and Hiberniae gessisse. Where
the History of Bid having been read, 'twas shown that from Austin's first
coming to the end of Bid, which was about 140 years, the Archbishop of
Cantorbury held the Primacy over the whole Island of Britain, and of Ireland.

Thus I think it is past dispute, that a superiority of Government, both in
Church and State, was vested with the English, and by consequence in the Crown
of England as the Head, from the 6 th of King Edgar at the latest, to the year
1151. when the Jurisdiction of Anselm Archbishop of Canterbury was submitted to
by the Irish, as the ancient and undoubted Right of that See.

Nor can it be imagined, without some account of the Circumstances, that the
Superiority and Authority of England should have been lost P. 8. An. 1172.
in less than 22 years, when Mr. M. supposes the Pretensions of England to have
had their first ground.

P. 6, 7, 8. Of H. 2d 's landing in Ireland.
He will have H. 2. his landing in Ireland, to have been occasioned only by a
fortunate Expedition thither by some of his Subjects a little before; in
assistance of some of the Princes, or Kings of Ireland, who had been oppressed
by a too powerful Neighbor; and would insinuate as if the Deliverers were only
entitled to be paid for the assistance which they gave: and he is so
bountiful, as to allow that England ought P. 144.
to be repaid all their Expenses in suppressing the late Rebellion.

But, as England has suppressed that Rebellion against the English Crown, it
appears by what has been above cited, that the disputes between the Kings of
Ireland only gave H. 2. opportunity, and encouragement, to assert the Authority
of the English Nation, and to restore to the Crown the possession of the City
of Dublin, and so much of the English Pale as could then be gained, with such
addition as they could make in a just War, to secure those Bounds which had
been invaded, and usurped upon by a barbarous Enemy.

The justification of H. 2d's Expedition.
In this H. 2. was not to be blamed, for that Ambition which has carried
Princes to make Conquests; since his Expedition was no more than he was obliged
to as King of England: For as the Confessor's Law has it, Lambard's
Archaionomia, F. 138. De Regis Officio, etc.
Debet vero de jure Rex omnes terras, and honores, omnes dignitates, and jura,
and libertates coronae regni hujus, in integrum, cum omni integritate, and sine
diminutione, observare, and defendere; dispersa, and dilapidata, and omissa,
regni jura, in pristinum statum and debitum, viribus omnibus revocare. But the
King ought of right to keep and defend all the Lands, and Honors, all
Dignities, and Rights, and Liberties, of the Crown of this Kingdom, with all
integrity, and without diminution: with all his might, to bring back to the
ancient and due state, the dispersed, dilapidated, and lost Rights of the
Kingdom.

This was not only incumbent upon the Prince, but upon the People also, who
were sworn Brethren to defend Vid. Leges St. Edw. Tit. Greve.
the Kingdom against Strangers, and against Enemies, together with their Lord
and King; and with him, to keep his Lands, and Honors, with all Fidelity.

Accordingly, when the Pope cited E. 1. to answer judicially before him,
concerning his Right over Scotland, the Parliament say,

Ryley's Placita Parl. 29 E. 1.
The Premises would manifestly turn to the disherison of the Right of the Crown
of the Kingdom of England, and of the Royal Dignity, and notorious subversion
of the state of the said Kingdom: And also to the prejudice of the Liberties,
the Customs, and Laws of our Ancestors, To the observation of which we are
bound, by virtue of the Oath we have taken; and which we will maintain with all
our Power, and, by God's assistance, will defend, with all our might. Nor also
do we, or can we, as indeed we may not, suffer our Lord the King, even tho he
would, to do, or in any wise attempt the Premises, etc.

Here Is a ground to justify H. 2. and the People of England at that time; which
this Gentleman never thought of.

And Giraldus Cambrensis, an Author received by him, and an Irish Vid. In^.
Parliament, has shown another, from the nature of the Irish, the necessity of
their Reformation, and that Authority which the generality of Christians in
those dark Ages placed in the Pope.

As to the Character of the People, after Girald had condemned their Clergy,
for not doing their duty among them, he says, Anglia sacra, Giraldus Cambrensis
de rebus a se gestis, Pars 2. c. 14.
Ut enim de perjuriis eorum, and proditionibus, de furtis, and latrociniis,
quibus totus hic populus prope modum, immopraeter modum, indulget; de vitiis
variis and immunditiis nimis onormibus, quas topographia declarat, ex toto non
emittamus; Gens haec Gens spurcissima, Gens vitiis involutissima, Gens omnium
Gentium in fidei rudimentis incultissima. For not wholly to omit speaking of
their Perjuries and Treasons, of the Thefts and Robberies which this whole
people in some measure, rather without measure, indulges; of their various
vices and uncleanness too enormous, which our Topography declares; This
Nation is a Nation most vile, a Nation the most drowned in Vices, a Nation of
all Nations the most ignorant in the Rudiments of Religion.

This being the nature of the People at that time, there might seem, if there
had been no prior Title, to have been as much a right of occupancy, as any
Nation has had by the first possessing the Lands of Savages: but if the right
of civilizing the barbarous part of Mankind was not sufficient, that Power
which the then general consent of Nations had placed in the Pope, joined with
the other, made a Title, which none but the Barbarians then disputed. This H.
2. had amply and formally.

Angl. sac. sup. pars 2. F. 485. speaking of King John, Pater ipsius intrandi
Hiberniam, sibique subjugandi, ab ecclesia Roman^ licentiam impetravit.
Giraldus Cambrensis not only informs us, that the Pope gave H. 2. license to
subdue the Irish, but exhibits the Bull at large, which, reciting the King's
Intention of entering the Island of Ireland, Ad subdendum populum illum legibus,
and vitiorum plantaria inde extirpanda, and de singulis domibus annuam unius
denarii B. Petro velle solvere pensionem, and jura Ecclesiarum terrae illius
illibata and integra conservare; To subdue that people to Laws, and extirpate
the plantations of Vices from thence; and that he will pay to St. Peter the
annual Pension of a Penny out of every House, and preserve the Rights of the
Churches of that Land unprejudiced and entire;

Declares the Pope's approbation of that King's attempting that Island, for
enlarging the bounds of the Pro dilatandis Ecclesiae ter^inis, etc.
Church, for restraining the course of Vices, for correcting their Manners, and
sowing Virtues, for the increase of the Christian Religion.

And this Pope desires the King's purpose may take effect, for the Honor of
God, and Salvation of that Land; and that the People of that Land should
receive him honorably, and reverence him as their Lord. Jure nimirum e
contrario illibato and integro permanente, and salva B. Petro and S. R. E. de
singulis domibus unius denarii pensione. The Right however remaining
unprejudiced and entire, and saving to St. Peter, and the holy Church of Rome,
the pension of a Penny out of every House.

The Right of the Church was hereby reserved unprejudiced: the Recital seems to
make it to relate to the particular Churches; and this Mr. Molineux, if he
please, may take to amount to such a Freedom, V. p. 129. Holy Church shall be
free, etc. If our Church be free and absolute within it self, our State must be
so likewise.
as exempted them from the Jurisdiction of the Pope, as well as of the Sea of
Canterbury: but he may easily observe that the Superiority of both is fully
reserved, and implied under jure illibato and integro permanente.

It thus appearing, that this Gentleman had not attended to the true grounds of
H. 2 d's Attempt upon Ireland, I shall consider what Submission the Irish made
to him, and in what sense he and his Parliament took it. It Is evident beyond
contradiction, that they did not submit to him as to a King, whom they chose to
govern according to their own Laws, but as one that imposed, and was to impose
Laws upon them* Of this Mr. Moline^x seems so much aware, that where he speaks
of the submitting to H. 2. he only mentions the general terms of receiving P.
10, and 11.
him for King and Lord of Ireland, and swearing Allegiance to him and his
Heirs, or the like: but the swearing to the Laws of England he P. 28.
places among the Con^essions; as if they were no otherwise subject to them
than the People of England.

Of the Submission of the Irish to H. 2.
It Is to be observed, for proof that the Submission was truly voluntary, and
that there was such a Consent as is essential to the making Laws to bind
Posterity; that upon H. 2's landing at Waterford, several of the Irish Kings,
and almost all the Nobility of Ireland flocked in to him; V. p. 10. Cited by
him.
that the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbats of all Ireland received him for King
and Lord of Ireland, and swore to him and his Hei^s, binding themselves by
their Charters to perpetual Allegiance; and that after their example, and in
like manner, the Kings and Princes there present received him for Lord and King
of Ireland.

Upon which I need not observe the known difference taken in Pliny, and other
good Authors, between Dominus and Princeps; since after this the King held a
Council at Lismore, cited by this Gentleman in a wrong place. P. 28.
Ubi leges Angliae sunt ab omnibus gratanter receptae and juratoria cautione
confirmatae. Where the Laws of England are thankfully received of all, and
confirmed by a juratory Caution.

Mat. Par. ib. Urbes and Castella quae Rex in sua receperat, sub fideli
custodia deputavit.
And for a farther Security, the King possessed himself of several Cities and
Castles, which he put into safe hands; but of this Mr. M. takes no notice.

As a cotemporary Exposition is ever of greatest Authority, let us see whether
the meaning of this was, that Ireland was to be governd by Parliaments of its
own, as free and independent as England; or that it should be governed by the
Laws made, and to be made, by England.

P. 29*
Mr. Molineux confesses, that H. II. within five years after his Return from
Ireland created his younger Son John King of Ireland, at a Parliament held at
Oxford: he might have learned from the same Authority, that in that Parliament
he not only disposed of several petty Kingdoms there, to hold of him and
Hoveden. f. 323.
John his Son, but Hoveden has these words, which comprehend Lands as well as
Governments. F. 324.
Postquam autem Dominus Rex apud Oxenford, in praedicto modo, terras Hiberniae
and earum servitia divisisset; fecit omnes quibus earundem custodias
commisserat, homines suos and Johannis filii sui devenire. But after the Lord
the King had at Oxford, in manner aforesaid, divided the Lands of Ireland and
their Services; he caused all those, to whom he had committed the Custody of
them, to do homage to him and his Son John, and to swear Allegiance and
Fidelity to them.

Int. December script. Bromton de eod. An.
Bromton says; Apud Oxoniam idem Rex Angliae Johannem filium snum, coram Episc.
and regni sui Princip. Regem Hiberniae constituit. Et postea fecit quosdam
familiares suos sibi and Johanni filio suo ligantias, fidelitates and homagia,
contra omnes homines, facere and jurare. Quibus terras Hiberniae dedit and
distribuit in hunc modum, etc. At Oxford the said King constituted his Son John
King of Ireland, before the Bishops and Princes of his Kingdom. And afterward
he made some of his Courtiers to do and swear Allegiance, Fidelity, and Homage
to himself and his Son John, against all men: To whom he gave and distributed
the Lands of Ireland in this manner, etc.

If what the King did in a Parliament was a Parliamentary Act, here was an Act
of the English Parliament, which, by Mr. Molineux's Vid. Inf. In truth he was
but Viceroy.
Confession, imposed a King upon Ireland, to whom they had not sworn any
otherwise than as they swore to submit to the English Laws: and he should have
observed, that herein, according to his own inference, of the making Ireland a
separate Kingdom, the English Parliament undertook to discharge the Oath V. p.
10. Jurantes ei and haeredibus suis
which the Irish had taken to be true to H. 2. and his Heirs; and sutably to
the Legislative Authority over Ireland in this Particular, the same Parliament
at Oxford disposed of and distributed the Lands of Ireland, without expecting
any Ratification from thence.

Here Is a Parliamentary and cotemporary Exposition, of what this P. 154.
Gentleman calls the Original Compact between England and Ireland.

I must agree, tho he has not observed it, that notwithstanding H. Il's
Acquisition in Ireland, an Irish Native had quiet possession of a Kingdom which
he seemed to claim as chief King over the Irish. This was Roderic King of
Connaught, who upon paying his Tribute, and performing his appointed Service,
was, Hoveden. t. 312. Sicut tenuit antequam dominus Rex intravit Hib.
according to Hoveden, to hold his Land as he held it before H. II. entered
Ireland: which could not be true in a strict sense, unless he were dependent
upon the Crown of England before; and however, this was a Grant after a more
absolute Acquisition: and A^. 1175.
three years after, Girald holds, as do the Irish Statutes, that he had Gir.
Cambr. expug. Hib. c. 34. de An. 1177. Anno primo quo illustrissimus Anglor. R.
and Hib. triumph^tor, ipsam insulam acquisivit.
conquered the whole Land of Ireland.

Benedict. Abbas, p. 69. ^ited in Dr. Bradey's Append. f. 39.
Abbat Benedict, an Author of that time, to be seen in the Cotton Library,
speaking of H. II. says, Concedit Roderico ligio suo Regi Conautae, quamdiu ei
fideliter serviet, ut sit Rex sub eo, paratus ad servitium suum: salvo in
omnibus jure and honor Domini Regis Angliae, and suo. He grants to Roderic his
Leige-man, King of Connaught, that as long as he faithfully served him, he
should be a King under him, ready for his Service: saving in all things the
Right and Honor of the Lord the King of England, and his.

As it appears by Record, by the 7 th of King John, the King of Connaught Rot.
Claus. 7. Jo. m. 5.
had two thirds duly taken from him, for not performing his Service; or else he
never had more than a third of that Kingdom granted; for then he acknowledged
that he held a 3 d part in the name of a Nomine Baroniae.
Barony, and for the other two thirds proffers the King, Duos Cantredos, cum
Nativis eorundem Cantredorum, de praedictis duabus partibus, ad firmandum in
eis, vel faciendum inde voluntatem suam. Two Cantreds, with the Natives of
those Cantreds, to let 'em to farm, or to do with them what he pleased.

Thus I take it, his Kingdom was as much dependent upon the Crown of England,
as any Barony in Ireland, or England, and as subject to Forfeiture.

Davis Rep. f. 38.
And it is probable, that this King was the head of the O Conoghors of
Connaught, who are, 3 E. 2. admitted to be entitled to the English Law.

But tho the Law of England was not current beyond the English Pale, or those
Cantreds and Divisions of Irish, who continued under Obedience to the English;
yet the Crown of England has, from very ancient times, not only laid claim to
the Lordship over the whole Land of Ireland, but their Parliaments have
recognized this Right more than once.

Of the Antiquity of the Right of the Crown of England to the Land of Ireland,
recognized by Parliaments there. Stat. 11 Eliz. Ses. 3. c. 1. f. 273.
Mr. M. if he had pleased, might have found, that Acts of Parliament made in
Ireland lay a much earlier Foundation of the Right of the Crown of England to
the Land of Ireland, even than our Confessor's Law does. A Statute made in
Ireland, 1 Eliz among sundry Titles, which the ancient Chronicles in the Latin,
English and Irish Tongues, allege for the Kings of England to the Land of
Ireland, derives one from Gormond Son of Belin, King of Great Britain.

Graston de an. ante Christum 375.
This King our Historians call Gurgunstus, and is said to have reigned in Great
Britain 375 years before the Christian Aerd. Grafton, De eod. an.
agreeing with the Irish Statute, tells us, that in his return from Denmark, he
met with a Fleet of Spaniards, which were seeking for Habitations, to whom the
King granted the Isle of Ireland to inhabit, and to hold of him as their
Sovereign Lord.

The Statute made in Ireland, 13 C. 2. recognizing his Title, has these words;
Recognitions of this Irish Stat. f. 493.
nature may seem unnecessary where your Majesty's Title to this your Realm is
so clear, as that it is avowed in sundry Acts of Parliament heretofore made
within this Kingdom, in the times of your Majesty's Royal Progenitors of famous
memory: and SO ANCIENT, AS IT IS DEDUCED NOT ONLY FROM THE DAYS OF KING H. 2.
your Majesty's Royal Ancestor, BUT FROM TIMES FAR MORE ANCIENT, AS BY SUNDRY
AUTHENTIC EVIDENCES MENTIONED IN THE SAID ACTS, AND RECORDS OF THIS YOUR
MAJESTY'S KINGDOM, MAY EVIDENTLY APPEAR. Since Mr. Molineux allows Acts of
Parliament made in Ireland, to have full Authority; I hope he will confess,
that he has given a very imperfect P. 4.
and undue account how Ireland became a Kingdom annexed to the Crown of
England; and thus, not here to observe that he need not have gone so far back
to show how it first became a Kingdom, I think I have made it evident, that he
has failed in his first Undertaking.

Of the comparison between W. 1. and H. 2. and of the style and notion of
Conquest.
2. 'Twill be as evident, that he is no less injurious to the Right of the
English Nation, than unhappy in the comparison, where he maintains, that
England may be said much more Davis 's Rep. ^. 41. Case de Tanistry.
properly to be conquered by W. 1. than Ireland by H. 2. tho in this he has the
Authority of Sir John Davis. I will agree, that the word Conquest was in the
times both of W. 1. and H. 2. of a very innocent signification; for which he
rightly cites Sir Henry Spelman, and might have P. 12, and 13.
observed a much greater and antienter Authority, in a Record of the time of
King John, referred to by Vid. Mr. Petyt's Pref. to the Rights of the Kingdom.
Mic. 2. Jo.
Mr. Petyt: wherein a younger Brother, in a Suit between him and his elder
Brother about Title to Land, pleads, that his Father had it de Conquestu suo,
and gave it him; The same transcribed more at large in Hales's Collect. in Bib.
Hospit^^ Lincoln.
according to the distinction in Glanvil, who wrote in the time of H. 2.
between Glanvil. de legibus, lib. 7. c. 1.
Questus, the same with Conquestus, and Haereditas. It Is certain the word
Conquestus did not in that age imply any thing of that Vid. ib. aut habet
haereditatem tantum, aut questum tantum.
Power, which a Prince or State might acquire, by Force or Terror of Arms, over
another Prince or State; and therefore I shall make no use of his Admission,
that H. 2. took Conquestor Hiberniae into his style, contrary to the Authority
of P. 14.
Mr. Seldom, cited in his Margin, and to which I cannot but subscribe. In
truth, tho Vid. Pref* to Davis's Rep. The first after the Norman Conquest that
was styled Lord of Ireland.
H. 2. was styled Lord of Ireland, I am very well assured none can be found
where he is Girald. Camb. Hibern. expugnat.
styled Conquestor. Yet Girald, an Author of that time, calls him, Triumphator
Hiberniae, which is tantamount to Conqueror. But since Conquestor, when first
used, signified no more than one who came to a Right which he claimed not by
hereditary Descent (according to which W. 1. acknowledged, that he was made or
created King of the English by hereditary Vid. Reflections upon a treasonable
Opinion against signing the voluntary Association.
Right, that is, as has elsewhere been shown, and may be more at large, was
duly let in to the Inheritance of the Crown) however the word Conquestor has
been in following ages applied both to W. 1. and to H. 2. Let Us consider a
little,

1. Whether the English Nation ever submitted to W. 1. as a Conqueror, in a
sense of larger signification than 'twas anciently used.

2. Whether the Irish Nation submitted to H. 2. or to any other of our Kings,
more absolutely than the English did to W. 1.

1. Mr. Molineux agrees, that E. 3. F. 14.
was the first that used the Era of post Conquestum; which indeed was no more
than to distinguish the Edwards after the time of W. 1. from the three Edwards
which reigned in England before that time: but no body that I know of, has yet
pretended that W. 1. ever assumed the style of Conqueror; and I dare say, no
one Author of that time, printed or in Manuscript, ascribes it to him. I must
own in some of his Charters, he says, he gained the Kingdom by the Sword,
having subdued Harold and his Accomplices: but besides that Puffendorf's
Assertion Puff. de Jure Gentium. VII. 7. 3.
is undeniable; that after a Prince is overcome in a just War, till the
Subjects consent, the State of War continues; and there is no Obligation nor
Faith, and so no Dominion; W. 1. did not come to civilize and subdue the People
to Laws, but to turn out, 1 st. An Usurper upon the Right of the People, upon
whom he had imposed himself without any true Election, notwithstanding what
several ancient Authors have affirmed. And, 2 dly. An Usurper upon the Right
which W. 1. had, by a full and a formal Election, he having been elected
Successor in the life time of the Confessor: which I may hereafter show, with
all the Circumstances, but shall at present refer only to three Authorities out
of many.

Pictav. gesta W. Ducis Norm. and Regis Anglor. f. 181.
William of Poictiers, an Author who lived in the very time, informs us, that
the Confessor sent an Embassy into Normandy, suorum assensu, by the assent of
his People; to assure him of the Succession.

Ord. Vital. f. 492.
And Ordericus Vitalis has these words. Edwardus nimirum propinquo suo W. D. N.
primo per Rodbertum Cant. summum Pontisicem, postea per eundem Heraldum,
integram Anglici regni mandaverat concessionem: ipsumque, concedentibus Anglis,
fecerat totius juris sui haeredem. Edward sent an Embassy to William Duke of
Normandy, first by Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, afterward by Harold
himself, acquainting him with the entire Grant of the Kingdom of England: and
had made him Heir of all his Right, with the Consent of the English.

Which shows in what sense Ingulph, who was Secretary to W. 1. is to be
understood, when he says, Eum sibi succedere in regnum voce stabili sancivit.
That the Confessor, with a stable Voice ordained, or appointed him to succeed
him in his Kingdom.

It Is not to be questioned, but Ingulph who was an Anglo-saxon, and well knew
that a King could not dispose of the English Crown, without the consent of the
States of the Realm; would be understood by this, that the Confessor's voice,
or nomination, had a Parliamentary Sanction; when one of the Norman writers
looks upon Harold as a Non expectabat vesanus Anglus quid publica electio
statueret. Pictav. ut memini, vel Ordir. Vital.
madman, for not staying to see what a public Election should determine.

That W. 1. came only to turn out an Usurper, is not all: but having done this
with a great force, the People of England would not receive him for King upon
his Victory, till they had treated and agreed with him in a Flor. Wig.
Fidelitat. juraverunt, quibus and ipse foedus pepigit. S. Dunelm. F. 195.
Hoveden. F. 258. Rad. de Diceto Col. 480. Bromton Col. 958.
Convention at Berkhamstead; where, as Authors concur, foedus pepigit, he
struck a League with them; and was not only obliged to maintain the English
Laws, in virtue of a mutual Contract: but part of the Contract with the Ordir.
Vital. F. 503.
Prelates, and the Nobility of the Kingdom, was, That he should be crowned as
the manner of the English Government requires. From those Authors who give the
heads of his Oath, administered by Aldred Archbishop of York, it is plain, that
he was crowned according to Bib. Cotton. sub Effigy Claudii, A. 3.
the standing Ritual in use from the Coronation of King Ethelred, and continued
to the Reign of H. 1. without any material alteration: And Authors, as well as
the Ritual, show, that the people were solemnly asked, whether they would have
him to reign over them? to which they expressed their consent, in such terms as
implied a Bib. Cot. sup. Volumus and concedimus. Vid. Seldom. Dissert. ad
Fletam de confirmatione, 4o Regni sui Ekal. vid. etiam Mat. Par. Addit. de
Fretherico Ab. Sancti Albani, extorquente cautionem juratoriam.
Grant.

But the Coronation Oath being only in general terms; that King was obliged,
once at least, if not oftener, to swear expressly, that they should enjoy the
Benefit of the Confessor's Laws; that Digest of so much of the common Law of
England, as was in his time thought necessary to be reduced to writing; to
which some additions were made by that King in Parliament, for the benefit of
the English.

That there was nothing like this, in the submission of the people of Ireland
to H. 2. has appeard above; and that he acted according to the import of his
style, of Lord of Ireland, in imposing Laws, and a King upon 'em.

And I would gladly know what Irish Laws and Customs he swore to maintain?

Tho, therefore, I am as avers to the common Notions of Conquest as this
Gentleman, especially to the supposition, that God, in giving Vid. God's ways
of disposing of Kingdoms. P. 20.
one Prince a Conquest over another, THEREBY puts one in possession of the
others Dominions, and makes the other's Subjects become his Subjects, or his
Slaves, as they come in, upon conditions, or at the will of the Conqueror: Yet
I must desire Mr. M. to explain those Acts of Parliament made in The sense of
Parliaments in Ireland, in relation to Conquest.
Ireland, which not only seem to import, that the Crown and Kingdom of England,
had made an absolute acquisition of the Land of Ireland, but use that scurvy
word, Conquest.

Stat. Hib. 28 H. 8. c. 3.
An Act, 28 H. 8. recites, That the King's Land of Ireland, heretofore being
inhabired, and in d^e obedience unto the King's most noble Progenitors, Kings
of England, who, in the right of the Crown of England, had great Possessions,
Rents, and Profits within the same Land; had grown into great ruin and
desolation, for that great Dominions* Lands, and Possessions, had by the King's
Grants, course of Descents, and otherwise, come to Noblemen of England, by
whose negligence the wild Irish got into possession; the Conquest, and winning
whereof, in the beginning, not only cost the King's noble Progenitors, but also
those to whom the Lands belonged, charges inestimable: and tho the King's
English Subjects had valiantly opposed the Irish, yet upon their absenting
themselves again out of Ireland, the Natives, from time to F. 64.
time, usurped and encroached upon the King's Dominions; and particularly that
the Earl of Kildare, with his accomplices, endeavored to take the Land of
Ireland out of the King's possession, and his Heirs thereof for ever to
disherit.

F. 65.
For these, and diverse other hurts and enormities, like to ensue to the
Commonweal of the Island; in respect of the inestimable Charges which the King
had sustained, and apparently had occasion to sustain for, and about the
conquest, and recontinuance of the same, out of his Enemies possession; tho the
King had right to all the Lands and Possessions there referred to, and tho he
might justly insist upon the Arrears of two parts of the Land of those who had
absented themselves, which might amount to more than the purchase of 'em; it
vests in the King and his Heirs, as in the Right of the Crown of England, only
the Lands of some particular persons.

Stat. 11. Eliz. Ses. 3. c. 1.
The Stature of the Queen attainting Shane Oneile, speaks of populous, rich,
and well-governed Regions, wealthy Subjects, beautiful Cities, and Towns, of
which the Imperial Crown of England had, before that time, been conveniently
furnished, within the Realm of Ireland; which after being lost, had been
recontinued to the Queen's quiet possession.

But the Rebel, Shane Oneile, refusing the name of a Subject, and taking upon
him, as it were, the Office of a Prince, had enterprized great Stirs,
Insurrections, and horrible Treasons, against her Majesty, her Crown, and
Dignity; imagining to deprive her Highness, her Heirs and Successors, from the
real and actual possession of her Kingdom of Ireland, her true, just, and
ancient Inheritance to her, by sundry Descents, and authentic strong Titles,
rightfully and lawfully devolved.

And having mentioned a Title from Gurmond the Son of Belin, King of Great
Britain, says,

F. 37.
Another Title is, as the Clerk Giraldus Cambrensis writes at large, of the
History of the Conquest of Ireland, by King H. 2. your famous Progenitor.

The Title to the Land then recognized, was abundantly strengthened and
confirmed by Irish Parliaments in the time of J. 1. and since. In the Act of
Recognition to J. 1. they tell 11 J. c. 1.
him, of his having quenched the most dangerous and universal Rebellion, that
ever was raised in that Kingdom; in the suppressing whereof, the unreform'd
parts of the Land, which being ruled by Irish Lords and Customs, had never
before received the Laws and civil Government of England, were so broken and
reduced to Obedience, that all the Inhabitants thereof did gladly submit
themselves to his Highness's ordinary Laws and Magistrates: which gave unto his
Majesty a more entire, absolute, and actual possession, than ever any of his
Progenitors had.

All Ireland being thus brought into subjection to the Crown and Laws of
England; K. James taking notice of Laws which had been made 12, 13, 14, J. 1.
c. 5.
after the Conquest of that Realm by his Progenitors Kings of England, to keep
up the distinction between the English and the Natives of the Irish Blood; that
he had then taken 'em all into his protection, and that they lived under one
Law, as dutiful Subjects of their Sovereign Lord and Monarch, repeals those
dividing Laws.

After this the Irish Parliament Act for Subsidies, 11 C. 1.
granted C. 1. four Subsidies, rightly considering the vast, and almost
infinite expense of Men, Money, Victuals, and Arms, sent out of England thither,
by the King and his Royal Progenitors, for reducing that Kingdom into the happy
condition wherein it then stood.

10 C. 1. Ses. 1. c. 3. and Ses. 3. c. 3.
And sutably to the import of the word Conquest, Acts of Parliament of that
Kingdom, in the Reign of that King, show that the Titles to Lands of the
English Plantation, or which they from time to time gained from the Irish, were
enjoyed by Grants from the Crown: and for securing the Estates to Undertakers,
Servitors, Natives, and others, all the Lands in several Counties, commonly
called Plantation Lands, were vested in the King, his Heirs and Successors, in
Nota, But one Imperial Crown.
right of the Imperial Crown of England and Ireland.

The Stat. 14 and 15 C. 2. holds the 14 and 15 C. 2.
Irish Rebels to be subdued and conquered Enemies, and therefore vests all
their Lands in the Crown of England, in order to make satisfaction to the
Protestant Adventurers, for the reducing that Kingdom to its due obedience, and
to enable the Crown to extend Grace to such as should be held deserving of it;
Reprisals being first made to the Protestant Proprietors.

Tho, therefore, I am far from admiring the Lord Coke's reasoning in Calvin's
Case; I may here subjoin part of Mr. M's reflection upon him, and refer him to
the Irish Acts of Parliament to qualify his Censure of the Ld Coke's
restriction of the Opinion in the Year-book, 2 R. 2. that the Irish are not
bound by Statutes made in England, because they have no Knights of Parliament
here; which, Non hic habent Milites Parliamenti.
says the Lord Coke, is to be understood, unless they be specially named. To
this assertion Mr. Molineux admits he P. 117.
gives color of reason, by saying, That tho Ireland be a distinct Dominion
from England, yet the Title thereof being by Conquest, the same by Judgment of
Law, might by express words be bound by the Parliaments of England.

To confound the Lord Coke, P. 117.
I would fain know, says this Gentleman, what the Lord Coke means by Judgment of
Law: Whether he means the Law of Nature and Reason, or of Nations, or the Civil
Laws of our Commonwealths? For answer to which I need at present only ask him,
what sort of Law he takes the abovecited Statutes of Ireland to be? and shall
afterward show that they have all along submitted to such a Conquest, or
Acquisition, as gives a Right to the imposing of Laws.

3. But since he is pleased to say, As P. 118. Of Mr. M's comparison between
Scotland and Ireland; and of the Annexation of Ireland to the Crown of Engl nd.
Scotland, tho the King's Subjects, claims an exemption from all Laws but what
they assent to in Parliament; so we think this our Right also: and going upon
the supposition of Ireland, being a Kingdom as distinct from England as
Scotland, he frames an Objection, that however they may be restrained by War
from doing what may be to the prejudice of England, the stronger Nation: If
this may be, he asks, why does it P. 147.
not operate in the same manner between England and Scotland, and consequently
in like manner draw after it England's binding Scotland by their Laws at
Westminster?

As to Scotland, not here to enter into the Dispute between the Lord Coke and
the rest of the Judges, who resolved Calvin's Case, and the Vid. Moor's Rep.
House of Commons of that time; nor yet, into the Question concerning the
Scotch Homage, whether 'twas for the Kingdom of Scotland, or only for some
Lands which their Kings held of the Crown of England: It Is enough to observe,
that during the Heptarchy here we often had one King, who was Rex primus, to
whom the others were Homagers, and obedient in the Wars for common Defense of
the Island; yet each King had his distinct Regalities, and the Countries their
several Laws and Customs, and distinct Legislatures for Lands, and other Rights
and Things within themselves. This 'twas easy to conceive that Scotland had;
and thus, both there and here, under the Heptarchy, the several Kingdoms,
notwithstanding Homage to one King who had the Primacy, were under separate
Allegiances, Vid. Ben. Ab. in Bib. Cot. de Homagio Regis Scot. H. 2.
as the respective Subjects were not bound to the same Laws; tho the States of
the Kingdom did Homage as well as the King. When the Right to the Crown of
Scotland came afterward in J. 1. to be in the same Person who had the Crown of
England, and that without any new Acquisition by the Crown or Kingdom of
England, there was Vid. Answ. to C. J. Herbert on the dispensing Power; and
particularly the Sherivalty of the County of N. for which some have supposed
that the Statute in that case was dissensed with. A Comparison between Ireland
and Wales.
no merger of the less Crown: and it is certain that in the Judgment of Law,
Palatinates fallen to the Crown continue distinct Royalties.

But if, for the keeping a Kingdom distinct, whether in the Person of the same
King, or as an Appendant to his Imperial Crown Mr. M. M. 165.
, a distinct Legislature is necessary as well as a distinct Jurisdiction; then
Wales, which in many of our Statutes is called a Dominion, was no distinct
Dominion, or Principality; if it at any time continued in the Crown, without
having Parliaments of their own, or being represented here, by Members of their
own choosing* but thus it was with Wales from the 12 th 34 H. 8. c. 13.
of E. 1. to the 34 th of H. 8. in right of E. 1 st's Conquest, as Sir John
Davis, or the Judges in his time call the Acquisition of that Dominion; and as
it is there; E. 1. changed their Laws and Customs as he had expressed in his
Charter, or the Statute of Rutland which follows: Divina providentia terram
Walliae cum incolis suis prius nobis jure feodali subjectam, in proprietatis
nostrae dominium totaliter and cum integritate convertit, and coronae regni
nostrae annexit. By the Divine Providence D^^^s 's Rep. f. 41. b.
the Land of Wales, with its Inhabitants, before subject to us by feudal Right,
we have turned wholly and entirely into the Dominion of our Propriety, and
annexed it to the Crown Should be in the plural number.
of our Kingdom.

And as to their Laws and Customs; Quasdam de consilio procerum regni nostri
delevimus, quasdam permisimus, quasdam correximus, ac etiam quasdam alias
adjiciendas and faciendas decrevimus. Some, by the Counsel of the Peers of our
Kingdom, we have abrogated, some we have permitted, some we have corrected, and
besides some others we have added and decreed to be put in execution.

Here is a Title, understood at that time, of taking a Forfeiture for Rebellion
against the Lord of the Fee; and in consequence of this the King and his Peers,
in Parliaments, took upon them to exercise a Legislative Power over Wales.

But notwithstanding that Wales was thus united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of England, and absolutely subjected to its Legislature, yet, as is held
in Davis's Reports, Davis f. 67. le Case del County Palatine.
this Principality of Wales, not being governed by the common Law, was a
Dominion by it self, and had its proper Laws and Customs.

That Report shows Wales, by reason of these different Laws and Customs, to be
more distinct and separate from the Kingdom of England, than Ireland is; and
that a Tenure of the Prince of Wales should not after its reduction under the
Subjection of England, become a Tenure of the Crown in chief, but that it
should be so in relation to Tenures of a County Palatine in Ireland, as well as
England, because such a County in either Land was originally a parcel of the
Realm, F. 67.
and derived from the Crown, and was always governed by the Law of England; and
the Lands there were held by Services and Tenures, of which the common Law
takes notice, although the Lords have a separate Jurisdiction, and Seigniory
separate from the Crown. But that Tenure in Chief in Ireland, as well as
England, could be no other than of the Crown of England, appears not only by
the Grants to the Electors Palatine, or Lords Marchers of Ireland, but in that
Ireland was not raised into a Kingdom till H. 8's time.

The mention of Palatinates may Comparison between Ireland and the County
Palatine of Chester.
well occasion a Comparison between the Land of Ireland, and the County
Palatine of Chester, a distinct Royalty in the Principality of Wales: that had
its Parliaments within it self, as it is very probable, from before the time of
W. 1. it being certain, that Hugh Lupus enjoyed that Earldom by Judgment of the
Lords, if not the Great Council in the time of W. 1. and their Parliaments may
be traced from within the time of Rot. Pat. 9. H. 3. m. 9. d. Rot. Pat. 44. H.
3. m. 1. d. Pat. 6. E. 1. m. 6. de 1 5ma in Com. Cestr. Pat. 20. E. 1. m. 6. de
1 5ma Regi, etc.
H. 3. downwards to their first having Representatives in Parliaments of the
Kingdom, 34 H. 8.

Their provincial Parliaments were chiefly, if not only, for the granting Aids
to the Crown: but notwithstanding their being represented in Parliaments at
home, yet Laws were made here in the superior Parliament, for the governing the
Inhabitants of the County of Chester.

P. 148. Some object, that Ireland is to be looked upon only as a Colony from
England.
Now, without considering whether Cheshire was a Colony from England, or from
Wales, or mixed, or else a place exempt without regard to the being any Colony;
I may well hold, that tho from before the time of W. 1. they had the privilege
of being taxed only by themselves, or with their own Consent: yet their
Parliament was subordinate to the Great Council of the Kingdom of England; and
'twas no violation of the Right of their Parliament, for the National Council
to give them Laws for their better Government, and to restrain 'em from acting
to the prejudice of the Crown and Kingdom of England: neither was this any
diminution to the Prerogative of the Crown. The instance of Chester I may well
bring to this point, being authorized by the Learned Judge Shardlow in the time
of E. 2.

Year-book of E. 2. f. 613.
In an Action of Debt in the King's Bench here, upon a Bond sealed at Chester,
that learned Judge says; Chester is out of our Jurisdiction here, insomuch that
there is not any Minister in that County answerable here for what he has done.
Of a Deed done out of the Jurisdiction here, or out of the Realm, as at Paris,
or elsewhere beyond Sea, I ought not to answer. The Counsel urges, that the
Power here extends throughout the Realm of England, and to a Deed done within
the Realm of England you ought to answer; and Chester is within England.

But Shardlow insists upon his former Judgment, and adds, IRELAND IS WITHIN THE
REALM; and to a Deed committed there, I shall not answer here. Also Duresm is
within England, yet I shall not answer at all here; because the Court cannot
try the Fact if denied.

This shows plainly, that at that time Ireland was as much part of this Realm
as Chester; that the distinction of Jurisdictions was not for want of
Superiority. This has been maintained over 19 H. 6. F. 12. b. 4. Inst. F. 212.
Chester and Ireland, by Writs of Error upon Judgments in Law. The reason of
which is given by Chief Vaughan's Rep*
Justice Vaughan, that otherwise they may insensibly alter the Law appointed,
or permitted, or give judgment to the lessening the Superiority.

Mr. Molineux will have it, the* Of the Jurisdiction of the King's Bench of
England ^ver that of Ireland.
this removal of a Judgment from the King's Bench of Ireland, by Writ of Error,
into the King's Bench of England, dos not infer the subordination of Ireland to
the Kingdom P. 13. Vib. ib. the Lord Coke, seems to infer from the
subordination, etc.
of England; but that this was a method appointed by an Act of Parliament of
Ireland, which is lost among a great number of other Acts which they want for
the space of 130 years at one time, and 120 a^ another. It Is easily supposed by
him, that they had Parliaments of their own for the most of those times; but
others will believe that they were generally governed by the Laws of England,
according to the Tenor of their submission to H. 2. and the interpretation
then put upon that submission. But methinks the force of his Argument, in
relation to the ordinary Jurisdictions the King's Bench of England exercises
over that of Ireland, is not to be feared.

P. 13. Of the ordinary Jurisdiction of the K's Bench of England over that of
Ireland.
He is pleased to say, erroneous Judgments might have been removed from England
into the King's Court in Ireland, for so certainly it must be since the Court
traveled with the King. For which I need only mind him of his own quotation of
P. 164, 165.
Sir Richard Pembrough's Case: according to which, for the King to have
required the attendance there of the Tenants in chief, who were the Judges in
his Court here, would have bin a banishment: But it is certain this could be no
part of their Duty declared by the constitutions of Clarendon, 10 H. 2. in
affirmance of the ancient customs of the Realm of England, under that clause
which Interesse judiciis Curiae Regis.
requires 'em to be at the Trials and Judgments of the King's Courts.

Besides, I shall show, that the King's Court in England (which when not meant
of the Parliament, did manifestly in those ancient times relate either to a
Counsel chosen in Parliament, and acting out of it by Authority from thence, or
to the Body of the Tenants in chief, the Great Lords, for whose easing
themselves of such troublesome attendances, the later Jurisdiction of the
present King's Bench has sprung up) was possessed of the Superiority of
ordinary Jurisdiction over Ireland, before Mr. M. can show that they had any
Acts made in Ireland of any kind, except that wherein they first gave
themselves up to obey and depend on the English Legislature; and unless they
can produce Acts of their Parliaments for raising Aids to the Crown of England.

In Rot. Claus. 37 H. 3. m. 4* d. Hibn.
the 37 th of H. 3. one Baret complained to the King of injustice done him by
Justices itinerant at Limbrick.

Et mandatum est Justiciariis Hib^rniae quod rec^rda cum omnibus adm^iculis
coram ^o venire faciant.
Upon which the Justices of Ireland were commanded to send the Record before
the King.

Where the Record was commanded hither, per saltum, without any regard to the
King's Bench of Ireland.

And another Record in the same Year before Shardlow, and other Justices at
Dublin, as I take it, of the Common Pleas there, was, by Writ Rot. Claus. 37 H.
3. m. 15*
of Error from hence, transmitted to the Justice of Ireland: Without which it
seems he was then held to have no Authority to proceed in Ireland.

Recorda penes Remem. in scaccar. Placita coram Rege 20 E. 1.
In the 20 th of E. 1. a Writ of Error had removed out of Ireland a Record of a
Judgment of Felony: Vid. inf. of Petitions in Parl. Temp. E. 1.
Which, indeed, was remanded; not for want of Jurisdiction to correct the Error
of the Judges in Ireland: But,

1. Because there was no notice to the King's Attorney General for Ireland: or
at least, he did not attend.

2. Because 'twas a question of Fact. Quia nullus venit ex part Regis ad
sequendum pro ipso, qui veritatem sciverit, ideo haec non potest ad
examinationem; set magis expedit domino Regi, quod in partibus Hiberniae, ubi
feloniae praed. perpetrari debent, examinentur, and modo debito terminentur.
Because no body who may know the truth, comes of the part of the King to
prosecute for him: Therefore this cannot proceed to examination: but it is
expedient for the King, that the said Felonies should be examined, and duly
determined in Ireland, where the said Felonies are supposed to have been
committed.

P. 133.
However Mr. M. conceives it manifest, that the Jurisdiction of the King's
Bench in England over a Judgment in the King's Bench of Ireland, dos not
proceed from any subordination of one Kingdom to the other; because the Judges
in England ought, and P. 132.
always do judge according to the Laws and Customs of Ireland, and not according
to the Laws and Customs of England, any otherwise than as these may be of force
in Ireland. But,

1. It Is evident that the Judges neither will, nor can judge according to any
Law or Custom of Ireland, which is contrary to the Rules of our Law, or which
has not been allowed there as no way prejudicial to the Law here: According to
his instance of a Declaration P. 133.
for an Acre of Bog, a word not known in England; but well enough understood in
Ireland. Which I may answer with a parallel case lately adjudged in the
Exchequer of England.

One having spoken scandalous welsh words in Wales, or in a part of England
where the Welsh Tongue is used, was libel'd against in the Ecclesiastical Court
there: Upon which the Court of Exchequer was moved for a Prohibition, because
the Words were insensible, and of no signification: But no Prohibition was
granted, because they were understood where they were spoken. And thus it is in
relation to the particular Instances of Manors, or inferior Courts. Therefore,

2. By the same reason, that the judging according to the Law used in Ireland
would imply, that there is no Subordination, 'twill follow that the Inferior
Courts in England are not subordinate to the Courts of Westminster Hall: and I
may add, neither is the King's The ordinary Jurisdiction of the Lords, and the
King's Bench, an incident to the Superiority of the Crown of England.
Bench of England subordinate to the House of Lords.

As to the question of their Jurisdiction, occasioned, as Mr. M's P. 3.
Margin has it, by the Case of the Bishop of Derry, I need say little here,
referring him to the Judgment of the Lords, and to that exercice of the
Judicial Power, which I shall have an opportunity of showing in the Reign of E.
1.

But as to his supposed clear Argument against the subordination, P. 125, 126.
Ro^. Parl. 8 H. 6.
from the Lords doing nothing upon the Petition of the Prior of Lanthony, who
appealed to the Parliament of England, from a refusal of the King's Bench here
to meddle with a Judgment which had passed in the Parliament of Ireland:

'Twill admit of several Answers;

1. This came not before the Lords by Writ of Error, or by Appeal from the
Lords of Ireland; but was a complaint of the King's Bench here.

2. This was after the Charter which I shall afterward show, placing a
judicial Power to some Purposes in their Parliaments: But whether they exceeded
that Authority, 'twas not for the King's Bench to judge, but for that Power from
whence their Charter was derived.

3. This Petition seems either to have come too late, or to have been waved:
for if it had fallen under consideration, it is probable that some Answer to it
could have been endors'd, as was usual in former times.

But that the ordinary Jurisdiction both of the Lords in Parliament, and of the
King's Bench here, is but an incident to the Superiority of the Crown of
England, will be much clearer than any thing Mr. M. Of the Annexation of
Ireland to the Crown of England.
has urged. And whatever Mr. M. conceives, the Annexation of Ireland to the
Crown of England, will sufficiently P. 41, 42.
manifest the Subordination; tho he, supposing that this was done by the Irish
Statute, which annexes it as a Kingdom, with others which declare it annexed as
a Land or Dominion of a lower Character, conceives little more is effected by
these Statutes, than that Ireland shall not be aliened or separated P. 44.
from the King of England, who cannot hereby dispose of it, otherwise than in
legal Succession along with England; and that whoever is King of England, is
ipso facto King of Ireland.

But if these Statutes, bating the name of Kingdom (which the Parliament of
England afterward gave them) are only declaratory of the ancient Right of the
Crown of England; then I may well hold, that there is not so much effected by
these Statutes, as he yields, it being only the operation of Law. And if by
operation of Law a King of England, tho not succeeding by a strict Right of
Descent, but by the Choice or Declaration of the States of this Realm is ipso
P. 127. P. 149. Vid. Davis Rep. f. 61. citing 28 H. 8. c. 2. La corone d'
engleterre en plusors auters Acts de Parl. est appel. Imperial Crown, and la
corone de Ireland est appendant, a ceo 28 H. 8. c. 20. and unite and knit al.
Imperial corone D' engleterre, 33 H. 1. c. 1.
facto King or Lord of Ireland, I would gladly know how that Kingdom or Land,
which he owns to be thus inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of England,
can be a complete Kingdom? And since he is pleased to ask, whether multitudes
of Acts of Parliament, both of England and Ireland, have not declared Ireland a
complete Kingdom? and whether it is not styled in them all, the Kingdom or Realm
of Ireland?

I would entreat the favor of him, to show me one Act of Parliament of either
Kingdom, which says, or all Circumstances considered implies, that Ireland is a
complete Kingdom: or that ever any Parliament of their own held it to be
advanced to the Dignity of a Kingdom, before 33 H. 8. c. 1.
33 H. 8. tho, as they acknowledge, the Kings of England had Kingly Power there
long before.

I must own, that as the name of King was in H. 8's time thought requisite to
charm the wild Irish into Obedience; so in Queen 2 Eliz. c. 1, and ^. 2.
Elizabeth's time, Imperial Crown was thought to make a conquering Sound: but
this was never ascribed to it by any Parliament of England^ nor, that I can
find, even of Ireland, before her Reign or since.

But the one Imperial Crown, upon which Ireland has been, and still is,
dependent, is the Crown of England: sor this the Statute of Ireland, before
that was made a Kingdom, is express, having these words;

28 H. 8. c. 2.
Calling to our remembrance the great Divisions which in time past have been,
by reason of several Titles pretended to the Imperial Crown of the Realm of
England, whereunto this your Land of Ireland is appending, and belonging.

So another in the same Year. Forasmuch as this Land of Ireland 28 H. 8. c. 5.
is depending, and belonging, justly and rightfully to the Imperial Crown of
England; it enacts, that the King, his Heirs and Successors, Kings of the Realm
of England, and Lords of this said Land of Ireland, shall have and enjoy,
annexed and united to the Imperial Crown of England, all Honors, Dignities,
Pre-eminencies and Authorities, etc. belonging to the Church of Ireland.

P. 166.
If Mr. Molineux observes duly, Ireland has all these Imperial Rights declared
in the Irish Statute, 33 H. 8. c* 1. but I cannot find by what Rule he insers
this from an Act of Parliament, which is express, that the King of England
shall have the Name, Style, Title and Honor of King of Ireland, with all
manner of Preheminencies, etc. as united and knit to the Imperial Crown of the
Realm of England.

Indeed it shows, that under the name of Lord, the King had the same Authority;
but the name of King was thought likely to be more prevalent with the Irish
Men, and Inhabitants within that Realm.

11 Jac. 1. c. 1.
The Statute, 11 Jac. 1. declares him King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, by God's Goodness, and Right of Descent under one Imperial Crown.

10 C. 1. Sess. 3. c. 3.
And the Statute, 10 C. 1. calls this the Imperial Crown of England and
Ireland: And indeed Mr. Molineux would do well to show that ever any of our
Kings took any Coronation Oath for Ireland, otherwise than as Kings of England.

And yet I know not what he may do when his hand's in; since he has the Art to
transubstantiate their Recital of an Act of Parliament in England, which
declares that Popes had usurped an Authority in derogation of the Right of the
Imperial Crown of the Realm of England; recognizing no Superior under God but
only the King, and being free from Subjection to any Man's Laws, but only such
as have been devised, made and ordained within the Realm of England; or to such
other as, by sufferance of the King and his Progenitors, the People of the
Realm of England had taken at their free Liberty, by their own Consent, to be
used among them, and have bound themselves by long Custom to the observance of
the same; To infer that it is thus with Ireland, because the enacting part of
that Statute which has this Recital is promulged for a Law in Ireland, is to
suppose Ireland to be turned into England; and that the Commissioners, who are
by virtue of that Act and the Great Q. Whether of England or Ireland, neither
being named.
Seal, to exercise that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction which the Statute in
England placed in the Sea of Canterbury, are become English Archbishops.

And with the like way of reasoning he would infer, that Acts of Recognition in
England are of no Force in Ireland, till the Irish have recognized the same
King; and yet P. 55.
confesses, That whoever is King of England is ipso facto King of Ireland, and
the Subjects are obliged to obey him as their Liege P. 127.
Lord: That they in Ireland are so annexed to England, that the Kings and
Queens of England are by undoubted Right ipso facto Kings and Queens of
Ireland. To P. 157.
use Mr. M's own Expression, I am sure there is an end of all Speech, if he does
not confess, that a Prince rightfully possessed of the English Throne, is thereby
King of Ireland, before any Recognition made by a Parliament P. 127.
there: and yet not withstanding this generous Concession, he immediately
subjoins;

And from hence we may reasonably conclude, that if any Acts of Parliament made
in England should be of force in Ireland, before they are received there in
Parliament, they should be more especially such Acts as relate to the
Succession and Settlement of the Crown, and Recognition of the King's Title
thereto, and the Power and Jurisdiction of the King. And yet we find in the
Irish Statutes, 28 H. 8. c. 2. An Act for the Succession of the King, and Queen
Ann. And another, c. 5. declaring the King to be supreme Head of the Church of
Ireland. Both which Acts had formerly passed in the Parliament of P. 128.
England. So likewise we find amongst the Irish Statutes, Acts of Recognition
of the King's Title to Ireland in the Reigns of H. 8. Queen Elizabeth, King
Charles 2. K. William and Q. Mary: by which it appears, that Ireland, tho
annexed to the Crown of England, has always been looked upon to be a Kingdom
complete within it self, and to have all Jurisdiction to an absolute Kingdom,
belonging, and subordinate to no Legislative Authority on Earth. Tho it is to be
noted, those English Acts relating to the Succession and Recognition of the
King's Title, do particularly name Ireland.

Before I enter into the enquiry how this can be made consistent with a
Kingship ipso facto before the Recognition in Ireland; 'twill be requisite to
inform him, that we have had Settlements of the Crown by Acts of Parliament
here, which never were formally received by any Parliament in Ireland; and yet
such Act of Parliament here has ever been held to bind Ireland, tho 'twas not
expressly named; and that tho the Settlement has carried the Crown from the
elder Branch of the Royal Family: for instance, 7 H. 4. at the request of the
Lords Vid. the printed Statute-Book ending with R. 3. and Reflections upon a
treasonable Opinion against signing the Association.
and Commons in Parliament, 'twas enacted, That the Inheritance of the Crown
and of the Realms of England and France, and of all other the King's
Seigniories or Lordships beyond Sea, with the appurtenances, be put and remain
in the Person of the said King, and the Heirs of his Body issuing; and 'twas
ordained, established, pronounced, expressed, and declared, that Prince Henry,
the King's eldest Son, be Heir apparent, to succeed him in the said Crown,
Realms, and Seigniories; to have them with all their Appurtenances, after the
King's decease to the Prince and the Heirs of his Body; with Remainders over,
to the King's 2 d and 3 d Sons, and the Heirs of their respective Bodies
successively.

In the beginning of the Statutes of H. 7. in French.
And according to this Form 1 H. 7. 'twas ordained, established, and enacted,
by Authority of Parliament, that the Inheritances of the Crowns of the Realms
of England and France, with all the pre-eminence and dignity Royal to the same
appertaining, and all other Seigniories belonging to the King beyond Sea, with
the Appurtenances in any manner due to them, or appertaining, do stand and
remain in the most noble Person of their said Sovereign Lord H. 7. and the
Heirs of his Body lawfully issuing for ever, with the Grace of God to endure,
and in no other Persons.

Not to trouble Mr. M. with an enquiry, whether these, or any other Acts of
Parliament in England of former Reigns, united Ireland to England, otherwise
than as they declared their intention for that Seigniory, or Dominion, to go
along with the Government of England; or what Act of Parliament in Ireland,
since the first submission to H. 2. created an Annexation of the Land of
Ireland to the Crown of England; I must entreat him to explain,

How it should come to pass, that the King of England, ipso facto, by his being
made King here, is King of Ireland; and yet that those Acts of Parliament here,
by which the King is declared King, without and against a strict courst of
descent, are P. 127.
of no force till the King is recognized by Act of Parliament in Ireland?

If a King of England, as such, is ipso facto King of Ireland, is he not so
before any Act of Recognition there? And if so, what can that, or other Acts
repeating the Laws made in England, signify more, than a full publication of
what was the Law before?

If the Election, or Declaration of a King, by a Parliament in England, gives a
Law in this matter to Ireland; and such a King is to be obeyed by virtue of
that Law, ipso facto, before he is received and acknowledged by a Parliament in
Ireland; do their subsequent Recognitions in the least infer that Ireland is a
complete Kingdom?

P. 128.
Is it any better than a Contradiction to hold, that a King of England, as
created or declared in a Parliament of England, is thereby, or at the same
instant, King of Ireland; and yet that Ireland is a Kingdom so complete in it
self, that he is no King till the Act of Parliament creating or declaring him
King, is confirmed by a Parliament in Ireland? Or take it the other way;

No Act of Parliament in England is of any force till confirmed in Ireland; and
yet a King declared by a Parliament of England, tho he was not King before such
declaration, is thereby, or ipso facto, King of Ireland: that is, an Act of
Parliament of England is not of force in Ireland till confirmed there; and yet
it is of force ipso facto by the being enacted here.

Does it not therefore follow, that such an annexation of Ireland to the Crown
of England, as makes the King of England, ipso facto King of Ireland, destroys
the supposition that their Parliaments have Authority to confirm or reject Laws
made by the Legislature in England? Or otherwise, that the supposition of such
an Authority in the Parliament of Ireland, destroys that annexation which Mr.
M. himself yields?

Further yet 'twill appear, that, even after a Parliament of Ireland had, as
far as it could, annexed that Land, as a Kingdom, to the Imperial Crown of
England; an Annexation here was requisite, for the ratifying what had been done
in Ireland.

Stat. 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 3.
Therefore, 34 and 35 H. 8. an Act was made by the Parliament of England, for
ratification of the King's Majesty's Style; by the King, with the assent of the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons in that Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, enacting that all and singular his Grace's
Subjects, and Resiants, of or within this his Realm of England, Ireland, and
elsewhere, with other his Majesty's Dominions, from thenceforth accept and take
the King's Style, in manner and form following.

H. 8. by the Grace of God, King of England, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, and of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, in Earth the
supreme Head.

And it is enacted, that the said style shall be from thenceforth, by the
Authority aforesaid, united, and annexed, to the Imperial Crown of his
Highness's Realm of England.

This related to all Ecclesiastical Power, as well as Civil, in Ireland, as
well as England: In pursuance of this the Statute 1 Eliz. for the extinguishing
1 Eliz. c. 1.
all usurped, and Foreign Power, and Authority, Spiritual and Temporal, which
had been used within this Realm, or any other her Majesty's Dominions, or
Countries, enacts, That no Foreign Prince, or Prelat, shall enjoy any Power,
Jurisdiction, Superiority, Authority, or Privilege, Spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical, within this Realm, or within any other her Majesty's Dominions,
or Countries; but that such Power, etc. shall be abolished out of this Realm,
and all other her Highness's Dominions: And that all Power of visiting and
correcting for Heresies and Schism, etc. shall for ever, by Authority of that
Parliament, be united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm:
Ecclesiastics were to swear that they would maintain all such Jurisdiction,
Privileges, Preeminence and Authority, as granted or belonging to the Queen's
Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united to the Imperial Crown of the
Realm. And the Queen is empowered to issue out Commissions for the executing
that Act.

This Statute bound Ireland, by plain intention, as that 34 and 35 H. 8. did in
express words. But Mr. M. will have it a mighty Argument, P. 83.
that this was of no force in Ireland, till received by a Parliament there:
because after it had bin repealed in England by one Act, and another since the
Revolution has declared such Commissions to be illegal; yet the Chancellor, and
others in Ireland, have held it to be still in force there. But,

1. He ought to have shown that the Statute here, repealing so much of the
Statute of the Queen, as plainly expressed an intention, that no such Commission
should be granted in Ireland, as the Statute of the Queen did, that Ireland
should be subject to the same Ecclesiastical Authority, and in the same manner
that England was: nor is it to any purpose for him to cite the Declarations in
the late Statute of the illegality of such Commissions; unless that Act had
damned such Commissions, not only as being contrary to the Act of Repeal, but
not to be warranted by the Statute of the Queen: but then this would have
condemned the Resolution which he cites, of the Authority of such Commissions
still in Ireland.

2. Admit Mr. M. should prove, that the Statute made in England, taking away
the Authority of such Ecclesiastical Commissions here, as plainly intended to
reach Ireland, 'twill afterward appear, that unless Mr. M. show, that this Act
had been transmitted to Ireland, under the Great Seal of England; the
supposition that such Commissions may still be legally executed in Ireland,
will not in the least derogate from the Authority of the Parliament of England.

The Power of England not departed from, but duly exercised.
3 dly, But how contrary his supposal of an independent Authority in the
Parliament of Ireland, is not only to the Laws of reasoning, but the
Authorities of all times, from H. 2. downwards, has already appeared in some
measure; and may farther by some Authorities out of many, which will manifest,
that the Rights of the Crown of England to impose Laws upon Ireland, by virtue
of prior submissions and consent, is so far from being departed from, that it is
strengthened and confirmed, by long exercice and submission to it.

P. 57 and 58.
Mr. M. considering the State of the Statute*Laws of England, under H. 2. King
John, and H. 3. agrees, That by the Irish voluntary submission to, and
acceptance of the Laws of England, we must repute them to have submitted
themselves to these likewise, till a regular Legislature was established among
them, in pursuance of that voluntary submission, and voluntary acceptance.

P. 62.
Yet he soon forgets this Concession, and would have it, that the men of
Ireland were not bound by new Laws, but that the Grants of Liberties from
Edward the Confessor's time, down to H. 3. were only declaratory Laws, and
confirmations one of another; and that thus Ireland P. 63.
came to be governed by one and the same common Law with England.

I must confess I could not but smile at his Marginal Note upon the proceedings
of the Parliament at Oxford in the Reign of H. 2. by this P. 40.
Ireland made an absolute separate Kingdom: And in the Body of his Book he
says, We shall observe that by this donation of the Kingdom of Ireland to King
John, Ireland was most eminently set apart again as a separate and distinct
Kingdom by it self, from the Kingdom of England; and did so continue until the
Kingdom of England descended and came unto King John.

But to help him to understand this matter, I shall mind him of another passage
in Hen. II's Reign. As he placed his Son John in Ireland, he, to secure the
Succession of the Imperial Crown of England to his eldest Son Henry, caused
him, in a Vid. Bened. Ab. in Bib. Cott. and al. Author.
Parliament, to be chosen and made King of England, while Henry the Father was
alive.

Now, did the Father by this, separate England from his own Jurisdiction? No,
certainly; and indeed, in the Oath to the Son, and the homage performed, both
at the Coronation and afterward, by the King of Scots, there was a particular
saving of the Allegiance and Homage due to the Father.

Thus both Hoveden and Bromton show that 'twas, in relation to the constituting
John King of Ireland, as they call him: they are express, that they to whom the
Lands of Ireland were distributed, in that very Parliament which gave John his
Office and Authority, were sworn to the Father and the Son. And Mr. M. might
have observed, that a Charter passed in that Parliament, and cited by Sir John
Davis, grants Davis Rep. F. 64. b.
to Hugh de Lacy large Territories in the County of Methe, to hold of H. 2. and
his Heirs. Whereas if Ireland had been given, as Mr. M. will have P. 148.
it, to John, and that thereby 'twas made an absolute Kingdom, separate and
wholly independent on England; The Tenure must have been of John and his Heirs.
Vid. leges W. 1. de ^ide* etc. Regi domino ^uo.
The Oath of Allegiance, which in those days used to have no mention of Heirs,
was to H. 2. as King of England, and went along with the Crown; but the Tenure
reserved, was expressly to the Heirs of H. 2. which must relate to the legal
Successors to the Crown of England; since as King he could have no other Heir.

But as this may manifest, that the Parliament which made John King of Ireland,
designed him no more than a subordinate and vicarious Authority; it is plain he
himself did not think he had more: in the Seal which he used, he styled himself
Son Vid. Sandford's Genealogical Hist. referring to a Charter in the Cotton
Library.
of the King, Lord, or who is Lord, of Ireland. Nor is there the least footstep
of any Coronation Sigillum Johannis filii Regis, domini Hiberniae.
Oath taken by John as King of Ireland; or that he ever wore an Irish Crown.

P. 41.
Notwithstanding that share in the Government of Ireland which John had in his
Father's lifetime; Ireland upon the Father's death fell Vid. Sandford, sup.
to R. 1. and the Archbishop of Dublin was assisting at his first Coronation,
before he went to the Holy War: Nor did John ever pretend to be King of
Ireland, while R. 1. lived, more than of England; which having attempted, while
his Brother was in Foreign parts far remote; upon his Brother's return, he was,
by Polidore Virg. f. 255. Habito concilio, etc. de concilii sententia honoribus
atque fortunis privatus. Thorn. int. december. script. col. 1868. Fuit citatus,
accusatus, and judicio coram paribus suis per eos legitime tanquam proditor
condemnatus. Mat. Par. Addit. f. 281.
Parliament, deprived of all his Honors, and Fortune: And thus, at least, he
lost his supposed Royalty of Ireland, if it did not expire upon the death of H.
2. and this shows how rightly Polidore judged, in calling him Ib. F. 236.
Oxoniam profectus, etc. Johannem fill. totius Hiberniae regulum facit.
Regulus, or Viceroy.

I will therefore admit Mr. M's supposal, that R. 1. P. 41, 42.
had not died without Issue, but his Progeny had sat on the Throne of England,
in a continued succession to this day; but cannot admit the other part of his
supposal, that the same had been in relation to the Throne of Ireland; since
John never had such Throne, either before he was King of England, nor after:
and therefore I may well conclude, that the subordination of Ireland to the
Parliament, or even to the King of England, need not arise from any thing that
followed after the descent of England to King John. Nor indeed was John King,
either of England or Ireland, by descent; but that Election of the States of
the Kingdom of England, which made him their King, preferring him before Arthur
an elder Brother's Son, drew after it the Lordship of Ireland, as an Appendant
to the Crown of England: And however, if H. 2. had not sufficiently brought the
Irish under the English Laws, John did after he came to be King of England.

In the 9 th of his Reign, he Rot. ^^t. 9. J. p. 1. m. 2. n. 8. Ad voluntatem
and consilium dilector. and fidelium nostror. Com. W. Maresc. and Walt. de
Lacey and al. Bar* nostrorum Hiberniae, qui nobiscum fuerunt in Angl. and per
consilium fidelium nostrorum in Angl. Quod latrones Hibern* expellantur de
terra nostra Hibern* etc.
imposed Laws upon them in a Parliament of England; not indeed without the
desire and counsel of such English Lords who had Lands in Ireland; but then
their consent would have been involved in the consent of the majority here, tho
those Lords should have expressly dissented: But the Authority was derived from
the consent of the King's faithful People, which is mentioned as distinct from
the desire or petition, which occasioned the Law then made in a Parliament of
England; for the expelling Thieves and Robbers out of the King's Land of
Ireland.

For the effectual execution of this Act of Parliament, King John's Expedition
seems to have been undertaken the next year, when he Annals de Margan. Ann.
1210. Jo. 11. f. 14. Hostibus ex voto subactis.
entirely subdued his Enemies; and Vid. ib. de Lacy Com. ultorum W. de Breusa
Walt. de Lacy, etc. Fecit con^isca^i omnia bona proscriptorum Principium quae
multa fuerunt in Angl. in Wall. and Hibernia.
confiscated the Estates of some of the English great Men in Ireland: Which
Confiscation seems to have been after his return to England; but before that,
or at some other time in his Reign, he made a Law in Ireland, which he
commanded to be observed there, That Pat. 30. H. 3. m. 1. Quod omnes leges and
con^uetudines quae in Regno Angl. tenentur, in Hibern. teneantur, and ^adem
ter. eisdem legibus subjaceat, and per easdem regatur, sicut dominus R. J. cum
ultimo esse^ in Hibern. statuit and fieri mandavit.
all the Laws and Customs which are in force in England, should be in force in
Ireland; and that Land be subject to the same Laws, and be governed by them.
This was before any pretense to their having any Charter for a Parliament,
other than the supposed sending over the modus tenendi Parl. by H. 2. and is
before the time that Mr. M. P. 58.
takes a regular Legislature to have been established among them: Therefore
according to himself, we must repute them to have submitted, not only to such
Laws as had before that time been made in Parliaments of England, but such as
should be made, till they of Ireland should have the establishment of a regular
Legislature.

However Mr. M. will have it, that John gave Laws to Ireland, P. 54.
not as King of England, but as Lord of Ireland; and forms a pretty sort of an
Argument from the style of Lord of Ireland: as if this were an Argument, that
it is not dependent upon the Crown of England; so excellent a faculty has he of
making contraries serve his purpose. But it is very unlucky, that John's
retaining this style is not only an Argument that Ireland is a Dominion, or
Land, appendant to the Crown of England; but that John was never King Vid. Rot.
Car^* 16. Johannis. Rex Angliae, Dominus Hibern. Dux Norm. and Aquitaniae,
Comes Audegav.
of Ireland, which he would certainly have kept up as a distinct Interest, if
he ever had such a Title separate from the Crown of England.

H. 3. being made K. of England by the like choice of the States, which
preferred him before Arthur's Sister, as they did John before the Brother; in
concurrence with these States, truly acted as Lord of Ireland, as might be
shown by numerous Instances.

Rot. claus. 18 H. 3. m. 27.
In the 18 th of his Reign, upon matters signified to him out of Ireland, he
summoned the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and all the great Men, or
Nobility of the Kingdom of England, to Regni nostri Angl.
a Parliament at London, to treat about the State of his Kingdom, and of his
Land of Ireland.

And in the 21 Rot. Pat. 21 H. 3. m. 10.
of his Reign, he sends a Writ to the Archbishops and others Ad tractandum
nobiscum ibidem super his and aliis statum nostrum, and terrae nostrae Hibern.
tangentibus.
of Ireland, acquainting them that by the common consent of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons of the Kingdom of England, alterations of
the Law of England were enacted, as to the Limitations of several Writs; which
were then required to be observed in Ireland, in pursuance of the Statute of
Merton.

In Rot. Claus. 37 H. 3. m. 15. Firmiter ad fidem and servitium nost. and
praedecessor. nostrorum Regum Angl. ad conquestum una cum Anglicis faciend.
super Hibernienses.
the 37 th of his Reign, an Irish man having pleaded, that he and his Brother,
and their Ancestors, had always bin faithful to the Kings of England, his
Predecessors, and served them in the CONQUEST OF THE IRISH; they are, by
peculiar license under the Great Seal of England, admitted to enjoy by descent,
as Englishmen. Which was an alteration of the Vid. Sir John Davis de Tanistry.
Law, and Custom of Ireland, as to those particular Persons, without any Act of
Parliament there.

Indeed, but four years after it is 41 H. 3. m. 11.
recorded, that 'twas Dudum.
long before, and Multis retroactis temporibus, which Mr. Pryn by mistake has
omnibus.
many Ages past; which must reach beyond the Expedition of H. 2. provided and
yielded, by the assent and desire of the Prelates, and great Men of the Land of
Ireland, that they should be bound by the Laws used in the Kingdom of England:
Yet the same Record restrains this to the consent of only the Omnibus Anglicis
terrae Hibern.
English of the Land of Ireland. However it is beyond dispute that the English
Laws, both made and to be made in England, were then held to reach as far as
the English Interest in the Land of Ireland: and this, Rot. Pat. 18 H. 3. sup.
Rex vult ut de communi consilio Regis provisum est quod omnes leges, etc.
according to the Record 18 H. 2. above referred to, was provided de communi
Consilio Regis, by the King's Common Council: tho by what Council, it must have
been provided, will more fully appear afterward, I may here explain it by an
Instance in that Reign.

All must agree, that the Provisions of Oxford, in the 43 d of H. 3. and
referred to in the Records of the next year, were made in as true a Parliament
as any in that Reign before the 49 th: it is called a Annals Monast. Burton. f.
411.
Parliament by good Authors, and the word is used in the Records of the next
Rot. Claus. 34 H. 3. m. 7. d.
year, in relation to a meeting on the Borders of Wales. The Annals Burton,
sup. In eod. Parl. apud Oxon. xxiv. electi, viz. xii. ex part domini Regis,
and totidem ex part communitat^s.
Ordinances and Provisions made at Oxford, were drawn up by 12 chosen by the
King, and 12 by the Commons; concerning which the Record has these words, Rot.
Claus. 44 H. 3. m. 18. do^so.
Anno ab incarnat. domini 1259. Regni autem H. Regis fill. Regis J. 43. in
quindena St. Mic. conven. ips. domino Rege and magnatibus suis, de communi
consilio and consensu dictor. Regis and magnatum, factae sunt provisiones per
ipsos Regem and Magnates. In the year from the incarnation of our Lord 1259.
but of the Reign of K. Henry, Son of K. John, the 43d, the said King and his
great Men, being assembled in the Quinzism of St. Michael, Provisions were made
by the Common Council, and consent of the said King, and great men.

And yet some of the Entries in the same Roll, mentioning Provisions then made,
are, Rot. Claus. 44 H. 3. dors. m. 18.
per magnates nostros qui sunt de consilio nostro, By our great Men of our
Council. Others, Ibid.
Per magnates de Consilio meo, By the great Men of our Council. As if 'twas by
the sole Authority of the King, and such noble Men as were of his Privy or
Private Council; when those Provisions were certainly made in full Parliament:
and this was the Council from whence Ireland then received its Laws.

Object.
However from a Charter in the first of that King's Reign, Mr. M. would infer,
that the English there had their independent P. 45.
Parliaments then established, or confirmed, tho he afterward admits, that
during that King's Reign they might have been bound by Laws made here for want
of a P. 58.
regular legislature established amongst them.

The P. 47. Pat. 1. H. 3. m. 13. intus.
Charter, or rather Writ with which a Charter was sent, runs thus. Rex*
Archiepisc. Episc. Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and omnibus
fidelibus suis per Hiberniam constitutis salutem. fidelitatemvestram in Domino
commendantes, quam Domino Patri nostro semper exhibuistis, and nobis estis
diebus nostris exhibituri; volumus quod in signum fideli^a^is vestraetam
praeclarae, tam insignis, libertatibus Regno nostro Angliae a patre nostro and
nobis concessis, de gratia nostra and dono, in Regno Hiberniae gaudeatis; quas
distinct in scriptum reductas, de'communi consilio omnium fidel. nostrorum
vobis mittimus, signatas Sigillis Domini nostri G. Apostolicae sedis Legati,
and fidelis nostri Comitis Mareschalli, Rector is nostri and regni nostri; quia
sigillum nondum habuimus, easdem processu temporis de Majori consilio proprio
Sigillo signatur.

Test apud Glost. 6. Feb.

The King to the Archbishops, Bishops Earls, Barons, Kts. and all our faithful
Subjects constituted throughout Ireland, Health. Commending your fidelity in
the Lord which you always showed to your Lord our Father, and are about to show
to (...) in our days; we will that in sign of your fidelity ^o remarkable, so
eminent you enjoy in our Kingdom of Ireland, the Lib^rties granted to our
Kingdom of England* by our Father and us; which, distinctly reduced into
Writing, we send you, by the Common Counsel of all our faithful People: Sealed
with the Seals of the Lord G. Legate of the Apostolic See, and of our faithful
Subject W. Earl Marshal Regent of us and our Kingdom; because we have not yet a
Seal, intending in process of time by consent of a greater Counsel to seal them
with our own Seal.

Test at Gloucester, 6. Feb.



Ans^^.
How specious soever this may seem, 'twill neither prove Ireland to have been a
Kingdom so early, nor to have had a grant of the English Liberties, in the same
manner as the English enjoyed them; that is, so as to have no Law imposed upon
them without their express and immediate consent, to that very Law. For,

1. It Is not to be supposed, but that if Ireland had been a Kingdom before this
Charter, H. 2. and other Kings of England would have styled themselves Kings of
Ireland, rather than Lords, because of the greater Dignity of Kingship; unless
Lord was chosen as implying more absolute Power; which would argue that Ireland
did not enjoy the English Laws with equal Freedom.

2. This Writ mentions no Liberties granted to Ireland, but what had been Regno
nostro Angl. concessis.
granted to England; which besides the improbability that Ireland should 1 H.
3. have a Charter of the P. 45.
same form with that which did not pass in England till 8 Years after, shows
the spuriousness of the supposed Charter preserved in the P. 46.
red Book of the Exchequer at Dublin, as dated the November before the Charter
sent the 6th. of February: and however, the constant Vid. Inf. temp. E. 1. and
deinceps.
method of sending Laws from hence to be applied to the use of the Irish,
without any alteration; may sufficiently detect that Charter, which P. 45.
has the City of Dublin instead of London.

3. The method of sending to Ireland the Laws made here, besides what appears
upon the face of the Record 6. Feb; may satisfy any Body that 'twas only a
Writ which went along with a Charter or Charters of Laws, passed in Parliament
here.

4. This Writ was before any confirmation of the English Liberties by H. 3.
other than general at his Coronation; and therefore bating such Confirmation,
the Charter of Liberties then sent into Ireland, must have been King John's
which (if it be read according to the due distinction of Periods, and that
Translation which the course of Records both before and after enforces, and
which the prevalence of Truth has obliged Dr. Brady to yield, to the giving up
his whole Controversy with Mr. Petyt, and the Author Brady's Append. to his
complete History f. 131. And shall have the Common Advice of the Kingdom
concerning the Assessment of their Aids.
of Jani Anglorum Facies Nova) makes express Provision for the City of London,
all Cities, Buroughs, and Vills of the Kingdom of England, to enjoy all their
Liberties and Free-Customs, and, among the rest, to be of, or to be represented
in, the Common Council of the Kingdom.

But Ireland had no City of London to claim this Privilege; nor could any City
of Ireland be included, any otherwise than as part of the Kingdom of England,
and therefore subject to the Laws which should be made here.

2. This could not be as extensive to Ireland as 'twas to England; since it
could not have extended beyond the English Pale there, and such particular
Districts as enjoyed the English Laws, of special Favor.

Therefore the Charter then sent by H. 3. could, as to this Matter, be no more
than a Memorial of that Supreme Law, according to which, England, with all the
Dominions belonging to it, was to be Governed, and an assurance that they
should have no Laws imposed upon them, in any other manner, than upon such of
the English here, as had no Votes in the making Laws. But one end at least of
the sending over that Charter must needs have been, suitable to the declared
end of a F. 52, 53. Claus. H. 3. m. 8.
Subsequent sending King John's Charter, when the Justice of Ireland was
required to Summon, not only the Great Men, but the Freeholders of every
County, who after the Laws had been read to them, were to swear to the
observance of them; beside which they were to be Proclaimed in the several
Counties.

5. Admit the Charter sent to Ireland 1. H. 3. had given the Irish Liberty to
hold Parliaments, with Representatives from all parts of that Land, according
to the English Form; This Liberty was derived from a Convention of the States
of the Kingdom of England, or Parliament, in the Minority of a King, who had no
Judgment of his own; was under the Government of a Subject whom the States had
set over him and the Kingdom; and that King was manifestly Chosen by them, to
the setting aside Eleanor, who had the Right of Descent as far as that could
avail: So that, the King could have no pretense to the imaginary divine Right
of Succession; and therefore that Charter must have been derived from the Grant
of the People of England. And besides, the Record shows that this, though sent by
the advice of all the King's faithful People, was thought to want some
Formality to make it a Parliament: the Assembly in which it was advised, being
held by a Regent, may be thought to have occasioned the reference to a greater
De Majori consilio.
or more solemn Council: However, such reference shows, that 'twas not their
Intention to be concluded by what was then done; and when a Charter is Vid.
Rot. Claus. 12. H. 3. 8. De legibus and consuetud. observandis in Hib. Cited p.
52, 53.
afterward sent over in full Form; then there is not a word of Concession, but
an absolute Command, that the Laws be published and obeyed.

However, take the Charter sent them 1. H. 3. in the utmost extent imaginable,
it is not to be thought, that while the English Parliament gave those of the
English Pale, or others in Ireland, Liberty to hold Parliaments, they divested
themselves of that Authority by which they gave such Liberty.

To use the Words of the great Man Grotius, Grot. de Jure belli and pacis.
Se, per modum legis, id est, per modum superioris* obgare nemo potest. Et hinc
est, quod legum Auctores habent jus leges suas mutandi. Potest tamen quis
obligari sua lege, non direct s^d per reflectionem ex aequitate naturali, quae
parts vult componi ad rationem integri. No Man can bind himself by way of Law,
that is as a Sup^rior. And hence ^tis, that Lawmakers have Right to change
their Laws. Yet one may be bound by his own Law, not directly, but by reflection
from natural Equ^ty, which requires the parts to be composed with respect to
the whole.

6. Admit the Charter sent 1. H. 3. being by consent of the States of the
Kingdom of England, should be taken for an absolute departure from Power before
vested in them; then it ought to be taken Stricti^juris, and to confer no
Rright beyond what is expressed: And therefore,

1. The Men of Ireland had a Grant only of such Liberties as were sent them
Quas distinct in Scriptum reductas.
distinctly reduced into Writing: And unless the usual Practice of sending over
the Laws made here be taken to explain this, or they show the very Charter then
sent; it is to be supposed, that only such Liberties were Expressed and Granted
them, as were proper for an Appendage to the Crown of England.

2. If all King John's Charter were sent them, (which I may well admit,
according to the explanation of the following usage;) unless they can prove, as
we can here, that before that time they had Common Councils of all the Land of
Ireland, for all Matters (b) Quz omnes tangunt ab omnibus tractari debent.
of Public concern, and that the Maxim here had obtained there; Those things
which concern all, ought to be treated of by all; the only end of Common
Councils of the Kingdom of England, expressed in King John's Charter, being in
relation to the principal Grievance about the raising of Aids to the Crown; the
Grants to Ireland could extend no further, than a Liberty to have such a
Council for the raising Aids.

And there is no doubt, but more Money may be raised by such National Consent,
than can be in the most Arbitrary way: which abates the force of the Argument,
from H. 3. his desiring the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, (c) P. 50,
51. 3. H. 3.
Earls, Barons, Knights, Freemen, Cities, and Buroughs of the Land of Ireland,
to Aid him as much as they could, with Men and Money.

And hence, though 'twould have been no breach of King John's Charter, for the
King to raise Aids of his Tenants in Chief, for making his Eldest Son a Knight,
without calling for them to any Council; that being one of the exceptions out
of the Liberties expressed Rot. Pat. 37. H. 3. pars 2. m. 10.
in that Charter; yet H. 3. writ to the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, Knights, and all his Freemen of the Land of Ireland, entreating
them to give him such an Aid.

6. After all, to show how little there is in his mighty Argument from the Writ
1. H. 3. Let him take his choice, either that the English in Ireland had a
Parliament, granted, or confirmed to them by the Charter sent along with the
Writ 1. H. 3. or they had not.

If they had, then those Laws which were made here after such Establishment, in
pursuance of the desire of them from Ireland, show that neither the Parliaments
of England, nor they of Ireland thought they had any Power to make Laws there.
If there was no Grant or Confirmation of any Parliament there, then the
Concession of English Laws and Liberties, was no more than a Declaration, that
they should be governed by the Laws made, and to be made by Parliament in
England, or received there by the consent of the People, giving Force and
Authority to their own approved Customs.

But since after all Mr. M.'s learned Flourishes about the Settling of
Parliaments in Ireland, by P. 58.
the Modus sent over in the time of H. 2. and subsequent Grants; he admits that
under the 3 Kings, H. 2. King John, and H. 3. and their Predecessors, we must
repute them to have submitted to the Laws made here in those Reigns, for want
of a regular Legislature established among them; And since, whatever he admits,
there is no Color of such an Establishment by the end of H. 3. Let Us see what
can be found in the next Reign.

E. 1. having in his absence from England upon the Death of H. 3. his Father,
been Elected and Declared King of England, in a full Convention of the States
of this Kingdom; Of the Authority of the parliaments of England, exercised over
Ireland in the time of E. 1.
in a Rot. Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 20. De conservatione pacis in Hibern.
Writ sent by those States to Ireland, it is affirmed, that the Government of
England, and the Dominion or Lordship of the Land of Ireland, belonged to him
by Hereditary Succession; not that he was held to be King by a mere Right of
Descent, but as the Haereditario judicio.
Ritual of the Coronation of H. 1. and the Writ for Proclaiming the Peace of E.
1. in England, and Authors of the time show, the Election of the States of
England placed him in the Claus. 1. E. 1. m. 11. Quia defuncto jam celeb^is
memoriae Dom. H. Patre nostro ad nos reg^i gubernacu^um successione
haereditaria ac P^ocerum regni volu^tate and ^idelitate nobis p^aestit^ sit de
volutum.
Inheritance of the Crown: therefore the States of England declare to the
Subjects of Ireland, that they were bound to take the like Oath of Allegiance
as the English had done; and this is required of them by the States here, under
the Great Seal of England: nor is there color to believe, that there was any
Summons to Ireland for any from thence to come to that Con^ention; nor indeed,
was there time for such Summons and return, before that meeting;
notwithstanding Mr. M's assertion of this Reign in particular, P. 96.
that the Laws made in England and binding them, were always enacted by their
proper Representatives; meaning, Representatives chosen in Ireland: the reason
for which he there brings from supposed instances in the Reign of E. 3. seeming
not to rely upon his Quotation from the White Book of the Exchequer in Dublin
but the Page before, which 9 E. 1. mentions P. 95.
Statutes made by the King at Lincoln, and others at York, with the assent of
the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and Commonalty of his Kingdom of Ireland. Which,
if it employed the presence of the Commonalty of Ireland, would be an Argument,
that all their Rights were concluded by the Tenants in chief, who had Lands in
Ireland, but were Members of the English Parliament by reason of their Interest
here: but in truth, this shows no more than that, at the request of those of
Ireland, the Parliament of England had enacted those Laws; and the Record in
their white Book is only a Record of the transmission from hence; and proves
that, suitably to the practice both before and after that time, they in Ireland
had no Parliaments for enacting Laws, but were forced to Petition to have them
enacted here; and what was enacted upon their Petition was truly with their
Assent. But then the Question will be, whether in the Laws made in that King's
Reign with intention to bind Ireland, their Consent is generally expressed, or
employed, any otherwise than from the nature of their former submission to be
governed by the English Laws. But if our Acts of Parliament, and Records
concerning them, are clear in any thing, they certainly are in this, that the
Parliament of England then had, and exercised, an undoubted Right of binding
Ireland, without their immediate consent by any Representatives chosen there:
Mr. M. indeed, (though as I have before observed, he admits that Ireland was
bound by Acts of Parliament here, till the end of the Reign of H. 3. for P. 58.
want of a regular legislature among themselves; yet, suitably to his usual
inconsistencies, upon the enquiry, where, P. 63.
and how, the Statute Laws and Acts of Parliament made in England since the 9
th. of H. 3. came to be of force in Ireland) will have it, that none of them
made here, without Representatives chosen in Ireland, were binding there, P. 64.
till received by a supposed Parliament 13 E. 2. yet it falls out unluckily,
that they have Statutes in Print 3 E. 2. which speak not a word of Confirming
the Laws before that time made in England; and yet no Man will question, but
Statute Laws of England made in the Reign of E. 1. were a Rule which the Judges
in Ireland went by, before the time of E. 2. And that all Judgments given in
Ireland contrary to any Law transmitted thither, under the Great Seal of
England, must, upon Writs of Error, have been set aside here as Erroneous.

But let us see whether our Parliaments in the time of E. 1. had such a
defference to the Irish Legislature, or that the English in Ireland then made
any such pretensions as Mr. M. advances.

If we Credit Judge Bolton, our Statute Westminster. 1st. which was 3 E. 1. was first
confirmed in Ireland 13 E. 2. and till then, according to Mr. M.'s Inferences
from their receiving or publishing Laws made here, that Statute was of no force
in Ireland, being P: 99 Before the Year 1641. there was no Statute made in
England Introductory of a New Law, etc.
Introductory of a new Law in several particulars; as among other things, in
Subjecting Franchises to be seized into the King's Hands for default of
pursuing Felons, and in Enacting, not only the Imprisoning and Fining
Malefactors in Parks, and Vivaries, but forcing them to Abjure the Realm, if
they could not find Sureties for their good Behavior.

This Act does not Name Ireland, but the King Ordained and Established it by
His Council, and by the assent of the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors,
Earls, Barons, and all the Commonalty of the Realm thither Summoned; for the
mending the Estate of the Realm, for the Common profit of the holy Church of
the Realm; and as Profitable and Convenient for the whole Realm.

However that Ireland, as part of the Realm, was bound by this Law, and by
other Laws made 11, 12, and 13 E. 1. without any regard to Parliamentary
Confirmations in Ireland; and that for enforcing Obedience to those Laws, 'twas
enough to send them thither by some proper Messenger, under the Great Seal of
England, if not without, appears by the Proceedings of the Parliament at
Winchester, holden the Oct. after the Parliament of Westim. 2. P^yns Animad. f.
256. 13. E. 1. m. 5. ^e Statutis liberatis. Et Rot. Stat.
Mem. quod, etc. Mem. that on Friday in the Feast of the Exaltation of the Holy
Cross, in the 13 th. Year of the King, at Winchester there were delivered to
Roger Br^ton, Clerk to the Venerable Father William, Bishop of Waterford, then
Justice of Ireland, certain Statutes, made and provided by the King, and His
Council, viz. The Statutes of Westminster, made soon after the Prynn omits
Regis which is in the Record.
King's Coronation, and the Statutes of Gloucester, and those made for Merchants,
and the Statute of Westminster* provided and made in (b) In Hiberniam deferenda and
ibidem proclamanda and observands.
the King's Parliament at Easter; to be carried to Ireland, and there to be
Proclaimed and Observed.

It appears that among the Statutes delivered to the Chief Justices Clerk, in
order to their being published and observed in Ireland, one was the Statute
concerning Merchants 12. E. 1. for the enforcing and improving a Statute made
at Acton Burnel 11. of that King; that of Acton Burnel provides a remedy for
Debts to Merchants, to be had by calling the Debtor before the Mayor of London,
York, or Bristol, or before the Mayor, and a Clerk to be appointed by the King:
which, as it seems, 'twas intended that the King should have Power to appoint,
in other Cities or Towns within his Kingdom: Accordingly, the Statute 12. E. 1.
says, the King had commanded it to be firmly kept En tout ^on Royaume.
throughout his Realm: and that Parliament 12. for declaring or explaining some
of the Articles of the former Statute, names the Mayor of London, or the Chief
Governor of that City, or Ou de auter bon ville.
of other good Town: This Statute expressly Ordains and Establishes, that it be
thenceforth held throughout the King's Per tout ^on Royaume D'Engleterre and
D'Irland.
Realm of England, and of Ireland: And it enacts the form of a Writ upon that
Statute; which was to be current in Ireland upon several accounts. 1. By the
Letter of that Law, which was ordained for the Benefit of Merchants in Ireland,
as well as in England. 2. If it had not been named, the being transmitted to
Ireland from a Parliament here, was a sufficient ground for their observing it.
3. Such observance was included in the terms of their Submission, above one
Hundred Years before. 4. The Writ, without any particular Provision, became a
legal and current Writ in Ireland, by virtue of an Act of Parliament here, 30
H. 3. which, Prvnn's Animad. f. 254. 30 H. 3. m. 1. Quia pro communi utilitate
terrae Hiberniae and unitate terrarum Regis Rex vult ut de communi consilio
Regis provisum est.
for the common Profit of the Land of Ireland, and unity of the King's Lands,
provided, that the Common Law Writs should have the same currency in Ireland,
that they have here.

Without enquiring what Records they have in Ireland, of Statutes Staple from
the 13 th of E. 1. when this Statute which settled them was sent thither; it is
certain, that from that time the English in Ireland were bound by it, and so
held to be in Vid. 28 E. 3. and 43 E. 3. c. 1.
subsequent Statutes of this Realm, confirming this Statute, or supplying its
defects.

But what pity it is, that neither Judge Bolton, nor Mr. M. thought of an Act of
Parliament in Ireland to confirm that Statute 12 E. 1. This was enacted in the
Year 1284. which was above 350 Years before that fatal Era of Innovations P.
99, 103, 105
1641; from whence it seems Calamities of all kinds are to be dated. But, I
should think, here is at least one positive Precedent before that time, of an
English Act of Parliament's binding the Kingdom of Ireland.

And to me it seems as plain, that in the Judgment of the Parliament 13 E. 1.
Ireland, tho not named, was bound by a Statute made here; for which I shall
refer him to the Interpretation then made of the extent of the Statutes of
Gloucester, which had been enacted in the 6 th. of that King's Reign.

Some would think Stat. of Gloucester 6. E. 1.
those Statutes to have been no more than Ordinances, made by the King and his
Counsel only: and that our Kings thus made Ordinances of that kind, some may
gather from Fleta, (b) Habet Rex consil. suum in Parl. suis.
who speaks of the King's Counsel, in which, not only erroneous Judgments were
corrected, but new Remedies provided; yet Fleta speaks this of the King's
Counsel in his Parliaments: and thus, though the Statute of Westminster. 2. Some
Statutes made by the King, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and his Council.
seems to restrain the making that of Gloucester to the King and his Council, the
Statute of Gloucester it self shows that the Counsel was to be taken, as acting in
conjunction with the Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and that under the word
Barons the Commonalty were included as as lower Nobility, or dignified by their
Election to Parliament; accordingly the Statute of Gloucester says suitably to
latter Writs of Summons, the 3. Inst. and Rot. Stat. de temp. E. 1. E. 2. E. 3.
Appellez les plus discres de son regne, ausibien des g^eindrescome des meindres.
more discreet of the Kingd. as well Great as Small were Summoned: So that the
Statutes of Gloucester were made as other Statutes 3 E. 1. by that King's Counsel,
and by assent of the Commonalty; where the Lords were manifestly included under
the word per sonconseil, and per assentement des tout la Commonalty.
Counsel, agreeably to the ancient form of Vid. Regi^^. Brev. ed. An. 1531. f.
17. Quod siat coram nobis and consilio nostro in Parl. nostro un. Rot. Claus.
17. E. 1. pars m. 8. Ad prox. Parl. post festum Paschae, ut tunc inde Rex
f^ci^t quod de consilio suo duxe^it ordinandum.
Writs of error, or other Writs returnable into Parliament, before us, and our
Counsel in our Parliament, or, at our next Parliament after, or at such a time,
there to do what the King shall think fit to ordain, by advice of his Counsel.

For evidence that this did not exclude the Lords, I may refer to the Ro^^s of
Parliament of several Reigns, and particularly to those of the 20 th. and 21
st. of E. 3. In the 20 th. the Rot. Parl. 20. E. 3. m. 11.
Commons are desired to deliver such Petitions as were then ready, to the Clerk
of the Parliament; which Petitions are said to be brought before the Great Men
of the Counsel. That they were but of the nature of a Committee to inform the
King, and Lords, of the Bills or Petitions which came from the Commons, appears
by the Proceedings of the next Year; when the Commons having (b) Rot. Parl. 21,
E. 3 m. 9. s^avisera ove les Grants.
made Petitions of an extraordinary nature, the King answers, Rot. Stat. temps
E 1. E. 2. E. 3. Pur le amendment, de son Royaume and pour plenere exhibitionde
droit, si come le profit de office regal demand.
He will advise with the Lords. To return to the Statute of Gloucester, there the
King by such advice as I have shown, made Laws for the amendment of his Realm,
and for the plenary exhibition of Right, as the profit of the Regal Office
requires; and to remedy Vid. the Stat. 3. Inst.
mischiefs, damages, and disherisons, suffered by the People of the Realm of
England; without the least mention of Ireland.

And yet we have the judgment of the Parliament in the 13 th. of that King,
that Ireland was within the remedy of that Statute, as part of the Realm of
England, as appears by this Preamble. West. 2. 13. E. 1. Ann^ 1285. Printed
Stat.
Where of late our Lord the King in the Quinzisme of St. John Baptist, the
Sixth of his Reign, calling together the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and his
Counsel, at Gloucester; and considering that diverse of this Realm were
disherited by reason that in many cases where remedy should have been had,
there was none provided by him nor his Predece^sors; ordained certain Statutes,
right necessary (b) Stat. ed. An. 1529 Quaedam statuta ^ opulo ^uo valde*
necessaria ucilia edidit, per quae populus ^uus Anglicus and Hybernicus suo
regimine gubernatus.
and profitable for his People, whereby the People of England, and Ireland
under his Government, have obtained more speedy justice in their oppressions
than they had before, and certain Cases wherein the Law failed remain
undetermined, and some remained to be enacted, that were for the reform of the
oppressions of the People; Our Lord the King in his Parliament, after the Feast
of Easter, holden the 13 th. of His Reign, at Westminster, caused many
Oppressions of the People and defaults of the Laws, for the Ad supletionem
dict. Stat.
supply of the defects of the said Statutes of Gloucester, to be rehearsed Et
Statuta edidit.
and made Statutes, as will appear here following.

This rehearsal of the Grievances was, for certain, by the Petition of the
Commons of this Realm, and the Statutes there made, as the Register of Writs
has it, were Vid. Regist. Writs f. 13. Quando uxor admittitur ad jus suum
defendend. and f. 16. De communi consilio Regni no^tri.
by the Common Counsel of the Kingdom: And this Counsel not only declared Laws
which were binding to Ireland, but made new; though Mr. Molineux will have it,
that from the time of Magna Chata to the 10 th. of H. 7. no Laws were, or are
in force in Ireland, unless allowed of by Parliament in that Kingdom: except
only such as are Declaratory of the Common Law of England, and not Introductive
of any new Law. And whereas he is pleased to say,

P. 81.
As to such English Statutes as seem to comprehend Ireland, and to bind it
under the general words of all his Majesty's Dominions, or Subjects, whatever
has been the opinion of private and particular Lawyers in this Point, I am sure
(says he) the Opinions of the Kings of England, and their Privy Council have
been otherwise. I may say upon much better grounds, if any King and His Privy
Council did any thing to Warrant this Assertion, the Judgment of E. 1. and His
Council in Parliament, was to the contrary, and is of greater Authority.

And it is to be remembered, as I before showed* that the Statutes of Gloucester,
which do not Name Ireland, and the Statutes of West. ^. which do, were both
delivered to the Clerk of the Justice of Ireland, in order to their being
published and observed there. And it is evident, that Ireland's being bound by
Parliaments in England, without any consent expressed in Ireland, was not
merely the Judgment of the times above referred to, but the settled Judgment of
that King and His Council, in His Parliaments.

Thus in Priyn's Animad. on Lord Coke Pat. 8 E. 1. m. 13. Hib. Omnibus Anglicis
terrae.
the 8 th of that King, there is a Writ taking notice, that the Irish had
desired to be governed by the Laws of England: upon which the King requires all
the English of the Land of Ireland to Certify, whether this might be granted
without pre judice to them; declaring that the King would make such Provision,
as should seem expedient to Himself, Quod nobis and consilio n^to to
videbiturexpedire.
and His Council: which, plainly enough referred to His Council in Parliament.
If, upon their Certificate, a general Law had passed to grant the Irish their
Request, the mentioning the consent of the English there, could not be thought
to derogate from the Legislature here; the Authority of which was intimated in
that very reference, and was fully asserted in that Kings Reign by an Act of
Parliament, made here after that time, and the Proceedings thereupon, both in
England and Ireland.

By the Case Davis Rep. f. 21. h. Issint 29 E. 1. quand per special ordinance
del Roy, etc.
of mixed Moneys in Ireland, we are informed, that 29 E. 1. when, by the King's
sepecial Ordinance, the Pollards and Crochards were cried down and made of no
Value; the same Ordinance was transmitted into Ireland, and Enrolled in the
Exchequer there, as is found in the Red Book of the Exchequer there.

And agreeably to this, it appears Rot. Stat. de temp. E. 1. E. 2. E. 3. Johan
Wogan, Justice D^rland, ou a son Lieutenant.
by the Statute Roll here, that this Ordinance, which in truth was an Act of
Parliament, or else an other of the same kind, was sent to John Wogan, then
Chief Justice of Ireland, or to his Lieutenant.

This is only a short Entry referring to the known usage; Printed Stat. 21 E.
1. c. ^. Record 22 E. 1.
But the very next Record of a transmission to Ireland of a Statute made here,
which was that about Juries, is more express. Mem. quod istud Statutum de verbo
ad verbum missum suit in Hib. T. R. aput Kenynt. 14. die Aug. Rni sui 27. Et
mandatum fuit J. Wogan Justic* Hib. quod praed* Stat. per totam Hib. in locis
quibus expedire videret legi Note a Stat. made in the 21 or 22 was not sent to
Ireland till the 27th.
and public proclamari, and firmiter teneri faciat. Mem. That that Statute,
word for word, was sent into Ireland, Test the King at Kenynton 14. Aug. in
the 27th. of his Reign. Command was gito John Wogan, Chief Justice of Ireland,
to cause it to be read in those places in which he shall think it expedient,
and to be publicly Proclaimed and Observed.

This Statute does not name Ireland, nor has general words which seem to
include it: But it seems some years after to have been Enacted, that this
Statute should be transcribed, and sent to Ireland for a Law given them by
Parliamentary Authority.

In the 35 th. of Ryley's Placit^ Parl. f. 379. 381, 382.
E. 1. Will. De Testa was Impeached in Parliament, for grievous Oppressions and
Extortions upon the People, by Color of Authority from the Sea of Rome: This,
upon the Petition of the Earls, Barons, and other Great Men, and the
Commonality of the whole Realm of England, occasioned Pro Statu Co^onae Regiae
nec non terrarum ipsius Regis Scotiae Walliae and Hiberniae.
general Law and Provision, for the State of the King's Crown, and also of His
Lands of Scotland, Wales, and Ireland.

The Remedy was Enacted by the Ex assensu Dom. Regis ac toto consilio
Parliamenti.
Assent of the King, and the whole Council of Parliament; and 'twas Enacted,
that for the future such things should not be permitted within Non
permitterentur in Regno.
the Realm.

That Ireland was then included as part of the Realm, appears not only by the
intention before declared, but agreeably thereunto, The Statute then made is,
by Et mandatum est Principi Wallia and Com. Ce^t. and Cu^todi Scotiae and
Justic. Hib.
Authority of Parliament, sent to the Justice of Ireland, as well as to the
Chief Governors of other the King's Dominions; enjoining them to enquire and
proceed against those who had offended in that kind, and to cause the
Provision, In ei^dem terris firmiter and inviolabiliter observari.
Agreement, and Judgment, of that Parliament, to be Firmly and Inviolably
observed in those Lands.

Ordinatio pro Statu Hib. ^alsly supposed to have been 17 E. 1.
Mr. M. having, as he thinks, answered an Objection from the Ordinance for the
State of Ireland, Printed in* our Statute-Books, not only that of 1670. but
even in others much more Ancient, P. 88.
as made 17 E. 1. I shall show Stat. ed An. 1529.
him some new Matter, which may deserve his farther Consideration; and yet though
he thinks he has P. 88.
proved, 1. That this Ordinance was never received in Ireland, P. 89.
2. That 'twas merely an Ordinance of the King, and His Privy Council in
England; it might be enough to observe, That the Clause which he Instances in,
forbidding the King's Officers to purchase Lands there, upon pain of
Forfeiture, has an Exception for the King's License; and though he has not been
at the pains to examine whether there were any such Licenses from England, I
can show him in the very next Year, a confirmation under Vid. Rot. Claus. 18*
E* 1. m. 8.
the Great Seal of England, of a grant of Land's there, before made from hence:
which were sufficient security against the forfeiture. 2. If 'twere admitted
that the Ordinance were made by the These* and ^arsuis de siccio Dublin. Pro
Othone de Grandison.
King and his Privy Counsel, 'twould be very difficult for him to prevail upon
many to believe, that a Land or Kingdom, which in all the principal Parts of
Government was under the control of the Great Seal of another Kingdom, was (as
he pretends) P. 148.
a complete Kingdom within it self, P. 155.
or a Kingdom regulated within it self; the contrary of which appears in
numerous instances of the time of which we are at present enquiring; as of
leave from hence to choose Ecclesiastical Governors, Pardons, Directions, for
the Proceedings of the Courts of Justice, and Council in Ireland; the
appointing distinct Courts of Judicature, Grants of Lands, Offices, Liveries
out of the King's Hands of Lands held in Chief of the Crown of England,
Licenses of alienation, and the like.

Further than all this, there is a Precedent of taxing Communities by Authority
from hence. It must be agreed, that 'twas frequent for Kings to grant to Cities
and Towns in England, power to raise Customs, or Duties for Murage, the
building or repairing their Walls, to be levied upon Goods and Merchandises
brought thither; in these Grants there was no mention by what advice, or
consent they issued; but it is to be presumed that the Great Seal was not rashly
affixed; nor were they extended farther than to the Walls, which secured the
Persons and Goods of those who paid the Duty: yet the Great Seal of England has
been applied much more absolutely, to the binding the property of the Subjects
in Ireland, as may appear by this Record. P^t. 18. E. 1. m. 13. De muraglo
Dublin.
R. Ballivis* and probis hominibus s^is Dublin Salutem Cum in subsidium villae
claudendae vobis nuper per literas postras Pat. concesserimusquod quasdan
consuetudines usque ad certum temp^s de singulis rebus venalibus ad eandem
villam venientibus capietis, ac dilectus and Fidelis noster Nic. de Clear These.
nost. Hibern. testificatus fuerit coram nobis, quod vos ad mandatum ejusd. Nic.
magnam partem pecuniae provende consuetud. antedict. in clausuram scaccar*
nostri Dublin posuistis nos ea de causa, etc. The King to the Bailiffs and
honest Men of Dublin Greeting; since, in aid of walling your Town, we lately by
our Letters Patents granted, that you should take some Customs to a certain
day, of every thing to be sold coming to that Town. And our beloved and
faithful Subject Nic. de Clear Treasurer of Ireland has certified us, that you,
at the command of the said Nicholas, have employed great part of the Money
arising by those Customs, to the enclosing or repairing the Exchequer at
Dublin. Therefore, etc.

The King by his Great Seal of England continues the Tax for Three Years longer
than his first Grant, and allows of the applying part of it to an end very
different from that of the Walling the Town.

For a yet farther Evidence of the more absolute Dominion, which E. 1.
exercised over Ireland, than he pretended to in England; I shall show, that he
took to himself Authority to set aside what is supposed to have been settled by
an Ordinance, in the seventeenth of his Reign.

One of the said Ordinances provides, Ordin. pro Statu Hib. c. 2.
That neither the Justice of Ireland, nor any other of the King's Officers, by
color of their Office, take Victuals from any Person without his Consent,
unless in case of necessity, and that by the assent of the chief of the King's
Council of those Parts, and by Writ, out of the Chancery of Ireland.

P^t. 18 E. 1. M. 2.
And yet in the next Year after this Ordinance is supposed to have been made,
the King, as a particular Indulgence to the Citizens of Roscommon, grants that
the Constable of Roscommon, or other the King's Officers, shall take no
Victuals, or Nisi tempore gu^riae necessitas hoc deposcit.
other things of them without their Consent, unless there be a necessity for it
in time of War. And this exemption Has literas nost^as fieri fecimus patentes
quamdiu nobis placue^it duratur'
is only by a Patent during Pleasure.

But, in truth, this was no violation of the Ordinance for the State of
Ireland: For, besides that, I shall show when 'twas made, and how, in another
Reign; It Is certain it could not be in a Council at Nottingham in the Octaves
of St. Martin; not only as may appear to any one who will trace the Close and
Patent-Rolls, and the Use of the Great Seal, which went along with the King
from his Landing at Dover Claus. 17. E. 1. M. 4. Intus. Nota Oct. Martini, is
but 2 Days after.
on the 12th of August, to the P. 89.
16th of November; during which time the Seals were far from Nottingham, but
chiefly because there was a Parliament at Westminster, appointed to be held on
the Crastino Martini; which, it is to be presumed, met accordingly, tho Mr. M.
is positive that E. 1. Claus. 17. E. 1. M. 8. Usque ad proximum Parl. post
Pasc^a ut tune inde Rex faciat quod de concilio suo duxerit ordinandum. Test
Edm. Com. Corn. Cons. Regis apud. West. 5 M^r^ii^
held no Parliament in the 17 th of his Reign.

But, for his Conviction in this particular, during d the K's Absence in
Foreign Parts, Edmund Earl of Cornwall, being Custos, Dated the Writs, among
which there was one referring a Matter to the Judgment of the King and his
Council, in the next Parliament to be after Easter.

And to satisfy Mr. M. that there was no need of a Council at Nottingh^m, nor
could there be one the Octaves of St. Martin, it happens that on Claus. 17. E.
1. M. 2. dorso Nobis ea in proxim. Parl. nostro referant
the 14th of that October, a Writ issued to the Sheriff of Nottingham,
acquainting him of a Commission to certain Persons to hea^ the Miscarriages of
the King's Officers in that Country, and to give me an account thereof at the
next Parliament; and therefore commands the Sheriff to Summon all Parties
aggrieved, to be at Westminster that year in the Morrow of Sanct Quod veniant
apud Westminster. in Craft. instantis Festi Sancti Martini.
Martin.

That it is to be believed a parliament was holden 17 E. 1. tho no Summons to it
found.
I must own that I have not found any Record of a Writ of Summons for any of
the Members to come to Parliament that Year, ^or has Sir William Vid. Dugdale's
Summons to the Nobility. That which be cites 5 E. 1. i^ a Summons to the Army.
Dugdale found any to the Lords, t^^l the 22d; and yet 'twill be agreed, that
there were Parliaments between the 49th of H. 3 and the 22d of E. 1. and it is
certain the Statute of Westminster. 1. Vid. Stat. e^. An. 1529* p. 21.
3 E. 1. is express, that the Archbi^^^ps, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, (...)
Barons, and all the Com^^nalty of the Land, were Summoned to that General
Parliament, and assenting to the Laws then made.

Of A Summons to parliament 18 E. 1.
Mr. Prynn, as I take it, had not seen any Writ of Summons to the Commons, till
26 E. 1. Yet I have found in the Close-Roll of Rot. Claus. 18. E 1. M. 10.
dorso.
18 E. 1. as Dr. Brady, and Mr. Pety^ have in the Bundle of Writs, this
following. Rex Vic. Northumb. cum per Com. Bar. and quosdam alios de proceribus
regni nostri, nuper fuissemus requisiti super quibusdam ^am cum ipsis quam cum
aliis de comitatibus regni illius, colloquium habere velimus and tractatum;
Tibi p^aecipimus, quod duos vel tres de discretioribus and ad laborandum
potentiori^us militibus, de Com. praed. eligi and eos ad nos usque Wes^m.
venire facias; fine dilatione. Ita quod sint ibid. a die Sancti ibidem a die
Sancti Johannis Baptistae prox. fatur in tres septimanas ad ultimum, cum plena
potes^ate pro se and tota Communitate comitat. praed. ad consulendum and
consentiendumpro se and communitat. illa, hiis quae Com. Bar. and Proceres
praed tum duxerint concordand. T. R. apud West. 14 die Junii. That ^it d by Dr.
Brady is to the Sheriff of Westmorland.
The King to the Sheriff of Northumberland. For as much as we were lattly in a
special manner entreated by the Earls, Barons, and some others of the Peers, or
Nobility of our Realm, that we would have a Colloquy and Treaty upon some
Matters, as well with them, as with others of the Counties of the Realm. We
require you without delay, to cause to be Elected, and to come to us as far as
Westminster, two or three of the more discreet, and more able to travail of the
Knights of the said County: So that they be there at the latest, within three
Weeks, from the Day of St. John the Baptist next ensuing, with full power for
themselves, and all the Commonalty of the said County, to consult and consent
to those things, which the aforesaid Earls and Barons shall then think fit to
be agreed. Test. the King at Wes^m. the 14th day of June.

Dr. Bradie 's Answ. p 230. Dr. Bradie's Introduction to his Complete History.
This Dr. Brady in his Answer to Mr. Petyt, more truly than he is aware, calls
a Summons to a Parliament: However in his Introduction he will have it, that
the Laws were then made by the King and his Peers, before the Knights of the
Shires came; the Statute of that time saying, that the Parliament was holden in
the Quinzism of St. John, and that the Laws were made at the Ad instantiam
Magnatum.
Instance of the Great Men.

But he might have observed,

1. That the Provision Et sci^^d^m est quod istud statutum ten^t lo^um deterris
venditis tenend. in seodo simplici tantum.
then made, is called a Statute.

2. That the Council wherein it passed, is called a Parliament.

Quia emp^ores terrar. etc. There used to be Manucaptors for this purpose.
3. That the Matter enacted, was a general Law, and of general Concern; it
being for the encouraging of Purchasers, and engaging the more Persons to a
National Interest by Propriety in Land, which till that time was in much fewer
Hands; because whoever purchased any part of an Estate, had been liable to be
charged with all the Rents and Services which lay upon the whole; and there was
one other necessary Provision, against Alienations in Mortmain.

4. The Precept to the Sheriff was to cause the Election to be made forthwith,
and to take care that the Parties were ^ound to be at Westminster by three
Weeks after the Feast of St. John, at the farthest. The Day when the Parliament
was holden, was but 5 or 6 Days before; which shows, that it is absurd to
imagine, that there should have been a Law made of that immediate consequence
to all Owners of Land, before the Knights of the Shire came up; not only
because they being obliged to be at Parliament by such a Day at the latest, may
well be supposed to have come 5 or 6 Days before the utmost extent of their
time, to avoid the Forfeitures of the Bonds which they used to give for their
Appearance; but chiefly, because, as it is well known, whenever a Law passes,
it is in Judgment of Law held to have passed the first Day of the Session; which
Day might have been agreed at their former Meeting. Nor is it absurd to
believe, that there might be a Summons to require the Sheriffs to secure Full
Parliaments, even tho the Days of Meeting and of Elections below, might have
been certain.

Why so few Writs of Summons in those Times now to be found.
The true reason why so few Writs of Summons, of those early times, are to be
found, seems to be, that once, at least, in a Year the Parliaments met of
course.

The Confessor's Law speaks of the Vid. Lamb's Archaionom Leges St. Edw*
Calends of May as the fixed Day. In the Rot. Claus. 17. E. 1. sup.
1st of E 1. the Custos of the Realm, as appears above, in the King's Absence
issued Writs, tho not for Elections to Parliament, yet returnable into the
Parliament, to be holden next after Easter, without mentioning any Day, as if
'twere commonly known; but no Parliament being holden soon after Easter,
because of the King's being out of the Land* a Return into a Parliament
appointed to sit after the King's Landing, was to a Day certain. But that at
the beginning of E. 1. the time of holding a Parliament was looked upon as so
fixed, that there was no need Rot. Claus 3. E. 1. M. 9. dorso in Prl. Quod
circ^ octobas R^su^^ectionis Domini celebra^^ in Anglia consuev^^.
of Summons, appears by that King's Letter to the Pope, 3 E. 1. referring him
to the Deliberation of the Peers of the Kingdom in a Parliament, which used to
be holden in England, about the Octaves of the Resurrection of our Lord.

5. If the mention only of the Instance of the Great Men, or Nobility, be an
Argument that the Law was then made before even the Knights of the Counties
came up, tho Summoned to Consult and Consent; the many Laws which have passed
immediately upon the King's Answer to the Petition of the Commons, would argue
as strongly, that those Laws were made without the consent of the Lords; but as
in such case, either they were included as part of the Community of the
Kingdom, or else the King answered by their Advice; So at the making the
Statute 18 E. 1. either the Commons were under the Word Magnates, as the lower
Nobility, or Men dignified by being Senators, or else the Great Lords finding
themselves chiefly agrieved, as being unable to pay their Debts, because none
would buy their Lands; this Law might have passed chiefly ^t their desire: But
then, since it is manifest it was in Parliament, 'twas by the Consent of the
Commons; but I rather think that the Commons Commons included under Magnates.
were then included under Magnates, bec^^^e I find them so in Times after th^s;
and that Petitions were made to them with as high Ascriptions as were given to
the Great Lords.

In the 1st of E. 3. a Statute was made, as one Record has it, by the Rot. Pat.
1 E. 3. M. 10.
Common Council of the Kingdom, as another Rot. Claus. 2 E. 3. M. 20.
by the King, the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of the Realm; and
yet an Historian well conversant in the Records, and common acceptance of
Words in that Time, speaking of this very Parliament, and of the Walsingham, F.
126.
Queen Mother's coming to London, with E. 3. her Son, says, Thither also
Convened the whole Tota regni nobilitas citata per prius ad Parl semend.
Nobility of the Kingdom, having been before Summoned to the holding a
Parliament.

In after Times there are numbers of Petitions to the House of Commons, from
Persons of Quality; from the City of London, and others: To the (a) Most
Honorable, or Right Honorable, and Most Wise the Commons in this present
Parliment Assembled.

The Rot Claus. 4. H. 4. n. ^9. Pur Monsieur Thomas Pomercy Chivalier. Tres
honourables and Tressages Communes.
Honorable and Most Wise, and the like.

(e) Rot. Parl. 8. H. 6. n. 51. Tressages and Tres honourables.
(c) But some who will admit that the Knights of the Shire, who indeed are in
many Records called Grands of the Counties, were part From the Mayor, Aldermen
and Commons of the City of London. Rot. Patl. 3. H. 5. pars 1. n. ^ Vid. Sup.
of Cities and Boroughs.
of the Magnates 17 E. 3. will have it, that the Citizens and Burgesses were
not, because. 1. They, in those Times, used to be distinguished by the Name of
Commons, from the Knights of the Shires. 2. There Is no mention of any Summons
tothem in the Records of 18 E. 1. when there was to the Knights of the Shires*
But for a full answer to this, I desire it may be considered.

1. That the Meeting 17 E. 1. Vide sup.
appears by the Statute then made, to be a Parliament, that Dr. Brady himself
has yielded, that the Cities, Boroughs* and Cinque Ports, and Vills, had by
King John's Charter, right to be of the Common Council of the Kingdom; which is
the Phrase most generally used in the Ancient Register of Writs, to denote a
Parliament.

2. There were Boroughs long before the reputed Conquest: As for instance, St.
Edmund's Bury, or Burgh, made a Borough in the Time of King Edmund, confirmed
in the Reigns of Cnute, the Confessor, W. 1. and other Kings.

3. Boroughs frequently occur in Doomsday Book, that great Survey taken in the
Reign of W. 1. and are mentioned as such in the Time of Edward the Confessor.

4. No one Charter of ancient Times since W. 1. can be found, giving any
Borough right to send Members to Parliament; but that has seemed the consequent
of being a Borough, having a Gild for Merchandise, and answering to the King,
or other chief Lord, as one entire Body: upon which account they appeared by
Representation, while individual Tenants were in the great Councils upon their
Personal Right.

5. That for asserting the Right of Boroughs to be represented in Parliament,
it generally was enough to plead that they were Boroughs; yet one instance at
least is to be found within two Reigns after the time of our present enquiry,
where a Rot. Pat. 17. E. 3. p. 1. m. 20. dorso.
Borough Pleads, or Alleges in Parliament, that they had been made a Borough
in King Athelstan's time, and ever after had been represented in Parliament by
two Members of their own choosing: and this the then Parliament, or the King's
Council in it, were so far from thinking improbable, that upon that Borough's
Allegation that the Charter was lost, they direct an enquiry, with declared
disposition to have it renewed.

6. These Boroughs, whether holding of the Crown in chief, or of Great Lords,
were either Baronies, or parts of Baronies, upon the account of Knights
Service; or Honors by reason of other free Tenures, and their Charters, that
they should hold freely and honorably, as many of them run; and thus the
Libere and honorifice.
Members in Parliament, who served for these Baronies, or Honors, were part of
the Baronage of the Kingdom: Not but that sometimes Barony and Honor are used
without distinction concerning them; and thus that ancient Borough of
Barnstaple Pat. 15. Jo. p^^. 1. M. 11 Reddidimus He^ de Tracy Baroniam de
Bardestaple. ^b. Dotum honorem de Bardestaple.
which held of the Lord Tracy, is in the same Record called both a Barony, and
an Honor. Which Honor, as appears by this instance, was not limited to
immediate Tenure of the Crown; and that this was not derived from the grant of
a reputed Conqueror might be proved by numbers of Authorities, of which I shall
here content my self with one out Vid. Doom^day de Norwic.
of Doomesday-Book. In Norwic erant temp. E. MCCCXX Burgenses, etc. Tota haec
villa reddebat TREE 20 l. Regi and Comiti 10 l. In novo Burgo Not^, What a small
proportion this new Plantation of French bore to the 1320 Burgesses, and yet
some English were mixed even among the French. Besides the French seem to have
had but 11 added to their number from the Confessors time to the 20th. of W. 1.
XXXVI Burgenses and VI Anghci. De hoc toto habebat Rex 2 parts and Comes
tertiam; modo XLI Burgenses Franci in dominio Regis, and Comes Rogerus Bigot
habet L. and sic de aliis. Tota haec terra Burgensium erat in Dominio Comitis
Rad. and concessit eam Regi in commune, ad faciendum Burgum inter se and Regem:
Ut testatur Vicecomes. In Norwich there were in the time of Edward 1320.
Burgesses. All this Town in the time of King Edward yielded the King 20 l. and
the Earl 10 l. In the new Borough there were 36 Burgesses, and six of them
English. Of all thus the King had two parts, and the Earl the third. Now there
are 41 Burgssses in the Kings demeasn, and Earl Roger Bigo^ has 50. and so of
others. And this Land of the Burgesses was in Earl (c) Ralphs Demeas^, and he
granted it to the King in common, to make a Borough between him and the King:
As the Sheriff attests.

This Earl was Ralph Guader or Wader, who continued Earl of Norfol^, or at
least of Norwich, from within the Confessor's Reign, till the 9 th. or 10 th.
of W. 1.

7. The Freemen, or at least they who had Borough holds in these, or in some of
them, are in Doomsday-Book, called Barons, as particularly in the Borough of
Warwick. Et in Burgo de Warwic habet Rex in Dominio suo CXIII Domus, and
Barons Regis habent CXII. de quibus omnibus Rex habet geldam. And in the
Borough of Warwick the King has in his demeasm 113 Ho^ses, and the Kings Barons
have 112. of all which the King has Aid.

8. They who were interested in the Government of these Boroughs, and had Right
to look after their common concerns, could not but be Barons as properly, as
the Free hold Tenants of Lords of Manors, Freeholders, who were Judges in the
County Courts, and the Freemen of London, who are called Barons in several
Records, and other undoubted Authorities, and the Barons of the Cinque Ports.

Of Dover in particular Doomsday-Book TREE reddebat, etc.
Doomsday Book says, in the time of King Edward it yielded 18 l. of which King
Edward had two parts, and Earl Godwin the 3. And a Charter(c) (b) Rot. Cart. 2.
Jo. m. 17. n. 51.
to this Port in the beginning of King John's Reign confirms to his Men of
Doura the Confessor's Charter, together with the Charters of W. 1. and other
Kings after the reputed Conquest.

9. If it is to be thought, that no Citizens and Burgesses were at the
Parliament 17 E. 1. because no Summons appears for other Commons, besides the
Knights of the Shires; by the same reason it is to be thought, that none of the
Great Lords were there; no Summons to them appearing.

Rot. Pat. 1^. E. 2. m. 5.
10. In the Writs for choosing Knights of the Shires there was no occasion to
mention the choice of others; and thus 12 E. 2. Only the Earls, Barons, and
Commonalty of the Counties are spoken of as granting an 18 th. part of their
Goods: but they would be very much deceived who should think, that no others
were at that Parliament; for the same Record shows, that the Clergy granted a
10 th. and the Cities and Boroughs a 12 th.

11. It Is very probable that at that time, the Cities and Boroughs had the
Writs directed to them in particular, to be returned by their Headborough, or
other Officer, or else by the Community there.

Rot. Cl^us. 14. Jo. m. 8. d.
Thus in the 14 th. of King John a Summons to the Army is sent to the
Headborough and Honest Men of Canterbury; so to Dover* Rochester, Gildford, and
a great many other Places.

Rot. Pat. 15. Jo. m. 3. n. 8.
And the very next Year particular Writs are sent to the Honest Men of
Canterbury, the Mayor and Barons of London, the Mayor and Honest Men of
Winchester, etc. and so to all the Boroughs and Demesns of the Crown; not only
referring them to the Justice or Custos of the Realm, but desiring an Aid of
them which: Mr. M. must agree to have been desired in as true a Parliamentary
Meeting, as those which he cites of the time of H. 3. in relation to Ireland.

This I hope may not be thought an unprofitable digression from the supposed
Ordinance 17 E. 1. but may sufficiently evince, by what Authority it must have
been made, if there were any such of that time; and that the King and his
Counsel pretended not to settle the State of a Dominion annexed to the Crown of
England, without consent of the States.

But though the King's Counsel did not then act in Parliament matters, otherwise
than Parliamentarily; yet it is certain that they did exercise an Ordinary
Jurisdiction in relation to Ireland, as well as to England, either as
Committees or Tryers of Petitions, appointed by the Lords or otherwise; though
the bringing a Cause from the Lords in Ireland to the House of Lords here, is
one of the circumstances in the present juncture of Affairs, which seems to
require Mr. M's learned Disquisition.

Bundela P^t. Parl. de temp. E. 1.
In the Bundle of Petitions to the Parliament, in the time of E. 1. there are
some Coram to^o coasilio.
endorsed as bro^ght before the King, some before all the Council; and as the
Method of following times explains this Matter, there had been appointed
Receivers and Tryers of Petitions concerning Ireland; for several are received
from thence, and authoritatively Answered.

There Is one from Jeffery de Geymul, who complains of the Barons of the
Exchequer in Ireland, for sending within his Jurisdiction, a Commission of
enquiry, who Sold Pollards; to the prejudice, as he alleged, of the Franchise,
which Vid. Davis Rep. le Case del County Pal. ^f. 64. Cart. H. 2. Hugoni de
Lacy Com. pro serve. suo and terram in Midea cum omnibus p^^^in' per serve. 50.
militum sibi and haer. suis tenend. de me and haer. meis.
H. 2. had granted to the Ancestors of his Wife, Maud de Lacy.

This Commission was manifestly founded upon the Record of the Statute made
here, as is shown above, enrolled in the Exchequer of Ireland by Order from
hence: This the Barons there obeyed, and held that by Virtue of that, they
might cause Commissions of Enquiry to be executed even in Palatinates: nor does
it appear, that the King's Council in Parliament disallowed of their
Proceeding, ^ for nothing was done upon this ^et^tion, any more than referring
it to the next Parliament.

In the Case of one Allen Fitzwaren, they Ordered a Writ from the Chancellor of
England, to require the Justice of Ireland to examine, whether a Judgment about
Title of Land had been given while a Man was absent, and under the King's
Protection; requiring, that if any thing was done contrary to Protection, it
should be amended in due manner.

And as the Lords in Parliament then exercised a Jurisdiction over Ireland; it
appears that out of it Rot. de superioritate Maris 26. E. 1. Les Roys du dit
Royaume du temps dount il n'a memore du contraire eussent este en paisible
poss. de la Sovereign Seignorie, de la mere Dengleterre, and des^sles este^nts
en y cel and q. l'Admiral ad jurisd. avec la con^uisance and justice and touts
aut^es appe^tenant^, etc.
the High Admiral of England had Conu^ance, of all maritime Causes, as well
throughout Ireland, as England, from the time then beyond the memory of Man,
which must relate to the general Prescription, which is at this day as far
since as the beginning of R. 1. Son to H. 2.

That during the Reign of E. 1. Irel. was governed as a part of England, or
appurtenant to it; and that the Laws made here wanted no other Publication,
than what was in obedience to the Great Seal of England, affixed to Writs and
Charters, or Exemplifications of our Acts of Parliament, by Authority from
hence, I think may be beyond dispute: which might excuse my not dwelling upon
the unfortunate Reign of E. 2. and yet there are some evidences not to be
neglected of England's being then possessed of its Of Ireland's being bound by
the Parliaments of England in the time of E. 2.
ancient Authority over Ireland: and that, though at least from the 3 d. of that
King's Reign Mr. M. supposes, that they had a regular Legislature in Ireland.

Prynn 's Animad. on Lord Coke f. 262. 10. E. 2. Quod semel in Anno teneatur
Parl.
In the 10 th. of that King, the English in Ireland petitioned him for a
Constitution, that a Parliament should be holden there once a Year: Upon this
and other things then desired, the King, under the Great Seal of England,
commands the Justice of Ireland to Summon a Parliament there, to consider what
was sit to be done, and to certify the result into England: upon which the
King declared that he would, by the advice of his Counsel* ordain what should
be sitting: but nothing more appears of that matter, which was the farthest
step toward settling an Annual Parliament in Ireland.

Stat. of York 12 E. 2.
In the 12 th. of that King an Act of Parliament was made in England, with this
Preamble, Forasmuch as diverse People of the Realm of England, and of the Land
of Ireland, have hereto fore many times suffered great Mischiefs, Damage, and
Disherisons, by reason that in some Cases where the Law failed, no Remedy was
ordained; and also forasmuch as some points of the Statutes heretof^re made,
had need of Exposition; our Lord King Edward, Son to King Edward, desiring that
full Right may be done to his People; at his Parliament holden at York, the
third Week after the Feast of St. Michael, the 12th Year of his Reign by the
Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonalty of his Realm there
assembled, has made these Acts and Statutes following; the which he wills to
be observed in his said Realm, and Land.

Though Ireland is in some sense part of the Realm of England, yet here it is
distinguished as a Land intended to be bound, tho it had no Commonalty of its
own to represent it in Parliament: and there is new Remedy provided where the
Law had failed, as well as the explaining what was Law before: that part at
least which creates a Forfeiture of Cap. 6.
Wine and Victuals sold by any Officer appointed to look after the Assizes of
them, was absolutely new.

Rot. Sat. de temp. E. 1. E. 2. E. 3. Statuta missa fuerunt in Hib. ut in brevi
subseq. continetur, and liberata fuerunt Godf. filio Rog. una cum dict. brev.
deferend.
This Statute was transmitted to Ireland, by the following Writ, under the
Great Seal of England, and the Name of the Party who received it, is entered
upon Record. Rex Cancel. suo Hibern' Salutem. Quaedam statuta per nos in Parl.
nostro nuper apud Ebor' convocato, de assensu Prel. Com. Bar. and totius
Communitatis, regni nostri ibid' existentis; ad Commun. util. regni nostri ac
terrae Hibern' edita, vobis sub sigillo nostro mittimus consignata. Mandantes
quod Stat* illa in dicta Cancel laria custodiri, ac in rotulis ejusd. Cancel*
irrotulari, and sub sigillo nostro quo utimur in Hibernia in forma patenti
exemplificari, and ad singulas placeas nostras in ter. praed. and singulo^
comitat. ejusd. ter. mitti facias, and brevia nostra sub dicto sigillo minist.
nostris placearum illar. and Vicecom. dict. Com. quod statuta illa coram ipsis
publicari and ea in omnibus and singulis suis artic. quantum ad eor. singulos
pertinet, ^irmiter faciant observari. Test R. apud Clarendon 10 die Sept. An.
quarto decimo. The King to his Chancell of Ireland, Greeting, We send you under
our Great Seal, certain Statutes made by us in our Parliament lately called
together at York, with the Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and all the
Commons of our Kingdom there assembled; for the Common Vtility of our Kingdom,
and Land of Ireland: Commanding you, that those Statutes be kept in the Rolls
of the said Chancery, to be enrolled and exemplified in the Form of a Patent
under our Seal which we use in Ireland: and tha^ you cause it to be sent to
every one of our Places in the said Land, and every County of the same. And our
Writs under our said Seal, commanding our Officers of those Places, and
Sheriffs of the said Counties, to cause those Statutes to be published before
them, and in all and singular their Articles which to every one of them
appertain, to be firmly observed. Test the King at Clarendon the 10th of Sept.
in the 14th of his Reign.

In the same Roll there is another Writ of the same Form, dated at Nottingham 20
Nov. sending to the Chancellor of Ireland, the Stature of York, and another
made before at Lincoln.

These Entries explain the general Transmissions; and show what was to be done
by the Justice of Ireland, in order to the publication of Laws made in
Parliaments here, and sent to him: but yet he had no need nor authority to call
a Parliament in Ireland, for the publishing any Law made here, unless
particularly required under the Great Seal of England.

Yet I cannot but admire the force of Mr. M's Imagination, in framing an
Argument, on that very Year that those Statutes were sent to Ireland, That the
Parliament of Page 130.
England did not take upon them to have any jurisdiction in Ireland, because
Page 129.
the King sent his Letters Patent to the Lord Chief Justice of Ireland
commanding that the Irish Natives might enjoy the Laws of England concerning
Life and Member; to which he had been moved by his Parliament at West-minster:
which is as much as to say, they used no Jurisdiction because they did.

That after this time, that King and his Parliament exercised Jurisdiction over
Ireland, appears by the Ordinance made for the State of Ireland, in a
Parliament held on the Octaves of St. Martin, in the 17th of his Reign, and not
of E. 1. for which I shall refer not only to what I before observed, which may
give reasonable satisfaction that no such Ordinance could have been made in the
17th of E. 1. but to the Statute-Rolls, where this is entered among the
Statutes of the time of Rot. Stat. temp. E. 1* E. 2. E. 3. M. 30.
E. 2. next above the Statutes of the time of E. 3. For maintaining the
Jurisdiction of England that Statute of Nottingham ordains, That no Pardon for
Felony be granted by the Justice of Ireland, nor Sealed with the King's Seal
there, without special Command of the King, under some one of his Seals of
England.

1. It being so manifest from undoubted Records, that the Parliaments Answer to
Sir Richard Bolton's Marginal Note.
of England, to the 17 th. of E. 2. exercised an Authority in making Laws to
bind Ireland, and that there was a plain and known Method for publishing those
Laws in Ireland by virtue of the Great Seal of England, I hope it will be
allowed, that the Authority of Sir Richard P. 63. 64.
Bolton's Marginal Note in an Edition of the Irish Statutes, is not enough to
induce Men to believe, that in the 13 th. of E. 2. the Statute of Merton* 20
th. H. 3. and some other Statutes made in England, were confirmed in Ireland,
as being of no force there till then: And that no other Statutes made in
England were of force in Ireland, till confirmed there. Can any Man think that
no part of the Statute of Merton was received for Law in Ireland till the 13
th. of E. 2. particularly, will even Mr. M. believe, that notwithstanding the
Record 21. H. 3. of Transmission of so much Vid. Sup*
at least of the Statute of Merton as relates to the Limitation of Writs, yet
till the 13 th. of E. 2. the descent in a Writ of Right was to be laid from
Stat. Merton c. 7. De Narratione in br^vi de recto ab antecessore a tempore
Hen. Regis senioris.
an Ancestor of the time of H. 1. which is 200 Years within One? Or does he
think that the Justice of Ireland, for the time being, would not have been
turned out, if not impeached, had he not caused the Statutes of West. 1. and 2.
and the Statutes of Vid. Sup.
Gloucester, to have been Proclaimed and Observed in Ireland, after they had
been delivered to his Clerk in the Parliament at Winchester? and yet, if there
be any thing in Mr. M*s Quotation from Sir Richard Bolton, these were not
received for Laws in Ireland till 13. E. 2.

But since it is manifest that those, and the other Statutes afterward sent
over in the time of E. 1. and E. 2. must needs have been put in Execution
there; if there were any such Act of Parliament 13. E. 2. as Mr. M. takes for
granted, upon no Authority in comparison with the Records which I have cited;
as to so much of any Acts of Parliament made here, as was not transmitted in
the form above shown, the Enacting them in in Ireland might be the first
Publication there: But as to what was contained in the Patent or Charter sent
thither, it could be no more than a Declaratory Law, or rather Republication.

Sometimes there might have been a special form of Transmission, which as one
means of publishing the Laws, might require their Parliament to meet to hear
Laws read to them, which would bind them whether they consented or no: or by
Writ from hence, a Law or Charter passed there might be so republished. Thus
'twas beyond Contradiction 12. H. 3. when a Charter of King John's, Mr. M. p.
52. and 53.
Sworn to by the Irish, was either sent Rot. Claus. 12. H. 3. De legibus and
cons. observandis in Hib.
back, or republished after it had lain there. Rex dilecto and fideli suo Ric.
de Burgo Justic. suo Mandamus vobis ^irmiter, praecipientes quatenus certo die
and loco faciatis venire coram vobis Arch. Ep. Ab. Pr. Com. and Bar. Mil. and
libere tenentes, and Ballivos singulor. Comitat. and coram eis public legi
faciatis cartam Dni. J. Regis Patris nri cui Sigillum sum appensum est quam
fieri fecit and jurari a Magnatibus Hib. de legibus and consuetud. Anglicis
observandis: and praecipiatis exparte nostra quod leges, illas and
consuetudines in carta praed. contentas de caetero firmiter tenennt. Et hoc
idem per singulos Comitatus Hib. clamari faciatis and teneri, Prohibentes
firmiter exparte nostra, and super forisfactur. nostram ne quis contra hoc
Mandatum venire presumat. The King to his Beloved and Faithful Subject Richard
de Burgh, his Justice of Ireland, we command you, firmly requiring, that at a
certain day and place, you cause to come before you the Archbishops, Bishops,
Abbots, Priors, Earls, and Barons, Knights, and Freeholders, and the Bailiffs
of every County: and before them cause publicly to be read the Charter of King
John our Father, to which his Seal is affixed, which he caused to be made and
sworn by the great Men of Ireland; concerning the observing in Ireland the Laws
and Customs of England. And command them from us, that they, for the future,
firmly keep and observe the Laws and Customs in the said Charter contained. And
cause this same to be Proclaimed through every County of Ireland, firmly
Prohibiting in our Name, and under our Forfeiture, that no person presume to
the contrary of this our Command.

All must agree that this Publication, in so formal a Parliament, and after
that, in the several Counties, was not necessary to give Sanction to that
Charter, for that it had before: And could be no more than a reminding them of
their Duty, or a more solemn Publication of the Law. But that being a Law made
here, was held sufficient to make it a Law to the English in Ireland, and that,
being transmitted thither under the Great Seal of England, it became a Rule to
the Judges there, even in matters happening before the transmission, appears by
the following Rot. Claus. 20. H. 3. m. 13.
Precedents.

A Man having been redisseis'd after the Statute of Merton, 20. H. 3. which had
made a Redisseisour liable to Imprisonment. A Party, who had been so injured,
applies to the King for Remedy, and as the Writ to the Justice of Ireland has
it, Ideo vobis mittimus sub sigillo nostro constitutionem nuper factam coram
nobis and Magnatibus nostris Angliae, de praedicto casu and similiter, de aliis
arti^ulis ad emendationem rni nri Mandantes quat. de consilio venererab. Pat.
L. Dublin, Arch. constitutionem illam in Curia nostra Hib. legi and de caetero
firmiter observari, faciatis, and secund. eandem praed. querenti plene
justitiam exhiberi faciatis. Therefore we send you, under our Seal, the
Constitution, lately made before us and our great Men of England, concerning
that Case, and other Articles, for the Amendment of this our Kingdom,
commanding, That with the Counsel of the venerable father L. Archbishop of
Dublin, you cause that Constitution to be read in our Court of Ireland, and for
the future to be firmly observed, and that you fully dojustice to the
Complainant according to the same.

In the Sense, in which the Parliament 12. of H. 3. was to receive the Charter
of King John, and the King's Court or Bench in Ireland was to receive the
Statute of Merton, I will agree that Parliaments in Ireland may have received
Laws in the time of E. 2. but there is no color to believe that they then
pretended to more, in relation to Acts of Parliament, sent over to them at
large under the Great Seal of England.

Of Ireland's being bound by Parliaments of England, in the Reign of E. 3.
The Reign of E. 3. I may divide into Three Periods, 1. Before, 2. At, 3. After
the main and most express Charter, for a Parliament in Ireland, of any yet
cited, or appearing.

1. In the Statute Roll of the beginning of E. 3. there are several entries in
Latin of this kind. Mem. that those Statutes were sent into Ireland in the In
forma Patenti.
form of a Patent, with a certain Writ here following. But the entry of the
Writ is sometimes omitted, it being looked on as matter of common form.

Vid. Rastals Collect. ed. Anno 1572.
In the 2 d. of that King, a Statute was made at Northampton, giving a command
about Fairs, to all Sheriffs of England, and other Parts. In the 6 th. a
Statute was made, supplying the Defects of that Statute, and creating the
Forfeiture of double the Value of what should be sold in any Fair, or Market,
beyond the time limited for them in the Charters.

In the 6 th. of that King, this last Rot. Stat. Mem. quod istud Stat. cum
Stat. precedentibus temp. Regis E. ^3. Post conquestum missa sunt in Hiber. in
forma Patenti cum brevi seq.
Statute, and all other Statutes made in his Reign to that time, are sent, in
the form of a Patent, to Anthony de Lucy, Justice of Ireland, requiring that
those Statutes, and all the Articles therein contained, be Proclaimed in the
King's Land of Ireland, as well within Liberties, as without; and that he
should cause so much of them as concerned the Et quantum ad vos and populum
nostrum illar. ter. attinet firmiter tene^i and observari fac.
Justice, and the People of that Land, to be firmly kept, and observed.

A Statute Stat. 11. E. 3. c. 2.
11. of E. 3. provides, That, except the King and his Children, no Person,
great nor small, within England, Ireland, and Wales, or so much of Scotland as
was then under the King's power, should wear any Cloth, but what was made in
England, Ireland, Wales, or such part of Scotland; upon pain of Forfeiture of
the Cloth, and being Punished at the King's pleasure.

And whereas Mr. M. according to the use which he makes of publications, in or
by Parliaments in Ireland, of Laws made in Parliaments of England, would infer,
that no Statutes made here against Provisors, could be of force in Ireland till
the 32 d. of H. 6. when 'twas Enacted P. 68.
there, That all those Laws made in England, as well as in Ireland, be had and
kept in force; it is evident, that Rot. Parl. 20. E. ^. Ut memini, part
transcripti circa idem tempus amissa.
E. 3 d's Parliament and his Council acting in Parliament, held, that there was
no need of other publishing and enforcing those Laws, than was usual by virtue
of the Great Seal of England.

The Commons N. 33.
Petitioned, that the Provisions and Ordinances made in the Parl. 17. of that
King, concerning Provisions and Reservations from the Sea of Rome, be affirmed
by a Statute to endure for ever: And particularly, N. 34.
that if any Archbishop, or other Spiritual Patron, do not present within Four
Months after Voidance, by a Man's accepting any Benefice Note, This was a
disposing of Property.
from the Sea of Rome, the Right of Patronage should accrue to the King: And
they pray, N. 37.
that Commissions and Writs be sent to all ports of England, Wales, and
Ireland, and other Places within every County, as there should be occasion, to
Apprehend all those who should carry any of the Bulls, Process, or Instruments
then complained of.

The Answer in French is thus, Resp. N. 39.
It Is accorded and assented by the King, the Earls, Barons, Justices, and other
Sages of the Law, that the Things above-written be done, and in reasonable
form, according to the prayer of the Commons.

Upon which, there is no doubt but either a Writ was sent to Ireland, with this
Act of Parliament, in the form of a Charter, to warrant Commissions for that
purpose in Ireland; or otherwise, Commissions might issue from hence, to
apprehend such Offenders as should be found there.

Stat. Stap. 27. E. 3. c. 1. and. 3.
The Statute of the Staple, 27. E. 3. taking notice of the Damages to the
People of the King's Realm, and of his Lands of Wales and Ireland, because the
Staples had been held out of the said Realm, and Lands, appoints places for the
Staple in Ireland, as well as in England and Wales; and creates a Forfeiture of
the Wool, and other Staple Commodities, which any English, Irish, or Welsh,
should carry out of the said Realm, and Lands: with the like Penalty, if they
Note, The Wisdom of that Law.
should receive Gold or Silver for them, elsewhere than at the respective
Staples.

At which Staples it is to be observed, that there were paid Duties and Customs,
granted by Parliament in England.

27. E. 3. c. 7.
Another Statute, of the same Year, appoints, That all Wines in England,
Ireland, and Wales, be Gauged, on pain of Forfeiture, and further Punishment at
the King's pleasure.

Stat. 25. E. 3.
And but Two Years before, the Statute of Treasons, which does not name
Ireland, was made for a Law to Rot. Stat. M. 15.
the whole Realm, and for Ireland as For the Honor of God and of Holy Church,
and the Amendment of his Realm.
part of it: But none of the King's Subjects in Ireland were within that Law,
unless they were to be adjudged Subjects of the Realm of England. And yet this
Statute is ordered to be published and observed in Ireland, as well as England,
in this manner.

Rot. Stat. de temp. E. 1. E. 2. E. 3. M. 15. De Proclamatione Statuti.
To the Sheriff of Kent, greeting. We send you, under our Seal, certain
Statutes, made in our Parliament assembled at Westminster, on the Feast of St.
Hillary last past, by us, the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and others of the
Commonalty of our Realm of England, to the said Parliament summoned:
Commanding, that you cause the said Statutes to be read in your full County;
and that they be firmly observed, and kept. Test the King at Westminster. the 6 th.
day of May.

Consimiles literae diriguntur Justic. Hib. mutatis mutandis sub eadem data.
The like Writs, of the same Date, are sent to the Justice of Ireland, what
ought to be changed being changed.

P. 161.
But if the Parliaments of England had, or exercised any Jurisdiction or
Authority over Ireland hitherto; at least, it is to be thought, that 'twas all
taken from 'em by a Charter of E. 3. part of which he transcribes out of Mr.
Prynn, but for his satisfaction, I shall give him more of it from the Rot. Pat.
17. R. 2. p. 1. m. 34.
Record, now to be seen in the Tower, it is a Charter of R. 2. of an Ordinance
for the State of Ireland, reciting and confirming the Charter 31. E. 3.
beginning thus: Quia ex frequenti side dignor insinuatione accepimus, quod
terra nra Hiberniae, ecclesiaque Hibernica, ac clerus and populus ejusdem nobis
subditus; ob defectum boni regiminis, ac per negligentiam and in curiam
Ministror regior ibin, tam major, quam minor, hactenus turbati fuerint
multipliciter and gravati: Marchiaeque terrae ipsius juxta hosts positae, per
hostiles invasiones vastatae, occisis Marchionibus, and depraedatis, and eorum
habitationibus enormiter concrematis, caeterisque coactis loca propria
deserere, quibusdam videlicet ad hosts, caeteris ad loca extranea fugientibus.
Diversaeque parts dictar. Marchiar. taliter desolatae and derelictae, per
hosts eosdem occupatae: nostraque and ejusdem terrae negotia incongrue and
inutiliter, leges and approbatae consuetudines minus debite observatae, populo
nro bonis and rebus suis contra justitiam, legem, and formam Statutor inde
editor. diversimode spoliat. paxque nostra laesa and minime custodita. Ac
proditores, Latrones, and Malefactores, non sicut convenit castigati: Quorum
malorum aliorumque occasion, majora damna irreparabillia, evenire, quod absit,
timentur, nisi praemissis opportunis reme diis occurrat. Nos desiderantes utili
regimini and quieti eorund. terrae and populi providere quae sequuntur:
propterea, deassensu consili nostri, ordinanda duximus, and firmiter
observanda. In prim. viz. volumus and praecipimus, quod sancta Hibernica
ecclesia, suas libertates, liber. and consuetudines illaesas habeat, and eis
libere gaudeat and utatur. Item volumus and praecipimus quod nostra, and ipsius
terrae negotia and ardua, in consiliis, per peritos consiliarios nostros, ac
praelatos and magnates and quosdam de discretioribus, and probatioribus
hominibus de Partibus Vicinis, ubi ipsa consilia teneri contigerit, propter hoe
evocandos. In Parliamentis vero per ipsos Consiliarios nros, ac Prelatos and
Proceres aliosque de terra nostra proutmos, exigit, secundum justitiam, legem,
consuetudine^, and rationem, tractentur, deducantur, and fideliter, timore
favore odio aut pretio postpositis, discutiantur, and etiam terminentur. The
supposed Magna Charta for Parliaments in Ireland.
Because from the frequent Relations of Persons to be credited, we understand
that our Land of Ireland, and the Irish Church, and the Clergy, and Rot. Stat.
ordinatione pro Statu. Hibn.
People subject to us, through defect of good Government, and by the negligence
and carelessness of the King's Officers there, both great and small, has
hitherto been manifoldly troubled and aggrieved, and the Marches of that land
placed against the Enemies wasted, the Marches being killed and despoiled, and
their Houses enormously burnt, and the rest being forced to forsake their
habitations, some flying to the Enemies, and others to Foreign Parts. And
diverse parts of the said Marches so desolated and forsaken, have been possessed
by those Enemies, and the Affairs of us and that Land, are incongruously and
unprofitably, and the Laws and approved Customs not duly observed; our People
being in diverse manners spoiled of their Goods and things, contrary to Justice,
Law, and the form of Statutes in those cases provided: And our Peace is broken,
and not in the least kept. And Traitors, Robbers, and Malefactors not punished
as they ought: By occasion of which, and other Evils, greater irreparable
Damages, which, God forbid, are feared as likely to happen, unless the Premises
meet with opportune Remedies: We desiring to provide for the convenient
Government and Quiet of that Land, and People; therefore we by the consent of
our Council, have thought fit to provide these following Particulars to be
ordained, and observed: In the first place, that the Holy Irish Church have its
Liberties, and free Customs unhurt, and enjoy and usethem freely. Also, we will
and command, That the Affairs and Arduous Matters of us and that Land, in
Councils by our Learned Counselors, and Prelates, and great Men, and some of
the more Discreet and Honest of the parts neighboring upon the place, where
those Counsels shall happen to be held, to be summoned for this purpose; But in
the Parliaments by those our Counselors and Prelates, Peers, and others of
our Land, as custom requires, be according to Justice, Law, Custom, and Reason,
brought, and faithfully, Fear, Favor, Hatred or Price, being disregarded,
discussed, and also determined.

Then particular Provisions are made here, notwithstanding the Allowance of
Parliaments there: Among which,

(a) per Justiciar and Conciliumnostrum Hiberniae.
1. That Men guilty of Broakage, should be Punished by the Justice and Council
of Ireland, and fined, and amoved from their Offices; as should seem reasonable
to the Justice and Counsel.

2. That no Purveyance be taken contrary to the form of Statut. and artic. per
nos in Parliamentis and aliis magnis consiliis ad utilitatem populi nri editor.
and factor.
Statutes and Articles, made and published, for the profit of his People, in
Parliaments, and other great Councils. But if there be any force in Mr. M's way
of Arguing, the Statutes against Purveyors were not binding to Ireland till 18.
H. 6. when it is Enacted, By a Statute made in Ireland, that all the Statutes
made in England against the Extortions and Oppressions of Purveyers are to be
holden and kept in all points, and put in Execution in this Land of Ireland.

3. It provides against Robberies, and for Hue-and-Crys, according to the
Statute of Winchester.

4. That no Pardon be passed but in Parliaments or Councils, by the assent and
counsel of the said Parliaments, and Counselors. And that there be no general
Pardon: but that the Offenses be specified and expressed Juxta tenorem cujusdam
Statuti per nos and consilium nostrum Angliae edit. and missi ad Hiberniam
observand.
according to the tenor of a certain Statute, by the King and his Council of
England, published, and sent to Ireland to be observed.

5. The Charter, taking Notice that false intelligence used to be sent from
Ireland to England, forbids it under Sub gravi foris factura Prelati, magnates
communitates aut quivis alii*
grievous Forfeiture, declaring, that if, for the future, the Prelates, the
great Men, Commonalty, or any other, should misinform the King and his Council,
they should be duly Punished.

6. Whereas they used to Exhibit against one another, several scandalous and
vexatious Libels and Bills, it provides, that they being reduced to Writing,
Sub sigillo Cancellar. protempore existentis ad Justic. Cancel. and The^.
nostris Hibern. transmittantur.
be, under the Seal of the Chancellor for the time being, transmitted to the
King's Justice* Chancellor, and Treasurer of Ireland, who are thereby empowered
to do Justice: but this is by virtue of the great Seal of England.

7. It Impowers the Vocatis ad se Cancel. and These. nris Hiberniae cum
quibusdam Prel. and Comitibus quos evocandos noverit.
Justice, calling to him the Chancellor and Treasurer, with some Prelates and
Earls, whom he shall know to be fit, or that they ought to be summoned, to
determine the Differences between the English of Irish Extractions, and which
were or should afterward be of English.

8. It requires the Justice and his Associates, when there was any Ex certa
causa sub sigil. Justic. and sibi associator.
special Cause, to certify to the King and his Council of England, the Names
of all Persons guilty, and their Offenses.

Since Mr. M. having, as he fancied, P. 161.
clearly made it out, that P. 150.
for Ireland to be bound by Acts of Parliament of England, is against several
Charters of Liberties granted unto the P. 161.
Kingdom of Ireland, thinks he had no need to add any other Authority than a
piece of that Charter, of the substance of which I have given an Account, with
all the distinguishing Expressions; I might well enough close here, and leave
it to himself to consider, whether when a Parliament is granted, or allowed, to
the Land of Ireland, in the fullest terms that ever it was in any King's Reign,
that can be shown; there was not at the same time a full exercice of the Power
of the Crown and Kingdom of England, in making Laws, and requiring the
Execution of others made in England, without any desire or expectation of a
Ratification there?

And whether even their Parliaments are not threatened, if they send false
intelligence to England?

For full proof that in this Ordinance, the Authority of the Parliament of
England was rete^^^d and asserted, I must observe to Mr. M. that this Noble
Charter to Ireland, is but according to the usual Methods of Publishing Acts of
Parliament, put under the great Seal, and thereby made a Patent or Charter: but
'twas an Ordinanc^, V^d. R^t. (...) t^mp. (...) E. 2. (...) m. 12.
or Act, of Parliament, for the State of Ireland, as may be seen by the Statute
Roll.

3. After this Statute mentioning (...) S^^t. ^. m. ^. (...) 36* E. 1.
Parliaments in Ireland, the Parliament here exercised the same Authority in
making Ordinances and Laws for Ireland, and the King and his Council held
Ireland to be bound by those Laws, as part of the Realm of Eng land.

A Statute made in the 36 th of that King provides, that no Lord of England,
nor any other Person of the Realm, except the King and Queen, take purveyance
on pain of Life and Member; and takes from Mayors and Constables of Staples,
all Jurisdiction in Criminal Causes: but I do not find any mention of Ireland,
and yet that both King and Council judged, that the publishing them in Ireland
would avail as much as the publishing them in England, appears by the Writ to
the (...)
Sheriff of Essex and Hertfordshire, requiring him to publish the Statutes and
Ordinances then made by the King, with the common assent of the Prelates, great
Men, and Commonalty, in his In (...) Parl. (...) Westminster.
full Parliament at Westminster; and to return the Writ, with an Account of the
Execution of it to the King in his Chancery.

P^r (...) Regem and (...) silium.
This Writ is tested by the King.

And in Eodem medo (...) est (...) vicecom* per Angl. (...) Dunelm (...) Pr.
Wal^^ Com. Ce^^^ Rob. de (...) Constab. (...) Dover and (...) stod. 5 (...)
Justic. (...)
the same manner commands are sunt to the Justice of Ireland.

But notwithstanding this Transmission to Ireland of Statutes made here, one of
which is about Purveyance, which is at least the Second of this kind made to
bind Ireland, Mr. M. may if he pleases, hold, that this was not Law in Ireland,
till P. 68. Of the fancy that the (...) had representatives (...) in Ireland,
(...) sent from the (...) to be (...) of Parliament here.
18. H. 6.

But after all, I would entreat the favor of Mr. M. to inform me, whether,
according to himself, such Acts of Parliament in Ireland, were needful to
Confirm Laws made here; when, if he puts a right construction upon the Record
above cited, P. 95.
9 E. 1. and of the Record, P. 97.
50 E. 3. of a Writ from hence for the Expenses of the Men of Ireland, who last
came over to serve in Parliament in England; The Men of Ireland used to send
their Representatives hither, to the making the Laws by which they were to be
bound: till P. 98.
this sending of Representatives out of Ireland to the Parliaments of England,
was found in process of time to be very troublesome and inconvenient.

But whatever Mr. M. may imagine in this matter, that sort of representation of
Ireland in the Parliaments of England, was no more than they had in the time of
H. 3. and have it is likely generally had to this day, of persons entrusted to
solicit the Vid. Rot. Parl. de temp. E. 3.
Affairs of Ireland, upon their numerous Petitions to the King, and his Council
in Parliament; for which Receivers and Triers used to be appointed, or other
matters of concern to them. But whether they were chosen by their Vid. Rot.
Pat. 5. R. 2. part 2. m. 19. Their Parliament required to send Nuncios.
Parliaments, when they had them, or elsewhere, their Expenses, as appears by
the P. 97.
Record cited by Mr. M. were levied by Authority under the Great Seal of
England.

But I will show a Record of the time of H. 3. when I will agree, that they had
Rot. claus. 32 H. 3. m. 6. d. Rex Baronibus Hiberniae.
Nuntii, Messengers, deputed, as it is likely, from a Parliament in Ireland.

H. 3. in his Writ, or Letter, to the Barons of Ireland, takes notice, (c)
Nuntil ex part vestr^.
that, by the De nostrorum consilio.
advice of his People, he had given a favorable answer to some of their
requests, made known by persons deputed from them. But because those persons
alleged, that their Instructions were to insist upon all the particulars of
their Requests; the King sends a Precept to the Justice of Ireland, under the
Great Seal of England, requiring him, as it seems, to summon a Parliament; for,
he was carefully to open the Ut eisdem articulis vobis diligenter expositis,
etc.
matters before the Barons of Ireland, and to know what they would give for the
Liberties they desired.

Et nos praed. negotium ad nostrum and v^strum honorem effectui mancipare
curabimus sine ex heredatione vestra.
The Justice had no Authority to have those Liberties settled in a Parliament
there, but was to signify their Answer to the King; upon which the King would
do what should be fitting, without taking any Right from them.

That this was to be done in Parliament here, and that the Messengers from
Ireland were no Members of that Council of the King's People which sent the
Answer, is beyond dispute; nor is there color to believe, that any of their
Deputies, or Representatives, had in any King's Reign more to do here, than
those of the time of H. 3. had..

P. 96.
But surely no Man but Mr. M. will conclude, that such Instances, or the
mention of the Consent, or Petition of the Irish in some Particulars,
manifestly show, that the King and Parliament of England, would not enact Laws
to bind Ireland, without the concurrence of the Representatives of that Kingdom.

Since therefore I have proved to the contrary, from H. 2's first acquisition,
till toward the latter end of P. 85, 98.
E. 3. and Mr. M. declares, that he will consider the more ancient Precedents
of English Statutes which particularly name Ireland, and are therefore said to
be of force in that Kingdom; I might rest here, did not Mr. M. take notice of
the Statute of the Of the Statute of the Staple, 2 H. 6. and the Resolution of
the Judges upon it.
Staple, 2 H. 6. and the Resolution of the Judges upon it, 1 H. 7. in such a
manner as makes it requisite to be set in a truer Light.

The Merchants of Waterford, pursuant to the License granted them by E. 3. and
confirmed by E. 4. had carried Wool, contrary to the ordinary provision of the
Statute 2 H. 6. which being seized by the Treasurer of Cal^is as forfeited,
part to the King, and part to himself as discoverer; The Merchants by Bill in
the Exchequer here, pray restitution. It Is to be observed, that the Act upon
which the Wool was seized, tho it creates a forfeiture of the value of Wool,
Butter, Cheese, and other staple Commodities, carried from England, Ireland,
and Wales, to other parts than Calais, and gives the Informer a 4 th of what
shall be carried contrary to that Act, from any County of the Realm, makes no
Pais du Roialm.
mention of Ireland as to the Informers share; and therefore his Interest could
bear no debate, unless Ireland had been included, and the Counties of Ireland
were Counties, within the Realm of England.

P. 90.
But Mr. M. says, the 2 d Question was, Whether the King could grant his
License contrary to the Statute, and especially where the Statute gives half
the Forfeiture to the Discoverer. But Salve la Prerogative le Roy.
he might have observed, that the Statute has an express saving of the King's
Prerogative, which goes through the whole, and certainly related to the King's
granting Licenses to the contrary in some particular Cases: Notwithstanding
which, 'twas the opinion of the Parliament the next year, that this saving was
not sufficient: and therefore the King, at the 3 H. 6. c. 4.
grievous complaint of the Commons, impowers the Chancellor of England to give
Licenses for Butter and Cheese, at his discretion.

As to the question, Whether Ireland was bound by the Stat. 2 H. 6. Mr. M.
pretends to transcribe verbatim, P. 90.
what relates to it in the Year-Book, 2 R. 3. The matter, as he observes, was
brought before all the Judges of England in the Exchequer Chamber; but after
[ibi] he omits the word [dicebatur] P. 91.
it was said, not per curiam, but at the most only by some Judge or Judges; and
might have been only by one of the Counsel for the Merchants. Whoever then held
that Ireland was not bound by that Act, might have spoken it in relation to the
Informer, who could claim no share of any Forfeiture incurred from Ireland,
unles the Counties of Ireland, were taken to be Counties within the Realm of
England: But even as to this matter they were soon convinced of their mistake,
in thinking Ireland was not bound by that Statute.

Mr. M. might have learned from the Year-Book, 1 H. 7. that this was so far
from the resolution of the Court 2 R. 3. that there was no Judgment, but the
Bill fell upon the 1 H. 7. Note. Ireland not named, yet the Courts in Ireland
certainly included.
demise of that King; which till the Statute 1 E. 6. was a discontinuance of
all real, personal, and mixed Actions commenced in any of his Majesty's Courts,
and other Courts of Record. 1 H. 7. f. 3.
And therefore 1 H. 7. the Suit was begun again, as if commenced Come bill.
fait en temps le Roy que ore est.
in that King's Reign; and then the question coming before all the Judges in
the Exchequer Chamber, Hussy the Chief Justice, delivering the Judgment of the
Court, declared, with the assent of the rest of the Judges, that Ireland was
bound by that Act, and I leave to Mr. M. to make it out, that this was directly
P. 92, 93.
contrary to the Judges opinion in the 2 d of R. 3. or that they were all
positive, that within the Land of Ireland, the Authority of the Parliament of
England will not affect them.

If there had been any such opinion, 'twas not delivered as the Judgment of the
Court; and however, the Resolution 1 H. 7. has settled the Point another way.

This Case is abridg'd, and the Resolution received for Law by Brook, a Learned
Judge in the Reign of H. 8. without any query, which is usual Vid. Brook. tit.
Parl. sec. 90.
where he doubted: his tamen nota, that Ireland is a Kingdom by it self, and
has Parliaments of its own, implies no more than that this, tho objected 2 R.
3. was of no weight to alter that judgment; and is as much as to say, a Kingdom
may be distinct from the Crown of a Kingdom to which it is annexed, and have
Parliaments at home; and yet be governed by the Statute Laws of that other
Kingdom as subordinate to it. And tho the naming that subordinate Kingdom in an
Act of Parliament here, or the otherwise P. 118. Is Ireland's being named in an
English Act of Parliament, the least step toward the obtaining the consent of
the people of Ireland?
manifesting an intention to bind it, is no step toward obtaining a
Parliamentary consent in Ireland; yet it is toward the submission and
acquiescence of the People to those Laws, by which they and their Forefathers
had consented to be governed.

I may now leave it to Mr. M. to answer his own Questions, Shall Ireland P. 157.
receive Charters of Liberties, and be no partakers of the freedoms therein
contained? or do these words signify in England one thing, and in Ireland no
such thing?

Nor need I much fear his terrible Expostulation, Whether it be not against P.
155.
natural Equity and Reason, that a Kingdom regulated within it self, and having
its own Parliaments, should be bound, without their consent, by the Parliament
of another Kingdom? But I should hope that he will admit it to be against
natural Reason, to go away with a Conclusion, without some color of proving
the Premises; and therefore before he had laid it home P. 105.
to English hearts to consider, Whether Proceedings only of thirty seven years
standing, shall be urged against a Nation, to deprive them of the Rights and
Liberties which they enjoyed for five hundred years before; He would have done
well to have proved, that any one Century, or much less number of years, for
these five hundred years and more, Ireland was ever, according to the terms of
his own Question, regulated within it self; or, that it is a Kingdom of more
than From 33 H. 8. An. 1542. at soonest.
one hundred and sixty years standing.

But it seems just P. 105.
thirty seven years since, and never before, the Rights and Liberties which
they had quietly enjoyed till then, were invaded, and from that day to this
have been constantly complained of. It Is not to be expected, that a man who
remembers so little of those many Acts of Parliament made in Ireland, which
might have moderated his assurance in this matter, should keep in memory even
his own concessions to the contrary; as where he grants, that the Parliaments
of England did at P. 65, 66.
least claim a superiority, before the 10 th of H. 4. and 29 H. 6.

P. 68. Object.
But then he says, We have not one single Instance of an English Act of
Parliament* expressly claiming this right of binding us; but we have several
Instances of Irish Acts of Parliament expressly denying this Subordination.

Answ. 1. As to the express claiming an Authority to do what is done, by virtue
of an Authority always supposed; that is so far from an Argument against it,
that it shows 'twas never called in question.

2. No Act of Parliament, even in Ireland, can be shown or pretended, denying
the Subordination; not but that there might be some question of the general
binding, for want of due publication, either under the Great Seal of England;
or of otherwise knowing the Intention of the Parliament of England: This, not
the P. 79.
Authority, was the Ambiguity mentioned in the Statute of Ireland, 8 E. 4. in
relation to a Statute 6 R. 2. which, without naming Ireland, alters a Law that
did name it.

3. If there were such Act of Parliament in Ireland, 13 E. 2. as it is P. 63, 64.
supposed that a certain Judge in Ireland had seen, and that we might rely upon
his Judgment in the sense of it; receiving some Laws before that time made in
England, and suspending the execution of others; what I have shown above from
undoubted Records, may be enough to show, that this would not in the least
weaken the Right of the Parliament of England, exercised before and after that
time: And if there were another Statute, 10 H. 4. that no Laws should be of
force, unless they were allowed and published by a Parliament in Ireland: This,
tho it is a strain farther than it is likely any Parliament of Ireland ever yet
went, would not necessarily infer any more, than that the Laws made in England
should be thus published, to the end they might be more generally known; not
but that the intention of the Parliament of England, made known under the great
Seal of England, was as much to be obeyed as their own Record Vid. sup. Davis
f. 21. b.
shows that 'twas 29. E. 1.

The Authorities above*cited having manifested the several Titles which the
Crown and Kingdom of England have to the Land of Ireland; and that from the 18
th. of An. 1172.
H. 2. at the latest, downwards as far as Mr. M. makes any controversy,
neither the Irish Nation, nor the English there, have been governed without the
interposition of the Parliament of England; and that the Parliament of Ireland
had all its Laws made here, or derived under Authority from hence, and that not
from the King's alone, or the Kings and their Pri^y Counsels* but their
Parliament; that the Parliaments of Ireland have had no Provision for their
being holden within any certain time, nor ever had Authority given them to act
as independent on the Parliament of England; I may well conclude, that the
right of the Parliament of England to bind Ireland by Laws made here, without
any Members chosen for Ireland, is so far from being departed from, that it is
strengthened and confirmed by the continual usage of the Parliaments of
England, and submission of the Parliaments and People of Ireland: to which
'twill be needless to add the consideration of the inestimable Treasure spent
in several Ages, for maintaining the English Interest there; and the late
freeing it from an Universal Insurrection, and Usurpation.

His politics and seeming popular notions wrong, and ^isapplyed.
4. Having used the proper means to convince Mr. M. by the true argumentum ad
hominem, showing that the chief Weapons which he uses turn strongly against
himself; I need the less apprehend the natural force of his reasoning upon dry
Notions.

The right says he, which England P. 4.
may pretend to for binding us by their Acts of Parliament, can be founded only
on the imaginary Title of Conquest, or Purchase, or on Precedents and Matters
of Record.

Wherein he admits, that Precedents and Matters of Record, may give a Right,
which is neither by Conquest nor Purchase: and of this the Authors he refers to
might satisfy him at large. I Will agree with him, that on consent depends P.
150, 151.
the obligation of all humane Laws: insomuch that without it, by the unanimous
Opinions of all Jurists no sanctions are of any force.

But do any of them say that the consent is necessary to be expressed, and that
immediate? if it were the Sons could not be bound by those Laws which their
Fathers chose, in restriction of natural liberty; and P. 152. Hooker l. 1. sec.
10.
he might have observed, by his own Authors, and even in the Words cited by
himself, that approbation, not only Men give, who personally declare their
assent, by Voice, Sign, or act; but also when others do it in their names, by
right originally at least derived from them, as in Parliaments, Councils, etc.

He adds,
To be commanded we do consent, when that Society whereof we are part, has at
any time before consented. Farther yet, whatever Freedoms the Progeny of the
English and Britains now in Ireland claim with the natural Born Subjects of
England, as being descended from them; it is certain, every Man here does not,
as an Englishman, claim to be a Member of Parliament, or to have a Voice in
choosing one: But there are many without this Privilege, who have been concluded
by the consent of their Forefathers, and their own* agreeing to stay within a
Kingdom governed by such Laws, to which they owe Obedience and Submission, at
least as long as they will receive the benefit of them, and the protection
which they assure.

This is the case of those Englishmen, who choose to live in Ireland, under the
Protection of England; without which the Protestants there could not have
subsisted, in any Age since the Reformation: and if the Irish Natives are not
conquered, or the Right of Conquest over them, ought not to be carried beyond
the reparation of the Damages P. 24.
sustained from them; or if a just conquest gets no power, but only P. 20.
over those who have actually assisted in that unjust force; and if the right
of conquest extends little f^rther, P. 21.
than over the Lives of the Conquered, but their posterity can lose no benefit
thereby: If an outrageous and Brutal Enemy, may not be restrained from doing
farther mischief, by the taking from him that Power and Estate which would
enable him to carry on his Designs; if the posterity may not suffer in the
consequence of this, as the aggressor's property is become the Conqueror's; if
the Children may not be restrained from revenging their Father's Quarrel; let
the English in Ireland look to it, how to ju^^ifie those Possessions which they
enjoy, by the help of the Crown and Kingdom of England: and if their
Consciences are squeamish, let them renounce their Right to the Lands of the
Natives* but let them not bring in to question the Right of Engl. to all
Foreign Plantations: and let them never fear that equal Power here, to which a
great part of the English Nation are resigned, without any other kind of
consent, than the People of Ireland have given, to the Laws made in England,
with intention to bind them, and be published there.

As to his notion of Purchase; Vid* P. 143. The People of England ought to be
fully repaid.
whenever Ireland will repay the value of the Purchase, that inestimable and
infinite expense of Men, Money, Victuals, and Arms, which their own Parliaments
own to have Prerog.
protected and supported them for several Ages; there is no great question but
England would be willing to leave 'em to their own ways.

Whereas he will suppose, that the Authority, which the Lords and Commons of
England have exercised from Age to Age, in relation to Ireland, would imply
that the Parliament of England have P. 166.
claimed a coordinate Power with the King; what is this but to argue, that in
relation to England the Parliament is coordinate? however, as by Parliament he
means only the States of the Kingdom; it is evident this insinuation proceeds
from his not observing the Gothic constitution, for which he would be thought
very zealous* but might have known, that the States of the Kingdom, or the
ordines regni, are those who are entitled to meet the King in Person, or by
representation, in his Parliaments; where the King is a distinct Body Politic
by himself: and, having the Supremacy, is manifestly above the ordines regni.

But though the Head which Mr. M. raises, about the supposed injury to
Prerogative, be only upon a pretended coordinate Power with the King, he
carries it farther: and will have it, that for the States of P. 166, 167.
this Realm to use an Authority, though subordinate to the King, to introduce new
Laws, or repeal old, established in Ireland, is a violation of the Const^tution
of Ireland under Boyning's Act, and of the Prerogative of the Crown of England;
which he supposes to have been highly advanced by that Statute speaking of the
effect of which he says,

The King's Prerogative is advanced to a much higher pitch than ever was
challenged by the King's in England, and the Parliament of Ireland stands
almost in the same bottom as the King does in England: I say; almost on the
same b^ttom; for the Irish Parliament have not only a Negative (as the King has
in England) to wha^ever Laws the King and his Pri^y Councils of both, or either
Kingdom, shall lay before them; but have also a liberty of proposing to the
King and his Privy Council here, such Laws as the Parliament of Ireland think
expedient to be passed: which Laws being thus proposed to the King, and put
into form, and transmitted to the Parliament here of Ireland, according to
Poyning's Act must be passed or rejected in the very words, even to a little,
as they are laid before our Parliament; we cannot alter the least Iota.

In this Narrative of their Constitution under that Law, he has 3. C. 4. P. M.
Vid. etiam Mr. M. p. 160. of the Sta^. 10. H. 7.
omitted the mentioning what is very material, that the Kings answer to what
they propo^e, is to be transmitted under the great ^eal of England, and this is
to be the License and Authority for the holding a Parliament in Ireland; and
therefore their Acts of Parliament since that settlement, mention their being
held by Authority under the Great Seal of England.

And there were two obvious ends and effects of this Law, as Mr. M. himself
owns, 1. The prevent^on of any thing passing in the Parliament of Ireland
surreptitiously, P. 160.
to the prejudice of the King or the English Interest of Ireland: to which I
must add, or of England.

2. To take from the Irish there, all color of pretense of holding Parliaments
as an independent Kingdom by virtue of any Authority within that Land.

But how the King's Prerogative in the Legislature was advanced by this I do
not understand: since long before, as well as notwithstanding this supposed
Constitntion of an Independent Parliament, held by Authority from the Great
Seal of England; the King had, and has, the Prerogative, not only to dissolve
the Irish Parliaments at his Pleasure; but never to call any: which this
Gentleman ought to fear, least such a claim as he makes might occasion: and I
would gladly know, what part of their Constitution provides for the frequent
holding of Parliaments in Ireland: yet frequency of Parliaments in England, is
an undoubted part of the Fundamental Constitution of the English Monarchy.

Farther, is it any advance to the Prerogative in the Legislature, that a
Prince who has the full exercise of an absolute Legislature at home, is only
possessed of a Provision against having any attempt made, to the lessening that
his settled and indubitable Prerogative?

I must needs say this Gentleman has a way of arguing beyond my apprehension*
for I cannot see the consequence, how the Prerogative should be advanced, if,
as he will have it, the Irish Parliament is put almost on the same bottom, as
that the King stands on in England: if it be so, I should think it a lessening
of the Prerogative, to have an Irish Parliament almost coordinate with him:
which Mr. M. is very fearful least an English Parliament should pretend to.

And I as little understand the reason he gives, why the Parliament of Ireland
stands almost upon the same bottom with the King; for says he, they have not
only a Negative Vote as the King has in England, but liberty to propose; yet
the Laws must be passed or rejected without alteration: This I take to be
Foreign to the bottom on which, either the King or that Parliament, stands. If
it be meant that they are, in a manner, as absolute in this negative and
liberty of purposing, as the King is in England: since it relates only to Law*
first desired from Ireland, either by the Privy Council* or Parliament there;
this Constitution of their Parliament, is so far from giving them a negative to
the Laws passed in England, with declared intention to bind them in Ireland,
that the Authority of England is wove into the very Constitution; and the
Parliaments of Ireland own that Authority by their very Sitting and Enacting.

M^. M. having represented that Consti^ution of their Parliaments, by which he
thinks they stand almost upon the same bottom as the King did here, makes this
strong assumption.

If therefore the Legislature of Ireland stand on this foot in relation to the
King, and to the Parliament of Ireland; and the Parliament of England do remove
it from this bottom, and assume it to themselves, where the King's Prerogative
is much narrower, and as it were reversed (for there the King has only a
negative Vote) I humbly conceive it is an encroachment on the King's
Prerogative.

But he might consider,

1. That as here by the Parliament he takes Lords and Commons without the King;
he mistakes the Fact in relation to their exercice of Power: for they do not
assume to themselves the Power of making any Law, but with, and under the King.

2. Neither do they, in the highest exercice of their Power, take from the
Irish any thing allowed or directed by Poyning's Law, or any other Constitution.

3. They do but assert the Chief Prerogative of the Crown of England, by which*
due consent being bad, our Kings give Laws to this Realm, and all the Dominions
belonging to it.

4. The ancient course of the Proceedings of the Parliaments of England* and
their making all manner of Provisions for the Government of Ireland, evince,
that Poyning's Law was rather an Indulgence to the English there, directing a
Method for their maintaining the face of a Legislature among themselves, than
any restraint of Power before vested in the Parliaments of England. And after
all, this Law was never, as I take it, confirmed by a Parliament of England. I
must not here omit the consequences which Mr. M. draws, from the Parliament of
England's P. 170.
pretending Power to impose any one Law upon Ireland.

1. That 'twill naturally introduce the Taxing them without their consent.

2. That 'twill leave the People P. 171.
of Ireland in the greatest confusion imaginable: that they are not permitted
to know, which is the Supreme Authority which they are bound to obey, whether
the Parliament of England, or that of Ireland or both; and that the uncertainty
is or may be made a pretense for disobedience.

3. That 'twill be highly inconvenient for England; may make the Page 172.
Lords and People of Ireland think they are not well used, and may drive them
into Discontent.

Of the Consequence in relation to Taxes.
1. Not here to consider, how far the Lordship of the Land of Ireland may infer
the Taxing it; if it should refuse to concur as it ought, to its own
Preservation: since the Law of necessity is no farther to be used, or
considered, than while the necessity is apparent; I may say, that this is no
consequence to be apprehended, and that as the Right of Taxing, does not follow
from the Right of Governing; and the Nature of the Government depends upon the
first Submission, and that Interpretation and Confirmation of it, which both
the governing Nation, and the governed have put upon it: I must infer, with
deference to the National Authority, that the Power which England has from the
time of H. 2. claimed and exercised over Ireland, does not naturally introduce
the Taxing them without their conConsent; Page 88, 89.
yet, if the Modern Precedents of English Acts of Parliament alleged against
Mr. M's Notion, are Innovations, and only of Page 105.
Thirty seven Years standing, depriving them of the Rights and Liberties which
they enjoyed for five hundred Years before, and which were invaded without
their consent; such an Invasion would naturally introduce the Taxing them
without their Consent.

But since England uses no Power which it has not generally used for these 500
Years, he should avoid putting it to the necessity, or temptation to go farther.

Of the uncertainty what Authority to obey.
2. As to the supposed uncertainty where the Supreme Authority resides; he
might have found that passed dispute in their own Statutes; and yet their
Denyals could be of no weight, till they had absolutely renounced the
Protection of England; and indeed must be thought to have come in
surreptitiously, without the due care of the Governors, there, under the Crown
of England; as well as without the notice of the Nation which has hitherto
protected and supported them.

However, the Obedience which that Nation has from H. 2d's Time, pay d to the
Laws of England, after they had been duly pubiished by Authority under the
Great Seal of England, might have sufficiently taught them where the real
Legislature is vested, and by them and their Forefathers acknowledged.

And since he admits that till a Regular Legislature was established in Ireland
by the Irish voluntary Submission to, and acceptance of the Page 58.
Laws and Government of England, we must repute them to have sub^itted
themselves to the Statute Laws made under H. 2. King John, and H. 3. and their
Predocessors; If a Kingdom can have no Supreme within Page 16^.
it self, and a Subordinate Parliament is no Parliament as he would infer; he
must thank himself for the Consequence, that therefore they have neither a
Kingdom, nor a Parliament: and then by his own confession, they are as much to
be governed by the Statutes now made in England, as their Predecessors were in
the Times of King John, and H. 3.

Of the supposed Inconvenience to England*
3. As to the imagined Inconvenience to England, and almost threatened Defection
from the Crown of the Kingdom, this Gentleman's Undertaking makes it evident,
that the Authority ought the rather to be exerted, to help some Men's
Understandings, least such a show of Arguments, and popular Flourishes, should
encourage them to act as if they were a complete Kingdom within themselves,
with a King at the Head of them, during whose Absence, or professing a Religion
contrary to that which the generality of the People profess, they might assert
the Right of a Free Kingd. subject to no Man's Laws, but what they had
consented to immediately, or permitted to grow into a Custom.

Since this Gentleman thinks he has silenced all the Patriots of Liberty and
Property, by his warm Appeals to them* and wheadling Notions of the inherent,
and unalienable Rights of Mankind; and, howevre that he, has engaged the Crown
of his side, by adorning it with a Prerogative to govern Ireland without any
relation to the pu^lick good of that Kingdom* the rightful Possession of which,
ca^^ies Ireland as an Appendant to the Imperial Crown;

I must desire him to consider whether in this, as well as other Particulars
before observed, the Charge of Inconsistency, will not fall upon him more
justly than upon the Lord Coke.

A little to qualify this heat, upon the supposed Injury to Prerogative, or
common Right, I shall recommend these Heads to his serious Consideration.

1. Whether he does not yield, that if there were a Submission and Consent, to
such Laws for Government, as England should from time to time publish, to be
obeyed in Ireland; this would be no injury to the Common Rights of Mankind?

2. Whether his Tragical Exclamations, against those who have acted contrary to
what he takes to be the Right of the English Proprietors in Ireland, are not
founded upon the Supposition; that those Acts of Parliaments there, which have
been made of late Days, with express intention of binding Ireland, are
Innovations?

3. Whether it being evident, that the Laws made here, have for so many Ages
been enforced and submitted to* as binding Ireland; an Englishman in Ireland
has more reason to complain of a Law made here, than a Wealthy Merchant Free of
no Corporation, or any Englishman who^e Profit obliges him to a continuance in
Foreign Parts?

4. Whether all the English Treasure which has been spent, and Lives lost for
the Reduction of Ireland, were absolutely at the Disposal of the Princes, or
directed by any of their Parliaments?

5. Whether a Law Book digested in the Time of H. 2. as it is Vid. Glanvil de
Seditione Regis vel Regni inter crimina lesae Majestatis.
supposed, by Public Authority, does not show, that in the Notion of that very
Time, when Mr. M. supposes that the Right of the Crown of England over Ireland,
was first acquired, there was, or might be Treason against the Kingdom of
England, as well as against the King?

6. Whether the submitting to take the English Laws from the King, employed the
taking them from him alone; unless he made Laws in England, without the Consent
of the States of the Kingdom of England?

7. Whether if the English modus tenendi Parliamenta, being, as Mr. M. thinks
he has proved, transmitted to Ireland, by H. 2. stiling himself Conqueror of
Ireland; after that, a Parliament of Ireland, held in that form, should have
Voted themselves independent upon the Parliament of England; would not every
Member have been liable to an Impeachment for Treason against the King and
Kingdom of England?

8. If by Municipal Laws, or the Provision of the Common Law of England, in
Cases not particularly expressed, the Son may justly suffer in the Consequence
of his Father's Forfeiture for Treason; may not the same Reason hold for a
dependent Nation?

9. Whether Jurists, universally agreed to be well skilled in the Law of
Nations, and even such as hold the People or Community to be the common Subject
of Power, do not maintain, that as well the Dominion or Power vested in the
People, as that which was in the Prince, may be acquired by another Prince, or
State?

10. Whether they do not hold, that such acquisition made in one Age, and
continued, lays an obligation upon Posterity to submit to it?

11. Whether they do not generally hold, that Protection is a good foundation
of Power; and that this confirms the Submissions of Public Societies anciently
made, to the Nature of that Government which they had subjected themselves to,
and to the governing Families?

12. Whether the Protection which the stronger Kingdom has continued to give to
a weaker, is not at least as forceable an Argument for Obedience, as that
protection which any Nation does, or can receive from the Prince who is at the
Head of it?

13. Whether our Savior's Observation upon the Roman penny, and St. Paul's
Epistle to the Romans, did not establish a general Rule of Subjection?

14. Whether the Jews, and other Nations subject to the Roman Empire, had not
much more plausible pretenses for casting off the Roman Yoke, than the Irish
have for disowning the English Legislature?

Vid. Rot. Parl. temp. E. 3. and H. 5.
15. Whether our Victorious and Heroical Kings, E. 3. and H. 5. thought it any
diminution to the Prerogative of the Crown of England, for their Parliaments to
be joined with them, in giving Terms to those Parts of France, which were
brought under the Crown of England, in Wars carried on at a National Expense?

16. Whether, notwithstanding his Concession, that every King of England, is
ipso facto King of Ireland; the contrary does not follow from his Notion of
Prerogative, of Irelands being a complete Kingdom reg^^^^ed within it self; and
the Supposition that Acts of Parliament in England cannot bind Ireland, till
confirmed by Parliament there?

17. Whether therefore according to his way of arguing, the Subjects of
Ireland, who fought under King William, before he was recognized by a
Parliament in Ireland, then served their Lawful and Rightful King.

18. Whether to dedicate to His present Majesty, a Book of such consequences as
the direct Answer to these Questions would manifest, argues a due Opinion of
His Majesty's Judgment and Penetration?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. Lin. 8. for have 'r. know, ib. l. 14. r. grievous, ib. p. 7. l. 9. for
must r. might, ib. l. 18. r. you represent, p. 11. l. 26. r. and nature, p. 12.
l. 23. r. first expedition, p. 29. l. 25. for will r. would, p. 41. l. ult. for
none r. no Charter, p. 62. l. 18. r. and that, p. 63. l. 23. r. Jurisdiction
which, p. 64. l. 25. r. from, p. 70. l. 5. r. would, p. 87. dele voluntary, p.
95. l. 11. r. H. 3. p. 104* l. 13. for the r. that, p. 108. l. 6. r. here, p.
112. l. 4. r. when, p. 115* l. 12. dele chief, ^. 122. l. 20. r. carta, p. 133.
l. ^. r. be then, p. 134. ^. 1. r. there then, ib. l. 9. for me r. him, p. 139.
l. 9. for 1st. r. 17th. p. 144. l. 1. for that r. though, p. 165. l. 15. r.
Precedent, p. 173. l. 21. r. Marchers, p. 174. l. ult. dele we, p. 184. l. 24.
r. consider only, p. 195. l. 19. r. express, p. 200. l. 4. ^. Poyning's, p.
201. l. 21. and 22. r. 1. As etc. p. 202. l. ult. r. who, with his States, p.
204. l. 23. for did r. does, p. 212. l. 9. for there r. here.


