A SERMON Preached in the Parish CHURCH OF HACKNEY; ON The fifth of JVLY, 1685.

Being the day before the Battle and Victory over the REBELS in the WEST.

By Thomas Aston, A. M.

Psalm. 85.10. Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. LONDON Printed
for Benjamin Crayle, at the Lamb in Fleetstreet. 1685.

TO COLONEL John Friend,
SIR,
YOu have showed me so many Favors, that I am neither able to requite, nor to
number them. Yet I have a further request, being [in a nature] compelled to
publish a Sermon; I humbly presume to lay it at your Feet, and heg your
Patronage.

Worthy SIR, your most obliged Affectionate Minister Thomas Aston.

A SERMON Preached to the Loving Society, etc.
Isaiah, 57, 21. There is no Peace says my God, to the Wicked.


SO ill sounding an accent, is the Alarm of War, that it makes those that hear
it to tremble: so sweet is the message of Peace, that it is as a Cordial to the
Heart. The proclaimer of War is terrible, Isaiah. 52.
but how beautiful upon the Mountains are the Feet of those that bring Tidings
of Peace? they have both the same Master, the same Prophet proclaims these
different tenours, from the same Authority. This Herald was sent to Jerusalem:
Isaiah. 40.2.
to tell her that her Warfair was ended: Then he brought an Olive Branch of
Peace; here he proclaims War and both sealed with the Kings Signet. Isaiah.
40.1.
Comfort ye my People says your God, there is no Peace says my God to the
Wicked.

Wherein observe 1st. the Thing proclaimed, 2dly. the Person proclaiming and
3dly. the Parties against whom. The Proclamation is War, negatively set down,
there is no Peace, which is more binding than a positive Assertion. The Herald
or Party Proclaiming, is no less then a Prophet but not from himself, but from
the King of Kings, which has an indisputable Power to grant a Commission, being
God; to whom he expresses his Relation my God. The Parties against whom, viz.
Wicked. Though God is a God of Peace, yet he has Enemies against whom he does
wage War from generation to generation. There is no Peace to the Wicked.

First of the Proclamation, There is no Peace. I shall not lead you into a
common place, to show the sweet Fruits of Peace, and the bitter Effects and
lamentable Calamities of War; I may say of it with wise King Solomon, Eccles.
1.18.
He that increases Knowledge, increases Sorrow.

I shall conjoyn the War and the Enemy, the Wicked and no Peace, Oh heavy
Doom! aggravated by the generality of the Persons and the universality of time
and place: no wicked Man at any time, in any place can be exempted. The
proposition will bear this, being an universal Negative.

A wicked Man has neither Peace of Grace here, nor Peace of Glory hereafter,
but as he passes from sin to sin, from one wickedness to another; so he
passes from one punishment to another, from one War to another, from one Hell
to another, from Flashes into Flames from the inward Torment of the Fiend of
Conscience, to the eternal Torments of the Devil and his Angels.

Thus you see there is no Peace to the Wicked, at any time, nor in any place,
nor [indeed] with any Person. 1st. not with God 2ly. not with Man, and 3dly.
not with themselves. Upon these three I shall ground my present Discourse.

First, the Wicked have no Peace with God. The Scripture tells us plainly they
Enemies to God, Psalm. 21.8.
Sons of Wrath, set on fire of Hell. Ephesians. 2.3. St. Jam. 3.6.
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians, 2.12.
and Strangers from the Covenant of Grace. Being such they are without Christ,
and consequently without peace, for he is our Peace. Romans 5.10.
When we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. St.
Luke 3 22
In him God is well pleased, and for him he is well pleased with us. Without
Christ we are Enemies; through him we are Friends of, and United to God.

The Apostle affirms, that some Men have not Faith. 2. Thessa. 3.1.2. Pray for
us, etc. That we may be delivered from unreasonable and Wicked Men: for all Men
have not Faith. Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to please God. And
this great King will not be at Peace with those that displease him. Without
Faith no justification, and we must be justified before we can have peace with
God. So long then as men continue in their unbelief, they can have no Peace.

Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft and Witchcraft is a kind of dethroning
God Almighty, 1. Sam. 15.23.
and [as far as the Creature is able] a setting the Devil in his place. This
heinous Sin we are guilty of, if we rebel, and we do rebel if we disobey Gods
Commandments: and this is one of his Statutes; Psalm. 105.15.
Touch not mine anointed. This is one Commandment, Romans 13.1.
Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers. This is one Precept, 1. Tim.
2.2
Pray for Kings and for all that are in Authority. This is one Commandment, 1.
St Peter. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake, whether it
be unto the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as unto them that are sent by
him. He then that draws his Sword, or lifts up his Hand against his lawful
Sovereign, the Lords anointed, is not only an Enemy, a Traitor, a Rebel to the
King, but also to the King of Kings, he proclaims open War against him, he
shall have no Peace.

And he does not only proclaim, but has joined Battle, and fought with the
Wicked from Heaven, on Earth, and summoned Powers from under the Earth.

First from Heaven. There is mention made of three Heavens, and from all he has
opposed the Wicked. From the highest Heaven by his Angels; 2. Kings. 10.35.
An Angel was sent to destroy the Assyrians; an Angel was sent to be the Death
of Herod. Act. 12.23.
By his Saints for though they know not the desires of Men in particular, yet
they pray in general, that God may be avenged of such as molest his Church.
Rev. 6.10. Crying with a loud Voice, saying how long O Lord, Holy and True,
do thou not judge, and avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth.

He has fought with them from the second Story, Judges. 5.20.
The Stars in their Courses fought against Sisera. The Sun stood still, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day, and the Moon stayed until the People
had avenged themselves upon their Enemies. Joshua. 10. v. 13.
For the Lord hearkened unto the Voice of a Man; and fought for Israel.

From the lowest Heaven. He brings the Winds and Storms out of his Treasure,
and persecuteth the Wicked with his Tempest. Hailstones from Heaven were
showred down, to slay the wicked Amorites. Psalm. 11.6. upon the Ungodly he
shall rain snares, fire and Brimstone, Storm and Tempest: this shall be their
Portion to drink.

Secondly, He has fought with them on earth. The earth opened and swallowed
the Rebellious Chorites. The Sea drowned the Egyptians.

Thirdly, He has brought Forces from beneath to War against them. An evil
Spirit from the Lord vexed Saul. And we read in the Gospel, of foul Spirits
that haunted many, made some deaf, some dumb, drove some into the Water, some
into the Fire. All which as actions proceed from God; for there is no Power but
of God. Romans 13.1.
The Devil cannot stir but when and so far as God pleases.

God Almighties hand is not shortened; what he has done, we may certainly
expect he will do. He will vex, overthrow the wicked, they shall have no Peace.

Secondly, The Wicked have no Peace with Men. Solomon tells us, there is a time
for War, and a time of Peace: But the time of Peace, the Wicked cannot be said
to enjoy; for when they sing Peace, Peace, then Destruction is hard at hand,
Like Oxen they are pampered and fed, but it is but for the Slaughter; But
generally, The Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest; whose
Waters cast up Mire and Dirt. verse. 20.
They are turbulent in their own Nature, and instead of Peace on Earth, they
send a Sword, and are Seminaries of Discord.

But there is little need to trouble my self, or you, to prove that the Wicked
have no outward Peace with Men; since both Nature, and the Holy Scripture gives
us So convincing a reason, which is this: Righteousness is the elder Sister to
Peace.

Aristotle in his Aethicks tells us, that Agreement in Evil, is not Amity, but
Conspiracy. The Tabernacles of the Edomites and Ishmalites, the Moabites and
Hagarens may cast their Heads together with one consent, and be confederate.
Herod and Pilate may agree against Christ. All the Dissenters [tho' they differ
among themselves] agree in their Opposition to the Church: but this agreement
does not not proceed from a Principle of Love, it is only the product of a joint
hatred in them toward others, and does not deserve the Name of Peace, it is
mere Confederacy.

The Royal Prophet, who spoke part of the lively Oracles of God, clears this
Point. Psalm. 85.10. Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other: For that
Man can never be a true Friend to any, that is not a Friend to Truth it self;
he can never be Faithful to any that confide in him, that is perfidious to his
God. What Peace [said Jehu to Jehoram] so long as the Whoredoms of thy Mother
Jezebel and her Witchcrafts are so many? 2. King 9.22.
And how can we expect Peace on Earth, and good Will among Men: so long as
Whoredom, Drunkenness, rash, and false Swearing, Lying, Deceit, Rebellion, and
Treason are so frequent among us? Peace is as inconsistent with Wickedness, as
Light with Darkness. St. James, 4.1. asks the question From whence come Wars,
and fightings among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts? This is the
reason; because Men keep not the unity of the Faith, they have broken the Bond
of Peace. We put up our Petitions for Peace, and may the Prince of Peace accept
our Devotion. But we cannot pray for it, but with St. Paul's limitation; if it
be possible, and it is impossible to be at Peace with Scismaticks and
Phanaticks, since they are professed Enemies both to Truth and Peace: When we
speak of Peace [saith King David] they make ready for Battle.

But [my Friends] I can show you the good and right way, to make even your
Enemies to be at Peace with you; Viz. When a Man's Ways please God: this great
King will be his Advocate to those that plead with him, and fight against those
that fight against him.

Now I come to the 3d. Position; viz. that the Wicked have neither Peace one
with another, nor in their own Consciences.

First they have very seldom Agreement among themselves. I will [saith God) set
Egyptians against Egyptians, and they shall fight every one against his
Brother, and every one against his Neighbor, Kingdom against Kingdom, and City
against City, Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim, the
Sadduces against the Pharisees, and the Pharisees against the Sadduces, and a
Man's Foes may be those of his own Household.

Do so, Oh Lord, to our Enemies, divide them, let every Man's Sword be against
his Fellow, but let us ever escape them.

Secondly, they have no Peace in their own Consciences. I have showed you
already, that they have no Peace with God; and Peace of Conscience arises from
Peace with him. The Conscience is never at Peace until sin be pardoned, and
being without Christ, their sin remains: and their Conscience will one day be
a thousand Witnesses to accuse them.

This Evil Conscience may be considered two ways, either too quiet, or too
unquiet; both directly opposite to a peaceable Conscience.

First, Conscience may be too quiet; This [you'l say] is a Paradox. A
Conscience quiet and not peaceable! This overquiet Conscience is, when a Man
seared as with a hot Iron is past feeling, viz. when the custom, 1. Tim. 4.2.
and habit of Sin has taken away the sense of it. When a Man is given up to a
reprobate mind to work all uncleaness with greediness, when neither threatenings
can terrify, judgments move, nor promises allure him; then Conscience is too
quiet. That Army must needs be surprised, where there is no Watches, no Alarums
to give Warning. When the Pulse beats not, the Party is near his Death. He that
is ignorant of his Sickness, will never apply himself to a Physician. He Is most
desperately sick, who feels not his Distemper. So if Conscience do not do its
Office to accuse and excuse, it is dangerously ill. There is the greatest danger
in such a calm, or rather insensibility of Conscience; nay, such a Numness, or
Lethargy is the greatest punishment. The Lord threatened the Israelites, that he
would smite them with Blindness, Deu. 23.28.
and Astonishment of Heart: meaning, that he would inflict upon them such an
insensible dullness, that in doing Evil, they should be without apprehension of
the Evil; and such a heavy Judgment fell upon them; for when they were pressed
by Pilate to release Christ, they in their implacable Fury neither knowing what
they did, nor said, horribly cursed themselves, crying out, his Blood be on us
and on our Children. And God Almighty is just and true in his dealing with
them; for ever since to this day they have been Vagabonds, and have no City to
dwell in, and are hatred of God, and Man.

Thus you see what a sore Judgment stupidity of Conscience is. Such are naked,
and not ashamed: they drink deadly Poison, and cannot perceive it: their Wounds
are so deep, that they had rather they should fester, than be searched. They
will not War against sin, but are at peace with Hell.

Conscience is privy to all our good and evil actions; and does either
vindicate, or condemn us. It is a practical Syllogism in our understanding; the
Major whereof is Gods Law, the Minor is our application of that Law to our
selves, approving in our Actions what is good, and disliking what is evil. As
Gods Secretary, it Records all our Actions, and Thoughts, and Words in a Book
of remembrance; and if it be not called to give Testimony here, it will be
called at the general Audit to make answer for whatsoever has been done in the
body, 2. Cor. 5.10.
whether it be good, or bad.

Men are now so carried away with the Delights of this Life, that they have no
leisure to take notice of the checks of Conscience: but in the day of Judgment
they shall be brought to light, and every Man's Conscience will acknowledge the
Justice of the Sentence of the Righteous Judge. Conscience is now a secret
Witness, only known to the Person whose it is; but then all shall be made
manifest, and apparent to all.

But this Conscience will appear a greater Enemy, if we consider the next
degree, which is a too disquiet Conscience. This is feigned by the Poet to be
one of the three Furies of Hell. For though a Man use all means imaginable; Wine,
Music, Society to quiet it, when it is once awaked out of that past feeling,
and deluding Dream, he endures a Hell upon Earth. This moved Solomon to ask the
Question. Prove. 18.14.
A Wounded Spirit who can bear? Then no Wisdom can counsel him, no Eloquence
persuade him; then no Physic can cure, nor Riches ransom him from this
tormenting Fiend. And it is such a Tormentor, as the Wretch always carries
about him; he continually feels those inward Flashes, and Flames: he can find
no comfort abroad, nor please himself at home; but in all places, and at all
times hellish Haggs, and infernal Furies afright him. A Man may fly from, and
escape an outward Enemy, but he cannot fly from himself. The Murderer of
Symmacus, [being at Supper] thought he saw his Visage in the head of a Fish,
served up to the Table. And it is reported of Richard the third, that [as a
Judgment for his bloody Act upon his two Nephews] he dreamed the Devil did haul
and pull him in most hideous and ugly shapes. Prince Edward and Richard D. of
York in the Tower.
Cain and Judas were dogged at their heels by their tormenting Consciences: the
death of the former is not so notorious; but you know how the other was brought
to his dismal end. His Conscience was a Bailiff to arrest, a Justice to commit
him, a Jailer to imprison, and a Witness to accuse him, a Jury to find him
guilty, and a Judge to condemn him, a Sheriff to convey him to the Place of
Execution, and a Hangman to end one Misery, and begin a greater.

It Is true a Tender Conscience, is a blessing, 2. Cor. 7.19.
it works Repentance never to be repented of; it prevents sin, and makes a
Man circumspect in his Ways. It was happy for King David, that his Conscience
checked him for his Adultery, and Murder, and numbering the People; this
wrought in him a Godly Sorrow, expressed by his poenitential and hearty
Prayers. It was happy for the Apostle Peter, that his Conscience checked him
for denying his good Lord and Master; he wept bitterly, discovered his own
weakness, and became a stronger Pillar in the Church of God. But there may be a
tender Conscience in Masquerade, I do not need to take up much time to
distinguish. It Is very apparent, some presume upon a tender Conscience when
really they have none. By their Fruits you may know them. When you see a Man
scrupulous at an innocent Ceremony, bowing at the name of Jesus, kneeling at
the Sacrament, etc. and yet make no Conscience to lie, to deceive, to speak
evil of Dignities, to be drunk, to commit uncleanness: you may well conclude
that Man's scrupulocity proceeds not from Conscience [properly so called] but
from erroneous Fancy; and this is that our pretended conscientious
Schismatics, [who disturb the Peace of our Church] are possessed off. Indeed
he is not a good Christian who is not conscious of his Failings, and
Aberrations, and does not earnestly beseech a Pardon for Christ's sake, with
strong cries, prayers, and Tears, wherewith God is well pleased to be
importuned. But a Man may as easily see the difference between these two, as
between a real Monarch and a personated King, on a Stage: The one cries out
against Sin; the other against Superstition and Idolatry, nicknaming Decency
and Order. The counterfeit Conscience is hateful to the true God, the unfeigned
is his Delight; and the gracious Redeemer of mankind will wipe away all Tears
from such: they shall see their Obligation cancelled, their Debt paid; for the
Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses them from all Sin. But the Wicked are condemned
by their Conscience. Their secret Faults, [whereof they would take no
Cognizance, when it might be advantageous to them,] their lying in wait for
Blood, their private lurking in thievish Corners, their secret slanders, their
Covetousness, their Rebellion, covered over with a superficial Holiness; all
these, and whatsoever else they are guilty of, are well known to Conscience;
and it will accuse, and condemn them.

Thus I have briefly showed, that the wicked have no Peace with God nor with
Men, nor among themselves, nor in their own Consciences. For though for a time,
they may seem quiet, they are not peaceable, it is only from carnal security. I
shall now descend to some practical Conclusions.

First we may conclude, that Sin in the Habit without Remorse; [which amounts
to Wickedness] inevitably brings Misery. no Peace! consequently War, ruin to
the Wicked. Yet because Sentence against an Evil Work is not executed speedily;
Eccles. 8.11.
therefore the Hearts of the Sons of Men are fully set in them to do evil. But
it shall not be well with the Wicked, neither shall he prolong his days. v. 13.
The wicked Man [because he is not presently struck with a Thunderbolt] Fancies
that God takes no notice of his actions, and will not punish him for them;
these things have thou done and I kept silence: thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee, Psalm. 50.21.
and set them in Order before thine Eyes. Now consider this ye that forget
God, ye that approve, and caress your selves in any known sin, whether
concupiscence, drunkenness, rash swearing, disobedience to Governors, or
deceit and fraud. Consider this ye that speak of good evil and of evil good,
that give base Schism, and ungodly Rebellion, the glorious Title of Religion;
and the true Worship, and Service of God, the ignominious name of Superstition:
ye put Light for Darkness, and Darkness for Light. Ye can have no Peace; God
will War against you, he will break you in pieces while there is none to help.
Man will War against you; like Ishmael your hand will be against every Man, and
every Man's Hand against you. Your own Conscience will War against you,
prosecute and condemn you. You shall have no Peace. Consider how fearful a
thing it is, to be at variance with all these, and therefore labor to be at
Peace with God, and then what Man? what Angel? what Devil can be against you?
If as yet you apprehend him your adversary, agree with him quickly; seek him
early whilst he may be found, call upon him, while he is near; it is not yet too
late: beseech him to forgive you your unrighteousness, and to cocover all your
Sin, and to be at peace with you through the intercession of your blessed
Mediator; so shall you not only enjoy the unspeakable Blessing, The Peace of
God which passes all understanding. But Peace with Men. Not only with good
Men, who are not apt to be at variance; but even with your Enemies, and Peace
in your own Consciences, which is a continual Feast. But if you fight against
God, by an unchaste Conversation, and wicked Life, then the Lord will fight
against you even with the Rod of the ungodly; those that are as wicked, or more
wicked than your selves, shall be your Scourges. For we may be well assured
that if the Wise Disposer of all Things, should give the Rebel Enemies the
Victory, [which God in mercy forbid, I hope there is no danger of them] it is
not for any love to them, but partly for the Chastisement, and so for the
amendment of Gods erring and straying Servants; and partly, that the Wicked
being promoted, may have the greater Downfall.

Secondly, We may conclude that, The only way to obtain Peace, is to vo
Righteousness. Men generally regard their own advantage, what more forceable
inducement to persuade Men to be just, good, meek, religious than this? This
great blessing Peace, is the portion, the inheritance of the Righteous;
wherefore the wicked intermeddle not in it. Peace is Gods Creature. I create
the fruits of the Lips, Peace, Peace. As in this Chap. he can convert cursing
Traitors and Rebels: and make cruel Esau dissolve into Tears in his Brothers
Bosom, whom he had vowed to kill. In a word, the only way to wound our Enemies
is to mortify our selves; so shall Sinners be converted unto us: so shall God
even our God, give us his Blessing: the Blessing of all possible Peace; the
Blessing of Plenty all good things shall be ministered unto us in this Life, and
after this Warfair is ended, he who is the Prince of Peace will Crown us with
Victory.

FINIS.

