THREE LETTERS TO Dr. Sherlock CONCERNING Church Communion, WHEREIN It Is
enquired whether the Doctor's Notion of Church Communion be not too narrow and
uncharitable, both to Dissenters, and Men of larger Principles.

By a LAYMAN of the Church of England, and in constant Communion with it.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

To the Reader.
I Hope these Papers will not fall into any Man's Hands, who counts it not a
great blessing to have Kings for Nursing Fathers to God's Church: To have the
true Religion established and guarded by humane Laws. And perhaps it is no
absurdity to suppose, that Men may as well continue Members of the National
Church, notwithstanding their breaking many positive Laws made for the outward
management and ordering of it, though not fundamental and necessary to its being:
As he who incurs the Penalty of any Statute of the Realm about Civil Affairs,
may however be a sound Member of the State, if he keep from Treason or other
Capital Crimes.

Nay possibly, That there should be several Religious Assemblies living by
different Customs and Rules, and yet continuing Members of the National Church,
is not more inconsistent than that particular Places should have their
particular Customs and Bylaws differing from the Common Law of the Land,
without making a distinct Government.

Sure I am, an outward Government in the Church is requisite, if it were only
for the restraining those Men who out of confidence of their own Abilities,
will be venting Notions, which none but Men of great subtilty can make one
believe to be agreeable, either to Scripture, or to that Doctrine to which they
have subscribed and declared their unfeigned Assent and Consent. And methinks
it were enough to remove Men's prejudices against Episcopal Government, to
consider how needful it is that some of the most learned and discreet should be
chosen from among the Herd of Clergymen, to oversee, admonish, and censure
those who are apt to go beyond their due Bounds. Yet even within this
Government, it may sometimes become the Duty of one of the Laity, to take upon
him to reprove his Teacher, when he apprehends the Doctrine to be dangerous: In
which case, unless he remonstrate against it, he may be thought to communicate
with him in his Error, which possibly may be as sinful as communicating in a
Schism, which Dr. Sherlock frights us with. Out of respect to whom I must say,
that I had rather be mistaken in that sense which I conceive ought to be put
upon his Sermons about Church Communion, than be able to justify, That the
Objections to which he never vouchsafed an Answer, were meither impertinent to
his Discourses, nor frivolous.

His Notion of a Political Union of true Believers to Christ, I had long since
read; but the hearing of it, fixed my Attention, and put me upon sending him my
Objections against it in a private manner.

The more I think of his Sermons, the more I am persuaded that they are
contrary to the whole Tenor of the Gospel, and the Doctrine of our Church.

The Scripture tells us, Acts 10. 34, 35.
That God is no respecter of Persons: but in every Nation he that fears him,
and works Righteousness, is accepted with him.

But the Doctor says, That the Resol. of Cases of Conscience, etc. Page 5.
only visible way of forming a Church, (for I do not now speak of the invisible
Operations of the Divine Spirit) is by granting a Church Covenant, which is the
Divine Charter whereon the Church is founded: And investing some Persons with
Power and Authority to receive others into this Covenant, lbid.
etc. And then to be taken into Covenant with God, and to be received into the
Church, is the very same thing.

So it seems, according to him, no Man is in Covenant with God, who is not
actually received into Covenant by a visible Church; Page 33.
that is, by the Bishops and Ministers of the Church, As he elsewhere has it,
speaking of what makes any thing in a strict sense an Act of Church Communion.

Indeed he may seem to have a reserve, when he says, P. 5. supra.
he speaks not of the invisible Operations of the Spirit: Yet what room he
leaves for that out of the Pale of a particular visible Church, is a great
Question, when he confines the Influences and Operations of the Divine Spirit
to the Unity of the Church: That is, Page 48.
if he speaks to the purpose, to Uniformity to that sound part of the Catholic
Church where a Man lives. But if a Man fall into a Nation where there are no
Bishops or inferior Clergy authorized by them, the Lord have Mercy upon his
Soul: for it is a question how that Scripture can be fulfilled, which says, God
is no respecter of Persons, etc.

But if the Bishops where he lives, fall out, Woe be to him if his Bishop be
singular.

And God knows, but one of the Primitive Fathers, Tertullian, notwithstanding
all his Zeal for the Christian Religion, lies in Purgatory to this day, with
all his Followers, to St. Austin' s Time: For though, as Cave's Antiq. Apostol.
Fol. 211.
Dr. Cave says in his excuse, He lived in an Age when a greater latitude of
opining was indulged; and good Men were infinitely more solicitous about Piety
and a good Life, than about the Modes of Speech, and how to express every thing
so critically, that it should not be liable to a severe Scrutiny and
Examination. Yet this good Man having had Disputes with others of the Primitive
Fathers; the Doctor tells us, Ib. Fol. 210.
Whether ever he was reconciled to Catholic Communion appears not: it is
certain, for the main, he forsook the Cataphrygians, and kept his separate
Meetings at Carthage, and his Church was yet remaining in St. Augustine's time:
By whose Labors, the very Relics of his Followers called Tertullianists,
were dispersed and quite disappeared.

What our Church determines in this case, we may see in the 19th Article. 2dly.
And I will leave it to Dr. Sherlock to reconcile himself to its Doctrine in
this Point: Which is, That,

The Church visible of Christ, 19th Artic.
is a Congregation of faithful Men, in which the pure Word of God is preached;
and the Sacraments be duly ministered, according to Christ's Ordinance, in all
those things that of necessity are requisite to the same.

If any Man tax me with undermining the Authority of the Church, in objecting
against Dr. Sherlock's way of supporting it, Dr. Stillingfleet has furnished me
with a sufficient Apology;

Men of any common understanding ( says he) would distinguish between the
necessaries of Life and of civil Society: Dr. Stilling. Answer to several
Treatises occasioned by his Book about Idolatry. Page 275.
So would any one but S. C. or N. O. of the Necessaries to Salvation, and to
the Government of the Church. For Men must be considered as Christians, and
then as Christians united together. As in Civil Societies they are to be
considered, first as men, and then as Cives. To say that a Man has all that is
necessary to preserve his Life as a Man, does not overthrow the Constitution of
a Society, although it implies that he might live without it. So when Men are
considered barely as Christians, no more ought to be thought necessary for them
as such, but what makes them capable of Salvation. But if we consider them as
joining together in a Christian Society, then many other things are necessary
for that end: For then there must be Authority in some, and Subjection in
others; there must be Orders and Constitutions, whereby all must be kept within
their due Bounds: And there must be Persons appointed to instruct the Ignorant,
to satisfy the Doubting, Page 276.
to direct the Unskilful, and to help the Weak. It belongs to such a Society,
not barely to provide for Necessity, but Safety; and not merely the safety of
particular Persons, but of it Self: which cannot be done, without prudent
Orders fixing the Bounds of Men's Employments, and not suffering every pretender
to Visions and Revelations, to set up for a new Sect, or which is all one, a
new Order of Religious Men.

This I should think were enough, not only to justify me, but to draw to my
side all the moderate Churchmen; yet that it may not be said that I bring but
one Doctor's Opinion against another, I shall take in the Suffrage of the
worthy Dean of Canterbury, and that delivered very solemnly in the presence of
his Sacred Majesty.

I do assure you, Dr. Tillotson's Sermon 1 Cor. 3. 15. last Ed. Page 59.
( says that great Man in his Sermon at Court) I had much rather persuade any
one to be a good Man, than to be of any Party or Denomination of Christians
whatsoever; for I doubt not but the belief of the Ancient Creed, provided we
entertain nothing that is destructive of it, together with a good Life, will
certainly save a Man; and without this, no Man can have reasonable hopes of
Salvation, no not in an infallible Church, if there were any such to be found
in the World.

But since the settling the true Notion of Schism will go a great way toward
the satisfying our Enquiries in this Matter, it may not be improper to
transcribe some part of Dr. Stillingfleet's sense of it, where he vindicates
the Church of England from the imputation of Schism; Dr. Stilling. Rational
Account. p. 359.
The Being of the Catholic Church, says he, lies in essentials, for a
Particular Church to disagree from all other Particular Churches, in some
extrinsecal and accidental Things, is not to separate from the Catholic
Church, so as to cease to be a Church; but still, whatever Church makes such
extrinsecal things the necessary Conditions of Communion, so as to cast Men out
of the Church, who yield not to them, is Schismatical in so doing; for it
thereby divides it self from the Catholick-Church; and the Separation from it,
is so far from being Schism, that being cast out of that Church on those terms
only, returns them to the Communion of the Catholick-Church. On which ground it
will appear, that the Church of Rome is the Schismatical Church, and not Ours.
For, although before this imposing Humor came into particular Churches, Schism
was defined by the Fathers, and others, to be a voluntary departure out of the
Church; yet that cannot in reason be understood of any Particular, but the true
Catholic Church: for not only Persons, but Churches may depart from the
Catholic Church: and in such Cases, not those who depart from the Communion of
such Churches, but those Churches which depart from the Catholic, are guilty
of the Schism.

Three LETTERS to Dr. Sherlock, upon his Sermons concerning Church Communion.
Reverend Sir,
NOT doubting but you will be willing to stoop to the capacity of the meanest
of your Auditory; I who have often heard you with great satisfaction, and I
hope not without edifying thereby, take leave to intimate to you, as nigh as I
can, in your own words, what I conceive to have been the substance of your
Discourse this last Sunday, upon I Cor. 12. 27. [ Now ye are the Body of
Christ, and Members in particular.] And to propound some Queries, which perhaps
you may think fit, in some part at least, to take notice of in your further
progress upon this nice Subject. However I hope you will heartily interpret
this friendly Intimation from one who is a Member of the same Church with you,
and is as hearty ^^^ his desires of a firm Union amongst Protestants as any Man
can be: And therefore is the more concerned at any Discourse which may
represent all Dissenters, as such, as Men deprived of the ordinary means of
Salvation, and consequently to be in as bad a case as the Moral Heathens. And
(as most Men of such Notions believe, or would infer) in a worse condition than
those of the Romish Communion. Which I hope was not in your Intention, how
liable soever your Assertions may seem to that Interpretation. Not but that
many things which you then taught us are of a far different import.

Be pleased to take your own again, with as little alteration of the words, or
order in which they were delivered, as may be, without the Repetition of many
things, whereby it is convenient to lengthen out a Sermon.

You may remember that you told us, That, The Church is a Body of Men separated
from the World, and united to God and themselves by a Divine Covenant: That
it is an entire Body, and every Member united to the whole Church by Christian
Communion. That our Savior ordained the Apostles, and gave the Government of
the Church to them and their Successors, with a promise to be with them to the
end of the World. That there can be but one Church where all Privileges and
Duties are common, And but one and the same Institution of God's Appointment:
That the Gospel Covenant is the Foundation of the Christian Church. God only
can make a Church, not Man's Invention. The only way God has of forming a
Church is, by granting a Church Covenant, and investing some Persons with power
of receiving others according to the Terms, with such Rites as they are pleased
to institute. As that can be no Church which is not in Covenant with God, so he
can be no Member who is not visibly admitted into Covenant.

You farther observed, under distinct Heads, 1. That a Covenant-State, and a
Church State, is the same.

2. Every professed Christian received into Covenant is a Member.

3. Nothing else is necessary to make Members but Baptism.

4. A Church State cannot depend upon humane Contract or Covenant: It Is God's
Covenant which is in our Church required of the Adult. The Independents found
their Church upon humane Contract, which they will not say is any part of the
Baptismal Vow.

5. It Is absurd to gather Churches out of Churches of Baptized Christians.

6. The Doctrine of the Unity of the Church confirmed from the Notion of a
Charter to any Body Politic. They who are not admitted into the Corporation,
have no right to the Privileges; and are Usurpers, if they exercise any Act
belonging to the Members. God considers all Men as united into one Church or
Body, has made no Covenant with Geneva or England in particular. The only thing
that can give us right to Church Membership, is to observe the Conditions of
the Covenant. He destroys the Unity of the Church, who is not subject to its
Censures. Every Member is a Member of the Whole: Baptism does not make us
Members of any particular Church, but of the Universal, founded only on Divine
Covenant. Every Act of Christian Communion must be an Act of Communion with the
whole Church: And it is impossible to live in Communion with the whole, without
Communion with some part, when it may be had:' It Is necessary to communicate
with some Church, by Communion with the Church in which we live, if it be a
sound Member; I communicate with the whole. According to the Primitive Rule of
but one Bishop in a City, they who divide from the National Church are guilty
of Schism. Nothing can justify Division, but such a distance as hinders the
Exercise of Joint-Communion.



To sum up what I take to be the force of all this.

The Apostles and their Successors were by our Savior invested with a power of
receiving Members into his Church upon his Terms, and with such Rites as they
should think fit. And they who are not so received into the Church, have no
right to any of the Benefits promised to the Members of Christ's Body.

This Power is by an uninterrupted Succession derived upon the Governors of our
National Church; Wherefore all others that pretend to the exercise of this
Power within this Nation, are Usurpers: And all the Laity baptized by their
Pastors, not being duly admitted into any particular Church, are so far from
being Members of Christ's Body, that they are Usurpers and Traitors to that
Power which is derived from him in a right Line. Durus hic Sermo.

Wherefore I may well upon the whole desire, that you would seriously consider;

(1.) Whether a pious Dissenter, supposed to be received into the Church by
such as he believes to be fully invested with sufficient Church Power, is in as
bad a condition as a moral Heathen, or in a worse than a Papist?

(2.) Whether the submission to the Power and Censures of this Church (which
all must own to be a sound Church) be part of the Divine Covenant, which unites
the Members of the Catholic Church to God and to each other? If it be, then as
he who is not admitted into this Church, is no Member of the Catholic, and has
no right to the Benefits of being a Member of Christ's Body: So it is with
every one excluded by Church Censures, though excommunicated for a slight
contempt or neglect, nay for a wrongful Cause.

If it be no part of the Divine Covenant, then a Man that lives here may be a
true Member of the Catholic Church, though he is not in Communion with this
sound Church.

But you will say, (which I think is not much to this Question), That he ought
to communicate if Communion may be had.

But then Query, Whether the Dissenters may not reply, That they are ready to
communicate, if the Communion be not clogged with some things which are no part
of the Divine Covenant? As for instance, An adult Person would be baptized if
he could be admitted without the Sign of the Cross: Or would receive the
Sacrament, if he might not be obliged to kneel; Which he supposes to have been
in use, and required, only since the Doctrine of Transubstantiation divided the
Church.

Yet however, Query;

(3.) Whether where Communion may not be had upon those Terms which our Savior
Instituted, a Church may not, at least in some cases, be gathered; without any
immediate derivation from other Church-Governors besides Christ himself? if it
may not, What think you of a Lay-Christian quietly permitted to teach the Word
of God amongst Heathens, and to Disciple such as will receive his Doctrine? If
a Church in such case may be erected, then surely God's only way of forming
Churches, and investing some Persons with Power of receiving others, is not
from a constant succession from the Apostles, but from under his Institution
who has appointed a Power in his Church, which expires no more with any
particular Governors than the Power of Kings, his Vicegerents, dies in any
Nation for want of some Monarch just going before, from whom the Claim is to be
made. Though the Power of a King be God's Power, yet I dare say you will own,
that at least in some Kingdoms, a King may be duly chosen to this Power by Men.

You will say perhaps, (though still the force of my Objection will remain)
that this is an extraordinary Case of utmost necessity, not to be instanced in
amongst us. But then I ask;

1. Whether upon allowing no other Case, you will not put the Being of our
Church upon a very hazardous Issue; and oblige your self to prove that it was a
True Church before the Reformation?

2. Whether supposing this Church to have been Antichristian before, (which I
think is the Doctrine of our Homilies); The Case I put of a Layman's discipling
Heathens, supposes a more violent necessity of acting without Authority from a
succession of Church Officers, than at least it is possible may be the Case of
our own Church?

(4.) Q. Whether from the Supposition, that there ought to be but one
Church Covenant throughout the Catholic Church, that there cannot be one True
Church within another; and that the nature of Catholik-Communion is such, that
one ought to be ready to communicate with any sound Church, from which one is
not hindered by reason of the distance of place? It does not not follow;

1. Either that the French Protestants have no Church here, but are
Schismatics in not communicating with ours; Or that ours is guilty of Schism,
in making the Terms of Communion so straight, that it is not the Duty of every
one (though a licensed Stranger) to communicate with this Church.

2. Does it not follow from the Obligation to communicate, or to be ready to
communieate with any True Church where distance does not hinder, that a Member
of the Church of England is not obliged to constant Communion with the Church,
but may occasionally communicate with the French Church; Nay with Dissenters
too, if he believes that any of their Congregations is a true Member of the
Catholic Church?

If they may, then constant Communion is not always a Duty where occasional is
lawful.

Dr. Stillingfleet indeed says, That if a Man were obliged to be a Member of
the French Church, or the like, and thought it lawful to communicate sometimes,
constant Communion would be a Duty. But according to you no Man is obliged to
be a Member of one sound Church more than another, provided the distance is not
so great, but that he may communicate with both.

(5.) Query, Whether a true Christian, though not visibly admitted into
Church Communion, where he wants the means, has not a virtual Baptism in the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God? according to 1 Pet. 3. 21.

(6.) Query, Why a professed Atheist who has been Baptized, and out of secular
Interest continues a Communicant with this Church, is more a Member of the
Catholic Church than such as are above described?

(7.) Query, Whether as the Catholic Church is compared to a Body of Men
incorporated by one Charter, upon supposition of a possibility of the
Forfeiture of a Charter to the whole Body, by the miscarriages of any of the
Officers, Does it likewise follow that the Miscarriages of Church Officers, or
the Church Representative, as I remember Bishop Sanderson calls the Clergy, may
forfeit the Privileges given by Christ to his Church, or at least may suspend
them? As suppose a Protestant Clergy, taking their Power to be as large as the
Church of Rome claimed, should deny the Laity the Sacraments, as the Popish did
in Venice, and here in King John's Time, during the Interdicts. Quid inde
operatur?

But more particularly I shall make Observations upon these following Positions.

1. You say, Our Savior made the Apostles and their Successors Governors of
his Church, with promise to be with them to the end of the World.

2. That it is absurd to gather a Church out of a Church of Baptized Christians.

3. That the Independents separate from Catholic Communion, by adding a New
Covenant, no part of the Baptismal Vow.

For the first: I desire to be satisfied in these Particulars.

1. Whether our Savior's Promise of Divine Assistance, did not extend to all
the Members of the Church, considering every Man in his respective Station and
Capacity, as well as to the Apostles as Church-Governors? for which you may
compare St. John with St. Matthew.

2. Therefore Query, Whether it signifies any thing to say there is no Promise
to Particular Churches, provided there be to Particular Persons, such as are in
Charity with all Men, and are ready to communicate with any Church which
requires no more of them, than what they conceive to be their Duty, according
to the Divine Covenant?

3. Whether if the Promise you mention be confined to the Apostles, as
Church-Governors, it will not exclude the Civil Power?

4. What was the extent of the Promise, Whether it was to secure the whole
Church, that its Governors should never impose unlawful Terms of Communion, or
that there should never be a general defection of all the Members of the
Catholic Church; but that there should always be some true Members?

But secondly, you say, It Is absurd to gather a Church out of a Church of
baptized Christians.

By which I suppose you mean that Men ought not to separate from such, and live
in a distinct Church Communion from any Church of baptized Christians; which I
conceive needs explaining.

But as it was worded, I desire to know,

1. Whether it is absurd for Protestants to live in Church Communion with each
other in France, separating from the Papists, whose is the National Church?

2. Whether the Civil Power did not make a lawful Reformation and Separation
from the Popish Church in England?

3. Whether as in the Primitive Times there was but one Bishop, and
consequently but one Church in a City, there are not now as many Churches
within the National as there are Bishoprics?

4. Whether is it more absurd that there should be Independent or Presbyterian
Churches within the National, than that there should be so many Bishoprics?

5. Suppose it possible for every of their Congregations to be a Church, with
sufficient Church Officers and Power, then may they not communicate with a
sound part of the Catholick-Church without actual Communion with the National:
And consequently all that you have said of their Schism will fall.

6. Admit they bring but colorable Proof for this, yet if it be enough to make
honest-minded Men believe it, dare you say that those who so believe are no
true Members of Christ's Body? For God's sake, Sir, consider this, and think
with your self, whether your Charity exceeds that of the Romish Church?

3dly, You suppose that the Independents exclude themselves from Catholic
Communion, by requiring of their Members a New Contract, no part of the
Baptismal Vow-Upon this I ask,

1. Whether any Obstacle to Catholic Communion brought in by Men, may not be a
means of depriving Men of it, as well as Covenant or Contract?

2. If it may, which I suppose you will not deny, will you not then, upon this
account, make the Church you live in more guilty than you do the Independents?
Baptism you own is the only thing which admits into the Catholic Church; but
they require no New Covenant at Baptism, ergo, they admit into the Church
without any clog or hindrance of humane Invention.

But Query, The 30th Canon calls it, a lawful outward Ceremony and honorable
Badg; Whereby the Infant is dedicated to the Service of him who died upon the
Cross.
Whether if an adult Person may not be received to Baptism without being signed
with the sign of the Cross: Which some, at least, may honestly scruple,
especially such as read the Canon, which explains the sense in which it is used.
How is this justifyable upon your Ground?

Lastly, I take leave to ask a few Questions about the meaning of your Text and
Context.

1. Query. Whether to say ye are the Body, and ye are of the Body, be the same?

2. Whether therefore the Individual Church of Corinth is not here made an
entire Body, of which every Christian in Communion with it was a particular
Member?

3. And whether it is absurd that our Savior should have a Metaphorical Body,
which is in him, and he in it; Wherever there is a number of True Believers
following all the Institutes, and exercising all the Discipline which they can
have, according to the best of their understanding and means?

4. Whether when Schism is in the 25th Verse used in opposition to having the
same care for one another, it does not show that Schism consists not in the
dividing Communion through difference of Opinions, but through want of Charity,
and that care which Christians in the same Neighborhood ought to have of each
other.

After all that I have offered to your consideration, I must own that these are
the sudden thoughts of one who believes he may be saved without understanding
the Notion of Church Government as it is intreagu'd between Clergymen of all
sides. And believes the Church of England to be a True Church, notwithstanding
it and the Romish might formerly have been Antichristian; V. Jovian.
though a learned London Minister pretends not to understand how then this
should come to be true.

Jan. 30. 168.
The Second LETTER.
SIR,
NOT doubting your candor and integrity, I went to Church this day with full
expectation of your attempting, at least, to clear your way from the Objections
I had sent you, before you expatiated upon your, as I may call it, uncharitable
Hypothesis. Surely every thing which I urged is not to be contemned; but I must
needs say, I could not meet with one Passage in your last Sermon which looked
like so much as an offer toward my satisfaction: Wherefore I conjure you, as a
Protestant Divine, to answer my Doubts categorically. For which end, I hope you
will not refer me to what Mr. D -- or any professed Papist has wrote on this
Subject, unless you will avow all that they have said on the necessity of the
intention of the Priest to concur with his Acts, or otherwise.

Your last Discourse occasions only my adding this farther Query.

Whether if the nature of Catholic Communion requires a readiness to
communicate with any sound Church, and yet a Church obliges us to communicate
with that alone, while distance does not hinder the occasional and frequent
communion with others? Is not that Church guilty of Schism in such an
Injunction, contrary to the nature of Catholic Communion?

Or at least is it not impossible that he who communicates sometimes with one
True Church, sometimes with another, can be a Schismatic, or any more than an
Offender against a positive humane Law.

Be pleased to send me your thoughts upon the particulars of my enquiry to etc.
directed to,

SIR, Your Servant, Anonymus.
Feb. 4. 1682/3.
The Third LETTER.
Feb. 19. 1682/3. SIR,
SInce it is more than probable that I have occasioned the speedy printing of
your Discourses concerning Church Communion. I am now become a Debtor to the
Churches of God, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
to publish those Objections which arose in my mind, and which you have not yet
thought fit to answer, though earnestly pressed thereunto.

And methinks you who have heretofore been a zealous Patron for universal
Grace, should be very ready to clear your self from the least imputation of
stinting it more than our most gracious God, nay than your most narrow
principled Adversaries have ever done.

Though he who questions the Dictates of his Spiritual Guids, had need run to
the protection of Obscurity; yet one would think, that he who prints in the
dark what he published on the House top, before the Face of the Congregation,
brings a foul suspicion upon his Doctrine. It Is well known that the Pulpit is
more licensed from Contradiction than the Press; wherefore the former is most
properly assigned for a Clergy-mans Recantation: Nor indeed did I think you far
from making public satisfaction, when you owned, (in your Sermon preached Feb.
11. on Luke 12. verse. 4, 5.) That the Censures of the Church are formidable
only when duly applied; and that God Almighty has not trusted fallible Men with
a power of shutting out those whom he will receive.

Keep to this, and make good your Notion of Schism if you can: The Dr's. Resol.
of Cases of Conscience, with respect to Church-Com. p. 49.
If Schism be, as you say, a very great Sin, and such as will damn us, as soon
as Adultery and Murder, God forbid that it should consist in such ticklish
Points as would place many thousands of truly charitable and pious Men within
the fatal Roll.

But to my thinking, while you blame Men for having no Notion at all of a
Church, or no Notion of one Church, Ib. page 50.
and that they know not wherein the Unity and Communion of this Church
consists, you remove their Guilt, and grant that their Schism is involuntary,
and only an Error of their Understandings. Alas! mistaken honest Men, how
unhappy is your condition, who must be damned for not understanding Dr.
Sherlock, when he fancies that he puts Matters past all doubt! tho others may
think he only amuses People with equivocal Words and Terms.

I beg of you to consider, whether you do not impose upon your self, or would
not upon others by a confused notion of the Church, and of separation from it,
wherein you make Schism to consist.

Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and great is the use of the word Church, when
good Crafts-masters have the handling of it; and of all Men those of Rome have
succeeded best at this play of words. By the using it indefinitely as you do,
the Pope keeps the Kevs of Heaven and Hell at his Girdle; and truly this in
some Cases comprehends things as different as Heaven and Hell are, such as
shall be saved, and such as are already under the dominion of Satan. If you use
it for several purposes, I hope for the future you will define what you mean by
the Church, when you are to consider it as Catholic and Universal, what when
you take it in a more restrained sense, otherwise you speak not like a Minister
of the Gospel, but as one that would pervert that use of words which in you
especially God Almighty designed for instructing us heartily in the Truth.

Indeed you may play a little more securely with the word Schism, because
(unless it be taken to lie wholly in want of Charity) People may not so well
understand what it is, how distinctly soever the Notion of Churches be taught
them; surely it is much a question whether it lies wholly in causless separation
from a sound part of the Catholic Church. To my thinking, St. Paul when he
speaks of it, supposes a continuance still of the same Body, and ascribes it to
Christians continuing such, nay, and communicating with each other. Thus
writing to the Corinthians, of whom he says;

Ye are the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.
and Members in particular. He tells you, to this effect, that there is but one
Spirit which communicates it self amongst them in various Dispensations, and
enables them, according to their different Capacities and Seize, to
promote each others growth in Grace. And then having compared them to the
several parts of a natural Body; Verse. 24.


God, says he, has tempered the Body together, having given more abundant
honor to that part which lacked.

That there should be no Schism in the Body, Verse. 25.
but that the Members should have the same care for one another.

Which seems no more than that God obliges the Members of his Church to live
together charitably, and to be ready to assist each other from the
consideration of the distribution of his Gifts and Graces in such manner, that
even the meanest and most despised Christian may administer Aid and Comfort to
those that are in the highest Station.

But all this was written to the Church at Corinth, 1 Cor. 14.
that Body of Christ there, which assembled together in the same place, 1 Cor.
3. 3.
and yet the Apostle charges them with real Schism; for, says he;

Whereas there is among you envying, and strife, and divisions; are ye not
carnal, and walk as Men?

But from the Apostle's Notion of Schism, I shall come to yours, as you have
jumbled it together with the equivocal word Church; of which you would make one
believe, that there can be no true Idea, but as particular visible, nay, and
that national too; wherefore be pleased to weigh a little with your self:

1. Whether you do not appropriate that to the National Church, Cases of
Conscience concorning Church Commun. p. 10.
which belongs to the Catholic visible and invisible? As where you say,

No Man has a right to any Act of Christian Communion, but he who is in a state
of Communion with the Christian Church. Page 13.
that no Man is in Communion with a Church which he is not a Member of: Page 5.
And that he is no Member of the Church, who is not at least visibly admitted
into God's Covenant by Baptism.

Now I would ask you this plain Question.

Whether a Man has a right to be of a particular Church, as he is a Christian;
that is, I should think, a true Member of the Catholic Church: or becomes a
Christian only as received into a particular Church? I take it, Infants are
received with us, by virtue of the federal right in the Parents; and as the
Apostle says, The believing Wife sanctifies the unbelieving Husband, else were
the Children unclean. Nor I conceive does our Church receive any adult Person,
whom it does not believe to be a true Christian before?

But to make your Fallacy the more evident, you tell us; The Divine Spirit
confines his Influences and Operations to the Unity of the Church, Page 48.
as the same Apostle tells us, That there is but one Body, and one Spirit;
which plainly signifies that the Operations of this one Spirit are appropriated
to this one Body, as the Soul is to the Body it animates.

I would fain know what need any Man has to deny this for avoiding the
Consequence, that therefore it is an improper way for edification, to forsake
Communion with a National sound Church where he lives; for the Apostle makes it
as plain as words can make it, that he speaks of the Invisible, as well as
Visible Church. For the Passage you cite, Ephesians. 4. 4. is but a continuation of
what the Apostle taught in the foregoing Chapter, where he says;

For this cause I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians.
3. 14.


Of whom the whole Family in Heaven and in Earth is named. Verse. 15.


This which is there called a Family, Ephesians. 4. 16.
is elsewhere the whole Body of which Christ is the Head, the increase and
edifying of which Body in love is ascribed to his Influence. If I should enter
my self of another Family, not owned by Christ, I thereby should renounce all
claim to the Promises of the Gospel: But admit several parts of this great
Family live by different Customs and Rules, Page 23.
not owning each others Members for their own; in which case you will have them
separate Churches, Page 22.
as well as upon the account of Doctrine, Government, or Worship, provided the
things wherein they differ, and for which they make distinct Communions, are
not destructive of common Christianity; does he put himself out of Christ's
Family, who can and actually does comply with the Rules and Customs of both?
One would think that a Member of the Church of England communicating with
Presbyterians here, does not thereby enter into a state of Separation, even
from this Particular Church, because he does not thereby so much as virtually
renounce the Communion of our Church, being nothing is required of him to
capacitate him for Communion with them which is not required in our Church,
much less any thing contrary to it; and perhaps the Independents may come
within the last circumstance: But to be sure, neither of them forsake our
Church in what essentially constitutes it a Church of Christ: and therefore it
does yet remain a Question, whether this can be a separation from the Communion
of Catholic Church, that happy Family abovementioned.

You know even, in the Primitive Times, about the end of the second Century,
there fell out a Division between the Latin and Asian Churches, and that upon
what one would think were neither Matter of Doctrine, of Government, nor of
Worship, for it was only about the Time of keeping Easter Holy Day. Victor the
Bishop of the Latin Church, in a Council, or as some will have it, a full
representative of that Church excommunicates the poor Asians for a little
mistake in Arithmetic; each Church was far from owning the others Members as
its own. Here was a Schism. perhaps on both sides, especially on theirs who
were so peremptory in imposing their own computation for Catholic. But what
should the poor Lay Christians do in this divided state, could they not
Communicate with both, or either, without danger of Schism themselves? or, was
it as necessary to know which was in the right, Page 37.
as to know which is the True Religion? 'Twas not enough in such case to know
which of these divided Communions was a true and sound Member of the Catholic
Church; Page 39.
which when known, they were bound to communicate with; for here both were
sound Members, at least they might be, notwithstanding this Difference: And yet
according to you, they who communicated with both these, were contrary to
themselves, Page 40.
and on one side or other went sure to be Schismatics: and if you please, you
may say the Prayers and Sacraments in those Churches, Page 17.
were not Acts of Christian Communion, but of Schismatical Combinations.

But, secondly, 2dly.
I must desire you to consider, whether you do not enforce the necessity of
communicating with the National Church, from Arguments which prove no more,
than that Men ought to serve God in public in distinct Congregations, as well
as in private and so apply that to a National Church, which belongs to the
Church in a more limited sense? But this is no wonder, since you manifestly go
upon the Supposition, that there can be no True Church which is not National,
at least, which is not the only true Church within the Nation or City where one
resides. Upon which Ground you affirm; That, Actual Communion, Page 23.
during our residence in any certain place, must be confined to that particular
Church in which we live, if it be a sound part of the Christian Church; or, as
you elsewhere vary it, the sound and orthodox Part of the Catholic Church
which he finds in that place.

Now if there be a possibility that there should be several sound and orthodox
Parts in the same place, be it the same City or same Nation, all your building
here falls to the Ground. Wherefore I desire you to consider, whether it is not
possible that at Aleppo, for the purpose, or any other place where the National
Religion is Ethnic, there may be several sound parts of the Catholic Church,
as the Greek or the French Protestants, and the English Churches, with either
of which one may communicate as sound parts of the Catholic?

But to come back to your method of bringing all into the National, you tell us
that you suppose no Man will deny but that every Christian is bound to worship
God according to our Savior's Institution; Page 33.
and what that is, we cannot learn better than from the Example of the
Primitive Christians; of whom St. Luke gives us this account, Acts 2. 42.
They continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine and Worship, and in breaking
of Bread.

According to your own Argument here, would it not seem that the only Church of
our Savior's instituting, is such an one as is described 1 Cor. 14. 23. where
it is said, If therefore the whole Church be come together into one place, and
all speak with Tongues, and there come in those that are unlearned, or
unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad?

Pray, Sir, is it absurd to suppose, that there should be several such Churches
in a City? May not every one of these have lawful terms of communion, such as
an honest minded Christian may submit unto, though some of them may have harder
than others? May not such a Man be more especially united in Communion, (be it
as a Member, or how you will call it) to that which he thinks the best, and yet
occasionally communicate with others, without being an occasional Member of
Christ's Body which, is but one, united in Charity under differences of
Opinions and Practices?

Admit that two of these Churches divide from each other by separate Communion,
and by making more things necessary to Communion with either than Christ made,
Page 49.
make a Schism and Rent in Christ's Body; why does it follow that he who can
and does communicate with both, as requiring nothing of him which he looks upon
as sinful, must needs be guilty of Schism? which if you think it a clearer
Expression, you may call communicating in a Schism. Ibid.


To follow you in your Repetitions, to this purpose you assert, Page 41.
That we must perform the constant Acts of Communion in that part of the
Catholic Church, in which we constantly live and communicate occasionally,
with that part of the Church where we are occasionally present. And that, There
cannot be two distinct Churches in the same place, Page 42.
one for occasional, and another for constant Communion without Schism: for it
is evident those two are distinct Communions, and that our Relation to them is
as different as it is to an House we live in, and to an Inn where we lodge for a
Night.

But it is evident that one of these must need be cut off from Christ's Body;
if not, why may I not communicate with one, or both, and thereby communicate
with the Catholic Church? But besides, how came you here to talk of a
different Relation, and as if that looked like occasional Membership, Page 39.
by which you elsewhere would expose such Communion? When before you had told
us, Page 14.
That the Communion of the Church does not make us Members of any particular
Church.

Then again, how does it appear that it is necessary to communion with the
Catholic Church, that we must perform the constant Acts of Communion, in that
part of the Catholic Church where we constantly lives.

Farther, is it self-evident that I am bound to communicate so much as
sometimes with a sound part of the Catholic Church, because I live where there
is such an one? You may remember what Mr. Chillingworth said to this purpose,
with the approbation of the great Learned Men of this Time. If, says that
Admirable Author, Page 15.
your require the belief of any Error among the conditions of your Communion,
our Obligation to communicate with you ceases, and so the imputation of Schism
to us vanishes into nothing, but lies heavy upon you for making our Separation
from you just and necessary, by requiring unnecessary and unlawful conditions
of Communion.

Truly I should think that that which essentially makes one a Member of Christ,
and so of his Church, is the Faith of the Lord Jesus Christ, this is
fundamental to it, intrinsecal and essential. What is external and visible in
respect of the Members which are gathered to Christ the Head of the Church, is
subject to changes and various circumstances of this outward World. And 'twould
be an hard case with us, if what is not within our power, as the derivation of
an uninterrupted succession of Church Officers, or the like, should be the
concernment of our Souls.

To this purpose, I cannot omit another Passage of Mr. Chillingworth's. I
believe, says he, Page 13.
our Savior ever since his Ascension, has had, in some place or other, a
visible true Church on Earth, I mean, a company of Men that professed at least
so much as was necessary to Salvation; and I believe there will be somevvhere
or other such a Church to the World's end.

I am sure your Notions tend to the destroying the foundation of all Mr.
Chillingworth's Arguments: and methinks you should be loath to deprive
Protestantism of such a Champion, though by the bafling him, you might the more
securely triumph over that part of it to which you seem to oppose your self.

I will not here dispute (because it alters not the state of any Question which
I sent you) whether I mistook you, or you have since corrected what you
preached concerning the Rites of Admission into the Church. Now you tell us
that the Persons invested with Power and Authority to receive others into the
Church Covenant, Page 5.
must do it according to the terms and conditions of the Covenant; and by such
Covenant-Rites, and Forms of Admission, as he, viz. God, is pleased to
institute; which under the Gospel is Baptism, as under the Law it was
Circumcision. Truly I had thought you had said, such Rites as they, viz. the
Church-Governors, fallible Men, had thought fit, which is but needful to your
Hypothesis. But if the Rites and Forms of Admission must be of God's
institution, what think you of the Sign of the Cross, of which Dr. Stilling
fleet says, Mischief of Separat. p. 351.
As Baptism is a Rite of Admission into Christ's Catholic Church, so the Sign
of the Cross is into our Church. But then, as Baptism is compared unto
Circumcision, does not the Apostle decide the Question, when he tells us, Romans
2. 29.
That Circumcision is that of the Heart?

I have only one farther Consideration to press to you, which is, That you
would seriously bethink your self, whether your method of converting these
damnable Schismatics, who are in your Opinion as bad as Murderers and
Adulterers, Page 49.
be not the most effectual means of keeping up the Schism? If want of Charity
makes Schismatics, surely this is not the way to convince them that that guilt
lies at their Door. Certainly if our Church required conformity to its Rites
and Ceremonies as necessary to Salvation, it could not blame Men for dividing
from it; and he who tells us, or he says nothing, Verse. 48*
That the Divine Spirit confines his Influences and Operations to the Unity of
the Church, in such Conformity, not only makes such Conformity necessary to
Salvation, but imputes to the Church the Damnation of many thousands of Souls,
who might expect to be saved upon other terms.

I hope you are none of those that think Dissenters come in too fast, and that
they are to be preached out again. I heartily wish they could conquer all their
Scruples, that we might not only have such love and sympathy as is peculiar to
the Members of the same Body: Page 47.
which I hope all good Christians have as Members of Christ's Body, though of
different Communions, but that all might be able to go to the House of God
together, as Friends, of one Mind and one Heart.

For my part, if I had any Scruples of this kind, they would arise from what
our Churchmen infuse; and when you talk of the danger of communicating in a
Schism, it would make me bethink my self, whether the Church with which I
communicate, may not be guilty of imposing something or other contrary to the
nature of Catholic Communion, or beyond the Power entrusted with it, for
edification and not for destruction.

If you had pleased, this Controversy had bin managed in a more private manner;
but since you have thought fit to print, you have hereby determined the choice
of

(SIR) Your humble Servant, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce my writing the foregoing Letter, I received your Book, particularly
directed to Anonymus: By which I am obliged to believe, either that you avow
the Consequences which I formerly urged to you, or think them not rightly
inferred: If the first, I have nothing more to say to you, only to entreat you
to consider, whether you would not persuade Men to Uniformity, by means which
tend to the begetting a low opinion of God himself, and of all revealed
Religion? If the last be made appear to me, assure your self I will not long
conceal my Conviction.

Feb. 24. 1682/3.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 17. l. 11. read Christian-Charity. lb. l. 22. read them.

Page 21. l. 13. add the before Catholic.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is now published the third Edition of the Conformist's Plea for the
Nonconformists. Or a Just and Compassionate Representation of the present State
and Condition of the Nonconformists. As to 1. The Greatness of their
Sufferings, with some Relations thereof. 2. Hardness of their Case, as to what
i^ enjoined. 3. Reasonableness of their Proposals of Amendments. 4.
Qualifications, and Worth of their Persons. 5. Peaceableness of their
Behavior. 6. The Church's Prejudice by their Exclusion, etc. With an humble
Apology for their Public Preaching, and Suspension of the Penal Laws against
them.

By a Beneficed Minister of the Church of England.

To this Edition is added a full Vindication of the Nonconformists, from the
foul Charge of the Murder of the late King, the whole Matter of Fact is here
related, viz. The London Ministers, about sixty in number, with many more from
several Counties, appeared and presented their Testimony to the Council of
Officers, declaring their utter abhorrency of the Army's Proceedings against
the King's Life, and Monarchical Government.

And the Author has also thought fit to give a full account out of the
Writings of Dr. Du-Moulin, and others, that the Jesuits (assisted by a Faction
in the Army) contrived and executed that horrid Villainy. Printed for Jonathan
Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.


