REFLECTIONS UPON A Treasonable Opinion, Industriously promoted, Against
SIGNING the National Association: AND The Entering into it proved to be the Duty
of all the Subjects of this KINGDOM.

Hoc quidem perspicuum est, eos ad imperandum deligi solitos, quorum de
justitia magna esset opinio multitudinis; adjuncto vero, ut iidem etiam
prudentes haberentur: nihil erat quod homines his auctoribus non posse consequi
se arbitrarentur Civ. de of. lib. 2. LONDON, Printed and Sold by E. Whitlock
near Stationers' Hall. 1696.

To His Excellency CHARLES Duke of SHREWSBURY, one of the Lords Justices of
England, and one of His Majesty's Principal Secretaries of State, etc.
May it please your Excellency.
SINCE among the many subjects of just Praise, which make up your Excellency's
distinction, it is not the least, that the true Religion, and Loyalty, are
known to have been chosen with a Judgment properly your own; my ambition could
not carry me to a fitter Patron for Truths, which are to encounter a strong
Pre-possession, in Men taught to object novelty against this Revolution: though
with as little cause of triumph, as the Papists have for their question, where
was the Protestant Church before Luther?

As your Excellency's wise and vigorous discharge, of Offices of the highest
Trust and Consequence, under our only rightful Sovereign, King WILLIAM, revives
to France the noted Terrors in the name of Talbot; permit me from thence to
take an Omen of Success, against Arguments supported by the French Interest,
and Power, more than by any color of reason.

Yet, they who oppose the Right of the present Government, having pretended to
seeming Authorities; I have used that method, which I hope may be proper for
their conviction: giving a short view of what, upon the various Exigencies of
the Public, in all Ages of this Monarchy, has been the uniform Judgment, and
regular Practice, of Conventions of the States, and Parliaments, of this
Kingdom; in concurrence with several glorious Preservers of the English
Liberties.

But, that I may use an Authority, sufficient in it self to justify our
present Settlement; I beg leave to appeal to your Excellency's early and
eminent Example: which will weigh more, with Persons acquainted with so
illustrious a Character, than any Argument from passed Times.

And yet, what I here offer, being for the most part, the Result of the
Collective Wisdom of the Nation; may not be wholly undeserving of your
Excellency's Patrondge: nor can I apprehend, that you will refuse these
Fundamental Truths, the benefit of being recommended to the World under so
Great a Name: which, though it will set my faults in the clearer light; if your
Excellency shall be thought to bear with 'em, cannot but moderate the Censures,
against

Your Excellency's most devoted humble Servant, W. Atwood.

REFLECTIONS UPON A Treasonable Opinion, etc.
THE Enemies of the Peace of these Realms having handed about a Paper, as the
Opinion of a certain florid Gentleman of the long Robe, eminent for making New
Treasons; and whose Authority is said to have prevailed with several to refuse
Signing the Associatlon for the defense of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and
Rightful Authority; I shall offer what I conceive a sufficient Antidote to the
Poison he would spread, with all his affected softness.

The words of the Opinion, as they have occurred to me, are these:

By the Statute of Hen. 7. the Subjects are Indemnified in taking an Oath, The
Opinion.
or Fighting for a King de Facto: But the Association is not within the
Statute, but an Overt Act of Treason against the King de Jure, and Punishable
as such when he shall be restored.

In refuteing the pernicious Errors contained in this Opinion, I shall evince,

First, That according to the best Authorities of them, who suppose that there
may be a King de Jure, as distinguished from a King in Fact; the Right of the
supposed King de Jure is not such, as makes any Act against him to be Treason;
nor is he King, or has any Right against the King in Possession, or his Issue.

Secondly, That an Association for the Defense of the King's Person and Right,
is within the purview of the Stat. 11 H. 7. and that as plainly as an Oath of
Allegianee.

Thirdly, That it is not supposed or employed in that Act, that there was or
might be a King de Jure, while an other was King in Fact; but that according to
that Act, the King for the time being, is the only Rightful King.

Fourthly, That the Statute 11 H. 7. is not introductory of any new Law in this
matter.

Fifthly, That his Present Majesty is the only King de Jure; and that the late
King neither is, nor of Right ought to be, King.

Sixthly, That according to this Gentleman's own Law, he is Guilty of
High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King.

1. No Treason against any King but the Regnant, nor has any other Person Right
against him or his Issue.
The Lord Coke, upon the Statute of Treason 25 E. 3. referring in the Margin to
the Statute 11 H. 7. says,

This is to be understood of a King in Possession of the Crown, and Kingdom:
For if there be a King Regnant in Possession, although he be Rex de Facto, and
not de Jure, yet he is Seignior le Roy within the purview of this Statute; and
the other, 3 Inst. F. 7.
who has the Right, and is out of Possession, is not within this Act.

Sir Matthew Hale says what in substance agrees with the Lord Coke.

A Hales's Pleas of the Crown, p. 11.
King, says he, speaking of the Statute 25 E. 3. de Facto, and not de Jure, is
a King withing that Act; and Treason against him is punishable, though the right
Heir get the Crown.

Indeed, both those Great Men seem to suppose, or admit, that there might be
one who had, or at some time or other might have, a sort of Right,
notwithstanding another's being so fully King, that a Conspiracy to Kill, or
Depose him, would be Treason.

But it is to be considered,

1. That the Lord Coke does not suppose that there may be a King de Jure, while
another is King in Fact; unless this supposition is warranted by the Statute 11
H. 7. which, as I shall prove, it is not.

2. The Statute, which in both their Judgments regards only the King Regnant,
makes it Treason to Conspire the Death of the King's Nota, In the Act 1 H. 7.
restoring H. 6. of the younger House, His Eldest Son Edward, who died in his
life time, is called Prince of Wales. Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. N. 16.
Eldest Son, or to violate his Eldest Daughter; for the last of which, the Lord
Coke 3 Inst.
assigns this Reason, That for default of Issue Male, she only is Inheritable
to the Crown.

So that the supposed King de Jure appears to be barred, not only by the
Possession of the King in Fact, but even by that Right which is Vested in his
Son or Daughter, before either of them have Possession.

And, indeed, That Right which ordinarily would descend to the Eldest Son of
the King Regnant, is truly explanatory of all that will be found to have
belonged to one, who since E. 4. of the elder branch of the Royal Stock, got
Possession, has often been called King de Jure; though, as will appear, in a
sense very different from the Modern vulgar Notion: Nor does the Judgment even
of E. the 4th's own Parliament, in the least favor the late King: however if
it did, later Parliaments in the time of H. 7. have taken away all color from
such pretenses.

That the Eldest Son even of the most Rightful Regnant King, was not King upon
the Death of his Father, without a Parliamentary Settlement of the Crown upon
him before his Fathers Death; nor with it, till the States of the Kingdom had
actually received and recognized such Son, will appear beyond contradiction:
And that the Eldest Son's Right was only a Right to be declared King, unless he
was unfit to Reign, or the exigencies of the Public required the advancing
some other Person of the Royal Family.

If a deserving Person was kept back, or one so judged by his own Party, or the
Nation, when he prevailed, the least Complement they could make him was, that
of Right, he ought to have been King, before he was King; but farther they
never extended their Transports of Loyalty, nor ever Authoritatively declared,
That he had such a Right as made him King, while another possessed the Throne:
And till he got Possession, it was never declared that he had Right. Nor does
the setting one aside, before his coming to Possession, or after, make any
difference in the Nature of the Right in question.

And I shall put it beyond Controversy, that whenever a worthy Person of the
Saxon Royal Family, especially of that branch, which for some Successions had
been settled as the Regnant Family, was solemnly recognized by the States of
the Kingdom, upon the Death, or disability, of a Person who stood forwarder in
the Royal Line; the Person so recognized became King de Jure, and no other
Person had any manner of Right, unless such as was in Abeiance, or in the
Clouds; and, indeed, no where, till Possession brought it to Light and Being.

3. Fully to show this Gentleman his mistakes, upon the Proof of the 2d and 3d
General Heads, Stat. 11. H. 7. c. 1.
Statute 11 H. 7. it will be requisite to transcribe the whole; which is as
follows.

The King our Sovereign Lord, calling to remembrance the Duty of Allegiance of
his Subjects of this his Realm, and that by reason of the same, they are bound
to serve their Prince and Sovereign Lord for the time being, in his Wars, for
the Defense of him, and the Land, against every Rebellion, Power and Might,
reared against him, and with him, to enter and abide in Service in Battle, if
case so require: That for the same Service, what Fortune ever fall by chance in
the same Battle, against the Mind and Will of the Prince, as in this Land, some
time passed, has been seen, that it is not reasonable, but against all Laws,
Reason, and good Conscience, that the said Subjects going with their Sovereign
Lord in Wars, attending upon him in his Person, or being in other places by his
Commandment within this Land, or without, any thing should leese or forfeit for
doing their true Duty and Service of Allegiance. It be therefore Ordained,
Enacted and Established, by the King our Sovereign Lord, by the Advice and
Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth,
no manner of Person or Persons, whatsoever he or they be, that attend upon the
King and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time being, in his Person, and do
him true and faithful Service of Allegiance in the same, or be in other places,
by his Commandment, in the Wars within this Land, or without; that for the said
deed and true Duty of Allegiance, he or they be in no wise Convict or Attaint
of High Treason, or of other Offenses for that Cause, by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise by any Process of Law, whereby he or any of them shall now forfeit
Life, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Possessions, Hereditaments, Goods, Chatals, or
any other things; but to be for that Deed and Service utterly discharged of any
Vexation, Trouble, or Loss. And if any Act or Acts, or other Process of the Law
hereafter thereupon for the same happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance,
that then that Act or Acts, or other Process of Law whatsoever they shall be,
stand and be utterly void. Provided always that no Person or Persons shall take
any Benefit or Advantage by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his,
or their said Allegiance. Here it is observable.

1st. That whereas this Gentleman absurdly supposes, that it is Treason to
engage to fight against one whom one may lawfully kill; and that one may enter
into a contrary Allegiance, but may not do any voluntary act of Allegiance; it
is evident by the Words, that if Swearing Allegiance is safe, so are all
voluntary Acts of Allegiance: for the Swearing is not expressly provided for by
that Act, or any otherwise than as it is a part of the Duty and Service of
Allegiance to the Sovereign Lord: but if Associating for the Defense of the
King's Person and Right, be part of the Allegiance due; then that is as much
provided for as the Oath is: and consequently this Gentleman must grant, that
the Statute 11 H. 7. indemnifies the present Associators. That this is part of
the Allegiance due, appears by the Common Law Oath of Allegiance affirmed in
the Laws of W. 1. and continued down to this day in Substance and Obligation:
Vid. Leges W. 1. c. 52. de fide and obsequio erga Regem.
according to which, all the Freemen of the whole Kingdom are to affirm with a
League [or Association] and Oath, that within and without the whole Kingdom of
England, they will be faithful to their Lord the King; preserve his Lands and
Honors with all fidelity, together with his Person; and defend them against
Enemies and Strangers.

And in an other Chapter of that Law, after Provision, that all Freemen shall
enjoy their Estates, Cap. 58.
as had been before enacted and granted in a Common Council of the whole
Kingdom, it adds, We also enact and firmly enjoin, that all Freemen of the
whole Kingdom be sworn Brethren [or Associators] to defend our Monarchy, and
our Kingdom, according to their Strength and Faculties, and manfully keep the
Peace, and preserve the Dignity of our Crown entire: and constantly to maintain
Right, and just Judgment by all means, according to their power, without fraud,
and without delay.

What is this but an Association to defend the King and Kingdom, against any
Person whatever; and by consequence, to declare that the King for the time
being, is the only Rightful King? Since his Person, Crown, and Dignity is to be
preserved by all means in their Power.

This part of the Common Law is affirmed by the Statute 11 H. 7. declaring it
the Duty of Allegiance to defend the King, and Land, against every Power and
Might: and therefore as well against Pretenders to Title as others.

2. This Act, expressly indemnifies for voluntary Acts of Allegiance, against
the mind and will of the Prince.

3. Proof of the 3d. General Head.
It can by no means have been intended or implied by that Statute, that there
was, or could be, any other King besides the King for the time being: For,

1. To take it in that sense, would be to make the Statute fight against it
self; and not only to admit that he were but [a] King not [the] King; but to
require the Subjects to fight, for, and against one and the same Person.

4. H. 7. And his Parliament could not be thought to admit, that he was an
Usurper, or a King contrary to Law, or Right. But H. 7. certainly intended to
provide for the indemnity of those that should pay Allegiance to him, as well
as of those that should pay Allegiance to future Kings for the time being. And
indeed upon some of the Words it may seem doubtful whether the enacting part
was intended to reach beyond his time; and whether any other Sovereign Lord for
the time being was intended, but he who was at that time. But if in relation to
the King, whose Parliament passed this Act, the King for the time being was
supposed to be the only Lawful and Rightful King; it must be so taken in
relation to all other Kings for the time being: if either the enacting Part or
the Preamble extend to 'em.

5. If this Act should carry a plain implication, that some other besides the
King for the time being, was the King of Right; this would be so far from being
for the Security of the King for the time being, (as must have been then
intended as well as the indemnity of his Subjects,) that it must needs have the
like effect with their Discourses, who will have it, that the present
Government is not Rightful, but yet that a sort of Allegiance is due to it,
because of God's Authority, though contrary to Right.

Whenever these Men speak out, it appears, that they allow no Authority to the
King for the time being, but what is derived from the Tacit, or implied
Consent, of their King of Right.

But this Jesuitism was not thought of at the making of that Statute.

6. I desire to know what Person besides H. 7. was so much as imagined to be
Rightful King, or Queen, of England, when that Act was made? However, whether
it can be thought, that in the Judgment of that Parliament, any Person besides
H. 7. had Right to the Crown; after a former Parliament had Ordained, Vid.
Printed Stat. 1 H. 7.
Established, and Enacted, that the Inheritance of the Crown of England and
France, should be, stand, and remain, in King H. 7. and the Heirs of his Body,
and in no other Person? That they held this Settlement to have been duly and
righfully made, and that without any relation to his marrying the supposed
Heiress to the Crown, appears by three other Acts of the same Parliament. One
of which attaints Ret. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 3.
R. 3. for traitorously conspiring against their Sovereign Liege Lord H. 7.
Another Vid. Abridg. Stat. usque ad 15 H. 8.
indempnifies Men for Trespass or taking Goods, in maintenance of the Title of
H. 7. for the time that his Banner was displaied against Richard late Duke of
Gloucester, Usurper of the Realm. Stat. 1 H. 7. and 6.
Another goes farther, and indemnifies them who came from Beyond Sea with H. 7.
or were in Sanctuary, or Hidel, for his Quarrel, and Title; and speaks of the
Battle against his Enemies, in recovering and obtaining his Just Title and
Right to his Realm of England.

Wherein H. Vid. Inf.
7 ths Right, and R. 3 ds Usurpation consisted, shall afterward be considered.

7. When the Parliament 11 H. 7. speaks only of the King, or Prince, or
Sovereign Lord for the time being, without giving any description whereby it
should be known who is [the Prince] unless what relates particularly to H. 7.
It must be presumed that no King is intended, but he that was the Sovereign, or
Liege Lord, in the Eye and Reputation of Law: which as appears by the Case of
R. 3. an Usurper, continuing so, was not then taken to be. But who ever was in
the Possession of the Throne without Usurpation, was always lawful and rightful
King.

8. It cannot be thought the Parliament 11 H. 7. would have made an Act
directly contrary to three others of the same Reign; but they would have
expressly repealed the former Acts, or have offered some reason to palliate or
color their Proceedings to the contrary.

But take the Statute of 11 H. 7. in this Lawyers Sense, (only with an
Exception that as to the Matter in Question it was a Declaratory Law, as the
words plainly show, and it will farther appear) and it is evident that the
Statutes against R. 3. and indemnifying them that acted for H. 7. before the
displaying his Banner, as well as after, while R. 3. was in Possession of the
Throne, were contrary to this Lawyer's Sense of the Statute 11 H. 7. according
to which, they who assisted H. 7. must have acted contrary to their Duty of
Allegiance to the King for the time being. Wherefore it plainly follows, that
R. 3. was not King for the time being, according to the true meaning of the
Statute 11 H. 7. and yet H. 6. who was of the younger House, was in his time
the only King for the time being, in the Judgment of that very Parliament which
supposes R. 3. not to have been so; Ret. Parl. 1 H. 7. n. 16. Restitutio H. 6.
as appears by their reversing the Attainder of H. 6. and declaring the Act of
Attainder, to have been contrary to the Allegiance of the Subject, against all
right wiseness, honor, nature, and duty, inordinate, seditious, and
slanderous; and reversing the Attainders of others for their true and faithful
Allegiance and Service to Hen. 6. and yet those Attainders were in a Parliament
of a King by many supposed to be the only Person that had Right to be King, and
that after his being formally recognized by the States, and then in Possession
of the Power of the Kingdom. Obj.


Obj. But it may be objected, if the Act 11 H. 7. was made only to indemnifie
them that paid Allegiance to Rightful Kings, there was no manner of need of it.

Answ. 1. Many needless Statutes have been made in affirmance of the
Common Law, out of abundant caution.

2. It could not be needless to obviate men's fears, upon pretenses which might
be set up against the King for the time being; by removing the supposal that
Allegiance could be due to any body else.

3. The enacting part extends to indemnifie Men, for what they out of Loyalty
should do in time of War, against the mind and will of the Prince: for which
the caution was but reasonable.

Effectually to prove, 3 d. Proof of the 4 th. and 5 th. General Heads.
that the Judgment of Hen. 7 ths Parliament, That there could be but one
Rightful King at a time, except where they were Partners in Power; is according
to the fixed and known Constitution of this Monarchy; and that this manifests
His present Majesty to be our only lawful and rightful Sovereign Lord; and that
the late King neither, is, nor of Right, ought to be King; I shall as briefly
as well as I can, give an Abstract of what will appear to any Man, who shall
with me carefully compare Records, Histories, Law Books, Charters, and
Authentic Manuscripts, from before the fixation of the Monarchy downwards.

The most ancient uncontested Authority of this kind which is allowed us even
by the Scotch Writers, who think themselves concerned to blemish our
Antiquities, Bid Lib. 1. cap. 1. Vbires veniret in dubium magis de foeminea,
regum prosapia, quam de masculina fibi eligerent.
is the Venerable Bede, who died in the year 735. He, speaking of the coming of
the Picts into the Northern Parts of Britanny, says, The Scotch gave them
Wives, on condition that when any Controversy arose, they should choose
themselves a King of the Female Stock of Kings, rather than of the Male.

Whereby it appears what was his Judgment of the Successions, where they have
seemed most fond of an Inherent Right of Birth.

But as to England, where a King has lest three Sons, Lib. 5. c. 24. An. 725.
Bid calls them all Heirs.

Accordingly, he more than once mentions Brothers reigning together as Lib. 4.
c. 11.
Sighard and Frede among the East Saxons; Susceperunt Subreguli regnum gentis,
and divisum inter se tenuerunt annis circiter december.
while Ib. c. 12.
the West Saxon Kingdom was governed by several petty Kings, in distinct
Divisions. These Kings probably at that time were Tributary or Feudatory Kings,
under the Mercian Kingdom: for in the year An. 730.
730 I find King Aetilbalt, styles himself not only King of the Mercians, but
also of all the Counties which by the general name are called South-Angles,
Cart. Orig. in Eib. Cot.
subscribing King of Britanny. And in the same year I find an Offa, who styles
himself King of the Mercians, and also of the other Nations where ever round
about. By reason of the Inheritance of Crowns belonging to several Sons of
Kings, the Kings were so numerous that Bid mentions two Brothers Crowned Kings
even of the Isle of Wight. But when any were Constituted Kings to the setting
aside all the old Regnant Family of that particular Kingdom, the Persons so
constituted were according Bid Lib. 4. c. 26. Circiter an. 685. Per aliquod
spatium reges dubii, vel externi disperdiderunt, donec legitimus Rex Victred
etc.
to Bid, Strangers, or doubtful, by way of distinction from Lawful Kings. And
yet all the Kings of the several Kingdoms were descended from Woden, from which
Common-Stock they all took their Qualifications for an Election, as afterward
the West Saxon Kings did from Cerdic, then from Ina, and after that from Egbert.

But generally, I take it, regard was had to that part or branch of Woden's
Family, which was the regnant Family within the particular Kingdom, where one
of that branch was advanced; according to that Charter of an Offa, where he is
styled Mon. 1. vol. f. 28. An. 764.
King of the Mercians, descended from the Mercian Royal Stock.

About which time I find two Kings Ib. col. 1.
of Kent, Sigered, and Eadberht, An. 762.
governing in severalty. These it is likely were Brothers, Ib. col. 2. alt. cart.
but Eadberht, who became King of all Kent, upon Sigered's death, or amotion,
was Cart. Orig. in Bib. Cot.
constituted King and Prince by the whole County. This was above 60 years
before the Foundation of the Monarchy was laid An. 699.
by the West Saxon King Ina. Tho most of the Moderns, and many of the Ancients,
lay it as late as Egbert's time; the Confessors Laws received and sworn to by
William the I. and following Kings, say of Ina, Leges S^i Edw. Lamb. Arch. and
Bib. Cot. sub. effig. Claud. D.
he was elected King throughout England, and first obtained the Monarchy since
the coming of the English into Britanny.

His qualification for an Election, the Saxon Cron. Sax. nuper ed. Cujus
prosapia oriunda est Cerdico.
Cronicle places in a Descent from Cerdic. But Malms f. 7.
Malmsbury assures us he was advanced rather for his Merit, than his being of
the Successive or Inheritable Family, Quam successivae sobolis prosapia.
and that from him Non parum linea Regiae stirpis exexorbitaverunt.
to Brictric, the Kings were far out of the Royal Line.

That Brictric was truly elected, appears not only in his bare qualification
from the Cron. Sax. p. 16, and 61.
Stock of Cerdic; but as he was immediate Successor to Kenwolf Cron. Sax. and
Bromton col. 770. super populum and regnum elegerunt.
elected upon the like qualification; and in whose Reign it was Spelm. Conc. 1.
vol. f. 291, 292.
ordained, in a National and Legantine Council, that no man suffer the assent
of Wicked men to prevail, but that Kings be lawfully elected, by the Priests
and Elders of the People: where it is manifest, that lawfully does not limit the
Election to any other Rule than what follows in that Law, viz. to avoid
electing Persons born in Adultery or Incest. The Person lawfully Elected, is
there called Heir of the Country. Where [Heir] is plainly used in the Sense
both of the Fund. Constable. 1. part. f. 80.
Civil, and of, our Common Bracton l. 2. c. 29.
Law, for the Person that comes duly to the Inheritance: Council. Calchuthense
Legantinum and Pananglicum An. 787.
in this sense all that have been elected Kings, have been held to succeed by
Hereditary Right. And thus in numbers of Charters in the Saxon Times, and
after, Private Inheritances are granted to Men, to leave to what Heir they
please; Haeres Patriae.
to the Church and its Sacred Heirs; and to the Barons, or Citizens of London,
and their Heirs.

To Brictric the first West Saxon King, after the Peoples Right to Elect, had
been declared by National Authority, succeeded Egbert, An. 800. vel Potius 801.
who derived after several degrees passed from Ingild, Ina's Brother.

It may well be thought, that he was Elected with a Consent no less full and
formal, than was held essential to his Grants of Lands, one of which was Cart.
in Regist. Ab. Bib. Cot. Claud. B. Cum licentia and consensu totius gentis
nostre, etc.
with the License and Consent of all his Nation, and the unanimity of all the
Great men.

Egbert was alive in the year 838 though Historians generally suppose him to have
died two years before. His Sons Few Historians take notice of him vid. tamen
Bib. Cot.
Domitian A. 8. Sax. and Lat. which shows him to have been King of Kent,
Surrey. and Suffex.
Ethelstan the Eldest, and Ethelwolf, were Kings in his life time: As I might
prove by several Charters, but shall here mention but two; one in the year
Evid. Ec. Cant. inter December script. col. 2220.
827. where an Ethelstan subscribes as Monarch of all Britanny; Bib. Cot.
Julius D. 2. f. 125. a
an other An. 836. where Egbert grants with the Consent of his Son Ethelwolf,
King of Kent.

In the year Vid. Cart. Orig. in Bib.
838. Ethelwolf succeeded Egbert in the Kingdom of West-Saxony, Cot. eod. An.
Egbert and Ethelwolf acting together, both Kings.
by a manifest Election, his eldest Brother Ethelstan being then alive, and
continuing Mon. 1. vol. f. 195. An. 843. Welding ealle Britone.
the Monarch or chief King of all Britanny.

Besides the Evidences above, that there was not at that time such a fixed rule
of descent in the West Saxon Royal Family, as made the Kings eldest Son to be
King, or to have a certain and indefesible Right to be King, may appear by the
Law or Custom of that Kingdom mentioned by Asser Men. ending with the life of
King Alfred f. 156.
Asser, and Nic. Gloc. in Bib. Cot. Caligula. A. Ending with the life of
Ethelwolf.
Nicolas of Gloucester, and others; not to suffer the King's Wife to be called
Queen, or to sit near her Husband: which seems to have occasioned the Ritual
for the Consecrating the Wife in Rituale in Bib. Cot. Coronat Ethelredi and H.
1.
consortium regalis thori, for the consortship of the Royal Bed. Till she was
so Consecrated, which was to be in a Convention of the States, or coming from
it, she had no more right to the Kings Bed than a Concubine. Of this doubtless
W. 1. was aware, when he Pictav. de Gestis ejus f. 205.
expressed a desire to have his Wife Crowned with him. Certain, it is that the
Sons of Kings begotten on Conubines, after they had been elected or adopted by
the States, were always held to have succeeded as Rightfully, and to have been
as legitimate Heirs, as the Sons begotten in Wedlock; the Mother's being Queen,
and by consequence the legitimation of the issue, and capacity to inherit the
Crown, having depended upon the will of the States.

But that in Ethelwolf's time, the word Elected was duly applied to English
Kings, and upon what qualification, may farther appear by an Author of the
Saxon time, who speaking of Eastengle, where Sr. Edmund was Crowned King, An.
855.
two or three years before Ethelwolf's death, says, Bib. Cot. Tiber. B. Albas
Floriacencis.
Over this Province reigned the most holy Eadmund, descended from the Exantiq.
Sax. nobili prosapia oriundus, etc. Omnium comprovincialium.
Noble Stock of the Ancient Saxons, etc. who coming from Kings his Ancestors,
being eminent for his virtue, with the unanimous favor of all the People of
the Province, Exgeneris Successione
is not so much elected, by reason of * the Succession, or Inheritance of the
Stock, as he is forced to reign over them.

With in this time Ethelbald, Ethelwolf's eldest Son reigned in his Father's
life time, and retained WestSaxony to his share, whilst the bigoted Father
having Asser Men.
withdrawn to Rome, though animo revertendi, was held to have abdicated, and with
much ado prevailed with his Son and the People, to let him be an underling King
of an inferior Kingdom.

Besides other objections to any right of descent from him, according to a good
Cron. de Mailros.
Authority, his elder Brother Ethelstan survived. However one or more Acts of
Parliament in his life time had provided for three Successions after him, as
appears by the Will of his fourth Son Alfred, made in the Presence and with the
Consent of all West-Saxony.

That Will recites what Bradies Introd. f. 359.
Dr. Brady calls Ethelwolf's Will, but was a Asser Epistola haereditaria immo
commendatoria.
Charter passed in a Append. vitae Alfredi.
General Council, for Alfred is express, that the Inheritance of King Ethelwolf
came to him by Charter thereof, made Ita Haereditas Aethelwolfis Rs. primei ad
me devoluta est, per cartam inde confectam in concilio nostro apud Langedene.
in a general Council at Langedene. Yet that Charter was but recommendatory to
a future relection; for Ethelbert, who is not named in Alfred's Account of that
Settlement, was upon the Fathers death Ethelwerdi Cron. f. 479. Ordinati sunt
filii ejus, etc.
ordained King of several of the Kingdoms: and succeeded his Uncle Ethelstan in
Cron. de Mailros f. 143. An. 160.
Kent. An. 160.


Alfred's Will shows that by the Parliamentary Settlement of the Crown, he was
to be Partner in Power, when his Brother Ethered should succeed: Append. sup.
for which he appeals to the Testimony of all West-Saxony; accordingly they are
both represented Polycron. R. Higden f. 255.
as Kings at the same time. S. Dun. f. 125. 126.


Alfred was Ethelwolf's fourth Son: An. 872.
which soever therefore of his three Brothers left Sons, every one of 'em
according to the vulgar notion, had Right to the Crown before him; and yet that
great and good Prince, in the last Public Act of his Life, expresses a
satisfaction in that Inheritance, which Append. Sup. De haereditate quam Deus
ac Principes cum senioribus populi misericorditer ac benign dederunt.
God and the Princes, with the Elders of the People, mercifully and bountifully
gave him.

That Will shows that he had two Nephews then alive, Athelm, and Ethelbalt: who
were not regarded in the Succession; but S. Dun. A ducibus and presulibus
totius gentis eligitur and non solum ab ipsis verum etiam ab omni populo
adoratur ut eis praeseset.
Alfred was upon his Brother Ethered's death elected by all the Saxons.

To Alfred succeeded his Son Edward, by a manifest Election, having Cousin
Germans of at least one Elder House: Asserii Annals and Huntindon.
Ethelbald or Ethelwold, who was one of them, was a Competitour with Edward,
and was elected by the Danes.

Ethelwerd (who himself descended from Ethered's Elder House) says of Edward,
Vid. his Book dedicated to Maud, Wife to W. 1.
Indeed the then Successor of the Monarchy, Edward, Son of the abovementioned
King, is Crowned after him. He, being of the Royal Stem, was Elected by the
Nobility at Whitsuntide, M S. in Bib.
one hundred years being passed since his Ancestor Egbert had his present
Dominion. COT. and Ed.


Where the Right of the Saxon Crown to the Monarchy, Ipse stemmate regali a
Primatis electus.
or Primacy, for even Edward had no more, was laid in perscription: but his
Right to the Crown, An. 925. or 924.
in an Election upon a qualification from the Royal Stem.

Edward's Son and Successor Athelstan was a Mat. West. f. 180. Selden's Notes
upon Polyolb f. 211. and MS.
Bastard, though Dr. Brady would have the contrary believed, from Malmsbury's
tenderness in the Matter; least it should diminish that King's Glory. Lelandi
and Wendover MS. in Bib. Cot.


The Saxon Cron. Sax. p. 11. Huntindon f. 204.
Cronicle mentioning the Father's death in Mercia, says, Ethelstan was elected
King by the Mercians. Huntingdon says, in Mercia: whither they might have
flocked from other Kingdoms.

To Athelstan succeeded his Father's eldest lawfully begotten Son, Edmund.
Electus est Rex in Merce.


Though Edmund had Sons, An. 944.
Eadred Bib. Cot.
his Brother succeeded: and that as an Author of those Times affirms, in the
Right of a Brother. Vitel. D. 15. vita sti Dunstani Autore Osberno Dorob. edit.
Inser script. sub nomine Anglia sacra. Successst in iure frarris.


And an Bib. Cot. Cleopat. B. 13.
Author of like antiquity, whose words are transcribed by others since the
reputed Conquest, says,

The next Heir Eadred, took upon him the Natural, or Hereditary Kingdom, by
succeeding his Brother.

Where the Uncle is plainly accounted the next Heir fit to Reign.

Alter author vitae Sti. Dunstani. Mox proximus haeres Eadredus.
And yet the Vid. Enquiry said to be Dr. Bradies, p. 14. and the Doctors
Introd. f. 364.
Enquirer and Dr. Brady, absurdly suppose, that Eadred was only Tutor, Curator,
Regent, or Protector, of the young Princes, and Kingdom.

Which was far from the meaning of that ancient Author, who blames the eldest
of those Princes for pretending to succeed his Uncle Bib. Cot.
before he had been elected; though both with Clergy and Laity, Sup. An. 955.
one Elected supplied the Numbers and Names of the Kings: Post hunc surrexit
Eadwig regnandi gratia poliens: licet in utraque plebe Regum numeros and nomina
suppleretelectus
that is, no Man was accounted King, who was not Elected; speaks of the day of
the common Election; what Authority the States exercised over him for his
egregious folly on that day; and his being cast off by the Northern Part of the
Nation Quoniam in commisso regimine insipienter egit.
because he foolishly administered the Government committed to, or entrusted
with him.

He being forsaken by an Ib. Hoc ita omnium conspiratione relicto, elegere sibi
Do. dictante, etc.
Universal Conspiracy or Agreement, they, says that Author, the Lord so
dictating, Elected his Brother Edgar.

After Eadwig's death, the same Author says, Edgar Ib. Et regnum ipsius velut
aequus haeres abutroque populo electus.
took his Kingdom upon him, being Elected by the People of both Kingdoms, as
equal Heir to both.

As an other Bib. Cot.
Author has it, he was elected by all the People of England.

To Edgar succeeded An. 975.
his eldest Son Edward the Martyr: who, whatever many of the Moderns, and some
of the Ancients may have thought, was undoubtedly a Bastard: which is not only
shown by an Osbernas sup.
Author of the Time; Vitellius. A. 20.
but is confirmed by the Brother Ethelred's Charter: which informs us that the
Election of the States preferred his Brother: as the Charter has it.

Bib. Cot.
The Great Men of both Orders elected my Brother King: Regist. Magn.
and gave me Livery of the Lands belonging to the Kings Sons: Abendoniae sub
Effig. Claud. B. f. 89. b
which plamly proves that Edward was a Bastard, the Private Inheritance having
fallen to the Father's younger Son. However, this is an undeniable President,
of an Election: Omnes utriusque ordinis Optimates ad regni gubernacula
moderanda fratrem meum
and yet for the reason above, it may well be said, that Edward was left Vid.
Dr. Bradies use of this Introd. f. 360.
Heir of his Father's Kingdoms, as well as Virtues: which Historians since
Eaduuardum elegerunt, etc. miho; terras ad regios pertinentes filios in meos
usus tradiderunt
the time of W. Ar. 979.
1. transcribed from one of the Writers of Sr. Dunstan's Life.

That Ethelred who succeeded the Martyr was truly elected, appears beyond
contradiction, by the Bib. Cot. sub Effig. Claudii A. 3.
Ritual of his Coronation: Ab Episcopis and a plebe electus.
which requires that the King being elected by the Bishops and the Plebs, or
Commonalty, take his Coronation Oath: after the Oath taken, the People are
solemnly asked, whether they will have him to be King: they answer, Ib. volumus
and concedimus.
we will and grant; they pray to God to bless his Servant, whom they have
elected King; and in an other place, they pray God to bless this Benedic domine
hunc pure electum Principem.
purely elected Prince.

To this time the Danes possessed great part of England; and Swane, Firmatum
est pactum inter Regem and populum suum and firma amicitia: jure jurando etiant
statutum est, ut nunquam amplius esset Rex Danus in Arglia.
King of Denmark, Landing with an additional Force, this, with Ethelred's
sloth and unacceptableness to his own People, drove him to an Abdication.

Upon Swane's death, the English invited back the Abdicated King, Bib. Cot.
Domition A. 8. sup.
on condition he would govern better than he had done: for which his Son Edward
undertook. Ethelred returning, as an Author who lived about the time has it, a
contract was established between the King and his People; and firm friendship;
and it was enacted with an Oath, that there never more should be a Danish King
in England.

After An. 1015. or 1016.
this Cnute the Son of Swane laid claim to the Crown of England as a Saxon, as
well as Dane, deriving from King Knighton f. 2320. Misit clameum, etc.
Ethelbald; who, doubtless was that Son of an elder Brother of King Alfred, who
opposed Edward the elder.

Notwithstanding this, though the Malms f. 39. Dani Cnutonem eligunt.
Danes elected Cnute, the English adhered to Ethelred.

Upon whose death they chose his Son Edmund Ironside, who, as Internal, vid.
Argl. Saer. Hist. Maj.
appears by the stream of ancient Authorities, Winton' Cujusdam Ducis fill.
nomine Algivam accepit, in Concubinam, exqua genuit filium nomine Edmundum
Ir^^side. Et
was a Bastard.

Upon (i) Edmund's death, Cnute was Crowned King of England by the Election of
all; and according Cited and applied Spelmans Glos f. 277.
to Florence of Woster, he swore to be Faithful Lord, as the People did to be
Liege Subjects. Bib. Cot. Cleo^. B. 13. De regno and nominibus Regum Anglor,
etc. De Edm. Irnenside Iste erat Bastardus.


At Cnute's death, his two Sons, Harold, who was a Ingulfas f. 58.
Bastard, or rather, Spurious, and Hardecnute his legitimate Son by Emma,
Ethelred's Widow, were Leofric Comes and tota nobilitas exparte Aquilonis
fluminis Tamesiae elegerunt Haroldum and Hardecnut fratrem ejus etc.
by Leofric and all the Nobility on the North-side of the River Thomes, elected
Kings over all England; as partners in Power, and coheirs. But Duke Godwin and
other Noblemen in West-Saxony opposed, and prevailed.

It appears by an Author who wrote in the Confessor's Time, and whose words are
transcribed by several, that they prevailed for the total rejection of
Hardecnute; because he made not sufficient haste to take the Administration
upon him. Therefore Harold, (who, however, would have been King of Mercia, Edw.
Conf.
and the Northumbrian Kingdom) was elected over all England, Vid. etiam ib.
by the Princes, and all the People: Cleop. A. 7.
or Bib. Cot. Abbrev. Cron. fin' temp.
as an other of like antiquity has it; Cron' breve ad An. 1062.
is elected King by all the People of England. Upon Harold's death, Haraldus:
Rex eligitur ab omni populo Angl.
and not before, Hardecnute was received: in what manner appears by the then
standing Ritual, for the Coronation of Kings.

But Emmae's Sons by Ethelred, Alured and Edw. Malms f. 43.
as Malms. observes, were despised almost by all; rather through the
remembrance of their Fathers sloathfulness; than by reason of the Power of the
Danes. Yet they two, without preference of one before the other, were accounted
Vid. Scrip. Norm, Eucomium Emmae Regno haereditatis vestrae privamini.
Heirs of the Kingdom; and accordingly Cnute, Gemet. f. 271.
while he was in fear of the then Duke of Normandy, offered half his Kingdom to
Edward, and his Brother Alured. M. S. cited in Monast.
Upon Hardecnute's death, Earl Godwin was chosen Administrator or Protector of
the Kingdom, during the vacancy, and till a fit Person should be elected King.
1. vol. Regni cura Reginae assensu and Magnatum consilio Comiti Godwino
commitritur donec qui digrus esset, eligeretur. and Bib. Cot. Domit. A. 13.
Cron. Wint.
Godwin summons a Convention of the States, where he nominated Edward,
Ethelred's only surviving Son by Emma, whom the Saxons called Elgive. After
some debates, all consented to the election of Edward. He being so elected, was
in the sense of those times Gemet f. 271. Ipse autem exivit hominem Edw. totius
regni reliquit haeredem. Malms. f. 450. Post. Hard. fr. ipsius ex matre ribus
Angliae in Regem electus etc.
Heir of the Kingdom to the last Possessor Hardecnute, his Brother by the half
blood. And yet it is observable, that Cart. Antiq CC Mon. 1. vol.
according to a Charter of Edward's passed in Parliament, at the latter end of
his Reign, the Hereditary Succession was hazarded by the Danes: that is,
according to what I before observed, f. 59. Periclitata sit haereditaria
siccessio, magnumque interstitium inter fratrem meum qui patri meo mortuo
successit meque habitum fuit.
the Anglo-Saxon regnant branch of the Royal Family was kept back, and was
likely never to have been restored. It Is evident that it was not for Edward to
carry this Point farther; for besides the Danish Royal Family, claiming from
King Ethelbald; and Mat. Par.
Fretheric, Abbot of St. Albans in his time, coming from the ancient Saxons and
Danes, and lineally descended from King Cnute; there was the Historian
Ethelwerd's Hist. Meus atavus.
Ethelwerd, or his immediate Ancestor, of the Family of King Ethered: and in
all probability, addit. f. 46.
there were several descendants either from Ethelstan, Ethelwolfs elder
Brother, or from his Sons Ethelbald, and Ethelbert.

What was the known Law in the Confessor's time, both as to the Succession, and
the continuing King, besides the former Evidences, appears beyond contradiction
from that King's Laws: according to which.

1. The Vid. sup. of Ina.
Monarchy was founded in election: which explains in what Sense a King is there
taken to be Constituted.

2. If the King do not answer the end for which he had been Constituted; Nec
nomen Regis in eo constabit.
not so much as the name of King shall continue in him.

3. It receives as a Vid. the Antiquity and Justice of an Oath of Abj. p. 90,.
and 91.
Rule in all Kingdoms, and particularly here, the Judgment of Pope Zachary,
encouraging the Franks to depose their King Childeric.

With Edward the Confessor, end the Saxon and Danish Successions of Kings:
Harold, the Son of Earl Godwin, as I shall show, never was King, nor reputed
King by any, but his own Party.

Here I may observe.

1. That Dr. Brady is mightily mistaken in his assertion, that Introd. f. 363.
the Saxons did in their subjection, owning of, and submission to their Princs,
acknowledge both proximity of blood, and nomination of their Princes, often
both, sometimes only one of them; but never followed any other rule.

2. The chief rule of Succession, upon the death, or disability of any King,
was a proper election of a worthy Person, of the Regnant Branch of the Royal
Family.

3. Introd. f. 364
Dr. Bradie's notion, that Elegerunt, signifies no more than recognoverunt,
they acknowledged, owned, submitted unto him as their King, is by no means
true; the recognition being manifestly subsequent to, or in consequence of the
election: nor is any thing more plain, than that the States did from the
beginning of the Monarchy downwards, rightfully declare an Heir to the Kingdom,
and then acknowledge his Right: though neither next upon the Royal Line, nor
representing the next; nor yet nominated by the Predecessor. And indeed till a
rare and noted instance in the case of Hen. 5. on whom the Crown had before
been entailed in Parliament; no Prince was known to have been formally
recognized, till he had taken the Coronation Oath. Claud. B. 6.


4 If according to any good authority of the Saxon or Danish Times, Reg. magnum
Abend. c. 50.
it should seem, that any man came to the Crown by the Gift of his Predecessor;
An. 931. Patriae procuratoribus.
it must have been made with such solemnity as was requisite, even for the
granting of Lands. As that of Sup.
Egbert's abovementioned, Vid. Rot. Par.
or Bib. Cot.
Athelstan's in an Assembly of the Bishops, Abbots, 17 E. 3. p. 1.
Dukes, or Earls, and the Procurators, or Representatives, of the Country; m.
20. d.
or an Ib. ejusdem Tota plebis generalitas.
other before the Plebs, A Petition in Parl, from the Borough of Barnstaple,
fetting forth that they had been a Borough, and sent Members to Parl. ever
since King Athelstan's Charter.
or Commons; or Edgar's Cart. Antique in Turri Lord. B.
in the open air, with the privity of the Great, or Wisemen, of his whole
Kingdom.

In the Confessor's life time, there were three Competitors for the Crown,
Edward, Edgar Atheling's Father, and Son to Edmund Ironside; Harold, who was
High Steward of England, and the most powerful of any Man, though not his Fathers
eldest Son; and William Duke of Normandy, Grand Nephew to Emma, who had been
Crowned Queen of England, nor as has appeared above, was William under any
incapacity from his Bastardy. Besides his Wife Maud was descended from a
Daughter of King Alfred, married to Baldwin Earl of Flanders: upon which
account, a Commentator on the Grand Custumary of Normandy, held him to be the
first, or chief Heir.

Edward, Guil. de Roville Erat regni Angtiae primior haeres e^. Matilda etc.
Son to Edmund Ironside, was at one time designed by the Confessor for his
Successor, if he could prevail with the Nation to consent; but that Edward
dying before the Confessor, his Son being a Minor, seems never then to have
been thought of.

Harold's design was covert; nor does he appear to have been a Pretender, till
the Confessor lay upon his deathbed.

But Duke William had long been promised his Cousin King Edward's interest: in
order whereunto, we may well believe, he in Ingulf.
the year 1651. came over to England, and, doubtless, to ingratiate him to the
Nation, was by the Confessor carried up and down the Kingdom. In the year 1657.
or 1658. the design was brought to bear; and in a Great Council of the whole
Nation, William was declared Successor; or as the Law Leges Edw. Regis ed per
Lamb.
received by him has it, agreeing with a Charter passed in Parl. 15. of his
Reign, Cart. Orig. in Bib. Cot. Haredem sibi esse etc. adoptavit.
was adopted Heir; or as another Charter has it, Edward instituted him Rot.
Pat. 1.
adopted Heir. That this Adoption or Institution of an Heir to the Crown, was
with a Consent truly National, I shall elsewhere have occasion to prove at
large: at present, shall only observe, that the above cited Law says, H. 6. m.
11.
that Edward caused the Kingdom to Regnum praed. nobis jurare fecit.
swear to William; and cart. Antiq. CC.
that Wilnot Earl Godwin's Son, and Hacun, his Grandson, were sent Hostages to
William, to secure the future Allegiance of that Family; that Robert,
Archbishiop of Canterbury, and Harold, were successively with the Duke to
assure him of his being declared Heir to the Crown; which Harold swore to
endeavor to preserve to William. But notwithstanding the Nations and his own
Oath; while the Nobility and People were at the Confessor's Funeral at
Westminster, Harold got a Party together at Lambeth, where, as some have it, he
set the Crown upon his own Head. The mad Englishman, Pictav. ut memini.
as a contemporary Writer has it, would not stay to see what the Public
Election would appoint.

Harold's Possession whatever it was, proved very short, lasting but nine
Months: nor was he ever fully recognized or submitted to by the States, or the
Body of the Nation: he never held any Parliament or Convention of the States;
which I take to be the reason that no Charter of his is to be seen, nor have I
met with any mention of one: They who fought for him against William, were
judged Traitors, and their Estates Vid. Domesday-Book.
forfeited: and it is rightly observed by the Lord Coke, that in Demesday,
Harold, who usurped the Crown of England after the decease of King Edward the
Confessor, is never named per nomen Regis, sed per nomen Comitis Haroldi.

Wherefore he leaves him out of his Lift of our Kings.

William, according to some Authors was encouraged to his attempt, from the
consideration that Harold was neither of the Saxon, nor Danish Royal Stock.

When William Landed, Pictav. f. 119.
he claimed the Crown from his Cousins Gift, Quoniam omnium qui genus suum
attingerent me credebat excellentissimum.
with the consnt of the Nobility of the Kingdom, confirmed by Oath: and lays
his qualification in being thought the most deserving of all that were nearly
related to the Confessor. Harold had nothing to plead against that, but the
suggestion, that the Crown had not been settled by a Consent sufficiently
formal; Selden's review p. 439.
that it was made without a Convention, and Law, of the Senate and People:
which it is no wonder that he should pretend, Absque generali senatus and populi
conventu and edicto.
though there were never so formal an Election.

Notwithstanding the Right, with which the Norman Duke Landed, he proffered to
submit to what the English should decree; and therefore to a new election if
they thought fit. Upon Harold's death, some of the English who dreaded the
consequence of receiving William after a bloody Battle, set up Edgar Atheling
for King: who, though but the second degree from a Bastard, and though his Father
never had Possession, was looked upon as the true Heir of the Crown: that is
the Person of the last Regnant Branch of the Royal Family, who ordinarily would
have succeeded by common consent of the States, if of sufficient Merit; and
reasons of State, or other obligations did not interpose. But the learned Ord.
vir. f. 525. Edgarus Adelinus, aliique plures ex linea regalis prosapiae.
Monk Guitmond, who could bot but know the constitution in this matter, Fl^^.
Wig. Fideli^^tem juraver^^^ quibus and ipse faedus p^pigit R. de Diceto col.
^80.
held him to be but one Heir among many of the Line of the Royal Family.
However the generallity of the Clergy thought themselves bound to maintain the
Title with which King William Landed, and that'twas Wats Advers. ad Mat. Par.
Rebellion to oppose him: yet before his being received for King, he at
Berkhamsted made a League, Bronton col.
or Contract with the People, headed by the Great Earls, 958. s. Dun. f. 195.
Edwin, and Morcar; who came up with the Forces from the North, which had never
been in the Battle against the Duke. Cuncti Praesules regnique proceres cum
Guil. concordiam fecerunt; ae ut dia lema regium sumeret, sicut mos Anglici
principatus requirit oraverunt.
Part of the League made with the People of England, was, that he should be
Crowned as the manner of the English Government requires: at his Coronation,
the consent of the People was asked in the due and accustomed manner: and the
account Historians give of the Oath he then took, shows it to be that which
stood in the Saxon Ritual.

After which, he more than once received and swore to that Body of the
Common Law of England, which had obtained the name of King Edward's Laws:
which, as has been observed, declare the end for which a King is Constituted,
and that he loses the Name, or ceases to be King, when he answers not, that end.

Indeed Dr. All the Liberties and Privileges the People can pretend to were
the Grants and Concessions of the Kings of this Nation, and derived from the
Crown.
Brady, who is as free with his Conquerors Memory, as with the Liberties of
England; Pref. to his complete Hist.
which he calls the Grants and Concessions of the King of this Nation; will
have it, that William the I. regarded his Oath only in the beginning of his
Reign, and that by notorious violations of his contract, with the People of
England, he acquired the Right of a Conqueror; and thereby put an end to the
ancient Constitution of this Monarchy, and those Liberties and Privileges of
the Subject, which manifestly appear to have been of elder date than the
Monarchy. Introd. f. 13.


Upon which, shall prove from undeniable reason and authority that he governed
the Nation as a Conqueror, and did so take and repute himself to be.
if one would return the Freedom of his Vid. Introd. f. 326.
Censures against others, it might be said, that this was not only to make the
then King the Successor of a Conqueror; but with a prospect of applying the
Rights which he ascribes to a supposed Qonquest, to justify what should be
practiced upon the late intended Conquest of this Nation.

That the Judgment and Practice of William the I. f. 14. This appears first by
his bringing in a new Law, and imposing it upon the People, and it is clear he
did this.
was very contrary to the Doctor's Imaginations, will be The justiciaries or
Chief Justices, the Chancellors, the Lawyers, the Ministerial Officers, and
under Judges, Earls, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Hundredaries, were all Normans from
his first coming until above 100 years. Introd. f. 20. The English had neither
Estates nor Fortunes left, and therefore it could be no matter to them, by what
Law, Right, or Property, other Men held their Estates.
proved by numerous Instances; and that it was so as to that part of the
Constitution which concerns the Succession to the Crown, appears by that King's
Deathbed Declaration: which some would set up for a will, disposing of the
Crown at that very time when he owns that it is not his to give.

I, says he, Ord. Vital Selden's Notes Polyolb. and Camden's Brit.
appoint no Heir of the Crown of England, but to the Universal Creator, whose I
am, and in whose hands are all things, I commend it; for I did not possess so
great Honor by Hereditary Right: but with direful conflict, and much effusion
of Humane Blood, I took it from the perjured King Harold, and brought it under
subjection to me. He adds.

Therefore I dare not bequeath the Scepter of this Kingdom to any body, but to
God alone; least after my death, worse troubles happen in it by my occasioning.
For my Son William, (always as became him obedient to me) I wish that God may
give him his favor, and that, if it so please the Almighty, he may Reign after
me. According to this.

1. He had no right, or pretense, to dispose of the Crown.

2. If some would have regarded his disposition; so many would have been likely
to assert their liberty, that it might occasion great troubles. 19. H. 6. n. 16.


3. Providence only could determine who should succeed: m. 7. per Inspex.
which is almost as much as if he said, there is no fixed or certain right in
any body. vol. f. 48. vid.
One reason why he pretended not to dispose of the Crown, Dr. B's Introd.
was, that he had it not by Hereditary Right, The pretense that he claimed jure
haereditario, is idle, unless, it were testamentario: for neither was be Heir
to Edward, nor Edward Heir to the Crown by Descent.
that is, as it came not to him by descent, neither was it disposable like
common Inheritances: not but that after he was declared Heir, and admitted
King, he had as true an Hereditary Right in the Crown, as any of his
Predecessors had: and this is justified by his own and other Charters. In Rot.
Cart.
one, he styles himself by the Providence of God, and Inheritance of
Consanguinity, King of the English. In another, he says, he was Mon. 1.
made King by Hereditary Right. In another, he is called Heir to Edward by
stock and gift: and in Charters of W. 2. and H. 1. their Father is said to have
succeeded by Mon. 1. vol. f. 98.
Hereditary Right.

Indeed one Cart. Antiq. in Tur.
of the Charters of W. 1. seems to contradict his Death bed Declaration, or the
sense I have given of it: Lord. F. Et Collectanea
for speaking of his victory over Harold, he says, he acquired the Kingdom due
to him and his Successors, to be possessed for ever by Hereditary Right. M.
^^ale Mil. in Bib. Hospit. Linc.


Yet this if duly considered is no more, than that by his Rightful Possession,
his became the Regnant Family; and the Successions were to be derived from him.

His Son W. An. 1087.
2. being, through the prevalence of the English against the Normans, elected
soon after the Father's ddeath; truly succeeded upon the old Hereditary Right:
and, indeed stood fairer for a recognition than his elder Brother Robert.

Dr. Introd. f. 370.
Brady observes out of Knighton, that the Barons of England, Cum plenario
consensu and consilio totius communitatis etc.
with the plenary consent and counsel of all the Community of the Kingdom,
branded Robert with illegitimacy, because he came not from a lawful Bed. No
Man, I believe, has imagined that Robert was not the Son of W. 1. by Maud, and
that after Marriage: but, as has appeared above, till she had been Crowned
Queen of England, she was but as a Concubine; and her Issue illegitimate: and
thus the very qualification to be elected, proceeded from that election which
made the Wife Queen.

H. An. 1100.
1. Upon this account was to be preferred upon the death of W. 1. before the
eldest Brother Robert, then alive: yet he did not scruple to own by his Cart.
in Mat. Par.
Charter, that next to God's mercy, this was owing to the Common Council of the
Barons.

The Ritual Bib. Cot.
for his Coronation shows, that he had been elected in a Convention of the
States; Claud. A. 3.
prays to God to bless him whom they have elected King; De Conventu seniorum
etc.
and declares his Authority to be delegated to him haeeditario judicio, Et
Episcopi prosternant se super pavimentum hinc and inde circa electum Regem.
by an Hereditary Judgment, or Decree, constituting him Heir of the Crown. Till
he presumed too far upon the love of the People, and bore too hard upon 'em,
they never thought of changing him for his elder Brother: nor was his
Possession long disturbed.

He, well knowing that his Issue had no certain Right of Succeeding him, till
the States should agree to it, prevailed upon 'em, to make two Settlements of
the Crown successively; one upon his Son William, an other after the Son's
death upon his Daughter Maud, An. 1116.
and both the Settlements were established by a National Oath. Hemirgford f.
473.
But it is observable, that the last was, Gerv. Dorob.
if the King died without Heir, say some, without Heir-male, Col. 1337.
say others. According to which, with regard to the ancient Constitution,
Stephen, Sisters Son to H. 1. when recognized by the States, became within the
express Provision of that Settlement.

Agreeably to this, as Bib. Cot. sub Effig. Vespat. A. 19.
we have it from an Author of the Time. H. 1. upon his Deathbed, recommended
Stephen to be received by Hereditary Right. And that Author speaks of his
Merits, De Monast.
joined with his being of the Royal Stock, Eliensi. Vt jure haereditario
suscipiatis.
as inducements to his Election.

As an Gesta Regis Steph. inter Script.
other Author has it, because he appeared fit to Reign, Et de stirpe regia
descenderat.
as well for the Dignity of his Stock, as the probity of his mind, they agreed
upon a common Resolution, and all with concordant favor, Constituted him King;
a compact being first made, and a mutual Oath, according to the vulgar
expression. Norm.


Maud's Title, though under a former Settlement of the Crown, gave him no
disturbance, till he either broke his part of the mutual Contract, or at least
disobliged the Clergy: which made his own Brother Malms. Hist. Nov. f. 106.
the Pope's Legate, turn against him, Dorob. Col. 1354.
and help to bring in Maud; who refusing to Gerv.
swear to the Confessor's Laws, was (chiefly by means of the Londoners, who
were very powerful at all Elections) rejected, Assensu cleri and populi in
Regem electus.
and never fully recognized.

At that time election was counted no disparagement to a King's Title: for
Stephen Bradies Introd. f. 371.
not only took into his Title Galba. A. 2.
by the Grace of God, by the Assent of the Clergy and People, Inter Sermones ad
populum.
elected King of England; but in an Bib. Cot.
Assembly of the States, in a memorable Speech, too long to be here inserted,
Quid obstinatius quid perniciosius quam contra voluntatem omnium regni jura
violenter abripere.
appeals to them, who ought rather to succeed in a Kingdom; one whom the
unanimous consent of the Nobility, and the University of the People earnestly
wished for, desired, elected? Or one, whom every Sex, every Age, opposed and
cried out against? What more pernicious than against the will of all, violently
to snatch the Rights of the Kingdom? Had Stephen's brave Son Eustace lived, in
all probability H. 2. had never succeeded; and however, was glad to come after
Stephen, as his Brompton f. 1024.
adopted Heir; as W. Cart. adoprionis, Successorem regni Anglie and haeredem
meum jure baereditario constitui.
1. had been, to the Confessor. Neither was Maud's consent ever asked to the
Settlement, or recognition afterward, though she lived beyond that time: nor did
the States take any notice of her pretended Title, after her manifest
forfeiture, of all that she could claim by the Settlement in the time of H. 1.
or otherwise howsoever. H. 2. knowing that the Consent of the States was the
best Title any Child of his could have to succeed him; and yet that they had
liberty of altering a Consent, Mat. Par. etc.
given upon reasons, which might afterward sail; out of abundant care for his
Son Henry, had him Crowned in his life time; which, through French Counsels,
put the Son upon insisting on the Rights of Kingship, Domit. A. 10.
to the great clamity of the Nation: though the Subjects swore Allegiance to him
with an Antiq. Brit f. 130.
express Salvo for the Allegiance due to his Father. Lib. Rof. Ibi forma
Convensionis inter uarosque Reges Fid. etiam Ben. Abbatem Author. ejusdem
temporis.
Which, whatever some have thought, or Scotland's Sovereignty p. 285.
affirmed, was Bib Cot. Domit. A. 10. lib. Rof. Ibi forma Convenionis inter
uposque Reges Fid. etiam Ben. Abbatem Author. ejusdem remporis.
the only Salvo in the Scotch Kings homage, according to ancient custom, for
the Crown of Scotland.

To H. 2. R. 1. An. 1189.
succeeded his eldest surviving Son, Richard, but was not accounted King upon
the death of his Father. Authors say, he was to be Walsi^gham Ipod. Neustriae
f. 45.
promoted to be King, by Hereditary Right: which is far from being King by
Hereditary Right. But, as the former usage explains such words, he deserved to
be elected and made King, in which sense one of R. de Diceto Col. 647.
the Authors who lived at the time, immediately explains himself, Comes itaque
mentioning his Coronation Oath, after the solemn and due election, Pictavorum
Rye. ^aeredita^io jure praemovendus in Regem, post tam Cleri quam populi
solemnem and debitam electionem etc.
as well of the Clergy as People.

Before this, he was at first only Earl of Poictou, and then Duke of Normandy,
but Mat. Par. de An. 1188. Ducatus Norm, gladium suscepit etc.
not till he had been solemnly invested with the Sword of that Dukedom. And
Bromton informs us, that he accepted the Crown upon Bromton f. 1159.
condition of keeping his Coronation Oath; without undertaking which, the
Archbishop charged him not to assume the Royal Dignity. He going to the holy
Wars after his being Crowned, his Brother John would have seized the Government
as vacant, but had no tolerable pretense, the War having been carried on with
a National Consent. Upon this, it was adjudged by a Hoveden de An. 1194.
Common Council of the Kingdom, Per commune consilium regne definitum est.
that John should be disseiz'd of all that he held in England, which might
extend to such right or expectancy as he had in the Crown. De omnibus
tenementis suis.


Notwithstanding which, upon Richard's death, the great Question came upon the
Stage, whether the Crown ought ordinarily to go according to the right of
Proximity, or of Representation. Descheance.


The right of Proximity was in John, Brother to King Richard: this was the
Right which the English seemed to think most agreeable to the Constitution of
this Monarchy; Calls the other mos Britanniae.
and is according to the Grand Cust. cap. 25.
Custom of Normandy for Succession to that Dukedom; and, as Cujac. de feudis f.
519.
Cujacius supposes, of most Nations. Dicentes judicium esse and consuetudinem
iliorum Regionum.
Foreigners were for Arthur of Britain, as having the right of Representation,
being the Son of John's elder Brother: and this was the Right Wendover in Bib.
Cot.
according to the custom of Britain in France.

But as to the Law of England, it appears by Glanv. tract.
Glanvil's account of the Law, de Legibus and cons.
as it was taken in the time of H. 2. that even for the Descent of private
Inheritances, it was doubtful, rni Angliae lib. 7. c. 3.
whether they ought to go to the Grandson, by the eldest Son who died in the
Father's life time, or to his next surviving Son. Licet praemoriatur patri suo
etc. nulla dubitatio est, etc.
If indeed the eldest Son had in the Father's life time done homage to the
Chief Lord for his Father's Inheritance; ^unc quidem ita body obtinet inter
avunculum and nepotem, quia melior est conditio possedentis.
this was held to remove the doubt. And Glanvil afterward says upon the
Question between Uncle and Nephew, that the condition of the Possessor is the
better.

According to which, -King John having obtained Possession of the Crown, had it
rightfully, and Arthur had no right to turn him out.

John Wendover de An. 1199.
being beyond sea at his Brother's death, sent over the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Earl Marshal of England, to solicit for his being admitted
to the Throne. These Great Men, with the assistance of the Chief Justice of
England, prevailed upon many to swear Allegiance to John: and in a Convention
at Northampton, those Persons were Sponsors Wend. Quod jura sua redderet
universis: sub tali conventione, Comites and Barons Comiti memorato
fidelitatem contra omnes homines juraverunt.
for John's doing right to all men: upon which condition, or in confidence of
his performing what had been undertaken in his name, the Earls and Barons swore
Fidelity to him, against all Men: yet after this, he was formally elected in a
full Convention of the States, where Mat. Par.
the Archbishop declares it as matter known to 'em all, that no man ought to
succeed an other to the Kingdom, upon any previous reason, unless unanimously
elected by the whole Realm, etc. But if any one of the Royal Stock was more
deserving than others, his election ought to be consented to, the more promptly
and readily. Noverit discretio vestra, quod nulius praevia ratione alii
succedere habet regnum; nisi ab universitate regni unanimiter, invocata
spiritus gratia electus, etc.


Notwithstanding what had passed in favor of John, in the Convention; the Mat.
Par.
Archbishop at the time of the Coronation calls him but Earl.

King John not only took the Oath appointed by the standing Ritual, which
declares every King of England to be elected; but assumed the Royal Dignity, as
his Predecessor did, with the express condition of keeping his Oath. Having
broken this Contract, and notoriously departed from that end, for which,
according to the Confessors Law, Dico de hoc Comite etc.
expressly sworn to by him, he had been constituted or created King; in making
War upon his People with Foreign Forces, with which he exercised inhuman
barbarities; and as much as in him lay alienating his Imperial Crown to the
Pope: Arch. and districte prohibitus, ne ^onorem bunc accipere praesumeret,
nisi in menre habeat opere quae juraverat p^^implere. Ad hoc ille respordens
promisit, se per auxilium Dei, bona side ea quae juraverat servaturum.
he, in the Wendover Dein adjuratus est ab eodem
Judgment of the Court of France, as well as of the States and People of
England, fell from his Royal Dignity: the Throne was Mat. Par. Addit. f. 281.
The French King's Advocate says, Dare non potuit, potuit tamen dimittere eam.
Ib, vacans itaque regnum sine Barcnibus ordinari non debet; unde Barons
elegerunt.
become vacant; and during the vacancy, the Administration devolved upon the
States: whereupon they resolved to elect a new King, and sent a solemn Embassy
to the King of France, to send over his Son Lewis to be King of England; whose
wife was John's Sisters Daughter. But the chief inducement to this Election,
seems to have been that expectation, in which they were not deceived, that the
Mat. Par.
Foreigners would desert John for Lewis.

Tho they promised to Crown him King, they, seeing great grounds to dislike his
French Temper and Conduct, kept him upon his good behavior, without a Crown;
And having found by the dying Confession of one of his confederates, that he
had sworn, if he came to be once Crowned King, he would treat the English as
Rebels to their former Prince; they soon sent this Probationer packing; yet did
not hold John to be King.

After John's death, many of the greatest interest in England, while Lewis was
here, An. 1216.
and Elianor Prince Arthur's Sister alive in Bristol Castle, (who, according to
the vulgar notion ought to have been Queen) elected Henry, John's Son: but were
far from thinking him King upon the death of his Father; or from repenting of
what they had done to the Father: but they thought it advisable to cut off
Lewis his expectation of the Crown: to which end the Martial of England Summons
a Convention to Gloucester: where he tells Mat. West. f. 277, and 279.
the States, that though they had justly prosecuted the Father for his evil
deeds, yet that Infant was innocent; because he is the Son of a King, Knighton
col. 2426.
and our future Lord, and Successer of the Kingdom, let us Constitute him our
King.

At last all as with one voice, cried thrice, let him be made King.

Here it is evident that he was not accounted King till Constituted or made, and
was but a future Lord: and agreeably to this Mat. Par.
Matthew Paris says, they assembled in order to exalt Henry, ut. H. Regis fill.
primogen, in Regem Angle exaltarent.
the King's eldest Son, to be King of England.

He took the Coronation Oath more han once, and at Mat. Par.
An. 1236. 20 H. 3. In signum quod est Comes Palatinus and Regem si oberret
habeat de jure, potestatem cohibendi. Vid. Wendover. A Coronation at Canterbury
5 H. 3. Vid. etiam Lib. de Antiq. Leg. in Archivis Civ. Land. f. 117. A
Proclamation 53 H. 3. declaring that he would not then wear his Crown, and
dispensing with the Services of the Citizens of London and others.
one of his Coronations, had the Confessor's Sword carried before him, by the
Earl of Chester, one of the Earls Palatine of England, for a sign that that
Sword was not to be born in vain.

He having trod in his Father's steps, the States were likely to have made good
their solemn Mat. Par. Ipsi de communi conc. totius regni ipsum cum iniquis
corsiliariis suis a regno depellerent, and de novo Rege creando tractarent.
denunciation 17th of his Reign, of deposing him in a Common Council of the
whole Kingdom, and creating a new King, which as appears by Bracton lib. 2. c.
16.
Bracton a very learned Judge in that Reign, was no more than the then known
Law of the Kingdom. Various were the events of a long Civil War, in which at
last the death of the great Darling of the Church and People, Rex autem habet
superiorem Deum; item Legem per quam factus est Rex; item Curiam suam etc. Vid.
etiam ib. c. 24. and l. 3. c. 9.
the then Hereditary High Steward of England, and the bravery of Edward Henry's
Son gave him the victory: which they who were on his side, and his own
experience of the consequence of his former Counsels, kept withing some bounds
of moderation. Henry to secure the Succession to his eldest Son Edward, Lib. de
Antiq. Leg. in Arch. Civ.
had before that success, caused many, and particularly the Citizens of London,
to swear to his Son as Successor.

And after that it should seem that a Parliament had made Lib. de Antiq. Leg.
in Archiv. Civ.
a Settlement of the Crown. Lon. An. 1260. 44 H. 3.
For in the 55th of his Reign a Writ was sent to London, the execution of which
was returned into the Parliament that year at Winchester; and it is probable the
like had been throughout England; L. 55. H. 3. post ejus decessum rectis
haeredibus coronae Angliae.
in pursuance of which Writ, the Mayor, Barons, Citizens, and University of the
Commons, swore Allegiance to the King, after him to his eldest Son Edward, then
to his Son John, after that to the right Heirs of the Crown of England: which
not being to the Heirs of either of those Persons, plainly left the Inheritance
as I have shown it was from the beginning.

Upon the Father's death, the Mat. West. Gilbertus and Johes Comites, nec non
Clerus and populus, ad magnum altar ecc. Westminster. celeriter properaunt Ed. prim.
Regis fidel jurantes.
Clergy and Laity flocked to Westminster, where they declared or received for
King, Edward, then beyond sea in the Holy War, so called. Soon after this, as I
take it, a great Convention Annals Wav. f. 227.
of the States was holden in his name: there a Chancellor was chosen, and other
Provisions made for the Peace of the Kingdom, in Edward's absence: the Writ
which they issued out, requiring the Subjects in general to swear Allegiance to
E. Facta convocatione omnium Prel etc.
1. says, the Government was devolved upon him by Hereditary Succession, Rot.
claus.
and the Will of the Nobility, and the Fidelity performed, 1. E. 1. m. 11.
or Allegiance sworn to him.

Agreeably to which, Walsingham says, Walsing. f. 1.
they recognized Edward their Liege Lord, and ordained him Successor of his
Father's honor. Though he was a very gallant Prince, yet, having taken ill
advice, Mat. West. f. 430. 25 E. 1.
being to cross the Seas, he upon a Pedestal at Westminster Hall Gate, with the
Archbishop of Canturbury, and the Earl of Warwick by his side, publicly asked
forgiveness of his People; Suscipiatis me: quod si non rediero, in Regem
vestrum filium meum coronetis.
entreated 'em to receive him again at his return; and if he died, to Crown his
Son King: which they who were then assembled consented to.

How much it was then known to concern a King to keep to his part of the
Contract, as he would have his People continue bound; appears by two great
Authorities in our Law, of that time, Fleta, who, as to this matter,
transcribes Bracton almost verbatim; and the Mirror Mirror p. 8.
of Justices; which speaks of the first Institution of Kings among us, by
Election; for what End they were Elected, and what they were to expect, if they
answered not that End.

E. 2. as Walls. f. 68.
Walsingham informs us, succeeded not so much by Hereditary Right, Non tam jure
haereditario etc.
as by the unanimous Assent of the Nobility and Great Men.

He was for misgovernment, formally deposed, or Walls. f. 107. Rex dignitate
regali abdicatur, and filius substituitur.
Abdicated from the Regal Dignity, as Walsingham has it; and his Son Edward was
Substituted, or Elected, in his stead.

The Son indeed, tho he had headed Forces against his Father, seemed to scruple
accepting the Crown, without his Fathers consent: And ex post Facto, after Edw.
2d. had been deposed, and his Son Elected, with a threat, that if he refused,
they would Elect sombody else; the Father took some comfort at the Election of
his Son, and, as much Knighton col. 2550.
as in him lay, consented.

The Son it must be owned in a Writ, cited by Dr. Brady, says, Post multos
ejulatus etc.
his Father amoved himself, by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, Rot. Claus, 1
E. 3. m. 28.
Barons, and other Nobles, and also of the Commonal^y of the whole Kingdom.
Which being only in Writs Issued out of the Chancery, can be of no Force to
limit or explain that Act of the States: And was but a civility or complement
from the Son to the Father. What the States judged in the matter, will be very
plain from the following account, in a contemporary Author.

King Edward remaining in Custody at Kenelworth, Bib. Cot.
a General Council of the whole Clergy and People of England, Cleop. D. 9.
was Summoned, viz. of every City and every County and Borough, Annals de
Gestis Britcnum De.
a certain number of Persons, to Treat and Ordain with the Great Men, An. 1326.
of the State of the King and Kingdom. Convocatum est concilium generals etc.
In which Council, at the cry of the whole People, unanimously persevering in
that cry, that King Edward II. should be Deposed from the Throme of the
Kingdom; becuase from the beginning of his Reign to this day, he had misbehaved
himself in his Government, had Ruled his People wickedly; had dissipated Lands,
Castles, and other things belonging to the Crown; had, by perverse Judgment,
unjustly adjudged Noblemen to Death; had advanced the Ignoble; and had done
many things contrary to the Oath taken at his Coronation; Walter Archbishop of
Canterbury, pronouncing Articles of this kind, by assent and consent of all,
King Edward 2. is wholly deposed, and Edward his eldest Son In Regem Angliae
est sublimatus.
advanced to be King of England. And it is Ordained, that from thenceforth he
should not be called King, but Edward of Karnarvan, the King's Father. And
immediately Messengers were sent from the Council to the said Edward the King's
Father, to notify to him what had been done, and to read to him the Articles
upon which he had been deposed. He answered, he was detained in custody, nor
could contradict their Ordinances; but said, he would bear all patiently.

And it is observable, that a Stat. 1. E. 3. Rastal.
Statute of the Kingdom 1 E. 3. justifies the taking Arms against E. 2. while
he was in Possession of the Throne, and indemnifies all Persons for the pursuit
of the said King, and taking and withholding his body. E. 3. who knew that
himself came in by and election of the States, being aware that if he should
die before any Provision were made about the Succession, the Controversy
concerning the Right of Proximity and that of Representation would be revived,
between his eldest surviving Son, and Grandson by the eldest who died in his
life time; obtained an Act of Parliament, whereby Rot. Parl. 50. E. 3.
Richard, his Grandson by his eldest and best beloved Son, was declared or
made, very Heir to the Crown.

R. 2. Began his reign An. 1377.
following the example of E. 2. had the same fate, of which the States of the
Kingdom had some years before given him fair warning, telling him Knighton f.
2683.
they had an ancient Statute, according to which they might, Propinquiorem
aliquem de stir pe regid.
with the common assent and consent of the People of the Realm, abrogats him,
and advance somebody near of kin of the Royal Stock.

He not profiting by this admonition, the States were some 23 R. 2.
years after put to the exercice of their authority, and having adjudged that
he Rot. Parl. 1. H. 4. n. 16.
justly ought to be deposed, the N. 52.
whole States appointed Commissioners, for giving the Sentence of Deposition.
And a Record speaking of it, says, he was Rot. serve. die Coron. H. 4.
deposed for his demerits. The Act of State for this, says 'twas, as Rot. Parl.
1. H. 4.
in like cases had been observed by the ancient custom of the Kingdom. This
being done, Henry Duke of Lancuster Rot. Parl.
as soon as the Kingdom was vacant, rose out of his Seat, 1 H. 4. n. 54. so
Welsing.
and claimed the Kingdom begin void.

His claim was Rot. Parl. sup.
als descandit be right line of the blood comeynge fro the good Lord Henry
therde. Tpod. Neust. f. 156. Regnum Angliae sic vacans.


The reason seems very plain, why he claimed from H. 3. his being the last
inheritable blood which he could claim from: not from R. 2. because deposed:
nor from E. 3. because of the forseiture of R. 2. declared or constituted his
next Heir: not from E. 2. because of his forfeiture: nor from E. 1. becuase E.
2. had been his next Heir.

Hen. 4ths Descent from H. 3. was the qualification for an election. This was
not, as has been supposed, a strict right of Succession, Vid. The Debate at
large. p. 127.
as he was the next Heir then appearing: but he entitled himself to a
preference before all other Descendants from that Blood, as being a Deliverer
of the Nation from Richard's tyranny: Walsing sup. and Rot. Parl.
he having with the help of his Kinsmen and Friends, recovered the Kingdom,
which was upon the point of destruction, through the defect of Government, and
violation of the Laws. This induced the Rot. Parl. n. 54. Iiden Status cum tote
populo absque quacunque difficultate vel m^ra ut Dux praefatus super eos
regnaret unanimiter consenserunt.
States and all the People, unanimously to consent, that Henry should fill the
vacant Throne: and they Rot. Servic. sup.
appointed all the Ceremonies of his Coronation. But as far as proximity to the
last King could infer a right, he being Grandson to E. 3. had it before
Mortimer descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence, under whom the Family of York
claimed: besides, that H. 4. was undoubtedly the first on the Male line. Though
no Vid. inf. the case of Bishop Merk.
Layman of knowledge and integrity, can be thought at that time to have
questioned those grounds upon which H. 4. was declared King; yet since it is
hardly possible that there should be any Government, which some will not be
desirous to shake off, as the Jews did the Theocrasy; it can be no wonder that
some would color their ambition or malice, under pretense of love to justice;
and that they should object want of right to disturb the most just and equal
Government. What was at the bottom of objections against H. 4ths Title, will
appear by the case of a true Head of the Church Militant, Merk, or Mark, Bishop
of Carlisle; who not being able, as a Divine, to make good his Argument against
the receiving H. 4th. for King; was resolved to justify it by dint of Sword,
after he was made King.

For in Rot. Pat.
second of H. 4. he was indicted, and tried by a common Jury upon a special
Commission, 2 H. 4. rot. 4.
for that he and other his Accomplices, among which there were two bigoted
Knights, Blunt and Sely, were Interliga. and confederati adversario and inimi^o
nri Regis and rni sui, de Erancia and adherentibus ad eundem adversar. etc.
leagued and confederated together with the Adversary and Enemy of England, the
French, and their Adherents; traitorously to bring the said Adversary into the
Land of England, with intention to destroy the King, and all his Liege People
of the Kingdom, and to new plant the Kingdom of England with our enemies of
France: that they in an hostile manner went up and down, making great
destruction and slaughter; and without any Authority, assuming to themselves.
Royal Power, proclaimed Nota Richard's name was used only to color the
inviting the French to overrun this hand.
Richard to be King, and that they would not suffer Henry to be their Lord, or
King.

To this Indictment the Bishop pleaded Church-Priviledge, as an Quod ipse Epus
unctus (...).
anointed Bishop, which the Court overruled: the the reason for which is very
remarkable; because the matters contained in the said Indictment, concern the
death of our Lord the King, and the destruction of the whole Kingdom of
England; and consequently the Nota Et consequenter eccles. Anglicanae per quam
etc.
manifest depression of the Church of England, by which he claims to be
privileged: all which is high, and the greatest Treason, and the Crime of
laesa Majestas: nor ought any man of right to pray in aid of the Law, or to
have it, who commits such a Crime, or intends to commit it, etc.

His plea being thus overruled, the Bishop pleaded not guilty: but being
convicted of the horrid matter contained in the Indictment; it seems he did not
think this a fit cause to die for; and whether he merited a Pardon or no, by
sincere Repentance, at least obtained one: in which it is observable, that he
is called Pardonae vimus eidem nuper Episcope sectam pacis etc.
the late Bishop: for this restitution to the Peace, did not restore his
Ecclesiastical Dignity.

He, who is still called the late Bishop, having a pardon sent him, petitioned
to be delivered out of Prison: which was granted upon his finding Sureties for
his good behavior: and four undertook, that he Quod ipse amodo se been geret
erga Dominum Regem. and populum.
should for the future behave himself well, toward the King, and his People.

Thus the fear of death reformed this stiff Prelate; and made him engage to sit
quietly under a Government, which none but the Enemies to England, and their
Adherents, endeavored to subvert. Still some were found calling themselves
Englishmen, who, for the like ends, with Merk, would do their utmost to blemish
H. 4ths Title: this occasioned Oaths of Recognition, thrice repeated 5o. This
recited in the Petitions of the Commons Rot.
of his Reign: first at a Council of Worcester, then at a Great Council at
Westminster, and after that in a full Parliament; where the two former
recognitions, Pat. 8 H. 4.
which were voluntary Associations, p. 1. m. 4.
were affirmed; D'un volunt and d'un assentcoment quil nen busoignoit my
affermerent.
though as is there said, there was no need of it.

By those Oaths, they acknowledged the then King to be their Sovereign Liege
Lord, to obey him as their King; and acknowledge the Prince his eldest Son as
Heir apparent, and inheritable to the Crown of England, to him and the Heirs of
his Body. And for default of such Issue to his Brothers and their Issue
successively, and Enheretablement.
hereditably; according to the Law of England, to Pur viver and morer encontre
touts les gents de monde.
live and die against all People in the World.

The perjury of some, and the doubts raised by others, upon some of the
expressions in the Act, 5 H. 4. occasioned an other Rot. Pat.
7o. which, by the Counsel and Assent, of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, 7.
H. 4. pars. 2. in. 23. Ad ammovendam penitus materiam disceptationis etc.
to wit, the Prelates, Great Men, Peers, and Clergy, and also at the earnest
Petition of the Commons, and by Authority of the said Parliament, declares,
that the King's eldest Son, Fore and esse (...) fore and esse debere.
shall be, and is, and ought hereafter, and now to be, true lawful and
undoubted Heir and Universal Successor to the Crown, Vid. alt. ib. reciting the
breach of former Oaths.
and Kingdoms of England, and France, and all the King's Dominions, whatsoever
and wheresoever beyond the Sea; and also has right of universally succeeding
the King, in the said Crown, Kingdoms, and Dominions. To have to him and the
Heirs Male of his Body, and in default of such Issue so in remainder to his
Brothers.

In an other Charter passed in that Parliament, the Rot. Pat.
Inheritance or Hereditation of the Crown is entailed upon the King, sup.
Hereditas sive hereditaria.
and the Heirs Male of his Body, then to his four Sons, and the Heirs Male of
their Bodies successively.

It seems the Rot. Pat.
next year some doubts arose upon these different Settlements, 8 H. 4. p. 1. m.
4.
that 5o. then remaining upon Record: therefore they cancel and make void the
Letters Patent of the Entail 5o. and change, and amend that Settlement, which
they seem to have thought defective.

1. In only declaring the Prince Heir Apparent, and Inheritable to the Crown;
which was no more than to declare him, before others, qualified to succeed, if
the States should Elect him.

2. In declaring him Inheritable only to the Crown of England, without
mentioning Rot. Pat.
its appurtenances; seeming to think, 8. H. 4.
that in Grants of this Nature, nothing would pass by implication. Ponrvous
succeder en voz saisditz corone, roialms, and Seigniories, pur les avoir ove
routz leur appurtenances, apres ure decesse, a luy, etc.


But to prevent all ambiguities, they being, as is said in that Record, met in
a Parliament Communi consensu regni juxta morem ejusdem regni, etc.
according to the Custom of the Kingdom, for diverse Matters and Things
concerning the King and his Kingdom: The King, with common Consent of the
Kingdom, Enacts, That a new Patent be Sealed, constituting Prince Henry Heir
Heir apparent pour vous succeder.
Apparent, to succeed the King in his Crown, Realms, and Dominions, to have
them, with all their appurtenances, after the King's Decease, to him and the
Heirs of his Body; and so in remainder to his three Brothers successively:
whereby they had a larger Estate than by the Entail 7o which was to Heirs Male.

Thus, by Virtue of one or more Settlements, by Authority of Parliament, H. 5.
succeeded, and yet it was thought a great instance of the confidence the States
had in him, that in a Convention, or Assembly, holden according to Ancient
Custom, in which they treated about Pol. Virg. in Vit. H. 5. and Drs. Gale
Praef. Script.
creating a new King, some of the Nobility immediately Swore Allegiance to him,
Saxon. Dan.
before he had been declared King.

But it is to be observed, that whereas his Father died the Walsingham.
20th of March, he is said to be created King on the Polydore Virgil.
5th of April; In quo de Rege creando more majorum agitabatur. Vid. etiam Stow
in the Reign of H. 5. mentioning this, and calling that Assembly a Parliament.
Death cutting off the course of his Glories, his Infant Son, H. 6. came in
under the Parliamentary Entail, but the Administration was held to have fallen
upon the States, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 6.
who, accordingly, after having declared H. 6. King, in full Parliament, passed
a Patent, constituting Humfry Duke of Gloucester Protecter of the Realm, John Duke
of Bedford Regent of France, and Henry Beaufort Bishop of Winchester, and
Thomas Beaufort Duke of Exeter, Governors of the young Prince.

The Death of the brave Duke of Bedford, occasioned not only the loss of
France, but the raising the Family of York to a pretense, which in all
probability had been buried to this day, had not H. 6ths treacherous Ministers
put him upon making Richard Duke of York 13 H. 6.
Regent of France, after being High Constable of England, and Lieutenant of
Ireland.

With these advantages, Duke Richard set up under a Mask of Popularity, as if
he only sought redress of grievances, while himself was the only National
Calamity. As nothing but success could give him any color of Title, he was
forced to conceal his Ambition even from his own Party, till 26 H. 6 yet after
Vid. the Oath 29 H. 6.
that, acknowledged, and swore to H. 6ths Right, Stow, f. 395.
and confirmed it with the Sacrament; which Solemnities were to be subservient
to his imaginary Divine Right. I am, and ought to be humble subject, and
Lieage-man, etc.
Though by his Frauds and Perjuries, he often came within the prospect of a
Crown, Rot. Parl. 38 H. 6. n. 7.
38 H. 6. he was deservedly Attainted of High Treason, and an Association, with
an Oath, was voluntarily entered into by the Lords; wherein every one severally
acknowledges H. 6. to be his most redoubted Lord, and rightwish, or Rightful,
by Succession born to Reign over him, and all the Kings Liege People; that he
will do his utmost for the Well, and surety of the King's Person, of his most
Royal Estats, and the very conservation and continuance of his most high
Authority, Pre-eminence, and Prerogative, and for the preservation of the
Queen, and of Prince Edward his Right redoubted Lord the Prince; that after the
King's Death, he will take and accept the Prince for his Sovereign Lord, and
after him the Issue of his Body lawfully begotten; for want of such Issue, any
other Issue of the Body of the King; that he will never give Aid, Assistance,
or Favor, to any thing contrary to the premises; and that he will put himself
in his due undelayed devoir, with his Body, Goods, Might, Power, Counsel, and
Advertisement, to resist, withstand, and subdue, all that should presume to do
contrary to the premises, or any of them.

This Association, not being General throughout the Kingdom, had no great
effect; not so much from any belief the Nation had of Richard's being injured,
as from the burdens a Treacherous Ministry induced a weak Prince to lay upon
the Subjects: This made the Commons of Kent invite over, from abroad, the Duke
and his Party, who had fled from Justice; then the Tide turned, and the King
became wholly in the power of the Duke of York, under whose awe and influence a
Parliament was called, where he laid claim to the Crown, with circumstances,
which one would think, were enough to give any Man a face of Title: and yet his
pretended Divine Right, countenanced by Providence, was mightily qualified by
the courage of the Parliament, and their regard to the Constitution of this
Monarchy.

His claim was Rot. Parl.
as Son to Ann, Daughter to Roger Mortimer, 39 H. 6. n. 11.
Son and Heir to Philippa, Daughter and Heir to Lionel Duke of Clarence, third
Son to E. 3. whereas H. 6. descended from John of Gaunt, the 4th and eldest
surviving Son. After Debate among the N. 12.
Lords upon this matter, these Objections were agreed upon against Richard's
pretense of Title.

1. The Oaths they had taken to the King their Sovereign Lord.

2. Acts of Parliament made in diverse Parliaments of the King's Progenitors, of
Authority sufficient to defeat any manner of Title to be made to any Person.

3. Several Entails made to Heirs Male.

4. That Richard did not bear Lionel's Arms.

5. That H. 4. took upon him the Crown, not as Conqueror, but right Inheritor
to H 3.

All that is urged materially against this for Richard, is,

1. That Oaths do not bind against God's Law; and that requires Truth and
Justice to be maintained: but this being a Spiritual matter, he refers to any
Judge Spiritual.

2. That there was but one Entail of the Crown, 7 H. 4. but that this was void
against the right Inheritor of the Crown according to God's law, and all
Natural laws.

3. It could be justified by Record, that H. 4ths saying was not true.

Upon which it is observable,

1. That Duke Richard's answer goes upon a manifest begging the Question, and
supposing, that he had a Right which could not be barred by Act of Parliament.

2. That the Lords having mentioned several Entails upon Heirs Male; we are to
believe that there was then upon Record, the Entail upon Heirs Male in the time
of E. 3. pleaded by Vid. unreasonableness of the new separation, Fortescue's
MS. of this belongs to the Cotton Library, but not now to be found there,
unless restored very lately.
Judge Fortescue in defense of the Title of his King H. 6. This we are the
rather to believe, because there was but one Entail upon Heirs male in H. 4ths
reign: nor is Richard's denial any argument against this, it appearing that he
thought it sufficient for him to affirm any thing; and this was to pass for
Truth and Law. Thus he denies, that there had been any Entail but 7o H. 4.
forgetting that which had been made 5o and was amended 8 H. 4. and so very much
did he mistake, that he supposed the Entail 7o to be upon the N. 15.
Heirs of the Body, when it was upon Heirs male of the Body. To be unto him,
and to the Heirs of his Body coming, and to his 4 Sons, etc.


3. What the Lords say of Richard's not bearing Lionel's Arms, confirms another
objection against him made by Judge Fortescue, from the Barstardy of Philippa,
born while Lionel was beyond the four Seas; and never owned by him; nor did
she, or her descendants, till the time of this claim, bear the Arms of that
Family.

4. Richard's Right of Descent, admitting there had been no Illegitimacy, is
laid as a Right in Nature: but either this must be as the Laws of the Land
guide the course of Nature, or, otherwise, we must go back in search of this
Right, if not as far as Adam, yet to some descendant from the eldest House of
the Saxon Royal Family: to such, at least, as could derive their Pedigree from
some House elder than King Alfred's; which may be done at this day. Besides, if
we should look back to a Right in Nature, all the Kings, descendants from H. 2.
from whom Duke Richard came as well as H. 6. must have been Usurpers; H. 2ds
Children having being begotten on Elianor Wife of Lewis King of France,
another Man's Wife, who had been Divorced for her Adultery; and therefore by
God's Law could not Marry again: nor does it appear, that the Divorce was from
the Contract. Mat. Par. de An. 1150.
Or, if this Matter should admit of Debate, such of our Kings as descended from
an other common Ancestor, King John, must have been Usurpers; not only by
reasonof John's supposed Usurpation upon Arthur of Britain, and his Sister;
but in that his Children were begotten on Mat. West. f. 1200.
an other Man's Wife, who does not seem ever to have been divorced: and
besides, according to the Law of Nature it would seem, that John had a former
Wife in being. For he was divorced from her only for their being third Cousins,
as H. 2 ds. Wife was from her first Husband, as they were Cousins in the 4 th
Degree. If the first Marriages in both cases were void, or voidable, it could
have been only by the Laws of the Romish Church; but if those Laws shall make a
natural right, by governing the course of descents, much more shall the Laws of
particular Countries. If, by the Law of Nature, Duke Richard meant that which
the consent of Nations has made to pass for the dictates of nature; according
to Vid. Sup. p. 27.
Cujacius, this Law of Nature is for the right of Proximity, which John of
Gaunt, from whom H. 6. descended, had to his Father before R. 2. and H. 4 John
of Gaunt's Son, had before the Son of Lionel's Daughter, supposing her
legitimate. And by that Law it should seem, that Males are ordinarily to be
preferred before Females; though their Virtues have often raised 'em to Empire.

Farther yet, if by this he meant the Law of reasonable nature; what shadow of
reason can be assigned, why Vid. Grot. de jure belli and pacis l. 2.
the eldest Issue of a King's eldest Child, whether that Issue be an Infant,
sect. 24. For the Neice from the elder Son to exclude the younger Son, cannot
hold in Hereditary
or void of understanding, or humanity, ought universally, to succeed to
Crowns, before the King's eldest surviving Son; whatever be his Merits, or the
exigencies of the Public? And why should not a moral incapacity in this sense
be a natural one?

But if the Great Lawyer Fortescue; Kingdoms; For that gives only a capacity to
succeed.
who, as may be seen by the Rolls of the King's Bench, was Chief Justice there
from before Richard pretended to the Crown, and to the end of H. 6 ths Reign,
may be allowed to speak the Sense of the Learned in that Time; But of those
that are capable, regard is to be had to the privilege of the Sex.
they held the Power of the Prince Fortescue de Laud. Legum Angl. Rex a populo
potestatem effluxam habet.
to flow, or be derived, from the People: according to which, it must have been
taken to be more according to natural right, that the People, who appointed the
Succession in any Family, Vid. Rot. de B. R.
should govern and vary it, as they saw occasion; than that from their pitching
upon a Person, or Family, they should be for ever debarred from doing justice
to the demerits of one, and to the merits of another, in that very Family.

I am sure the learned Grotius, who distinguishes Grot. de jure belli and pacis
Lib. 2.
lineal Succession from Hereditary, says, Ib. Sect. 14.
an Hereditary Kingdom is one which was made so by the Peoples free consent.
And in such Kingdoms he supposes several Rules of Succession, by guessing at,
Sect. 22.
or presuming, the will of the People.

If Duke Richard would have admitted the Law of the Land, to govern the course
of Descents and Successions to the Crown; then it is evident beyond
contradiction, that H. 6. came in by a legal and natural course of Descent:
and, however, according to laudable custom from the beginning of this Monarchy,
Acts of Parliament may alter that course.

However, the timorous Rot, Parl. 39 H. 6. n. 18.
Lords, without concurrence in that matter of the stouter Commons, The Oaths
that the said Lords had made unto the King's highness, etc.
agreed, that the Duke's Title could not be defeated: and yet thought not
themselves discharged from their Oaths to H. 6. unless he would consent to the
mean, or expedient, they found out: which was, saved, and their consciences
therein cleared, etc.
for the King to keep his Estate and Dignity Royal during his life, and the
Duke and his Heirs to succeed him in the same.

To this both the King and Duke consented: it was agreed that the said mean the
should be opened and declared to the King's highness.
but neither the King's Right to the Possession, nor the Duke's to the
reversion, arose from their private agreement, but from the N. 18.
Authority of Parliament; according to which, the King had as much right N. 27.
to the Possession, as the Duke to the reversion.

And it remains as the judgment even of that Parliament, whatever force or awe
were over it, The King by advice of the Lords, condescended to the Accord, and
to be authorized by Authority of this present Parliament.
that Richard Duke of York had no right to the Possession; and neither was
King, nor of right ought to be King, till H. 6. should die, or cease to be King.

Nay even E. 4 ths Judges owned, that H. 6. was not a mere Usurper, Baggot's
Case 9 E. 4. Car-le corone fuit taille a lay per Parliament.
because the Crown was entailed to him by Parliament.

As a just judgment upon Duke Richard's pretense of Title, saving and ordaining
by the same auctority the King to have the said Corones, Reaumes, Roial Estate,
Dignity, and Preemirence of the same, and the said Lordship of Ireland during
his life natural.
contrary not only to the National, but Divine Authority, giving sanction to
the Laws of the Kingdom, and his own Oaths; he died within sight of the
Promised Land.

But An. 1460.
soon after his death, his Son Edward having less to answer for, and success to
recommend him to the People; upon more specious pretenses, succeeded H. 6. by a
manifest election.

Though he and his Father had, upon the agreement established in Parliament,
sworn to be true to H. 6. during his life, or till he should freely quit his
Crown; the dread of And furthermore by the same avis and authority, wolle,
consents and agrees, that after his decesse, or when it shall pleas his
highness to ley from him the said Corones etc. or thereof ceasseth etc.
their Arms got a liberty for 'em to enter their protestations, that this was
upon the express condition, that the King performed his part: but if he should
compass or imagine the death or destruction of the Duke, or his Blood, should
forfeit the Crown. And indeed it seems that the first acts of Hostility after
this agreement were committed by the Queen, and others of the King's Party; who
in attempting to rescue him out of the custody of the Duke of York, put an end
to his pretensions with his life. But his Son Edward Stow. f. 413.
having routed the Earl of Pembroke and other the King's Loyal Subjects, in a
Battle near Ludlow, marched up to London, where he was received with joy on the
28 th of February. Then he calls a Great Council of Peers, to whom he opens his
claim, upon the King's breach of the Articles. After the Lords had considered
of the matter, they Vid. Notes upon the Earl of Stamford's Speech An. 1692.
determined by Authority of the said Council, that forasmuch as King Henry,
contrary to his Oath, Honor, and Agreement, had violated and infringed the
order taken and enacted in the last Parliament; Citting Grafton's Chron. f.
652, 653. 658. Speed f. 851. Stow f. 414, 415.
and also because he was insufficient to rule the Realms, and unprofitable to
the Commonwealth; he was therefore, by the aforesaid Authority, deprived and
dejected of all Kingly Honor, and Regal Sovereignty: and incontinent Edward
Earl of March, was, by the Lords in the said Counseil assembled, named,
elected, and admitted for King and Governor of the Realm.

After this, the same day, the consent of the Ib.
common People was asked in St. John's Fields; where a great number, were
assembled. The Lords being informed of the consent of the Commons, acquainted
the said Earl with their election, and admission, and the loving assent of the
Commons. The next day he went to Westminster, where his Title and Claim to the
Crown was declared. 1. As Son and Heir to Richard his Father; right Inheriter
to the same. 2. By Authority of Parliament. 3. 3d. Not mentioned in those
Notes, but in Hollinshead f. 663.
And forfeiture committed by H. 6.

The Notes upon the Earl of S's Speech Sup.
Commons being again demanded, if they would admit and take the said Earl, as
their Sovereign Lord; all with one voice cried yea, yea: which agreement
concluded, he was then proclaimed.

Here it is observable.

1. That Edward did not claim upon any Title Prior to the Settlement in
Parliament, 39 H. 6. and therefore, in effect, claimed as adopted Heir to H. 6.
as H. 2. had been to King Stephen.

2. He alleges against H. 6. forfeiture, by breach of the Contrac^t
established in Parliament; and a Moral incapacity in him to Reign.

3. Notwithstanding this, he does not set up as King, before a solemn judgment
pronounced against H. 6. and in favor of him; and the formallity of a public
election.

4. It appears, that though he came to London, and was possessed of the head and
strength of the Kingdom; and Hen. 6. had, in effect, abdicated, he, who
according to the modern notion of the Successionaries, should have been King
upon the death of his Father, was not King, nor so reputed by his own Party,
till all those accustomed ceremonies were over; the last of which was
Hollinshead 663.
on the 4 th of March. Now if it shall prove, After the Earl of March had taken
upon him the Government.
that in the judgment of King Edward's own Parliament, his right ot turn H. 6.
out of Possession, was founded in H. 6 ths breach of the Contract, established
in Parliament; that E. 4. was not King till the 4 th of March; and that no Act
committed against him before that day, was Treason; nor was there, or could
there be Treason against his Father, who never had been King: then it will
appear, that some consent, or election, of the States, or People, was
essentially necessary to make a King, even of one who had, or at least was
supposed to have, all the right that descent could give him: and that the other
King must have forfeited, or ceased to be King, before such right could be
duly claimed. But,

1. The Act of Parliament declaring Rot. Parl. 1. E. 4. m. 8.
E. 4 ths Title, is held to be a restitution to the same: so that the very
Title, or Right was as if it had been extinguished. Declaratio tituli regii,
and restitutio ad eandem.


2. It is in that Act Ib.
particularly insisted on, that H. 6. had declared before witness, that he
would not keep the contract established in Parliament; and is expressly charged
with the breach of it.

3. E. 4. Rot. Parl. 1 E. 4. m. 8.
is adjudged to have been in lawful Possession of the Realm, n. 20, 21, 22, 23,
24.
upon the 4 th of March; and [on that day] lawfully seized, and possessed. But
not before: and then the exercice of the Royal Estate by E. 4. and amotion of
H. 6. are declared rightwise, lawful, and according to the Laws and Customs of
the Realm.

4. That Act says the Crown ought to have descended to Edmund Mortimer,
Edward's Ancestor, and after his decease to the next Heir of Blood: if the same
Usurpation had not been committed. Wherefore, according to that Act, the Crown
did not descend to any one of Mortimer's Family, while the Person who they
supposed to have usurped the Crown, or any descendant from him, kept Possession.

5. Edward's Parliament held his Father to have been no more than Duke of York:
and though in the Rot. Parl. 1 E 4. m. 17.
Act attainting H. 6. he is charged with the Murder of Richard Duke of York,
Convictio quorundam Dom. and al. authoritate Parl.
the first Treasonable Fact in H. 6. and others, is laid in levying War on the
29 th of March, and imagining to depose their Sovereign Lord Edward: who had
been declared King on the 4 th of that March: and H. 6 ths forfeiture is laid
in acting against his Faith and Allegiance to his Sovereign Lord: whereby they
plainly show, that as there could be no Treason against the Duke of York,
because he was never received for Sovereign Lord: neither could there have been
any against E. 4. unless he had been so received.

6. If any now will own his present Majesty to have right by Law; and yet
refuse to declare him rightful King; They go no farther then E. 4. and his
Party did, even after his Possession, in relation to such as they held to be
Usurpers. And should such Men add, that neither has the late King any right; as
it is probable that they mean, that he has no right making him King; they
therein would still keep to that President. But then if they would exactly
follow that, they must believe that the late King cannot be duly restored to
the Regal Dignity, till he should be received by the election, or consent, of
the States, or Body of the People: nor could that be rightfully done, unless
his present Majesty in a legal sense ceased to be King; before such election,
or consent.

Thus far I am sure they cannot come without a manifest departure from their
avowed Principles: and, therefore, to keep to them, they must give up the only
colorable Authority for their notion of King de jure, and de facto.

And they must yield, that there is not the least shadow of pretense, from what
was held in those times, that there was a King of right, at the very time that
an other was in fact: it going no farther, than that the Person who was King,
ought not to have been King; but while he was King the other was none.

7. The judgment of E. 4 ths first Parliament, whatever hard names they gave
that Family, on which they trampled, The Earl of March upon the death of R. 2.
and consequently E. 4. from him was undoubted
was so far from being an Authority, as has been Vid. The Debate at large etc.
p. 128.
pretended, against the receiving his present Majesty, upon the late King's
breach of the Original or Common Law Contract, confirmed by several declaratory
Statutes of the Kingdom, and the solemn Oaths of our Kings; that it is express
for the Rot. Parl. 1. E. 4. m. 7. and 8. and that God had given Ed. the grace
of eviction
eviction and amotion of one King, upon his breach of a contract established in
Parliament, King by conscience, by Nature, by Custom, and by Law: referring to
the Par. Roll. 1 E. 4.
and the setting up an other by an election.

And it is observable that the Act 1o StAT. 1. E. 4. C. 1.
E. 4. which confirms several judicial and other Acts of such as it calls Kings
only in fact, says, other than by Authority of any Parliament holden in their
times; plainly admitting that Authority to be sufficient in it self.

H. 6. coming again into Power; because of a Possession with such a consent of
the People as made E. 4. King; was Stow. 412.
formally again elected at the Tower: and in H. 7 ths time, De term.
was adjudged to have had his attainder purged, by his re-adeption of Power:
which seems not to have been till he had been re-elected.

Then H. 6. calls a Parliament, where he in his turn attaints the Adherents of
E. Mic. 1. H. 7. f. 4. b.
4. and, Stat. 1 E. 4. c. 1.
as we are to believe, himself: but the Record of that having been cancelled,
and the Rolls loss'd, it appears not whether it was for any Act committed
before H. Referred to 17o E. 4.
6 ths re-adeption of Power.

The Tide again Rot. Parl. 17 E. 4. n. 34.
turning for E. 4. all the Acts of that Parliament are reversed and declared,
or made, void: from the time that he had been declared, Vid. etiam
he was held to have continued the Possession of the Regal Dignity, Rastal.
cap. 6.
though withheld from the exercice of the Power; and therefore H. 6. from the
first admission of E. 4. to the Crown, was accounted no King, and his
Parliament to be but a pretenced Parliament.

E. 4 ths usage of H. 6. was repaid to his Sons by their Uncle R. 3. some will
have it that he made them away, as indeed is intimated in the Act attainting R.
3. but it is certain that they were bastardized in a Convention, whose Acts were
by Rot. Parl. 1. R. 3.
Parliament after Richard was admitted King, declared for truth, and not to be
doubted; and there are Vid. Buck's Hist.
Authorities to induce the Belief, that Edward's Sons were really Bastards, by
reason of the Father's pre-contract: however the Rot. Parl. 1. R. 3.
Convention declared, that they were not fit to Reign, because they were
Infants, and their Mother ignoble, and married clandestinely without the
knowing and assent of the Lords. George Duke of Clarence, the next Brother to
E. 4. having been attainted in a Parliament of E. 4. they having singular
confidence in Richard's particular merit, have chosen in all that in them is,
and by that their certain writing, choose him their King and Sovereign Lord, to
whom they know of certain, it appertains of Inheritance to be chosen.

And observing that though the Learned in the Laws and Customs know his Title to
be good, the most part of the People is not sufficiently learned in the Laws
and Customs; they declare that the Court of Parliament is of such Authority and
the People of this Land of such a disposition, as experience teaches, that
Manifestation and Declaration of any Truth or Right made by the three States of
the Realm assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of the same, makes before
all other things most faith, and certain quieting of men's minds, and removing
the occasion of doubts and seditious language. Therefore by the Authority of
that Parliament, it is pronounced and declared, that their Sovereign Lord the
King, was, and is, the very undoubted King, as well by right of Consanguinity
and Inheritance, as by lawful Election, Consecration, and Coronation. And they
Enact, Establish, Pronounce, Decree, and Declare, Edward the King's eldest Son
Heir Apparent: to him and his Heirs of his Body.

Any Man who compares that Act at large with the former Presidents; must see,
that it was penned with great Wisdom, and regard to the Constitution of the
Monarchy.

And though out of an usual complement to the prevailing side, R. 3. has
generally been represented as a Monster in Person, and Nature; the learned Buck
has made it doubtful, which was the most deserving in all things, R. 3. or H.
7. Certain it is, that though the Crown had, by Authority of Parliament, been
settled in remainder after H. 6. upon Rot. Parl. 39 H. 6. n. 27.
Duke Richard and his Heirs; and that Duke's Granddaughter was alive and
marriageable, in the Reign of R. 3. her supposed Right gave him no disturbance,
and his Possession was very quiet till he disobliged the Duke of Bucks (who was
the great Instrument in setting him up) by rejecting his Claim to be
High-Constable of England: which was an Authority dangerous to be trusted in
the hands of so popular a Man: nor could the Duke and his Faction expect to
succeed in their conspiracy, without the support of French Forces: and,
accordingly, applied themselves to Henry Earl of Richmond, afterward H. 7.
with whom the Duke of Vid. Comines Un june Princ de Engle terre.
Brittany had for some years kept even E. 4. in awe.

Henry was glad of the opportunity: and, to strengthen his Interest, agrees
with some of his Party to marry the Daughter of E. 4. but was far from making
any claim in her right. It is very probable that one of E. 4 ths Sons was then
alive: be that as it will, as appears by the Statutes 1 H. 7. cited above, his
Parliament held that he landed with Title: and R. 3. being deserted, and slain
in the Field of Battle; that opposition to Henry was, by Authority of
Parliament, adjudged Treason against the Sovereign Lord of this Land: and H. 7
th. was held to have recovered his right.

After this, when H. 7. meets Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7. Idem Dominus Rex praefatis
communibus ore suo proprio eloquens, ostendendo suum adventum ad jus and
coronam Angliae fore tam per justium titulum haereditantiae, quam per verum Dei
judicium, in tribuendo sibi victoriam de inimito suo in campo.
his first Parliament, he, with his own Mouth, tells the Commons in full
Parliament, that his accession to the Right and Crown of England, was as well
by just Title of Inheritance, as by God's true judgment, in giving him the
victory over his enemy in the Field.

In which, bating the Settlement in the time of the Confessor, H. 7. claimed as
W. 1. did, by the Inheritance of consanguinity, and that Success which gave him
the preference before others of the same Blood; especially, since that enemy,
whom he subdued, was held to be an Usurper.

This it is evident, that he was accounted before H. 7. Landed. But if it be
truly considered, his Usurpation, if any, must have consisted in the Tyrannical
Exercice of his Power, which the Duke of Bucks had urged to justify his Arms,
and not from the assuming it; and that H. 7 th's Sovereignty was founded in
that election of the Body of the People, without a formal Convention, which
pitched upon him as a fit Person to deliver them from their real or imagined
Yoke. This will appear beyond contradiction, from the proceedings of the
Parliament upon his Claim, and the moral impossibility of giving it any other
color. However, the Parliament took to it self full Authority in the matter;
and Stat. 1 H. 7. Rot. Parl. II est ordeign establie and enact par auctorite du
die Parliament, etc.
declaring their hopes that it might be to the pleasure of Almighty God, the
Wealth, Prosperity, and Security of this Realm, by Authority of Parliament
settles the Crown upon H. 7. and the Heirs of his Body, exclusive of all
others. After which, indeed, they desire him to marry Eliz. E. 4th's Daughter,
Rot. Parl. 1 H. 7.
that by God's Grace there might be issue of the Stock of their Kings: but then
special care is taken, that neither the King, or the Children by that marriage,
should be thought to derive any Title from her: for though they, by Authority of
Parliament, repeal her Bastardy declared 1o R. 3. they, by Ib. n. 18.
the said Authority, ordein, that the then Act ne any clause in the same, be
hurtful or prejudicial to the Act of stablishment of the Crown of England, to
the King and the Heirs of his Body begotten.

After this H. 7. obtains a Bull from the Pope, which says Bib. Cot. Cleop. E.
3.
the Kingdom belonged to him, not only by right of War, and notorious undoubted
Ib. proximo successionis titulo.
nearest Title of Succession; but also by the election of the Prelates, Peers,
Great Men, Nobles, and the Commons of all the Kingdom of England; and by the
known and decreed Statute and Ordinance of the three States of the said Kingdom
of England, In ipsorum conventu, etc.
in their Convention called a Parliament.

According to this, though his Reign was held to have begun before he had been
declared King, it was, as I shall have occasion to observe in other cases, only
by way of relation to that solemn Investiture; without which he had never been
King. That his Right must have been derived from a plain Election, is very
evident; for,

1. He had been Vid. the Year-Book, 1 H. 7. f. 4.
attainted in a Parliament of R. 3. and if the Royal Blood could not be so
attainted but whenever a former King ceased to be King, the Person so
attainted, standing next to the Crown, should have his Attainder purged by the
descent of the Crown; then according to them of this Opinion, the Earl of
Warwick, Son to George Duke of Clarence, who had been attainted by Parliament
in the Reign of his Brother E. 4. must have had the Right before H. 7.

And yet, if we regard the distinction between Proximity and Representation, H.
7. was, in that respect, more truly the Vid the ^ull sup.
next Heir to the Crown. But however, the resolution of the Judges, Year-Book 1
H. 7. f 4. Eo. Facto que il prist sur luy le royal dignity destre Roy.
1 H. 7. has been taken, they held the disability to cease eo facto, that he
took upon him the Royal Dignity to be King; nor by any imagined Right of
Descent.

2. At least, one of the Children of E. 4. was alive when H. 7. came to the
Crown.

3. This said of ^. 6. and applied to H. 7.
Though in truth, it appears by the Statute reversing the Attainder of H. 6. to
have been the judgment of H. 7th's Parliament, that H. 6ths Family, of which he
was, ought to be the reigning Family; yet H. 7. had no pretense to preference
in that Family, but from his Merits, and the People's Choice. For,

1. His own Mother, who stood before him upon that Line, was then alive.

2. He came from a Bastard branch, his Ancestor being the Bastard Son of John
of Gaunt, during former Marriages on both sides. And though there was a
legitimation Rot. Parl. 20 R. pars 2.
20 R. 2. that neither did, m. 6. and 4 Inst. F. 36.
nor was intended to extend to capacitate for the Royal Dignity: However, H. 7.
is, in an Act of Parliament, called Rot. Parl. 3. H. 7. m. 15.
Natural Sovereign Liege Lord.

Certain it is, The Attainder of the E. of Linc.
that he was never in his time, or after, Authoritatively declared, or
accounted, King only in Fact: and they who will take the distinction of King in
Right and in Fact, from the last Parliamentary Declaration in this matter,
before the Revolution, must hold; that till the restitution of the younger
House, which had been settled the Regnant Family for three Reigns successively;
all the Kings of the elder House were Kings only in Fact, but not of Right.

And yet it is not to be thence inferred, that while they of the elder House
had possession, they were to be accounted Usurpers, for not standing first upon
that Line which ought to have had the preference: But when any Prince of either
branch, had Justice done to his Merits, who would not say, that he ought sooner
to have been King?

H. 8th An. 1059.
came in under the Authority of Parliament, which had made H. 7th the Head of a
new Succession, as the Crown had been Entailed upon him and his Issue. And though
H. 8th's Mother was Daughter to E. 4. whatever Dr. Brady Introd. f. 391. next
Heir to the Crown by proximity of Blood, as right Heir to his Mother.
suggests, it has appeared above, that particular care was taken by H. 7th's
Parliament, that the Crown should not be thought to descend by proximity of
Blood; but that the Right of Succession was to be derived from Parliamentary
Authority.

It is beyond contradiction, that in the judgment of H. 8th. and his
Parliaments, the inheritance of the Crown was variable as Parliaments should
determine; and that no Man could rightfully succeed, without such appointment.

By Authority Stat. 25. H 8. 6. 1.
of his Paliament 25o. the Marriage with Katherine, Mother to Queen Mary, was
declared void, and that with Ann, Mother to Queen Elizabeth, lawful, and the
Children made inheritable, according to the course of Inhetances, and laws of
this Realm; first to Males, then to Females: 'twas made High Treason by
Writing, Print, Deed, or Act, to attempt any thing to the prejudice of that
Settlement; and the substance of an Oath was appointed Stat. 26. H. 8.
afterward made more express, by another Statute, repealing all Oaths to the
contrary, and engaging the Subjects, in maintaining that Act of Succession, to
do against all manner of Persons, of what estate, degree, or condition soever
he be.

By 28 H. 8. c. 7.
Authority of Parliament, 28 H. 8. the Marriages with Queen Katharine and Queen
Ann, are declared unlawful, and the Children illegitimate; and the Crown is
settled upon the issue of the Body of Queen Jane, E. 6ths Mother: for want of
such issue, to such Person and Persons as the King should appoint by Virtue of
the said Act. And it provides, that if any should attempt to succeed contrary
to that Settlement, they should lose and forfeit all right Title and Interest,
that they may claim to the Crown, as Heirs by Descent, or otherwise.

The reason for reserving an appointment to the King is very remarkable;
because, as the words of the Statute are, If such Heirs, should fail, as God
defend, and no Provision made in your life, who should rule and govern this
Realm; for lack of such Heirs, then this Realm, after your transitory life,
shall be destitute of a lawful Governor: or else per case encumbred with such a
Person, that would covet to aspire to the same, whom the Subjects of this Realm
shall not find in their hearts to love, dread, and obediently serve, as their
Sovereign Lord. And all offenders against that Act, their Abetters,
Maintainers, Fautors, Counselors, and Aiders, were to be deemed and adjudged
High Traitors to the Realm.

According to which it is very evident,

1. That no Person would have had Right to succeed, who was not within the
express limitations then made; or the future Provision by Virtue of the
Authority of that Parliament.

2. If any Person should aspire to succeed from a pretended Right of Proximity,
or the Settlement 1 H. 7. he would have been an Incumberer, or Usurper, of the
Realm: unless the Subjects should find in their Hearts, or freely Consent, to
serve him as their Sovereign Lord; that is, till he should be elected King.

3. That till the election of another King, there would be a vacancy; and
whoever would pretend to be King till Elected, was punishable as a Traitor to
the Realm.

By 28 H, 8, c. 10.
Authority of the same Parliament, the Illegitimations of Mary and Elizabeth
are continued; yet if the King, and Prince Edward should die without Heirs of
their Bodies, the Crown was to go to the two Ladies successively: but their
respective interests to determine, if they did not perform such Conditions as
the King should appoint. And in case of failure of Issue, or in performance of
the Conditions, least the Realm should be destitute of a lawful Governor, the
Crown was to go as the King should appoint, in such manner as is there directed.

The 35 H. 8.
Settlement by Authority of Parliament, 28 H. 8. was by the same Authority
confirmed in substance 35o, with a repetition of the inducement to place in the
King a Power to appoint a Successor. But whoever should have been so appointed,
or, for want of such appointment, elected by the Estates upon a vacancy,
according to a Statute 25 H. 8. and that above cited 1 H. 7. would have become
a natural Lord.

That what I have observed in Acts of Parliament in the time of H. 8. proceeded
not from the prevalence of any Party, or compliance with the King's humor, but
was the settled Judgment of the Learned of those times, how much soever divided
in other matters, may appear by some passages between the Learned Sir Thomas
Moore, who had been Chancellor, and Rich then Solicitor General.

Sir Thomas being a Prisoner in the Tower, for not owning the King's Supremacy,
Rich, to persuade him to comply, used this argument: later recorda de An.
If, says he, it should be enacted, by Authority of Parliament, that I should
be King, and that if any one should deny it, 27 H 8. sub cust. urrwumque
Capital. Justic. and Attornat.
it should be Treason, would you say that I were not King? For certain, adds
he, in my conscience this would be no offense, but you would be obliged to say
so, and to take me for King: Genesis Si in acttat. fuisset autoritate Parl. etc.
si diceret non, etc. Vid. etiam B. Burnet's Hist. of the Ref.
because your own consent was bound by the Act of Parliament.

Sir Thomas Answers, it would be an offense, if he should say he were not King:
because he should be bound by the Act; for that he might give his consent to
that matter. This, he said, was a light case: But what if a Parliament should
enact, 1 Vol. f. 354.
That God should not be God? Rich replies, It was impossible God should not be
God. But, says he, because your case from God is sublime, I will propose to you
this of an inferior Nature: You know our King is constituted Supreme Head on
Earth of the Church of England, and why ought not you, Master Moore, so to
affirm and take him, as well as in the case above, of my being made King? In
which case you grant, that you would be obliged to affirm, and take me to be
King. Moore says, these were not like cases, because Quia Rex per Parl. fieri
porest and per Parl. deprivari potest.
a King may be made by Parliament, and may be deprived by Parliament: to which
Act, every Subject being present in Parliament, may give his consent: But to
the case of the Primacy, he cannot be obliged, because to that he cannot give
his consent in Parliament, etc. And it is observable, that though this is set
forth in the Indictment against Sir Thomas Moore, it is only used as proof of
his denying the Supremacy; without any aggravation from what he says of the
Power of a Parliament in the present Question.

E. 6. 1546.
succeeded H. 8. according to Parliamentary Settlements, without any formal
recognition.

Nor was 1553.
Mary, his half Sister, who succeeded him, recognized, but her Parliament
thought it for her Honor to take off her illegitimation, though that was not
necessary to give her a Right to the Crown: nor did that Parliament use any
expressions whereby they might seem to think so. When she came to marry Philip
King of Spain, they fully asserted their rightful Power; all the marriage
Articles being settled by Stat. 1 M. c. 2.
Authority of Parliament: By that, Philip is made an English King: 1 and 2 P.
M. c. 9.
Another Parliament makes it forfeiture of Goods and Chattels, and perpetual
Imprisonment the first time, and High Treason the second, after a former
Conviction, maliciously to maintain, that either of them ought not to enjoy the
Style, Honor, and Kingly Name.

Her Right was founded upon the express limitation to her by Authority of
Parliament; and her Husband's not in 1558.
marrying her, but the consent of Parliament. Upon the same Right her half
Sister Elizabeth succeeded her. By that good Providence which so often appeared
for her, Mary dying Camden. Eliz. f. 12.
while a Parliament was sitting; The States, with general consent, decreed
Elizabeth to be proclaimed true and lawful Heir to the Crown, according to the
Act of Succession,, 35 H. 8.

And in the Act of Recognition, she is declared, Stat. 1 El. c. 3.
their rightful and lawful Sovereign Liege Lady and Queen.

Soon after this, in a Letter written with her own hand Camd.
to Ferdinand the Emperor, she tells him that she by God's goodness succeeded
her Sister, by right of Inheritance, and consent of her Subjects.

Though she had sufficient opportunity to have procured an Act of Parliament to
take off her illegitimacy; she seemed with wisdom to decline it.

1. Because the Authority of Parliament, under which she claimed, was more
generally acknowledged in those days in relation to the Succession of the
Crown, than in voiding or confirming Marriages: which has been held a Spiritual
Matter.

2. To admit that she owed her Crown wholly to the Authority of Parliament,
could not but be more popular, than to pretend to it by right of Blood.

In the Journals of Q. Eliz. f. 105, 106, 107.
8 th and 9 th of her Reign, the Lords addressed to her, that a Successor might
be appointed in Parliament, least God should call the Queen, without certainty
of Succession: and affirm, that the not granting their request, would leave the
Realm without Government.

In the Stat. 13 Eliz. c. 1.
13 th of her Reign it is made Treason during her Life, and forfeiture of Goods
and Chattels after her death, to deny the Power of Parliament to limit and bind
the Crown, and the Descent, Limitation, Inheritance, and Government thereof;
and a penalty is set upon them, who should affirm, that any, but the Issue of
the Queen's Body, had right to succeed after her.

For any one who expected the Crown, to pretend to it while she lived, is made
disability during life only: but by a Stat. 27 Eliz.
subsequent Statute approving and explaining the voluntary Association of the
Subjects that year, every such Person is excluded and disabled for ever. And
though at Camd. Eliz.
the time of giving judgment against Mary Queen of Scots, it was declared to be
without prejudice to her Son; that could not hinder the operation of the Law
upon that Statute: and I would gladly know how he could have any right, since
he had no pretense as a special Heir, under any Parliamentary Settlement then
in force.

Upon the Queen's Treaty of Marriage 14o of her Reign with the French King's
Brother, she declared Camden f.160.
that she could not grant, An. 1571. 14 El.
without the assent of the States of the Realm, that he should be Crowned after
the Marriage.

In Coke's Entries f. 373. 380.
an information in the Exchequer 21o of her Reign, upon which judgment was
given, with the advice of the Judges of both Benches, Lands are said, after the
death of E 6. to have come to Queen Mary, as his Sister and Heir, as in right
of the Crown; and so from her to Queen Elizabeth: In both which instances,
according to the judgment of that time, the rightful Possession of the Crown
made them Heirs to their respective Predecessors: notwithstanding the half
Blood of both, and the continuing illegitimacy of one of them.

That An. 1602.
J. 1. could not rightfully succeed that glorious Queen, without an election by
the States of the Kingdom, had been declared with sufficient Authority in her
time, and in the time of H. 8 th. and without such Declaration would appear by
the observing how the Law stood, and was taken in all former times.

But whatever right was ascribed to him after he got Possession; his Party here
found it requisite to set Vid Camd.
up a will or nomination of Queen Elizabeth, Eliz. and Wilson's Hist. of J. 1.
to facilitate his accession to the Throne.

Then with a new strain of Loyalty, Judges, Lawyers, and Juries, concurred in
making attempts to prevent his coming to the Crown, Treason: the like of which,
withal its Circumstances had not been known in any Age of this Monarchy. Though
there had been Treason against W. 1. before his actual admittance to the Crown,
it was, as has appeared above, after a National Settlement upon him by name:
and this was the case of the unfortunate Lady Jane, and others who set l er up
against Queen Mary. Yet that complement to J. 1. was but suitable to the
flattering Act of Recognition 1o of his Stat. 1. J. 1.
Reign: according to the Preamble of which, immediately upon the decease of
Queen Elizabeth, the Crown did by Inherent Birthright, and lawful, and
undoubted Succession, descend and come to him; as lineally descended from
Margaret, Daughter to

However, that Parliament made no Law in the Matter, and, by good luck, left
the constitution as they found it: for they made no Settlement of the Crown,
only offered that recognition as the first Fruits of their Faith to him, and
his Royal Progeny, and Posterity for ever; which, if it had been a Settlement,
would amount to no more, than what had been usual in former times; for
Parliaments to make a branch of the Royal Family, a new head of future
Successions: but by this any one of the Issue, or Posterity, stood fair for an
election.

Yet, possibly, the Parliament had not been so forward with these Fruits of
their Loyalty, but for his Speech to 'em, wherein he says,

Vid. K.
Every King in a settled Kingdom is bound to observe the Paction James his
Works.
made to his People by his Laws, in framing his Government agreeable thereto.
And a King governing in a settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates
into a Tyrant, as soon as he leaves off governing according to his Laws. In
which case the King's conscience may speak to him, as the poor Widow said to
Philip of Macedon; either govern according to your Law, or be no King.

The Parliament take him at his word, and grafting upon it, say, Stat. 1. J. 1.
His Majesty has vouchsafed to express many ways, how far it is, and ever
shall be from his Royal and Sincere Care and Affection to the Subjects of
England, to alter, or innovate, the Fundamental, and ancient Laws, Privileges,
and good Customs, of this Kingdom: whereby not only his Legal Authority, but
the Peoples security, of Lands, Livings, and Privileges, both in general, and
particular, are preserved and maintained. And by the abolishing or altering of
the which, it is impossible, but that present confusion will fall, upon the
whole state and frame of this Kingdom. Where, in as modest terms as they could,
they bid the King, at his peril, to violate the Fundamental Laws, on which his
regal Authority depended, as well as their Rights and Privileges.

But that King soon forgot upon what terms he had been received King; and,
getting the leading Clergy on the side of his Divine Right, it passed at that
time as the Doctrine of the Church of England.

While this fit of Loyalty lasted, C. 1. succeeded as by inherent Birthright,
without any formal recognition: which then began to be thought needless. The
occasions of the War between him and his Parliament, I shall not enquire into,
but shall content my self with Dean Sermon before the House of Commons p. 6.
Sherlock's concession; who, as he will not dispute the lawfullness of
resisting the King's Authority, and whether it were lawful for the Parliament
to take Arms against the King, to desend the Laws, and Liberties of their
Country; admits that they had a Ib. They could pretend to no farther right etc.
right to keep the King within the boundaries of Law: these C. 1. apparently
broke; and where there is no Vid. Vindic. of the Case of Allegiance p. 46, 47.
Tribunal on Earth to appeal to, the Dean allows use of the Sword. But whatever
was the consequence of that War, there has been no reason for the Pulpits to
sound to loud, and long as they have done, with, denunciations of God's wrath,
but, indeed, the Clergies, against this Kingdom, for what happened in a War, for
which the Parliament and People, who would not have carried the Point so far,
as it unhappily went, are not to answer. C. 1. dying a deplorable death, the
Nation was left without the exercice of any Legal Government, till the
Restoration of C. 2. who was accounted King from the death of his Father.

But by what Law, or in what respect is worth enquiry, and will it appear.

1. That the supposed Maxim that the King never dies, Finehes description of
the Common Law ed. An. 1613.
is of very late and doubtful Authority, in comparison with those which show
that no Man was, or ought to be accounted King, till he had been formally
recognized.

2. Yet though this should be true, when any Prince succeeds in virtue of a
Settlement, made in the Ancestor's life time; it will not be so where there has
been none, as was the case of C. 2.

3. If one should in the eye of Law be King immediately upon the death of an
other, it would not follow that this would be by a strict right of descent; but
that after the being admitted King, there should be a relation backwards, to
prevent the loss of any rights belonging to the Crown: and thus it was plainly
taken by the Chief Justices Dyer Dyer f. 165. Anderson f. 44.
and Anderson, who say, that the King who is Heir, or Successor, may write and
begin his Reign, the same day that his Progenitor, or Predecessor, died.

And agreeably to this, it was the resolution of all the Judges of the King's
Bench in Queen Elizabeth's time, that a saving to a King and his Heirs, shall
go to a Successor of the Crown, though not Heir to that King.

That J. 2. made too great haste to succeed his Brother C. 2. now at least Men
will be apt to believe: of whom I shall observe only in short,

1. That he was within no Parliamentary Settlement of the Crown then in force.

2. The best pretense J. 2. had of coming to the Crown without an immediate
election, must have been the Settlement 1o H. 7. But no shadow of reason can be
assigned, why the late Act of Settlement was not as rightful, and with as true
Authority, as that 1o H. 7.

3. J. 2. being reconciled to the Sea of Rome, which is High Treason by Stat.
23.
our Law, and for which he had been convicted in his Brother's time, Eliz. c. 1.
if the Indictment had not been arbitrarily defeated, was as much disabled from
succeeding to the Crown, as the Family of George Duke of Clarence, by reason of
that Duke's attainder.

4. Admit the assuming the Royal Dignity, had purged the former disability; the
continuing a Papist was a constant incapacity to be the Head of this Protestant
Church, Will you grant and keep etc.
and Kingdom; rendering it impracticable for him to answer the end for which our
Kings had been constituted. namely the Laws, and Customs, and Franchises
granted to the Clergy, by the glorious King St. Edward your Predecessor
according to the Laws of God, and the true profession of the Gospel,
established in this Kingdom: and a Greeing to the Prerogative of the Kings
thereof, and the ancient custom of this Realm.


5. He was never duly invested with the Royal Dignity Lib. Regalis penes
Decanum West. and Sandford's account of the Coronation.
not having taken the appointed Coronation Oath: which for his sake, was
traitorously altered; with an omission of the Rights of the People, and an
unjustifiable Salvo for Prerogative. Nor was he ever fully recognized.

6. By seizing the Customs, and raising Taxes, without Authority of Parliament,
dispensing with the Laws of the Kingdom, raising and keeping a standing Army in
the time of Peace, and the like enormities; he violated that constitution which
should have made or kept him King: and if he ever was King, more than Harold,
the Son of Earl Godwin, manifestly ceased to be King, before his abdication.

7. However it may have been at his first leaving the Kingdom, without any
other Government, than what, according to ancient Custom, fell upon the States
of the Kingdom; he, having since discovered a settled intention to destroy the
People of England, or the greater part of 'em, by a Foreign Power, with their
Party here; according Vid. Falkner's Christian Loyalty p. 526.
to those Casuists who are most favorable to such rights as he has claimed;
from the time, at least, of his manifesting such intention, Citing Barklay. etc.
he ceased to be King: and His present Majesty having been regularly declared
King; the other is totally barred from all claim, and color of pretense.

How great a noise soever some make for him since his flight after their
deseting him; the greatest sticklers for his supposed rightful Authority, being
disappointed of their sanguine expectations, warmly opposed his exercice of
those rights to which their servillity had encouraged him: the very Bishops,
who for his sake have set up for heads under him of a separate Church; not only
disobeyed his Concerning the Declaration of Indulgence.
positive commands in matters which at other times, at least in things of the
like nature, they would have contended to belong to his Headship of the Church;
but Vid, the Bishops Address to J. 2.
they would have limited his Power little less than the 19 Propositions to C.
1. which they had long seemed to abhor.

Some of their Party, if not themselves, joined in soliciting his present
Majesty to undertake our Deliverance: and a certain Person who would be thought
never to have departed from their Principles, is said to have gone so far as to
sign the invitation: though upon second thoughts he desired to have his name
scratched out.

The Bishops being required to sign Vid the Form printed in Reflections upon
the Jacolite Form of Prayer p. 26.
an abhorrence of that enterprise, absolutely refused it. Their Archbishop was
one of them who 11 Dec. 1688.
petitioned his present Majesty to take the Government upon him, before the
late King left England: and Non-assistance to their jure Divino King, was
become as Catholic Doctrine as Non-resistance.

During this time the designs of the Party were kept secret, but the People
began to hope well of the Body of the English Clergy; believing them, by a
wonderful providence, to be reformed in their Principles of Government, with
which they had brought a scandal upon the Reformation.

But the Convention meeting, to provide for the Peace and Settlement of the
Nation; it then appeared, that the mighty Zealots for the Monarchy, were only
for setting up themselves; and in truth, would have no Sovereignty but in the
Church, as they called their Faction: for as they would not have his present
Majesty to be King, but a Regent, or Officer for the interim, till the late
King, should come to their terms: neither did they truly own him for their
King; whom they neither would assist as Subjects, nor consult in choosing a new
Government.

However, the Throne having, according to former Presidents, and the plain
right of the Kingdom, been declared Vid. the Vote of the Commons Jan. 28. 1689.
and that of the Lords Feb. 6.
vacant, upon the late King's breach of the original contracts, and abdication;
the Lords and Commons, reciting many particulars of his misgovernment, Stat. 1.
W. M. Ses. 2. cap. 2.
resolve that William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, be, and be
declared, King and Queen: and make a farther Settlement of the Crown.

They having accepted the Crown, Vid. the Proclamation.
the Lords and Commons, together with the Mayor and Citizens of London, and
others of the Commons of this Realm, with full consent, publish and proclaim
William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, to be King and Queen of
England, France, and Ireland; and in the Proclamation, own a miraculous
deliverance from Popery, and Arbitrary Power; and that our preservation is due,
next under God, to the resolution and conduct of His Highness the Prince of
Orange, whom God has chosen to be the Glorious Instrument of an inestimable
Happiness, to us and our Posterity.

A Parliament called soon after, Stat. 2. W. M. Ses. 1. cap. 1.
declares, and enacts, that they do recognize and acknowledge, that Their
Majesty's are, and of Right ought to be, by the Laws of this Realm, their
Sovereign Liege Lord and Lady, King and Queen of England, etc. in, and to whose
Princely Persons, the Royal State, Crown and Dignity of the said Realms, with
all Honors, Prerogatives, etc. are fully, rightfully, and entirely, Invested,
Incorporated, United, and Annexed.

Notwithstanding which, many who have sworn to bear Faith and true Allegiance
to King William, will be wiser than the Law, not only declared by this Act of
Parliament, but by several in former Reigns; and with a gross Jesuitical
evasion, without any color of foundation in Law or Reason, pretend that they
have sworn to K. William only as King in Fact; but that another was rightful
King at the same time.

This groundless and wicked distinction, appears to have engaged some Men in an
horrid and barbarous Plot against his Majesty's Person and Government, though
they had sworn to be true and faithful to him: and it seems, by the case of Sir
John Perkins, that neither he, nor his Casuists, thought the Oath to King
William any departure from the Allegiance to King James: nor the design of
Assassinating King William, any breach of the Oath to him.

Since therefore the deceit has taken rise from the supposition, that the late
King continues King of Right, together with the general terms of the Oath,
which are pretended to leave a latitude for this illegal and nonsensical
supposition; and an Oath more explicit has been artfully kept off; a voluntary
Declaration that his present Majesty, King William, is Rightful and Lawful King
of these Realms, as it is fully warranted by the fundamental constitution of
this Government, is, at this time, become a necessary duty; when it is evident
to the World, what they who are of a contrary Opinion, will act, as they have
opportunity. But to engage to stand by and assist each other in the defense of
His Majesty's Person and Government, is not more a consequence of the declaring
him rightful and lawful King; than it is implied in the Oath of Allegiance
appointed by the Act of Parliament which settles the Crown; and, however, the
Common Law Oath, and the legal sense of Allegiance, manifestly require it.

If any who have taken the Oath of Allegiance, to his present Majesty, scruple
to associate, because of the declaring His Majesty to be rightful and lawful
King; it is evident, that they prevaricated when they swore. If they questioned
the legality of entering into this before there was a positive Law for it; it is
certain, they have been little acquainted with the Common Law Oath of
Allegiance, and the warrantable Presidents of former times; according to which,
the Stat. 7 and 8 W. 3. For the better Security of his Majesty's Royal Person
and Government.
late Act, late Act, which enjoins some to Sign the Association, not only gives
it Sanction for the future; but, with express relation to its being voluntarily
entered into, by great numbers of His Majesty's Subjects, declares that it is
good and lawful.

And any Man who impartially weighs what I have laid together from Records, and
other Authentic Memorials of passed times, must own, that it is, with full and
indubitable Authority, enacted, That if any person or persons shall
maliciously, by Writing, Printing, Preaching, Teaching, or advised speaking,
utter, publish; or declare, that His present Majesty is not the lawful and
rightful King of these Realms; or that the late King James, or the pretended
Prince of Wales, has any Right or Title to the Crown of these Realms; or that
any other person or persons has, or have any right or title to the same,
otherwise than according to an Act of Parliament made in the first year of the
Reign of His present Majesty, and the late Queen, Entitled, An Act declaring
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject, and settling the Succession of the
Crown; such person or persons, being thereof lawfully Convicted, shall incur
the danger and penalty of Praemunire.

To imagine that after all this, the late King either is, or ought to be King,
is to flight all Authorities, Ancient as well as Modern.

Which leads me to the Nature of our Lawyer's offense, Proof of the 6th general
head.
who, before the Act for the Security of His Majesty's Person and Government,
held the Signing the Association to be an Overt Act of Treason against the King
de Jure: which, as has appeared above, tends manifestly to depose and unking
His present Majesty, as in the Eye of the Law there is but one King, and he is
the only King de Jure.

Besides, this Gentleman admits, That by the Statute 11 H. 7. Allegiance is due
to a King in Fact, and that the Oath of Allegiance was to be taken to him: nor
can pretend that there ever, till of late, was any other Oath but what expressly
obliged to the Defense of the King and Kingdom against all Men: therefore in
consequence of his own Notion he must grant, that to contend that there may be
Treason against any other but the King for the time being, is to suppose two
contrary Allegiances; and therein to depart from that Allegiance which was due,
even by his own interpretation of the Statute 11 H. 7. But it being evident,
that by that Statute, and the whole course of the Common Law, there is but one
King, I need not tell him the Crime of publishing a written Opinion, manifestly
importing an endeavor to Depose him.

If this had been delivered only in Words, it is well known who used his
Oratory to make words alone Treason, within the Statute 25 E. 3. for which I
may refer him to the Trial of the now Earl of Macclesfield, in the beginning of
the late King's Reign: and to the Author of the Magistracy and Government
Vindicated.

But as the Opinion was written; he may well know from what late Authority,
Soribere est agere, is become a Maxim, or Proverbial.

Nor can he deny the Words to be within the reason of what the Court held
Yelverton, f. 1 07. 5 J. 1.
in Blanch Flower's Case, of a Man's affirming the King to be a Bastard; or
that another had better Tittle to the Crown: because it may draw the Subjects
from their Allegiance, and beget Mutiny in the Realm: or Owen's Case, of
declaring it Lawful to kill the King being 1 Rolls, f. 185.
Excommunicated by the Pope: both which, not to mention more of the like kind,
were adjudged High Treason. According to the Print of the later Case, it would
seem that Words alone made the Treason'; but it appears, by a Banks MS. p^nes
meipsum Pas. 13 J. 1.
MS. Report of one who had been Attorney General, and afterward Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, that Owen's Subscribing his Confession of what he had
publicly declared, was given in Evidence as the Overt Act.

But if any Lawyer, who has labored to make Treason of Words alone; or Writing
alone, without Publication; or Signing an Association to defend the King for
the time being, against one who had been King, but is not; should appear, not
only to have Written, or Signed, the Opinion above, after a Discourse showing
to what Persons it related; but to have published this; and to have Solicited
Men not to Subscribe the Association, upon those, or the like topics; should
he be Convicted of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King; it would
be difficult not to apply that of the Poet,

-- Nec lex est justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
None can the Justice of that Law deny,
By which, who strained it against others, dye.
FINIS.

