Newly Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead, against S. Dunstans
Church, in Fleetstreet.
AN Enquiry into the Power of Dispensing with Penal Statutes; together with
some Animadversions upon a Book, writ by Sir Edward Herbert, Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common Pleas, Entitled, A short Account of the Authorities in
Law, upon which Judgment was given, in Sir Edward Hales's case. By Sir Robert
Atkins, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and late one of the Judges
of the Court of Common Pleas.

THE Power, Jurisdiction and Privilege OF PARLIAMENT; AND THE ANTIQUITY OF THE
House of Commons ASSERTED.

OCCASIONED By an Information in the Kings Bench, by the Attorney General,
against the Speaker of the House of Commons.

As also a Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction IN THE REALM of
ENGLAND Occasioned by the Late Commission in Ecclesiastical Causes.

By Sir ROBERT ATKINS, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and late one
of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead, against S. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet. 1689.

IN THE KINGS BENCH, TRIN. 36 CAROL. II. BY INDICTMENT.
Middles.
THe Kings Attorney informs the Court; That W. W. Esquire being a Pernicious and
Seditious Man, and Contriving and Practicing Falsely, Maliciously and
Seditiously, to disturb the Peace and Quiet of the Kingdom:

And to stir up Sedition, and to procure Ill Will between the King and his
Subjects:

And to bring the D. of Y. into Contempt with the King and his Subjects.

In order to the Compassing of all these,

The ninth of November, 34 Car. 2, In the Parish of S. Martins in the Fields,
in the County of Middlesex, He the said W. W. did with Force and Arms, Falsely,
Unlawfully, Unjustly, Wickedly, Maliciously, Scandalcusly, Seditiously and
Devillishly, for his own Lucre,

Cause and Appoint a certain False, Scandalous, Seditious and Infamous Libel;
entitled, The Information of Thomas Dangerfield, Gentleman, to be Printed and
Published.

In which Libel, (among other things) are contained, as follows: The
Information of Thomas Dangerfield, Gentleman, etc. (the Contents of it have
been read, and need no Repetition.) In Contempt of the Law, and to the ill
Example of others; and against the Peace, and the Kings Crown and Dignity.

And the King's Attorney prays Process against him, That he may be brought in
to answer it.

The Defendant pleads to the Jurisdiction of this Court; and says,
That by the Law and Custom of Parliament.

The Speaker of the House of Commons sitting, the Parliament, according to the
Duty of his Office, as Servant to the House, ought, and ever has accustomed, to
Speak, Sign and Publish such Proceedings of that House, and in such manner as
he shall be ordered by the Commons so assembled.

And that such Speaking, Signing or Publishing, according to the Law and Custom
of Parliament, are the Act and Doing of the Commons themselves; and has ever
been so accepted and taken, and not as the Speakers own Acting or doing.

And that the Speaker, for such Speaking, Signing or Publishing by him made or
done, sitting the Parliament; and by their Order, ought not to answer in any
other Court or Place, but in Parliament.

He further says, That at the Sessions of Parliament at Westminster, the 15th.
of March, 31 Car. 2, held by Prorogation,

One William Viscount Stafford and others, were impeached by the Commons,
before the Lords, according to the Law and Custom of Parliament, of High
Treason,

For a most execrable Conspiring to kill the King,

And to Alter and Subvert the Ancient Government, and the Laws of the Realm.

And to Suppress the true Religion established in this Kingdom.

And to root up and destroy the Professors of it.

And that afterward, in the Sessions of Parliament, held by Prorogation, at
Westminster, 21 October. 32 Car. 2.

The said Viscount Stafford, at the Prosecution of the Commons, was Tried, and
Convicted, and Attainted, in due Form of Law, by the Temporal Lords then
assembled in Parliament, for the High Treasons, of which he was so Impeached by
the Commons.

As by the Record of Parliament does appear.

He further says, That in the opening of that Session,

The King, in his Speech to the Lords and Commons, charged them to pursue a
further Examination of that Conspiracy, with a Strict and Impartial Enquiry.

And the King then told them, That he did not think himself nor them secure
till that matter was thoroughly done.

He further says, That in the same Sessions of Parliament, last mentioned,
which continued at Westminster till 10 Jan. 32 Car. 2. both Houses of
Parliament, in pursuance of his Majesty's said Direction, made a Strict and
Impartial Enquiry after that Conspiracy.

And upon that Enquiry, in the same Sessions of Parliament, last mentioned, the
said Thomas Dangerfield, in the said Information named, did upon his Oath
exhibit to the Lords in Parliament, the said Libel (entitled, The Information
of Thomas Dangerfield, Gentleman) as his true Information of that Conspiracy:
And delivered it to the Lords, which was and is there Recorded, as by the
Record thereof in Parliament does appear.

And he also delivered it to the House of Commons in the same Parliament, at
the Bar of that House.

And the said Commons then ordered, That that Information (among others, then
before given in at the Bar of that House, touching the said Plot) should be
entered in their Journal.

And that all the said Informations should be printed, being first Perused and
Signed by their Speaker:

And that the Speaker should name and appoint the Persons that should print
them:

And that Thomas Dangerfield should have the Benefit of the Printing of his
Information.

And the Defendant further says, That he was a Member of the House of Commons
during all the Sessions of Parliament, last mentioned, and was duly Elected and
Made their Speaker, and was so all that Sessions.

And that by virtue of, and in pursuance of the said Order, as Speaker of the
House, afterward, during that Session, sc. 10 Nov. 32 Car. 2. in the Parish of
S. Martins in the Fields, in the said County of Middlesex,

He did Peruse the said Information, so exhibited by the said Thomas
Dangerfield to the Commons, and he Signed it by putting to it his Name, viz.
William Williams, Speaker of the House of Commons.

And then and there appointed Thomas Newcomb and Henry Hills (being the Kings
Printers) to Print that Information, according to the said Order of the House
of Commons.

And thereupon the said Information afterward, and during that Session, sc. 10
Nov. 32 Car. 2. was printed by those two Printers.

And that the said Thomas Dangerfield had the Benefit of that Printing,
according to the Order of the House.

Which Setting to of his Name, and Appointment of the said Printers to Print
the said Information, are the same Causing and Appointing of the Printing and
Publishing of the Libel in the Attorney General's Information mentioned.

Absque hoc, That he is Guilty of the Premises in the said Attorney General's
Information specified, on the ninth of November, in the said Information
specified, or at any other Time after the said Session of Parliament, or before
it; or otherwise, or in any other manner than as he has above alleged.

And this he is ready to aver, etc.

Wherefore, and for that what he so did, was done by him as Speaker of the
House of Commons, in Parliament, and by their Order, and Sitting the Parliament,

He demands the Judgment of this Court, Whether this Court will take any
further cognizance of this Matter.

Kings Bench:
The Kings Attorney is Plaintiff, and W. W. Esquire Defendant, in an Information
for a Misdemeanour.
The Information sets forth, etc. vide the Brief of the Record.
THe Information taken singly by it self, Introduction.
(without the Defendents Plea) contains a very Severe and Heavy Charge in it,
against the Defendant, set out with the highest Aggravations:

And this against a Gentleman of the Profession of the Law, and one who has
had the Honor to be Speaker of several Parliaments.

We may observe in this Information the worst of Adjectives or Epithites
fastened upon the Defendant: It styles him, A Pernicious and Seditious Man.

It charges him with the worst of Actions; sc. Stirring up of Sedition,
Disturbing the Peace of the Kingdom, endeavoring to procure Ill Will between
the King and his Subjects; and to bring the D. of Y. into Contempt with the
King and his Subjects; and with the Printing and Publishing a False,
Scandalous, Seditious and Infamous Libel.

These Crimes and Actions are set out in Mr. Attorneys Information with the
worst of Adverbs; and with a great Heap of them together; viz. That these
things were done by the Defendant, Falsely, Unlawfully, Unjustly, Wickedly,
Maliciously, Scandalously, Seditiously and Devillishly.

And to add (if possile) to all this, it is charged to be done out of one of
the basest Principles: Out of Malice; and for one of the most Sordid and Odious
Ends, viz. For his own Lucre.

It may further be observed, That the Information does not alleged or affirm,
That there is any such Person in the World as Thomas Dangerfield (though it
mention the Name;) nor that any such Person did ever Frame or Draw up any such
Scandalous and Libellous Book or Information, as is mentioned in Mr. Attorneys
Information.

But (for all that, Mr. Attorney shows) the Name of Thomas Dangerfield, may be
but a feigned or borrowed Name, and that the Defendant may be the Author and
Composer of this Libel, as well as the Publisher.

And one would not imagine, upon reading Mr. Attorney's Information, that any
thing of these Matters, thus charged, was ever transacted in Parliament: But
Mr. Attorney gives them another Date, both of Time and Place. Time and Place
not material, unless the Defendant make them so, by his Plea, (as here.)
He does not lay the Scene at Westminster, but at S. Martins in the Fields, and
he times it to the Year 1682. whereas there was no Parliament in that Year.
This was warily done.

Thus the Case stands upon Mr. Attorney's Information, and should it be left
here, it would be a wosul Case with the Defendant;

But as Solomon says in his Proverbs;

The first in his own cause is just, then comes the other party and enquires
into him.

The plain English of which is (as we use to say) One Tale is good till another
is told.

The Defendant, in his Plea, Plea.
states the matter truly and fully, and tells us, That there is nothing true in
this Information exhibited against him, save only that there was such an
Information of Dangerfields, but that the Defendant was none of the Author.

It was drawn up and delivered in to both Houses of Parliament, first to the
Lords, upon Oath; and there ordered to be entered in their Journal: And
afterward delivered at the Bar of the House of Commons.

And that the Defendant, being Speaker of the Commons, he examined that
Information of Dangerfields, and directed the Printing of it: But it was all
done in time of Parliament, and ordered to be done by the House of Commons.

By this Narrative of the Plea, all the unlucky Adjectives and untoward Adverbs
are thrown off, and the Defendant cleared from the Malice.

Nor is it true that is said in Mr. Attorney's Information, To be done for the
Defendants Lucre. He did it out of Obedience to the Parliament; and he denies
that he made any Profit by it, but according to the Order of the House; the
Profit of the Printing was to Dangerfield. And all this is confessed by the
Demurrer.

The Plea consists of these Parts: Matter of Fact, Matter of Record, and Matter
of Law.

It begins with Matter of Law; and sets down the Law and Custom of Parliament.

Then he does assume the Matter of Fact, and of Record, and brings them home to
that Law.

He tells us, That, for certain, there was such a thing as a Popish Plot, and
that it was a Desperate, Horrid, Devilish Plot. And here all the bitter
Adjectives and Adverbs would have been well bestowed, rather than upon the
Speaker of that Parliament; which Parliament with such admirable Zeal and
Courage did prosecute some of those Plotters.

He sets forth, That -- the Lord Stafford was in Parliament Convict before the
Lords of High Treason, committed in that Plot; and he was Covicted at the
Prosecution of the Commons, according to the Law, and Custom of Parliament.

He says, That the King in his Speech to the Lords and Commons, charged them to
make a further strict and impartial Enquiry after this Plot.

Then the Plea tell us, They did accordingly make an impartial Enquiry, and
diverse others were thereupon convicted of that Plot.

It now appears plainly, That all that is contained in this Plea was not only
done during the Parliament, but by the Parliament it self; and that the
Defendant only acted as Speaker.

And it is worth the remembering too, That there has been another Parliament
since, namely that at Oxford.

And though all that was done by him in the Parliament at Westminster, was then
very well known and remembered; and though he were so Pernicious and Seditious
a Man, in the Opinion of Mr. Attorneys Information, yet the World had a better
Opinion of him, for he was chosen Speaker again, in that latter Parliament, and
his Majesty approved of him.

At last, the Defendant concludes his Plea to the Jurisdiction of this Court:
viz. That what he had so acted, Conclusion of the Plea.
being acted in Parliament time, and by Order of Parliament, he demands the
Judgment of this Court, Whether they will take Conusance of it.

The Attorney General demurred to it.
THe Subject Matter of this Record is a very large Field, viz. The Power and
Jurisdiction of Parliament, and yet I shall have but a narrow Path to walk in.
It is a very Nice and Tender Point: It is my Case, as it was heretofore with
those that were to undergo the old Saxon Trial by Fire Ordail (per ferrum
candens) If I tread aside and make a wrong Step, I may do my self a Mischief.

But by the Grace of God, I shall take care neither on the one hand to give any
just occasion of offense to those above me; nor yet on the other hand, shall I
be wanting in that Duty I owe to the Kingdoms Cause. I shall speak my mind
freely in it, and leave the Success to God.

And while I must argue for the freedom of acting in Parliament, and speak for
the Speaker, and endeavor to maintain their Rights and Privileges, I may
justly claim that ordinary and reasonable Privilege for my self, that if I
happen unawares to misplace a Word, or to be misapprehended in what I say, I
may have the liberty instantly to explain my self.

And I take my self to be under the protection of the Law, while I argue the
Law.

In arguing this Case, Three Points
I shall make three Points, or lay down these three Positions.
1. That what is done in this Case, is done in a course of Justice, and that in
the highest Court of the Nation (the Parliament) and according to the Law and
Custom of Parliament.

2. That however, that which is done in this Case, is not to be imputed to the
Defendant, who acted in it but as the Servant or Minister of the Parliament,
though in a very honorable Station.

3. That these being Matters transacted in Parliament, and by the Parliament,
this Court of the Kings Bench ought not to take conusance of them; nor has it
any Jurisdiction to judge or determine of them.

As to the First, First Point.
I shall frame this Syllogism.
No Indictment or Action lies for what is done in a course of Justice, or in a
way of Legal Proceeding.

But what has been done by the Defendant, and by the House of Commons in this
Case, has been done in a course of Justice, and in a way of Legal Proceedings,
and that in the highest Court of the Nation.

Therefore what has been here done, is neither subject to an Action or
Indictment.

I shall first prove the Major Proposition. First Proposition.

That no Indictment or Action lies for what is done in a Course of Justice.

The Reason of the Law is, Reason
That the Law and Courts of Law, and Justice, and Remedies against wrong, ought
to be free and open; and no man must be frighted nor discouraged from a legal
Prosecution of his Right.

To prove this, Authority.
I shall make bold to cite the Opinion and Authority of a Town Clerk. The
Report of it is in the Holy Scripture, the truest and highest Report. It was
the Opinion and Advice of the Town Clerk of Athens. The Town Clerk of Athens.
We read it in the Acts of the Apostles, and it instantly stilled and quieted a
mighty Uproar, it had so much weight in it. If any man (says he) have any
matter against another, the Law is open, and there are Deputies; let them (says
he) implead one another.

The Parties to a Suit in Law, the Council, the Attorney, the Witness, the
Officers, the Jury, are all under a protection of the Law for what they do or
say in the prosecution of a Suit in Law, or any Legal Proceeding.

I will put some few Cases suited to every one of these who are the several
Actors in a Suit. The Party to a Suit.

By the Stat. of 3 E. 1. called the Stat. of W. 1. He that reports slanderous
News, whereby Discord may grow between the King and his People, or the Great
Men of the Realm, is to be imprisoned, till the first Author of the Tale be
brought into the Court. This comes near our Case; and this is all the
Punishment that the Statute inflicts upon this Crime of reporting such a
Slander.

Sir. E. C. in his Exposition upon this Stat. in his 2d. Instit. 228. says,
That this Stat. extends only to Extrajudicial Slanders.

And therefore (says he) if any man bring an Appeal of Murder or Robbery
against any of the Peers of the Realm, although the Charge be false, yet shall
not the Peer have an Action De Scandalis Magnatum, neither at the Common Law,
nor by this Stat. of W. I. nor any other Stat. for any such Appeal, nor for
affirming the Matter of it to be true, either to Council or Attorney, or for
speaking the same in Evidence to a Jury.

It was the Lord Beauchamp's Case, Lord Beauch. Case.
13. H. 7. Keilway, 26, 27, 28. Sir Richard Crofts sued a Writ of Forgery of
False Deeds against the Lord Beauchamp: The Lord Beauchamp sues Sir Richard
Crofts in an Action De Scandalis Magnatum, upon the Statute of 2 R. 2. c. 5.
for this Slander, in charging him with Forgery. Keble, of Council for the Lord
B. admits, that at the Common Law no Action did lie for this Slander, it being
in a course of Legal Proceeding.

But Keble was of Opinion, that this Statute of 2 R. 2. did give the Action in
such a Case, though it were a Slander occasioned by a Suit.

But by Brian and the rest of the Court, the Action De Scand. Magnatum, did not
lie for such a Slander, though the Matter of it were false, because it is in
prosecution of a lawful Suit.

With this agrees Boulton and Clapham's Case in Justice Jone's Rep. 431. and
Weston's Case, Crok,. 432.

Sir E. C. puts the Difference in his 2 d. Inst. before cited.

If a man prefer a Bill in the Star Chamber against a great Peer, A Difference.
and charge him with Forgery or Perjury, no Action De Scand. Magnat. lies, it
being in a legal Proceeding, and in a Matter wherein that Court had a
Jurisdiction.

But if in such a Bill in the Star Chamber a Peer be accused for Felony (which
that Court has nothing to do with, nor no Jurisdiction in) this (says Sir E.
C.) has not the face of a Legal Proceeding, and shall not excuse a man in an
Action De Scand. Magn. Sir Rich. Buckley's Case. 4 Rep. 14. Cro. Eliz. 230. the
same Case. Yet where there is but a Mistake of the Jurisdiction, if the Suit be
once well commenced, some little Irregularities in the Proceedings shall not
expose them to the Action De Scand. Magn. As,

If a man bring an Appeal of Murder, and through the ignorance of the Party, or
his Clerk, or Attorney, it is made returnable in the Com. Pl. where they have
no Jurisdiction in it: yet no Action De Scand. Magn. lies for this, the Suit
being well begun, and it being in the Nature of a Lawful Suit. So says Sir E. C.

In the Case of a Councellor pleading for his Client. Councellor.

He likewise in what he affirms or pleads for his Client, if it be pertinent to
the Matter of the Suit, and he has it by instruction from his Client, he shall
be protected against an Action of Slander for it. This is a Point that may
concern many of us.

It was the Case of Sir Hen. Mountagu Recorder of London, M. 3. Cro. fo. 90. in
B. R.

Ral. Brook brought an Action upon the Case for Slander against Sir H. M. for
saying of the Pl. Brook, that he had committed Felony.

Sir H. M. pleaded specially to the Action, That he was a Councellor at Law,
and was retained against the Pl. Brook, and at the Trial in giving of Evidence
to the Jury, he did indeed speak those Words; but averred that they were
pertinent to the Matter, and were part of his Instruction. It was resolved upon
a Demurrer, That the Plea was good, the Words being pertinent, though they were
false. And there is a further Reason given by the Court in that Case, viz. The
Words appear not to be spoken out of Malice: And no Actions of this sort, nor
will any Indictment of this Nature lie, unless there be Malice in the
Defendant; and where there is any justifiable occasion of speaking words that a
man in discharge of his Function or Calling is led by the Subject Matter of
Discourse, as a Preacher, or Pleader, or the like, to speak words in such Case;
it shall be presumed they were not spoken out of Malice.

In the Case of an Attorney. Attorney.

Sir E. C. in his 2d. Instit. in his Exposition of the Stat. of Articuli super
Chartas, 28E. 1. c. 10. tells us, That in the very next year after the making
of that Stat. viz. 29 E. I. Will. de Weston brought an Action of Conspiracy in
the Kings Bench, against William of Hempswell, Parson of Newton, and John of
Malden, Parson of Askerby, for causing the Plaintiff to be cited before the
Archdeacon of Linc. for a Trespass, whereof he had been acquitted in the
King's Court. John of Malden pleaded, That he was Communis Advocatus pro suo
dando, and so justified as an Attorney; and it was found the Parson was
Communis Advocatus, and so not guilty of the Conspiracy.

In the Case of a Witness: For what he says as a Witness, Witness,
or for what is said against him, to disable him from being a Witness, or to
take off his Credit, no Action of Slander will lie.

35 H. 6. 14. In an Action of Conspiracy, one of the Defendants justified as
being a Witness, to the Jury.

Crok.. 432. In the King's Bench, Weston against Dobneet, in an Action for
Slander. There was a Suit in the Spiritual Court, and the Plaintiff that
brought the Action of Slander, was produced as a Witness in that Cause, and the
Defendant in that Suit in the Spiritual Court, put in Exceptions against him,
That he had been perjured, and therefore ought not to be used as a Witness.
Thereupon, Weston the Witness, brought this Action for that Slander. And after
Arguments, the whole Court held, that the Action of Slander did not lie for
this manner of Slander, because it was in a course of Justice, and not ex
Malicia.

In a Writ of Conspiracy. Juror.
One of the Defendants pleaded, that he was one of the Indictors. Judgment, si
Actio. And the Plea is allowed. 20 H. 6, 5. and 33.

Nay though it be not in a course of Justice, Justa occasio lequendi.
in a Suit of Law, yet if a man be in the doing of his Duty, and in discharge
of his Function and his lawful Calling, and in discoursing of a Subject proper
for his Function, and enforcing of every man's duty of avoiding of any Sin, and
in pursuit of it, tells a Story which he takes up upon trust, and does not know
it to be false, and it prove at last to be utterly untrue, and an innocent
person is highly slandered by it, yet he shall not be subject to an Action of
Slander for it. The occasion of speaking shall clear him from the Malice,
without which the Action will not lie.

In the Book of Martyrs, written by Fox, there is a Story of one Greenwood, who
lived in Suffolk, that he had perjured himself before the Bishop of Norwich, in
testifying against a Martyr that was burnt in Queen Mary's time; and says (
Fox) this Greenwood afterward, by the just judgment of God, had his Bowels
rotted in him, and so he died.

This Story by Fox in his Book of Martyrs, was utterly false of Mr. Greenwood,
and after the Printing of that Book of Martyrs, Mr. Greenwood was living in
that very same Parish.

One Prist, a Parson, happened to be Presented to the Living of that Parish
where this Mr. Greenwood then dwelt; and 27. Eliz. in one of his first Sermons,
happened to inveigh against the Sin of Perjury; to which his Text did lead him;
and the better to deter the People from the Sin of Perjury, he told this Story
out of Fox's Book of Martyrs, and named the very Man Mr. Greenwood; and Mr.
Greenwood himself was then in the Church, and heard this Story told of himself,
but the Preacher knew it not, but thought the Story to be true. Greenwood
brings an Action of Slander against Prist the Preacher; and upon the Trial of
the Cause before the Lord Chief Justice Wray, the Case appearing to be thus, he
directed the Jury to find for the Defendant, for that it appeared it was not
done out of Malice: And Chapter I. Popham affirmed it to be good Law, it being a
Matter delivered after his occasion, as Matter of Story.

This Case is cited by Sir E. C. in Sir Henry Mountagu's Case, before
mentioned. Crook.. f.. 90.

With this agrees the Case of the Lord Cromwell, against Denny a Vicar, 4 Rep.
13. b. in an Action de Scand. Magn.

There is a Case in many Circumstances of it much resembling our Case.

It was the Case between Smith and Crashaw, and others M. 20. in the Kings
Bench, in Sir Jeffr. Palmer's Rep. 315.

An Action upon the Case is there brought against the Defendants, for
maliciously causing the Plaintiff to be indicted of Treason; upon which
Indictment the Grand Jury found an Ignoramus.

To this Action the Defendants pleaded Not Guilty, and were found Guilty.

It was moved in Arrest of Judgment; That to accuse one for Treason was not
Actionable, for the Safety of the King and State: For if a Man be subject to an
Action for it, it will be a means that Treason shall be smothered, and Men will
not expose themselves to Actions, by making such Discoveries.

J. Houghton held the Action would not lie upon an Ignoramus found; for by that
the Party is not acquitted, but may be Indicted again and Convicted.

But he holds, That if he be Indicted, and upon Trial Legitimo modo
acquietatus, then he shall have an Action upon the Case, in Nature of a
Conspirary; for now he is absolutely acquitted and cleared of the Accusation,
and never can be Indicted again for that particular Fact.

Dodderidge agrees with Houghton, and puts this Case;

If an Action of Conspiracy be brought against a Man, For Indicting the
Plaintiff of Treason, The Defendant may Plead Specially (and that is the safest
way of Pleading) That he heard the Plaintiff speak such and such Treasonable
Words, and that he thereupon complained to a Justice of Peace, who committed
the Plaintiff upon it, and this (says he) shall excuse him.

Ley, Chief Justice, inclines too against the Action, and gives a strong
Reason, Because (says he) it is Misprision to Conceal it; and yet if we allow
of this Action, it shall be Dangerous too to discover it, so that the Defendant
does Lupum auribus tenere.

And so the Judgment was arrested.

But we find, that soon after, when the Judges of that Court were changed, the
same Plaintiff brought a new Action for the same Cause: And it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff, That the Action would lie; but the Judges acknowledged it was
the first Precedent. I suppose it was upon pleading Not Guilty. Perhaps the
Court might have been of another Opinion, had the Defendant pleaded specially,
and justified, according to the Opinion of Judge Dodderidge. The Case is Cro.
Car. 15 and Latch. 79.

The allowing of such Actions of Conspiracy, or upon the Case, or of
Indictments or Informations for what is said or done in a Course of Justice,
and especially by way of Discovery of Treasons, would prove of a mischievous
Consequence;

And would be an occasion of multiplying Actions against the Parties to the
Suits, against Council, the Attorneys, the Witnesses; and so Suits would be
infinite.

As in this present Case, Should an Action be adjudg'd to lie against the
Defendant for what he has acted by Authority of Parliament, what a multitude of
Actions would be stirred up by it?

If the Speaker be liable to this Information for what he has done; by the same
Reason he would be liable to the Actions of the several great Persons that are
said to be defamed by the Printing of Dangerfields Narrative.

And if the Speaker be liable, who acted but by Command of others, and as their
Minister, how much more would all those Persons be ilable, by whose Command he
so acted?

And how many Narratives have there been printed, wherein several great Persons
were severely reflected on, and how many Votes of the like Nature have there
been Printed?

So that there would arise a Multitude of Suits.

In Sir Drue Druries Case, 6. Rep. 74. The Justices in judging of that Case,
give a very good Rule and Caution: They say, That Judges ought to have good
Consideration in all Cases depending before them, not only of the present
Cases, but also of the Consequences, What general Prejudice may ensue upon them
either to the King or Subject.

The Case before you exceedingly requires that Consideration

The Prejudice to the King will be, that he will not be Safe, for by this means
Men will be discouraged from discovering Treasons.

The Subjects will receive Prejudice, by the multitude of Suits that will arise
by it.

This mas suffice to be said in maintaining the first Proposition, That no
Information or Action lies for what is said or done in a Course of Justice.

The Minor Proposition is, The Minor Proposition.
That what is here done by the Defendant, in this Case, was done in a Course of
Justice, and in a Legal Proceeding, and that in the highest Court of the
Nation, (in the Court of Parliament) and done according to the Law and Custom
of Parliament. This I must make out in the next Place.

In the making this out, I am under a Necessity of speaking of the transcendent
Power of the High Court of Parliament, and I must assert these Positions
following.

1. That the House of Commons was originally, and from the first Constitution
of the Nation, the Representative of one of the three Estates of the Realm, and
a part of the Parliament.

2. That what is done by either House, according to the Law and Usage of
Parliament, is properly, and in the Judgment of Law, the Act of the whole
Parliament: And that what concerns the One, must of necessity concern the
Whole; not merely by Consequence, but by an immediate Concernment, as being
One, and Entire.

3. That what has been acted in our present Case, by the Defendant, as
Speaker, and by the House of Commons, whose Minister he was, and by whose
Command and Order he did What he did, was done according to the Law, and Usage
of Parliament.

As to the first, The Commons, as now elected, have ever been a part of the
Parliament.
That the House of Commons was from the first Constitution of this Kingdom, a
part of the Parliament.

There has been an Opinion, that has been stiffly maintained by some Divines,
and others of late,

That the House of Commons originally were no part of the Parliament, at least
not as now elected, and consisting of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses; but that
their Beginning was in the forty ninth Year of King Henry 3. when that King had
given a total overthrow at the Battle of Evesham, to Simon Montford Earl of
Leicester and the Barons.

And that to balance the Power of the Barons, that King caused the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses to be chosen, and to make a Part of the Parliament.

And from hence some Unquiet Innovating Writers, Dr. Heylin in the Life of
Archbishop Laud.
quorum res, and spes ex adulatione pendent; and who would destroy Foundations,
and remove our Ancient Landmarks, and the Ancient and Just Limits and
Boundaries of Power and Authority; Sir Rob. Filmer.
Persons of necessitous Estates, Dugd. in his Orig. Juridic. Mr. Pryn in his
Preface to Sir Rob.
or of greedy and ambitious Appetites, which drive them upon devising how to do
some acceptable Service to those that maintain them: Or at the best out of
unsettled Judgments, and too much Zeal, which carries them to a contrary
extreme. Cotton's Abr. (as he conjectures).
These Men conclude, That therefore all the Power and Privilege the House of
Commons claims, is not by Prescription, but that they depend upon the King's
Royal Will and Pleasure, and had their Original by his mere Concession, and not
by Ancient Inherent Right, nor Original Constitution, and therefore may be
resumed at Pleasure.

It was one of the Articles against Dr. Manwaring, Dr. Manwaring.
in the Parliament 3 Car. 1. for which he was Impeached by the Commons, and
Sentenced by the Lords in Parliament;

That to Subvert, Pryns Plea for the Lords ^5^.
Scandalize and Impeach the good Laws and Government of this Realm, and the
Authority of the High Court of Parliament, and to avert his Majesty's Mind from
calling of Parliaments, and to alienate his Royal Heart from his People, he did
in his Sermons, and in his Books printed, endeavor to persuade the King,

That his Majesty was not bound to observe the Laws of the Realm concerning the
Rights and Liberties of the Subjects:

That Authority of Parliament was not necessary for raising of Aids and
Subsidies.

His Sentence was Imprisonment during pleasure, and but 1000l. Fine for this
high Offense, not 20000l, as has been of late times.

He was to acknowledge his Offenses, as it should be set down by a Committee in
writing at the Bars of both Houses.

He was suspended from his Ministry.

Disabled to preach at Court.

His Books were to be called in, and burnt in London and both the Universities.

Power limited by Law is safest. It may be thought Potestas minor, sed tutior
and diuturnior
Ea demum tuta est Potentia, quae viribus suis modum imponit.


To encounter these new and upstart Opinions, I shall mention an Author or two,
whom all sober men reverence, that are of a contrary Judgment to these new
Authors. And they are either Eminent Lawyer, or Divines.

And I am the more encouraged to do it, King Charles the Second.
because His Majesty that now is, has upon several occasions been pleased
graciously to declare, That he holds Parliaments to be the best Method for
healing the Distempers of the Kingdom, and the only means to preserve the
Monarchy in credit at home and abroad; and he promises to rule the People by
the Law.

Hales, that solid learned Divine, in his Golden Remains, cites Baldus for it:
Digna Vox est Majestate Regnantis, Legibus alligatum Principem se prositeri.

And Learned Hooker, that great Champion for the Discipline, and for the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church, in his Eccles Polity, delivers his Opinion quite
contrary to these Time-Servers.

Page 27. All public Government (says he) of what kind soever, seems
evidently to have arisen from deliberate Advice, Consultation and Composition
between men. That Composition signifies the Laws. And, page 28. he says
further, That the Power of making Laws to command whole Politic Societies of
men, belongs properly to the same entire Societies.

What can be said more in confutation of the Book that goes by the Name of Sir
Rob. Filmers?

The Duke of Wittemberg, at the Council held at Worms, when other Princes
discoursed of many Privileges and Conveniences of their Lordships and
Territories, openly protested it to be his greatest Felicity,

That he could in aperto Campo, and in Sinu Subditorum suorum dormire.

Non eget Mauri jaculis, nec arcu, etc.
I shall further add only the Judgment of one or two of our most Famous and
Learned Judges concerning this Matter.

Fortescu, that was first Lord Chief Justice, and afterward Lord Chancellor in
the Reign of H. 6. in his excellent Book in commendation of the Laws of
England, affirms this Doctrine.

Ad tutelam Legis, Fol. 32.
Subditorum, ac eorum Corporum and Bonorum erectus Rex est. Et ad hanc
Potestatem a Populo effluxam ipse habet.

Sir E. C. in his 12. Rep. 64. delivered his Opinion freely in the Case of
Prohibitions, before the King and the Lords of the Council; where there was a
warm Debate between the Judges and Dr. Bancroft, Archbishop of Canterbury. And
what Sir E. C. delivered for Law, was with the clear consent of all the
Justices of England and Barons of the Exchequer.

And there Sir E. C. says, it was greatly marvell'd at, that the Archbishop
durst inform the King, That the King had an absolute Power and Authority by the
Word of God to determine what Causes he pleased in his own Person.

And it is admirable to observe with what a true and honest Courage that grave
Chief Justice Sir E. C. answered the King himself in that Debate. When the King
was pleased to say, It was Treason to affirm, that the King was under the Law:
The Chief Justice answered him with the Words of an ancient Judge, and Author
of our Law (that is, out of Bracton) That the King was Sub Deo and Lege. And
Fleta, another of our ancient Authors in our Science, uses Words to the same
effect. This Doctrine differs from some of our late Motto's in the Sergeants
Rings.

Tacitus, in his Annals, gives this excellent Commendation of two of the best
of the Roman Emperors, Nerva and Trajan: Res olim insociabiles miscuerunt,
Imperium and Libertatem.

And that Author well observes it as the true Case and Condition of a People,
and a necessary Consequence; Amissa Virtute pariter ac Liberate.

This Discourse of mine may seem to some to be a Digression; but a man can
never have a juster occasion for it than now, and upon this Argument and Suit:
I make that my Apology, which I learn from King James, (His Majesty's Royal
Grandfather) in his Discourse of the Powder Treason: Which proves it the more
seasonable.

There is a Time (says King James) when no man ought to keep silence. Fol.
223. of his Works.
It has (says he) been ever held as a general Rule in all well-governed
Commonwealths, whether Christian, or Ethnicks, That when either their
Religion, or their King, or their Country was in any extreme hazard, no good
Countryman ought then to withold either his Tongue or his Hand according to
his Calling or Faculty, from aiding to repel the Injury, repress the Violence,
and avenge the Guilt upon the Authors.

To support the Power and Privilege of the House of Commons, as being an
essential part of the Parliament; The Commons as now constituted, began before
49 H. 3.
it is absolutely necessary to make it out against these Innovators, that the
House of Commons have ever been a part of the Parliament, and that they were
long before 49 H. 3.

Or otherwise they are but precarious in their power and privileges, and enjoy
them but of Grace.

Every Privilege is by Prescription, says the Lord Dier, fol. 60. a. med. in
Trewinnard's Case, which I shall have occasion to mention more at large before
I have done.

And in the same Dier, fol. 70. in the Case of Withers and Iseham, it is held,
That a man cannot prescribe to an Incident or Appendent, nor indeed to any
Power or Authority where the Principal Thing has not had a perpetual
continuance.

Therefore where the beginning of a thing is known, there can be nothing
belonging to it by Prescription.

In one of our late Kings Reigns, Rushw. Hist. Collec. Part 1. fol. 52.
the House of Commons in an Address of theirs, made mention of their
Privileges, as their ancient and undoubted Right and Inheritance: But Offense
was taken at it, and they were told, it had been better if they had said their
Privileges were derived from the Grace and Permission of the King and his
Ancestors.

Now I shall clearly prove that these Powers and Privileges were indeed their
ancient Right and Inheritance. Which they cannot be unless that House, or the
Commons by their Representative, have been ever from the beginning of the
Governm ent a part and member of the Parliament.

I shall prove it out of several authentic Authors of the Law, Proof that the
House of Commons have ever been a part of the Parl.
Historians and Antiquaries, and by a multitude of Records, and by diverse Acts
of Parliament, which are all the sorts of Proof that can be in a Question of
this Nature.

The Mirror of the Justices, In his Pref. to his 10th. Rep.
of which Book Sir E. C. says, That most of it was written before the Conquest
(as appears by the Book it self) Tho. Horn, a Learned man, added much to it in
the Reign of E. 1. in this Mirror of the Justices, c. 1. sect. 3. It is said
that King Alfred Ordained for a perpetual Usage, That twice in the Year or
oftener, if need be, the Parliament should assemble. And to let you see of whom
that Parliament did consist, he tells us in the same Chapter by whom the Laws
were then made. It is (says he) among other things, ordained, that no King
should change his Money, nor impair it, nor inhanse it, nor make any Money but
of Silver, without the assent of the Lords and All the Commons.

Sir E. C. in his Preface to the 9th. Rep. tells us, That Tenants in Ancient
Demesne, because by their Tenure they were bound to Plow and Husband the Kings
Demesnes, before the Conquest: And in the Conquerors Time, had diverse
Previledges, which they claimed by Prescription; and among others, Not to
contribute to the Wages of the Knights of the Shire.

Now the Privilege must be as Ancient as their Tenure and Service, for their
Privilege comes by reason of their Service, and their Service is known by all
to be before the Conquest, in the time of Edward the Confessor, and in the time
of the Conqueror. And it is expressly said by this Learned and Reverend Judge,
That these Tenants, in Ancient Demesne, claimed this by Prescription; and it
could not be so, if the Wages of the Knights of the Shire had begun within
Memory of Man, or of any Record. Therefore it clearly follows, That Knights of
the Shire to serve in Parliament, and the paying Wages to them for their
Service, has been Time out of Mind, and did not begin 49 H. 3. for that is
within Time of Memory in a Legal Sense.

The same Argument is used by a Learned Lawyer and Antiquary Mr. Lambard, in
his Archion, or Commentary upon the Courts of Justice, fol. 57, and 239, and
245. where the maintains that the Parliament was used in the Saxons time, and
then consisted of the King, Lords and Commons, as in the time of King Ina. Anno
712.

He does affirm, That Burgesses were chosen to the Parliament before the
Conquest, fol. 257, 258, 265.

Littleton's Tenures, sect. 164. says, That the ancient Towns called
Burroughts, be the most ancient Towns that are in Engl. for the Towns that now
are Cities or Counties, in old time were Buroughs, and called Buroughs, for
that of such old Towns came the Burgesses to the Parliament.

Sir E. C. in his Comment upon this Text of Littl. 1 Inst. 110. says, it is
called Parliamentum, because every Member of that Court should Parler la Meant.

Many Pretenders to Learning, take upon them to censure Sir E. C. for this and
some other like Etymologies, as being ridiculous.

Let me do right to that Learned in the Law, and (which is more) honest and
worthy Chief Justice, who lives in his useful Works, and in (that great
Blessing from God) a numerous and flourishing Posterity.

It is true, Mentum is an ordinary Termination of diverse words of the Neuter
Gender, and so it is (if we will be strict) in the Word Parliamentum.

But give me leave to say, if it be ridiculous, he is not the first nor the
greatest that has been guilty in this kind; nor is it any proof of
Illiterateness, nor to be charged only upon the Profession of the Common Law,
as if it were an Absurdity peculiar to us.

For the Antiquity of the like Etymology, it is of above a thousand years
standing; and for the Authority of it, it is to be met with in the Imperial
Laws of Justinian the Roman Emperor, and the last of the Roman Emperors.

Even in the very Text of the Civil Law, it makes the Etymology of Testamentum;
Ex eo appellatur (says the Text) quod Testatio mentis est.

Allusione quadam Etymologica ostendit rei and vocis convenientiam, ( says
Vinius) in his Comment. fol. 270.

Nomen ab officio convenienter habet.

And Vinius says further, Estque hujusmodi allusiva derivandi ratio, omnibus
Auctoribus admodum familiaris. In jocis Venustas delectat; qualis est illa
Ciceronis, Fides, quia fiat quod dictum est.

And Sir E. C. (it may be) was prompted to this Etymon from that ancient
Author, the Mirror of Just. who, in the place I before cited, c. 1. sect. 3.
though he did not expressly mention the Word ( Parliament) yet speaking of it
under another Name, he tells us what their Property is, viz. A Parler la Meant.

Thus much by way of Digression, for the Vindication of that Honor of our
Profession, Sir E. C. to whom not only his own, but all Posterity are highly
obliged, especially our Profession.

The Register of Writs, fol. 261. Quod homines de antiquo Dominico non
contribuant expensis Militum ad Parliamentum venientium. This is the Title of
the Writ.

The Writ it self runs thus, viz.
Monstraverunt Nobis ( says the King) Homines and Tenentes de Manerio de S.
quod enim de antiquo Dominico Coronae Angliae, ut dicitur, quod licet ipsi and
eorum Antecessores Tenentes de eodem Manerio a tempore quo non extat Memoria,
semper hactenus quieti esse consueverunt de expensis Militum ad Parliamenta
Nostra, vel Progenitorum Nostrorum Regum Angliae, pro Communitate dicti
Comitatus, venientium, etc.

M. 11. H. 4. Fitzh. Avowry, Placito, 52. (which is said to be the first Case
in our Year-Books, concerning Wages to Knights of the Shire) In a Replevin the
Defendant avows as Undersheriff, by virtue of a Fieri facias, to levy the
Wages of the Knights of the Shire; and he took his Distress in a Town called
Wotton. Tremain, for the Plaintiff, pleads in Bar to the Avowry, That W. temps
d'ont, etc. never paid to the wages of the Knights of the Shire; and so Issue
is joined upon that Prescription.

M. 14. H. 8. fol, 3. in the Year-Book, by Fineux Chapter J. The Parliament (says
he) consists of the King, the Lords and the Commons, and they are by the Com.
Law One Body Corporate. Now, that, they cannot be at the Common Law, but by
Prescription,

I shall now proceed to prove it by several Records of Parliament, Proof by
Records of Parliament.
that the Commons have ever been a part of the Parliament, as constituted at
this day, of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses.

Ex Rotulo Parliamenti, anno 51. E. 3. Membr. 5. number. 45. Mr. Pryn's 4th. part
of a Register of Parliamentary Writs, fol. 315. in Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. 51 E. 3.
it is too short; but at large in Mr. Pryn, as before cited.

There is a Petition of the Commons to the King in French.
Item, For that of Common Right (which is the same with the Common Law, in the
Language of the Acts of Parliament) of the Realm. Of every County of England
there were and are chosen two Persons to be at the Parliament, for the Commons
of the Counties, besides the Prelates, Dukes, Earls and Barons, and such as
hold by Barony; and besides Cities and Buroughs, who ought to choose of
themselves such as are to answer for them. And such as are chosen for the
Counties ought to have their accustomed Wages, and to have Writs to the
Sheriffs to levy them.

They pray that it be ordained this present Parliament, that the Wages be
Levied of all the Commons of the Counties, as well within Franchises as without
(excepting within Cities and Boroughs, and excepting of those that are summoned
by Writ (meaning the Barons) and their Tenants.

Resp. Soit fait come devant ad este use en cest Case.
This was in the time of K. E. 3. who was but the Fourth King in Succession
from that K. H. 3. in whose Reign our new Authors would have our Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses to have their Original.

And the Kings Answer to the Petition of the Commons, admits the matter of the
Petition to be true, and refers to Usage in former times.

In the same Fourth Part of Mr. Pryn's Register, 5 H. 4. nu. 71.
fol. 643. 5 H. 4. Rot. Parl. number. 71, and 78.

On the behalf of Rich. Chedder Esquire Menial Servant to Tho. Brook, Knight for
Somersetshire.

The Commons Petitioned, That whereas, After the Custom of the Realm, all the
Lords, Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, with their Servants coming to
Parliament, by the Kings Writ, in coming, going and returning, are under your
Royal Protection, etc. And this Petition was answered by the Act in Print.

We may note from hence, That their Privilege, and therefore much more their
being a Part of the High Court of Parliament, it was by Custom of the Realm.

I would note further (since I shall have occasion to use it for another very
material Point) that this Custom (though the then present occasion for the
mention of it, was from the Servant of a Member of the Commons House; yet it is
(alleged as one entire Custom for the whole Parliament, viz. all the Lords
Knights, Citizens and Burgesses. They are all but One Body, One Court; and
their Rights and Privileges are entire, and not some for the Lords, and other
for the Commons; but it is a joint Privilege.

From hence it follows, you cannot invade the Privilege of the one House, but
you invade both.

Elsing, in his Treatise of Parliaments, fol. 145. It Is also in Sir Rob. Cott.
Abr. fol. 433. but not so full.

In the time of the same King, 5 H. 4. number. 74.

The Commons pray, 5 H. 4. na. 74.
That whereas according to the Custom of the Realm, the Lords, Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses, coming to Parliament, ought not for any Debate, etc. to
be arrested.

It is said to be the Custom of the whole Realm (that is, the same with the
Common Law) and it is made to be one entire Custom, both for the Lords and
Commons; and this is for freedom of Debates, and not the same with the last
that I cited, though in the same year.

39 H. Mr. Pryn, ut supra, fo. 771.
6. Rot. Parl. number. 9. On the behalf of Wr Clerk Burg of Chippenham in Wiltsh.

And 17 E. 4. Rot. Parl. number. 36. On the behalf of I. at Will. Cit. for Exeter.

In both these Cases (though upon occasion of two particular Members) yet the
whole House of Commons petitioned.

And the Petition on the behalf of Wr. Clerk, runs thus;

That, whereof time that man's mind is not to the contrary, it has been used,
etc. and then sets forth their Privilege.

The Petition of the Commons on the behalf of I. at Will. is in these words,
viz. The Freedom of which Commons has ever before this time been, and owes to
be, that the Knights of the Shire, Citizens of the Cities, and Barons of the
Cinque Ports, called to any of the Parliaments of your Noble Progenitors (
among other Liberties and Franchises) have had and used Privilege, that any of
them should not be attached by their Persons or Goods in their coming to any
such Parliament, their abiding, nor returning to their proper homes, etc.

Their Freedom had ever been; then it did not begin first, nor had they
themselves their beginning in 49 H. 3.

And owes to be: Then it was not of mere Grace, and by Permission, but of
Right it ought so to be.

And Two Acts of Parliament passed upon those two Petitions, which confirm the
truth of those Suggestions.

And another thing I would observe, which does naturally and easily flow from
these Records, and is very useful to us, viz.

That the Commons Petitioning to have these Freedoms allowed them, does nothing
derogate from their Right to those Liberties and Franchises, nor is no Argument
to prove them to be mere Emanations of Royal Favor; for the humble way of
Address, by the Commons to the King to have their Rights maintained, is made
use of by our Novellists, to prove they were granted from time to time, merely
by the Kings Grace.

I am far from condemning this humble way of Subjects addressing to their
Sovereign: Addresses to the King ought to be with Reverence.
It becomes the Duty of Subjects, and is due to the Majesty of a King, to have
all decent Reverence shown: But I would not have ill use made of their
Humility, to deprive them of their Rights. It was (as I take it) the
observation of Caesar, in his Commentary, of the Temper of the old Britains,
Jam domiti ut pareant, non ut serviant.

In that famous Case of Thomas Thorp, the Speaker of the Commons, ^1 H. 6.
Thorpes Case.
31 Hen. 6. number. 25. there are the very Words of the Petition, at large set
forth, in the fourth Reg. of Mr. Pryn, fol. 644.

Thorp, was taken in Execution, at the Suit of the D. of Y.

The whole House of Commons petitioned to have their Speaker restored to them:
And their Petition is in these Words.

By Common Custom, Time out of Memory of Man, and ever before these Times used,
in every of the Parliaments of the Kings Noble Progenitors, etc.

And so it proceeds to declare the Privilege of the Commons.

I would observe also, out of these three last Records of Parliament; That when
any Breach of Privilege befell but a single Member of that House, as that of
Walter Clerk, and I. at Will.

The whole House thought it self concerned, and the whole House petitioned;
especially in this last Case of Thomas Thorp, their Speaker, to whom the D. of
Y. was no Friend. This will be useful to my Second Point.

Hitherto I have presented you with Records of Parliament, as being the most
proper Proof of the Rights of Parliament, much beyond the Reports of our
Historians, from whom our Innovators fetch most of their Arguments.

I shall now offer you some Records out of an inferior Court, Ex^hequor Records.
one of the four Courts of Westminster Hall, that is, out of the Exchequer: But
they are Judicial Records, adjudged by the whole Court, by Advice, with all the
Judges of both Benches, to confirm the same Point.

M. 12. E. 4. and H. 13. E. 4. in the Office of the Pleas in the Exchequer,
mentioned by Mr. Pryn, in his fourth part of his Register of Parliament Writs,
fol. 752.

In a Plea of Debt by Done against Walsh.

Walsh was menial Servant to Henry Earl of Essex, and he sued out his Writ of
Privilege, and the Writ under the Great Seal, was of this Tenure: viz.

Cum secundum consuetudinem in regno hactenus obtentam and approbatam, Domini
Magnates Milites Comitatuum ac Cives and Burgenses Civitatum and Burgorum, ad
Parliamenta nostra venientes, at eorum Familiares ratione alicujus
Transgressionis (and so proceeds to enumerate other sorts of Actions) dum sic
in Parliamentis nostris morentur, arrestari aut implacitari minime debeant, etc.

And then the Writ mentions that Action of Debt, brought against Walsh, menial
Servant to the Earl of Essex, in that present Parliament, Vobis mandamus (says
the King by that Writ of Privilege to the Barons of the Exchequer,) quod si
ita est. Those Words do not refer to the Custom set forth, nor to the Law upon
it, but to the Allegation in the Writ of matter of Fact; viz. That Walsh the
Defendant was menial Servant to the Earl of Essex.

And then the Defendant does by way of Plea, grounded upon that Writ, apply the
Writ to himself; and averrs, That he is the same Person mentioned in the Writ;
and averrs, That he was the menial Servant to the E. of Essex, and then demands
allowance of his Privilege.

The Plaintiff in that Suit traverses the Custom and Privilege alleged in the
Writ (as to the being impleaded) but admits it as to the Freedom from Arrest.
This Traverse is in the Nature of a Demurrer; for it is Quaestio Juris, ad quam
respondent Judices non Juratores.

Et super hot viso and praelecto brevi praedicto, per Barons, etc. Habitoque
Avisamento Justiciariorum Domini Regis, de utroque Banco in hac part. Quia
videtur praefatis Baronibus de avisamento Justiciariorum praedictorum, quod
talis habetur and habebatur consuetudo, quod Magnates and Milites Comitatuum,
ac Cives and Burgenses Civitatum and Burgorum ad Parliamentum de Sumonitione
Regis venientes, ac eorum Familiares Ratione alicujus Transgressionis, etc. dum
sic in Parliamento morentur, capi aut arrestari non debent. (But then they
adjudge that the Privilege does hold only against Arresting their Persons, but
not against the Suing them.)

This strongly proves the Point I have in Hand, That the House of Commons have
their Privileges by Custom, and therefore the House it self could not have its
Original within Time of Memory, as 49 H. 3. is, in a Legal Understanding.

It is very useful further to observe, That the single and sole Occasion of
this Record was from the Privilege of the Peers, from the suing a menial
Servant of a Peer. No Man denies but the Peers have even been a part of the
Parliament: Nay, our new Modellers of the Government would have the Parliament
to consist only of the King and Lords.

And yet it is said to be a Joint Custom for the Commons, as well as for the
Lords, by express and particular Words. Why did they not lay the Custom for the
Privilege of the Lords only, that might have served for that present Occasion,
which was about the Privilege for a menial Servant of the then E. of Essex?

But the Custom was an entire Custom for both Houses: This proves them to be
coaetaneous, and Twins by Birth and Original.

All this is by the Judgment of all the twelve Judges, in a Judicial
Proceeding: And it takes in the Opinion of the Chancellor, who issued out that
Writ.

The other Record of the same Court is entered H. 12. E. 4. H. 12. E. 4. in the
Exchequer.
Rot. 7. inter Ryner and Cousin, Keeper of the Wardrobe to the King, in an
Action of Debt too; and there the Defendant claims his Privilege, not as
Servant to the King, but as Servant to Thomas St. Ledger, Knight of the Shire
for Surrey.

And the Writ of Privilege sets forth the same entire Custom, both for Lords
and Commons (though the Occasion was here from the Commons only) and the Court of
Exchequer gives the like Judgment, as in the former Case, by Advice too, of all
the Judges of both Benches.

The next Record I shall make use of, E. 2. S. Albans.
shall be that of E. 2. which is a most invincible Proof that the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses have originally, and before 49 H. 3. constituted the
House of Commons, and have ever been a part of the Parliament.

The Burgesses of S. Albans, in their Petition to the King, say, That they
sicut caeteri Burgenses Regni ad Parliamentum Regis, per duos Comburgenses suos
venire debeant, prout retro-actis temporibus venire consueverant, tam tempore
Domini Edwardi, nuper Regis Angliae, Patris Regis (which must be E. 1.) and
progenitorum suorum (which must be understood of the Progenitors in the plural
number of E. 1. for he mentions the then King E. 2. afterward) so that of
necessity it must take in King Hen. 3. and his Father King John, at the least.

And this Computation much exceeds the Date given to the House of Commons by
these new Authors, viz. 49 H. 3.

And then the Petition descends to the mention of the then Kings Time, viz. E.
2. tempore Domini Regis qui nunc est, semper ante instans Parliamentum. And the
Petition complains of the Sheriff of Hertfordshire, who by the Abbots
procuring, refused to summon that Borough.

The Answer by the Council is, Scrutentur Rotuli, etc. de Cancellaria, si
temporibus Progenitorum Regis Burgenses praedicti solebant venire, vel non.

This Answer admits the general Usage of Burgesses to be chosen for diverse
Buroughs, in the times of the King's Progenitors; For it is absurd to think,
that that needed any search of the Rolls in Chancery, but the Search was to be
only, Whether that particular Borough of S. Albans was one of those Ancient
Buroughs that had used that Privilege, and had a Right to it, which would
appear by the Rolls, and Returns of Writs of Summons.

The Record lays the Usage for the Borough to have been semper, ante instans
Parliamentum; so that the Usage had been from ever.

In the Rolls of Parliament 11 H. 4. number. 59, 11 H. 4. number. 59.
cited by Mr. Pryn, in his Brevia Parliamentaria rediviva, fol. 185. There is a
Petition of the Commons in French, reciting the Stat. of 7. H. 4. c. 15. which
Statute (as the Petition says) was made for the preserving the Franchises and
Liberties of the Election of Knights of the Shire, used throughout: the whole
Realm, and by the Kings Progenitors from Parliament to Parliament, time out of
mind observed.

I will now put the Court in mind of some Acts of Parliament, that fully prove
this Point.

The Statute of 5 R. 2. Parl. 2. c. 4. Proof by Acts of Parliament. 5 R. 2.
Parl. 2. C. 4.
(in a time When Parliaments were not so much valued) It is thereby Enacted, by
Assent of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons, that all Persons and Communalties,
which should have a Summons to Parliament, should come from thence-forth to
Parliaments in the manner as they were bounden to do, and had been accustomed
of Old Times; otherwise they should be Amerced as of Old Times had been
accustomed.

Rot. Parl. 2. H. 5. Pars 2. Numb. 10. 2 H. 5. pars 2da. Numb. 10.
This is left out of Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. That Act declares, that the Commons
had ever been a Member of the Parliament, and that no Statute or Law could be
made without their Assent. I will not spend time in citing those Learned
Antiquaries, Historians and Antiquaries.
or Historians; as Sir Henry Spelman, Bedes Eccl. Hist. nor Famous Seldom, nor
Learned Cambden, who by general Words, used in the Saxon Times, for the
Assembling of Parliaments, though not by that Name, prove the Commons to be a
Part of Them; but they do not prove the Commons to be so Elected, and to
consist of Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, as is clearly Proved by the
Records I have already offered.

The Parliament in the Saxon Times was styled Commune Concilium, Et Populi
Conventus.
tam Cleri quam populi. And the Laws were made per Commune Concilium, and
assensum Omnium Episcopar' and Principum Procerum Comitum, and omnium sapientum
Senior' and popular' totius Regni and Populi Conventus. King Edward the
Confessor Confirmed the Saxon Laws, and made new, says Lambert in his Book De
Priscis Anglor. Legibus C. 8. fol. 139. and there' it is said, all to be done a
Rege, Baronibus and Populo. These general Words cannot be understood otherwise,
than to include the Commons.

And so totius Regni assensu and omnium astipulatione and judicio, Seld. Tit.
of Hon. page 702. in a Case between the Archbishop of York, and the Bishop of
Worc. Mag. Char. 9 H. 3.
says Mr. Seldom, a Judgment was given concerning Lanfrank, Archbishop of
Canterbury. The Statute of Mag. Charta was made and Confirmed 9 H. 3. which was
forty Years before this new Date of the Original of the House of Commons, viz.
49 H. 3. And it appears by several Statutes, that Mag. Charta was made De
Communi Concilio Regni says one Statute: Per Commune assent de tut le Realm,
says another. Per le Roy, Peers, and Communes de le terre, says another.

It is worth the while to examine the Grounds of their Opinion, and it will
appear how weak they are.

These new Authors affirm, that the House of Commons began to be admitted as a
part of the Parliament, not till ^ 49 H. 3. Their reason is because (as Mr.
Prin says, Object. 1.
in his Plea for the Lords fol. 182. and in his Preface to Sir Robert Cott.
Abr.) The first Writ of Summons of any Knights, Citizens and Burgesses now
extant is no antienter than 49 H. 3. Dorso 10. and 11. And from thence he
concludes, that it is most apparent, that the Commons had no Place, nor Votes
by Election in Parliament, before the End of the Reign of H. 3. and Sir Robert
Filmer is in like manner positive in it in his Book called The Freeholders
Grand Enquest, fol. 18. and they both cite Mr. Seld. and Camd. and other
Learned Authors, and Mr. Dugdale in his Origines Juridiciales, fol. 18. follows
them in it. It is true Mr. Seldom in His Titles of Honor, fol. 717* toward
the end of that fol. does take notice that the First Roll that they find extant
is that of 49 H. 3. for the Summoning of the Commons by way of Election; but he
does not thence conclude, (as those new Authors do) that this was the first
time that the Commons came to the Parliament by Election.

But in other places of his Learned Book, he does strongly intimate his Opinion
to be that the Commons did very Anciently and long before 49 H. 3. make an
Essential part of the Parliament, and were summoned to it; but in what Form
they were summoned, and when they first began to be distinguished from the
Barons Majores, Seldom himself seems much unresolved.

Learned Camden does indeed date the Original of the Commons as a part of the
Parliament, and as now Elected, from 49 H. 3. fol. 13. of his Britannia in the
Edit. at Land. An. 1600. But let us take notice upon what Authority he does it.
He says he has it Ex satis Antiquo Scriptore, but he names not his Author.

Mr. Seld. fol. 713. says, he could never meet with that Author, and professes
he gives little Credit to that Relation, but acknowledges there had been a
great Change in the Constitution of the Parliament, but supposes it long before
49 H. 3. viz. in the time of that King's Father (King John) and that it was
done by a Law, though the Law be lost, as many Rolls of Parliament were, wherein
those Laws were entered.

And the distinction of Barons Majores and Minores he supposes was made by Act
of Parliament, Fol. 709.
about the time when the great Charter of King John was made at Runnymead viz.
17 Johannis. By which Charter, some of the Barons Majores were severally to be
Summoned to Parliament by special Writs. And all other Tenants in capite, or
Tenants by Knights Service were to be summoned by a general Summons directed to
the Sheriff of every County.

By this Conjecture, it should seem that the Court of Parliament before
consisted but of one House or Assembly. And it is generally held, that at the
first, from the beginning of the Reign of William the first, till that Charter
of King John, all Tenants in Capite had a Right to sit in Parliament. For says
Mr. Seld. fol. 704. medio folii. Tenere de Rege in Capite, and to be a Baron,
and to have a right to sit in Councils or Courts of Judgment, are Synonymies.
That great Charter of King John, says Seld. was made by the King and his
Barons, and liberos homines totius Regni, and that it seems first made the
distinction.

But Mr. Seld. does by no means leave it to K. H. 3. or his Son E. 1. or to any
other King at any time, to send his special Writ of Summons to such of the
Barons only, quibus ipse Rex dignatus est Brevia Summonitionis dirigere. As Mr.
Camden's nameless Author taught him, and from Mr. Camden, Mr. Pryn, Sir Robert
Filmer, and Mr. Dugdale take it up, and so propagate that Error. So that this
new fancy is wholly grounded upon the Credit of that uncertain Writer, whom Mr.
Seldom could never meet with, and to whom he gave no credit.

The Argument upon this Subject, begins fol. 701. in Mr. Seld. Tit. of Honor,
and is continued to fol. 718.

Now the Argument taken from the Rolls of Summons, which are not extant before
the time of 49 H. 3. is of no weight.

For by the same Argument it might be proved, that there was no Parliament from
the time of 49 H. 3. till 23 E. 1. For there is no Roll nor no other Testimony
left of a Summons for any Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, from 49 H. 3. till
23 E. I. And yet we know there were no lest than fourteen Parliaments between
those times.

And yet we know there were no less than fourteen Parliaments between those
times.

They may as well argue, The Ancientest Writ of Summons, that Mr. Seldom had
seen for a Peer, was but 6 Johannis. Tit. of Hon. 707, 708.
that there were no Acts of Parliament, nor no Parliament till 9 H. 3. when
Magna Charta was made, because there are no Rolls of them till that time.
Whereas it is beyond all dispute, that there were Parliaments and Acts of
Parliament long before, as 4 Will. 1. when the Bishops were brought in to hold
by Barony, (as Mr. Seld. conceives) and some in H. 1. and others yet extant in
History, yet the Rolls of them are lost. This is observed by the Ld. Chapter I.
Vaughan, in his Rep* fol. 358. in the Case of Thomas and Sorrel.

In the next place, Mr. Pryn's Plea for the Lords, fol. 113. but mis-paged.
these late Authors proceed further in their error, and maintain that the
Commons had no further power in Parliament, than what the King and the Lords
admitted them unto.

And Sir Robert Filmer, fol. 40. allows neither Lords nor Commons any Power but
by the King's bare Permission, and thus they are growing in their Invasions
against the Court of Parliament, and impeach one first, and the other will
follow more easily.

And Sir Robert Filmer further holds, the Legislative Power rests solely in the
King, and fol. 39. he has these words, But the truth is (says he) The
Liberties and Privileges of both Houses, have but one and the self-same
Foundation, which is nothing else but the mere and sole Grace of Kings.

And Doctor Heylin, in his Life of Archbishop Laud, fol. 91. denies the
Privileges of Parliament to be the Peoples Birthright, but holds them not
otherwise exercised, than by the Grace and Goodness of the King.

Mr. Pryn, 2. Object.
Sir Robert Filmer, and Mr. Dugdale, lay great stress upon the diversity that
is in the Writs of Summons, between the Summons for the Lords, and the Summons
for the Commons.

That to the Lords (say they) is super negottis praedictis tractaturi
vestrumque consilium impensuri* But that to the Commons, is (say they only ad
faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc ibidem de communi cousilio dicti
regni contigerint ordinari.

It is true, that for many years of late, that distinction has been so used in
the Summons, but not constantly so.

As to this point, I will cite Mr. Dugdale's, and Mr. Prin's own Books against
their own Opinion.

The very first writ of Summons, 49 H. 3.
which as they say is now extant, for the Summoning of the Commons by Election,
viz. 49 H. 3. runs in these words, Nobiscum ac cum praedictis praelatis and
magnatibus nostris super praemissis tractaturi at que consilium impensuri.
Dugd. Orig. Jur. page 18.

The Writ, 28 E. 1.
De expensis Militum qui venerunt ad Parliamentum venientibus ( says that
Writ) usque ad Westmonasterium ibidem de diversis neg^ciis nobiscum
tractaturis. See Mr. Pryn's 4th. part of a Register of Parliament Writs, fol. 8.

In Mr. Ryley's Placita Parliamentaria, 35 E. 1.
it appears, that as the Summons to the Temporal Lords, fol. 318. was ad
tractandum, and so likewise the Summons to the Prelates, fol. 319. so also fol.
320. it is entered in these words, Mandatum fuit singulis Vicecomitibus per
Angliam quod de quolibet comitatu duos milites, and de qualibet civitate duos
cives, and de quolibet burgo duos Burgenses eligi and ad dictum Parliamentum
venire facerent ad tractandum, etc.

In the same Book, 15 E. 2.
fol. 570. An. 15 E. 2. there is mention of a Writ of Summons, for Knights out
of Wales, to a Parliament at York, ad tractandum and consilium impendendum.

In Mr. Pryn's 31 E. 3.
Brevia Parliamentaria Rediviva, fol. 274. there is the very Indenture returned
by the Sheriff of Norsolk for great Yarmouth, ad tractandum, consulendum and
consentiendum.

And fol. 68. 18 E. 2.
of that Book, another Writ, de expensis militum, reciting the Cause for which
they had been Summoned to the Parliament, viz. ad tractandum, etc.

And in the same Book, fol. 145. it appears that 18 E. 3. 18 E. 3.
the Writs to the Sheriffs for choosing Knights, mentioned what their work was
to be, in these words, viz. Nobiscum, cum praelatis and proceribus praedictis
super diversis and arduis negotiis nos and statum regni nostri specialiter
tangentibus tractaturi and suum consilium impensuri.

And fol. 147. and 149. 26 E. 3.
the like words in the Writs.

And fol. 177. 1 H. 5. the Indenture returned by the Sheriff of Wiltshire,
recites their trust in the same words, and pursues the words of the Writ.


And 276. and 283. and 381. Indentures returned from Reading, 2 H. 4. 25 H. 6.
16 E. 2. 27 H. 6.
Bristol, London, with the same words. And ib. fol. 178 and 179 and 291 for
Windsor, and 365. So that in the Reigns of seven several Kings, and those of
the most Ancient Kings, there was no such distinction in the Writs of Summons.

Another Argument used by these late Authors, to prove that the whole Power and
all the Privileges of the House of Commons, are not from the Original
Constitution of the Government, (as I Affirm, and I hope have proved they are)
but of a later Original, and by the mere Grace and Indulgence of Princes (as
indeed they must be, if the House of Commons began within Memory) is taken from
the Words and Phrases of our Historians, Object.
who have written since the coming in of the Normans, and ascribe the making of
Laws, and all the Determinations and Decrees in Matters of Judicature, and all
the Actings of the Ancient Parliaments before the time of the Normans, to the
King and Lords only, Exclusive to the Commons, and that the Commons had no part
in them, till this time of 49 H. 3.

And they ground this Opinion upon the Form of Penning of our Ancient Acts of
Parliament, Pennings of Ancient Acts of Parliament.
which seem by the Words of them to be mere Concessions of our former Kings,
and to have proceeded only from their Royal Bounty, and at their sole Will and
Pleasure.

And they Confirm themselves in that Opinion, Petitions for Freedom of Speech,
etc.
from observing the Course used in the beginning of Parliaments, when the
Speaker makes his humble Petitions to the King for the Granting of them Freedom
from Arrests, and Freedom of Speech.

Now to discover the Falsity of these Grounds, and the Weakness of these
Arguments, taken from the Words and Phrases used by our Historians, I shall
show that our Historians who have written since the time of the coming in of
the Normans, and have Translated the Saxon Annals, have in those Translations,
instead of the Saxon Titles, used the Titles that were never in use before
their own Times, which Titles used in the Saxons times had quite different
Significations from the Titles used in the times of the Translators.

The Title ( Earl) for Example, is used in the Penning of the Saxons Laws (as
among those of Athelstan) as we may see by Mr. Lambert in his Book de Priscis
Anglor. Legibus, and the Title ( Comes) came in amongst us since, from the
Empire; and signified a different thing from ( Earl.) Now our Translators
mistaking those two Titles ( Earl) and ( Comes) to signify the same thing,
wherever they met with ( Earl) in the Annals of the Saxons, they have rendered
it ( Comes) in their Translations: and whatever in those times was done by
Earls, and whatever Power the Earls then used, is by our Translators ascribed
to our Comites, Tit. of Honout Fol. 603, 604.
who are therefore also called Earls, when in Truth they had different
Significations, and were different in their Powers. Mr. Seldom takes notice of
this Error in our Norman or English Translators proceeding from their
Ignorance. But from this Error false Conclusions have been raised, and false
Measures taken in our Discourses, concerning the Power of the Peers.

Sir H. Spelman observes the same Error in our Translators, in rendering Words
and Titles Non emore Saeculi antiquioris, but according to the Titles used in
their own times, when many times they signified different things. Nobilis, says
Mr. Seldom, Fol. 603.
in the Saxons times denoted every Gentleman.

Now because ( Nobilis,) in our times is generally restrained to Peers, whom we
call the ( Nobility,) our New Writers, as Mr. Pryn, and Sir Robert Filmer, and
several others, ascribe all to the Earls and Barons and other Peers of our
times, which they read in the Translations of the Saxon Annals, to be acted by
those that are called ( Nobiles) in those Annals. Although in truth in those
Saxon times, they were acted by the middle sort of Persons, as well as by those
of the highest sort of Dignity under the King.

Those Translators misled our new Authors. For the Norman Writers translate the
Word ( Thanes) into ( Barons) and these new Authors of ours, whatever they
find in these Translations to be related of the ( Barons) they limit it as a
Peculiar to our present ( Barons) and so ascribe all judicial Power anciently
used in Parliament to the Barons only. And they bring those Historians and
Translators for a Proof.

For Example, The Saxon Title ( Thanes) was in the Saxon times applied to all
Lords of Manors. But the Translators of the Saxon Annals, translating the
Title ( Thanes) into ( Barons) Our Innovators apply all that in Saxon Writers
is said to be done by the ( Thanes) that is, all Lords of Manors, as
peculiarly belonging to the Power of the Barons in our times.

Hence it is that Sir E. C. cautions us against taking Reports of Law from
Historians: in his Preface to the 3d. Rep. he calls it Chronicle Law.

The Word ( Baro) was not in use in England till the Normans times, and the
Root of it (as Mr. Seld. and Camd. and Sir H. Spelm. teach us) is from the
Northern Language ( Barn) which signifies the Male Sex, as when we put Cases of
Baron and Feme; or it signifies ( a Freeholder) hence come the Words Courts
Baron.

Nomine Baronagii (says Camd. Eliz. Edit. Land. An. 1600. fol. 137.) omnes
quodammodo Regni Ordines continebantur. It comprehended the Gentry as well as
the greatest Persons. Fol. 176.
After this manner Godwin in his Roman Antiquities speaking of the Roman
Magistrates, Translates the Words ( Triumviri capitales) into (3. High
Sheriffs) but this affords no Argument, that what was done by the Triumviri
among the Romans, may therefore lawfully belong to the power of High Sheriffs
among us.

And so the Words Proceres, Magnates, Optimates, Nobiles, and such like, were
not in the Writers of the Saxons times restrained to Men of the highest rank
then, such as our Earls and Barons are now, but to all Persons of the better
sort, though not of the highest rank, not only to Patricians, and those of the
Senatorian order, but to those also that were Equestris ordinis. Excluding none
but the Ignota capita, or sine Nomine turba, such as the Romans styled
Plebeians. Magnates and Proceres, are said to make the Stat. of Mortmain, but
we all know that the Parliament that made it, consisted then of King, Lords,
and Commons.

The great Charter made 17 of K. John appears by the body of the Charter it
self to have been made per Regem, Barons, and liberos Homines totius Regni; so
that it is most plain it was not made by the King and the Barons only, as Mr.
Seld. observes in his Tit. of Honor, fol. 709. and there he refers to the
Close Roll 17 Johannis dorso memb. 22 Yet K. H. 3. speaking of this Meeting,
calls it Baronagium Angliae, and rot. claus. 28 H. 3. Pars unica membr. 12.
dorso, it is called Parliamentum de Runni-meade quod fuit inter Dominum Regem
Johannem and Barons suos Angliae.

As for the other gross mistake, The Freeholders grand Enquest. fol. 40. and 41.
That the Power of making Laws rests only in the King, (as Sir Robert Filmer
would have it,) which he proves from the Titles of Acts of Parliament, and the
Forms of those Acts being by way of Charter and Grant from our Kings in ancient
times, as that of Magna Charta DOMINVS REX CONCESSIT; and the Stat. De donis
conditionalibus, DOMINVS REX statuit, sure he was no Lawyer that used this
Argument, and he never read the Prince's Case.

Nor Sir E. C. 2. Inst. nor shall I need to labor in the consutation of this
Error, the fallacy of it being so well known to every Man that wears a Gown.
As for that Stat of Mag. Char. whereby the King only seems to speak, and all
that is ordained by that Stat. runs in the language of the King's Concessions
only; yet we know the Stat. of 15 E. 3. c. 1. which confirms it, says of it,
that it was ordained by the King, Lords, and Commons. The Stat. of 28 E. 1. c.
8. and c. 13. has these words, 28 E. 1. c. 8. and 13. Elect. of Sheriffs.
viz. The King has granted unto his People that they shall have Election of
their Sheriffs every year, if they list. One would take this to be a most
gracious Liberty, and an high Condescension if it should be granted now adays.

And our Innovators would be apt to conclude from the words of this Act and
from the Penning of it, that the People once had this mighty Privilege merely
as a Boon from the King, and by virtue of his Grant. Whereas there is nothing
more certain and clear than that the Freeholders (who are often called the
People, and are the true Proprietors of the Nation and Land) had originally and
from the very first Constitution of the Nation, the Election not only of all
Sheriffs, but of all other Magistrates Civil or Military that had any Authority
over them under the King; so that they had a mighty Freedom in the very
Constitution of the Nation, and this overthrows all the wild Fancies of Sir
Robert Filmer, and Dr. Heylin, and some later Doctors, as if all were derived
from mere Grace and Bounty, and many other Deductions might be made from the
knowledge of this.

The Freeholders had originally the Election of the Conservators of the Peace,
who are become out of date by introducing our present Justices of Peace, who
have their Power not by the Elect. of the Freeholders, or are they of their
Nomination (as anciently) but nominated by the King, and have their Power by
special Commission under the great Seal; and how, and by what means, and in
what tempered times this came about, and that this freedom was gained from the
Freeholders of England, you may read in Mr. Lambard, in his Eirenarcha, fol.
16. 19. 20. 147. It was done by Act of Parliament, in the beginning of K. E.
3d, and in his Infancy, when his Mother Q. Isabel ruled all.

The Freeholders originally and from all antiquity did likewise by Writ at the
County Court styled in pleno Folkmote choose the Heretochii; What were those?
that sounds like a strange word. I will imitate our Norman or English
Translators in the translation of the Saxon Annals, and render it into the
English style: you may by that rule call them Lords Lieutenants, or Deputy
Lieutenants; for the Saxon Laws tell you their duty or office, they were the
Ductores Exercitus.

See Lamb. de priscis Anglor. Legibus, in his chapter de Heterochiis, fol. 147

All these great Officers were chosen by the Freeholders, as our Knights of the
Shire are, and as Coroners and Verderers (formerly Men of great Power) are
chosen by Writ at the County Court to this day.

These were mighty Powers and Freedoms, and enjoyed by the People as anciently
as any of our Records reach, and are more authentic Proofs than the writings
of Historians, and best show the Native Freedom that the People had by the
ancient Constitution of our Government, contrary to all the new Doctrines of
our late Writers, and prove that the Privileges and Freedoms we yet enjoy are
not mere Emanations of Royal Favor, as our Novellists would impose upon us.

See Sir E. C. to this purpose. 2. Inst. 174. and 558.

I could name some great Men that have lately used the same language in Books
published The late E. of Clarend. in his Answ. to Hobs.
sub magni Nominis umbra. Bracton who lived in the time of K. H. 3. l. 1. c. 1.
fol. 1. affirms Legis vigorem habet quicquid de consilio and consensu magnatum
and Reipub. Communi sponsione (authoritate Regis praecedente) just fuerit
definitum and approbatum.

In the last place, that humble and modest way of the People's addressing to
their Sovereign either for the making of Laws (which has been very ancient) or
for granting of Privileges (as the Speaker of the Commons has of late years
done) it shows indeed great Reverence, and I do not in the least dislike it;
and it becomes the Majesty of the Prince to be so addressed to; but let it not
be made an argument that either the Laws thereupon made, or the Privileges so
allowed, are precarious, and merely of Favor, and may be refused them.

I would be loath to pay Wages and to maintain at my Charges every one that
styles himself my humble Servant.

In that Act of Parliament Entitled, Petition of Right 3 Car. 1.
The Petition of Right, the Title corrects and qualifies it self, 3 Car. 1. the
Lords and Commons petitioned the King, but it was for their Rights and
Privileges; not for any new, but for their ancient Rights and Privileges, and
yet they style it a Petition.

In the Title of this Act (the Petition of Right) those res olim, insociabiles,
sc. Imperium and Libertas are been mixtae: and from hence is a mixed Monarchy.

In the Stat. of Provisors, Stat. of Provisors 25 E. 3.
25 E. 3. the Commons prayed; they are fond of the word, and I commend it in
them; but the word was used by the Figure Catachresis, as the Scholars call it;
not properly, as appears by the Subject matter of that Act that follows; what
was it, I pray, that they so prayed? They prayed (says that Act) That upon the
mischiefs that happen to the Realm, the King ought, and is bound by his Oath,
with the accord of his People in his Parliament, thereof to make Remedy and
Law. The Peers are here included in the People; so that the word prayed had it
been used to any other than the King, had signified remonstrated, declared, or
represented.

This proves too where the transcendent Power of the Legislature is, and that
the Exercise of it, though it be free and not subject to coercion, yet it is not
at will and pleasure in the Exercise of it, but guided by Rules.

And though the Speaker does (upon his being approved of by the King) make it his
humble Petition to have Liberty of Speech allowed the Commons; from whence Dr.
Heylin. and Sir Rob. Filmer, and others, infer that the Commons enjoy that
Liberty merely by the King's Grace and Favor; yet they are clearly answear'd
by the words that accompany that humble Petition, he prays they may be allowed
that Freedom, Mr. Pryn's Plea for the Lords, 389, 390.
as of Right and Custom they have Used, and all their Ancient and Just
Privileges and Liberties. So that this from the Speaker is also a Petition of
Right.

Nor is this request of the Speakers ancient in the use of it, if we may
believe Mr. Hakewel, in his Treatise of the manner of Enacting Statutes in
Parliament, fol. 136.

Thomas Moyle Speaker, 34 H. 8. the first that is recorded to have made
Petition for Freedom of Speech.

I hope I have sufficiently made it out, that the House of Commons as a Member
of the High Court of Parliament, are not of so late an Original, as 49 H. 3.
but have been as Ancient as the Nation it self, and may in the Sense of Julius
Caesar in his Comment. be accounted among the Ab-Origines, and that they have
had a perpetual Being, to speak in the Language of the Law, temps don't, etc. a
tempore cujus contrarii memoria hominum non existit, and that they are
therefore capable by Law (together with the rest of the three Estates in
Parliament) to prescribe and claim a share in all Parliamentary Powers and
Privileges; I do not mean separately, but in conjunction with those other
Estates, which they could not otherwise legally have done, if their Original
and Commencement could have been shown.

I shall in the next place endeavor to make it evident, All three Estates one
entire Body and Corporation.
That the three Estates of Parliament are one entire Body and Corporation; and
that all their Powers and Privileges in the Right of them, and in the Title to
them, are entire, per my and per tout, and belonging to the whole Body of the
Parliament, though in the Exercise of those Powers, and sometimes in the claim of
them they are distinguished, and in the practice of their Powers, they are in
many things distributed into parts.

For their Powers are one thing, and their Privileges are another; the latter
are but an incident or attendant upon the former.

It is very material in our present case to have this matter considered, I mean
the Intireness of this High Court; for Divide and Impera: The Faggot is easily
broken when first the Band is broken. If this be well considered, the
consequence of this Case will be better understood.

It concerns the Defendant only by name and more immediately, but in the right
and near consequence, it is now most evident, that it nearly concerns the House
of Lords: this Information of Mr. Attorneys, like a Terrae-motus, or as that
great Blast would have done (had not Almighty God, in his Infinite Goodness to
this Nation, prevented it) shakes the Foundation of both Houses, and reaches to
all future Parliaments; it frights me to speak what may be the effects of it,
if it should prevail and be stretched to the utmost. I am far from saying or
thinking it is so intended. But who knows how far a single Precedent will be
made use of in times to come?

All the Estates, in Parliament, are all called by one common name, 14 H. 8, 3.
Fineux Chapter Just.
as Commune Concillum Regni, Magna Curia, They are one Body Politic, M. 14 H.
8. fol. 3. in the year-book (which I cited before to another purpose) it is
said by Fineux Chapter I. that the Parliament at the Common Law, consists of the
King, Lords, and Commons, and they are ( says he) but one Body Corporate.

This proves likewise (what I before argued) that the Commons at the Common Law
(which is ab initio) were a part of the Parliament.

In the Case of Ferrers out of Crompt. Jurisd. of Courts, Ferrer' s Case,
Crompt. Jurisd.
fol. 8, 9, 10. (for I keep within my proper Element, and move in my Sphere,
and cite Authors of our own Science of the Common Law) K. H. the 8th. called
before him the Lord Chancellor, the Judges, the Speaker of the House of
Commons, and others, and thus expressed himself before them, viz. That he was
informed by his Judges, that he the King as Head, and the two Houses as
Members, were knit together in one Body Politic, so as whatsoever Offense or
Injury (during time of Parliament) is offered to the meanest Member of the
House, is to be judged as done to the King's Person and the Whole Court of
Parliament. And Sir Edward Mountague the Ld. Chapter I. then present, confirmed all
that the King had said, and it was assented to by all the rest of the Judges.
Now if you bruise or pierce the hands; (and the House of Commons may well be
compared to the hands, for they have been the Liberal Hands, and the Hands feed
the Head) the Head and all the rest of the Body must quickly be sensible.

In Trewinnard's Case, Dier. 60. and 61. The Privilege of the Commons upon
this very account, is termed the Privilege of the Parliament, and the Judgment
given in that Case by the House of Commons, is there said to be the Judgment of
the most High Court of Parliament.

The Statute of 1. C. 1. says the Parliament is the whole Body of the Realm.

By the two Records that I cited before out of the Office of Pleas in the
Exchequer, 12 E. 4. It appears in two several Cases of Privilege, the one
concerning the Lords, and the other concerning the Commons, in both Cases the
Privilege was laid and claimed as one entire Privilege, and so allowed by the
Judgment of that Court, by advice of all the Judges of both Benches.

The Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir Pierce de la Mare.
by the Rolls of Parliament, (which are the most proper proofs in a thing of
this Nature) is termed the Speaker of the Parliament, so it is in the Roll of 1
R. 2. in Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. fol. 155 it was in the Reign of a King that
was no favourer of Parliaments.

Sir John Bussey, Speaker to the Parliament, Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. 20. R. 2.
number. 14 and 15.

51 E. 3. number. 87. Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. fol. 151. Sir Thomas Hungerford
Speaker of the Parliament.

And so is the Speaker of the Commons styled in the Case of Ferrers in
Crompton's Jurisd. of Courts, fol. 8, 9, 10. (before cited.)

In the Statute of 6 H. 8. C. 16. the Clerk of the House of Commons, is called
Clerk of the Parliament.

In the Case of Godsol and Sir Christ, Heydon, 12. in B. R. in Sergeant Roll's
Rep. fol. It was affirmed by Sir E. C. that in ancient time all the Parliament
sat together, and the separation was at the desire of the Commons, This is
contradicted by Mr. Pryn, in his Preface to Sir Rob. Cotton's Abr. fol. 5, 6.
notwithstanding ( says he) they are but one house: and he further affirms,
that he had seen a Record, 30 H. 1. of their Degrees and Seats.

Having made it appear that the Parliament is one entire body, and therefore
mutually concerned in Powers and Privileges as to the Right and Title of them,
though dividod sometiems in the Exercise. I shall proceed briefly to show what
those Powers are, in order to the proving that what in our Case is charged to
be done by the Speaker, The Powers of Parliament.
by Order and Command of the Parliament, (for so I may now affirm) is pursuant
to their Power and Jurisdiction.

The Parliament has three Powers.

1. A Legislative, Of the Power and Jurisdiiction of the Parliament.
in respect of which they are called the three Estates of the Realm.

2. A Judicial, in respect of this it is called Magna Curia, or the High Court
of Parliament.

3. A Counselling Power, hence it is called Commune Concilium Regni.

For the proof of these, I shall cite some few Antiquaries, but chiefly some
Authors of our Profession of the Law, and those of the best Authority with us.

I shall mention them without observing any exact method, because diverse of
them extend to more than one of these distinct Powers, and some of them refer
at once to all of them.

Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossary Tit. (Gemotum) which was the old Saxon word
for a Parliament, fol. 261. Convenere (says he) Regni Principes tam Episcopi
quam Magistratus (there are those that now make up the House of Lords)
Liberique homines (there are the Commons) what is their proper Work and Power?
Consulitur de communi salute, de pace and bello. This proves them the Commune
Concilium Regni.

Learned Camden.

Quod Saxones olim Wittena Gemot nos Parliamentum recte dicicimus, as to their
Power, Summam and Sacro-sanctam authoritatem habet in legibus ferendis,
interpretandis, and in omnibus quae ad reipubl. salutem spectant. This shows
their Legislature.

The Mirror of Justices, (this is an Authority in Law) C. 1. fol. 9. says,
Parliaments were institued Pur oyer and terminer; this is is the Supreme Court
of Oyer and Yerminer. The Court of King's Bench is said to be above all Courts
of Eire or Itinerant; and if the King's Bench be adjourned into any County,
where the Eire is sitting, the Eire ceases, In praesentia Majoris, etc.

But this Court is above the King's Bench and all Courts of Oyer and Terminer.
The King's Bench is the Highest Eire, but this is (according to Solomon's
Hyperbole) higher than the highest.

But what is the proper Subject of their Oyer and Terminer? Our Ancient Author
(who wrote some part of his Book before the Conquest) tells us their work is to
hear and determine les plaintes de tort le Roy, de la reign, and de leur
Enfans, (the King's Children, so that they make an Impartial Enquiry, but says
our Author further, De eux specialment de queux torts lun ne poit aver
autrement common droit, this flies very high to prove their Judicial Power. I
forbear to English it.

It is the proper work of this Supreme Court, to deal with such Delinquents, as
are too high for this Court of the King's Bench or other ordinary Courts.
Against whom, through their Potency or mighty Interest, common right cannot be
had, it must be understood in ordinary Courts. And the Writing and Printing of
this, was never taken to be a Scandal to the Government or to the Justice of
the Nation. For the Author speaks in the Person of the King himself, and tells
us, that the High Court of Parliament is armed with a Power, able to cope with
and quell the most insolent Offenders.

When the Great Judge of all the Earth comes to make Inquisition for Blood, and
to Execute Judgment by the hands of this High Court. The lofty looks of man
shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down and made low.

To discourse of this Judgment, will make a Foelix tremble.

We have often heard it confidently said from the Pulpit. That our Laws are
like the Spiders Webs, which catch the little Flies, but the great ones break
through them.

Now it is quite contrary with this great Court, this great Court encounters
only with great Offenders. It is like the Imperial Eagle, Aquila non capit
Muscas, it leaves them to this and other Inferior Courts, but that takes to
task the Animalia Majora.

In the great Case, Rot. Parl. 40 E. 3. number. 7. King John had resigned up the
Crown of England to the Pope, by the hand of Pandolphus his Legate, and
sordidly submitted to take the Crown at his hand again, at a yearly Tribute.

In the Region of our noble King Edward the 3d. the Pope demanded his Rent and
all the Arrears.

The Prelates, Dukes, Counts, Barons, and Commons, resolved that neither the
King nor any other, could put the Realm nor the People thereof into subjection,
sans l'assent de eux.

This intimates, that with their joint consent the Crown may be disposed of.

This was the highest Resolution in Law, in one of the highest points in Law,
concerning the King's Claim of an Absolute Power, and in a time when the Pope
was in his height. And the Commons join in the Resolution, both against the
Pope's and King John's pretense to a Despotick Power.

Sir Tho. Smith who was a Secretary of State, in his Commonw. l. 2. c. 2. fol.
50, 51.

In Comitiis Parliamentariis posita est omnis absolutae potestatis vis (taking
in the King as the Head of them, as it ought to be understood this shows where
the rightful absolute Power under Almighty God is. And among other Magnalia he
tells us, Incerti Juris Controversias dirimunt. This shows their transcendent
Judicial Power; they determine the greatest Disputes and Doubts in Law. They
would quickly decide this Dispute and Controversy, (were it once before them)
without Argument.

This appears to be the proper business of a Parliament, even from the Writ of
Summons both to Lords and Commons, (for they did not Anciently differ in any
thing material (as I have abundantly shown already) they are De Arduis Regni
tractitare, and Concilium impendere, here is their Councelling Power. According
to that Equitable Rule, Quod omnes tangit, ab omnibns tractari debet.

Their Legislative Power is most clearly set out by Bracton (a Judge in the
time of K. H. 3d. in whose latter times our Innovators would have the House of
Commons to begin) I cited him before; Legis vigorem habet (says he) quicquid de
Consilio and de Consensu Magnatum and Reipubl. communi Sponsione (anthoritate
Regis praecedente,) just fuerit definitum and approbatum 5 H. 4. Number. 11. The
Record there uses too gross a Word. The Commons (says the Roll) require the
King, it should have been, made it their Request to the King (and the Lords
accorded) that four special Persons should be removed out of the Kings House.

This in some Ages, as in the Reign of K. R. the 2d. would have been thought a
very high presumption, and a saucy thing (to speak in the Language of the
Pulpit, and Press too from a late Cambr. Dr. and a Chaplain in Ordinary, (if
the Title of the Print may be credited) but said to be printed by the -- of
that University. A saucy thing with their Profane and Unhallowed Hands to
presume to meddle in a thing so Sacred. (Thus says the late Printed Sermon) But
it was a Sacred or Consecrated thing indeed in this Roll of Parliament
mentioned. One of the 4 required to be removed out of the King's House, (where
he was a Domestic) was no less than the King's Confessor. And it was not in
the Reign of a R. the 2d. or H. the 6th. but of K. H. 4th. one of our Wisest
and most Active Valiant Kings.

But it may be thought that these four Persons were in some desperate Popish
Plot of killing the King, as the four we have heard of, were.

No, the King himself will resolve that Doubt.

That noble King said in answer to it, He knew no cause wherefore they should
be removed, but only for that, they were hated of the People.

And yet that great King charged those Four to depart from his House.

This proves their Councelling Power.

I might enumerate a vast multitude of Animalia Majora, no small Flies, that
have in several Ages been catched in the Net or Webb of an Inquiry made by the
House of Commons, who fish only for such greater Fish, such as we call the
Pike, who by Oppression live upon the smaller Fish, and devour them. The
Commons to that end fish with a Net, that has a wide and large Meshe, such as
lets go the small Frye, and compasses none but those of the largest size. Such
as the Lord Latimer in the time of E. 3. An. 50. Such as Michael de la Pool E.
of Suff. and Lord Chancellor; in 10. R. 2. Tho. Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury. 21 R. 2. and such like. William de la Pool D. of Suff. 28 H. 6. who
were all impeached by the House of Commons in several Parliaments.

And I my self have seen a Lord Chief Justice of this Court, while he was Lord
Chief Justice, and a Learned Man, by leave from the House of Commons, pleading
before that House for himself, and excusing what he had done in a Trial that
came before them in the West, whereof Complaint was made to the House. And he
did it with that great Humility and Reverence, and those of his own Profession
and others, were so far his Advocates, as that the House desisted from any
further prosecution.

In the the late Act of 13o. of his now Majesty for safety of his Royal Person,
there is a Proviso for the saving of the Just Ancient Freedom, and the
Privilege of either of the Houses of Parliament, or any of their Members, of
debating any Matters or Business, which shall be debated or propounded in
either of the said Houses; or at any Conferences or Committees of both, or
either of the said Houses; or touching the Repeal or Alteration of any old, or
the preparing any new Laws; or the Redressing of any public Grievances. I
observed but now out of Trewinn. Case in the Ld. Dier. that the Judgment of the
House of Commons in a Case of the privilege of that House, in that Report, is
called a Judgment of the most high Court of Parliament; which proves they are
not without a Judicial Power.

3 H. 6. Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. fol. 574. The great Case between the E. of Warwick
and the Earl Marshal for Precedence, fol. 576. was determined by the King. By
Advice and Consent of the Lords and Commons; and yet one would have thought
that a Case of Precedence between two Peers, should have been a peculiar of the
Lords.

In the Case of 1 H. 7. in the Year Books, fol. 4. about reversing of
Attainders, it is advised by all the Judges, that those Knights and others of
the House of Commons, should not sit in the House, till the Act for reversal of
their Attainders were passed. And the Reason is, that it is not convenient,
that such as were attaint should be Judges; (and it might have been added in
their own Case) so that attainting by Bill, or Reversing Attainders, though by
Bill, is most properly a Judicial Act, and the Members of the House of Commons
are acknowledged to be Judges in that Case by all the Judges, and by that
Statute of 6 H. 8. C. 16. which I mentioned before to another purpose, the
Iournal of the House of Commons is called a Record.

I have formerly observed, but to another purpose too, that the Writs of
Summons anciently for Electing Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to Parliament,
did direct them in their Duty, that they were to meet ad Consulendum and
Consilium impendere, though of late Years this has been omitted, and now
advantage is taken of it. Nothing acted in this present Case, but what is
within their Power.


Let us in the next place examine whether the matters acted in this Case by the
House of Commons be Warranted by these Powers, of the Parliament, and have been
done in pursuance of those Powers.

And upon Examination, we shall find they have done nothing but what they had a
full power to do, and what is agreeable to the Law and Usage of Parliament.

It is set forth in the Plea, (and admitted by the Demurrer, but we all know it
to be true) that there was an Horrid Devilish, etc, Popish Plot. The Enquiry
after which, and the searching of it to the bottom. and discovering all the
Accomplices, was Negotium Arduum, and it did, Regem and Statum Regni
specialiter tangere, according to the Writ of Summons to Parliament.

For the Plea tells us the design of it, viz. to Kill the King. 2ly. To subvert
the Government and the Laws, to suppress the True Religion, and to destroy the
Professors of it.

The Plea shows, that One great Lord was convicted of it by Impeachment of the
Commons, and attainted before the Lords. The Kings Speech shows there was need
of further Enquiry, and that it was not as yet thoroughly done, nor himself,
nor the two Houses safe; and the King charges both Houses to make an Impartial
Enquiry. The word Impartial imports, there might be some great Persons
concerned, that might be apt to be favored.

And the Plea shows that both Houses accordingly made a strict and impartial
Enquiry after the Conspiracy.

All this appears plainly to be the proper Work of a Parliament, and his
Majesty himself was of that Judgment, and charged them to do their Duty in it.

And the Enquiry is the most proper Business of the House of Commons.

For this Reason they are commonly styled The Grand Inquest of the Nation. The
House of Commons the Grand Inquest of the Nation.
though Sir Rob. Filmer's bold writing terms them so by way of Diminution and
Contempt, (as if enquiry were their highest work).

This Inquiry of theirs is necessary in a Subserviency to all the several High
Powers of that High Court. Namely, in order to their Legislature, or to the
Exercise of their Power of Judicature.

Courts that have Power of Oyer and Terminer, and to punish Great and Enormous
Crimes, are still by their Commissioners armed with a Power of Empannelling
grand Inquests, to make Enquiries in order to their Exercise of their Power of
determining.

Or it may be in order to their Counselling Power, for removal of great
Officers or Favorites, whereof I have given an Instance, and the Parliament
Rolls and Journals are full of them.

But still they first make Enquiry. They enquire among themselves, and every
Grand Jury Man by his Oath, is to impart his Knowledge in any thing Material to
his Fellows. But the most effectual Enquiry is most probably from without
doors; and without such enquiry, things of great importance may lie concealed.

And the Defendants Plea shows some good effect of that Enquiry. Diverse were
convicted: And one Tho. Dangerf. delivered in an Information, and that upon
Oath, and first to the Lords House, so that it did not begin with the Commons;
but if it were so Infamous and Malicious, why did not the Lords Reject it, and
Commit the Informer and punish him? No, they received it, and Entered it of
Record in their Journal. The Reason was, it was done in a Course of Legal
proceeding, they could not reject it, being the proper Court of Justice for a
thing of this Nature. And the King had given it them in charge to enquire. Nor
do they by receiving of it give it any Countenance or Credit. Then why should
it be so heinous a thing in the House of Commons, more than in the Lords? Let
us remember still they are but one Body; and though they sever themselves for
their better dispatch of their great Affairs, and distribute the Work amongst
them, yet the Power by which they Act, is Entire.

But why should any man divide and sever those that are Entire? It concerns the
Lords equally with the Commons.

But how comes it to concern the Speaker of the Commons so highly above the
House it self, who Acts merely as a Minister, and by Command of the House; but
that, I reserve for a point distinct.

But perhaps it may be allowed, that what is done by either House, in receiving
Dangerfield's Information and entering of it in their Journals is Parliamentary
enough. But the Offense and Scandal arises first upon the publishing of it in
print. The printing Dangerfield's Information.
Now a word or two to that.

Let us consider how public this Information of Dangerfield's was before the
printing of it. It was made very public by being delivered at the Bar of the
Lords, the High Court of Parliament; and indeed all Courts of Justice ought to
be open and of easy Resort.

The Information of Dangerfield is first made a Record of that Court, and to a
Court of Record any person may resort, as Sir E. C. tells us in his Preface to
the 3d. Rep. and that it was the Ancient Law of England, and is so declared by
a General Act of Parliament, 46 E. 3. C. which though a general Law is not in the
printed Book of Statutes, as I observed of another general and useful Act of
Parliament before (however it comes to pass) In that Act of 46 E. 3. the
Commons prayed that a Record of whatsoever is done in the King's Court, 46 E.
3. C. Search of Records must be Free.
ought in Reason to remain there for perpetual Evidence for all persons. And
they complain that of late the Court had refused to suffer the People to search
and to have Exemplifications for evidence against the King or to his
disadvantage.

Therefore they pray that search and Exemplification be made to any persons of
any Record whatsoever, though it concern the King or any other, and make
against the King or any other.

And the Answer is, Le Roy le voet.

But then it was made more public, by being delivered in at the Bar of the
House of Commons, which ought to consist of about 500 Members, who are supposed
to come from all parts of the Kingdom: So that this was made very public,
before this publishing of it in print.

Let me observe by the way, that this Author of the Information (Tho.
Dangerfield) was not sent for by the House of Commons, but for any thing that
appears, applies himself to the House of Commons, as he had before done to the
Lords, of his own accord, so that this is far from malice or ill design.

The Commons order it to be entered in their Journal, among other Informations
that had been given them.

And besides, they order this and several others to be Printed.

The Offense and Scandal is supposed by Mr. At. Information to begin here:
what need was there of printing it?

I wish we could hear the House of Commons answering for themselves to this
point: they could (it may be) give a better account of it, and a sufficient
reason for the Printing of it.

But let it be observed, they barely cause it to be Printed.

They do not give any Attestation or Credit to it, but leave all that hear or
read it, to judge or believe as they think fit. They do not make it their own,
by printing it without mention of the true Author, they style it the
Information of Tho. Dangerfield, as indeed it was; they do not adopt it their
own, as they had done, had they left out the name of the Author.

Nay the Author himself had delivered it in a course of Justice and in the
Highest Court of Justice, i. e. before the Lords in Parliament. If it were a
Libell and Slander, why did the Lords receive it, See the 1 st. St. in such
Cases of Reporting false News, viz. W. 1. C. 34. the Reporter is only to be
imprisoned till he have found out him of whom the word was moved. So is 2 R. 2.
C. 5. the Stat. de Scandalis Magnatum. So is 12 R. 2. c. 11. Dier 155.
and cause it to be entered of Record as they did? Why did they not rather
reject the Information and punish the Author?

If it were no Crime in the Author to deliver it to the Lords, were it true or
false, Why should it be a Crime to Print it as being his, and with his Name?

Whether the matter of that Information were true or false, yet what is done by
the House of Commons and by the Defendant as their Speaker, is all true, that
is that Tho. Dangerfield had drawn up, and was the Author of such an
Information, and this was true. By the Statutes that punish the Reporters of
false News, the penalty is but Imprisonment, till the first Author be brought
forth, and that is done in this Case.

The Author is avouch'd, The Lady Morirsons Case Crok.. 162. but more fully in
Marshes Actions of Slander. fol. 19. 20. If an action of Slander be brought for
Reporting what another had said Slanderously, the Pl. in his Declaration must
aver that A. did never so report: the Defendant may Plead that in truth A. did
so report, and it is a good Plea, by Tanfield. Leonards Rep. 1. P. 287. in an
Indictment upon the Stat. of W. 1. C. 33. and 2 R. 2. c. 5. for reporting false
News, it was found billa vera as to the Defendant's reporting the false News,
but as to the maliciose and seditiose, Ignoramus, and the Defendant therefore,
discharged.
and his name is Printed with the Information, and it is upon Record in the
Lords House, and he in person did present it to the Lords.

Besides, if there can be any just reason or occasion assigned for the Printing
of it, it shall never be ascribed to malice or ill design, and without malice
alleged, this Information lies not.

Nor can a thing so dishonorable as malice and ill design, be decently or
justly conceived or objected against so Great and Grave an Assembly: why? it is
the Body of the whole Nation.

And can a whole Nation be in Reason suspected to harbor Malice, and to have a
Design against the Commonweal, that is against themselves?

There may most probably and justly be this in the Case, to induce the Printing
this Narrative or Information of Dangerfield.

The Plot was very desperate and dangerous, it was not yet fully discovered and
searched to the bottom.

They were Commanded by the King to search further into it. Besides it was the
proper work of the House of Commons so to enquire, as they were the Grand
Inquest of the Nation.

Here was one positive Witness already that had sworn to these particulars,
before the Highest Court of Justice, where the great Persons concerned in it,
sat themselves as Members of the Lords House.

But one Witness alone, though it were sufficient to make an Accusation, yet it
was not enough to make a Conviction; in High Treason the Law requires two at
least.

The House of Commons could not in Duty and Conscience to the King and Kingdom,
pass it by or let it sleep.

This Information though but from one man, might possibly have given Courage to
another Person or more than one to testify to the same particulars, if there
were any more that knew them to be true, who were unwilling to be the first in
the discovery, not knowing but they might stand singly in it: but finding the
discovery already made and sworn to, might then think it their Duty, and be
encouraged to appear also in it, when it might probably be of effect and amount
to a Legal Testimony. The difficulty, and the danger, and discouragement, lay
upon the first Informer.

This Consideration might induce the House of Commons out of a Sense of their
Duty, to make a further and impartial enquiry as his Majesty had commanded
them, to make it yet (if possible) a little more public in order to a fuller
proof: and Printing is but one way among many other of Publishing or Enquiring
into any matter.

And of late years enquiry by Printing has been a most frequent practice, and
we meet with it every week, and it is become the most ordinary way of making
enquiries, which run into all parts of the Nation. And the Printing of public
Proceedings at Trials, has been generally of late practiced by the Courts of
Law, or by the Judges of those Courts, or by the chief of them.

But what has made this Information of Dangerfield's more public, than Mr.
Attorney General's preferring this Information against the Defedant Mr.
Williams, for causing it to be published in Print?

Had it not been thus awakened again, it might have slept in silence, and have
been Buried in Oblivion.

Tacitus the Roman Historian tells us in his Annals in the Life of Nero, of one
Fabricius Veiento, who was accused for uttering slanderous Speeches against the
Lords of the Senate and against the Priests, in certain Books, which he termed
Codicello's, which in our Dialect, is the same with Libels or little Books.

Nero would have the hearing of the Cause himself, and he was Convicted before
him, and was Condemned to Exile, and his Books were Sentenced to be burnt.

Tacitus observes, that before this Sentence for the burning of the Books,
there was little notice taken of these Books, and few there were that read
them: but when once it grew dangerous to read them, then they were much sought
after.

But the very opening of that Information of Dangerfield here in this great
Court, and in so great an Audience, which was of necessity, and occasioned by
Mr. Attorneys Information that recites it, though Mr. Attorney never intended
this ill consequence, has made the matter of it as public as possibly can be.

And it must be observed, that it never yet came so far as to a Trial, nor to
have an Ignoramus found, much less to an acquital modo legitimo, in which case,
according to the Opinion of some Judges, an Action of Conspiracy, or upon the
Case for a Slander will not lie, as not being ripe for it till an Acquital: by
the same Reason it is not ready for an Information, which is but the King's
Suit, the Reason being the same in both.

But it may perhaps be thought, The Persons too great to be so used.
that in respect of the Persons concerned in it, this was too high a Flight,
and too bold an Attempt, and that the height and eminence of some persons may
exempt them from common Justice, and from the Power even of a Parliament.

In answer to which, I would observe, that some Laws are more especially
levelled against the Highest Subjects.

By the Statute of W. 1. c. 5. The King forbids that null haute homme, no High
or Great Man, upon pain of grievous forseiture, disturb Elections, but
Elections ought to be free.

The like may be observed in the Statute of W. 1. c. 35. Des hautes bommes, etc.

And the greater the Persons are, if they are in the rank of Subjects, they
must be subject to the King's Laws, and they are the more proper for the
undertaking and encounter of this High Court. It will not be Impar congressus.

I cited before, the Mirror of Justices, Chap. 1. Page 9. where it is said,
that Parliaments were ordained for to hear and determine in such wrongs, and
against such Persons, especially against whom otherwise Common Right cannot be
had.

I will cite no Historians to prove what has been done in Ancient Times within
this very Kingdom, of this Nature against the highest Subjects.

I will keep still within my own Sphere, and cite none but Authorities in Law.
And so keep my self in the way that belongs to me, and so doing, I am under the
Protection of this Court and of the Law, and may rely upon the performance of
that Blessed Promise, He will keep thee in all thy ways.

There must be no respect of Persons in doing Justice. The great Judge of all
the World gives it as a Rule, and himself gives the Example, God is no
respecter of Persons.

The King was pleased to charge both Houses, to make a strict and impartial
Enquiry.

I shall cite two Authorities in Law, that come to this point.

The first is in Case of a Brother and an Heir apparent too, John, Earl of
Moreton.
and of a Person that did after succeed in the Crown. King Richard the 1st. in
his Magna Curia, petiit sibi Judicium fieri de Comite Johanne fratre fuo qui
contra fidelitatem quam ei juraverat, Foedus contra eum cum inimico suo Rege
Franciae inierat. That was the Offense charged.

It may possibly be Objected that the King himself complained: True, but he
complains to the proper Judicature: This proves their Power.

Hunts Arguments for Bishops, fol. 80.

But what did the High Court do upon that Complaint?

They pronounced a very severe Sentence, though it were but in the Nature of a
mean process to make him appear, and Answer.

Seld. Tit. of Hon. fol. 707. The Lords Order or adjudge, that if John Earl of
Moreton did not appear within 40 Days after Summons, Judicaverunt Comitem
Johannem demeruisse Regnum.

Let me remember you of a stronger and higher Case, and I have it out of an
Author of the Law too. Crompt. Jurisd. of Courts in his Chapter of the Court of
the King's Bench.

In a Case of Corpus cum Causa. Whidden, one of the Judges of the Court, cited
a Case that did happen in the time of Gascoign Chapter I. in the Reign of King H.
4. Gascoign committed the Prince of Wales (who was afterward our King H. the
5th.) to Prison for endeavoring to take away a Prisoner from the Bar of the
King's Bench, and the Prince humbly submitted and went to Prison, and the King
hearing of it, commended it.

If the King's Bench, being an Inferior Court to that high Court, might soar so
high, how much more the highest Court of the Realm; where the King sits in the
Exaltation of his Orb, and is in his greatest Splendour?

The King indeed is presumed in Law to be in this Court, which makes the style
of its proceedings to be Coram Rege, and some of our Kings have been said to
have sat here. But the King is in his High Court of Parliament, per
Eminentiam, as K. H. 8. one of the highest and most resolute of our Kings, said
in the Case of Ferrers (which I cited before to another Point.) That he was
informed by his Judges, (who were all then present) that he in no time stood so
high in his State Royal, as in the time of Parliament. Then if we consider the
Person whom the Chapter I. Gascoign Committed. He was a continuing, settled, fixed
Heir, and then Prince of Wales, whose Chair now stands Vacant in the Lord's
House in time of Parliament, and afterward this Prince of Wales proved a
Renowned King.

Nescit Imperare qui nescit obtemperare. The Sacred Scriptures tell us, that
the Heir differs nothing from a Servant. I may say also from a Subject, until
the time appointed of the Father, Gal. 4. 1, 3.

What would the Author of the Sermon preached before the University have said
in these Cases that I have cited?

He would have called them Unwarrantable Proceedings, and would have affirmed
that the Persons thus proceeded against, were too sacred to be touched with
such unhallowed Hands. This has been the Bold Language from the Pulpit and the
Press, if the Title of the Book be true from a Cambr. Dr. Oblitus Professionis
suae, quae nil nisi lene suadet and justum.

And the Author while he was guilty of gross Flattery on the one hand, was not
afraid to run into the other Extreme, of speaking Evil of Dignities, So called
1 Eliz C. 3. 4. H. 8. c. 8. the House of Commons called the Honorable House in
the Petit. of Rich. Strode, which is part of the Act.
on the other hand, of one of the three Estates of the Realm, of the
Representative of the Great Body (whereof he himself makes but a small
inconsiderable Atome).

We know from certain and undoubted Histories of our own, that in the time of
King H. 8. greater Persons in the Account of the Law than the Prince of Wales,
and yet but Subjects of the King have been brought to Trial, and that before
Lords Commissioners; and however, in other Respects their Cases might be very
hard, yet it was never doubted but they were Subject to the Law and Justice.

Now to proceed to my second Point, wherein I shall be brief. viz.

That however, 2d. Point.
the Matters Charged in the Attorney General's Information are not to be
imputed to the Defendant in this Case: He being but the Minister or Mouth of
the House, and Acting only by their Order.

He is frequently in the Parliament Records styled the Mouth of the House whose
Speaker he is.

Mr. Hakewell in his Treatise of Parliaments fol. 200. among the Catalogue of
Speakers, Mr. Pryn E Contra in his Preface to Sir Rob. Cot. Abr. but nothing
clear.
begins with Petrus de Mountf. whom he makes Speaker 44 H. 3. of the House of
Commons, and he cites the Register of St. Albans for it, Fol. 207. where it is
said that Petrus de Mountford Vice totius Communitatis consented to the
Judgment of Banishment of Adomar de Valence Bishop of Winchester, and Sir
Robert Cotton agrees with Mr. Hakewell in this Point. Mr. Pryn in his Preface
to Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. is of an Opinion by himself, that tota Communitas
signifies the whole Baronage. But it appears by the Body of the Letter there
written, that Communitas is distinguished from the Majores. Sir Sir Robert
Cotton's Abridgement 6 E. 3. fol. 12. in the upper part, It is said, the Lords
and Great Men by the Mouth of Sir Henry Beaumont.

Mr. Hakewell in his aforesaid Treatise, speaking of William Trussel, says, the
Commons aswered by his Mouth. 13 E. 3.

2 R. 2. Numb. 16. Sir Robert Cotton's Abr. fol. 174. The Commons return their
Answer to the King by Sir James Pickering their Speaker.

17 R. 2. Numb. 17. Sir R. Cott. Abr. 353. The King advising with the Commons,
concerning a Peace with France, return their Answer by Sir John Bussey their
Speaker.

Mr. Hakewell in his Book before cited, fol. 205. 7 H. 4. says, that Sir John
Tiptoft, while he was Speaker, signed and sealed the Deed of Entailing the
Crown with these words, Nomine totius Communitatis.

Mr. Elsing in his Treatise of Parliaments, fol. 125. tells us, that what was
spoken by the Speaker is entered in the Rolls, as spoken by the Commons.

But take what is done by the Defendant to be his proper acting, yet he acting
only as a Minister and Servant to the High Court of Parliament, by the ordinary
Rules of Law, in Cases of Officers, he is not suable, nor any way punishable
for it.

This is Resolved in the Countess of Rutland's Case 6 Rep. 54. and the same
Case likewise Reported in Moor's Rep. 765. That an Officer or Minister
executing Process which is erroneously awarded (as where a Capias is awarded
against a Peer) the Officer is to be excused; for he must not dispute the
Authority of the Court, but obey. And in that Case the Secondaries of the
Counter, and the Sergeants in London were excused and held not guilty of any
offense.

So in the Case of the Marshelsea, 10 Rep. 76. Where the distinction is, If the
Court have a Jurisdiction, the Officer is excused though the Process be
Erroneous. Qui jussu Judicis aliquod fecerit, non videtur dolo malo fecisse
quia parere necesse est.

Keilwey 99. a Med. by Brudnel, and the Lord Dier in Trewinnard's Case fo. 60.
b Where a Writ of Privilege in case of a Parliament Man Arrested, is granted,
where it ought not to be; and the Sheriff by virtue of that Writ discharged the
person Arrested. Yet the Sheriff (says that Case) is not chargeable in an
Action for this: Parere necesse est. What that necessity is we may see in that
Case of Trewinnard, Dier fo. 61. a Med. if the Sheriff refuse to execute the
Writ.

And as a fair warning to Sheriffs, and other Officers not to resist or disobey
the Commands and Orders of the House of Commons, the Lord Dier mentions what
punishment was inflicted upon the Sheriffs of London, in the Case of Geo.
Ferrers.

They were committed to the Tower for their contempt in not letting a
Parliament Man taken in Execution, to go at large, when the Sergeant at Arms of
the House of Commons came for him without a Writ.

Nay the Lord Dier says, in the latter end of that Case of Trewinnard, that if
the Parliament erred (he speaks it of the House of Commons) yet there is no
default in the Sheriff.

When the late King being in Person in the House of Commons, and sitting in the
Speaker's Chair, asked the then Speaker, Whether certain Members, whom the King
named, were then in the House. The Speaker answered readily, and wisely, and
with a good presentness of mind (which arose from the Genius of that House)
That he had neither Eyes to see, nor Tongue to speak, but as the House was
pleased to direct him.

III. POINT. As to the last Point; That for matters done in or by the
Parliament (as the matters in our Case are) neither the King's Bench, nor any
other Court, but the Court of Parliament it self, can by Law take Cognizance of
it. This is the great Point of the Case.

I shall first offer to prove it by Reasons, and then I shall back and enforce
those Reasons by many Authorities, and those of the highest sort.

1. Reason. The Parliament gives Law to this Court of the Kings-Beneh, and to
all other Courts of the Kingdom; and therefore it is absurd and preposterous
that it should receive Law from it, and be subject to it. The greater is not
judged of the less.

2. The Parliament is the immediate Court for Examining the Judgments of the
Court of King's Bench, and if they be erroneous, they reverse them; and if this
Court should against Law take upon them to proceed in this Cause, and give
Judgment, the Parliament, when it Meets, no doubt, will set it aside as
Erroneous: And no Man does in the least doubt but they have power to do it, and
there is as little doubt but they will do it; therefore it is wholly in vain
for this Court to take Cognizance of it; and it cannot be reversed elsewhere,
it being in a matter of Jurisdiction. See the Statute of 27 Eliz. c. 8. The
Preamble reciting, that Erroneous Judgments given in the King's Bench are only
to be reformed by the High Court of Parliament; 1 ^ac. c. 1. The like words.
which Court of Parliament was not in those days (...) often holden, as in
Ancient time it had been: Neither yet in respect of the greater Affairs of the
Realm could they well be considered of and determined in Parliament, etc.

There is an Exception of Errors that concerned the Jurisdiction of the
King's Bench; those remain as before; and in the Errors that are referred to
the Judges of the Common Pleas and Barons of the Exchequer, by 27 Eliz. c. 8.
the Jurisdiction of the Parliament is to Examine them, etc.

3. This Court, as all the Courts of Common Law, Judge only by the ordinary
Rules of the Common Law. But, the proceedings of Parliament are by quite
another Rule. The matters in Parliament are to be discussed and determined by
the Custom and Usage of Parliament, and the Course of Parliament; and neither
by the Civil, nor the Common Law, used in other Courts.

4. The Judges of this, and of the other Courts of Common Law in Westminster,
are but Assistants and Attendants to the High Court of Parliament: And shall
the Assistants judge of their Superiors?

5. The High Court of Parliament is the dernier resort, and this is generally
affirmed and held; but it is not the last, if what they do may yet again be
examined and controlled.

6. The Parliament is of an absolute and unlimited power in things Temporal
within this Nation.

I shall now proceed to Authorities that are full to this Point* and do second
and back those Reasons that I have offered; wherein I shall not observe any
method by reducing or ranking of them under these Reasons that I have offered,
because some of the Authorities justify several of these Reasons, all at once.

That the Parliament has the highest and most sacred Authority of any Court;
that it has an absolute power; that it is the highest Court in the Realm, is
acknowledged by our most Learned and gravest Writers, and Historians; for I
would not wholly omit them, though I do not need them; but I rely only, and
put all the stress of my proofs and arguments upon my Authorities in Law.

Cambden in his Britannia* Summam and sacrosanctam Authoritatem habet
Parliamentum. Knighton, de eventibus Angliae l. 1. fo. 2681. col. 1, 2. He
calls it the Highest Court of the Realm. So it is called in Trewinnard's Case
in Dier 60, 61. Sr. Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth of England l. 2. c. 2.
fo. 50, 51. In Comitiis Parliamentariis posita est omnis absolutae potestatis
vis.

Sir R. Cotton in his Posthuma edit. at Land. page 345. cited by Mr. Pryn in
his Preface to Sir Robert Cotton' s Abr. The Parliament controlls all Inferior
Courts, and all Causes of difficulty; cum aliqua dubitatio emergit, referr it
to the Parliament.

To show their power and jurisdiction upon Erroneous proceedings in other
Courts, by authorities in Law, which confirms one of my Reasons.

In Trewinnard's case, it is said, that though the Parliament err, it is not
reversible in any other Court: This is spoken in a case where the then occasion
was upon a Judgment given, only by the House of Commons, in a case of
Privilege.

Agreeable to this is 21 E. 3. fo. 46. Br. Abr. tit. Error. plac. 65. in the
latter end of that case, and 7 H. 6. Br. Abr. tit. Error. plac. 68. by
Cottesmore, and 1 H. 7. fo. 19. Br. Error. plac. 137. Error in Parliament shall
be reversed in Parliament, and non aliter; for there is not an higher Court. 1
H. 7. fo. 19, 20. By all the Judges in the Exchequer-Chamber for a Judgment in
the King's Bench, Error must be sued in Parliament; and as the Parliament shall
correct the Judgments, so they are to correct the Judges that give corrupt and
dishonest Judgments. These are the words and the opinions of the Lord chief
Justice Vaughan in his Reports fo. 139. in Bushel's case. Such, says he, in all
ages have been complained of to the King in the Star Chamber, (which is a Court
now dissolved by Parliament) or to the Parliament. He there mentions many
Judges; those 44. that were hanged in King Alfred's time before the Conquest,
for corrupt judgments; and those in the time of E. 1. E. 3. and R. 2. for their
pernicious resolutions: He vouches the Journals of Parliament, and instances in
the Judgment of Ship Money in the last King's time, and the particular Judges
impeached.

Sir E. C. in his 12 Rep. fol. 64. the words are spoken by Sir E. C. but (as
that Rep. says) with the clear consent of all the Judges. The King has his
Court, that is to say, in the Upper House of Parliament, in which he with his
Lords is the Supreme Judge over all other Judges. For if Error be in the
Common Pleas that may be reversed in the King's Bench; and if the Court of
King's Bench err, that may be reversed in the Upper House of Parliament, by
the King with the assent of the Lords.

Now though this is spoken of the Lords House only, yet it must be again
remembered that the Parliament (as I proved before) is one entire Body, and that
their power in the right of it is entire, though as to the exercise of it, it
is distributed into parts, and is divided: Not can the House of Lords exercise
any power as an House of Parliament, or as a Court for Errors, without the
House of Commons be in being at the same time. Both Houses must be Prorogued
together, and Dissolved together; like the Twins of Hippocrates, they live and
die together, and the one cannot be in being, without the other also, at the
same time be, in being too.

2. Inst. 408. Matters of difficulty were heretofore usually Adjourned to
Parliament; but (says he) it is now disused.

And 2. Inst. 599. Courts at variance, properly complain to the Parliament.

4. Fol. 72. Med.
Inst. In the Chapter of the Court of the King's Bench, Errors in the
King's Bench, in matters that concern their Jurisdiction, and other Cases there
excepted in the Act of 27 Eliz. Cap. 8. cannot be Reversed but in the High
Court of Parliament.

4. Inst. Fol. 67. There is a Court Erected by the Statute of 14 E. 3. Cap. 5.
Stat. 2. For redress of delays of Judgments in the Kings great Courts,
consisting of a Prelate, Two Earls, and Two Barons, to be chosen in Parliament
by that Statute. If the Case before them be so difficult, that it may not well
be determined without assent of the Parliament, (it does not say by the House
of Lords only) then shall the tenor of the Record be brought by the said
Prelate, Earls and Barons, into the next Parliament, and there a final Judgment
shall be given.

Si obscurum and difficile sit Judicium, ponantur judicia in respectu usque
magnam curiam. Rot. Parl. 14. E. 3. Number. ult. Sir Jeffery Stanton's Case.

25. E. 3. Cap. 2. The Chapter of Treason in the 2. Inst. Fol. 21. The Judge or
Court in some Cases, is to forbear going to Judgment till the Cause be showed
before the King and his Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or
not.

That this Court proceeds by the ordinary Rules of the Common Law; but that
High Court of Parliament proceeds not by that Law, but by a Law peculiar to
that High Court, which is called Lex and Consuetudo Parliamenti, and consists
in the Customs, Usages, and Course of Parliament; and therefore, this Court,
nor no other inferior Court, can, for this very Reason, judge or determine of
what is done in Parliament, or by the Parliament.

If this Court should take upon it to proceed in such cases, it would justly be
said of it as a thing very irregular. Metiri se quemque suo modulo, ac pede,
verum est.

Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. 20. R. 2. nu. 14, 15.

Sir Tho. Haxey delivered a Bill to the Commons in Parliament, for the honor
and profit of the King, and of all the Realm, complaining of the outrageous
Expenses of the Kings House, and namely of Bishops and Ladies.

Here the Camb. Dr. I have before mentioned, would take occasion again to
complain of the sauciness of this Bill.

K. R. 2. was offended with the Commons for preferring this Bill to the King;
for it seems they had entertained this Information from a particular hand, (as
was done in our Case from Dangerfield) and they proceeded upon it.

K. R. 2. said it was an offense against his Dignity and Liberty, and said he
would be free therein.

And Sir John Bussey, the Speaker to the Parliament (as that Roll of Parliament
calls him) is charged to declare the Name of him who Exhibited that Bill.

By this, it appears the King could not take notice of what was done in the
Commons-House, or delivered to them, but by the House it self, and that is one
of the Laws and Customs of Parliament; and yet, no doubt but it was well known
to every Member of that House, and yet it came not to the Kings knowledge.

Nu. 16. The Commons delivered to the King the Name of the Exhibiter, which was
Sir Tho. Haxey.

Nu. 17. The Commons afterward came, and submitted themselves to the King, and
craved Pardon, and the King excused them.

Nu. 23. Sir Tho. Haxey was adjudg'd by Parliament to die as a Traitor. The
King was offended, the Commons forsook the Exhibiter, and submitted, and the
Lords adjudge him guilty of Treason. This seems to be a strong Case against the
Liberty and the Privilege of the House of Commons, (but it seems strange how it
should be made Treason;) but it is stranger; especially, if it be supposed this
Sir Tho. Haxey was a Member of the House, one would have thought he should have
been under a protection and special privilege. But I take him to be no Member,
for he is afterward called Sir Tho. Haxey, Clerk; and Graduates in the
University, and those in Orders, were usually dignified with the addition of
Sir; and it is not yet quite out of use in the University.

I find by Mr. Pryn, in his Plea for the the Lords, Fol. 345. that in the next
Kings Reign, H. 4. the Commons exhibited a Petition on the behalf of Sir Tho.
Haxey, (for he was not Executed, the Archbishop of Canterbury took him into his
Protection, being a Clergyman;) and the Commons in their Petition affirm, that
the Judgment against Sir Tho. Haxey, for delivering in this Bill to the Commons
in Parliament, was against Right, and the Course that had been used before in
Parliament, in destruction of the Customs of the Commons.

Here note, Mr. Pryn. ibid. 388.
That the Right and Course of Parliament, and the Customs of the Commons, are
mentioned as Synonymies.

Upon this Petition of the Commons, the Judgment is adjudg'd to be null and
void.

But this could be adjudg'd no where but in Parliament, for it concerned the
Right and Privilege, and the Customs and Course of the Parliament.

1 H. 4. Nu. 91. In Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. the Record says, Sir Tho. Haxey, Clerk,
Pardoned, and the Judgment reversed, and he restored to all.

This Case, in very many Circumstances, suits with the Case of Dangerfield, and
in many, with our present Case. Ours is in the Case of an Heir apparent or
presumptive. But a greater than the Heir is here, in this Case of Sir Tho.
Haxey. namely, the then King himself.

But I cite it, principally to prove one of my Reasons and Arguments to the
third point, namely, that there are Rights and Customs that are peculiar to the
High Court of Parliament; and that there is a Law called the Course of
Parliaments, and it may be observed, that the Customs of the Commons are the
Law and Course of Parliament.

Concurring with one observation that I made out of this Case, that one of the
Laws or Customs of Parliament, is, That no Member is to publish at the Court,
or elsewhere abroad, what is done in the House of Commons, but it ought to
proceed from the House it self, and no other, (which is another Argument, to
prove that no other inferior Court can enquire into, or hear or determine of
their doings) for no notice can be taken of what they do, unless it come by
their own Relation and Discovery.

That, I say, which concurrs with this, is another Roll of Parliament of that
noble King H. 4. viz. 2 H. 4. Nu. 11. The Commons require, that is, request the
King, that he would not give an ear to any untrue reports of the Commons-House,
until the time might try the same; and that time is when the Commons apply to
the King in it, and not before. Whereunto the King granted; which allows it to
be the Law and Course of the Parliament.

4. Inst. Fol. 15. Every Court of Justice (says Sir E. C.) has Rules and
Customs for its direction. So the High Court of Parliament, de suis propriis
legibus and consuetudinibus consist it.

Again, Sir E. C. in his select Case, Printed 1677. Fol. 63. Note (says he) the
Privilege, Order, or Custom of Parliament, either of the Upper House, or of the
House of Commons, belongs to the determination only of the Court of Parliament.

And there he cites two Precedents for it.

The First that of 27 H. 6. in the Controversy between the Earls of Arundel and
Devonishire, for Precedence: The King, by advice of the Lords, referred it to
the Judges to examine and to report; not finally to determine as Judges of the
Case, but as Assistants to the Lords.

The Judges answered, That it was a matter of Parliament, and belonged to the
King and the Lords to determine.

One would think this were a strange answer of the Judges, to deny their
advice; Were they not Assistants to the Lords in matters of Law?

The true reason of their declining to give their Advice, is, It was a Case
above them, and not to be determined by the ordinary Rules of Law, and
therefore out of their element. Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. Therefore their
answer was, That it was a matter of Parliament, and belonged to the King and
Lords, but not to the Judges.

This is a Resolution of all the Judges in the very point; though this
particular Case concerned only the Lords, A Resolve of all the Judges in the
point.
being a matter of precedence between Two Lords; yet, as I have proved, the
Parliament is one entire Body, and are mutually concerned in their powers and
privileges.

The other Case mentioned by Sir E. C. is that of Tho. Thorp. the Speaker of
the Commons, Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. page 651.
31 H. 6. taken in execution at the suit of the Duke of York, during the recess
of the Parliament.

We have it at large in the Parliament Roll of 31 H. 6. nu. 25, 26, 27, 28.

The Commons, at the opening of the next Session of Parliament, request the
King and Lords, to restore their Speaker to them.

The Judges being demanded of their Counsel therein; (Note, it was nothing but
their Advice asked.) It was after mature deliberation, they answered, It was
not their part to judge of the Parliament, which may judge of the Law. Mr.
Pryn, in his Plea for the Lords, calls this a famous, memorable Case, and says
he was then chapter Baron.
Note, the reason to judge of the Law, signifies they are the Supreme Court to
judge what is Law, and what is not. And to judge of the Law, likewise
signifies, that they can judge whether a Law be good or not; in order to
Approve of it, and to Enact it, or to Repeal a Law.

This is in a Case that concerned the privilege of the Commons and their
Speaker; and yet they say, that judging in this Case were to judge of the
Parliament: This intimates too, that the Parliament judges by other Rules than
those of the Common Law. And it is the Common Law is the proper Element of the
Judges of the Courts of Westminster Hall.

This is a second Resolution of all the Judges in the very point. Mr. Hakewel,
A second Resolution of all the Judges in the point.
in his Treatise of the manner of Enacting Laws in Parliament. Fol. 125.
reports this Case of Thorp at large.

It is time now to come to higher Authorities, that is, to Resolutions of
Parliament in this point.

And first, the Resolution of the House of Commons in maintenance of their own
Right, or at least a claim of their Right; I have it out of an Author that is
very far from being a friend to the House of Commons; A Protestation of the
Commons against Impeachments, other than in the House, etc.
and it is a Clergyman too. I mean Dr. Heylin, in the Life of Archbishop Laud,
Fol. 89. He reports, that the House of Commons made a Protestation in 1621.
against all Impeachments, other than in the House, for any thing there said or
done.

Let me present you with the like claim made by the Lords, The like Claim of
the Lords, and confirmed by Act.
which seems to run something in the form of an old Act of Parliament.

In Sir Rob. Cott. Abr. 11. R. 2. nu. 7. In that Parliament, all the Lords, as
well Spiritual as Temporal; being present, claimed their Liberties and
Franchises; viz. That all weighty matters in the same Parliament, which should
be afterward moved, touching the Peers of the Land, ought to be determined,
judged, and discussed by the Course of the Parliament, and not by the Civil
Law; nor yet by the common Laws of the Land, used in other more Courts of the
Realm.

The which Claim and Liberties the King most willingly allowed and granted
thereto in full Parliament says that Roll.

Now, as I have before proved, the Liberties and Franchises of the Parliament,
in the right of them, are entire, and due to both Houses, for both make up the
Parliament.

Mr. Seld. in his Title of Honor, Fol. says, That a thing granted in full
Parliament, signifies an Act of Parliament.

Now for an Act of Parliament full in the point, An Act of Parliament in the
point.
and then I can go no higher.

It was in the Case of Richard Strode, one of the Burgesses for Plympton in
Devonshire, Pryn's Plea for the Lords, fol. 401 at large.
in the Parliament of 4 H. 8. for agreeing with the Commons House, in putting
out Bills (as it is reported there) which seems to resemble the Printing or
Publishing, mentioned in our Case. Those Bills so put out were against the
Abuses of the Tinners, who were a great and numerous Body of men; who by these
Bills took themselves to be scandalized and slandered.

After the Parliament was risen, this Richard Strode for what he had so done in
Parliament, was presented and found guilty in the Stannary-Courts, and
condemned to forfeit 40. l. (a moderate fine.) He was for this imprisoned in a
Dungeon, within a Castle, and fed with Bread and Water.

When the Parliament met again, he Petitioned the Parliament for remedy, and
that the Judgments had against him and the Executions might be made void; 4 H.
8. c. 8.
which was done accordingly by Act of Parliament.

And it was further Enacted, That all Suits, Accusations, Condemnations,
Executions, Fines, Amerciaments, Punishments, passed or had, or thereafter to
be passed or had, upon the said Strode, and to every other person, that was in
that Parliament (thus far it is a private and particular Act) but the reason of
this, and the Justice of it extends to all like Cases; but then it goes
farther, Or that of any Parliament hereafter shall be; for any Bill, speaking,
reasoning, or declaring of any matter concerning the Parliament, to be communed
or treated of (these are very large and general words) be utterly void, and of
none effect. And it goes farther yet, And that any person vexed or, troubled,
or otherwise charged for any Cause, as aforesaid; shall have an Action of the
Case, against every person so vexing contrary to this Ordinance, and recover
treble damages and costs.

Here now is an Action given against one, for what they shall do in a course of
Justice. But it is because it is suing in an inferior Court that has no
jurisdiction in the matter. This Act takes away all jurisdiction in such
Parliament Cases, from all other Courts. Memorials of the English Affairs, fol.
12.
I know that in the Case of Denzill Hollis (afterward the Lord Hollis) Mr.
Seld. and others, 3 Car. I. the Judges being consulted upon some Questions
propounded, Res. That that Act of Strode's, was a particular Act, and extended
to Strode only; and no doubt it was a particular Act in a great part of it, and
in that part extended to Strode only.

But if the Judges meant that no part of that Act was a general Law, then I
must crave leave to say, 1. That their opinion was extrajudicial; it was
delivered upon their being consulted with about Questions propounded to them,
and therefore has not that weight. And I must take the liberty to appeal to
the very words of the Statute it self, and to any man of reason, and honesty,
to use his reason aright, that shall read them; and I must offer some reasons
against their opinion, and cite some good Authority in that point, and then
leave it to this Court to judge of it.

The words, and persons, and time mentioned in the latter part of that Act, are
general.

It speaks indeed, first of Strode in particular; but then it has these words
(every other person.)

It mentions that Parliament in particular; but then it proceeds to speak of
(any Parliament that there-after shall be) Then the things also are general
that the Act extends to, not only to indemnifie Strode, for what he had said,
or done in parliament; but then the Indemnity extends to every other person,
for any Bill, Speaking, Reasoning, or Declaring of any matter concerning the
Parliament.

The words of the Royal Assent to this Bill, are such as are constantly used,
only to general Acts, viz. Le Roy veut; whereas to a particular Act, the Royal
Answer is, Soit droit fait al parties.

And this Act of 4 H. 8. is enrolled as general Acts use to be. But a private
or particular Act is always filled, but never enrolled; for this latter
distinction we shall find it in the Case 33 H. 6. fol. 17, 18. for authority in
this question, Sir E. C. in his 4th. Instit. fol. 19. holds this Act of 4 H. 8.
in the latter part of it to be a general Act.

It is indeed commonly said Boni Judicis est ampliare jurisdictionem. But I
take that to be better advice which was given by the Lord Chancellor, (Sir
Francis Bacon,) to Mr. Justice Hutton, upon the swearing him one of the Judges
of the Court of Common Pleas; That he would take care to contain the
jurisdiction of the Court within the ancient Mere-Stones without removing the
mark.

I find but one Resolution in all our Books, that I can meet with, that seems
to make against us in this point, and maintains a jurisdiction in this Court,
for a Misdemeanor, or Conspiracy supposed to be done by some particular Members
of the House of Commons, in the House in time of Parliament. It is reported by
Mr. Justice Croke in his Reports of the time of King Charles, fol. 181. but it
is more fully reported in a late Book, entitled Memorials of the English
Affairs, set out by a Learned Lawyer, and the Son of a Judge; and it is the
Case that I lightly touched upon but now, that of Mr. Hollis, Seldom, etc.

The offense charged upon Mr. Denzill Hollis (who was afterward the Lord
Hollis,) See Rushw. Collect.
Mr. Seldom, Sir John Elliot, Sir John Hobart and diverse other Parliament Men,
1 part page 672. Appendix to it page 44.
was for a force used upon the then Speaker, Sir John Finch (afterward Lord
Keeper) in keeping him in the Speaker's Chair against his will, when he would
have left it; and pressing him to put a question, which the King had forbidden
him to put.

For this supposed offense, after the Parliament was Dissolved, these
Parliament Men were first convened before the Council, where they refused to
answer the Charge, it being for matters done in Parliament.

Then the Judges had Questions propounded to them, to which they gave their
resolution, that for things done, not in a Parliamentary way, a Parliament Man
may be punished after the Parliament is ended, if he be not punished in
Parliament; otherwise as J. Croke, said, There would be a failure of Justice,
but, that regularly he cannot be compelled out of Parliament to answer things
done in a Parliament in a Parliamentary course.

This Answer seems to be very oracular, for it resolves that a Parliament Man
shall not Answer for things done in Parliament in a Parliamentary course. If it
be done in a Parliamentary course, what occasion can there be to answer for it?
But who shall judge what is a Parliamentary course, but a Parliament? not
Judges of the Common Law; for the Parliamentary course differs from the Rules
of the Common Law.

But they refusing to answer at the Council Board, were committed close
Prisoners to the Tower.

After this Sir Robert Heath, the King's Attorney, preferred an Information in
the Star Chamber against them, that was not proceeded in. The Lord Keeper was
under difficulties about it, says, the Author. The Judges of the King's Bench
were to consult with the rest of the Judges in granting a Habeas Corpus for
bailing the Prisoners. The rest of the Judges would hear arguments, so it was
put off, and delayed, (as our Author reports it.) At last an Information was
exhibited against them in the King's Bench. The Defendants pleaded to the
jurisdiction of the Court; their plea was overruled, and they refusing to
plead over, judgment was entered by nihil dicit, and they fined and imprisoned.

Mr. J. Croke, at the latter end of those Reports gives this further account of
that Case, The Resolution of the Commons in Irewinnard's Case is called the
Judgment of the most high Court of Parliament. If it had been clear that the
King's Bench could have punished it, they would have begun with it there, but
they tried the Council and the Star Chamber first.
that afterward in the Parliament 17 Car. 1. It was Resolved by the House of
Commons, that those Parliament Men should have a recompense for their damages
sustained for the services to the Commonwealth in the Parliament, 3 Car. 1. If
a Judge has thought fit to report this, it may be as fit for me to mention it.
I take that to be the first precedent or resolution given in any case for what
was done in Parliament, and it stands alone; I have heard of none since that
neither. It seems to be directly against the provision made by it; it is
clearly within the Equity and Reason of it, Strode's Act. I wish I could not
say that even those times of 3 Car. 1. were not full of trouble. It appears
much by the difficulty the Judges seemed to be at in the proceedings of that
Case; this detracts much from that veneration, that otherwise is justly due to
a Resolution so solemn as that of all the Judges.

The Lord Chancellor Bacon in his profound Book of the Advancement of Learning,
dislikes all Precedents that taste of the times; and advises that Precedents
should be derived from good and moderate Times.

The only reason that I find given for that proceeding in the case of Denzill
Hollis, is that given by Mr. J. Croke, viz. That otherwise there would be a
failure of Justice.

This reason must be grounded either upon the Infrequenecy of Parliaments, or
upon an opinion that Parliaments will be partial in cases of their own Members.

As to the first of these (the long intervals between Parliaments,) This under
favor ought to be no reason, especially to come from a Judges's mouth, (I have
a great honor for the memory of that Reverend Judge) who must needs know, and
ought to assert it, That by the Law, Parliaments ought to be very frequent, and
Judges ought to take part with the Law, and to maintain it.

Before the Conquest (as it is untruly called) by the Law, Parliaments were to
be held twice a year, as appears by King Edgar's Laws, c. 5. in Lamb. de
priscis. etc.

And the Mirror of Justice c. 1. Sect. 3. tells us that King Alfred ordained
for a perpetual Usage; that twice in the year, (and if need were) oftener. The
Seniors or Earls should assemble themselves at London, to speak their minds.

And it is reckoned among the Abusions (as they are there termed) of the
Common Law; That whereas Parliaments ought to be twice in the year for the
salvation of the Souls of Trespassers (and at London too) that they are there
but very seldom, and at the pleasure of the King, for Subsidies and Collections
of treasure.

And by the Statute of 4 E. 3. c. 14. Parliaments ought to be once a year, and
oftener (if need be) I have heard a Civilian in the House of Commons give this
construction to that short Act, that the words (If need be) should referr to
the Parliaments being (once a year) as well as to the words (and oftener) and I
never heard that any man was of that opinion but himself; but I remember he
himself laughed when he spoke it, but he was more laughed at for that ridiculous
exposition. And should that sense be put upon it, it would make the Law a very
ridiculous thing indeed, for then the short of it would be this; That we should
have a Parliament when there is need.

But to refute that fancy, there is another Statute of the same King's time,
namely, 36 E. 3. c. 10. which says, that for redress of diverse mischiefs and
grievances, which daily happen, its accorded that a Parliament shall be holden
every year without any such restriction (If need be.)

And by the Act of 16 Car. 2. c. 1. These Acts are declared to be in force. And
farther, it is Declared and Enacted, That the holding of Parliaments shall not
be discontinued above three years at the most.

Now how can any man say in Defiance of these Laws, That there can be any long
discontinuance of Parliaments? King Charles the Second.
His now Majesty has been pleased graciously to declare his Resolution often to
meet his People in Parliaments, and in the word of a King there is power. Nay,
we have the King's Oath for it, for he is sworn to observe the Law; And eadem
praesumitur esse men's Regis quae legis; And it is an high presumption for any
man to think, or say otherwise.

For that other ground of that reason given by Mr. Justice Croke, viz. That
there would be a failure of Justice, if offenses committed in Parliament, were
not punishable in the King's Bench; namely, because Parliaments will be partial
in Cases of their own Members. This carries with it a very high reflection upon
that great and solemn Assembly, to entertain a thought so mean, and so
dishonorable of the Supreme Court of the Nation, that the Court which is to
Correct the Errors of all other Courts, and is the last resort of the Nation,
that they should be guilty of Injustice and Partiality.

No Man that is a lover of his Country, or a friend to his own true and honest
Interest, will harbor a dishonorable thought of that great Assembly.

I am apter to think, that the reporter of that Case did mistake, when he
charged that worthy and reverend Judge, Mr. Just. Croke, with the offering of
that for a Reason.

I find the most Reverend of our Judges speaking with the greatest Reverence of
that Supreme Court.

Besides, the Learned Lord Chief Justice Sir Edw. Coke, who often expresses his
great veneration for them,

Hear what the Chapter Just. Brook, and Just. Saunders, say of that Assembly in
Plowd. Comment. in the Case of Hill and Grange, Fo. 175. a. toward the lower
end of that Folio, Injustice (say they) may not be presumed of a Parliament.
And in the Earl of Leicester's Case, in the same Comment, Fol. 398. toward the
end of the Folio, The Parliament is a Court of very high Honor and Justice, of
which no man ought to imagine a thing dishonorable.

I do agree, that an offense committed in Parliament, is a very high offense;
but the higher it is, the more proper it is for their Judicature; and that
Court is armed with a power to punish the highest offenses, and the highest
offenders.

But to take it out of their hands, and to make it determinable in any other
Court, is a disparagement to that Grave and Supreme Court.

We easily agree that a Parliament may Err, for they are not Infallible; but
the Law has provided a Remedy against those Errors, and a way to Reform them.
A subsequent Parliament may Reform the Errors of a preceding Parliament, as I
have proved by several Authorities.

But to say they will be partial or unjust, or corrupt, or do any thing out of
malice, is to raise a scandal upon the whole Nation, whose Representative they
are.

I will make no difficulty to affirm, That if any offense whatever be committed
in the Parliament, by any particular Members, (as this was accounted a Force or
Riot in the Case of Denzill Hollis and Seldom, and others committed upon the
Speaker) it is an high infringement of the right and privilege of Parliament,
for any Person or Court to take the least notice of it, till the House it self
either has punished the Offender, or referred them to a due or proper course of
punishment. To do otherwise, would be to make the highest Court an Offender,
and to charge them with Injustice.

Nay, their right and privilege so far extends, that not only what is done in
the very House sitting the Parliament, but whatever is done relating to them,
or in pursuance of their Order, during the Parliament, and sitting the
Parliament, is no where else to be punished, but by themselves or a succeeding
Parliament, although done out of the House, as in the case of Ferrers.

It any shall imagine, as Mr. Pryn does, and others, that of later times the
Parliament have encroach'd more power than anciently belonged to them, I have
already answered this objection, by showing how large a power they exercised of
old, and see what is further mentioned in Lamb. Archion 57. viz. That King H.
3. was told by his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, that of ancient time the
Creating and Deposing of all the Judges and great Officers belonged to the
Parliament.

I do not deny, but some sort of Orders by them made, are no longer in force,
than while the Parliament sits; but then, what is done after the Parliament is
risen, is not to be said to be done by their Order, for then it ceases to be
their Order: This must be understood of matters Executory, not as to things
executed by their Order during Parliament.

However, this Case of Denzill Hollis comes not home to our present Case, but
it is wonderfully short of it: This was an Offense charged only upon some
Particular Members; and it cannot be denied, but particular persons, even in
the Parliament, may misdemean themselves, and they are to be punished by the
Parliament, but no where else.

But in our Case, that which makes the Offense, and for which the Information
is brought by the Kings Attorney, is what is done by the whole House of
Commons, and by virtue of their express Order. Although, as I have already
observed, the Information it self does not expressly own it, yet the demurrer to
the Defendant's Plea (which sets it all forth) does most plainly avow it. And
this I am sure is without any color of precedent, and never was attempted till
this time.

If any Man will extenuate or justify this way of proceeding, by saying, that
this was not for any thing done in the House, but a matter done out of the
House; viz. the Printing and Publishing was abroad in the Printing House, and
in the Streets, and spreading them abroad throughout the Kingdom: Yet this will
not salve it, for the Defendant did what he did as Speaker, and not in his
private Capacity. And it was done by order of the whole House and sitting the
Parliament; so that this Information does directly question the Parliament it
self, and Arraigns their power and actings; for I have fully proved, that what
the Defendant has done, is not his Act, but indeed the Acting of the whole
House of Commons. And I have also proved, that the Two Houses, as to the right
of the power that they claim, and use, is but one, and they are entire, though
they may divide in the exercise of that power. So that it is a matter of the
highest concernment to the Nation that possibly can be.

Sir E. C. Fol. 15.
in his Fourth Inst. in his Chapter of the High Court of Parliament, mentions
Two Cases only, and some other beginnings of a Prosecution against such as
absented themselves from Parliament, and departed from it without License; but
they had no effect, as he affirms, but only against Six timorous Burgesses,
(where Thirty nine Members were informed against) who ad redimendam vexationem,
submitted to Fines; but he could not find that ever they paid any.

The first of the Two Cases is that of the Bishop of Winchester, it is in the
Year-Book of 3 E. 3. Fol. 18, and 19. Fitz. H. Abr. tit. Coron. plac. 161.

And he affirms that those are all the Cases that he can find concerning this
matter.

The suit against the Bishop was by original Writ in the King's Bench, and it
charges him with a Trespass and Contempt in departing from the Parliament
without the Kings License.

The Bishop there pleads (as the Defendant does in this Case) to the
jurisdiction of the Court. Et dicit quod si quis eorum ( speaking of the Lords
of Parliament,) deliquerit erga Dominum Regem in Parliamento aliquo, in
parliamento debet corrigi and emendari, and non alibi in minori curia quam in
Parliamento. Vnde non intendit quod Dominus Rex velit in curia hic de bujusmodi
transgressione and contemptu factis in Parliamento responderi.

Note the Plea, as to the offense, is very general, not only restrained to the
offense of absenting from the Parliament, but to any trespass or offense in
Parliament. Si quis deliquerit.

And it would be a little improper to call absence from Parliament offense
committed in Parliament, for it looks like the quite contrary: But in a just
sense, any offense committed by a Member relating to the Parliament, though
done out of the House, is termed an Offense in Parliament. So Printing any
thing by Order of Parliament, though it be done and executed in another place,
yet it may be said to be done by the Parliament, and in Parliament, if it be by
their Order, and in time of Parliament.

We may note further that this is a prosecution only against one particular
Person, for a particular Offense and Contempt charged upon him. But in our
Case, the prosecution is against the very Speaker of the Parliament, and is in
effect a prosecution against the Parliament; for it is against him, for what he
did by command and order of Parliament, and sitting the Parliament.

And though the Attorney General, replied to the Bishops Plea that the King
might sue in what Court he would, yet the Bishop rejoins upon him and maintains
his former Plea, and there it rests; so that as Sir E. C. observes that the
Bishops Plea did stand and was never overruled, agreeable to the resolutions
of former times. So this I. may claim as an authority on our side.

And though Mr. Plowden the Lawyer, ^ Just. fol. 17.
to the like Information put in against him and others, 1 and 2 Philip and
Mary, pleaded that he remained continually from the beginning to the end of the
Parliament, and traversed the absence whereby he passes by the advantage of the
Plea to the jurisdiction, yet this is no Authority against us, for he might
think fit, Renunciare juri pro se introducto, having so true an occasions of
clearing himself from that scandalous imputation of being absent from doing his
duty in Parliament, which certainly is a very high breach of Trust; and he
might be impatient of lying under it, and therefore thought it best to traverse
it to clear his Reputation in that point; yet I must confess I should never
have advised it, nor was there any further prosecution against him.

I will mention but one most excellent Record more, and it is a Record out of
the Parliament Rolls, 27 E. 3. Number. 9. Sir Robert Cotton's Abridgem. and with
that I will Conclude. I take it to be very pertinent, and I am sure it is very
seasonable.

Among the Petitions of the Commons, One is;

They pray the King, that he will require the Archbishop, and all other of the
Clergy, to Pray for the Peace and good Government of the Land.

And for the King's good will toward the Commons.

The King's Answer, is,

The same prayseth the King.

And I wish with all my heart, it were the Common Prayer.

I have but one Prayer more to make, and that is, That this Court will allow
the Defendant's Plea.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction IN THE Realm of England:

Occasioned by the Late COMMISSION IN Ecclesiastical Causes.

By Sir Robert Atkyns Knight. of the Honorable Order of the Bath, and late One of
the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas.

LONDON, Printed for Tim. Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street, MDCLXXXIX.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction IN THE Realm of
England: Occasioned by the Late COMMISSION IN Ecclesiastical Causes.
THE Preamble acknowledges, 26 H. 8. c. 1.
That the King justly and rightfully is, and ought to be, Supreme Head of the
Church of England, and is so recognized by the Clergy in their Convocations.
And it is Enacted, That the King and his Successors shall be taken, etc. the
only Supreme Head in Earth of the Church of England. And shall have and enjoy
annexed to the Imperial Crown all Jurisdiction, etc. Authorities, etc. to the
said Dignity of Supreme Head of the same Church belonging. And that the King
and his Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm, shall have full Power and
Authority from time to time to visit, repress, redress, reform, order, correct,
restrain and amend all such Errors, Heresies, Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and
Enormities whatsoever they be, which by any manner of Spiritual Authority or
Jurisdiction ought, or may, lawfully be reformed, repressed, ordered,
redressed, etc. Any Usage, Custom, foreign Laws, foreign Authority,
Prescription or any thing to the contrary notwithstanding.

Note, This Act does not make the King to be the Supreme Head of the Church of
England, but acknowledges, that he ever has been so (as it is recited by the
Statute made in the same Parliament of 26 H. 8. c. 3. the Act for the
First Fruits. See the Preamble toward the latter Part, being the first
Paragraph.) See also the Oath prescribed by the Statute of 35 H. 8. cap. 1. for
the Succession, Paragraph the 11th in Mr. Keeble's Edition of the Statutes at
large, very full to this purpose, to show that the Act of 26 H. 8. cap. 1. gave
the King no new Title, but only acknowledged, that he ever had a Right to it,
and that the Bishop of Rome had but usurped it.

And as the Act of 26 H. 8. cap. 1. gave the King no new Title, so it gave him
no new, nor further Authority in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things, nor over
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Persons, than what he had before.

Therefore it is to be inquired what jurisdiction or Authority the King had
before the making of that Act, and how the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was of
right and duly before exercised and administered. viz. in what Courts, by what
Rules, Laws or Canons, and by what Persons.

It is clear in Law, that the King himself merely in his own Royal Person could
never take to himself the Hearing of any Cause Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and
adjudg and determine the Cause himself: For by the Law and Constitution of the
Realm, the King has committed all his Power Judicial to diverse Sir Hen. Heb^i'
s Reports f. 63. It is said by the Judges of the Common Pleas, That the Power
of Justice is in the King as Sovereign originally, but afterward settled in
several Courts, as the Light being first made by God, was after settled in the
great Bodies of the Sun and Moon. And Sir E. (...) 4 Inst. f. 70. in the
Chapter of the Court of King's Bench, to the same effect.
Courts, some in one Court, some in another, as is held in Sir Ed. Cokes 2d.
Institutes fol. 186. at the lower end of that folio, and in the middle of fol.
187. All Matters of Judicature and Proceedings in Law are distributed to the
Courts of Justice, and the King does judge by his Justices. See the Reports that
pass by the Name of Sir Ed. Cokes 12th. Reports, fol. 63. the Case of
Prohibitions: Which is true as to See the Original of Bishops Courts and
Jurisdictions severed from the Hundred Court distinct from Provincial and
national Synods, and that there were then Ecclesiastical Laws, the Chartter of
K. William he 1st. to Remigius then Bishop of Linc. Mr. Selden's Notes ad
Eadmerum f. 167.
Ecclesiastical Causes as well as Temporal; for every Man knows, that there
have been from the first Constitution of the Kingdom certain Courts and
Jurisdictions erected within this Realm for deciding and determining of
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Causes. Selden's History of Tithes, fol. 412.

All this is excellently well set forth by the Preamble of the Statute of 24 H.
8. cap. 12. concerning Appeals. That as the King has ever been the Supreme
Head of the Realm (which Word Head is by way of Metaphor, and must have
relation to some ( Body;) therefore the Statute in the Preamble proceeds to
tell you, what the Body is to which the Head relates, viz. The Body Politic of
the Realm consists of all sorts and degrees of People (within this Realm)
divided by Names of Spiritualty and Temporalty. The Statute proceeds to mention
the plenary Power, Authority and Jurisdiction the King has within this Realm
in all Causes. It shows us how that Power is distributed, and by whom to be
exercised. Not by the King in Person, nor at his Will and Pleasure in any
arbitrary Way; but as that Preamble further iustructs us, Sir Ed. Cokes 5. Rep.
The Case of the Kings Ecclesiastical Law, f. 40.
The Body Spiritual has Power in all Causes Divine and Spiritual to determine
and to administer all such Offices and Duties as to their rooms Spiritual does
appertain; the like is declared as to Temporal Causes to be in the other Part
of the said Body Politic, called the Temporalty. And both their Authorities
and Jurisdictions do concur in the due Administration of Justice, the one to
help the other.

The Preamble of this Stat. of 24 H. 8. c. 12. of Appeals further shows, how
that this Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Jurisdiction, had been confirmed and
defended by several ancient Acts of Parliament against the Usurpations of the
Bishop of Rome (and that long before the Reformation of Religion.) Then comes
the Enacting Part, which does Ordain, That all Causes determinable by any
Spiritual Jurisdiction, whether they concern the King himself (as the Case of
the King's Divorce) or any of the Subjects, shall be heard, examined discussed,
clearly, finally and definitively adjudged and determined, within the Kings
Jurisdiction and Authority, and not elsewhere in such Not by extraordinary
Commissions at the first instance, but only gradually upon Appeals Sir John
Davies Reports fol. 91. the Case of Praemunire 4. Inst. 339. of Appeals.
Courts Spiritual and Temporal of the same, as the nature of the Cases shall
require.

Then the same Statute shows us in what Courts, and by what Steps and Method,
Suits and Proceedings concerning Spiritual and Ecclesiastical Matters ought to
be handled, See Paragraph 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. It begins with the Arch Deacon's
Court, which is infimi gradus, and proceeds gradually from the Archdeacon to
the Diocesan, from him to the Metropolitan, and at last it mentions the
Convocation, as the Supreamest.

Note, That further Appeals have been given by several Acts of Parliament, as
by 25 H. 8 c 19. from the Archbishop or Metropolitan to the King in Chancery,
which is by Commission of Delegates, etc. And it has been Resolved, That
though the Acts of 24 H. 8. cap. 12. and of 25. H. 8 cap. 19. do upon certain
Appeals, make the Sentence definitive as to any further Appeal, yet the King
(as Supreme Head) may grant a Commission of Review: See the Case of Halliwell
against Jervois, Sir Francis Moors Reports, fol. 462. and in the same Reports,
fol. 782. in the Case of Bird against Smith, and in Sir Edw. Cokes 4th.
Institutes, fol. 341.

And as the Kings Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction are by the Fundamental
Laws of the Realm distributed into several Courts, which are mentioned and
confirmed by the said several Acts of Parliament, and may not therefore be
exercised by any other, but by such Courts, and in such Method and Manner as by
Law, and the said Acts of Parliament it is provided: So also those Courts
cannot proceed Arbitrarily, but by the known and settled Ecclesiastical Laws,
Constitutions and Canons that are in force.

By the Act of 1. Eliz. cap. 1. Entitled, An Act for restoring to the Crown
the Ancient Jurisdiction over the Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, etc. the
seventeenth Paragraph in Keeble's Book of Statutes, It is Enacted, That such
Jurisdictions, etc. Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, as by any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Power or Authority has heretofore been, or may lawfully be,
exercised or used for the Visitation of the Ecclesiastical State and Persons,
and for Reformation, Order and Correction of the same, and of all manner of
Errors, etc. Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities shall for ever by
Authority of this Present Parliament be united to the Crown.

By the 18th. Paragraph of that Act the Queen and her Successors have Power by
virtue of this Act, This Statute was the ground for Commissions to hear and
determine Spiritual Causes ad primam Instanti^m.
by Letters Patents under the Great Seal, to assign, etc. (as often as they
shall think meet and for such time) such Person or Persons, as the Queen, etc.
shall think meet to exercise all manner of Jurisdictions Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual; and to Visit, Reform, Redress, Order, Correct and Amend all such
Errors, etc. Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Anormities whatsoever, which by
any manner of Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power, Authority or Jurisdiction can,
or lawfully may be, Reformed, Ordered, Redressed, Corrected, Restrained or
Amended; and such Person or Persons so to be named, etc. shall have full Power
by virtue of this Act, and of the said Letters Patents, to exercise, use and
execute all the Premises according to the Tenor and Effect of the said Letters
Patents.

See Sir Edw. Cokes 4. Inst. in his Chapter of Ecclesiastical Courts, fol. 324,
325. and see the 3d. Observe. fol. 326. observe the Words, viz. It was Enacted
out of necessity, etc. and ibid. Necessity did cause this Commission, and it
was not to be Exercised, but upon necessity; for it was never intended, That it
should be a continual standing Commission, etc.

That the main Object of that Act was to deprive the Popish Clergy. See fol.
332 Almere's Case, and Tailor and Massie's Case, left to the proper Diocesan.

Upon the last recited Clause in that of 1. Eliz. was grounded the late Court
called, The High Commission Court: From which Act it may be observed and
collected, That it needed an Act of Parliament to give such Authority to the
Queen to grant such Letters Patents, or Commission; and that without an Act of
Parliament such Commission could not have been granted: For if the Queen by her
mere Prerogative and Supreme Power in Ecclesiastical Causes could have granted
such Commission an Act of Parliament had been unnecessary. And the express
Words of the Act are, That the Queen, etc. shall have power, (by virtue of this
Act) and the Law had (as has been before observed) distributed the Kings
Ecclesiastical Power and Jurisdiction into several Courts: So that, without a
new Law, the like Power could not be put into any other hands in Derogation of
those ordinary Ecclesiastical Courts.

Secondly, Note, This Act makes no new Crimes nor Offenses, but gives the
Commissioners or Patentees Power to Visit, Reform, Redress, etc. all such
Errors, etc. Abuses, Offenses, Contempts and Enormities, which by any manner of
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Power can, or lawfully may be, Reformed, Redressed,
Corrected, etc.

In Sir Edw. Cokes 12 Rep. fol. 49: It was Resolved, Trin. 6. Jae. Per totam
Curiam, in the Court of Common Pleas (there being then Five Judges of that
Court, Coke being Chief Justice) That the High Commissioners by virtue of their
Commission, and that Act of Parliament, ought to proceed according to
Ecclesiastical Law. Secondly, If their Commission gave them any Power, which
was not allowed or warranted by that Act of Parliament, it was not Legal (which
proves that such Power cannot be exercised by a Commission under the Great Seal
merely, without an Act of Parliament) See Drakes Case in Justice Croke's
Reports of the time of King Charles, fol. 220.

There it is also Resolved, That the King by his Commissioners cannot alter the
Ecclesiastical Law, nor the Proceedings of it.

And if the Word (Lawfully) had not been in that Act of 1. Eliz. yet it must
have been so intended, and the Judges of the Common Law (who are proper Judges,
Expositors and Interpreters of Acts of Parliament) would have so understood it;
as appears by the Resolution of the Judges in the Case in the same 12. Rep. of
the Lord Coke, fol. 84, 85. and little regard therefore was given by the Judges
to Commissions under the Great Seal, which the Arch Bishop of Canterbury
(Abbot) said, had been made in like Cases in the Times of King Hen. VIII. and
Ed. VI.

In the last Case, ibidem fol. 85. the Chief Justice Coke says, He had seen the
Commission made to Cromwell (by King Hen. VIII.) to be Vicegerent, and other
Commissions to others (by his appointment) and he refers to the Commission at
large inserted in his Book of Precedents.

See in the same 12. Rep. of Sir Edw. Coke, f. 88. Excellent Rules to be
observed upon such extraordinary Commissions, viz. They ought to be solemnly
read; for they may possibly contain many things against the Law (as the
Commission in that Case mentioned did.) The Commissioners may every one of them
require Copies of the Commission: The Commissioners ought to Sit in an open
Place, and at certain Days.

Note also, That such Commissions ought not to be kept secret, but they ought
to be Enrolled in the Chancery, That the Subjects may be under a known
Authority. See Sir Edw. Coke's 4. Instit. fol. 332. the middle of that fol. And
upon irregular and illegal Commissions in Ecclesiastical Causes, the Remedy is
by Prohibition out of the Courts at Westminster.

In the same 4 Instit. fol. 340. the Author has this Note. Nota, 4. Inst. 340.
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester was deprived at Lambeth by Commission
from King Edward the VI. made to Ten Persons, proceeding upon it, ex Officio
mero mixto vel promoto omni appellatione remota, summarie de plano, absque omni
forma and figura Judicii sola Facti Veritate inspecta: The Author passes no
Opinion upon it. Quaere, by what Law this was warranted. It must be rare and
extraordinary, otherwise Sir Edw. Coke would not have so specially mentioned
it, but a Facto ad Jus non valet Argumentum.

Note, That part of the Act of 1 Eliz. viz. the 18th. Paragraph (before
verbatim transcribed) viz. of the Queen Eliz. and her Successors granting such
Letters Patents or Commissions in Ecclesiastical Causes, is repealed by the Act
made 16 Car. 1. cap. 11. See it in Mr. Keeble's Book of Statutes at large. See
the last Paragr. or Clause in that Act of Repeal of 16 Car. 1. It is Enacted,
That no new Court shall be erected or appointed, which shall have The like
Power or Jurisdiction, as the High Commissioners had or pretended to have; but
that all such Letters Patents, Commissions and Grants, and all Powers and
Authorities thereby granted, and all Acts, Sentences and Decrees to be made by
virtue or color of them shall be Void.

Note, The late Act of 13 Car. 2. cap. 12. in Mr. Keeble's Book of Statutes,
does declare that the Ordinary Power of Archbishops and Bishops was not taken
away by that Repealing Act of 17 Car. 1. cap. 11. (as this last Act dates it.)

But by this Act of 13 Car. 2. cap. 12. in the second Paragraph. The aforesaid
Repealing Act of 17 Car. 1. and all the Matters and Clauses therein contained
(excepting what concerns the High Commission Court; or, the new Erection of
some such like Court by Commission) are Repealed. See the third Paragraph also
of the Act of 13. Car. 2. That the High Commission Court shall not be Revived.

So that I conceive, no such Commission nor Letters Patents can now be granted,
but the Repealing Act of 16, or 17 Car. 1. stands in force against it.

By what Law or Rules Cromwell in the Time of King Henry VIII. and by what
Instructions he acted, does not appear; the Commissions to make him Vicar
General (which was surely in Imitation of what had been used by the Pope in the
time of his Usurpation) or that of Vicegerent in Ecclesiastical Matters (which
seems to be new and prime Impressionis) are not now to be found, of which Dr.
Burnet in the History of the Reformation of the Church of England, Dr. Burnet's
Hist. of the Reformation, 183. med. folii.
makes some probable conjectures, fol. 181. and wherein consisted the
difference between those two Authorities and Titles, and the Commissions for
the exercise of them is not easy to find out: But the thing then principally
designed was to suppress the religious Houses belonging to the regular Clergy,
which were great Supports to the Popish Hierarchy, not at all to impeach the
Lawful Power and Jurisdiction of Episcopacy; for we find at the same time as
Cromwell's Commissions were in force, and had been then but newly passed, That
Cranmer Archbishop of* Canterbury, made his Metropolitical Visitation; under
which (as I conceive) most properly falls the Conusance of any contempt or
abuse committed by any of his Suffragan Bishops; if not in a See Dr. Field of
the Church, fol. 511, 512. The ancient Canon requires the consent of 12,
Bishops to censure, judge and depose a Bishop.
Provincial Synod, Archiepiscopi Jurisdictioni subsunt immediate suffraganti.
See Lind. Provin.

The exclusion of the Pope in the Time of King Hen. VIII. made no diminution of
the Power or Jurisdiction of the Clergy, as to determining of Ecclesiastical
Causes, or making Canons, Constitutions and other Synodical Acts, as is rightly
observed by Dr. Heylin in his Introduction to the History of Laud late
Archbishop of Canterbury; upon this ground it is, that to this day they
exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in their own Names, and
under the distinct Seals of their Offices, the Statutes that made some
Alteration in the matter being all repealed: See Dr. Heylin's Introduct.
aforesaid, ibid. fol. 341.

The Legislative Power in Matters Ecclesiastical continues in the Convocation
for making Canons and Constitutions confirmed by the King and Parliament;
Discipline and the Admonition still resides in the Bishops and those under them.

In Case of any Irregularity in the Metropolitan, Resort must doubtless be to
the Head of the Church upon Earth (the King) as it was in the Case of
Archbishop Abbot, who shooting at a Deer unfortunately killed the Keeper; and
his Jurisdiction (he being suspended) was supplied by Commission, as you may
read in Dr. Heylin of the Life of Archbishop Laud, in the 87th fol. of the
Book it self, but more fully, fol. 170.

The Bishop of London is next in Place and Dignity to the Metropolitans, see
his Privileges, ibid. 185.

See Dr. Heylin's Judgment in the Work of Reforming the Church, either in
Doctrine or Exercise of the Discipline, pertinent to the Matter now in hand,
but in Point of Law it would be no very difficult thing to discover him to be
mistaken, fol. 327.

See the Power of the Metropolitan, and of the Appeal from him to a Provincial
Synod, and a Stop put there, and a ne ultra, and that there is no Vicar upon
Earth appointed to be the Supreme Judge in Ecclesiastical Matters in the
Opinion of the Council of Nice, discoursed of by Dr. Stilling fleet in his
Antiquities of the British Churches, fol. 100. but still it must be understood,
that this fixed Power in the Ecclesiastical Judges and Courts in England, is
derived from the Crown; but now under the Crown settled in this Method not to be
interrupted; this is quoad See Mr. Bagshaw's Arguments in Parliament against
the Canons made by the Convocation, 1640 fol. 19.
Potestatem Jurisdictionis non Ordinis.

FINIS.

