ADDITIONS Answering the OMISSIONS OF OUR Reverend AUTHOR.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Berry 1681.

ADDITIONS Answering the OMISSIONS, etc.
SInce the Doctor thinks to flourish with some of his frivolous Omissions, like
running his Sword through me after he had slain me in imagination; To show that
I am not quite killed, I shall venture to try the length of his new whetted
Animadverting Weapon, and give him a few home thrusts in exchange for his
intended ones. Because I find him a gentle, and easy Foe, I shall advise him
like a Friend, Frange miser Calamos, vigilataque praelia dele.
Your miserable Scribbling pray give over,
With such Polemicks vex the World no more.


Nor censure every thing as Impertinent, Against Jani, etc. p. 1.
Unintelligible, and Obscure, that is above the level of your understanding. For
proof of his great understanding he taxes three Paragraphs of mine with
Obscurity, Ib. p. 113. and 114.
and that darkness which is in his own mind.

1. The first is, Jani, etc. p. 26.
that the City of London being charged with a Tallage, their Common Council
dispute whether it were Tallagium, or Auxilium, which is there meant of
voluntary aid, not due upon the account of their Houses being of of the Kings
Demeasn, Quid, a new Paragraph.
though indeed it is then shown that they had several times before been
talliated. Quid est quod in hac Causa defensionis egeat? I must needs say I
take all this to be so plain that I know not which part I ought to add any
light to. Is the difference between Tallage and a Voluntary Aid obscure? Or is
it not well known that the Kings Demeasns only were talliated, and that the
City having been talliated, 'twas in vain to urge that they paid only voluntary
Aid?

But perhaps in the two next the obscurity may lie, and yet, by the Doctors Art
of multiplying faults, they may make three obscure Paragraphs.

2. This explains that part of the Charter, He adds such to Cases, to render it
obscure.
Simili modo fiat de Civitate London, that is as in all Cases besides those
excepted Escuage or Tallage should not be raised but by a Common Council of the
Kingdom, Jani, etc. p. 26.
that is of all the persons concerned to pay; so for the City of London, unless
the Aid was ordered in Common Council, wherein they and all other Tenants in
chief were assembled, none should be laid upon any Citizens but by the consent
of their own Common Council, Na. So if a sum in gross were laid upon them.
and if the Ordinance were only in general Terms, that all the Kings Demeasns
should be talliated, the proportions payable there should be agreed by the
Common Council of the City.

This consists of two parts; First, That where there was not the consent of a
Common Council of all the Tenants in chief, the Citizens might of themselves
give a Tallage, which is not in dispute between us, but is with admirable
ingenuity turned into an assertion, Viz. To such payment as Tallage.
that Cities and Buroughs were not taxed or assessed toward any payments, but
by their own Common-Councils, (which is not to be inferred from the privilege
of one City, suppose it were so for London, nor can be gathered from my words,
which yield that even London might be Taxt or Assessed by the consent of the
Common Council of Tenants) or that they, Against Jani, etc. p. 113.
as part of the Common Council of the Land taxed themselves, which is true; but
no man of sense can understand that to be the meaning of this part of the
Obscure Paragraph, but that something farther was intended.

2. The second I need not explain since he understands, for all his affected
ignorance, Indeed he would take in more places.
that after a Tax was imposed upon the City of London the Inhabitants (or those
who composed its Council) met to proportion it, so as it might be paid with as
much equality as could be. Na. the King did perhaps require a certain sum after
a general Ordinance made by the Council of Tenants for a Rationabile auxilium.


This he yields to my hand, that they always did if they would, it seems
convinced by that Record, which shows that when the Council of the City would
not agree to the Sum demanded by the King, 'twas de voluntate omnium Baronum
nostrorum Civitatis ejusdem, that the King talliated his Tenants per se, Jani,
etc. p. 26.
or per Capita, so much upon every head.

3. This clears the last Paragraph which I need not recite, it having no
meaning differing from the Record, but if my Record give not sufficient light
and strength he, I thank him, according to his usual Courtesy cites one clear
enough. Dr. p. 115.


Et cum praedicti Cives noluissent intrare finem praedict' trium mill marcarum
praedicti These. and alii voluerint assidere illud Tal. per Capita.

So that till the Citizens refused the the Sum in gross, the King did not
Talliate each man in particular.

But I am told that this is nothing to my purpose, it is strange that he who
blames me in other places for not quoting more than is for my purpose, when
nothing behind makes against me, should now tax me for not skipping over any
part of that Clause which 'twas needful to take and explain entire.

To clear up his understanding if possible, though I thought to have left this
Task, I will obviate an objection which such as our Answerer may make, that
it is obscure how the Record of the Common Council of London's concerning its
self about the Charge laid upon the City should explain that part of the
Charter which says Simili modo fiat de Civitate London, but surely practice is
a good Interpreter of a Law, and there is this further evidence that here is
provision for the power of the Common Council of the City, because that holding
in Capite, and being mentioned distinct from all the other Tenants there named
in general, it must be for something else, besides that for which it is joined
with the other Tenants.

But Excedimus tenebris in crepusculum, from this obscurity and darkness to be
felt by the Doctors groaping hand, we come to broad day light.

When in the 39th. H. 3. Provisum fuit per Consilium Regis apud Merton, Against
Jani, p. 115. and 117.
that he should talliate his Demeasns, though this was after King John 's
Charter, which was intended to restrain the King from levying public Taxes
without public consent; yet it seems to be plain by the Record that the King
by the advice of his Privy Council taxed the City of London, even without the
consent of the Common Council of his immediate Tenants, whom he makes the
Common Council for all manner of Aid and Escuage.

But it may be said, a Tallage was no public Tax, though the Tax here spoke
of, is made no more public than the consent required to charge it; Which
consent according to him, was from immediate Tenants only, so that Tallage
might be a public Tax as well as any other. And to be sure Scutagium
concerning the Kings Tenants only, and the Cases in which the King reserved to
himself power of taxing without public consent in his sense, relating only to
them; the Tax because of tenure must be provided for, as well as other, if any
other were there meant by Auxilium, vel Scutagium.

Nay, he owns expressly, that according to the Law in King John 's Charter,
London and other Cities and Burghs were to be Assessed and Taxed by the
Common Council of the Kingdom. p. 117. and 118.
And he makes a reason of that provision, to be the usage in the time of H. 2.
for the King to Talliate, or Tax them without such a Council.

The Doctor has doubtless the most particular convincing way of reasoning of
any man, he says that Law in King John 's Charter intended to restrain the King
from levying of public Taxes without public consent: And the reason of this
Artice in King John 's Charter is Argument sufficient to prove it: for, mark
the weighty reason, H. the Third after this was granted, and Edw. 1st. taxed
their Demeasns through England, though not the whole Kingdom by Advice and
Consent of their Privy-Councils only until the Stat' de Tallagio non
concedendo, That is (as Tallage is confessed to be, a Public Tax) because some
of King John's Successors Tax't their Demeasns without public consent.
Therefore 'twas provided in King John's time, by way of Prophesy, that no
public Tax, Aid, or Escuage should be raised without public consent.

So that what was done after, was a moral cause, or occasion of what preceded.

'Twill be said, that the thing that the Doctor went to prove was, that the
Common Council mentioned in the Charter was the Great and Common Council of the
Kingdom, to all intents and purposes. Not that the King was restrained from
levying a public Tax without the consent of the Great Council. But surely when
he goes to give the reason why the Charter must be taken in such a sense, we
are to expect the proof of that, not of something else, quitting the thing to
be proved.

If I can understand his dark meaning, he was proving that Nullum Scutagium,
etc. intended to restrain the King from levying public Taxes without public
Consent. That is (to explain what he very obscurely drives at,) the restraint
was only from Taxing the whole Kingdom; not from Taxing his Tenants in Chief.
And the reason of this Article, p. 118.
viz. as taken in this sense, is, that several times after this Charter was
granted, Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. Taxed their Demeasns through England, though not
the whole Kingdom, by Advice and Consent of their Privy-Councils only, until
the Statute De tallagio non concedendo was made 34 E. 1. And both Richard the
First and King John had Taxed the whole Kingdom without common Assent, before
the grant of Magna Charta. And when he has made good the Premises in this
Argument for the meaning of the Article, which will be ad graecas Calendas,
then, he may conclude that this Article intended to restrain the King, Na. he
should have added only.
only from levying of public Taxes without public Consent, not to provide
about Escuage, Nullum Scutagium, etc.
or Tallage, which none but his immediate Tenants were liable to. And from
hence when proved, we might with some more color and coherence raise the
Consequence that the Common Council mentioned in King John's Charter was the
Great and Common Council of the Kingdom to all intents and purposes. But how
that should appear from the mention of Aid, and Escuage only, will be a
Question.

It Is by him observed of Richard the First, Accepit de unaquaque carucata
terrae totius Angliae sex solidos.

But what proof is there from the word accepit, or the collecting of a Tax, ex
praecepto Regis, that he took it without public consent? Bracton Lib. 1. cap.
16.
I am sure Bracton, as good an Author as the Historian whom he Vouches, tells
us Carvage, and such this was, could never be raised but Consensu communi
totius regni.

But if the King in his Privy Council might Tax the Kingdom its self, till the
making King John's Charter, and was restrained then, I wonder our Reverend
Author has made the Constitution of the House of Lords, that is according to
him, the whole great Council, to have been no earlier than the 49th. of H. 3.

And unless such a Council as is mentioned in that Charter were Constituted
before, Nay sometimes he Argues that it was not before, p. 56.
how comes it to pass that the Clerus and Populus, which were of the Kings
Council for making Laws, and giving Taxes, were not till 17. Jo. confined to
such of them as were of the Privy Council, as well as Communitas populi, after
Magnates was meant of such people as were Magnates, and Milites, p. 110.
and libere tenentes, besides Barons, were the Tenants in Capite, 112.
who by their Acts obliged all that held of them by Knights Service: 113.
that is all the Milites, but not the libere tenentes.

We are taught that in the 6 of King John Tenants in Capite only, Against Jani,
etc. p. 125, 126, 127.
provided that every nine Knights should find a tenth for the defense of the
Kingdom, and that they who were to find them were all Tenants in Military
Service. Though the Record shows, that besides the Miles vel Serviens, Alius
terram tenens was Charged with this. And he vouchsafes not to take notice of my
Argument, that every Knight being bound by his tenure to find a man; if this
had not extended to all that had to the value of a Knights Fee, Jani, etc. p.
225.
though not held by Knights Service, it would have been an abatement of the
Services due, and a weakening of the Kingdom.

Besides, admit that Tenants in Capite only laid this Charge, and only Tenants
by Knights Service were bound by it, here is such a Commune Concilium of
Tenants, as I say King John's Charter Exhibits, and no Charge laid by them upon
others. Whereas he should have proved that they did oblige others without their
consent.

But suppose Tenants only were Charged, why might not the Charge have been laid
by Omnes fideles in my sense, as we find Omnes de Regno, taxing Knights Fees
only?

The Doctor in his Margin gives us an admirable nota, p. 119.
that Liberi were Tenants in Military Service, or Gentlemen, Rustici Socagers,
possessors or Freeholders in Socages only, which is as much as to say that
Freeholders were not Freemen, unless they held in Military Service, and yet a
Tenement, or Possession neither added to, Glos. p. 10.
or detracted from the person of any man, if free or bond before.

But surely Mr. Professor has some colorable proof for his remark here: For
that let others judge.

Hoveden acquaints us with the manner of collecting a Carvage in the ninth of
Richard the First, which was, that in every County the King appointed one
Clergyman, and one Knight, who with the Sheriff of the County to which they
were sent, Galls Milites.
and lawful Knights chose, and sworn to execute this business faithfully,
Fecerunt venire coram se senescalos Baronum istius comitatus, and de qualibet
villa Dominum vel Ballivum villae and prepositum cum quatuor legalibus
hominibus villae, sivae liberis, sive rusticis, who were to swear how many
Plough Lands there were in every Town.

If here liberi, and rustici are not meant for two denominations of the same
sort of men, that is ordinary Freeholders, I will leave him to fight it out
with Hoveden, since he himself is directly contrary to the old Munk; Hoveden
shows us that these Socagers were legales homines, such as chose Juries, and
served on Juries themselves, Against Mr. Petyt, p. 36.
etc. but our new light is positive that Tenants in Military Service were the
only Freemen, and the only legal men. Thus I have done right to his Omissions,
So Against Jani. p. 36.
passing by nothing which has not received justice before, and shall add some
confirmations of what I have taken leave to assert in other places.

I had affirmed for one reason why the Doctor could have small assistance from
Domesday Book, p. 78.
that the Titles whereby men enjoyed their Estates are seldom mentioned there.
And if I find by Record a whole County in the Doctors sense, that is all the
Lands of the County enjoyed by descent from before the imaginary Conquest; What
will he say in justification of his whymsies upon the Conquest, and the
authority he would fetch for it from Domesday Book?

He may please to consider, and give a Categorical Answer to this memorable
Record.

IN placito inter Regem and priorem Ecclesiae de Coventre de annua pensione uni
Clericorum Regis, Placita coram Rege Hill. Anno 14 R. 2. Rot. 50* warw.
ratione nove creationis ejusdem prioris quousque, etc. prior venit and
defendit vim and injuriam and quicquid est in contemptu domini Regis, etc. non
cognovit Ecclesiam suam beatae Mariae de Coventre fore Ecclesiam Cathedralem
nec ipsum priorem tenere aliquid de domino Rege per Baroniam prout pro domino
Rege in narratione sua proponitur. Et dicit quod tenet prioratum praedictum ex
fundatione cujusdam Leofrici quondam Comitis Cestriae qui prioratum praedictum
fundavit tempore sancti Edwardi dudum Regis Angliae progenitoris domini Regis
nunc per Cantam suam in haec verba.

Anno dominice incarnationis 1043. Ego Leofricus Comes Cestriae Consilio and
assensu Regis qui literas suas infrascriptas sub sigillo misit and testimonio
aliorum religiosorum virorum tam laicorum quam Clericorum Ecclesiam Coventre
dedicari feci, in honor dei and Ecclesiae sanctae Mariae genitricis ejus, and
sancti Petri Apostoli and sancte Osburge Virginis, and omnium sanctorum; Has
igitur viginti quatuor villas eidem Ecclesiae attribui, ad servitium dei and ad
victum and vestitum Abbatis and Monachorum in eodem loco deo servientium,
videlicet Honiton Newenham Chaldeleshunt Ichenton Vlston Soucham Grenesburgh
Burthenburgh Mersten juxta Avonam Hardewick Wasperton Creastorton Sotham Rugton
dimidium Sow Merston in Gloucestriae provincia Salewarpe in Wigorniensi Eton
juxta amnem qui dicitur dee in Cestriae provincia Keldesbye and Windwyk in
Hamptoniensi provincia Borbach Barewell Scrapstofte Pakinton and Potteres
Merston in Leycestrensi provincia. Has autem terras dedi huic Monasterio cum
Soca Saca cum telonio and theme cum libertatibus and omnibus consuetudinibus
vbique Sicut a Rege Edwardo melius unquam tenui. Cum hiis omnibus Rex Edwardus
and ego libertates huic Monasterio dedimus, ita ut Abbas ejusdem loci Soli Regi
Angliae sit Subjectus.

Ibidem recitatur Charta ejusdem Regis Edwardi quas donationes and concessiones
diversi alii Reges confirmaverunt and dicit quod postea per processum temporis
nomen Abbatiae praedictae divertebatur in nomen prioratus, eo quod Leofwinus ad
tunc ibidem creatus fuit in Episcopum Cestriae and ordinavit per assensum
Monachorum ibidem quod Abbatia praedicta ex tunc foret prioratus and quod
Superiores ejusdem Ecclesiae forent priores successive in perpetuum, and dicit
quod de ipso Leofrico, quia obiit sine herede de corpore suo descendente
advocatio Ecclesie predicte tempore Willielm' Conquest' Angliae cuidam Hugoni
Comiti Cestriae ut Consanguineo and heredi ipsius Leofrici, Na. this is the
Hugh to whom he imagines that William, gave all the Lands of the County of
Chester.
viz. Filio Erminelde sororis ejusdem Leofrici and de ipso Hugone cuidam
Ricardo ut filio and heredi and de ipso Ricardo cuidam Ranulpho ut Consanguineo
and heredi, viz. filio Matildis sororis praedicti Hugonis and de ipso Ranulpho
cuidam Ranulpho ut filio and heredi and de ipso Ranulpho filio Ranulphi quia
obiit sine herede de corpore suo descendente advocatio praedicta simul cum
Comitatu Cestre and Huntingdon and aliis diversis Castris Maneriis terris and
tenementis cum pertinentis in Anglia and Wallia quibusdam Matildae Mabilliae
Ceciliae and Margeriae ut sororibus and heredibus predicti Ranulphi inter quas
propertia facta fuit de predictis Comitatibus advocationibus and Castris
Maneriis terris and tenementis cum pertinentiis supradictis. Et predicta
advocatio Simul cum toto predicto Comitatu Cestriae cum pertinentiis allocata
fuit predicte Matilde pro proparte sua in allocationem diversorum aliorum
Castrorum Maneriorum terrarum and tenementorum cum pertinentiis praedictis
Mabilliae Ceciliae and Margeriae seperatim allocatorum and de ipsa Matilda
descendebant predicta advocatio simul cum praedicto Comitatu Cestriae cum
pertinentiis post propertiam predictam cuidam Johanni Scot ut filio and heredi
praedictae Matildae Qui quidem Johannes Scot advocationem praedictam simul cum
praedicto Comitatu Cestriae cum pertinentiis dedit Henrico quondam Regi Angliae
filio Regis Johannis and heredibus suis in perpetuum, etc. praedictus prior
sine die.

This was a Judgment upon solemn Debate and Trial, and it cannot be believed
but the Judges, and Kings Council so many hundred years ago, knew as much of
the right of the Conquest as our Doctor can discover. 'Twill be said
notwithstanding this Record, that Hugh had the Confirmation of his Kinsman the
Conqueror.

Admit he had, he being his Kinsman would either thereby wheedle others in to
the like acknowledgment of Williams power; Or else having the Government of the
County, would do this in complement to the supreme Governor.

But that such Confirmation as to the Lands he had there, and all appendants or
appurtenances to them was wholly neeedless, appears in that the Title is laid
only in descent, nor does it in the least appear that William either granted or
confirmed more than the Comitatus, Government, or Jurisdiction of it, or that
more than that was held by the Sword, which the Doctor makes Tenure in Capite.
Let him show how, by what manner of tenure his Land was held.

Not being aware that so great an Author as the Doctor would have condemned for
precarious, Against Jani, etc. p. 89.
all that I think I have proved from the Records and Histories which I cite for
the foundation of my former Essay, Jani, etc. p. 264.
viz. that till the 48. and 49th. H. 3. all Proprietors of Land came to the
Great Council without exclusion. ib. p. 264.
I had asserted that the probi homines, or bonae conversationis, came to the
Great Councils (which in common Intendment is meant of coming as Members) in
their own persons, Against Jani, p 4.
and when they agreed to it, which was no abridgment of their personal right,
they came by Representation, and Election, and every one was there himself
virtually by his Deputy, but they often met in vast bodies, and in capacious
places, both in the Saxon times, and after William the First obtained the
Imperial Crown.

(1.) If you will believe the Chair all this is precariously said, Against Jani,
etc. p. 89.
without Foundation or Authority; however it is granted that I seem to back it
with an instance, where I say, The whole body of Proprietors were assembled at
Runemede between Stanes and Windsor, at the passing of King John's Charter.

The Doctor refers us to p. 106. and 107. of his pretended Answer to Mr. Petyt,
to see what this Assembly was, and of whom it consisted; where he proves my
Assertion, being all that he there shows is, that there was not time for Writs
to issue to choose any Representatives of the Commons, but not a word offered
against their being there in their own Persons, having been got together
expecting the Kings Answer to their Demands, who appointed a meeting at
Runemede. Rot. Pat. 17. Joh. pars unica m. 13. n. 3. ib. m. 23. dorso.
The Record says there were Comites, and Barons, and liberi homines totius
regni, or according to that Expounder of more fallible Record Ma. Paris,
Against Mr. Petyt, p. 183. p. 127. in Marg.
there were the Magnates, which must there be meant of the Nobilitas Major,
(unless you take them for the Kings friends only, as the great men of the
Kingdom elsewhere) these Magnates had drawn to their side, and to that treaty,
Vniversam fere totius Regni Nobilitatem, Ma. Paris fo. 244.
and this Nobility was so numerous, that they made a vast Army, exercitum
inestimabilem confecerunt, and the Records not only show that such as were but
liberi homines were there, and parties to the agreement being inter Regem,
Comites, and Barons and liberos homines, but the body of the Charter shows
that Tenants by other free tenures, besides Knights service were interested in
it.

Besides this, the frequent meetings in so wide a place as Runenede called
Pratum Concilii, as I observed in the same page, is a strong Argument that vast
bodies composed the great Councils in those days, and why Tenants in free
Socage were not Members, as well as such as held of Subjects by Knights service
I see no reason, but wait for the Doctors; In the mean while I shall present
him with some other Authorities which show that my Assertion was not precarious.

(2.) If in the 38th. of H. 3. the Commons, or probi homines were Members of
the Great Council by Representatives of their own choice, and degree, there
being besides all the Tenants in Capite two chose for every County, Jani, etc.
p. 244. Vide amongst other Authorities.
Vice omnium and Singulorum, and yet such came in their own persons both
before, and after the making of King John's Charter, since which till the 48th.
or 49th. of H. 3. no alteration in the way, Jani, p. 51. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61.
66. 2^4. 248.
or right of coming is supposed; then it follows that Representations were
brought in when the Commons (who might have come in their own persons) agree to
it, and there being of the Councils before the Norman times and then, Barons
and populus, it is not to be doubted but that they came in their Persons if they
would, both in the Saxon, and Norman times, especially since William the First
did but confirm the Law of the Confessor concerning the power of the Great
Council, Rex debet omnia rite facere in regno and per judicium Procerum Regni
Leges Par. Ed.
in words that showed that all the Members were in those ages styled Peers,
such as might come in person, and that inferior Proprietors were Members, the
Law of the great Folcmote then received proves beyond all dispute.

3. If besides Barons, Jani, etc. p. 241.
and Milites, we find Libere tenentes, Against Mr. Petyt, p. 112.
or Fideles in the account of Great Councils before 49 H. 3. we are to suppose,
The free Tenants in Scotland, and the Possessionati in Poland used to be
Members of their great Councils without Representation.
even without Consideration of the Capacious places of their Assembly, and the
multitudes there, that such Proprietors of Land as would, came personally, till
a Law or common practice to the contrary be shown, it being according to their
natural right, and the natural import of the words; besides the Doctor does not
allow of Representations, except the Tenants in Capite who came without
Election, Jani, etc. p. 248. and p. 66.
were Representatives of the rest.

4. If King John's Charter does not exhibit the full form of our English Great,
Jani, etc. throughout.
and most general Councils in those days, but, by continuing the rights of
every particular place, leaves room for Proprietors of Land to have been
Members, as well as Tenants in Capite, then the libere Tenentes, which many
Records before the supposed change in the time of H. 3. mention as Members of
the Great Councils, were not Tenants in Capite.

And as Tenants in Capite came in their own persons for matters concerning
their Tenures; So, unless the contrary can be shown, we are to believe that the
libere tenentes, not holding in Capite, came in like manner, especially if we
consider how mean were some of the Majores Barons, to whom special Writs were
to be directed, as he that held part of the Barony of Mulgrave, Communia de
Term. Mich. An. 39 E. 3. Rot. 36. penes Rem. R. in scaccario.
per servitium millesimae ducentesimae partis Baroniae. Nay I find Norman
Darcy, who indeed held several parcels of the Manor of Darcy, which seem to be
by several purchases, Penes Rem. Regis in scaccario de Term. Pasche 29 E. 3.
Lincoln de Re. Brook tit. exemption.
amongst other shares holding Centessimam partem Centessimae Sexagessimae
partis Baroniae. The hundredth part of the Hundred, and sixtieth part of the
Barony, and yet that he who had only so much was Baro Major appears, in that
the Common Law exempted him from being of a Common Jury as holding part of a
Barony.

Besides the Doctor yields that more than such as are expressly mentioned in the
contested Clause, Tenants in Military service of King John's Charter, viz. of
Tenants in Capite were Members of the Great Councils, (which he does not always
confine to the great Tenants) and some of these were as inconsiderable, and as
unfit for Counselors as the generality of the libere Tenentes; for though he
in his sixteen years search, Against Mr. Petyt, p. 41.
could find no less a part of a Knights Fee, than a twentieth, yet in the last
recited Record he may meet with the sixtieth part of one Knights Fee in the
Manor of Norton.

5. Being all that were Members of the Great Councils in those times of which
our dispute is, Jani, etc. p. 32. 35, 36. 40. 57. 62, 63, 64. 66. 185. 219.
were Nobles, in which the Doctor and I agree, and the Nobles came in their own
Persons, the libere Tenentes, part of the Nobility were personally present.

Indeed Corporations holding in Capite might well come by Representation, being
they were but as one Noble, and one Tenent, and would have been an unweildy
body to move to Council united as their interest was.

(6.) King John's Resignation was void, because 'twas without the consent of
the Commons, Sanz leur assent, and to say that this is without the assent of a
general Council, Colloquium, or Parliament, in those times when it was done;
unless he yield the same sort or degree of men to have been Members of the
Great Councils formerly as then, does not take in the full meaning, but is to
say nothing, being the Commons manifestly assert their right, as when they
declared that they had ever been a Member of Parliament, Against Mr. Petyt, p.
133.
and as well Assenters as Petitioners. And what force does it bring to the
Doctors Assertion, that the Commons answer in the same form of Speech conceived
by the Barons? ib. p. 140.
Which he thinks worthy of great Letters, is that an Argument that the Commons
did not think that they ought to have been parties? He himself grants that King
John resigned before them that came upon a Military Summons, Against Jani, etc.
p. 22, 23, 24.
that is (as all who ought to come were concluded by them that came) before all
his Barons; wherefore nothing wanted to the Confirmation, but the Consent of
the Commons.

And if the Commons were then an essential part of the Great Council they might
come in Person, Vid. the 12th. head.
unless the change in 49 H. 3. can be shown to have been any otherwise than in
the bringing in a Representation of them.

(7.) By the Charter of H. 1. Jani, etc. p. 34.
for the King's dominica necessaria, or de arduis Regni, all the Counties and
Hundreds, that is the Freeholders, the Suitors at those Courts were to be
summoned to the Great Council, as it had been in the time of the Confessor,
when there repaired to the Great Folcmote, or General Council held once a year,
all the Peers, Knights, and Freemen, at least Freeholders of the Kingdom.

(8.) For demonstration that libere tenentes came to the Great Councils in
their own Persons, and as Members; King John before the passing of his Charter,
writes to the Milites, and Fideles, (the last of which takes in all the libere
tenentes) and tells them that if it might have been done he would have sent
Letters to every one of them; wherefore these Members whose right is here
acknowledged were single, individual persons; for they could not have been
summoned to come by Representation in the case of such particular Writs, or
Letters, unless the Representation were settled before the Summons, which is not
to be supposed. These Arguments all but the last, which the Doctor has supplied
me with, arise out of my former Treatise, and I take it that this which the
Doctor has occasioned, will yield a few more without pressing. V. Domesday, etc.


(9.) Since William the First was no Conqueror, Besides (according to the terms
first agreed on) he received the Confessors Laws about this Folcmote.
Confutation, p. 33.
it follows that the Great Folcmote, or General Council in the Saxon times,
where to be sure all Proprietors of Land were to be Members, could not have
been turned into an Assembly of the Kings Tenants upon the old legal Title,
(and without a Conquest there was no other.)

And as there must have been a vast number of the Proprietors whom the Kings
immediate Tenants could not oblige; so they must have been Members of those
Councils which laid any general Charge, and that with the same privileges the
Tenants in Capite, who came in Person, had.

(10.) Though demonstration it self will not satisfy unreasonable men, yet not
to mention more I shall urge the Authority of the Legier Book of Ely before
cited, Jani, p. 41.
(the great Antiquity of the hand writing of which is beyond all exception) to
persuade the Doctor that my Notion is far from being precarious; Since that M.
S. shows that King Stephen consulted about the State of the Kingdom, not only
with the Bishops, Abbots, Monks, and inferior Clergy, but with the Plebs, and
they in an infinite number, Concilio adunato Cleri and populi, Episcoporum,
atque Abbatum, Monachorum, and Clericorum, Plebisque infinitae multitudinis,
etc. de statu Regni cum illis tractavit.

This single instance is sufficient to prove that the Primates, Against Jani,
p. 62.
Primores, Proceres, Magnates, and Nobiles, were not the Constituent parts of
Great Councils in the Reigns of W. the 1st. H. 1st. King Stephen, H. 2. R. 1st.
according to his restrictive and limited understanding and exposition of these
words and phrases, but that the CLERUS and POPULUS (the general words which
often comprehend all the Members) signify as well as Great Men, the Common
Freeholders, as at this day; nor need I examine his Book any farther: but I
hope the Doctor, a man of that known integrity, as his excellent Book expresses
him to be, will now make good his promise to be of my opinion, when I should
evince that Common Freeholders had this great privilege. p. 62.


(11.) The Lords right of answering for their Tenants being founded in the
imaginary feudal right, which is made to extend only to Tenants by Knights
Service, the Socagers, being free from that Law, could not be charged without
their own consent, and that given by word of their own mouths, if they pleased.

(12.) The Authority cited by Mr. Cambden, Jani, etc. p. 248.
and approved of by our Author as well as by me, shows that the only change in
the Great Council was in leaving out of the special Summons what Earls and
Barons the King pleased but the right of all other Barons* Against Mr. Petyt,
p. 226. ib. p. 228. Confutation, p.
as Singular Persons, to share in the Legislature was preserved by the alia
illa brevia, by which the Representatives for the Counties came, and being all
the Members of the Great Councils, but Citizens and Burgesses, or all such
Barons as aforesaid, came before the change in their own Persons, and no new
kind of Members were then Created, and yet there was a substantial alteration,
Against Mr. Petyt, p. 210.
a new Government framed and set up, this alteration must consist in the
Commons, or Barons Minores, their being put to Representatives when before
they came Personally.

(13.) I could bring many Arguments from the Doctor, Against Mr. Petyt, p. 183.
and 192.
as, besides others, that the Vniversitas Militiae, or qui militare servitium
debebant, that is as Record explains, Ma. Paris, the Fideles besides Milites
were Members of Parliament, but I may spare farther proof till he gives me
fresh occasion.

(14.) And possibly then amongst his other mavelous discoveries, I may have
time to animadvert a little more largely upon his fancy, Against Jani, etc. p.
34.
that the Suitors in the County Court were all Tenants in Military Service, Yet
this tenure came in with Will. 1st.
except Barons, both in the Saxon and Norman times; by the way you must
understand that the Barons were not Tenants in Military Service, Against Mr.
Petyt, p. 31.
though they held in Capite by Knights Service. And that William the the First
made no alteration of the Government; for Tenants by Military Service, were the
only legal men, and the only Members of the Great Council before.

But as Tenants in Capite, Glos. p. 26.
and their Tenants in Military Service were of the Great Councils in Person,
all the Suitors at the County Court, who were according to the Charter of H. 1.
qui liberas habent terras, in each County respectively, were there in Person as
Members.

Though not relating to the foundation of my Essay, Against Mr. Petyt, p. 43.
according to him, who makes the Question about the Conquest not directly to
reach the Controversy between us, Against Jani, p. 15.
I may make a little sport with his Arguing that William 1st. gave whole
Counties to his Followers, Against Mr. Petyt, p. 29.
under the word Comitatus, that is as he renders it, all the Lands in the
Counties, Glos. p. 8.
and yet that besides whole Counties, he gave a great proportion of Lands in
them.

But since he taxes what I lay for the foundation of my Essay for precarious,
let us see a little whether he does not render his own so, where it opposes
mine. His whole Book in that respect resolves its self into these three Heads;

1. That King John's Charter in affirmance of the Law imposed by William, or in
force before, declares that the Tenants in Capite were the only Members of the
General Council of the Kingdom.

2. That from thence to the 49 H. 3. the practice or fact was for Tenants only
to compose the Great or General Council.

3. That none but Tenants in Capite were Nobles.

(1.) If he himself yields that till King John's Charter there was no such
Council as one made up only of Tenants in Capite, he thereby renders all under
this head precarious, but this he does in two places at least. One where he
urges that if the Curia Regis Ordinaria, which I say was the Court of the Kings
Tenants, Against Jani, p. 46. and 47.
and Officers exclusive of others, went off by reason of the Clause in King
John's Charter, it certainly went off before it began, that is, such a Court
began not before; and agreeable to this, he says, that after the granting of
this Charter by King John there were many General, and Great Councils, or
Colloquiums summoned by Edict according to the form there prescribed: that is,
as he will have it, after that the Tenants in Capite only were summoned to the
Great Council, but not before, for then began this form.

In another place (though he charges upon me what are his own words) he says
King John resigned his Crown the 15. ib. p. 22. and 23.
of May in the 14th. of his Reign, and he granted the great Charter of the
Liberties three years after on the 15. of June in the 17. of his Reign, Thus p.
48. and 49. he charges Mr. Petyt and me for averring that even Servants who are
not in a legal sense people of the Kingdom were Members of the Great Council.
and therefore could not resign it in such a Council as was Constituted three
years after his Resignation. And it is a question whether he asserts not this in
a third place, where he affirms that before this Charter the Kingdom had been
Taxt by our ancient Kings, and their Privy Council only.

(2.) But in truth he not only yields that the Tenants in Chief were first made
the General Council by King John's Charter; My words are in such a Council as
this here.
but that after that, more than such were Members, Jani, p. 15. which is as
much as to say that there was such a Council as this before. p. 118.
not only the Tenants in Military Service, of Tenants in Chief, but other
ordinary Freeholders. So that he submits himself to be goard by both the horns
of that Dilemma enforced in my former Treatise, viz. that King John's Charter
was either declarative of the Law as 'twas before, Against Jani, p. 66. Jani,
p. 236.
or introductive of a new Law. And yields the precariousness of his own
vagaries.

(3.) But does he not own that the Notion that Tenants in Capite only were
Noble, is precarious? Since he yields that no kind of tenure does nobilitate,
Glos. p. 10.
or so much as make a man free who was not so before according to his Blood or
Extraction.

Though, according to this, one that held of the King in Chief might have been
a Subjects Villain, yet none that held a certain Estate of Freehold could be a
Villain, because it is contrary to the nature of a Freehold, that it should be
so no longer than another pleased, that is only an Estate at will.

He will have it that Mr. Petyt is guilty of some horrible Design, Against Mr.
Petyt, p. 1.
from the effects of which it seems this mighty Champion is to rescue the
Government.

And for me I am a Seducer, one who would seduce unwary Readers, Against Jani,
p. 71.
a malicious insinuation, as if I would wheedle to my side a party against
Truth and the Government; but whether he who would set aside the evidences for
the Rights of the Lords, and Commons, or they who produce them fair, and would
render them unquestioned, is guilty of the worst design, the World will judge;
and I doubt not, but he has at home a thousand Witnesses, Conscientia mill
testes.
who, if he will hear their unbyast Testimonies, will inform him whose are the
groundless and designing interpretations. Against Mr. Petyt, p. 1.


But I must confess they are so weak that these sacred things need very little
help to rescue them; ib.
especially since their Enemies are so far from agreeing amongst themselves,
that it is more easy to conquer than to reconcile them.

As on Mr. Petyts, and my side, the design can be no other, than to show how
deeply rooted the Parliamentary Rights are; So the Doctors in opposition to
ours, must be to show the contrary, (a design worthy of a Member of Parliament)
and it is a Question whether he yields these Rights to be more than precarious.

For according to him the Tenants in Capite were the only Members of the Great
Council before 49 II. 3. and if others were after, 'twas by Usurping upon the
Rights of Tenants in Capite, ib. p. 210.
who and not others, ib. 42.
when the new Government was set up, How were Cities and Buroughs holding in
Capite Represented according to this?
began to be Represented by two Knights for every County, out of their own
number, and they at first, that is then, Elected their own Representatives; and
yet these Tenants in Capite might be set aside if the King and his Council
pleased, And how came they ever to be Represented?
nor was any power given to others to choose till 10 H. 6. c. 2. which gave no
new power, ib. p. 79.
and the Lords depend upon the Kings pleasure. ib. p. 42.
Therefore what the design is, ib. p. 227. and 228.
and at whose door the crime of it lies* the thing it self speaks, tho I should
be silent.

But for fear he should seduce unwary Readers, I must observe his Artifice in
imposing upon them the belief that as it has ever since 49 H. 3. been at the
Kings pleasure that any Lords came to the Great Council; so the King could of
right name to the Sheriff what Representatives for the Counties, Against Mr
Petyt, p. 249.
Cities and Buroughs he pleased, as he observes in the Margent upon a Record
31 E. 3. but he is not so Candid to observe, that though indeed at that time
there was such a nomination, yet that was not to any Parliament, or to make any
new Law, or lay any kind of Charge upon the Nation, or particular men; but was
a Summons of a Council to advise how what was granted by full Parliament,
legally Summoned, might be best answered juxta intentionem concessionis
praedictae, and in such Cases the Judges only, who are but Assistants in
Parliament, might well be consulted; but pro magnis, and urgentibus negotiis,
(as when King Charles the First called the Magnum Concilium, or Great Council
of Peers to York, An. 164^.
upon the Scotch Rebellion) the King called more to Advise with* and the
Counselors might well be of his own Choice.

'Twill be urged that when the King appointed but one for every County, p. 242.
26 E. 3. p. 246. 27 E. 3.
they were empowered to consent to what de Communi Consilio contigerit ordinari,
and that such a Council made Laws, as the Statute of the Staple made the 21 of
E. 3. to which the answer is very obvious, that they made only Ordinances, not
Laws, and that these were Magna Consilia, taken in a sense totally different
from the Generalia Concilia, or Parliaments, and all this appears above the
power and subtilty of our learned Doctors Evasions, in that the Record cited by
himself in the 26 E. 3. calls the Assembly they are Summoned to, Concilium
only, and an Act of Parliament in the twenty eight of that King calls what was
done in the twenty seven Ordinances, 28 E. 3. c. 13.
and that meeting a Great Council, Magnum Concilium; but such a Council it was,
and its Resolutions such mere Ordinances (the distinction of which from Acts is
well known) that that very next Parliament finds it needful to confirm, and
give them the force of a Law. Agreeably to this the Earl Marshal in that grand
Case in the 3 H. 6. pleads, Rot. Par. 3 H. 6. n. 12.
that though a determination had be made against the said Earl Marshall in
great Council, though he had be of full age, that might not disherit him
without Authority of Parliament, these are uncontrollable evidences, and proofs
against him, let him to save the great Credit of his Learning answer them if he
can.

But who is the new Government-Maker, and new Parliament-Maker, perhaps one
might know from himself when he has considered a little better, and then he may
think the Government, as it is now established, nighly concerned in his Errors.

Perhaps 'twill be said I injure this good man in imputing to him a design in
relation to the present Government; Since he owns that the most excellent great
Council, Against Mr. Petyt* p. 229.
(and goes to prove it evidently from Records) received its perfection from the
Kings Authority, and time. But it is obvious that its Perfection, must be meant
of such its Perfection, as his Book allows, and he would make evident, but what
is that? That Lords should, to the time of his excellent discoveries, be
Summoned to Parliament, ib. p. 227. and 228.
or past by, at the Kings pleasure, and that if the King pleased, he might
Summon one Knight for a County, ib. p. 249.
one Citizen for a City, one Burgess for a Burgh, and those named to the
Sheriff.

And this design will be very evident if we observe his aerie ambuscade, to
return his own phrase, and mere juggle in joining the Kings Authority and time
together; we think we have something, but by an Hocus Pocus Trick it is gone;
for admit that its Perfection were such as we say it has at this day, viz. for
Lords to come of Right in their own Persons, and that the Commons should send
Representatives of their free Choice. Yet let us see what setlement he gives
this Great Council, for which purpose we must divide the two Authorities, which
sometimes may differ.

And (1.) Suppose that though time would preserve that power which the Great
Council exercises, a King would hereafter take it all to himself, and make Laws
by a Council of his own choosing, or without any. If the Doctor allows this
power, doubtless the next Parliament will thank him.

(2.) Suppose that without, or against the Kings Authority, time only would
establish this Great Council, can this be done? He that affirms it surely will
be no great friend to Prerogative, nor understands he that Maxim,

Nullum tempus occurrit Regi. And one of these must be closed with.

'Twill be objected that I am as injurious to Prerogative in arguing that some
Lords may have a Right of Prescription to come to the Upper-House.

But I think no sober man will deny that there is a right either from Writs
alone, or from Writs as prescribed to, and it is strange that it should not be
against Prerogative to urge a right from one Royal Concession, and yet it
should be to urge it from many; but farther, if they who had no right to come
in Person, or be Represented in Parliament, should by color of Prescription
put themselves upon the King for Counselors, this were derogatory to the
Prerogative. But if there be a natural right for Proprietors of Land (with whom
some say is the balance of power within this Nation) to be interested in the
Legislature, which I (...) not affirm. Or if there be such a positive right,
not only from the Laws for frequent Parliaments, which suppose such to be
Members as had been, but more particularly from the Law received in the 4th. of
William the First, Rex debet omnia rite facere in Regno and per judicium
procerum Regni.
and by positive Law or Custom the King used to send special Writs for some,
general for others; the Prescribing to special Writs, which is not of Substance
as to the Legislative Interest, is no diminution of Prerogative; because no
more in effect is out of the King than was before, which is, that this man
should one way or other have a share in the Legislature.

If this Solution of mine will not pass I cannot help it, I am sure the Law for
a right grounded upon one or more Special Writs of Summons, stands fast, though
the reason of it should be above my reach.

Having run through a Book so illnatur'd to the Government, and so impotent in
its settled anger, Above all vid. Title page Against Mr. Petyt, and p. 81.
as that which some may think to have no other design, than that of exposing
Mr. Petyt and me, the one for Artifice, unhandsom dealing with, and false
application of Records, etc. the other amongst other things, for Ignorance,
Confidence, and Cheating his Readers; I may hope notwithstanding the disparity
of years, and the dignity of his place, to be very excusable in using our
Answerer with no more respect.

When a man renders himself cheap by his folly, and yet meets with many so weak
that they are discipled by him, to notions of dangerous and pernicious
consequence to the State.

-- Ridentem dicere verum,
Quis vetat? --
In summing up the Product of his many years labors, which my Preface charges
him with, perhaps it may be thought that I omitted one considerable Head;
however I leave to others if they think fit to add for a seventh.

That both Lords, and Commons may be deprived of all Shares, or Votes in making
of Laws for the Government of the Kingdom, when ever any future King shall
please to resume the Regality.

Some perhaps may add an eighth; That the Parliaments are nothing but Magna
Concilia, such as are called only to Advise upon what shall be given in
direction, but no consent of theirs required to make the Kings determination a
binding Law.

And Vice Versa, every Great Council, such as that called to York, An. 1640.
is a Parliament.

FINIS.

